THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN DEDVCED BY AGES, OR CENTENARIES
FROM THE NATIVITIE OF OUR SAVIOVR, UNTO the happy Conversion of the Saxons, in
the seventh hundred year; whereby is manifestly declared a continual
Succession of the true Catholic Religion, which at this day is professed and
taught in, and by the Roman Church.

WRITTEN BY RICHARD BROVGHTON.

THE FIRST TOME.

CONTAINING THE FOUR HUNDRED FIRST YEARS.

TO WHICH ARE ANNECTED FOR THE GREATER Benefit of the Reader ample Indexes
after the Preface, both of the Authors out of which this History has b^ne
col^ec^ed, and of the Chapters; and at the end of this Tome a copious Index of
the Special, and particular matters contained in these four hundred of
years.

Remember the old days, think upon every generation: ask thy Father, and he
will declare to thee: thy elders, and they will tell thee. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 7. DO
FLAMMA ESSE SVVM FLAMMA DAT ESSE MEVM printer's device of Mark Wyon

AT DOWAY, By the Widow of MARK WYON, at the sign of (...)

M. DC. XXXIII.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, RIGHT HONORABLE, AND VIRTUOUS LADIES, THE LADY
CATHERINE DVTCHESSE, AND DOVVAGER OF BVCKINGHAM, SOLE DAVGHTER AND HEIR TO THE
RIGHT HONORABLE FRANCIS LATE EARL OF RVTLAND, AND THE LADY CECILIE
COUNTESS, AND DOWAGER OF RVTLAND.
DEEM it not I beseech you (MOST ILLUSTRIOUS NOBLE LADIES) any the least
disparagement to your NOBILITIES, or blemish to your VERTVES, that your humble
servant, and Secretary, has presumed to join you, within the narrow
straites, and precincts of one, and that so short an Epistle, whom both terrene
Dignities and heavenly Blessings have so happily united in one most Noble
STOCK and LINEAGE. He is not ignorant that the SPLENDOUR of a DVTCHESSE cannot
commonly be paraleld by the DIGNITY and TITLE of a COUNTESS: yet when he
co^sidereth the RENOWN of a COUNTESS descended from most ancient and Noble
Families, Daughter to the Noble, and by Name and Descent most ancient S. John
Tufton of Tufton, and before she was wife to her most Noble Father, wife to
the noble heyr of the great and ancient L. Hungerford should any whitt
eclipse, shadow, or obscure the RADIANT BEAMS of a DVTCHESSE* but rather by
adding Splendour to Splendour, make both more GLORIOUS and RESPLENDENT.

Moreover he apprehends a mutual and long AFFECTION even from the young
years of the one betwixt MOTHER and DAVGHTER, as also the united hearts of
WIFE and DAVGHTER, both embracing the most Noble Earl of Rutland of famous
Memory, the one with the LOVE of a WIFE toward her HUSBAND, the other with
the AFFECTION of a DAVGHTER to her dear FATHER: Whose LOVE to requite, he with
his own hands styled your GRACE, his DEAR DAVGHTER; and your HONOR, his
DEAR WIFE of whom he further gave his most ample Testimony and in these
words: I WILL SAY THAT THERE WAS NEVER MAN HAD A MORE LOVING AND VIRTUOUS WIFE
THEN SHE HAS BEEN TO ME. And as your LOVE has been GREAT to this most
honorable Earl, who was Discreet in his words, Prudent and just in all his
Actions, Charitable to the Poor, Affable to all, Faithful to his Country,
Gracious to his Sovereign, Constant in his Faith and Religion, most beloved
and honored of all; and then whom noe Noble man of England was more affected,
or more Generally honored in his life, or more Bewailed and lamented after his
death; So your VERTVES do shine in this world with a most resplendent LIGHT,
and are the DIAMONDS and PEARLS which adorn the RING of your Ancient
NOBILITY. And these his, and your Heroical VERTVES, being grounded on the
ROCK of a true FAITH, as they have made the Earl, so they will make you
CONSTANT SVPPORTERS of holy CATHOLIC RELIGION; These being fixed to the ANCHOR
of HOPE, as they have guided him, so will they direct you to the quiet HAVEN of
eternal FELICITY. Yea it is verily to be hoped that he by these VERTVES, is
there already arrived, whilst the one of you like a PHAROS, and the other like
the CYNOSVRE with the FLAMES of CHARITY, do give LIGHT unto others, in this
time of DARKNESS.

Wherefore (MOST VIRTUOUS LADIES) to whom after the most Noble Earl (to whom
this WORK was first designed, and for whom before his death it was set on
the PRESS) can I more worthily dedicate these, CENTVRIES OF OUR
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, then to these, in whom the Noble Earl still in
renown SVRVIVES? If you esteem NOBILITY joined with SANCTITY, behold here
LUCIUS, HELENA, and CONSTANTINE, three great SAINTS, three great PRINCES, and
all great PROMOTORS and ESTABLISHERS of the RELIGION, which you embrace. If you
take pleasure to see the DAMASK ROSES of MARTYRDOM, here is an ALBAN our
PROTOMARTYR, here is an AMPHIBALVS with many more, all stout and valiant
CHAMPIONS, Who have sealed the TRVETH of our FAITH with there dearest BLOOD:
They all were once PILGRIMS in this VALE of TEARS, as you both now are, but
now they are glorious COVRTIOVRS in the Triumphant HIERARCHY. If you follow
their STEPS, and imitate their VERTVES and CONSTANCY in FAITH, you may have
great CONFIDENCE to be Partakers of the like GLORY: and in the mean time,
your NAMES being prefixed before their HEROICAL ACTIONS, may impetrate their
PATRONAGE in all your corporal and Spiritual NECESSITIES; and I shall pray to
THEM, and to all the SAINTS, and by THEM to the SAINT of SAINTS to bestow
on you here all TEMPORAL, and in HEAVEN all ETERNAL FELICITY.

MADAMS YOUR GRACES AND YOUR HONORS Most humble and devoted Servant R. B.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
AMONG all Writers, things written, or to be written whatsoever, none have
been, or can be in any time, or place, or by any person more useful, or
necessary then such, as have truly written, been or shall be written of the
true office and duty of all men, of all Estates and conditions to God, and his
hig^est ruling Powers; this being the chiefest end of all men in this world to
do and perform suc^ duty. This is the end of all good Laws and Lawemakers.
Histories, and Historians, divine, and humane, to give and leave direction both
in present, and to Posterity to all men, how to live in duty to heavenly and
terrene Authority. And to take the word History, Historia, (...), in the
most true and proper sense, meanind and etymology, (...), spectare vel
cognoscere, to behold or know what they write. The holy Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, and other holy Writers of holy Scriptures, beholding and most
certainly knowing of God, by divine revelation what they committed to writing,
are most properly and truly the best Historians, and their Writings most
properly best and truest Histories: and next to them the true Narration or
History of their Traditions, and holy doctrine and teachings which were most
true and certain, taken from the most ancient and approved Antiquities,
Antiquaries and Registers of those things where they were performed, And in
times and places of Controversies, Contentions and Questions about Religion,
noe History, Narration, or Exposition, as History signifies of Ecclesiastical
affairs, can be more requisite, or necessary to know, and truly find true
Religion, to receive and profess it.

Wherefore seeing all true Christians confess, and agree, that this holy Law,
Religion, Religation, and Duty was truly taught by Christ, and his holy
Apostles, and Disciples, and, as in many other Kingdoms, and Countries, so in
this Noble Kingdom of great Britain, by his greatest Apostles, and
Disciples, S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Joseph of Aramathia that buried Christ, and
others then, and after most holy and learned true Apostolic men: and nothing
is more common, and frequent in the mouths, and penns of the learned then that
the Britans receiving this most true and holy Religion, never left, lost,
changed or altered it, not when they left, or lost the greatest part of their
Country in the six hundred years of Christ, nor long after; And all Writers
agree, that never any Heresy except the Pelagian, of which it was happily
freed by our renowned Apostles and Prelates S. German, S. Lupus, S. Seuerus and
S. David, took root in Britain for a long time after.

By which we are assured by all accounts, that the Church of Britain enjoyed
many glorious Apostles, Apostolic Saints and others, teaching, preaching, and
professing with the Church and Christians here the most holy and undoubted true
Religion of Christ in all Articles, both now questioned and others, as all our
Rulers spiritual and temporal, Kings and Subjects, Britans and Saxons did,
thereby giving and duly to this renowned, and greatest Island, the name and
Title of the most Noble and Holy first Christian Kingdom in the world. To
renew and illustre whose honor and glory, therein (lately too much by some
obscured) and show the way of truth to all that be now wandering in error, and
want direction, to know the holy true Religion of those happy times in this
Nation, that if they will not be wilfully erring and ignorant, they may easily
and plainly know it, and securely embrace and profess it, as their holy, and
Religious Ancestors and Predecessors did. This duty has chiefly called upon
me to write this Ecclesiastical History, of our Noble Britain, deducing it
from the Nativity of our blessed Savior Christ Jesus until the happy, full
Conversion of our Ancestors the Saxons in the seventh hundred year, after
which time our Ecclesiastical Histories are plain and perfect, not needing
helps, or Additions.

And this which I have taken in hand, especially the first 600. years, are the
most difficulte Work Britain had to be performed in this kind, most or many
of the Antiquities and Monuments of those times by many outrages of enemies to
those holy days, parsons, and proceedings, destroyed, consumed, concealed,
suppressed, defaced, or abused, and those that from many difficulties, and
dangers be still preserved, are not without great favor, labor, diligence
and cost to poor Students, especially Catholics to be obtained. Yet I a poor
Catholic Student in holy learning from my young years, unto my now old Age,
may boldly confess, which this History itself will prove, that I have seen,
and diligently perused the most and best Monuments, and Antiquities extant, or
their true Copies, which I could learn of, know and procure, requisite and
useful for such a Work, and therefore at the entreaty and desire of diverse my
learned friends, having better opinion of my studies and reading, then I dare
affirm of my self, have taken this great charge in hand, and wholly
performed and ended it, written in our English tongue, because principally of
England, and to English men.

FINIS.
AVTHOR ad Lectorem.
STEWKLIA, me paruum genuisti magna: parents
Quam faelix, antiqua magis, BROVGHTONIA Turris.
Hunc LANCASTRA locum tenet, HVNTINGTONA priorem,
Quo cum Matre Pater sub saxo conditurvno.
Quos sociat Tumulus, socient and caelica Regna,
RICHARDVMQVE, sua reliqua cum prole perennes.
Qui legis haec, relegens (te supplex oro) preceris.
THE INDEX OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE FIRST TOME.
THE FIRST AGE.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. TReating generally of the Nativity of Christ, in the time
of Augustus Emperor of Rome, and Kymbelnie King of Britain: And how it came
to the knowledge of the Britans. page 1. Chapt. ij. Contcining Diverse
particular wonderful things, (at, or about the time of the Birth of Christ) at
Rome; or in other places which came thither by true relation; by means whereof
our Britans at Rome, and they in Britain from them, took soon notice of his
Nativity. 3 Chap. iij. Of diverse particular motives, preparations, and
dispositions at home, for the inhabitants of Britain, to learn out, know,
and embrace the Nativity, and Religion of Christ. 9 Chap. iiij. Of the time of
the Empeperour Tyberius. 12 Chap. v. Further continuing the extraordinary
preaching and revealing of Christ at Rome, by means whereof among many others,
diverse Britans were connerted in the days of Tyberius. 18 Chap. vj. That S.
James the Apostle, who is commonly said to have preached in Spain in this
time, did not preach in Ireland, as some write: yet his preaching to the Jews
in Spain might prepare the way for the spiritual good of some in Britain,
although none of them conucrted by him. 25 Chap. vij. Of the time of Caius
Caligula, Emperor; and some Christian Britans of this nation, probably both at
Rome, and in Britain in his days. 30. Chap. viij. Of the time of Cla^dius,
and how by our Protestants testimony one of the twelve Apostles then preached
in Britain. 36 Chap. ix. Wherein is proved by Protestant Antiquaries, that
among the three Apostles S. Peter, S. Paul, and S. Simon Zelotes which are
thought by any Antiquaries to have preached hear in Britain, it was not S.
Paul, which first preached hear, but S. Peter. 40. Chap. x. How S. Simon
Zelotes never Preached in this our Britain, ^uen by the best testimony of
Protestants, and others: nor any Simon an Apostle, but S. Simon Peter; and
perhaps S. Simon Leprosus, or S. Nathantel, by by some called S. Simon. 43
Chap. xj. Wherein Diverse Protestants incline to think S. Peter preached here
in Britain, before his com^ing to Rome: and what probability that opinion
has. 49 Chap. xij. Wherein is showed, to be the most probable opinion, that S.
Peter at his first coming to Rome, was received thereby Britans of this
Nation: and who probably they were. 54 Chap. xiij. Making manifest unto us:
how, and whom in particular, S. Peter the Apostle sent from Rome unto us: and
so consequently into this kingdom of Britain also, so known and renowned
then, among the Nations of the western world. 63 Chap. xiiij. Wherein is
proved by many Arguments, Authorities, and Antiquaries both Catholics and
Protetansts, that S. Peter the Apostle parsonally preached, and founded
Christian Religion in this kingdom. 68 Chap. xv. Wherein is both Answer Made
to Protestant objections against S. Peter's preaching in Britain, by the
Protestants themselves, and their own Authors; and by the same confirmed, that
S. Peter preached in in this kingdom. 80 Chap. xvj. Wherein is set down both
by Protestants, and others, when S. Peter pr^^ched in Britain: if not before
his coming to Rome, yet after^a^d both in the days of Claudi^s, and N^ro. 85
Chap. xvij. Wherein is proved, by the best ^ngli^h Protestant writ^rs, their
B^^h^^s, and others, that S. Peter founding the Church of Britain, ordained in
it, Archbishops, Bishops and Priests. 90 Chap. xviij. Wherein are set down by
warrant of Protestants, and other A^thorities the names in particular of the
first Archbishop, and diverse Bishops of, or in Britain, in this time by S.
Peter's Ordination. 92 Chap. xix. Of diverse Christian Churches, or Ora^o^ies,
such as the state of things then allowed, erected, and founded in Britain, in
the time of saint Peter's preaching here. 100 Chap. xx. Wherein for the better
decerning of truly consecrated Bishops, so many Ecclesiastical matters
depending there upon, is showed by the Antiquities how these Bishops were here
consecrated in the Apostles time and succeeding Ages. 103 Chap. xxj. Of the
coming of S. Joseph of Aramathia, who buried Christ, into this our Britain:
And how it is made doubtful, or denied by many writers, but without either
reason or Authority. 106 Chap. xxij. Wherein is proved by all Kind of
testimonies, and authorities, that for certain, S. Joseph of Aramathia, with
diverse holy Associates, came into, preached, lived, died, and was buried in
Britain, at the place now called Glastenbury in Summerset shire. 108 Chap.
xxiij. Examining who sent S. Joseph hither, and evidently proving that he was
not sent into Britain by S. Philipp the Apostle from our neighboring Gallia
or France: confuting all pretended arguments, and authorities to that purpose.
111 Chapt. xxiv. Further proving that S. Philipp the Apostle was not in that
Gallia France next to Britain, neither were S. Joseph and his associates
t^^r^, or came from thence into Britain. 116 Chap. xxv. That many other
Christians came ^ither, especially into the N^rthren parts, and Islands with S.
Joseph of Aramathia, besides them which continued with him at Glastenbury: and
many of them married with Britans continuing Christianity hear in their
children, and posterity, until the general Conversion of Britain, under the
first Christian Kings, Lucius, and Donaldus. 124 Chapt. xxvj. Of the coming,
and settling of saint Joseph and his company, where Glastenbury now is, then a
wilderness, rather to profess the penitential contemplative Eremiticall
Religious life, then employ their time in preaching. 127 Chap. xxvij. That
saint Joseph did not actually convert to the Christian Religion, either King
Aruiragus, Coillus or Marius. 131 Chap. xxviij. In what reverend sense S.
Joseph of Aramathia is termed Apostle by some holy Fathers, the renowned
sanctity of him, and his companions, together with some particular points of
their holy Religion, now denied by some, but even from their time to this,
Miraculously approved. 135 Chap. xxix. Wherein is showed how our Protestant
Antiquaries and others of England vehemently contending to prove that saint
Paul the Apostle preached hear in Britain, do prove no such thing, by any
Authorities they allege for his being hear. 139 Chap. xxx. How it is very
probable, that saint Paul preached hear in Britayne although not until long
after that saint Peter and his Disciples had first hear founded the Church of
Christ. 144 Chap. xxxj. Concerning the time of S. Pouls coming into, and
preaching in Britain. That it could not be until the later end of the Empire
of Nero, a little before the Martyrdom of saint Poule, and was hear, but a
very short time. 147 Chap. xxxij. Of our holy Christian Britans in Rome at this
time, and cheifely of Lady Claudia, and her holy family. 153 Chap. xxxiij. Of
S. Peter his return from Britain to Rome, and fettling the Apostolic Papal
power there. His great care of Britain: and our Christian Britans dutiful
love, and honor to him. 161 Chap. xxxiv. Entreating of the time of Pope Linus,
Vespasian Emperor, and Marius King of Britain: and of our Christians in those
days, both at Rome, in Britain, and other places. 165 Chap. xxxv. Of the
state of Christian Religion in Britain in the time of Pope Cletus, King
Marius, or Coillus: and how we had hear in Britain a continued Succession
both of Priests and Bishops all this first hundred of years. 169 Chap. xxxvj.
Of the state of Ecclesiastical affairs in Britain in the Papacy of S.
Clement, Empire of Traian and Reign of King Coillus, unto the end of this
first hundred of years of Christ. 173
THE SECOND AGE.
THE I. CHAPTER. Wherein is related by all Testimonies of Protestants, and
others, how in the Papacy of S. Anacletus, this kingdom was divided into
Provinces for Christian Primats and Bishops, and that these Bishops and holy
Priests were Massing sacrificing Priests, and consecrated by such form and
manner of Consecration, as the present Roman Church now uses, as likewise all
our Primative British Bishops and Priests were: and diverse such sent into
these parts by this holy Pope, as saint Peter, and Clement had given charge
before. 185 Chap. II. How in the Papacy of saint Euaristus, and Empire of
Traiane, the same holy Pope sent a Legate to our King in Britain to exhort him
to Christian Religion, and the benefit thereof, Traian commanding that
Christians should not be persecuted. 192 Chap. III. Of the state of Britain in
Ecclesiastical Affairs in the time of saint Alexander Pope, Adrianus
Emperor, and Coillus, or Lucius his son King hear. Their affections to
Christian Religion, and of diverse Apostolic men sent from the Sea of Rome
preaching hear. 195 Chap. IV. Of the Ecclesiastical estate of Britain in the
Popedom of Saint Sixtus, the rest of the Empire of Adrianus, and beginning of
Antoninus Pius. How many learned Britains were converted, and converted others,
to the faith of Christ in this time. 200 Chap. V. Of the great increase of
Christians in Britain in the Papacy of saint Telesphorus and saint
Higinius, and how King Lucius himself did now either actually receive and
privately profess the Christian Religion, or made promise thereof. 208 Chap.
VI. Wherein is entreated what learned and Apostolic men they were which
preached in this time in Britain, and converted King Lucius, and very many of
his people. Such were saint Timothy, saint Marcellus, Mansuetus, Theanus
with others. 212 Chap. VII. Declaring many Human lets and Impediments,
hindering King Lucius, and his Noble Britans some years from publicly
professing Christian Religion, which secretly they embraced: and the occasions
of diverse mistakings either of Historians, or their Scribes, in the Date,
times, and Titles of letters written about the Conversion of Britain to the
faith of Christ. 219 Chap. VIII. Of the Holy Pope S. Pius, and our renowned
Christian Britans by their Mother S. Claudia, S. Pudendentia, saint Nouatus,
saint Timotheus and saint Praxedes with their holy families and friends in
Rome. 223 Chap. IX. Of S. Timothy still preaching in Britain, his disposing
his te^porall goods in Rome for entertaining and releeuing persecuted Priests
and Christians, his house there being dedicated a chief Church, most
Christians resorting to it. And other Apostolic men sent from Rome into
Britain in this time. 227 Chap. X. Of the last holy labors of S. Timothy in
Britain, his honor with S. Denis the Areopagite, his return from hence to
Rome, and Martyrdom there, and Martyrdom of S. Pius Pope in the same place.
231 Chap. XI. Of the holy Popes next succeeding Saint Pius, and their
Religion. The favorable Edict of Marcus Aurelius Emperor for defense and
protection of Christians and the Christian Lieutenants Trebellius and Pertinax,
with the forhidding the Druids Religion, occasions of the public receiving and
profession of Christianity in Britain by King Lucius and his subjects. 234
Chap. XII. How the Religion of the Druides in Britain made some binderance for
the general receiving of the law of Christ; But convicted to be abominable
Idolatry, and Superstition, the Professors of it generally embraced the faith
of Christ, detesting their former Infidelities and Impieties. 240 Chap. XIII.
Of Pope S. Eleutherius, and how in his Papacy, and by his Papal order and
power Britain had the honor to be the first Christian kingdom in the world,
and eldest daughter of the mother Church of Christ, King Lucius by his
Ambassadors and petition to the Pope of Rome so obtaining. 247 Chap. xvj.
Wherein is related, how King Lucius did not only sue unto the Pope of Rome by
his Embassadges, for the general settling of Christian Religion in Britain,
but for civil and temporal laws also to be allowed by him to rule hear in
Temporal affairs. 252 Chap. xv. The mission of the holy Legates saints
Damianus, Fugatianus Bishops, and diverse others from saint Eleutherius Pope of
Rome, at the request of saint Lucius King hear in Britain, by Authority to
plant, and setle hear the true Christian Religion. 260 Chap. xvi. How these
holy Roman Legates by Power and Commission from the Pope, and Apostolic See of
Rome, converted and confirmed unto, and in the faith of Christ, all manner of
Parsons in all places of Britain, whether the Nobility, Flamens, Archflamens,
or of what Order or degree soever. 266 Chp. xvij. How in Britain these holy
Legates placed Archbishops and Bishops in our Cities, Archbishops in the places
of Archflamens, and Bishops for Flamens. And how by all writers, such dignities
were among the ancient Pagans, both in Britain and other Nations. 272 Chapt.
xviij. In what Places of Britain these chiefest commanding Archflamens were,
to wit at London, York and Caerlegion, and how these Roman Legates placed for
them Archbishops, with their several commands, and Jurisdictions, some of them
by the Apostoli^e power extending, and commanding over Provinces and Countries
not temporally subject to King Lucius of Britain, or the Romans, but rather
enemies unto them in civil affairs. 279 Chap. xix. Of the Episcopal Sees and
Cities, of the Inferior Bishops subordinate to the Archbishops, which where,
and how many they were, ordained by these Roman Legates, and continued Bishops
Sees in the Romans and Britans time. 285 Chap. xx. How S. Eleutherius Pope did
not only by his Papal Authority establish and settle Religion, and
Ecclesiastical things hear, but directed what temporal Laws were to be
used, appointed the bounds and limits of this kingdom, sending and allowed
Crown to our King: and such Laws and Order continued hear in many Ages
after. 295 Chapt. xxj. Of many Archiepiscopall, Episcopal and other Churches,
and Monasteries both of men and women founded, and ritcly endowed and
privileged in this time. 304 Chap. xxij. How after these Roman Legates had
fully settled the affairs, and estate of our Church hear, they went again to
Rome to procure the Pope there to ratify and confirm what they had done,
which he did, and they returned hither again with that his Confirmation, and
many other Preachers then sent hither from Rome. 311 Chap. xxiij. Of the
Archbishops of London, York and Caerlegion in this time in particular: and
many other inferior Bishops, and the Roman Church Discipline hear also settled
by Papal Authority. 316 Chap. xxiv. Of the coming of these holy Legates to
Glastenbury, their holy labors, deeds and long aboade there, their renewing
there the old Religeous Order of S. Joseph of Aramathia, and his brethren,
great privileges and indulge^ces by the^ procured to that holy place, the
glory, honor and renown thereof, in the whole Christian world. 322 Chap. xxv.
Of the great honor, and Renown of our old British Apostolic Order of
Religion, from the coming of saint Joseph of Aramathia, in the year of
Christ's Nativity 63. (without any discontinuance, or Interruption by some, and
very short time after his death by all) many hundreds of years in great
perfection without any change or alteration, (to be named a Mutation of
Monastical Rule) being the Mother or Nurse of Monastical holy life to many
Nations, and Religious Orders in them: by which also many Cou^tryes to Christ
were converted. 328 Chap. xxvj. That diverse of the Britans which lived in that
part of Britain, then called Albania now Scotland, were converted by the same
means, and manner by these Roman Legates, as the other Britans of Loegria and
Cambria were at that time. 333 Chap. xxvij. Of diverse books or writings of
saint Phaganus, Damianus, Eluanus, Meduuinus, and others: Charters and
Immunities of Pope Eleutherius, and King Lucius: the Scripturs hear received
in the old Latin Translation, and the same Canon of them, which Catholics now
observe, and follow. 337
THE THIRD AGE.
THE I. CHAPTER. Wherein is delivered, that saint Victor being now Pope,
Seuerus Emperor, and saint Luciu^ yet King of Britain, but shortly dying,
saint Victor was Supreme in government of the whole Church of Christ, in
Asia, Afrike and Europe, and particularly in Britain, which so acknowledged,
and received from him the true observation of Easter, as it had done with other
Catholic customs, from saint Eleutherius before. 343 Chap. ij. Of the time,
and place of King Lucius his death; That he did not die, or was martyred in
Germany. Neither had he any Sister called Emerita martyred there. It was an
other Prince of Britain after this time. This our first Christian King Lucius
died at Gloucester in Britain. 346 Chapt. iij. How notwithstanding the death
of King Lucius without Heir to succeed in the government of the kingdom, the
Brittans perseuered constantly in the Christian faith: and the Scots by
Preachers sent from saint Victor Pope of Rome at the entreatie of their King
Donalde received the faith, and as the Brittans continued in it until the
Protestants time, even by their own confessions. 350. Chap. iv. That allthough
the being of the Scots in Britain in the time of saint Victor is uncertain,
and not proved, but rather otherwise, yet the Inhabitants of the part now
called Scotland, Britans or whosoever, were converted in King Lucius and this
time. The Bishops of the converted Scots were ever true Bishops, and they ever
obedient to the Sea of Rome 354 Chap. v. How the Emperor Seuerus, which came
into Britain and ruled hear King, after Lucius, was of the Regal Race of the
Britans and true heir to the Crown hear, and so of others reigning hear
after him. 362 Chapt. vj. Of the state of Christians especially, in Britain in
the time of Seuerus, under whom allthough in some parts there was great
persecution of Christians, yet not hear in Britain, but the Christians were
hear in quiet without affliction. 365 Chap. v^j. How in the time of Bassianus
son of Seuerus being Emperor ^e was both in Britain, whence he was
descended, and other places: he was a friend to Christians, and Persecutour of
their Persecutours. How saint Zepherine the Pope then sent diverse Apostolic
men into Britain. 369 Chap. viij. How very many Kings with variable
proceedings Ruled hear in Britain before Constantius Father to the great
Constantine by saint Helen our British Lady: yet the Christians hear were
quiet from Persecution, in all or most of their time. 372 Chap. ix. Of the
Popes of Rome in this time, how by all writers, even the Protestants
themselves, they were holy men, and both they and other learned holy Fathers in
this time, were of the same faith and Religion, which the present Roman Church
and Catholics now profess, and Protestants deny and persecute. 377 Chap. x. Of
saint Mello, or Mellon a Britan, sent Archbishop by Pope Stephen from Rome to
Rhoan in Normandy. Of saint Mellorus a Noble British M^rtyr, and a
Provincial Council of British Bishops hear in Cornewalle in this time. 386
Chapt. xj. Containing an abbreuiate of some Roman Emperors, and inuincibly
proving that the most holy Queen and Empress S. Helen, was a Britan of Regal
Race, the only true and lawful wife of Constantius Emperor: and Constantine
the Great their true lawful Son and Heir, borne in Britain. 391 Chap.
xij. Of the other three children, of Constantius and saint Helen, and
particularly of two of them saint Lucius and saint Emerita, renowned and
glorious Martyrs for holy Christian Religion, among foreign Pagans, S. Lucius
an holy Bishop preaching it to them in Germany. 401 Chap. xiij. That saint
Helen was all her life an holy and virtuous Christian, never infected with
Iudaisme, or any error in Religion. And that Constantius her Husband long lived
and dyed a Christian, and protected both Britain and other Countries under him
from Persecution. 406 Chap. xiv. By what wicked plotts, practices, and devises
Dioclesian and Maximian began and prosecuted their wicked Persecution of
Christians in Britain and how Constantius was innocent, and free therein. 413
Chap. xv. When, and by whom, the Persecution, called Dioclesians Persecution,
began in Britain: long before the Martyrdom of saint Alban and many hear
then martyred before him: and in what sense the Title Protomartyr, or prioritie
in Martyrdom is yet duly given to him. 417 Chap. xvj. The wonderful excess,
and extremity of this Persecution of the Christians in Britain, in general,
and the most greuious torments, miseries, and afflictions they endured, with
their renowned sanctity, constancy, and patience. 422 Chap. xvij. Of diverse
holy Martyrs, most cruelly putt to death at Wincester, Caerlegion, and other
places in Britain, long before the Martyrdom of S. Alban, with their great
honor and renown. 426 Chap. xviij. How saint Amphibalus a British Bishop,
and many holy and learned Priests of the Britans in this Persecution went to
the Scots and Picts, were reuereutly received of them, and preached; lived and
continued there in great Sanctity, and left great Succession of such, there
after them. 429 Chap. xix. The return of saint Amphibalus from the Scots to
the Britans: his coming to the house of saint Alban at Verolamium, and
preaching unto him: the miraculous vision, and Conversion of saint Alban,
their exceeding zeal and devotion, and delivery of S. Amphibalus at that time.
433 Chapt. xx. Of the holy and most constant faith, devotion, charity,
sufferings, miracles and Martyrdom of S. Alban. 438 Chap. xxj. The constant
profession of Christ, by the holy Soldier Heraclius, converted by the Miracles
of S. Alban, and his Martyrdom, in, and at the same time and place, with
saint Alban. 442 Chap. xxij. Of very many converted to Christ, by the
miraculous death of saint Alban, and after going to saint Amphibalus to be
fully instructed by him, suffered Mattyrdome, and being a thousand in number,
were diverse from the 1000. Martyrs at Lichfeild, and those near Verolamium.
445 Chap. xxiij. The Martyrdom of saint Amphibalus, and many others with him,
o^ at that time and place, and wonderful numbers converted then to Christ, by
the Miracles then there showed. 447 Chapt. xxiiij. How by Coilus being King,
and preuayling against the Roman Persecutours, and their adherents hear, the
Persecution in Britain ceased. 450
THE FOVRTH AGE
THE I. CHAPTER. OF the great peace, and quiet the Church of Britain enjoyed,
during the whole life, and Reign of Constantius Emperor, and King hear in
Britain; and Constantine his son by saint Helen was hear brought up in
Christian Religion. 457. or 475 Chapt. ij. Of the finding the holy Cross by S.
Helen in Constantius his time. His Christian life and death, and crowning his
son Conflantine Emperor hear in Britain. 462 Chap. iij. Of the coronation
and Christian beginning of Constantine the great Emperor, and the general
restoring and professon of Christian Religion in all places of Britain then
467 Chap. iv. Of Constantine his profession of Christ, his miraculous victories
against his Pagan Enemies, restoring and establishing Christian Religion, and
exalting the Professors thereof in all his Empire. 470 Chap. v. The miraculous
Baptism of Constantine at Rome by S. Syluester Pope. He was an holy and
Orthodoxe Emperor to his death, and both in the Greek Church and with those
of the Latin honored and styled an holy Saint. 474 Chap. vj. That S. Helen
ever professed herself a Christian: never joined with, but against the Jews.
Was in Britain when Constantine was baptized in Rome, and after going from
Britain to Rome, was there with Constantine present at the Roman Council,
consenting to the Decrees thereof. 478 Chap. vij. Of the presence at, allowance
and receiving of general Counsels by our Emperor Constantine, our Archbishop
and other Bishops of Britain: together with the doctrine, then professed in
those Counsels and after practiced in Britain. 482 Chap. viij. The general
establishing, endowing and honoring of Christian Religion, Bishops, Priests
other Clergy men, chaste and Religious parsons in all places of the Empire by
Constantine. 486 Chap. ix. Constantine did not prolonge his Baptism so long as
some write. He was not baptized, by an Arrian Bishop, never sell into
Arrianisme, or any Heresy. 489 Chap. x. The undoubted truth of the donation
and munificent enritching of the Church of Rome by Constantine the great
Emperor. 497 Chap. xj. Of the settling of the Imperial Seat at Bizantium, or
Constantinople, and Conversion of, or settling the Christian faith in many
Nations by the help of our British Emperor Constantine. But Ireland not then
converted. 500 Chap. XII. Of the calling of the Nicen Counsel by the temporal
assi^^ance of Constantine against the Arrian Heretics. The Decrees thereof,
highest spiritual Power of the Popes of Rome and general Councels, by
general agrcement of all, Pope, Emperor and others. 505 Chap. XIII. How
Britain received the Nicen Council, and agreed with the whole Catholic
Church, both in the observation of Easter, and all other holy Doctrins and
Observations. 511 Chap. XIV. Of the finding the holy Cross and sepulcher of
Christ by S. H^len, our British Queen, and Empress, and the great honor
done to them, and other holy Reliks of Christ's Passion. 513 Chap. XV. Of the
great and wonderful zeal, and devotion of saint Helen our British Queen,
and Empress. The long and painful Pilgrimages she performed to many far
and remote holy places, and Reliks. The sumptious and manifold Churches,
Monasteries, and Oratories she founded in many places. And after her long and
holy life, her happy end and death. 520 Chap. XVI. Of the holy Devout life of
Constantine, his Religion in many particulars. His death glorious, and not so
soon as some relate it. 530 Chapt, XVII. That the Popes and Church of Rome in
this time were of the same Religion they now are, and all Christian Catholics
then professed the same with them, and the Supremacy of that S^e Apostolic.
537 Chap. XVIII. The Constancy of Britain in the true Catholic Religion,
before, and after the Nicen Council, it had Bishops there, consented unto,
received, and kept inviolable the Decrees thereof, not admittin Heresy hear.
541 Chap. XIX. How Britain had many Bishops at the true great Sardican
Council: they and the other Bishops, Priests, and Christians hear professed
the true Catholic faith, and were free from Heresy. 548 Chap. XX. How
Britain having many Bishops at the great Council at Ariminum, all were free
from Heresy; And very few Britans consented to Arianisme: but were free from
Heresy until that of Pelagius. 551 Chap. XXI. Chiefly entreating of Liberius
Pope and Constantius Emrour, manifestly clearing saint Liberius, making him an
holy Catholic Pope, and Saint: and the Emperor Constantius a true penitent
and to dye a Catholic. 556 Chap. XXII. Julian the Apostata never persecuted
the Christians of Britain: But they, during the whole time he was Caesar or
Emperor, were hear in peace and quiet, both from Persecution, Paganism, or
heresy. 562 Chap. XXIII. Of diverse renowned Saints hear in Britain in this
time, saint Kebius a glorious Catholic Bishop, a great and long acquitaince
of saint Hilary of France, saint Decumanus and others. 565 Chap. XXIV.
Wherein Maximus our King and Emperor is cleared from many imputations, and
slanders especially concerning true Catholic Religion, which he both
professed in himself, and maintained in others, all the other Emperors and
Popes were of the same Religion the Roman Church now professes. 570 Chap. XXV.
Of many renowned, holy, and learned Bishops, Apostolic men, and other great
Saints hear in Britain in this time. 577 Chap. XXVI. Of the honorable
Translation of the Reliks of saint Andrew Apostle from Achaia to Britain by
saint Regulus. The great reverence both Princes and others hear gave unto
them, and such, and professed in other matters the Religion, which Catholics
now do. 587 Chap. XXVII. Of many renowned Archbishops of all our
Archiepiscopall Sees hear, many other learned and holy Bishops and Apostolic
men hear^ in this time: and their Religion, the Catholic Religion. 590. or 560
Chap. XXVIII. Of very many and renowned Monasteries and holy Monastical
parsons in Britain in this Age. 599 Chap. XXIX. Of certain Heretics and
Heresies, the Trimothian and Pelagian Britain in this time. 606
CATALOGVS AVCTORVM OMNIVM TAM ANtiquorum, quam Neotericorum, tota hac Quatuor
Primorum Saeculorum Ecclesiastica magnae Britanniae Historia Citatorum.
A.
ABbas Spanhimensis. Abbas Vspergensis. Abbas Fecknam. Abbreuiatio Chronicorum.
Abbreuiatio temporum M. S. Abdias. Abraham Esca. Abraham Leuita. Abraham
Ortelius. Abstractum memorabilium Antiquitatum. Acta S. Damiani, and Fugatiani.
Acta Eleutherij Papae. Acta Nouati. Acta S. Philippi. Acta S. Sebastian. Acta
S. Stephani Papae. Ado Treuirensis. Ado Viennensis. Aegidius Schudus. Aelius
Sampridius. Alanus Boutchard. Albertus Krantzius. Aldus Manutius. Alexander
Papa III. Alphonsus rex. Aluredus Rieuallensis. Amalarius. S. Ambrosius.
Amonianus Marcellinus. Anastasius Bibliothecarius. S. Anactetus. Andelmus.
Andrue de Chesne. Andreas Altham. Anicetus. Annals Baronij. Annals Britanniae
minoris. Annals Burtonenses. Annals Durenses. Annals Galliae. Annals
Ecclesiae Luciensis. Annals Ecclesiae Verdunensis. Anonymus in uita S* Albani.
Anonymus in l. Sancto Greal. Annotationes Baronij in Martyrologium Romanum.
Antiquitates Ecclesiae S. Gereonis Coloniae. Antiquitates Ecclesiae
Landaffensis. Antiquitates Ecclesiae Verdunensis. Antiquitates Ecclesiae
Wintoniensis. Antiquitates Glastonienses. Antiquitates Glasconi; in tabulis
ligneis. Antiquitates Galliae Belgicee. Antiquitates Monasterij Croylandiae. S.
Antonnus. Antonius Democharez. Antonius Sabellicus. Antonius Wernerus.
Arnobius. A^noldus Mermannius. Articuli Religionis Protestanticae. S. Asaphus.
S. Athanasius. S. Augustinus Hypponensis. S. Augustinus Anglorum Apostolus.
Auctor trium conuersionum Britanniae. Auctor libri statuum Hiberniae. Auctor
libri de vitis Sanctorum inter opera S. Isidori. Auctor Martyrologij Anglicani.
Aulus Gellius. Aurelius Victor.
B.
BAlaeus. v. Ioannes. Barlowe. Baptista Mantuanus. Baronius. v. Caesar.
Bartholomeus Carranza. S. Basilius. Beatus Rhenanus. Beuterus. Beda
Venerabilis. Bellarminus. v. Robertus. Berengosus. Bernardus Guintius. S.
Bernardus. Berosus. Beza. Bibliotheca patrum Minor. Bilson. Binnius. v.
Seuerinus. Bostius. Bonston Buriensis. Bracton. Brenzius. Breuiarium Romanum.
Breuiarium Ecclesiae Tolletanae. Bridges v. Ioannes. Bruti Historia. Bulla
Honorij.
C.
CAelius Sedulius. Caesar Comment v. Julius. Caesar Baronius. Caius Suetonius.
Calendarium Ecclesiae Salisburiensis. Calepinus. v. Ioannes. Camdenus v.
Guilielmus. Cantilupus. v. Nicolaus. Carolus Sigonius. Cassianus. v. Ioannes.
Cassiodorus. Cassius. Catalogus Episcoporum Coloniensium. Catalogus Episcoporum
Metensium. Catalogus Episcoporum Triuirensium. Catalogus Episcoporum
Tullensium. Catalogus regum Britanniae. Caxton. Cedrenus v. Ioannes. Charta
Regis Arthur. Charta Regis Cadwalladri. Charta S. Patricij. Chemnitius
Chronicorum Abbreuiationes. Chronicon Abtingoniense. Chronicon Angliae Vetus.
Chronicon Chronicorum. Chronicon Eusebij. Chronicon Freculphi. Chronicon M. S.
Chronicon Gallicum. Chronicon Westmonasterienses. S. Chrysostomus. Ciaconius.
Cicero. v. Marcus. Claudius Ptolomaeus. S. Clemens Alexandrinus. S. Clemens
Romanus. Comment: in Claud: Ptolom. Compabellus. Compendium Christianae
Religionis. Compilatio M. S. de gestis Bri. Concilium Antiochense. Concilium
Arelatense. Concilium Ariminense. Concilium Nicanum 1. Concilium Nicaenum 2.
Concilium Romanum. Concilium Sardicense. Conradus Gesnerus. Constantinus
Magnus. Constantinus Monasses. Constitutiones Apostolicae. Continuator
Venerabilis Bedae. Continuator Florentij Wigorniensis. Continuator Sigiberti.
Cornelius Grasius. Cornelius Tacitus. S. Cyprianus. S. Cyrillus.
D.
S. Damasus. David Powell. Decretales Epistolae. Democharez. v. Antonius.
Dicetus M. S. Diptoma Arthuri regis. Dio. Diodorus Siculus. S. Dionisius
Alexandrinus. S. Dionisius Areopagita. Dionisius Halicarneseus. Drogo Episcopus
Hostiensis. S. Dorotheus. Downame. Drayton. v. Michael.
E.
EDicta M. Aurelij. Edwardus Grymston. Edwardus Howes. S. Edwardi regis leges.
Egbertus Abbas. Eluanus Aualonius. S. Epiphanius. Epistola Alexandri Papae 3.
ad Henricum 2. regem Angliae. Epistola Comptouincialium Episcoporum Arelat: ad
Leonem Papam. Epistola Flauij Vopisci ad Adrianum. Imperatorem. Epistola
Ioannis Papae ad Ethelredu^, and Alfredum reges Angliae. Epistola Kenulphi
regis Anglorum ad Leonem Papam Epistola Nicolaij Papae 2. ad Edward. Angliae
regem. Eremita Britannicus. Ethelwerdus. Euagrius. Euangelium ascriptum
Nicademo. Eusebius Pamphilus. S. Eusebius Papa. Eutropius.
F.
S. Fabianus. Fasciculus Temporum. Fasti regum and Episcoporum Angliae.
Fecknam. v. Abbas. Fenestella. Flauius Josephus. Flauius Vopiscus. Florentius
Wigorniensis Florilogium Matthew: Westmonasteriensis. Fortescue. Fortunatus. v.
Venantius. Franciscus Belforest. Franciscus Burgoin. Franciscus Feuerdentius.
Francisciscus Godwin. Franciscus Hastings. Franciscus Mason. Franciscus Modius.
Franciscus Petrarcha. Freculpus Episcopus Luxoniensis.
G.
GAlfridus Monumetensis. GAllic: orat: panag: ad Constantinum. Gaspar
Bruschius. Gaufridus abbas Burtonensis. S. Gelasius. Genebrardus. Genuadius
Patriarch: lonst. Georgius Abbots. Georgius Bucanan. Georgius Lilius. Georgius
Mayor. Georgius Vicelius. Gerardus Mercator. Gildas Sapiens. Giraldus
Cambrensis. Giraldus Ferrar. Godwin. v. Fransciscus. Gordanus. Gotcelinus. v.
Ioannes. Gratianus. S. Gregorius Magnus. Gregorius Papa 7. S. Gregorius
Nazianzenus. S. Gregorius Turonensis. Gualterus Oxoniensis. Gulielmus Camdenus.
Gulielmus Eisengrenius. Gulielmus Harrisius M. S. Gulielmus Harrison. Gulielmus
Lambertus. Gulielmus Malmesburiensis. Gulielmus Reed. Gulielmus Wernerus.
H.
HAmolarius. Hacluit. v. Richardus. Hardinge. v. Ioannes. Harpesfield. v.
Nicolaus. Hartmanus Schedel. Harrisius M. S. v. Guilielmus. Harrison. v.
Gulielmus. Hector Boethius. Hegesippus. Hermes. v. S. Pastor. Henricus a S.
Fide. Henricus de Erford. Henricus Huntingtoniensis. Henricus 8. rex Angliae
Countra Lutherum. Henricus Pantaleon. Henricus 2. Rex Angliae in litteris
patentibus. Henricus Spondanus. Herodianus. Hiericus Gallus. Sanct. Hieronimus.
Hieronimus Gebulinus. Sanct. Hilarious. Historia antiqua M. S. Ecclesiae
Cantuariensis. Historia Gallica M. S. Historia Tripartita. Historia Vaticana M.
S. Holinshed. v. Ranulphus. Homerusl Honorius. Hooker. Houeden. v. Rogerus.
Howes. Humfredus Lhuid. Hunibaldus.
I.
IAcobus Bergomensis. Iacobus Cardonus. Iacobus Gedeon. Iacobus Genuensis.
Iacobus Grynaeus. Iacobus Rex Angliae in orat. Parlam. Jewel. S. Ignatius.
Index Protestant. in Gul. Malmesb. Index Protest. in Bed. Ingulphus Abbas.
Innocentius 1. Inscriptio antiqua in Coenobio Glastoniensi. Ioannes Anglicus.
Ioannes Auicius. Ioannes Balaeus. Ioannes Baptista. Ioannes Bridges. Ioannes
Caius. Ioannes Calepinus. Ioannes Capgrauius. Ioannes Cassianus. Ioannes
Cedrenus. S. Ioannes Chrysostomus. S. Ioannes Damascenus. Ioannes Diaconus.
Ioannes Fox. Ioannes Frisius. Ioannes Funccesius. Ioannes Gotceline. Ioannes
Hardingus. Ioannes Herorldus. Ioannes Ioliuettus. Ioannes Iotzelinus. Ioannes
King. Ioannes Leland. Ioannes Leanclauius. Ioannes Lydgate. Ioannes Martinus
Lydius. Ioannes Molanus. Ioannes Mercius. Ioannes Nauclerus. Ioannes Norden.
Ioannes Owen. Ioannes Papa III. Ioannes Papa V. Ioannes Pitheus. Ioannes
Priseus. Ioannes Psellus. Ioannes Rossaeus vel Roussaeus. Ioannes
Salesburiensis. Ioannes Seldom. Ioannes Speed. Ioannes Stowo. Ioannes Tigion.
Ioannes Trethemius. Ioannes Stumphius. Ioannes Wellis. Ioannes Whitguifte.
Ioannes Wilson. Ioannes Xephilinus. Ioannes Zonaras. Iodocus Coccius. Iodocus
Vaillichius. Jonas in vita S. Columbani. Josephus Benguion. Josephus Bargor.
Josephus Iudaeus. Josias Simleus. S. Irenetus. Isacius. S. Isidorus.
Itinerarium Giraldi Cambrensis. Julius Capitolinus. Julius Caesar. S. Iuo. S.
Justinius. Iustus Lipsius.
K.
Kenulphus rex Angliae. King. v. Ioannes.
L.
LAmberti perambulationes Ca^tiae. Lampridius. v. Aelius. Lazius. v. Wolfangus.
Laurentius Surius. Legend de l*Eglise de Charters. Legenda S. Timothei. Leges
Aluredi regis. Leges Gulielmi regis. Leland. v. Ioannes. S. Leo. S. Linus.
Lippolous. v. Zacharias. Lippomannus. Lucius Florus. Ludouicus Caelius.
Ludouicus de Mayence. Lydius. v. Ioannes.
M.
MAgdeburgrenses. Mamertius. Manuscriptum antiquum de vita S. Joseph ab
Aramathia. Manuscriprum Antiquum in Bibliotheca publica Cantabrigiae.
Manuscrip. Anti. in Ecclesia S. Petri in Cornehill. Londini. Manuscrip. Ant. in
Monasterio S. Chricij. Manuscrip. Ant. de vita S. Dubritij. Manuscrip. Ant.
caenob. Glaston. Manuscript Antiq. de vita sancti Melori. Manuscript Antiq. de
vita sanct. Mellonis. Manuscript Antiq. de regibus Angliae. Manuscript Antiq.
de vita S. Amphibali. Manuscrip. Ant. de vita S. Helenae. Manuscrip. ant.
Monasterrii Augustini variae. Manuscrip. Gallicum. Manuscrip. Peruetustum de
primo statu Ecclesiae Landaffensis. Manuscrip. Archiep. Cantua. Manuscripta
Historia de Romesey. Manuscripta Historia in tabulis ligneis Glastoniae.
Manuscrip. de Antiquitate Caenobij Glaston. per Gul. Malm. Manuscripta
compilatio de regibus Britanniae. Manuscrip. dictum Scala mundi. Manuscrip.
Ant. Eccles. Wintoniensis. Manuscrip. Ant. de vita S. Niniani. Manuscrip.
Vaticanum. Manuscrip. Ant. Britannicum. Manuscripta Historia Eccles. Angl. per
Gul. Harris. Manuscrip. Ant. de vitis Sanctorum. Manuscrip. de vita S. Albani.
Manuscrip. Historiae Roffensis. Manuscrip. de vita S. Amphibali. Manuscrip. de
vita S. Patricij. Manuscrip. de vita S. Kibij. Manuscrip. de vita S. Decumani.
Manuscrip. de vita S. Cadoci. Manuscrip. de vita S. Modwennae. Manuscrip. de
vita S. Dauidis. Manuscrip. de vita S. Gildae: Manuscrip. de vita S. Carantoci.
Manuscrip. de vita S. Gundlei. Mantuanus. v. Baptista. Marcellinus. Marcus
Antonius de Dominis. Marcus Aurelius. Marcus Tullius Cicero. Marianus Scotus.
Marius Maximus. Martinus Polonus. S. Martialis. Martialis poeta. Matthaeus
Parter. Matthaeus Paris. Matthaeus Sutcliffe. Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis.
Martyrologium Anglicanum. Martyrologium Rabani. Martyrologium Romanum.
Matyrologium Vsuardi. Mazarabicum Officium. Melito Sardens. Menologium
Graecorum. Methodius. Michael Drayton. Michael Glycas. Michael Syngelus.
Mountague.
N.
NAtalis lomes. Necchamus. Nennius. Nicephorus. Nicolaus Cantilupus. Nicolaus
Giles. Nicolaus Grachius. Nicholaus Harpesfield. Nicolaus Offa. Nicolaus Papa.
Nicolaus Vignier. Notitia Episcoporum orbis Christiani.
O.
OEcumenius. Onuphrius. Opimerus. Optatus Meleuitanus. Ormerod. Orosius. v.
Paulus. Otto Frigensis.
P.
PAnegyricus Constantino dictus. Panegyr. in nuptiis Constantini and Faustae.
Papinianus. Parkins. S. Pastor. Paterculus. v. Velleius. Paulinus Nolanus.
Paulus Diaconus. Paulus Orosius. M. Paiell. Pelagius. Petrus Cluniensis. Petrus
Merseus. Petrus de Natalibus. Philippus Bergomensis. Pius primus. Platina.
Plinius. Plutarchus. Polydorus Virgilius Polycrates. Pomponius Laetus.
Pontificale Romanum. Ponticus Virunnius. Porphirius. Probus. S. Prosper.
Protest. Theatrum magnae Britanniae. Protest. annotationes in Hen. Hungting.
Protestant: Concordantes. Prudentius. Ptolomaeus. v. Claudius. Ptolomeus
Lucensis.
R.
RAnulphus Holinshed. Ranulphus Higdenus. Regino. Reginaldus. B. Renanus.
Richardus Dinothus. Richardus Gibbonus. Richardus Hackluit. Richardus
Stannyhurst. Richardus Vitus. Richardus de Wasseburg. Rider. Robertus Barns.
Robertus Bellarminus. Robertus Caenalis. Robertus Claucestrensis. Robertus
Personus. Rodulphus de Diceto. Rodulphus Niger. Rogerus Houeden. Rolwinke. v.
Walterus. Rossaeus. v. Ioannes. Rufinus.
S.
SAbellicus. Schedel. Sebastianus Munsterus. Scriptor vitae S. Albani. Scriptor
vitae S. Diuidis. Scriptor vitae S. Helenae. Scriptor vitae S. Liuini Archiep.
Scroope. Sculcardus. Sedulius. v. Caelius. Seuerinus Binnius. Seuerus
Sulpitius. Sextus Aurelius. Sextus Rufus. Sigebertus Gemblacensis. Sigonius. v.
Carolus. Simeon Metaphrastes. Sixtus Senensis. Socrates. Sophronius
Hierosolimitanus. Sozomenus. Spartianus. Speed. v. Ioannes. Stanishurst. v.
Richardus. Stephanus Aduensis. Stowe. v. Ioannes. Strabo. Suetonius
Tranquillus. Suidas. Surius. v. Laurentius. Suteliffe. v. Matthaeus. Sybilla
Erithraea.
T.
TAbula antiqua in Caenobio Glaston: Tabula Ecclesiae Rhotomagensis. Tacitus.
v. Cornelius. Tertullianus. Theatrum conuersionis Gentium. Theatrum magnae
Britanniae. Thelesinus. Theodoretus. Theophanes Cerannius. Theophilactus.
Thomas Eboracensis. Thomas James. Thomas Rogers. Thomas Rudburne. Thomas
Thomasius. Thomas Twyne. Thomas Walsingam. Titus Liuius. Traditiones Romanae
apud Baron: Traianus ad Plinium. Trebellius. Trithemius. v. Ioannes. Trogus
Pompeius.
N.
VAlerius Maximus. Velleius Paterculus. Venantius Fortunatus. Veremundus.
Vicelius. v. Georgius. Victor Vticensis. Vincentius Lirinensis. Virgilius.
Viterbiense Chronicon. Virunnius. v. Ponticus. Volateranus. Vsuardus.
W.
WAlterus Rollewinke. Wandelbertus Prumiensis. Warwicensis. Wellis. v. Ioannes.
Whitguifte. v. Ioannes. Wolfangus Lazius.
X.
Xephilinus. v. Ioannes.
Z.
ZAcharias Lippolous. Zonaras. v. Ioannes. Zosimus.
IN LAVDEM AVTHORIS per Amicum.
HIstoricam, Braughtone, Fidem risere Prophani;
Inque Sacris, Propriam Substituere Fidem.
Sic prorevera, verisub imagine ponant
Somnia, quae Heracliti risibus apta crepant.
Temporis Annals Lucem, Monumentaque Patrum,
Tollere vesana sic nouitate student.
Expungunt vetera, and fingunt noua Saecula. Quare?
Nam vetera, ipsorum de nouitate Silent.
Perge istos Braughtone tuis configere Scriptis,
Quos praesens tanta luce refellit opus.
R. I.

TO MASTER RICHARD BROVGHTON, whom Venerable Age, Equal learning, and Tried
Virtue rank amongst the Worthies of our time. Upon his Ecclesiastical
History of Great Britain.
AMongst the VERTVES which a STORY crown,
TRVTH stand's at HELM: (whole Ages done)
It makes men, like an other Sun,
See what they were in THEIRS: Noe Smile, no Frown,
Noe fawning hopes, noe base unmanly fear,
Noe self sought glory, noe applawse
Ought to divert us from the LAWS
Of this forsaken GODDESS. Hence forebeare*
Profaners of such good: See hear a SIRE
Of the old frame, who dares not write
Things false; noe if he might;
Omit what is true: Blessed be such holy FIRE.
See, see and blush, Truth-killers, view this Book,
In which a Miracle appears,
Times past revived to freshest years,
And so a lick to what they were they look,
That should their Owners live and reed, they would swear
THESE DEEDS WERE OVRES; THESE TIMES. Then pray
Their Issue read them through, and say,
NOE FORGD VNTRVTH, NOE FALSITIE IS H^R^.
F. S.

DE EODEM.
GArrula nunc sileat VETERVM malesana FVRORVM
Lingua, REPRODVCI quae canit orb NIHIL.
Nunc ANTIQVORVM taceat lis alta SOPHORVM
Quae male PRAETERITVM posse redire negat:
Ecce REPRODVCIS VETERVM NOVA SAECVLA; quaeque
Tempora BRVTIGENIS, praeteriere, manent.
Reddita, nostra sibi est nunc ANGLIA; Teque BRITANNI
Praeside, quem cultum deseruere, tenent.
Saecula SATVRNI per te Rediuiua priorem
Iactando vultum, quem tenuere, ferunt.
F. S.

DE EODEM.
If what PYTHAGORAS held of Souls were true.
I Would swear BARONIVS Soul had place in you.
F. S.

IN PRAISE OF THE AVTHORE.
PIts had thou been so courteous to have said. See the worthy praises of M.
Broughton in D. John Pits de illustribus Angliae Scriptoribus aetat. 16. ann.
D. 1612. number. 1071.

Less of this Authors former works, the had made
Me happy with thy self; where now the praise
Thahs' given to Brougkton bringes to the the Bayse,
Who have already soom'd up all that can
Prayse-worthy be, in him, or any man.
Shall thy this glorious work for fear of theaft
from they fore-stawling praise, of praise be reaft?
Noe; nor will I be houlding be to thee
For aught I say; but thou shall enuey me.
Who live to See a work that now affoords
More then thy Art could have expressed in words
Then here to Broughtons Glory, Pits' be don
Our strise; thou sawst his STARS, but I his SOONNE.
G. G.

ILLVSTRI, PEREXIMIO AC ERVDITISSIMO DOMINO D. RICHARDO BROVGTON IN ANNALS
ECCLESIASTICOS MAGNAE BRITANNIAE.
PEr te ROMA viget, per te colit ANGLIA ROMAM,
and Britoni nomen Pontificate subest.
Condidit in Latio Romanam Romulus vrbem,
Per te est ANGLIACIS condita ROMA plagis.
R. T.

EIVSDEM IN EVNDEM.
WHere STARS do shine, we love the night of AGE
Embrace men's years, when TIME is VERTVES PAGE
GRAY HEADS are CROWNS: it is honor to be old;
A SILVER hair becomes a WORK of gold:
What glory then to thee, whose Nestors, face,
Bears GREEN with GRAY, an aged, and youthful grace?
The serpents skin is slipped, then young again,
Since able now to strike to high a strain;
But rest, and sleep, and let thy praises fly;
I need not bid him live, who cannot die;
Or if they state be mortal, it is a lot
That Nature gave, and therefore fear it not:
DEATH will be LIFE to thee, when FAME shall cry:
Who lived, an Eagle, did a Phoenix die.
R. T.

TO MASTER RICHARD BROVGHTON upon his learned History of the Church of
ENGLAND.
THou speak of Ages Broughton, and thy Lines
Measures past times with new reviving, signs
Of better days; for in thy aged glass
Our years are taught, as did the old, to pass.
So each Age, by the writ desires to be
The subject of thy pen, that we may See
How each with have succeeds the other's pace;
Striving with grateful force to have it is case
By the decided; and thou best judge sit*st
And each to each in this fair tome reknit*st.
And were not to loose thee, Broughton, the day
Wherein thou live, would straight in have decay
To be made famous by the expression
Of thy most faithful pen's relation.
But may the Ago live, and thy Ages be
Of Ages all the best Epitomie.
R. B.

(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...);
(...)
(...).
IN LAVDEM HISTORIAE ECCLESIASTICAE AB Eruditissimo viro RICH. BROVGHTONIO
Eruditissime conscriptae.
LOnga retro series! cessit quamplurimus annus,
Sponsaque florentes luxit anilis opes.
Quam been sponsa Dei calamo Broughtone superbit
Scripta tuo? veterum quam been gesta doces?
Te pingente vetus viget ecce Ecclesia, crimen
Per t^ gens videat, lugeat, and vigeat.
R. B.

To his Renerend, Worthy, and most learned Countriman Master RICHARD
BROVGHTON upon his Ecclesiastical Annall's.
GReat BROWGHTON, all thy works have made the, GREAT,
But this last Piece claims yet a higher Seat.
In doing this, thou have out done thy self,
Restored our sick Church to her former health:
Reuel'd a world of Reuolution's made
By heavens fair Orbs. What ere Obliuion's shade
Had ruined: and in the doing lost,
Thou have repaired at thy dear Memorye's cost.
Yea the whole SVMME OF BRITISH MOTION
Renewed reduc*d to present Notion.
Philosophers that hold NO ACT THE SAME
CAN TWICE BE DONE, must needs adore thy NAME.
Thy so divining, so presageing NAME,
Whose every lettre is a TRVMP of fame
To sound Gods Church. Thou haist BROVGHT back whole Ages,
The same, to act ON ours, and future stages.
Thou have enforced great Rome with much a do
To know that we have OUR BARONIVS too.
Live till thy Book die; laugh at Enuys dart;
And glory in thy AGE-REVIVING ART.
H. T.

IN EVNDEM.
DOcta SOROR Latium, magnis licet inuidet AVSIS
Et dolet Angliacos tanta refer modos:
In lauds Broughtone tuas tamen ire superbit,
Miraturque Tuum, quod cupit esse Suum.
Ne dubites, en Romano te more salutat,
Atque NOVENA INGENS FRONDE coronat OPUS.
H. T.

AN ANAGRAME ON THE SAME. RICHARD BROVGHTON. RI^H HARD BROVGHT ON.
RICH is thy work: in times best jewels RICH.
Pure gold in every Stitch.
HARD too. What wonder? all fair things are HARD.
Fair same be thy reward.
BROVGHT back from death. Who ere the like has BROVGHT?
This past our Ages thought.
ON then; least wanting thee, times go not ON.
THEE times relies upon.
H. T.

I can not speak thy WORTH yet I desire
To be amongst thy PRAYSERS and ADMIRE.
F. H.

APPROBATIO.
HAEC Historia Ecclesiastica magnae Britanniae a viro docto elaborata multa
continet ex vetustissimis monumentis eruta, quae fidem Catholicam a primis
saeculis in illa florentem demonstrant: nec habet aliquid fidei aut moribus
aduersum, vt fide digno testimonio, ab eo percepi qui opus totum perlegit.
Quapropter dignum visum est, quod lucem aspiciat. Actum Duaci 12. Octobris 1633.

GEORGIUS COLVENERIVS S. Theol. Doctor, and Regius ordinariusque Professor
Duacensis Academiae Cancellarius, and librorum Censor.

THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN.
THE FIRST AGE.
THE I. CHAPTER.
TREATING GENERALLY OF THE Nativity of Christ, in the time of Augustus
Emperor of Rome, and Kymbelnie King of Brittayne: And how it came to the
knowledge of the Brittans.

1. AFTER Julius Caesar, the first Emperor of Rome, who had made this kingdom
of Brittayne tributary to the Romans, and carried many Hostages and Prisoners
from hence, to Rome, was slain and his next Successor Augustus, the second
Emperor, (say our Antiquaries, ancient and late, Catholics and others,) by
the will of God had established most sure peace through the world, our Redeemer
The blessed birth of Christ Jesus Redeemer of the world. Ranulph. Higeden.
hist. l. 4. c. 6. Stow. Et howes hist. tit. the Romans, in Caesar Augustus. an.
1. Christ. Matthew. Westminst. chron. an. gratiae 5. Galfrid. monum. hist. Britt.
l. 4. c. 11. Virun. l. 4. Io. Harding. f. 30. Stow. and howes. supra. Matthew.
Westminster. aetat. 5. an. 9. 10. Theater of Brit. l. 6. Raph. holin. hist. of Engl.
l. 3. p. 32. Hector. Boeth. Scotor. hist. l. 3. veremund. hist. Scot. Grim sto^
in Scot. in Metellan. Stow. hist. in Cassibelan. and Octau. Augustus. Io. Bal.
l. de Script. centur. 1. in Gilda Cambr. and Claudia. Mat. Pa^ker. antiquit.
Brit. p. 2. Theater of Brit. page 202. Mat. Westminster. an. 44. Golfrid. hist. Brit.
l. 4. c. 9. Bal. supr. in Androgeo. Fabian. hist. in Kimbeline. and Guido de
columna. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. l. 3. p. 32. Dion. l. 59. Stow. hist. in
Guider. Galfrid. hist. Brit. l. 5. c. 18. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. l. 4. p. 51.
Stow. hist. in Coil. Hector Boeth. Scotor. hist. l. 3. f. 36. p. 2. Strabo l.
de Situ orbis. Hect. Boeth. supra fol. 37.
Jesus Christ, true God and man was borne in the 42. year of his Empire, in
the fifth year of the Reign, of Canobelyne, or Kymbeline in this Kingdom of
Brittayne; and as our scottish historia^s say, Metallanus ruled then among the
people, called Scots. A little before which time, by the great providence of
God, to make this our Brittayne more timely, and particularly partaker of such
heavenly Tideings, before other nations, Augustus intending an expedition
against this kingdom, Ambassadors came from Brittayne to Rome entreating for
peace, swearing fealty in the Temple of Mars, offering gifts in the Capitole
to the Gods of the Romans, and submitted part of the I Will to Augustus. They
gave him for security, so many and great Nobles of this Nation, for pledges,
and hostages, that all here were so quiet, that one band of Souldiars, and a
few horesemen were sufficient to keep the I Will in the Roman possession.

2. And by such means the Romans did ever here secure themselves, of the
Brittans, from their first Invasion by Julius Caesar, carrying away from hence,
and keeping them at Rome, for their glory, honor, and quiet, not only many of
our chief Nobility, men, women and children, but of the regal race, and
blood, and Kings themselves. Among which we find, that Androgius son and
heir to King Ludd, lived and died there. Cassibilane his uncle, who was
subdued by Caesar, give hostages, and made this kingdom Tributary to the Roman
Empire. Theomantius his Nephew, and Successor in the Kingdom, paid tribute
to the Romans, which Cassibilane had granted, and reigned quietly. And his
Son Cunobeline King after him (his Father) was one of his Fathers hostages in
Rome, in his time, and was kinghted there. Adaminus son of King Cunobeline,
was kept at Rome by Caius Caligula, Emperor. His Brother Guiderius, (if he was
King here at all) reigned but a very short time. Aruitragus next King of
Brittayne, Married the daughter, or near kinswoman of Claudius, the Emperor,
and had by her, his son and heir Marius, and Successor in this kingdom.
Coillus his son, heir and next King here after him, was, ab Infantia Romae
enutritus; brought up at Rome from his Infancy. King Lucius his son, and
heir, and our first Christian in Britain, had the like dependances from
thence, and by that happy means, and occasion, together with his kingdom,
received publicly the faith of Christ from blessed Eleutherius, Pope and
Bishop there.

3. Neither was this great league of amity only between Rome, and such
parts of Britain, (which English inhabit now, and long have done,) but with
the whole Island of Britain, and other parts about it also; as the Scottish
historians do plainly write, contending, That the Emperor Augustus and
Senate of Rome did not only send Ambassadors to King Kymbeline to
congratulate his being King of Britain: but also (as These writers say) to
Metellanus, King of the Scots, to signify their love to him, and the great
peace the Emperor had then established in all the world; whereupon Metellanus
to make this love of the Romans more sure unto him, sent unto Augustus Caesar
and the Capital of Rome gifts, in his own name, and the Scottish nation: by
which he obtained the firm friendship of the Senate, and people of Rome, which
remained to him and the kingdom many ages after: Augusto Caesari dijsque
penatibus in Capitolio donaria suo Scoticorumque gentis nomine offerenda. Vnde
firmam Senatus populique Romani assentitus est amicitiam, quae illi regnoque
multos deinceps annos perdurauit. And King Metellanus lived in this great
peace, and amity until his death, which was in the 29. year of Christ and
the 14. of the Emperor Tyberius.

Which love of the Romans, then commanders of the wotld, although by that
title it swaied with it, a kind of subjection of this whole kingdom to the
Roman power: yet it was an happy temporal subjection of the Britans, The
t^mporall dep^ndanc^ of Britain^, to the Roman Empir^, occasion of the
greatest spiritual good thereof.
then strangers in effect with all the world besides, to be in such amity,
although with dependence, to the Empire and Emperor of Rome, where, and where
only, or principally they might (...) way to be delivered from spiritual
bondage, and thraldom in soul, (...) ^^franchized them to be Municipes and
freemen of the privileges of the heavenly Empire by holy Religion, which an
ancient Father calls by this style: To be chosen eternal Consuls Prudent.
him. 2. de S. Laurent. S. Leo. 1. Sermon. 1. de SS. Apostol. Petro and Paulo.
of the celestial Rome. For as that most renowned Doctor, Pope, and Saint
has written: Quae vsquam gentes ignorarent quod Roma didicisset? what nations
in any place could be ignorant of that which Rome had learned? for the
confluence of most Nations, unto Rome, at that time was such, that they must
needs be acquainted, especially with such strange and wonderful events, as
the^ chanced there, or were sent, from other contries, especially from Jury,
where Christ was borne (then subject to the Romans, and governed by their
presidents,) truly delated and transported thither: and of all people our
Britans here, (many of their chief nobles and others from all parts of the
land at that time, residing there) could not be strangers to such affairs,
whereof Tertullian, Nicephorus, and others speaking of such state of things in
Tiberius time, give Tertullian. in Apologetic. Nicephorus hist. l. 2. cap. 8.
Acustome, and duty among the Romans, to have all strange events related to the
Emperor at Rome.
this certain reason: Consuetudo a plurim is annis obtineb at, vt qui
praefecturas aut prouincias sortiti essent, res nouas quae sub eis accidissent
singulas, summum Imperium habenti Caesari significarent, vt illum nihil prorsus
lateret: It was in Tyberius time a custom many years old, that the Presidents
and Rulers of Provinces should signify to the Emperor, all new things, that
changed under them, so that nothing at all could be unknown to him.

5. Therefore this custom being so old, a plurimis annis, in the time of
Tiberius immediate Successor to Augustus, toward the later end of whose
Empire, Christ was borne into the world, It must needs be a custom, and law
of the Empire at that time, and all new things by it to be so certified, that
nothing at all could be unknown. The strange and miraculous things which the^
publicly happened at Christ's Nativity, (such as the world had not seen, or
heard before) could not be left out; and this bounden duty belonging only to
the Emperor of Rome, most residing there, and no where else observed, and our
Britans only pledges, hostages, and continuers there, being strangers to
other Nations, must needs derive, as from a faithful fountain, their
chiefest, and best foreign Intelligence of such things from thence. How
strange and great fore knowledge, God had provided for them of the same happy
business here at home, I will also declare hereafter.

THE II. CHAPTER.
CONTAINING DIVERSE PARTICVLAR Wonderful things, (at, or about the time of the
Birth of Christ) at Rome; or in other places which came thither by true
relation; by means whereof our Brittans at Rome, and they in Britain from
them, took soon notice of his Nativity.

1. ORDER requires that I should speak somewhat of Io. Herold. in Martin.
Polon. in Octauiano. Ran. Higeden. M. S. hist. l. 4. c. 2. 3. Herdin. Schedel.
aetat. 5. fol. 93. Suetonius in Augusto. Lactant. firm. Augustine. l. de
ciuitat. Mart. Polon. hist. in Octauiano Augusto.
those things, yet Will I confine my self to such as belong to to the history
of this nation, and then served for the Instruction of our Britans at Rome, and
others at home from them: for to speak of all would make a volume in history.
Many of our English Protestant Antiquaries and others, both Pagans, as
Suetonius, and Christians, testify, That Augustus Caesar the Emperor being
urged by the Romans to be made a God after the heathnish manner then, at or
about the very time, when Christ was borne, before he would consent unto it,
consulted with Sybilla Tiburtina, then renowned for her Prophesies: Sibillam
Tiburtinam super hoc consuluit, quae post trium dierum ieiunium respondit, in
hunc modum. Iudicy signum: tellus sudore madescet. De coelo Rex adueniet per
secla futurus. Quorum versuum capitales literae hunc reddebant sensum. Jesus
Christus Dei filius Saluator. Et illico apertum est caelum, and nimius splendour
irruit super eum, and vidit in caelo pulcherrimam virginem stantem super altar
puerum tenentem in branchijs. Et miratus est nimis, and vocem dicentem audiuit:
haec ara filij Dei est. Qui statim proijciens se in terram, adorauit. Quam
visionem Senatoribus retulit, and ipsi mirati sunt nimis: After she had fasted
three days, Sybilla answers in those Achrosticall known verses, whose first
letters make this sense: Jesus Christ the son of God our Savior. And
presently the heaven opened, and an exceeding brightness fell down upon the
Emperor, and he saw in heaven a most beautefull virgin standing upon an
Altar, holding a child in her Arms: and he meruayled exceedingly, and heard
this voice saying. This is the altar of the son of God. Whereupon presently
prostrating himself upon the ground he adored. Which vision he related to the
Senators, who meruaylously wondered at it.

2. And this miraculous preaching of Christ's birth so far of, then at Rome,
was so much more public and general. That at, or a little before this time,
the same Emperor as Suidas witnesses, in their, then, greatest sacrifice, was
Suidas in Augusto.
told by their oracle that an Hebrewe child commanded their Gods (as they
term them) to silence: whereupon Augustus ab oraculo reuersus, in Capitolio
aram erexit, Romanisque literis inscripsit: haec Ara est primogeniti Dei
Augustus returning from the oracle, erected an Altar in the Capitol, and made
this Inscription upon it, in Roman letters: This is the altar of the first or
only begotten son of God. Our English Protestant Historians with others
proceed to Io. Herolde in Martin. Polon. dedic. to Queen Elizabeth of England.
Martin. Polon. in Aug. Etalij.
more such public testimonies concerning Christ, at Rome, at that very time:
hoc ipso die quo natus est Christus trans Tyberim fons olei emanauit: ac per
totum diem largissimo riuo fluxit. Tunc etiam circulus ad speciem caelestis
Arcus, circa solemn apparuit. Etiam statim vt virgo peperit, illa statua aurea
corruit in Romuliano Palatio, quam Romulus posuerat, dicens. Non cadet donec
virgo pariat. The very day on which Christ was borne; beyond Tyber at Rome, a
fountain of oil flowed, and ran with a most large stream all the day. Then a
Circle like unto an heavenly bow appeared about the Su^ne. Also presently so
soon as the Virgin brought forth her son that golden statua in the palace
of Romulus fell down, which Romulus placed there (above 700. years before:)
saying it shall not fall, until a virgin be brought to bed of a child.

3. Upon these, and other such motives, this Emperor was so fully persuaded of
the Messiah then borne, that he highly reuere^ced all testimonies thereof,
among others, the Prophesies of the Sibils (which an so clear for almost all
mysteries of Christ, as his Nativity, life, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension,
with the rest, as if they had been present witnesses, rather then Prophets and
Evangelists of these things) he so respected, that as Suetonius a Pagan
Suetonius in Augusto.
witnesses: Quicquid fatidicorum librorum Graeci Latinique generis, nullis,
vel parum idoneis authoribus vulgo ferebatur, supra duo millia co^tracta
vndique concremauit: ac solos retinuit Sybillinos: hos quoque delectu habito:
condiditque duobus forulis auratis sub Palatini Apollinis basi: he gathered
together all Books of southsaiers Greek and Latin, and he burnt above two
thousands, whose Authors were either unknown, or of little credit: he only
preserved the books of the Sybills, making also the best choice of them, and
these he laid up in two gilded chests wnder the base Herod. supr. in Martin.
Pol. an. 1. Christi, and a condita vrbe 752.
of Apollo Palatinus And was so co^uinced in his understanding by these means
of the truth of Christ: That, as our Protestant writers with others, write,
when the Romans came to him and said: Te volumus adorare, quia Deus est in te:
si hic non esset non tibi omnia tam prospere succederent: we will adore thee,
because God is in thee: if he were not here all things could not succeed so
prosperously with thee: yet he being the greatest Conqueror, that ever was in
the world, and was never conquered, or overthrown in battle; Quum ipsum pro
Deo colere vellent Romani, prohibuit, nec se Dominum appellari promisit: When
the Romans would have worshipped him for a God, He forbad it, and would not
suffer himself to be called Lord.

4. Thus far was this Roman Emperor, and consequently many other Romans,
and Britans of this Nation then (as before) remaining at Rome, which could not
but take notice of so public, and manifold enforcing motives, and miracles for
acknowledging the nativity and coming of the Messiah, taught and illuminated
for this heavenly truth; And much more and inuincibly were they moved, when
they were according to the remembered custom, undoubtedly certified, and
assured from King Herod, and others in Jerusalem, that at the very same time,
when these miraculous wonders happened at Rome: There were then revealed unto
them there, the miraculous Conception, and birth of Saint Ihon Baptist, and
Zachary both his silence and Prophecy: The Angels Iubily, and joy in the
Nativity of Christ: The wonderful star which then appeared, The coming of
the Magi to Jerusalem, and Question there; where is he that is borne King of
the Jews, we have seen his star in the East, and are come to adore him. The
Amazement of King Herod, and all Jerusalem with him about this. The public
Answer of the Priests thereupon that the Messiah was to be borne in Bethleem
of Judah. The pilgrimage of those holy Kings, their gifts, and adoration, unto
him there: his presentation in the temple: The rejoicing and prophecy of
Symeon: And soon after the martyrdom of so many thousands of Infants by King
Herod. All or most of these Events for certain were both by the remembered
custom, and duty otherwise certified to the Emperor by King Herod, and the
Rulers there.

5. And not only thus, but by many other means, both of the Jews of Rome
repayring to Jerusalem, and many hostages of Jury kept then at Rome, among
which as our Protestants with others tell us, were the sons of King Herod*
who both for duty, and love to Caesar, and the Senate could Stow histor.
Abstract of memorab. Antiquities in Herod Son of Antipater.
not conceal any thing from them, for as a Protestant antiquary writes: He
was by the Senate of Rome declared and called King of the Jews. He was very
well beloved of the Emperor Augustus, who to augment his kingdom, gave him
Samaria, with the cities and Castles. Herod builded a temple and a city, which
he called Caesaria, in honor of Caesar Augustus, he sent his two sons
Alexander and Aristobulus unto Rome, to be instructed. And these things were
certified so well to Rome, that Saint Leo S. Leo Sermon. 2. Epiphan.
writes: I am tunc caeli enarrauerunt gloriam Dei and in omnem terram sonus
veritatis exiuit. Quando and Pastoribus Exercitus Angelorum Saluatoris editi
Annuntiator apparuit, and Magos ad eum adorandum praeuia stella perduxit: vt a
solis ortu vsque ad occasum, vere Regis generatio coruscaret, cum rerum fidem
and regna Orientis per Magos discerent, and Romanu^ Imperium non lateret: Even
then the heavens declared the glory of God, and the sound of truth went fourth
on all the earth. When both an army of Angels appeared to publish, that our
Savior was borne: and a star going before the Magi brought them to adore
him. That from the rising of the sun, unto the setting thereof, the
generation of the true King might shine fourth. When the kingdoms of the East
might learn the truth of things by the Magi, and it should not lie hid from
the Roman Empire.

6. Which preaching from heaven so co^uinced the world, that the Paga^s
themselves confessed, It showed the birth and coming of God into the world:
among whom one of them in the name and opinion of many, and best learned of
them writes of that miraculous star: denuntiasse aduentum Dei venerabilis
Calcidius l. 2. in Timaeum Platonis.
ad humanae confirmationis rerumque mortalium gratiam: quam stellam cum
nocturno tempore inspexissent Chaldaeorum viri sapientes significasse dixerunt
recentem ortum Dei: That it did show the coming of God to be worshipped for the
cause of man's perfection and mortal things: which star when the wise men of
the Chaldeans did behold, in the night time, they said, It signified the new
birth of God. The like do Philo. l. 3. Chronogr. an. 3. Herodis. Macrobius l.
2. Saturnal. Dion. Cass. in vita Augusti. Suidas in Augusto. Nicephor. l. 1.
hist. Ecclesiast. c. 17. Eusebius. de praepar. Euangel.
Philo the Jew, Macrobius, Dion, and Cassian Pagans, besides the Scriptures and
Christian writers, testify of the martyrdom of so many thousand Innocents by
Herod, and the relation of that, as of such other events, made presently to
Augustus the Emperor at Rome. Who also about this time offering to his Pagan
God Apollo Pithius, their Hechatombe, great sacrifice of an hundred Oxon,
could receive noe other Answer but this, that an Hebrewe child that ruled the
Gods, was borne, and their Oracles put to silence, whereupon the Emperor
builded in the Capitol a great Altar with this Latin Inscription: Ara
primogeniti Dei: The altar of the only begotten son of God. Then all these
things thus happening, at, and about the Nativity of Christ were thus truly
and faithfully delivered at Rome, and so came to the knowledge of our Britans
there, and from them, and the Romans also, both to the Romans and Britans in
this kingdom: So did other mysteries concerning Christ, especially of his
flyeing into Egypt then subject unto Caesar Augustus, and the Presidents there
keeping the same law and custom of giving intelligence unto him.

7. Among which one so admirable, public, general and beyond example,
Epiphanius l. de Prophetaru^ vita and interitu in Ieremia. Dorotheus in Synopsi
in Hieremia propheta. Fascic^l. tempor. Palladius in vita Apollinis.
there testified by the ancient Fathers Saint Epiphanius, Dorotheus and
diverse others, could not, might not be concealed. Ieremias signum dedit
sacerdotibus Aegyptiacis, quod oporteret simulachra little concuti, and
decidere, per Seruatorem puerum ex virgin nasciturum, and in praecepi
iaciturum. Propterea etiam nunc virginem in lecto, and infantem in praesepio
collocant, and adorant. Et cum causam olim Ptolomaeus Rex percontaretur,
responderunt mysterium esse, ipsis a maioribus traditum, quod illi a sancto
Propheta acceperunt: Jeremy the Prophet gave a sign to the Priests of Egypt,
that their Idols should be broken in pieces, and fall down by the Savior of
the world, a child to be borne of a virgin, and to be laid in a stall.
Therefore even still they worship a virgin in a bed, and a child in a Cribbe.
And when long ago their King Ptolomy demanded the cause, They Answered it
was a mystery delivered to them from their Ancestors, which they received
from the holy Prophet. And according Origin. in Exodus Pallad. Hist. Pan. in
vit. Apol. Sozom. l. 5. hist. Eccle. c. 20. Cassio. l. 6. c. 42. Nicephor. l.
10. c. 31. Guliel. Eiseng. cent. part. 1. did. 3. volater^^n. comment. l. 13.
Petr. de Natal. l. 3. c. 218. If. cap. 19. v. 1. Pallad. hist. sup.
to this, so soon as our Savior was brought into Egypt, a contry (as Origin
and others write,) most full of Idols, they all fell down, and were broken in
pieces. Diverse write that S. Aphrodisius (sent Bishop into France, by Saint
Peter) was prefect of Egypt then, and moved by that miracle. S. Aphorodisius
genere Aegypti praefectus, eo tempore quo puero Jesus in Aegyptum fugato and in
templa deorum illato, Idola omnia corruerunt, B. Petri, Apostolorum Coryphaei
discipulus Buturicensis Ecclesiae consecratus est antistes Anno Christi 48.
This was also foretold by the Prophet Esaias, who by our Protestants
translation, writes of this time: The Lord shall come into Egypt, and the
Idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence. Whereupon Palladius in the life
of Apollo (says) he had scene a Temple near unto Hermopolis, in which when
Christ with the blessed Virgin Mary his mother, and Joseph came into Egypt, at
his entrance into the city, all the Idols fell down prostrate upon their faces
on the earth according to the prophecy of Esaias. And S. Epiphanius in his book
of the lives, and deaths of the Epiphanius l. de vita and interitu Prophetarum.
Prophets, showing how besides those things, which be contained of them in holy
scripture, many or most of them did also further prophecy to the people where
they lived, of the coming of Christ, and the miraculous signs, and tokens of
that time, as namely Jeremy, Azarias, Helisaeus, Ezechiel, Osee, Jonas, Abacuc.
He writes of the Prophet Osee: signum dedit, and prodigium, Dominum Epiphan.
supr. in vita Osee.
scilicet venturum caelitus, caeterum hoc fore indi cium aduentus eius, si
quercus illa in Selom findatur e seipsa in portiones bis senas, and fierent
totidem quercus; and accidit ita: He gave for a sign and wonder that our Lord
should come from heaven, and this to be a sign of his coming, if an oak tree
which was in Selom should cleeue a sunder from it self, into twelve parts, and
be made so many oak trees; and so it came to pass.

These and so many other most strange and miraculous things, of that time,
remembered in histories, most evident signs, and demonstrations of the
miraculous birth of Christ, being according to the custom, and Imperial
decree, exactly certified by the presidents of all provinces where they
hapened, to Augustus the Emperor, at Rome, where so many Britans were of this
nation, Galfrid. monum. lib. 4. hist. cap. 11. Theater of great Britain l. 5.
c. 6. Guido de Colu^na apud Fabian. in hist. in Cunob. Fabian. ib.
of greatest dignity, learning, and wisdom, as King Kimbeline himself, at,
or about that time, many both his noble attendants, and hostages, and Druids
that ruled in matters of religion, and were our most learned men to instruct
them there, were present, or resident, and for their singular straungnes being
noted and observed by all, as concerning all in the greatest question of their
souls, could not be singularly or carelessely passed over by so many worthy,
and wisest Britans alone. They alone could not be strangers, and unacquainted
with the preachings, and prophesies so public and manifest to all, as they
were, for if we may believe Pagans or Christians, Catholic or Protestant
writers. For thus it is related. This Sybilla endued with the spirit Matthew.
Westminster. aetat. 4. cap. 14. Protest. annot. ib. in Merg. and Iudic. Sebastian.
Munster. Cosmograph. lib. 2. Hertman. Schedel, chronic. aetat. 3. fol. 35.
August. sermon contra Iudaeos. Lactant. Eusebius.
of prophecy, preached in Macedonia, Herostaia, Agalguldea, Cilicia, and
Galatia. Then she went into Ethiopia, Gabaon, Babylon, Afric, Lybia,
Pentapolis, and Palestina. Audientes igitur Romani famam eius, nuntiaucrunt
haec omnia Imperatori. Mittens ergo Imperator (decernente Senatu) ad eam
legatos, cum magno honor vocatam, fecit eam adduci Romam: Therefore the Romans
hearing her fame, told all these things to the Emperor. Whereupon the
Emperor. (The Senate so decreeing) sent Ambassadors unto her, and brought her
with great honor to Rome. Where she was publicly and honorably entertained.
Where she as publicly preached and foretold all the mysteries of the coming of
Christ, as if she had been a present witness. Among the rest, telling that
his name should be Jesus, she said: Mulier de genere Hebraeorum nomine Maria
habens spon sum nomine Joseph pariet, and erit Virgo, ante partum, Virgo post
partum. Qui ergo nascetur ex ea, erit verus Deus, and verus homo, prout
Prophetae praedicauerunt: adimplebit legem Iudaeorum irreprehensibiliter, and
adiunget sua propria in simul, and regnabit in saecula saeculorum amen.
Nas^ente eo exercitus Angelorum a dextris and a simstris erunt, dicentes,
Gloria in excelsis Deo, and in terrapax hominibus bonae voluntatis: eo autem
baptizato a Ioanne praecessore suo, veniet vox desursum dicens. Hic est filius
meus dilectus, in quo mihi complacui, ipsum audite: erant autem ibi ex
Sacerdotibus Iudaeorum audientes haec verba, and Indignati dixerunt ad ^am.
Ista terribilia sunt, sileat haec Regina: Respondens Sybilla dixit: ^ Iudaei
necesse est ita fieri, sed vos non credetis in eum: A woman of the race of the
Hebrews named Mary, having a spouse called Joseph, shall bring fourth a
child, and she shall be a Virgin both before and after her child birth.
Therefore he that shall be borne of her, shall be true God, and true man as the
Prophets have foretold. He shall irreprehensibly fulfill the law of the Jews,
and add also his own. And he shall Reign world without end. Amen. When he is
borne, there shall be armies of Angels, both on thc right and left hand saying:
glory to God on high, and upon earth peace to men of good will: when he is
baptized by Ihon his foregoer in water, there shall come a voice from above,
saying: This is my well beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear you
him. And there were some of the Priests of the Jews hearing these things, and
being angry said unto her. These are terrible things, let the Queen keep
these secret or in silence. And Sybilla answearing said. It is needful to be
so, But you will not believe in him. Then follows: how the Jews should put
him to death, buffet, spit upon, and whip him. Should give him gall and
vinegre, Crucify him upon a tree and put him to death. He should arise the
third day, appear to his disciples, instruct them in his law, and send them to
preach it in all the world, and in their sight ascend to heaven, and of his
kingdom there shall be no end.

9. The Authors say this was Sybilla Tyburtina, the same which by that name
prophesied as before to Augustus, and the testimony that the Emperor sent for
her and so honorably entertained her, so conuinceth, for before Augustus there
was no Emperor but Julius (Emperor but three years and three months) who by
no history had such conference with any Sybill, and by the words of this
Sybilla it is plain that it was Augustus Caesar, for she gives his conquest
of the world, a sign of the Nativity of Christ Jesus. In diebus illis erit
Caesari Augusto regnum and regnabit in Roma, and subijciet sibi omnem terram.
Which happened a little before the birth of our Savior. Therefore this thing
being so public, as it was, The Sybilla so renowned in so many nations, so
solemnly sent for by the Emperor and decree of the Senate, so honorably
entertained at Rome, and there publicly proving both against the Jews, and
Gentiles, that the Messiah of the world was then to be borne with such signs,
and circumstances, that cannot deceive us, but confounded all opposites; we may
not exclude our noble, and learned Britans, which were then at that time in
Rome, from that happiness: And if we may follow our british histories, Matthew
of Westminster a man as Protestants tell us excellent for history and
supputation of years quantum ad historiam, in recta annorum Io. Bal. l. de
Scrip. centur. 3. fol. 143. in Matthew. florileg. Galfrid. monum. hist. l. 4. c.
11. Ponticus Virunnius hist. Britan. l. 4.
supputatione singularis, and our late Protestant writers by computation of
time, our King Kimbelinus was then in Rome: for we are told: Post Tenuantium ad
culmen Regale Kimbelinus filius suus miles strenuus, quem Caesar Augustus
nutriuerat, promotus est. After Tenuantius Kimbeline his son a valiant knight
whom Augustus Caesar had brought up, was promoted to the kingdom of Britain.
In those days our Lord Jesus Christ was borne. Kimbeline was but young when
Augustus first (quem Augustus Caesar nutrierat) brought him up: and he stayed
in Rome so long, that as diverse before, and Pontius Virunnius also affirms,
Augustus made him knight, quem Augustus Caesar nutrierat and armis decorauerat.
Ponticus Virun. supr. l. 4.
And if we follow this exact supputator of times Matthew of Westminster, he was
come from Rome to be King here but five years before the birth of Christ. Anno
Dominicae Incarnationis quinto, Kimbelinus Rex Britanniam Matthew. Westminster. An.
Dom. 5.
december annis tenuisset. So likely he was in Rome, when these things concerning
the Nativity of Christ were so certainly, and publicly foretold, and proved
in Rome. And most certain it is, by all histories of our noble and renowned
british hostages residence in Rome, all the time of Augustus Caesar, and after,
that we had many worthy Britans there, ear and eye witnesses to know these
passages by themselves, and testify them to their contrimen and friends at
home.

THE III. CHAPTER.
OF DIVERSE PARTICVLAR MOTIVES, preparations, and dispositions at home, for the
inhabitants of Britain, to learn out, know, and embrace the Nativity, and
Religion of Christ.

1. AND if we return now from Rome and our Britans there, and visit this
kingdom of Britain, the inhabitants, and many of their proceedings here, in
such affairs, so far as our decayed and worn out antiquities will give us
leave, we shall find an agreeing Sympathy, and concordance of such things at
Rome and in Britain, that he will seem a dull Expounder of Events, who would
not, or could not conclude from thence, that the Messiah and Savior of the
world was then borne into it. Our Protestant Theater writers following
Postellus, tell us, of the druides, which ruled in spiritual and religious
matters then in this kingdom: Their offices were most employed about holy
things, and Theater of great Britain l. 6. cap. 9.. 10.
their doctrine cheifely consisted in teaching the immortality of the soul,
the motions of the heavens, the nature of things and the power of the Gods, yea
and Postellus from others will enforce, that they prophesied likewise of a
Virgins Conception. These were the helps, says Tertullian, that caused the
Britans so soon to embrace the doctrine of Christ. Thus write our best learned
English Protestant Antiquaries with great privilege. Which inference of the
Britains speedy conversion to Christ, although I do not remember in
Tertullian, but is perhaps added by these men, yet the effect of that illation
is contained in Tertullian, when he places the Tertullian. contra Iudaeos.
Plin. Strab. Tacit. apud Boeth. l. 2. Iul. Caesar. commorer. Gallic. l. 1.
Theater of Brit. supr. l. 6. Holinsh. and Stowe hist. Hector Boet. Scotor.
hist. l. 2. fol. 23.
Britans among the first Christians. That which is alleged from Postellus. And
others of the Druides prophesies of Christ, is further confirmed by other
undeniable authorities: for granting (as Julius Caesar. Plinius, Strabo,
Tacitus, and after them, British, English, Scottish, French, and other histories
do witness) that the chief Schools and Doctors of the druides were here in
Britain, from whom they of France received instruction and direction. Druidum
religionem asseuerant ortam in Britannia, inde in Galliam translatam.

2. We are assured that this prophecy and doctrine among the Druides that a
Virgin should conceive, and bring fourth, such a wonderful child, as our
Savior was, was so public, and of such credit, and authority, in these parts,
that by regal, and highest power and command, Churches were builded, and
dedicated in honor of that mystery, long before the Blessed Virgin ^egende de
l'Eglise de Chartets. Francois. Bellforest Cosmograph. l. 2. p. ^03. and in
Indice. D. Druides.
Mary was borne. It is related by the ancient Annals, and Register of the most
ancient Church of the city of Charters in France, Francis Belleforest, and
other historians, in this manner: Druides, ils croyoient qu*il deuoit naistre
vne Vierge en terre, laquelle enfanteroit le salut des hommes: The Druides did
believe that a Virgin should be borne on earth, which should bring forth, the
salvation of men. This caused Priscus Prince of Charters, to make an Image of a
Virgin, Franc. Bellefor. Cosmograph. l. 1. col. 110. Hector Boeth. hist. l. 2.
f. 22. 23. Ex Veremund. Campobel. and Cornel. Hybernic.
holding an Infant in her Arms, which he placed among the statues of the Gods
of the Gentiles. To which he offered sacrifice. Which gave occasion to the rest
of the contrie to do the like, and gave Revenues to the temple sacred to this
Virgin, and offerings before she was borne. And this opinion continued there
with them, until after the death, resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, the
son of God. And when S. Sauinian, and Potentian were sent into those parts,
by S. Peter, they found the people about Charters, Orleans, and those places,
honoring the memory of the Virgin, which should bring forth the son of God,
and in honor of her made a temple many ages: plusieurs siecles, before Christ
was incarnate, And so found no difficulty to bring them to the faith of
Christ, and dedicated this Temple, to our lady: as also S. Aduentine a
disciple also of S. Peter the first Bishop of Charters did the like. And the
constancy of these there converted: was so great, That when Quirinus
Proconsul of France persecuted the Christians there, he cast many of the
faithful Christians into a well within or under the same Church, which is
called the pit of valiant Saints.

3. The like we must needs conclude of the Druids of this kingdom, who in
respect of those in France were Masters and Superiors, and the Religion of
those there derived from them of Britain; whose chief Seat being in the Isle
of Man, had so ancient a residence there, that it was given them either by
King Iosinas, or his son and immediate Successor Finnanus, an hundred years
before Christ was borne. And so great knowledge of the true God and worship
of him was in this Kingdom at that time, that King Iosinas overthrew Idolatry,
and by public decree commanded the only true God of heaven to be worshipped.
Viuentis Dei coeli cultu^ authoritate instituit. And although his son King
Finnanus did permit, or allow idolatry after, Deorum simulachra restituit
omnibus veneranda: yet he did not forbidd, but permitted and suffered all that
would to worship the true God only, as his father Iosinas had ordained. Hand
tamen viuentis Dei caeli cultum patris authoritate institutum, abolendum
decreuit, cuique faciens potestatem, Deo quem elegerit, libandi.

4. The Scottish histories ascribe this reformation to two learned men, whom
they take to have been Priests of Spain, driven by tempest in sayleing upon
this coast. And we find that in the time of King Solomon Spain being
tributary to him, many true believers, and expecting the coming of the Messiah,
were in the Kingdom of Spain, and among these his noble Ald. Minut. l. de
Inscripi. vrb. Hispan. 3. Reg. c. 5.
servant Adoniram, very honorably mentioned in holy Scripture in the third
book of Kings, sent for that tribute died and was buried there with this
inscription Hebrwe: This is the grave of Adoniram Servant of King Solomon,
which came hither to exact tribute, and died here. Hoc est sepulchrum Adoniram,
Serui Regis Salomonis, qui huc venit, vt exigeret tributum, and mortuus est.
Aldus Manutius an eye witness, thus testifies. And that the body was
preserved with Balsamum. And we read that some of them expressly believed in
Christ to come, and prophesied of him long before he was incarnate. For we
find that in the year 1230. a Jew at Tolletum in Spain digginge in the
ground, found a Zistus Senen. Bibliothec. in Christo.
stone in which there was a most old book, in which among other things, this
was written: in the third world, or third age of the world, the son of God
shall be borne of the Virgin Mary, and shall suffer for the salvation of men,
and that this book should be found at that time, to wit in the time of Feranda
the virgin Castile and presently the Jew with his whole family was baptized. In
tertio mundo filius Dei nascetur de Virgin Maria, and pro salute hominum
patictur.

5. Neither did this knowledge of the true God by the Scots take the first
beginning, at that time, of King Iosinas, but carries as great antiquity with
them as that nation does, If we may believe Their best Historians, which Hect.
Boeth. l. 1. Scot. hist. fol. 1. 2. Rich. Stannys. hurst. in hist. Hibern.
holinsh. hist. of Scotl. Buchan. Rer. Scot. l. 2. Io. Harding. Chronicle c. 50.
f. 42. Et Melkinus vel Meto. apud eundem supr.
deduce their name and Original from Scota a daughter to King Pharao of Egypt,
that persecuted the Israelites in the time of Moses: for she being married to
Gathelus and Driven with her husband, and company out of Egypt, by the great
punishments God then imposed upon that nation, they were so fully persuaded of
the majesty of the true God of Israel, and the truth of the preaching of
Moses, that for a memory, and holy relike of him, they brought with them (as
both continued tradition, and diverse historians, very ancient testify) the
stone whereon Moses preached very miraculous, one writes thus:

Which stone was holy as some men then did teach,
And did miracles, so was the common speech:
In honor it was had, both of great and small,
And holden for a relike most special.
This stone was called the Regal of Scotland,
On which the Scottish Kings were set
At their coronoment, as I can understand
For holiness of it, so did they of debt
All their Kings upon this stone was set,
Unto the time of King Edward with long shanks,
Brought it away again the Scots vnthanks
At Westmonastery it offered to Saint Edward.
Which is confirmed by the Scottish histories teaching how they brought this
Hector Boeth. Scotor. hist. l. 1. fol. 2. and l. 13. fol. 309.
stone out of Egypt to Portugal, from thence to Ireland, and then into
Scotland, where it remained until King Robert his time, their King being
crowned sitting upon it, until King Edward the third of England brought it
with many others chiefest Iuells into England, and they say it was a
prophetical stone to, that wheresoever it was found, it forshewed the Scots
should reign there, and thereupon had of old this inscription.

Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Inuenient lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
Which is now fulfilled in King James, reigning here, as it was by the Scottish
long since, in Portugal, Ireland, and Scotland, in all which places they say
the Scots have reigned.

6. So we see that the inhabitants of this kingdom from the beginning in many
persons had knowledge of the true God, and foreknowledge of Christ, and not the
Scots only but Britans also; for what was the opinion and foresight of the
Druides concerning the true God and Messiah to be borne of a Virgin, must needs
be the doctrine and religion as well of Britans as Scots, the same Druides being
teache^^, Masters, and Rulers to both those peoples in religious affairs.
Neither did this their belief of the true God, and Christ to come, faint, or
diminish in the inhabitants of this Island, after the death of King Iosinas, who
commanded, and Fynnanus that allowed and permitted the worship of the true
God, no King in this Island for any thing we find in histories, British or
Scottish, ever forbidding, but at the least consequently permitting what was
commanded or allowed before in such things. But the nearer the time of the
nativity of Christ approached, the signs and motives, to embrace it, rather
increased, then diminished, until this nation actually, and generally received
the true faith, after the Ascension of Christ, with the first converted
Gentiles, as will be manifest in this history. And here I end the time Matthew.
Westminster. an. gratiae 15. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. Florent. Wigor. an. 16.
Hector Boeth. in Metel. hist. Scot. and alij.
of Augustus the Emperor, Kymbeline continuing still King in Britain, and
Metellanus among the Scots, as they write in the 15. or 16. year of Christ's
Nativity.

THE IV. CHAPTER.
Of THE TIME OF THE EMPEROVR Tyberius.

1. IN the days of Tyberius, the next succeeding Emperor. The true knowledge
of Christ was more clearly manifested unto the world, and among others, to
some Britans of this nation, especially such as then lived in Rome. For as in
the time of this Emperor our Savior began, and ended his preaching, and
suffered his passion, for our Redemption: So these things in such order as they
were accomplished, in the land of Jury, they were presently and truly delated
and sent to the Emperor at Rome, and others there, as many Protestant both of
England, and other nations, with other Antiquities agree. They of Protest.
praef. in Mat. West. Bal. centur. 3. in Ranulph. Hygeden. and Matthew. Flori.
Matthew. Westminster. an. D. 37. Ranul. Hygeden. in Polych. l. 4. c. 4. Marian. Scot.
l. 2. aetat. 6. in Tyberio. Metho. hist. Et apud Marian. supr.
England much recommend unto us Matthew of Westminster, and Ranulphus Higeden,
especially as they have publication and allowance by them. Yet these Authors
both in their printed and manuscript histories consent in this, with others,
that Tyberius was truly informed at Rome of the miraculous life, and preaching
of Christ, long before his Passion. And being afflicted with a leprosy was so
confident in the heavenly power of Christ, esteeming him then at the least for
a great Prophet, Saint, and worker of miracles, that he sent with great
solemnity Volusianus to Jerusalem to entreat Christ Jesus to come with him to
Rome to cure him, of his incurable malady. But the Jews had caused Pilate to
put him to death before the Ambassador came thither.

2. The Magdeburgian Protestants with others, have published to the world an
Epistle of Lentulus, out of the Annals of the Roman Senators, to this Magdebur.
cont. 1. l. 1. cap. 10. col. 354. epist. Lentul^ ad Tyber. Imp.
Emperor Tyberius before the death of Christ, thus beginning: apparuit his
temporibus, and adhue est, homo magnae virtutis nominatus Christus Jesus, qui
dicitur a gentibus Propheta, quem eius discipuli vocant filium Dei, suscitans
mortuos, and sanans omnes languores: There appeared in these times, and still
is, a man of great virtue, named Christ Jesus, who is called of the gentiles a
Prophet, whom his disciples call the son of God, raising the dead, and
curing all diseases. And presently upon Egesippus Anaceph. de morte Christi.
Matthew. Westminster. an. 33. Florent. Wigor. an. 38. Tertull. Apolon. c. 5. and 21.
Eust. hist. l. 1. cap. 24. Oros. l. 7. c. 4.
the death of Christ, as it is proved, both by our own, and foreign
Antiquaries, ancient and later, Greeks, Latins, Catholics and Protestants,
Pontius Pilate wrote unto Tiberius the Emperor at Rome, of the Passion of
Christ in this manner. De Passione Dominica Pilatus Tyberio Caesari scripsit in
hunc modum. Nuper accidit, quod and ipse probaui, Iudaeos per inuidiam se
suosque posteros crudeli damnatione peremisse. Nam cum promissum haberent
patres eorum, quod Deus illis mitteret de caelo sanctum suum, qui eorum merito
Rex diceretur, and hunc se promiserit, per virgine^ ad terram missuru^; Iste me
praeside, Hebraeoru^ Deus cum venisset, and vidissent eu^ caecos illuminasse,
leprosos mu^dasse, paraliticos curasse, daemones ab hominibus fugasse, mortuos
suscitasse, ventis imperasse, super mare siccis pedib^s ambulasse, and multa
alia mirabilia fecisse, cum omnis populus Iudaeoru^ hunc Dei filiu^ dicerent,
inuidia^ contra eum passi sunt Principes Sacerdotu^, mihique traedidera^t, and
alia pro alijs mentientes, dixerunt illu^ Magum esse, and contra legem eorum
agere. Ego autem credidi ita esse, and flagellatu^ tradidi arbitrio eoru^. At
illi crucifixeru^t eum, and sepulto ei custodes adhibueu^rt. Ille vero
militibus meis custodientibus eu^ die tertia resurrexit. Sed intantum exarsit
nequitia eoru^, vt dare^t eis pecuniam, dicentes: dicite, quia discipuli eius
corpus ipsius rapuerunt, veruntamen milites cum accepissent pecuniam, quod
factum fuerat, tacere non potuerunt, nam and illum resurrexisse testati sunt,
and a Iudaeis se pecuniam accepisse, and ideo suggessi hoc, ne quis aliter
referens, mentiatur, and existimet credendum mendacijs Iudaeorum: Pilate wrote
unto Tyberius Caesar of our Lords Passion in this manner. It lately changed,
which I have made proof of. That the Jews through Enuey, have destroyed
themselves, and their posterity with cruel damnation. For when their Fathers
had a promise, that God would send unto them his holy one from heaven, who
worthily should be called their King, and promised him to be borne of a Virgin
to the earth. This God of the Hebrews when he came, I being president, when
men bad seen him to cause blind men to see, to have cleansed the Lepors,
cured the diseased of palseis, to have driven devils from men, to have raised
the dead, commanded the winds, to have walked upon the sea, with his feet,
and to have done many other marvelous things, when all the people of the Jews
said he was the son of God. The principal of the Jews were malitions
against him, and delivered him unto me and devising many lies, said he was a
Magicie^, and did against their law. And I beleeu^d it was so, and having
whipped him, delivered him to their will. But they crucified him, and being
buried they appointed keepers unto him. But he arose again the third day, my
soldiers keeping him. But their iniquity so flamed out, that they gave money
unto the^, saying: say you, that his disciples t^oke him away. But the
soldiers when they had received the money, could not conceal that which was
done: for they both witnessed; that he arose again, and that they had received
money from the Jews. And therefore, I have suggested this, least any man
relating it otherwise should make a lie, and think we chould give credit to
the lies of the Jews. Hitherto the very words of the Bal. in Flor. wig. and
Matthew. Floril. Magdeburg. ce^t. 1. l. 1. c. 10. col. 354 Tertull Apolog.
aduers. gentes. Naucl. in Chron. volum. 2. gener. 2. p. 512. etc. ^^gl.
Protest. in Matthew. Westminster. an. Do. 37. And Ranulp. Hyged. Polycronic. l. 4
epistle of Pontius Pilate himself to the then Emperor, not only allowed by
our English Protestants and other our Authors, the greatest Chronographers of
their time, by their Judgment, but word for word so justified by the german
Protestents, by Tertullian, and almost all ancient writers, and others
treating of that Age approving it.

3. And Tyberius the Emperor having sent Volusianus (as before) to inuit
christ to come unto him to heal his leprosy. Christ being put to death before
Volusianus his coming thither, he brought from thence with him, as our
Protestants Authors of England are witness, that miraculous image of christ
which he gave to S. Veronica in an hand kerchour, wherewith he wiped his face,
going to his Passion, and with great reverence presented it, to this Emperor,
at Rome, and he as reverently received it: for say these Authors: Caesar pannts
sericis viam sterni fecit, and imaginem sibi praesentari praecepit. Qui mox vt
eam fuit int^^tus, pristinam ass cutus est sanitatem. Et haec imago, vsque
hodie Romae in Ecclesia Apostolorum, Principis, populo demonstratur, quae and a
portatrice, a quibusdam. Veronica appellatur Caesar caused the wa^ to be spread
with clothes of silk, and commanded the image to be presented unto him. Who
presently as he had beholded it, obtained his former health. And this image
even to this day, is showed to the people in the Church of the Prince of the
Apostles at Rome, and is called by the name of her that carried it Veronica.
And although Pilate, as before, had so excused himself, and Acknowledged
Magdeb. cent. 1. lib. 2. c. 3. Nicep. l. 2. c. 10. fore to. 1. in Tiberius.
Christ for the Messiah, unto this Emperor: yet say the German Protestants,
Narrat Nicephorus Pilatum ideo maximis Romae affectum esse contumelijs, quod
Maria Magdalena Romam adierit and Saluatoris res ibi retulerit: Nicephorus
makes narration that Pilate suffered most great reproaches at Rome, because
Marie Magdelen went to Rome, and there related the things of our Savior: in
Tyberius time. Whereby Tyberius was so moved and convinced for the
acknowledging Matthew. Westminster. And Ran. Higed. supr. Tertull. in Apolog. Gyld. l.
de conquest. and excid. Britan. Freculph. l. exouien. to. 2. chron. l. 1. c. 9.
of the truth of Christ's doctrine; That these English Authors thus confess
with S. Gildas, Tertullian, and many others: Tunc Caesar, cum suffragio magni
fauoris retulit Epistolam ad Senatum, postulans vt Christus Deus haberetur. Sed
Senatus consecrationem Christi recusauit, indignatione commotus, quod non
secundum morem prius epistola sibi delata fuisset: Caesar with his voice of
great favor related the epistle of Pilate to the Senate, requesting that
Christ should be accounted God. But the Senate refused the consecration of
Christ, moved with indignation, because the epistle was not first delivered to
them as the custom was.

4. S. Chrysostom in diverse places relates this history, and proves that
both Pilate under whom Christ was put to death, Tiberius the Emperor, and the
whole Senate at Rome upon their certain knowledge there, of his wonderful
life and miracles, were convinced in judgment that Christ was God, And the
Senate only, and upon mere worldly respects, resisted against it. Quum igitur
facta Christi renuntiata essent per nuntios, rogauit prouinciae praeses, S. Io.
Chrisost. Hom. 66. ad popul. Antioch. and hom. 28. in c. 12. Epist. 2. ad Cor.
number illis videretur, ipsum suis suffragijs creare Deum. Hic enim hanc habebat
potestatem, Deos creandi and decernendi, cum igitur ei omnia Christi opera
renuntiata fuissent, misit gentis princeps interrogatum, an eis videretur and
ipse Deus decernendus. Illi vero non annuerunt, indignantes and aegre ferentes,
quod ante decretum and sententiam suam, effulgens Crucifixi virtus omnem
terrarum orbem in sui traxisset venerationem. Hoc autem and ipsis nolentibus
dispensatum est, ne mortali decreto, Christi praedicaretur diuinitas, nec vnus
de multis esse videretur, qui ab eis fuerant Instituti: When all the Acts and
miracles of Christ were related by the Messengers of the President to the
Senate at Rome, the President of the province (Pontius Pilate) demanded of the
Senate, whether they would declare him to be God, for the Senate had this
power, of making or decreeing Gods. Therefore when all the works of Christ
were brought unto him, The Prince of the nation did send to demand, whether it
was thought pleasing to them, to have him declared for God. But they did not
consent unto it, being angry, and taking it ill, that before their decree and
sentence, the refulgent power of Christ crucified, had drawn all to his
worship. And this was disposed of against their wills, that the divinity of
Christ should not be preached by the decree of mortal men, nor Christ should
be accounted as one of those many Gods, which were ordained by them. By which
it appears, that the President did not write only to Tyberius the Emperor
of these things, but to the Senate also, sending diverse messengers unto them,
per nuntios, about it, and to wish them to declare him for God, which the world
in great multitudes had already acknowledged so to be. Which the Senate could
not upon so many and infallible testimonies and motives deny to be true. But
they were angry that he was so received without their allowance, an in so much
as they were able, were enemies to his worship, which redounded to the true and
greater honor of Christ, as the same holy father writes, to win the whole
world to worship him by his own effulgent virtue and power, not only
without their help, or furthera^ce, but maugre and in dispite of the greatest
humane resistance, and opposition of the Roman Senate.

5. Orosius also with many others so write, that Pilate wrote both to Tyberius
the Emperor, and Senate, of the miracles which Christ or his disciples
publicly wrought in his name, and that the people were thereby so convinced
Orosius lib. 7. c. 4.
that he was God, that they striued who should soonest, and most honor him.
Pilatus praeses Palestinae prouinciae ad Tiberium Imperatorem, atque ad Senatum
retulit, de passione, and resurrectione Christi, consequentibusque virtutibus,
quae vel per ipsum palam factae fuerant, vel per discipulos ipsius, in nomine
ei^s fiebant, and de eo quod certatim crescente plurimorum fide Deus
crederetur. And as Sabelicus Antonius Sabel. l. 2. Ennead. 7.
with others writes, diverse have delivered, that Pilate himself did truly
repent him of delivering Christ to the Jews, was actually a Christian, and
obtained pardon of his sins. Non defuerunt qui traderent Pilatum suae
impietatis paenitentiam egisse, meruisseque adeo veniam. And that in this
beginning of the Freculphus Lexouien. Episc. l. 1. cap. 9.
Gospel the faith of Christ might be every where received, without let, or
contradiction, as the ancient learned Father Freculphus writes, God put it
into the mind of Tyberius the Emperor to give it way, and suppress the
persecution of the Senate. Quod profecto diua prouidentia iam tunc Caesaris
sensibus ingessit, vt absque vllo obstaculo in ipsis dumtaxat initijs Euangelij
sermo vsquequaque percurreret. And as our learned contryman S. Gildas with
others witnesses, S. Gildas lib. de Excid. and conqu. Brit. c. 6.
threatened death to those should accuse Christians: Tempore summo Tiberij
Caesaris, absque vllo impedimento Christi propagabatur religio, comminata,
Senatu nolente, a Principe morte delatoribus militum eiusdem. Which is proved,
and confirmed by all sorts of writers. Tunc Senatus edicto constituit,
Christianos ab vrbe esse exterminandos. Sed Caesar hoc indignatus*
accusatoribus Christianorum mortem comminatus est: Then the Senate ordained by
an edict, that Christians Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 37. Ranulph. Higeden. in
Manuscript. Polichronic. l. 4. c. 4. Manuscript. antiq. Gallic. in Tiberio.
Fore tom. 1. Act. p. 30. Fr^^^lph. supra.
should be driven forth of the city. But the Emperor being therewith
offended, threatened death to the accusers of Christians. And not content with
this: ex illa die (say these Authors) caepit immutari laudatissima Caesaris
prius modestia, in poenam contradictoris Senatus. Nam adeo crudeliter desaeuit
in Romanos, quod vix aliquem eorum reliquit incolumem. Sicque contigit, vt qui
Christo spreuerant duce saluari, a Caesare proprio punirentur; from that day
(of this edict of the Senate against Christians in Rome) the former most
commended modesty of Caesar began to be changed, into the punishment of the
contradicting Senate, for he was so cruel against the Romans that he scarcely
left any of thom safe. And so it came to pass, that they which had despised to
be saved by Christ our Captain, were punished by their own Emperor.

6. The only pretense of excuse of the Senate against so many miracles, and
invincible arguments, that Christ was the true Messiah, and son of God
Tertullian Apologet.
proved to them and acknowledged by the Emperor, Romans, Britans and other
inhabitants at Rome at that time, was this: vetus erat decretum (as Tertullian
and other write) ne Deus ab Imperatore consecraretur, nisi a senatu probaretur:
It was an old decree, that a God should not be consecrated by the Emperor,
except he were approved by the Senate. For: in Pontificum libris ita seruatum
est: seperatim Naucl. in chron. volum. 2. g. ner. 2. p. 512. Libr. Pontific.
Romans Paganor.
nemo sit habens Deos nouos, sieve aduenas: nisi public ascitos, priuatim
colunto, diuos qui coelestes semper habiti, colunto. Constructa a patribus
delubra habento, so it was kept in the books of the high Priests: let no man
separatly have new or strange Gods: except publicly allowed, let them be
privately worshipped let those Gods which were always accounted celestial be
worshipped. Let them he had for temples that were builded by the Fathers, where
we see, that the Senate it self could not by their Pagan law, make any decree
against the private, but only public worshipping of Christ, but, priuatim
colunto, that Christ might privately be worshipped, even then in Rome
notwithstanding their edict. Which yet took noe effect at all, The Emperor
disabling it. And both our Englishand Magdebur. cent. 1. l. 1. col. 354. l. 2.
col. 24. Fore to. 1. Act. and Mon. in Tiberius. Nicholas Vignier Biblioteque
historiale p. 699.
other Protestant Antiquaries, and ministers do thus relate this matter: when
Tyberius Caesar, having received by letters from Pontius Pilate, of the doings
of Christ, of his miracles, Resurrection, and Ascension into heaven, and how he
was received as God of many, was himself also moved with belief of the same,
and did confer thereof with the whole senate of Rome, to have Christ adored
as God: but they not agreeing thereunto refused him, because that, contrary to
the law of the Romans, he was consecrated, said they, for God, before the
Senate of Rome had so decreed, and approved him. Thus the vain Senate
following rather the law of man then of God, and which where contented with
the Emperor to reign over them, were not contented with the meek King of
glory, the son of God, to be their King. And therefore after much like sort
to the Jews, were scourged and intrapped for their unjust refusing, by the
same way which thy did prefer. For as they preferred the Emperor, and
rejected Christ, so the just permission of God did stir up their own
Emperors against them, in such sort, that both the Senators themselves were
almost all devoured, and the whole city most horribly afflicted, for the space
almost of 300. years together. After the Passion and Resurrection of Christ
this foresaied Tyberius Nero lived 6. years, during which time no persecution
was stirring in Rome against the Christians, through the commandment of the
Emperor.

7. And to come home into our own Contry, of Britain, we shall not only
find all those preparing dispositions to Christian Religion, rememored before,
in the time of Augustus, the worshipping of one only true God, the birth of
Christ, to be borne of a Virgin, with Churches founded to that honor, still
observed by many, and those the wisest, best learned, and of most integrity of
life, and conversation: But the time of these figures being now accomplished,
those professors came nearer to Christianity. S. Martial writes, S. Martial.
epist. ad Burdegalen. cap. 2.
that he found in his time Temples and altars dedicated by the Druides, Ignoto
Deo; to the unknown God. Which he in the Apostles time interprets of Christ.
There were also so many in this kingdom then living in perpetual chastity, in
honor of Christ a virgin, borne of the blessed Virgin, that as Opimerus
Opimerus chronograph. in Tyrio Caesare.
writes, in one Island of this our British Sea, in Insula in Britannico mari,
belonging to this kingdom, there were seven chief Rulers in Religion, which
he calls by Bishops names, Antistites, that lived in perpetua virginitate; in
perpetual virginity. Likely to be the same British Island, whereof Plutarch the
Pagan Philosopher, and after him Eusebius, writes, all whose Plutarchus lib.
de Oracul. Eus. l. ^. praeparat. Euang. cap.
inhabitans by the Britans were accounted holy Saints: vbi incolae omnes
sacrosancti a Britannis habentur. We may add unto these, and from the same
approved Authors, and others, that as in diverse other nations, and places,
drowned in the damnable errors of the Pagan Idolatries, in worshipping hellish
devils, in the place of God, these wicked spirits being now conquered by the
death and passion of Christ, and thereby seeing their kingdom to be at an end,
and desolate, did manifestly testify the same by their silence, and forsaking
the Idols, and Oracles, when before they gave answeares, and were honored,
Plutarch. supr. Sueton. Et alij.
as the Pagan writers themselves even in whole books of that subject, are
witnesses: so here in our British Island, though so far distant from the
local passion of Christ, the devils which were adored here, for Gods, both
felt the power, and virtue thereof, and inforcedly confessed it in as manifest
terms, and signs as they which were honored nearer to Jerusalem, or rather
more expressly, and plainly then they did. For in other Regions not so remote
from Jury, they did ordinarily only confess it by their silence and ceasing
to be worshipped, But in Britain they made manifest, so much as they could,
that the death of Christ had not only deprived them of that moral life and
being, which they possessed by the idolatry and false honor yielded unto
them by their worshippers, but that the Passion and death of Christ was a kind
of death, even to their natural essence, and living, making thereupon a show
to their simple worshippers, that they did altogether cease to be, and live,
valuing a dishonorable life to be worse then death.

8. Plutarch, Eusebius, and others from the testimony of Dimetrius an eye
witness himself, with hundreds, or rather thousands of Britans here, with
him, seeing, observing and witnessing the same matter, thus relate this history,
in the name, person, and words, of the same Dimetrius, a gretian, trauayling,
and present here in Britain, at that time, in these terms: nauigaui ipse
auxilio Plutarch. lib. de Oraculis. Eusebius. l. 5. praeparat. Euan. c. 9.
Regis, videndi gratia, ad proximam Britanniae Insulam. Cumque ibi essem magna
tempestas in aere commota, nimbis and fulminibus omnes exterruit. Quam rem
accidisse Insulares dicebant, quia ex daemonibus aliquis deficeret. Sicut enim
lucerna, dum ardeat, ^emini noceat, extincta vero multis: sic magnas animas
aiebant, propitias esse, dum viuant: dum vero extinguantur, aut corrumpantur,
aut cum nimbis and grandine, vt modo, pestifero cuncta replent veneno: I sailed
to the next Island to Britain, and when I was there, a great tempest being
raised in the air, terrified all men with showers and lightnings, which thing
the Ilanders said did chance, because one of the devils did dye. For as a
candell so long as it burns, hurts no man, but being extinguished
offends many: so said they, great souls are favorable while they live: but
when they are extinguished, they either are corrupted, or fill all places with
storms, and hayle, as they do now with pestiferous poison. Thus far
Plutarch: which Eusebius, ^iting, adds thus immediately, from himself: haec
Plutarchus: animaduerendum Eusebius l. 5. praeparat. Euang. c. 9.
autem arbitror diligenter, quo tempore daemonis mortem fuisse dicit: quippe
Tyherij tempore, Saluator and Dominus nester cum hominibus conuersatus, omne
daemonum genus ab humana depulit vita. Habes igitur a summis apud Gentiles
viris, non alio tempore vnquam, quam temporibus Saluatoris nostri daemones
extinctos fuisse: Thus Plutarch, and it is diligently to be considered, at what
time he says, the death of the devil changed; For in the time of Tyberius,
our Savior and Lord conuersing with men, drive all kind of devils from man's
life. Therefore you have it from the chiefest men among the Gentiles, that the
devils were not extinguished at any other time, then in the times of our
Savior.

9. By which it is made evident in natural knowledge, That the learned Druides
and other Philosophers here in Britain, acquainted with all these things, at
home, and understanding by frequent and certain relation from Rome, the
mentioned miracles, and proceedings concerning Christ, and his holy Religion
(as these Protestants have before declared) and knowing by natural science in
Philosophy, that devils and intellectual spirits are immortal, and cannot
dye, which they confessed after their pithagoricall manner, of the souls of
men, and this imagined death of devils never was heard of, until the time and
passion of Christ, They could not but conclude, that he had triumphed over
them, and put them to silence, and was, that son of the virgin, unknown God,
son of God, God of heaven and earth the living God, maker, and creator of
all things, whom they had so long expected, to be revealed to the world, and
many of them, in such manner as is related before, so long time had
worshipped, prayed and sacrificed unto. Which gave so open way, that before
other nations so many of this Island took such painful iourneys to be truly
instructed herein.

THE V. CHAPTER.
FVRTHER CONTINVING THE EXTRAordinary preaching and revealing of Christ at
Rome, by means whereof among many others, diverse Britans were converted in the
days of Tyberius.

1. MANY other extraordinary, powerful, and merciful means were used by
Christ at this time in Rome to move the Romans and our Britans there, and by
them, those which were here in Britain, to believe in him. Saint Clement
afterward Pope, and then living in Rome gives testimony, that the miracles and
preaching of Christ were publicly and wonderfully proved there in this time of
Tyberius, and so inuincibly, that diverse meetings and assemblies were there
held about these affairs, and many went from thence into Jury to S. Peter, and
the Apostles to be instructed in this truth, among whom both he himself, and
his uncle also S. Clement Romans were two, and among these there were some also
of this nation of Britain, as hereafter. Thus he writes: fama quaedam sensim
in Imperio Clemen. Romans l. 1. Recognit. Metaphrastes in vit. Barnabae Berg.
Chron. l. 8. Gul. Eisengren. c^ns. 1. Magdeburg. centur. 1. l. 2. c. 2. col. 22.
Tyberij Caesaris, initio ex orientis partibus sumpto, peruenit ad nos, and per
singula conualescens, velut a Deo bonus quidam nuntius missus, vniuersum
replebat orbem: nec patiebatur diuinam voluntatem silentio tegi, Diffundebatur
namque per singula loca adnuntians, quod esset quidam in Iudaea, qui sumpto a
tempore veris exordio, regnum Dei euangelizaret Iudaeis: idque percepturos
diceret eos qui mandatoru^ suorum, and doctrinae instituta seruassent. Vt autem
sermo eius fide dignus ac diuinitatis plenus esse crederetur, virtutes multas
and signa ac prodigia mira efficere iussione sola, dicebatur: Ita vt tanquam a
Deo potestatem habens, surdos faceret audire, and caecos videre, and claudos
erigere: atque omnem infirmitate^ cunctosque daemones ex hominibus effugaret:
sed and oblatos sibi mortuos suscitaret: leprososque eminus videns curaret: and
nihil omnino esset, quod ei impossible videretur. Haec and horum similia
processu temporis, crebris iam rumoribus, sed manifestis quodammodo
aduentantium ex illis partibus nuntijs, firmabantur: and ipsa iam per dies
singulos rei veritas patescebat. Denique in vrbe per loca conuentus fieri, and
de hoc sermon tractari: atque in admiratione res haberi caepit. Quisnam is
esset, qui apparuerit, vel quid nuncij a Deo hominibus detulisset: donec sub
eodem anno vir quidam adsta^s in vrbis loco celeberrimo, proclamaret ad
populum, dicens. Audite me ciues Romani, filius Dei in partibus adest Iudeae,
promittens omnibus volentibus audire se, vitam aeternam: Si quis tamen secundum
voluntatem eius, a quo missus est, Dei Patris actus suos direxerit: propter
quod conuertimini a malis ad bona, and a temporalibus ad aeterna. Agnoscite
vnum esse Deum, coeli terraeque rectorem, in cuius justice aspectibus, vos
iniusti mundum eius inhabitatis. Sed si conuertimini, and secundum voluntatem
eius agitis, ad futurum seculum venientes, and aeterni effecti, ineffabilibus
bonis ac praemijs perfruemini. Erat autem viriste qui hoc loquebatur ad
populum, ex orientis partibus, natione Hebraeus, nomine Barnabas, qui se etiam
vnum ex eius discipulis esse diceret: missumqu^ ad hoc, vt volentibus
indicaret. A certain fame by little and little in the Reign of Tyberins Caesar,
taking original in the parts of the cast, came to us (says this great learned
philosopher, and after holy Pope of Rome) still waxeing stronger as a good
messenger sent from God, filled all the world: neither suffered the divine
pleasure to be covered: for it was diffused through all places, showing, that
there was one in Jury, who taking his beginning in the spring time, preached
the kingdom of God to the Jews, and said they should receive it, who should
keep the ordinances of his commandments and doctrine. And that his speech
might be esteemed, worthy to be believed, and full of divinity, he was
reported to work many miracles, and signs, and marvelous straungs wonders,
by his only commandment: so that having power from God, he made the deaf
to hear, and blind to see, and lame to go upright, and drive away all
infirmity and all devils out of men: and but seeing lepers a far of cured
them, and there was nothing at all, which might be thought impossible for him
to do. These things and others like unto these, were confirmed with often
relations, and in a manner manifest messages of men coming out of those parts.
And now the truth of the matter daily was made manifest. Finally assemblies
were made, and held in the city in diverse places, about this business: and the
matter began to be had in admiration. Who The coming of Christ, publicly
preached in Rome before his passion.
he should be which appeared, or what message he had brought, from God, to men:
until about that year a certain man standing by them in a most frequented
place of the city, cried out with a loud voice to the people saying: O
Citizens of Rome, Harken unto me. The son of God is in the parts of Jury,
promising everlasting life, to all, that will hear him, and direct their
actions, according to the will of God, his Father, from whom he was sent,
wherefore be you converted from evil unto good, and from temporal to eternal
things. Acknowledge that there is one God Ruler of heaven and earth, in whose
just sight, you being unjust inhabit his world. But if you be converted, and
do according to his will, when you come to the world to be hereafter, you
shall be made eternal, and shall enjoy his unspeakable good things, and
rewards. This man who spoke these things unto the people came from the parts of
the East, was by nation an Hebrewe, by name Barnabas, who said he was one of
his disciples, and sent to this end, to declare these things, to those that
would embrace them.

2. Hitherto this holy and learned Roman in that very time and a witness to
these things, hearing and seeing them performed. Whereby we learn the
extraordinary love of Christ to that city of Rome, which he had chosen for the
residence, and See, of his chief Apostle S. Peter and his Successors unto the
end, That in his very life before his passion, as the words of this Sermon
witness: filius Dei in partibus adest Iudeae: the son of God is now present
in the parts of I^^y, he would send a particular notice, and warning unto the
Romans being Gentiles of his coming, which for any thing we read in scripture
or other antiquities, he did not, to any other city or nation of them until
diverse years after his Resurrection and Ascension into heaven. And yet here
this holy disciple began his Sermon with these words: Audite me ciues Romani,
filius Dei in partibus adest Iudeae: Harken unto me o you Citizens of Rome, the
son of God is present (as this time of his preaching) in the parts of Jury.
And Clem. Romans l. 1. Recognit. supr. Magdeburgenses 2. col. 22.
presently after, he had delivered this heavenly Embassage, unto the Romans,
being by the circumstances of the place only sent as Herald unto them of Rome,
he returned unto Jury again. Yet his short sermon and abode there, with the
other remembered motives, wrought such effect, that diverse Romans, Diverse Romans
and Britans also then at Rome, conu^rted at this time.
and others, strangers then in Rome, went into Jury to be instructed in the
certain truth of so joyful things, among whom was this S. Clemen himself, as
he there relates, and was converted by S. Peter. So likewise did an other S.
Clemente his uncle, first Bishop of Treuers. So did diverse of Catalog. Episc.
Treuer. in Clem. 1. Greg. Turon. n l. in glor. Martyr. cap. 12.
France, among whom Gregorius Turonensis places a noble Matrone, who going to
see Christ, brought home with her part of S. John Baptiste his blood newly put
to death. And we must needs think that among these were diverse of this noble
kingdom of great Britain, converted by this extraordinary calling of the
Romans, at that time: for of all the people of Britain, they which then,
(before the Scots seating their selves there) inhabited that part, after named
Scotland, in no wise subject to Rome, had the least resort thither; yet we
find in many antiquities that S. Mansuetus borne there, natione Scotus; by
later denomination went so long a journey with others to be instructed by S.
Peter in the days of Tyberius, long before S. Peter came to make abode at
Rome, and was both baptized by him, and so fully instructed Catal. Episcop.
Tullens.
and profiting in Christian Religion, that he was by S. Peter made Priest, and
Bishop also and sent by him into these parts, before he himself made his
residence at Rome, even in the Regine of Caius Caligula Emperor, except diverse
historians deceive us.

3. Much rather, then, may we think, that among the other Britans, by so
Gulielm. Eisengrenius centen. 1.
many occasions at that time transported and going unto Rome, and inhabitants
there, diverse were so converted: among which I doubt not to marshall the noble
British Christian parents of our glorious contry woman lady Claudia called also
Sabinella or Priscilla, who at this time, or soon after were there converted
to the faith, and were entertainers of S. Peter himself, and The British noble
parents of lady converted, at, or about this time, with an other reason from S.
Ambrose of the Roman Britans so soon conversion.
S. Paul with others when they came to Rome. S. Ambrose yields unto us an
other reason, why Romans, Britans, and others which lived at Rome, did so
soon, and easily embrace the Religion of Christ says he: constat temporibus
Apostolorum, Iudoeos propterea quod sub regno Romano agerent, Romae habitasse,
ex quibus hi qui crediderunt, tradiderunt Romany, vt Christum profitentes,
legem seruarent, Romani autem audita fama virtutum Christi, faciles ad
credendum fuerunt: It is evident, that in the time of the Apostles, the Jews
because they lived under the regiment of the Romans, dwelt at Rome, among whom
they which believed, delivered Ambros. praefat. in Epist. ad Romans
unto the Romans, that professing Christ they should keep the law, and the
Romans hearing the same of the miracles of Christ, were easily induced to
believe. By which we may inform our selves, that as the Jews, because they
were under the government of the Romans, many of them lived at Rome, so did
many of our Britans, by the same reason: And as the Jews which were most
backward in believing in Christ, to be so foreward at Rome, that they gave
encouragement to the Romans to believe in him, and the Romans by the fame of
Christ's miracles, did so easily come to be converted: So the Britans which were
there resident being as well as the others acquainted with those holy and
invincible true motives of belief in Christ, would not singulary remain in
Incredulity: especially when they had not only the Examples of the Jews, and
Romans to follow in admitting the religion of Christ in Rome, and warrant, and
protection from the Emperor, that they might without all danger perform it:
But were assured there, by many and most certain messages from Jerusalem,
that immediately upon the Ascension of Christ, and descending of the holy ghost
upon the Disciples, at one Sermon of S. Peter, three thousand souls were
converted unto Christ, of all nations under Actor. c. 2.
heaven; Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and dwellers in Mesopotamia, and
in Iudaea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphilia in Egypt
and in the parts of Libia about Circne, and strangers of Rome, Jews and
Proselites; all these as the Scripture recounteth then being people of all the
then-knowne parts of the world, Asia, Afrike, and Europe, and hearing S. Peter
miraculously preach in such manner, that they all understood him, in their
several languages, were at that time converted.

4. So that if either so many miracles of Christ, and his holy Apostles, or
examples of all these nations, so many that the holy scripture styles them all
nations under heaven (which no man may deny) might move our Britans at Rome to
follow them therein, they also then performed it. And this only by that happy
means, in that respect, that they then dwelled at Rome, where they obtained
most certain and speedy intelligence of these things. And among all these
people of the named nations converted by S. Peter at that time, we find not by
any history or antiquity to warrant us, that the inhabitants of this kingdom
of Britany either dwelling here at home in this land, at Rome or else where in
the universal world, had any commerce, or conversation with any of those
nations present at that heavenly sermon, or witnesses of the miracles of Christ
or his disciples to instruct them in these things, But only with the remembered
strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselites, which then lived there in Rome, as
our Britans did. And from and by this conduct and fountain of grace only for
the same reasons did the water of life issue and flow so fast and far into
this kingdom in that very time of Tyberius the Emperor, soon after the death
of our Savior, as our Protestant Antiquaries of England thus deliver unto us:
There are who upon a very good ground from the words of Gyldas, the most
ancient of our British histerians, will have the Theater of great Britain
page 202. 5. Gild. de conq. Britan.
sun of the Gospel to have risen in this our west, and this Island of
Britain to have enjoyed the very morning of his ascent, the brightness
thereof peirring through the mistie clouds of error, and shining here in
Britain even in the days of Tyberius, toward whose end, Christ suffered his
death, and by whose Indulgence toward Christians, their profession was
propagated far and near. Which Assertion the said Gyldas does not deliver
coldely, or doubtingly, but with great confidence, and relying upon good
grounds, as it appears when he says scimus, we know for certainty, that
this was in the later times of Tyberius, which was immediately after our blessed
Samours Passion.

5. An other English Protestant Antiquary writes: It may appear that the
Christian Religion was planted here (in Britain) in this land, shortly after
Christ's Holinshed hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 5. Franc. Mason ep. dedicat. Franc.
Mason Consecrat. lib. 2. cap. 3. page 51.
time. An other directed as he says, by the present Protestant Archbishop of
Canterbury, is so earnest upon the words of Gildas, or malice to Rome, that
thus he speaks: Tyberius died in the year of Christ 39. according to
Baronius. Where upon it follows, that Britain received the gospel, five
years at least before either Paul or Peter came to Rome. By which it is
evident by these Protestant writers of England, that they are confident, that
diverse of this nation received English Prot^sta^ts from S. Gildas and otherwise
prove, that Britain rec^aued the faith of Christ^n Tyb^rius his time and by
means of Rome.
the faith of Christ, soon after his Ascension in the time of Tyberius; which
could probably be effected, by no other way, or mediation, but by Rome, where
many Britans then lived and inhabited, and (as before) where and whence only
they could take notice, and knowledge of such things. Which may sufficiently be
co^uinced even out of that place of S. Gildas, whereupon these English
Protestants do ground themselves, and as they are both published, and urged by
them, being these: Interea glaciali frigore rigenti Insulae, and velut longiori
terrarum secessu soli visibili non proximae verus ille non de firmamento Gildas
l. de conq. Britan. c. 6.
solum temporali, sed de summa etiam coelorum arce tempora cuncta exce^ente,
vniuerso orbi praefulgidum sui coruscum ostendens, tempore vt scimus, summo
Tyberij Caesaris, quo absque vllo impedimento, eius propagabatur Religio,
comminata, Senatu nolente, a principe morte, delatoribus militum ciusdem,
radios suos primum indulget, id est sua praecepta Christus: In the mean time
he who is the true sun, not only from the temporal firmament, but from his
high tower of heaven exceeding all times, showing his bright shinning to the
whole world, in the later time of Tyberius Caesar, in which without any
Impediment his Religion was propagated, death being threatened by the Prince,
against the Senates will, to the Accusers of his Soldiers, Christ does first
afford his beams, to wit, his precepts, to the Island stiff with frosen cold,
and by a long separation of the earth separated from the visible sun. Where
we see, that if our Protestant Antiquaries have dealt sincerely with S. Gildas,
he is both a witness, that this Island of Britain, which is that he there
describes, did both take knowledge of Christ, the true heavenly sun, and
benefit of his celestial light, in the later time of Tyberius, where he
suffered for redemption of the world, and that Emperor threatening death to
the accusers of them which should receive him for the Messiah, did give
occasion, that the faith of Christ was so soon preached, and embraced in this
so remote, and cold a Region, then subject to the Empire of Tyberius.

6. Therefore we cannot by this ancient Authority devise any better means,
how the religion of Christ was then first planted here, but as I have proved
before from Rome, the residency of that Emperor, where these mysteries of
Christianity were first revealed, authentically examined, allowed, and
confirmed: where that command and privilege of the Emperor for Christians
was decreed, and published, and where, or whence only, the inhabitants of this
nation by their dwelling and continuing there, or receiving continual
intelligence from thence, could learn, or come to the notice of these things.
Neither can the Protestants of England contending thus, that there were
Christians here in this time, be of any other opinion, for they do not, yea
cannot assign any one other, but such as were sent from S. Peter, when he was
come to Rome, are from him, and by his authority before he was seated there,
that preached the faith of Christ in this I land either in that time, or above
twenty years after: for they find not any other until the coming of S.
Joseph of Aramathia, who buried our Savior, and came not hither until the 63.
year after his nativity, and the time of Tyberius the Emperor his death 24.
at the least. Long before which time, the Britans had both learned Priests,
and also Bishops sent hither, or consecrated here, by the blessed Apostle S.
Peter.

7. And if S. Mansuetus, of whom I have spoken before, as the Germane
histories assure us, was consecrated by S. Peter, and sent, or went so far a
Catal. Episcop. Gullens. in Lothoring. Arnold. Mirm. in Theatr. Conuers. Gent.
Gal. E^sengren. cent. 1. part. 1. did. ^. fol. ^6. Pet. de Natal. l. 11. c.
vlt. Franc. Bellefor. Cosmogr. l. 2. col. 263. Ant. Demochar. l. 2. c. 33. de
Miss. contr. Calvin.
Journey to him, in the eastern contries for that holy purpose, whether he went
out of this kingdom with direction, or from the city of Rome, with instruction
given him there yet he being sent and directed to go so far, to Peter, and
consecrated by him, and by him again directed, and sent an Apostolic preacher
and Bishop, into these parts, we may not be so alienated from that most blessed
Apostle, but to give him this his due, to acknowledge, That he or they, who
directed this our contryman, to S. Peter, above all others, was, or were also
first directed by the same S. Peter, in such things. And thus having the chief
Apostle of Christ, and highest Ruler in spiritual things, taking notice, care,
and charge of this kingdom in this his time; The Emperor our friend and
favorer, giving all allowance, and noe prohibition to Christianity, and by so
many extraordinary motives as are before remembered, so great a fervor and
forwardness of the inahbitants here to receive the faith Our Kings of Britain
were rather friends and furtherers then enemies to Christian Religion in this
time.
of Christ, there could now no impediment be found to hinder it, except in our
own Kings, which was not so; for concerning our government here in Britain,
if Aruiragus was then King here, as some historians seem to teach us, he was a
friend and no Enemy to Christian religion, as we shall see hereafter: Or if
Cunobile yet lived, as diverse of our Protestant writers do seem to think,
upon the authority of Dio Cassius, reporting that Adminus the son of
Cunobeline being bannished out of Britain, by his Father, was received Dio. l.
59. Stow. and howes hist. in Caius Caligula Theater of great Britain l. 6 cap.
4.
into protection by Caius Caligula, the fourth Emperor: yet this hinders
nothing; for all histories, and antiquities are witnesses, that notwithstanding
the recited difference between the Emperor Tyberius and the Senate, about the
honor of Christ, and liberty of Christians, whether it was Cunobeline,
Guiderius, or Aruiragus which then reigned here, he stood in terms of amity,
and peace with the Emperor, and resisted not that his edict, but rather was a
favorer, and friend unto it. Which our Protestant Antiquaries incline unto
grounding themselves upon the authority of Cornelius Tacitus, Theater of great
Britain l. 6. c. 4.. 4. p. 191.
in this Manner: In Britain Tyberius neither maintained garrison, nor
attempted alteration, and thereby as it may be thought, their own laws and
Princes bare sway among themselves, howsoever the cause of Tribute was
ballized, if not in Tacitus Annal. l. 2. c. 5.
subjection, yet were well affected to the Romans, as appears by Tacitus, in
the kind intertainements, and in releeuing their shipwracked soldiers, that
by Crosseinge the seas, were by tempest driven upon their coasts, and
courteously sent them thence, by their petty Kings unto Germanicus, their
General.

8. Neither does the British history gainesay this opinion, although the
Theater writers immediately after the last recited words, do add:
Notwithstanding Ieffory of mo^mouth seems to affirm the contrary, that
brings fourth the the Reign of one Guiderius, and the valor of Aruiragus,
the sons of Cunobeline, to withstand the Romish, command, and utterly to
refuse the payment of the Tribute, banding both against Tiberius, as also
against Caligula, and Claudius, the Emperors subceeding. Which denial of the
Tribute Guiderius or Aruiragus to either Caius Caligula, or Tyberius, is not
affirmed by the writer of the British history, which these men name Geffory of
monmouth, who truly translated Galf^id. monum. hist. Reg. Brit. l. 4 c. 11.
Ponticus Virun. Brit. hist. l. 4.
it. For this Author says first: post illum (Tenuantium) promotus est ad
Culmen regale Kymbelinus filius suus miles strenuus, quem Augustus Caesar
nutrierat. Hic in tantam amicitiam Romanorum inciderat, vt cum posset tributum
eorum detinere, gratis impenderet. In diebus illis natus est Dominus noster
Jesus Christus: After Tenantius his son Kymbeline a valiant knight, whom
Augustus Caesar had brought up was preferred to the kingdom. He loved the
Romans so much, that when he might have detained their Tribut, he freely paid
it. And in the next chapter, where he brings in Guiderius, and Aruiragus,
cap. 12. supr.
he adds: Expletis vitae suae diebus. cessit regni gubernaculum Guiderio. Cu^
ergo Tributum quod appetebant Romam, ipsis denegaret: superuenit Claudius, qui
in Matthew. Westminster. an. D. 44. Stowe and howes hist. in Claudius Holinsh. hist. of
Engl. l. 3. in Theomantius c. 18. Strabo in Geograph. in Brit.
Imperium subrogatus fuerat: when Kimbeline was dead, Guiderius succeeded in
the Kingdom. Therefore when he denied the Tribute, which the Romans demanded,
Claudius came hither being then Emperor, which is that, the British history
has of this matter, and also Ponticus virunnias word by word, which was in the
fourth year of Claudius, seven years at the least after the death of
Tyberius. Therefore it is evident, by all accounts, that during the life of
Tyberius, there was no breach, but a continued amity between him and the
Britans, And so his Imperial favorable edict for all Christians, was not,
could not be contradicted, but received, and approved in this kingdom, by the
Britans here. And yet if the Kings of Britain had denied their Tribute unto
Tyberius, this would have proved nothing, but they were yet rather friends, then
enemies, maintainers, then persecutours of Christians; which is evident in that
King Aruiragus, who at such time, as the Roman Emperor Nero was a persecutour
of Christians, and Claudius before him, yet this British King was so great a
friend and favorer of the Religion of Christ, that even by our Protestant
Antiquaries themselves, this nation was in their days, an harbor Theater of
great Britainel. 6. Godwin. Conu. of Britain. Leland. in Arth. antiq. Glascon.
Capgrau. in 5. Joseph. Aramat. Stowe Howes hist. in Aruiragus. Holinsh. hist.
of Engl. in eodem of Canelden in Belg. Hardinge Chron. in Aruiragus. Arnoldus
Nurman. theatro Conuers. Gent. Gulielm. Eiseng. centent. 1. Petrus de Natal. l.
11. Anton. Democh. l. 2. contra Calvin. c. 33.
and receptacle, for such Christians, as fled hither from their persecution.
And this King did not only permit them to enjoy peace, and quietness, but
releiued their necessities, allowing them public profession of their holy
religion, even in Churches and oratories, privileged by his authority, and was
so far from being a persecutour, that diverse have written (of which
hereafter) that he himself was also a Christian.

9. By which and other such, or more heavenly motives it came to pass, that I
may boldly write, this nation of Britain had diverse Christians even in this
time of Tiberius. Among who^ that little testimony of so holy and ancient
antiquities (which by injury of times is left unto us,) will give me warrant to
write that S. Ma^suetus borne in this kingdom was one, and (no other nation
clayming them) not improbably his holy Successors, and Associats S. Amon, and
S. Alcha: especially if we follow those Authors which say, That S. Mansuetus
was sent as an Apostolic man, and Associate to S. Clement, uncle of S. Clement
the Pope, first Bishop or Archbishop of Metz, by S. Peter the Apostle, in the
time of Caius Caligula Emperor in the 40. year of the Nativity of Christ:
anno and quod excurrit quadragesimo, S. Petro Pontifice Maximo, Caio Caligula
Imperatore. About the 40. year of Christ in the time of S. Peter's Papacy, and
Empire of Caius Caligula. Wherefore we must needs grant, he was a Christian
some time before, for neither Catechumens, Neophites, or newly converted were
allowed to such functions, And so he was a Christian in the time of Tiberius,
which was the case also of S. Clement sent with him, converted by S. Peter in
that time of Tyberius, as is before remembered. And if S. Mansuetus borne in the
furthest and more northern, and remote part of this Island, and therefore
termed natione Scotus, travailed so far, from hence as to Antioch, or those
eastern Arnoldus Mirm. and Gulielm. Eisengren. supr. Franc. Belleforest
Cosmograp. l. 2. col. 263. Cat. Ep. tull.
parts, beyond, or about Jerusalem, to be then instructed, by S. Peter,
before he came to Rome, or any western nation, as these authorities have told
us; we may not be so regardlesse of the honor of this kingdom; but to think
that many of these nearer parts in Britain, at home, and others at Rome,
undertook either by themselves, or with this holy Saint, that happy
pilgrimage, to that most blessed Apostle to be instructed in the faith.
Concerning some of them which probably went out of Britain about that time I
have spoken and among them that were then residing at Rome, and went from
thence, or in this time were converted there, not without probable reason, I
reckon the blessed parents of S. Claudia, Christians before S. Peter's coming to
Rome, to be resident there, and his entertainers there, before Claudius the
Emperor came into Britain, to lead them, or any such, hostages, or captives
thither, as I shall prove hereafter. And this gives some particulars of that
which diverse Gildas epist. de excid. and conq. Brit. cap. 6. Theater of great
Britainel. 6. c. 9.
Protestants would deduce from Gildas, in general of this our Britain, that
it received praecepta Christi tempore summo Tyberij Caesaris: the precepts and
Religion of Christ in the later time of the Empire of Tyberius. As our
Protestant antiquaries have both published, and plainly expounded him before,
in their public work the Theater of great Britain composed by their common
labors and consents. Besides which, an other both reputed a Bishop, and
learned historian among them thus affirms, there be many testimonies to such
Godwin. Catal. in York 1. Paulinus.
purpose: there be manifold testimonies of very credible Authors who witness,
that the faith of Christ was received in diverse particular places of this
Island, presently after the Ascension of Christ, or the least while the Apostles
yet lived. Their first Protestant Archbishop says: ab ipsis Ecclesiae
Incunabilis, hanc Insulam in fide Christiana Matthew. Parker Antiquit. Brit. page
2.
fuisse instructam: That this Island was instructed in the faith of Christ even
from the cradle, or first infancy of the Church. And this is their commonly
received opinion.

THE VI. CHAPTER.
THAT S. JAMES THE APOSTLE, WHO IS commonly said to have preached in Spain in
this time, did not preach in Ireland, as some write: yet his preaching to the
Jews in Spain might prepare the way for the spiritual good of some in
Britain, although none of them converted by him.

1. DIVERSE historians write, That S. James the Apostle, son of Zebedeus, and
brother to S. Ihon the Evangelist, preached in the west part of the world,
wherein Britain is (among Cosmographers) accounted to be situated, in this
time of Tyberius, and so may somewhat belong to our history, especially if we
should follow some late Protestant writers, which would extend his preaching
into Ireland so near unto us in this time, whereof we now treat. Which if it
be true, we may not pass it over with silence; for Irelande having been the
ancient contrie of the Scots, even those of this kingdom, Some men perhaps
The Authority whereo^ they build, which write S. James the Apostle preached in
Irland insufficient, and mistaken by them.
might think, that S. Mansuetus came to the knowledge of Christ by that
means, though I do not find any Protestant we have, to write of this holy
Saint. But that which is said before, that he was disciple to S. Peter will
keep us, from that error. They which would bring S. James into Ireland,
ground upon Vincentius. The likeness of the name Hiberia caused perhaps the
error that he was in Hibernia: Ireland, for almost all histories of the Irish
and other nations are silent of that Apostles being there. Isidor. hispal. l.
de Patrib. non. test. V^terbien. Chro. part. 14. Petr. de Natal. l. 6. c. 133.
Antonin. part. 1. titul. 6. cap. 7. Loys de Mayerne Turquet histoire generale
d'Espane. Philip. Bergone. Holin^h. or Stanish. histor. descript. of Ireland.


2. Yet for his preaching in Spain, Hiberia, we have many Authorities, beside
the histories and tradition of the Spaniards. When otherwise there is no such
testimony for his being in Ireland, and the Irish themselves do derive their
first preaching, or teaching the faith of Christ among them, from such as came
out of this Britain thither, or from S. Patrik sent thither by S. Celestine
Pope of Rome, about the year 430. And is named the Irish men's Apostle. And
although Holinshed, or Stanishurst the writer of that part of the Irish history
does say: ^e find that immediately after Christ's time, S. James the Apostle and
others tr^uayling into these west parts, did first instruct the Irish people
and teach them the glad tydeings of the gospel, so that diverse amongst them
even the^ were Christened and believed: Yet he brings no other warrant for
that assertion of his, not so much as naming Vincentius but teaches after how
it was converted by S. Palladius and Patricius, and others out of this
Britain, neither is any one Christian of that nation to be named, before that
time: Which will hardly be found to be true of any nation, that received the
faith so long before, as Vincentius supposes, if he means Ireland: which he
does not, but Vinc^ntius does not affirm that S. James preached in Ireland but
in Hiberia, Spain.
only Spain, as is evident in his ninth, and seventh chapter where entreating
of this S. James, he says, as the ancient French (in which he wrote)
manuscript, which I follow does give me warrant that S. James the Apostle did
not preach in Hibernia, Ireland, but only in Hiberia, Spain: his words
translated be these: when the Apostles were separated into diverse parts, and
contries, Vincent. speculhistorial. l. 9. c. 7. Manusc. Gallicu^ antiq. Guliel.
Eisengren. centin. 1. fol. 163. Calist. 2 in vit. S. Iacobi. Breuiar. Romans in
fest. eius 25. Iul. Antonin. part. 1. tit. 6. c. 7. Mantuan. in fast. Petr. de
Natal. lib. 6. c. 133. Viterbien. Chron. part. 14. Isid. in Jacob. Holinshed
description of Ireland. p. 52. Loys de Mayerne hist. generale d'Esp. l. 4. p.
179.
James the Apostle of God, preac^ed the word, of God es parts de Hiberie, in
the parts of Hiberia, Spain, where he chose seven disciples: And then
immediately follow the names of his Spanish disciples, as they are also related
by the Spanish historians. And this is all he writes of this matter and the
preaching of that holy Apostle. Therefore it cannot be imagined by any thing
written by Vincentius, except my Manuscript deceaueth me, that he ever preached
in Ireland. And this English Protestant historian, who has so relied upon
Vincentius, proves as much, from the Irish Antiquities, and Antiquaries
themselves in these words: The Irish writers themselves affirm, that their
contry, was rather still esteemed as one of the unchristened Islands till about
the year four hundred twenty and six, whilst Celestine the first of that
name governed the Sea of Rome, Who sent S. Patrike thither. And his preaching
in Spain it self is not so certain by the writers of the Spanish history.
Among whom Louys de Mayerne in his history generale d'Espagne writing from the
Spaniards themselves, affirms, that the doctrine of Christ was known in the
time of Tyberius, but obscure, who was their Apostle. And after proves how the
Spaniards which say, S. James was there, say also: that he converted but nine
persons, and returned into Jury, and lived all his life after in Jerusalem,
and the places adjoining. And so no time is left for his Irish Journey, supposed
as before, being beheaded by Herod in the third year of Claudius the
Emperor. And S. Isidor himself a Spaniard (if Author Isidor. Hispal. l. de
vit. and mort. Sanctorum c. 73. Philipp. Bergom. ad An. 43. Breu. Romans in fest.
S. Iacobi. 25. Iulij.
of that book of the life and death of Saints) carries him no further the^
Spain: so Philippus Bergomensis with others, and the whole Latin Church in
the public office of his festiuitie, Is so far from allowing any further
limits to his preaching then Spain, in these western parts, that it does not
warrant unto us, that he was in Spain, but only says, that the Tradition of
the contrie of Spain is so. Iacobus post Jesus Christi Ascensum in coelum, in
Iudaea and Samarta praedicans, plurimos ad Christi fidem perduxit. Mox
Hispaniam adijsse and Magdeburgen. Cen^ur. 1. l. 2. c. 2. col. 22. 23. Francis
Burgoin. hist. l. 2. c. 1.
ibi aliquot ad fidem conuertisse illius prouinciae traditio est.

3. And that Hiberia, Spain, should be gathered only from Vincentius, and not
Hibernia, Ireland, it is made clear, by the like mistaking of the Magedurgian
Protestants, who setting down, who they think preached in this part of the
world, in bringing Vincentius to say S. James preached in Ireland quite thrust
him out of Spain it self, leaving it to S. Paul, and yet that doubt fully.
In Hispaniam Paulus se permittit Iturum esse, Romans 15. verum an eo peruene^t,
incertum est. In Hibernia Iacobum vna cum alijs quibusdam docuisse, Vincentius
scribit lib. 8. c. 7. Paul promises that he would go into Spain in his
epistle to the Romans. But whether he came thither or no, it is uncertain,
Vincentius writes that James with some others taught in Ireland. So that the
error of these men in this matter, does so much as it can, against the
tradition of the Spaniards, deprive them of that holy Apostle, and yet for his
being in Ireland proves nothing at all for as all men know, Hiberia, and
Hibernia, be quite different Contries, and Hiberia (Vincentius his word) is
never taken for Ireland but for Spain. Therefore whosoever would with the
Magdeburgian Protestants change Vincentius his Hiberia, into their own (in
this case) Imagined Hibernia, which Vincentius does not name, must needs by his
authority, the only or chief ground they have, deprive both Ireland and
Spain of the presence of S. James. For Vincentius only names Hiberia to be
the place where this Apostle preached, which by no possible construction can
comprehend both those Contries so divided. And the Disciples which he had,
being very few, Guliel. Eisengr. cent. 1. in Hispa. Antonin. part. 1. tit. 6.
c. 7. Petrus de Natal. lib. 6. c. 133. Loys Maycrne hist. gener. sup. Vincent.
in specul. historial. l. 9. c. 7. and cap. 6. Breu. Romans 25. Iulij. Martyrol.
Romans 25. Iulij.
were only Spaniards there borne, and not any one of any other Nation,
Scotland, Ireland, or whatsoever, as is evident in all writers of his life and
death, even by Vincentius himself, whom these Protestants have cited before,
who never names Mansuetus, or any sent into these parts, of Ireland, Scotland,
or Britain. So the public Church Service in the feast of that Apostle with
the rest. The old Roman Martyrologe speaks of his body carried to Spain not
of his preaching there. That place which these men cite from Vince^tius in the
7. chapter of his 8. book, has not one word either of Hiberia, or Hibernia,
or S. James, but speaks of S. Ihon Baptiste his preaching and life.

4. Therefore the whole current of our late English Protestant Antiquaries
(who^ I am still to be directed by,) perceauing perhaps how unadvisedly their
Brethren of Magdeburge, Francis Burgoinge, and Holinshed have carried
themselves in this business, has quite forsaken them, running in an other
channel, and never remembering S. James among those Apostles, from whom this
kingdom by any means received the holy Religion of Christ. For Vincentius
writes no such thing, but quite oterwise, that he only preached in Hiberia,
Spain, and from thence returned to Jerusalem again. His words in the old
Manuscript Copy, are these: Quandles Apostres se separirent en diverse Vincent.
specul. historial. manuscrip. Gallic. antiq. l. 7. c. 7.
parties and contr^es, Iacques Apostre de Dieu prescha la parolle de Dieu sans
poeur es parties de Hyberie la ou il esleut 7. Disciples, Torele, Second,
Inladette, Cilefont, Eufrase, Celee, Ysichoe, and annonca leur erreur, and sema
en eux la parolle de Dieu, qui longuement auoit este fans fruict, and quand le
dernier iour approcha, il les mena auec luy en Jerusalem, and la reccut le
martyr: Which translated into English, is thus: When the Apostles, did disperse
themselves into several parts and Contries, James an Apostle of Christ did
preach the word of God without fear in the Contries of Hiberia (Spain) where
he did choose 7. Disciples Torquel, Second, Inladette, Cilefont, Eufrase, Celee,
Ysichoe, and did announce their errors, and sow in them the word of God, which
long time remained without fruit. And when the last day did approach, he Hymn.
Eccl. Tolet. de S. Iacobo apud Baron. annot. in Martyrolog. Romans die 25. Iul^j.
Baron. annotat. supr. in Iacobo. Arnoldus. Mirm. Theat. Conuers: Gent. in S.
Iacobo fratre Ioa. Act. c. 8. 9. 10. etc. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. page
202. c. 9. Act. 15. v. 7.
led them with him to Jerusalem, and there received martyrdom. Hitherto the
very words of Vincentius: whereby is only expressed, that he preached in
Spain, and from thence returned to Jerusalem again.

5. The same is testified also by the ancient public hymn of him, used in
the Church of Toletum, in Spain, made by S. Isidore. Though many think he
never preached at all in Spain. And if he did as Baronius well proves, it was
only to the Jews which were there, (and not in Hibernia, Ireland) his
contrimen, for the time of the Decree of the Apostles for preaching to the
Gentiles, was not yet made, this being as the Spaniards say, in the 37. year
of Christ, within 4. years of his Ascension, at which time, and after, they
only preached unto the Gentiles, as the holy Scriptures themselves are witness
in diverse places. And the Protestant Authors of the Theater say: that Go^ had
chosen S. Peter, that from his mouth the Gentiles might hear the Gospel and
believe as himself alleges. And his own words are these by Protestants
translation: God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should
hear Io. Bal. l. 1. de vit. Pontif. Romans in Petr. ex Mant. l. 6. de fast.
Philip. Pantal. chron. an. 38. Petr. epist. 1. cap. 1. v. 1. Jacob. ep. c. 1.
v. 1.
the word of the gospel and believe. Therefore S. Peter, and not S. James was
the first preacher to the Gentiles, And our best learned Protestants do prove,
that S. Peter did not preach formally to any nation, of the Gentiles, nor to
the Gentiles in Bythinia, Capadocia, Pontus, Gallatia, or any other place,
until after this, but to the Jews only dwelling there:

Quotquot erant illis Iudaea ab origin regnis,
Edocuit Christum, veterique reduxit ab vsu.
Which both S. Peter himself and S. James testify in the beginning of their
Epistles. And were it not for the authority of those which write that S. Peter
did consecrate those seven Disciples of S. James making them Bishops and
sending them into Hiberia, Spain, we might think the Hiberia where Saint
James preached was the Hiberia, in, or near Armenia, a place far more near
and likely for him to preach in, then this west Contry of Spain is. For there
also is a Nation then named Hiberia, or Iberia, and the people thereof Cooper.
v. Iber. Abrah. Orte^ius in Catal. nomin. antiq. in Iberia and in descript.
Asiae.
Iberi or Hebres, as the Spaniards also were called, as both Protestants and
others testify, the Georgians now are dwelling there, being a Contry of Asia
near Pontus Euxinus.

6. And to give all contentme^t that may be in this matter, it does not seem
altogether improbable: (especially the ancient Scots now called Irish,
inhabiting of Irelande, and the Scots of Scotland, being aunciently one and the
same people with the old inhabitants of some of the maritane parts of Spain
now Portugal as both Scottish, Irish, and English historians also inform us,)
That S. James the Apostle preaching in Spain near unto, or among the Hector.
Boeth. Holinsh. hist. of Irl. Mat. Westminster. aetat. 5. c. 5.
people of Spain, from whom diverse of our Scots and Irish are come, some fame
of his preaching though short, and miracles there, might come from them to the
Scots their Contrimen, mixed with our Britains here, and by that heavenly
doctrine, which seemed unto them little or nothing to differ from that which had
long before more darkely been taught among them, before the coming of Christ,
and hearing that S. James was returned unto Jury, and Jerusalem again, and
the chiefest Apostles, Doctors, and Teachers of that holy Religion, were
there, But diverse both Scots, and Britans, which then dwelled together, and as
before were of one and the same mind in spiritual things, undertook that
pilgrimage and sacred Journey: and there meeting with S. Peter, the chiefest of
that blessed company, and first preacher Hect. Boeth. in descr. Scot. Reg. fol.
4. 5. Hieron. l. 2. contr. Iouin. Abrah. O^tel. in Cosmog. B^libald^n Co^mog.
Munst. in Cos. Cooper. v. Scotia Calepin. v. Scot. A^^st^^. lib. de mund.
Th^odor. H^st. ^cc^es^^^t. Claud. P^o^om. Geog^^p. l. 2. c. 2. Claud. Panyger.
to the Gentiles, were instructed by him in the faith of Christ. And this S.
Mansuetus being styled both by Antiquities and later writers before to have
been natione Scotus sufficiently conuinceth he was either a Britan or Scot of
this Island of Britain, for although all those three people before remembered
were sometimes named Scoit, as Hector Boethius, and diverse others do witness:
yet to have been constantly and ahsolutely named Scots, was and is peculiar to
those of this Island. Scoticum nomen ob eminentem prae caeteris virtut^m, solum
nobis etiam nunc superest, quum and in Hispania and in Hibernia vetusiate
interierit. And it was so aunciently decayed both among those inhabitants of
Spain and Ireland that even in the time of the Apostles, and before, it was
almost proper to them of this Island.

7. That which we call now Ireland was in the time of Aristotle or the ancient
Author of the book, (...) of the world among his works called I^rna. So does
Theodoret name it. Claudius Ptolomaeus calls it Iuernia, or Hibernia. And
Claudianus Hyberne: Scotorum Tumulos fleuit glaciali Hiberne, so that we see,
the name Scotia Scotland appropriate to our northren part of Britain; and this
whole Island by some, was named Scotia. For Commentar. in Claud. Ptolom.
as Pirckeinerus, or whosoever the Commentor upon Claudius Ptolomaeus was, all
this Island has been called by some Scotia, Scotland. Anglia nunc dicitur
vulgo England, prius Loegria, Deinde Scotia, vulgo Scothland, Albania prius,
and Caledonia, Rufo Britannia secunda. And among all historians Latin, French,
Spannish, Scottish, English or what else, The northren part of Britain is
absolutely called Scotland, and so has ever been, since the name Albania, or
Britannia ceased there. And if Ireland has been at any time named Scotia,
Scotland, it was only among the Scottish, or Irish writers, and such as
followed them therein, those Irish historians willing to give that denomination
unto it, because many of the Scots with other people dwelled there; when the
true name, and among strangers was not so, but as I have declared before, from
ancient histories; and to speak in a Protestants words therein Author of the
Book of Estates in Ireland Edw. Grymst. estate of the King of great Britain.
p. 22.
following good authorities, thus he discribeth it: Ireland which some of the
ancients called Hibernia, others Iuernia, Iuuernia, and Ierne, and Ogigia, and
by the Irish themselves, Erim, called by Ptolomee little Britain, lies between
Britain and Spain. Where we see, the name Scoland is never attributed,
simply, unto it, by these Authors Judgments either by the Irish themselves, or
other writers, late or ancient. And, as all men know, The sentence of Hector
Boethius is, that the name of Scots and Scotland has been of late proper to
them of this our Britain, and quite ceased and discontinued both in Spain,
and Ireland; Arnoldus Mirman. Theatr. conuers. gent. Gulielm. Eiseng. Centen.
1. part. 1. distinct. 3. fol. 56. Petr. de natalib. l. 11. cap. vit. Ant.
Monchiacen. Demochar. l. 2. de Miss. contra Calvin. cap. 33. Franc. Bell^for.
Cosmograph. l. 2. col. 2. col. 263. Catalog. Episc. Tullers.
and yet they which term. S. Mansuetus natione Scotus: a Scot by nation, are
late writers, as Arnoldus Mirmannius, Gulielmus Eisengrenius, Antonius
Democharez, Franc^s Belleforest, and others speaking after the vulgar manner of
nameing Scot and Scotland in their time, of which only they speak, not
entering into any controversy, what people have been called Scots, but are
such as call no other Scots or Scotland, then of our Britain.

8. So that the truth which is affirmed in this matter, is only this, that S.
Mansuetus disciple of S. Peter the Apostle, and by him ordained the first
Bishop of Tullum, Toul, in Lorraine, was by nation borne in that part of
Britain, which now, and ever of late for many years, is and has been called
Scotland: But whether he was a Britain or a Scot those Authorities do not
determine. But it will more fully appear hereafter that he was by birth a
Britian, that part of this Island at that time being part of Britain, and long
after; which among others Martial the Poet makes manifest for that time: for
speaking of the inhabitants of that part of this kingdom, which now is called
S. Mansuetus disciple of S. Peter the Apostle was a Britain.
Scotland. To Quintus Ouidius, that was to travail thither, from Rome, he
calls them Britans of Caledonia.

Quinte Caledonios Ouidi visure Britannos. The contry now called Scotland was
part of Britain^ in this time, and long after.
And it should seem by Martial, that this Quintus Ouidius himself was a
Britain of this nation, and perhaps of the kindred or retinue of lady Claudia,
for he does not only speak of his long Journey from Rome, to our North part
of Britain, as before, now Scotland, but in the same place sets down, that
he was to return again into Italy, from hence, and make his abode at Martial.
l. 10. epigram. 44. ad Quintum Ouidium. Martial. supr. epigr. 44.
Sabinam where the house of our Contry woman lady Claudia, and her Husband
Pudens was.

Sed reddar^ tuis tandem mansure Sabinis. But this hereafter, when I come to
that time. But this sufficiently conuinceth both that the northre^ inhabitants
of this kingdom in those days were called Britans, and that there was
intercourse between Rome, Romans, and them especially when we see an old man,
fitter to sit by the fire, then to take so long a journey, as the Poet there
describes him, not only to go to the remotest places of this kingdom from
Rome, but to make his return into Italy again. And here I end the days of
Tiberius, leaving Cunobeline still King in Britain, or Guiderius newly begun
his Reign.

THE VII. CHAPTER.
OF THE TIME OF CAIUS CALIGVLA, Emperor; and some Christian Britans of this
nation, probably both at Rome, and in Britain in his days.

1. AFTER the death of Tiberius, Caius Caligula succeeded in the Empire, but
reigned so short a time as I have before remembered: Caius Caligula Emperor a
friend and favorer of Christians.
neither do we read that among his other vices, which were many, and great,
that he was a persecutour of Christians: for those outrages which he committed
against the Jews, which among others (our own historians do report) were
rather in revenge against the Jews, for the death of Christ, and their
persecuting of Christians, then for any hatred to Christian Religion: And it
was a just punishment of God toward that incredulous people, and their holy
temple, that had been so long renowned, for the true worship, and sacrifice
of God, to see it now polluted Matthew West. an. 40. Theat. of Britain in
Caius Caligula.
with the Idolatrous sacrifices, of the Gentiles, the Idol of Jupiter, and the
Emperor himself, a vile and wicked man, to be worshipped and adored there, as
the Lord of heaven and earth: Caesar, templum quod erat Hierosolymis iussit
prophanari sacrificijs Gentilium, Iouis statuam ibi collocat, seque* vt Dominum
coeli and terrae coli and adorari praecepit. When otherwise, concerning
Christians, he still permitted Matthew. Westminster. 38. 39. Niceph. Histor. Eccl. l.
2. cap. 10. Arnold. Mi^m. in Theat. Conuers. gent.
the favorable Edict of Tiberius to remain in force. He bannished Pilate by
whom Christ was crucified. He deprived Herod of his kingdom, and together
with Herodiades his brothers wife, which he kept, (the occasion of the
martyrdom of S. Ihon the Baptist) he drive into bannishment, and these and
such favors and Justice he extended unto the Christians, who together with
their friends had complained to L. Vitellius President of Syria, which he
related the Christians proueing it to Caligula. And though this man made a show
of war against the Brittans, yet it was not for any matter concerning Stow
and howes hist. in Ginde^ius. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. l. ^. Galfrid. monum.
lib. 4. hist. cap. 13. Pontic. Virun. li. 4. Britan. hist. Stab. Geograph.
Christian Religion.

2. And we are assured, both by the British history, Ponticus Virunnius, and
diverse Protestant writers, that not only Adaminus son of King Kimbeline with
his retinue, lived with the Emperor Caligula, but there were then many,
Britanni obsides Romae: Britans kept for pledges, or hostages then at Rome. And
this Emperor did nothing in matters of hostility against the Britans, but only
made a show of war, and returned with contempt. And the British Kings at
that time whether Kymbeline, Guiderius or Aruiragus were friendly S. Mansuetus
Britan made Bishop by S. Peter the Apostle.
unto Christians. In the time of this Emperor we read that S. Peter the
Apostle consecrated our holy contry man S. Mansuetus, which he had Christened
before in the time of Tyberius, a Bishop, and sent him to Tullum in Lorraine.
Tullenses habuere Apostolum, suaeque in Christum fidei primum Antistitem
Arnoldus Mirmannius in theatro conuersionis gentium.. Metensibus. Eisengr.
cent. 1. distict. 3. part. 1. Anton. Democh. lib. 2. de Missa ^ontra Calo. cap.
33. Petr. de natalib. l. 11. c. vlt. Franc. Bellefor. Cosmog. l. 2.
S. Mansuetum S. Petri Apostoli discipulum, S. Clementis collegam, origin
Scotum: The Tullensians, or inhabitants of Tullum in Lorraine, had for their
Apostle and their first Bishop of their faith in Christ, S. Mansuetus, a Scot
by nativity, the disciple of S. Peter the Apostle, and c^mpanion of S. Clement.
This is testified also by many others as Gulielmus Eisengrenius Antonius,
Democharez, Petrus de natalibus with others saying: S. Mansuetus natione
Scotus, ex nobili prognatus familia, Simonis Bar-ionae Apostolorum Coryphaei
discipulus, socius beati Clementis Episcopi Metensis, a Petro Loucorum in vrbe
Tullensi primus Antistes consecratus est. Mansuetus by nation a Scot (so they
term our northren Britans) borne of a noble family, the disciple of Simon
Bar-ionas the chief of the Apostles, fellow of S. Clement the Bishop of Metz,
was consecrated by S. Peter the first Bishop in the city of Tullum.

3. Hitherto these Authors, only this difference I find between them,
Arnold. Mirm. in Theatr. Conuer. gent. in S. Clem. Metensi Episc.
that Arnoldus Mirmannius says, S. Clement whose companion S. Mansuetus was,
was Bishop of Metz by S. Peter's appointement in the 40. year of Christ, Caio
Caligula Imperatore, when Caius Caligula was Emperor. And Eisengrenius says,
S. Mansuetus was made Bishop of Tullum, in the year 49. eight or neyne years
after. Which may easily be reconciled together* by saying S. Mansuetus was sent
by S. Peter in the year of Christ 40. and took not upon him the charge of
Tullum, until the year 49. in the mean time being otherwise, and else where
employed, in preaching the gospel of Christ. Neither will it avail, or prove
any thing to the contrary, for any man to object, that S. Peter was not yet
come to Rome, nor after until the beginning Diverse Churches, founded, Priests
and Bishops consecrated for the west by S. Peter before h^ was resident at Rome.
of the Empire of Claudius: for although he came not thither, to make any
residence there, until about that time: yet this nothing hindered many of
these western nations, moved with the love of Christ, and fame of S. Peter, to
resort unto him, in the parts of the East, where he remained, to be instructed
by him. And he both by himself, and his disciples sent from him, had founded
many Churches, in diverse parts of the western world, before this time, as
namely at Tauremoniu^, the 39. year And at Siracusas, the same year. And in
Guliel. Eisengr. centen. 1. part. 4. did 8. Metaphr. in vit. Petr. Niceph. l.
2. c. 35. Eisengren. supr. Volaterr. lib. 11. Add. cert. Apol. l. 1. Eisengr.
cent. 1. part. 1. distinct. 7. Metaphrast. in v l. Petri and Pauli Nicephor. l.
2. c. 35. Is. c. 66. v. 19. 21.
Sicilia Ecclesiam Christi instituisse, to have founded the Church of Christ in
Sicily the same time. And at Antaradum, before that, in the year 37. and at
Tauromenium in Sicily, where he as before had then preached, he ordains S.
Pancratius Bishop, in the year 39. and S. Marcianus his disciple, Bishop of
Siracusas. And as before, sent S. Barnabas with others, into other parts of
Italy. And this is no more, then God had long time before foretold by his
Prophet Isay, speaking of these times, and the Apostles preaching, after the
Ascension of Christ: I will set a sign among them, and I will send of them
unto the nations to Tarsis, to Greece, into Italy, to the Isles a far of, and
they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles. And I will take of them for
Priests and levites, says the Lord. Where we see not only Italy, but this
very Island to be remembered by the Prophet of God to have the gospel preached
unto it, even in the very first beginning of Christianity. For the words of the
Prophet cannot be more properly applied unto, or verified of any Island, then of
this our Britain; both an Island a far of from Jerusalem and one of the
greatest in the world, and The Pro^hets of the old t^stament f^retolde the
conversion of Britain in this time.
that which before all others, did generally, and publicly afterward embrac^
the gospel of Christ. And at that time as all writers agree, this Island did
acknowledge Christ, as likewise that other great Island Taprobana, or S.
Laurence Island, the greatest with this, or greater, and also far from
Jerusalem, did by the preaching of S. Thomas the Apostle. And the scripture is
so clear for the conversion of the great Islands unto Christ, even in the
beginning of the gospel, that no nation almost in the world may be more
plainly said to be called to the faith of Christ in that time, the^ this Island
the most renowned in this western or northren world. Our Lord has reigned,
let the Ps. 96. v. 1. Is. 24. v. 15. 16. Is. 42. v. 4. Is. 49. 1.
earth rejoice, and many Islands Joy. The name of the Lord of Israel in the
Islands of the Sea. From the ends of the earth we have heard praises the glory
of the just one. The Islands shall expect his law. Harken you Islands, and
people a far of attend. The Islands shall expect me. These and more places
have the holy Prophets of this our happy vocation and calling unto Christ in
that time.

4. Neither may we be so injurious to the honor of this our Ila^d of Britain,
the Lady and Queen, as it were, of Islands, to deny that honor unto it, which
we do and must give to others, to have received the faith of Christ in these
times. I have spoken of Taprobama before; as likewise of Sicily. Saint Titus
preached in Creta, and was Bishop there. S. Paul the Apostle in Melita as he
Act. Apost. Paul. epist. ad Tit. Act. 28. Petr. de natalib. l. 2. c. 62.
Guliel. Eisengr. centen. 1. part. 4. did. 8. Nicephor. l. 2. c. 40.
was brought to Rome. S. Nicanor one of the seven Deacons in Cyprus, and diverse
other Islands both in the mediterranean, and other Seas are proved both by holy
scripture, and allowed authors to have received the faith about this time.
Neither are they wanting that affirm, one S. Simon an Apostle, whether S.
Simon Peter, or S. Simon Zelotes I will entreat hereafter, preached also in
this Island, not long after these. And many lying in our Northen, Ocean as
Island (esteemed to be the Aunciently named Thyle, Groneland,) and other
prophesied to receive then the faith of Christ: this Ila^d of Britain, the,
gate, way and passage unto them, was not passed by in that happy work.
Especially when (if it shall not be thought to interrupt my history of
Britain) The faith of Christ preached in America, by such as preached in
Britain.
I have clearly proved, to be added in due place, That the gospel was
preached in America, by such as preached here, And that it was known many
hundred years since to those of this kingdom of Britain, and not improbably
in the Apostles time, and was the harbor and succor of some of them or their
disciples, first preaching here, and from hence happily transported and passing
thither, to deliver there their heavenly message.

5. But howsoever these things be proved hereafter, manifest it is, by that
which is said before, that our contryman S. Ma^suetus was either in the reign
of Caius Caligula, or Claudius, Bishop of Tullum, and founded the first
Episcopal succession there. S. Mansuetum Petri Apostolorum Coryphaei
discipulum Guliel. Eisengr. centen. 1. part. 7. did. 1. Petr. de natalibus l.
11. c. vlt. Demochar. l. 2. c. 33. Arnold. Mirm. thea^^o, conuers. Ma^tirolog.
Romans 3. September. Ado eod. die.
Episcopatum in Leacorum vrbe Tullo fundasse. And no man will think, that he
alone of his nation, was either consecrated Bishop, or Priest, or became a
Christian. It is a thing scarcely heard of in histories, that any one man
should only be called to that highest dignity, and calling, in the Church of
God, and to leave his contry, to preach to strangers, except his own nation
was otherwise furnished both of clergy men, and other Christians, and except
some storm or violence of persecution should separate him from his natural
friends and contry: which neither is, nor can be pretended in this case. For
neither at that time, nor all the life of S. Mansuetus, being (as here after)
very long, Diverse other Britans probably converted with S. Mansuetus by S.
Peter.
yet he not returning into Britain, was there any persecution of Christians in
this kingdom, but quite otherwise, favor and friendship of all in authority to
that religion: and not this only, but (as I have proved before) a general
inclination, and disposition in the whole Island, to be instructed in, and
receive the faith of Christ. And so whether we will say, that this holy Bishop
of Britain, went from hence to S. Peter in the Eastern Contries, or S. Peter
was then here in these parts, when he consecrated him Bishop or Priest, no man
can be so unadvised to think, that he was the only Bishop, Priest, and
Christian also of this Nation then: This cannot enter in any reasonable
judgment. If we say that S. Mansuetus went out of this Nation to S. Peter in
the Eastern Contries, (which Protestants will rather agree unto) this makes
as much for the honor of that Apostle, and the love and reverence of our first
Christians unto him, to draw them by such forcible bands thereof, to undertake
so long and dangerous a journey to be instructed by that holy Apostle. And this
holy Bishop being Associate to S. Clement a Roman borne, and so returning by
Rome from those Eastern Contries, being their direct way to Metz, Tullum, and
those places where they preached, but at their passing by Rome, S. Mansuetus
visited those Britans of this Nation, which then were hostages, and pledges
there, whereof some at that time in true judgment The British parents of lady
Claudia, and others of their family, became Christians about this time.
must needs be thought to be Christians: as namely the parents of Lady
Claudia, which both were Britans: And that they were then Christians before the
beginning of Claudius his Empire, or S. Peter's coming to Rome, in the beginning
thereof, the Romans themselves shall witness for they tell us, that the house
of Pudens husband of our contry woman S. Claudia was the first lodging of S.
Peter in Rome, and there, first the Christians assembled Baron. in annot. in
diem. 19. Maij Martyrol. Romans Author of 3. ConH. Godwyn Conuers. of Britain
page 17. Godwyn supr. page 17. 2. Tymoth. 4. Godwyn supr. Martyrolog. Romans die
19. Maij. Martial. Epigram. Bal. centur. 1. De scriptur. in Claudia.
to serve God. Maiorum firma traditione praescriptum est, domum Pudentis Romae
fuisse primum hospitium S. Petri Principis Apostolorum, illucque primum
Christianos conuenisse ad Synaxim, coactam Ecclesiam, vetussimumque omnium
titulum Pudentis nomine appellatum. And yet certain it is, that this S. Pudens
was either but a very young child, or not yet borne when S. Peter came to Rome,
and so young, that our Protestants by their Bishop and Antiquary says of him
and Claudia, Pudens and Claudia were two young Persons, when S. Paul remembered
them, in his second epistle to S. Timothy which they say was in the last year
of Nero, or without doubt not long before, 24. or 25. years after S. Peter's
coming to Rome in the beginning of Claudius his time by all accounts. And these
Protestants further say, thy were so young that they were not in their
judgments married until the later end of Traians time, or about the beginning
of Domitian. And the ancient Roman Martirologe it self is witness, that when
S. Peter came to Rome S. Pude^s was not a Christian but baptized by him: S.
Pudens S. Pude^tianae pater qui ab Apostolis Christo in Baptismo vestitus.
Therefore it was not S. Pude^s then not borne, or a young child and not
Christened, but after, that did or could give the first entertainment in his
house to S. Peter, or make Christian Britans in Rome, the first entertayners of
S. Peter the Apostle there: and their h^us^ the first Church, or Oratory for
C^^istians t^^re*
his house a Church for Christians. Besides evident it is, that this S. Pudens
was borne in Vmbria in Italy, far from Rome, and his dwelling house was there
at Sabinu^, of which S. Claudia his wife took an other name unto her, as more
hereafter. Therefore I must entreat the Romans, to give me leave, to think,
that this house which was the primu^ hospitiu^, the first lodging ^f S. Peter
in Rome, was the house of the holy Christian parents of our renowned contry
woman S. Claudia, and they then Christians and some of the Hostages of Britain
at Rome when S. Peter came thither first, and were so charitable to the Saints
These probably converted by their ^^ntryman S. Mansue^us r^turning^ by Rome,
from S. ^^ter ^n (...) contry^^.
of God, that they gave entertainment to that holy Apostle before any of the
Romans, and made their house, the house of God, and serving him.

6. Not improbable it is, that these holy Br^tans then in Rome, which so first
received S. Peter there, were first converted by their holy contryman S.
Ma^suetus disciple of S. Peter, as he returned from that great Apostle at
Antioch or there abouts, with S. Clement by Rome into these parts, whether S.
Peter sent the^ Bishops. And by this happy means of that holy Apostle S.
Peter, his disciples and our Christian co^triman at Rome, much spiritual good
redounded after to this Kingdom, as I shall make more manifest in the time of
Claudius, and other succeeding Emperors. Neither ca^ we think but very many
here in Britain were also then converted by the means of S. Ma^suetus, or
some other of his holy companions, both in his journey to Antioch to S. Peter,
and in his return into these Co^tryes again to preach the gospel especially
in the more Northren part of Britain, of which Nation he is supposed to be,
and named Scotus, a Scot, as all the Britains of the North part beyond the
wall or Tre^ch of the Emperors Adrian and Seuerus were named, because they
were so mixed with the Diverse of the Northren B^itans converted about this
tym^, and by diverse authors before those ^f the Soutern parts.
Scots, that in time, the Scots were the greater and stranger nation in that
part. And of this time and in this sense it is most properly true for any thing
which we read particularly in histories which the Magdeburgian Protestants
with diverse also of this kingdom, both Catholics and Protestants was from
Petrus Cluniacensis (and I may add Tertullian) that the people of Britain in
the North where the Scots now be, were the first Christians. Scotos Christianos
antiquiores Petrus Cluniacensis vocat: ac referatur huc quoque Tertulliani
testimonium, qui Magdeburgen. centur. 2. cap. 2. col. 6. Theater of great
Britanie l. 6. Tertullian l. aduers. Iudaeos. Theater of great Britanie l. 6.
c. 9.. 9.
inquit: Britannorum inaccessa Romany loca Christo fuerunt subdita. Petrus
Cluniacensis calls the Scots, the more ancient Christians. And hitherto we
may refer the testimony of Tertullian who says the places of the Britans
which were inaccessable to the Romans, were subject to Christ. And he adds of
the Britans, nomen Christi regnat, the name of Christ reigned among them. Which
our English Protestant Bishops in their Theater confirm in this manner. It is
certain that the Britans were with the first Conuerts: And Tertullian who
lived within 200. years of Christ's Nativity, shows no less: who the more
to provoke the Jews, against whom he wrote, calls to witness the fruitful
increase of the Gospel Tertullian contr. Iudaeos cap. 7. Petr. Cluniacen. ad
Bernard.
of salvation, through many Contries and Nations, and among them names the
Britans, to have received the word of life. The power whereof, says he, has
peirced into those parts, whether the Romans could not come. Whence Petrus
Cluniacensis supposes the Scottish men the more ancient Christians.

7. The like have other Protestants, and those their cited Authors: which The
Northre^ Brittans received the faith ^yther by S. Mansuetus, or some other
disciples of S. P^t^r, about this time.
cannot be otherwise verified, but applying this preaching of the faith of
Christ, unto those Northre^ Britans, either by this their holy Contriman, saint
Mansuetus, the first Bishop we can find of this kingdom, or some other
Associete of his, sent hither, at, or about that time, by the same holy Apostle
S. Peter. For in all other respects, whether we speak of the British
Christians here in the time of Claudius, or Nero, of which these Protestants
will tell us Hector Boeth. hist. Scot. Georg. Buch. rer. Scoticar. l. 4. Rege
27. Holinsh. h^stor. of Scotland in Donaldus. H^ris. descript. of Britans.
Stowe and Howes hist. Theater of Brit. l. 6. Matthew. west. an. 209. 198. and
others.
more hereafter, or the cominge of saint Joseph of Aramathia, and his
Religious Companions into this kingdom, in the days of Nero, or the general
Conversion of the kingdom of Britain unto the Trenches of Seuerus in the time
of King Lucius by Pope Eleutherius, all these were long before the Conversion
of the Scots in the time of their King Donaldus either by Pope Victor, or
Zepherinus, as Harison rather supposes, the first time which is assined by
any, being in the 203. year of Christ: and if it was under Pope Zepherine, it
was after that time, for he was not chosen Pope until the year 209. before
which time or the beginning it self of the Papacy of saint Victor, which was
in the year 198. this our Britain on this, side (the remembered division) had
generally and publikly received the faith of Christ. And the very words of
Tertullian, living and dying before this Conversion of Scotland, within the
first two hundred years, by these Protestants before, and writing that his
book, aduersus Iudaeos, long before, and yet saying, that the places of
Britain, which the Romans could never conquer, or come unto, Britannorum
Romany inaccessa loca: did acknowledge Christ and his name did reign in them,
before he wrote, do manifestly convince it to be so. For Tertullian living and
writing in Afrike, could not possibly take notice of things done here in an
Island so far of, presently after they were first effected: and by no means,
could either he, or any other writer speak of things done so long after,
truly to repart them done so long before, If he had been the greatest Prophet
that ever was. Therefore both the Testimony of him, and Peter Cluniacensis also
must needs, (to be true) have relation to these days of saint Mansuetus, and
his Associats, or others living in those times, and sent hither by saint
Peter. Or else how can we allow, and commend the spiritual love and charity
of saint Peter that most glorious Apostle, whom we may not control, or of
this holy saint our Contryman made Priest, and Bishop by him to this his most
beloved contry, if he had continually stayed at Tullum, so far hence, or
there abouts, never coming hither to relieve the extreme spiritual needs,
distresses, and miseries of this his native contry, except others were then
assigned by the same Apostle to supply and perform that charge? In such a case
the Order of Christian charity had otherwise sent him hither, and so required
both of saint Peter and this his disciple, to prefer this Nation in their
heavenly love. That spirit which moved holy Moses to say to Exodus c. 32. v. 32.
God: Aut miserere populo huic, aut dele me de libro quem scripsisti: Either
take mercy upon this people (my contry men) or blot me out of the book, which
thou have written. Romans c. 9. v. 3.
That which enforced and inflamed saint Paul to write: I could wish (so our
Protestants translate) that my self were accursed from Christ, for my
brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh. Yea the order and law of holy
love bound, and tied with the chains thereof the whole College of the blessed
Apostles to stay so long in Jury, among their brethren there, before they
preached unto the Gentiles. And Christ himself said, he was sent, ad oues quae
perierunt domus Israel: to the lost sheppe of the house of Israel: and preached
most to the Jews of whose nation he had received his Incarnation. Matthew. 15.
Camden. in Belgae. edit. an. 1586. Seldom. in Analect. Girald. Cambr. l. de
sedis menou. dignitate. Ioh. Pris. defens. hist. Britannic. p. 73. 74. Parker.
antiq. Britanni. Anton. Sabell. lib. de occid. Imper. and alij.


8. Therefore besides all the Protestants of England before recited, their
chiefest Antiquary concludes that it is a thing certain, not to be
questioned, or doubted of, but the Britans did receive Christian Religion, even
in the very infancy and beginning of the Church of Christ. certum est Britannos
in ipsa Ecclesiae Infantia, Christiana^ Religionem imbibisse. So M. Seldom and
others before alleged. And though S. Mansuetus be called natione Scotus, yet
this nothing preiudiceth the preaching of the faith to the Brita^s, in the
North part of this Ila^d by him, or others of his holy companions. For long
after this time all or the greatest part of the inahbitants of that Northren
Co^try of Britain, were known Brita^s and not Scots, as is evident by all
antiquities of this nation, and the preuayling of the Scottish nation there,
first gave the denominatio^ of Scotland to it, long after being then, even by
the Romans, called Britain. For as both ancient and late, foreign and
domestical antiquaries agree, this Island was long time after the days of
saint Mansuetus divided into five distinct Provinces, and yet every Saint
Mansuetus made Priest and Bishop by. S. Peter, pr^ached in Britain.
one called, Britannia. Britannia prima. Britannia secunda. Britannia Flauia.
Britannia Maximia. Britannia Valentia. Which last was that, which was
aunciently Albania, and after abusiuely (because the Scots possessed it)
Scotland. Quinta, Valentia, Albania scilicet, quae nunc abusiue Scotia dicitur.
And although this holy Bishop of Britain is ordinarily called in histories the
Bishop of Toul in Lorraine, where, and where about he seems much to have
conuersed, and preached after he was promoted to Episcopal order by saint
Peter; yet this hinders not, but that (as before) he spent much time, and
labor in that kind, as nature and charity bound him, in this his native
contry: which is testified in plain terms both by Methodius that most
ancient writer, and saint Marianus Scotus, his own contriman of this Island,
who speaking of diverse Apostolic Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. in Nerua col.
254. Method. apud eund. supr.
men of that time, whom they call, Insignes sanctitate, and gratia pollentes:
renowned men excelling in sanctity and grace, among whom they name both this
our holy Bishop, and saint Clement his associate, they say of them: non solum
propria prouincia, sed and in extremis (al. externis) and vltimis industrij and
illustres regna Tyrannorum vicerunt: They were not only industrious, and
renowned for preaching in their own contries, but also in extreme, (or
externe) and uttermost nations, overcame the kingdoms of Tyrants. Where it is
evident by these two great witnesses, that this most blessed Bishop of
Britain preached here in his own contry, propria prouincia at that time. And
thus I end the Empire of Caligula, Guiderius reigning in Britain.

THE VIII. CHAPTER.
OF THE TIME OF CLAUDIUS. AND HOW by our Protestants testimony one of the
twelve Apostles then preached in Britain.

1. NOw we are come to the time of Claudius, when both Catholics and
Protestants assure us, both that the Apostles formally preached unto the
Gentiles, and there were many Christians in this our Britain: But before we
proceed further, to avoid all ambiguitie, or error, that might chance in
these matters, in the judgment of Protestants, let us first crave their best
assistance, and direction by some certain grounds, and maxims in history, as
infallible rules truly and plainly to square our narration by, least we be
deceived. They Certain historical grounds, and Maxims given by our
Protesia^t Antiquaries, to kn^we what Ap^stles first preached in Britani^.
propose some few for most certain and undoubted general verities, which
will easily lead us to many undoubted particular conclusions. First they say,
which in some sort is remembered before, that this kingdom of Britain received
the faith of Christ soon after his Ascension. Secondly, that this holy
Religion was preached here, by some one at the least of the Apostles. Thirdly,
who they are in particular of that most holy number and order, of whom mention
is made in histeries to have preached in this nation. Fourthly that in the time
of Claudius, of which we now entreat, diverse Christians came hither from Rome,
when he persecuted them there. Fifthly that saint Paul came not to Rome, or to
any of these west parts until long after the death of Claudius, in the reign
of Nero: Sixthly, that saint Simon Zelotes, whom some write to have preached
and been martyred in Britain, was put to death in Persia, with saint Jude.
Seventhly, that it was the 63. year of Christ, before saint Joseph of
Aramathia, that buried our Savior, came hither with his religious companions.
Lastely, that saint Peter, that great Apostle was one of those three Apostles,
saint Paul and saint Simon Zelotes the other two which are reported in
histories to have preached hear. All which assertions Theater of great
Britanie lib. 6. Camden. in Britan. Stowe. And howes hist. Holinsh. hist. of
Engl. Godwyn Conu. of Brit. and Catal. of Bishop. Protest. Comm. Book. Parker.
antiquit. Britan. Mason Book of Ordin. with others.
are taught by the chiefest Protestant antiquaries, and historians of England,
in their common book of their religion, their Theater and other writings, of
most credit with them, for undoubted historiall verities. By which it evidently
will be concluded, by their own graunts, and directions, that saint Peter was
the only Apostle, that first brought, or sent Christianity into this
kingdom. Which is particularly also proved before, in the case of S.
Mansuetus, the first Priest and Bishop which was borne in this Island which any
histories, I read, make mention of, yet consecrated by S. Peter, sent and
directed by him with others of his disciples into these parts.

2. But to make all these things so evidently true, even by these Protestants,
that no man with any pretense of probability, shall be able to make
contradiction unto them, They shall all and every of them be particularly and
Inuincibly proved true, by these me^ themselves. The first, of the faith of
Christ, received hear, soon after his Ascension, and in the time of Tyberius
is verified before, from these Protestant Authors: To which I add this their
Testimony again: The Apostle himself says: the sound of the gospel went
through the earth, and was heard unto the ends of the world. Which his sayings
cannot more Theater of great Britain l. 6. c. 9. Romans 10. v. 18.
fitly be applied to any other Nation then to us of Britain, whose land by the
almighty is so placed in the terrestrial Globe, that thereby it is termed of
the ancient the the ends, and deemed to be situated in an other world. And
again: Immediately after Christ's death, does Gildas fasten our conversion,
where he writes, that the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, which first
appeared to the world in the later time of Tyberius Caesar, did even then
spread his bright beams upon this frosen Island of Britain. The Gildas. de
excid. Brit.
like testimony they reiterate in an other place, Which I will cite hereafter;
and according unto this, runs the whole current of their writers of
antiquity from the highest and greatest to the love and meanest among them.

3. Their first Protestant Archbishop Matthew Parker in his Entitled
Antiquitates Britannicae, The Antiquities of Britain, proves it from
Antiquities in Matthew. Parker. antiquit. Brit. p. 1
these words: primam Christianae Ecclesiae originem and institutionem in Insula
Britannica, ex antiquissimis patrum scriptorumque testimonijs repertemus nor
modo peruetustam eam fuisse, sed etiam ab ipso primum per Apostolos propagato
per orbem Euangelio initia duxisse and accepisse incrementa: we shall find out
of the most ancient testimonies of the Fathers and writers, That the first
beginning, and institution of the Christian Church in the Island of Britain,
was not only very ancient, but to have had beginning and received increases
even from the time when the Ghosppell was first propagated in the world by the
Apostles. And he yields his reason immediately in this manner. Gildas enim
Antiquis^imus inter eos qui fide digni sunt, Britannicaru^ r^rum scriptor,
tradit Britannos iam inde ab ortu Euangelij Christianam (...) fid^m: for Gildas
the most ancient writer of British matters among those that (...) ^^^^edit,
does deliver that the Britons received the Christian faith even from Engli^h
Protestants mistake the testimony of Gildas about the time of the faith of
Christ received hear.
the rising up of the gospel. The Protestant Bishops and others, Authors of
their great Theater of great Britain give testimony unto this, in these
words: There are, who upon a very good ground from the words of Gildas, the
most ancient of our British Historians, will have the sun of the gospel
long before the coming of Joseph of Aramothia hither, to have risen in this
our w^st, and this Island of Britain to have enjoyed the very morning Assent,
the brigtnesse thereof per^i^g Theater of great Britain l. 6. c. 9.. 5.
through the must^ clouds of error, and shyning hear in Britain even i^ the
(...) of Tiberius, toward whose end Christ suffered his death, and by whose
Indulgence toward Christians, their profession was propagated far and near.
Which assertion the said Gildas does not deliver couldely or doubtingly, but
with great confidence, and relying upon good grounds, as it appears when he
says, Scimus etc. we know for certainety, that this was in the later times of
Tiberius which was immediately after our blessed Saviors Passion. Their
Protestant Bishops Bale and Godwyn say: The Britans received the doctrine and
discipline of their Church from the Apoles of Christ. The religion of the
Britans was that which the Apostles by the commandment of God delivered to
the Churches of the Christians. And continued in the Country of the Britans
from the Apostles time. Their most renowned Antiquary Sir Camden Clarentieux
among Harolds is of the same opinion, in diverse editions. D. Fulke says: The
Britans continued in the faith of Christ, from the Apostles Godwyn. Conu. of
Britain p. 43. 44. Balaeus l. 2. de Act. Romans pont. in Gregor. 1. Camden in
Britan. Fulke Answ. to counterf. Cath. p. 40. Powel Annotat. in l. 2. Giraldi
Cambren. Itiner. Cambr. c. 1. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. c. 21. p. 102. Seldom in
Anal. Gildas epist. de Excid. and Conq. Brit. cap. 6.
time. An other adds: The doctrine of the Britans and their worship of God
was pure and from the Apostles themselves. Holinshed says: the Britans
Christianity never failed from the Apostles time. In like manner write diverse
others, needless to be recited: And most of them ground upon the Authority of
S. Gildas, as some of them have plainly before expressed.

4. Therefore for better satisfaction of the Readers I will cite at lardge the
words of that holy Ancient British writer, as our English Protestants have
published him to the world, and some Manuscripts also have. These they are:
Interea glaciali frigore rigenti Insulae, and velut longiore terrarum secessu
soli visibili non proximae, verus ille non de firmamento solum temporali, sed
de summa etiam caelorum arce tempora cuncta excedente, vniuerso orbi
praefulgidum sui corruscum ostendens (tempore vt scimus) summo Tyberij
Caesaris, quo absque vllo impedimento, eius promulgabatur Religio, comminata
Senatu nolente a Principe morte dilatoribus militum eiusdem, radios suos
indulget, id est, sua praecepta Christus. In the mean time, to this Island
stiff with forsen could, and far distant from the visible sun, That true
sun which is Christ, does vouchsafe his beams, that is to say his precepts,
showing to the whole world his glittering brightness, not only from the
temporal firmament, but from his high Tower of heaven, exceeding all times, in
the latter time of Tyberus Caesar, without any impediment his Religion was
propagated, the Prince threateing death, to the accusers of his soldiers,
against the will of the Senate. Hitherto the very words of S. Gildas, as he is
published by Protestants. Who freely acknowledge, that clause of the time of
Tyberius to be wanting in other copies of that holy writer, as namely in that,
which was put forth by Polydor Virgill, and others. And the very first word of
this narration: Interea, Protestant Ann. in Prologum Gildae in Marg. and in
cap. 14. in marg.
in the mean time: do seem plainly to convince, that they are no part of S.
Gildas, especially in that sense, that he thought this kingdom to have
received the faith of Christ in the time of Tyberius, but in the days of
Claudius. For they being of a Relative nature, and having relation to that
which went before, they must in due construction of necessity prove, that this
receiving of Religion interea, in the mean time was when things last and
immediately spoaken of before were done. Which were, the subjection of the
Britans the second time to the Romans, Which was in the time of Claudius coming
hither in the fourth year of his Empire, and of Christ the 44. which our
Protestants Matthew. Westminster. an. Do. 44. and 4. Claudij, Stowe, Holinsh. Camden
with others. Protest. annot. in c. 5. Gildae. Protest. annot. and tit. in c. 6.
Gild.
notes upon these places of S. Gildas do make most manifest. For the chapter
which goes immediately before the recited Authority is, thus by them
entitled: De secunda gentis subiectione: of the second subjection or subduing
of this Nation to the Romans. Which was in the beginning of the Reign of
Claudius, and then immediately follows the next chapter, wholly before
recited, and by these Protestants entitled. De religione. Of religion received
hear. Therefore if the Religion of Christ was received by the Britans, by
Gildas only, Interea, in the time when they were subdued by Claudius, it
cannot be S. Gildas does not affirm that the Britans received the faith in
Tiberius time, but in the days of Claudius.
gathered from him, that they received it sooner. Otherwise it was not
received, Interea, in that time, the words of the holy historian. But howsoever
that Authority is to be understood, It proves at the least, to the great
honor, of this kingdom, that it received the faith of Christ in the beginning
at the least of the Empire of Claudius. Which George mayor and other his
Protestant followers do rather approve, in this tenor: that immediately after
Christ's Resurrection under Claudius, the light of the Gospel was kindled in
Britain. And this Georg. mayor in Praefat. Stowe and Howes histor. in
Agricola. Theater of Britain. l. 6. c. 9. Godwyn Conu. page 1. 2. Stowe and
Howes hist. in Agricola. Godwyn supr. page 2.
must needs be by some one of the 12. Apostles, or their Disciples, by the
sentence of these Protestants, assuring us, first in these words soon after
the Ascension of Christ, the holy Apostles being dispersed through out the
earth divided the Provinces among them, by lot to preach the gospel in. And
again: It is delivered plainly by sundry ancient writers, that Britain fell
in division among the Apostles. And so of necessity it must needs receive the
faith of Christ, either immediately by some one of that most blessed company, or
mediately by their Disciples, or both, which is most probable in so great a
business, exceeding the labor of one, and not performed only by the scholars
and Disciples, seeing by these Protestants grounding upon ancient writers, it
fell out to the division, Britain received the faith from one of the 12.
Apostles by Protestants.
and portion, of one of the chief Masters in this sacred work, one of the
Apostles of Christ himself. Which the holy Prophet seems long before to
foreshew of this Island, one of the greatest and most remote, long from
Jerusalem, when speaking of the Apostles in the person of God, he says, as
Protestants Isai c. 66. v. 19.
translate him: And I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that
escape of them, to the Nations, to the Isles a far of, that have not hard my
fame, neither have seen my glory, and they shall declare my glory among the
Gentiles. Which, diverse Protestants and not unworthily apply to this Island, one
of the Theater of Brit. l. 6. Godwyn. supr. Magdeburgen. Centur. 1. l. 2. c. 7.
col. 518. Eusebius. l. 3. hist. c. 1. Musculus ib. Prochorus hist. c. 1. in tom.
7. Biblioth. patr. S. Leo sermon. 1. de Apost. Petro and Paul. Isidor. l. de vita
and obitu Sanctorum c. 83. 71. Freculph. Lexou. To. 2. Chronic. l. 2. c. 4.
Antiquit. Glast. apud Capgrau. in S. Patricio. and al. Hartman. Schedel
Chronic. Chron. f. 202. p. 1. Nicephorus hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 1.
greatest in the world, and furthest distant from Jury, where this Prophecy
was uttered.

5. And this division a portition of the world among the Apostles to preach and
publish the gospel in, is as these Protestants before do warrant us: as also
that Britain (as needs it must, being one of the greatest Islands of the world)
fell in this division among the Apostles, Is plainly delivered by soundry
ancient writers. The Magdeburgian Protestants tell us that Eusebius says it
was a Tradition that the Apostles divided the Provinces of the world by lot
amongst the^. Quod Apostoli inter se sortiti sunt orbis terrarum prouincias.
And Musculus in his translation of Eusebius is witness, from Eusebius that it
was the Tradition of the Church; sicut traditio (...) continet. Which is
confirmed by S. Prochorus one of the seven Deacons, made by the Apostles, as we
have his works. S. Leo says: That the Apostles undertook to preach the
Gospel to the world dividing it, into parts among them: diuisis sibi terrarum
partibus. S. Isidor, or whosoever, that ancient Author of the book, de vita
and obitu Sanctorum, among his works, and Freculphus Lexouiensis writes so
also, and excludes S. Paul from any part in this ordinary partition, being
after called an extraordinary Apostle: Paulo cum caeteris Apostolis nulla sors
propria traditur. So we read in the ancient Antiquities of Glastenbury Abbey.
Hartmanus Schedel says of the Apostles: totum orbem per Prouincias inter se
partiti sunt: The twelve Apostles parted the whole world among them by
Provinces: So Nicephorus in many places: Apostoli sicut diximus per omnem
dispersi terram, Prouincias orbis ad Euangelium praedicandum sort partiti
sunt: The holy Apostles divided among them by lot the Provinces of the world to
preach the gospel. Thus our English Protestants, Godwyn, Stowe, Howes and
others. Godwin. Conu. of Britain. Stowe and Howes hist. in Agricola and
others. Breuiar. Roman. in vit. S. Philipp. Apost. 1. Maij and S. Matt. 21.
Sept. Ioa. Whitgift. Answer. to the Ad. and def. Bilson against the Purit.
Barl. Ser. of Bish. Bridge. def. of the Eccl. govern. Covel. def. of Hooker.
Downam. l. 4. c. 4. of Bishops.


6. And to make all sure, the Church of God in the public offices of the holy
Apostles, S. Philip on the first day of may, and S. Matthew the 21. of
September propounds the same for a certain truth unto us. Neither does the
rule of our Protestants Religion, their communion Book, impugn it, and so
none do contradict it. And our Parliament Protestants of England, such as stand
for the dignities and functions of Bishops, against the Presbyterian Puritans,
such as their Bishops, Whitgift, Bilson, Barlow, Bridges, and others, make a
reason of this division, not only the better to derive true doctrine, but
Jurisdiction also unto Bishops succeeding them both in doctrine, and Episcopal
power. It is manifest (say these men) that the Bishops have received, and
derived their authority from the Apostles, whose successors they are, not
only in respect of doctrine, but also in the government of the several
Churches, not only Diocesian Bishops but Archbishops such as Metropolitans
are, were from the Apostles time. And they exemplify who these were in many
places, where the Apostles preached. And yet this nothing hinders any thing I
have written before, of diverse Britans of this Nation converted to the faith of
Christ before the time of Claudius, for I showed that to have been the great
and extraordinary grace, and favor of Christ to those persons; now I entreat
of the ordinary calling, and Conversion of this Country, among others by the
public consent, and agreement of the Apostles, which although it was before
the calling of S. Paul to be an Apostle, yet I do not thereby go about to
exclude him from this holy work, wherein, being extraordinarily called, he
labored as extraordinary and probably also honored this Nation with his
presence, although after it had received the faith of Christ: The division of
the world being among the 12. Apostles before S. Paul his Consecration.

THE IX. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN IS PROVED BY PROTESTANT Antiquaries, that among the three Apostles S.
Peter, S. Paul, and S. Simon Zelotes which are thought by any Antiquaries to
have preached hear in Britain, it was not S. Paul which first preached hear,
but S. Peter.

1. NOw therefore being thus warranted, by so general a consent, and harmony
of chief Protestants, that the Faith of Christ was so soon preached in this
Island by some or other of the holy Apostles, there is no difference concerning
the undoubted truth of that sacred Religion, whether it was by S. Peter, Paul,
Andrew, James, Ihon, or any of the rest, all of them after the coming of the
holy Ghost, being as infallibly confirmed in grace, and truth, as S. Peter, or
whosoever in any opinion was chiefest among them: yet in other respects it is
not unworthy a short inquiry by these men Needful to know who was our first
Apostles.
who in particular it was. First because in the end of this first hundred of
years I shall deliver in particular so far as these Protestants my
Directours will give me leave, what Religion it was, which every of our
Apostles and Masters in Christ taught and delivered to this Nation: for
knowledge whereof, the knowledge who they were, is first to be required.
Secondly in that respect, we shall be tied with a more strict, and binding
obligation, of duty, and debt, to render our most obedient, and respective
filial observance of religious children, to that our worthy father in Christ,
who travailed so far, and paynefull a journey, from Jerusalem to this Nation,
to make us, his regenerate children, with so many and difficult labors: for as
S. Paul writes to his Children the Corinthians, in like case: though you have
ten thousand Instructors in Christ, yet ye have not many fathers, for in
Christ Jesus I have begotten 1. Cor. c. 4. v. 15. 16.
you, through the gospel. Wherefore I beseech you, be followers of me.
Thirdly and lastely, to be breife, the more honorable that Apostle was, by so
much the honor of this Nation is more increased, and our duty to him the
greater. For to speak with a Protestant Bishops tongue: we should account it a
great glory to our Nation, to derive the pedigree of our spiritual lineage,
from so noble and excellent Godwyn Conu. of Britain. p. 6.
a Father as S. Peter. For the more easier finding forth whereof, this very man
with many others his brethren in Religion, gives us direction in these English
Protestants confess, there is no mention in histories but of 3. Apostles, S.
Peter, S. Paul, and S. Simon, to have preached hear.
words: I find mention of three only of the Apostles to have been in our
Britain, to wit, Peter, and Paul, and Simon Chananaeus called also Zelotes.
Like is the testimony of their Bishops in their Theater, their first
Archbishop in his Antiquities, their Bishop in his Catalogue of writers, their
chief Antiquaries Camden, Harrison, Holinshed, Stowe, Howes, Powel and others,
neither does any history or Antiquity to my reading and memory make mention
of any other. Therefore if we join this to that, which these Protestant
Masters Godwyn supr. page 2. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. c. 9. Bal. praef. in
l. de scrip. Parker. antiquit. Britan. page 2. Camden in Britan. Harrison
descript. of Britan. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. Stowe and Howes histor. Powel
annot. in Girald. Cambr.
have taught us in the precedent Chapter: That this Nation received the faith
by an Apostle either in the time of Tiberius or Claudius, this question is
soon decided, for it will evidently appear unto all men, not wilfully blinded
with malice, or inexcusable ignorance, that by these Protestants own Rules,
and directions in this matter, it could only be S. Peter who first taught the
faith of Christ in this kingdom; and hear instituted unto us, our
Hierarchicall Order, and Succession of holy Bishops, and Priests, in these
later never yet interrupted, and for sacred Bishops never until the late
unhappy times of Queen Elizabeth.

2. Concerning S. Paul one of the only three supposed to have preached, he
could not possibly be the first Apostle, that came, or sent preachers hither.
For no Protestant or other brings him near unto these western Nations,
until diverse years within the Reign of Nero. The Theater writers S. Peter
preached hear first. Our Episcopal Hierarchy instituted by him, did ^ontinu^
without interruption, until Queen Elizabeth her Protestant persecution, and
his Preistly order never interrupted still continues.
say, it was the tenth year of Nero, which was the 64. year of Christ, before
S. Paul came to the west. But though these Protestants (to take no advantage of
their error) are deceived in some few years of that his trauayles, yet the
holy scriptures with all writers, Protestants and others, are ample witnesses,
that diverse years of Nero his Empire were past, before he came to Rome, the
first western place he rested in, and then a Prisonner two years together.
So he could not possibly be that first Apostle, by whose holy means and
labors we had many Christians of this Nation long before, in the time of
Claudius at the least, as these Protestants before have proved, diverse years
before the beginning of Nero his government. Besides, these Protestants do
assure us, that Britain fell in the division of the world among the twelve
Apostles, S. Paul could not be the first that preached in Britain.
following the ancient Fathers in that matter: of which number S. Paul was
not, but extraordinary called to be an Apostle as S. Barnabas also was, and in
that sense left no successors either in this Nation, or else where, to whom we
may or can adheare, either for a Hierarchicall Succession, or Epist. ad Romans
Act. Apostol.
other matters in Religion. And S. Paul himself puts us out of all doubt,
that he was not present with the rest of the holy Apostles, when this division
of the world was made, among them. For long after that time writing to the
Galathians, he says: Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them, which were
Apostles Galat. cap. 1. v. 17. 18. 19.
before me, but I went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damasus. Then
after three years, I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him
fifteen days. But other of the Apostles saw I none, save James the Lords
Brother. Thus S. Paul, as our Protestants by our Kings allowance translate him.
Therefore most certain it is, he was no party in this division, of which
these Protestants have thus informed us, wherein this kingdom of Britain fell
out within the division of one of the twelve Apostles. And except all men of
learning, Protetestants and others be deceived, in teaching that S. Peter first
converted the Romans to the faith of Christ, S. Paul gives to him, the honor
of that Christianity which the Britans had: for writing to the Romans he
says, I Romans 1. v. 8.
thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is spoaken of
throughout the whole world. Therefore except the Romans did not receive the
faith from S. Peter, which no man will, or with any probability, can affirm,
or Britain then was no part of the known world, a thing evidently untrue,
being then both known, and in a great part subject to the Roman Empire. It was
neither S. Paul, nor S. Simon Zelotes, but S. Simon Peter, that either by
himself or his holy Disciples first preached hear. And this might suffice in
this Question, but inte^ding to make all things co^trouersed in these matters
undeniably manifest, I will reserve those later labors of S. Paul, which a
little before his death, and not before, he bestowed in this kingdom to their
proper place.

3. I will now resolve the doubts of S. Simon Zelotes his pretended preaching
in this Island, and prove even by these Protestants, that he neither preached in
this our Britain, nor near unto it. But this was peculiar to S. Peter and his
Disciples sent by him. For as the great Protestant Antiquary freely
confesses. If S. Paul was hear, It was after his imprisonment the second time
at Rome Camden. Brit. in Belgae.
under Nero: post secundam Romae incarcerationem. And it could not possibly be
before, the Scriptures themselves giving warrant thereof. So the Magdeburgian
Magdeburg. Ce^tur. 1. l. 2. c. 2.
Protestants with others. Paulum a priore captiuitate Roma dimissum Britannijs
Euangelium praedicasse: that S. Paul preached the Gospel in Britain after he
was dimissed from his first captivity in Rome. Which our English Antiquarie
before calls his second imprisonment, in respect of his former imprisoning
before he came thither. And S. Paul was neither one of the twelve to whom the
Math. cap. vlt. v. 19. Marc. c. 16. v. 15. Luc. cap. vlt. v. 47. 48. Ac^t. c.
9. c. 11.
Conversion of the world was first committed by Christ, neither present, nor
yet consecrated by imposition of hands, when the other Apostles had made this
division, as the scripture witnesses: And though he was called, Apostle of the
Gentiles, Yet he, after his conversion, preached with Barnabas unto the Ie^wes
only, until in the 13. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles after this time,
as appears in those their words to the contradicting Jews: Then Paul and
Barnabas waxed bold, and said it was necessary, that the word of God should
first Act. 13. 46. 47. 48.
have been spoake^ to you, but seeing yea put it fro you, and Judge your selves
unworthy of everlasting life, lo we turn to the Gentiles. For so has the
Lord commanded us, saying, Is. 49. v. 6.
I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou should be for
salvation unto the ends of the earth. And when the Gentiles heard this, they
were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord. And the word of the Lord was
published throughout all the Regio^. And false it is, which our English
Protestants in their Theater say: that huge multitudes of Theater of Brit. l.
6. c. 9.. 5. Act. 11. v. 19.
Christians dispersed themselves into all parts of the world upon the martyring
of S. Stephen at Jerusalem. For we are warranted by the scripture it self,
that these preached only to the Jews. The words of our Protestants
Translation are These: They which were scattered abroad upon the persecution,
that arose about Steven, travailed as far as: Phenice, and Cyprus, and
Antioch, preaching the word to none, but unto the Jews only. Where the quite
contrary of this Protestant Assertion is evident, out of the Scripture by their
own Translation: That neither the whole world as yet, nor the Gentiles were
preached unto, by these dispersed Disciples in that persecution, S. Peter being
(as they have told us before, and the scripture also witnesses) the first of
the Apostles, which preached to the Gentiles.

THE X. CHAPTER.
HOW S. SIMON ZELOTES NEVER PREAched in this our Britain, even by the best
testimony of Protestants, and others: nor any Simon an Apostle, but S. Simon
Peter, and perhaps S. Simon Leprosus, or saint Nathaniel, by some called
saint Simon.

1. CONCERNING S. Simon Zelotes, one of the twelues Apostles of our Savior, to
have preached here; I find a Protestant Antiquarie so desirous to have it so
bruted unto the world, that he cares not what or how many absurdities he
commits, in so breife a relation; first supposing for a thing certain that
S. Philip the Apostle preached in this Gallila, France next unto us, which
when I come to S. Joseph's time I will prove to be utterly untrue, afterward,
imagining his sending S. Willian Harriso^ description of Britain p. 23.
Joseph from thence, more incredible the^ the other, he adds thus: Hereby it
came topasse that the said Philip upon good deliberation did send Josephus
over, and with him Simon Zelotes to preach unto the Britans, and minister the
Sacraments there, according to the rites of the Churches of Asia, and Greece.
Thus this Protestant Antiquary, where first, whereas all protestants deny all
prioritie of power among the Apostles, he makes saint Simon Zelotes, an
Apostle, equally as saint Philip was, not only to be subject to saint
Philip, to be sent by him, but also inferior to saint Joseph, probably no
Clergy man, who by all, was chiefest among them, and was so appointed by him
that sent them. Secondly, he makes S. Simon the Apostle not only inferior to
S. Philip the Apostle, and S. Joseph, but to S. Philip the Deacon; for as a
Protestant Bishop, and Antiquary perceauing the improbabilitie of S. Philip the
Apostle his preaching in our neighboring Gallia, France, says, and cites
others to the same purpose, that it was rather Philip the Evangelist one of the
seven Deacons, that preached Godwyn Conu. of Britanie p. 9.
there, and if any Philip sent S. Simon and Joseph from this France into
Britain it was he. But if these were no absurdities, yet this will not help
us, in this business, but we must still Appeal to S. Peter, to be the first
founder of Harrison supr.
our Church in Britain, where these Protestants and this man also have told us
there were many Christians soon after the Ascension of Christ; And yet by this
Protestants co^putation, this first supposed coming of S. Simon Zelotes with S.
Joseph of Aramathia was 30. years after; his words be these: he came over into
Britain, about the 64. year after Christ, when the persecution began under
Nero. Harrison supr.


2. Therefore we may not rely upon this holy Apostle, to be our first
instructor, or to have been hear at all: Which other Protestants perceauing
speak more doubtfully hereof. Among whom one a Bishop that would willingly
exclude S. Peter, dares only to say: some think, Simon Zelotes to have been
one of Joseph's companions. So that now we have not the former warrant, but a
thinking of some, not one named for this matter. And by this man improbable
Godwyn Conu. of Brit. p. 10. Page 11.
or impossible that we should rest upon S. Simon: for he faith from
Antiquities, that Joseph was the chief of the company of twelve holy men that
came hither in the thirty and one year after the Passion of our Savior. When
by these Protestants, this kingdom had many Christians above twenty years
before. The next to these shall be their first Protestant Archbishop of
Canterbury Matthew Parker, who having spoake^ before of S. Joseph of Aramathia
that buried our Savior, and came hither in the 63. year of Christ, adds
these of S. Simon Matthew. Parker. Antiquit. Brit. p. 3. Nicephor. l. 2. c. 40.
Io. Capg. in Catal. sanct. Angliae.
Zelotes: alij Simonem Zelotem in Britanniam-venisse, and Euangelium primum
nu^ciasse referunt. Quorum verumque verum esse potest. Nam Iosephi socij non
nominantur, inter quos fuisse Simonem est verisimile: Other Authors report that
Simon Zelotes came into Britain, and first preached the gospel: Both which
may be true, for the fellows of Joseph are not named, among which it is very
likely Simon was. And he cites for his Authors, Nicephorus, and Ioannes
Capgrauius, as I have placed them in the margin. Concerning Nicephorus other
Protestants hereafter shall answer, that he neither does, nor can bring S.
Simon Zelotes the Apostle into this our Britain at all. Yet if it could be so,
not coming hither before the coming of S. Joseph above twenty years, by these
Protestta^s before, that Britain had received the faith, It cannot possibly be
true that he first preached the faith in this Island, but that must needs by
these me^ be wholly left to S. Peter and his Disciples. For his second and other
Author Capgrauius, It is the forgery of this Protestant Archbishop, for no
such thing is to be found in him in all his book, of which this man cites no
place at all, because nusqua^ est. That, he one of the Apostles, the chiefest
spiritual man and co^maunders in the Church of God that ever were in the world
should come hither as a nouice and Inferior under S. Joseph the superior of
all the Religious me^ that came Antiq. Glascon. apud Lel. in Assert. Arthur.
Capgrau. in S. Joseph. Stowe and Howes histor. Camden in Brit. Godwyn. Conuers.
of Brit. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. in Joseph. Michael Drayto^ Poly-Obion. Seldom
Illustr. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 5. Menolog. Graec. 6. Idus Maij.
Baron. annot. in Martyrol. Romans in Sanct. Simone Chanan. 28. die Octobr.
Camden. in Britannia. Godwyn. Conu. of Britain p. 2.
with him, as all Antiquities and antiquaries, Protestants and others are
witnesses is as incredible an absurdity. And yet all this to no purpose, if we
should be so simple to admit them for good congruitie: For by noe possibility
could he be the first (as before) that preached hear. And if no Christianity
had been known hear, which these Protestants have already disproued, until
this time, yet he coming with S. Joseph the Superior of that holy company,
rather S. Joseph then any under him, should be said to have first preached the
Gospel, and not S. Simon or any other under him. An other Protestant
historia^ citing that very place of Nicephorus, writes thereof in this manner,
Nicephorus writes in his second book, that one Simon Zelotes came likewise
into Britain, where by that his diminitiue addition one, one Simo^ Zelotes, he
does manifestly declare his opinion to be, that this Simon could not be S.
Simon the Apostle, but some other Simon, as Simon Leprosus, or Nataniel also
called Simon the Disciples of S. Peter that came into these parts, as diverse
French histories are witness. And Camden the great Antiquary knowing it to be
absurd, that S. Simo^ Zelotes the Apostle should preach in Britain, and so
certain that S. Peter the Apostle called also Simon, and most zealous in
Religion, preached and planted the faith in this Nation, Interprets that very
place of Nicephorus to be understood of S. Peter's preaching hear. An other, a
Bishop with Protestants proves from Nicephorus himself that S. Simon Zelotes
had not Britain in his division, but Egypt and Lybia, and he that had Britain
was alius, an other Apostle different from him, his words be these: whereas it
is delivered plainly by sundry ancient writers, that Britain fell in
division amongst the Apostles, amongst the rest Nicephorus has these words:
Aegyptu^ and Lybia^ alius, alius ite^ extremas Oceani Regiones and Insulas
Brita^nicas fortitus est. One Apostle had for his part Egypt and Lybia, also an
other Apostle had for his lot the extreme Regio^s of the Ocea^, and the
British Ila^ds.

3. Therefore being evident both by Nicephorus, and these Protestants, that it
was S. Simo^ Zelotes the Apostle in their Judgments, which had Egypt and Lybia,
allotted unto him, and he that had the extreme Regions of the Ocea^ and the
British Ila^ds was alius, an other, not S. Simo^ Zelotes thy cannot possibly
say, that he preached hear, but S. Simo^ Bariona Peter: for having granted
before, that no other Apostle, except S. Peter, S. Paul, and S. Simo^ Zelotes
are remembered in histories to have preached in Britain, and thus now excluding
both S. Paul for a long time, and S. Simon Zelotes for ever, they must needs
acknowledge, that it was S. Peter that planted the faith of Christ in this
Nation, which some of the^ have before plainly confessed. And the words of
Nicephorus first objected, if they were to be understood of S. Simo^ Zelotes,
yet they prove nothing for his preaching in this great Britain, or near unto
it: his words be these: eandemque doctrinam Nicephor. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 40.
Stowe hist. in Agricola.
etiam ad Occide^talem Oceanu^, Insulasque Brita^nicas perfert. Which a
Protestant thus tra^slateth: and the same doctrine he brought to the
Occide^tall Ocea^, and the Isles called Britannie. Where he only says, which
is true, that he preached as far as unto the west Ocea^ when he was in the
west co^fines of Africa, to which the west Ocea^ is adiace^t. But he neither
says, that he brought that doctrine over the Ocea^, or preached it in any
British Ila^d. Neither does any history say, that he did preach either in
Ireland, Gernsey, Ierusey, the Hebrides, Mona, or any other British I Will, that
lie between Africa and us, and are more truly called Insulae Britannicae, the
British Islands, the^ this, not so named, but absolutely Britannia great
Britain. The^, not preaching in any of them, much less did he preach in this
Ila^d, and much lose was he crucified hear, that kind of death never used by
the Britans, yet Dorotheus the chiefest Author for this matter says, he was
martyred Doroth. in Synops.
in Britannia, in some place called Britain, or rather like to that name as
our Protestants correct him, which two of them do together in these words:
Stowe. And Howes hist. in Agricola.
Dorotheus, writes thus: Simon Zelotes passing through Mauritania and Africa,
preached Christ, at length was crucified, slain, and buried in Britain, or
rather Bithania. where it is evident, they deny his being hear, but rather in
some place of like name. Which may easily be proved out of Dorotheus himself,
who directly teaches, that S. Aristobulus one of the 72. Disciples, and
Disciple of S. Peter, (as hereafter) was Bishop of Britain absolutely, which
he neither would, nor truly could have said, if such an Apostle had preached,
and been martyred, and consequently been Bishop in this Britain. For it will
evidently appear in the Doroth. supr. in Aristobulo.
due place hereafter, even by these Protestants, that S. Aristobulus was a
Bishop hear long before the time they have assigned to S. Simo^ Zelotes, and
continued hear long time after his death. And great ingratitude it had been
both of the British, and Saxon Christians, If so renowned an Apostle of
Christ, one of the twelve, had both preached, and been martyred hear, and as a
late writer without Author. of the Engl. martyrologe 28. Octobr. page 296.
any Authority seems to think, ordained Priests, and Deacons, erected
Churches, and the like, if noe monument had been kept thereof, no Church, no
Chapel, no altar erected to his honor, and memory, when we fee it far
otherwise in all Nations, where any Apostle preached, and suffered martyrdom.
And in this kingdom where S. Peter only preached, and dyed not, we see the
most ancient Churches of this la^d, except to the blessed Virgin Mary, were
dedicated unto him in our first public receiving of christian Religion, as
those two in London S. Peter's Church at westminster, and in Cornhill in King
Lucius time, are witness. So we ever kept vnuiolably, and with honor the
memories of S. Joseph of Aramathia, S. Amphibalus, saint Alban, S. Aaron,
Julius and others. Martyrol. Romans 28. die Octobr. Ado. Et Vsuard. eodem die.
Engl. Martyrologe 28. Octobr. Beda Martyrol. 28. October. all ancient Cale^d.
Breuia. Romans in festo S. Simonis Chan. 28. die Octobr. Protestant Co^m. book
die 28. Octobr. in the seru. of S. Simon and in Calendar. 28. Octobr. Menolog.
Graec. 6. Id. Maij. Baron. annot. in Martyrol. Romans 28. Octobr. Venantius
Fortunat. l. 8. c. 4. Magdeburgen. Centur. 1. col. 586. l. 2. Crato in vita S.
Simonis and Iudae. Abdias certain. Apost. lib. 6. Ant. part. 1. tit. 6. cap.
14. Pert. de Not. l. 9. c. 115. Eutropius Persa l. de vit. S. Simonis and
Iudae. Anton. part. 1. titul. 6. ca. 28.. 3. Petr. de Natal. l. 4. c. 105.
Guliel. Eisengr. Centen. 1. part. 6. did. 6. Vincent. in specul. Sabellic. En.
7. lib. 4. Magdeburg. Cenrur. 1. supr. and l. 2. c. 10. col. 584. Isidor. lib.
de vita and morte Sanctorum. Hartin. S^hedel Chron. fol. 107. S. Dorothaeus l.
de 12. Apostolis.


4. But all our historians of Antiquity printed, and Manuscripts, which I have
seen, many, both of our Brittans and Saxons agree with the whole Latin
Church, with all Martyrologes, that be ancient, as that of the Romans, Ado,
Vsuardus, and others, that: Natalis Beatorum Apostolorum Simonis Chananaei, and
Thadaei qui and Judas dicitur: Quorum Simon in Aegypto Thadaeus in Mesopotamia
Euangelium praedicauit, deinde in Presidem simul ingressi, cum innumeram gentis
illius multitudinem Christi subdidissent martyrium consummarunt. The nativity
(so the Church names the happy Martyrdom and death of Saints) of the blessed
Apostles, Simon of Chananee, and Thadaeus who is called Judas the 28. day of
October: of the which Simon preached the gospel in Egypt, Thadaeus in
Mesopotamia, then entering together into Persia, when they had made an
innumerable multitude of that Nation subject to Christ, they consummated
martyrdom. So has S. Bid in his Martyrologe: so have all ancient Calenders
of Britans and Saxons. So has the whole Latin Church in the festiuitie of
this holy Apostle, and to bind all English Christians, as well Catholics by the
Rules before, as Protestants by the commanding squares of their Religion, the
Parliament, and their Communion Book, they all celebrate with the Latin Church
the festiuitie of this glorious Apostle upon the 28. of October, when he
suffered martyrdom as before with S. Judas in Persia. When they which hold, he
came into Britain, keep his day upon the sixth of the Ides of May, the tenth
day of that month.

5. And this is the ancient opinion of the fathers, concerning this holy
Apostle, that he with S. Jude was martyred in Persia, among whom Venantius
Fortunatus so renowned among our Protestants, for S. Paul's preaching hear,
has made it public to the world, thus testifying that he was martyred in
Persia with S. Judas, never bringing him near unto this Nation.

Hinc Simonem, ac Iudam lumen Persida gemellum,
Laeta relaxato mittit ad astra sinu.
And to join forraing Protestants with these of England, in this business, The
Mardeburgians say plainly, that if Nicephorus does say, that S. Simon preached
the gospel to the Occide^tall Ocean, and British Islands, he does it without
any certain testimony. Narrat, sed sine certo testimonio Nicephorus,
Euangeliu^ Simonem propagasse per regiones ad Occidentalem Oceanu^ sitas and
Insulas Britannicas. Where they be so far from allowing his coming to these
Islands, that they account his preaching in the Contryes near the west Ocean
improbable, and make him to be living in the East Countries, and preaching, and
there ending his life, 50. years after this Island had received the faith of
Christ by these Protestants before. And Crato the Disciple of these two
Apostles S. Simon, and Judas followed them throughout 12. Provinces of Persia,
writing all they did and suffered there, by the space of 13. years; the like
has Abdias. The like has Antoninus, Petrus de Natalibus, Eisengrenius and
others. Their lives also in the same manner were written by Eutropius a Persian
son of Adimundus Xerxes King of Babylon, both in the Chaldy and Greek
tongues. To these I add Vincentius, Sabellicus, the Magdeburgian Protestants of
Germany in their Centuries, S. Isidor, or whosoever the ancient author of the
book of the life and death of the Apostles, who says besides, iacet in
Bosphoro, that he is buried in Bosphorus, And died many years after his
supposed death in Britain. The like has also Hartmannus Schedel, teaching,
that he both preached, and suffered martyrdom in Persia, also Dorotheus, that
ancient Greek father himself, that is alleged, to say, that S. Simon the
Apostle was crucified* killed, and buried in Britain: in Britannia crucifixus,
occisus, ac sepultus est, the greatest authority for his being hear, is
contrary to himself, if so he should mean of this our Britain, for in the
same place he makes S. Simo^ the Apostle to have been crucified in the East
Country in, or near Egypt. cruci alligatus, occisus est in Ostracina ciuitate
Aegypti: and makes S. Simon the Apostle Bishop of Jerusalem, and so never to
come near unto Britain. So small is his Authority in the matter. The Author
of Fasciculus temporum says, he was martyred in Persia Fasciculus temp: an. 74.
with S. Jude. Simon and Judas martyrisati sunt in regionibus Persidis. The
ancient Anonymus that writes the lives of the Apostles published by
Frediricus Nausea, Bishop of Vienna, says, that S. Simon and Judas were sent,
by revelation into Anonymus in vit. and passione SS. Apostolorum Apostolorum
Simonis and Jude.
Persia, to confou^d the wicked Sorcerers, Zaroes, and Arfaxard which had fled
thither from S. Matthew the Apostle in Ethiopia, and the Prince of Persia was
then named Baradach, that they had many Disciples there, of which they ordained
Priests, Deaco^s and other Clergy men, that in one year they baptized above
forty thousands besides children, and the King himself, that they ordained
Abdias Bishop of Babylon, that came with them from jury. That Craton their
Disciple wrote their lives, which Julius Africanus translated into Latin, and
after many miracles there wrought, they were there martyred together with S.
Sennes by whom they were harbored. So that if we will believe either
ancient, or later, Greek or Latin, or the Persians themselves, Catholics, or
Protestants, or any thing, that can be pretended for authority, worthy to be
followed in this matter, S. Simon the Apostle was neither crucified, killed,
buried or preached in or near unto this Nation.

6. Wherefore I cannot in any wise give allowance unto him, who not only
places him among the saints and Apostles of Britain, but cites diverse
ancient writers (as he says) for this his relation. In Persia the Passion of
the gloroius Apostle S. Simon, surnamed Zelotes, who according to diverse
ancient writers, among The Author of the English Marty rologe printed ann.
1608. 28. Octobr his great mistaking authorities.
other his Peregrinatio^s came into our Ila^d of Britany, about the year of
Christ forty and six, and there preached the Christian faith, baptized,
ordained Priests, and Deaco^s, erected Churches and the like, whereby we may
worthily call him our Apostle, and with greater solemnity celebrate his feast,
by whom we received so singular graces and benefits. He afterward went into
Persia with S. Jude to preach the Christian faith to the infidels of that
Country, where at last he received the reward of his labors by martyrdom,
Nicephor. l. 2. c. 40. Pol. Vir. l. 7. hist. West. ann. 636. and 652. Dor. in
Synopsi. Matthew. Westminster. an. 125.
being nailed to a cross: though Dorotheus writes, that he suffered and was
buried in Britany. Hitherto this Author, and he cites for his warrant, as I
have placed the^ in the Margin, Nicephorus, Polidor Virgil, Matthew
Westminster, and Dorotheus. Of all which not any one affirms these things.
Matthew Westminster and Poildor Vergil do not so much as name S. Simon the
Apostle, except Matthew Westminster says he was Bishop of Jerusalem next
after S. James. Dorotheus does not say that S. Simon the Apostle was either
crucified or at all in Persia, neither does Nicephorus, neither does any of
these or any other say that S. Simo^ was hear about the year of Christ 46.
neither ca^ that possibly be true by any co^putation, for by the undeniable
testimonies of many ancient Fathers he was present with other of the Apostles
at the death of the blessed Virgin in the same year or 45. and yet by
Nicephorus, and all that seem to think Matthew. Westminster. an. 45. Dorotheus in
Synop. Niceph. l. 2. c. 40. loc. cit.
he was in Britain, he preached both through Mauritania and all Afrike,
therefore noe being for him in Britain at that time, and Nicephorus makes it
more impossible saying he travailed through Egypt and Africa, the^ through
Mauritania and all Lybia preaching the gospel. And the same doctrine he
brought to the Occid^ntall Ocean. Which all Cosmographers know not to be that
part of the Otean, which is next unto us, upon the cost of Afrike, for
Britain from thence is in the Boreale, and North Ocean, the Occidentall Ocea^
of Afrike is that which is next to the Asores, and Chanary Islands and others
exte^ding toward America, Which seems to have been that which deceived
Nicephorus, if he though Abrah. Ortel. in typo. Orbis and Africae descript.
Ptolom. Bilibald Pirckeymher. and lij in Afric. Stephan. v. Brit. Isac. in
Lymphr.
S. Simo^ came from the west Ocean to the British Ila^ds, taking perhaps all
those Ila^ds to be comprehended under that name. But more probable it is, that
the Britannia, to which S. Simon went (if to any) or was put to death in, is
the Britannia, in the East Country, near unto Persia. For Isacius is witness
that of old there were three Britains, this which we inhabit, a second about
Thyle, now Island, and a third in the East, which is most like to be that
which Dorotheus and Nicephorus mean in this matter. Or if we will say, that S.
Simo^ went from the west coast and Ocean of Afrike unto Persia, if he passed by
the Mediterre^ and Adriake sea, which was his easiest journey going by Jury, as
he did, he passed by Britannis, or Britannia an Island in the Adriacke Sea,
called by some Elaphusa, Stephanus. v. Brettotia, Brettannis.
or Elaphites, 12. miles from Malta, by Pliny. And that there was an other
Britania, or Brita^nis, in the same passadge between Afrike and Italy, is
testified by our English Protestants in their Theater, who cite Polybius for
Author, (that Speed Theater. l. 5. c. 4. Polyb. Eglog. l. 10. 11. 42. Camden
in Brit. Theater l. 5. c. 1.. 11. Claudius Ptolomaeus in Geograph. Sebast.
Munster. in Cosmograph. Bilibald. Pirck-emher. in Ptolom. Abrah. Ortelius in
Theatro Orbis. Rich. Hackluyt trauails of English. etc. Isidor. l. de vi^a and
morte Sancto^um in S. Simone. Harris Hist. Ecc. of Britain to. 1. M. S.
Ha^nibal was enclosed within the streights of Britain) which must needs be
about Italy, near Afrike, and not out of his journey by Sea to Jury, and
Persia, when if he had come by our Britain, to go thither, he should either
have returned the same way again, or compassed the greatest part of the whole
co^tinent, and passed the frozen seas, by the North pole, which way no man is
remembered and known to have gone at that time: and yet uncertain, whether
passable or no; and after his la^ding he had most vast, and Barbarous
Countries, to travail through, where no man writes he ever was, before he
could come to Persia, as all Cosmographers, ancient, and late are witnesses:
when passing by the other Britain, or British Ila^ds, he had a short, and
ready Journey by sea, and by la^d to travail only through Jury, or Syria to
Persia, and those Countries there, where these Protestants and others tell us,
he preached, lived long, and was put to death. This was his travail by la^d,
as we have heard before from such as wrote the life of that holy Apostle. And,
that was the part, which fell unto him, as S. Isidore and others affirm, when
the Apostles divided the world among the^ to preach the Gospel in.

7. An other late writer there is who in his Manuscript History never printed,
would bring him hither after S. Paul, which also some Protestants have urged
before: But I have answered this in the^ already: and long before that time,
Britain had by these protestants, received the faith of christ. The like I say
to those Protestants, (which would have S. Philip the Apostle to send S. Joseph
of Aramathia hither out of France in, or about the year of Christ 63.) many
Christians being hear by there own confession long before that time; yet when
I come S. Philip the Apostle never came into Gallia (Fraun^^) ly Britain, nor
near unto it.
to the days of S Joseph's coming into this Island, I will prove at large, that
S. Philip the Apostle never came into this Gallia, or near unto it. For this
place, it will suffice that both by Protestants and Catholics S. Philip the
Apostle was crucified in Hierapolis in Phrygia, many years before this his
supposed sending S. Joseph hither, from this our France, or Gallia: So there
is no place or possibility Protestant Author of the history l'estat de
l'Eglise printed an. 1556. Eusebius. in Chronic. an. 54. Philip. Borgom. an. 52.
left for any Apostle but S. Peter to have been our first Father and Master in
Christian Religion; Which I shall more plainly and directly make this manifest
hereafter. In the mean time I am to set down some former labors, and
proceedings of this holy Apostle S. Peter, yet only such, as have connection
with our Ecclesiastical History of Britain.

THE XI. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN DIVERSE PROTESTANTS INclyne to think S. Peter preached hear in
Britain, before his coming to Rome: and what probability that opinion has.

1. DIVERSE English Protestant writers (whether for love to S. Peter, or dissick
to Rome) knowing what great warrant there is, for saint Peter's preaching hear,
incline to affirm it to have been before he came to Rome. Among whom the
THEATER WRITERS producing diverse testimonies Theater of great Britain l. 9. c.
9.. 5.
for his being in Britain, they add: If Peter were hear at all, It was before
he went to Rome, and that the Gospel was preached hear, before it was in
Rome, if Peter were the first, as some hold, that preached there: both Diverse
English Protestants incline to think, S. Peter preached in Britain, before he
came to Rome: and how probably.
which may be more probable, if we consider the huge multitudes of Christians,
fifteen thousand, says Baronius, which dispersed themselves, into all parts of
the world, Upon the martyring of S. Stephen at Jerusalem. Where we see that
they make the coming of S. Peter into this our Nation, to have been so soon
after the Ascension of Christ, that they seem to suppose it to have been
before his coming to Rome, and make it the more probable opinion (their own
phrase) that it was soon after the Martyrdom of S. Stephen, which was to
speak in their own words, presently upon the death of Christ: which was
diverse Theater supr.
years before any Authority teaches, he came to Rome. And their opinion
before, that Britain received the faith in the time of Tyberius will make the^
of that mind, being before proved that S. Peter was the first Apostle that
preached hear. For which, they bring his own testimony to S. Brithwald, and
other testimonies. And that which is written before, of S. Mansuetus a Bishop
of this Nation, sent to Toul in Lorraine by S. Peter in the time of Caius
Caligula, gives some allowance to this opinion, if we will follow those
Historians, which write, he was sent thither at that time in the year of
Christ 40. making it not improbable, but he was sent from S. Peter being in, or
near this Island.

2. The like I may say of S. Aristobulus made Bishop, as William Eisengrenius
says, in the year of Christ 39. who as commonly Protestants will tell us
hereafter, was our Bishop hear in Britain: and this the rather because we
Guliel. Eisengr. Centenar. 1. part. 1. did. 7. fo. 67. 66 and did. 8.
Sophron. Patria. Hierosol. l. delabor. S. Petr. and Paul.
find that about the same time, and in the same year, (if we may believe this
Author) the same holy Apostle S. Peter placed S. Pancratius Bishop of
Tauronienium, and saint Marcianus Bishop of Syrocufa in the Island of Sicilia
near unto Italy: and diverse others far distant from Jerusalem, Antioch, or
any Eastern place of the aboade of that great Apostle, as S. Clement with
diverse others into the hither parts of Germany, as the antiquities of those
places are witness. And if we call to memory the vnspakeable labors, and
expedition used by this Apostle, in such sacred a business before remembered, and
how in that time he is said to remain at Antioch, he visited, as the Scripture
is evidence, Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia, the hither parts
Petr. 1. v. 1.
of Asia: from whence we shall not find it a more difficult journey for that
renowned Apostle, to vouch safe to visit this Island of Britain, if we consult
with Cosmographers in these affairs, then to come from Antioch in Syria the
chief place of his residency at that time, to visit all those Contries
related, in which he preached as the Scriptures assure us. But these be but
conjectures, upon which I may not found an Historiall Narration, especially
when we have a whole world of witnesses to the contrary, that Rome was the
first place in the west, whether S. Peter came, and was chiefly directed unto.
And S. Peter came to Rome before he came into Britain
the chiefest reason of the dispersion of the Disciples at the martyrdom of S.
Stephan, is before answered how they preached only to the Jews. And the
Scripture is manifest that the Apostles were then at Jerusalem (except the
Apostles) and not dispersed. And the history of the Acts of the Apostles
keeps Act. c. 8. v. 1.
S. Peter preaching in the East, Ionge after this to the Jews and Gentiles,
until such time in the days of Claudius Emperor, it pleased Christ our
blessed Savior, as many and great Authorities do warrant us, to send and
direct this his chiefest Apostle to make a great part of his Residencie at
Rome, the great and commanding Imperial Citte, at that time in the world,
that he might the better by that means, preach the Gospel both by himself,
S. Peter's seating himself at Rome, foretold by holy scripture, ^^bbins, and
Sibils, before Christ.
and his Disciples, to these Western Nations, and Contries of the world.

3. Of this mission of S. Peter to Rome Esaias the Prophet though in more
general terms had long before admonished, saying, (as I have alleged
before,) that God would send of his Apostles into Italy. Of this the ancient
Rabbis before Christ were witnesses, as a Jew himself has proved against
the Jews, that Rome should be the chief place of the Law and Religion of the
Messiah. Sybilla Erythraea long time before preached this Hieronymus a sanct.
fide l. contra Iudaeos. Sybill. Erithaer. in l. Nasalographi 1. Imperial.
Scrip. Venetijs an. 1516 per Patriarch. Venet. approbat. and Pontif. Romans
to the Gentiles, when Prophesying of Christ and his twelve Apostles, thus she
foretold: in vltima aetate humiliabitur Deus, and humiliabitur proles diuina.
Iungetur humanitati deitas: iacebit in faeno agnus: puellari officio educabitur
Deus and homo. Eliget sibi ex piscatoribus, and deiectis numerum duodenarium,
vnumque diabolum, non in gladio belloue Eneadem vrbem Regesque subijciet, sed
in hamo piscantis, in deiectione and pauperie superabit diuitias: superbiam
conculcabit morte propria: nocturno suscitabit and commutabitur: viuet and
regnabit and consummabuntur haec omnia, fietque regeneratio. Vltimo bonos
iudicabit and malos. Surget stella mirabilis: Danaos illuminabit: orbem
illustrabit. In Eneadem latus piscatoris nomen agni vsque ad fines seculi
virtute perducet: Inde in Eneade iuncta, vinctos a diabolo liberabi^: In the
last age God will be humbled, and the son of God will be humbled: the lamb
shall lie in Hay: God and man shall be brought up by a virgin service: he shall
choose unto him out of fishers and mean persons, a number of twelve, and one of
them a devil. He shall make subject unto him the city of Aeneas, Rome, and
Kings, not by sword and war, but by the hook of a fisher; in deiection and
poverty he shall overcome Riches; he shall tread down pride with his own
death. He shall raise himself in the night time, and shall be changed: he
shall live and Reign, and all these things shall be brought to pass, and
there shall be a regeration; at the last he shall judge the good and the evil.
A meruaylous star shall arise, it shall illuminate the Greeks, and
Illustrate the world. The side of the fisher shall by power bring the name of
the lamb into the city of Rome unto the end of the world. From thence Rome
joined unto him, he shall deliver the bound from the devil. Hitherto the
words of that Sybilla in the time of Priamus written in the Chaldy tongue, and
translated into Greek, and being found in the Tresury of Emmanuel, Eugenius
King of Sicily translated it into Latin, and was published by the Patriarch of
Venice with great privilege, before the revolt of Luther or denial of the
Popes jurisdiction. Like is the testimony both of Catholics and Protestants in
this matter. And both the ancient Fathers, as S. Augustine, Lactantius, with
others and the Church of God it self long since joining the Sebastian. Mu^st.
Cosmograph. l. 2 p. 208. Hertm. Shedel. Mag. Chron. aerate 3. f. 35. Aug. l.
18. de ciuit. Dei. Lact. offic. Defunct. in hymno. Aug. sup. c. 21. and to. 6.
concione ad Catechum. and in ep. ad Romans and l. ciu. 18. cap. 45. Eus. praep.
Euang. Magdeburg. ce^t. 1. Clem. Romans epist. 1. Constant. Mag. in decret. S.
Sylu. apud Gennad. Patriarch. Constant. sect. 3. pro Concilio Flor. Abb.
Vrsperg. apud Eisengr. ce^t. 1. fol. 123. Marcell. epist. 1. ad Episc. Antioc.
S. Leo sermon. 1. de Natal. Apostol. Petr. and Pauli. S. Sim. Metaphr. in vit.
Petr.
prophesies of the Sybils, with those of the Prophet David t^ste David in
Sybilla, give testimony unto this.

4. S. Clement himself both Disciple and Successor to S. Peter, says of him,
that he was commanded by Christ, as the more potent, among the Apostls to
come to Rome and illuminate the west, the more dark part of the world. Qui
obscuriore^ mundi plagam occide^tis velut omnium potentior, illuminare
praeceptus est, quique and integre potuit implere praeceptum. And Constantine
the great, Emperor, our Renowned King, and Contryman thus witnesses: That the sea of Rome has primacy and Principality in matters of Religion, because our
holy law maker, and Savior Jesus Christ sent S. Peter thither, and commanded
him to hold his Chair there, and there he was put to death: Aequu^ est enim,
vt ibi diuina lex obtineat apicem and principatum, vbi sanctus legislator Jesus
Christus Saluator noster, misso Beato Petro iussit Cathedram tenere, and vbi
patibulu^ passus est. Abbas Vrspergensis says, that Christ commanded S. Peter
to come to Rome. Aduentus Petri in Romam primi, fuit praeceptu^ Christi
iubentis. S. Marcellinus to the Antiochia^s says: that his See was first with
them, but by the commandment of Christ, It was translated to Rome. S. Leo
says, that S. Peter Prince of the Apostolic order, was sent to Rome, the
chifest place of the Roman Empire: beatissimus Petrus, Princeps Apostolici
ordinis, ad arce^ Romani destinatur Imperij. And to conclude this matter, S.
Simeon Metaphrastes is a witness, that S. Peter coming from his Eastern
Travails to Jerusalem, Christ appeared in a vision, and said unto him: Arise
Peter, go to the west, for it has need to be lightened with thy torches, and I
will be with thee: reuersus est Hierosolymam, visus est autem ei Dominus in
visione dicens, surge Petre, vade ad occidentem, opus enim habet vt tuis
illustretur facibus, and ego ero tecum. Which is sufficiently insinuated by our
renowned Contrimen Florentius Wigorniensis, and Marianus Scotus as they are
published by Protestants: The first says of S. Peter was sent to Rome: Romam
mittitur. The other says, it was superna visione ordinante: by the ordinance
of an heavenly vision. And diverse Catholics and Protestants say: omnem
occidentalem plagam suo specialiter Apostolatui destinatam. That all S. Peter
directed by Christ to all the westeren Nations, as Britain and others.
the western Nations were designed to S. Peter's Apostleship.

5. Whereby it is manifest, that S. Peter was not only sent by Christ, to the
Imperial City of Rome, and Italy, but unto all the Occidentall Nations,
whether under the Roman Empire then or not; for the Empire and kingdom of
Christ even on earth, his holy Church, was not to be confined within Flor.
Wigorn. an. 2. Claudij. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. in Nerone. M. S. apud
Lipp. 14. Sep. Franc. Burgoing. histor. Eccl. l. 2. 3. 4. 5. Stow. hist. p. 34.
edit. an. 1614. Mere des hist. aetat. 6. f. 22. c. 13.
the limits of any terrene, or earthly Empire of what Nation soever: But the
whole world was given to Christ for his Inheritance. And the then Imperial
City of Rome, though a commanding place, to the vaste and mighty Pagan
Empire, at that time, yet by the coming of Saint Peter, his living, preaching,
dying, and settling the highest powerable Apostolic See, and Chair there, it
was made not the head of the worldly Empire, that was great, but the head of
the whole world in the chiefest affairs of men, without restriction, or
limitation of either time, or place; As says S. Leo that holy and learned Pope
of this Roman city. Vt ciuitas sacerdotalis, and regia, per sacram Beati Petri
sedem, caput orbis effecta, latius praesideres religione diuina, quam
dominatione terrena: Rome was made by the holy See of S. Peter, a preistly and
Kingly City, head of the world, and to rule further by divine Religion, then
by earthly Regiment. And therefore, as when S. Peter made Antioch the place of
his greatest Residency in the East, he preached to so many other Nations in
that part of the world; so now being sent to the great Imperial City in the
western parts, he likewise used the same Pastoral care, labor, and diligence
to convert the western Nations, even those, that be most remote either from
Jerusalem, or Rome, such as this kingdom is, for they properly and most
really are the western Contries, and that Occidens: west, which is obscurior
mundi Plaga: the more obscure or dark part of the world, for whose lightning
saint Peter was (as saint Clement before has witnessed) sent to these
western Regions. For howsoever we will expound this obscure plaga of the
world in the west, whether it be for temporal and bodily darkness, for the
great distance from the visible funne, or darkness of mind, grown by
barbarous rudeness, or howsoever; Rome and Italy are not so to be termed,
neither France, Spain, or any Contry between Rome, and us, being all nearer
the Southe and East, and accounted civil Nations before the preaching of
Christ unto them. And the Apparition and words of Christ, vade ad occidentem,
go to the west, for it has need to be illuminated by thee, assures us, it
was the whole west part of the world, and not a portion of it only, that was
thus by our blessed Savior commended, and committed to saint Peter, to be
illuminated in the true faith by him. Neither could the words of the Rabins or
Sybils in this matter, be otherwise performed, in this great fisher saint
Peter, and his hook, not only to subject the city of Rome, but Reges, the
Kings of the Empire, and west unto him; nor Rome be truly termed the chiefest
place, or permancy of the Messiah, to rule in all the world, except this his
vicegerent, saint Peter, and his successors there by the conversion of these
nations, unto Christ, had effected, and made it so: As we see accordingly, as
they foretold, this fisher and his hook have made the name of Christ the lamb
of God so glorious in that City, over all the world of Christians, and vsque ad
fines saeculi, and shall so continue to the end of the world, as that
prophecy, agreeable with the holy Fathers, and scriptures themselves, assures
us.

6. And if we may believe the Protestant writers, either of this, or other
nations, they put us out of all doubt, that saint Peter both by himself, in
his own labors, in these western parts, and Plaga, Quarter of the world, and
by his holy and learned disciples most diligently performed this office, and
charge imposed upon him. Our English Protestants are witnesses that the labors
and travails of S. Peter in preaching in these Countries were so long, and
painful, that he did not accomplish them, until the foureteenth, the last
year of Nero, Bassus and Tuscus being then Roman Consuls (our Protestants
words) The holy Stowe. and Ed. Howes hist. of the Romanesan. Dom. 70. in Iul.
Agricola.
Apostle S. Peter having accomplished his preaching, in the west parts,
returned to Rome, where he preached again, as he did before. Henricus
Pantaleon, a german Protestant writes: Cum Diuus Petrus Ecclesiam Christi
Romae verbo Dei salutifero pasceret, non contentus fuit vno in loco gentilium
superstitiones tollere, and vineam Domini plantare, verumetiam ad alias parts,
pios and eruditos viros suos discipulos Henricus Pantal. de viris Illustrib.
Germ. part 1. p. 200. ad an. 55.
emisit, qui homines instruerent: when S. Peter did feed the Church of Christ
at Rome, with the wholesome word of God, he was not content, to root out the
superstitions of the Gentiles, and plant the vineyard of our Lord in one place,
but he sent Godly and learned me^, his Disciples, to other parts to instruct
the people. What these were in particular, which he thus sent, and to what
parts of the west he sent them, I shall in some part declare hereafter. For
this present I speak in general Henricus 8. Rex An^^iae in assert. 7. Sacram.
art. 2.
of these western nations: of which also King Henry the eight in his book
against Luther writes: Negare Lutherus non potest, quin omnis Ecclesia
fidelium, sacro sanctam sedem Romanam, velut matrem primatemque recognoscat, ac
veneretur, quaecunque saltem neque locorum distantia, neque periculis
interiacentibus prohibetur accessu: Luther cannot deny, but every Church of
the faithful does acknowledge, and reverence the holy See of Rome, as their
mother and primate, how far distant soever it be from it, and dangers
between them. And Marcus Antonius de Dominis, even at that time when he most
professed himself a Protestant, Marc. Anton. de Dominis l. 4. ca. 10. de
Repub. Christ.
and defendor of our English Protestants, and most earnest against the sea of
Rome, yet thus confesses: Est caput Roma, quatenus ab ea diffusum est
Euangelium in reliquas totius ocoidentis Ecclesias, and in multas Orientis, at
que in barbaras etiam extra Romanum Imperium nationes: Rome is the head,
because from it the Gospel was diffused to the rest of the Churches of all
the west, and to many of the east, and to barbarous Nations, even out of the
Roman Empire. Where we see plainly acknowledged, that all the Churches of
this west part of the world, received the faith of Christ from saint Peter,
and the Sea of Rome.

7. Wherefore our King James in open Parliament publicly pronounced of the
Roman Church: It is our mother Church. An other calls King James Speech. in
Parl. 1. Ormorod. pict. Pap. page 184.
it, The eye of the west. From which this Nation among others must needs first
receive their sight in Christ. Neither can any man without a preiudicate mind
(considering what has been written before) be of other opinion. Yet we may
add much more to that which is already written. As that Arnobius who lived with
in the first 300. years of Christ, speaking of the conversion of the Gentiles,
and saint Peter's preachinge, says of him, that Arnob. l. 2. adu. gentes.
he preached in Insulis atque prouincijs omnibus quas sol Oriens a^que Occidens
lustrat: in all Islands, and provinces, which the son rising and setting does
compassc, all Isles and provinces in the west part of the world. Michael
Singelus says of him: Michael Syngelus in Martyrio Dionisij Areop.
Regiam vrbem miraculis editis illustrauit, and occidu^m obscuritatem in
splendorem clarissimum commutauit: Peter did make the Kingly city renowned with
the miracles he wrought, and changed the darkness of the west into a most
bright slyninge; by which obscure west he must needs, (to speak truly) mean
these furthest, and most western parts, as I have urged in the like case
before. Nicephorus says of saint Peter: Petrus per orbem habitabilem vadens,
Ecclesias vbique constituit, Nicephor. lib. 2. hist. c. 35.
and Romanam quos supradiximus Successoribus commisit, Lino videlicet,
Anacleto, and tertio Clementi: Peter trauayling throughout the inhabited
worlds, appointed Churches every where, and committed the Church of Rome to his
successors which we have named before. Linus, Anacletus (so he calls Cletus)
and Clement the third. And again: Orbem peragrauit: he trauayled throughout
the world. The like have many others, the number of them is too great to be
recited; all agreing, that after he came to Rome, he consecrated there two
Bishops saint Linus, and Cletus, to supply the spiritual needs, in that
place, and he himself trauayled often to preach in these western Regions, as
he did in the East before, when he had his Residency at Antioch, as the
scripture itself, with all, or most Antiquities of that business are witnesses.
And this may suffice in general for the labors of that holy Apostle, in these
western parts, so far as they concern the History of this Nation, which we
have in hand. What he performed in particular, in this kind, and belongs to
the Ecclesiastical affairs of Britain, (so much as these my Protestant
directors will gi^e me leave) shall immediately appear.

THE XII. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN IS SHOWED, TO BE THE MOST probable opinion, that S. Peter at his first
coming to Rome, was received there by Britans of this Nation: and who probably
they were.

1. THE holy and learned ancient Pope saint Leo, treating of the coming of
saint Peter to Rome for the settling of his supreme Apostolical power, and
preeminency there, and reconciling this western part of the world unto Christ,
writes in this manner: Cu^ duodecim Apostoli accepta per spiritu^ sanctu^
omnium locutione linguarum, imbuendum Euangelio mundum, distributis sibi
terrarum S. Leo ser. 1. de S S. Apost. Petro and Paulo.
partibus suscepissent, beatissimus Petrus Princeps Apostolici ordinis, ad
arcem Romani destinatur Impery, vt lux veritatus, quae in omnium gentium
reuelabatur salutem, officatius se ab ipso capite per totum mundi corpus
effunderet. Cuius autem nation is homines in hac tunc vrbe non essent, aut quae
vsquam gentes ignorarent, aut Roma didicisset? I am populos qui ex
circumcisione crediderant, erudieras: iam Antiochenam Ecclesiam, vbi primum
Christiani nominis dignitas est orta, fundaueras: I am Galatiam, Cappadociam,
Asiam, atque Bithyniam legibus Euangelicae praedicationis impleueras: nec vt
dubious de prouentu operis, aut de spatio tuae ignarus aetatis, Trophaeum crucis
Christi Romany Acibus Inferebas: quo te diuinis praeordinationibus anteibant,
and honor potestatis, and gloria passionis: When the twelve Apostles having
received by the holy Ghost, the gift of speaking all languages, dividing the
parts of the earth amongst them, had undertaken to endue the world with the
gospel, most blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostolic order, is sent to the
chiefest place of the Roman Empire, That the light of the Truth, which was
revealed for the salvation of all nations, might more effectually diffuse it
self, from the head thereof, to the whole body of the world. For what Nation
was there, that men thereof were not the^ in this city, or what Nations in any
place could be ignorant of that, which Rome had learned? Now thou (S. Peter)
had instructed the people of the circumcision which had believed: Thou had
already founded the Church of Antioch, where first the dignity of the
Christian name was risen: Thou had already replenished Pontus, Galatia,
Cappado^ia, Asia, and Bithynia with the laws of preashing the gospel:
neither as doubtful of the success of thy work, or ignorant of the space of
thy age. Thou did bring the Trophie of the Cross of Christ, to the Roman
Towers, whether by the preordination of God, both the honor of thy power, and
glory of thy passion went before thee. Where we see, by this most learned Pope,
(the general consent of the other holy Fathers, and Antiquity, concurring
with him, in this declaration,) that it was the merciful preordinance of God,
that seeing the whole world, and in that, these western nations, also were to
be instructed in the truth, and the number of the Apostles to perform so
wonderful a work, was so small, That Rome the^ being the of the head world,
where people of all Nations lived especially of these western Regions, and
more principally of this kingdom of Britain, having many thereof then making
their dwelling at Rome. The chiefest Apostle should be directed, and sent
thither by Christ, to bring this happy work the more easily to pass, and
settle there for ever, by the glory of his passion, the honor of his greatest
Apostolical power: quo te diuinis praeordinationibus anteibant and honor
potestatis, and gloria passionis.

2. In this happiness common to all, then dwelling at Rome, this Island having so
many Britans, both as hostages, and otherwise residing there, as all our
histories of those times assure us, was equal with the best: In one, which S.
Peter first entertained at Rome by Britans, his Cathedral See, and Church
first in their house.
I take to be the greatest honor, and happiness this kingdom ever had, or any
other could have, this our Britain stripped, and ouerwent them all. Which was,
that our Britains then dwelling at Rome were the first, except the Romans
themselves deceive me, that received, entertained, and happily harbored that
blessed Guest S. Peter, there. The first erection of saint Peter's Chair, and
See, the co^maunder of the Christian world, in spiritual things, was made in
the house of one of our noble Brita^s there. Where the first Christian Church
of that great and holy Apostolic City as the Christian poverty of that time
would permit, was founded, where the gospel was preached, the most blessed
Sacrifice of the sacred body and blood of Christ was offered, for the living
and the dead, where the daily and ordinary Synaxes, and holy Assemblies of
Christians then, for these, and other most holy exercises, of Christian
Religion were kept, from whence many holy disciples of that highest Apostle,
were afterward sent, and directed by him, both into this kingdom of Britain,
and other nations in this western world, the happy and renowned Christians of
this Country that then dwelled there, in the best sort and sense they could,
cooperating and assisting in so heavenly labors. For whereas we are told for
an undoubted truth, by a Tradition of the Romans, that S. Peter Traditio
Romanorum apud Baron. in Annotat. in Martyrolog. Roman. 19. die Maij in Pudent.
Author of the 3. conuers. with. others.
was first lodged at Rome, in the house of Pudens a Senator, and that the
Christians met there at their Synaxis, and had their Church there, which is now
called the Church of S. Pudentiana: maiorum firmatum traditione praescriptum
est, domum Pudentis Romae fuisse primum bospitium S. Petri, Principis
Apostolorum, illicque primum Christianos conuenisse ad Synaxim, coactam
Ecclesiam, vetustiss imumque omnium Titulnm Pudentis nomine appellatum, qui and
Pastoris nomine dictus reperitur, hodie vulgo Ecclesia S. Pudentianae
nuncupatur: The Romans must give me leave to write, and more then probably to
prove, that this house called by them the house of Pudens a Roman Senator,
came not to him from his Roman Ancestors, but rather by his wife, Iure vxoris
suae, a noble Christian and lady of Beda Martyrol. 14. call. Iunij. Seuerin.
Binnius annotat in Tom. 1. Council. in S. Pio. Baron. Tom 2. Annal. 159. Zepher.
Bin. annot. in tom. 1. council. in Pio. 1. Traditio Romanorum apud Patres tam
Latin. quam Graecos. Matthew. Westminster. ad An. 42. Florent. Wigor. hist. an. 28. and
60. Stowe. And Howes hist.
Britain, called by our histories and saint Paul also Claudia, by others,
Priscilla, or Sabinella.

3. And so at the coming of saint Peter to Rome, this holy place was the
house, and habitation, of the Christian British parents, of that renowned Lady
Claudia, which then lived as hostages at Rome, to the Emperor, for this land,
and kingdom of Britain, and by that means it was their happiness, and honor,
to give the first entertainment to the blessed Apostle saint Peter, at his
first coming thither; as that Roman tradition of that their house after by
marriage with the holy British Lady Claudia their daughter and heir with
Pudens the Senator, and so long after this coming of saint Peter to Rome named
the house of Pudens, the Senator, assures us. Which I prove by an other
undoubted tradition of the Romans: That S. Peter was 15. years in Rome, before
S. Paul came thither: Romani autem dicunt Petrum annis 15. in Roma fuisse,
antequam Paulus ad Romam venit. So writes our Florentius Wigorniensis with the
common consent of Antiquity, and writers, both Catholics, and Protestants. And
the Roman Martyrologe itself tells us, of this Pudens the Senator, that he
was baptized by the Apostles: Qui ab Apostolis Coristo in baptismo vestitus
Innocentem tunicam vsque ad vitae coronam immaculate cusiodiuit. Martyrolog.
Romans antiq. die 19. Maij.
And there calls him plainly S. Pudens the Senator, Father of S. Pudentiana
the virgin. S. Pudentis Senatoris patris supradictae virginis Pudentianae. So
that being baptized by the Apostles, saint Peter, and saint Paul (for no
others were then in Rome) ab Apostlis, this could not be, by true account,
until, at the soonest, fifteen years after saint Peter was first received
in that house. And if the Martyrologe could carry that interpretation, to
understand by Apostolis, the Apostles, in the plural number, one Apostle (no
propper constructio^) yet by this frie^dly and more then lawful
interpretation, he must needs be baptized by S. Peter, and so also a most
improbable thing, that diverse Christians then being, as before, in Rome, S.
Peter could first commit himself to a Pagan, or Catecumene, and he and the
Christians of Rome make such an house their chiefest Church, and place of
assembly for divine things. And to put all out of doubt, this S. Pudens as I
shall demonstrate hereafter in the proper place of him, and saint Claudia his
wife, was either an infant, or not borne when S. Peter came to Rome; and was
first lodged and received in that house, which after many years by title of
marriage with our Lady the Lady Claudia came to be his house, and not before,
but it still remained in the hands of our Christian Britanes the Parents of
that Lady there in Rome. For more pregnant Martial Pocta. Epigram.
proof whereof, we are told by him that lived in the days of this Pudens, by
the most common consent of writers, both Catholics and Protestants, and was
well acquainted with him, his state and Country, that this Pude^s was by
birth, and Country, a Sabinite, far distant from Rome, and his house at
Sabinum, the chiefest Town there, and no mention of any house at all, which of
their own, either he or his parents had in Rome: when by all testimonies of
writers, we are told, the parents of Lady Claudia being Britanes were dwelling
in Rome, as hostages among others, for this Nation there, and without question,
had an house there, suitable and answerable to their honorable degree, and that
their daughter S. Claudia was borne there, and not in Britain, for no Auihour
that I read, does affirm she was borne in this Island, but only of British
parents living in Rome. Claudia caerulcis cum sit progmata Martial. l. 11.
Epigr. 54. de Claud^a Ruff. Godw. Conuers. of Brit. p. 16. Theat. of great
Britainel. 6. Matt. Parker. antiq. Brit. p. 2. Io. Pits. l. de vir. Illustrib.
p. 72. Author of; conuers. part. 1. 2. Timoth. 4.
Britannis. Claudia borne of Britans; But not in Britain, only she is called
of the Poet Martial, peregrina, a stranger, as the children of strangers
usually are termed both with us, and other people. And the time of her birth,
and age so convince, as I shall declare hereafter; and may be plainly proved
from S. Paul himself a little before his death.

4. And whereas we find noe memory at all, of any natural parents of S.
Pudens dwelling in Rome, we have sufficient testimony, not only of the
permanent dwelling both of the Father, and Mother of S. Claudia there; before
remembered, but that, by diverse probable Arguments they dwelled in that very
house, where Pudens continued with them, after his marriage with their
daughter, and were holy and renowned Christians, although their native Country
of Britain has hitherto been almost wholly deprived of their honor, and so
must needs be by the Roman Tradition the first entertainers God win conu. of
Britain p. 17. c. 3 ^. Tim. 4. v. 21.
of saint Peter in Rome: for as a Protestant Bishop in their common opinion
writes: Pudens and Claudia were two young persons, but faithful Christians,
at that time unmarried, when Paul writ the second epistle unto Timothy, which
was in the last year of Nero, a^ all men suppose, that I have read except
Baronius: and that they were married in the later end of Vespasian, or about
the beginning of Domitian. Therefore Pudens being so young in the end of Nero
his Empire, Although we grant him then newly married, yet this was by all
computations at the least 24. years after the coming of saint Peter to Rome.
And so it could not possibly be Pudens, but the parents of Claudia, our
Britans, that entertained first S. Peter in their house at Rome. Who for
certainty being Britans of noble order, and degree, and living in Rome as
Hostages by all Judgment they enjoyed more freedom, and liberty in matters of
Religion, then the Romans did at that time; The Emperors of Rome the^, nor
long after, intermedling with the Britans, for matters of Religion, but leaving
it voluntary and free unto them, as other Tributaries, to use the Religion of
their Contries, or as they were best, and most disposed, privately at the
least, even in Rome itself, without controlement. So by the great mercy, and
providence of God, the subjection and temporal captivity, or restraint of
diverse these our worthy Contrimen, proved to be the most happy spiritual
freedom in Christ, both of those our Hostages there, and this whole kingdom,
afterward converted to the true faith, from thence, by this original, so
renowned and glorious for ever to this Nation, to have in Rome it self the
first Harbourers and Receauers of that most Blessed, and highest Apostle S.
Peter. And thus I have proved directly both against the Protestant Bishop of
England denying it, the truth of that Roman Tradition, that saint Peter was
first with his holy Disciples received in Rome in the house which the Romans
truly called the house of Pudens, after he was God wyn supr. Conuers. of Brit.
p. 17. c. 3.
married to Lady Claudia of this Nation, confuting his idle objection of the
young age of Pudens: As also the Romans, therefore calling it the house of
Pudens, because so it was, in such sense as I have declared, and not truly
inducing from thence, that therefore Pudens the Roman Senator first entertained
S. Peter there: for as I have proved before, this Pudens being a Sabiline, and
no Roman as of the city of Rome by birth, was neither Senator, Christian,
Catechumen, or perhaps not borne at that time, and the house was only called
his house, because long after he was owner of it: as it was also after called
Domus S. Nouati, Domus S. Timothaei, and S. Pudentianae; the house Martyrol.
Romans die 20. Iunij. 26. Iulij. and Baron. Annot. ibid. Et in Sanct. Nouato,
Tim. Pudent. and Praxede. Baron. in annot. 19. Maij. Author of 3. Conuers.
part. 1. p. 17. Rob. Barnes in vit. Pont. Romans in Pio 1. Martyrol. Romans 20. die
Iunijin S. Nouato.
of S. Nouatus, the house of S. Timothy, the house of S. Pudentiana, the
blessed children of S. Pudens and S. Claudia our Contry woman, who all
successively possessed it, termed by their name for the time, as usually houses
and places be, by the owners name: until in the time of Pope Pius the first,
It was by the Donation of S. Pudentiana, absolutely converted to a Church, and
ever since after her death, called the Church of S. Pudentiana, as the Roman
Antiquities themselves, and their continually kept tradition together with some
English Protestants, and others testify, Which before was called the house of
them, as they possessed it in order, or the house of them all sometimes, as the
old Roman Martyrologe calls it, the house of all those four children of S.
Pudens, and Claudia, for speaking of them all by name, S. Nouatus, Tymotheus,
Pudentiana, and Praxedes, it adds: horum domus in Ecclesiam commutata,
Postoris Titulus appellatur: The house of these being changed into a Church,
is called the Title of Pastor.

5. And it is evident, that the Father of the Lady Claudia by all probability,
God win. Conu. of Brit. page 17. Theater of great Brit. l. 6.. 6.
owner of this house, where all his children long after lived, was yet living,
and possessor thereof, both now, and when S. Peter was first entertained there,
for Martial the Poet which lived in this time and wrote in the days of
Domitian and Nerua long after makes an honorable memory of the Father of Lady
Claudia, then living calling him Socer of Pudens, the Father of his wife, S.
Claudia, our Contry woman by parents, for the word Socer, has no other
meaning, then a Father in law, Father to the wife whose Father in Cooper.
Rider. Thom. Thomas. Calepin. and alij v. Socer. Martial. l. epigr. saepe. Io.
Bal. l. de Script. cent. 1. in Claudia Ruffin. Io. Pits. l. de Vir. Illustrib.
in ead. Godwin. Conu. of Britain. Et alij.
law he is, or Father to the husband of that wife, to whom he is so termed
Socer, Father in law, Cothen, Pentheros so in Hebrewe, Greek, Latin, and all
languages. Evident it is also, that Pudens had no other wife but Claudia, to
have any other Socer, or Father in law by, and she long over lived her
husband Pudens. And that this Father in law was as noble for his faith, and
Religion in Christ, as by descent, and birth, we may easily inform ourselves,
if from noe other grounds, yet from the most holy and virtuous education of his
daughter in that profession, who by the examples and documents of her pious
parents the best Tutours of children their greatest charge, was by their
Instruction come to that perfection in the law of Christ, that being yet but
young in all opinions, when S. Paul wrote his second Epistle to S. Timothy, a
little before his The British parents of S. Claudia were Christians.
death, she deserved the style of one of the four principal Christians, in
the judgment of that great Apostle, as two great Doctors, S. Chrysostom,
and Theodoret expound that passage of his Epistle. Salutat te, inquit, Eubulus,
and Pudens Chrysostom. inep. 2. ad Tim. c. 4.
and Linus, and Claudia, and fratres omnes, nominatim illos memorat, quos
nouerat magis fide feruere: S. Paul says: Eubulus saluteth thee, and Pudens,
and Linus, and Claudia, and all the Brethren, he remembers them by name, whom
he knew, to be more fervent in faith: and again, Theodoret upon that place,
says: Meliorum, and Theod. in ep. 2. ad Tim. cap. 4. in eund. loc.
virtut is amantiorum nomina in serut: alios autem commu ni appellatione
vocauit. S. Paul put in the names of them which were the best, and most loving
of virtue. By which we may sufficiently see, the great piety not only of S.
Claudia, but her holy parents also, the then honors of this kingdom, that had
caused her then under their charge, to be taught, and instructed, in so
excellent a manner, in true Religion.

6. And if I may have the like license to write for the Religion of this Father
in law to Pudens, which a Protestant Bishop takes, to prove Pudens the son
in law a Christian, I may do it with much more reason, for thus he writes:
That the same Pudens was a Christian, we have a great presumption, in the
Epigram Godwin. Conu. of Britain pa. 17. Theater of great Brit. l. 6.. 6.
of Martial, where for his virtuous carriage, he calls him, S. Maritus: but a
greater in an other of the same Martial, wherein he yields him thanks, for
persuading him to amend his writings, that for obscenitie and lasiuiousnesse,
are indeed not to be endured by Christian ears, and this it is.

Cogis me calamo, manuque nostra
Emendare meos, Pudens, libellos.
That by this kind of argument the Father of Claudia our Noble Contryman,
Martial. l. 7. Epigram. 11.
was in all degrees as good, or rather better Christian then his son in law
Pudens was, is most evident, for those verses which Pudens did well like
Martial. l. 7. Epigram. 57. ad Rufin.
and allow, yet by the testimony of Martial himself, might not be imparted
to the Father in law of Pudens, but would seem light unto him, occupied in
more serious things for thus he writes unto Pudens: S. Eubulus named with
honor by S. Paul probably was the Father of S. Claudia, and a Britan.


Commendare meas instanti, Rufe, camaenas
Parce precor Socero, seria forsan amat.
Where we see, that the gravity of the Father in law to Pudens, was greater
then his, therefore much more we may presume from hence, that he was a
Christian then the other, by that argument. And yet we have a better Author,
both for his Christianity, and name also: for the other three named by
Martyrol. Romans 20. Iunij in San. Nouato. Martia. in Epigram.
S. Paul, to send salutations to S. Timothy from Rome at that time, for
certain except Eubulus, the first, were most continuing in one house, Pudens
and Claudia were then married, as is evident in the ancient Roman
Martyrologe, and others: And seeing by the Romans tradition, and other
testimonies, the house wherein they dwelled, was the chief lodging if the
Apostles S. Peter and Paul, and their Successors, until in the time of Pope
Pius the first, it was converted to be a Church, we must needs account S. Linus
the Bishop, the third which is here named, to be also of that family for the
most part. Then how to single forth only S. Eubulus, which here is first
either for piety, nobility, or that he was the chief paterfamilias, owner
and Master of that house, or all, and make him a stranger there, I cannot find
it by S. Paul, only repeating them of one family, or any other warrant. For it
is plain here by the Apostle, that he was a chief and principal Christian in
Rome, and first named among these worthies, and before S. Linus, a Bishop then,
and Pudens a Senator, and absolutely there set down, as their chiefest
receauer, friend, or patron, which cannot agree to any other, better then to
the Father of S. Claudia, this father in law to her husband Pudens and first
entertainer of S. Peter the Apostle in Rome, by the Romans tradition. For
neither Dorotheus, the continuator of Florentius Wigorniensis, nor any other
that write of the Disciples there, place him among Clergy men, and S. Paul
which gives him that honor in that place, clearly proves he was none of his
Disciples then in Rome, for he writes in the same place. Lucas est mecum
solus: only 2. Tim. 4. verse. 11.
Luke is with me. No Martyrologe speaks of him, neither any Historian, or
Interpreter of Scripture to my reading, sets down of what Nation he was,
but leave him for a stranger, as likewise many do S. Claudia: Therefore except
better authority can be brought against me seeing he is by the Apostle himself
so dignified, and placed the first in that family, and salutation, Eubulus
greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia: There is no cause yet I
find, to 2. Tim. 4.
deny him, to be the owner and Master of that house, that first entertained S.
Peter in Rome, and he himself the first happy man, that gave that glorious
Apostle entertayme^t there, that he was our most renowned Co^tryma^ of
Britain, and Father of Lady Claudia. For there is no other, who by any
probable conjecture, was likely to perform this duty in that house. Pude^s as
before, was either then unborn, or an Infant: of his own parents father and
mother, there is no mention in antiquities, that either they were Christians,
or that they dwelled at all in Rome, much less in that house, being
Inhabitants of Sabinum, and by Co^try Sabinites far distant from Rome; And so
there is none left unto us, to be a Christian, and entertain that heavenly
Messenger, and Gheast, S. Peter in that time, and place, but the renowned
British parents of Lady Claudia, then dwelling in Rome, and there confined to
a certain house, and place of permanency by command of Roman power, to whom
with many other noble Britans they were hostages, and pledges for the
fidelity, and obedience of this kingdom, to the Roman Emperors at that time.

7. To strengthen this opinion, we may add, that S. Paul sends to S.
Timothy, his Disciple the salutations of Eubulus, before all others of which
sending the greetings of so few by name, It will be no easy search, to find
out a better or more probable reason, then this, that S. Timothy so near and
beloved a scholar of S. Paul, lodged usually in this house, he also was there
with his Master, entertained by Eubulus the owner thereof, and by that title of
his holy hospitality deserved the first place in that salutation: otherwise no
man will doubt, but S. Linus Bishop by calling, so honorable in the Church of
Christ, ought and should have been, named before him. And that this familiar
acquaintance, between S. Timothy, and these our holy Christian Britans,
received original from their ancient entertainment of S. Timothy in their
house in Rome, many years before this their salutation in S. Paul's Epistle,
it is evident; for S. Paul being now lately, come to Rome when he wrote this
epistle, and neither he, nor saint Timothy there, after S. Paul's first
dismission from prison there, so long before, it is manifest, that these
though the lady in young years, were ancient Christians at that time. And we
have uncontrollable warrant, from S. Paul himself, in his epistle to the
Hebrews, that S. Timothy was at Rome, when he was first prisoner there, in
the beginning of Nero his Empire; for thus he writes know you Hebr. c. 13.
verse. 23.
that our Brother Timothy is set at liberty. Thus S. Paul writes from Rome
in the time of his first imprisonnement there. And so makes these our Contry
Christians the acquaintance of S. Timothy then, to be more ancient in the
s^hoole of Christ, then either S. Timothy or S. Paul his coming first to Rome,
when there were none to instruct either the^, or others, in Christian Religion
at Rome, but S. Peter, and his Disciples: I add to this the charge, and warning
which Martial the Poet gave before to Pudens, that his father in law should
not see his Poems: commendare meas camaenas parce precor Socero: An evident
testimony, Martial. sup^. l. 7. Ep^gr. 67.
that they then lived in one house together, and so the Poems sent to Pudens
might easily come to his father in law his hands, and reading, except Pudens
had been so forewarned to keep and conceal them from him. Whereof there had
been no danger, or need of that admonition, if they had then lived in distinct
places, and not in one house. And thus much of the father, of lady Claudia.

8. Concerning her holy mother also, so good a Noorse, and Tutrix to so happy a
child, we are not altogether left desolate, without all hope, but we may
probably find her forth, for the honor of this kingdom, her Contry. And
except the Roman Historians can find unto us, a Christian Father to S. S.
P^isc^lla foundr^sse of the Churchyard of her name in Rome mother of S.
Claudia, very probable.
Pudens, and dwelling with his wife, in the same house, as I have found unto
them, a father to Claudia, and father in law to Pudens, an holy Christian
dwelling in that house before Pudens his time, by Nation of this kingdom which
by that is said before, they cannot do, seeing that noble Matrone which is
acknowledged by the Roman writers, even Baronius, to have dwelled in that
house, and Grandmother to S. Claudia her children, must needs be her Mother,
her fathers wife, and mother in law to S. Pude^s, I am bold to assign that
glorious and renowned Saint, S. Priscilla, foundresse of that wonderful and
religious Churchyard, to be the same blessed British Christian Lady. Ba^onius
though staggering sometimes in his opinion herein, says plainly from
Antiquity: fuit Romae nobilissima Matrona Priscilla nomine, Auia Pudentianae,
and Praxedis Baronius ^^ Annot. in Martyrolog. Romans Iu^. 8. S. Pastor seu
Hermes in act. S. Pudentianae. Baron. Annotat. in Martyrolog. Romans die 16. Ian.
Baron. Tom. 2. Annal. Ann. 159. and an. 166.
virginum: de qua mentio habetur in Actis S. Pudentianae, a Pastore
conscriptis. There was a most noble Matrone in Rome, called Priscilla,
Gra^dmother of the virgins Pude^tiana and Praxedes: of who^ there is mention in
the Acts of Pudentiana, written by S. Pastor. The like he writes in other
places where as she is there called by him the mother of Pude^s, Matter
Pudent^s, he must needs be understood, to speak in their Phrase, which
ordinarily all Mothers in law, by the absolute name of Mothers, as the common
custom is. Sometimes in other places Baronius faith, S. Priscilla was wife to
S. Pudens, and mother to S. Nouatus, Pudentiana, and Praxedes: so likewise does
Zepherinus Binius, when it is evident before, that S. Claudia our British Lady
was the only wife, of S. Pudens, and Mother to those Saints. Therefore to
excuse the one from error, and the other from contradiction, they must hold,
that both the Mother of S. Claudia, and she herself also was sometimes called
Priscilla, as she was in Vmbria termed Sabinella, of her husbands house at
Sabinum there. And this may sufficiently be gathered from those Antiquities,
Baronius cites, in which one S. Priscilla is called Priscilla Seniour, the
elder, or old Priscilla, to make which justifiable, we must have also Priscilla
Junior, the you^ger or young Priscilla, and this is usual for distinction
sake, where the mother and daughter, Father and son be of one, and the same
name, to call the Father and Mother by their name with the addition, old, or
elder, and the son and daughter, with the distinction, young, or younger
added unto them. And there be other distinctions between these two: The eldest
(grandmother to those holy children,) as the Roman Martyrologe with others
testifies, who died at Rome having employed Martyrol. Romans die 16. Februarij.
hereselfe, and her goods to the service of Martyrs: die 16. Pebruarij Romae
Sanctae Priscillae, quae se suaque Martyrum obsequio mancipauit. Where we see
her festiuitie kept upon the 16. day of February, and that she dyed at Rome. Of
the other, the younger, if by any called Priscilla, we find no such
observation, nor that she died at Rome, but quite otherwise, that after her
husband S. Pudens death, she lived so long at his house at Sabinum, in Vmbria,
that she thereupon took her name Sabellina, and by all writers dyed there
far from Rome. Secondly S. Pastor who lived in the Apostles time, and
familiarly in that our British house, as I shall show in due place, is
witness, even Baronius acknowledging it, That the elder S. Priscilla
Grandmother to S. Nouatus, Tymotheus, Pudentiana, and Praxedes, which were S.
Claudia her children, was foundresse of that renowned Churchyard, in via
Salaria, S. Pastor in actis S. Praxedis, and apud Baron. in Annot. Martyr. Romans
die 16. Ian.
at Rome which boar her name, caemiterium Sanctae Priscillae via salaria, and
was founded long before S. Claudia was of years to be Author thereof.
Caemiterium via Salaria nomine sanctae Priscillae, Priscillae seniori Pastor
tribuit in act is S. Praxedis. And it must needs be this, and noe other, which
prepared that most charitable Christian costly work; for we find no other
saints of that name, especially in that time, but only her, and S. Priscilla
wife of S. Aquila, diverse times mentioned by S. Paul, being a Jew, who could
not be author of that foundation at Rome. First because probably it was
founded before she came to Rome, being at Corinth, and there saluted by S. Paul
in his 1. Cor. c. 16.
first epistle to the Corinthia^s, and was with her husband coadiutresse to S.
Paul, with her husband in those parts before they came to Rome, as the same
Apostle testifies: Salutate Prisca^ and Aquila^ Adiutores meos in Christo
Jesus, qui pro anima Romans 16.
mea, suas ceruices supposuerunt. Neither did she with her husband stay so
long at Rome, to effect such a business: for as S. Luke proves, they came from
Act. 18.
Rome upon the bannishment of the Jews from thence by Claudius, which was
soon after their coming thither. And they were at, or near Ephesus a little
before S. Paul's death, as he proves writing his second epistle then to S.
Timothy. Saluta Priscillam and Aquilam. And the old Roman Martyrologe 2. Tim.
4.
with others give evidence, they ended their lives in Asia the less, upon the
8. day of July, when the other S. Priscilla, died (as before,) at Rome, far
from thence, the 16. of January. ^ctaua Idus Iulij. In Asia minori Sanctorum
Martyrol. Romans 8. Iulij.
Aquilae and, Priscillae vxoris eius, de quihus in Actibus Apostolorum
scribitur.

9. And Baronius, who was an eye wetnesse of the chargeable work of that
foundation, found in his time, shall prove all the wealth both of this S.
Priscilla, and her husband S. Aquila being but Tentma^ers; erant autem
scenofactoriae Act. c. 18.
artis, as the scripture testifies, was not able to effect such a work.
Baronius which had seen and often visited it, compares it to a city, for
Baron. Annal. Tom. 2. an. 130.
lardgnesse and streets under the earth, relating, that the whole city of Rome
was amazed to see it. Mirabile dictu: vidimus, saepiusque lustrauimus
Priscillae caemitcrium, haud pridem inuentu^, atque refossum via salaria tertio
ab vrbe lapide, quod nullo magis proprio vocabulo dixerimus prae cius
amplitudine, multisque atque diuersis eiusdem vijs, quam subterraneam
ciuitatem: quippe quod ipsius ingressu primaria via caeteris amplior pateat,
quae hinc inde vias diuersas habeat, easdem frequentes, quae rursum in diuersos
viculos diuidantur and Angiportus: rursus vt in ciuitatibus, statis locis,
velutfora quaedam, ampliora sint spatia, ad conuentus sacros agendos, ead^mque
Sanctorum Imaginibus exornata: nec desint, licet nunc obstructa, ad lumen
recipiendum desuper excisa foramina. Obstupuit vrbs, cum in suis suburbijs
abditas se nouit habere civitates. So wonderful and chargeable a work, with
such streets, turnings, Churches, altars for holy Mass, Images of Saints, and
the other things of price, as they argue the rich and noble degree of the
blessed foundresse; so for a lady of Britain a stranger there, to be at so
excessive chardg, and expenses to provide such a Sanctuary for the honor of
Christ, safety, releife, and comfort both temporal and spiritual of his
Servants in a foreign Country, must be a perpetual glory of this Nation. And
to give further testimony: that this our renowned Country woman was foundresse
thereof, we find expressly, that diverse of her family and posterity namely
S. Pudens her son in law, her grandechildren, his daughters, S. Pudentiana,
and S. Praxedes, as likely S. Nouatus, and Timotheus were honorably Martyrolog.
Roman. 21. Iulij. Act. S. Praxedis in Breuiar. die 21. Iulij. and S.
Pudentianae die 19. Maij.
interred there. Cuius (S. Praxedis) corpus a Pastore presbytero in patris and
sororis Pudcntianae sepulchrum illatum est, quod erat in caemiterio Priscillae
via Salaria. And yet besides this memorable foundation, for the public good of
the Church of Christ, these Romans themselves do tell us, and the lately
continued buildings themselves testify, that there was an other such secret
Church yard, at her own house, to hide, protect, and bury holy Martyrs in. In
ipso Titulo Pastoris, vbi erant thermae Nouati, quae and Timothinae dictae,
ipsae balnei inferiores Caesar Baron. Annot. in Martyrol. Romans die 16. Ianuarij.
cellae instar porticuum sibi concameratione coniuctae, quae vsque in hanc diem
cernuntur poene integrae, caemiterij loco ad sepeliendos sublatos occulte
martyrs inseruisse creduntur. And thus we have found out now at the last the
house of our noble Christian Britans at Rome, to have been the first lodging of
the great Apostle S. Peter there, his first Church, and Seat, the Harbor of
S. Paul, and many of their Disciples, and Successors Popes of Rome after them,
the first Seminary, college, or mother of Christian learning there, or in the
western world, the common and ordinary place of holy Christian assemblies, and
exercises; from whence, as from the original well and fountain the water of
life did take course, and current, to diffuse it self unto all parts and
Nations of the Occidentall world. We may make some estimate and apprehension of
the wonderful charitable help, and assistance, this most happy house of our
noble British Christians, parents of S. Claudia yielded to the holy work of
converting this, and all other western Countries, if besides their
extraordinary love to their own Nation, we do reflect upon that the old Roman
Martyrologe has told us before, of this Priscilla, Employing herself and her
substance to serve the Saints, and Servants of Christ: se suaque Martyrol. Romans
dic 16. Ianuarij in S. Priscilla.
martyrum obsequio mancipauit: That she and her husband were two of the
chiefest of the nobility of Britain kept hostages at Rome, for this kingdom,
and yet after so many years spent, and their honorable revenues much
exhausted in these pious works, in maintaining, and releeuing distressed
Christians, by rhemselues, substance, and great numbers of Attendants, and
servants, attending also to those holy ends, they left so much to posterity,
that in the Family of their grand child S. Pudentiana, in the same house there
Vita S. Pudent. in Breuiar. Romans die 19. Maij. Bar. Tom. 2. Annal. in S.
Praxede.
were nonaginta sex homines, 96. Christian men, ordinary Attendants, and S.
Praxedes her Sister living there, 19. holy Christians were martyred in that
house at one time.

THE XIII. CHAPTER.
MAKING MANIFEST UNTO US: HOW, and whom in particular, S. Peter the Apostle
sent from Rome into these parts of the world, next unto us: and so consequently
into this kingdom of Britain also, so known and renowned then, among the
Nations of the western world.

1. NOw let us examine more particularly, who they were, whom S. Peter, (thus
received in Rome by our British Countrymen) sent into these parts of the
world, next adjacent unto this Island; That if we find, the first preachers of
the faith of Christ, in all these Countries next unto us, were sent by saint
Peter so well acquainted with our Roman Britans, we may boldly conclude, that
this kingdom alone was not left unremembered, in those holy Ambassages. Our
Protestant Antiquaries from S. Innocentius twelve hundred years since, and
other Antiquities, acknowledge it for so certain, and undoubted a truth. Quis
nesciat, cum sit manifestum, that no man can be ignorant of it, being manifest:
But S. Peter founded the first Churches of Afric, Italy, Godwyn Conu. of
Britain p. 3. Innoc. 1. epist. ad Decent. did. 11. Simon Metaphr. 29. dic
Iunij. Bar. Annal. an. 44.
France, Spain, Sicily, and the Islands, that lie betwixt them, Sardinia or
Corcica, Maiorca, Minorca. And for Sicily, and those Islands, we need not
expect S. Peter's coming to Rome; for while he was in the East so far of, he
sent S. Martianus and Paccatius thither, and landed there himself in Sicily,
the chiefest Island, when he came to Rome. Of Italy there is no question, among
writers, Protestants, or others, but it fell to the division of saint Peter:
for though Act. Apost. c. 12. 13. 14. 15. Sophron. tom. 7. Biblioth. Patr.
Hartmann. Schedel Chronic. chronicor. f. 205.
many bring saint Barnabas into Italy, yet it is evident, by the holy
Scriptures themselves, that it must needs be long after saint Peter's coming
to Rome. And when saint Barnabas Brother to S. Aristobulus by some father in
law to saint Peter preached in Italy, it was, as antiquaries say, by the
direction of saint Peter. Barnabase 72. Discipulis fuit natione Cyprius, is in
Italiam veniens, ex praecepto Petri omnem Longobardiam praedicando, and docendo
circuiuit, and apud Mediolanum primus Cathedralem locum tenuit. Barnabas one of
the 72. Disciples, was by Nation a Cyprian, he coming into Italy, by the
commandment of Peter went about all Lombardy, preaching and teaching, and was
the first that held the Cathedral place at Millane. The next Nation to this,
in the way to this Island of Britain, is that of the Heluetians or Switcers,
whose Theater of great Britain lib. 6. Pantal. de vir. Illustrib. Germ.
Apostle, as our Protestants assure us was that our renowned Countriman S.
Beatus sent Apostle thither by his Master saint Peter's authority of which
matter I am to speak more hereafter. For the parts between Heluetia, and us,
Sebastian Munster, the Magdeburgian Protestants in the first of their Sebastian
Munst. Cosmograp. l. 3. Magdebur. cent. 1. Henricus Part. de vir. Illustrib.
Germ. part. 1. page 100. Henricus de Erford hist. Germ. Catal. Episc. Tungr.
Catal. Epis. Met. Catal. Episcop. Tullen. Guhel. Eisengr. Centen. 1. Henric. de
Erford. apud Munster. and Pant. sup. beat. Rhenan. l. 2 rerum Germ. p. 88.
Francis Burgoing. Eccl. hist. l. 2. c. 1. Theater of great. Brit. l. 6. Bal. l.
de Scriptor. in Kentegern. Io. Capgrau. cat. in S. Kentegern. Guliel. Lomb. l.
de leg. Regum. Britan. in Ewardo Confessore. Richard. Kackluyt in Reg. Arthu.
and Edga. Arnold. Mirman. in Theatro Conu. gent. Acta S. Joan. in Breuiar. Romans
die 25. Iulij. Martyrol. Romans 25. Maij. Bed. Mart. ib. Vsuard. ib. and Ado.
Breuiar. Eccles. Toletan. Greg. 7. Epist. ad Alpho^sum Reg. Vincent. in spec.
hist. lib. 6. cap. 6. Francis Mas. l. 2. of Consecrat. cap. 2. Loyes de Mayerne
Turquet history general d'Espagne li. 4. p. 179. Beuter. ib. Vincent. supr.
Centuryes, Henticus Pantaleon, Iodocus Willichius, Arnoldus Mermannius, Henry
of Erford, and other historians of Germany both Catholics and Protestants are
witnesses with the ancient Catalogues of their Churches, that saint Peter
about the year of Christ 55. or before, long before S. Paul or any other
Apostle came to Rome, or to any of these parts, sent S. Maternus, Eucherius and
Valerius, who converted Alsatia, Treuers, Argentine. Mentz, Colin and those
Contryes. Of his directing and sending saint Clement, our renowned Countryman
saint Mansuetus with others, into or near the same parts, I have related
before. And to the parts of Germany nearer to De^marke, the same glorious
Apostle saint Peter sent saint Aegistus one of the 72. Disciples, and saint
Marianus into the Cou^tryes of Germany next to Holst, and Denmark who was
Martyred there. Flanders and the low Countries received the faith from this
our Nation, by the preaching of such as were sent and authorized by the Church
of Rome, as our Protestant Authors of the Theater of great Britain tell us.
For Denmark, Norway, Island and those parts we have proof from our
Protestants of England, the ancient laws of saint Edward, and other
Antiquities, that they received the faith of Christ from such also of this
Nation, as were licenced and warranted thereunto, from the Popes of Rome. The
French and German writers, both Catholics and Protestants testify: Britannos,
Normannos, Picardos, omnemque maris Oceani tractum instruxit formanitque side
sanctus Nicasius, a sancto Clemente Apostolus illuc delegatus, Imperante
Nerone: saint Nicasius being sent thither Apostle in the time of Nero by
saint Clement, did instruct and form in the faith the Britans, Normans,
Picards, and all the coaste of the Ocean Sea.

2. And to compass all the next parts of the continent, and make sure work,
that no preachers of the faith of Christ did or could come hither, but from S.
Peter, and his Apostolic See of Rome; If we circuit France, and Spain, and
return that way into Italy again, we shall find it so. For although we
read, that S. James the Apostle was in Spain, yet it was before the Gentiles
were preached unto, and profited not there in that kind but left the labor
and glory thereof to saint Peter. The public Acts of saint James his life
bear record: Hispaniam adijsse, and ibi aliquos ad fidem conuertisse,
Ecclesiarum illius prouincia traditio est: ex quorum numero septem postea
episcopi a beato Petro ordinati in Hispaniam primi directi sunt: It is the
tradition of the Churches of that province, that saint James the Apostle went
into Spain, and there converted some to the faith: of which number seven were
after made Bishops by saint Peter, and were the first were sent thither. The
Roman Martyrologe, Vsuardes saint Beda, Ado, Pope Gregory the seventh in his
epistle to king Alphonsus, or Adelphonsus, Vincentius and others have the
like, and name those seven Bishops ordeynad by S. Peter and by him sent into
Spain to be these: Torquatus, Cresiphontes, Secundus, Indaletius, Caecilius,
Hesichius, and Euphasius. Among whom Pope Gregory writes of these Bishops
sent into Spain by saint Peter: Destructa Idololatria, Christianitatem
fundauere, and Religionem plantuere, and ordinem and officium ostendere: having
destroyed Idolatry, they fownded Christianity, and planted Religion, and
showed order and duty. The general Spannish historye of Spain, Beuter and
others write that saint James converted there only 9. parsons, and speaking
of the time of Claudius long before saint Paul came to Rome, affirm: Saint
Saturnine S. Peter's disciple, was sent into Spain, he which was the first
Bishop of Tholose: who preached at Pampelone, and there converted in seven
days forty thousand parsons. So that we see the kingdom of Spain received
the faith by saint Peter, his Disciples, and direction.

3. Now let us wind nearer to Italy, and go to Marseils, where we find that
renowned history of S. Lazarus, and Maximinus coming thither with saint Mary
Magdalen, and her Sister saint Martha. That these two holy Bishops were also
directed by saint Peter, we cannot doubt, when we find it proved by many
Authors, that saint Maximinus was vnus ex Gulile. Eisengr. centenar. 1. part.
5.
72. Discipulis Christi, cui a diuo Petro Apostolorum Principe Maria Magdalena
commendata fuerat: one of the 72. Disciples of Christ, to whom Mary Magdalene
was committed by saint Peter Prince of the Apostles. And as we read in the
acts of saint Martha, this Disciple of saint Peter, saint Maximinus baptized
Maistre Puiel hist. in vita S. Mariae Magdal. 22. Iulij. Volater. Petr. de
Natal b. Antonin. Vuern. Bed. Hamular. and Fortunat. Episcopus Treuer. apud
Eisengr. Centen. 1. part. 1. did. 3. an. D. 46.
all that family. And after their coming unto Marseils, their dependence of
saint Peter (then being come to Rome) was no less then before, for the French
Antiquities tell us, That after the Ascension of our Lord an. 14. the Jews
raised so horrible a persecution against the Christians, that the most part
fled whether they could. S. Maximinus accompanied with S. Lazarus takes Mary
Magdalen, Martha, Marcella her hand-mayde, and S. Cedoyne borne blind whom
our Lord made to see, and committed themselves to the Sea, to avoid the fury
of the Jews, they arrive at Marseils, after by the persuasion of saint Mary
Magdalen, the Prince of Marseils was Christened, and went to Rome, and was
there directed by saint Peter. And this Journey of King or Duke Stephen of
France to saint Peter at Rome to excuse himself of the Martyrdom of saint
Valeria his wife, when he was a Pagan, is the common opinion of French
Historians, treating of that time. Therefore we cannot Question, but those holy
Bishops saint Maximinus, and Lazarus, who thus directed others, so great a
Journey to Rome to be instructed, and receive directions from S. Peter there,
were in the same case of dependancie from him themselves.

4. Thus we have compassed all the Sea coasts of Italy, Spain, France round
about, and find all places furnished with holy preachers from saint Peter and
the Sea Apostolik of Rome. For the other Countries of Germany, Denmark,
Norwey, and the rest, I have related how their conversion was long after, from
this Nation: And Origin writes that those Countries in his time had not yet
heard the word of the Gospel: Circa Oceanum Daci, and Origin. tract. 28. in
Matthew.
Sarmati, and Scythae nondum audierunt Euangelij verbum. Concerning the inward
parts of France, being a Country nearest unto us, we find all the Bishops
thereof, being many, to be the Disciples of saint Peter, and sent from him.
And to begin with the chiefest and Primate there, to whom the others were
subordinate, Eisengrenius from many Authors proves that S. Guliel. Eisengr.
Centen. 1. part. 1. did. 3. f. 56. an. D. 54. He cites. Bed. Martyrol. pride.
call. Ianuar. Petr. de Natal. l. 2. c. 25. Antonin. part. 1. tit. 6. c. 25.. 3.
Martin. in Chron. Vicel. in Hagialog. Vuern. Carthusian. in Fasic. tempor.
Sauinianus or Sabinus one of the 72. Disciples of Christ, was by saint Peter
the Apostle Consecrated Primate of all France, and Archbishop of Sens, in the
54. year of Christ, when Tybertus Claudius was Emperor, and to him succeeded
in the year 74. saint Potentianus Martyr, also one of the 72. Disciples and
Scholar of saint Peter chief of the Apostles and Companion of saint
Sauinian; sanctus Sauinianus sieve Sabinus vnus ex 72. Christi Discipulis a
sancto Petro Apostolo Primas totius Galliae, and Senonensis Archiepiscopus
consecratus est anno Christi. 54. Tyberio Claudio Caesare Augusto^cui successit
anno d. 74. sanctus Potentianus Martyr, and ^^^e ex 72. Petri Apostolorum
Corypha discipulus, beati Sauiniani in Itinere comes and peregrinationis.
Therefore If the two first Primates of all France were the Disciples of saint
Peter, and by him placed in that Dignity, over all the Bishops of France, the
rest must needs be at his Dispotion, and substitution, and the first of them
being so placed in the year of Christ 54. in the Empire of Claudius when
saint Paul was a strunger in this part of the world, this prerogative, and
honor must needs be yielded to saint Peter: who was the first did send the
first preachers, and Bishops into France, in the time of Claudius, by all
testimonies, long before saint Paul came into any western part, or Nation;
his first coming thither being in the time of Nero, and yet as a Prisoner, to
Rome, and so continuing there two years, as both Scripture and Historyes give
ample Testimony. The Authorities for this sending and mission by saint Peter;
are too many to be alleged: Therefore I will only set down diverse of these
first Bishops, and the years wherein they were first consecrated, and directed
thither, as they are gathered and collected out of many Authors by
Eisengrenius, and Democharez, that It may be evidently known, by the time it
self, that only saint Peter by his Disciples founded the Church of France.

5. I have spoaken of saint Maximinus, and saint Lazarus, the first Bishop
Guliel. Eisengr. Centenar. 1. in S. Maximin. Lazaro and Iuliano.
of Aquens, the second of Massilia consecrated and deputed to those places by
saint Peter, no other Apostle being in these parts to accomplish that holy
work, these being ordained Bishops there, as these Authors tell us, in the
year of Christ 46. in which year also saint Simon Leprosus whom our Savior
cured of that infirmity was consecrated Bishop of Cenomanenses: This Anton.
Democ. l. 2. de Missaco^tra Calvin. Gul. Eisengren. Cent. 1. part. 1. did. 3.
also was called saint Iulianus. In the year following 47. saint Martial
Disciple and Godchila to saint Peter; D. Petri Apostolorum Principis, and in
Baptismate filius, was with diverse others sent by the same holy Apostle, and
was father in Christ to so many Provinces, and people in France, as the Annals
thereof do mention. In the same year saint Trophimus, out of whose
spiritual Magdeb. Centu. 1. in Trophim. mart. Romans in S. Troph. Tom. 1.
council. Gul. Eisengr. Cente^. 1. Matthew. Westminster. Arnold. Mirm. in Theatr.
conuers. gent. and alij. Gul. Eisengr. centen. 1. in S. Aphrodisio.
fountain, as Pope Zosimus writes all the Ryuers and brooks of France were
filled, was ordained Bishop of Arles, which must needs be by saint Peter,
being twelve years at the least, before that time, some think he was left
there by saint Paul. In the year following being 48. saint Aphordisius by
birth an Egiptian, and Prefect of all Egpyt, at the time when our Savior being
driven into Egypt, the Idols of the temples there, fell down, being the
Disciple of S. Peter, Prince of the Apostles at Antioch was consecrated Bishop
of the Church of Buturigum in France. sanctus Aphrodisius genere Aegyptius,
totius Aegypti praefectus, eo tempore, quo puero Jesus in Aegyptum fugato, and
in templa Deorum illato, Idola omnia corruerunt, B. Petro Apostolorum Coryphaei
apud Antiochiam Discipulus, Buturicensis Ecclesiae consecratus est Antistes
anno Christi 48. sedit annis Volaterra^. comment. l. 13. Petrus de Natalib. l.
3. c. 218. Gul. Eiseng. Centenar. 1. part. 1. did. 3. Franc. Belleforest to.
1. Eisengr. Centen. 1. fol. 56.
sex, moritur 11. cal^ndas Aprilis anno Saluatoris 54. he was Bishop there six
years, and dyed the eleventh of the calends of April: and sanctus Vrsinus a
beato Petro consecratus: consecrated by saint Peter, whom some call Nathaniel,
succeeded him, in his Bishopric in the year of Christ 54. And the same year
48, (except Eisengrenius and others cited by him, deceive us) Paulus Sergius
was consecrated Bishop of Narbon, eight or more years before saint Paul came
to Rome, and so by no other Apostle but saint Peter. The next year after, the
49. of Christ, by the last account, saint Clement surnamed Flauius with
Caelestus and Faelix, and our contryman saint Mansuetus first Bishop of Tullum
were directed in Gallias, the parts of France by saint Peter. In the year
54. these Authors testify, That saint Amator, Potentianus, Sauinianus, Fronto,
with others were sent Bishops by saint Peter into France: all long before
saint Paul's coming to Rome. And for a Religious memory, and due honor of
saint Peter, and the Sea of Rome in that respect, Those Sees of Bishops which
were first founded by saint Peter, and his Successor saint Clement, of whom
Annal. Gall. Book of Estat. in France. Edw. Grymston. p. 97.
I shall speak hereafter in his proper place, are for the most part the
chiefest Archbishops Sees there at this time. As the Archbishops of Reims,
Sens, Lion, Soissons, Amiens, Noyon, Paris, Charters, Orleans, Angers, Man's,
Beuuis, Burges, Bishops sees founded in France by S. Peter in honor* thereof
are for the most part Archbishops Sees at this time.
Tours, Chalon, Auxerre, Troys, Meaux, Angolesme, Baion, Narbon, Rouen,
Bordeaux, Aix, Vienna, and others: all first founded by saint Peter the
Apostle, and his Successor saint Clement, as before saint Peter, and in
saint Clement hereafter is, and shall be related.

6. And because some Question has been, by whom saint Trophimus so renowned
in France, was first sent to Arles there, to pass over other testimonies, the
epistle of the Bishops of that Province to saint Leo the great, S. Trophimus
sent to Arles in France by S. Peter.
Pope of Rome, clears this for to be saint Peter's doing. Omnibus Regionibus
Gallicanis notum est, sed non sacrosanctae Ecclesiae Romanae habetur
incognitum, quod prima inter Gallias Arelatensis ciuitas missum a beatissimo
Petro Apostolo Epistola co^prouincialium Episcoporum Metropolis Arelaten. ad S.
Leone^ Papam. inter epist. S. Leonis epist. 108. and in Tom. 1. council.
sanctum Trophimum habere meruit sacerdotem, and exinde alijs paulatim
regionibus Galliaru^ donum fidei and Religionis infusum: It is known to all
Countries of France, neither is it unknown to the holy Roman Church, that
Arles the chief city of France deserved to have for Priest, saint Trophimus
sent from saint Peter the Apostle, and from thence by little and little the
gift of faith was infused to the other Regions of France. Where we see it
proved by the public letters and testimony of all the Bishops of that
Province: That it was a certain and confessed truth among all the Churches of
France, and known also at Rome, that saint Trophimus who was so renowned in
France was sent thither by saint Peter; which yet does not condemn their
opinion, which say, saint Paul in his Journey from Rome to Spain left him by
the way at Arles whether he was formerly sent by saint Peter, and saint Paul
finding him at Arles, went on his Journey leaving saint Trophimus, where he
found him. Which confirms that I have delivered before of this matter, and
thus I have compassed and circuited all Countries round about us, and find that
they all first received the faith of Christ in these times by saint Peter the
Apostle, and his disciples, and no other means but this, was left, or to be
fownde in histories to bring the first knowledge of salvation to this Kingdom.
And having this far entreated of saint Peter's Disciples, let us now speak
of that most glorious Apostle himself and his and preacing hear.

THE XIIII. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN IS PROVED BY MANY ARGVments, Authorities, and Antiquaries both
Catholics and Protestants that saint Peter the Apostle parsonally preached,
and founded Christian Religion in this kingdom.

1. NOW I am come, to give that glory to this kingdom, whereof a Protestant
thus speaks: we should account it Godwyn Conu. of Brit^ine. p. 6.
a great glory to our Nation to derive the peti-degree of our spituall
linadge, from so noble and excellent a father, as saint Peter. And diverse
others of that profession will seem to give that Preeminencie unto him. To
satisfy therefore, these men, and give that due honor to this kingdom: this
is sufficiently proved before by those that have told us he preached in all
kingdoms and Islands of the west; therefore this Cuontry, so great, and ample
a portion of the western world, and the most flourishing Island thereof, cannot
be excluded from this prerogative. This moved our first Christian King Lucius,
and the S. Peter his personal preaching, and founding our Church in Britain
proved by all human authority.
chiefest of the clergy hear in that time, in the first publik and general
conversion of this kingdom to dedicate the first and principal Churches of
this Land to this glorious Apostle, as our first father and founder in Christ,
as namely two in one city of London, the one of them the Metropolitan chief
See, diverse hundreds of years, situated in Cornhill, and still keeping the
name of saint Peter's Church: The other at westminster also to this day Stowe
hist. in K. Lucius an. D. 179 Holinsh. ib. hist. of Engl. The Table of S.
Peter's Church there. Ihon Norden Specul. Britan. part. 1. p. 42. Camden in
Brit. Belgae Sommersetsh^re. Francis Mason Consecrat. l. 2. c. cap. 2. page ^0.
retayning the name, saint Peter's Church, and diverse others in this kingdom,
when except that of Glastenbury dedicated to our blessed lady, saint Mary, we
cannot find the like of dedicating so ancient and many Churches to any other
saint, saint Paul, saint Joseph, or whom soever supposed to have preached
hear.

2. The next argument shall be from the testimony of our holy King Inas and
the Clergy of England then. Who in the place of the old Church of
Glastenbury, building a very magnificent new Church dedicated it to Christ,
saint Peter, and saint Paul, and in the high forefront thereof engraued
certain verses in the honor of saint Peter and saint Paul, among which
these three are found.

Surgit in his templum quod placet ara Deo.
Anglia plaude lubens, mittit til^ Roma salutem,
Fulgor Apostolicus Glasconiam irradiat.
The first which our Protestants omit to translate is thus: in Th^se (to wit
saint Peter and saint Paul* a Church and an Altar pleasing unto God is
raised, The other two are thus tran^lated by our Protestants: Be glad England,
Rome s^^deth health to thee, and Apostolical Brightness does lighten
Glastenbury. And they say that this is meant either of doctrine, or protection.
But the words mittit ^^bi Roma salutem: That Rome s^nt salvation unto Britain,
and the Apostolical brightness of saint Peter and Paul did illuminate
Glastenbury, do include only doctrine and Salvation, and no mention there at
all is had of protection, which is contrary, to protestant Religion: and in
Catholic Religion, for so worthy a King, as saint Inas was to ascribe the
patronadge of Glasten bury to saint Peter and saint Paul, if neither of them
had given Influence to the first settling of Religion there, and exclude saint
Joseph, who both lived and died in that place, is an harsh and unworthy
construction: And to give further testimony, that the words of that
Inscription are altogether to be understood of our first conversion, and
receiving the faith from saint Peter and Rome all those verses excepting the
words Anglia, and Glastonia, England, and Glastenbury, are taken word by word
from Venantius Fortunatus, Bishop of Venant. Fortun. l. 3. c. 7.
Poyctires in France, who testifies in those verses, (as I have by others
proved before) that Gallia, France, and the Allobroge people of Sanoye, and
the Dolphinists were converted by S. Peter and his disciples, and S. Paul also
preached there, as I shall show hereafter: And therefore among the rest of the
encomiasticall verses of those two glorious Apostles, has these:

Gallia plaude Lubens, mittit tibi Roma salutem:
Fulgor Apostolicus visitat Allobrogas.
Which King Inas applied to Britanie, and Glastenbury, in the same manner only
changing Gallia into Anglia, and Allobrogas into Glastoniam, and to make a true
verse, visitat into Irradiat in the manner before related:

Anglia plaude lubens, mittit tibi Roma salutem:
Fulgor Apostolicus Glastoniam irradiat.
Which he neither would, nor truly could have done, except, as venantius
Fortunatus truly found by undeniable Authorities, that France and the people
of Sauoy and Delphinate did first receive the doctrine of Salvation from Rome,
S. Peter, and S. Paul; So King Inas had sufficient warrant, to apply the very
same, and in the same sense, to Britain or England and Glastenbury to have
received the first light of faith from the same Rome, and holy Apostles S.
Peter and S. Paul.

3. I may add to these the testimony of Kenulphus King of the Mercians with us,
to Pope Leo the third, where in his epistle unto him, thus he writes; vnde
Tibi Apostolica dignitas, inde nobis fidei veritas Innotuit: from whence
Apostolical dignity was derived unto thee, (which by all consent, was from S.
Peter Kenulphus Rex Mercior. epist. ad Leonem Pap. 3.
the Apostle) from thence, the truth of faith appeared or was made known unto
us* Which by the reason before, must needs be from S. Peter, And we read in an
Epistle of Pope Ihon the fifth, written in the year 686. to Ethelred King of
the Marshes, and to Alfride King of Northumberland, on the behalf of Bishop
Wilfrid for the restoring his Chuch unto him with certain Monasteries, that
this land of Britain first received the faith of Christ by S. Peter Ioa. Pap.
5. epist. ad Ethelred. and Alfrid. Reges Guliel. Malmes. l. 3. de Pontific. c.
de Archiep. Ebor. ex libr. Step. Cantuariens. in vita S. Wilfrid. Archiepis.
Ebor. Harr. hist. tom. 1.
chief of the Apostles: the words are as follow: Dominis eminentissimis
Ethelredo Regi Merciorum and Alfrido Regi Deirorum and Bernitiorum Ioannes
Papa, de vestra Religionis acc^ssibus, gratia Dei cooperante gaudemus, feruorem
fid^i ^ernentes in vobis, quam ex praedicatione principis Apostoloru^, Deo
vestros animos illuminante, percepistis, and efficaciter tenetis: Pope Ihon to
the most ^^inent Lords Ethelred King of the Mercians and Alfride King of the
Deires, and Bernitians: we rejoice of the accesses of your Religion, the grace
of God cooperating, perceauing the fervor of faith in you, which you have
received ^y the preaching of the prince of the Apostles. Where we play^ely see,
the first preaching of the faith of Christ in those parts, ascribed to S. Peter
the Apostle. For testimony whereof, we may also add the words of Pope Alexander
the third, in his epistle to King Henry the second of England, where he
plainly says: That England was under S. Peter's protection, ever since Christ's
name was glorified there. Or why did Arnobius that renowned father 1200. years
since, speaking of S. Alexand. Pap. 3. epist. ad Henric. 2. Reg. Angl. Eugubin.
de donatione Constable. Arnobiu^ lib. 2. contra gentes.
Peter's trauayles say, that he preached in all the Islands and provinces of the
west: in Insulis and prouincijs quas Sol occidens lustrat? except he thought he
was hear in Britain, the most renowned Island of all the western world. Where
the lesser and more unnoble are included, as by such general words they are,
the most noble and worthy cannot be thought to be excluded.

4. And so certain this seems, that a late writer inclines to think that
Harris in Theatr. l. 1.
S. Peter gave denomination to some places at his being hear: There is (says
this Author) in the North parts an old City called Aldclihit, which in the
Britans time many hundred years passed, bore his (S. Peter's) name. For
Aldclihit in the British tongue is as much to say, as Peter's Clyhit, or
Peterclyhit for so Henricus Huntingtoniensis a learned Author of reverend
antiquity tells us in his first book of Histories, where he says:
Orientalis autem habet in medio sui vrbem Guidi, Henric. Hunting. l. 1. hist.
occidentalis supra se, hoc est ad dextram sui habet vrbem Aldclyhit, quod
lingua Britonu^ significat Petrum Clyhit, est autem iuxta fluuium nominis
illius. Thus in This Author wrote before the printing ^f Henry of Huntington,
by the Protestans, and so cites the Manuscript. For the printed book has
Petram Clyhit, and not Pet^um.
English: the east part of Northumberland has in the midst of it a city
called Guidi: and in the west part, on the right hand thereof there is a city
called Aldclyhit, which in the Britans languadge does signify Peter's Clyhit,
or Peter Clyhit. The which stands upon a River of the same name. In which
sense also the words of S. Prosper seem to be understood, who writing of S.
Celestine Pope of Rome, his care to purdge this Island of the Pelagian Heresy,
and convert Ireland to the faith of Christ, speaks in this manner: dum
Romanam Insulam studet seruare Catholicam, fecit etiam Barbaram Christianam:
while ^e studieth to keep the Roman Island Catholic, he also made the
Barbarous Island Christia. Whereas Prosper. l. contra collatorem c. 41.
by the Barbarous Island he understands Ireland: so by the Roman Island he
means and describes this Island of Britain. Which can in no other sense
especially at that time be called the Roman Island, but as it was under S.
Peter's spiritual Empire, and Regiment and his Successors, Popes of Rome. For
first in respect of temporal subjection this Island was never at any time
wholly, Romana Insula: a Roman Island, all those Countries beyond Seuerus or
Adrians wall were free from subjection to the Romans, and in S. Prosper his
time and S. Celestine of which he speaks, It was further from having any such
denomination, both Scots, Picts, and Saxons having invaded and spoiled diverse
provinces of that part, Which the Romans did formerly possess, and the Romans
at that time had nothing at all, to do in this Island, but the Britans had
Kings of their own, as Vortigern, Vortimer, Aurelius Ambrosius and others.
Which construction of S. Prosper is more warranted by the first Protestant
Archbishop of Canterbury, who cites Cardinal Pole the Popes legate in these
terms, never improuing, but allowing them: ha^c Insulae nobilitatem atque
gloria^ Dei prouidentiae atque beneficientiae soli acceptam ferendam, sed tamen
Matthew. Parket. l. antiqu^t. Br^t. ^n Regina^d. Pol. Cardina. p. 351. 1. cap. 69.
via^ ipsam atque ratione^ qua haec nobilitas atque gloria parta est, a sede
Romana nobis p^imo semperque monstratam, and patefactam fuisse: we must ascribe
t^is nobility, and glory of this Island, to have the first of all received the
faith of Christ, to the providence and Bounty of God, but yett that the away
and means how this Nobility, and glory ^as gotten to this nation, was first
and always showed, and made open from the Sea of Rome. Which must needs be
extended, and ascend to S. Peter, and the Apostles time, as the words, primo
semperque, first and always do demonstrate, for it is the common opinion of
our Protestant writers, and among them three of their Bishops here cited, that
Britanniae Ecclesiae origo ab Apostolis ipsis Parker. in Indice. v. Britannia.
Bal. l. de Scriptor. Cent. 1. in Joseph Ara. Godwyn. Conu. of Brit. c. 2. p.
15. Theater of great Britain l. 6. cap. 9. page 202.
probatur: that the beginning of the Church of Britain was from the Apostles.

5. How the first Apostle that preached hear could be no other then S. Peter I
have made manifest by our Protestants before; and in their Theater of great
Britain, their best learned Antiquaries from diverse authors, and approved
Antiquities, thus testify: saint Peter the Apostle is supposed to have
preached in Britain. And again: That S. Peter the Apostle preached the word
of life in this Island as to other Nations he did, for whom, God had chosen
him, that from his mouth they might hear the gospel, and believe, as himself
alleges, and that he hear founded Churches, and ordained Priests, and
Deacons, which is reported Metaphrast. Gul. Eisengr. cent. 1. 1. part. 7. did.
8.
by Simon Metaphrastes, out of the greek Antiquities, and Gulielmus
Eisengrenius in the first of his Centuries. Where we see both Greeks and
Latins to agree in this, by our Protestants censure. Which other Protestant
Antiquaries, namely among others Sir William Camden their absolutely best
historian, who makes it a thing so certain that S. Peter the Apostle both
preached hear, and performed such holy Apostolik offices for this kingdom, as
are partly remembered before, that he makes it a wonder, that any man should
oppose Camd. in Brit.
against it, and not believe it to be so. Quid ni crederemus? why should we not
believe it, and them that write it to be so? And besides the Authors before
alleged, and to be cited hereafter, both this Prince of Protestant
Antiquaries, and Andredu Chesne in his French general history of England,
Scotland, and Island, and diverse other English writers, and allowed historians
do plainly Andre du Chesne histoire general d'Angleterre, Escosse and
d'Irland l. 3. page 152. and in Indice. Harris in Theatro in S. Peter l. 1. c.
22. Nic. Fa. antiq. Cath. p. 12. Camd. supr. Edit. an. 1594. and 1588. Andre
Chesne supr.
affirm, that Nicephorus is of the same opinion. Camden confidently in diverse
Editions tells us: Nicephorus de Petro prodit: Nicephorus does declare of
saint Peter, that he brought the faith of Christ, to the Isles of Britain. The
French historian says: Nicephorus teaches in most express terms, that
saint Peter brought the doctrine of Christ to the occidentall Ocean, and the
Isles of Britain.

6. And if those men should ground upon no other place, then that of
Nicephorus, which some would expound for S. Simon Zelotes being hear, which is
in his second book, and 40. chapter: It cannot be understood of any other
Apostle in any probable opinion, but S. Simon Peter, the chief of the
Apostles, for none other of that most holy company being named Simon, but Simon
Peter, and the other by some Zelotes, and Chananaeus. I have made
demonstration, both by Catholics and Protestants, that S. Simon Zelotes was
never hear in this Britain: Therefore Nicephorus to justify the coming of S.
Simon an Apostle to preach the gospel in this kingdom, to make his assertion
true, must needs understand it, of S. Simon Peter. And his very words will
easily suffer that construction. These they are as they be translated by our
Protestant historians: Nicephorus a Greek Author in his second book 40.
Stowe and Howes hist. in Agricola.
chapter has as follows. Simon borne in Chana Galilei, who for his fervent
affection to his Master, and great zeal he took by all means to the
Gospel, was surnamed Zelotes, he having received the holy Ghost from above,
travailed through Egypt, and Afrike, then through Mauritania, and all Lybia,
preaching the Gospel. And the same doctrine he brought to the occidentall
Sea, and the Isles called Britannicae. What is here in this narration, but may
truly and literally be applied to saint Simon Peter? who by name was Simon,
by Country of Galilie, where he was first called by Christ, to be an Apostle,
as first the scripture witnesses: Matthew. c. 4. v. 15. March. c. 1. v. 16.
Joan. c. 21. v. 15. 16. 1^.
and for zeal and love to his master, the most zealous, and loving among all
the Apostles, by his own, and Christ's testimony, recorded by the beloved
Apostle of Christ. That S. Peter the Apostle trauayled those Countries, or
taugth the faith in them, is both proved before, and Nicephorus himself shall
further testify. Therefore to keep Nicephorus, or whosoever, from whom he
cites that allegation from contradiction, seeing it cannot truly be
interpreted of S. Simon Zelotes, we must for the credit of the Author expound
it of S. Simon Peter, and this the rather because those Protestants themselves
which cite these words of Nicephorus, do not affirm, that they are true of
Stowe and Howes supr. in Agricola. Godwyn Conu. of Britain pa. 2.
the other saint Simon, or that he ever was in this Island: therefore to
justify their truth in any respect, we must by consent both of Catholics, and
Protestants, say, they are only verifiable of saint Peter. Which the same
Author Nicephorus does more plainly prove in other places. First in the first
chapter of his third book he does plainly distinguish that Apostle called by
him before saint Simon that preached in Britain, from that Apostle, called
also commonly saint Simon Cananaeus, or Zelotes, which preached in Egypt,
Afrike, and Mauritania, making them two several, and diverse Apostles; for
speaking there of the sortition or division of the world between the 12.
Apostles, to preach the Gospel in, he uses these words: Aegyptu^ and Lybia^
alius, alius item Nicephorus lib. 3. cap. 1. Stowe and Ed. Howes hist. Romans.
p. 37.
extremas Oceanu^ Regiones, and Insulas Brita^nicas sortitus est. Which our
Protestants thus translate: An other chose Egypt, and Lybia: an other the
uttermost coosts of the Ocean, with the Isles of Britain. Where we evidently
See, that whereas it is commonly taught that S. Simo^ Zelotes did preach in
Egypt, and Afrike, which also Nicephorus allows, yet even by him it was
(...), alius, an other and Apostle, yet by him before called Simo^ that
preached in Britain: Therefore by him as the Protestant Antiquaries before
have truly deduced, it must needs be S. Simon Camden supr. Andre Chesne supr.
Nicephor. l. 2. c. 35.
Peter, Prince of the Apostles, which preached in this kingdom. Which he
further confirms of S. Peter, in an other place, speaking thus of him: Petrus
per orbem habitabilem passim vadens, Ecclesias vbique constituit, and Romanam
successoribus commisit, Lino videlicet, Anacleto, and Clementi: Peter going
every where, through the habitable world, appointed Churches in every place,
and left the Roman See to his Successors, Linus, Anacletus, and Clement.
Therefore speaking of this voyadge of S. Peter after he came to Rome and
leaving it to S. Linus, and his Successors, he must needs principally
understand his Journey, and labors into this west world, through all which, as
he says he trauayled and founded Churches in every place. For to that purpose
by the common consent of Antiquaries, he committed the chardge at Rome to S.
Linus and Cletus, vt ipse instaret praedicationi verbi and orationi; that he
might intend to preach the word of God Niceph. l. 3. c. 1.
in this western world, and to pray. And that he constituted Bishops in Islands
and cities: in totius Europae oris, in all the coasts of Europe. Therefore
except England the greatest of Islands is not to be called an Island, and so
renowned a Monarchy of Europe is no part thereof, we must needs grant by
Nicephorus, that S. Peter preached the faith of Christ, consecrated Priests,
and Bishops, and founded Churches in this Nation of great Britain.

7. And because our Theater Protestants before have a relation of this to be
proved from the Greek Antiquities I will asce^d much higher then the days of
Nicephorus, even to the time of our great Emperor King and Cuontryman
Constantine, in whose age and Empire about thirteen hundred years since, that
great glory of learned men in Greece Eusebius, as an ancient learned saint
of that Nation testifies has written, that S. Peter preached, Eusebius. Pamphili
apud S. Sim. Metaphrast. die 29. Iunij.
(and long time as it appears by him) in this our Britain, and the near
adjoining western Nations. Eusebius Pamphili dicit Petrum duodecim annos esse
versatum in Orient, vigint: autem tres annos transegisse Romae, and in
Britannia, and in ciuitatibus quae sunt in Occidente: adeo vt sit totum tempus
praedicationis Petri triginta and quinque anni: Eusebius Pamphylus says, that
Peter conuersed in the East, twelve years, and spent three and twenty at Rome
and in Britain, and in the cities which be in the west: So that the whole time
of the preaching of Peter is thirty and five years. Where he speaks of the
complete years of S. Peter's preaching in the west, omitting the parts of
years, or taking S. Peter's going to Jerusalem again, at the death of our
blessed Lady, out of the 25. years of his abode in the west. Which account our
English Protestants in their Fasti of the Kings and Bishops of England,
confirm. Let no man object that his testimony is not sufficient; he being an
holy learned saint living in Constantinople the chief City of Greece, where
Eusebius works were then most famous, and known to all men of learning, and
having so constantly avouched it, when all Greece could argue him of untruth,
if it had ^ene otherwise. Who but extraordinarily wicked will once imagine that
so worthy an Author would to his own eternal shame, and confusion, have once
invented such a forgery? what Grecian since that time, or before by some
numbers of years has so much favored the Church of Rome as to honor it with
untruths, when they have rather endeavored the contrary, as many have written?
Neither Fasti Regum and Episcoporum Angliae vsque ad Gul. seniorem.
do those works of Eusebius which be now commonly extant contradict, but
rather confirm, that which is cited from him before of S. Peter his spending
much time in preaching in Britain. For although Eusebius both in his History,
and Cronicle says, with the general opinion of historians that S. Peter was
Bishop of Rome 24. or 25. years: yet this is so far from keeping him from
Britain, that it makes it a matter almost incredible, but in some part of
that time he was in Britain. And first all those renowned Authors, Greek,
and Latin, which affirm that S. Peter preached hear in Britain, affirm
also, that he was so long Bishop of Rome. And seeing the world was even by
Christ, and the Apostles themselves so divided among them, to preach the
gospel in, and convert it to the faith, what other Apostle did make any
Residence so near unto us by many hu^dreds of miles, as Rome the Sea of S.
Peter? all histories of their lives and deaths, be constant in this. And I have
proved before, that no other of the 12. Apostles, among whom this division was
made, except S. Peter, preached either in, or near to this kingdom.

8. And all those Authors before have proved, that S. Peter preached in all
these western Nations, during that time when he is said to have had his
chief Residencie at Rome, as the same Eusebius, with the holy Scriptures, and
all historians affirms, that during his first named Residency of Antioch, in
ponto, Galatia, Bithinia, Cappadiocia, and Asia praedicauit: he preached in
Pontus, Galatia, Bithynia, Cappadocia, and Asia. Some of those places fully
Eusebius. in Chron. Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 1. Godwyn. Conu. of Brit. c. 1.
page 5. Act. Apost. c. 15. v. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
or allmoste as remote from Antioch, as Britain is from Rome. And our
Protestants themselves with the Scriptures and many historians testify, that
after S. Peter his settling at Rome, he went again from thence to Jerusalem,
and Antioch also, far more distant from Rome, then Britain is. And if S.
Peter had not preached hear, it is evident before, that none of the twelve
Apostles to whose preaching the world was first by Christ committed, had
performed it. And so we should perhaps have in that respect been the most
unhappy kingdom in the known world, at that time, not any on of so great
extension, greatness, and honor, being to be reckoned, but probably as
appears by former Relations, one Apostle or other preached the gospel in it.

9. An other also a Grecia^ and an holy Saint as is set down in the Menologe
Menol. Graecor. in S. Sim. Metaphr. Sur. Et Lippom. die 27. Nou. in festo eius.
Ioh. Molan. in addit. ad Vsuard. 27. Nou. Conrad. Gesner. in Bibl. in Io. Psell.
of the Grecians and diverse Latin Martyrologes as Surius, Lippomannus, and
Molanus, and his holy life written by Ioannes Psellus, much commended by the
Protestants, Co^radus Gesnerus, Iosius Simlerus, Ioa^nes Iacobus Frisius and
others, sets down all the circumstances of S. Peter's coming hither, by what
contries, the time of his staying hear, what he performed in this kingdom,
how he was hear admonished by an Angel from heaven to return again to Rome,
to suffer Martyrdom, and other matters of such consequence, in so great a
business, that there is not more certain, and particular Relation left in any
Antiquity we have for any historical truth, and verity concerning this
Nation, which any Antiquarie, Catholic, or Protestant gives the most undoubted
credit, and assent unto, then for this preacing of S. Peter, and his pla^ting
the Church of Christ in this Island. Thus this holy Saint living 800. years
past, sets down the holy Journey of that blessed Apostle, our first father
in Christ S. Peter: Cum non diu mansisset apud Romanos, and sancto Sim.
Metaphrast. die 29. Iunij.
baptismate multos regenerasset, and Ecclesiam constituisset, and Linum
Episcopum ordinasset, venit Tarracinam, in qua cum Epaphroditum ordinasset
Episcopum, venit Sirmium ciuitate^ Hispaniae. Quo in loco cum Epinaetum
co^stituisset Episcopum, venit in Aegiptum, and cum Thebis quae septem habet
portas, Rufum, Alexandriae aute^ Marcum Euangelistam, eorum qui se in
disciplinam tradiderunt Episcopatui praefecisset, rursus venit Hierosolymam, ex
reuelatione propter Deiparae Mariae migrationem. Deinde reuersus est in
Aegiptum, per Africam rursus Romam redijt. Ex qua venit Mediolanum, and
Photicen quae sunt civitates in continente, in quibus cu^ constituisset
Episcopos, and presbyteros, venit in Britanniam, quo in loco cum longo tempore
fuisset moratus, and multas gentes non nominatas attraxisset ad fidem Christi,
angelicam aspexit visionem, quae dicebat: Petre instat tempus tuae
resolutionis, and oportet teire Romam: in qua cum mortem per crucem
sustinueris, accipies mercedem Iustitiae. Cum ergo propterea deum
glorificasset, and egisset gratias, and apud Britannos mansisset dies aliquot,
and verbo gratiae multos illuminasset, and Ecclesias constituisset,
Episcoposque, and Presbyteros, and Diaconos ordinasset, duodecimo anno Caesaris
Neronis rursus Romam reuertitur: when S. Peter had stayed but a short time with
the Romans, and had baptized many, and fownded the Church, and ordained Linus
Bishop, he came to Tarracina, in which when he had ordained Epaphroditus
Bishop, he came to Sirmium a city of Spain, in which place when he had
constituted Epinaetus Bishop, he came into Egypt and when he had made Rufus
Bishop of Thebes which has seven gates, and Mark the Evangelist, Bishop of
Alexandria, he came again to Jerusalem by revelation for the migratio^ or
passing out of life, of Mary the mother of God. After this returning into
Egypt, through Africa the returned again to Rome. From which he came to
Milane, and Photice, which are cities in the co^tinent, in which after he had
appointed Bishops, and Priests, he came into Britain: in which place when he
had stayed a long time, and had drawn many nations not named to the faith of
Christ, he had an Angelical vision which said: O Peter the time of thy
Resolution is at hand: And thou must go to Rome, in which when thou have
suffered death by the cross, thou shall receive the reward of Justice.
Therefore when he had glorified God for it, and given thanks, and stayed after
with the Britans some days, and illuminated many with the word of grace, and
constituted Churches, and ordained both Bishops, and Priests, and Deacons, in
the twelfth year of the Emperor Nero, he returns to Rome. Hitherto the
Relation of this holy learned and ancient Saint and writer. Where the labors
and travails of S. Peter are so orderly and punctually set down, after his
first coming to Rome, that except so worthy a man had sound certain and
undoubted Authority for such a Relation, no man can be so malicious, as to
think he would so confidently and particularly have written of that matter.

10. And it appears plainly by that I have written before, that both by
Catholics, and Protestants all the rest of S. Alredus his narration of S.
Peter's Iorneyes, are most true, and certain, except this last of his coming
hither, and so long remaining in this our Britain, and these parts: which I
matuaile that any man of this kingdom will call in question, being delivered
by so many Authorities before, and above all other parts of that his Relation,
fortified by so many undeniable circumstances, and Arguments, as the time
when, the way by which he came, a long continuance of his aboude hear, his
passage by this Island to draw many unnamed nations to the faith of Christ,
what he did hear, his making of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and founding of
Churches, his love to this kingdom so great, that until he was admonished
from Heaven by an Angel to return again to Rome, to receive his crown of
Martyrdom, he had so happily placed his Apostolical Cathedral See in this
Imperial and commanding Island, of this Northren and western world and by his
blessed presence and heavenly labors left it Illustrious to succeeding
generations, not only to be styled, Romana Insula; the Roman Island, as I have
written before, but as the same Apostle himself did testify to S. Brithworld
S. Peter's preaching in Britain proved by infallibly divine authority.
Bishop of Winton, or Wilton, as our Protestant Historians do plainly
testify, together proving that S. Peter first preached in this kingdom of
great Britain. The Protestant Theater writers have these words: It is
reported by Aluredus Riuallensis, the writer of King Edward the Confessors
life, that a holy man Theater of great Britain l. 6. c. 9.
studious and careful for a governor to succeed, was in his sleep told by
S. Peter, that the kingdom of England was his, wherein himself had first
preached, and would also provide him successors. Which other Protestants thus
further confirm: Alredus Francis Mason of Consecrat. of Bishop. l. 2. c. 2. p.
47. Sutcliffe subuers. Godwyn conu. of Britain p. 4.
Riuallensis an English Abbot left written above 500. years agone, a certain
Revelation or apparition of S. Peter to an holy man, in the time of King Edward
the Confessor, showing how he had preached himself in England, and
consequently, the particular care he had of that Church, and Nation: Thus far
these Protestants. So that if this was a true Revelation, there needs no more
testimony in this matter: for the wittnes of Angels, and glorified Saints
cannot by any possibility be untrue, and the vision testifiing, that S. Peter
himself had first preached hear in this kingdom, is an evident demonstration,
both that he preached hear, and was the first either immediately by himself,
or mediately by his disciples, and Substituts, which preached the faith of
Christ in this kingdom: Therefore all the difficulty will be in the proposers
of this holy Revelation, he to whom it was made, and they which have commended
it to writing: And because supernatural things, such as this was cannot be
proved by natural Argument, a priore, by their cause: to give some certain,
and undoubted proof thereof a Posteriore, by some effect, necessarily
conuincing some supernatural power to have had Influence thereto, for the more
credit of this sacred truth prove by these Protestants themselves.

11. And first concerning the writer and recorder of this holy history, they
have told us, it was Alredus Riuallensis, a man of that worth, learning, and
Ioh. Balaeus de Scriptor. Ce^tur. 2. fol. 88. p. 1. in Alred. Riual.
piety, that to speak in a Protestant Bishops words, he was. Cistertiensiu^
Monachorum Abbas, natione Anglus, gencre, doctrina, and inculpatae vitae
moribus praeclarus enituit, Episcopatum ac alios honores mundanos omnino
recusabat, vt ad virtutum exercitia, maxim ad Euangelij praedicationem
expeditior haberetur. Vir erat, vt alter Bernardus, ingenio pius, and consilio
modestissimus: Abbot of the Cistersian monks, by Country an English man, he
was eminently renowned by birth, learning, and holy life, and conversation: he
refused a Bishoprike, and other worldly honors utterly, that he might be more
ready to the exercises of virtues, chefely for preaching the gospel, he was a
man as an other S. Bernard, Godly in wit, and most modest in counsel. He that
desires more of this holy witness, may find in our ancient M. S. antiq. de
vit. Sanct. Ioh. Capgr. in Cata. l. in S. Alred. Abb.
Manuscripts, our learned Countriman Ihon Capgraue, and others, how he is
registered among the most glorious and miraculous Saints of this Nation, to
which our Protestant Bishop before has given allowance, where he gives us
assured knowledge, that this was the same Registerer of this heavenly vision,
set down by him in S. Edwards life, for speaking of the memorable works, and
writings of this renowned Saint, he says: composuit inter caetera Bal. sup.
centur. 2. in Alred. Rieual.
vitam Edwardi Anglorum Regis: among other things he wrote the life of King
Edward of England, containing above 28. chapters, which was presented to King
Henry the second. So that there cannot be the least exception taken, either to
the Author, so learned, and worthy a Saint, neither to the keeping or
preservation of that work, being presented to the King of England, that then
reigned, and preserved in the Library of our kings, from whence other copies
and Exemplars were taken. Therefore now to make all sure, let us come to that
learned, and holy man, to whom this revelation was made, and to the subsequent
effects which demonstratiuely prove it, to have been a most certain and
undoubted divine testimony, and vision. Continuator histor. S. Bedae in S.
Edwardo. l. 2. Guliel. Malmesbur. de gest. Reg. Angliae. l. 2. Alred. Rieual in
vit. S. Edward. Reg. Capgrau. Catal. in eod. M. S. Antiq. de Sanct. in S.
Edward. Confess. Harpesfeld. sec-11. c. 3. Godwyn Catalog. in wynchester 31. in
Brithwold. and in Salisbury or Wilton 8. in Brithwold. Protest. Index in
Guliel. Malmes. in Brithwold. 10. Herold. epist. dedic. ante Marian. S^^t.
Godwyn in Cat. in Winchester in Brithwold ^1. Godwyn supr. Balaeus de Script.
Brit. cent. 2. in Gulielmo Malm.


12. All Authors that write of this matter agree, (whether Catholics or
Protestants) that it was S. Brithwold, an holy Bishop of England, a most
devout, religious, and miraculous man, to whom this vision and Relation was
made. Only there is some question, whether it was S. Brithwold, Bishop of
winchester, wintoniensis, or saint Brithwold Bishop of wilton, or Salisbury
wiltonensis, the likeness of names Wilton and Winton perhaps causing that doubt:
But because they were both so holy and renowned men, that they have gotten
their worthy praise, and commendation with all writers, even Protestants
themselves, and saint Alredus lived in both their times, to receive the
certainty, and undoubted truth of these things from them, or either of them;
It is not the difference of Vuintonensis, or vuiltonensis, can make any
material difference in this point, all vniformerly agreeing, it was S.
Brithwold an holy English Bishop and saint of that time, who had this
Illumination and apparition from heaven. A Protestant Bishop thus speaks of
this holy Bishop: It is written of him, that one night being late at his
prayers, he chanced to think of the low ebb, of the blood royal of England,
which now was all most quite consumed, and brought to nothing. In the midest of
this cogitation, falling a sleep, It seemed unto him, he saw S. Peter,
crowning young prince Edward, that lived in exile at that time in Normandy,
and furthermore to show, how he should reign four and twenty years and die
at last without Issue. And he cites William of Malmesbury in his second book
of the kings of England for Author. who because he is cited and approved by
this Protestant Bishop, and by an other most highly recommended in these words:
suo seculo in omni genere bonarum literarum plane eruditissimus, and in
erue^dis antiquitatibus, ingenio, diligentia, curaque singularis, Anglicae
nationi^ studio sissimus illustrator absolutely the most learned in his age, in
all kind of Learning, and in searching out Antiquities, singular for wit,
diligence, and care, the most studious ennabler of the English Nation: I will
cite him also, thus he writes entreating of the happy times of this Nation
under that our holy king saint Edward the confessor: viderat quonda^ sommij
Gulielm. Malm. l. 2. de gest. Reg. Anglorum. c. 13.
reuelatione, seculi illius faelicitatem Brithwoldus Vuiltunensis (alias
Vuintoniensis) Episcopus, viderat and annuntiauerat. Nam dum tempore Cnutonis,
caelestibus apud Glastoniam lucubraret excubijs, subijssetque illum cogitatio,
quae frequenter angebat, de regia stirpe pene deleta: haec meditanti sopor
irrepsit, and ecce in superna raptus, videt Apostoloru^ principem Petrum,
ipsism Edwardum qui tu^c in Normannia exulabat, in Regem consecrare, caelibe
designata vita, and certo viginti quatuor annoru^ numero r^gni computato:
Brithwold Bishop of wilton (or winton) had some time by revelation of a dream,
seen the felicity of that age, and declared it. For when in the time of King
Knut, he was in the night attending to heavenly watchings, and had a cogition,
which often trobled him, of the regal race all most blotted out: while he
meditated these things, sleep fell upon him, and behold being rapt on high,
he saw the prince of the Apostles Peter to consecrate for King, Edward himself
who then was bannished in Normandy, designeing unto him the chaste life, and
accompting the years of his reign twenty and four. This same history, the
same commended Author more plainly remembers in another place, as also the
Co^tinuator of the history of saint Bid in these terms. Brithwoldus ex
monacho Glastoniensis qui multis annis Gulielm. Malm. de gest. Pontif. Angl. l.
2. Continuator hist. S. Bedae l. 2. in. S. Edwardo.
a tempore Regis Ethelredi vsque ad Edwardum vltimum administrauit Episcopatum,
Is tempore Regis Cnutonis quadam vice caelestibus apud Glastoniam, vt saepe
faciebat, intentus excubijs, diuinam visionem expertus est. Cum enim subijsset
eum cogitatio, quae frequenter eum angebat, de Anglorum regia stirpe pene
deleta, hoc m^ditanti sopor irrepsit, and ecce in supernaraptus vidit
Apostolorum principem Petrum, manu tenentem Edwardum filium Ethelredi, qui tunc
in Normannia exulabat, and in Regem consecrare, caelebe designata vita, and
certo 24. annoru^ numero co^putato, quo regni metam terminaret: Brithwold first
a monk of Glastenbury, and now many years from the time of King Ethelred unto
the last Edward having been a Bishop, he in the time of King Knut, upon a
certain time, as he often did, attending to heavenly watches at Glastenbury,
had a divine vision. For having a cogitation, which often troubled him, of the
race of the Kings almost extinguished, while he thus meditated, sleep came
upon him, and being in an Extasis, he saw Peter prince of the Apostles,
holding Edward the son of Ethelred, then an exile in Normandy by the hand,
and consecrating him King, and Assining to him the chaste life, and accompting a
certain number of 24. years, in which he should end the time of his Reign.
Hitherto this so renowned Antiquarie, so much commended by our Protestants, and
as he is published and allowed by them, so manifestly approving this vision and
Revelation of saint Peter to saint Brithwold as is declared, and so
conuincingly that our Protestant publishers of his works, have thus noted
upon those places: Brithwoldi Episcopi visio: the vision of Protest. Index in
Guliel. Malmesb. in Brithwold. and Index Protest. in hist. Bed. Stowe and Edw.
Howes. hist. in K. Edward. Confessor. Basilius Ioannes Heroldus in ep. dedic
ante Marian. Scotum.
Bishop Brithwold: and again more plainly: Brithwoldus Episcopus Sanctum
Petrum Apostolum videt: Bishop Brithwold does see saint Peter the Apostle. So
other Protestants, as Stowe, Howes, Ioannes Heroldus, and others: among which
this last writing to our late Protestant Queen, Q. Elizabeth, speaking of the
great providence of God to this kingdom, proves it by this vision and
Revelation of S. Peter to saint Brithwold calling it, oraculare Testimonium
Diui Petri: the Oracular Testimony of saint Peter.

13 S. Alredus whom our Protestants have so dignified before, and alleged for
wittnes of saint Peter's first preaching hear, makes it a most miraculous,
and true heavenly vision, and prophecy of many things to come, which could not
be foretold, but by supernatural or heavenly knowledge, thus he relates it:
saeuiebat gladius bostilis in Anglia, caedibus and rapinis omnia replebantur:
vhique luctus, clamor and desolatio, incenduntur Ecclesiae, monasteria Alredus
Rhieual. in vit. San. Edward. Regis and Confess. in Antiquis M. S. and apud
Surium. Lipp. Io. Capgr. in Catalog. in S. Edward. Confess. and alios.
denasta^tur, sacerdotes asuis sedibus fugati, in locis desertis commune^
miseriam deplorantes delitescebant. Inter quos vir venerabilis Brithwoldus
wintoniensis Episcopus, caenobium Glasconiense moerens ac tristis ingressus,
orationibus vacabat, and psalmis. Qui cum aliquando pro Regni plebisque
liberatione, preces lachrimasque profunderet, inter preces tandem and lachrimas
fatigatum sopor suauis excepit, videtque per somnium beatum Petrum in
emine^tiori loco constitutum, and ante eum praeclari vultus in forma decenti
regalibus Insignijs amictum Edwardum. Quem cum proprijs manibus Apostolus
consecrasset, and vnxisset in Regem, monita salutis adiecit: praecipue que
caelebem vitam commendans, quot esset annis regnaturis aperuit, obstupefactus
Praesul tanti miraculi nouitate, petit sibi a sancto huius visionis mysterium
reuelari. De statu in super Regni, and de instantis periculi fine Apostolicum
exegit oraculum: Tunc placido vultu Intuitus Intuente se, ait: Domini, o
Praesul, est Regnum, and Ipse dominabitur in filijs hominum, Ipse transfert
Regna, and mutat Imperia, and propter peccata populi regnare facit Hypocrytam.
Peccatum peccauit pupulus tuus domino, and tradidit eos in manus gentium, and
dominati sunt eorum qui oderunt eos. Sed non obliuiscetur misereri Deus, nec
continebit in ira sua misericordias suas. Erit enim cum dormieris cum patribus
tuis, visitabit Dominus populum suum, and faciet Dominus redemptionem plebis
suae. Elegit enim sibi virum secundum cor suum, qui faciat omnes voluntates
suas, qui me opitulante Regnum adeptus Anglorum, Danico furori finem imponet.
Erit enim acceptus deo, gratus hominibus, terribilis hostibus, amabilis
ciuibus, vtilis Ecclesiae, laudabilemque vitam sancto fine concludet: The
enemies sword did rage in England, all places were full of slaughters, and
rapynes. Lamenting, crying, and desolation was every where. Churches are
burned, monasteries destroyed, Priests driven away from their seats, be
wayling the common misery, lay hid in desert places. Among whom a venerable man
Brithwold Bishop of winchester moorning and sadd entering into the Monastarye of
Glastenbury, continued in prayers, and psalms. Who on a certain time when he
powered forth his prayers, and tears, for the delivery of the kingdom and
people. At the last wearied in prayers and tears, fell into a sweet sleep,
and in his dream sees saint Peter placed in an eminent place, and before him
Edward of a beutifull countenance, in a comely form clothed in kingly Robes.
Whom when the Apostle had consecrated with his own hands and anointed him
King, he gave him Precepts of salvation: and principally commending unto him,
the chaste life, declared unto him how many years he should reign. The Bishop
astonished with the strangenes of so great a miracle, desires to have the
mystery of this vision to be revealed unto him, and further desired the Oracle
of the Apostle, about the state of the kingdom, and the end of the Instant
danger. The Apostle with a friendly countenance looked upon him beholding him,
and said: o Prelate, The kingdom is the Lords, and he shall reign over the
sons of men. He transferreth kingdoms, and changes Empires, and for the
sins of the people suffers the Hypocrite to reign. Thy people have sinned
against God, and he has given them over into the hands of Nations, and they
which hated them have ruled over them. But God will not forget to have mercy,
nor contain his miserations in his angor. For it will come to pass, when thou
shall sleep with thy Fathers, our Lord will visit his people, and make
redemption of his servants. For he has choasen a man according to his heart,
who shall fulfill his will in all things, who by my help obteining the kingdom
of England, shall make an end of the Danis be fury. For he shall be acceptable
to God, gratfull to men, terrible to enemies, amiable to citizens, profitable
to the Church, and shall conclude his laudable life with an holy end. Thus
far this holy saint, and immediately adds: Quae omnia in beato Edwardo
completa rei exitus co^probauit: All which things the event of the thing did
prove to be fullfilled in saint Edward. Whereupon a Protestant historian from
antiquity writes: Stowe hist. in K. Edward Confess.
This King Edward of famous memory, says mine Author, before the day of his
nauitie was elected of God, who perseuering in chastity, ledd all his life
dedicated unto God, in true marriadge, wherefore as we have known proved by
good and sufficient men, being witnesses, God greatly glorified him in his
life with wonderful signs. Thus we see by invincible testimonies, and many
Protestants themselves, confessing and approving them, that this was a most
certainly true, and infallibly an undoubted heavenly vision, That it was
saint Peter glorified in heaven, that appeared and revealed these things to
our holy Bishop saint Brithwold.

14. And to demonstrate saint Brithwold to be a true proposer of these
secrets, he had proposed them to the world, and was dead before they began to
take effect, and be fullfilled: The mysteries foretold were beyond the
compass of natural knowledge, to foresee, or prophecy of. As that a
bannished child, and perhaps then unborn, should beconne so worthy, so holy,
so victorious a King. That a Nation so generally, and long time overwhelmed
with so great calamities, should so strangely, and beyond expectation in a
time foretold, be redeemed and set at liberty. That at a time appointed a
bannished exile should become so miraculous, potent, and victorious a King,
that he should reign so many certainly appointed 24. years, that a married
man especially a king should live and die a virgin. And the rest before
remembered, having no causes in nature to know them by, should thus
miraculously, and infallibly, be foretold so long before, there was no least
hope, expectation, or in moral Iudgmentany probability or rather possibility
at all of many or most of these extraordinary future events: But rather a
doubted Alred. Rieual. in vit. S. Edward. Guliel. Malmes. sup. Stow. hist. in
K. Edward. Confess. Holinsh. l. 8. hist. of Engl. c. 7. Theater of great
Britain in K. Edward Conf. with others. Godwyn. Catal. in Winchester 3. Brith
would. Holinsh. hist. of England. l. 8. cap. 1. Stowe hist. in K. Edward
Confess. will. Malmesb. l. de gest. Reg. Anglorum c. 13.
fear or certainety of the contrary. And yet all these things were published
to the world, diverse years before they took effect, and in the life of saint
Brithwold proposer of them, who by the same revelation was, dormire cum
patribus, to be dead, before they began. Which is apparently true even by our
Protestants themselves, to give them their choice whether saint Brithwold
Bishop of winchester or wilton it was, that had this vision. For these
Protestants assure us, that saint Brithwold of winchester was dead almost 30.
years before the return of saint Edward from exile. And it is the common
opinion the revelation was made to him. And if it was Brithwold Bishop of
wilton he was also dead by these men's accounts, 22. years at the least before
these things were accomplished. Therefore I must infallibly conclude, that
saint Peter or whosoever it was, which so prophetically and miraculously
foretold so many things of this holy King, and this kingdom to be effected so
long after, was not, and possibly could not be an untrue or doubtful Relator
of saint Peter's first preaching in this Nation, contained, and as constantly
avouched as the rest of those revealed mysteries foretold in that vision. And
the Inhabitants of Britain are so much more bound to glorify God, and Honor
this most blessed Apostle, as both his extraordinary first labors in
instructing this kingdom in the true Religion of Christ, and this his
extraordinary care and Pastoral love in so many ways making it known unto
us, to let us understand, how much we are bound unto him for such inestimable
benefices, deserve it. Which we read in our history^s both Catholic and
Protestant to be confirmed by an other example of like nature, but of more
ancient memory a thousand years since, in the time of king Ethelbert, our
first christian king, of the Saxons Race. When saint Peter miraculously
testified concerning the Church of Westminster in London, in these M. S. antiq.
in S. Edward. Confess. Guliel. Malmes. l. 2. de gest. Pontif. c. de Episcopis
Londin. Alred. Rieuall. in vit. S. Edward. Joan. Capgrau. Catal. eodem. Franc.
Mason Consecr. of Bish. page 47. Nichol. Pap. 2. in epist. ad Edward. Reg.
Angl. apud Capgrau. in S. Edward. M. S. antiq. in eod. and Alred. Rieuall. in
vit. S. Edwardi.
words as a Protestant writer translateth them: Est mihi locus: I have quoth S.
Peter a place in the west part of London, chosen to my self, and dear unto me,
which sometimes I did dedicate with my own hands; Quem locum quondam proprijs
manibus consecraui, renown with my presence, and Illustrate with divine
miracles, the name where of is Thorneia, Westminster. Which cannot literally
and truly be understood of any spiritual vision, wherein saint Peter in his
only glorified. soul should appear, as in the time of King Ethelbert we
read he did, but of his personal presence there before his death, when and
never after, nor until the day of Judgment and the general Resurrection,
saint Peter had, or at any time shall have, proprias manus, his own hands, or
any part of his body united to his soul, and yet he speaks plainly here,
proprijs manibus consecrauithe consecrated that place with his own hands,
which is not true either in a spiritual vision, or where an assumpted body is
used, for an aslumpted body, hand, foot, or any other member cannot be called
the proper and own body, Hand, foot or other member of any parson. Therefore
Pope Nicholas the second speaking of this matter, in his Epistle to saint
Edward the Confessor, says, this place was consecrated by S. Peter whose vicar
he was: primam autiquitus consecrationem a heato Petro accepit cuius licet
Indigni Vicarij sumus: Therefore except Pope Nicholas may be said, to be Vicar
to saint Peter's Soul, and not to him, as he was Bishop of Rome in body and
soul, we most by him and this antiquarie refer this matter to saint Peter's
first preaching in this land, when he lived, and not to any apparition in soul
only, as that was wherein he appeared at Westminster in the time of King
Ethelbert, and S. Mellitus Bishop of London: of which more hereafter. Now I
will answer to some vain and weak objections of a few Protestant writers,
and also show by such men, in what time, or times, once or oftener S. Peter
preached personally in this Island, so near as probably may be concluded in
such a case, as also what holy offices he performed hear in founding the
Church of Christ in Britain.

THE XV. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN IS BOTH ANSWER MADE to Protestant objections againct S. Peter's
preaching in Britain, by the Protestants themselves, and their own Authors;
and by the same confirmed, that S. Peter preached in this kingdom.

A Protestant Bishop challenges S. Symeon metaphrastes, for writing so
confidently of S. Peter's preaching hear; and having not Godwyn Conu. of
Britain p. 3. cap. 1.
any thing to except against him, first vpbraydeth him with his Countries of
Greece Graecus fuit, and haec natio est fuitque; semper ad mentiendum
promptula: he was a Grecian, and that Nation is, and ever was a little promt to
lie. But by such liberty we may condemn the greatest lights of the Chuch of
God, S. Athanasius, Chrysostom, SS. Gregory's, Naziancen, and Nissen, the
seeuen first general Councels kept in Greece, and cheifely of Greek fathers,
and so leave nothing certain in the Church of God. But how free from all
suspicion of lying that holy Saint was in this poinct, I have showed to the
shame of all such accusers before, demonstratiuely proving by all kind of
Testimonies, that his testimonye herein was true. And whereas this Protestant
Bishop urges against that holy Saint that Caesar Baronius should write of him:
in his esse hallucinatu^ constat: Baron. annal. Eccl. Christi. an. 44. page 371.
it is evident he was deceived in these things: It is most evident, this
Protestant Bishop was either deceived in himself, or went about to deceive
others his readers in this point, for Cardinal Baronius is so far from going
about to take the least exception against S. Simeon Metaphrastes, for
testifiing S. Peter's preaching in Britain, and the west Nations, that he
follows him, and others in that opinion, in these words: Cum non sicut in
Orientales orbis Baron. Annal. to. 1. an. Christi. 58. page 597.
parts sciamus caeteros Apostolos missos esse in occidentem vno excepto
Barnaba, qui ad breue tempus, Ligures docuit, vel Iacobo (Si tamen
consenserimus ijs qui tradunt eum cito rediturum Hispaniam penetrasse)
caeterorum autem neminem esse missum liquido appareat. Petri igitur muneris
erat, vt qui iam quamplures Orientis prouincias, praedicando Euangelium
peragrasset, iam (quod reliquum esse videbatur) lustraret orbem occidentalem,
and vsque ad Britannos (quod tradunt Metaphrastes and alij) Metaphr. die 29.
Iunij.
Christi fidem annuntians penetraret: when we know that the rest of the
Apostles were not sent into the west, as into the Eastern parts of the world,
except only Barnabas who a short time taught the Ligaria^s, or James (if we
shall consent to them who deliver, that quikly to return from thence, he went
into Spain.) It manifestly appears that none of the others were sent into
the west part of the world. Therefore it was the office of Peter, who having
travailed very many provinces of the East, in preaching the gospel, now,
which was left to do, he should compass the western world, and as
Metaphrastes and others deliver, penetrate to the Britans, preaching the faith
of Christ. Where he makes it a certain known truth, and manifestly apparent
in Histories, Sciamus, liquido appareat, that none of the twelve Apostles but
only S. Peter preached the word of Christ in Britain; and among others cites
and follows S. Metaphrastes for that manifest truth. And when he had alleged
diverse, and approved Authors for Christ's appearing to S. Peter, and sending him
into this west part of the world, he adds: Metaphrastes his consentiens
Metaph. 29. Iun.
haec scribit: visus est ei Dominus in visione, dicens: Surge Petre, vade ad
Occidentem, opus enim habet, vt tuis illustretur facibus: and ego ero tecum:
Metaphrastes consenting unto these, writes thus: our Lord appeared to him (S.
Peter) in a vision, Baron. Annal. to. 1. and in Indice v. Petrus. Theater of
great Brit. l. 6.
saying: o Peter arise and go to the west, for it has need to be lighted
with thy links, and I will be with thee. And he says plainly, for his own
opinion: Petrus a Domino monitus in occidentem venit: Peter admonished by our
Lord so to do, came into the west: and as hereafter, sets down his time of
coming hither into Britain, in the time of Claudius the Emperor.

2. Therefore except we would be so wilful, that we should neither bel^eue so
many worthy witnesses, nor Christ himself, we cannot be doubtful Godwyn Conu.
of Brit. c. 1. p. 6. and page 5.
in these things. And it is more to be noted in this Protestant Bishop who in
an other place calls the same S. Simeon Metaphrastes, an Author without
exception: and uses him as a principal witness, in other matters of as great
importance. How gross and ignorant that exception of a Protestant Sutcliff.
subuers. prope fuit.
Doctor is, to the Revelation made to S. Brithwold our Bishop about S. Peter's
preaching hear, because, as he says, the holy man to whom it was made, is
not named, is already manifestly proved, his name being set down together
with his learning, piety, and worthiness, by so many worthy Authors before
remembered. And more childish is that, which an other by direction of the
Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, writes ignorantly or maliciously
affirming, that it was not this history and Revelation, which Alredus Francis
Mason Ordinat. of Bishops l. 2. cap. 2. page 47. 48.
committed to writing, but an other about the Dedication of the Church of
westminster, in the time of King Edward the Confessor, to a Recluse, an holy
man of that time. When both the matter, men to whom these things were
revealed, the times, places, and all circumstances are quite different. And
both the histories and Revelations for the most part of them are set down by
S. Alredus, Willian of Malmesbury, the ancient Manuscripts of S. Edwards life,
Ihon Capgraue, and the Protestant Authors themselves before alleged.

3. But our Protestants further object: Onuphrius denies he (S. Peter) went
Theater of great Britain l. 6. c. 9.
westward being expulsed by Claudius, but to Jerusalem, and thence to Antioch,
where he lived till the death of Claudius. To which I answer this is evidently
false, by their own words, immediately before, which be these: I see not well
how it can stand either with Eusebius his account which keeps him (S. Peter) so
long at Rome, or Onuphrius: as before from him alleged. For if Eusebius
assigning S. Peter to be so long at Rome 24. or 25. years, did so fix him
there, that he could not in that time visit this Island, nearer to Rome then
Antioch is: How dare these men in their next words thus avouch? that S. Peter
went from Rome expulsed by Claudius to Jerusalem, and from thence to Antioche,
in Siria and stayed there until the death of Claudius. These two cannot
possibly agree, but I have reconsiled these things before. And whereas these
men would frame their building to keep S. Peter out of Rome, by virtue of the
Edict of Claudius bannishing the Jews from thence, it is overthrown before,
for I have proved that S. Peter was long time in Rome in the life of Claudius,
after that Edict. Secondly it is evident by all Antiquities, that S. Peter was
gone from S. Sim. Metaphr. 29. Ian. S. Damas. orat. 2. de dormit. Deiparae.
Dion. Areopag. epist. ad Timot. Nicephor. l. 2. c. 22. Mat. Westminster. an. 45. 49.
Godwin. Conuers. Act. c. 18. v. 2.
Rome to Jerusalem, to be present by revelation with the other Apostles, at
the Migration of our blessed Lady Mary the virgin, and our Protestants do not
deny it, long time (4. years by Matthew of Westminster and others) before the
Edict of Claudius, this being, as both the scriptures, and histories agree, in,
or about the 49. year of Christ; and the other in the 45. And how could the
Edict of Claudius concern S. Peter's either expulsion, or keeping out of Rome?
when both by the Scripture, Josephus, Orosius, Ado, and others, it only
concerned the tumultuous Jews; Claudius Imperator Iudaeos tumultuantes a Roma
expulit: Claudius the Emperor expelled the Tumultious Jews from Rome? for S.
Peter was not within the compass of that Edict, being neither in Religion a
Jew, but a chife Christian then, favored rather then Act. 18. Joseph. and
Oros. l. 7. c. 6. Orosij. Ado. chron. aetat. 6. in Claudio. Flore^t. Wigorn.
an. 50. or 72. etc.
persecuted by Claudius: much less was he accused of any tumult there. And
though no good Christian can think, that our chief Pastor S. Peter did fear
the Edict of Claudius, if it had concerned him, but was ready to die rather (as
he did in the time of Nero) then to forsake the sheep of Christ, so carefully
committed unto him: yet to make all sure in this kind, that which these
Protestants would make their ground, to keep S. Peter from Rome and these
parts, in that time, does overthrow the^ in their own devising: for it is as
the Magdeburg. ce^t. 1. l. 2. col. 26. Oros. l. 7. c. 6. Suein vit. Claudij.
Magdeburgian Protestants acknowledge, from their constructio^ of the saying of
Orosius in his seventh book, and Suetonius in the life of Claudius: Claudium
Iudaeos impulsore Christo assidue tumultiuantes Roma expulisse: That Claudius
did expel from Rome, the Jews daily making tumults, Christ (so they read)
being the mouer. Therefore seeing the Jews were expelled for tumults they
made, and we are assured that the Christians were in no wise Agents in these
tumults, Claudius could not expel them under that pretense. And where they
read. Christo impulsore, Christ being the impeller, if we apply it to Christ
our Savior, either it must be understood that Christ moved to the tumults,
which is blasphemous, or that he moved Claudius to expel the Jews, and so the
Christians were not expelled, for Christ neither did, would, or could move to
expel the Christans his holy Servants.

4. And Orosius himself having with Gregorius Turonensis, and others Orosius l.
7. c. 6. Greg. Turon. l. 1. hist. cap. 25.
ascribed the conversion of the first Christians in Rome, in the beginning of
the Reign of Claudius unto S. Peter, he adds: Anno eiusdem nono expulsos per
Claudium vrbe Iudaeos Josephus resert. Sed me magis Suetonius mouet, qui ait
hoc modo: Claudius Iudaeos Impulsore Christo assidue tumultuantes Roma expulit.
Quod vtrum contra Christum tumultuantes Iudaeos coerceri and comprimi iusserit,
an etiam Christianos simul velut cognatae religionis homines voluerit expelli,
nequaquam discernitur: Josephus relates, that Claudius expelled the Jews out
of the city, in the ninth year of his Reign. But Suetonius moves me more,
who says in this manner: Claudius expelled forth of Rome the Jews, daily
making tumults, Christ moving. Which is not decerned whether he commanded the
Jews that made tumults against Christ to be corrected, and suppressed, or
would also have the Christians, men in Religion some what like the Jews to be
also expelled. This is all he says, and which others ground upon, and this
later construction as I have proved before, most needs give place to the
former, which keeps the Christians in favor with Claudius, and free from
Banishment; which is confirmed by Suidas and others: he writes in Claudius in
this manner: Cum sub eo Iudaei seditionem contra Suidas in Claudio.
Christianos mouissent, Claudius Faelicem eis praefecit, cosque punire iussit.
When under Claudius the Jews did raise sedition against the Christians,
Claudius oppointed Felix Governor over them, and caused him to punish them.
Whereby it is manifest, that Claudius was then rather a friend, then enemy to
Christians. And they which read, Christo impulsore: Christ being the mouer,
are mistaken, for it was Chresto impulsore, Chrestus being the mouer hereof.
Which Chrestus was a wicked Pagan then living in Rome, as many Pagans
themselves are witnesses. Zosimus a Pagan together with Xiphilinus, Dio, Sextus
Aurelius, victor and others witness, that (...) Chrestus was then a Consul in
great credit in Zosim. Com. hist. Graec. l. 1. in Alexand. Sever. Ioh.
Xiphilin. in Epitom. Dionis in eodem. Sext. Aurel. Victor. hist. Aug. Oros.
supr. Ado in Chronic. aetat. 6. Suetonius in Claudio. Sueton. in Nerone. Aelius
Lamprid. in Alexand. Seu.
Rome; and being by Latin translators translated Christus after the manner of
many Grecians pronou^cing ^ or ita, as. ^. in Latin, (...) being the Greek to
Christus, and written with ^. iota, and not ^, eta or ita, was the occasion of
this mistaking, to write, Christo Impulsore, for Chresto impulsore as Orosius
and Ado, and perhaps some others did, citing Suetonius for their Author; which
is evident by Suetonius himself, who in the place cited from him, reads
Chresto, and not Christo. His words be these: Iudaeos Impulsore Chresto assidue
tumultuantes Roma expulit. Claudius expelled the Jews out of Rome because they
daily made tumults, Chrestus being the mouer thereof. And the same Suetonius
calls Christians by their name Christians, and not Chrestians, so does
Flauius Vopiscus in his epistle to Adrian the Emperor, call Christ our Savior,
and Christians believing in him Christum, and Christianos, Christ, and
Christians: so does Aelius Lampridius and other Pagan Authors. And that
Chrestus which was Impulsor, a mouer in those affairs, and occasion of the
Edict of Claudius, being a Pagan was so wicked a man that I may not describe
him, being so impious that Martial the Poet living in those days, and stained
also with the tinctures of great sins, yet, speaking of him and his
behavior, concludes: pudet fari: Martial. Epigr. l. 7. Epigram. 54. and lib.
9. Epigr. 28
he is ashamed to speak it. Therefore to follow this so warranted opinion
that S. Peter was no bannished man from Rome by that Edict of Claudius, but
voluntarily, ex reuelatione, by revelation, as the other Apostles dispersed
also did at that time, went to Jerusalem, to celebrate the Assumption of the
blessed virgin, and to be present at the Council of the Apostles, we shall
leave time enough for S. Peter to return again to Rome, and visit also this
kingdom, and these western parts in the time of Claudius. For our Protestants
agree, that Council to have been kept about the fourteenth year of the
Ascension of Christ, building upon S. Paul, who says: fourteen years
Sutcliffe Subu. page 3. Godwyn Conuers. p. 5. c. 1. Gal. 2. v. 1. Protest Fasti
Reg. and Episcop. Angl.
after I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and took Titus with me.
Which was the time of this Council of the Apostles, and the last Act of note,
at which these Protestants say S. Peter was present at Jerusalem, from which
unto the death of S. Peter they tell us in their Chronology of Kings and
Bishops of this Nation, there were twenty years, time enough to have preached
hear in the time of Claudius, if he were not hear before his going from Rome
to Jerusalem.

5. If we should harken to their opinion, that would have S. Peter bannished
from Rome by that Edict of Claudius, and so to have thereupon gone to
Jerusalem, seeing they tell us before, he stayed not there longer then the 14.
or 15. year after Christ's Ascension, but by all men returned then again into
the west parts, where he had his Residency 24. years, if in the life of
Claudius he did not return to Rome, what Nation in the western world shall we
find more probable to entertain this exiled Apostle, then this Island of
Britain? which harbored at that time so many other Christians converted at
Rome before by S. Peter, that our Protestants have thus with a common consent
written of that time: It has passed with allowance, among the Theater of great
Britain l. 6. c. 9.
learned Senate of our Antiquaries, that when Claudius and Nero began to
bannish and persecute the Christians in Rome, many Romans and Britains being
converted to the faith, fled thence into these remote parts of the earth, where
they might, and did more freely enjoy the liberty of their professions. Which
disciples of S. Peter so multiplied and increased hear in that very time of
Claudius, that a Protestant Bishop, and Antiquary writes thus confidently of
those days: That there be manyfold testimonies of very credible Authors, who
witness, that the Godwyn Cataloge of Bishops in York. 1.
faith of Christ was received in diverse particular places of this Island,
presently after the Ascension of Christ, or at least while the Apostles yet
lived. Therefore, if in the time of Claudius when no other Apostle had been at
Rome, or any of these parts of the world, and presently upon the Ascension of
Christ, so many both Romans and Britans which were Christians, and must needs
be the disciples of S. Peter, were in this Island in diverse particular places,
and this so undoubted a thing by these Protestants, That it has passed with
allowance among the learned Senate of our Antiquaries: and is confirmed by
manifold testimonies of very credible Authors: It is a strange, unnatural,
and vndutifill mind, and will in them, that would and willingly do admite so
many of the disciples of S. Peter, to have been received hear, and with more
cruelty, then either Claudius or Nero could in any opinion perform, bannish
the blessed Apostle S. Peter their father and ours in Christ, both from Rome,
and this kingdom also. Thus I have fully satisfied the objections of such
Protestants, as would exclude the great Apostle S. Peter from this Nation, and
deprive the Inhabitants of Britain, of so great an Honor to be the spiritual
children of that our most worthy Protoparent in Christ. Now I will by the
consent of these men set down so near as Antiquities will give me warrant,
the time or times when he preached hear, and what he happily effected hear,
in those his great labors and travails hither.

THE XVI. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN IS SET DOWN BOTH BY Protestants, and others, when S. Peter preached
in Britain: if not before his coming to Rome, yet afterward both in the days
of Claudius, and Nero.

1. I Have before examined that Protestant opinion, which because it finds S.
Peter both to have been the first that preached in Rome, and that he was hear
in Britain, would bring him hither before his first coming to Rome: And
therefore will now speak little thereof. Our Theater Protestants from thence
would thus infer. S. Peter was hear, before he ever went to Rome: both which
may be Theater of great Britain l. 6. c. 9.. 5.
more probable, if we consider the huge multitudes of Christians, fifteen
thousand, says Baronius which dispersed themselves, in all parts of the world,
upon the martyring of S. Stephen at Jerusalem, which was presently upon the
death of Christ. Their opinion which would bring S. Peter into Britain, before
he came first to Rome, examined.
Hitherto these Protestant Bishops and Antiquaries, making it the more probable
opinion, as their own words (which may be more probable) import, that S. Peter
preached hear, before his first coming to Rome, of which mind also all those
English Protestant Bishops, and writers most needs be, which from the
Authority of S. Gildas, as they would expound him, do contend that Britain
received the faith of Christ in the days of Tyberius, or Caius Matthew. Parker
antiquit. Brit. p. 1. Georg. Abb. apud Mason co^secrat. l. 2. c. 3. p. 51.
Mason ibid. Theater of Brit. p. 202.
Caligula Emperors, and before the Empire of Claudius, in the beginning of
whose Reign S. Peter came first to Rome, for they all agree, that we first
received the faith from some one of the Apostles, and they have concluded
before, that no other Apostle, but S. Peter could be hear in those days. Of
this opinion is the first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, and the present,
that is Director of the Author of the books of the pretended consecration of
their Bishops, the Author of that Book, the writers of their Theater, and
others. And if those words they cite were the true words of Gildas, they make
not a little for that sentence, being these: Tempore vt scimus summo Tyberij
Caesaris suos radios primum indulget, id est, sua praecepta Christus. Christ
did Annot. Protest. Marginal. in prologum Gildae.
afford his beams, to wit his precepts to the I Will of Britain in the later
time of Tiberius, as we know. But because the Protestant publisher himself of
Gildas, does freely acknowledge that they were not usually in the copies of
Gildas, I dare not ascribe so much unto them. But if we will allow the
computation of Arnoldus Mirmannius, following as it seems, the ancient
Catalogue of the Bishops of Metz, who tells that S. Peter sent our Countrima^
S. Mansuetus into Arnold. Mirm. in Theatro Conu. gent. Catal. Episcop. Metens:
those parts, together with S. Clement, the first Bishop there, in the year of
Christ 40. in the time of Caius Caligula, two or three years before S. Peter
came to Rome, it gives not a small allowance to this opinion, for those
Histories do not relate from what parts, East, or west, these men were sent:
but the very Country of S. Mansuetus Natione Scotus, will rather incline us to
think S. Peter had been then in this Island, or near unto it at that time, or
else we must send this holy Saint of Britain without authority a very long
Journey to S. Peter in the East, and so far back again toward these
Countries. Or if we should make so ample an acceptance of Galatia, where the
Scripturs testify 1. Petr. 1.
S. Peter preached before the days of Claudius, as some Cosmographers and
Antiquaries do, we shall bring him so near unto us in those days, that
considering the infinity labors of that Apostle, and his love to this
kingdom, it will be noe vain conjecture, to think he visited Britain in
those days. Which is rather confirmed, if we reflect, and allow of that which
I have set down before, that his first entertainment at Rome was among the
Britans of this Nation, to whom he could not have better direction, nor so
good, from any other, as from this kingdom.

2. But to come to things certain, and undoubted in this History of S. Peter's
S. Peter preached in Britain, both in the time of Claudius and Nero Emperors.
living and preaching in this Island, it is an historical verity out of
Question, that he was hear both in the time of Claudius, and Nero also: his
being hear in the days of Claudius, what time soever it was of his Empire,
must needs be long before S. Paul, S. Joseph of Aramathia, or any other, that
is thought to have preached hear, or came into these parts, as I have proved
already, as also that S. Peter was hear in that time. To which I add the
testimony of Gildas our most ancient and renowned Historian: who in his book
De Excidio Britanniae; Gildas Epist. de Excid. Britan.
of the destruction of Britain, thus writes: Ita vt non Britannia, sed
Romania censeretur: Et quicquid habere potuisse^ aeris, argenti vel auri,
Imagine Caesaris notaretur. Interea glaciali frigore rigenti Insulae, and velut
longiore terrarum secessu soli visibili non proximae verus ille non de
firmamento solum temporali, sed de summa etiam caelorum arce, tempora cuncta
excedente vniuerso orbi praefulgidum sui coruscum ostendens, radios suos primum
indulget, id est, sua praecepta Christus: So that this Island might be rather
deemed Romania, then Britannia and what soever Coin it had either Brass,
silver or gold, it was stamped with the Image of the Roman Emperor. In the
mean time, while these things were doing, Christ who is the true Sun, not
only from the temporal firmament, but from the high Tower of heaven,
exceeding all times, showing his exceeding brightness to the whole world does
first afford his beams, to wit, his precepts to this Island, stiff with frozen
cold, and by a long distance of land removed from the visible sun. These be
the true and undoubted words of S. Gildas, in all examples both written and
printed, which I have seen: and the other words of propagating the law of
Christ by the permission of Tyberius the Emperor against the will of the
Senate, not so certain to be the words of that holy, and ancient Father, but
some later addition, and cannot be well applied to this kingdom, where
Tyberius had not such command, and power as this Saint affirms, the Romans
had in this kingdom, when Christ first afforded his precepts, primu^ Indulget
Christus, to this cold and termed frozen Island. For it is certain, by all
Antiquities, that this great subjection of the Britans unto the Emperors of
Rome, did never fall out until the time of Claudius.

3. Therefore seeing this Nation did first receive the faith of Christ, Primum,
at that time, it must needs be in the time of Claudius, when first and never
before, this Island was in that state, he there describes: And this is that
very time which so many Antiquaries, Catholics, and Protestants, S. Simon
Metaphrastes, Surius, Lippomannus, Sir William Camden, Andrie Chesne, and
others before named, agree upon, that S. Peter preached in this kingdom. To
which S. Paul himself, by our Protestants constructio^, and interpretation, by
his epistle written to the Romans at that time, and among so many Christians in
Rome then, which he reme^breth; and never once saluting either S. Peter, S.
Aristobulus, S. Clement, or any one that is supposed to have been in these
parts with S. Peter, gives no small allowance: And yet in this epistle he
takes upon him certain knowledge, that the faith of the Romans which was
planted by S. Peter; annuntiatur in vniuerso mu^do. (...) your faith is
preached, or showed in all the world; therefore also in Britain, so great a
Nation of this western world, and the Roman Empire, for as our Protestants
infer from Romans 1. v. 8.
that epistle; if S. Paul had not known S. Peter was not the^ in Rome, he
would have saluted him, whom he so much honored and loved. For as in the
beginning of that epistle; he generally saluteth all: omnibus qui sunt Romae
dilectis Romans 1. supr.
Dei, vocatis Sanctis gratia vobis and pax a Deo patre nostra and Domino Jesus
Christo; To all that are at Rome beloved of God, called Saints, grace be to
you, and peace from God our father, and our Lord Jesus Christ: So in the later
end of the same epistle, Romans cap. 16.
he saluteth by name Prisca, Aquila, Epaenetus, Mary, Andronicus, Julius,
Ampliatus, Vrbanus, Stachis, Apelles, and many others there named. Never
saluting S. Peter, or any which are thought to have been with him either in
Britain, France, or Germany, or any Nation on this side of Rome, or sent
thither about this time by S. Peter, of which I have named many before, among
which diverse were of the number of the 72. Disciples and acquaintance of S.
Paul, and among the acquaintance of this Apostle he does not salute S.
Aristobulus, nor S. Narcissus, though he saluteth their families then in Rome:
salutate eos qui sunt ex Aristobuli: salutate eos qui sunt ex Narcissi domo:
salute the^ that be of the household of Aristobulus: Salute them that be of the
household of Narcissus. Therefore being so familiar with S. Aistobulus, and
Narcissus, and kind unto the^, that he saluteth their families, for his love to
the^, we must needs, conclude that S. Paul well knew they were not then in
Rome. And being absent at that time from their families, and thence, and the
known Disciples of S. Peter, as all at Rome then were, where should they,
especially S. Aristobulus our Bishop or Archbishop of Britain, as I have
showed before, be at that time, but with S. Peter their Master hear, who then
at the writing of this epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, was as I have proved
before by many testimonies, both of Protestants, and others, in this our
Britain. For this epistle of S. Paul was written after the assembly of tbe
Apostles at Jerusalem, about the Assumpsion of the blessed Virgin, by all
writers, and S. Paul himself is Gal. 2. v. 1. 9.
both witness, that he saw S. Peter there, and stayed some time with him, and
that the Church of Rome was then so well founded, that their faith was famous,
and renowned in all the world; therefore S. Peter the founder thereof being to
bestow the rest of his time by Christ's direction unto him, in converting this
our Britain, and other western nations, we must needs conclude from hence
also, that S. Peter which was then come from the East again into these parts,
and was not at Rome, but had left S. Linus, and Cletus to supply Episcopal
duties there, was hear in Britain at that time, as so many before have
witnessed; And as the holy Apostles at their meetings imparted their journeys
they were to take, in preaching the gospel one to an other, as they did in
their first division of the world, among them, for the better effecting their
most holy office and charge committed to them by Christ: So S. Peter, ^^ much
beloved of S. Paul, and so great a lover of him, that he calls him hi^ most
beloved, would not conceal his intended travails in these western 1. Petr.
3. v. 5.
parts, unto him, especially seeing S. Paul was the only Apostle, excepting S.
Peter which was to visit these Occidentall Nations. And S. Paul saluting the
family of Aristobulus in Rome, and omitting him does sufficiently insinuate
that S. Peter had acquainted him with this his western voyage, and taking S.
Aristobulus with him, or sending him hither before him. For except identitie of
name, or both Sophronius and Metaphrastes deceive us, S. Atistobulus brother to
S. Barnabas, was father in law to S. Peter, and so following Sophron.
Hierosolymit. l. de laborib. S. Petri and Pauli. Sim. Metaphr. die 29. Iunij.
him, did likely at the coming of S. Peter to Rome, remove his family thither,
and left it there, and he himself employed by S. Peter, and by him ordained
Bishop of this our Britain, as is before declared, must needs be hear, or in
his Journey hither, at that time.

4. Whether S. Peter was hear in, or about the beginning, of the Empire of
Probable, that S. Peter was in Britain, or sent Disciples hither about the
coming of Claudius hither.
Claudius, and his invasion of this Nation, in the fourth year of his Reign
as the common opinion of Antiquaries is, I dare not absolutely determine:
though diverse together with Baronius incline to that opinion, and reasons be
not wanting to give probability unto it. For if Pomponia Graecina, the wife of
Aulus Plantius, the Emperors Lieutenant in Britain, was converted hear to
the faith of Christ, as our Protestants assure us, this being before the
persecution, Bar on. to. 1. an n. in S. Petr. Aut h. of 3. Conuers.
which they say Claudius raised against Christians in the 49. year of Christ,
Aulus Plantius then being returned to Rome, together with his wife, and company
to triumph there, therefore she could not be converted hear by any which they
say fled hither from Rome in the beginning of that persecution, Matthew. west.
an. 49.
and they can find no other Christians hear, except S. Peter, or some sent by
him, which they do not express, to perform that holy office. Secondly
whereas it is manifest before, that S. Peter after his coming to Rome, occiduam
obscuritatem in splendorem clarissimum commutauit, obscuriorem mundi Mich.
Singel. in Martyrio Dion. Areopag. Clem. Romans ep. 1.
plagam Occidentis illuminare praeceptus est; changed the darkness of the
west into most bright splendour, and was commanded to illuminate the west the
more dark or obscure part of the world: It carries great probability, that
he began this work, before his coming from the East to Rome, the second time,
after the Assumpsion of the blessed virgin Mary, and had enterprised it hear
in Britain, before those days: for we read in our own ancient historians
especially the Manuscript Antiquity of Canterbury that about the 49. year of
Christ, Petrus iterum Romanam Cathedram suscepit: Peter did take the Roman
Hist. antiq. M. S. ex Eccl. Ca^tuar. ad circit. an. 49. Guliel. Eisengr.
Centen. 1. did. 3. Matthew. Westminster. an. 46.
Chair again; which must needs be to make it true, after his return to Rome
out of some of these west parts. Thirdly we find in the French Annals cited by
Gulielmus Eisengrenius, diverse Bishops consecrated by S. Peter in this time,
for our neighboring Country of France, as namely S. Maximinus or Maximus at
Aquens or Aix, and S. Lazarus at Marsiles, in the year of Christ 46. S.
Martial at Limoges, and S. Julian at Man's the same year. S. Paulus Sergius at
Narbon in the year 48. when S. Paul the Apostle was not come into Eisengr.
sup. in S. Mansueto. and Episp. Gall.
these parts, to place him there. And to make this more credible, if we follow
that Author with his Ant^quities, S. Clement at Metz, and our Countriman S.
Mansuetus at Toul in Lorrayne, who in this opinion may be thought to be Arnold.
M^rm. in Thereat. Co^u. gent. Guliel. Eisengr. supr. Centen. 1. Francisc.
Bellef. Cosmograph. tom. 1. in Toul.
left there by S. Peter in his first return from Britain to Rome, being in
his way from hence thither, and this the rather, because many historians
testify, he was ordained Bishop there by S. Peter, and yet not any one
remembers any place from whence he was directed thither, but only affirm, as
he expounds them, that he was consecrated Bishop of that place by S. Peter in
the 49. year of Christ. And this more probable, because after this 49. year
of Christ, these French historians which take pains to set down exactly the
very year wherein their first Apostles and Bishops were ordained unto them by
S. Peter, which are many, do not set down the year, wherein any one after
this time was consecrated until the 54. of the Nativity of Christ, by and
before which time S. Peter was come from Jerusalem, and the Eastern parts the
second time into these west^ne Nations of the world, when he both was, and
stayed long time in this our Britain.

5. And this gives light unto us, that about this year of Christ 54. S. Peter
came hither to stay long time in Britain, for in this year as the French
Antiquaries Probable, that S. Peter came into Britain the second time about
the 54. year of Christ.
write, S. Peter consecrated many Bishops in France, his way from Rome to
Britain; in this year as they write, he ordained S. Sabinianus or Sabinus one
of the 72. disciples Primate of all France, Archbishop of Sens: Sanctus
Sabinianus, sine Sabinus vnus ex 72. Christi discipulis a beato Petro Apostolo
Primas totius Galliae, and Senonensis Archiepiscopus consecratus anno Christi
54. in which Anton. Democharez lib. 2. de miss. contr. Calvin. c. 30. Eisengr.
centen. 1. fol. 56. cit. Bed. Martyr. pride. Call. Ian. Petr. de Natal. l. 2. c.
25. Anton. part. 1. tit. 6. c. 25.. 3. Mart. in chr. Vicel. in Hagiol. Vuerner.
Carthus. in Fascul. temp. Eisengr. Cent. 1. Franc. Bellefor. tom. 1. p. 202. l.
2. Vincent. in Specul. lib. 11. cap. 43. Bed. Anton. Volaterr. Petr. de Natal.
apud. Eisengren. supr. in S. Front. in Gall. S. Sim. Metaphr. supr.
year also he consecrated (as these Authors say) many other Bishops in
France, as S. Nathanael spoken of in the gospel, and by some named vrsinus,
S. Amator, S. Potentianus, S. Fronto and others: among which, the rather to
induce us, to think, that S. Peter was then in France, this S. Fronto then
consecrated Bishop, by S. Peter, was a French man borne, as many Authorities
prove unto us: and so most likely to be consecrated in his own Country. And
the Authority of S. Simeon Metaphrastes, who of all others does most
particularly set down the Travails of S. Peter, will bring him into Britain
about this time, the second time, (as it seems, of his being hear:) for
bringing him to Rome as others do, in the beginning of the Reign of Claudius,
he adds of him: Cum non diu mansisset apud Romanos, and sancto baptismate
multos regenerasset, and Ecclesiam constituisset, and Linum Episcopum
ordinasset: when he had stayed not long with the Romans, and baptized many, and
founded the Church, and ordained Linus a Bishop, he went into Spain, then into
Egypt, and so to Jerusalem by revelation for the Transmigration of the mother
of God, then returned into Egypt and through Africa returned to Rome, from
whence he came to Millan and Photice, and so into Britain. Which time being
truly calculated, will teach us, that he came hither in, or about the 54.
year of Christ, when in the way hither he made so many Bishops in France,
long before S. Paul came, although as a prisoner first to Rome, or any other
Apostle thither or to any western Nation. For as I have proved before, S.
Peter going up to Jerusalem by Revelation, at the death of the blessed virgin,
did stay but a short time there, and in the Eastern parts in that Journey, but
the chardge of the western world being more peculiarly committed unto him
before, he returned unto it to dischardge this duty hear; and allthough S.
Simon Metaphrastes brings him back again by Rome, yet he speaks of no stay
he made there at this time, but presently brings him into Britain.

THE XVII. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN IS PROVED, BY THE BEST ENglish Protestant writers, their Bishops, and
others, that S. Peter founding the Church of Britain, ordained in it, an
Archbishop, Bishops, and Priests.

1. THat we may without contradiction of any Catholic, or Protestant (except
wilfully erring in their own proceedings) be assured, that S. Peter performed
hear all Pastoral duties, in fou^ding unto our predecessors in this our
Britain, the true and undoubted Church of Christ, and so left it to
posterity, because I stand assured, my pen shall still in all things carry
with it an undoubted Assent of Catholics, seeing this matter of the true
Church, founding thereof, professing the doctrine, which it teaches to all her
children, and they ought to follow, concerns us all, so much, that the
Protestants of this Nation agree, there is no salvation to be had, or expected
out of this holy society: I will set down by their warrant, both what this
Church is, and how it was first in all things essential, and by them needful
to salvation, founded hear by Saint Peter the Apostle.

2. Concerning the first, the Canon or decree of the Protestant Religion in
their Synodicall, and Parliament Articles, to which all Protestant Bishops and
Ministers of England have sworn, and subscribed, is this: The visible Church
Articl. of Religion. an. 1562. ar. 19.
of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, in the which the puer word of
God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered, according to Christ's
ordinance, in all those things that of necessity, are requisite to the same.
Hitherto this publik Protestant Article of Religion. Therefore seeing it is
allowed, and proved before by these men, that S. Peter first founded the Church
of Christ in this kingdom, to insist still in their own allowances, I must
show by them how he performed these things, which by these Protestants must
needs be in every true Church, to wit true and lawful Ministers, to preach the
word of God, and duly minister the Sacraments. So there be three things
essential, true Ministers, the puer word of God preached, and Sacraments duly
ministered, among which the two last depend upon the first, true and lawful
Ministers. For where true and Orthodoxall Ministers are, and accordingly preach
the word, and Minister the Sacraments, there the puer word must needs be
preached, and Sacraments duly ministered. And contrariewise where such
Ministers are not, there these things cannot be possibly by such performed.
Which this Protestant Rule of Religion confirms in an other Article in these
words: It is not lawful for any man, to take upon him the office of public
preaching, Articul. 23.
or ministering of the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be lawfully
called, and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to Judge lawfully
called, and sent, which be chosen and called to this work, by men, who have
public authority given unto them, in the Congregation, to call and send
Ministers into the Lords vyneyard. And in their Article entitled: of
Consecration of Bishops and Ministers, they set down these orders and degrees
in such men: Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons: and have set forth a
book, both by the Regal Authority of King Edward the Sixth, Q. Elizabeth, and
King James our present Sovereign, and their Parlaments, for the particular
consecration of all those degrees; and in that so highly authorized Book
assuer us, that all these degrees and Orders have ever been in the Church of
Christ from the days of him, and his Apostles. And all particular writers
among these Protestants, as they are bound by subscription to these Articles;
so they plainly testify in their writings, among whom the public and
approved Protestant comment upon these Articles, Entitled, The Catholic
doctrine of the Church of England. With great privilege Rogers. in Artic. 36.
sets down in this manner: It is ageeable to the word of God, and practice
of the primative Church, that there should be Archbishops, Bishops and such
like differences, and inequalities of Ecclesiastical Ministers: and adds:
The proof from the word of God: Albeit the terms, and Titles of Archbishops
we find not: yet the superiority which they have, and authority which
Bishops, and Archbishops do exercise, in ordering, and consecrating Bishops,
and Ecclesiastical Ministers, is grownded upon the word. And again: from the
Apostles days hitherto there never wa^ted a Succession of Bishops, neither in
the East nor western Churches. This is the general, and common opinion of
all the English Protestant Bishops, against their Puritans. Thus their
Archbishops, whitgitf, Bancroft, their Bishops Bilson, Barlow, Bridges,
Doctors, Filled, Hooker, Couell, Downame, Barlow Sermon. before King James 21.
Septembr. an. 1604.
and others. Whereof one writes: Episcopal function is an ordinance
Apostolical, Christ has acted it for succeeding posterity, and so it is
thesis Pneumatichi, a Canon or constitution of the whole Trinity. Thus a
Protestant Bishop before our King, with both his and the allowance of the
Protestant Bishops, as the Puritans themselves thus acknowledge. The callings
of Prelates be of divine ordinance, Offer of Conference.
as Bishop Barlowe avouches in his last Sermon. The Bishop of Rochester with
the consent, and by the direction no doubt of some of the chiefest Prelates,
has now lately published his Sermon, preached in September, before the King at
Hampton Court, the maine drift whereof, is to prove, that the office and
calling of a Diocesan Bishop, is a divine and Apostolical ordinance. The same,
besides so many their Bishops and doctors before, is remembered in their public
Apology, entitled of the Consecration of the Bishops in the Church of England,
masked under the name of Francis Mason. So that there can be no question with
any Protestant in England, both their Archbishops, Bishops, and Doctors of the
English Protestant Church thus consenting, but S. Peter, as the rest of the
Apostles, directed so by the law, and word of Christ, and their own
Tradition, Sutcliff. Subu. p. 3. Ihon Whitg. Answ. to the admonit. p. 65. sect.
1. and def. of the Answ. page 318. Clem. l. Compe^diar. Christ. relig apud Pol.
Virg. l. 4. de Invent. c. 12. Whitg. supr. in Indic. and p. 372. 373. 427. 470.
471. Clem. Roepist. 1. to 1. Council.
did ordain, and consecrate such holy Rulers in those Churches, which they
founded: and so consequently in this our Britain, according to that I have
already written of his preaching hear. Which diverse of these Protestant
writers teach in plain terms of him in particular: one of them writes thus:
Peter preached in no place, but he there ordained Bishops, and teachers, and
founded Churches. An other, an Archbishop with them, citing diverse authorities,
for his Assertion, says: I prove that the names of Metroprolitane and
Archbishop be most ancient: yea that they were in the Church, long before the
gospel was publicly embraced by any Prince, or in any kingdom. Polidor
Virgil lib. 4. de Inuentoribus rerum cap. 12. says, that Clement in his book
entitled Compendiarium Christianae Religionis, testifies, that the Apostle
Peter did in every province appoint one Archbishop, whom all other Bishops of
the same province should obey: he says also, that the same Archbishop was
called Primas, Patriarcha, and Metropolitanus. Which is also set down at
lardge from the mouth of S. Peter, by the same S. Clement, his Disciple and
successor in his first epistle. And so these Protestants justify both the
precept and practice of S. Peter in this point: which they must needs do,
except by their own warrant before, they would make him a most wicked
transgressor of the word of God, the Apostles Tradition, and his own
commandment.

3. Therefore with the license of these men, we may boldly say, with S. Simon
Metaphrastes, of S. Peter's holy labors of this kind in Britain, verbo Metaph.
29. Iun.
gratiae multos illuminauit, Ecclesias constituit, Episcoposque, and
Presbyteros, and Diaconos ordinauit: he illuminated many with the word of
grace, constituted Churches, and ordained Bishops, and Priests, and Deacons.
And this the rather because not Arnold. Mirm. Theatr. conuers. gent. Sur. and
Lippom. 29. Iun. Gul. Eisengr. ce^tenar. 1. part. 7. did. 8. Baron. to. 1.
Annal. Harris hist. to. 1. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. Camden in Brit. Andre
Chesne hist. of Eng. Scot. and Ireland lib. 3.
only Arnoldus Mirmannius, Surius, Lippomannus, Gulielmus Eisengrenius,
Baronius, M. Harris in his Manuscript history and other Catholic writers have
thus delivered: But our Protestant Theater writers speaking of these matters
prove the Relator of them lived 800. years since, and for his Authority,
produced them out of the Greek Antiquities. And the chief Protestant
Antiquary of England affirms it to be so certain, that it should not he
doubted of; so does Andrew Chesne in his French history of this Island, and
Ireland. And so must all the Parliament Protestants of England, who allow the
book of Articles, where it is decreed, that a true Church cannot be without
such clergy Rulers. Therefore being granted by them before, that S. Peter
founded the Church of Christ in this kingdom, they consequently have granted,
he ordained Bishops, and others to exercise holy functions in that Church.

THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN ARE SET DOWN BY WARrant of Protestants, and other Authorities the
names in particular of the first Archbishop, and diverse Bishops of, or in
Britain, in this time by S. Peter's Ordination

1. ANd to descend to some particulars in this kind: our Protestants S.
Aristobulus ordained Archbishop of Britain by S. Peter, as our Protestants
assent.
will give me warrant, to set down the very names of our first Archbishop, and
some Bishops, ordained by that great Apostle S. Peter: And concerning the
Archbishop (except we should turn disciplinary Puritans, and be singular
against all English Protestants, Catholics, and all Antiquities, and deny that
S. Peter himself, S. Ihon the Evangelist, and others of the Apostles were
Archbishops) we most needs by the public warrant of our English Protestants
affirm, that S. Aristobulus was by S. Peter ordained Archbishop of this our
Britain. For supposing (which is proved and granted before) that he was made
Bishop by S. Peter, in their common, public, and allowed Commentary, upon the
Articles of their Religion, thus Thom. Rogers in Articul. Relig. in Artic. 36.
they place him among the confessed Archbishops of the Church of Christ, and
prove him to be Archbishop of this our Britain in these terms: In the
Apostles days, how themselves both were in dignity above the Evangelists, and
the 72. Disciples, and for authority both in and over the Church, as twelve
Patriarchs Beza in act. Apo. 1. 2.
says Beza, and also established an Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. Hence came it,
that Bishop was of Jerusalem James, of Antioch Peter, of the Asian Churches
Ihon, of Alexandria Mark, of Ephesus, yea and all Asia, Timothy: of all Crete
Titus, of Philippos Epaphroditus, of Corinth and Achaia Apollos; of Athens
Dionisius, of France Crescens, of Britain Aristobulus. Where we see it so
manifestly acknowledged by these Protestants, that S. Aristobulus was
Archbishop of this our Britain, that except we would deny that dignity to the
Apostles, and other known Archbishops there remembered, we may not deny it to
S. Aristobulus for our Britain. And so these Protestants in their words
immediately going before do name all these I have recited, for telling us how
the Superiority Rogers supr.
and Authority which Archbishops do exercise, in ordering and consecrating of
Bishops and Ecclesiastical Ministers is grounded upon the word of God: they
immediately exemplify in those men, and words as I have related, making S.
Aristobulus that chief, or Archbishop of Britain: from whom the consecra^^^n
of Bishops, and clergy men was deryued to posterity in this kingdom, as it
was from S. James at Jerusalem, from S. Peter at Antioch, S. Ihon in Asia, S.
Mark at Alexandria, and the others remembered in those kingdoms, and
Provinces, of which they are named Archbishops by Whitg. ag. Cattw. Bilson true
differ. Bridges l. of the Church. of Engl. Downam def. of the Sermon. Gul.
Camden. in Britan. in Belg. Andre Chesne hist. genesis p. 132.
these Protestants, not only in this, but many other places.

2. And S. Dorothaeus Bishop of Tyrus, even as our best Protestant Antiquaries
allege, and expound him, does sufficiently testify. Thus they write:
Dorothaeus Tyri Episcopus in sua Apostolorum Sinopsi tradit Aristobulum, cuius
meminit Paulus in Epistola ad Romanos, Britanniae Episcopum factum fuisse:
Dorothaeus Bishop of Tyrus in his book, entitled, Synopsis of the Apostles,
does deliver, that Aristobulus, of whom S. Paul makes mention in his Epistle
to the Romans, was made Bishop of Britain. Dorothaeus agrees wholly with this
Protestant, not in his book of the Apostles, but of the 72. Disciples, where
he plainly says: Aristobulus and ipse ab Apostolo ad Romanos commemoratus,
Episcopus Britanniae factus est* Aristobulus named by the Apostle, to the
Romans, was made Doroth. in Syno. 72. Discip. in Aristobulo.
Bishop of Britain. Where by the words, Bishop of Britain, and not in
Britain, or any particular place of Britain, it is evident that he was made
the chief commanding Bishop, or Archbishop of Britain, the whole kingdom of
Britain being subjected unto him, in spiritual proceedings; and it is clear
in all such Examples in Antiquity, not one instance to be given to the
contrary, as appears in the same ancient Father S. Dorothaeus in that place,
and others entreating of the same subject. And the words, The Bishop of
Britain, will allow no other interpretation. And if there were no other
motive to induce us to be of this opinion, but the consent of writers, both
Catholics, and Protestants, that this holy Bishop of Britain was one of the
72. Diciples of Christ, as both the same S. Dorothaeus, our contriman
Floren^^us Wigorniensis, Doroth. supr. in Titul. Florent. Wigorn. in Catal. 72.
Discipul. Arnold. Mirm. in Theatr. Gul. Eiseng. cent. 1. Magdeb. cent. 1.
and later Authors agree, it would be a warrant sufficient, in this cause,
when we do not find in Antiquities, but probably all the 72. that suruiued
were constituted Archbishops in their divisions, in those that concern us
most, which were settled in our neighboring Nations, France, and Germany, I
have exemplified before. Alnoldus Mirmannius in his Theater of the Conversion
of Nations, and the Authorities which he follows, will make this a matter out
of question, for he deriueth the whole Hierarchicall order of the Church of
Christ in this kingdom, from this holy man in Arnold. Mirm. in Theatr. conu.
gent. in Britann.
this manner: Britannia Straboni a Britone Regenun cuipata, primum Aristobulum
vnum certe ex class 72. Discipulorum Apostolum est nacta. Deinde nacta est
Britannia Fugatium, and Damianum, qui ordinem Hierarchicum Ecclesiae istic
fundatae ab illo inchoatum constituerunt, sanxeruntque more nimirum Apostolico:
Britain so named by Strabo, from King Brito, or Brutus, had first for the
Apostle of it Aristobulus, one doubtless of the order of the 72. Disciples.
After that, it had Fugatius Guliel. Eisengren. centenar. 1. in S. Aristobulo.
Actor. cap. 13.
and Damianus, who constituted and confirmed after the Apostolik manner the
Hierarchicall order of the Church there founded begun by him. Where he
ascribes to S. Aristobulus this our holy Archbishop of this our Britain named
of Brutus, three Attributes, all commonly properties almost quarto modo,
belonging to S. Aristobulus Archbishop of Britayne, consecrated by diverse
Authors, an. dom. 39. and before S. Paul.
Archbishops: to be our Apostle: to have founded our Church: and begun our
Ecclesiastical Hierarchicall order. Which cannot belong to any other then an
Archbishop, especially in so great a kingdom.

3. And if we will follow Eisengrenius, and his Authors, he will tell us,
that this holy Saint and Archbishop of Britain was made Bishop in the 39.
year of Christ, within five or six years of his Ascension, and before S.
Paul the Apostle himself did receive imposition of hands, or S. Mansuetus
Other Bishops, or some other Bishop then in Britayne besides S. Aristobulus.
by any account, or any other that is remembered in Antiquities, to have been a
Bishop in, or of this Nation, except the most glorious Apostle, our first
Father in Christ S. Peter, was made a Bishop. Therefore it does evidently
follow, that next unto S. Peter, that renowned Saint, and Disciple of Christ,
S. Aristobulus was by S. Peter's means the first Archbishop of this kingdom,
Who were these Bishops in particular, in or of Britayne.
by this account. Which makes it also an undoubted truth, warranted both by
holy Scriptures, Apostolic Tradition, and all chiefest Authorities, as these
Protestants have proved unto us, that we also had some Bishops whosoever they
were, subordinate to this chief, ouerseeing, commanding and Archbishop, S.
Mansuetus Beatus his Anonymus companion and S. Augulus probably Bishops hear
in Britayne.
and by the same Authority of S. Peter: for all this is necessarily induced,
and depending of the name, nature, office and dignity of an Archbishop,
instituted and ordained hear, by that greatest Apostles power, and Authority.
For it is an implicancy of contradiction, and in natural evidence impossible,
that there should be an Archbishop above all other Bishops, where Engl.
Martyrol. 7. Febr. in Augulus. Drek. in alm. an. 1620. 7. Febr. Io. King sermon.
at Paul's Cross 26. Mart. an. 1620. page 45. Martyrolog. Romans 7. Febr. Bed.
Martyrol. ib. vsuard hac die. Petr. de Natal. in Catal. l. 3. cap. 105. Ado and
Vuandelbert. apud Baron. in annot. in Martyrol. 7. Feb^. Calendar. Eccles.
Sarisb. Engl. Martyrol. 7. Febr. Rabanus hac die.
there is no Bishop, for him to be the chiefest, or under him. And that such we
had by S. Peter's ordination, it is in plain terms acknowledged before, both
by Catholic, and Protestant Antiquaries, testifiing, and proving that this
highest Apostle when he instituted this most sacred subordination, did ordain
both Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in, and for this kingdom; Who these our
Primative Bishops were in particular, or any of them, the Injury of time and
so many Enemies of holy Religion, under whose heavy burdens, and persecutions
this kingdom has often groaned, do make it a greater labor. Yet it is
evident by that I have already proved, that S. Mansuetus, S. Beatus, and his
holy companion, though to us now Anonimus, of which two, I shall speak more
hereafter, may be recompted in this number.

4. To which we may probably add S. Augulus, Bishop of Augusta, London, in
England, as both Catholics and Protestants expound it, and among them one in a
Sermon before King James speaking to the Londiners says: your city has been
aunciently styled Augusta. For we read both in the ancient Roman Martyrologe,
that also of S. Bid, Vsuardus, Ado, Vandelbertus, Petrus de Natalibus and
others, that this S. Augulus was Bishop of Augusta in Britannia, Augusta or
London in Britain, and was a martyr: Augustae in Britannia Natalis beati
Auguli Episcopi, qui aetatis cursum per Martyrium explens aeterna praemia
sus^ipere meruit. Baronius says, he cannot tell when he suffered: Quo tempore
passus sit, hactenus mihi obscurum. But if we compare the name of London at
that time it was called Augusta, with other circumstances, and with the
Catalogue of the Bishops of London, after the time of King Lucius, we shall
very probably find, that this worthy Saint our Bishop of London, is to be
reckoned one of the first Bishops, that were consecrated in this kingdom, and
long before our common Conversion, in the days of King Lucius, and so
consequently by S. Peter, or his Disciple S. Aristobulus, no other then with
eminent Authority being hear to consecrate him Bishop, and settle him Bishop
of Augusta, London. For first this city was not called Augusta in the Reign
of King Lucius, when this Nation was generally converted, but only Londinum:
London, nor never since that time, or by any before, but by the Romans at their
first settling hear in the time of Claudius, when as before is proved, S. Peter
preached in this kingdom. Secondly the first Bishop of London as all the rest
from King Lucius time to the coming of S. Augustine were Archbishops, and this
only in all Antiquities called only Bishop of Augusta in Britain. Thirdly
this was a Martyr, and so we do not read of any Iotz. in Catal. Epis. Brit.
Io. Godcel. de Episc. Lo^d. Matthew. Parker antiq. Brit. Godwin Catal. of
Bishops. Stowe Histor. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. Harris in Theat. to 1.
Will. Harris descr.
Archbishop of London, except on S. Vodinus Martyred in the times of King
Vortigerne, and Hengist, in whom, both the times, names, callings, and other
circumstances are much different, making it impossible that they were one and
the same man. Fourthly no Antiquity, or Antiquary, Catholic or Protestant
setting down the Catalogue of the Archbishops of London, as Iotzeline of
Furnes, Ihon Godcilene, Matthew Parker, Godwine, Stowe, the Theater writers, or
any other, once names this S. Augulus to be any of them that were since King
Lucus time: But make S. Thean the first, the last Theonus, that formerly was
Bishop of Gloucester, and in, or about the year of Christ 553. became
Archbishop of London, and about the year 586. together with Thadiocus
Archbishop of York fled from the Pagan Saxons, into wales, and left their Sees
vacant until the coming of S. Augustine. And between these there is not any
one but S. Vodinus before a Martyr, or that has any resemblance in name, or
other description with S. Augulus. Their names be these: Thean. Eluanus. Cadar.
Obinus. Conan. Palladius. Stephan. Iltut. Theodwin or Godwyn Catal. in London.
and alij supr.
Dedwin. Thedred. Hillary. Restitutus. Guitelnius or Guitelinus. Fastidius.
Vodinus, Theonus.

5. A late writer in his Manuscript History of Britain, says plainly that S.
Harris in Theat. tom. 1.
Nicasius the first Bishop of Roan in Normandy of France, preached hear in
this Britain, in these times. And he seems to rely much upon Arnoldus
Mirma^nius, who says: Britones instruxit, formauitque fide S. Nicasius,
imperante S. Nicasius Bishop in our Britain by some writers.
Nerone: Nicasius did instruct, and form in the faith the Britans, in the time
of Nero, being then delegated an Apostle thither, illuc Apostolus delegatus.
And this he proves to be understood of our Britans, because the Britans of
Armorica Arnold. Mirm. in Theatr. Conu. gent.
in France, were not called Britans, until long after: which by all writers
is a thing most certain, and out of Question. Therefore except that Author
spoke very improperly, to call them Britans, that were not until 300. years
after, he must needs mean, to speak truly, the Britans of this Island. And
this S. Nicasius being sent Apostle by Roman Authority, as he says to the
Britans, in the time of Nero, it must needs be by S. Peter. And although the
same Author in the same place, joins with the Britans, whom S. Nicasius
thus instructed in the faith, the people of Normandy, Roan, Picardy, which be
people in France, Britones, Normandos, Rothomagenses, Picardos; this hinders
nothing, but he might preach both to them, and the Britans hear also, as many
others did; and that which follows, omnemque maris Oceani tractum instruxit;
he instructed in the faith all the Coaste of the Ocean sea, cannot well be
justified, except we bring him hither into our Britain: for those Countries he
names in France, be far from being omnis maris Oceani tractus, either all,
or the half part of the Coaste of the French Ocean.

6. To these I may probably add S. Martine living in the Apostles time, and
Probable, that S. Martin Disciple of the Apostles was a Britan, or preached
hear.
so renowned in this kingdom, that in the time of King Lucius, to speak in an
old Authors words: constructa est extra Cantuariam Ecclesia Sancti Martini, a
Church was builded unto him without Canter bury. Which is the same, S. Bid and
others write, was the old Church builded there, in the time of the Romans: who
where departed hence before the days, either of S. Martine M. S. Abbreuiatio
tempor. in Rege Lucio. Bed. hist. Anglic. in S. Augustino. l. 1. Stowe histor.
in Ethelbert. Theater of great Brit. Matthew. Parker. antiq. Brit. Godwyn Conu.
of Britain p. 40. Ado in chronic. ad an. 101. Will. Lamb. perambulation of
Kent. p. 13.
the Pope, or S. Martine Bishop of Tours in France, by all accounts. And Ado
and others testify, this S. Martine was a Bishop in the time of Traiane, and
armo. D. 101. Disciple of the Apostles. Martinus Episcopus Discipulus
Apostolorum Viennae resedit. And M. Lambert the Protestant Antiquary does
assure us, that this Church by Canterbury dedicated to S. Martine, was both
builded in the Romans time, and was, and continued a Bishops See, until the
coming of the Normans hither, and so extraordinarily there were two Bishops
Sees in one City, this being substitute to the Archbishop, which argues how
great the honor was, that this nation gave unto him. And yet a Church so
aunciently dedicated to him hear, would of it self by British proceedings in
such affairs, induce us to think, that either he was a Britan borne, or
preached in this our Britayne, or both. For in perusing our Antiquities of
those times, we shall hardly find any Church dedicated in this kingdom to any
Saint, except the blessed Virgin Mary, for her eminent privilege, but to such
as were Saints of this Nation, as S. Alban, Amphibalus, Aaron, Julius; or
preached hear as S. Peter the Apostle, S. Clement his Disciple and successor,
and such like.

7. To make which more apparently probable unto us, we have two renowned and
annuncient Authors, Methodius and S. Marianus, who speaking Marian. Scot. l. 2.
aetat. 6. in Nerua Imp. col. 254. Method. apud cund. supr.
of this holy Bishop S. Martine, and telling he lived and suffered Martyrdom
in the time of Nerua the Emperor within the first hundred year of Christ,
say; That non solum propria prouincia, sed and in extremis and vltimis
industrius and illustris non solum confessione, quin and martyrio existens
regna Tyrannorum vicit: He was not only industrious and renowned in his own
Province, but also in the uttermost and last Regions, not only a confessor,
but a Martyr, conquered the kingdoms of Tyrants. Therefore to grant unto Ado,
that he was sometime Bishop of Vienna in France, seeing so great authority
does warrant us, that he preached in extremis, and vltimis, not only in one
province, but the very last and uttermost, in respect of that place, which
must needs comprehend this Island of Britayne, we may not now exclude him from
hence, where he has been honored with a Church dedicated to him as an holy
Bishop, so many hundreds of years above 1400. since, in a Nation so peculiarly
honoring the memories of the renowned Apostles, and Saints thereof, with such
testimonies of love and duitie. And this the rather, because we are told by
foreign writers, that he was not only Apostolorum discipulus: a disciple of
the Apostles Arnold. Mitm. Theatr. Conu. gent.
and sent to these western parts, whether as before, it is hard to find any to
have been sent from any Apostle, but S. Peter. And this Church being aunciently
a Bishops See, as the Kentish Protestant Antiquary has told us before, and yet
without the City of Canterbury, it gives more strenght to this opinion; for
all Antiquities agree, that through out the whole kingdom in the time of King
Lucius, all the Cathedral and Episcopal Churches were in cities. Which
argues this See to have had a more ancient original, then from that time:
for further proof whereof, the ancient Manuscript History Histor. Roffen. M.
S.
of Rochester says: Extra Ciuitatem in part Orientali est Ecclesia Beati
Martini, vbi Seeds Episcopalis erat: without the city of Canterbury one the
East side is the Church of S. Martine, where there was a Bishops See. And
Bishop Godwin was the last Bishop there in the time of Archbishop Lanfranke,
who would not permit any successor therein, saying that two Bishops might not
be in one city. Godwino vltimo illius Sedis Episcopo successorem Lanfrancus
subrogare noluit: dicens, quod in vna ciuitate duo Episcopi minime esse
deberent. Standing upon the Canons of the Church, as his reason argues which
further confirms, this custom to have been long more ancient, then the
Canons in that behalf. And seeing Cathedral Churches ordinarily take their
denomination of the first Saints, that were Bishops there, except some other
extraordinary merits of Saints, and devotion unto them give them this
privilege; this may be some warrant unto us, in this case, to incline to
think, this S. Martine either preached hear, or so well deserved of this
Nation, that we may not easily deprive him of this honor.

8. To this I may probably join S. Nathanael, spoken of in the Ghospel, Not
vmprobable, but S. Nathaniel was, and preached in Britain.
and termed of our Savior, a true Israelite: for as our French Historians tell
us, he was both consecrated Bishop by S. Peter the Apostle, and was successor
to S. Aphrodisius in the Sea of Bituriges in France, about the time of S.
Peter's coming hither and at his direction at those times, and by the Greeks in
their Menologe called Simon. Therefore seeing some have so contended before,
Guliel. Eisengr. centen. 1. f. 54. an. 54. Anton. part-1. tit. Anton. De. much.
l. 2. c. 24. Graeci in Menolog. Baron. in Annot. in Martyrol. 28. October. Sim.
Chan.
to bring one S. Simon into Britayne, and demonstration is also made, that it
could not be S. Simon Zelotes the Apostle, to leave a place of due credit to
their Authority, I may credibly ascribe it to S. Nathanael, called S. Simon,
and by some the brother of S. Philip the Apostle, and generally after the
Ascension of Christ at the disposition of S. Peter principally in these Western
parts where although cheifely he bore the title of the Bishops of Biturigum:
Burages in Berry in France, yet he travailed in diverse other parts, as
appears in Histories, as others likewise did, who took their names of being
Bishops of certain places. Which is most evident in S. Peter himself, who
although he never took name of Residency but at Anthioch and Rome; yet he
trauay led and preached in so many Nations as I have, and shall set down
hereafter.

9. And if we will follow the Antiquities of Glastenbury, upon whose authority
Antiq. Glast. M. S. in tabul. lignea perantiqua. Io. Capgrau. in Catalog. in S.
Joseph ab Aramathia.
the Protestant Antiquaries of England have builded much, in many things, we
are told in them, that S. Iosephe son of S. Joseph of Aramathia, that buried
Christ, and came hither and lived, and dyed hear, came hither with his Father,
and that holy company, and also lived and dyed a Bishop hear. That he was not
a Bishop at his coming hither, it seems evident by many arguments: first,
because no History makes mention of any Episcopal function S. Iosephe son
of S. Joseph of Aramathia by diverse Antiquities, was a Bishop hear, and
probably consecrated hear by S. Peter or his Disciples.
performed then by him, or any of that happy society; secondly, by all
Antiquities, they lived and dyed in the Eremiticall state of life. Which much
differs from Episcopal, which conuerseth with, and rules others, and the
Churches committed unto his chardge. Thirdly in all Antiquities and Monuments
of these holy men remembered either by Catholics, or Protestants, S. Joseph of
Aramathia is called the chief and principal: ex quibus Joseph ab Aramathia
primus erat.

Intrat Aualoniam duodena caterua vivorum. Inscriptio antiqua in aere in
Caenob. Glaston. Tabul. antiq. ib. Ioh. Capgr. in S. Joseph ab Aramath. Godwin
Co^u. of Britain p. 11. Theater of Brit. l. 6. Camd. in Glastenbury. Capgr. in
S. Patricio.

Flos Aramathiae Joseph est primus ^orum.
Iosephes ex Joseph genitus, patrem comitatur.
Where S. Joseph that was no Bishop is every were styled their chief, and
Ruler: Therefore his son Iosephe could be no Bishop at that time, for so a
Bishop whose office is to rule, and in all languadges by all interpretation is
an Ouerseer, Chief commander and Ruler of others his subjects should have
been inferior, subject, commanded, and caled to, and by his inferior and
subject. Therefore to justify the prediction of our Savior after his
Ascension, that Iosephe, should be a Bishop, which the Antiquity of
Glastenbury sets down as a thing then done, saying of him: Iosephe quem
Dominus Jesus prius in ciuitate Sarath in Episcopum consecrauit: Iosephe whom
our Lord Jesus had consecrated for a Bishop, before in the city Sarath: We must
needs say, that he was afterward according to the designment, and Prophecy of
Christ, consecrated Antiquit. Glaston. apud Cap. grau. in S. Joseph ab Aramath.
a Bishop in this kingdom, for Prophesies that be true, are so certain they
shall come to pass, that often times they are expressed as presently done and
acted, as is usual in holy Scripturs and other wtiters, when they are not to
be performed long after, because they are as assuredly to be after in due time,
as if they were presently acted and fulfilled, as we must needs interpret
this. For the reasons before demonstrate, that S. Iosephe was not then
consecrated a Bishop by Christ. Neither does the Antiquity so say, but in
Episcopum consecrauit, Christ consecrated him to be a Bishop afterward. And we
do not read that Christ after his Ascension did actually consecrate any
Bishop, having committed those Functions to his Apostles. In so much that S.
Paul himself that was so extraordinarily and above all others that ever were
called by Christ, chosen and designed by him to be a Bishop, and Apostle, that
he often and confidently, and as it were singularly speaks of himself: Paul
Ephesians. 1. v. 1. Colossen. 1. v. 1. Galat. 1 v. 1.
an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God: Paulan Apostle, not of men,
neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from
the dead: Yet when he speaks of his Episcopal Consecration, and the exercise
of that holy Function, in the first Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans
saying: Paula servant Romans 1. v. 1. Protest. Concord. ibidem.
of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated unto the Gospel of God:
He refers this, as our Protestants in there Co^cordance of Scripturs in that
place expound him, to his Consecration in the 13. Chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles, by fasting, prayer, and imposition of hands. And before that time he
never exercised Act. 13. v. 1. 2. 3.
any Function merely Episcopal. The like I may say of S. Barnabas by Act. 11.
12. 13.
the same warrant, who though a Companion of S. Paul, and Preacher unto the
people, yet until he had at the same time with S. Paul externally received
ordinary Consecration he entermedled not with those peculiar offices.

10. The like examples (to omit others) we have of this Nation: We read of S.
Sampson, Archbishop of York, that S. Peter, S. James, and S. Ibon, Apostles
Io. Capgrau. in Ca^alog. in S. Samplone Episcop. Et M. S. antiquit. ^b^d.
appeared unto him before his Consecration, and one of them being demanded by
him, who they were, he said; Ego sum Petrus Christi Discipulus, and hic Frater
Domini Iacobus, and Euangelista Ioannes. Dominus Jesus Christus te sibi in
Praesulem elegit, and t^ consecrare nos misit. Quem cum benedictione
consecrassent, abeius oculis elapsi sunt: I am Peter the Disciple of Christ,
and this, James the Brother of our Lord, and Ihon the Evangelist. Our Lord
Jesus has chosen thee for a Bishop, and sent us to conserate the. Whom when
they had consecrated with benediction, they disappeared out of his sight. Where
nothing can be more plain then that this should be a true Consecration, and
thereby S. Sampson and Undoubted consecrated Bishop, if true consecration could
be so obtained; for all things required unto it, are here expressed, that our
Lord Jesus had chosen him, in Praesulem; for a Bishop, as the other Antiquity
was of S. Joseph in Episcopum: for a Bishop. Here is Christ's warrant to
consecrate him, and the three greatest Bishops and Apostles to perform it, and
the words are plain, that in that manner they effected it, quem cum
benedictione consecrassent: Yet it was adjudged both by heaven, and earth, God
and man, that this was no Consecration, nor S. Sampson yet to be accounted a
Bishop, but to expect the ordinary Consecration by Bishops; for it follows in
the same History: nec multo post Angelus Domini beato Dubritio apparens,
Sampsonem ordinari Episcopum praecepit: not long after an Angel of God
appearing to S. Dubritius (then Archbishop hear) commanded that Sampson
should be consecrated a Bishop. which he performed by the external Rites of
consecrating Bishops, and this his external Consecration by that holy
Archbishop, then the Popes Legate hear, was so miraculously confirmed, that as
it follows in the same Antiquity: They which were present at his
Consecration did see a Dove sent from heaven immouably to stand over him: In
cuius consecratione qui aderant columbam caelitus emissam immobiliter super eam
stare videbant.

11. And we have heard from these Protestants, and others before, that S. Peter
Godwin Catal. W^nchester 31. in Brith^ald. Capgr. in S. Edward. Conf. M. S.
Antiq. in eod. Alred. Rieuall. in Vit. S. Edwardi. Stowe histor. in Edward.
Confesan. 1043. Holins. hist. of Engl. l. 8. cap. 1.
did crown King Edward the Confessor, being an Exile in Normandy: Yet he was
not King, or so accepted, until many years after, and then ordinarily crowned
by the common Order of Coronation, belonging to our Kings at Winchester, as our
Protestant historians thus assuer us: Edward was crowned at winchester by
Edsinus then Archbishop of Canterbury, on Easter day in the year of our Lord
1043. When the Prophetical Coronation of him by S. Peter was many years
before. To these I may add the Dedication of the Church of our blessed Lady at
Glastenbury, builded by S. Joseph of Aramathia, and his holy company, which
Christ himself is written to have dedicated: And that of Westminster by an
apparition of S. Peter the Apostle, only with this difference, that the
figurative Dedication of this last by S. Peter did declare, what he had there
done before, as I have partly showed already, and more hereafter; the other
foresignified, what should by some Bishop be effected after, no Bishop being of
that company then to perform it, which I make an other Argument to show that
S. Joseph was no Bishop at that time, but (if at all) consecrated by S. Peter,
or his Disciples. And if we may give so much credit to a late writer, that S.
Aristobulus our first Archbishop suffered Martyrdom at Glastenbury, the place
of S. Joseph and his son, their only or chiefest aboade in this Nation. It
will make it more undoubted, that if S. Joseph was Martyr. Angl. die 15. Martij
in S. Aristobulo.
a Bishop, he was consecrated either immediately by S. Peter, or by this his
renowned Disciple our Archbishop then S. Aristobulus, whose daughter S. Peter
had married: Cepit vxorem Petrus filiam Aristobuli, fratris beati Barna^ae
Apostoli, ex qua suscepit filium and filiam, and sent him hither, as he sent S.
Sophronius Hierosolym. Episc. Libell. de labor. S. Petri and Pauli. Simon
Metaphrast. die 29. Iun. Hartma^. Schedel in Chronic. Chron. f. 205
his Brother S. Barnabas to Millan in Italy, as Hartmanus Schedel, with diverse
other Authors witnesses.

THE XIX. CHAPTER.
OF DIVERSE CHRISTIAN CHVRCHES, OR Oratories, such as the state of things then
allowed, erected, and founded in Britain, in the time of S. Peter's preaching
hear.

1. WE have heard before, how among other holy labors of S. Peter in this
kingdom, Ecclesias constituit: be constituted some Churches: how many in
number, or which they, or any of them in particular were, it is not so easy to
set down from Antiquities, all being in a manner silent of those proceedings;
and we may not expect to find any such Churches in that time, to carry that
glory, and honor with them, to continue to succeeding Generations, How poor
the Christian Churches were in th^se times.
when the Church of Glastenbury builded by the License of King Aruiragus, and
at the entreatie of the Roman Lieutenant, as Harding from others writes, by
the holy company of S. Joseph, was made but of writhen wands, and so desolate
within one hindered and three years only, after the first building Harding
Chroic. c. 47. f. 7^. Antiq. Glascon. apud Capgrau. in S. Patricio. Et M. S.
antiq. ib. Bed. Hist. Angl. Capgrau. in Catal. in S. Niniano. Bed. hist. Angl.
l. 2. cap. 14.
of it, that, caepit locus esse ferarum latibulum, qui prius fuerat habitatio
Sanctorum: The place which had been an habitation of Saints, began to be a Dene
of wild beasts. And diverse hundreds of years after this, the first Church of
stone, to remain durable, that is remembered to have been in Britain, was
builded by S. Ninian, at witherne, as S. Bid and others write: and King Edwine
of Northumberland, long after S. Augustins coming hither, was christened at
York in the Church of S. Peter, the Apostle, which he had builded of wood: in
Ecclesia S. Petri Apostoli, quam ipse de ligno construxit. And the days even
hear in Britayne were then such for Christians, that we must rather seek
their places of abode, and poor Oratories among the Deserts, and obscure
corners, in Cells, and Cotages, then in populous cities, and costly buildings:
As our ancient Christian Poet writing of such times in Britayne, thus
expresses.

Sic vt erat celebris cultu numeroque Deorum, Nochamus apud Bal. and alios.

Cum Iouis Imperium staret Britannia tellus:
Sic vbi terrestres caelo descendit ad oras
Expectata salus patribus fuit inclyta Sanctis,
Qui Neptunicolum campos, and Cambrica rura,
Corineasque casas, loca desolata colebant.
Which our Protestants have thus translated, for us. T^^a^e^ of g^^^t
B^^tainel. 5. c. 4.


As were the Britans famous, for their zeal
To gentile Gods, whiles such they did adore:
So when the heavens to earth did truth reveal,
Blessed was that Land with truth, and learning store,
Whence British plains and Cambreas desert ground, ^o. Bal. l. 1. d^ vit.
Pontif. Roman. Bap. Mantuan. l. 1. de Fast.

And Cornewals ^rags, with glorious Saints abound.
To which purpose a Protestant Bishop does allege an other Christian Poet in
this manner.

Nam cum Caesarei gens sanguinolenta tyranni
Praedacentur oues Christi, nullasque liceret
Christigenis habitare vrbes impune, ferarum
Consortes facti, fines tenuere supremos
Orbis:
When the persecution of Nero the Tirant grew so bloody, and destroyed the
sheep of Christ, and no Christians might without punishment live in cites.
They became companions of wild beasts, and inhabited the uttermost ends of the
world. Therefore if out of the private houses of Christians in those times we
would find any places to bear the names of public Churches, or Oratories for
the Christians then converted, though never so mean, and obscure, we must
seek them out of frequent and inhabited places, in the Deserts and
wildernesses, whether the rage of persecution did not so easily penetrate.

2. And to find any such, after so many hu^dreds of years, and changes of
things in this kingdom, we must be content with probable Arguments, and
Probahle that S. Peter's Church at westminster had some Original at this time.
testimonies, as is usual in such cases, and not expect demonstrations, which
cannot be given in such affairs. Among such Deserts of that time, diverse
Protestant and other Antiquaries will tell us, the place of S. Peter's Church at
Westminster was: Thus they write: Thorney now Westminster was called
Thorney-Iland, for that is was ouergrowne with Briers, and Thorns: which
Thorney place was in the Ihon Norden in Specul. Britan. page 4. 2. Polidor.
Virgil. Angl. hist. l. 2. page 41. Holnish. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 10. page 25.
Harris. descript. of Brit. cap. 2. page 140. Richard. Vit. Hist. l. 5. Io.
Seldom. Anaclet. cap. 6. Sulcardus apud Vit. Seld. Stowe hist. in K. Lucius.
Holinsh. hist. supr. Harrison. sup. Ihon Norden Specul. Brit. part. 1. in
Middelsex page 42.
time of King Lucius cleansed about the year 186. which Lucius is said to lay
the first foundation of the great Temple of S. Peter's. Which clensing of that
place by this religious King building a Church there, and dedicating it to S.
Peter, gives no swall argument unto us, to think it had a more ancient
founding, with some Relation from the beginning, to that holy Apostle;
otherwise there were many far more fit and convenient places in, or about the
City of London to build so stately a Church, then a desolate, briery, and
thorney Island. And the Church of S. Peter in Cornhill being dedicated to him,
and the Cathedral Church, by all Antiquities, we cannot be of any other mind,
but S. Peter had some former title unto that denomination. Which is rather
strengthened, in that these Protestants from Antiquities testify, that Theonus
Archbishop of London, in King Lucius time, who had his See at S. Peter's in
Cornhil, and helped to the building thereof, preached, read, and ministered the
Sacraments there, to such as made resort unto him in this Ila^d Church. A
Protestant Antiquary writes. I have heard, that there are, or have been
Records in the same Abbey (of Westminster) which declare it was a Church,
before the Britans received the faith of Christ; He means the time of King
Lucius. Then, if he speaks properly, it proves it was a Christian Church
before that time. For the word Church in English, Kyrke in the Scottish
languadge of the Greek Chiriache, the house of God our Lord, cannot by
Christians be applied or given to the Idols or pagan Gods of the Infidels, but
only to Christ, our true Lord and God. And this is confirmed by the known
vision, and words of S. Peter the Apostle in that place, in the time of S.
Ethelbert King of Kent, and S. Mellitus Bishop of London, which I have alleged
before from many allowed Antiquities, where S. Peter said of this place and
Church: By some a Christian Church at Ald^lyhit.
Quem locum proprijs manibus consecraui: which place I consecrated long ago
with my own hands. Which must needs, as I before have proved, be understood
of his parsonall presence, and consecration of that Church, when he lived, and
Harisin Theatr. l. 1.
preached hear, for then only and never since, he had proprias manus: his
own proper and natural hands, to execute either that, or any function with.

3. A late writer in his Manuscript History inclines to think there was a
Church founded by S. Peter the Apostle in the North parts of this Land,
aunciently called Aldclihit, in the old languadge of that place Peter's Clihit,
as though S. Peter founded it, and it took the denomination from him, and
cites Henr. Hunting. hist. l. 1. Matthew. Parker Antiq. Brit. p. 3. God wyn.
conu. of Brit. c. 2. p. 10. S. Aug. in quad. Ep. apud Auth. supr.
Henry of Huntington for his opinion, as is already declared. The first
Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, and an other also named such a Bishop,
will help us to find an other in the I Will of Glastenburye, more ancient then
that which was builded there by S. Joseph of Aramathia, and his companions in
the year of Christ 63. this being then fully and perfectly framed and finished
before their coming thither, and so found by them absolutely perfected. And
they cite for their Author S. Augustine the Apostle of England, in a certain
Epistle written by him, wherein he says, these holy men A Church at
Glastenbury, before that builded by S. Joseph of Arama^hia.
found at their coming thither, a Church builded by no art of man, but prepared
by God for man's salvation: Ecclesiam nulla hominum art instructam, immo
humanae saluti adeo paratam repererunt. Which is also recorded in the old
Antiquities of Glastenbury, written upon parchiment fixed upon broad bords,
which cite for the same, historiam apud S. Edmundum, and Augustinum, the
history at S. Antiq. Gaston. M. S. ^abulis fixae ex ^ist. apud S. Edmundum and
S. Augustinum.
Edmunds and S. Augustines. Which we must needs refer to the time of S.
Peter's preaching hear, and among other miracles, to prove his doctrine by, God
so miraculously provided a Church, to preach the gospel, and Minister
Sacraments in, and perhaps a motive to the Pagan King, to grant license to S.
Joseph, to build their poor Chapel at Glastenbury, and to endowe it with
possessions. Neither can we think, this Church so privileged by that King, to
have been finished without allowance of S. Peter, then present in this
kingdom, no Bishop being then hear, but by his Authority, or Consecration,
to dedicate and hallow it. And when our Protestant Theater writers with others
have told us, that in diverse places of this kingdom even in the Court of the
Roman Lieurenant, and among them, his Lady and wife, Pomponia Graecia, there
were many Christians before S. Joseph's coming hither, which must needs be the
spiritual children of S. Peter, we may not make him so careless a Father,
that standing in no worse terms, with the then king of Britain, and Roman
Lieutenant, then by circunstances before it appeared he did, but he provided
some Oratories, or poor Churches, either by those Princes permission, or not
contradiction, for them to exercise their sacred Christian Religion in, though
the injury of so many changes and alterations of gouernements, in this
kingdom, with persecutions, and Innouations in Religion, have buried their
memories in oblivion, and left the certain knowledge and remembrance of so few
unto us. And both Catholic T^^e Christian old Churches in the Il^ of ^^wy^.
and Protestant Historians tell us, of two Miraculous ancient Chapels in the
Isle, of Iewis; Boethius calls it, Leuisa, the one dedicated to S. Peter the
Apostle, the other to his Disciple and Successor S. Clement; where if the fire
or Holinsh. hist. of Scotland l. 4. c. 15 ^ector Boethius descript. Scot. f. 14.
light by mischance goth forth, it is, or was wont to be in Catholic times
miraculously restored at the Altar: No man to my reading writes, of their
first founding, but their names and dedication together with the Miracle give
no small argument, they had some original, in, or near those times, when S.
Peter and S. Clement preached in this kingdom.

THE XX. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN FOR THE BETTER DECERNING of truly consecrated Bishops, so many
Ecclesiastical matters depending thereupon, is showed by the Antiquities how
these Bishops were hear consecrated in the Apostles time, and succeeding Ages.

1. HAVING thus set down some holy Bishops consecrated by S. Peter, with
Priests, and others subordinate unto them, and places wherein they preached,
practiced, and professed the first Apostolic Christian doctrine, and Religion
in this kingdom. Order and Method in History call upon me, next to deliver
in particular, so fare as our penury of Antiquities will give me leave, what
Religion it was especially in points now controuersed, which that glorious
Apostle by himself and those his worthy Disciples taught the Christians of
this our Britain, and professed in those and other Churches, and places of
Christian Assemblies. But intending to reserve that labor to the end of every
hundred of years, (or to some other book a part) to show the Religion of
our Christian Brita^s in that age in such, I will hear only speak of the
Order and manner of co^secrating Bishops hear in that happy time, both because
I have made so late and lardge mention of such holy Rulers, and our Protestants
of England still without example of any others, of these new Religions, retain
their names and offices, as they suppose, as ever to have been from the
Apostles time most necessary to rule, direct, and govern in the Church of
Christ.

2. It is the common opinion of their Antiquaries, that the Britans hear from
their first receiving of the faith of Christ, in the time of the Apostles,
never altered, or changed it in any one essential thing, at the least until
the coming of S. Augustine hither, in the later end of the sixth hundred year
of Christ. Then much more must we affirm, by these men, that the essential
things in the consecration of true and lawful Bishops, upon which all other
depended were never changed, otherwise the change and alteration in these
unchangeable and unalterable affairs had been contrary to these men's
assertions too great and intolerable. Then we read in a very old Manuscript,
Capgraue and to follow two Protestant Bishops with many others that Io. Bal. l.
de Scrip. Cent. 1. in Asaph. Godwin Catal. of Bishops in cod. Asaph. Pits. l.
de vir. Illustr. in eod. S. Asaph in vit. S. Kenteg. M. S. Antiq. in eodem. Io.
Capgrau. in S. Kentegerno Episcop. and Confess.
S. Asaph did write the life of S. Kentegern and dyed above a thousand years
since, that when S. Kentegern vas consecrated Bishop almost, by these
Authors, 1200. years ago: Mos in Britannia inoluerat, in consecratione
Pontificum tantummodo capita eorum Sacri Chrismatis infusione perungere, cum
inuocatione Sancti Spiritus, and benedictione, and manus impositione. Insulani
enim quasi extra orbem positi emergentibus Paganorum infestationibus Canonum
erant ignari: Ecclesiastica ideo censura ipsis condescendens excusationem
illorum admittit in hac part: A custom was grown of long time in Britain in
the consecration of Bishops, to anoint their heads with infusion of holy
Chrisme, with invocation of the holy ghost, and benediction, and imposition of
hands. For the Ilanders being as it were placed out of the world, by often
Infestations of Pagans were ignorant of the Canons. And therefore the
Ecclesiastical Censure condesce^ding unto them, admits their excuse in this
point. And immediately before this manner of co^secrating Bishops is called Mos
Britannorum and Scotorum: The custom or manner of the Britans and Scots in
consecrating Bishops, and the same is there p^oued of the Christians in Ireland
in those times: For the same Antiquities testify, that there was a Bishop sent
for out of Ireland to be present and a Consecratour of S. Kentegern after that
manner, accito de Hibernia vno Episcopo more Britonum and Scotorum in Episcopum
ipsum consecrari fecerunt.

3. We are also taught by a Protestant Bishop, that S. Asaph who write the Io.
Capgrau. M. S. and S. Asaph supr. in S. Kentegerno.
life of S. Kentegern, and succeeded him in his Episcopal See in Wales and by
his sanctity gave that denomination unto it, was consecrated Bishop by holy
unction: vnctionem recepit: And there speaks as though it was the essential
ceremony of that holy Order, ascribing there no other thing essential unto it,
but authoritatem and vnctionem; authority, and inunction, so that Authority
Ioh. Bal. lib. de Scriptor. cent. 1. in Asaph fol. 34.
being the same with Jurisdiction, he makes the Sacrament only or cheifely to
consist in Anointing with holy Chrisme. And though these testimonies that this
Order or manner of consecrating Bishops was a general custom with the
Britans, Scots, and Irish people, when S. Kentegern was made Bishop, which was
long before the death of S. Patrike the Popes Legate in these Countries, and
before any notice taken of the Canons of holy Councels in this matter, do
sufficiently prove this ordering of Bishops with holy Chrisme was essential,
and from the time of the Apostles; yet if we will follow the opinion of the
Protestant Archbishop Whitgift, M. Fox, M. Barnes and Ioh. Witg. Answer to
the Admonit. p. 65. sect. 4. and p. 66. sect. 1. Foxeto. 1. page 12. Rob.
Barnes in vit. Pontif. in Anacleto. S. Anacletus Epi. ad Galliae. Episc. tom.
1. Council.
other English Protestant writers, testifying S. Anacletus that was made Priest
by S. Peter the Apostle, and after succeeded in the Sea of Rome, to be Author
of the Epistles extant in his name, it makes this matter out of Question: For
answearing the petition of the Bishops of France desirous to be instructed by
him in this matter, thus he writes: Vt a beato Petro Principe Apostolorum
sumus instructi, a quo and Presbyter sum ordinatus, scribere vobis sicut
petistis, non denegabimus. Ordinationes Episcoporum, authoritate Apostolica, ab
omnibus qui in eade^ fuerint Prouincia, Episcopis sunt celebrandae. Qui simul
conuenientes, scrutinium diligenter agant, ieiuniumque in omnibus celebrent
precibus, and manus cum sanct is Euangelys, quae praedicaturi sunt, imponentes,
Dominica die bora tertia orantes, sacraque unction, exemplo Prophetarum, and
Regum, capita eorum more Apostolorum, and Moysis, vngentes, quia omnis
sanctificatio constat in Spiritu sancto, cuius virtus inuisibilis Sancto
Chrismate est permixta, and hoc ritu solemnem celebrent ordinationem: As we
were instructed by S. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, by whom also I was made
Priest, we will not deny to write unto you, as you have requested. Ordinations
of Bishops by Apostolic authority, are to be celebrated by all the Bishops
that are in the same Province. Who assembling together, let them diligently
make scrutiny, and let them celebrate fasting with all prayers, and imposing
their hands ^ith the holy ghospels which they are to preach, praying upon our
Lords day at the third hour, and with holy vnctio by example of Prophets, and
Kings, anointing their heads, according to the manner of the Apostles and
Moses, because all sanctification consists in the holy ghost, whose
invisible virtue is mixed in holy Chrisme, and by this Rite let them celebrate
solemn ordination. Where we learn of an eye witness, and Anditor and
Disciple of S. Peter, so authentically witnessing it, that the other Apostles
and S. Peter did not only use his holy anointing of those Bishops they
consecrated, but in this external ceremony the virtue and grace of that
Sacrament was given.

4. To give further confirmation to this Antiquity, and inuincibly prove that
this manner of consecrating Bishops with holy unction, must needs descend from
the Apostles, it was the general custom in all parts of the world, Asia,
Afrike, and Europe, both in the Greek and Latin Church, in the first unspotted
days of Christianity. For Asia, and the Greek Church Marcus Marc. Anton. de
Dom. l. 2. c. 2. p. 187.
Antonius de Dominis when he was a writer for Protestants, and by their warrant
in England writes plainly: Areopagitae Dyonisio tributum opusculum vnctionem
ponit express: the work ascribed to Dionisius the Areopagite does expressly
put unction in consecrating a Bishop. And proves directly out of S. Gregory
Nazianz. orat. 20. de laudib. S. Basilij. and orat. 5. ad Pat. and Basil.
Naziancen, that both S. Basile and he also were consecrated Bishops with this
holy Ceremony: me Pontificem vngis. For Afrike he cites diverse Councels. And
for Europe and the Latin Church he alleges the Epistle of S. Anacletus before
cited: addit vnctionem capitis Anacletus, quae est antiquissima. I rather cite
these Protestants for these, then the ancient Catholic Authors themselves,
known to all learned men, that no Protestant may stand in doubt of the verity
of the Antiquities.

5. And to speak a little more of the Latin Church in which England is, S.
Gregory says plainly, that the anointing of Bishops is a Sacrament, and so
cannot be omitted: Qui cum in culmine ponitur, Sacramenta suscipit vnctionis.
Gregor. in c. 4. 1. Reg.
Quia vero ipsa vnctio Sacramentum est, is qui promouetur, been foris vngitur,
si intus virtute Sacramenti roboretur: he (a Bishop) that is placed in the top,
receaueth the Sacrament of unction. Because that unction is the Sacrament, he
which is promoted, is well anointed out wardly, if inwardly he is strenghtned
by the virtue of the Sacrament. The learned Fathers S. Isidor, Amalarius,
Fortunatus, at Treuers S. Isidor. lib. 2. de Eccles. offic. c. 25. Stephan.
aduers. tractat. de Sacrament. Altar. S. Iuo sermon. de reb. Eccl. de signific.
Indumentorum Bed. l. 3. detabernaculo and vasis eius. Et apud Amalar. supr.
Protest. Book of Articles of Religion. art. 25.
in Germany Stephanus Adnensis a Bishop, and S. Iuo in France testify the
same, that a Bishop is consecrated chiefly with this holy ceremony of unction.
So does S. Bid in England, saying: Indutus sacris vestibus Pontifex, mox oleo
vnctionis perfunditur, vt per gratiam Spiritus Sancti consecratio perficiatur:
The Bishop attyred with sacred vestiments is presently perfused with oil of
unction, that consecration may be perfected by grace of the holy Ghost. Where
we see all, which the Religion of English Protestants in their public Articles
thereof, requires to a Sacrament, an external sign, instituted by Christ,
giving grace and internal grace performed in this holy unction. And all the
ancient Christans of this kingdom, Britans, and Saxons before they were
united in other things in the time of S. Theodor Archbishop of Canterbury ever
agreed in this, as before is manifest in the Britans their old custom, and
Saxons receiving the faith from S. Gregory, who held this holy unction to be a
Sacrament. And we read in the life of S. Cedda our holy Bishop, who coming Io.
Capgrau. in S. Cedda.
to Canterbury to be consecrated, S. Deusdedi^ being dead before his coming
thither, and Wina being then the only Bishop a live among the Saxons Bishop
of the west Saxons Canonically ordered, he joined with two British Bishops
which differed from the Church of Rome, in the observation of Easter, and they
three consecrated S. Cedda Bishop: assumptis in so^ietatem ordinationis duobus
de Britonum gente Episcopis, qui Dominicum Paschae di^m secus morem Canonicum,
a quartadecima vsque ad vigesimam lunam celebrabant. Where we see, agreed by
all parties though at difference in some other things, that this sacred Rite of
holy unction, was the chief essential, and material ceremony in consecrating
Bishops, and they which obtained it in their consecration, though wanting other
ceremonies of that holy Sacrament, were ever esteemed, and honored for true,
and lawful Bishops, and otherwise of such as want it, the case of all
Protestants at this time, which have by this means deprived themselves, of all
true Bishops, Priests, and other Clergy men depending upon true Bishops: and
so have none but mere lay men in their profession, and consequently no Church
of Christ by their own confessions. But I shall more fully entreat these
things hereafter; when I shall both demonstrate that S. Peter, and all the
Apostles where Massing sacrificing Priests, and neither did, nor could
consecrate any others then such.

THE XXI. CHAPTER.
OF THE COMING OF S. JOSEPH OF ARAmathia, who buried Christ, into this our
Britain: And how it is made doubtful, or denied by many writers, but without
either reason or Authority.

1. ABOUT this time, when S. Peter and his holy Disciples, were thus happily
planting the faith of Christ, and founding his Church in Britain, it is the
common opinion, (which I will follow hereafter) that S. Joseph of Aramathia,
(who as the Gospel testifies, buried our blessed Savior) came hither, in,
or about the 63. year of his Incarnation: and for the great Honor of this
kingdom, was with his Religious company the first Founder of Monastical life
in this Nation; But before we Diverse make the coming of S. Joseph into Britain
doubtful: others wholly deny it.
can give him quiet possession hear by his presence, life, death, and burial,
to be made partakers of so great happiness, as they brought unto us: we find,
as in S. Peter before, many impediments, and hindrances of such benefit to
this kingdom; for some make his coming hither doubtful, others affirm he was
not hear at all. The writer of the ancient Roman Martyrologe seems to
think, he died at Jerusalem, for in his Festiuitie, which he makes the 17
day of March, so he affirms: Mart. 17. Hierosolymis S. Joseph ab Aramathia,
Martyrol. Romans 17. Martij.
nobilis decurionis, Discipuli Domini, qui eius corpus de cruce depositum in
monumento nouo sepeliuit. Philippus Bergomensis follows the same opinion that
he lived and dyed in Jury. And Cardinal Baronius though in his Annals Philipp.
Berg. hist. l. 8. f. 104. in an. D. 34. Baron. Annal. tom. 1. an. 35. Baron. in
annot. in Martyrolog. Romans 17. Ma^t. Author of the Book 3. Conu. part. 1. c.
1. p. 24. n. 25.
he cites a Manuscript History in the Vaticane, for his coming into, and dying
in Britain, yet in his Annotations upon the Roman Martyrolog, he inclines to
that which I have cited from thence, that he died in Jerusalem. The Author of
the Three Conuersio^s of England, speaking of S. Joseph's coming hither, says:
albeit I find no very certain, ^r ancient writer to affirm it, yet because
our later Historiographers for two hundred years or more do hold it to have
come down by Tradition, I do not mean to dispute the matter hear.

2. Others there be who allthough they agree with the common opinion, and
consent to the received truth, that S. Joseph came hither, lived, and died
hear, together with diverse of his religeous companions, yet they assign such
a time, for this his coming into this land, that it cannot be reconciled to the
true reasons of Antiquities in this point, and so they weaken thereby the
credit of the true Historye. Ihon Funccius a Protestant writer seems utterly
to deny his coming hither at all, so^^^^^gly say^^g th^se things Io. Funct.
lib. 6. Comm. in suam chronolog. ad an. 178.
which the writers of Britain deliver of Joseph of Aram^hia, who (...) the
^^lp of Nicodem^s, buried the body of Christ, how with many others be ca^^ to
that (...) and there first sowed the Gospel of Christ, and the rest, I leave
them to the (...) to be believed: Quae de Iosepho de Aramathia, qui Christi
(...) Nicodemo, sepalchro mandauerit, tradunt Britanniae Scriptores quomodo ad
(...) cum multis alijs venerit, ac Euangelion Christi primus ibidem
seminauerit, ac reliq^^ Britonibus credenda relinquo. By which words if he
means that S. Joseph was never hear at all, I shall plainly confute him
with the rest hereafter; but if he intends only, that S. Joseph was not the
first as his words be, Euangelion Christi primus ibidem seminauerit, that
preached hear, it hinders nothing at all, for I have proved S. Peter, and
his Disciples to have well deserved that Preeminencie; which perhaps this
Protestant was willing virtually to grant, naming no others, when in the
immediate next words he adds: Quamuis non dubito, quin multis annis ante,
Christi fides in Britannia fuerit culta, Funct. supr.
quam Lucius Rex ad eam peruenerit: allthough I do not doubt but the faith of
Christ was reuerencedin Britain many years before King Lucius received it.
But allthough these Exceptions against S. Joseph do carry a greater
countenance of authority and credit, then any were made against S. Peter, as I
have inuincibly freed this holy Apostle from the least suspicion therein, so I
will now This error confuted, with the occasion thereof.
deliver S. Joseph, and set him and his holy companions in the same state of
liberty.

3. And concerning the strongest objections from the Roman Martyrologe, and
Bergomensis, they only take notice of his first Conversation in Christianity,
as they found it in the Gospel, and so they go no further then it does,
only speaking of him in Jury and Jerusalem. Besides, if we should expownd
them, as Keepers of S. Joseph out of Britain, they are at variance with
themselves, for the Roman Martirologe keeps his festiuitie upon the 17. day
of March, and Philip of Bergon says: cum ob eximias eius virtutes Sanctus
habitus sit, eius Festum 13. calendas Augusti celebratur: when for his
excellent virtues he is accounted a Saint, his Feast is celebrated the 13. of
the Calends of August, the twenteth day of July. And whereas it is most
certain S. Antiquit. Glaston. and alij.
Joseph was present at the Transmigration of the blessed virgin Mary, and lived
many years after, Bergomensis sets down his death in the 34. of Christ,
soon after his Ascension: And the writer of the Martyrologe taking no other
notice of him, then from the Gospel sets down no time of his death, or
other Act of his life at all, not having read any History entreating of him,
after his coming from Jury, nor after the buryall of our Savior, and so no
maruayle if he was ignorant of the obscure and Eremiticall life, and death of a
Saint though otherwise so glorious, thus living and dying in so remote an
Island, formerly accounted an other world. For to omit hundreds, or thowsands
rather, of holy Saints of other Nations, which the Author of that Martyrologe
remembers not, things memorable confused and concealed with utter oblivion by
the Persecutions then, he speaks not one word of any one Saint of this
kingdom in that first age, and hundred years, though some of them are honored
in holy Scripture by S. Paul as S. Eubulus, and Claudia, and others, renowned
Bishops made public mirrors and spectacles of the then Christian world, as S.
Mansuetus, Beatus he whom some call Achates and others. So many and credible
ancient Antiquities of this Nation, which besides the certain Tradition of
that verity, I shall presently bring for the true History of S. Joseph's
living, and dying hear, will euidenrly declare, how little or unfortunate their
serches had been in our Antiquities, that could find no very certain or
ancient writer to affirm it: for I do not doubt but I shall produce as many
such for this matter, as we have for many most certain Relations, of so great
Antiquity concerning this kingdom, and for such acknowledged generally, both
by Catholic and Protestant writers.

THE XXII. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN IS PROVED BY ALL KIND of testimonies, and authorities, that for
certain, S. Joseph of Aramathia, with diverse other holy Associates, came into,
preached, lived, dyed, and was buried in Britayne, at the place now called
Glastenhury in Summerset shire.

1. THE most credible, faithful, and undoubted human testimonies, which we can
have, or desire in such things of Antiquity, to try their truth, were ever
accounted those which be given, and warranted by the public Charters, and
Instruments of our Kings, to which commonly all subjects of understanding, and
quality give some assent, or approbation, and in matters concerning Antiq.
Glast. M. S. Et Capgrau. in S. Joseph. Park. Antiq. Brit. p. 3. Godwin Conu. of
Brit. p. 9. Stow hist. in Aruiragus. Camden in Belg. Io. Leland in asser.
Arthur. Bal. l. de Script. cent. in Joseph ab Aram. Antiquit. Glast. M. S.
tabulis affixae. vetust. Guliel. Malm. l. de antiq. Glastoniae M. S. Io. Bal.
l. de Script. cent. 2. f. 81. in G^^elu. Malmesburien. Ioh. Leland. l. de
assert. Arthur. f. 12. Stowe and Howes histor. in Romans. Agric. Godwin Conu.
of Brit. Theater of Brit. l. 6.
the community, such as freedom, privilege, and exemption in matters of a
different Religion, and conversation, from other subjects are, must needs take
notice, and knowledge of them, the privileged and exempted parsons, or their
chiefest, and places, their names, nature, and condition. And yet the best and
most ancient Antiquities we have of that, and which Catholics receive and
allow for true in this point do assuer us, that the Pagan which then lived and
reigned hear, did expressly testify and approve this History of S. Joseph by
his public Instrument of Immunitie in such manner, diverse of these Antiquities
name that King, saying it was Aruiragus, and affirm the same of the two next
succeeding Kings, Marius, and Coillus: others as the most ancient Manuscript
Antiquity written in great leaves of parchment fixed upon broad bords, and
formerly belonging to the Monastery of Glastenbury, and William the Monk of
Malmesbury, who as a Protestant Bishop writes, was an old man in the year of
Christ 1130. in his Manuscript History de antiquitate Glastoniae: of the
antiquity of Glastenbury, (both which I have seen) punctually set down the
same History, but do not express the names of the Pagan King, and Kings which
gave this public liberty and protection to S. Joseph of Aramathia, whose name
they plainly set down, but only say, it was the Pagan King which then
reigned, and two other Pagan Kings after him.

2. The same irreprouable certainty of this verity was continually afterward
warranted by other Kings, in the same Order by their public Charters, and
Testimonialls of the same truth: among whom King Henry the second in his
letters Patents is witness, that his Antecessours Kings hear, william and
william, Henry, Edgar, Edmund, Elfred, Bringwalthius, Henthwine, Baldred, Inas,
Arthure, Cynred Christians, and Kennewalla a Pagan, had in the same manner by
their public Charters given testimony unto it: all which (he there protests)
he had caused diligently to be sought forth, presented and read before him.
Quorum priuilegia and Chartas feci diligenter inquiri, and coram me presentar^
and legi: and that the venerable authority of the Ancients did prove the
Church so privileged, was so builded by them, which were the very Disciples
themselves of Christ our Lord: ab ipsis Discipulis Domini aedificatam fuisse,
venerabilis habet antiquorum authoritas. Of which holy company all Antiquities
bring Evidence, that S. Joseph of Aramathia was the chief, and principal. To
which the name of the place called by the first chiefest builder, as is usual
in such things, bears the name now even in the Ruyns thereof, as it ever did
when it flourished most, S. Joseph's Chapel. Because principally builded by
him, and not for that is was dedicated to him, for all Antiquities plainly
acknowledge it was from the first building dedicated to the blessed Virgin
Mary. To this the holy body of S. Joseph buried there with the an ancient
Inscription in Brass upon his Tomb, testifying that Saint Joseph's body was
interred there, was a William Hariso^ descript. of Brit. p. 23.
witness without exception, so long, until the new Religion defaced it, with
so many holy and memorable Antiquities. And as I have been credibly informed,
it was after presented and given to Judge wamslowe, when he was Judge of that
circuit. The styled holy most miraculous tree, still growing in the place of
his, or some of his companions first resting there, does every Christmasse time
preach even to this day the truth of this, and Christian Religion, in so
wonderful and supernatural manner, that no Jew, Mahumetan, or Pagan can
deny them. The Charter of King Henry the second which testifies that so many
Kings had taken public notice of this matter, is, or lately was extant, for
Ihon Leland writing of this History, says: ipsa Henricianae donationis verba,
ex Archetypo subscribam. I will set down the words of King Henry his grant
Ioh. Leland assert. Arthurij fol. 12.
out of his original writing it self. Therefore he had seen it. And Master
Stowe making relation, from this Charter of King Henry the second, how all
those Kings before remembered, and many other Christian Kings besides, had
publikly confirmed this truth, he adds: all which so to be, the foresaid King
Henry Stowe history the Romans in Agricola. Theater of great Brit. lib. 6. cap.
9. Godwin Conu. of Brit. p. 10. Theater sup. l. 6. Ihon Harding Chronicle fol.
60. c. 47. Act. SS. Damia. and Fugat. apud Capgr. in Catal. Leland. in Asser.
Arthur. Theat. of Brit. l. 6. Epist. S. Patric. apud Capgr. sup. and alios.
Godwin Conu. of Brit. p. 10. Gaufrid. Abbas Burton. M. S. hist. de vit. S.
Moduenae Virg. c. 2. 4. etc. Nenius apud Harding Chron. fol. 41. c. 48. Melkin.
apud Capg. in S. Joseph and in Antiq. Glaston. Baleus l. de Scri. cent. 1. in
Melkino. Matthew. Parker in antiq. Brit. sup. Godwin Conu. p. 10. Io. Anglic.
Fox to 1. Mon. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. c. 9.. 2. David Powel in Annot. in
hist. Cambr. p. 12. 13. Godwin Conu. of Brit. p. 11. Ioh. Capgrau. in Catalog.
in S. Patri. the Ancient inscriptio^ in Brass. Apud Capgrau. in S. Joseph. M.
S. Vatican. apud Baron. to. 1. Theat. of Brit. l. 6. Godw. Conu. of Brit.
Philip. Pantal. Chron. ad an. 70. and 75. Andre Chesne hist. d'Angletere,
Escosse and Hiber. Matthew. Parker. Antiq. Brit. Bal. cent. 1. in Joseph Godwin
Conu. Mont. Infra. Camden in Belg. Stowe and Howes Hist. Powell annot. in hist.
Brit. Drayton in Poly. olb. Seld. Illustr.
established by his Charter: which Charter myself have seen and read.

3. The Protestant Theater writers write in like manner, and a Protestant
Bishop writing in the year 1615. of this matter, plainly writes: The
Charters are extant of King Henry the second. And the same Protestants late
Theater tells us the like of the Charter of King Edward the third, to the
same effect: one exemplified under the seal of King Edward the third is to be
seen at this day: wherein Relation is made of all those Charters and
Testimonies I have before remembered. Ihon Harding writing of the coming of S.
Joseph hither, and the extraordinary favor which King Aruiragus publikly
showed unto him, and his Associats, says it was, at the entreaty of Vespasian
the Roman Lieutenant unto Aruiragus, and his Queen. We have further witnesses
hear of the Acts of the Legates of Pope and Saint Eleutherius, in the second
hundred year alleged by S. Patricke, whether the first sent by S. Celestine
Pope then of Rome as his Epistle testifies, or the second as a Protestant
Bishop rather supposes, I do not hear contend, for this second also was a
glorious Saint as Gaufride Abbot of Burton in his Manuscript History writes, ^
sent by Pope Leo into Ireland, the tenth in number from the first S. Patrike.
we have or had also Nenius in his History in the British tongue testifing the
same, except Ihon Harding does deceive us. We have the Epistle of that S.
Patrike; which lived long and died at Glastenburye, where S. Joseph also lived
and died, and was buried, to the same purpose. We have Melkinus who wrote above
a thousand years since, witnessing the same, and that he was buried under a
marble stone at Glastenbury. In Aualonia Joseph ab Aramathia dictus somnum sub
marmore caepit diuturnum. And except two Protestant Bishops, Parker and
Godwyne, and as they say Ioannes Anglicus long since deceive us, S. Augustine
our Apostle in an Epistle which he wrote to S. Gregory gives like testimony.
Ihon Fox, the Theater writers, David Powell, with sum others allege the same
from Gildas in his book of the victory of Aurelus Ambrosius. There is, as a
Protestant Bishop writes, and Ihon Capgraue cites the same History, an
ancient Inscription in Brass formerly fixed upon a pillar in S. Joseph's
Chapel at Glastenbury, and now, or lately in the custody of M. Thomas Hewes
Esquier in Wells, but three miles distant thence, expressly proving, that S.
Joseph of Aramathia, with eleven other holy men, he being the chiefest, came
hither in the thirtith year after the Passion of Christ: Anno post passionem
domini 30. duodecim sancti, ex quibus Joseph ab Aramathia primus erat, huc
venerunt. And it is contained in the same Antiquit^^* that Saint David in his
time offered a Sapphire of inestimable value upon the Altar there: cuius altar
inaestimabili Sapphiro insigniuit; And set a pillar for a during mark,
between the Chapel which S. Joseph had builded, and other later additions
unto it, perpetually to know it by: with the perfect breadth, and length
thereof.

4. We have the ancient Poet to assuer us that S. Joseph was the principal of
the twelve holy men coming to Aualonia.

Intrat Aualoniam duodena caterua virorum,
Flos Aramathiae Joseph est primus eorum.
We have forreyne testimonies hereof, both Catholics and Protestants, the
Manuscript history in the Vaticane Library at Rome, cited by Baronius, our
Theater writers, and others: Philip Pantaleon a German Protestant telling us
that Joseph of Aramathia with his fellows preached the Gospel in Britayne:
Josephus de Aramathia in Britannia cum socijs suis Euangelium praedicauit. So
for France has Andrew Chesne in his French History of England, Scotland and
Irelend with others, at home we have a general consent of Historians,
Catholics, or Protestants, in this matter, namely among Protestants, their
Protestant Bishops Parker their Archbishop, Bale, Godwine and Montague, of
others Camden, Stowe, Howes, Powell, Seldom, Drayton, and others. Among these,
Doctor Montague Protestant Bishop of Wells with in three miles of the place
where S. Joseph dyed, and was buried, and so taking the best knowledge thereof
he could, to present a Queen withal in his Panegiricall entertainment of the
late Queen Anne producing four parsons to represent S. Peter, S. Paul, S.
Andrew Apostles and S. Joseph of Aramathia, brings forth the Representor of
S. Joseph thus to speak unto her. I am the Herald of these Saints Peter,
Paul, and Andrew, sent hither by them full fifteen hundred and forty years
ago, to bring the waters of life into this Isle of Britayne. In this Isle I
made choice of an Isle, the Island of Aualon, near adjoining to this place,
where after I had planted and watered, and God had given an happy increase, I
rested from my labors, and my body lay buried in a grave of honor, hoping
verily that since I had that honor, to intombe that blessed body, no body
would have done themselves that dishonor, as to have violated my sepulcher.
But God wot, ruinated it is, and with it the goodlyest Monastery that ever eye
in any Island did behold. And after confirms his narration with these
miraculous Arguments, presenting two boughs unto her: Saint Peter open the
gates with your keys. Saint Paul defend with your sword. Saint Andrew bless
with your Cross. All of you pray the God of heaven to give her Majesty long
life, happy health; glorious days, blessed posterity, and all prosperity. As
for me that have been spoiled of all, I have nothing left me, but these
boughs; the one a Branch of that Thorn, that in memory of my blessed Master
ever buddeth one the day that he was borne. The other in memory of his Martyrs,
which one the longest day begins to live, one which they began to dye.

THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
EXAMINING WHO SENT S. JOSEPH HITHER, and evidently proving that he was not
sent into Britayne by S. Philip the Apostle from our neighboring Gallia or
France: confuting all pretended arguments, and authorities to that purpose.

1. BEING thus perfectly instructed in the truth of S. Joseph of Aramathia and
his Associats being hear: It follows next in Order, to be truly informed,
from whom, whence, and when he came hither. The opinion of many Protestants
is, that he was sent hither out of this Gallia, or France next adjacent unto us
by Saint Philip the Apostle, then preaching there. But as I have not allowed
this sentence before, so I must now utterly disable it to be received for true.
Which cannot better be performed then by first examining and improuing the
reasons one which it is grounded, and then set down what is most probable to
be followed in this Question. Some Protestants, as Fox, David Powell, Sir
Francis Hastings, and the Theater writers would Fox to. 1. David Powell annot.
in hist. Cambr. p. 12 13. Fra^. Hastings etc.
have their Readers believe, that S. Gildas held this opinion that S. Joseph
was sent to the Britans out of this next Gallia by S. Philip the Apostle. But
when we come to find this testimony in Gildas, we can find no such Gildas to
prove it by: for the true History of Gildas which is de Excidio and Conquestu
Britanniae, from which diverse of these men allege it, has no such thing
either Gildas pretended by some to say, that S. Joseph was sent out of France
into Britain by S. Philip the Apostle, has no such thing.
in the printed book published by the Protestants or Polidor Virgil, neither
in any Manuscript copy which I can find, or is cited for this matter. Master
Fox writes thus: Gildas in his History affirms plainly that Britany
received the Gospel in the time of Tiberius the Emperor: and that Joseph of
Aramathia was sent by Philip the Apostle from France to Britayne. Gild. lib. de
victoria Aurel. Ambrosij. Master Hastings follows Fox as his Master word by
word, only he citing Gildas does not allege that book. And that Fox Act.
and Monum. to. 1. p. 96.
which they cite from Gildas of Britayne receiving the faith in the time of
Tiberius, overthrows the credit of this allegation, for they cite both that
and Saint Joseph's sending hither out of France by S. Philip the Apostle from
one and the same Gildas, and place, in him. And yet that Relation of Britayne
receiving the faith in the days of Tiberius, is in Gildas de Excidio
Britanniae, and only in that and no other ancient Author, any Gildas or
other for any thing I can find in Antiquity, or justified or justifiable by
any later writer. For besides the true acknowledged Gildas, of whom I have
spoken before, called the wise: cognomento sapiens, we find but two others
mentioned in our Histories, one of them lived at Rome and dyed as a Protestant
Bishop testifies in the year of Christ's Incarnation 74. vitae compleuit
cursum anno ab incarnato Dei verbo 74. And for any thing we read was no
Christian, neither wrote any such thing, and dying diverse hundreds of years
before Ioh. Bell. l. de Script. cent. 1. in Gilda Cambrio f. 15.
Aurelius Ambrosius was borne, could by no possibility be Author of the book
entitled, de victoria Aurelij Ambrosij: of the victory of Aurelius Ambrosius,
from which this pretended testimony is alleged. The other Gildas commonly
named Albanius could not be Author of this pretended Antiquity of S. Philips
sending S. Joseph to this Nation: for though I acknowledge, with the British
History, Ponticus Virunnius, Bale, Pits, and others that this Gildas wrote a
book of that Title, and subject, yet it could not be this which is here
produced: for as both the British History and Virunnius witness, the names
and Acts of the Roman Legates Damianus and Phugatianus with there Associates
Galfrid. Monu. hist. Reg. Brit. l. 4. cap. vlt. Ponticus Virunn. Brit. hist. l.
4. in fine.
were set down by Gildas in that book: eorum nomina and actus i^n libro
reperiuntur, quem Gildas de victoria Aurelij Ambrosij inscripsit. And yet these
being so memorable things for our Ecclesiastical History, not any one of these
Protestants which cite the pretended Gildas before, though all of them writing
of purpose of such matters, does make the least memory of them, which they
would not have so grossly omitted, if they had seen the true Gildas which was
written in that time.

2. Again Doctor Powell a Protestant, Citer of this new found Gildas, Says
from thence, that Joseph of Aramathia came into this Island about the year of
Christ 53. Which differs ten years from the received Historyes of the time
of his coming hither: and it is as much at variance with itself, as it is
cited by other Protestants, for Ihon Fox says: some other allege out of
Gildas Fox l. 1.
de victoria Aurelij Ambrosij, that Joseph of Aramathia was sent by Philip the
Apostle from France to Britayne about the year of our Lord 63. Where we see
evident contradiction in the pretended Author, and citers of him. And in an
other place this Protestant quite discrediteth this citation, testifying that
it was one and the same Gildas, which wrote of Britayne receiving the faith in
the Fox l. 2. p. 106.
time of Tiberius, which was Gildas Sapiens, and that wrote of S. Joseph sent
into Britayne out of France by S. Philip, which as before, he never mentions.
An other Protestant more disableth this citatio^ making the difference of the
time greater in this manner: George Mayor writes in a preface that immediately
Stow hist. in Agricola.
after Crists Resurrection, under Claudius the Emperor the light of the
Gospel was kindled in Britayne by Joseph of Aramathia, that buried the body
of Christ. Polidor Virgil whom some Potestants, though untruly, cite for S.
Philips Bal. cent. 1. l. de Scriptor. f. 14. in Joseph Arimath. Polydor.
Virgil. l. 2. hist. Angl. p. 37. Polydor. Virgil. supr. l. 1. p. 16.
sending S. Joseph hither, out of France has no such thing, but makes the
means of his coming hither doubtful, whether by chance or of purpose; sieve
cas^, sieve consilio in Britanniam venit, and named the deviser of this Gildas,
the most impudent knave, that ever lived: Sane is nebulo long post homines
natos impudentissimus. Whereupon the best Protestant Antiquaries, Bale, Camden,
Parker, Stowe, Godwine, and others quite forsake that pretended authority never
vouchsafing to allege it, and the citers of it, by the contradictions there,
have sufficiently reproved it, diverse of them rather inclining to think, as I
shall entreat hereafter; that S. Philip the Apostle was never in this next
France, to send S. Joseph from thence into Britayne. And no man of any
indifferent Judgment will think, but if the true Gildas had written any such
thing, the most diligent Collectours of the Antiquities of Glastenbury; who
gathered so many and of far meanner credit, and Antiquity, then the true
Gildas was, would for the honor of that house, in one place or other have
remembered it, which none of them, nor any other, old or new credible writer
has done.

3. Therefore seeing their hope from Gildas has thus failed the^, let us
consider, what other Authority they find to rely upon. A Protestant Bishop
writes thus of S. Joseph: Hunc Philippus Apostolus cum non paruo comitatu a
Bal. l. de Script. cent. 1. in Joseph Aram. f. 14.
Gallijs in Britanniam misit, nostrae salutis anno 63. vt post Capgrauium and
Scropum aliosque Scriptores Anglicos, testis est locuples Polydorus Virgilius
Anglicae Historiae libro secundo: Philip the Apostle sent Joseph with no small
company, out of France into Britayne, in the year of Christ 63. as after
Capgraue and Scroope and other English writers, Polydor Virgil is a sufficient
witness in the second book of his English history. Where we see only three
particularly named. Capgraue the chiefest, whom Scroope seems to follow and
Polydor Virgil. This last as I Polyd. Vir. hist. l. 2. p. 37. 41. 89.
have cited before has no such thing in any place, where he speaks of S.
Joseph, never so much as naming S. Philip the Apostle in this matter. Capgraue
recites such an opinion in the life of S. Joseph out of Freculphus, who, as
hereafter, has no such thing at all, and in the life of S. Patrike written
after that of S. Joseph makes the like narration of some, which think that S.
Io. Capgrau. in Catal. in S. Joseph and in S. Patricio. Io. Bal. de Script.
cent. 5. f. 201. 202. in Io. Capgrau. Godwin. Conu.
Philip sent S. Joseph hither, but he brandeth it, with this blemish: si
Veritatem sapiat, lectoris arbitrio relinquo. Which whether it tastes of
truth, I leeue to the Judgment of the Reader. Which is far from approving it
for a true History: An^d by our Protestant Bishops, who though they acknowledge
Capgraue for a very learned Author, make him credulous enough in such things,
it utterly discrediteth that report: for when he had written all, which he
thought credible of the matter, he then handled, he immediately adds: Quae
inferius digesta sunt, si veritatem sapiant, lectoris arbitrio relinquo. The
things which follow I leave to the Reader to Judge of their taste of truth.
And among these, the first and chiefest of all is this, of S. Philip the
Apostle his coming into France, and from thence sending S. Joseph hither into
Britayne. So that we evidently see, all authorities ^itherto alleged by these
Protestants, are rather against, then for, them in this business.

4. Their last and principal whereupon they now rely herein, is a pretended
testimony of Freculphus the ancient learned Bishop of Lexouium. The first
Protestant Arch bishop of Canterbury citing for his only Author Freculphus l.
2. cap. 4. says: Philippus Apostolus qui in Galliam venit, and Euangelij
Matthew. Parker Antiq. Brit. p. 3.
praedicatione plures ad fidem vertit, cum de Britannia modico freto separata
Insula accepisset, a qua Druidum superstitio manabat in Galliam, delegit ex
suorum sociorum numero duodecim; quibus Iosephum Aramathiensem, qui dominum
Christu^ sepulchro condidit, praefecit: Philip the Apostle which came into
France, or Gallia, and by preaching the Gospel converted many to the faith,
when he understood of Britain, an Island separated from thence by a narrow sea,
from which the superstition of the Druids did flow into France, he did choose
twelve out of the number of his fellows, among whom he ordained for Ruler,
Joseph of Aramathia that buried Christ. Another writes in this manner: William
of Malmesbury in his book of the Antiquities Stowe History Romans p. 37.
of Glastenbury alleges Freculphus, to write in his second book, and fourth
Chapter as follows: Philip the Apostle preaching the word of God in Gaul,
now called France, chose out twelve amongst his Disciples, whom he sent into
Britain, to preach the word of life, and upon every one of them, he most
deuoutely stretched out his right hand, over these he appointed for chief his
dear friend Joseph of Aramathia, that buried our Lord. An other Protestant
Bishop plainly says: the occasion Godwin Conu. of Brit. p. 9. c. 2.
Chronicil. c. 4.
of Joseph's coming hither, Freculphus Bishop of Lexouia that flourished an. 840.
reports to be this. That when Philip the Apostle, or as some think rather
the Evangelist, for their Actions are much confounded in Historyes, preaching
Christ in France, had much to Do with the Druydes, who had their beginning,
and chief Doctors in Britain: and understanding that this our Island was
separated from France by a small cut of a few hours sail, he thought good to
send over hither 12. Preachers the chief where of was Joseph aforesaid. Thus
perhaps other Protestants do write, and might be cited in the same sense, but
these be too many, except their allegations were more free from falsehood; for
first allthough William of Malmesbury in his Manuscript of the Antiquities of
Glastenbury seems to allege Freculphus, for S. Philips sending S. Joseph
hither out of France, or Gallia; yet of the rest, which these Protestants
father upon him, about the Druides and all other circumstances set down
before, he writes not one word, never mentioning any such thing at all, his
words be these: Freculphus testatur libro 2. cap. 4. quod Philippus praedicans
Euangelium in Gallia, duodecim Guliel. Malm. l. de antiq. Glast. M. S.
ex suis Discipulis elegit, quos misit in Britanniam ad praedicandum verbum
vitae, and super singulos manum dexteram deuotissime extendit, hi autem
praefecit amicum suum Joseph ab Aramathia, qui dominum sepeliuit. Venerunt his
in Britanniam anno Dominicae Incarnationis 65. and Assumptionis beatae Mariae
15: Freculphus in his second book and fourth Chapter does witness, that Philip
preaching the Gospel in Gaul, did choose twelve of his Disciples, which he
sent into Britain to preach the word of life, and upon every of them did most
deuoutely stretch forth his right hand, and appointed his friend Joseph of
Aramathia to be chief of the^. These came into Britain, in the year of our
Lords Incarnation 65. and of the Assumption of blessed Mary the 15. where we
find no mention at all of those pretended motives concerning the Druids, and
other circumstances related before by these Protestants, and untruly fathered
upon these Authors, but truly, though illegittimate, and Bastards, only
begotten and brought forth by the false pens of these Protestant Relators. And
the time of S. Joseph's coming hither to differ also so much by these alleged
Authorities, from that which some of them cite from their concealed Gildas, as
I have before related. And the very substance of the narration itself of S.
Philips sending S. Joseph hither out of France grounded upon the Authority of
Freculphus, very suspicious, that the true original Manuscript of Gulielmus
Malmes buriensis (though some Transcripts which I have seen do) warranteth no
such thing. For this William Monk of Malmesbury himself in his second book,
De gestis Ponfiticum Anglorum, which was written after his book of the
Antiquity of Glastenbury, does take plain exception to the History of S.
Patrike his burial there, whereon this narration is grounded, saying: Iacet
ibi Patricius, si eredere dignum, Natione Britto ^eati Germani Antisiodorensis
Discipulus, quem a Papa Caelestino ordinatum Episcopum Hyberniensibus misit
Apostolum. So do two English Protestant Bishops, God^in supr. Bal. l. de
Script. cent. 1. in Patric. Gaufrid. Abb. B^^ton. in vit. S. Moduenae M. S.
one cited before, thinking this was a second Patrike, which the Abbot of
Burton says, Pope Leo sent into Ireland, and was also a Saint. And the same
William of Malmesbury does in the same Manuscript History of Glastenbury soon
after the first pretended citation from him, set down the Authority of
Freculphus, only to prove that S. Philip preached in Gallia, his words be
these: Freculphus Historiae libro 2. cap. 4. testatur Philippum Gulielm. Malm.
l. de Antiq. Glaston. M. S. Paulo post initium.
Apostolum Gullis verbum dei praedicasse: Freculphus in the second book and
fourth Chapter of his History, does witness that Philip the Apostle did preach
the word of God to the Gauls. Never writing one word, that Freculphus affirmed
S. Philip to have sent S. Joseph from thence into Britain. Which Freculphus
does not teach in that, or any other place: his words in the place alleged be
only Freculphus Episcopus Lexouie^. Chron. to. 2. l. 2. c. 4. p. 448.
these: Philippus a Bethsaida, ciuitate hic Gallis praedicat Christum;
Barbarasque gentes, vicinasque tenebris, and tumenti Oceano coniunctas, ad
scientiae lumen, fideique portum perducit. Deinde in Hierapoli phrygiae
Prouinciae vrbe crucifixus, lapidatusque obijt, rectoque sepultus Cadauere
ibidem requiescit: Philip of the city Bethsaida, preaches Christ to the
Gauls, and brought Brabarous Nations, and near to Darkness, and Joined to the
swelling Ocean, to the light of knowledge, and the haven of faith. And
afterward crucified, and stoned, died in Hierapolis, a citic of the Province of
Phrygia, and there rests his body being buried upright. Which be the Author.
l. d. vit. and mort. Sanct. inter opera S. Isid. in S. Philipp. Apostol.
words also of the Author of the book, of the life and death of Saints: de
vita and morte Sanctorum, among the works of S. Isidor. And Freculphus has not
any word of S. Joseph of Aramathia at all, neither speaks more of S. Philip,
but a little after setting down breifely, as likewise the said Author of the
life and death of Saints does, where every Apostle preached, he says of S.
Philip, Gallias accepit; he took the Countries Gallia. Which, as I will
demonstrate Freculph. supr. l. 2. p. 45 1.
in the next Chapter, were not meant of this Gallia or France, next unto us,
whether S. Philip the Apostle never came.

5. And to refute the gross error, and ignorance of them that cite S. Isidor
or other Author of the book of the life and death of Saints, for S. Philips
sending S. Joseph out of France into Britain, besides the negative testimony
Io. Bal. l. de Scritorib. cent. 1. in S. Joseph. Aramat. Franc. Godwin Conu. of
Britain p. 11.
of both those Authors, which have no such thing at all, the Protestant Bishop
Ihon Bale and others so much acknowledge, among whom Francis Godwin the
Protestant Bishop must needs be one, who brings the ancient Antiquity of
Glastenbury engraued in brass, which says he had seen, and alleges it,
word by word, for the coming of S. Joseph and his companions hither, with the
time, and other circumstances, and yet has not one word, that they were sent
hither by S. Philip out of France, or that he was at any time in this Gallia:
The same I affirm of all French writers, both late and ancient, not any one
among so many, which to my reading, and memory teaches, that either S. Philip
the Apostle sent S. Joseph of Aramathia into Britain out of France, or that he
himself ever preached there, or sent any preachers thither; which will more
manifestly be proved in the next Chapter ^ollowing: But the Gallia where S.
Philip the Apostle is by some supposed to have preached, is far distant from
this our neighboring Gallia, or France. And so the similitude or Ide^titie of
one and the same name, for diverse Countries, gave accasion of Error unto some
few such, as reading that S. Philip the Apostle was in a Country called Gallia,
and S. Joseph of Aramathia lived and died hear in Britain, to make this
false, and Ignorant collection: That S. Joseph was sent hither by S. Philip out
of this next Gallia, where he never Acta per Legate. Antiquit. Glast. Manuscr.
Tabul. Fix.
was. And it is evident by our old Antiquities of Glastenbury, that S. Philip
neither did, nor could send S. Joseph or any hither from our next France, which
had not that name until some hundreds of years after, when the Frankes of
Sicambria came first into some parts of that kingdom, thus it testifies from
the old Acts of the first Christians at Glaste^bury in S. Joseph's time: In
antiquis scriptis inuenerunt, qualiter sanctis Apostolis per vniuersum orbem
dispersis Sanctus Philippus Apostolus cum multitudine Discipulorum in Franciam
veniens, duodecim ex ipsis in Britanniam misit ad praedicandum: S. Damianus and
Phaganus sent hither by Pope Eleutherius did find in an old writing, how when
the Apostles were dispersed into all the world, S. Philip the Apostle with a
multitude of Disciples coming into Francia, sent twelve of them into Britayne
to preach. This Manuscript Antiquity first written in S. Joseph's time, and
after found in the days of King Lucius long before any Frankes gave name unto
our next France, or came thither, gives demonstrance that S. Philip was among
the Frankes of Sicambria, which many others also testify, and if he sent S.
Joseph hither out of Francia, it was that and no other Francia, from whence he
sent him. The Antiquities of Glastenbury from the testimony of an ancient
Monk of S. Denis in France, to one Godfridus a Monk of Glastenbury relates
that the Church of Glastenbury was consecrated by the highest great Bishop,
meaning as it seems S. Peter the Apostle, the highest great Bishop in that
time, and that it was called the second Rome, for the multitude of Epist.
Godefrid. Monachi Glast. Antiquitates Glaston. Manus. tab. Affix.
Saints buried there, of the which S. Joseph was the first. Haec gloriosissimi
Martyris Dionisij Ecclesia, and illa (Glastoniensis) de qua te asseris, eandem
priuilegij dignitatem habent. Ista in Gallia, illa in Britannia vno eodem
tempore exortae, a summo and magno Pontifice consecratae: Vno tamen gradu illa
supereminet. Roma etenim secunda vocatur, and hoc propter multitudinem
Sanctorum inibi requiescentium, quorum primus fuit Joseph ab Aramathia, ille
nobilis Decurio qui and Dominum sepeliuit, pro cuius sepultura Dominus locum
illum elegit, atque benedixit.

THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
FVRTHER PROVING THAT S. PHILIP the Apostle was not in that Gallia France next
to Britayne: neither were S. Joseph and his Associates there, or came from
thence into Britayne.

1. BESIDES the recited Authorities of S. Isidor, or the Author of the book
of the life and death of Saints among his works and the learned Bishop
Freculpbus, of which I have spoken before, for their opinion that held S.
Philip the Apostle preached Ordo officij Muzarabici in festo S. Iacobi Apostoli
fratris S. Ioann^s Apostoli and Euangelistae in hymno.
in the next France or Gallia, I find the like mention, in the ancient
Muzaraban public Church office, received in the fourth Toletan Council, at
wbich S. Isidor Archbishop of Hispalis for all Spain was President. In this
Council mention being made, where the Apostles preached, it is said: Philippus
Gallias: That S. Philip preached in the Countries called Galliae. Which
although I do not find alleged by any Protestant to confirm this opinion of
S. Philips being in this next France, yet because I seek the truth, and am
unwilling to conceal any thing that may either help, or hinder the finding
fourth thereof, I hear produce it, and the rather because it gives more
countenance to that book, de vita and morte Sanctorum, to have been written by
S. Isidor, President in that Council, and taking (as it seems) that
Muzaraban Office, as warrant for his writing, that S. Philip the Apostle was in
Gallia; as also Freculphus followed the steps of S. Isidor in the same
Assertion; for better deciding whereof, because the Muzaraban Office is so
breife as I have related in this matter, and I have set down the words of
Freculphus before, I will and what S. Isidor, or other Author of that book,
has written of this business, which is as follows: Philippus a Bethsaida
ciuitate, Isidor. Hispal. Episcopus l. de vita and morte Sanctorum cap. 75.
vnde and Petrus, Gallis praedicat Christum, Barbarasque gentes vicinasque
tenebris, and tumenti Oceano coniunctas ad scientiae lumen, fideique portum
deducit. Deinde in Hierapoli Phrygiae Prouinciae Vrbe crucifixus lapidatusque
obijt: Philip of the city Bethsaida, from whence also Peter was, preaches
Christ to the Gauls, and brings Barbarous Nations, and near to darkness, and
joined to the swelling Ocean, to the light of knowledge, and tbe heaven of
faith, and after dyed, crucifixed, and stoned in Hierapolis, a city of the
Province of Phrygia. The very words of Freculphus before; so that it is evident
the one of these received them from the other: and after these Hartmanus
Schedel uses the same phrase: Philippus Hartm. Sched. Chronic. chron. f. 202.
p. 1.
Gallias accepit: that S. Philip had the Countries Galliae. Yet neither he, nor
any of the others, make him the Apostle of this next Gallia, or France, neither
do any of the Historians of France, or Antiquities thereof best to be credited
in such causes, make mention of S. Philip, or any other Apostle besides S.
Peter and S. Paul, to have preached in that kingdom, neither any others, but
such as were Disciples unto them, and not to S. Philip, or any other of the
Apostles to have taught the faith of Christ in that Nation.

2. Neither does any of our French Historians once allege, or interpret M.
Pniel. I Tigeon. M. Clem. Merch. M. I. le Friar de Leual in hist. Andre Chesne
hist. general d'Angleterre, d'Escosse, and d'Irland. page 152. Bed. Martyrol.
call. Maij. Martyr. Romans 1. die Maij. Vsuard. Martyrol. cod. die. Dorotheus in
Synopsi in S. Phil. Magdeb. cent. 1. in S. Philip. Apost. Prot. comm. Book in
F. S. Philippi and Calend. 1. Maij.
either S. Isidor, or Freculphus, to understand this next France, by any Gallia
or place where they write, S. Philip preached. But expound them both, as they
only meant, he preached in Scythia and Countries far remote from this France.
And so they expound Freculphus himself in the place alleged. Vincentius,
Abdias, Nicephorus, Sabellicus, Eusebius, Simeon Metaphrastes, Clement of
Alexandria, and Policrates are of that mind. So likewise teaches S. Bid, the
Roman Martyrologe, Vsuardus, Dorotheus, the Magdeburgian Protestants, and the
Protestants of England in their most authorized public Church service book,
Calenders and others. And this is sufficiently testified and expressed in the
words of S. Isidor, and Freculphus before, both of them plainly auouching,
that the Gauls and people to whom S. Philip preached, were: Barbarae gentes,
vicinae tenebris and tumenti Oceano coniunctae: Barbarous Nations, near
Inhabitants unto Countries of darkness, and conjoined to the swelling Ocean:
which have no resemblance at all, to this our Gallia, but quite contrary, or
different. For this Gallia is far remote from either of the Poles Artike, or
Antartike, and so by many degrees removed from all Nations living in darkness.
Neither is the sea which is next to this Gallia, tumens Oceanus, that Ocean
which is termed the swelling, but Oceanus Scythicus, the Ocean of Scythia,
where S. Philip by all Antiquities preached. Neither was this Gallia at that
time, or any other, ever esteemed a Barbarous Nation by any credible writer,
late or ancient, Christian or Pagan, Catholic, Protestant, or other, but as a
Protestant Cosmographer with others testifies: Fuit Gallia ab antiquis
temporibus, semper culta tam in vrbibus, Sebastian. Mu^st. Cosmograph. l. 2
cap. 38.
quam in oppidis, quam in agris, hortis, and pratis. Et vt strabo scribit, qui
tempore Incarnationis Christi vixit, nullus tunc fuit angulus in Gallia
incultus, praeter lacus and nemora quae culturam non admittunt: Gallia was ever
from ancient times repleni^^^d as well with cities, as with Towns, as with
Feilds, Orchards, and Meadows, and as Strabo writes, who lived in the time of
the Incarnation of Christ, there was no corner in Gallia uninhabited, except
lakes and woods, which admit not habitation. And not only Ioannes Annius out
of Xenophon, S. Iustine and other ancients, Joan. Annius Comm. in Beros. in
orat. Justin. p. 52. Bal. l. de Scriptor. cent. 1. in Samothe. Io. Selde^
Anaclet. l. 1. cap. 1. Nichol. Vigine^ Biblioth. Historial. an. mundi 1900.
2200. etc. Io. Ioliuett^s in descript. Gall. apud Abr. Ortel. 1. 9.
but our Protestant Antiquaries Bale, Seldom, Nicholas Vignier, Ihon Ioliuet
and other French Historians assuer us, that these Gauls had learning and
letters before the Graecians, and that from this Gallia using the Greek
characters, they were brought into Greece. And that the Romans themselves did
use to send their youth, and children into Gallia especially Massilia, to be
instructed in learning, and civility. Therefore this cannot be any of those
Barbarous Countries, related by those Authors where S. Philip preached. But by
those descriptions they might with more reason think S. Philip was in this our
Britain, by some taken for a part of Gallia, or an other continent, and much
more likely in those times to be a Barbarous Nation, as it was nearer the
Regions of Darkness, by the Northpole, and the swelling Ocean: Yet no Author
affirms he was hear, and from hence hither (being a contradiction) he could
not send S. Joseph.

3. Moreover if S. Isidor, and the others cited before, for S. Philip his
preaching in Gallia, had thereby meant this Gallia, adjacent to Britain, they
could not bring him either by Land, or Sea, into those Barbarous Nations, where
they affirm, he long time lived, or Hierapolis in Phrigia, where he was put to
death, but he must needs have passed through, and preached in diverse other
great interiacent Nations between them, and yet they name not one, for S.
Isidor himself confineth this Gallia with these bounds: Iuga Alpium: the tops
of the Alps one the East side, with the Ocean Sea one the west, the Pyrenaean
Isidor. l. 14. Origin. v. Gallia.
Mountains one the South, and the River of Rhene and Germany. Where by S.
Isidor his own account and description of this Gallia, there be above a
thousand miles between the Countries, where, he with all others, says S.
Philip lived, and died, and the nearest part of this Gallia unto any of them by
all Cosmographers. In what Gallia, S. Philip the Apostle preached.
Neither shall we by this means exclude S. Philip from preaching to Gauls in
Gallia or Gallatia, nor contradict the opinion of S. Isidor, and Freculphus,
but show what Gallia it was, they truly did and must needs understand, the
very same Nation far from this Gallia, where all writers agree he preached in
the parts of Scythia, and this by S. Isidor his own interpretation; for he
plainly writes of that Gallia or Gallatia where S. Philip by all Antiquities
Isid. l. 14. Origin.
did live, was named of the ancient people of the Gauls, by whom it was
possessed. Dicta a pris^is Gallorum gentibus, a quibus extitit occupata.
Ioannes Zonaras makes this matter clear, dividing the Gauls into the Gauls
of Europe, Io. Zonaras Ann. to. 2. in Vitellio.
and not of Europe, but Asia in express terms. So does Zosimus, Diodorus
Siculus, and others. Among whom the last writes in this manner: Zosim. l. 4.
in Gratiano and Theodosio. D^odor. Sicul. ^er. antiq. l. 5. c 9.
Omnis ea Regio Galatia, id est, Gallia, dicta est. Haec a multis nationibus
incolitur, Natio vt plurimum ad Arcton sita. Regio frigida, vt quae hiemis
tempore pro aqua niuibus oppleta existat. Glacies quoque immensa adeo regionem
occupat, vt flumina congelata sint peruia transeuntibus, non solum paucis, sed
exercitibus quoque cum curribus, atque impedimentis: all that Region is called
Galatia, that is to say Gallia. It is inhabited of many Nations. A Country for
the most part situated by the North a could Region, which in the time of
winter for water is covered with snow. And huge Ice does so possess the
Region, that the Rivers being frosen, are passable for trauaylers, and not
only for a few, but for whole Armies also, with their wagons and impediments.
And a little after, he further adds: Qui ad Scythiam vsque habitant dicuntur
Galli: quas omnes gentes communi nomine Romani Gallos appellant. Eorum qui
subtus Arcton habitant quique Scythiae sunt propinqui, vtpote caeteris
agrestiores nonnullos aiunt humanis carnibus vesci: They which dwell even to
Scythia, are named Gauls: all which Nations the Romans by a common name call
Gauls. And some of them which dwell under the North Pole, and are near to
Scythia are said to eat man's flesh. Titus Liuius also makes mention of the
Schytian Gauls, when he thus relates the speech of Manlius: non me praeterit
milites, Tit. Liuius hist. l. 28. in orat. Manlij Consulis. ad milites.
omnium quae Asiam colunt gentium, Gallos fama belli praestare. O Soldiers I
am not ignorant, that of all people, or Nations, which inhabit Asia, the
Gauls excel in fame of war. Thus renowned was the Asiaticall Gallia even
with the Romans, and their Historians at that time.

4. And Richardus Dinothus in his book of Historical common places, Rich.
Dinothus loc. com. hist. l. 2. c. de Germanis.
citing Diodorus Siculus, who has testified as much before, proves, that
before the time of Caius Caligula, the Emperor, next unto Tyberius, under whom
Christ suffered his passion, the name of Germany was not kowne; but all those
Countries even to Thracia, were called Gallia, or Gallatia all one in effect,
the Romans commonly naming them Gallia, and the Greeks Gallatia. Hier. Gebuler.
l. de libert. Germ. c. 12.
Germanorum nomen paulo ante Caij Caesaris tempora caepit innotescere, cum
antea omnes populi a Gallico Oceano ad Thraciam vsque Galatae vocarentur. Which
Hieronimus Gebulerius also confirms, testifying, that the Romans themselves
aunciently called both the Germans, and those which we now call Gauls, or
French by the common name of Gauls, or Gallia. Non nescimus veteres Romanos
Trog. Pomp. and Just. hist. l. 24. and 25.
communi Gallorum nomine cum Germanos, tum Gallos comprehendisse. Which also
Justinius, Trogus Pompeius, with many others, speeking of the conquests of the
Gauls, under the conduct of Brennus, commonly supposed to be a Britane, and
brother to our King Beline, 400. years before the birth of Christ, do
plainly affirm: Gallorum ea tempestate tantae faecunditatis Iuuentus fuit vt
Asiam omnem velut examine aliquo implerent, denique neque Reges Orientis sine
mercen^rio Gallorum exercitu vlla bella gesserint, neque pulsi Reges, ad alios
quam ad Gallos confugerint tantus terror Gallici nominis, sieve armorum inuicta
faelicitas erat, vt aliter neque maiestatem suam tutam, neque amissam se
recuperare posse, sine Gallica virtute arbitrarentur: The youth of the Gauls
at that time was so plentiful, that they filled as it were with a swarm all
Asia, finally neither did the Kings of the East make war without an army of
Gauls, neither did Kings driven from their seats, fly unto others for succor,
then to the Gauls. The Terror of the Gaulish name was so great, and their
invincible felicity in arms such, that they thought they could not keep
their majesty in safety, nor recover it, being lost, without the Gaulish
puissance. And our Country Historian Matthew of Westminster relating the same
Matt. Westminster. hist. aetate 5. Stowe and Howes hist. in Belin. and Bre^nus.
Galfrid. Monum. histor. Briton. l. 3. Pont. Virun. hist. Brit. l. 3. H^er.
Gebuin. l. de libert. Germ. cap. 12. Sebast. Munster. Cosm. lib. 1.
History of Brennus Leader of the Gauls, being three hundred thowsands,
affirms, sua prole totam Asiam repleu^runt; they filled all Asia with their
Issue. And so gave the name of Gallia, or Gallatia unto their posterity.

5. The like have other English Historians, Stowe, Howes; and the British
History with Ponticus Virunnius do not differ, of which this last writes:
Exercitus eius adhuc Galatae nominantur: his army or the posterity of it are
called Galathians to this day. Which name Galathians is the same with Gauls,
as also Galatia and Gallia are. Only with this difference, that the Greeks
more usually called both the Gauls of Asia, and those next to us in Europe
Galathians and Galathia, as their first ancient denomination was; for as both
Hieronymus Gebuinus, and Sebastian Munster a Protestant with many others well
prove, this next Gallia was first called Galatia, a Galate Rege of their King
of that name: and they were the Romans which altered it, taking a syllable away
and naming it for brevity Gallia: Romani autem dementes vnam syllabam pro
Gallatia, Galliam appellarunt. And the old Greek writer, as Dion Cassius, Dion
Epitom. p. 252. in Caio Calig. Dion in Caesare Aug. p. 214. and p. 313. in
Vitellio. Eutrop. l. 9. p. 122. Zosimus l. 4. in Gratiano and Theodos. Theoret.
in Epist. Pauli in Id. Cresc. in Galatia. Godw. conu. of Britain p. 2.
Eutropius, Zosimus, and S. Paul himself as both Theoderet, and a Protestant
English Bishop with others expownde him, did call this our next Gallia, by the
first name Gallatia, and these Gauls, Galathians. So does Ammianus Mercellinus
with others, which a Protestant Bishop shall thus confirm: Ammianus
Mercellinus says: Gallos sermon Graeco Galatas dici solere. That in the
Greek languadge the Gauls were used to be called Gallathians, and thereof we
have a plain testomony in Theodoret, that writing of that place of the
Apostle. Cresce^s into Galatia, etc. sic Gallias appellauit, says he. By which
testimonies it is made inuinciblye evident, that S. Isidor and Freculphus being
Latin Authors followed the phrase of speech of the Romans, and Latins; and
called the Asian Gallatia or Gallia, plainly Gallia, as the Latins usually
did, and that they only meant, that S. Philip the Apostle preached in that
Asiaticall Gallia, and not in this of Europe near unto us, where, or near
unto it, he never was.

6. And yet to give the greatest credit we may to them, that would have In what
sense S. Philip the Apostle may be named the Apostle of the Frenchmen,
descending from Sicambria where he preached.
S. Philip to be named also the Apostle of these next Gauls, and Fra^kes,
though he was never in that Nation, whereas it is the common opinion of French,
and other Antiquaries, that they came from Sicambria, the Sicambers, or Frankes
by the Maeotides paludes, between Scythia of Europe, and Asia, our Countriman
Ingulphus Abbot of Crowland solueth this difficulty unto us, in this manner:
Beatus Christi Apostolus Philippus, cum Scythis verbum dei praedicasset, and
plurimos eorum ad fidem Christi conuertisset, rediens in Asiam, per Sicambros
viam fecit, ac illis Christi nomen primus annunciauit. De quibus exeuntes
Ingulphus in Hist. Croland.
Franci, vt plures eorum Hierochronographi testantur, beatum Philippum
Apostolum suum specialem Protodoctorem, and Neopostolum adhuc tenent: Philip
the blessed Apostle of Christ, having preached the word of God to the
Scythians, and converted very many of them to the faith of Christ, returning
into Asia, passed by the Sicambers, and first preached the name of Christ unto
them. From which the Frankes or Frenchmen being descended, as many of their
holy Chronographers do witness, they account S. Philip the Apostle for their
special first doctor and new Apostle. So we have credibly fownde, how S.
Philip the Apostle, might in a lardge manner of speech, be called the Apostle
of those Frankes, or Frenchmen, which came from Sicambria; but not of the
ancient Gauls of this Gallia which came not from thence. S. Philip the
Apostle could not di^ectly send S. Joseph hither from S^^a^bria or any other
place.


7. Neither could S. Philip send S. Joseph from Sicambria directly into this
our Britain, for the time when he preached in Sicambria was, by this
authority, long before his death, and yet he was, as I have already proved,
Martyred many years before S. Joseph came into Britain: yet do I not deny
but S. Joseph might be some time, with S. Philip the Apostle, when he was among
the Gauls of Asia and other Nations there, and that when he Hector. Boeth.
hist. Scot lib. 4. Holinsh. Hist. of Scotl. Stow. Hist. in Marius. Galfrid.
Monu. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 4. c. 17. Pont. Virun. Hist. Brit. lib. 4. Matthew.
Westminster. anno 75.
came hither, he came, though long after S. Philips death, from parts not far
remote from thence. For we read in our Scottish, and other Histories, that
about this time great numbers of those Countries arrived, and settled in our
Islands, and Northren parts, among whom Hector Boethius speaking of this time
of S. Joseph's landing hear, says: sub id tempus populus quidam Morauiae, vt
nostris Annalibus est proditu^, Romany armis profligati, suisque pulsi
sedibus, dispalatim ad Rheni Ostia deuenere. Vnd^ conglobati nauibus vtcunque
comparatis, nouas seeds quaerendi gratia, per vastos incognitosque maris
tractus errauere, prohibiti tandem and Gallicis, and Britanicis Oris, ab ^arum
Incolis, in Fortheam sunt delati: About that time a certain people of Morauia,
as our Annals do testify, being driven away by the Romans, and expelled from
their Seats, came wandering to the mouth of Rhyne, where gathered together, and
getting shipping, as well as they could, did roue through the vaste, and
unknown passadges of the Sea, and being forbidden landing, either on the
French, or British Coasts by their Inhabitants, they came to Forth, by
Pictland. Where we see the time when, place from whence this people came, and
where they landed, and other circumstances agree with the Journey of S. Joseph
hither: the time as before consents. Morauia from whence they came, is near
the parts where S. Philip preached. The place where they arrived agrees with
S. Joseph Journey, for by the Antiquities Antiquit. Glast. Io. Capgrau. in S.
Joseph and alij.
of Glastenbury and others he must needs land about the North of this Island,
from whence coming to Glaste^bury he came by the parts now called Northewales,
and was imprisoned there, and the number which landed with him was so great,
that no Historye makes memory of any such to have arrived hear, at, or near
that time, the Romans only, which were not friends, but Enemies to them,
excepted.

8. And yet if we follow Ihon Harding, he will tell us, that S. Joseph and his
Religeous company came hither with Vespasian Lieutenant to the Roman S. Joseph
by Harding and others came into Britain with Vespasian the Roman President
hear.
Emperor, and he himself also afterward Emperor, and that by the entreatie
of Vespasian to the then King, and Queen of Britain, Aruiragus and Genuissa,
those favors and freedoms which by our Histories he enjoyed at Glastenbury,
were bestowed upon him: for speaking of Vespasian he says.

With whom Joseph full holy and full wise Ihon Harding Cronicle fol. 40. cap.
47.

Of Aramathie with his fellows fourtene
Into this land then came and gave contene.
For whom so then Vespasian prayed the King,
The Queen also, to him to be good Lord, fol. 41.

And good Lady, which they granted in all thing.
When Vespasian to Rome returned home again,
The King endued Joseph in Meatrine.
Which Relation wants not probability, to make it good, for Vespasian Eutrop.
l. 7. Mart. Polon Supputat. an. D. 71. in Vespasiano
came hither out of Germany, by which S. Joseph must needs pass in his Journey
to Britain from the Asiaticall Gallia, and the adjoining Countries, where S.
Philip preached, and in his way were those Disciples of S. Peter, of whom I
have spoaken before, S. Egistus, Marianus, Maternus, Valerius, Eucharius,
Clement, Mansuetus, and others. Neither was Vespasian an Enemy but a known
friend, and lover of Christians, as I shall show when I come to the time of
his Empire: and the times of S. Joseph's and Vespasians S. Joseph probably was
directed into Britain by S. Peter the Apostle.
coming hither may without difficulty be reconciled, especially if we speak
of their abode hear.

9. And if we will follow the best Antiquities we have, or Protestants
themselves in this matter, we shall easily find, that S. Joseph rather came
hither by direction of S. Peter, then any other Apostle: for first they assuer
us, that Antiquit. Glast. in Tabul. Antiq. Capgrau. in S. Joseph and Patr.
Godwin Conuers. page 36. cap. 3. Godw. supr. page 9. cap. 2.
S. Joseph was present with the Apostles, at the time of the Assumption of the
most blessed Virgin Mary; secondly, to speak in a Protestant Bishops words, he
received directions for his preaching and discipline, either in the Council of
the Apostles gathered at Jerusalem, or else of S. Philip the Apostle in
France. This second is disproued before, and this Protestant author himself
does disabl^ S. Philip the Apostle his being in France, then much more, that he
directed S. Joseph there. And if S. Joseph was then directed by some of the
Apostles at Jerusalem to come into Britain, by whom should he take
directions therein, rather then of S. Peter who alone among the Apostles was to
preach at that time in Britain, and these western parts? Again it is evident
by the Scripture itself, that S. Peter preached in Galatia, or the Asian
Gallia, where S. Joseph is said to have been. Further, these Protestants tell
us, that S. Joseph came hither in the beginning of the persecution of Nero, and
to avoid it; one of them a great Antiquary writes, in this manner: I will
add in few words, what I have read of Joseph's arrival hear. First of all
therefore you shall Will. Harrison descrip. of Brit. p. 23. Theater of great
Brit. l. 6. Godw. Conu.
note that he came over into Britain about the 64. year after Christ when the
persecution began under Nero. Therefore seeing that persecution, by all
Antiquities, was in Rome, and the nearer places of the Empire unto it, S.
Joseph was not altogether a stranger thereabouts, otherwise he could not come
from any of them by reason of the persecution there.

10. To conclude we read in the most approved Antiquities of Glastenbury that
one which came in the company of S. Joseph was his kinsman, consanguineus
Joseph, and a man of such note that the History terms him, Rex: a King,
Antiquit. M. S. ^laston, intabul. antiq.
some Prince or chief Ruler among them: Rex Orcaniae, was named Petrus: Peter,
which name was so new at that time, being first given hy Christ himself to S.
Simon Bar-Iona, Peter the Apostle, and rare in the world, not found in
Scripturs, but only in him, and unknown also in histories, being rather a
name of signification, then usual denomination to import, what a Rock, and
foundation of the Church of Christ, S. Peter the Apostle was to be, we cannot
but think, this Peter S. Joseph's Kinsman received that his name, with his
baptism and Christianity of S. Peter the Apostle; and not altogether without
just merit of that name, for as Ecclesiastical writers and holy Scripture make
S. Peter, the chief Pillar spiritual in the Church of Christ; so this Peter S.
Joseph's Kinsman, was as this Antiquity affirms a temporal foundation, and
Father even to Kings and Princes in these parts, and in particular, it lineally
deduceth from him King Loath that married the Sister of King Arthur. Therefore
if so chief a man in S. Joseph's company was in all probable Judgment, so
nearely depending of S. Peter the Apostle, we may not rashly make the rest such
strangers unto him, but that they had direction from him in their proceedings,
as I have evidently before proved, and shall make it more manifest hereafter,
that when they were come hither they depended of him, and his Disciples in
things spiritual: And such subordination had these holy men to the Sea
Apostolic of Rome, that when in the time of King Lucius their memory was
almost forgotten hear in Britain, for any thing we find in Histories, it
was renewed from Rome even as our chiefest Protestants themselves acknowledge,
among whom their first Protestant Archbishop affirms, that S. Phaganus and
Damianus were informed at Rome, before their coming hither of the dwelling of
S. Joseph and his companions Matthew. Parker Antiq. Brit. p. 3.
in Britain de Iosephi sociorumque in Britannia olim habitatione. And makes
this his reason, because, Joseph as also the other Apostles and Disciples
dispersed throughout the whole world, used to certisie by Messengers, and
letters, their fellows at Rome, what they had done, and suffered in every
Region for Christ, and what profit they had. And that by this means the Legates
of Pope Eleutherius did search for those places, which they had learned out of
ancient writings at Rome, to have been first inhabited by Christians: neque a
veritate alienum esse potest, Iosephum perinde ac alios Apostolos ac Discipulos
per totum orbem sparsos, quid singulis in Regionibus pro Christo effecissent,
quidue sieve aduersi, sieve commodi sensissent, per Nuncios ac liter as certiores
fecisse Collegas suas, tam Romae quam Hierosolimis, alijsque in locis: aut
Eleutherij Legatos indagare voluisse ea loca quae a Christianis prius culta
Romae ex antiquis scriptis acceperunt. And immediately setting down, how these
Roman Legates after much search and seeking, found out the place of S. Joseph's
abiding, he adds, how they knew by manifest signs, and tokens* that it was
the habitation of Joseph and his fellows in Britain, of which they were
advertised in Rome: Quibus alijsque manifestis signis, atque indicijs, facile
intellexerunt, eam ipsam fuisse Iosephi, sociorumque in Britannia habitationem,
de qua Romae acceperant. The like have others: and the Antiquities of
Glastenbury which Antiquit. Glast. apud Capgrau. in S. Patric. in S. Joseph.
set down this diligent search in Britain, must needs have relation, and
reference to proceed from that notice which the Legates had received of these
things at Rome, for they are so far from testifying, that they learned this
in Britain, that they assuer us, the memory of them hear was so blotted out,
and forgotten, that caepit idem locus esse ferarum, qui prius fuer at habitatio
Sanctorum: The same place began to be a Denn of wild beasts, which formerly
was the habitation of Saints. And so much the more undoubted, that the best
knowledge of Christian affairs in Britain in these times was at Rome, for it
is a common opinion of our English Protestant Antiquaries, that even at that
time, when S. Joseph came hither, many both Romans, and Britans that were
Christians, came from Rome into Britain, to avoid the Persecution of Nero,
falling out at this time, of which the Theater Authors do thus testify: It
has passed Theat. of great. Brit. l. 6. cap. 9.
with allowance, among the learned Senate of our Antiquaries, that when
Claudius and Nero (which now reigned) began to bannish and persecute the
Christians in Rome, many Romans and Britans being converted to the faith, fled
thence unto these remote parts of the Earth, where they might, and did more
freely enjoy the liberty of their professions. Therefore we cannot question,
but a more perfect memory of our Christian proceedings, was kept at Rome, from
whence so many of our primative Christians came, then in any other forreyne
place, and that these Christian Romans, and Britans so reparing hither, being
the Disciples or spiritual children of S. Peter, that either S. Joseph and his
associates were of the same number, or joined with them in profession of
Religion in this Nation.

THE XXV. CHAPTER.
THAT MANY OTHER CHRISTIANS CAME hither, especially into the Northren parts,
and Islands with S. Joseph of Aramathia, besides them which continued with him
at Glastenbury: and many of them married with Britans continuing Christianity
hear in their children, and posterity, until the general Conversion of
Britain, under the first Christian Kings, Lucius, and Donaldus.

1. ALthough our usual Histories of S. Joseph of Aramathia, cheifely speak of
the coming of him, and his Religeous companions, not above 14. by any account:
yet we have Antiquities testifiing, that great numbers of other Christians
came with him hither, or to our Islands adjoining at that time. Among these, a
British Eremite living when Glastenbury Abbey was builded by King Inas, when
the Antiquities thereof were diligently sought, and examined, and he so
conversant in them, that Io. Pitseus l. de vir. Illustrib. aetat. 8. an. 720.
in Eremit. Brit. Anonim. in l. Sanct. Graal. Ioh. Capgrau. in Catal. in S.
Joseph ab Aram.
he wrote a book of that subject, does plainly testify in his History hereof
named, Sanctus Graal, the holy Graal, that there came hither in the company of
Saint Joseph, and his Religeous Associats, which continued with him at
Glastenbury in Eremiticall conversation, above 600. men, and women, that were
Christians, and had vowed chastity, or continency until they should happily
arrive in this Land, Miraculously assigned (as it seems) unto them to
continue in. Venerunt autem cum eis vt legitur in libro qui sanctum Graal
appellatur, sexcenti and amplius tam viri, quam foeminae, qui omnes votum
vouerunt quod ab vxoribus proprijs abstinerent, quousque terram sibi delegatam
ingressi fuissent. And because some take exception to this Author, the most
warranted Pits. supr.
and allowed Manuscript Antiquities of Glastenbury, written in old letters in
parchment, upon broad Tables aunciently belonging to the Monastery of
Glastenbury affirm the same. And how diverse of them were noble parsonages,
Antiq. Glast. in Tabul. Antiq.
and such as in those times, and small Islands, were styled Reges: Kings, and
some of our British Kings descended from them. Among these, was first Helaius,
Nephew to S. Joseph, of whom this old Manuscript Antiquity thus relates.
Helaius Nepos Joseph genuit Iosue, Iosue genuit Aminadab. Aminadab Diverse noble
Christians delivered to have been in this Company and of whom our King in
Britain descended.
genuit Castellors. Castellors genuit Manaclauiel, Manaclauiel genuit Lambrord,
Lambrord genuit filium qui genuit Ygernam, de qua Rex Vterpendragon genuit
nobilem and famasum Regem Arthurum. Per quod pater quod Rex Arthurus de stirpe
Joseph descendit: Helaius Nephew of Joseph begat Iosue, Iosue begat Aminadal,
Aminadab begat Castellors, Castellors begat Manaclauiel, Manaclauiel begat
La^brord, La^brord begat a son which begat Ygerna, of whom vterpendr^gon
begat the noble and renowned Arthur. By which it appears that King Arthur did
descend of the Race of Joseph. And these Antiquities do thus further relate
unto us: Petrus consanguineus Joseph ab Aramathia Rex Orcaniae genuit Erlan,
Erlan genuit Melianum, Melianus genuit Arguth, Arguth genuit Edor, Edor genuit
Loath, Qui du xit in vxorem sororem Regis Arthuri, de qua genuit quatuor filios
scilicet walwanum, Agrauains, Gwerehes, Gaheries: Peter kinsman of Joseph of
Aramathia, King of Orcanie begat Erlan, Erlan begat Melianus, Melianus begat
Arguth, Arguth begat Edor, Edor begat Loath, who took to wife, the Sister of
King Arthur, of whom he begat four sons to wit walwan, Agrauayns, Gwerehes,
Gaheries. Antiquit. Glast. supr. Et Capgr. in S. Joseph.


2. Again the same Antiquities speaking of S. Joseph's Imprisonment, presently
after his coming into this Island, which was in Venedocia, now Northwales, near
to the I Will of Man, was set at liberty by a noble man whom he had converted to
the faith, named Mordraius whom the Antiquity calls a King, Rex Mordraius.
A late writer thinks this Mordraius to be the then Harris M. S. Hist. l. 1.
c. 25. Hector. Boeth. Hist. Scot. in Crathlint. Bal. l. de Script. cen. tr. in
Amphibalus. Theater of great Britain l. 6. c. 9.. 4. S. Joseph's Sister.
Married to a Britan. Nicholaus Vignier Bibliothee. Hist. an. 63.
King, or Ruler of the Island, Mona, and that the place where he was converted,
named the city Saract, was Soder, in the I Will of Man, which was the first
Bishops See, we read of in those parts, in the time and persecution of
Dioclesian. And our Protestant writers of the Theater of great Britain tell
us of some others, of this company of S. Joseph, that lived in the world, and
were not of the Religeous number, that settled at Glaste^bury with S. Joseph,
and among them name a Sister of S. Joseph, called Eurgaine, who (to speak in
their words) afterward married a Britan named Siarklos: and they cite Georg
Owen Harry for the same opinion. And Nicholas Vignier a French writer in his
Bibliotheke Historiall, in the year of Christ 63. plainly affirms: Joseph
of Aramathia arrived this year in great Britain, auec vne trouppe: with a
troop or great number of his companions. To these I may add the testimony of
Tertullian before of the timely receiving of the faith of Christ, by our
Northren Britans commonly confounded in Histories with the Scottish Nation, by
reason of their dwelling long together, and how Petrus Cluniacensis writing to
S. Bernard, as our Theater Protestants cite, and follow him Theater of great
Brit. l. 6. c. 9.. 9.
therein, supposes the Scottish men the more ancient Christians, as not being
in the like subjection to the Romans, as the other then were. Which cannot more
probably In what respect the Scots may be termed the more ancient Christians.
be affirmed of any, then these that came, by those Antiquities, with S.
Joseph, into those outward Islands, where the Scots then inhabited, and with
whom they united themselves, as also with our Northren Britans. Neither can we
think, but among so many, even hundreds (as before) which came hither at that
time, some of them left a Posterity of children as is exemplified in two
before, one the Nephew, the other kinsman of S. Joseph; and we may take notice
from the names themselves of some of these, that be recited, as Iosue,
Aminadab, and Loath, that they were Christians, no others in these parts in
those times taking names from Scripture but they only; and for Loath, one of
them that is named, certain it is by our British and other Histories that he
was a Christian, so of Ygerna and King Arthur which likewise by these
Antiquities did descend from those of the company of S. Joseph. And allthough
these three last were late in respect of that first age of Christ, and lived
when Britain generally professed Christian Religion, yet Helaius Nephew or
Grandsonne to S. Joseph placed for the first of that Genealogiein this Land, at
the time of S. Joseph's comig hither, and his son Iosue, must needs be living
in the days of S. Joseph, and Aminadab the son of Iosue being by his name a
Christian did probably live unto the days of Kings, Lucius, and Don^l^us* to
be of those which continued a succession of Christiantie hear, until the
general Conversion of Britain, at that time. So we may reasonably affirm, of
the posterity of Peter, kinsman to S. Joseph in some part before remembered,
out of those Antiquities; and after the same proportion Judge of the children
of Eurgayne, S. Joseph's sister, and her British husband Siarklos, if they left
any behind them in the world. For no man will once conjecture, that either
son, Sister, Nephewe, kinsman or kindred of S. Joseph would undertake so long
and tedious a Journey with him from Jury into Britain, to live poor Exils
hear, but for the love of Christ, and his holy Religion so extremely
persecuted by the Jews in S. Joseph, for his honorable burying of our Savior,
and his friends and kindred, as we are taught in approved Histories, that the
malice and hatred of the Jews was not more enraged against any Disciple of
Christ, then toward S. Joseph, and his friends. And as Gregorius Turonenfis and
others testify: maiorem in eum habentes saeuitiam, quam Antiquit. Glast. apud
Capgr. in S. Joseph. Drogo Episc. Hostien. Hist. de morte and Resurrectione
Saluatoris. Greg. Turon. l. 1. Hist. Franc.. 21. p. 18. Vincent. in spec. Hist.
l. 5. c. 56. 57. 58. Act. Pilati apud Capgrau. and Turon. supr. Nicodem. in
Eua^g. Eremita Anon. author l. 5. Graa. Manuscr. antiq. Glaston. Monasterij
tabulis affixum in membranis.
in ipsum Dominum, vt cum ille a militibus, hic ab ipsis Sacerdotibus
custodiretur: The Jews had more hatred against Joseph, then against our Lord
himself, for whereas Christ being buried, was kept and watched by soldiers,
Joseph being imprisoned in a close place without any light, was guarded and
watched by the Priests themselves. Yet he was Miraculously from thence and them
delivered, and preserved to honor this kingdom with the holy life, and death
of himself, and many his Religeous companions and friends.

3. The ancient British Eremite of whom I have spoken before, testifies,
that S. Joseph his wife came in this company with her husband, and that it was
appointed, and promised of God to them, and their posterity. Joseph ab
Aramathia qui Christum sepeliuit, cum vxore and filio Iosephe nomine in maiorem
Britanniam sibi and semini eius promissam, venerunt. And the Collectours of the
Antiquities of Glastenbury, who as it seems by their o^ne testimony, were
most diligent, and careful to deliver nothing to posterity but what they
found to be approved by ancient Historiographers, as the first words of their
History deliver, affirm the same. Quoniam dubia legentem fallunt, certa dubijs
ablatis, atque ex antiquis Historiographorum dictis probata, de antiquitate
Glastoniensis Ecclesiae quaedam inseremus. It is also testified in this
Antiquity, recommended to contain so certain, and undoubted verities, that
the Pagan King that had imprisoned S. Joseph, and his companions in the Country
now named Nothwales, Mordraius a Christian set up a Christian King in his
place, named Celidonius son of Natianus, and his wife the daughter of Lalel
or Label a noble Persian was also a Christian. And cites the ancient British
Eremite for the Author hereof. But this was rather to be esteemed some noble
Governor, or Ruler, called by the name Rex, King, or Ruler of some few people,
in which sense all Rulers though mean, may be truly termed Reges, Rulers, and
not such potent parsons, as the name is now almost appropriated unto: of which
Rank and Order, King Lucius was the first Christian King, and Donaldus next to
him.

THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
OF THE COMING, AND SETTLING OF S. Joseph and his company, where Glastenbury
now is, then a wilderness, rather to profess the penitential contemplatiu^
Eremiticall Religeous life, then employ their time in preaching.

1. LET us now prosecute the History of S. Joseph, and his Religeous Associats,
that came to the place, where Glastenbury in Sommerset shire now stands,
where they lived, died, and were buried. The Antiquities of Glastenbury tell
us, that the first landing of S. Joseph in this Island was in, or near unto
that part, we now call Northwales, Antiquit. Glast. apud Capgrau. in S. Joseph.
M. S. in tabulis latis.
where he and his Companions preaching the faith of Christ, were not only
denied all necessary things for their releife, and sustenance, but their
doctrine rejected, and themselves committed to Prison by the King or Prince of
that Province, a Pagan Infidel: perfidus Rex Northwalliae Joseph seruum Dei in
partihus suis praedicantem, cum socijs suis carceri mancipauit, inhumaniter
nega^s eis victui necessaria. Of which Imprisonment of S. Joseph, although
other Antiquaries are sparing in relating it, yet they are so far from
denying it, that they rather show unto us, how credible it is: for they
generally teach, Guliel. Camd. in Brit. Godw. co^u. of Brit. c. 2. p. 9. 22.
Tacitus Ann. in Agric. Iul. Caesar comment. l. 1.
with Julius Caesar, Tacitus, and others how this Island was at that time
subject to diverse petie kings, or Rulers. So that although Aruiragus which by
marriage had entered into alliance, and amity with Claudius the Emperor, a
public and professed enemy to the Druides, the greatest Adversaries and
hinderers of Christian Religion: Yet such Princes or Rulers as lived in Mona:
Anglesey and the partsof wales, where S. Joseph is said to have been
imprisoned, were friends and followers of the Druids, and professed Enemies
Camd. in Brit. in O^douic. Hect. Boet. Hist. Scot. in Crathlint.
to the Romans, and such as they favored either in matters of Religion, or
others. But S. Joseph and his Associats being freed of their imprisonment, by
the great mercy and providence of God unto them, allthough with the
contradiction and resistance of their Persecutors, as those Antiquities make
more particular Relation, and seeing how fruitless a business it was like to
be, to stay any longer among that then so obstinate and obdurate people, came
into this part of this Island Loegria now England, and dividing themselves into
diverse Trad. of Glasto^. in Summers. Shire.
companies being in all 12. 13. or 14. (such is the diversity of opinions) in
number, three of them as the continued Tradition of the still inhabitants of
Glastenbury in Sommerset shire testifies, came tired and weary near unto the
situation of that Town, to an Hill almost a mile distant from thence, called
thereupon in our common English languadge, as the general opinion there is,
Weary-all hill, where the miraculous, and there named even by Protestants at
this day, holy thorn grows of which more hereafter. And after their prayers
made to be directed, where to make their stay and aboade, interpreted the will
of God to be, they should set up their rest in the adjoining place where the
late renowned and now ruinated Monastery of Glastenbury stood, being at that
time a solitary desert, and wilderness compassed about with fennish Lakes, and
Marshes, and most fit for the Contemplative Eremiticall Religeous life which
they professed.

2. And it neither was, nor could be long after, when the rest of that
Religeous company assembled, and joined themselves again together with these
three. For all Antiquities agree in this, that in the first year of their
coming into Britain, whereof they had spent part before their imprisonment,
part in prison and part in travail after, to this place of their union and
dwelling together, they builded their little Church or Oratory, and yet this
not without the notice and allowance of the King obtained in that behalf. Thus
testify all our Antiquaries, Catholics, and Protestants with our Antiquities,
Manuscripts Io. Capgr. in Catal. M. S. Joseph. Antiq. Glast. tabulis fixae. M.
S. Inscriptio aeris in Custod. T^. Hughes and apud Godwin conu. of Brit. p. 11.
Capgr. in S. Patric. Bal. l. de Script. cent. 1. in Joseph ab Aramath. Matt.
Parker antiquit. Brit. p. 3. Guliel. Malm. l. de antiquit. Caenob. Glaston. M.
S.
or printed: Eodem anno quo in Britanniam missi sunt: the very same year
wherein they came into Britain, being warned by divine admonition so to do,
they builded a Church in the honor of the holy Mother of God, and perpetual
Virgin Mary, in the place showed unto them from heaven, per Archangelum
Gabrielem in visione admoniti sint Ecclesiam in honore^ sanctae Dei Genitricis,
and perpetuae Virginis Mariae, in loco eis caelitus demonstra^o, construere. At
the building whereof, as these Antiquities tell us, they were all present, and
there afterward even unto the times of their deaths continued together. By
which, we see it made clear unto us, that if S. Joseph and his companions had
been the most learned men that ever were, there is left little or no time
almost at all for them to have preached unto the Britans of this kingdom; for
the time of their travail before they were imprisoned, the space of their
imprisonment, travail after into the parts of their aboade, their suite to
King Aruiragus for the place of their dwelling, his grant and confirmation
thereof, and their building their Church, being all finished and effected in
the first year of their coming hither, by so many Antiquities, eodem anno,
leaves little space or leisure for S. Joseph, and his associates did but little
pr^uaile in preaching, or rather preached little.
any other business. And therefore a Protestant Bishop and Antiquary might
justly write: It seems that Joseph and his fellows prevailed little by their
preaching, and therefore gave themselves at last unto a Monastical and
solitary life in the Island of Aualon. Where he might well have omitted the
words (at last) Godw. Conu. of Brit. p. 16. c. 3.
for if they thus employed themselves to Monastical and solitary Eremiticall
life, as this Protestant Bishop and all acknowledge in the very first year of
their coming hither, it was at the first and not at last, but with such
expedition, and celeritie, that it is rather to be maruailed, how in a strange
Nation among Pagan Infidels, they could quietly enjoy that freedom, and
liberty so soon: For to pass over other letts, and hindrances before
remembered, no man of Judgment will think, but that indulgence and privilege
for their quietly and peacebly serving of God, which King Aruiragus granted
unto them, came by long and earnest suites, and supplications both of
themselves and others Intercessours for them in that behalf, whereupon Ihon
Harding writing upon this immunitie allowed unto S. Joseph and his companions
whom he affirms to have been fourteen, says it was by the entreaty and
intercession of Vespasian, who was afterward Emperor, unto King Aruiragus, and
his Queen, thus he writes of him.

For whom so then vaspasian prayed the King,
The Queen also, to him to be good Lord,
And good lady, which they granted in all thing.
And then sets down the liberties, and privileges, given by King
Aruiragus, to S. Joseph, and his Religeous companions as other Historians do.

3. Neither was this Donation made unto them, but after experience of their
modesty of life, which could not be suddenly known to the King, and then in
respect of that, and their long Journey as William of Malmesbury in his
Manuscript History of the Antiquity of the Monastery of Glastenbury Guliel.
Malm. M. S. de Antiq. Glast. Capgrau. in Iosepho ab Aramathia.
with others writes. The barbarous King did grant unto them to inhabit a
certain Island named Inswitrin in the Borders of his Country compassed about
with woods, Bushes, and fennes: Rex Barbarus quia de longinquo venerant,
vitaeque eorum exigebat modestas, quandam Insulam filuis, rubis, atque
paludibus circundatam, ab Incolis Inswetrin nuncupatam, in lateribus suae
Regionis ad habitandum concessit. The Antiquities of Glastenbury which Capgraue
and others follow say Capgrau. in S. Joseph. ab Aramathia Matthew. Parker Antiq.
Brit. page 3.
plainly, visa vitae eorum modestia. Thus before the King did grante them that
favor, he did see, and had experience of the modesty of their lives. Neither
did these holy men presently after this their enfranchisement by King
Aruiragus, to live peaceably in that Island, build this Church which was
finished in their first year of Landing hear, but expected some time, and
living as poor Eremits in that wilderness, as the Antiquities of that place,
and other Antiq. Glaston. in tabulis and apud Capgrau. in S. Joseph Theat. of
great Brit. l. 6. Io. Leland. in assert. Arthur.
Antiquaries thus prove unto us: praedicti sancti in eodem Deserto co^uersantes
post pusillum temporis per Gabrielem Archangelu^ in visione admoniti sunt,
Ecclesiam in honorem sanctae Dei Genetricis and perpetuae virginis Mariae
construere: The aforsaid holy men living in that Desert, after a little time
were admonished by Gabriel the Archangell in a vision to build a Church in
honor of the holy mother of God, and perpetual virgin Mary. And allthough
there is no doubt but these holy men were as these Antiquities testify,
obedient to the heavenly admonition; diuinis admonitionibus obedientes, and
made all haste they could to perfect that holy work, yet in that their great
penurye and want of things, necessary to bring to effect, though it was never
so poor or mean a building, yet some time must needs pass, before it was
ended: And all these things were done, the Chapel perfected in the first
year of their coming hither: Capellam consummauerunt eodem anno quo in
Britanniam missi sunt. Where we see little, or no time, or leisure for them to
preach, if they had come, or been sent hither for that purpose. Neither was
this Oratory, being so little, as Histories mention, and the Guliel. Malm. M. S.
de Antiq. Coenob. Glast. Antiq. Glast. apud Capgrau. supr. M. S. de Antiq.
Glast. in Tab. M. S. Chronic. apud Haris The atrum l. 1. Io. Leland. in Assert.
Arthurij. Matthew. Parker Antiquitat. Brit. page 3. and 4. Godwin Conuers. of
Britain cap. 2. page 9. Antiquit. and Historici supr.
lamentable ruynes of it still extant witness, a place convenient to preach unto
multitudes, and great numbers, but only answereable to the small company of
these holy Eremits. Which is also manifestly proved, by the poor building
thereof, being framed only of writhen wands, virgis torquatis, and was never
amended in any respect until the coming of the holy Legates of Pope Eleutherius
hither, above an hundred years after, but so rude and desolate, after the
death of these Saints which builded it, that it was only an harbor for wild
beasts, and not for men: caepit idem locus esse ferarum latibulum, qui prius
fuerat habitatio Sanctorum. Therefore if these Eremits had converted any to the
faith of Christ in that place, either very small was their number, and
ability, or less their devotion, that neither during the life of these holy
men, they sought more to enlardge or beutifie that building, nor after their
death had more reverence unto it, but let it be an abiding for Beasts, and not
for men.

4. Neither will any man of Judgment esteem that Chapel (builded in such a
Desert, by fenns, wods, bushes, almost inaccessible unto, and inhabitable) a
preaching place, to convert wanton and libertine pagans, to the law of Christ:
yet this was the manner of life and proceeding of S. Joseph and his company, as
so many Antiquities have proved unto us, and the ancient Poet records in
this order.

Intrat Aualoniam duodena caterua virorum, M. S. in Tabul. de Antiq. Glast.
Capgrau. in S. Joseph. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. and Bal. ibid. Caradorus M.
S. de vita S. Gildae. Godwin Conuers. of Brit. page 9. cap. 2.

Flos Aramathiae Joseph est primus eorum;
Iosephes ex Joseph genitus patrem comitatur.
Where we see they willingely and of set purpose, and by entreatyes and
petitions sequestered themselves from the world, to live a solitary Religeous
life, mured and intre^ched about with woods, and waters, as walls and
Rampires, in a little rude wilderness, where no other people then did or would
live. Which a Protestant Bishop thus confirms: the place where they
principally settled themselves, was even there where Glastenbury now stands
near Wells, which being at that time and long after an Island all compassed
about with Lakes, and standing water, was given unto them by the King of those
parts. Where we see themselves with their privileges and Immunities confined
only within a little rude and unpeopled willdernes. Where no others inhabited,
whether none could, or morally would have access to be instructed in the faith
by them, nor they easily might or by their liberty being only parsonall, and
local for themselves in that place, could go forth from thence to preach unto
others abroad: or if that had been permitted, being all Jews or of Countries
of a strange S. Joseph and his companions brought eremiticall Monastical life
and profession into Britain.
languadge, both to Britans and Romans then the only or chief dwellers, and
Inhabitants hear, and wanting all Interpreters, nor having the Miraculous
gifts of tongues (for any thing we read in Antiquity) I cannot see, how they
did or possebly could profit much by preaching in this kingdom, neither can it
be reasonably thought, that these men came hither of purpose to preach, but to
give a beginning and introduction to the praying, Penitential, and
contemplative Religeous life, otherwise they would not have seated themselves,
and make such suits, to obtain their settling in a place so inconvenient by all
descriptions before, and in lateribus suae regionis; in the Guliel. Malm. M. S.
de Antiq. Coenob. Glast. Antiq. Glast. apud Capgrau. in S. Joseph. and al.
Matthew. Parker Antiquit. Brit. page 3. Io. Leland in assert. Arthurij. Godwin
Conuers. of Brit. page 10.
outside of King Aruiragus Country, as William of Malmesbury, diverse
Antiquities of Glastenbury, Capgraue and others write, and by the first
Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury and his Authors, in Regionis suae finibus:
in the very end of his Dominion, a place unfit to convert the whole Country, or
great parts thereof, which Apostolic men Conuerters of kingdoms, have ever
endeavored, and aimed at, when they first settled themselves in any Country,
to convert it to Christ.

THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
THAT S. JOSEPH DID NOT ACTVALLY convert to the Christian Religion, either King
Aruiragus, Coillus or Marius.

1. MVCH less can I be of their opinion, that seem to hold, that S. Joseph
converted King Aruiragus, Marius, or Coillus to the faith of Christ. A late
writer speaking of King Aruiragus says: Quidam Historici testantur, ipse
omnium Regum Britannorum Io. Pitseus Rel. histor. to. 1. aetat. 1. in Aruirago.
primus, fidem Christi cum Sacramentis Christianis, Christianus factus
suscepit: some Historians witness that of all British Kings he was the first
that being made a Christian received the faith of Christ with the Christian
Sacraments: An other thus plainly writes of S. Joseph: He converted to the
Christian Author of the Engl. Martyrol. 27. Iulij. in S. Joseph of Aramathia.
faith, Marius, and Coillus, son and Nephew to King Aruiragus. The first does
not affirm, that either S. Joseph did Convert Aruiragus, or that he was at all
converted to the faith of Christ, but only says some Historians do affirm,
that he was a Christian: And Ihon Harding is Author, that he both was a
Chistian and converted by S. Joseph, and plainly alleges Nennius King
Aruiragus was not a Christian converted by S. Joseph or any other. Ihon.
Harding. Chronic. c. 47. f. 41.
Authority of this opinion, thus he writes.

Joseph converted this King Aruiragus,
By his preaching to know the law divine,
And baptized him as written has Nenius,
The Chronicler, in Britain tonguefull fine,
And to Christ's law made him incline.
And gave him then a shilde of silver white,
A croise endlong and overthwart full perfect.
Thus writes this Author, but without warrant for any thing I can find, for
whereas he cites Nennius to have written thus in the British languadge, it is
evident by all Antiquities, that Nennius which wrote in that tongue was Io.
Bal. l. descrip. Brit. cent. 1. in Nennio Helio Io. Pitseus l. de Illustrib.
Britan. Scriptorib. aetate 1. in Nennio. Seldom Illustr. of Polialbion p. 128
long before the birth of Aruiragus, or S. Joseph, and dead 50. years before
the Nativity of Christ, and was Brother to King Ludd and Cassibelam, and was
named Nennius Helius: And so he could not write any such thing. The other
Nennius called Banchorensis, as all Authors agree, wrote only in Latin, and
consequently could not write so in the British tongue, as that Author
thinks: and our best Protestant Antiquaries affirm they find no such thing
in any copy of Nennius. Codices ij, quos consuluisse me Nennij antiquos
contigit, huiusce rei parum sunt memores, and for Catholics, I have seen
diverse affirm the same. Neither is King Aruiragus, or S. Joseph named by him.
Neither does any Antiquary of sound Judgment so teach, from any for Nennius, or
otherwise.

2. And if we had no other Arguments, or evidence, then that I have remembered
before of the Desert and desolate place, almost inaccessible unto, as M. S. de
vita S. Gyldae. per Caradoc.
both printed and Manuscript Histories tell us, propter munitiones Arundineti,
and fluminis, and paludis; so compassed, and environed with Reeds, River, and
fennes, which was allowed to S. Joseph, and his Christian company, and a poor
Oratory builded by themselves of such base Alder wands, as that fenny
wilderness afforded, gives sufficient testimony how far this King was from
being a Christian, that had nothing but such abject, and outcaste things, to
allow to Christ, and his servants. When for the maintenance of the Pagan
Idolatry, which he professed, both as the British History, Matthew of
Westminster, Galfrid. Monum. Hist. Brit. l. 4. cap. 15. 16. Matthew. Westminster. an.
44. 73. Pont. Virun. Hist. Brit. l. 4.
Ponticus Virunnius, and others as well Protestants as Catholics are witnesses,
he was Author of stately and sumptuous buildings, and so far from
diminishing any honor that was then given to the false Pagan Gods of the
Idolatrous Britons, that he added more unto them, namely worshipped the wicked
Emperor Claudius (whose Bastard Daughter he had taken as wife) as God,
dedicated a costely Temple unto him soon after his death, yet after this his
acquaintance with S. Joseph: for as I find in an old Manuscript History, and
others do not dissent, the City of Gloucester then Cair M. S. Histor. Antiq.
an. 66.
Glou, the City of Glaudius, was builded by King Aruiragus in the year of
Christ 66. Which was after the donation of privilege by Aruiragus to S. Joseph
2. ot 3. years. And it must needs be longer before the Idolatrous Matthew.
Westminster. an. D. 73. Galfr. Monumeten. Hist. Reg. Briton. l. 4. cap. 16. Pontic.
Virun. Britan. Hist. l. 4. King Aruiragus lived and died a Pagan.
Temple erected by him to the honor of Claudius was founded, and finished.

3. And to demonstrate that he both lived and died a Pagan, this King Aruiragus
was, and by his own Order, buried in that Pagan Temple in the year of Christ
73. Ten years after S. Joseph's coming hither. Aruiragus vt dies suos
expleuit, sepultus est Claudiocestriae in quodam Templo quod in honor Claudij
dedicauerat, and construxerat. And Ponticus Virunnius further adds, that he
did every month offer Sacrifice in that Temple, after the Pagans manner, so
much he loved him: singulis mensibus sacrificabat, tantum eum amore
prosequebatur. And it is further evident, by many Antiquities, that Aruiragus
did many public Acts, besides this, which Christian Religion cannot permit; as
that after he had been long time married to Voada, Sister of Cataracus, King of
the Scots, and had diverse children by her, he disinherited the children, put
away and Compabellus Cornelius Hybern. and Verem. apud Hect. Boeth. l. 3. Hist.
Galfr. Hist. l. 4. cap. 14. Pontic. Virun. l. 4. Matthew. Westminster. Antiq. 44. Stowe
Hist. in Aruiragus. Bal. l. Script. Brit. cent. 1. in Aruiragus Ioh. Pitseus de
V^r. illustr. aetat. ^. in Arui^ago. Gu^^el. Malm. l. de Antiquit. Glaston. M.
S. Capgrau. in Catalog. M. S. Joseph ab Aram. Antiquit. Glaston. apud eundem.
imprisoned the mother, and Married Genuesse, the supposed Bastard Daughter of
Claudius, and kept her, the other yet living, and left the kingdom to Marius
her son: And was so far from repenting this Barbarous Act, contrary to
Christian Religion, that being challenged for that Impiety, he wrote a Book in
defense of this his wickedness; affirming therein, that it was lawful for him
to have plurality of wives, because neither the Roman, nor Britan Pagan Laws
as he avouched, denied that to Princes, never speaking of, or regarding the
law of Christ, and in this state he lived and died.

4. Moreover all Antiquaries whatsoever, of any credit, tell us plainly that
Aruiragus was no Christian but still persisted in his Pagan Religion. First
William of Malmes bury says: Rex qui tunc regnabat fuit Barbarus, and
praedicationi eorum consentire noluit, nec paternas Traditiones commutare
volebat: The King which then reigned, was a Pagan, and would not consent to
their preaching, nor would he change his Ancestors Traditions. The
Antiquities of Glastenbury, Capgraue, and many other ancients write: Rex
Barbarus cum sua gente tam noua audiens, and inconsueta, nec paternas volens in
melius commutare Traditiones, praedicationi eorum renuebat: The Pagan King with
his people, hearing such new and vnaccuctomed things, as S. Joseph and his
fellows taught, would not change his Ancestors Traditions for the better,
but refused their preaching. The first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury with
his Protestant followers, affirms: Qorum praedicatione Rex Aruiragus cum
Proceribus suis ab inueterata Druidum Religione abduci noluit: King Aruiragus
with his Nobles would not by the preaching of Joseph, and his companions, be
drawn from the inueterate Religion of the Druids. Thus we see it manifestly
declared that King Aruiragus was in all his actions, life, and death, far
from being a Christian in profession.

5. Now let us examine, whether, as that late Author says, S. Joseph
converted Neither King Marius, or Coillus was a Christian.
King Marius and Coillus to the Christian faith: for this he brings no
reason, or Argument at all, but only in the Margent there cites, as teaching
that opinion, Ihon Capgraue, Polydor Virgill, Camden and Harpsfeld: but not any
one of these so affirms but the contrary. Capgraue in the place by him cited,
calls them, duo Pagani Reges Marius and Coillus; Two Pagan Capgrau. in Vita
S. Joseph. Camde^ in Romans in Aruirago. Polydor. Virg. l. 2. Hist. Angl. p. 41.
Kings Marius, and Collius, so Camden makes them long after S. Joseph's time,
and avouches King Lucius Son of Coillus to have been our first Christian
King. So does Polydor Virgill, thus plainly testifiing of Lucius: Britannorum
Regum primus Christianus factus est: he was the first Christian of the British
Kings. Harpsfeld says, that neither Aruiragus, Marius, or Coillus the Kings
which followed did embrace the Religion of Joseph and his companions: Aruiragus
caeterique Principes eum secuti etsi eorum Religione^ non amplecterentur,
molesti eis non fueru^t, immo Harpsf. Hist. Eccl. Angl. p. 3.
virtutes eoru^ admirati, beneficijs auxeru^t. But only were not troblesome
unto the^, and admiring their virtues bestowed benefits upon them. Which no man
denies: but this is far from saying S. Joseph converted to the Christian
faith Marius, and Coillus Engl. Martyrol. in S. Joseph. 27. Iulij.
Son and Nephew to King Aruiragus; the words of that Author from these
writers, as he seems to pretend by his citing them. And if we should follow
either the computation of Sir william Camden, the best Antiquary our
Protestants ever had, or others of that Religion, we should make it impossible,
that any of these should be converted by S. Joseph. For first Sir Camden would
have them to have lived long after the Age of S. Joseph. And for the Bal. l. de
Script. Britan. centur. 1. in Joseph Aram. and in Aruirag. Catal. Reg. Brit.
ante Hist. Brit. in Mario. Matthew. Westminster. an. 72. Polydor. Virgil. l. 2. hist.
p. 38.
rest they agree in this, that King Marius and yet a Pagan ouerliued S. Joseph.
To which computation Matthew of Westminster, Polydor Virgill, and others do
not dissent. And concerning King Coillus, he was ab Infantia, even from his
Infancy, by all writers brought up at Rome, and came not into Britain while he
came hither to reign as King, many years by all accounts after S. Joseph was
dead. And so by no possibility could he be converted to the Christian faith in
Britain by S. Joseph. What dispotion or Inclination these had to the faith of
Christ, I will entreat when I come to their days hereafter, in the mean
time, William of Malmesbury in his Manuscript of Glastenbury, all other
Antiquities of that place, and Historyes as before generaly say, these three
were Reges Pagani: Pagan Kings, which Harding himself confesses of Marius,
and Coillus, though friends to Christian Religion, neither does Guliel. Malm.
M. S. de Antiq. Glaston. Harding Chron. in Marius and Coillus.
he affirm, that Aruiragus was a Christian, but alleges Nennius (wherein he
seems to have been deceived) to be of that opinion. And the Author which
before would have King Marius and Coillus to be converted to the faith of
Christ by S. Joseph, does in an other place with the consent of Historyes name
S. Lucius the first Christian King of Britany. Therefore Marius and Coillus
could not by his opinion, without contradiction, be Christian Kings, Engl.
Martyrol. die 3. Decembr.
nor either of them a King Christian before him, otherwise he had not been the
first, but third or second in that order, and degree.

6. And if King Marius had been a Christian, or inclined to that holy Religion,
it carries no probability, that he learned it of S. Joseph: for as Harding
with others witnesses, he was of a child brought up at Rome with the Emperor
Claudius, and his mothers kindred.

Who norished was at Rome in his Iuuente
With his mothers kin the best of The Empire Hard. Chronic. in Marius c. 49.
fol. 41.

With Claudius also, that was his own Grandsire.
And not returning into Britain until the death of Aruiragus his father, to
inherit the kingdom after him, for any thing we read in Historyes; and by
the common computation of Antiquities, King Aruiragus and S. Joseph dying
within three years together, it is not a thing to be easily believed, Matthew.
Westminster. an. 73. Bal. cent. 1. in Aruirag. and Joseph Aram.
that Marius did or could learn Christianity of S. Joseph. Neither did, or
could Christian Religion allow Marius, a notorions known Bastard, to Inherit
the kingdom of Britain, as Heir to King Aruiragus, he having diverse
legittimate children by his lawful wise, Voada daughter of King Caratacus.
Hector Boeth. Scotor. hist. l. 3. f. 41.
Ex qua filium vnum and duas filias susceperat. All which by Christian Religion
should have inherited before them, and he, whether they had been living or
dead, by that could not claim Title to inherit, and possess the Crown of
Britain as he did. And the Scottish Historians who had best reasons Hector
Boeth. from the Scottish antiqu. Scohist. l. 4. fol. 58. Stowe hist. Romans in
Marius.
to keep these things in memory, do tell us, that he was so far a Roman, as
by all Antiquities, by his mother and education he truly was, they style him
Marius a Roman: Marius nobilis Romanus. And he was so far from having any
true Title to the Crown by being the Bastard son of Aruiragus, that he was
declared king by the Emperors Authority, Caesaris Authoritate Britonum Rex
appellatus; and to take all controversy away, was forced to marry his own
Sister by Father the eldest dughter of Aruiragus and his lawful wife Queen
Voada: Harum natu maiorem, vt iam inde Insulae status pacatior foret Matrimonio
sibi copulauit. Which all me^ know no Christian could do. And yet this was
after the great victory of Marius against the Scots, and Picts with their
Captain Roderike, which was as Matthew Westminster Matthew. Westminster. an. D. 75.
Bal. ce^t. 1. in Joseph Ara.
and others write, not above a year before the death of S. Joseph, that
chancing in the 75. and this in the 76. year of Christ. In which Battle the
two Daughters of Queen Voada, their Brother as it seems being dead, were
taken Prisoners, and the eldest the next Heir of Britain, after the matters
pacified, which was not in any probability before S. Joseph's death, was as I
have said before, married to Marius her Bastard Brother. Which marriadge (if I
may so term it) was still continued, and by them was begotten in it Coillus
after King, and Father to our first Christian King S. Lucius.

7. So that if we speak properly, and strictly of Christians, and name them
only such which actually, and really both in faith, and profession, do hold,
only the Christian Religion, and no other, it is evident that none of these
three Kings of Britain, Aruiragus, Marius, or Coillus was a Christian, much
less converted or baptized by S. Joseph. But if we speak of Christiantie In
what sense these Kings may largely be termed Christians.
in a more ample and exte^ded sense, as Tertullian and some other ancients
have done, of Tyberius, Caius, and some other Emperors, not actually
Christians, but so affected especially in some points, and as he does of
Pilate, Tertullian. Apol. aduersus gentes. Matthew. c. 27. v. 24
which washed his hands, and said he was innocent of the putting of Christ to
death, Innocens sum a sanguine huius: I am Innocent of the blood of this just
parson: that he was, in conscience a Christian, pro sua conscientia Christianus,
we may speak the like of these Kings. And goeso far with Hardings Author,
as to say with him.

Joseph converted this King Aruiragus
By his preaching to know the law divine.
For it is not improbable, but he was persuaded, the Law and Religion which S.
Joseph professed was true. But whereas Harding adds.

And baptized him as written has Nennius,
The Chronicler in Britain tongue full fine.
Except we take baptising in a very lardge, and Poetical amplifying
construction, and say Harding a Poet did thereby understand the true knowledge
of Baptism, and not the receiving thereof, neither Nennius nor any approved
Author does, or can prove any such thing. By this also we are sufficiently
assured, that neither S. Joseph of Aramathia, nor any of his company, though
otherwise most holy and renowned Saints, and excellently deserving of this
Nation, none of them converting either the King, Nobles, or people of Britain,
as so many worthy Authors, and Antiquities have told us, may be named the
Apostle, which converted this kingdom to the faith of Christ, or first founded
Christian Religion hear.

THE XXVIII. CHAPTER.
IN WHAT REVEREND SENSE S. JOSEPH of Aramathia is termed Apostle, by some holy
Fathers, the renowned sanctity of him, and his companions, together with some
particular points of their holy Religion, now denied by some, but even from
their time to this, Miraculously approved.

1. BUT allthouh S. Joseph was not in the common sense, an Apostle properly
unto this Nation, yet we may not deprive him of his due honors; among which,
one, as S. Hilary writes, was to enjoy the name of an Apostle, in an other,
yet most honorable construction, and meaning, after the S. Joseph how named an
Apostle.
same manner as he also calls S. Joseph husband to the blessed virgin, an
Apostle: because as the Apostles did bear Christ about into the world, by
their preaching, so these more really and personally carried him in their
arms. The one in his Infancy into Egypt, this other to his sacred sepulcher.
Joseph enim Apostolorum habet speciem, quibus Christus circumferendus est
creditus, Hilar. comment. in Matthew. can. 33.
and idcirco quanquam in duodecim Apostolorum numero non fuerit, Discipulus
Domini nuncupatur. The other Apostles and bearers of Christ were diverse, but
this Apostolic or Christ-bearing dignity to take the blessed body of our
Savior from the holy Cross, so solemnly to carry it unto, and bury it in the
sacred sepulcher, was a peculiar honor and prerogative to this S. Joseph, and
registered by all the four Evangelists for this his most heroical Act of
Christian Matthew. c. 27. v. 57 58. 59. 60. Marc. c. 15. v. 43. Luc. c. 23. v.
50. Ioa. c. 19. v. 38. 39. 4.
charity and magnamitie with greatest honor: and not without just desert,
seeing at that time, when all the properly named Apostles, as Christ had
foretold them, were offended because of him, (as our Protestants tanslate)
forsook him and fled, this most holy and valiant Apostle, Saint and Soldier
of Christ, went boldly unto the President, that had condemned him, asked,
obtained, Matthew. c. 26. v. 31. 65.
and buried his sacred body, with so great pomp, and honor, as the
Evangelists have remembered. For which his great and singular faith, and
belief in Christ, and love of him, the malice of the Jews was so vehemently
incensed against him, as the Antiquities of Glastenbury, Vincentius, Drogo
Episcopus Antiq. Glast. apud Capgr. in S. Joseph. Drogo Ep. Hostien. hist. de
morte and Resurrect. Saluat. Greg. Turon. l. 1. hist. Franc.. 22. p. 18.
Vincent. specul. hist. l. 5. c. 56. 57. 58. Euang. ascript. Nicod. Acta Pilati
apud Greg. Tur. supr. and al.
Hostiensis, Gregorius Turonensis, the Ghospel ascribed to Nicodemus, who
assisted him in that holy action, the public Acts of Pilate found and
examined by Theodosius the Emperor, and other Authors, and Monuments bear
testimony, that they presently incloased him a close Prisoner in an obcure
Cell, and watched him by the high Priests themselves, hating him more, then
they hated Christ himself.

2. Yet he was miraculously delivered from thence, to the great amazement and
confusion of his Persecutors: and having solemnized the Assumptio^ of the
blessed Virgin Mary with the Apostles, renowncing all his worldly wealth, and
terreene honor, his friends, Country, Riches, adventured so long; tedious and
dangerous a Journey after S. Peter into this part of the world, to live and
die in contemplation of the Mysteries of his Masters Religion, in a corner of
an Island, where at that time little or nothing at all was to be found fit for
the use of man, and thereby was the first Founder of Eremiticall Religeous life
in this Nation, and was by permission of King Aruiragus one of the builders and
the principal among them, of the first publikly allowed Church to the Blessed
Virgin Mary, and the first settled known Altar for Priests to consecrate and
offer the blessed body and blood of Christ, proprio ore Antiquit. Glast. apud
Godwin Conu. p. 11. Capgrau. Cat. in S. Patricio f. 264. p. 1. col. 1.
conficere, as the Antiquities of that holy place with other Monuments are
sufficient witness. Their conuersasion was in that place, deuoutely to serve
God, and the blessed Virgin Mary, wholly conversant in watchings, fastings, and
prayers: duodecim sancti praedicti in eodem loco Deo and beatae Virgini deuota
exhibentes obsequia, vigilijs, Ieiunijs, and orationibus vacantes. So much
these holy men were honored for these obsequies even from heaven it self, that
no meaner, nor inferior Angels, Prayer and duty to the blessed Virgin Mary by
S. Joseph.
nor any other but the same Archa^gel Gabriel which saluted the blessed virgin
with the happy tidings of Christ's Incarnation, for which he was chosen and sent
messenger from God unto her, was also sent to them, to admonish and Antiq.
Glast. apud Capgr. in S. Patric. l. 5. Joseph Guliel. Malm. l. antiquit.
Caenob. Glaston. Leland. in Assert. Arthur. M. S. apud Harris Theatr. l. 1. c.
25.
instruct them to build a Church in honor of this blessed Virgin Mary Mother
of God, and appointed them the place it self: Ibidem Deo seruientes, per
Gabrielis Archangeli admonitionem, Ecclesiam in honor sanctae Dei genetricis
Mariae contruxerunt: Loco eius caelitus demonstrato. And as they were most
dutiful to Christ, and above all Saints, to his blessed Mother, so neither of
their helps and assistance was wanting unto them, for not only Christ daily
and continually preserved and comforted them, in their difficulties, but the
blessed Virgin did extraordinarily assist and aid them in their necessities.
Eiusdem Virginis Det genetricis auxilio in necessitatibus suis refocillabantur.
And as Christ and his bles-Mother The blessed Virgin Mary Protecteth S. Joseph
and his companions.
gave them these comforts, and consolations from heaven for themselves, and
testimonye to others then of their sanctity, and holy Religion; So they give
continued witness thereof to this day by yearly, and miraculous testimony in
the same place. For in the very place where S. Joseph with two others of his
holy company first rested their weary bodies, upon an Hill with in a mile of
Glastenbury, as the preserved Tradition of the Inhabitants there affirms, and
thereupon in our languadge named weary-all Hill, there A wh^^e Thorn at
Glastenburie buddeth forth both leaves and flowers at Christmasse.
sprunge up, and still grows a miraculous Thorn Tree, of that kind and
species, in all natural respects, which we term a white Thorn, called
usually, even by the Protestants which inhabit there, the holy Thorn, which
every year at Christmasse in the coldest years and weather, firost, snow, or
what soever, never failing, buddeth forth both leaves, and flowers. The blomes
and branches where of are carried as miraculous remembrances by the Merchants
of Bristolle, not far thence, into foreign Nations.

3. And not without great warrant therefore does a Protestant Antiquarie
Seldom Illustrat. upon. Poly Olbion 3. Song. p. 54.
write: It goes for current truth that a Hawthorne thereby, on Christmasse day
always blossometh. You may cast this into the accomt of your greatest
wonders. And again: worthily famous was the Abbay of Glastenbury from Joseph
of Aramathia, that noble Counselor, as S. Mark calls him, buried there. And a
Protestant Poet thus.

O three times happy I Will where is that place that might Michaell Dragton
Polyolb. song 3.

Be with thy self compard, for glory and delight,
Whilst Glastenbury stood?
O who thy Ruynes see, whom wonder does not fill,
With our great Fathers pomp, devotion and their skill?
Thou more then mortal power (this Judgment rightly wayd)
Then present to assist, at that foundation laid:
On whom for this sad waste, should Justice lay the crime?
Is there a power in Fate, or does it yield to time?
Or was their error such, that thou could not protect
Those buildings which thy hand did with their zeal erect?
To whom did thou commit, that monument to keep,
That suffers with the dead their memory to sleep?
When not great Arthurs Tomb, nor holy Joseph's grave
From sacriledg had power their sacred bones to save:
He who that God in man to his Sepulcher brought,
Or he which for the faith 12. famous battles foug^^.
What? Did so many Kings do honor to that place,
For Avarice at last so ugly to deface?
For Reverence to that state which has asscribed been,
Trees yet in winter bloome, and bear their Summers green.
And notes in his margyn thus: The wonderful Tree at Glastenbury. And justly
may these men write in this manner, and further of this great wonderful thing:
for except my Judgment with many be deceived therein, it is one of the greatest
wonders, and continued miracles in the world, by my reading, if we consider but
a few of many circumstances thereof. It grows upon an Hill in a Pasture,
bare, and naked of other Trees, for shade and shelter for cattaile feeding
there, by reason whereof the Pasture being great and cattaile many, round
about the Tree the grownde is as bare and beaten, as any high way, flore, or
continually trodden place; the Trunk of the Tree being as great as the
ordinary body of a man, is so cut and mangled round about in the bark by
engrauing the letters of peoples names resorting thither, to see that wonder,
that a wonder in Nature it is, how the sap and nutrument should be diffused
from the root, to the bows and branches thereof, which also be so maimed and
broken of by the co^mers thither, to carry them away for show, and marvel,
that a marvel it is, how it can continue any vegetation or growing at all;
And yet the arms and bows are spread and dilated in a circular manner as
far, or farther then other Trees freed from such impediments of like
proportion, bearing the Hawes, fruits of that kind, as fully and plentifully
as others do, of which I have been an eye witness and obseruer.

4. And to make evident Testimony that these and such effects are miracuous and
have no cause in Nature, but proceed from a supernatural Agent, and worker to
witness the holiness of these Saints, and their Religion. This holy A Protestant
punished by God for endeavoring to cut down the foresaid Thorn. Part of the
same Thorn flourished as before though cut of from the body. A wallnut tree
miraculously buddeth forth at Glastenburie on S. Barnabas day: Crosses and
other Christian picturs made by S. Joseph and his company. Antiquit. Glast. M.
S. tabulis ligneis affix. in me^branis. Holy Reliks brought hither, and
reverenced by S. Joseph. M. S. antiq. de vit. S. Iosephi. Capgrau. in eodem.
Melkin in S. Joseph. Antiq. Glast. tabul. Fix. Antiquit. quonda^ in Monaster.
S. Edmundi in Suffolc. and S. Augustini Cantuar. Theater of great Brit. Cat. of
Rerelig. Houses Richard. Gibbonus Catalog. Religioas. aedium in Commit.
Somersetten. L. vlt. de Pagan. C. Theod. and l. Decernimus C. de Episc. and
Cler. nouel. 117. c. 7. ex Julian. and Constable. 1. c. 1. Auth. coll. 5 tit. 17.
Ord. Romans de divine. offic. c. deaedif. Eccl. page 107. Prudent. ^ym. 5. de S.
Vincent. and 12. de passionib. Apost. and al. apud Bar. To. 2. Annal. and die
26. Iulij.
Thorn (as the Protestants themselves there name it) had within the memory of
diverse, there living so testifing unto me two Trunkes, or Bodies, the other of
a greater bigness, and a profane Protestant endeavoring to cut down the
greatest, and likely both, if God had not miraculously prevented his wicked
designement, was extraordinarily punished by cutting his leg, and one of the
chips which he hewed of, flying up to his head put out one of his eyes, was
enforced to desist, yet having cut down the greater Trunk only, except a
little of the bark on the one side, this body of the tree so separated from the
root, and lying upon the ground 30. years together, still continued the
miraculous flourishing as the other did, and still does: and being after taken
quite away, and cast into a ditch far of from the place, it likewise
flourished and budded as it used before. And after that year it was quite
stolen away, not known by whom or whether, as the old people there affirmed.
There is also the remnant of a miraculous wallnut Tree near S. Joseph's
Chapel, the stock remaining still alive with a few small bows, the rest cut
away, which never buddeth forth until the Feast of S. Barnabas the Apostle,
commonly esteemed the longest day, and then it sodaynely florisheth as much as
others of that kind, of which I have spoaken before from the Protestant Bishop
of that place Doctor Montague. That which is left of this Tree keeps the same
miraculous course every year in flourishing, and bringing forth of leaves, but
no other fruit, of nutts, the branches being, when I saw it of late years,
too small, young and tender to bring them forth or sustain their weight.

5. These holy men among other memoryes of their holy Christian profession
made, used, and left there, the Picture of the Crucifixe, and other holy Images
to testify to posterity they were Christians by Religion, which there
inhabited. Figuram nostrae Redemptionis aliasque figuras manifestas repererunt,
quibus been cognouerunt, quod Christiani prius locum inhabitarunt. which
remained there until the coming of those Apostolic men, which Saint
Eleutherius Pope sent hither in King Lucius his time. There they kept with
great reverence (which with like devotion they brought so far with them) two
small silver vessels filled with the blood and sweat of our blessed Savior.
Duo vascula alba and argentea cruore prophetae Jesus perimpleta. There they left
a Succession of the first and most holy Religeous men, continuing (except in
one part of the second Age) by some until S. Dunstan his time, by all, many
hundreds of years, after the Saxons coming hither, and were renowned in all
Nations in the time of the Romans, the Britans and diverse Ages of the Pagan
Saxons, as also after they were Christians, in and after S. Augustine his
days: as I shall deliver at large when I come to that Age. These two Religeous
memories, the vessels of sweaty blood of Christ, and the sign of the Cross
found in that holy place, gave invincible testimony it was the Residency and
habitation of blessed S. Joseph, and his holy company, none but good
Christians, reverent preseruers of such Relics, and ensigns, and as appears
by the ancient laws and monuments hear cited, no Church founded by
Christians but with a Cross or Crosses erected there, even in those first
happy times, as a Title and memory.

THE XXIX. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN IS SHOWED HOW OUR PROtestant Antiquaries and others of England
vehemently contending to prove that S. Paul the Apostle preached hear in
Britain, do prove no such thing, by any Authorities, they allege for his
being hear.

1. IT is a common opinion of our English Protestant Antiquaries, and others of
that Religion, that S. Paul preached hear in Britain, but the testimonies
and Authorities upon which Protestants Arguments and authorities for S. Paul's
preaching in Britain examined.
they ordinaly build, do not in my Iugment prove any such thing of him in
particular, more then of the other Apostles. Their first Archbishop of
Canterbury thus pleads for S. Paul: Paulum ipsum gentium Doctorem, cum alijs
gentibus tum nominatim Britannis Euangelium nuntiasse post priorem suam Romae
incarcerationem, and Theodoretus and Sophronius Patriacha Matthew. Parker. Antiq.
Brit. p. 2. Lib. de curandis Graecoru^ affect.
Hierosolymitanus affirmant: both Theodoret and Sophronius patriarch of
Jerusalem do affirm that Paul himself, Doctor of the gentiles did preach the
Gospel to other Nations, and namely to the Britans, after his first
imprisonment at Rome. The Protestant Authors of their great Theater of great
Theat. of great Brit. l. 6. c. 9.
Britain, thus write of S. Paul's being hear: who doubtless after his first
releasement from Rome, confirmed the doctrine to these western parts of the
world, and among them, as may appear, to this Island of Britain, as both
Sophronius Patriarch of Jerusalem, and Theodoret an anncient Doctor of the
Church do affirm, and prove, saying that Fishers, Publicans, and the
Tentmaker (meaning S. Paul) which brough the Evangelical light unto all
Nations, revealed the same unto the Britans. Sir william Camden a principal
Antiquarie speaking of S. Peter's preaching hear, joins also S. Peter with
him in these words: Petrus etiam Camden Brit. in Sommersetshire
ipse huc penetrauit and diuini verbi lumen diffudit, vti etiam Paulus, test
Sophronio and Theodoreto post secundam Romae Incarcerationem: Also Peter
himself came hither, and diffused the light of the divine word, as also Paul,
as Sophronius and Theodoret testify after his second Imprisonment at Rome.
Also Andre du Chesne in his Andre de Chesne hist. d'Anglet. Escosse and Hiberne
p. 152. Stowe hist. Romans. Holinsh. hist. of Eng. Harris. descript. of
Britain. Author of 3. Co^uers. part. 1. p. 21. 22.. 22. Engl. Martyrol. die
25. Ianuar.
French History of England, Scotland, and Ireland says: S. Paul came hither
apres se second prison a Rome: after his second Imprisonment at Rome. And
cites for this his opinion Theodoret, and Sophronius, as the alleged English
Protestants have done before, of which opinion and upon the same Authority are
other English Protestant Historians, as Stowe, Holinshed, and Harrison.

2. To whom I add two late Catholics, Authors of the Three Conuersions, and
the English Martyrologe both of them relying upon the same Fathers Authority,
and Arnoldus Miramannius, whom they also mistake as the others, contending to
prove from him that S. Paul came hither in the fourth year of Nero the
Emperor, which he affirms not, and whosoever so teaches, or with our
Protestant Antiquaries before, that S. Paul came hither upon his liberty from
his first Inprisonment in Rome, quite over turns his being hear at all, as I
shall demonstrate in the Chapter following, which perhaps the Gatherer of the
English Martirologe observed, and therefore Die Iunij. 29.
contradicts himself; concerning this coming of S. Paul into Britain in an
other place, making it to fall out in the 67. year of Christ, which was Matthew.
West. an. gratiae 67. Godwin Conu. of Brit. p. 7. Godwin supr. p. 6. Hieron. in
cap. 5. Amos. Godwin Conu. supr. p. 7. Theat. of great Brit. l. 6. c. 9. Engl.
Mart. 25. Ianuar.
by common account the last year of the Empire of Nero. And to carry
Protestants consent with me, a Bishop of their profession, speaking of those,
which say S. Paul came hither in the fourth year of Nero, according to truth
of History, thus affirms: it cannot be, but he is mistaken, this Protestant
cites S. Hierome upon the 5. Chapter of Amos the Prophet inclining to bring S.
Paul hither, but the place being examined, proves no such thing, S. Hierome
there only speaking, as diverse others of the holy and ancient Fathers do, of
the great labors of S. Paul, but nothing at all of his coming either into,
or near our Britain. Wherefore this Protestant Bishop leaving S. Hierome, as
unprofitable to his purpose, catches hold of Theodoret, as his fellows did
before, in this manner: But Theodoret some what more plainly to the same
purpose, when S. Paul, says he, upon his Appeal being sent to Rome by Festus,
was heard, and upon his hearing acquitted, and set at liberty, he travailed
into Spain, and making excursion unto other Nations, brought unto them the
light of heavenly doctrine. Again Paul, says he, extended his travails into
Italy, and Spain, profiting also the Islands that lie in the Sea. And lastly
that we may not doubt, in these kind of speeches (other Nations, and the
Islands that lie in the Sea) he had an aim at our Britain: in an other place
he says plainly and expressly, (as I find it cited In psalm. 116. l. 9. de
curand. Graec. affect.
by N. D.) that he preached in Britain. The same seems, to be confirmed (if
happily he used not, poetica licentia) by venantius a Christian Poet, yet very
ancient, that describing the travails of S. Paul writes of him thus.

Transijt Oceanum, vel qua facit Insula portum,
Quasque Britannus habet terras, quasque vltima Thule.
He crossed the Seas unto the land, and utmost Coasts of Thule
Arryuing at the Ports and Isles, where Britans bare the Rule.
For so do our Protestant Authors of the great Theater allege, and
translate that ancient Christian Poet, yet with this clause of exception: if
Theater of great Britain l. 6.
credit may be given to a Poet. And the same Protestant Bishop confidently thus
writes: Sophronius Patriarch of Jerusalem in plain terms delivers, that
S. Paul was hear amongst us. Godwin Conu. supr. page 7.


3. These be the chiefest or only grounds, where upon our English Protestants
with some other Antiquaries do frame their so fixed opinion, of S. These
Arguments disabled to bring S. Paul into Britain.
Paul's coming into Britain, and preaching hear, far too weak and feeble
to bear and support that their building, as will appear by a breife examen of
these their Authors. And first concerning Venantius Fortunatus their own
Antiquaries before have disabled him in such a business, certainly to conclude
Venantius Fortunatus does not prove, that S. Paul preached in Britain.
that S. Paul was hear upon any report of a Poet speaking therein, as they
think Poetically amplifingely or faignedly, if credit may be given to a Poet,
say some, If happily he used not Poetica licentia; Poetical excess, as an
other writes: Which is as much as if they had plainly said, no certainty
thereof can be concluded from that Author. Which is a thing undoubted, and
without question, if we examine, and consider the discourse and intention of
that Poet, in that place, which being Poetical, as these Protestants have
insinuated, does climb up to an high Hyperbole, that we might the better be
assured, that the trauails of S. Paul (whereof there is no doubt) were
exceeding great. For he tells us, after the manner of Poets, that S. Paul
converted, or at the least preached in all Nations, even all Islands of the
world, which cannot possibly be true. For desides so many far distant of, and
vast Nations, where others of the Apostles are known to have preached, and S.
Paul never to have approached unto them, there be innumerable Islands in the
known world, and to omit the other great Ocean, Protestants and others assure
us, there be eleven thousand and more which the Spaniards call Philippins, and
and name their King Emperor of them, and yet this Poets words say, S. Paul was
in, and travailed through all Islands, which had any landing Port in them.

Transijt Oceanum, vel qua facit Insula portum. Where the words qua and Insula
have relation to all Islands in all other places, Harrison description of
Britany. p. 29. 30.
and not to this our Britain, or British Islands, which be remembered
particularly in the next words.

Quasque Britannus habet terras. And if we should only insist in the British
Islands, there be so many, and those that have landing places, that S. Paul
could out by any means visit them all, to justify the Poets words in a true
literal sense, and meaning: for our Cosmographall descriptions of Britain set
forth by Protestants, and others tell us, besides the greater Islands, the
Sorlings and Isles of Sully beyond Cornewale are in number 147. The Hebrides
43. Orchades 31. or 28. further this assertion, that S. Paul should travail
and pass through all the land, and Islands of Britain, and Thule.

Quasque Britannus habet terras, quaesque vltima Thule:
Transijt;
Cannot possibly be verified of S. Paul, who could not by any account as I
will prove hereafter, be in these parts above three months at the most, in
which short time all the lands of Britain, and Thule, commonly taken to be
Island so far distant hence, could not be passed over, nor in many years.
Sebastian Monster. in Cosmogr. and alij co^muniter mislandia.
And it plainly appears by this Author in the same place, that he spoke
this Poetically, and in amplifying manner of S. Paul; for there he says of
him, that he preached to all Nations, by all Sea and land, Europe, Asia, and
Afrike that he preached in all places where the sun shyned, North, South,
west, and East.

Quid saccr ille simul Paulus tuba gentibus ampla,
Per mare, per terras Christi praeconia fundens.
Europam, and Asiam, Lybiam, sale dogmata complens,
Et qua sol radijs tendit, stylus ille cucurrit
Arctus, Meridies, hic plenus vesper, and ortus.
Which cannot literally be verified of S. Paul, or any man, that ever was; and
then immediately follow the two before cited verses.

Transijt Oceanum: quasque Britannus habet terras: To testify they were to be
taken in the same sense, Britain being called by some an other would, and
Thule, the utmost end of the then commonly known globe of the earth; which is
further proved by the next and immediate words having reference in
construction, with his verse of Britain: for he makes a distinction, and
stay, at the and of the first verse.

Transijt Oceanum; To testify; he meant not Britain, but all Islands by the
words.

Vel qua facit Insula port^m: And then adds as a narration of an other
different thing.

Quasque Britannus habet terras, atque vltima Thyle,
Buccina concrepuit Regiones vna per omnes.
That S. Paul sounded forth the doctrine of Christ through all Regions which
either the Britans or they of Thule did possess. And then further reckons
all other Nations converted by S. Peter, and S. Paul, and how they both
preached in all the world.

Ambo triumphantes spargunt noua dona per orbem. The like Hyperbolical speech
he uses of S. Paul in an other place, saying, Venant. Fortun. Libell. ad
Justin. Junior. Imperatorem and Sophia^ Aug.
the wheel of his tongue did run about the Poles of the world, and to
thowsands of Nations be preached.

Quod cecinit Paulus passim tuba millibus vna,
Gentibus and stupidis fudit ab ore salem.
Cuius quadratum linguae rota circuit exem.
And plainly says, that both S. Peter, and S. Paul preached through out
Venant. Fortun. in vita S. Martin.
the universal world.

Dogmata quae Christi totum sparsere per orbem. Theodoret cited by Protestants,
does not in any place affirm that S. Paul preached in Britain.
And thus concerning venantius Fortunatus.

4. Now let us come to Theodoret and Sophronius. The first place which our
Protestants allege from Theodoret, for S. Paul's preaching hear, is in his 9.
book, de curandis Graecorum affectionibus, and thus urged as also Sophronius
by these men: Sophronius Patriarch of Jerusalem, and Theodoret an ancient
Doctor of the Church do affirm, and approve saying, that Fishers, Publicans,
and Theater of great Britain l. 6. c. 9. Sophron. sermon. of the Nativity of
the Apostle. Theodoret. de Curand. Graec. affect. l. 9.
the Tentmaker, (meaning S. Paul) which brought the Evangelical light unto
all Nations, revealed the same unto the Britans. But if this were so testified
by these Fathers, it no more proves that S. Paul brought the Eua^gelicall
light hither, then all the other Apostles, which no man will affirm, for it is
spoken equally of them all, meaning (as the words be plain) that the whole
company of the Apostles joined together, and some preaching in one Nation, some
in others, both preached in Britain, and the other Nations, as the words of
Theodoret being these, which follow are manifest: nostri illi Piscatores ac
Publicani Theodoret. l. 9. contra Graecos.
Sutorque ille noster cunctis Nationibus legem Euangelicam detulerunt. Neque
solum Romanos, quique sub Romano degunt Imperio, sed Scythas quoque ac
Sauromatas, Indos praeterea, Aethiopes, Persas, Setas, Hircanos, Britannos,
Timerios and Germanos, vtque semel dicatur, omne hominum genus, Nationesque
omnes induxerunt Crucifixi leges accipere. Which by no possibility can be
verified, or understood to be spoken only of S. Paul, but all the Apostles
together, of which some one at the least, as S. Peter before, did preach to the
Britans, and caused them to receive the Law of Christ crucified. And to
manifest this more fully, the same Author Theodoret speaking in an other place
of the travails and preaching of S. Paul in particular, never bringerh him
nearer to Britain, then Rome, or Spain, thus he writes of that holy Apostle:
Beatus Paulus Theodoret. in ps. 116.
breuiter docet quot gentibus salutaria praeconia attulit, inquiens, ita vt ab
Jerusalem per circuitum vsque ad Illericum repleuerim Euangelium Christi:
postea igitur in Italiam venit, and in Hispanias peruenit, and Insulis quae in
mari iacent vtilitatem attulit. Romany quidem scribens ait, spero enim cum in
Hispanias proficisci caepero, quod praeteriens videam vos, and a vobis deducar
illuc. Et admirabili Tito scribens, inquit, huius rei gratia reliqui te Cretae,
vt co^stituas per Civitates Presbyteros, sicut and ego disposui tibi. Where we
are fully told, and assured, that Theodoret does not write, that S. Paul came
nearrer unto Britain then Rome, or Spain, for he expounds himself, what
Islands he means S. Paul brought Salvation unto, when he exemplifieth in
Crete, and the Islands in the Adriake sea, where he ordained S. Titus Bishop,
and it was Metropolitan to the others, Ptolomaeus Geogr. Munster. in Creta.
Abraham Ortel. and alij. Ioannes Leuncl. de ordine Ecclesiarum Constantinopoli
subject. Prouincial. Roman. Hier. Catal. in Titus. Doroth. Synops. in eod.
Theodoret. epist. Act. cap. 27. cap. 28. c. 13. c. 20. Godwin Conu. p. 7. Tree
Conuers. part. 1. p. 21. Magdeburg. cent. 1. l. 2. cap. 10 col. 595.
aunciently known by the name Ecatompolis, the Island of an hundred Cities
having so many in it, and the Metropolis of it, was Metropolis and
Archiepiscopall See to the adjacent Islands, as we are assured by Ioannes
Leunclauius, Prouincialis Romanus antiquus, and others more ancient, as S.
Hierome, and Dorothaeus, and Theodoret in his defensory Epistle, where he
testifies, that being Bishop of Cyprus, he had 800. Churches under him,
Octingentis Ecclesijs Pastor essem. And the Scripture itself tells us, of
diverse Islands in that Sea only, where S. Paul was, as Cyprus, Crete itself
where he ordained S. Titus, Bishop, Clauda, Melita, and others. And absurd it
is which the same Protestant Bishop before cited from N. D. the Author of the
Three Conuersions, that Theodoret says plainly, and expressly upon the 116.
Psalm, that S. Paul preached in Britain, that Author affirming no such
thing, but speaking in the name of the Magdeburgian Protestants, who if they so
teach, they are mistaken therein, as I have proved before, Theodoret having no
such saying there, or in any other place, and there not so much as naming
Britain, or Britans: and the Magdeburgian Protestans seem also to be of
opinion, that S. Paul was never in Britain, for dilating at lardge the
Travails of that holy Apostle and teaching how a little before his death he
preached in Italy, Spain, France, and other parts of the west: In Italia,
Gallia, Hispania, and alijs Occidentis partibus docuit Euangelium, they name
not Britain, except coniecturally Sophronius teaches not, that S. Paul
preached in Britain.
they include it in that clause, and other parts of the west.

5. Now to come to their other Author, Sophronius, Patriarch of Jerusalem,
who as some Protestants before, and some Catholics also write, does teach, in
his Sermon of S. Peter and Paul, and as a Protestant Doctor affirms 3.
Co^uers. part. 1. Engl. Martyr. in S. Paul. Sutcliffe subuers. page 4. Sophron.
l. aut Sermon. de Petro and Paulo.
in his Sermon of the Nativity of Christ, that S. Paul preached in Britain,
there is no such thing or the like in any of those Sermons. Only I find in
his Sermon or Book of S. Peter and Paul, how he writes of S. Peter in this
manner: illi mundi procuratio committitur, and traduntur caelestium the
saurorum claues. Super caetum Apostolorum constitutus est, vbique seminando
verbum vitae: the chardge of the world is committed to S. Peter, and the keys
of the celestial treasures The charge of the world, committed to S. Peter.
are delivered unto him, sowing the word of life every where. Therefore these
Authorities so magnified by Protestants for S. Paul's preaching hear, cannot
warrant us in that behalf. Which some of their best Protestant Antiquaries
have both observed, and plainly confessed. One of them thus writes, of the
chiefest Harrison descrition of Britain p. 22. 23.
Authority: some repose great assurance upon Theodoret, that Paul the Apostle
should preach the word of salvation hear, after his delivery out of
Captivity: But since I cannot verefy the same, by the words of Theodoret, to be
spoken more of Paul, then Peter, or the rest, I will pass over this
conjecture. And their great first Protestant Archbishop seeing the weakness of
the proofs for this opinion, does Matthew. Parker. Antiquit. Brita^nic. p. 2. 3.
plainly say, that S. Paul was not hear in parson at all: And is content to
acknowledge it for an incredible and impossible thing also, that S. Paul was
hear either parsonally by him himself in presence, which he utterly
disableth, or by sending Protestants confess S. Paul was n^uer in Britain.
any others hither, except he converted Claudia Rufina, our British Lady at
Rome (the contrary whereof is evident) and she sent the Christian faith to her
friends in Britain: hoc quod Pontificij incredibile, atque adeo impossible
statuunt, cum vero cohaeret maxim. Quanquam enim ipse ad hanc Insulam
profectus S. Claudia a British Lady, a Christian before S. Paul his first
coming to Rome.
non sit, tame^ Claudiae Rufinae nobilissimae Britannae, and Graecis Latinisque
literis instructae Christianam Religionem suasisse perspicuum est. Hanc itaque
iam ad Christum conuersam, non minus est verisimile Christiana dogmata ad
Britannos misisse suos, quam ante acceptam fidem, Epigrammata Martialis. What a
chimericall conceipted untruth this is, will more appear, when I come to this
our Noble British Lady, a Christian in Rome, long before S. Paul's first coming
thither. An other a Protestant Bishop among them, is witness, that it is so
far from a common, and allowable opinion, that S. Paul was in Britain that
diverse ancient and worthy Authors exclude him from Spain itself, and all
other Western Nations, except Italy, whither he was brought a Prisoner to
Rome. Innocentius the first, Bishop of Rome, says plainly, that non of the
Apostles Godwin Conu. of Brit. p. 6.
except Peter taught either in Spain, or in any other part of the west. And
Thomas Aquinas grounding himself upon the Judgment of Gelasius, delivered by
Gratian utterly denies the repair of S. Paul into Spain. So does Dominicus
Soto, yielding for his opinion, that no ancient writer ever mentioned that
voyadge. And the French Historians, Nicholas vignier, and Francis Burgoing,
make it Nichol. Vignier Biblioth. historial. an. 61. Francis Burgoing l. 2. c.
1. l. 3. c. 2. Romans cap. 15.
very doubtful: the first says: it is not found by any certain, and trusti^
Authors. The other says: S. Paul did promise to go into Spain, but it is
not certain that he was there.

THE XXX. CHAPTER.
HOW IT IS VERY PROBABLE, THAT S. Paul preached hear in Britayne allthough
not until long after that S. Peter and his Disciples had first hear founded
the Church of Christ.

1. BUT although I may not be so confident as these our Protestants have been
upon so weak, and slender foundations, to build an undeniable and
unquestionable certainty of S. Paul's being, and preaching hear in Britayne:
Yet I do not doubt but standing upon other grounds, then they have done, I may
both publish it for a morally warrantable historical truth, that S. Paul
preached hear, that we may honor him for one of our holy Apostles, set
down a prefixed time, though near his death, of his coming hither, as also
some few things, which in moral Judgment he performed hear. And to S. Paul
preached in Britain.
begin with his coming hither, we have diverse both ancient and later
Authorities to settle us in that opinion. First Eusebius himself brings him
into our Neighboring Countries, Italy, Spain, and France to preach the
Gospel: Dicitur peregre profectus in Hispaniam, and Italiam Christi Praeco
verbum Eusebius Hist. Eccl. l. 2.
disseminasse. Therefore coming of purpose to these parts to preach, and to
parts far from Rome, peregre profectus Christi Praeco, and to sow the word
round about, verbum disseminasse, we may not exclude his labors out of this
Nation. S. Hierome speaks more plainly, and urges the testimony of S.
Paul himself to entitle our Britain so great a part of the western world to
be partaker of the preaching of S. Paul, and speaks as though God had
ordained his liberty from Prison to that end. Sciendum Paulum ^ Nerone
dimissum, Hieron. in Catal. Scrip. in S. Paulo Apostolo.
vt Euangelium Christi in Occidentis quoque partibus praedicaret, sicut ipse
scribit in secunda Epistola ad Timotheum, eo tempore quo and passus est, de
vinculis dictans Epistolam. In prima mea satisfactione nemo mihi affuit, sed
omnes me dereliquerunt, non eis imputetur. Dominus autem mihi affuit, and
confortauit me, vt per me praedicatio compleretur, vt audirent omnes gentes.
Thus S. Hierome contendeth to prove by S. Paul's own words, and testimony,
that he preached in these parts, and his words, vt per me praedicatio
compleretur, vt audirent omnes gentes: that by me the preaching might be fully
known, and that all the Gentiles 2. Tim. 4. v. 17.
might hear: as our Protestants translate, do prove no less. For it is
evident by S. Paul himself, and all others, that after his return into the
Eastern parts, he preached unto those he had instructed before, and not
fulfilled all his preaching there, nor all the Gentiles did or could hear him
there, being dispersed in so many Nations, also of the west, of which this
Nation was so great a portion, that where, omnes gentes: all the gentiles were
to hear S. Paul's preaching, in this part of the world, Britain was not, nor,
(to make good S. Paul's words) could be exempted, especially seeing S. Hierome
says plainly, and S. Paul confirms it, that he was delivered from his
Prison to preach the Gospel to all gentiles of the West. And S. Isidor bears
the same witness, for showing how S. Paul preached in the East, and then after
in Italy, and Spain, he adds of the other western Nations, ac nomen Christi
multarum Isid. Hisp. l. de vita and morte Sanctorum c. 71.
manifestauit gentium populis, quibus ante non fuerat declaratum: and he made
the name of Christ manifest to people of many Nations, to which it was not
before declared. And says he was chosen a Master, and preacher in all places,
and his Apostleship was given for the uncircumcised gentiles. Paulus in omnibus
Magister Cap. 83. supr.
and Praedicator eligitur. Paulo Apostolatus praeputij in gentibus datus est.
S. Epiphanius seems to be of the same opinion. And our renowned Countriman
Epiph. haeres. 52. Bed. in Martyr. pride. call. Iul. to. 3.
S. Bid speaking of S. Paul, says, that besides his great labors in the
East, he also preached in the parts of the west: Euangelium christi in
Occidentis quoque partibus praedicauit. Where the words, the parts of the west,
spoken without restriction, or limitation to any particular place, part,
Province, or kingdom, will not suffer so great a part, as great Britain to
be excluded from his preaching,

2. For which opinion we may also cite the ancient Roman Martyrologe,
Martyrol. Romans Ado, and Vsuard^ in Martyrol. die 29. Iunij. Petr. Cluniacen. l.
2. ep. 1. Trithem. in S. Maximo. Cat. Episc. Mogune. Ant. Demochar. cont. Calu.
Gul. Eisengr. cent. 1. Philip. Bergom. histor. l. 8. an. 90. Genebrard. in
Chron. an. 63. Franc. Burgoing hist. l. 3. c. 2. Magdeb. cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10.
col. 595. Theater of great. Brit. l. 6. Godw. Conu.
Ado Viensis, Vsuardus, Petrus Cluniacensis, Trithemius, the Cathalogue of the
Bishops of Ments, Philippus Bergomensis, Antonius Democharez, Gulielmus
Eisengrenius, Genebrard and others, testifying S. Paul's preaching in the west
Countries, near unto Britain: so do diverse foreign Protestants, and of this
Nation also: Francis Burgoing, the Mageburgians with others, writing plainly,
that, in Italia, Gallia, and Hispania, and alijs occidentis partibus docuit
Euangelium: he preached the Gospel in Italy, Gaul and Spain, and other west
parts which he had concluded with himself: citing for this proof, Philip. 1.
v. 25. 26. Epist. ad Phillem. v. 22. and Romans 15. By which relation we cannot
without injury both to S. Paul, and this kingdom, deprive Britain of his
preaching. And therefore diverse both ancient and late writers do expressly,
and particularly affirm, that Saint Paul preached in this Nation. Among
which for ancients I may allege Venantius Fortunatus before; for allthough as
I have proved, his narration of S. Paul's preaching cannot without some
Poetical strain, or fiction be verified, yet being a Christian, a Priest of
Italy, and Bishop of Poicters in France where he was most likely to be truly
informed of S. Paul's labors, he might not without too much liberty, and
amplification in his kind extend them, as he does, unto Thule and the
uttermost parts of the known world, except he had found good warrant to write
as he did, that he preached in all the Dominions of the Britans, the way and
passadge thither.

Quasque Britannus habet terras, quasque vltima Thule. And Arnoldus Mirmannius
plainly writes of him: Ad Occidentis and Arnold. Mirm. in Theatro co^u. gent.
Europae Climata importare Euangelium studens, Hispaniam primum, hinc Galliam,
inde Britanniam pridem a Claudio triumphatam, Orchades, caeterasque Oceani
Regiones, seu Insulas extremas quasque petens, per Germaniam in Italiam
contendit. Desiring to carry the Gospel unto the Climats of the west, and
Europe, going first into Spain, then to France, from thence to Britain, where
Claudius had triumphed a while before, the Orchads and other Regions or Isles of
the Ocean by Germany went into Italy. Where we see, a constant affirmation of
his preaching hear, with such circumstances, and particulars, that without
great Authority for so constant a Relation, it had been great rashness to
have made it. To these we may add Bellarmine, who speaking of Christ's sending
his Apostles to preach, says: he sent some into the furthest part of Britain
to destroy by them the Idols of the world, and erect the Standard of the Cross
to change laws, and customs, and Bellarm. l. meditat. Anglice translat. page
207.
to overthrow the Tyranny of the Devil. Where speaking in the plural number
of Apostles sent hither, he must needs by one of them understand S. Paul. For
it is evident before, even by Protestants allowance, that excepting him none of
them but S. Peter preached in this kingdom of great Britain. And in this
opinion are diverse Catholic writers of this Nation, expressly writing that S.
Paul parsonally preached hear.

3. M. Harris in his Manuscript History thus testifies of him: he came into
Harris Theat. l. 1 c. 15. Engl. Martyrol. die 29. Iunij.
this la^d of Britany, and hear preached the Gospel. The Publisher of the
English Martyrologe says of him: It is recorded by diverse ancient writers,
that he came parsonally into our Island of great Britain, and there preached
the Christian faith. And again in another place: according to diverse ancient
writers, S. Paul parsonally came into Britany, and there preached the faith of
Christ. The author of the Ianuarij 25. The Author of the 3. Conu. of Brit. p.
22. Gulielm. Camd. in Britannia. in Sommersetshire. Matthew. Parker. Antiquit.
Brit. p. 2.
book entitled The 3. Conuersions is of the same judgment. So be many others,
and some Protestants as their chief Antiquarie Camden; who affirms, that
both S. Peter and S. Paul preached hear: Petrus ipse huc penetrauit, and
diuini verbi lumen diffudit vti etiam Paulus: Therefore it is a far fetched
fiction, of the first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury to say, that those
which be of the Popes Religion do make it a thing incredible, and impossible,
that S. Paul either parsonally by himself, or by any his Disciples preached
hear: pontificij incredibile atque adeo impossible statuunt. For Catholics
are so far from making either of these either incredible, or impossible, that
we willingly allow them, both for probable. Only I have proved, and by
Protestants warrant that it is a thing both incredible, and impossible that
either S. Paul or any other of the Apostles, but S. Peter and his Disciples
should be the first and principal Founders of the Church of Christ in this
Kingdom. But they be Protestant and not Catholic writers, which by their
weak grownds, and feeble Authorities have so much as in them lies, made S.
Paul's preaching in Britain to be neither credible, nor probable, both which I
have thus disproued, and proved it be both possible, credible, and probable
that he was, and preached in this kingdom.

THE XXXI. CHAPTER.
CONCERNING THE TIME OF S. PAVLS coming into, and preaching in Britain. That
it could not be until the later end of the Empire of Nero, a little before the
Martyrdom of S. Paul, and was hear, but a very short time.

1. CONCERNING the time of S. Paul's supposed coming hither, being but a
circumstance of a doubtful object, and matter it self, it must needs be more
doubtful and uncertain* the Authors of the English Martirologe, and the
Three Conuersions of Britain, asscribe his coming to the fourth year of Nero
Engl. Martyrol. die 25. Ianuar.
The first says: According to diverse ancient writers, in the fourth year of
Nero the Emperor his Reign, the Iewe^ ^eing by his Edict banished Rome, he (S.
Paul The error of them which think S. Paul came into Britain in the 4. year
of Nero, confuted.
parsonally came into Britain, and there preached the faith of Christ: The
other writes in this order: Arnoldus Mirmannius in his Theater of the
Conversion of all Nations affirms, S. Paul to have past to Britain, in the
4. year of Nero. Anno Domini 59. and there to have preached. Diverse
Protestants seem to incline to the same opinion, and for the same respects:
But as I have proved before this could not be, and the first Author
contradicts himself, both in the time, and his Author of 3. Conu. of Brit.
p. 22. Engl. Martyr. June 29.
Authors: for in an other place using the same Authorities of Theodoret,
Sophronius, Venantius Fortunatus, and Mirma^nius, as in the former, not any one
of them speaking any such thing, he says: It is recorded by diverse ancient
writers that about the year of Christ, threescore and seven S. Paul came
parsonally into our Island of great Britain, and there preached the Christian
faith. And the Author of the book of the Three Conuersions is as much
deceived, if he thinks Arnoldus Mirmannius did teach, that S. Paul came
hither in the fourth year Theater of great Brit. l. 6. Godwin Conuers. p. 7.
of Nero, as our Theater Protestant writers do cite him, for Mirinannius
speaks of no year at all, of S. Paul his coming hither: But making S. Paul
to begin his travails after his Imprisonment by Nero in the fourth year of
his reign, caryeth him presently into Syria, Pamphilia, Licaonia, Phaenice,
Mysia, Phrigia, Galatia, Bithinia Achaia, Macedonia, the rest of Greece and
Asia, and after Arnold. Mirm. Theatro conu. gent.
all this affirms, he came into the west, Spain, France, and Britain:
Quarto Neronis anno postremum iter ingressus, peragrauit tertium aut quartum
Syriam, Pamphiliam, Lycaoniam, Phaenicen, Mysiam, Phrygiam, Galatiam,
Bythiniam, Achaiam, Mac^doniam, reliquamque Graeciam, pariter and Asiam,
Illericum vsque Christianae Religionis prorogans pomaeria. Demum ad Occidentis
and Europae Climata importare Euangelium studens Hispaniam primum, hinc
Galliam, inde Britanniam petens. Where he makes his coming into these parts,
one of his last labors, and his last of all, except his return to Rome, to
suffer Martyrdom, in the later time of Nero. And he is no less deceived,
which says: About the later end of Guiderius Reign, or not long after
Claudius return to Rome, it seems both by testimony of ancient writers,
and by the course of S. Paul's peregination that he came into this land of
Britain, and hear preached the Gospel. For it is evident Harris hist. M. S.
l. 1. c. 15.
by diverse places of holy Scripture, that it was both long after the return
Romans 15. Act. ca. 26. c. 27. and 28. c. 25. Matthew. Westminster. ad an. 44. and alij.
Stowe and Howes hist. in Claudius. Cat. Prot. Regu^ Brit.
of Claudius the Emperor unto Rome, being about the 44. or 45. year of Christ,
and after his death also, 8. or 9. years after this, and after Nero had
reigned some time before S. Paul came to Rome itself, or any part of Europe
or the West. And this Author naming in general ancient writers for his
assertion mistaketh them in this thing, for none does, or can, whether ancient
or late writer contrary to Antiquity, and the holy Scripture, so affirm. The
chief testimonye he brings is from Theodoret, affirming that S. Paul came
into Italy, and into Spain, and profited the Islands that lie in the Sea: in
Italiam Theod. in Ps. 116.
venit, and in Hispaniam peruenit, and Insulis quae in Mariiacent vtilitatem
attulit. But I have showed before that Theodoret interprets himself of
Islands in the Adriaticall See, and names them in the plural number. And it
rather makes against, then for that opinion, if by impossibility he could be
vndestood of our Britain, for he sets down S. Paul's visiting those Islands
after his being both at Rome, and Spain, 20. years at the least after the
Return of Claudius to Rome from Britain. He alleges Petrus de Natalibus, to
as little purpose, writing as he says, that S. Paul converted one Lucius in
Britain, and his Disciple S. Tymothie baptized him: what this Lucius and
Tymothie Petrus de Natal. l. 1. c. 24.
were I will entreat hereafter, but certain it is, that S. Timothy Bishop of
Ephesus continued at his chardge, and came not hither; and if we should suppose
the contrary, (contrary to all Antiquity) yet coming hither with S. Paul, and
S. Paul not coming unto any western part of many years after, as I have made
demonstration before, this disproueth, and proves not his purpose, speaking of
no time at all. And this Author contradicts himself in this Relation, for
he expressly writes in these words: S. Paul after his second Imprisonment at
Rome came into Britain. Which was many years as I have Harris supr. l. 1.
already proved, after the death of King Guiderius, and Claudius his return
to Rome, and very long after this our Britain had received the faith of Christ
from S. Peter, and his Disciples.

2. And to manifest unto us, that S. Paul did not come into Britain, until
he had performed his promise of going into Spain, after his dismission from
his imprisonment at Rome, and his long travail into the East Countries again,
we have both Antiquity and Scripture for sufficient warrant, to be firmly of
that mind. For all those Authors which I have cited before, for S. Paul's
preaching in these parts, especially in Spain, as the Martyrologes of the
Romans, Vsvardes, S. Bid, and Ado, Petrus Cluniacensis, Trithemius, Antonius
Democharez, Eisengrenius, Mirmannius, Genebrard, Matthew of Westminster with
others, as diverse Protestants, namely the Magdeburgians, Francis Bargoing,
their English Protestant Bishop Godwin, their Publishers and Comments upon
Matthew Westminster with many others agree, that after Matthew. Westminster. an. 57.
Magdeb. cent. 1. in S. Paul. ^r^nc. Burg. hist. l. 3. Godwin Co^uers. p. 7.
Protest. comm. in Matthew. Westminster. an. 57. Romans c. 15. v. 24. 28. 25.
his freedom from Prison at Rome, S. Paul went through France into Spain. And
except we should offer so great violence, and injury, to the honor of S.
Paul, as to make him a wilful breaker of his holy resolution, and promise, he
himself in holy Scripture is best witness, that after his liberty at Rome he
immediately went into Spain, for writing to the Romans he says: Whenever I
take my Journey into Spain, I will come to you, for I trust to see you in my
Journey, and to be brought one my way thitherward by you. And again in the same
Chapter: when I have performed this (his Journey to Jerusalem) to minister unto
the Saints, I will come by you into Spain. Where he makes a full resolution,
and promise, to go by Rome into Spain: the Greek is, (...): Per vos
proficiscar in Hispaniam: I will come by you into Spain: as our Protestants
translate it. All Texts agreeing, as though he principally intended his Journey
to Spain. Wherefore being an undoubted truth, both by Scriptures, and
Antiquities, that he was at freedom, and liberty at Rome, so far one his
promised Journey to Spain from the East, and by which he said he would come to
go, and by them be accompanied thither, and certain, that after two years,
so soon, as he had liberty, he went from S. Paul after his first imprisonment
at Rome, went into the East Countries, spending diverse years there, before he
could come to Britain.
Rome, and as so many Authors before affirm, immediately through some parts
of Gallia into Spain, I cannot see how this his course, and Order of travail
can be questioned.

3. That S. Paul did after this his preaching in Spain, presently return
again into the East Countries, where he had preached before, and consequently
not into Britain at this time, we have as great allowance by the holy
Scriptures, as they are expounded even by Protestant writers, and by their
testimonies as well as other Catholic Authors, and other Antiquities. First
the Magdeburgian Protestants speaking of that time of S. Paul's liberty, after
his imprisonment first at Rome and liberty, which they think to be ten
years, they say S. Paul spent, is first in Syria, Asia, and Greece and then
returned Magdeb. cent. 1. l. 2. c. 20. col. 595.
again into the west, before or in the last year of Nero: Annis illis december
vsque ad vltimum Neronis, inuisit Ecclesias Syriae, Asiae and Graeciae. Quod
omnino sibi proposuerat ante liberationem, vt patet ex Epistola ad Philippenses
1. certo scio, inquit, quod mansurus sim, and cum omnibus vobis permansurus
sim, in vestrum profectum, and gaudium fidei, vt gloriatio vestra exuberet per
Iesum Christum, per meum ad vos reditum. Et ad Philemonem: praepara mihi
hospitium: spero enim quod auxilio precum vestrarum donabor vobis. And they
cite Eusebius, and Athanasius and Dracontium, for the same opinion. The
Protestant Minister and Historian of Geneua Francis Burgoing in his French
History is of the same mind, and upon the same grounds of Scripture: only he
differs in saying, this preaching of S. Paul was but six years, thus he
writes: during these Franc. Burgoing Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 2.
six years until the last of Nero, he visited the Churches of Syria, of Asia
and Greece. Which he had concluded with himself before he was delivered, as
appears by that he says: having this confidence, I know that I shall abide
and continue with Philipp. 1. verse. 25 26.
you all for your furtherance, and Joy of faith: that your rejoicing may be
more aboundan^ in Jesus Christ for me, by my coming to you again: In his
Epistle to Philemon, prepare me a lodging, for I trust, that by your prayers,
I shall be given unto you. Epist. ad Philem. v. 22.
Where we see that S. Paul then a Prisoner in Rome was so certain, and
confident that he should be delivered, and come to them in the East again,
that he says he knows it, and that it was to be so, soon after his
delivery, that though he was first to go into Spain, yet his aboade there
should be so short, and his return into the East so soon, that he writes
to have a lodging provided for him against his coming thither, which he would
not have done, if he had determined to have made any long stay either in
Spain, or any other place by the way.

4. I have showed from Arnoldus Mirmannius before, that he confidently Arnold.
Mirm. Theatr. Conu. gent.
with his Authorities affirms, that S. Paul upon his liberty at Rome went
into Syria, Pamphilia, Licaonia, Phoenice, Misia, Phrygia, Galatia, Bithinia,
Achaia, Macedonia, the rest of Greece and Asia. Gulielmus Eisengrenius citing
Gulielm. Eiseng. cent. 1. f. 137. part. 5. distinct. 1.
many ancient Authors for the same, affirms the like, and so of others.
Therefore it is evident, that S. Paul neither did, nor could come into
Britain until after his last coming from the Eastern Countries, very little
before his Death. For what account soever we will follow of the time, and
number of years of this travail of S. Paul, after he was dismissed from
Prison at Rome, to go from thence through France, into Spain, and from thence
again into the Eastern Countries, and visit so many Nations there, as I have
remembered, and after to come again into Spain from thence into France, and
then into Britain, and yet to go with such speed from hence, that passing
through Germany, and Italy, he had been a Prisoner at Rome no short time, as
appears by his second Epistle to S. Timothy, when he was there martyred by
Nero in the later end of his Empire. Our Countriman Matthew of Westminster
says S. Paul had then been a long time Prisoner there, when he was pute to
death the same day S. Peter was: Paulus qui Matthew. We^^m. an. 66. 2. Timoth. v.
6. Chrysostom. Praefat. in Epist. 2. ad Timoth. Athanasius in Synopsidiu. Script.
Theophilact. in Argum. Epist. ad Haebr. 2. Tim. ver. 9. 13. verse. 21. Martyrol.
Romans die 29. Beda, Usward. Ado, and alij. Haebr. c. 13. v. 23.
dudum vinctus tenebatur in vrbe eadem die capite truncatus est. And it is
manifest in his second Epistle to S. Timothy, written at that time, as is
plain both in the same Epistle of his Martyrdom at hand, and other
circumstances there, as both S. Chrysostom, S. Athanasius, Theophilact, and
others prove, that he was a Prisoner then no small time at Rome, for he writes
to S. Timothy at Ephesus so far of, to come unto him, and to bring certain
things with him, which S. Paul had left behind him in that his Eastern
Journey. And exhorts him thus: do thy diligence to come before winter; and
shows he had then once ben called to his answer. Yet it is certain, that
S. Paul ouerliued that winter, and was pute to death, by all testimonies, upon
the 29. day of June: which must needs be at the soonest about a year after.
And that S. Paul's full intention was at his first Imprisonment presently upon
his liberty to go to the Hebrews and the East again, besides that is said
before, he plainly protests in his Epistle to the Hebrews, written at Rome
in his first imprisonment, when he says: know ye that our Brother Timothy is
sete at liberty, with whom, if he come shortly, I will see you. Where it is
evident that S. Paul intended upon his delivery presently to return into the
Eastern Countries again, to visit the Jews and Hebrews there, to whom he
write in these words, and the whole Epistle, and not to come to make any stay
at that time in any Western Nation, much less Britain, so remote, and
diametrically almost distant from all those Countries.

5. And when he returned from this his Eastern Journey again, it is evident by
his own testimony that he was taken, and kept a Prisoner at Rome again soon
after his return from the East, that if he came into Britain at all, he If S.
Paul was in Britain, his stay was very short.
had no time between that Eastern Journey and second Captivity to make any
aboade hear. For in his second Epistle to S. Timothy when he was a Prisoner
even until his Martyrdom, he writes, as though he was newly come forth of
the East at that time, writing to S. Timothy to have the cloak and 2. Tim. 4.
v. 13.
parchments brought unto him which he left at Troas with Carpus. And speaking
again of that his late Journey, he says: Erastus aboade at Corinth: But
Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick. These he writes as late accidents in
that Journey, which he would not have done, if after his coming from thence,
there had been so great distance of time, that he might, and did come to make
any long stay in this kingdom. And that he did not come hither after this, but
continued a Prisoner to his death at Rome, it is evident before, and he in this
Epistle thus confirms it: I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my
depature 2. Tim. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.
is at hand. I have fought a God fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous judge will give me. Thus, our Protestants translate
him. Where we see, S. Paul's travails were come to their end, and his end and
triumph by Martyrdom, and Crown and reward in heaven for his labors and
merits one earth at hand.

6. And to follow Historiall account, and computation even by Protestants
allowance, we shall be brought to the same want, and distress of time to bring
S. Paul into Britain, to make but a small continuance hear for their best
Antiquaries with common consent write in these words: It seems, Godwin Conu.
of Britain p. 7.
that S. Paul was called to his answer in the third year of Nero, which was
the 59. of Christ, and continued a Prisoner, but with some liberty, two years
after, so that it must needs be anno Domini 61. the year of our Lord 61. and
the 5. of Nero, Neronis 5. before he passed either into Spain or Britain. And
they affirm with the common Godwin supr. p. 6. Protest. notat. in Mat. Westminster.
an. 157. Francis Burgoing Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 2. l. 2. c. 1.
opinion also that S. Paul went from Rome into Spain, according to his
promise, and to use their words, spending some time there. The Protestants of
Geneua say, that after S. Paul's liberty, when he went into Spain, there were
but six years of freedom for him, until he was Prisoner in Rome again, or
rather to the time of his death in the last year of Nero; and further say:
During these six years, until the last of Nero he visited the Churches of
Syria, of Asia, and Greece. Our Protestant Authors of the Theater of great
Britain speaking of S. Paul his coming to Rome again, after this Eastern
Journey, write in this manner: Paul came not to Rome till the tenth of Nero,
and Theater of great Britain l. 6. c. 9.. 7.
in his thirtenth year from the Prison wrote his Epistle to Timothy, as
Eusebius declares. So by these men, he was there a Prisoner at this time, the
space of three whole years, which they further confirm, when speaking of his
imprisonments, they say they were long, Paul well known in Rome, by his long
Theater supr.
imprisonments. So that to follow that opinion, which is most honorable for S.
Paul, and this Nation, and best pleasing our Protestants of England to bring
him into this kingdom, this by no probability, or warrant, can be effected,
until his second return from the Eastern parts, when so short a time, as
before, is allotted and limited for that journey, and his labors therein to
visit France, Spain, Syria, Pamphilia, Lycaonia, Phaenice, Mysia, Phrigia,
Galatia, Bithynia, Achonia, Macedonia, all the rest of Greece, and Asia, the
Islands in the Adriake sea, Spain, and France again, Britain, the Orchades,
and all the other Countries or Islands of this Ocean as Venantius Fortunatus,
and Arnoldus Mermannius affirm, and Germany and Italy as he returned to Rome
in the last Journey of his life, he being Martyred, by S. Hierome and the common
opinion in the 69. or 70. year of Christ, by our Countrima^ Matthew Hieronym.
Catal. Scriptur. in S. Paul. Arnol. Merman. in Theatro Conu. gent. Matthew
Westminster. an. 66.
of Westminster, and others 2. or 3. years sooner, and of this time from the
beginning of that Journey, in the 61. year of Christ, probably two years a
Prisoner, the time of his oboade in Britain must needs be very short, and his
labors p^^portionably as little, in so much as we have not any fure foundation,
to my reading to build for certain, any memorable thing in particular, which
he performed hear in this respect. For allthough Arnoldus Mermannius says, of
S. Paul, that he left hear and there Priests, and sent hither and thither
Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Doctors and Pastors: partim relictis hic ibi
Mystis, partin huc illuc destinatis Apostolis, Euangelistis, Prophetis,
Doctoribus, Arnol. Merm. in Theatro Conu. gent.
Pastoribus: yet he does not understand this in any sense of Britain, but
other places of S. Paul's preaching there remembered, and chiefly those, where
he, and no other Apostle preached, which he sufficiently insinuates, when he
adds, that the other Apostles did the same, id quod etiam alij Apostoli
fecerunt. Which cannot be understood of Britain, where they were not, but of
the peculiar places of their preaching. And S. Paul an extraordinary Apostle
used not to ordain Priests, where the other ordinary Apostles performed it, as
S. Peter did hear in Britain. And this was also the condition of S. Barnabas
S. Paul and Barnabas ordained Priests only, where the other Apostles came not.
extraordinarily made Apostle, as S. Paul was, both these as Theophilact and
other Fathers witness, only ordayning Priests in places where the ordinary
Apostles came not, or not near unto them. In Cypro autem non fecerunt
Presbyteros neque in Samaria, quia haec quidem Hiero solymis and Apostolis erat
vicina. Which S. Paul himself does sufficiently express, in the first and
second Theophilact. in cap. 14. Act. Apos^^l. Gal. c. 1. and 2. Act. Apost.
cap. 13. 14. etc.
Chapter of his Epistle to the Galathians, where he teaches his preaching to
have usually been, where none of the ordinary Apostles preached.

7. The like we read in his travails described as well by S. Luke in the Acts
of the Apostles, as other Histories. And we see, that the chiefest of S. Paul's
Disciples, which are said to have been in these parts near unto us, as S. Luke
in France, as S. Epiphanius witnesses, S. Trophimus left by him at Arles
there, by the common opinion, S. Titus as the Catalogue of the Bishops of Mentz
affirms, and S. Crescens at Vienna; yet all these still followed S. Paul, and
stayed not there, in his time and by his direction. For S. Luke was with him at
Rome a little before his death, as he himself is witness: only Luke is 2.
Tim. 4. v. 11.
with me: S. Trophimus was then at Miletum sick, S. Crescens was gone from him
at Rome in that imprisonment, and S. Titus is departed into Dalmatia 2. Timot.
cap. 4.
which are thus affirmed by S. Paul in his second Epistle to S. Timothy. Of
which his use and custom he himself makes also this reason: So have I Romans
c. 15. verse. 20. Harris Manuscr. hist. l. 1. c. 13. Pert. de Natalib. l. 1. c.
24.
stryued to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named, least I should
build upon an other man's foundation. I have spoken before of him, who writes:
we find in Petrus de Natalibus of one Lucius a Britain converted in Britany
by S. Paul, and baptized by Timotheus his Scholar, who followed him in that
Peregination, for thus he says: Lucius beatus Confesser fuit Rex Britanniae
baptizatus a Timotheo Discipulo S. Pauli: This Lucius was not that man whom
Eleutherius converted to the faith in the year of our lord 184. But some other
noble Britain, converted by S. Paul in his Peregrination whom Petrus names
a King, belike more in respect of his nobility, then for any kingdom he did
possese. Wherein this Author must needs be mistaken, first because I have
proved before, that S. Timothy which he means, S. Paul's Disciple, and
Bishop of Ephesus was never in, or near Britain, to baptize either a King, or
noble man named Lucius, nor any other. Secondly his Author Petrus de Natalibus
even as he is cited by him, does not attribute the conversion of any such
Lucius to S. Paul, but only says, that S. Lucius King of Britain was
baptized by Timotheus Disciple to S. Paul: Lucius S. Thimothie Bishop of
Ephesus was not in Britain.
beatus Confessor fuit Rex Britanniae baptizatus a Timotheo Discipulo S. Pauli.
Never saying, that this S. Timothy which baptized him was hear with S. Paul,
or that this was at the time of S. Paul's being hear, much less, that S. Paul
converted this King Lucius. And this Lucius was the same that was converted in
the time of Pope Eleutherius, and one S. Timothy son of saint Claudia our
noble Country woman was one of the happy instruments of his Baptizing, and the
conversion of this Nation at that time, as I will prove when I come to that
History in the next Age, and likely called Disciple of S Paul, because being a
child, probable it is, he was baptized and instructed by him in the faith of
Christ. And it is as improbable, that S. Timothy Bishop of Ephesus should be
hear with him, as any that then was, or had been his Disciple, both for the
reasons formely remembered, as that S. Paul prensently after his being hear,
and return to Rome from prison there does write to him being then at Ephesus,
so far more remote from hence, and that Epistle 2. Tim. c. 1. 2. 3. 4.
directly proves, that this S. Tymothie was there in that very time, which
What Disciples of S. Paul, were probably in Britain with him.
can only be allowed to S. Paul for his being hear. But of all the Disciples
of S. Paul or his companions, most probable it is, that first S. Luke the
Evangelist was hear with him, first because S. Paul says of him by Protestant
Translation: who was the chosen of the Churches to travail with us. Secondly
because 2. Cor. 8. v. 19.
he is before said to have come into these parts, and lastely because S. Paul
at his return from hence testifies that S. Luke was the only Disciple, or
companion continued still with him: only Luke is with me. The like I affirm
of 2. Tim. 4. v. 11.
Demas, who as he writes, forsook him after that time, and the same I suppose
of S. Crescens, which after this went, from him into Galatia, and Titus unto
Dalmatia, and Tyticus whom he sent to Ephesus. 2. Tim. 10. 12.


THE XXXII. CHAPTER.
OF OUR HOLY CHRISTIAN BRITANS IN Rome at this time, and cheifely of Lady
Claudia, and her holy family.

1. HAVING thus attended S. Paul in his holy travails, and probably brought
him, in those his long Journeys, into this kingdom, and from hence to Rome to
the place, and near the time of his triumphant Martyrdom, before I perform
that duty to S. Peter, I will say some what of our British Christians, then
at Rome: And the rather because S. Paul in his second Epistle to S. Tymothie
written from his Prison in Rome at this time, making an honorable memory of
some of them, puts me in mind to make mention of them in this, as their
fittest place. I have spoken before of our noble Britans, the Christian parents
of S. Claudia, and of her the holy child of those Religeous Christians: Now
Iam to entreat of her, as an happy natural Mother of diverse holy Christian
children, which she brought into this world, and as a supernatural Mother unto
many of this her Nation, being in her degree and order an happy occasion and
means of their birth in Christ. But a late English Catholic writer little to
the honor of this Nation has questioned, whether our noble Countriwoman
Author of 3. Conuers. of Brit. part. 2. p. 17.
Claudia was the same, whom S. Paul recounteth among the renowned Christians
at Rome, or no; and seems to deny it, rather leaving this British Lady by
his opinion, in Paganish Infidelity, then to be a Christian: and a Protestant
Bishop writes not so clearly of that matter, as he might have done, leaving
it almost doubtful to his Readers, by saying, he will Godwin Conu. of Britain
p. 16. c. 2.
not stand, to dispute it; whether that British Lady Claudia so honorably
remembered by Martial the Poet, living in that time, was the same Claudia which
S. All objections to disprove Claudia honored by S. Paul for a renowned
Christian, not to be our British Lady Claudia are disproued.
Paul has so renowned: which words take away some credit from the true opinion
making her a Christian and to be one and the same woman. For our Protestants
themselves which receive her into the number of holy Christians, derive their
greatest Authority for their affirming thereof, from S. Paul's words,
recounting S. Claudia among the holy Christians at Rome.

2. Allthough I have sofficiently cleared the truth in this matter before, to
the eternal honor of that most noble Lady, and this her Country of Britain;
yet for satisfaction of all, I will now fully answer all objections. It
Martial. Epigr. de morte Pude^tis. Bal. l. de Scrip. Brit. cent. 1. in Claudia
Rufina. Doroth. in Synop. in Pudens. Martyr. Romans die 19. Maij. Vsvard. eod.
die. Bed. Martyrol. in S. Praxede. ^. Conu. part. 1. p. 17. 2. Timoth. 4.
may be objected by these men that Pudens spoaken of by Martial the Poet,
husband to our british Claudia died in Cappadocia, diverse hundreds of miles
from Rome, When the Ecclesiastical monuments which speak of S. Pudens the
Christian spoaken of by S. Paul, say he died at Rome. And S. Bid with others
says, S. Praxedes his daughter was buried at Rome, by her Father Pudens, as
likewise her Sister S. Pudentiana was. Other objections there be of the
difference of the supposed time, and age hinde^ing the Christian Claudia to be
so be wtifull in the days of Martial as he commends our british Claudia.
This Poet writing in the time of Vespasian, and Titus, and dying in the days
of Traian, whereas S. Paul's Christian Claudia was a woman, and of note in Rome
in the last year of Nero. Besides our British Lady Claudia both as Martial,
and our English Protestants are witnesses had only three children, or at the
least they name but three, S. Nouatus, S. Praxedes and S. Pudentiana. Whereas
the old Roman Martyrologe proposes unto us 4. Christian children of the
Christian Parents S. Pudens and S. Claudia and name those three remembered
Nouatus, Praxedes, Pudentiana, and S. Timotheus a Priest, Romae depositio S.
Nouati filij S. Pudentis Senatoris, and fratris S. Tymothei Martyrol. Romans die
20. Iunij in S. Nouato.
presbyteri, and sanctarum Christi virginum Pudentianae and Praxedis, qui ab
Apostostolis eruditi sunt in fide. Again S. Bid and others write, that the
wife of Pudens the Christian mother to S. Pudentiana, was called Sabinella,
Cuius matter erat Sabinella. But these are easily answered: And first for S.
Pudens, finding but one of that name in this time, for his dying, or being
rather in Cappadocia, and yet buried at Rome, we may either say that he
returned to Rome before his death, insinuated by Martial. Martial. l. 6.
Epigram. 58. Io. Pitseus lib. de Illustrib. Britan. Script. aetate 2. p. 72. in
Claudia Rufina. Martyr. Bed. 14. call. Iunij. Romans Martyrol. die 19. Maij.


Sospite me sospes Latias reueheris ad vrbes. Or with other writers, that his
body by the Christians was brought from Cappadocia to Rome if the report of his
death in Cappadocia is true: Pudens in Cappadocia dicitur a^imam efflasse,
(...) ^orpus Christiani Romamtranstulerunt, and in caemiterio Priscillae via
Salaria sepult^re honoratae tradiderunt, vbi postea Pudentiana and Praxedes
sepultae fuerunt. And S. Bid says, he was buried at Rome.

3. The objection of the beauty of our British Claudia so recommended by
Martial, was neither worthy of proposing, or deserving answer, being but a
blast of a vain mo^uth, vented by the pen of a Poet, forward enough, as such
men be to give too great a flattering flourish to women's bewtyes: yet as our
Protestant Antiquaries not improbably calculate, she could not be above 40.
years of age at the most, when this Poet so commended her in that respect,
Godwin Conu. of Brit. p. 17. 18. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. c. 9.
and when his Epigram thereof was published; although as he well says, that
Epigram happily might be written, some years sooner, when her bewtte was more
fresh, and again: except the said Epigram, as often it falls out in those
cases, was made long before it was published, or some time after their
marriage. Which is most probable, the Poet taking notice only of three
children she then had, S. Tunotie not then yet borne. And it is no marvel, if
S. Timothy her son an holy Priest, living in obscurity in that time, and
much in this kindome of Britain (as hereafter I shall show* was unknown to a
Pagan Poet especially seeing for such respects there is little memory of him in
Ecclesiastical monuments.

4. How it came to pass that S. Claudia was also called Sabinella, the same
Poet will sufficiently inform us, when he tells us expressly, that her Lady
Claudia of Britain the same holy Christian Claudia, whom S. Paul remembers.
husband S. Pudens had an house at Sabinum in Italy where she also lived, and
after the ancient manner had her name Sabinella from thence. Which two
denominations of Claudia and Sabinella only agreeing to our British Claudia
and by no possibility to any else, I conclude it for a certainty both by
reasons, and Authorities, that our British Lady Claudia mentioned Martyrol.
Romans 20. die Martij. Graeci in Menol. eod. die. Mart. Romans 28. Maij and Menol.
Graecorum eod. die.
by Martial, was the same renowned Christian Claudia which S. Paul speaks of
with so honorable memory. The name, time, place and all circumstances agree,
and plead it is so. For of that name, in that time and place, I find no other
such in Histories, nor long time after in any other place, and then of two:
one at Amisis in Paphligonia, the other at Ancyra in Galatia a Matrone and
Martyr long after this time, and far distant from Rome and Italy where our
S. Claudia lived, and died. Again among the Roman writers much is spoken of
her husband S. Pudens, and their holy children, bredd up, and borne amongst
them, and almost a silence of the blessed Mother S. Claudia, but that Martial.
lib. 4. Epigram. 10. Godw. Conu. of Brit. p. 17. Parker Antiq. Brit. page 2.
Camd. in Brit. Stowe hist. Bal. cent. 1. Pitz. aetat. 2. in Claudia Rufina.
Harrison descri. of Brit. Harris hist. l. 1. Theater of great. l. 6. c. 9.
Andre du Chesne histoire generale d'Angleterre etc. p. 152. Mart. l. 11.
Epigram. 30. Io. Herald. epist. dedicat. ant hist. Mari^ni Scoti.
it pleased God by S. Paul's pen to remember her, which argues she was a
stranger to the Romans, whose Annals would not have left any woman of their
Nation, though of meaner merit, and glory, then she was, in so great darkness
of oblivion. Further when we find such a penurye of the names, Pudens, and
Claudia, in the Roman, and other Histories, that there is almost no mention of
them; And yet we see them both remembered, and joined together in one line, and
to be in one City of Rome, and by all probable Judgment in one house, and as
husband and wife, by the holy Apostles writing of them, as he is commonly
interpreted: And a Pagan writer also of that time, who well knew both Pudens
and Claudia and their children, plainly affirms with many later Authors,
that this Claudia living in Rome in the same house with Pudens, and his
undoubted wife, was borne of British Parents, which cannot be verified of any
other Claudia: we must needs therefore be of opinion that this our British
Claudia was as bewtifull in spiritual fayrenes, and Religion, for S. Paul's
testimony thereof, as in corporal bewty, by the Poets writing.

5. Whereupon it is the constant received, and not to be questioned opinion,
among writers, Catholics and Protestants, Christians, and Pagans, English,
French and others, that the holy Christian Claudia so dignified by S. Paul, was
the same British Lady Claudia, whom Martial so commends, borne of British
Parents.

Claudia caeruleis cum sit Rufina Britannis
Edita:
Elle estoit Bretonne de Nation: she was a Britan by Nation. And by the happy
occasion of this so renowned, and noble Christian of this Nation continually
then residing at Rome, and so perfectly instructed in the faith of Christ, and
acquainted with the holy Apostles, many spiritual blessings were in that time
bestowed upon many our Britans both at Rome, and hear in Britain; of this
both Catholics and Protestants agree, allthough there is diffence in the order
and manner thereof. The first Protestant Archbishop thus writes of this holy
British Lady: hanc iam ad Christum conuersam, non minus est verisimile
Christiana dogmata ad Britannos misisse suos, quam ante Matthew. Parker.
Antiquit. Brit. p. 3.
acceptam fidem Epigrammata Martialis. Nec verisimile solum, sed verum
iudicandum est, in tam nobili familia, fuisse cum Claudia gentiles suos
Britannos, qui vna baptizati fuerunt, a quibus Euangelij Ignicula per totam
gentem Britannam dispersa, viritim ad multos peruenerunt. After Claudia was
converted to the faith of Christ, it is as likely that she sent Christian
doctrine to her Countrymen the Britans, as before she received the faith, she
sent the Epigrams of Martial. Neither is it only likely, but to be adjudged
true, that in so noble a family, there were with Claudia diverse Brita^s of her
Country, which were baptized with her from whom the sparks of the Gospel
being dispersed through all the British Nation, came from one to an other to
many. The Protestant Bishops with other their Antiquaries in their great
Theater of great Britain thus write of her: This Claudia with S. Paul's
spiritual Theat. of great Brit. l. 6. c. 9.
Manna is said to send the choysest and chastest of the Posies of Martial
(whose verses generally are no lessons befitting Ladies) for new years gifts
unto her friends in Britain, both for to feed their souls with the bread of
life, and to instruct their minds with lessons best fitting unto civil
behavior. Which thing moved the Poet himself with no small self glory, in
his verse thus to write.

Dicitur and nostros cantare Britannia versus. And they note in their Margin
these words: Claudia senas both S. Paul's, and Martials writings into Britain;
Which is allowed by other Protestants also: among whom one a chief Antiquarie
thus boldly speaks: of this Lady Harrison description of Britain in Claudia.
Io. Bal. l. de script. Brit. cent. 1. in Claudia Rufina.
Martial speaks rejoicing, that his Posies were read also in Britain, and
only by her means, who used to cull out the finest and honest of his
Epigrams, and send them to her friends for tokens, saying after this manner.

Dicitur and nostros cantare Britannia versus. Britain is said to sing our
verses. Like is the testimony of other Protestants; to whom, in that they
affirm much spiritual good to have grown to this Nation of Britain, by the
believing Britans, and others which lived in, or resorted unto the house of S.
Claudia in Rome, I willingly consent unto them, and have already proved no
less, and will speak more of the same hereafter.

6. But where these men so constantly avouch this holy Lady was a translater
Lady Claudia neither sent S. Paul's Epistles, nor Martial his Poems into
Britain.
of S. Paul's Epistles, and sent them hither, for the Instruction of others, and
also sent into this Nation the Epigrams of Martial, proving the first only by
some likelihood, because they assuer themselves, by the verse of Martial
recited, that Britain was reported to singe his verses; as the last is untrue,
and not affirmed by Martial, or any other except these Protestants, and a
foul forgery to blemish the bewty, of that holy Lady; so the other having no
warrant, or Authority, but their falsely imagined congruence from that, must
needs be as improbable. And first, where these men say that the Poet says his
verses were sung in Britain by the means of this holy and virtuous Lady;
Martial has no such thing, but rather the contrary, for except she a woman of
so great chastity, modesty, and piety, by all testimonies, could so far
forgete her shamefaste sex, and temperate carriadge, and exceed the boldness
of men even her own Father, and Husband, she was so far from being an
approuer, and recommender of Martial his Poems unto others in Britain, that
by the Poets own testimony, she utterly condemned them for their intolerable
wantones, and scurrilitie; for so did both her Father, Father in law to Pudens
her Husband, and her own Husband also, as the same Poet himself has before
plainly confessed: saying of the Husband of Claudia, to whom he presented
diverse Poems, that he compelled him to correct and amend his books.

Cogis me calamo, manuque nostra
Emendare meos, Pudens, libellos. Martial. l. 7. Epigram. 11. ad Pudentem.

And S. Claudia her Father was much more auerted from the Poems of Martial,
then Pudens his son in Law was, by that Poets own confession, for even
those Poems which he sent to Pudens would have so much been disliked by Claudia
her Father, that he entreated S. Pudens not to communicate them unto him,
because he knew well he condemned their leuitie.

Commendare meas Instanti, Rufe, camaenas
Parce precor socero, seria forsan amat. Martial. l. 7. Epigram. 57. ad Rufin.

And a simple suggestion it is to write, she culled out the finest and
honestest of his Epigrams, and sent them hither; for this she could not do,
without reading also the fowlest, and dishonestest, which we may not think
that so modest, and holy a Saint would do, which is of these Protestants
sufficiently before acknowledged, when they expressly say, Martials verses
generally are no lessons be fitting Ladies. Therefore if generally they were so
unbeseeming, Theater of great Brit. supr. l. 6.
we may not make so holy and renowned a Lady either a general or particular
Approuer of such stuff, to send it so long a Journey to her beloved Friends in
this her Native Country of Britain, for toake^s, much les for Newyeares gifts,
neither was that name, nor ceremony known in Britain, long after that time*

7. And the first Protestant English Archbishop which before observed that
absurdity, and yet willing to insist in the same erroneous steps of his
brethren in this point, and therefore has written that it is likely Claudia
sent these strange Poems hither from Rome before she was a Christian;
verisimile est Claudiam ante acceptam fidem Epigrammata Martialis ad Britannos
misisse suos, speaks far more absurdly, for it is evident by all Accounts,
both of Christians and Pagans, Catholics and Protestants, that Claudia was a
Christian, and renowned by Saint Paul's pen, in the time of Nero, 26. years
before Martial wrote, or came to Rome: Therefore it was great ignorance, or
willfulnes in that Protestant Archbishop, to write, it was verisimile a very
likely thing, that Claudia sent that Poets Epigrams into Britan before she was
a Christian, she being a renowned Christian so long before he was a Poet.
Godwin Conu. of Britain p. 17. 18.
But Martial had other means to vent his Poems hither, he was acquainted with
Quintus Ouidius, and his company that came hither, he and wrote an Epigram unto
him cited before, such was also one Stella as he writes. Martial. l. 10.
Epigram. 40. ad Quintum Ouidium. Lib. 12. Epigram. 3. ad librum suu^.


Ille dabit populo, Patribusque, Equitique legendum. And it was his glory, thus
by idle headed parsons, to send his bables about, both to Rome, and from thence
to other parts, as appears in the beginning of the same Epigram.

Ad populos mitti qui nuper ab vrbe solebas,
Ibis tu Romam nunc peregrine liber.
And he plainly declares, even in his first Epigram to his Reader this was
his humor to make him self known in the world for such Poetical, and vain
scriblings:

Hic est quem legis, ille, quem requiris.
Toto notus in Orb Martialis,
Argutis Epigrammaton libellis.
And to make speedy utterance of such wares to all parsons and places, the very
Martial. l. 1. Epigram. 1. ad Lectorem. Lib. 1. Epigr. 2.
next Epigram (which is also to the Reader) is to tell where his books were to
be bought: and besides he sent them up and down to particular parsons as their
Titles testify. And allthough we had diverse holy Christians then in Rome of
this Nation, which rejected Martial his Poems, as S. Claudia, and her Father
did; yet there were also at that time many Pagan Britans, and some of them also
Poets, as Gildas Cambrius, a most noble Britan Poet, as Ponticus Pontic. Virun.
Hist. Brit. l. 1. Girald. Ferrar. hist. Poet. Dialog. 5. Io. Bal. Script. Brit.
cent. 1. in Gilda Cambrio.
Virunnius calls him, Gildas Poeta Britannicus nobilissimus, and others, by
whose means, besides such as I have related before, it is not unlikely, but
Martials verses, as well as others came into this Country, and he might take
notice there of, and thereupon write: it was reported that his verses were
sunge in Britain.

8. And hereby it appears how weak a propp they have to support S. Claudia
did not translate or send S. Paul's Epistles into Britain.
them therein, that would probably and by comparison conclude that S. Claudia
did send S. Paul's Epistles into Britain, because she sent Martials Poems
hither: for first there is so great difference and repugnancy between the
holy writings of S. Paul, and the idle Epigrams of that Poet, if we choose their
best; that rather the contrary is to be gathered, that whosoever did affect the
libels of Martial, could not be a lover of S. Paul's doctrine, so opposite unto
such vanities: and so she known to be so renowned a Christian when Martial
wrote, and so highely commended by S. Paul, could be no recommender of Martials
vanities, unto this, or any other parts, or parsons. And it is evident before,
she allowed them not. And allthough I willingely allow, what a Protestant
Bishop writes of her, placing her among our British writers, and affirming,
that she was renowned all through out Italy, and other Nations, for her style
in the Latin, and Greek tongue: Claudia Rufina Britannici generis nobilissima
Io. Bal. l. de Scrip. Brit. cent. 1. in Claudia Rufina.
mulier, nominis claritatem ex ingenti vtriusque linguae Latinae and Graecae
notitia, per Italiam, and alias commeruit mundi Regiones: yet this is no
warrant for others to say, that therefore she translated S. Paul's Epistles, and
sent them into Britain. For every one that has knowledge in Latin, and
Greek, allthough in a more excellent manner, then a Lady, a stranger to them
both, and young in years, as by these men she was, is not a fit Translator of
holy Scripturs, and we do not find that honor then given to any of her sex,
nor did that, or such office belong to her or any such; her Father before
confessed to be a learned Christian, was a fitter man to perform such things
to this his Nation, if any such was done at that time. But among all the
Epistles which S. Paul wrote, we do not find any one of them written, or sent
by him, to any parson, or place, but such as had received the faith of Christ
before, neither S. Paul's Epistles, nor any part of Scripture will make an
Infidel a good Christian without a Preacher or Interpreter. And I suppose he
would be thought a strange Poet surpassing Martial in that kind, in the
judgment of Antiquaries, who should say, he had ever seen, or credibly heard
of any part of Scripture then translated, much more by any woman into the Welsh
or British languadge.

9. And no less paradoxe it is, which a Protestant Bishop and Antiquarie
Godwin Conu. of Brit. p. 18. c. ^.
proposes to the world, concerning S. Pudens, husband to this our holy Country
woman S. Claudia, laboring to persuade his Readers, that he came into S. Pudens
Hust. ad to S. Claudia did (...) B^itain^, n^r nea^^ ^^. N^^ther preached ^e
any whe^^.
Br^taine, and hear preached the faith of Christ. First he makes this his
Marginall Note of that which follows: Britain a Refuge for Christians. And
then adds of this time: it was not counted unlawful for those to be
Christians, that dwelt beyond Italy, and France, as in Britain or near the
Pirenaea^ Mountains, and so to the western Ocean. Whereby undoubtedly it came
to pass, that many professing Christ, not daring to abide near unto the heart
of the Empire, as in Italy, France, or some other of the nearest Provinces,
made choice of our Britain, and some other remote places, where to lead their
liu^s in such sort, as they might enjoy liberty of conscience. In the number
of these, I may well suppose Aulus Rufus Pudens before mentioned to be one, who
after the time of his marriadge, travailed to these Northren parts of the
world, as it is plain, by these verses following.

Cernere Parrhasios dum te iuuat, Aule Triones, Martial. ad Aul. Pudentem l. 6.
Epigr. 39.

Comminus and Scythici sidera far poli; And after,
Si mihi lanificae ducunt non pulla sorores,
Stamina, nec surdos vox habet ista Deos:
Sospite me sospes, Latias reueheris ad vrbes
Et referes pili praemia clarus eques.
By means of these kind of men adding their helps unto the successors of
Joseph, Io. Pits. l. de Illustr. Brit. Script. aetate 2. in Claudia Rufina. Io.
Bal. l. de Script. cent. 1. in eadem. Matt. Parker ant. Brit. Stephanus v.
Archadia and Parrhasia. Calep. in Parrhasia. Tho. Tho. in eod. Abrah. Hortel.
Phnius l. 4. c. 6. Ptol. l. 3. and annot. in eund. Sebast. Munster. and alij.
Bed. Martyr. 14. call. Iunij. Joan. Pits. in Cat. aetat. 2. in Claud. Ruf.
Martyrol. Romans die 19. Maij. Vit. S. Pudentianae in Breuiar. 19. die Maij.
Tradit. Romans apud Baron. ann. in Romans Martyr. die 19. Maij. Et Tom. 1. and 2.
Annal. 3. conu. part. 1. p. 17.
and his Disciples, I suppose it came to pass, that Lucius a King of this
Country, was drawn to a liking of Christian Religion. Where we plainly see
this Protestant Bishop and Antiquarie would make this Pude^s to have preached
hear in Britain, and to have been one of them, which gave continuance to the
faith formerly preached hear, even to the time of King Lucius; when it is
evident not only by all other Histories which tell us he lived and died in
Cappadocia, but by their Protestant Archbishop, and Antiquary, and this
Protestant Bishop himself, and his own Author, Martial living in that time
and acquainted both with the man, and his Journey, that he was a corporal and
bodily soldier, and warryer for the Romans. Eques Romanus, Tribunus militum,
which the last verse cited from Martial plainly proves, and never came near
unto this kingdom, the nearest when he was in Italy, for Parrhasia where
Martial says he was, and this Protestant Bishop absurdlie cites against
himself, is Archadia, and all Archadia called often by that name, farther
hence then Rome is, and what Scythia soever Asiatica, or Europaea S. Pudens was
in, or near unto, suer we are, that Britain is far remote from any part of
any Scythia, and as I have showed before, his body was brought from Cappadocia
to Rome, and there interred: And by some ancient Authorities, that probably he
was returned alive from the wars of Cappadocia unto Rome, died and was buried
there. Romae Sancti Pudentis Senatoris, Patris S. Pudentianae Virginis, qui ab
Apostolis Christo in baptismo vestitus innocentem tunicam vsque ad vitae
coronam immaculate custodiuit. Which testimony also confirms their opinion,
which write, that this British house was according to the Roman Tradition,
primum Principis Apostolorum Romae hospitium, illicque primum Christianos
conuenisse ad Synaxim, coactam Ecclesiam: The first lodging of S. Peter at
Rome, being there fifteen years before S. Paul, and the first Church of
Christians in Rome where they assembled to serve God, from the first preaching
of Christ there by S. Peter; for although S. Paul makes that special memory
of S. Pudens, and Claudia, yet here we are told by undeniable Authority, S.
Claudia her house in Rome what profit it brought to Christian Religion.
besides the Roman Tradition, that they were also S. Peter's disciples,
signified in the word Apostolis Apostles in the plural number, when no
Apostles but S. Peter and S. Paul came thither in those times. And so this
house of our holy Christian Britans being the then principal Church for S.
Peter, S. Paul, the Popes which succeeded, among whom S. Linus is reckoned by
2. Tim. 4.
S. Paul, together with the owners of that holy house, as commonly resident S.
Claudia her known learning, and other virtues.
therein, we may easily gather how great spiritual good flowed to this
Nation, from that only fountain, and well of life, in this western world,
where the Christian Parents of S. Claudia before her, she and her Husband
Jacob. Bergom. l. de Poetissis. Harris Theater. l. 1. c. 21.
S. Pudens after, and after them their holy children gave the greatest
entertaynement, and releife to the holy Apostles, their Disciples, and
Successors, and others the servants of Christ in those dangerous days of
Persecution. Of this our renowned Country woman it is written by strangers:
Claudia Rufina mulier Britannica, vtraque lingua erudita: Claudia Rufina a
Briton borne was learned and skillfull in both tongues, both Greek and Latin.
Which our English Protestant Antiquaries, and others confirm, affirming the
same of her. Haec Io. Bal. l. de Scriptor. cent. 1. Io. Pits. l. de Illust.
Brit. Script. aetat. 2. in Claudia Ruffina.
magno praedita ingenio mulier, tam Latin quam Greece, and register her among
the learned writers of this Nation, delivering unto us the names of diverse
books penned by her.

10. What her worthiness was, I have somewhat related from S. Chrysostom, and
Theodoret before. And besides the testimony of S. Paul, making her one of the
four most renowned in Rome, and the only Worthy both of Britain, and these
western Nations, except S. Eubulus was her Father and our Countriman, which is
remembered in holy Scripturs. What a means and help she was to propagate the
faith of Christ both to her Countrymen, and others at Rome, Italy, especially
in Vmbria where she lived after her going from Rome, and in this our Britain,
we may be assured both by that is said before, that her house was the chiefest
and usual assembling place in that time, for such Religeous designements, as
also by the received and approved Histories of her holy children, as namely S.
Pudentiana and S. Praxedes, which she had brought up in so great sanctity,
both by her instructions, and example, that together with their two Brethren S.
Nouatus and S. Timotheus they are honored in the Catalogue of holy Saints. Of
one we read, that in Acta S. Praxedis in Breuiar. Romans 21. Iulij. Martyr. Romans
eod. die. Sic Bed. Vsuard. Ado. Sur. and Lipp. eod. die.
the Persecution under Marcus Antonius the Emperor, her Parents being now
dead: Christianos facultatibus, opera, consolatione and omni charitatis
officio prosequebatur, nam alios domi occultabat: alios ad fidei constantiam
hortabatur: aliorum corpora sepeliebat: ijs qui in carcere inclusi erant, qui
in ergastulis nulla re deerat: The persecuted Christians she assisted with her
wealth, labor, confort, and all offices of charity: for some she did hide in
her house; others she exhorted to constancy of faith: she buried the bodies of
others: To those that were in prison, and durance, she was wanting in no kind
of releife. Of her Sister S. Pudentiana, we read, that Act. S. Pude^tianae in
Breu. Romans die 19. Maij. Mart. Romans eod. die. Ado Treuer. ad 12. Calend. Iulij.
Momb^it. tom. 2. Beda and Vsuard. 19. die Maij. Sur. and Lipp. eod. die.
she was of admirable sanctity in Christian Religion. She had in her family
notwithstanding the Persecution 96. Christian men: nonaginta sex homines. And
whereas the Emperor Antonius had made a Decree, that Christians should not
publikly offer their Sacrifice, the holy Pope S. Pius with the Christians used
to say Mass in her house: Quod autem ab Antonino Imperatore sancitum erat, ne
Christiani public sacrificia facerent, Pius Pontifex in aedibus Pudentianae
cum Christianis sacra celebrabat: And she gently entertained them, and
ministered all necessaries unto them: Quibus illa benign acceptis, quae ad
vitam necessaria essent suppeditabat. Therefore if this sanctity of these
childen was derived unto them from their holy Parents and after their deaths,
when their Riches and Revenues were diuidie into so S. Claudia her ^ouse as a
Christian school and Seminary to teach the Christian faith in Britain and
the western Nations.
many portions, one only daughter dwelling in that their house at Rome, was
able to keep such hospitality that besides 96. Christian men which she kept
in her family, she received the Pope, and all Christians resorting to her, and
supplied both their spiritual necessities in making her house their settled
Church to celebrate Mass, and other divine exercises, and ministered also
temporal things unto them, as their needs required: how much the rather must
we conclude these things of their holy Parents, more enabled to perform such
bounties, then any their children were. And this much more in the time of the
parens of S. Claudia, being by exemption as strangers, not so liable to the
Roman Pagan laws, and penalties of them, and so Christian Assemblies were more
frequent, and freely kept there, then in any Roman house, the Apostles and
their Disciples there more securely entertained, Religion exercised, Priests,
and Clergy men consecrated and directed into diverse Countries, and among so
many, so great multitudes of Christian Britans living in that house, and
usually resorting thither, and there instructed, we may not think but diverse
Britans then and there, received holy preistly Orders, and consecration: And
with others were sent into this kingdom, some of which number I shall remember
hereafter, when I have first brought S. Peter again from Britain to Rome,
because they principally depended one him, and by him, or his Suecessours
received Consecration, Jurisdiction, Directions and Instructions, for the
Conversion of this, and other western Countries. After a long and happy life
spent in such sanctity she ended her days at Sabinum in Vmbria, whether she
retired herself, to her Husband S. Pudens his noble house, and Municipium
there, after his death.

THE XXXIII. CHAPTER.
OF S. PETER HIS RETVRNE FROM Britain to Rome, and settling the Apostolic
Papal power there. His great care of Britain: and our Christian Britans
dutiful love, and honor to him. The chief Scate of the Messiah Prophesied to
be at Rome.


ABOUT this time, the Prophecy preserved among the ancient Rabins, that the
chief Seat of the Messiah should be in Rome, was to be performed in his
chief Apostle, and Vicar S. Peter. Which the Prophetisses and Sybils among
Henricus a S. fide l. contra Iudaeos. Sybilla Erythrea apud Franc. Petr. Arch.
l. 1. de otio Relig. Bernard. Senen. 6. part. Sermon. 1. de Fest. Mariae. Anton.
Chron. part. 1. tit. 3. c. 9. Hartm. Schedel. in Sybill. Sybill. Erythr. in
Nazaograp. p. 53.
the gentiles had also received, and delivered to posterity, testifiing, that
this great and victorious City, which had triumphed over so many potent
peoples, Kings, and kingdoms, should be subdued to the Messiah, not with the
force of sword, but by the fishers (S. Peter's) hook. Non in gladio belloue
Aeneadem vrbem Regesque subijciet, sed in hamo piscantis, and this fisher
should there, and over Kings subject unto it, setle the name and victory of
Christ for ever. In Eneadem latus piscatoris nomen Agni vsque ad fines seculi
virtute perducet. Therefore this Imperial Regiment of the Church, and Kingdom
of Christ, being principally committed to S. Peter, and so from him to remain
in his Successors, in that prime Apostolic See, and the time of his death now
drawing near, having almost ended his preaching in these parts of the world,
to give that further honor to this kingdom of Britain, an Angel appeared unto
him, telling him, the time of his leaving this world was at hand, and that he
must return to Rome, where after he S. Peter admonished in Britain from
heaven of his death at hand to be in Rome.
had suffered death upon the Cross, he should receive his reward of Justice:
Angelicam aspexit visionem, quae dicebat; Petre instat tempus tuae
resolutionis, and aportet te ire Romam: in qua cum mortem per crucem
sustinueris, recipies mercedem iustitiae. This heavenly vision, and admonition
was made unto this blessed Sim. Metaphr. die 29. Iunij. Sur. and alij in fest.
SS. Apost. Petri and Pauli.
Apostle hear in our Britain, after he had been hear long time: quo in loco
cum longo tempore fuisset moratus. For which extraordinary grace showed unto
him, when this holy Apostle had given thanks unto God, and settled the state of
our Primative Church hear in Britain, as I have before made mention, in the
twelfth year of Nero, as this ancient and holy Author writes, he returned
from hence to Rome. Cum ergo propterea deum glorificasset, and egisset gratias,
and apud Britannos mansisset dies aliquot, and verbo gratiae multos Stowe and
Howes hist. in Nero. Sueton. in Nerone. Dio Cass. and Matt. Westminster. in eodem.
Marian. Scotus. l. 2. aetat. 6. Mart. Polon. Supputat. in Netone. ^or. Wigorn.
an. 14. Ne^on^s. Matthew. Westminster. ^n. 13. Neron. Cassiodor. Ma^an. ^or. Wi^^r. sup.
illuminasset, and Ecclesias constituisset, Episcoposque and Presbyteros and
Diaconos ordinasset, duodecimo anno Caesaris Neronis, rursus Romam reuertitur.
Some English Protestants write the 14. year of Nero the holy Apostle S. Peter
having accomplished his preaching in the west parts, returned to Rome, where he
preached again as he did before. Which may without much difficulty or
difference be easily reconciled to the former, if we say with Suet onius, Dio,
and others, that Nero reigned 13. complete years, and some months: Nero
quintus ab Augusto, imperauit annis 13. and mensibus octo. And S. Peter went
from Britain in the later end of the twelfth year of Nero, as S. Simeon
Metaphrastes notes, and the next year coming to Rome preached there some
time, and was Martyred in the beginning of the 14. and last year of Nero,
allthough Matthew of Westminster and some others set down the death of S.
Peter in the 13. year of Nero, differing from those, that say Nero killed, S.
Peter, S. Paul and himself the 14. and last year of his Empire. Nero Petrum
and se interfecit.

2. By this we see the exceeding great Pastoral, and Fatherly care, and S.
Pet^rs Pastoral ^are of Britain, ^^nding Ch^ists Church in it.
love of this greatest Apostle S. Peter to this kingdom, that allthough he was
so extraordinarily admonished by the holy Angel, to return to Rome, yet he
neither would, nor did forsake this Nation, until he had perfectly settled
such an Hierarchicall Order, and holy government hear as I have described,
and was needful in the first founding of the Church of Christ, among so many
Countries and Provinces of this Western world. And the love and duty of many
Britans, especially such as were not so perfectly intructed in the faith,
cannot be thought but to have been reciprocal to that supreme Pastor, How it
is p^obable diu^rs Britans went with S. Peter from hence to R^me.
in so great degree, that it moved many of them to attend him in his return
to Rome, to be better instructed in true Religion, as diverse also after his
departure hence, did undertake that Journey to that end, such as S. Beatus and
his Associate were. And S. Peter being now come to Rome immediately from this
kingdom, without staying in that Journey, as may be sufficiently gathered out
of the words and admonition of the Angel unto him before his going hence, and
both having in his company diverse Britans, and at Rome finding yet alive as
appears by S. Paul writing to S. Timothy before, diverse Christian Baron.
Tom. 2. Annal. Ann. 165. and S. Justin. apud ^und. supr.
Britans in that house, which as is showed before, and Baronius from S.
Iustine, and others proves, was both his, and other Christians common lodging;
patebat domus Pudentis ab initio Petri Romam aduentus, hospitio Christianorum:
we are sufficiently allowed to be of that opinion, that he was entertained now
at this his coming again to Rome from Britain in the same house, as at S.
P^ter at (...) to R^m^ (...) rec^au^d again in our B^^^^ns ^ouse* with many
^^her^.
his first coming, and usually in the time of his continuance and residence
there. And in this Noble Christian Britans house it seems S. Peter among
other his Apostolical labors and designments for the Church of God, wrote his
second Epistle, wherein he makes memory of some memorable things, that chanced
unto him by all probable Judgment in this Nation, as of the Angels appearing
unto him, the forewarning of his death at hand, and that S. Peter in his 2.
(...) s^^meth to (...) ^f the vision (...) ^r^ta^^e.
it should be in Rome. Knowing that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle,
even as our Lord Jesus Christ has shew^d me. As our English Protestants
translat^ which words of the holy Apostle do seem to have reference unto that
Apparition, and admonition to him of his death at hand, of which I have spoken
2. (...). 1. verse. 14.
before. For we do not find in Histories, more then two warnings heareof
given by Christ to S. Peter; the first, and most evident in Britain, and the
other more obscure at Rome, recorded by S. Linus, Egesippus, S. Bid, and Linus
l. de Pass. Apost. Egesipp. de excid. Hieros. l. 3. c. 2. Beda Sermon de S.
Petro and Paulo. Tom. 7.
others, when S. Peter a little before his death being sought for by Nero, and
willed by the Christians to forsake Rome, to avoid the fury of the persecuting
Tyrant, being come to the gate of the City, Christ appeared unto him, and
being demanded by S. Peter whether he went, Domine quo vadis? Christ answered,
Iterum veni^ crucifigi. Which S. Peter interpreted to be spoken of his Passion;
because Christ who suffers in all his members, was also to suffer with S.
Peter. Intellexit Petrus de sua dictum passione, quod in ea Christus passurus
videretur qui patitur in singulis: non vtique corporis dolor, sed quadam
misericordiae compassione, aut gloriae celebritate. And this cannot be well
construed to be that admonition of his death which S. Peter wrote off in his
Epistle, being both obscure, and in all probable Judgment after the writing of
that his Epistle, and immediately before his apprehension, and death, as
appears by those Authors, affirming S. Peter was presently taken and
martyred: conu^rsus in vrbem redijt, captusque a persecutoribus cruci
adiudicatus. Therefore seeing besides this so obscure admonition given to S.
Peter by Christ of his death, we find no other, but that most clear and
manifest foretelling thereof to S. Peter, by an holy Angel in Britain, we must
needs conclude that the holy Apostle in that passadge of his Epistle, how he
should shortly leave the Tabernacle and dwelling place of his soul, his
mortal body, as our Lord Jesus Christ had showed unto him, did this Nation
that honor, to remember in his holy writings, that foresight and admonition of
his end approaching made unto him by the heavenly vision and Instruction
thereof, which he had in Britain. And signifiing in the first words of this
his last Epistle that he wrote it to all believing Christians at that time,
saying: Simon Peter a Servant and an Apostle 2. Petr. 1. v. 1. 2.
of Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained like precious faith with us, grace
and peace S. Peter's care and love to Britain to his death, and after in heaven
by his own promise.
be multiplied. We must needs acknowledge, that coming then immediately from
the Christians in this Nation, whom he had so lately converted, he most
fatherly remembered them with others in those words, and the whole Epistle
following, especially where he writes: I think it meet, as long as I am in
this Tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance. Knowing that
Verse. 13. 14. 15.
shortly I must pute of this my Tabernacle; even as our Lord Jesus Christ has
showed me. Moreover, I will endeavor that you may be able after my decease, to
have these things always in remembrance. In which words this our kingdom of
Britain does most justly claim, that S. Peter remembered it, and rather then
any other, citing there the admonition, which he received by the holy Angel
hear, and there protests his great care he had of this Country, that it
might not only during his life but after his death remain constant in the
profession of Christian Religion. And by Oecumenius and diverse others, both the
Greek and Latin Text giving way to that exposition, S. Peter did there
promise Oecumenius in verba illa: Dado operam etc. 2. Petr. 1. v. 15.
to remember this Nation, not only during his life, but after when he should
be in Heaven, as I have showed by diverse examples from ancient and credible
Authors before, and shall remember more hereafter. And in the next verse he
proves, that he principally hear remembered Britain, and those Nations, to
which he had parsonally preached, for he says: We have not followed 2. Petr.
1. v. 16.
cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming ^f
our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye witnesses of his Majesty. Where he
plaine^y speaks, of such people, and Nations, to whom he had made known the
power of our Lord Jesus Christ, by his preaching, such as Britain was.

3. And when being to leave this world and his chief Pastoral chardge, which
might not die with him, to his successor, we must further acknowledge, how
mindful he was of this kingdom, with others in that designement, whether he
constituted S. Linus, or S. Clement, to be his next Successor; for the first as
I have showed before, was familiarly known to our Christian Britans, and lived
most with them in Rome, and the other. S. Clement was not only in the same
estate, but was parsonally hear with S. Peter in this Nation. Neither were our
Christian Britans then unmindful or ungrateful for so many favors of S.
Peter unto this Country, but ever continued most dutiful, and faithful unto
him without any discontinuance of those obsequies unto him; for as I have
probably showed they were the first that entertained him in Rome, and after: so
I cannot without prejudice, and injury The great honor, and love of our first
Christian Britans to S. Peter: and how probably diverse of them, honorably
buried him.
unto this kingdom think, but they were cheifely Christian Britans that
performed the last and funeral duties to that holy Apostle, among whom likely
was S. Marcellus Disciple of S. Peter, by birth a noble Britan, of whom I will
speak more hereafter, for we read in many, that one of S. Peter's Disciples so
named did honorably bury that glorious Apostle martyred by the cruel Tirant
Nero. Marcellus quidam Discipulus S. Petri accepit Corpus Apostoli, Bed. Hom.
de S. Petro and Paulo Tom. 7. oper. Guliel. Eisengr. centur. 2. part. 6. D^st.
1. S. Anton. Vinc. Petr. de Not. apud Magdebur. cent. 1. l. 2. c. 12. 650. 2.
Tim. 4.
and lauit illud tali vnguento, quod nunquam posset putrescere, and postea
misit illud in monumento. Yet I find that there was an other Marcellus in this
time a Roman borne, Marci vrbis Romae Praefecti filius, that sometime followed
Simon Magus, and was converted to the faith of Christ by S. Peter, and wrote
among other works the Acts of S. Peter, and S. Paul. But this man being thought
to be martyred by Nero, cannot so well be adjudged to have been the buryer of
S. Peter, seeing S. Peter's Martyrdom was one of Nero his last Actions. And we
may not doubt, but our Britans that first received S. Peter in their house at
Rome, and were ever afterward most faithful and true unto him both at liberty
and in prison, as we are taught by their love to S. Paul in like case testified
by himself, and brought up their children in such sort that among other Acts
of Christian piety, we find as in S. Praxedes, that they Vita S. Praxed. in
Breuiar. die. 21. Col. Iulij.
buried the bodies of the holy martyrs; Imperatore Christianos persequente, eos
facultatibus, opera, consolatione, and omni charitatis officio prosequebatur.
Nam alios domi occultabat: alios ad fidei constantiam hortabatur: aliorum
corpora sepeliebat: ijs qui in carcere inclusi erant, qui in ergastulis
exercebantur, nulla re deerat: Therefore much more we may judge, that the holy
parents their Christian British family and friends, who from the first coming
of S. Peter to Rome had ministered in such duties unto him, were not wanting to
perform this last and Antiquit. Glast. Capgr. Cat. in S. Joseph. Hard. in
chron. Stow hist. Cornelius Tacit. in Vita Agricolae.
farewell obsequie to that greatest Apostle: both in respect, their great love
and effection to S. Peter, be sufficient Testimonialls thereof, and above all
others they might more freely perform it, then many others. For the Romans did
not intermeddle then with the Britans in matters of Religion, but left such
affairs to their own Government, and British Governors, as we see in their
Kings then Aruiragus, Marius, Coillus, and Lucius, all friends and favorers
That neither S. Pude^s, S. Claudia, any of their family, or any Britan was then
punishable by the Romans for Religion.
of Christians, before Lucius was converted to the faith, openly to profess
it, and none of them joined with the Pagan Romans in their Religion. which we
cannot affirm so freely of France, where Claudius had forbidden the use of
their old Religion, which in Britain neither he nor any other Emperor had
done, but the Christian Britans did both at home, and else where under the
Romans quietly enjoy the free use of the Religion of Christ, until the
Persecution of Dioclesian.

4. If any man object, that S. Pudens husband to S. Claudia was a Roman, and so
subject to their Laws in Religion. I answer first, that it is evident
before, that the Father of S. Claudia, a Christian and chief commander in that
family, was yet living, and long time after. Secondly I answer, that S.
Pudens himself was but a Municeps, and no Roman, partaker thereby of the
Roman privileges, and immunities, but not subject to their penalties;
especially in things concerning Religion, as is testified by Aulus Gellius, and
others their own writers. Municipes sunt ciues Romani ex municipijs suis suo
Aul. Gellius Noct. attic. l. 16. c. 13. Io. Seldom Analect. p. 39. Cicero l. 2.
de legibus.
Iure and legibus suis vtentes, muneris tantum cum Populo Romano honorarij
participes, a quo munere capessendo appellati videntur, nullis alijs
necessitatibus, neque vlla populi Romani lege astricti. Marcus Tullius Cicero
has the like even in matters of Religion, and diverse others. Therefore a
Protestant Antiquarie boldly concludes, that by the Roman Laws, the Municipes
such as S. Pudens was, might be of what Religion they would, without
controlement. Tanta municipiorum videtur fuisse libertas, vt maiorum ac auitis
sibique proprijs sacris vti minime prohiberentur. Seldom supr.


THE XXXIV. CHAPTER.
ENTREATING OF THE TIME OF POPE Linus, Vespasian Emperor, and Marius King of
Britain: and of our Christians in those days, both at Rome, in Britain, and
other places.

1. THE chief Governor of the Church of Christ S. Peter, having now happily
by holy Martyrdom ended his labors in this world, and obtained his Crown,
and reward, in heaven; as an other succeeded him, in that high Pastoral
chardge After the death of Nero, others enjoy the Empire a very short time.
in spiritual things: so also at, or soon after that time, the supreme
Governors in temporal affairs, both in the Roman Empire, and this kingdom of
Britain were changed. Nero the Emperor the same year he Eusebius. in Chron.
Matt. Westminster. in Galba. Otho. and Vitell. Marrian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. Martin.
Polon. in Supput. Flor. Wigorn. and al^j.
Martyred the holy Apostles, murdered himself, and Galba was Emperor though a
short time of six months or little more, and Otho who stewe Galba, was an
Emperor allthough of a less continuance, for being in the fourth battle he
fought with Vitellius, conquered by him, having had victory in the three
former, impatient of dishonor killed himself, bearing the name of Emperor but
three months. And Vitellius which triumphed over him, enjoyed as short an
Imperial life, only eight months long, as his death, for his cruel
wickedness was dishonorable, stabbed to death, cast into the River of Tyber, and
wanting burial. Cum Vitellius multa crudeliter, ac nequiter Romae ageret,
minutissimorum ictuum punctionibus est excarnificatus, and ad Vespasian
Emperor.
vltimum in Tyberim mersus, communi caruit Sepultura. After these Vespasian was
Marius King in Britain, no Persecutor of Christians, but a friend, and
Benefactor to the^.
invested in the Empire enjoying it almost eleven years.

2. In Britain Marius commonly esteemed the son of Aruiragus, and Genuissa,
the reputed daughter of Claudius, was King: and both these so far from being
enemies and Persecutors of Christians, that King Marius is by diverse, as I have
showed before, reported to be a Christian, and by all opinions both a friend,
and Benefactor unto them, confirming unto the Christian Eremites of Aualon, S.
Joseph and his Associates those Donations, liberties, and Immunities which his
Father King Aruiragus had formerly granted John Harding Cronicle c. 47.
unto them. And the Emperor Vespasian whas so friendly and favorable to holy
Christians, that when he was in Britain, before he was Emperor, as Vespasian
Emperor also a friend to Christians, and thought to have believed in Christ.
Harding from more ancient Authors has testified, he procured those
Immunities, and Exemptions for S. Joseph, and his company, which King Aruiragus
endowed them with. And I do not doubt, but he was so far a Christian in
judgment, that I may recompt him in the number of those first Emperors of
whom Tertullian thus writes: The Emperors themselves would have Tertullian.
Apol. contr. gent. c. 21.
believed in Christ, if the Emperors had not been necessary to the world, or
men that where Christians might have been Emperors: Sed and Caesares
credidissent super Christo: si aut Caesares non essent saeculo necessarij: aut
si and Christiani potuissent esse Caesares. For we find in ancient Histories,
Manuscripts and others written diverse Manusc. French hist. pr. Or que nous
sommes.
hundred years since, that this Vespasian being Miraculousely cured of a
naturally irrecouerable desease, by the power of Christ, did plainly
acknowledge him to be the son of God, fuist le filz de Dieu, And promised
thereupon to reuendge his death upon the Jews. Which he performed, when he
sacked Jerusalem, and so slaued that people. For executing which Justice of
God, and desolation of the Jewish Nation, this kingdom of Britain, though so
far distant thence, was present there, as both Haebrew and English writers
even Protestant Ministers are witnesses, with 20000. soldiers. I 20000.
Britans served under Vespasian, at the sacking of Jerusalem by Vespasia^ and
Titus.
read (says a learned Protestant Antiquarie and Minister) in Joseph Bengorion
a very authentical Haebrew Author, a Testimony of the passing of twenty
thousand Britans valiant soldiers to the seige and fearful sacking of
Jerusalem under the conduct of Vespasian and Titus the Roman Emperor.
Therefore so many thowsands going so great a Journey, to fight under so
Christanly a minded General, and for the Quarrel of Christ, we cannot think
but many of these were Joseph Bengor. apud Rich. Hakluit praef. l. Nauigat.
Angl.
also in judgment, Act, or both, Christians.

3. And so we may worthily register Britain for one of the first believing
Nations, though so far distant from the place of the life, death, and first
preaching Credible that many of these Britans were Chsistians.
of Christ, and boldly say, it was the first, chiefest, principal, or only
kingdom that sent so great forces, and so far of, through so many
difficulties, to execute the just Reuendge of God upon his Enemies. And the
Christian either public profession, or known disposition of many British
Souldiars there mixed with the Romans under Vespasian, must needs be a Motive
to justify his words for true, to force Josephus to those forcible complaints
to the Jews at that time, that they could not expect any help from God, for as
Oration Iosephi ad Iudaeos Egesippus l. 5. excid. Hierosolymitani cap. 15.
they had forsaken him, so he also had forsaken them. And he that was wont to
defend them, was gone to the Romans their Enemies, who then worshipped the true
God, whom the Jews had offended, and the true God was with the Romans: an
praesidium speratur diuinum, atque auxilium de penetralibus? Sed qui nos
defendebat, ad hostem migrauit: quoniam quem nos colebamus, Romani venerantur,
nos offendimus. Quis autem ignorant cum illis esse deum? So that whether soever
we go where Brita^s Josephus and Egesipp. supr.
were in that time, either in Jury about Jerusalem, where the faith of Christ
was first preached, or Rome in Italy where the chief Vicar of Christ was
seated, The chief Rulers in Britain friends to Christians in this time.
or in Britain, then termed by Josephus and Egesippus an other world: Quid
attexam Britannias, interfuso Mari a toto orb diuisas, and a Romany in orbem
terrarum redactas. We find there were many Christians among them. And their
chief Rulers even in temporal affairs, not vnchristinaly minded, as
Vespasian in Jury, King Marius in Britain, at Rome Coillus, his son
afterward King hear brought up at Rome even from his Infancy, hic ab Infantia
Romae nutritus, a great friend to Christians, both there, and in Britain,
when Matthew. Westminster. an. 78. Galfrid. Monum. li. 4. ca. 18. Po^tic. Virun. Hist.
Brit. l. 4. Stow Hist. in Coillus.
he came to Rule.

4. And to come to the spiritual chief Governor of the Church of Christ in
the Sea at Rome in this time (to defere the Question whether S. Linus, or S.
Clement immediately succeeded to S. Peter until I come to S. Clements place,
by common computation) and hear to follow that opinion, which the Church of
Christ seems to prefer, that S. Linus was S. Peter's next successor, in the
Papal Government, Linus Pontifex primus post Petrum Breuiar. Romans die 23.
September. in S. Lino.
gubernauit Ecclesiam: How careful and mindful this Pope was of the
spiritual good of this Nation, and the means he had to effect it, may be
gathered by his acquaintance, and familiarity, which he had with our Britans,
then remaining Pope Linus his care of Britain.
at Rome, by whom, and with whom, he was most releiued, and resident, as is
before related. And to instance in some particulars; it seems that both S.
Beatus, and his other holy British companion of whom I have H^ consecrateth
diverse British Priests of this Nation.
spoken before, were consecrated Priests and sent into these parts by this Pope
S. Linus: To which opinion both our English and German Protestants with other
Authors induce me. Our English Protestant Antiquaries write in this manner: As
Beatus Rhenanus, in his History of Germany, Pantaleon, and others Theater of
great Britain l. 6.. 9.
do report, one Suetonius a Noble man's son in Britain converted to the
faith, by the first Planters of the Gospel in this Island, and after his
baptism called Beatus, was sent by the Brethren, from hence unto Rome, to be
better instructed, and further directed by Saint Peter. By which, and that I
have proved before, that S. Peter was put to death soon after his return to
Rome from hence, it may well be concluded, that S. Beatus and consequently also
his companion in the same case were consecrated by S. Linus, and not by S.
Peter: for Pantaleon proves, that these men were long at Rome to be instructed
both in faith, and learning, requisite for such Ecclesiastical parsons, before
they were consecrated Priests, and directed into these Countries, and this
rather by S. Peter's succesfor, then by himself then Martyred and in heaven; S.
Beatus Heluetiorum Apostolus. Henric. Pantal. de viris Illustrib. Germ. part
1. p. 114. Stumpff. l. 7. Bibliotheca Patrum minor. Chronic. chronicor. tom. 2.
Beatus ille nobilibus parentibus natus ex Britania Roman profectus est, vt a
S. Petro, in vera fide rectius institucretur. Cum autem in humanioribus literis
optime profecisset, atque Suetonius diceretur, Christianis dignus visus est,
qui doctrina^ veram perciperet, atque eandem vbique disseminaret. Which could
not be well effected in so short a time, as is showed before S. Peter lived
after his return from Britain to Rome. Therefore I must needs asscribe it, to
the time and ordinance of S. Linus. Which I may safely affirm in both opinions
concerning S. Linus, as well of them which deny him to have been Pope, and
affirm that what he did in Papal affairs, he did it by S. Peter's direction,
and appointment: ex praecepto beatt Petri Apostoli: as also of such, as say, he
was true Pope, and immediate successor to S. Peter, in which last opinion there
can Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. Mart. Polon. Supput. in S. Lino. Leo 2.
epist. decret. Florent. Wigorn. in Siluan. and Otho.
be no pretense of difficulty at all; And in the former opinion, allthough we
may not without just reason say, that, Exp^aecepto Petri, S. Linus proceedings
by commandment of S. Peter are to be understood of things he did in the life of
S. Peter, and time of his absence from Rome, for if S. Linus was not Pope
after, but S. Clement, it should rather be said that S. Linus did ex praecepto
S. Clementis, as S. Clement then living commanded and directed, then by the
commandment of S. Peter, who being dead neither could command as Pope, nor be
esteemed Pope: yet we may lawfully suppose, that S. Peter who had been in
Britain, and had such care thereof, And seeing in his life time S. Beatus, and
his British companions, went so long a Journey, as from hence to Rome to be
instructed in the faith, and desirous to be consecrated Priests, to preach in
their Country, would give chardge, and direction to S. Linus, his successor to
perform those duties for the spiritual good, and honor of this Nation.

5. And so we may probably upon sufficient warrant suppose, these holy British
Priests, and Saints were directed into these parts, both by S. Peter, and S.
Linus Authority, and Order. By this holy Pope also were such Britans, as were
Christians in Rome at that time instructed, the most principal place of S.
Linus Residence being then in the house of S. Claudia our British Lady, and so
ordinary and usual that S. Paul before seems to number, and account him one
of that family, Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus and Claudia; that
house being as is already showed, the most known and frequent place of
Christians in Rome either to instruct, or be instructed in Religion, minister
or receive the holy Sacraments thereof. And allthough King Coillus of Britain,
did not openly profess himself a Christian at that time, for fear of the
Roman Emperor, and Senate; yet being brought up at Rome, and in this time, and
so far a Christian in judgment, and affection, that he confirmed to the
Eremits of Glastenbury, those immunities and privileges, which Antiquit.
Glast. in tabula antiq. Io. Capgr. Cat. in S. Iosepho Ara. Gulielm. Malm. l. de
antiq. coenobij Glast. M. S.
his Grandfather, and Father, Kings, Aruiragus, and Marius had granted before
unto them, we must needs affirm, that he learned this his so great allowance,
and love to Christians, and their Religion at Rome from S. Linus and his
Disciples, in whose time of Papacy he lived, and had his education and
Instruction there by all Antiquities. And to give us assurance that this S.
Linus had a Pastoral care, as part of his great chardge, and cuer, as
necessity required, and the times would permite, to send Bishops, and
preachers into these parts where Britain is, we are told by diverse French
Historians, and from their primative Antiquities: that even in the first year
of his dignity, he sent Saint Cler, to the Realm of Britanny Armorike, who
brought with him the Mere des histoires and chroniques de France lib. 1. fol.
87. Alani Bouchard. Annals de Bretaigne l. 1. f. 19.
Nail, wherewith the right Arm of S. Peter was crucefied, and S. Cler there
settled his Episcopal See in the city of Nantes in the year of grace 72.

THE XXXV. CHAPTER.
OF THE STATE OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION in Britain in the time of Pope Cletus,
King Marius, or Coillus: and how we had hear in Britain a continued
Succession both of Priests and Bishops all this first hundred of years.

1. S. Linus being martyred, S. Cletus succeeded him in the Apostolic Roman
See, and was Pope above 11. years: And for temporal Rulers Matthew of
Westminster and diverse after him do testify, that King Marius died in the 78.
year of Christ, and left Coillus his son his Successor in this kingdom,
Anno gratiae 78. Marius Britannorum Matthew. Westminster. an. 78. Catalog. Regum
Britann. in Mario. Stowe Hist. in Marius. Harding Cronicle in King Marius. c.
50. fol. 42.
Rex, ab hoc seculo transiens, Coillum filium habuit successorem. By whom he
reigned but a short time, not above six years. Others affirm he reigned a
far longer time, the Protestant Publishers of the British History ascribe
52. years for his Reign, Polidor Virgil gives him 48. years, Stowe says he
reigned 53. years, Harding avouches that he dyed,

When he had Reigned sixty years and three.
His Tribute paid full well to Rome City.
Of Christ's faith some what he was informed,
But much more he needed to have been reformed.
But howsoever the question about the time of his Regiment, long or short, be
resolved; certain it is, that he was a friend to Christians, and if he reigned
long, longer was their peace by his permission, and if his Regiment was shorter
yet the quiet of Christian Religion was not thereby abbreuiated, for Coillus
his Son being also very favorably affected to Christians, and leaving the
Kingdom to his Son Lucius, under whom the whole Nation was converted to the
faith of Christ, we cannot find any King of Britain in those days, which was
an enemy to Christianity; so that if any outrage or cruelty was committed
against any of that profession, it was rather by the malice of Marian. Scot.
lib. 2. aetat. 6. in Tit. Martin Polon. Supput. col. 36. in Tit. Matthew. Westminster.
an. 81. Florent. Wig. in Tit.
the Druids, and some such, and not by regal command, and Authority, which
rather stood for the defense, then offense of Christians all that time.

2. And so long as Titus Son of Vespasian was Emperor of Rome, which was but
two years, and not many months, there was no Persecution of Christians there
not putting any of them to death, and so merciful he was to all, that he
pardoned the very convicted, that had conspired against him, and used them as
familiarly as he did before. vir omni genere virtutum mirabilis, adeo vt amor
and deliciae humani generis diceretur. Hic in Imperio tantae bonitatis Domitian
a v^ry wicked and persecuting Emperor.
fuit, vt nullius omnino sanguinem fuderit, sed conuictos aduersum se
coniurationis dimitteret, atque in eadem familiaritate, qua antea habuerat,
retineret. But after Eusebius. Hist. and in Chron. Marian. Martin. Matthew. West.
Flor. supr.
the death of Titus, his younger Brother Domitian taking the Empire upon him,
differed so much from his Brother, and Vespasian his Father before him, that he
fell into so great pride, and impiety, that he caused and commanded himself
to be called, and worshipped as God, and was the second after Nero, who setting
forth his cruel Edicts to that end, persecuted Christians and the Church of
Christ. Which cruelty of his, allthough it did not extend to our Christian
Britans as Rome, still by the Roman Laws enjoying there their privileges, and
immunities from compulsion to square themselves in matters of Religion to the
Imperial laws, and Edicts, yet being of force against all that had not such
municipall prerogatives, many of these bannished and persecuted Many Christians
in this Persecution of Domitian fled into Britain.
Christians, as in the Persecution of Nero before, as our Protestant and other
Antiquaries tell us, fled into this our Britain, whether that Persecution did
not, nor could extend it self, for refuge, and succor, at the least until
his wicked Edicts 15. years and some months after the beginning of his Empire
immediately upon his death for their cruelty were revoked by Nerua, his
Successor, who by his first Edict recalled all which Domitian had bannished.
Nerua primo edicto suo cunctos exules, quos Domitianus relegauit, reuocari
praecepit. Whereupon a Protestant Bishop and Antiquarie speaking of this time
of Domitian Matthew. Westminster. an. Dom. 97. Godwin Conu. of Brit. p. 18. Tripart.
hist. l. 1. c. 7.
calls Britain, a refuge for Christians. And adds both from Cassiodorus,
and his own judgment: It was not counted unlawful for these to be Christians,
that dwelt beyond Italy, and France, as in Britain or near the Pireney
Mountains, and so to the western Ocean. Whereby undoubtedly it came to pass,
that many professing Christ, not daring to abide near unto the heart of the
Empire, as in Italy, France, or some other of the nearest Provinces, made
choice of our Britain, where to lead their lives in such sort, as they might
enjoy liberty of conscience.

3. By which means it seems, that the number of our Apostolic men, though
their names be buried in oblivion, by iniquity of time, was again S. Joseph
of Aramathia, and diverse of his company died about this time, as also others
our primative Christians.
renewed, and increased, diverse of the former now hastening to their death, and
some of them, credibly deceased already. Among which we may with good warrant
number S. Joseph of Aramathia and others of his holy companions, which though
they were subject unto him, as their Abbot and chief: yet for years and age
little, or not at all inferior unto him, in probable judgment. And S. Joseph
was so venerable for years before this time, that the holy Evangelists, as our
Protestants translate them, tell us he was at the death of Christ one and
thirty years, of age. And he was, as the Antiquities of Glastenbury, with
many other Authorities witness, before his coming Matthew. cap. 27. Marc. cap.
15. Luc. cap. 23. Ioa. cap. 19.
into Britain, an honorable Counceller, in high esteem with the Jews, and so
honored by Pilate, the President of Jury, that he boldly had access unto him,
asked, and obtained of him the body of Christ, which he buried in his one
Tomb, thinking thereby, that he had not long to live; and so old he was at his
coming hither, that as many before have thought his son Joseph was
consecrated a Bishop at the least assigned to that dignity. Therefore the
ancient writers, and Antiquities of this History say, that within few years
M. S. antiq. de Vit. S. Joseph ab Aramathia. Io. Capgrau. in eod. Antiquit.
Glast. and alij.
of their settling themselves at Glastenbury, they gave place to nature and
ended their lives one earth, and S. Joseph, as probably the rest, was buried by
the holy Chapel which they had founded to the blessed Virgin Mary:
effluentibus paucis annorum curriculis sancti memorati carnis ergastulo sunt
educti: inter quos and Joseph sepultus est, and positus in linea bifurcata
iuxta Oratorium praedictum. And about this time our renowned Archbishop S.
Aristobulus died hear (a late writer says) by Martyrdom, and at Glastenbury,
setting down the time about the year of Christ three score and ten; which how
true it is, I dare Author of the Engl. Martyrol. 15. day of March.
not affirm, because I find none of his Authors which he cites, who are
Arnoldus Mirmannius, Dorotheus in Synopsi and Baronius, to deliver any such
thing, but if we should leave him to a natural death, we cannot conjecture, S.
Aristobulus his death in Britain by Martyrdom.
that he lived long after this time, for if he was the Father of S. Peter's
wife, he must needs be very old in these days; so likewise if he was a Roman,
and Arnold. Merm. in Theatro co^u. gent. in Britainnia. Martyrol. Romans 15. die
Martij. Catal. Regum. Britannor. 1. Fasti Regum and Episcoporu^ Angl. in
Domitiano. Matthew. Westminster. an. 94. Protest. Marginal. Ann. in eund. ibid.
the same S. Paul mentions to have had his family in Rome, before his coming
thither. Arnoldus Mermannius says he died in Britain in the time of Domitian
Emperor and S. Clement Pope in the year of Christ 99. anno and quod excurrit
99. Clemente Pontifice Maximo Domitiano Imperatore. The old Roman Martyrologe
is plain that he ended his life by Martyrdom, qui cursu praedicationis
peracto, martyrium consummauit. By whom he was martyred, either by the Druids,
or any Lieutenant of the Romans in the time of Domitian his Persecution, or
soon after Julius Agricola being hear about that time, and conquering this
Britain to the Romans in the days of the persecuting Emperor Domitian,
Brita^nia tunc primu^ penitus subiugata ductu Agricolae auspitijs Domitiani, I
dare not conclude; neither precisely of the time, or place. But thus we see
that the chief Disciple of S. Peter lived hear among the Christian Britans
until the days of S. Clement, and after such time as he sent many other
Bishops into these western parts, which as Matthew of Westminster Britain was
not without Priests, and Bishops after S. Aristobulus death but still enjoyed
diverse.
and his Protestant publishers, was in the year of Christ 94. Doctores
mittuntur versus Occidentem. Which was 5. years before the Martyrdom of our
Archbishop S. Aristobulus.

4. And yet after his death, we had diverse other Bishops in, or of this Nation,
as namely S. Beatus that lived until the year 110. as also his companion,
Marian. Scotus aetat. 6. in Nerua. Catal. Episcop. Treuer. Matthew. Westminster. an.
gratiae 98. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. in Domitian. Martin. Pol. supput. in
cod. Florentius. Wigor. in chron. Eusebius. in Chron. and hist. Hist. Tripartit.
Stow hist. in Domitian. Catal. Reg. Brit.
whose certain name is not remembered, so did S. Mansuetus long ouerliue this
Age, as I shall show in the second Century, or hundred of years, and S. Peter
at his time of his going from hence a little before his death, and consecrating
at his departure diverse Bishops with Priests, we may not probably think that
they all were dead, though their particular memories do not remain, for both
S. Mansuetus and S. Aristobulus were long time Bishops before them, and yet
the one lived until now, and the other a far longer time: And they which
fled, or came hither in the Persecutions of Nero, and Domitian, (which last
reigned and raged against Christians, until the 98. year of Christ, commonly
supposed the time of his death) could not be all dead, but many living, at, and
long after this time, even hear in Britain: for Traian succeeding him next,
except Nerua, who was Emperor but one year, and 4. months, kept the Empire
all most twenty year he, and many of them continued a Persecutor, at the least
until he was (about the year of Christ 107. in the next age) moved by the
letters of Plinius, to mitigate his Some Religious men lived at Glastenbury,
all this first Age to the end, and longer.
Persecution. And allthough, as I have insinuated before, S. Joseph of
Aramathia and his holy company did not live long at Aualon, yet it is a thing
not to be doubted in History, but either some of them, or some that succeeded
them in that holy place, and his conversation of life, lived there all this,
and some time of the beginning of the next Age. For it is testified by all
Antiquities of that holy Catal. Reg. Brit. Galfrid. Monu. Hist. Brit. Virun.
hist. Matt. West. Stowe hist. in Claudio.
Mansion of their, that King Coillus confirmed those privileges thereof which
his Grandfather, and Father Aruiragus and Marius had formerly granted unto it:
And many hold, it was the next Age before Coillus was King. The Cataloge of the
British Kings says, he began his Reign in the year 125. And certain it is,
that this his confirmation could not be until toward the later end of this
Age at the soonest, for Claudius the Emperor concluded not the Marriadge
between his Grandfather Aruiragus, and Genuissa or Geuissa his Grandmother,
until the 44. or 45. year of Christ. This was none of his first Acts hear,
her sending for from Rome hither, according to her estate required time, we
must allow a man's Age to Marius his Father, before Coillus was borne or
begotten, and to make Coillus his Charter of confirmation validate, requires
so many years in him, that the end of this first Age must needs approach
before it was effected, and those holy Eremits to whom it was made, did but a
short time enjoy that privilege, if none of them suruiued to see the second
Age. Which is confirmed by those Histories Antiquit. Glast M. San Tabulis. M.
S. de Vit. S. Joseph. Capgrau. Catal. ineod. Melkin. in S. Joseph. Gulielm.
Malmesb. l. de antiq. Caenobij Glaston. M. S.
which assuer us, that when S. Damianus and Fugatianus came thither, toward
the later end of the second hundred of years, they found both their house or
Oratorie still standing, and diverse Christian Images of the Cross, and others,
which could not have so long continued, considering the weak and mean
building of that poor Chapel, the matter of those picturs, and the
inhabitants thereabouts Pagans, more apt to destroy, then maintain such
Christian memories, if the Christian Possessors thereof had all been dead, and
left it desolate long before.

5. I have made former mention, how among all Countries between this and Rome,
this kingdom was in all times the most safe and quiet harbor and refuge for
Christians in these times: And yet we find in German, and French Histories,
that toward the later end of this first hundred years, in the days, and by
the holy labors, of S. Valerius and others sent thither by S. Peter the
Apostle, there were so many converted to the Christian faith, that in number
they exceeded the Pagans in many or most parts of France and Germany,
especially those that be near unto Britain, and from whence to use the phrase
of strangers it is but a short cut into this kingdom. Vnde breuissimus in
Britanniam, nunc Angliam, est traiectus, vti Tacitus and Julius Caesar Tacit.
and Iul. Caesar apud Anold. Merman. Theat. conuers. gent. Petr. Merssaeus
Catal. Archiep. Treuer. in S. Valor. and Materno.
meminere. Such was the increase of Christians there: Iam tunc pene per Galliam
and Germaniam Christiani Paganos and numero super^^ent and Religione. This was
in the time of S. Valerius, which died in the year 93. and, being before the
Division of Provinces was fully made into Archiepiscopall Sees, ruled diverse
chief Churches, and far distant, as Collen, Tungers, and Treuers, as also
his Successor S. Maternus did, and both of them were probably hear in
Britain, and converted many hear: for Marianus joins these with other S.
Valerius and S. Maternus Disciples os S. Peter were by probability in Britain
sometime.
holy Preachers and Bishops of those days which preached not only in their
own Provinces, but in these uttermost, and extreme parts. Qui non solum
propria Prouincia sed in extremis and vltimis industrij and illustres
existentes regna Tyrannorum vicerunt. And this great increase and
multiplication of Christians, continued all this age in these Countries, as
these forreyne Antiquaries tell us, and until the death of S. Maternus, which
was in the year of Christ Marian. Scot. aetat. 6. in Nerua.
133. as they witness: all which time and longer our renowned Bishop and
Countriman still lived, and often visited this his native Country preaching
hear. And yet before the end of this age, we had a new supply of Apostolic
men sent hither, from the Sea of Rome and Authority thereof, as I shall
further declare in the next Chapter.

THE XXXVI. CHAPTER.
OF THE STATE OF ECCLESIASTICAL affairs in Britain in the Papacy of S.
Clement, Empire of Traian and Reign of King Coillus, unto the end of this
first hundred of years of Christ.

1. S. Cletus having happily ended his life by Martyrdom, S. Clement took
upon him the government of the Apostolic Roman See, and the tyrannical time
of Domitian being now by his death expired, and his Acts for their cruelty
generally recalled by Nerua, though Emperor Marian. Scotus l. 2. aetat. 6.
Method. apud. eund. col. 255. Martin. Pol. Supput. in Clem. and Traiano. Matthew.
West. an. 102. 98. 117. 124. and alij.
little above one year, Traian succeeded him, holding the Empire until, or
about the year of Christ 117. being for diverse years a Persecutor of
Christians, especially about Rome, the Eastern, and other parts, remote from
this Nation, where King Coillus agreat friend, and fauouror of Christians
reigned.

2. Before I proceed further in S. Clements days: my promise before, and
urgent reasons to be remembered hereafter, do call upon me, to clear the
doubt, whether S. Clement was ordained by S. Peter his Successor immediate or not. S. Clement himself thus writes in these words: S. Peter himself Clemens
Romans Epist. 1.
for his great charity, toward all men, when he perceived his death at hand,
in the Assembly of our Brethren, the whole Church hearing him, taking me by
the hand, uttered these words: hear me, my brethren and fellow Servants,
because, as I am taught of him, my Lord and Master Jesus Christ that sent me,
that the day of my death is at hand, I ordain this Clement your Bishop, to
whom only I commit the Chair of my preaching, and doctrine. To him I deliver
the power of binding, and loosing, delivered to me by our Lord, that of all
things whatsoever he shall decree on earth, the same be decreed in heaven. For
he shall bind that which ought to be bound and shall loose that, which ought
to be loosed, as he which perfectly knows the Rule of the Church: Ipse Petrus
pro immensa charitate, quam erga omnes homines gerebat, in ipsis diebus, quibus
vitae finem sihi imminere praesensit, in conuentu fratrum positus apprehensa
manu mea, in auribus totius Ecclesiae, haec protulit verba: audite me fratres,
and conserui mei, quoniam vt doctus sum ab eo, qui misit me, Domino, and
magistro meo Jesus Christo, dies mortis meae instat, Clementem hunc Episcopum
vobis ordino, cui soli meae praedicationis, and doctrinae Cathedram trado. Ipsi
trado a Domino mihi traditam potestatem, ligandi and soluendi, vt de omnibus
quibuscunque decreuerit in terris, hoc decretum sit and in caelis. Ligabit enim
quod oportet ligari, and soluet quod expedit solui, tanquam qui ad liquidum
Ecclesiae regulam nouerit. This Act so concerning, and so publikly effected,
and concerning the whole Church, registered by so worthy a present witness and
party in that business leaves no place of exception unto it, especially when
we see almost all, that followed, co^firming it. S. Anacletus the next
successor to S. Clement, whom our greatest Anaclet. epist. 1. and 3. to. 1.
Council. Matt. Parker. Antiq. Brit. p. 24. Io. Pris. defens. hist. Brit. p. 73.
Rob. Barnes l. de vit. Pontif. in Anacleto, and Alexa^dro. Alexand. Pap. 1.
epist. 1. S. Leo 2. apud Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. col. 238. Florent.
Wigor. an. 50. and 75. Bed. Martyr. 9. call. Decembr. Hier. l. de Scriptor. in
Clem. Epiph. haeres. 27. Ioa. Pap. 3. Epist. decretal. Tom. 2. Council. Egbert.
Ser. 3. de incremento and manifestatione Catholicae fidei.
Protestants approve, approves both that Epistle, and this very part thereof,
containing this Act of S. Peter in diverse places. S. Alexander likewise
carrying with him Protestant approbation, twyce in one Epistle cites and
allows the same Act for S. Peter's: Ipse Apostolorum Princeps in ordinatione
beati Clementis populum instruens. And again: beatus Princeps Apo^stolorum
Petrus qui in ordinatione sancti praedecessoris nostri Clementis, instruens
clerum and populum. So does S. Leo the second as S. Marianus, Florentius
Wigorniensis, and others testify. S. Bid says the same of S. Clement. Hic ex
praecepto beati Petri Ecclesiae suscepit pontificatum. S. Hierome says most of
the Latins held so: plerique Latinorum secundum post Petrum Apostolum putant
fuisse Clementem. S. Epiphanius a Grecian is of the sameopinion, Pope Ihon the
third above 1000. years since expressly sets down this History from that
Epistle of S. Clement. And Egbertus co^uincibly thus proves this Epistle: nec
vnqua^ defecit in Ecclesia Romana fides quam habuerat and quam praedicauerat
Petrus sicut ei promiserat Dominus, quando imminente passione sua, dixit ad
eum; Ego rogaui pro te, vt non deficiat fides tua, hoc est, fides Ecclesiae
quam tibi commisit. Beatus autem Petrus cum sciret appropinquare sibi passionem
suam, sanctum Clementem, quem ad fidem conuerterat, and baptizauerat, ordinauit
in Episcopum, eiusque gubernationi sedem suam and Ecclesiam, quam ipse rexerat,
commisit: and ita successor beati Petri factus estin Sede illa. Nam quod Linus
and Cletus successores Petri fuisse leguntur, ita intelligendum est, quod adhuc
ipso viuente, Coadiutores eius extiterunt in gubernando populum Dei Romae, and
ad hoc abipso erant in Episcopos ordinati, vt scribit quidam Apostolicorum
Patrum Episcopis Germaniae and Galliae: The faith which Peter had, and
preached, did never fail in the Roman Church, as our Lord promised him, when a
little before his Passion he said unto him, I have asked for thee that thy faith
fail not: That is the faith of the Church which I have committed to thee. And
Peter when he knew his passion to be at hand, took S. Clement, whom he had
converted and baptized, and ordained him Bishop, and committed to his
government his See, and Church which he had governed, and so he was made the
successor of S. Peter in that See. For where we read that Linus and Cletus
were the successors of S. Peter, we must so understand it, that while he lived
they were his Coadiutors in governing the people of God at Rome, and for that
end they were ordained Bishops, as an ancient Pope writes to the Bishops of
Germany and France. which must needs be this Epistle of Pope Ihon the third
before mentioned, both the subject being the same, this ancient Author
related, and written to the Bishops of Germany, and France, as the beginning of
that very Epistle is, thus an able testimony: Ioannes Episcopus vniuersis
Germaniae and Galliae prouincias constitutis, in Domino salute^. So we have
besides a world of other witnesses, the Decretall Epistles of two ancient Popes
Io. Pap. 3. in fine Epist. Marian. Scot. and Florent. Wigor. supr. Bed. in
Martyr. Manuscript. ant. in Bibliotheca publ. Cantabrigiae volum. 28. tract. 9.
Sabellicus l. 9. Ennead. 7. Henticus Hunting. hist. l. 3.
this of Pope Ihon above a thowsa^d years since, who in the end of this
Epistle, calls it his Decree, and the other of S. Leo so named by S.
Marianus, Florentius Wigorniensis and others: Leo secundus in sua decretali
Epistola. To these I may add S. Damasus Pope, commonly esteemed Author of the
Pontifical cited by S. Bid before Anastasius time, to whom Bellarmin
asscribeth it, and directly said in an old Manuscript in Cambridge to be
written by Damasus Gesta Romanorum Pontificium Authore Damaso.

3. So writes Sabellicus saying S. Damasus was author of it, and gave it to
S. Jerome to peruse. Damasus omnium qui antese fuerant Pontificum vitas
monumentis tradidit, deditque id opus Hyeronimo cognoscendu^; and it is every
where approved by our best Historians, Florentius Wigorniensis, William of
Malmesbury, Henry of Huntington and others: among which, this last says
plainly for this matter; that S. Augustine did ordain S. Laurence his
Successor at Canterbury in his life time, as S. Peter did S. Clement at Rome;
Laurentium vero adhuc viuens ordinauerat Augustinus in Archiepiscopum, exemplo
S. Petri qui Clemente^ similiter ordinauerat. I have cited Florentius
Wigorniensis sor the same opinion before. S. Damasus says plainly, that S.
Peter consecrated S. Clement Bishop, and committed his See and the Church to
his chardge, leaving unto him that highest spiritual Pontifical power which
Christ committed unto him. Petrus beatum Clementem Episcopum consecrauit, cui
and Cathedram vel Ecclesiam omnino disponendam commisit, dicens sicut mihi
gubernandi tradita est a Domino meo Jesus Christo potestas ligandi soluendique,
ita and ego tibi committo: And if I should grant unto Bellarmin, (which truth
of History will not permit me) that Anastasius who lived 800. years since was
Author of this work, his allowance is, that I have him a publicly approved
witness for this matter, so many hundred years ancient. Which he confirms
also in the life of S. Clement, as also this Epistle to 8. James, testifying
from the same Epistle, that S. Peter committed the Papal dignity, and chardge
of the Church to him, and that Linus and Cletus are numbered before him, only
because S. Peter made them Bishops before that time. Clemens ex praecepto beati
Petri suscepit Damasus in S. Clemente.
Ecclesiae Pontificatum gubernandum, sicut ei fuerat a Domino Jesus Christo
Cathedra tradita, vel commissa. Tamen in Epistola quae ad Iacobum scripta est
qualiter ei commissa est a beato Petro Ecclesia reperies. Ideo Linus and Cletus
ante cum scribuntur, quia ab ipso Principe Apostolorum, ad ministerium
Sacerdotale exhibendum, sunt Episcopi ordinati. The like is testified by S.
Clement in his third Epistle, not subject to that censure some tax this with,
in that it is written to S. James Bishop of Jerusalem, thought to be dead at
this time, where he plainly calls S. Peter his Ordinator: beatus Petrus
Instructor and Ordinator noster. The Clemens Romans Epist. 3. and l. Recognit.
Gelasius Catal. Illustr. Vir. in Rufino.
like he does in those books which with Gelasius and Rufinus who translated
them out of Greek almost 1300. years since, by common agreemcnt all
acknowledge to be S. Clements undoubted works. And the main objection against
this Epistle of S. James the Apostle, his death before S. Peter is not worthy
recital. For Nichephorus, Marianus, Florentius Wigorniensis, Martinus Polonus,
and others, which acknowledge that: yet approve this Epistle and S. Clement to
have been chosen Successor to S. Peter by that testimony. And S. Dorotheus
that ancient Father and many others are witnesses, S. Dorothaeus li. de 72.
Discip. and l. de 12. Apostolis.
that the next Successor to the first S. James first Bishop of Jerusalem, was
besides his other name Simon or Simeon called also James, and by the Hebrew
phrase of speaking, calling near kinsmen, Brothers, named the Brother of our
Lord, as the first James his Brother was by that custom.

4. Therefore I may now boldly say, with our holy and learned ancient Marian.
Scotus l. 2. aetate 6. in Adriano. S. Aldelmus l. de laudib. Virginitatis c. 12.
Bishop Saint Aldelmus, converted by S. Gregory the great as he himself
writes: a quo rudimenta fidci and baptismi Sacramenta suscepimus: that S.
Clement was the first Successor of S. Peter, and the second Governor of the
Roman Church, allthough some in vain and without cause prefer Linus and
Cletus before him: Clemens caelestis Clauicularij primus Successor, and
secundus Romanae Ecclesiae dispensator, quanquam nonnulli Linum and Anacletum
in Pontificatus Regimine nequaquam S. Clement yielded the Papacy to S. Linus,
soon after S. Peter's death.
sine causa praeferant. Yet I do freely and willingly yield, to save the
honor and manner of speaking of the Roman Martyrologe, and some ancient
Fathers, (for the Canon of the Mass naming S. Linus and Cletus before S.
Clement has only meaning of prioritie in time) that as Baronius interprets
S. Epiphanius and Rufinus (and might have added many more) S. Clement gave
place to these, to execute the Apostolic dignity before him: and upon Baron.
Annal. Tom. 1. an Christi 69. Henric. Spondan. p. 124. Epiph. haer. 27. Rufin.
Praefat. in Clem. Wern. Rolwink. Fascic. temp. an. 94.
this motive, as some have written, least by accepting the chardge imposed one
him by S. Peter in his life, he might leave an example of danger to other
Prelates, to substitute Successors whom they would. S. Clemens primum a beato
Petro, vt dicitur, ordinatus fuit sibi Successor: Sed propter periculum, voluit
ante se beatum Linum and Cletum Pontificari, ne videlicet hoc exemplo Praelati
substituerent sibi quos vellent. And the words themselves which S. Clement used
when he yielded this Papal dignity to S. Linus, as S. Epiphanius does allege
them, from his own works, will well bear such construction of his Religeous
meaning in that matter: Secedo, abeo, erigatur populus Dei: I give place, I
Clemens Romans apud Epiph. haer. 27.
go away, let the people of God be provided for. For so he says in an
Epistle, says S. Epiphanius, and this we find in certain Commentaries. Dicit
enim in vna Epistola sua. Hoc enim in quibusdam Commentarijs reperimus.

5. So it appears, by that is said, that S. Clement was twice Pope, and at S.
Clement twice Pope.
both those times, for some space executed that highest function and dignity:
first when it was imposed upon him by S. Peter, and he wrote his Epistles with
that Title: Clemens Romanae Ecclesiae Praesul. Clemens vrbis Romae Episcopus:
Clemens Romans epistol. 2. 3. 4. Constable. Apost. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Ignat.
Epist. ad Mariam. Cassobol. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Tertul. l. 3. carm. Optat. l. 2.
Aug. Epist. 161. Martyr. Romans in Lin. Clet. and Clem. M. S. antiq. Brit.
Martin. Polon. supput. col. 35. in Clemente.
Bishop of the Roman Church, and does in them iuridically set down things to
be observed of the whole Church. So likewise in his other Books where he
delivers the Doctrine, and Tradition of the Apostles concerning the holy
Sacrifice, and other matters generally to be kept of all. And not long after
yielding it up to S. Linus, whom S. Ignatius, Irenaeus, S. Augustine, Optatus,
an old British Manuscript, which I have seen, and others make the next to S.
Peter, for some years by that Title of S. Clements Resignation. And secondly
after the death of Cletus, when it was imposed upon him again, the second
time, and died in that dignity: as Martinus Polonus and others write. Clemens
quamuis a beato Petro esset electus, tamen coegit Linum and Cletum ante se
pontificari. Et ita est ipse primus post Petrum per electionem, tertius vero
per gradum. This I have written more at lardge, not to labor to putt those two
glorious Bishops, Saints and Martyrs, S. Linus and Cletus, out of the Catalogue
of the renowned Roman Popes, but to give due to S. Clement, one of our Apostles
S. Clement was hear in Britain with S. Peter.
some time hear in Britain, except good arguments deceive us, according to
his worth and merit in this part of the world, and redeem that his most
learned Epistle or Book to S. James, S. Simon or Simeon Bishop of Jerusalem,
much concerning his honor, and this Nation. For although we have good witness
of S. Paul, S. Irenaeus and others of his conversation and familiarity with S.
Peter and him; yet therein we learn from S. Peter and S. Clement themselves
that he was with S. Peter in all his Journeys, great in these parts, never
forsaking him, one reason why he principally made choice of him for his
Successor, as being so best acquainted with his Apostolic course. Qui mihi ab
initio, vsque in finem comes in omnibus fuit, and per hoc veritatem totius
Paul. Epist. ad Philipp. cap. 4. Irenaeus l. 3. haer. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 5.
c. 5. 6. Clem. Romans Epist. 1.
meae praedicationis agnouit: Qui in omnibus tentationibus meis socius extitit,
fideliter perseuerans: Quem prae caeteris expertus sum Deum colentem, homines
diligentem, castum, discendi studijs deditum, sobrium, benignum, iustum,
patientem, and scientem far nonnullorum etiam ex his, qui in verbo Dei
instituuntur, iniurias. Propter quod ipsi trado a Domino mihi traditam
potestatem ligandi and soluendi. O my brethren hear me, for as I am
instructed of our Lord which sent me Jesus Christ, the day of my death is at
hand, I ordain this Clement, taking me by the hand, your Bishop, to him alone
I deliver the Chair of my preaching and doctrine, Who from the beginning to
the end has been a companyon unto me in all things, or places, and by this
has known the truth of all my preaching: Who has been my fellow faithfully
perseuering in all my temptations: whom above the rest I have proved to worship
God, love men, to be chaste, given to the studies of learning, sober, gentle,
just, patient and knowing to bear the injuries of some, even from them that be
instructed in the word of God. For which respects I deliver unto him the power
of binding, and loosing, which was delivered to me by our Lord. Where we see
it plainly testified both by S. Peter, and S. Clement his Secretary, as well as
Successor, that he was with S. Peter in all his trauails, and places even to
the end, that we may be assured he was with him hear in Britain, which was
his last place of stay, before this at Rome, and this was a chief cause why S.
Peter thought S. Clement most fit for this dignity for he whom he calls;
homines diligentem; so loving and kind to all men, must needs be more kind,
and careful of them, with whom he had conuersed, and whose necessities he best
knew.

6. And yet besides this love of S. Clement to these parts of the world, which
he had so travailed with S. Peter, the same holy Apostle as he himself
witnesses, gave him express chardge to send learned Bishops unto all Cities
in those parts where S. Peter had not ordained such before. Episcopos S. Petrus
Apost. apud Clem. Rom* Epist. 1.
per singulas civitates quibus ille non miserat, perdoctos and prudentes sicut
serpents, simplicesque sicut columbas, iuxta Domini praeceptionem nobis
mittere praecepit. And to make it manifest, that among other Countries he sent
also into this our Britain S. Clement sent Bishops into Britain, and by S.
Peter's direction.
according to S. Peter's direction, he says plainly, that he desired and
intended to send such Bishops and preachers into Italy, Spain, France,
Germany, and, to include Britain, to all other Nations in these parts of this
western world, wishing the Bishop of Jerusalem to whom he wrote, to do so in
the East. Vos per vestras Dioeceses Episcopos sacrate, and mittite, quia nos
ad alias parts quod idem inssit, agere curabimus. Aliquos vero ad Gallias,
Hispaniasque mittemus, and quosdam ad Germaniam and Italiam atque ad reliquas
gentes dirigere cupimus. Where we see S. Clement by this power committed to him
by S. Peter and Prerogative of the Sea of Rome, thought it is duty, and took
upon him not only to send Bishops and Preachears into all this western world,
but by that office and privilege gave chardge to those that were in the East
to do the same. And there sets down what Order S. Peter Epist. r. supra.
and the other Apostles took, for setting of Patriarks, or Primats in the
chief Cities, where in the Pagans time their Archflamens were and chiefest
Doctors, Archbishops for their less chief Flamens, and Bishops in the other
ordinary Cities. And what was appointed him by S. Peter, and he promised Matt.
Westminster. an. 94. Protest. not. ib. Francisc. Belleforest. hist. Gall. Francisc.
Feu^ardentius in lib. 1. Iren. cap. 3. Anton. Democh. cont. Calum. Guliel.
Eisengr. ce^t.
in his behalf, that he effectually performed, as into France which he named
with other kingdoms of his chardge before, he sent S. Denis, Nicasius,
Taurinus, Trophimus, Regulus, Paulus, Saturninus, Astroniomus, Martialis,
Gratianus, Iulianus, Lucianus, Firmius, Photinus with others, and the places
whether he directed them are for the most part Archbishop Sees to this day.
Therefore we cannot doubt, but eythe^ S. Clement did well know, that this
kingdom of Britain was yet provided of such Apostolic men, still living from
S. Peter's establishing them hear, or else sending so many into our next
neighboring Country, he remembered Britain in the same, or like measure,
especially seeing it is evidently his own words, that he had a greater care of
Britain, accounted a rude and barbarous Country at that time, and among such
reputed by S. Clement, and so distinguished by that note, from Italy, Spain;
France; and Germany by him, where recompting them, he adds, that into those
Nations that be more rude or barbarous, he must send more wise and Clem. supr.
Ep. 1.
austiere Bishops or preachers, then into the other Civil Nations* Vbi autem
ferociores and rebelliores gentes esse cognouerimus, illuc dirigere
sapientiores and austeriores necesse habemus, qui quotidie non cessent diuina
seminare semina, and multos Christo lucrari, and ad rectam fidem and viam
veritatis perducere. And this the rather, Anaclet. Epist. 3.
because he sets down the Apostles Order, which he was to follow, to
Primats and Archbishops by S. Peter, and S. Clement their order hear in
Britain, besides other Bi^hops.
constitute Primats, where the Pagans had their chief Archflamens, as he did
in France: and his immediate Successor S. Anacletus, as he himself and diverse
others testify, did write a book or Cataloge (he calls it a Tome) of the
names of the Cities both in Britain, and other places, where such were to be
resident, and this according to the prescript and practice of S. Peter and S.
Clement. Episcoporum ordo vnus est, licet sint Primates illi, qui primas
Civitates tenent. Illi autem qui in Metropoli a beato Petro Apostolo, ordinante
Domino, and Girald. Cambr. l. 2. de Iure Metrop. Eccl. Meneuen. ad Innoc. 3.
Ioa. Pris. defe^s. hist. Britan. p. 73. 74. Matt. Park. antiq. Brit. p. 24.
Werner. Rolwinck. in Fascic. an Dom. 94. Harris. descript. of Brit. Harris.
Hist. Manus. l. 1. Godwin Catal. York. Parlm. 1. Marian. Scot. l.. 2 aetat. 6.
Method. apud eund. ib. Martyr. Romans die 11. Aug. Vsuard. eod. die. Petr. de
Natal. l. 4. Vincent. l. 11.
a praedecessore nostro praedicto sancto Clemente, seu a nobis constituti sunt,
non omnes Primates, vel Patriarchae esse possunt: sed illae vrbes, quae
praefatis and priscis temporibus Primatum tenuere, Patriarcharum aut Primatum
vtantur nominibus, quiahaec eade^ and leges saeculi in suis contine^t
Principibus: aliae aute^ primae Civitates quas vobis conscriptas in quodam Tomo
mittimus, a sanctis Apostolis and a beato Clemente, sieve a nobis, Primates
praedicatores acceperunt. And according to this Cataloge, or Tome of S. Peter,
S. Clement and S. Anacletus iuxta Tomum Anacleti: ex Anacleto huius Insulae
diuisionem; Canterbury, London, Caerlegion, York and Alba in Scotland, by some
taken to be the City now called S. Andrews, vrbs Legionum, Cantuaria,
Londonia, Eboraca, and Alba vnde Albania prouincia, were designed Sees of such
Primats, as Giraldus Cambrensis in his second book to Pope Innocentius the
third, Sir Ihon Prise, Matthew Parker the first Protestant Archbishop of
Canterbury, with others testify.

7. Therefore seeing he plainly writes, that some of these Cities even in
Britain, had received such Primats from S. Peter or himself, and we find it
witnessed by many, that one S. Taurinus sent by S. Clement, was Archbishop or
Primate of York, which is one of the Sees remembered for such, both by S.
Peter, S. Clement, and S. Anacletus, we may not utterly deny, that he was our
first Primate in that City. And if he was the same which was Bishop of Eureux
in France sent by S. Clement, as diverse hold, being usual in that time, as
Methodius, Marianus and others teach, for one Bishop S. Taurinus thought by
some the first Archbishop of york, and sent by S. Clement.
to preach in diverse places, and Countries, he lived long, much propagated the
faith of Christ, and was renowned for Miracles he wrought, as the ancient
Roman Martirologe with others give evidence: Euangelij praedicatione
Christianam fidem propagauit, ac multis pro ea susceptis laboribus miraculorum
gloria conspicuus, obdormiuit in Domino. But whereas some say, and Harris supr.
l. 1. Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae. 115. Hector Boeth. Scotor. hist. l. 5. for 76.
77. 78.
allege S. Antoninus for Author, that this S. Taurinus did raise from death,
a daughter of Lucius King of Britain: filiam Lucij Legis Britanniae a morte
suscitauit: I cannot be of that opinion; for first Lucius our Christian King
was not borne until the year of Christ 115. and we do not read of any
daughter or child he had. And though Lucius Antenous the Roman Prefect, did as
some write, prescribe laws hear, and in that respect might S. Antoninus
mistaken by some for writing S. Tauri^^^ raised from (...) a daughter (...)
^ius King in (...).
be called King, and lived in York in the time of Adrian the Emperor, and so
both his name, Title, the place, and time might well agree, that S. Taurinus
might there raise his daughter to life, if he had any which died there, being
so Miraculous a man, miraculorum gloria conspicuus. Yet this could not be that
Miracle, which S. Antoninus speaks of; for in that very place, which is cited
for the raising of the daughter of King Lucius of Britain, he has no such
thing, not once naming any Britain, much less any King of Britain, but
plainly says, that the Father of that daughter, which S. Taurinus raised from
death to life, was, Lucius ciuis Ebroicensis; Lucius a Citizen Francis Godwin
Cat. of Bishops York 1.
of Eureux, which is in France and far from our Eboracum, York in Britain.
Where; as a Protestant Bishop writes: It is reported that Constantius Chlorus
the Emperor appointed Taurinus Bishop of Eureux to be Archbishop of York:
This confirms the opinion, that one and the same S. Taurinus sent into these
parts by S. Clement, was Bishop of Eureux in France, and Archbishop of York in
Britain. But the supposed time of his remouall Matt. Westminster. in Constant. Flor.
Wigor. in Chro. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. Martin. Polon. in Suppu. Io.
Xephil. Epitom. Dion. l. 55. in Caesar. Aug. Camden in Middlesex. English.
Martyr. 7. Febr. Martyrol. Romans die 7. Febr. Bed. eodem die. and Vsuard and
Ado. Vuandelb. and Petr. in Catal. l. 3. c. 105. Baron. Annot. in Martyr. Romans
7. die Febr. Auth. of English. Mart. 7. Febru.
must needs be mistaken; for I have proved before, that S. Taurinus was sent
with diverse others by S. Clement in, or about the year of Christ 94. when
there were by all accounts, 160. years at the least between that, and the
first coming of Constantius Chlorus into, Britain. For our other chief
Metropolitan See, which we call now London, being from the beginning of
Christiantie hear, as Camden and others witness, called Augusta, we read in
approved Authors, the ancient Roman Martyrologe, S. Bid, Vsuardus, Ado and
others saying, he was Bishop of Augusta, London, in Britain, and ended his
life with Martyrdom. Augustae in Britannia Beati Auguli Episcopi, qui aetatis
cursum per Martyrium explens, aeterna praemia suscipere meruit. Baronius does
plainly confess he knows not in what time he died. Quo tempore passus sit,
hactenus mihi obscurum. An other late writer is bold to say: Augulus Bishop and
Martyr in the Persecution of Dioclesian the Emperor for preaching the
Christian faith in our Island of great Britain, was put to death, by the
enemies of truth, about the year of Christ, three hundred and five, a little
after the death of S. Alba^. But I cannot be of his min^e therein, he neither
alleging any one author that so affirms, nor reason which so induces. But
many reasons there be to the contrary: and supposing with the common opinion
that London was called Augusta, because, as Dio and Xephilinus write, Legio
Augustalis nominata hibernabat insuperiore Britannia, The Roman Legion so
termed wintered in the upper Britain, near London as is thought, it was long
before S. Augulus probably first Archbishop of London, about this time.
Dioclesians time when it was thus called, in the days of Caesar Augustus, or
soon after, and in the time we have now in hand. Secondly the Catalogue of all
the Archbishops of London, from the general conversion of this kingdom, long
after Dioclesian his persecution, is, and has been carefully, and diligently
gathered Dio Cassius l. 55. Xephil. Epitom. in Aug. Caesare. Marcellinus l. 28.
Andre Chesne Hist d' Angleterre l. 1. Iocelin. de Episc. Brit. and Io. Gotcelin
de eisdem Stowe hist. Holinsh. Hist. of Engl. Harr. Theatr. l. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
Godwin Catal. of Bish. in London. Harris Thea^r. supr. l. 4. c. 7.
by many, and no such name as Augulus, or like unto it, found among the^, being
accounted these: Thean, Eluanus, Cador, Obinus, Conan, Palladius, Stephan,
Iltut, Theadwin, or Dedwin, Thedred, Hillary, Restitutus, which was at the
Council of Arles in France about the year of Christ 326. after Dioclesian his
death. And after him succeeded Guitelinus, Fastidius; Vodimus, Theonus. And no
mention of S. Augulus, or any such to be found.

8. Further M. Harris in his Manuscript Theater, taking upon him more
particularly then others, to set down the times of those Archbishops of London
from King Lucius time, expressly says: About this time an. Do. 308. lived
Stephanus the seventh Archbishop of London next after Paladius, certain
years, and died in London. Wherefore making Stephanus the seventh, as others
do, and saying he was Archbishop there in the year 308. which is within 3.
years of the imagined time, when S. Augulus was Archbishop, and Martyred there
and Paladius, which name has no proportion with that of Augulus, was his
immediate Predecessor, either Paladius or Stephanus by this account, was
Archbishop at the surmised time of S. Augulus Martyrdom, and so no place found
for him in London after King Lucius his conversion. And all our Histories are
witness, how diligent the Christians of Britain were, immediately upon the
ceasing of Dioclesian his Persecution, to renew the memories and honor of
their late principal Martyrs, in honoring their Reliks, and dedicating
Churches unto them: And yet no mention at all of him, though their Gsldas l. de
excid. and conq. Brit. Bed. Hist. l. 1. Galfrid. Mon. Hist. Brit. Virun. Hist.
Britan. Matthew. Westminster. an. gra. 313. Godwin Catol. inwinchester. 1.
Archbishop and most noble Martyr if he had lived and suffered in that time. No
Church spoken of dedicated to him, not his name once remembered in those
Antiquities; yet so worthy an Archbishop, Primate, Saint and Martyr he was,
that as I have before mentioned, he has the best and most renowned writers of
such things to be Registers of his Triumph by holy Martyrdom, and most of
them in foreign Countries, the memory of our first Apostolic men almost by
iniquity of seasons hear forgotten in our own writers, but as we are
enforced to beg and borrow them from strangers not so punctually and
circumstantially allways writing of the affairs of Britain, then with many
reputed an other world or continent, as we could desire. Therefore to give S.
Augulus his due place, and deserved memory, I cannot tell what time to assign
him more agreeable to his life, and death, then this whereof I now entreat:
for I have showed before how S. Peter left us a Metropolitan S. Aristobulus,
who lived until these days of S. Clement, and almost the end of this Age in
the 24. year of the next Ce^tury 124. Lucius our first Christian King took
the Regiment of Britain in hand, when there was no Perfecution but all favor
for Christians hear, the ancient Authors Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 124. and
alij.
which write of his death speak, as though he had lived long before he was
Martyred, almost a course of life, so say S. Bid and the Roman Martirologe,
Statis cursumper Martyriu^ explens: Vsuardus has the like; cursum temporis
Bed. Martyrol. 7. Id. Februar. Romans Martyrol. die 7. Februar. Vsuard. eod. die.
per Martyrium explens. So testify others; By which I have sufficient warrant,
to think this glorious Saint our Metropolitan was one of them which S. Clement
according to his own promise before, the chardge S. Peter gave unto him, and
so many have already testified, sent hither into this kingdom. S. Augulus
probably sent Archbishop into Britain by S. Clement Pope.


9. And what I have said of S. Augulus, if I should incline to think the same
of our two other glorious Martyrs of great Britain S. Socrates and S.
Stephen, which S. Bid, the Roman Martyrologe and Vsuardus with others do
prove were martyred hear, I have all, or almost all the same reasons and Bed.
Martyrol. 15. Call. Octobr. Mart. Romans die 17. September. Vsuatd. and Ado Mart.
Anglic. Secundum vsum Sarum. cod. die Engl. Marty. 17. Sept.
authorities to assist me, which I used for S. Augulus, and therefore need not
repcate them again, and no argument or Author, but that late writer without
all warrant for these, as for S. Augulus to impugn me, and him I have fully
answered. Only one thing he writes to their honor, which I willingly
allow: There are diverse Churches yet remaining in Wales, that in ancient
times have been dedicated in their honor: among whom also their memory is yet
famous until this day, especially in Monmouthshire, and the Southern parts
adjoining. But that they were martyred under Diocletian he brings no
Authority. The Authors which he cites for them, being those I alleged
before, are silent S. So^ates and S. Stephen probably ma^tyred in Britain
about this time.
of any such thing, only they say, that upon that day, not speaking of any
time, they were martyred in Britain. Neither can I find any ground with him
or elsewhere, for that he says of them: They were converted to the faith of
Christ in our Primative Church by the preaching of S. Amphiball Priest, and
Martyr? For Britain, and the Britans were converted long before. And though
many Christians in Britain were put to death in the time, or Persecution
commonly ascribed to Dioclesian, as a thousand at one place called Lichfeild,
which argues the inhabitants hear then were Christians, and more needed grace
of perseverance, then preaching especially toward the Countries now called
Wales: yet I do not find any particularly named in ancient Authors but S.
Alban, Heraclius Amphibalus, Aaron and Julius: except we should allow of that,
which Regino writes of S. Lucia Virgin, and Martyr in Britain: Lucia Virgo in
Britannia. Which is discredited by himself, for he says she Regino in
Chronic. an. D. 242.
was putt to death in Britain in the year of Christ 242. Which probably was
before Dioclesian was borne. Yet will I not deny but Regino Prunie^sis,
mistaking the time for the number of years, may otherwise write a truth, that
S. Lucia Virgin and Martyr in Britain by Regino Pruniensis.
Lucia a Virgin was martyred in Britain, and in the days of Dioclesian, and
if half so much Authority had, or could be brought for S. Augulus, Socrates,
or Stephen, I should not so easily have disabled it. Only one thing I will
add, concerning the place of S. Augulus Martyrdom.

10. That a late French writer in his History of this our Britain seems to
Andre du Chesne Taurauge en l'Historie general d'Angleterre, Escosse, and
d'Irland.
think that Caerlegion was in the time of Julius Agricola, and by him named
Augusta, which if it were so, it only varieth the particular place of his
Martyrdom, nothing detracting from the glory of him, or this Nation, or
contradicting that I have said of the time of his death, for no memory is in
Histories of any such there in the time of Dioclesian, nor any Archbishops name
of that place preserved long after Dioclesian his death, Tremonius and S.
Dubritius the first that be named in Histories, which rather confirms the
honor of the place of his Martyrdom to London, especially seeing this Author
brings neither reason nor Authority to infring it; and if we take the
denominatio^ Augusta to have been given hear in respect of the Nobility of the
place, it must needs best agree to our most ancient and noble City, as Camden
and others yield that reason ea dignitate floruit Londinum, vt Augusta dici
caeperit, many foreign Cities very famous were called Augusta in that respect:
as Vacienorum, Augusta praetoria: Camden in middle sex page 217. Monster in
Cosmogra. Cooper. in Augusta. Abraham Ortelius in Indice Antiq. Region. Insul.
Vrb. Oppid. etc.
Augusta Taurinorum: Augusta Tricastinorum: Augusta Veromanduorum: Augusta
Valeria: Augusta Emerita: Augusta Bracchara: Augusta Acilia: Augusta Tiberij:
Augusta Vindeliciorum: Augusta Caesarea: Augusta Vestonum: Augusta Treuirorum
and other famous Cities among Cosmographers, which have taken that name for
their Noblenes, and not from the Roman Legion, called Augusta, lying in so many
places: And of all places, Caer-legion could not be so named from that
relation, no evidence given, that any so named Legion continued there. And the
generll name Caer-legion, the City of the Legion conuinceth, it had not the
name from any Legion in particular, much less Augusta, for then it should have
been named Caer-augusta, and not Caer-legion, as we see all the others are
before named Augusta, absolutely without reference to any Legion either in
general, or particular. And the Cities before named Augusta, are called, as we
see, of the Countries, where they be, or were, and not from any Roman Legion.

11. I have mentioned before, that the Emperor Traian was a Persecutor of
Christians, and among many others, the renowned Pope S. Clement was barbarously
first exiled, and after cruelly put to death. But this Persecution as it much
advanced the honor of our British Christians, so it gave occasion, to increase
their number. Our noble Christian British house at Rome, as in this time and
before it was the most frequented receptacle of Christians, releeuing them in
all their wants, while they lived, so now in this storm of Persecution,
besides the famous Sepulchrary, and burying place, which it had most charitably
before provided, in via Salaria, bearing the name of S. Priscilla, our British
Foundresse thereof, there was an other very costely burying place, Loco
caemiterij, at their own dwelling house, as the Baron. Annot. in Martyrol.
Romans die 16. Ianuarij.
Romans have before confessed: where they secretly buried the bodies of the
holy Martyrs suffering in these Persecutions: ad sepeliendos sublatos occulte
Martyrs. And as I have showed before, this Christian British house having so
great resort of Christians unto it, that at one time there were in it
baptized, nonaginta sex homines, 96. men besides women, and children, as that
phrase is usually taken in Histories, and was as the common school, Seminary,
chief Church, and place to minister Sacraments, and consecrate holy parsons:
we must needs conclude from hence, that this kingdom of Britain was before
all other Nations, to take especial fruit and benefit thereby, to have
diverse of those holy Priests there consecrated, to be sent hither unto it. This
the law of the Gospel allowed, the chardge of S. Peter exacted, and S.
Clement as duly performed: the law of nature pleading for Britain to our
Christian British house, and school in Rome, that so it ought to be. And yet
an other law, and of no small power, with those, that desired to serve Christ
with quiet, and security, the law of necessity, drew many Christians from
Rome, and those parts of the Empire, where the Persecution then raiged, as
diverse both Catholic and Protestant Authors have before proved, to come unto,
and live in this Nation, both in respect of the King, a friend to Christians,
and the Immunities of the place, and Country. And this may suffice for the
History of this first Age of Christianity in this kingdom of great Britain.
For them that are desirous to know, and inform themselves more fully in every
particular point of true Christian Catholic Religion, lately and now still
hear, as in diverse other places questioned, what was publikly preached,
professed, and received for such, by the holy Apostles, Apostolic men and
Primative Christians of this first Age, when by all, the holy and undoubted
true Religion, to be a Rule and direction to all Posterity in succeeding times
for ever, was published and accepted: I have set it down at lardge in my late
Book entitled: The Judgment of the Apostles between Catholics and
Protestants in matters of Religion. Wherein they shall find the true and holy
sentence of them, and other Apostolic men living in this Age, in every
Question, to be for the present Catholics, and against their Adversaries, the
first to profess undoubted truth, the others known and confuted Error, in
every Article. Which would seem too long to be set down in an History, and
thererefore I caused it to be printed a part in the year of our Lord 1632.

The end of the First Age.
THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN.

THE SECOND AGE.

THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN.
THE SECOND AGE.
THE I. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN IS RELATED BY ALL TESTImonies of Protestants, and others, how in the
Papacy of S. Anacletus, this kingdom was divided into Provinces for Christian
Primats and Bishops; and that these Bishops and holy Priests were Massing
sacrificing Priests, and consecrated by such form and manner of Consecration,
as the present Roman Church now uses, as likewise all our Primative British
Bishops and Priests were: and diverse such sent into these parts by this holy
Pope, as S. Peter, and Clement had given chardge before.

1. BEING now to begin the second hundred of years from the Birth of Christ,
we must make our beginning with those Rulers, with which we concluded the first
to wit S. Clement Pope, Traiane Emperor, and Coillus King of Britain. These
two last reigned diverse years, in this Age; but S. Clement being putt to death
by Traiane, even in the beginning of this Eusebius in Chronic. an. 3. Traiani.
Hieron. Catal. in S. Clement. Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 102. Damasus in Pontif.
in S. Clem. Baron. Annal. an. D. 100
Centurie, as Eusebius, S. Hierome with others testify, and likely bannished
from the Sea Apostolic, into the Island Chersonesus (where working strange
miracles, and converting many thereby, he suffered glorious martyrdom) in the
later end of the former Age, I must come to his next Successor, in that
highest chardge, and dignity S. Anacletus, who enjoyed it, as S. Damasus and
others witness, nine years, three months, and tene days: sedit annos nouem,
mens^^ tres, dies december. Matthew of Westminster says: 9. years, and ten
months: sedit in Cathedra Romama annis 9. mensibus december. He as himself, and
Damasus in Po^tif. in Anacleto Vit. cius in Breuiar. 13. Iulij. Matthew. Westminster.
an. 102. Martin. Polon. supput. in Anaclet. Anaclet. Epist. 1. Epist. 3.
Florent. Wigor. in chronic. an. 93. vel 71. Marianus Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. in
Domitiano. Magdeburg. in Indice cent. 2. tit. Anacletus. Magdeb. cent. 2. ca.
7. col. 146. Matthew. Park. Ant. Brit. p. 24. Bills. Barl. Bridge. Couell. Hooker.
Down. l. in Text. citat. Ioa. Pris. defens. Hist. Britan. page 73. 74. Rob.
Bar. l. de vit. Pontif. Romans in Anaclet. Ormerod. pict. of Pop. p. 78. Gir.
Cambr. l. de Iure Metropol. Eccl. Menou. ad Innocen. 3. Marian. Scot. l. 2.
aetat. 6. Flor. Wigorn. in in chron. in Domitiano.
others prove unto us, was consecrated Priest by S. Peter the Apostle, and
instructed by him. Petrus Princeps Apostolorum Instructor noster a sancto Petro
Apostolorum Principe Presbyter ordinatus. And as he says, placed by Christ in
the Sea Apostol^ke, in Apostolica-Sede a Domino constitutus. And in an other
place he writes again, that he will write as S. Peter the Prince of the
Apostles, who made him Priest, instructed him: vt a ^^ato Petro Principe
Apostolorum sumus instructi, a quo and Presbyter sum ordinatus, scribere vobis,
sicut petistis non denegauimus. This is so warranted a truth, that the greatest
Protestant Enemies to such Antiquities, the Magdeburgian writers plainly thus
confess it: Anacletus Presbyter a Petro ordinatus. And cite for their
evidence, the Epistle of S. Anacletus only, and thereby confirm it to be his
writing. So do our best learned English Protestants, their first such
Archbishop of Canterbury Matthew Parker, their Protestant Bishops, Bilson,
Barlowe, Bridges, and others, against their Puritans, Sir Ihon Prise, Couell,
Hooker, Downame, Barnes, Ormerod, and too many to be recited; therefore I may
pass over Catholic Writers in this matter, and only I name three of our
ancient Antiquaries, Giraldus Cambrensis, Marianus Scotus, and Florentius
Wigorniensis, by Protestants testimonies renowned for such learning. And so I
might boldly, if I had no other warrant, insist upon the Authority of this
holy Apostolic man for S. Peter his Consecratour, and Instructour, confirmed
in grace, could not deceive either him, or us, or any: and his writings
proposing S. Peter's instruction, doctrine, and practice, are sufficiently abled
before to be a true proposer: yet I will be so far from building only upon
this ground, though so firm a foundation, that I shall have so many other
ample witnesses besides, for that I shall allege from him, that without him,
it shall have credit and certainty sufficient.

2. First he declares how Provinces were divided before the time of Christ,
for the most part, and afterward by the Apostles, and by S. Clement this
Predecessor, that division was renewed again: And how they took Order in
which, and which places should be Primats, or Patriarks, Metropolitan and
others inferior Bishops? Prouinciae multo ante Christi aduentum tempore
diuisae sunt maxima ex part, and postea ab Apostolis, and beato Clemente
Praedecessore nostro, ipsa diuisio est renouata etc. And in his next Epistle he
plainly repeateth the same again and further adds in two several places,
that he had set The Provinces in Britain for Christian Primats and Bishops
assigned by S. Peter, and S. Clement, and set down by S. Anacletus in a Tome,
written by him.
down in a book, or Tome, which he sent with this Epistle, the several names
of the Cities in all Provinces, which were to have Primats, and had received
such from S. Peter, S. Clement, or himself: aliae autem primae civitates, quas
vobis conscriptas in quodam Tomo mittimus, a sanctis Apostolis, and a beato
Clemente, sieve a nobis, primates praedicatores acceperunt. And to make manifest
unto us, that he as being Bishop of Rome or whosoever should succeed him in
that See, was to be chief Governor of all Churches, and he gave this
instruction, and direction, generally unto all, and for all Christian people,
and Churches, in all places, and parts of the world, Europe, Asia, or Afrike,
Anacl. Epist. 2. and Epist. 3.
he immediately adds of the Roman Church, that by a singular Prerogative it
did obtain Primacie, and Eminency of power over all Churches, and all
Christian people, not from the Apostles only, but from Christ himself, haec
vero sacro sancta Romana and Apostolica Ecclesia, non ab Apostolis, sed ab ipso
Domino Saluatore nostro Primatum obtinuit, and eminentiam potestatis super
vniuersas Ecclesias, ac totum Christiani populi gregem assecuta est; as he said
to S. Peter thou art Peter or a Rock and upon this Rock will I build my
Church etc. sic vt ipse beato Petro Apostolo dixit: Tu es Petrus and super have
pe^ram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Clem. Epist. 3. Epist. 2.
And a little after, shows again, how the Roman Church was made the chiefest
by authority from heaven: prima ergo Seeds est caelesti beneficio Romanae
Ecclesiae. Then he names the Sea of Alexandria to be the second: where S.
Peter's Disciple S. Mark the Evangelist seated himself by S. Peter's
Authority. Secunda autem Seeds apud Alexandriam, beati Petri nomine, a Marco
eius Discipulo atque Euangelista, consecrata est. And the third at Antioch by
Authority of S. Peter also, who was there resident before he came to Rome, and
placed a Successor there. Tertia autem Seeds apud Antiochiam, eiusdem beati
Petri Apostoli nomine habetur honorabilis: quia illic priusquam Romam veniret,
habitauit. And to leave it without question, that he sent the names of all
other Cities, and places, whether in Britain or else where, in which Primats
were to be, being the Order of the Apostles, that the Bishops of all Nations
might know who was to be Primate or Chief among them, that they might yield
him due honor, he adds there. Reliquas vero vt praediximus in quodam Tomo,
prolixitatem vitantes Epistolae, vobis conscriptas direximus. Inde namque and
beati Apostoli inter se statuerunt, vt Episcopi singularum scirent gentium,
quis inter eos primus esset, quatenus ad eum potior eorum folicitudo
pertineret. How according to this Tome, or book of S. Anacletus, this Island
was divided into five Provinces I have in some sort insinuated before, which
Giraldus Cambrensis relates, and diverse Protestants and others in this manner,
as he says he found it then both in Papal and Imperial Acts or
Constitutions. Iuxta Prouinciarum numerum, quas tempore Gentilitatis habuerat
Insula, quinque Metropoles. Iuxta Girald. Cambr. l. de Sedis Meueuensis
dignitate. Matthew. Parker. l. antiq. Brit. p. 24. l. Pris. defens. Histor.
Britan. p. 73. 74. Io. Leland Indice Brit. ant. v. Britanniae. Beat. Rhenan. l.
de redus German. 3. p. 123. 124. Wolefangus Lazius in Comme^tarijs Reipub.
Romanae p. 172.
Tomum enim Anacleti Episcopi Romani, sicut in Pontificalibus Romanorum gestis,
and Imperialibus continetur, directum Galliarum Episcopis, iuxta statum
gentilium, ante Christi aduentum, Britannia habuit Prouincias numero quinque,
Britanniam primam, Britanniam secundam, Flauiam, Maximiam, Valentiam. Prima
dicta est Occidentalis pars Insulae. Britannia secunda Cantia. Tertia Flauia,
quae and Mertia. Quarta Maximia, idest Eboraca. Quinta Valentia, Albania
seilicet, quae nunc abusiue Scotia dicitur: according to the number of
Provinces which it had in the time of the Pagans the Island of Britain has
five Metropolitan Cities. For according to the Tome of Anacletus Bishop of
Rome, as it is contained in the Decrees of the Popes of Rome and Emperors,
directed to the Bishops of France according to the state of the Gentiles before
the coming of Christ, Britain had five Prouinees, Britain the first, Britain
the second, Flauia, Maximia, Valentia. The first was the west part of the
Island, the second Kent, the third Flauia called also Mertia, The fourth Maximia
that is to say York, The fifth Valentia, Albaniae now corruptly named Scotland.
The Metropolitan City of the first Britain was Caerlegion. The Metropolitan
of the second Dorobernia now Canterbury. In the third London. In the fourth
York. In the fifth Alba taken to be the City now named S. Andrews. Thus far
Giraldus out of S. Anacletus Tome extant in his time as he has witnessed, both
in the Papal, and Imperial Decrees.

3. And this division of this Island into five Metropolitan Sees, according to
S. Anacletus division, was observed by S. Damianus and Fugatianus in King
Eleutherius time, preaching the faith throughout all the Island from Sea to Sea.
Qui fidem Christi per vniuersam Insulam a Mari vsque ad Mare plantauerunt.
which division might then be allowed by these Legates, but that Canterbury and
S. Andrews actually had Primats in them, must have relation to later times;
but this argues their ancient Right from the beginning to have been
Metropolitan Cities, as now they are, and long time have been. The first,
Canterbury, not then made a Metropolitan See, because giving that Title to
London, it could not have so many Cities and Bishops under it, as the division
of S. Anacletus prescribed then twelve in number. And for the other in
Scotland, no means then to erect it to that dignity, the King being still a
Pagan. Sigonius also who expressly handles this matter, testifies that
Britain was divided into those five Provinces before remembered, and was so
before Constantine the Great his time, which observed the division Sigonius l.
4. de Occidentali Imperio p. 89. 90.
made before, paucis mutatis changing few things, among which for Britain
probably was, that he allowed the names Maxima or Maximia for York, and
Valentia for Albania or Scotland; the first so named from Maximinus, Girald.
Cambr. Matthew. Park. Io. Pris. and alij supr.
and the other by Valentinian. Which is proved by Sextus Rufus a Pagan writer,
who writing to the same Valentinian the Emperor, of the Provinces of France
and Britain, mentions the rest of Britain not naming Valentia, unknown
then by that name, as it seems by his recital of our Sext. Rufus Breu. rer.
gestar. Po. To. ad Valentianum Augustum. Anicetus Ep. Decret. to. 1. Council.
Gratian. did. 30. Beatus Rhenanus rerum Germanic. l. 3. p. 123. 124. Pelag. 2.
Ep. Decret. t. 2. Co^c. Nicen. Council. Can. 4. 6. 7. Council. A^elat. 2. Can. 5.
Conc. Antioch. 1. can. 9.
Provinces, omitting it, an Argument that name was but lately given unto it,
and after S. Anacletus time. And what this holy Pope has written before of the
Apostles constituting such Primats, and Metropolitans, and the places, where
they should be, is word by word approved by S. Anicetus about the year 167. so
likewise by S. Lucius, expressly citing S. Clement for the same, as S.
Anacletus does, and he lived in the year 255. The like has Pelagius the
second and others. And to write from the first general and great Counsels,
the first Nicen Council both in the fourth, sixr, and seventh Canon, both in
Greek and Latin, and in all Copies, makes mention of such Primats, and
Metropolitans, and their privileges calling it, antiqua consuetudo: the old
custom: so does the second Council at Arles in France, where our Archbishop
of London was present and subscribed, for the Clergy of this Nation about the
same time. And the first general Council of Antioche sets down, how in
every Province there should be a Metropolitan over the other Bishops, and that
other Bishops might do nothing without his allowance. And says, the old Rule
and Canon of the Fathers was so, and from the beginning: secundum antiquam a
Patribus nostris Regulam constitutam, vt vult, qui ab initio obtinuit Patrum
Canon: as an other translation reads. Therefore this so certain and ancient
a Rule, and Canon so general, so binding, and from the beginning thus
testified by these first general Counsels, must needs be the same, which is
before delivered, from S. Clement, and S. Anacletus in this matter.

4. And to make all sure, by our English Protestants Religion, to pass Book
of Consecration of Archbishops etc. in Praefat. Articl. of Relig. 36. Tho.
Roger. Annalis. Artic. 36.
over their private writers in this case, the general Rule of their Religion
for making unto them such Primats, and Archbishops as they have, assures us,
this was the practice of the Church ever since the Apostles time. So does their
publik Gloss upon the Articles of Religion to which all their Protestant
Bishops, and Ministers have sworn to maintain the doctrine thereof: as they
write: Perrused, and by the lawful Authority of the Church of England,
allowed to be public. And thus Entitled on every leaf, as upon this in
particular: The Catholic doctrine of the Church of England. In which they
expressly write of their Protestant Archbishops, which they call Primats, as
their Catholic Predecessors were: It is agreeable to the word of God and
Practice of the Primative Church, that there should be Archbishops. The
superiority which Archbishops enjoy, and exercise is grounded upon the word
of God. And for a sum of their reasons Couell. Examinat. c. 9. page 105. 106.
herein, thus they print with public privilege: Apostolical ordination,
reason, the custom of all Churches ancient, and well governed, and nature it
self does ordain Archbishops in their Provinces to Rule the Church. Which is
as much in so few words, containing the heads of all chief Arguments for this
matter, as either S. Anacletus or any Catholic writer at this day, does or can
use in this business. And give this greatest warrant they are able to those holy
writings of S. Clement and Anacletus, and in mysteries besides, whether of the
Popes Supremacy over all Christian people and Churches, or any other delivered
in them, being the first witnesses hereof we have after Apostles, whom they
their immediate Scholars and successors allege both for teaching, and
practicing the same. And for these present questions of chiefest importance, as
for others hereafter, they do in express terms thus both allege and allow
these so ancient Testimonies of this holy Apostolic man: Anacletus Episcopos
officio pares, ordine duplici distinxit: eos Primates sieve Patriarchas
appellari voluit, qui in illis ciuitatibus praeessent, in quibus olim primarij
Flamines Robertus Barnes l. de vit. Pontif. Romans in Anaclet. excuss. Lugduni
Batauorum 1615. cum gratia and priuileg. illustrium DD. ordinum generalium.
sederunt* in alijs Metropolitanis vrbibus Episcopos Metropolitanos, vel
Archiepiscopos nominandos esse censuit. Ab ipso Domino Primatum Romanae
Ecclesiae super omnes Ecclesias, vniuersumque Christiani nomine populum
concessum esse asseruit: Pope Anacletus did distinguish Bishops equal in
calling, into two orders: he would have them called Primats or Patriarks, which
ruled in those Cities, in which in old times the primary Flamins did sit: in
other Metropolitan Cities, he did hold, that the Bishops should be named
Metropolitans, or Archbishops. He affirmed that Primacie was granted by our
Lord himself to the Roman Church over all Churches, and all Christian people.
Therefore seeing it is so amply confessed, that what S. Anacletus has
delivered unto us was by the warrant, instruction, and example of S. Peter, and
S. Clement his Predecessor, and diverse times among other holy directions
sufficiently declares, that in his time it principally appertained unto him,
to send Bishops and Priests into this, as to other parts of the world, that
they which would be accounted Sheep, and belonging to the Fold of Christ, may
know whether those Sheephards and Pastors which they follow, are true and
lawful Pastors, or no: we cannot better learn this distinction to know them
by, then of this holy man made Priest and tought by S. Peter himself, and
after succeeding him in that highest Chardge, and dignity, especially seeing
he has more particularly then any others of that Age (to my reading) delivered
this cognizance to Posterity, cheifely to know their chief Pastors, Bishops
by, and of others so plainly, that no man except wilfully can be deceived
therein. First he sets down the Inferior Orders, Inferior Ecclesiastical
Orders to assist at the Mass in the Apostles time.
under holy Preisthood, as Deacons, Subdeacons, and other Ministers, to assist
the Bishop in the holy sacrifice of Mass, making that their principal office,
and duty, as of a Priest to offer the sacrifice of Mass: Episcopus Deo
sacrificans testes secum habeat, and plures quam alius Sacerdos. Sicut enim
maioris honoris gradu fruitur, sic matoris testimonij incremento Indiget. In
sole^nioribus diebus aut Septem, aut quinque, aut Anacletus epist. 1.
tres Diaconos, and Subdiaconos, atque reliquos Ministros secum habeat, qui
sacris induti vestimentis in front and a tergo, and Presbyteri e regione,
dextra laeuaque, contrito cord, and humiliato spiritu, ac prono stent vultu,
custodientes eum a maleuolis hominibus, and consensum eius praebeant
sacrificio. Where expressly naming Bishops, and Priests to offer sacrifice,
and Deacons, Subdeacons, and other Clergy men, besides them, Diaconos,
Subdiaconos, atque reliquos Ministros, and appointing their places and manner
of ministering in the holy sacrifice in sacred vestements, must needs make that
their chiefest office and imploiment. And allthough he does not name in
particular those Orders that were inferior to Subdeacons, but only in a
general name, atque reliquos Ministros, yet thereby expressing, they were
diverse, and their chief chardge, and attendance was, to assiste Bishops and
Priests at Mass, he must needs mean, those ancient Inferior Orders which
still and ever were in the Catholic Church, and which that blessed Father S.
Ignatius, living then and in the first Age, rembreth in his Salutation, naming
after Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons: Readers, Exorcists, Singers, Ianitors,
Laborers, Saluto sanctum Presbyterorum Collegium, saluto S. Ignat. Epist. ad
Antiochenos.
sacros Diaconos. Saluto Hypodiaconos, Lectores, Cantores, Ianitores,
Laborantes, Exorcistas. Where allthough he does not set down the very form
and manner All Priests and Bishops were ordained to say Mass in the Apostles
time, and Priests then consecrated by a sacrificing form, and manner, as the
Roman Church now uses.
of consecrating Priests, yet calling them sacrificing, or massing Priests,
Sacerdos and Episcopus Deo sacrificans: peracta consecratione: and as our
Protestants cite from him: sacerdotem Sacrificatorum. The form of their
consecration must needs consist of those sacrificing words, the Catholic
Church now uses in consecrating Priests, or others equivalent unto them,
otherwise they could not possibly have had such sacrificing, and Massing power
in them, as he testifies they had.

5. Concerning Bishops, he relates and prescribes their manner of
Consecration more at large and plainly: teacing that by the Apostles order all
the Bishops shall assemble or give consent, when a Bishop is to be consecrated,
Rob. Barn. supr. in Anacleto.
and being assembled make diligent examination about the Bishops to be
consecrated, fast, and pray, and lay their hands with the book of the Ghospels
upon them, Bishops consecrated in the Apostles time, as they are now in the
Roman Church.
and anoint their heads, as the Apostles used with holy unction, because all
sanctification comes from the holy Ghost, whose invisible power is given by
holy Chrisme, and so they must celebrate Episcopal Ordination. And thus he was
instructed of S. Peter: vt a beato Petro Principe Apostolorum simus instructi
scribere vobis, sicut petistis non denegauimus. Ordinationes Episcoporum,
authoritate Apostolica, ab Anaclet. Epist. 2.
omnibus, qui in eadem fuerunt Prouincia, Episcopis sunt celebrandae. Qui simul
conuenientes, scrutinium diligenter agant, Ieiuniumque cum omnibus celebrent
precibus, and manus cum sanctis Euangelijs, quae praedicaturi sunt, imponentes,
sacraque unction capita eorum, more Apostolorum vngentes, quia omnis
sanctificatio constat in spiritu sancto, cuius virtus Inuisibilis, sancto
Chrismati est permixta, and hoc ritu solemnem celebrent Ordinationem. And after
shows how by the example of S. Peter, S. James and S. Ihon thus ordering S.
James, first Archbishop of Jerusalem, they left thereby example to Successors,
that three Bishops should thus consecrate every one, that was to be admitted to
that holy Order. And this was the form, and manner of consecrating Bishops
hear in Britain, from the beginning, and before the Canons were made, or
known hear in this business, as we read in our ancient and approved
Antiquities: Mos in Britannia inoleuerat, in consecratione Pontificum,
tantummodo capita eorum S. Asaph in Vita S. Kentegerni. Et M. S. antiq. and
C^pgr. in vita c^^^.
sacri Chrismatis infusione perungere, cum Inuocatione sancti spiritus, and
benedictione, and manus Impositione and this was the ancient use both of the
Britans and Scots, more Britonum and Scotorum, the old custom inoleuerat 1200.
years since, about which time in the consecrating of S. Kentegerne it is so
termed, and testified.

6. Therefore we have sufficient warrant to think that both Britans and Scots
from their first receiving the faith of Christ, observed this holy Rite, and
manner in consecrating Bishops. And without these by the testimony of S.
Anacletus, warranted therein by S. Peter, as he has told us, the grace and
power of the holy Ghost was not given in that Sacrament. And so where it is
wanting, as in our Protestants of England and all other Heretics, there can be
no true and lawful Bishops, no Priests made by such as be not so consecrated,
no Sacraments duly ministered, no word of God truly and orderly preached, even
by the Articles of the English Protestant Religion, disabling in Articles of
Engl. Protest. Religion Articul. 19. 23. 36.
such things every one but lawfully, and rightely consecrated, and called
Clergy men, saying it is no true Church, where these things are wanting. And
that S. Anacletus did send such Bishops, even Metropolitans, and Sacrificing
Massing Priests, Consecrators and Offerers. Sacri corporis Domini tractatores
(as he names Priests,) of the sacred body of our Lord, into diverse Countries,
even Anaclet. Epist. 2.
these parts it is evident, where he writes that S. Peter, S. Clement, and he
himself sent such from the Sea Apostolic. Illi qui in Metropoli a beato Petro
Anaclet. Epist. 3.
Apostolo ordinante Domino, and a praedecessore nostro Sancto Clemente, seu a
nobis S. Anacletus sent diverse Archbishops, Bishops and Priests, consecrated as
before, in these parts.
constituti sunt, non omnes Primates vel Patriarchae esse possunt: sed illae
vrbes quae priscis temporibus Primatum tenuere, Patriarcharu^ aut Primatum
nomine fruantur. And to make it manifest, that he, as well as S. Peter, and S.
Clement, did send Metropolitans also, as well as Patriarckes, and gave
direction where such should be resident, he adds: aliae autem primae
civitates, quas vobis conscriptas in quodam Tomo mittimus, a sanctis Apostolis,
and a beato Clemente, sieve a nobis, Primates Praedicatores acceperunt. Among
which were hear our Metropolitan Cities in Britain. Therefore we thus learn
of S. Anacletus, that either our Metropolitans which S. Peter, and S. Clement
sent hither, or ordained hear, were now living, or else their places, some at
the least, were supplied by his Mission of others to succeed them, for so he
witnesses. And we find in some our neighboring Countries, which have better
preserved their Antiquities then Britain has done, that he performed this in
particular to them. Diverse French Historians among which Richard de Wasseburg
Archdeacon Antiquite^s de la Gaul Belgique per Rich. de Wasseburg. f. 28. 29.
Bouchard Annal. de Bretaigne. Antiquit. Ecclesiae Verdunen. in S. Sanctino.
of the Church of Verdune in Lorraine, where our worthy Countriman S.
Manfuetus was Bishop or Archbishop at Tullum yet and long after living (and
therefore I first name this place as having correponde^ce with our Country) is
witness out of the same Church, that in this time S. Sanctin which before had
been Bishop of Meux, and S. Antonine preached there S. Sanctin was by Pope S.
Anacletus constituted Bishop of that place, and lived and died there in the
year of Christ 118. And S. Saluin his next Successor but one, the third Bishop
there, was hear in Britain, as I shall show heareafter, in King Lucius time.
Which is not improbable also of S. Sanctin, there so near us, so many years,
and so near to S. Mansuetus of this our kingdom, visiting it, as I have
before mentioned.

THE II. CHAPTER.
HOW IN THE PAPACY OF S. EVARISTVS, and Empire of Traiane, the same holy Pope
sent a Legate to our King in Britain, to exhort him to Christian Religion, and
the benefit thereof, Traian commanding that Christians should not be
persecuted.

1. S. Anacletus having gloriously ended his days by Martyrdom, Martin Pol.
in Euarist. Damasus in eodem. vit. S. Euaristi in Breuiar. Romans 26. die Oct.
Matthew. West. an. gratiae 111. Martin. Pol. in Euaristo. an. 112. Plin. l. 10.
Epist. 97. Epist. Traiani ad Plin. apud eu^de^l. 10. Epist. 98. Tertullian.
Apol. Matthew. Westminster. an. 107. Martin. Pol. in Traiano. Mar. Scot. l. 2. aetat.
6. in Traian. Martin. Polon. supr.
in, or about the 111. year of Christ, Traiane still continuing his Empire,
and Coillus King in Britain, S. Euaristus borne of a Jew by Father, called
Judas, in the City of Bethlem, succeeded him, in the Papal dignity, and
continued therein 9. years, and 3. Months. Some say 10. months and 2. days,
Matthew of Westminster gives him 10. years: Martinus says, 13. years. 7.
months 3. days. In his days the Church of Christ enjoyed more quiet, then it
had done in his Predecessors time. For Traiane the persecuting Emperor being
moved with many, and forcible motives, did not only mitigate the Persecution,
so much as he could, but utterly forbad any at all to be used. First upon the
letters of Plinius the second his Lieutenant or Prefect in Bithinia, of the
great number of Christians there, their fervor and zeal in their Religion,
their Innocence and piety of life, and Inoffensiuenes to the Roman Empire, and
laws in other respects, he so far mitigated the former rigor of
Persecution, that he commanded no enquiry should be made to call them into
question. And some be of opinion, that although much Persecution was used in
his time, yet it was by the instigation of his Substituts more then his desire.
Traianus non perse, sed per suos Consiliarios, tertiam Christianis iussit
inferri Persecutionem. And this is further Traiane the Emperor a favorer of
Christians in Britain, and all places.
confirmed by Suidas an ancient Greek writer, who does insinuate so much, and
plainly witnesses, that upon the letters of information from Tiberianus
Prefect in Palestina, how the number of Christians was so great and their
desire of Martyrdom so much, that he was not able to putt all to death, which
voluntary offered them selves to dye for that cause. Whereupon Traiane Suidas
in vitis Caesarum in Traiano.
the Emperor sent express commandment to all his Prefects, in all places
that they should not persecute Christians any longer. Traianus Christianis
aliquid induciarum concessit. Nam qui illis temporibus a Romany Magistratus
redimebant ad demerendos Imperatores, varijs Christianos supplicijs
afficiebant: adeo vt Tiberianus qui primae Palestinorum genti praeerat, ad eum
retulerit se non parem esse Christianis occidendis, qui vltro supplicia
appeterent. Vnde Traianus omnibus Praefectis mandauit ne supplicijs eos
afficerent. Whereupon we have warrant sufficient to hold, that this Mandate of
the Emperor which was so general, that it was to all his Prefects, omnibus
Praefectis, was sent also in to Britain, and Nennius Hist. M. S. in Mults
exemplan. ant.
so far extended itself; which is with advantage confirmed by our ancient
British Historian Nennius, in many Manuscript Exemplars, where he does assure
us, that the Roman E^perour (which was when S. Euaristus was Pope) was only
Traiane, who did not only forbid Persecution in Britain, but sent a solemn
Ambassadge hither, missa Legatione ab Imperatore Romanorum, that they which
would might be baptized and profess Christian Religion.

2. And that S. Euaristus then Pope making religeous use of this lenity of the
Emperor, and his favor to Christians, did write and send to our King hear
Coillus at that time, and Nobles of Britain to receive the Christian Gildas
and Ne^nius writ, how long before K. Lucius, S. Euaristus Pope sent a Legate
to the King of Britain, to persuade him to the Christian faith.
faith, and so there came a double Ambassadge from Rome hither then about that
business, one from the Pope exhorting, and an other from the Emperor permitting
it. Missa Legatione ab Imperatore Romanorum, and Papa Romano Euaristo. Gildas
also (as our Protestants term that Author) in his Manuscript History in two
distincts Libraries in Cambridge gives the same testimony of S. Euaristus
Pope his sending hither at this time, and differs from Nennius only in this,
that whereas Nennius has told us, that the Ambassadge was sent hither by the
Roman Emperor and the Pope of Rome Euaristus, Gildas says it was sent from
the Roman Emperors, and Euaristus Pope of Rome, Missa Legatione ab
Imperatoribus Romanorum, and a Papa Romano Euaristo. Which more confirms this
matter, for howsoever we will take these Gildas hist. in Bibliotheca public.
Cantabrigiae. and in Colleg^o S. Benedicti.
Emperors of the Romans, either for the chief Emperors, as commonly they are
understood, or the chief Rulers under them, in the Roman Empire, as he seems
some time to accept that word, and the word Imperator properly signifying a
Ruler, will bear it in some sense, it cannot have a proper and literal
reference (such as these worthy Authors would use) to the time of King
Lucius, though there was such a sending after in his days, by like men, and
means, which is made plain by their joining of S. Euaristus with them, who
dyed in the time of King Coillus Father to King Lucius, by all accomps, and by
common computation before King Lucius was borne, and by their rekening which
give the soonest life to King Lucius, which is Matthew of Westminster, saying
he was borne in the year of Grace 115. When Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 115.
he was a child, six years old at the most, his Father living and reigning
King, when neither Emperor nor Pope would write or send to him about such
business, and the words of Suidas are plain before the Emperors command in
these affairs was to his Prefects omnibus Praefectis mandauit, such as his
Father King Coillus, and Julius Agricola were then in Britain. And allthough
in the same places where Gildas and Nennius speak of these Messadges from the
Pope Euaristus and Emperor, they write also of King Lucius and his Nobles
conversion, this can be no Argument that they sent to King Lucius, but his
Father Coillus; for allthough they mention both those things near together,
after their breife manner of writing, they must make them two distinct matters
and never say that the messadge was sent to King Lucius, neither could they so
have done, if the time and other circumstances would have given allowance
thereunto: for they which write of King Lucius, his Nobles, and Countrie's
Conversion, do write also how he wrote for, and entreated it by suppliant
letters to Pope Eleutherius. Secondly both these being learned Britans, and the
best writers they had, and knowing as well as any the time of their Conversion
in King Lucius and Pope Eleutherius time could not be so mistaken in such a
cause to miscalculate so many years, for the Copy of Gildas says: 164. annis
post aduentum Christi Lucius Britannicus Rex cum vniuersis Britanniae Regulis
Baptismu^ suscepit that King Gildas supr.
Lucius was baptized with all his Nobles of Britain 164. years after the
coming of Christ: and Nennius says it was three years afte^* Post centum and
sexaginta septem annos post Aduentum Christi, Lucius Britanulcus Rex cum
omnibus Regulis Nennius supr.
totius Britannicae Gentis baptismum suscepit. So that whether we will take the
account of S. Gildas or Nennius, for King Lucius his time of conversion, though
others make a greater difference by 20. years and more; we see, that King
Lucius was converted 44. years after the death of S. Euaristus, and 54. from
his first entrance into the Papacy: 7. Popes, S. Alexander, Sixtus,
Telesphorus, Higinius, Pius, Anicetus and Soter being between him and S.
Eleutherius, in whose time, by all accounts, King Lucius was converted, of
which two such renowned writers could not be ignorant, much less may we judge
without great injury and dishonor to them, and bold rashness in our selves,
that they would, or could err, or be mistaken in so high a degree, the one of
them Nennins the meanest styled by our Catalogists of such men, both Catholics
and Protestants: the most excellent Doctor of the Britans; Principal or
Arch-Abbot Io. Lelandus in Nennio. lo. Pitsaeus de vir Illustrib. aetat. 7. in
Nennio. Ba^chorensi. Balaeus centur. 1. Script. Brit. in eod.
of the most renowned Monastery of Bangor, renowned both for wisdom, and
Religion: Britannorum eximius Doctor, egregius Britannorum Doctor, famosissimi
Monasterij Banchorensis Archiabbas, Banchorensis Collegij Pontifex, sapientia
clarus, and Religione conspicuus. The other S. Gildas the most renowned writer
of the Britans, of whom Histories remember, by all Antiquities, wherein he is
styled for his excellent, and singular wisdom singularly, Gildas sapiens:
Gildas the wise; and so does this Manuscript begin: Incipiunt gesta Britonum a
Gilda Sapiente composita. Here begin the Acts of the Britans, composed by
Gildas Initium Gildae in Bibliotheca public. Cantabrigiae. Volum. 247. tract. 3.
Surnamed the wise. And if the firm ground of such so ancient and worthy
Authors could need Supporters, there is an other Manuscript in the Library of
S. Ben ets College in Cambridge, so ancient and credible that it is bound up
in the same Volume with Nennius, the ancient History of Landaffe and such
others, and by the Protestant Publisher of the Titles of the Manuscripts of
Cambridge, and Oxford styled Gildae Sapientis Historia; the History of Gildas
Thom. James in libris Manuscr. Cantabrig. in Bibl. Collegij S. Bened. Volum.
373. tract. 7.
Surnamed the wise, but by an ancient note in that Copy ascribed to an other
ancient writer Quastus, or much like, which is more likely, for even in this
place there is some difference though not material, between that Copy of
Gildas in the public Library where is written: 164. annis post Aduentum
Christi: and this in S. Benets College there reads: post centum sexaginta
quatuor annos post Aduentum Christi: And this so commended and authorized
Manuscript has the same words with Gildas, and Nennius in this point: missa
Legatione a Papa Romano Euaristo: That S. Euaristus Pope wrote to the King of
Britain, to receive the faith of Christ. And for the difference between S.
Gildas and Nennius about the Emperor, or Emperors of the Romans writing, is
of the same mind with Gildas: missa Legatione ab Imperatorihus Romanorum, and
a Papa Romano Euaristo. That they were the Emperors of the Romans in the
plural number, which thus sent to the then King of Britain.

3. And this confirms not only the exhortation of Pope Euaristus to our King
then to receive the Christian faith, but that besides the command of Traiane
the Emperor, against all Persecution of Christians, sufficiently proved by
Suidas, and Nennius, sent to his Prefects and Lieutenants hear, as in other
places, but that these Roman Lieutenants themselves did signify so much to
King Coillus, that it was Edicted, and commanded of Traiane the Emperor, that
Christians should not be persecuted in Britain. For in that sense, which I
somewhat insinuated before, does S. Gildas understand, Imperatores Romanorum,
in the same work, where speaking of the Tribute which was paid to the
Emperor of Rome, says, it ceased to be paid in that Gildas supr. in Claudio.
manner, and was paid to the Britain Emperors: in tempore Clundij quieuit
dari census Romany a Britannia; sed Britannicis Imperatoribus traditur. Which
so named Emperors of the Romans that were in Britain, must needs be their
Prefects or Lieutenants hear, receiving that Tribute to the use of the great
Emperor and Senate of Rome. And by this clemency of Traiane toward
Christians, with prohibition to persecute them, not only our King which was
ever before a favorer of them, did now receive new spirit, to do all
friendely offices he could to the Christian Britans subject unto him; but the
Roman Prefects, which then were commorant in this kingdom, did either
willingly or forcebly by the Emperors Mandate, permit all Romans and others
which were, or desired to be Christians, quietly and without any trouble, or
molestation to enjoy their Religion; which both for the present and after times
gave great assistance to the happy increase of Christians in this kingdom,
for the converted Romans, and their Apostles, by long conversation, now made
acquainted with the languadge, and manners of the Britans, were become not
only for such as were learned among them, to be fittist men among strangers to
preach unto them, but the very unlearned themselves most desirous all they
could to promote and further so holy a work, became ready and skillful
Interpreters to such Apostolic men, as the Sea of Rome sent of forreyne
Countries into this Nation, to convert it to Christ.

THE III. CHAPTER.
OF THE STATE OF BRITAIN IN ECCLE siasticall Affairs in the time of S.
Alexander Pope, Adrianus Emperor, and Coillus, or Lucius his son King hear.
Their affections to Christian Religion, and of diverse Apostolic Dio in
Traiano. Eutropius lib 8. Spartian, in Adrian. Matthew. Westminster. ann. 117. 118.
119. Marian. aetat. 6. in Traiano and Adriano Martin. Polon. Supput. in eisd.
Martyrol. Romans 28. die October. Bed. Vsuard. and Ado eod. die. Vit. Alexand. 1.
3. die Maij in Breuiar. Romans Dam. in Pontif. in Alex. 1. Method. apud Marian.
in Adrian. Imp. Matt. Westminster. an. 120. 115. 124.
men sent from the Sea of Rome preaching hear.

1. TRAIANE the Emperor being now dead, about the 117. 118. or 119. year of
Christ, the accounts being somewhat and so much different therein, Adrianus
succeeded him in the Empire, wherein he ruled 21. years, or there abouts, and
S. Euaristus being Martyred in the beginning of the Reign of Adrian, S.
Euaristus Papa and Martyr Ecclesiam Dei sub Adriano Imperatore suo sanguine
purpurauit, S. Alexander the first of that name, was his next Successor, and
ruled the Sea Apostolic, 10. years, 5. Months 20. days, by the most
received opinion. The lives of Popes asscribed to S. Damasus, say so many
years, 7. months, 2. days: annos December, menses 7. dies 2. Matthew of
Westminster allows to his Papacy, but 8. years, 5. Months, and 2. days.
Sedit annis 8. mensibus 5. and diebus 2. in the beginning of whose Regiment,
and until the fourth year of Pope Alexander and the sixth of Adrian the
Emperor, in the year of Christ 124. Coillus was King in Britain, then leaving
the Crown to his young son Lucius not above ten years old, as the same
Monk of Westminster, with others recko^. But by others Coillus lived, and
continued King long after. Which seems more probable, even Rem. Higed. l. 4.
c. 16. Catal. Reg. Britannor. ante Hist. Brit. an. 125. 165. Holinsh. Hist. of
Engl. Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 115.
by that which Matthew of Westminster himself with the common opinion
allows, that Coillus was an old man before he begat Lucius, Natus est Coillo
Regi Britonum, vnicus filius, quem vocauit Lucium, qui factus est Patri
gaudium, and exultatio, quasi in senectute, and quasi ab haerede destitutus,
generat eum. Which could not probably be in this year of Christ 115. when he
says Lucius was borne. For by that computation I have made before of the
marriadge of his Grandfather, and Grandmother, after the coming of the Emperor
Claudius hither, at this time when Lucius is supposed to be begotten, Coillus
could not be much above forty years of Age, and so not then an old man, nor
to be said to do any thing in his old Age, much les^e almost out of hope of
a child an heir for Age: in senectute and quasi ab haerede destitutus.

2. This Emperor Adrian is he which in the beginning of his Empire, about the
year of Christ 123. came into Britain, and among other Reformations, and
Provisions he made hear (as Spartianus and others after him testify) caused
the French, which we call, the Picts wall to be made, to separate Spartianus in
Adriano. Stowe Hist. Holinsh. Histor. of Engl. Theater of great But. l. 6.
and divide that part of Britain which was under the Romans, from the Northren
Inhabitants, not subject to them. Hadrianus Britanniam petens, multa correxit,
murumque per Octoginta millia passiuum primus duxit, qui Barbaros Romanosque
diuideret. In his first years he was a Persecutor of Christians, among whom
S. Euaristus the last Pope was by his Authority put to death, and he caused to
take away the memory of Christ, the Statues of Devils to be erected in the
place of our Lords Passion, and by Seuerus Sulpitius and others, is termed the
fourth Persecutor. In loco Dominicae Passionis daemonu^ Simulachro constituit.
Sever. Sulpitius sacrae Hist. l. 2.
Yet soon he corrected his error therein, forbidding Christians to be punished
for their Religion. Quarta sub Hadriano Persecutio numeratur. Quam tamen postea
exerceri prohibuit. Iniustum esse pronuntians, vt quisquam sine crimine reus
constitueretur. And wrote so expressly, commanding, to Minutius Fundanus
Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 3. and in chron. An. 9. Adriani. Hier. de Script. Eccles.
in Quadr. and Aristid. Hier. Epist. 84. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 8. 9. Just. in Apol.
Matthew. Westminster. an. 135. Aelius Lamprid. in Alexandro Seuero.
his Proconsull in Asia, moved there perhaps by the Apology, and Oration of S.
Quadratus unto him for Christians, and the letters of Sereius Granianus his
Legate in behalf of Christians, declaring their Innocence. And S. Aristides
presented the like Apology unto him. And he was so much moved by these me^,
that one of our own Historia^s writes, that he was thereby instructed, and
informed in the Christian Religion. Inperator Hadrianus per Quadratum
Apostolorum Discipulum, and Aristidem Atheniensem virum fide and sapientia
plenum, ac per Serenum Legatum, libris de Christiana Religione compositis
instructus est and eruditus. And Aelius Lampridius confirms as much or more,
when he says that this Emperor Adrian did intend to receive Christ for God,
and caused Temples in all Cities to be erected without Paga^ Idols, which
remained so in Lampridius time, and were called Adrians Churches, which he
intended to the honor of Christ, but was kept back from performing it, by
fear or flattery of the Idolaters, told by their Oracles, that if he proceeded
so, all would become Christians, and their Temples should be left desolate and
forelorne. Christo templum facere voluit Alexander, eumque inter Deos recipere.
Quod and Adrianus cogitasse fertur, qui templa in omnibus ciuitatibus sine
simulachris insserat fieri: quae body idcirco quia non habent Numina, dicuntur
Adriani. Quae ille ad hoc parasse dicebatur: sed prohibitus est ab ijs qui
consule^tes sacra, repererunt omnes Christianos, si id optato euenisset, and
templa reliqua deserenda. And these were motives to very many in these days,
to embrace Christian Religion, both at Rome, where the mind and judgment of
the Emperor himself, a good Prince was so known to be convinced, by the
constancy and Innocence of the Christians and their unanswerable Apologies for
the only truth of their Religion, and evident errors and falsehood of the
Pagans superstitious Rites, now made manifest in all places.

3. So that to extend my pen no further then to the bounds I have appointed
unto it. First for Rome where we had many Britans Christians and other then
resident, we are told by the best allowed Relation of those things, that the
holy Pope S. Alexander did then convert to the faith a great part of the Roman
Nobility. Alexander Romanus, Hadriano Imperatore regens Ecclesiam, magnam
partem Romanae Nobilitatis ad Christum conuertit. Among whom was Hermes the
chief Prefect or Ruler of Rome: Hermes Praefectus vrbis qui per eu^ Vita S.
Alexand. Papae 1. in Breu. Romans 3. die Maij.
(Alexandrum) crediderat. The increase of Christians in the Papacy of this
holy man, was so great, that notwithstanding the favor and love of the
Emperor. unto Christians, the Pagan Flamins and others were so malicious
Martin. Polon. in Alexandro 1.
against him, that they procured him to be put to cruel death, even in the
time of the same Emperor, These proceedings especially of the favor of the
Emperor to the Christians, their piety, constancy, and increase were so much
diuulged in the world, that among others they moved, or more incited our King
of Britain, which then was Coillus or Lucius to send to Pope Alexander, as we
are informed by foreign Histories, and procure of him to have the Christian
faith preached hear in Britain, by such as he should think The King of
Britain Sedeth to Pope Alexander to have Christian Preachers sent hither.
fittest for that designement. Albertus Krantzius a worthy Historian, and one
which has given light to diverse of our Antiquities, relates this matter,
thinking it was King Lucius which now began so timely to show his love, and
liking of Christian Religion. Religionem Christi Lucius quondam Britanniae Rex
ab Alexandro primo eius nominis summo Pontifice, impetrauit in Insula
praedicari. Albert. Kra^tzius Metropol. l. 1. c. 6. Matthew. Westminster. an. 115.
Baron. Annal. to. 2. an. D. 132. Zepherin. Binnius in Vit. Alexandr. to. 1.
Council. Matthew. Westminster. an. 124. 132. Io. Bal. l. de Scri. Brit. Cent. 3. page
143. in Matthew. Florigero. Prot. Publ. of Matthew. West. in Praefat.
Which may well stand with the common opinion of King Lucius his own
conversion, in the time of Pope Eleutherius, especially if we will follow
Matthew of Westminster, and his followers, which have told us before, that King
Lucius was borne in the 115. year of Christ; for by that account he was 18.
years of Age at the Martyrdom of S. Alexander by the common opinion in the
132. year of Christ, and King Coillus had then been dead 7. or 8. years, by
Matthew of Westminster, whom our Protestant Antiquaries style a man
excellently learned in all kind of learning, and in the right Supputation of
years, singular. Vir suo seculo in omni genere bonarum literarum plane
eruditus, and quantum ad Historiam, in recta annorum supputatione singularis.
So we have King Lucius old enough, by this man's testimony, so singular in
Historical Accounts, to write to Pope Alexander of this matter, before his
death, and justify the very words of the recited Antiquity. Or if we will
follow the other opinion, which I have written to be more probable, that King
Coillus lived longer, this hinders nothing, but either Lucius in the life of
his Father might request this of Pope Alexander, and King Coillus thought by
diverse before to have been actually a Christian, to have given allowance unto
it, or he himself being so persuaded in judgment, did so write to that holy
Pope, more moved unto it by the example of the Emperor, and so many Nobles of
Rome, whom he meant to follow, at the least in performing that favor to so
many Britans now already Christians, and more desiring so to be: which his
proceedings were honorable in him, though he himself intended not to be a
Christian, and offensive to none in Authority, whom he needed to fear: And
yet afterward seeing S. Alexander so cruelly King Coillus supposed by some to
be a Christian.
put to death for that Religion, did defer to procure that happiness to
himself, which he did to others. But Harding supposes him to have been a
Christian, and thereupon says: Lucius was the second Christian King of
Britain. Harding Chron. 50. 51. in Coillus. and Lucius.
And it will appear hereafter, that about this time there were diverse
Christian Preachers sent into Britain, and within few years after the death
of Pope Alexander, if not in his life, they converted many hear to the faith
of Christ, among whom I may probably number S. Timothy, Marcellus or
Marcellinus and S. Saluine. Of who me I shall speak more in the certain time
of S. Timothy an Apostolic Priest son to S. Claudia a noble Britain,
probably sent into Britain by Pope Alexander.
King Lucius his Reign.

4. Hear only I say of S. Timothy a Britiane of this Nation, by his holy
Mother S. Claudia Sabinella, who as diverse write preached in this kingdom,
sent hither by the Roman See Apostolic, must needs be sent hither about this
time. For as the ancient Roman Martyrologe with others testify, he was at
Rome and martyred there in the time of Antoninus. Romae Sanctorum Martyrum
Marci and Timothei, qui sub Antonino Imperatore Martyrio coronati sunt. Petrus
Merssaeus Catal. Archiep. Treuer. in S. Marcello 20. Magdeburgen. Cent. 1. l.
2. Martyrolog. Romans die 24. Martij.
Which Antoninus began his Empire in, or about the year of Christ 138. within
6. years of the Martyrdom of S. Alexander Pope. Therefore to allow him but
competent and ordinary time for his coming hither from Rome, where he was borne
and lived, his aboade hear, return to Rome again, and being there before his
Martyrdom, I cannot find any fitter time, or parson, when and by whom he was
sent hither, then Pope Alexander, solicited by our King of Britain to send
such to preach hear, and no S. Marcellus a Britan and Bishop preached hear in
his time.
man more fit then he by his Mother a Britane, and so not unskillful in the
Britans tongue, and their affairs.

5. S. Marcellus also was a noble Britan of this Nation, and had preached
hear, and among others persuaded King Lucius to embrace the faith of Christ,
and departed so soon hence at that time, that he was the third Bishop of
Caspar Bruch Cat. Episc. Tungren. Petr. Merssaeus Catal. Archiep. Treuer.
Anton. Democh. l. 2. contra Calu. Guliel. Eisengr. centen. 2.
Tungers, the first being S. Maternus S. Peter's Disciple and by him sent with
others thither into those parts; the second, Auitus and our blessed Countryman
the next, continuing that See 29. years, and was after Archbishop of Treuers,
where he was martyred, and S. Metropolos succeeded him, as the Annals of
Treuers witness, in the second year of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, long before
the commonly supposed time of King Lucius Conversion. By which account he must
needs be a Priest or Bishop hear in this time, I have now in hand. Annal.
Eccles. Verdun. Rich. de Wasseburg. l. r. f. 32. antiq. de la Gaul Belgique.


6. So I say of S. Saluine the third Bishop of Verdune in Lorayne, termed by
the Annals of that Church, long before King Lucius his death, to have been his
old acquaintance, which must needs be hear in Britain, long time before, and
gives some argument, he was also borne in this kingdom. And no man will
doubt, but King Coillus, which in his younger time, and S. Saluin probably
Bishop hear in this time, and a Britan.
when Christian Religion was more persecuted by the Roman Emperors, their
Augustals, Proconsulars, Lieutenants, and other Prefects in Provinces, then now
it was, and either upon his own piety to that holy profession, or at the
suite and petition of Christians hear, or their friends had, as all the Antiq.
Glast. in Tab. ligneis Guliel. Malm. l. de antiq. Caenob. Glaston* Io. Capgr.
in Catal. in S. Joseph ab Aramathia. Etalij.
Antiquities of Glastenbury, William of Malmesbury, with others witness,
confirmed to the Christian Eremits there, those privileges which his
Accestours King Aruiragus and Marius had granted before, would now in more
easy times be persuaded to write to Pope Alexander, then the most renowned man
in the Christian world, and having chief care and chardge of such things, to
acquaintaine him, how willing he was to give way to such proceedings, and
desire his highest Pastoral help, and assistance therein. Who, having been so
diligent, as before, in such holy works, that he had converted a great part of
the Roman Nobility, would most willingly give his best furtherance unto this
so laudable, and honorable business. For the Martyr. Romans Bed. Ado. and Vsuard.
24. Martij 20. Iunij. 21. Iulij.
better and more easy, and honorable effecting whereof, all the pains and
chardges the happy children of our glorious Countrywoman S. Claudia would
undertake herein, were accounted nothing unto them, hoping to see their Mothers
Country converted to Christ. The eldest son S. Nouatus still continued in
Rome with his noble Patrimony and Religeous offices assisting those which were
employed in this business, soliciting the holy Popes to prosecute with all
endeavor, so worthy a work. S. Timothy one of our Apostolic men, his
Brother came, and parsonally preached hear, and gained the honor to be the
Conuerter of King Lucius, and one of the Apostles of this Nation. Their holy
Sisters, S. Pudentiana, and Praxedes, made their houses, and Patrymonie,
Seminaries and Instruments to harbor and entertain Clergy men, to be
directed hither, among other Acts of eternal memory, and left to the honor of
this their Mothers Country, that among the few ancient Tituli titles, or
Churches (all is one) in Rome, by which the Cardinals have their honor, and
style two of the most ancient, S. Pudentiana and S. Praxedes Onuphrius Panuin.
Veronen. l. de Episc. tit. and Diaconijs Cardinalium. Baron. in annot. Martyr.
Romans die 19. Maij in S. Pudente. Act. Nouat. Pudent. and Praxedis.
came by donation of our holy Britans. And of all in Rome Baronius himself
confessing it, that of S. Pudentiana to be the most old, and ancient.
Vetustissimumque omnium Titulum Pudentis nomine appellatum, qui item and
Pastoris nomine dictus reperitur, hodie vulgo Ecclesia S. Pudentianae
nuncupatur. But of such things I shall speak more hereafter, when I come to
those blessed Sisters, who to increase their glory in heaven by their
sufferings for Christ, and Charity in Harboring, releeuing, and burying his,
both living, and martyred Servants, and Saints in earth, lived longer time then
their happy Brothers did; Of some fruits and effects among others whose
memory is perished, I will entreat hereafter in the next Pope, in whose time,
and not, or not much before, it seems these Apostolic men designed by S.
Alexander Pope for Britain, entered their chardge there, their happy Sender
hastening to his glorious end by Martyrdom.

7. Only in this place because they were appointed by S. Alexander, the What
Religion concerning matters now questioned these Apostolic men did teach in
Britain by Protestants Confession.
better and more surely to be informed with our Protestants consent, what
Religion in matters now questioned they received of that holy Pope and brought
hither, I will call these Protestants themselves to be witnesses and Relatours
thereof. They have with public allowance, and Authority of their chief men,
in such matters both of England and their Flemmish Confederats in Religion, the
one penning and approving, the others approving and publishing it to the world,
given us their best assurance, first that he was a man renowned for preaching
the Gospel, and working miracles, and suffering most greuious punishments for
the holy doctrine he taught; he was Robert. Barn. in Vit. Pont. Romans in
Alexandro 1. Io. Bal. in Romans Pont. Act. l. 1. in eod. Alex. Joan. Martin.
Lydius Minist. p^^uileg. Illustr. DD. Ord^num general.
putt to death by Martyrdom, studio Euangelizandi and Miraculis celebris,
interfectus Martyr obijt. Supplicia grauissima ad mortem vsque passus est. This
ableth him for a glorious Saint, and so disableth him to deceive us in his
doctrine, which these men confess was this: He added in the Sacrifice of Mass
all that is from the words: Pridie quam pateretur: The day before Christ
suffered; unto these words: Hoc est corpus meum: This is my body. Where the
Consecrationis. In this Sacrifice of the Eucharist, he caused wine to be
mingled with water. For the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, he commanded to take
unleavened bread. He commanded water with salt mixed with it, to be hallowed and
kept both in the Church, and in houses to drive away Devils. And in the end of
Mass the people to be sprinkled with holy water. He excommunicated those which
resisted the Popes Legates, he decreed that one sacrificing Priest should say
but one Mass in one day. Speaking of the Eucharist, he says that sins are
blotted out by Sacrifice: Therefore he instituted, that the Passion should be
recited in Mass. He added the reason of such effect of this Sacrifice, saying:
Because in Sacrifices, nothing or none is greater then the body and blood of
Christ: In Missa, pridie quam pateretur, vsque ad haec verba, hoc est Corpus
meum, addidit, ad memoriam Passionis Christi inculcandam. In Eucharistiae
Sacrificio aquam vino admisceri voluit. Ad Eucharistiae oblationem azinium
panem, non fermentatum sumendum esse praecepit. Aquam admixto sale precibus
benedicendam, eamque in Templo, and domi, ad Sathanam propellendum, and ad
peccata tollenda, seruari iussit. Aqua consecrata populum finitis sacris
aspergendum esse iussit, vt (inquit, sanctificarentur, and purifice^tur.
Legatis Apostolicis obsistentes Decreto excommunicauit: Vno die vnam tantum
Missam a singulis sacrificis fieri debere, Decreto sanciuit. Peccata
Sacrificio, de Eucharistia loquens, deleri ait: Ideo Passionem in Missa
recitandam instituit. Rationem effectus huius Sacrificij, hoc est, quod peccata
expiet, adiecit, dicens: Quia Corpore and Sanguine Christi in Sacrificijs nihil
maius est: He also forbad that any Clergy man should be called to a Lay
Tribunal, Clericum ad Plebenum Tribunal pertrahere prohibuit.

THE IV. CHAPTER.
OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL ESTATE OF Britain in the Popedom of S. Sixtus, the
rest of the Empire of Adrianus, and beginning of Antoninus Pius. How many
learned Britains were converted, and converted others, to the faith of Christ
in this time.

1. NEXT after Pope Alexander, succeeded S. Sixtus, the first of that name in
the Papali dignity. Which he enjoyed, by the Damas. Pontif. in Sixto. 1.
Martin. Polon. Supput. in Sixto 1. Matthew. Westminster. an. 128. Marian. Scot. aetat.
6. in Adriano. an 131. Onup. Pano. l. de Po^tif. part. 1. in Sixto. 1.
lives of Popes asscribed to S. Damasus, 10. years three months, and 21.
days. Sedit annos december, menses tres, dies 21. the same, word by word writes
Martinus. Matthew of Westminster detracteth one only day from that account:
sedit in Cathedra Romana annis december, Mensibus 3. diebus 20. Marianus assigns
him twelve years: Sixto 12. annis Romanae Ecclesiae gubernaculis functo.
Onuphrius allows him but 9. years, 9. months, and 30. days, sedit annos 9.
menses nouem, dies 30. By Baronius, and others which begin his Papacy in the
year 132. and give him the shortest Regiment, he continued only until the
year 142. by Marianus beginning his Papal Government a year sooner, then the
others, and allowing it the continuance of twelve years, he entered the 143.
year of Christ, so Marianus from Methodius accompteth. Until the ninth year
of this Pope, Hadrianus continued Emperor, after whom, then succeeded
Antoninus Surnamed Pius, the Godly, who by Baronius reckning was Emperor 22.
years, Martyrol. Romans 6. die Aprilis Baron. Tom. 2. Annal. An. D. 163. Marian.
Scot. aet. 6. l. 2. in Antonino Pio. Flor. Wigorn. Chron. an. 12^. and 145.
seven months, and 26. days. Annis viginti duobus, mensibus Septem, and
diebus viginti sex, Which differs not much from Orosius and Marianus, which
say: viginti, and non plenis tribus annis. And both Marianus and Wigorniensis
say, Eusebius and S. Bid gave 3. months more then 23. years: because it was
the custom of Historia^s, to depute unto the Emperor that year, wherein he
died: and therefore we may say, (say they) that Antoninus Pius did not reign
full 23. years, because he lived not until the end of the year. Mensibus
item tribus secundum Eusebium and Bedam, hoc est vsque ad Calendas Nouembris,
in anno 134. post passionem Domini. Quia autem mos erat Historicorum, vt
Imperatori deputuretur Annus in quo moreretur, velregno deficeret: Ideo dici
potest, quod non plenis viginti tribus annis Antoninus Pius regnauit, quum ^on
vsque in finem anni vixit.

2. In the Time of this Pope reigned hear King in Britain, either Coillus or
Lucius his son, according to the diversity of opinions before remembered. But
seeing all Antiquities, and Antiquaries confess, so many great, and renowned
things, and of such labor, and difficulty to be performed, were effected for
receiving generally Christian Religion, and abandoning the Pagan Superstitions
in this kingdom in the reign of King Lucius, we Harding Chron. c. 50. f. 42.
p. 2. Matthew. Westminster. an. 124.
must not keep the Crown of Britain from King Lucius long after the death of
Pope Sixtus. Harding, who says his Father Coillus reigned but 13. years, will
make him King all this Popes time, which Matthew of Westminster does confirm,
with 4. years addition at the least, to the time of his Reign in the days of
Pope Alexander before: And yet he makes the years of his whole Age but 87.
from which, if we deduct the whole term between the year 124. when the Monk
of Westminster says Lucius began his Reign, until the year 142. or 143.
when it is before agreed S. Sixtus was Martyred, to prove by all accounts King
Lucius regined in some part of the Papacy of S. Sixtus, we make the time of
his Reign, being very young at the death of his Father, old when he was borne
as is before declared, but 59. years, and his Age not great. And Ihon Harding
says, Lucius King of Britain reigned Harding Croni. c. 51. f. 43. Author of
the English Martyrol. die 2. Decembr.
54. years. And they which write he died in the year 84. make him reign but
53. years, if they allow him King in Pope Sixtus time, and yet leave him dead
before Pope Eleutherius, which we may not do. That this holy Pope was for
learning and sanctity of life and well governing the Church of God renowned
these Protestants tell us in these Terms: He was a man powerable in word, and
work, adorned the Church itself with certain holy Acts, always careful
for the flock of Christ. Sixtus Romanus, in Sermon and opere vir potens, Io.
Bal. l. 1. de Act. Romans Pontif. in Sixto. Io. Mart. Lyd. supr.
Ecclesiam ipsam pijs quibusdam factis ornauit, pro Dei grege sollicitus
semper. And what holy deeds, and doctrine they were, with which this so worthy
a man did thus adorn the Church of God, and provided for his flock, thus they
declare unto us: Sixtus Romanus Natione, sacra vase, ne qui praeter sacros
Ministros Robert. Barns. in Vit. Pontif. Romans in Sixto 1. Joan. Martin. Lyd.
and Ordin. general. supr.
attingerent, praecepit. Quod corporale appellant, ex lineo panno fieri iussit.
Episcopum ad Pontificem Romanum accersitum, domum redeuntem, nisi Ecclesiae a
Pontifice datas literas reddiderit, non esse recipiendum ab Ecclesia sanxit. Vt
Sanctus, in Communione Eucharistiae ter caneretur, ordinanit. Missam non nisi
in Altari celebrandam esse constituit. Ab Episcopo ad Romanum Pontificem
appellandi ius dedit Ecclesiasticis Ministris: Sixtus a Roman by Nation,
commanded that none but consecrated Ministers should handle the holy vessels.
He ordained that, which we call the Corporal should be made of linen cloth.
He decreed that a Bishop being sent for to the Pope of Rome and going home,
should not be received of the Church, except be brought letters unto it from
the Pope, he ordained, that Sanctus, should be song thrice in the Communion of
the Eucharist; he constituted that Mass should The Emperor Antoninus Pius his
love to Christians and their Religion.
not be celebrated but on an Altar. He gave power to Ecclesiastical men to
appeal from the Bishop to the Pope of Rome.

3. Antoninus Pius the Emperor of this time, was so frie^dly to Christians,
that as both Catholics and Protestants witness, he wrote into all places, for
Melit. Sarden. Apologia. Melit. apud Eusebius. l. 4. c. 26. 25. Magdeburg. ce^t.
2. c. 3. col. 9. Anton. Pius Ep. ad Populos Asiae pro Christian. apud Eusebius. l.
4. c. 13. and Nicep. l. 3. c. 28. Justin. in fine orat. ad Anton.
them to be free from Persecution. Testatur Melito, referente Euseb^o,
Antoninum Pium generaliter ad omnes civitates pro Christianis scripsisse. And
in his Epistle to the people of Asia, recited at lardge by Eusebius,
Nicephorus, and other writers, he plainly affirms, that the Christians had
been unjustly persecuted, for worshipping the one true God: mortem ob
singularis and very Dei cultum oppetere. And adds further, that their
Persecutors did not observe the worship of God, and therefore did envy the
Christians which worshipped him, and prosecuted them to death. And that diverse
Rulers of Provinces had written to his Father before against Christians, to
whom he wrote again, that they should not troble such men, except they could
be proved to do any thing against the Roman Empire. And many having written to
him also of such men, to whom he answered according to his Fathers sentence,
whom he meant to follow: If any man having an Action against a Christian,
accuses him only as such a man, the Christian accused shall be absolved,
allthough it is manifest he be such an one: and his Accuser shall be punished
in Judgment. And that Christians were far moore dutiful and faithful to God
then their Persecutors were: Long illi sunt quam vos erga Deum liberiores
atque fidentiores. Vos cultum Dei non tenetis. Quocirca and illum colentibus
aemulatione inuidetis, and ad mortem vsque persequimini. De rebus eiusmodi and
alij quidam prouinciarum Rectores diuinissimo patri meo scripserunt. Quibus
ille rescripsit, nihil molestiae faciendum esse talibus viris, nisi quid
aduersus Imporium Romanum moliti esse deprehenderentur. Quin and ad me multi de
eis literas deder^^t, quibus de patris mei, quem imitandum mihi esse duxi,
sententia respondi: Si quis actionem aduersus quempiam eiusmodi habens, deferat
illum duntaxat, vt huiusmodi hominem: Delatus quidem a crimine absoluatur;
etiamsi talis esse appareat: Ipse autem Delator Iudicio paenas pendat. And
allthough diverse years of this Emperor his Reign had passed before he
established such public Order for the quiet of Christians, and much
Persecution was in the beginning of his time, yet it cannot be thought to have
had warrant, and Original from him. And it was almost in the beginning of his
Empire, the third year thereof, as some write, that S. Iustine wrote, Matthew.
Westminster. an. gratiae 141. an. Anton. Pij 3.
and delivered unto him, his Apology for Christians, and made him friendly
unto them: Anno gratiae 141. Justinius Philosophus librum de Christiana
Religione compositum Antonino tradidit, eumque benignum erga Christianos fecit.
And he was surnamed Pius: Godly, by some judgments, for his piety toward
Christians, as well as for other respects: Antoninus Pius gener Adriani erat,
erga Mart. Polon. in Antonino Pio.
Christianos Pius. And he himself before is witness, that he proposed his
adopting or Father in law Adrian so friendly to Christians to be imitated by
him herein. Quem imitandum mihi esse duxi. And he therefore being so fully
Antoninus Pius Epist. supr.
persuaded that Christians did worship God truly, and better then any Pagans
their Persecutours, these must needs be motives to our King of Britain Motives
to the King of Britain to be a Christian.
ever a favorer of Christians, now much more to defend and maintain that
Religion, when in so doing he might also maintain his honor with God, with
the Emperor, and thereby obtain rest and quietness to his conscience on earth,
and eternal peace and happiness to his soul in heaven.

4. And both for the continuance and increase of Christians hear in Britain,
all this time from Pope Alexander, of whom the King of Britain procured Godwin
Conu. of Brit. page 18. Caius l. 1. ant. q. Cantab. Will. Harris. descr. of
Brit. Holinsh. Hist. of England.
Preachers to be sent hither, we are assured not only by Catholics but diverse
Protestant writers. And sure if there had not been Christians hear to exhort
our King to Christian Religion, and by him to be favored therein, he could
neither have been persuaded by them to Christianity, or been a friend to them
for their quiet and liberty in professing thereof. And yet besides the Court
and Residence of our King, we see even by that little light of Many Britans
received the faith of Christ in this time.
our Antiquities, that in sundry and far separate places, there were many
which both preached the faith to others, and which at such men's preaching
embraced it. Among others we read: in peruetustis Annalibus Burtonensibus sic
lego. Anno Domini 141. hic baptizati sunt nouem ex Doctoribus and scholaribus
Io. Caius l. 1. ant. Ca^tab. Accad. p. 95.
Cantabrigiae: I read in the very old Annals of Burton thus: in the year of
our Lord an hundred forty one hear were baptized nine of the Doctors or
Teachers and Scholars of Cambridge. What great distance and separation of
space Many Scholars of Cambridge now converted, and converting others.
there is between Burton in Staffordshire, where these Annals were written,
and kept which testify so many Scholars of Cambridge the chief Town of that
Shire, were baptized there at Burton, hic baptizati sunt, and the University
of Cambridge, is not unknown to English Readers. And yet we are sure if they
came so far to be baptized, they had been catechized, and instructed in the
faith of Christ, there before, and so the faith of Christ had then been taught
at Cambridge, and not by unlearned Preachers to convince so many learned men,
to be so devout to travail so far, to receive holy Baptism. Neither can
any man imagine, but the British inahbitants between these two so distant
places, were also preached unto, by those holy men which preached in them both,
and passed from the one to the other. Many others there be Stowe Histor.
Theater of great Brit l. 6. Willam. Harris descript. of Britain. Harris
Theatr. l. 2. Annal^^ Burton. in Co^^^* S. Benedict. in Bibliot. ib. vol. 38.
tract. 2.
Catholics and Protestants, which Justify this Antiquity, and the Antiquity
itself is yet extant in the College of S. Benet in Cambridge: where the very
same words be, without any difference at all: Anno 141. hic baptizati sunt
nouem ex Doctoribus and Scholaribus Cantabrigiae. And there written that the
Book belonged to the Abbey of Burton. Qui fuit de Communitate Burtoniae.

5. The Protestant Authors of the Theater of great Britain with others, do
sufficiently approve, what I have written, either of the continuance of the
faith of Christ in Britain in this time in general, as also of this Antiquity
in particular, although they add some exceptions, which rather are their own
mistakings, then worthy the name of exceptions. First they truly testify in
this manner: As we have searched the first foundation of our faith, so neither
Theater of great Brit. l. 6. c. 9.
want we testimonies concerning the continuance of the same in this Land, unto
following Posterities: allthough the injury of time and war have consumed
many Records. For the Britans that were daily strengthened in their received
faith, by the doctrine of many learned and Godly men, left not their first
love, with the Church of Apoc. 2. 4. Zachar. 8. 23. Radulph. Niger. Eusebius. l.
4. c. 9. etc. 13. and l. 5. c. 5. Bal. Vit. l. 1.
Ephesus, but rather took hold of the skirts: As the Prophet speaks, until
the Tortures of Martyrdom cut them of by death: and those Fathers even from
the Disciples themselves held a Succession in doctrine (not withstanding some
repugnance was made by the Pagans) and preached the Gospel with good
success, even till the same at lenght went forth with a bolder countenance, by
the favorable Edicts of The English Protestant Theater writers much over seem
in diverse things in this time.
Adrian, Antoninus Pius, and Marcus Aurelius Emperors of Rome, as Eusebius
has noted, and in Britain was established by the Authority of Lucius their
King. Of the Teachers of those times, Bal^ from some other has these verses.
Sic vt erat celelebris etc. Which thus they English.

As were the Britans famous for their zeal,
To Gentile Gods, whiles such they did adore:
So, when the heavens to earth did truth reveal,
Blessed was that Land, with truth, and learnings store.
Whence British Plains and Cambreas desert ground,
And Cornwals Craggs with glorious Saints abound.
But this Authority proves not what they affirmed, for the ancient Author
speaks not of learned Teachers of that time, nor learning store, as these men
translate him, or that they dwelt in the plain grounds of Britain: But only
of Eremits, living in the out Islands, in Deserts, in walls, and Coats in
Cornwayle, which were men far vnfite to preach in Towns and Assemblies.

Britannica tellus patribus fuit inclita Sanctis:
Qui Neptunicolum Campos and Cambrica rura,
Cornieasque Casas loca desolata colebant.
where he confineth them to Deserts, and desolate places: where no people were
to be preached unto: and rather has reference to the after persecuting times
of Dioclesian when Christians hear as in other places were forced to those
courses. Yet thus we see the consent of Protestants is, that in this time we
now speak of, and from the beginning of Christianity hear, Britain never
wanted Preachers of the true faith, this they plainly affirm, though they
have failed us to prove how, and by whom it was preached, which I have
performed for them and others.

6. Such like is that which they speak of this time: It is reported also, that
Theater of great Brit. l. 6. sup.
Patricke the Irish Apostle, and canonized Saint long before the Reign of King
Lucius, preached the Gospel in many places of Wales: as also that Ninianus
Bernicius of the Race of the British Princes, converted the Picts to the
Religion of Christ. I marvel much that a whole learned Senate, as they term
themselves, of Protestant Antiquaries would go about to blind their Readers
eyes, with such palpable, foggy, and filthy mists of Lies, seeing no Author,
no Antiquity, Manuscript or other so reports of S. Patrike, the Irish
Apostle, and of S. Ninian, Apostle of the Picts, both of them being sent hither
by the Popes of Rome by all Antiquaries and Antiquities above 250. years after
these days, whereof we now entreat. Concerning the Antiquity of the Annals
which affirm so many Scholars of Cambridge, as before, to have been baptized
in this time, thus they write: That there were Christians in Britain at these
times Theater of great Brit. l. 6. c. 9.. 9. Holinshed descr. of Brit. c. 9.
I make no question, though some exceptions may be taken against the Monk of
Burton, the Reporter thereof, who says, in the 141. year and Reign of
Hadrian, nine Masters of Grantcester were baptized themselves, and preached to
others the Gospel in Britain, howsoever he fails in the Emperors name,
which year was the second of Antoninus Pius, his Successor, and ascribes to
these men School Degrees, altogether unknown for nine hundred years after,
yet these do not hinder the truth of the thing, though that Monk was none of
the best Historians. Thus they allow the testimony, and yet would disgrace
the Author and witness, although he seems to be the only ancient
Antiquarie, which is now left unto us, that has preserved this so memorable a
matter. But these men that had not seen these Annals, might have spared to
have branded the Author, to be none of the best Historians, for those
exceptions which they take to this Relation, are their own devises, and not
his assertions, he never ascribes School Degrees to those Cambridge men, but
says, as I have recited, that nine of the Doctors or Teachers, and Scholars
of Cambridge were baptized in that year. Neither does that Protestant, from
which they cite this Antiquity, mistaking Hollinshed for William Harrison
Author of that Description of Britain, give them School Degrees, but only
calls them nine Masters of Gra^tcester, taking the name Masters for
Teachers or Professors of Arts there learned, and the Latin word Doctores
has that signification, so every Master or Teacher is a Doctor in Latin;
Christ is so called in Scripturs the Doctor of Justice; so is S. Paul the
Doctor of the Gentiles, because principally he taught them; so S. Ambrose,
Augustine, Hierome, Gregory, Basile, Chrysostom, the two Greek Gregory's
Naziancen and Nissen are commonly called Doctors of the Latin and Greek
Church; So of the two Ambassadors King Lucius sent to Rome, Eluan and Medwine,
the Pope by all Antiquaries Catholics and Protestants made the one S. Eluan a
Bishop, and the other S. Medwine a Doctor, Meduuinum in Doctorem, allowing and
authorizing him to teach and preach. And in this sense do these men themselves
before take the word Doctors or Masters for Preachers of the Gospel. And
their supposed mistaking of the Emperor his name then, Hadrian for Antoninus
Pius is as unworthy an exception, for diverse learned Historians write, that
Hadrian was alive in that year 141. of Christ, and after, S. Marianus so
plainly affirms: Adrianus regnauit vsque ad Calendas Augusti in anno 111.
post Marian. Scot. aetat. 6. in Adriano Florent. Wigot. in Chronic. an. 145.
146.
Passionem. Our learned Countryman and Antiquarie Florentius Wigorniensis
continues his Empire until the year of Christ 145. four years longer, such
is the account of others. And they which will have him dead before this year
make it no longer distance then between the first day of August in the year
140. and the first day of January 141. 5. Months. And their own Protestant
Author William Harrison mistaken by them does both Justify that Antiquity,
and never contradicting that opinion, seems to be of the fame mind that
Hadrian was then Emperor. Thus he writes: I find in Will. Harrison
Description of Brit. p. 23.
the Chronicles of Burton under the year of grace 141. And time of Adrian the
Emperor that nine Scholars of Grantha, or Granta (now Cambridge) were
baptized in Britain, and became Preachers of the Gospel there, but whether
Taurinus Bishop over the Congregation of York (who as Vincentius says) was
executed about this time, were one of them or not, as yet I do not certainly
find. Lib. 10. c. 17.


7. By which it is evident that this Protestant Antiquarie with others did
certainly find, as I have proved, that nine Scholars of Cambridge were King
Lucius as other Kings of Britain taught the Christian faith by Cambridge men.
at this time converted to the faith of Christ, and baptized: and by these men
became Preachers of the Gospel. Which is further confirmed by the public
Charter of Privileges and Immunities of King Arthur to that renowned ancient
Town, School or University of Cambridge: Where among other memorable things
he declares, that his Christian Predecessors Kings of Diploma. Arthuri Regis
Dat. an. D. 531. die 7. April. in Ciuitate London. apud Caium l. 1. de
Antiquit. Cantab. Accadem. and in Arce. Londin. inter. Antiquit. Concess. vt
idem supr. p. 72.
Britain had been instructed there, in learning and Religion: Vbi hactenus
splendorem scientiae, and lumen doctrinae, gratia fauente Conditoris, m^i
Praedecessores acceperunt: And in particular speaking there of King Lucius,
what Immunities he granted to that University testifies further, that this
our first Christian King did receive the faith of Christ by the preaching of
the learned Christian Scholars of Cambridge: Sicut gloriosus Rex Britanniae
Lucius decreuit, Christianitatem amplectens praedicatione Doctorum
Cantabrigiae. This Charter was dated at London in the year of Christ 531. the
seventh day of April. Dat. Anno ab Incarnatione Domini 531. septimo die
Aprilis, in Ciuitate London. The Charter of King Cadwalladar to Almericus
Rector of the Scholars of Cambridge, Almerico Rectori Scholarum Cantabrigiae,
gives not unlike testimony, when it witnesses Charta Regis Cadwalladri:
Rect. Schol: Cantabrig. in Antiq Cantabr. and Io. Caium l. 1. de Antiq. Cant.
Accadem. p. 92. 93. 94.
that his Praedecessours Kings of Britain, Lucius, Asclepiodorus, Constantine
Vhother-Pendragon, Arthur, and his Father Ceadwall Kings of Britain did honor
and reverence the Inhabitants of the City of Cambridge for their learning, and
sanctity, and because the chiefest Philosophers and lovers of wisdom in all
Europe, had gone from that City. Quemadmodum Antecessores mei Rectoribus
eiusdem Ciuitatis concesserunt, and statuendo confirmauerunt, videlicet Lucius,
Asclepiodorus, Constantinus, Wther-Pendrago^, Arthurus, and Pater meus
Ceadwallus, Britanniae Patris altissimi gratia Reges, qui Ciuitatis
Cantabrigiae habibatores, causa doctrinae and Cambridge renowned for learning
long before this time.
sanctitatis vitae honorantes, in reuerentia habuerunt and amore, cum ex illa
Ciuitate praecipue praecesserunt Philosophantes and scientiae amatores totius
Europae. And before declares how Cambridge the most renowned Mother of
learning, was builded and founded by Cantaber a Spaniard many hundred years
before Christ, and walled about by Grantinus. Sintque Doctores and Scholares
illius celeberrimae matris Philosophiae Ciuitatis Cantabrigiae a Cantabro
aedificatae, necnon a Grantino Comite hono rabiliter muratae, ab omni calumnia,
inquietatione and scandalo liberi. Which diverse Oxford men and Antiquaries
though no friends to the glory of Cambridge yield unto, both Catholics and
Protestants.

8. Therefore if Cambridge was so renowned for learning and Christian Io. Ross.
Histor. Wil^iam Harris. descript. of Brit. c. 3. p. 148. Nich. Cantilupus.
Hist. Cantab. Io. Bal. in Praefat. l. de Script. Brit. Harding Cro^cle c. 25.
f. 22. Merlin. apud eund. ib. Io. Ross. Hist. in Sta^ford. Stow hist. in
Bladud. Io. Caius Hist. Cantabr. Accad. p. 20. Will. Harrison Descript. of
Brit. c. 3. page 148. Hector Boeth. Hist. Scot. Plutatchus Dial. Holinsh.
descrip. of Irland. p. 48. Velleius Patercul. Hist. Romans l. 1. Pontic. Virun.
l. 1. Hist. Brit. Io. Bal. supr. in Praef.
Sanctirie and Religion in the time of King Lucius, we may boldly affirm, that
nine, and many times nine Scholars there were Christians in this time, and
these nine were not the first that were converted there. And as I have spoaken
of Cambridge, so we may more then probably hold of our other Schools, or
Universities in this our Britain then, namely Stamford founded by King Bladud
and furnished with Philosophers of Athens by him, and so continued a place of
learning until the coming of S. Augustine hither, when it was by the Pope of
Rome interdicted for Heresies. Glamorgan before the first Arrival of Julius
Caesar hear. Eridon or Criclade, and perhaps others. For besides our own
Writers testifying these things, Plutarch and other Groecians are witnesses,
that the learned Groecia^s had much resort into these parts, even this our
Britain before the birth of Christ. And Velleius Paterculus is witness, that
the learned Groecians dispersed themselves into many Countries, and Cities to
increase learning. Corpora gentis illius separata sunt in alias Civitates. And
Vitrunnius a Roman Writer plainly with the truth confesses, that our Britain
before Christ's time ever loved learning, and had their renowned men both for
Greek and Latin learning, vnicum est in tot and tantis turbinibus verum
semper litteras amauit, and vtraque lingua saepe plurima floruerunt magni
vates, sicut Plenidius Oronius. And all Histories foreign and domestical,
Christian and Pagan, Catholic and Protestant are full, what a learned Sect,
that of the Druids was, how they flourished in France, and of the learning of
that Nation, contending with Greece itself for prioritie and preeminencie
therein, and yet, that the principal and chiefest of that profession, were
hear in Britain, therefore seeing they were with all mankind borne in
ignorance, not learned but to learn, and God did not, does not, will not
miraculously Many Learned me^ of Britain in other Schools besides Cambridge
now converted.
infuse knowledge to such men his Enemies, we must needs allow them
Accademies, Shooles, learning, and teaching places to be first instructed, and
then instruct others in so many Arts and sciences, for whose knowledge they are
so much by all Antiquaries commended.

9. Then to deny those which I have recompted to have been their Schools and
teaching places testified for such by so great Authority, and seek or feign
others without any allowance to supply that use, and office, would argue us of
great willfulnes in simplicity, or error. And for performing such a business
as the general Conversion of this Kingdom, so lardge, and ample, to furnish
and enjoy so many Places and Dignities of Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Clergy with learned and worthy men, will shortly and now at hand require us
to find, we must needs say, that very many both in Cambridge, as also in all
Schools in Britain were converted to the faith of Christ, catechized long
before they were baptized, and baptized no short time and enabled to instruct,
and teach others, before they were thought worthy of holy Orders, Preistly and
Episcopal calling, and dignity, to which by the law of the Gospel of
Christ, Neophits, new Conuertits, and young Scholars were not to be admitted;
and not without urgent cause, when such men could not possibly perform such
duties, and difficulties, as in such time and circumstances are expected, and
of necessity must be done by Clergy men. And by this Conversion of so many
learned men of Cambridge, then the principal School, and place of learning at
one time and place, and proportionably of other such places and learned persons
therein, being founded and dedicated for the Instruction of others, from the
highest the King himself, to the lowest, and meanest subject, we may easily
learn, what a great means, motive, and disposition it was to King Lucius,
his Nobles, and all others to consider, and diligently discourse, and dispute
with themselves and others, how unworthy that profession of their Pagan
Religion was, which so many chief men for Judgment in such things, and
ordained to be their Doctors and Teachers had now not without some temporal
losses, and Indignities utterly and publicly renownced, and forsaken; and how
holy and honorable that Christian Religion was, which with many labors and
difficulties they had embraced. Which seems to have been a singular help, and
furtherance to so easy, timely, and general a Conversion of this kingdom to
Christ, little or no impediment now remaining, but temporal disgrace, and
losses in departing from their so long received and prosessed Rites, and
Ceremonies, which had been lately qualified, even by the commanding letters,
and Edicts, of some Emperors themselves, in such respects.

THE V. CHAPTER.
OF THE GREAT INCREASE OF CHRIstians in Britain in the Papacy of S.
Telesphorus and S. Higinius, and how King Lucius himself did now either
actually receive and privately profess the Christian Religion, or made promise
thereof.

1. ANTONIUS Pius still possessing the Empire, and King Lucius the Crown of
Britain as diverse hold, S. Sixtus gloriously ending his life by Martyrdom in
the beginning of this Emperors time: sub Antonino Pio, vt sibi Christum Lucri
faceret, libenter mortem sustinuit temporalem: S. Telesphorus Martyrol. Romans 6.
die Aprilis. Damas. Pontif. in Telesphoro. Matthew. Westminster. an. 139. Martin.
Polon. in Telesphor. Onuphr. in cod. Rob. Barns in Vit. Pontif. Romans in
Telesphoro. Io. Bal. l. 1. de Act. Romans Pontif. in Telesphoro. Rob. Barns in
Vit. Telesphori.
succeeded him in the Apostolic Roman See. Which he continued above 11.
years, in all opinions. Only one English Protestant much forgetting himself,
or mistake^ by his Printer gives him but 2. years. 3. months, and 22.
days. This Pope was, as our English Protestants inform us, eruditione ac
pietate vir insignis, tam ore quam sanguine fidelis Jesus Christi Testis fuit. A
man renowned for learning and piety, a faithful witness of Jesus Christ as
well with word, as blood. His doctrine they deliver unto us in this manner:
Septem septimanas ante Pascha Ieiunium obseruandu^ a Clericis instituit. Tres
Missas celebrandas in die Natalitio Christi sanciuit, alijs diebus ante horam
diei tertiam Missam celebrari prohibuit. Gloria in excelsis Deo etc. in Missa
canendum praecepit: he Instituted seven weeks fast (Lent) before Easter to be
observed of Clergy men. He decreed that Priests should celebrate three Masses
on the day of the Nativity of Christ: upon other days he forbad Mass to be
celebrated before the third hour of the day. He commanded that Gloria in
excelsis Deo: glory to God one high: (the song of the Angels at the birth of
Christ) should be song at Mass. The piety of Pope Telesphorus, and his
Religion by Protestant witnesses in matters now controuersed by them.


2. And hear I will join S. Higinius immediate Successor to S. Telesphorus,
both in respect he continued but a short time in that highest spiritual
dignity, little above 4. years, but he was exalted to a more permanent,
eternal, and far greater honor in heaven by Martyrdom. For his holy life
and conversation thus our Protestants recommend him: officia boni Pastoris, and
Ecclesiastici Operatoris in Mess Domini persecit: ac morte non incruenta, sub
mundi Tirannis Bal. lib. 1. de Vit. Romans Pontif. in Higinio. Rob. Barns and
alij Protestant. supr. in Vit. Po^t. Romans in Higinio.
vitae finem accepit: he performed the offices of a good Pastor, and
Ecclesiastical workman in the harvest of our Lord, for which he ended his
life by shedding his blood under the Tirants of the world. That which they
breifely set down for his Religion and practice therein, is this: he commanded
to dedicate Churches with solemn Ceremony, and Sacrifice. That Churches
should neither be diminished, nor increased without the consent of the
Metropolitan. He forbad the timber, Tiles, The Religion of Pope Higinius by
English Protestants testimony in Articles n^w questioned by them.
and other matter of Churches, to be converted to profane uses. He appointed
that in Baptism a Godfather, or Godmother should be had. And that the
Metropolitan should not convict or condemn any man without the consent of the
Bishops of his Province: and if he did otherwise he pronounced the sentence to
be void: Templa dedicare cum solemni ceremonia and Sacrificio iussit. Item
Templa nec minuenda, nec augenda esse, sine Metropolitani consensu. Trabes,
tegulas, aliamue templorum materiam in prophanos vsus vertere vetuit. Vnum vt
vocant, Compatrem, vel virum, vel faeminam in Baptismo adhiberi voluit. Ne
Metropolitanis aliquem vel reum ageret, vel damnaret, sine suae Prouinciae
Episcoporum suffragio: quod si fecerit secus latam sententiam irritam
pronuntiauit. Clerum in ordinem redegit, and gradus distribuit: he brought the
Clergy into order, and distributed degrees. Thus we are acquainted by these
Protestants, what the life and doctrine was of these Popes: and cannot doubt
but they which were so holy men by these witnesses, and taught and professed
the true Religion and suffered Martyrdom for professing and teaching thereof,
were far from professing or teaching error, otherwise they could not have
been good Pastors and work men in the harvest of our Lord, and faithful
witnesses of Jesus Christ, but the contrary.

3. What was the increase of Christ's Church and Servants hear in Britain The
great increase of Christians, in Britain in the time of these Popes.
in their time, we may easily conjecture by that which has been said before
of so many learned men converted hear to the faith in the very later end of
their immediate Predecessor, which in all Judgments must needs be much more
verified of the days of these Popes: for the chief learned men and of their
principal School for learning, being thus converted to Christ, and as we have
been told before, became Preachers of the Gospel hear in Britain, Will.
Harris. sup. in Descri. of Brit.
we cannot but assuer our selves of great and plentiful fruit of their
labors, being manifest by the general Conversion of the whole Kingdom, all
Degrees, and Estates, now at hand, a great disposion thereof was made, and
diverse of the Druyds, Nobles, and others were now converted, or else the
general Conversion of all with so great a change in all persons, and places
hear, as our Histories mention, and will hereafter appear, could not have so
soon ensued: And this was made so evident then, that one of these holy Pope
Higinius careful of the general Conversion of Britain, and manner thereof.
Popes Higinius or Eugenius as some call him, began to take order how to settle
and perfect our general Conversion at hand. Which Ihon Harding in his ancient
Chronicle does manifestly declare, though not citing his Authors, when
recounting how the Archflaming Seats, were turned to Archbishopriks, and those
of Flamins 28. in number, into so many Bishopriks, he presently thus adds:
all these works Eugeny confirmed. Then if Pope Eugenius or Harding. Chron. f.
43. c. 51.
Higinius confirmed and allowed these affairs, and proceedings, we must needs
yield, they were in a great forwardnes in this his time. No man can reasonably
say, that the name Eugeny is mistaken for Eleutherius, for there is no
proportion between those two names, for any Author, Scribe, or Printer to
commit so great an error, especially no man correcting it, as an escape in
writing, and to assure us heareof, the same Author makes mention in Hard.
supr.
the same Page both of Eleutherius, calling him by our English phrase
Eleuthery, and Higinius by the same manner of our languadge naming him, as
before Eugeny which confirmed these things. And it is no marvel, or any
singular thing, but usual and the ordinary common course for Popes to give
such order before hand, how things shall be settled, when there is such hope of
happy proceedings, and Apostolic men taking the chardge in hand, as hear it
was at this time, if God shall so cooperate with their labors, and to proceed
otherwise, is to work without warrant and Authority. So S. Paul writes to S.
Titus, that he had left him in Crete to constitute Bishops or Priests in every
City; yet it would be great and unwarranted boldness to say, that S. Titus
profited there so much in his time, to make and ordain so many Priests or
Epist. Pauli ad Tit. cap. 1.
Bishops there, for we are told by Homer, and Strabo living about S. Paul's
time, and others that there were an hundred Cities in Crete, and there upon it
was (...) the I Will of an hundred Cities in Homers time: Poeta aetate sua Cretam
Strabo Geograp. l. 10. p. 338. Homet. Odyff. 3.
(...); id est centum vrbibus instructam esse inquit. So when S. Peter sent any
Apostolic man, or men, into any Nation, he gave him direction and warrant
where to constitute Bishops, so did the other Apostles, so did the Popes of
Rome in this last Age in the Conversion of America, and other Countries; and
for this our Britain, I have proved before that S. Anacletus even by the order
of the Apostles gave direction, and made a little book setting down therein,
where Pirmats and others were to be resident, and this, when there was less
hope of our Britans Conversion, then now, and no such success therein.

4. Thus it was also in the time of S. Augustine when he was sent hither by S.
Gregory to the Saxons. He sent him his Archiepispopall Pall to be Archbishop of
London, yet he seated himself after by warrant at Canterbury, and gave him
power to send an Archbishop to York, if that Country should receive Greg.
Epist. ad August. Bed. Eccles. Hist. Gent. Angl. l. 1. c. 29.
the Christian faith, and he would send him an Archiepispopall Pall, and that
See should have Bishops under it, and be a Metropolitan See: Ad Eboracum vero
ciuitatem te volumus Episcopum mittere quem ipse iudicaueris ordinare: ita du
ntaxat, vt si eadem ciuitas cum finitimis locis verbum Dei receperit ipse
quoque duodecim Episcopos ordinet, and Metropolitani honor perfruatur. Quia ei
quoque, si vita comes fuerit, Pallium tribuere, Domino fauente, disponimus. And
yet it is certain, that S. Augustine in his time never sent Archbishop to
York, neither did he make above two Bishops in his own Province, S. Mellitus
at London, and S. Iustus at Rochester. Neither did S. Gregory live to send a
Pall to any Archbishop of York, or see any there. Neither ever had that See
since the Saxons time twelve, or half twelve Bishops under it. Neither did S.
Augustine who received this warrant for all the Saxons, preuaild so far, nor
all that came with him, or after him from Rome to convert half the English
Nation, but far the greater part of them was converted by holy Bishops,
Priests, and Religious men, which were of our ancient Hierarchiall British
succession, and order hear. And allthough I do not find it expressly
affirmed in any Antiquarie but Harding that S. Higinius now Pope did so
particularly, give assistance and direction in this business of our Britains
Conversion, yet many very ancient and renowned Writers give such testimony
herein, that we must needs grant that to be most true, which Harding
affirms, and that after coming Scribes and Copiers of their Histories have
done the Authors wrong by their negligence or ignorance in writing one man
for another, Eleutherius for Higinius. For among others S. Bid, as he is
extant, says that King Lucius of Britain did write to the Pope of Rome in the
year Bed. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 4.
of the Incarnation of our Lord 156. anno ab Incarnatione Domini centesimo
quinquagesima sexto, that by his order or command he might be a Christian.
Obsecrans vt per eius mandatum Christianus efficeretur. The Manuscript
Antiquities of the Church of Landaffe, more ancient in probable Judgment then
S. Bid, Antiq. M. S. Eccles. Landaffen. Galfr. Monum. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5.
c. 1. Hist. Brut. Stowe Hist. in Lucius. Caius Anti. Ca^tabr. l. 1. p. 107. M.
S. ant.
and written by a Brittan, which should not be ignorant in that the greatest
business of his Country, gives the same testimony of the same year, anno ab
Incarnatione Domini 156. The ancient Author of the British History, also a
Brittan, makes King Lucius a Christian in, and before this year 156. in
direct terms. So testifies the old History called Brutus, ancient Records
belonging to the Guildehall in London, the Antiquities of S. Edwards Lawe^*
Goceline in the life of S. Augustine, so writes Nauclerus, and diverse ancient
Manuscript Antiquities which I have seen. Therefore to save so many ancient,
and worthy Authors, and their Scribes from a double error both of the time,
and name of the Pope, to whom King Lucius did now write, we must needs lay
this single tax upon such, as have Transcribed their Histories, that they did
mistake the name of the Pope, writing Eleutherius for Higinius. And this they
were more easily drawn unto, because they found, that Pope Eleutherius was a
great Agent in the general Conversion of this Nation, which was long after
this time, and their Scribes are more excusable in this point. And this by
their leave we must say, or else both wander from the proved truth of this
History, and lay a double imputation of mistaking upon these Authors or their
Transcribers. For it is evident by all Antiquities that S. Eleutherius was not
Pope many years after this time, which they must contradict, if they will
maintain their mistaking. And where they say, that King Lucius wrote to the
Pope of Rome in this year, they must recall that, and say he wrote then to no
Pope, for Eleutherius was not Pope until long after. King Lucius either
actually converted, or consented to be a Christian in the time of Pope Higinius.


5. Therefore to give every one his due, I may not deprive S. Higinius Pope of
this honor, nor this Nation of the true Title of so great a benefit and
blessing by him, and yet when I come to his time, place, and happy proceedings
with this kingdom in such affairs, I shall render unto him his most worthily
deserved glory. For it is manifest in holy Histories that whatsoever was
written to the Pope of Rome in the year of Christ 156. must needs be written
to S. Higinius, who then two years before, and two years after, until the
11. day of January 158. when he was martyred was Pope of Rome, Eusebius. l. 4. c.
10. and in chronic. Martyrol. Romans 11. Ianua, Ado, and alij eod. die Baron.
Tom. 2. Annal. Sever. Binnius To. 1. Conc. in Higin. Damas. Pontif. in Pio.
Aniceto and Sotere. Baron. Sever. Binnius. Rob. Barn. Ioa. Bal. in eisdem
Marian. Scot. Mart: Pol. and alij. Ethel verdus chron. l. 1. an. 156.
and no other, true or pretended. And between him and S. Eleutherius were
three Popes, S. Pius, S. Anicetus and S. Soter, Which held the Papacy above
twenty years, S. Eleutherius first possessing that Apostolic dignity in the
year 179. which was 24. years after the time an. 156. when King Lucius by so
many Authors wrote to the Pope to be a Christian. And this is more confirmed
by the Testimony of our Countryman Ethelwerdus, who testifies that the Pope of
Rome which was in the year of Christ 156. which was S. Higinius sent letters
to King Lucius, and a Legate to him also, to the same purpose exhorting him to
be a Christian, to which he consented, and after performed accordingly. In
sexto quinquagesimo anno beatissimus Christi famulus per Nuntium and literas
Lucium adijt Insulae Regem, admonens eum de fide, and baptismo Catholico, qui
tum Britanniae Regni potestatem pollebat: qui etiam concessit verifimili
ratione Christianum se esse futurum, quod and perfecit. Which confirms that
which Harding has before delivered, that Pope Higinius did confirm the
spiritual labors and proceedings in Britain in this time; for hear is
proved that the Pope then, which could be no other, but this holy Saint, did
both write his letters, and send his Legate hither to such intent, and persuade
the King to Christian Religion. And we are assured that in this time both King
Lucius sent to the Pope of Rome, to have Apostolic men sent hither to preach
the faith of Christ to his subjects hear, and the Pope both by letters and
Legate solicited King Lucius to receive the Catholic faith and Baptism, and
he so did: quod and perfecit; but whether he was actually baptized at this
time, or only promised it now, and performed it after, I am not hear to
determine: only I add that the very Authors themselves Matthew. Westminster. anno
gratiae 185. 186. 596.
as namely Matthew of Westminster that teach the general Conversion to have
been long after this, yet confess the Britans received the faith at this time:
in part Britonum fides Christi anno Dominicae Incarnationis 158. habita,
nunquaminter eos defecit.

THE VI. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN IS ENTREATED WHAT LEARned and Apostolic men they were which preached
in this time in Britain, and converted King Lucius, and very many of his
people. Such were S. Timothy, S. Marcellus, Mansuetus, Theanus with others.

1. HITHERTO we have heard of the happy proceedings hear in pla^ting the faith
of Christ, and the letters and Legate of the Pope, and persuasion of the holy
Christian Clergy hear, which had taken so good effect, that the King himself
was either in act, or by promise, and desire a Christian; it would make much to
the honor of the Instruments of so holy a work, if we could find out the
name, but of any one of them, which then persuaded, and converted this first
Christian King of the world, in public profession, and manner, to be a
Christian. The ancient Charter which the Antiquities of Cambridge ascribe to
King Arthur, does give this honor, or a great part thereof to the learned King
Lucius persuaded to be a Christian by British Christians of Cambridge.
Scholars of Cambridge, which being converted to the faith of Christ, and
diverse of them now become Clergy men, and Preachers, moved King Lucius by
their preaching to be a Christian: gloriosus Rex Brita^niae Lucius
Christianitate^ amplectens praedicatione Doctoru^ Cantabrigiae. Which is more
confirmed by the Chart. Regis Arth. 7. April. an. 531. Bull. Honotij 1. Academ
Ca^tab. concess. 20. die Febr. an. D. 624. Caius Antiquit. Accadem. Cantabr.
li. 1. p. 75. 76. 77. Chart. Reg. Arthuri. supr. apud Caium supr. p. 69. 70.
ancient Bull of Pope Honorius the first of that name, to confirm the
Privileges of Cambridge University, a thousand years since, and other
testimonies there are, which say that both King Lucius did confer and
confirm by his public Charter great Privileges and Immunities to that
School, and Pope Eleutherius likewise, which he did not for any thing we find
in Histories, to any other School or University in the world, nor any of his
holy Successors many years after. The chiefest motive of these exemptions and
Prerogatives to that place we cannot interpret in any better sense, then that
King Lucius had received much spiritual benefit from thence, which he
requited with temporal honor, and dignity; and the holy Pope Eleutherius
bestowed that singular grace, and favor to that School, for the holy labors,
and fruitful effects it had wrought in the Church of Christ, by their
Conversion and Preaching, moving King Lucius, and so many men of sundry degrees
in Britain, to forsake superstitious Idolatry: And embrace the Christian
faith and Religion. Will. Harrison descript. of Brit. supr.


2. A Protestant Antiquary before seems to leave it as probable, that one of
these Cambridge men was Archbishop of York, and by some called Taurinus; an
other supposes Eluanus and Meduuinus which were employed by King Lucius was
not converted by S. Taurinus.
King Lucius in this holy business, and by diverse writers were Instruments both
of his Conversion and Baptism, were Scholars of Cambridge. Fuisse Eluanum and
Meduuinum Cantabrig^^nsis studij Alumnos conijcio. But the opinion of Io. Caius
Antiq. Cantabr. Acad. l. 1. p. 99.
S. Taurinus to have been Archbishop of York in Britain, is before found too
feeble a ground to build upon. And certain it is by approved witnesses, King
Lucius not converted by Eluanus or Meduninus.
that Eluanus and Meduuinus were but Catechumens in Christian Religion, when
they were sent by King Lucius to Rome, and they were there perfectly instructed
in the faith and continued there so long, that being become learned in
Christian Religion, after they had been baptized, and taken inferior Orders,
not suddenly performed, Eluanus was consecrated a Bishop, and the other
Meduuinus made Priest, were sent back again to preach in Britain. Consilio
Senioris Romae placuit, ^osdem Legatos baptizari, and Catholica fide suscepta
ordinari Eluanum in Episcopum, Meduninum autem in Doctorem. Antiquit. Eccles.
Landaffe^.
Thus have the ancient Antiquities of the Church of Landaffe, and others.
Therefore I do not see, how it is probable, that these men being but
Catechumens should preach that faith to King Lucius before their going to Rome,
they themselves having not yet embraced it: And, much less dare I so boldly
affirm, as a Protestant Bishop and Antiquarie does, perhaps more for his hate
to Rome then love of truth, and by good warrant, that Eluanus and Meduuinus had
often inculcated the faith of Christ to King Lucius. Qui eandem ipsi fidem
saepius inculcassent. But to excuse this man, he holds before, that they Bal.
l. de Scriptor. Brita. centur. 1. in Eluan. and Meduuino.
were both baptized by Apostolic me^ hear in Britain, were and become
Priests to preach and Minister the Sacraments, and were recompted among the
most renowned hear for those offices, before they were sent to Rome. Eluanus
and Meduuinus Britannorum Doctores and in Britannia nati imbibitis primum
Ethnicorum litteris, scientiam habebant cum eloquentia non infaeliciter
coniunctam. Per Apostolicos viros tandem in Christo renati, adeo Scripturis
sacris operam dederunt, vt in dispensandis Dei Ministerijs, inter primos
haberentur. Per eos igitur, vt per illos, qui candem ipsi fidem saepius
inculcassent, litteris suis Rex Lucius, ad Eleutherium Pontificem egit, vt apud
Romanos Christianorum adscriberetur numero. If he had proved this by any
allowed Authority, we might have harkned unto him, but citing none for any
thing here affirmed, but Ihon Capgraue, Ioanne Capgrauio test, for King Lucius
sending Eluanus and Meduuinus to Rome, which no man denies, I dare not second
him in the rest, which he finds no warrant to affirm. Yet do I not deny
having proved so much before, that as this man teaches, there were Apostolici
viri, diverse Apostolic men, then in Britain persuading King Lucius and his
subjects to the Religion of Christ. Such I seek in particular, and not
Catechumens; and yet more then probable it is that neither Eluanus nor
Meduuinus was either Christian or Catechumen at this time, nor diverse years
after, or else we must make them to have stayed at Rome above twenty years fot
their better Instruction, Baptism and Consecration: For I have proved before,
that there was so long time, even from the death of this present Pope Higinius
of whose days we now entreat, and the beginning of the Papacy of S.
Eleutherius, to whom as Pope Eluanus and Meduuinus were sent by King Lucius. So
that finding no warrant, to allow them Priests, or Preachers as yet, I must
reserve them to King Lucius converted to the faith with many of his Subjects,
Nobles and others by S. Timothy and Marcellus, Brita^s.
their true time and place, where I shall give them their worthily due and
deserved honor.

3. But we find some Apostolic men in this very time, to have preached the
faith in Britain to King Lucius himself, as well as to his subjects, and
these to have been of this Nation, though by warrant and Authority from the
Apostolic See of Rome. Among these, two are cheifely commended unto us, in
this business S. Timothy, and S. Marcellus, or Marcellinus. And to begin with
S. Timothy, we find, that he preuay led so far with King Lucius, that by
his learning our King was induced to the Religion of Christ. S. Lucius
Britanniae Rex S. Timothei eruditione ad Religionem Christi inductus est.
Petrus M^^ss^us in Catal. Archiepisc. Treuer. in S. Marcello alias Marcellino.
Henric. Pantal. de vir. Illustrib. Germ. part. 1. p. 116. Io. Naucler. vol. 2.
general. page 565. Io. Caius l. 1. Antiq. Cant. Academ. Legenda S. Timothei.
Petrus de Natalib. l. 1. c. 24. Harris. Theat. l. 1.
And to make this an opinion both of Catholics and Protestants, Henricus
Pantaleon writes, that King Lucius of Britain was the Disciple of S.
Timothy. S. Lucius ex Regio Britannorum sanguine Timothei Discipulus: And
cites the Magdeburgian Protestants, Stumphius, and the Annalls of Curre in
Germany. And Nauclerus with others writes plainly, that one S. Timothy came
into Britain, and Lucius King of Britain, and his kingdom of Britain did
receive the faith of Christ from him: Lucium Britanniae Regem, cum tota
Britannia a Timotheo Apostolo qui in Britanniam venerat fidem recepisse. Where
we see this matter constantly affirmed both by Catholic and Protestant
Antiquaries. that King Lucius did receive the faith from one S. Timothy, and
he was so renowned, that he is styled an Apostle, at the least to King Lucius
and the British Nation. And that we might the better come to notice, what S.
Timothy this was, that so deserved of this kingdom, they do almost
Indiuiduate him, when they agree, it was one S. Timothy Disciple to S. Paul
the Apostle. Of this name, which can in any probable sense be termed S. Paul's
Disciples, we find but two remembered in Histories, S. Timothy Bishop of
Ephesus, to whom S. Paul wrote two Epistles part of holy Scripture, and S.
Timothy son of our noble Countrywoman S. Claudia honored in holy Scripture
S. Pius Papa 1. Epist. ad Iustum Viennens. Epi^c. Tom. 1. Biblioth. Sanct.
by S. Paul's pen, who as S. Pius Pope of Rome writes was ab Apostolis
educatus, brought up by S. Peter and Paul, and so might justly be termed
Disciple to either of them, and very probably took his name from the other S.
Timothy, familiarly acquainted in his parents house as appears in the same
Epistle; where it is also manifest, that this young S. Timothy and his holy
Parents were of the most faithful Disciples which S. Paul then had, as they
were also to S. Peter, and his next following Successors: for when almost all
had forsaken him in his imprisonment before his death, these remained constant
and ministering unto him. And allthough S. Timothy was then 2. Tim. 4.
very young, yet now being come to be of ancient years, was an holy Priest,
had performed the exhortation of Christ to perfection, to give all to the poor
and follow him, for he had given over his Patrimony, leaving his house at Rome
called of his name Timothinae, Timothies house, and preached the Gospel. And
being by his Mother a Brittan, remembered by the example and writing of S. Paul
to have an especial care of this his Cou^^^y, and to manifest his true love to
it, to win it to Christ, as he had before performed the same, to the Natives
thereof which were at Rome. So that if these Historians which testify King
Lucius was converted, or persuaded to the faith of Christ by S. Timothy, and
said no more, that he was S. Paul's Disciple, or given any other note or
distinction to know what Timothy it was, which vndertoocke so great labors,
and had so happy success in this kingdom, we must needs, (expressing it with
great Joy) conclude, it was S. Timothy Son of our renowned British Lady
Claudia, which showed so great love and atcheiued so worthy things in his and
our Country Britain. And to leave it without question, it could be no other.

4. The other S. Timothy Bishop of Ephesus was martyred, and buried there in
the time of Domitian, and many years by all accounts before King Lucius was
borne. And S. Onesimus mentioned by S. Paul was his Successor, Vi^. S.
Timothei Ephesians. in Breu. die 24. Ianuar. Martyrol. Romans eod* die Bed. Ado. and
Lipp. Ignat. Epist. ad Ephesians. and Epist. ad Antioch. Nicep. l. 3. c. H. Magdeb.
cent. 2. Breuiar. Romans die 22. August. Martyrol. Romans 23. Aug. Bed. Vsuard. and
alij Martyrol. Romans 3. Maij. and Menol. Martyrol. Romans Bed. Vsuard. 21. Maij.
Petr. Catal. l. 5. c. 28. Martyr. To. Bed. and Vsuard. 23. Aug. Greg. Tur. l.
de glor. Mart. c. 54. Martyrol. Romans and alij 19. Decembr. Martyrol. Romans and
Menol. 10. Iunij. 2. Tim. 4. S. Pius Pap. 1. Ep. ad Iustum Vie^n. Epist. sup.
and apud Baron. To. 2. Annal. an. 166.
and Bishop there in S. Ignatius days, as he himself witnesses, both which
were also martyred 50. years before this time I now entreat of, by all
witnesses, Catholics, and Protestants. There have been diverse other holy Saints
of that name, but none of that time, and Episcopal or Preistly Function, to
whom we can possibly ascribe this honor. S. Timothy of Antioch preached at
Rome, but long after this, in the time of Pope Melchiades, martyred there.
There was an other martyred in Macedonia, but no Priest, nor about this time.
An other martyred at Thebais, but a married man Husband to S. Maura martyred
with him in the time of the Arrians. An other of that name was martyred in
Mauritania, with Polius and Eutichius Deacons, he himself also only a Deacon.
An other in Rhemes in France with S. Apollinaris, but not noted to have been
any Clergy man. An other a Deacon only in Mauritania. An other with Tecla and
Agapius, but no Priest, and in the time of Diocletian now unborn, as also S.
Timotheus Bishop of Prusiadis, in the time of Julian the Apostata in Bithinia.
I can find no more of that name, for holy Saints, neither any either
probability, or possibility, that any of them converted, or ever persuaded
King Lucius to be a Christian.

5. Therefore I leave it as due to our glorious Countryman S. Tymothie, son
of S. Claudia, and brother to S. Nouatus, S. Pudentiana and S. Praxedes:
sufficiently insinuated by S. Paul himself when he so honorably enrolled his
Parents for such his most beloved in holy Scripturs, when that holy Pope which
ordinarily lived in his house, dedicated it for a Church, was present in Rome
to see his happy death by Martyrdom, and next succeeded S. Higinius, of whose
Papacy we now write, does expressly witness, that he was brought up, by two
most glorious Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, and was, their Disciple. Sanctus
Timotheus, qui ab Apostolis educatis, Presbiter vsque ad nos peruenit. Great
honor it was for the first Christian King of Britain, the first Christian
kingdom of the world, to be instructed in the faith by so noble and renowned
Apostle of his own Nation, with the assistance and concurrance of the Pope
himself S. Pius as he testifies, when he says concerning S. Timothy and S.
Mark that was Martyred with him, that he dispensed the word of faith with
them: cum quibus simul verbum fidei partiti sumus. What were the Impediments in
temporal respects, which hindered King Lucius from public Profession of
Christian Religion, wherein he was thus instructed, until, or near the
Papacy of S. Eleutherius, I shall declare hereafter, and speak more of S.
Tymotheus our Countriman and Apostle, as also of S. Nouatus his blessed
brother, and the holy virgins his Sisters S. Pudentiana, and S. Praxedes. Only
I say now of him, that he was a most worthy man to be Legate to the Pope of
Rome, of whom Ethelwerdus has told us before which in the year of grace 156.
sent a Legate hither with letters to King Lucius exhorting him to the Christian
Religion: Beatissimus Christi famulus per Nuntium and literas Lucium adijt
Insulae Regem, ammonens eum de fide and Baptismo Catholico; which he so
honorably performed. Yet in giving this so great deserved honor to S.
Tymothie, I do not exclude others from their due praise and glory for their
labors in this business, but as I have proved before, so hear I acknowledge
again in our Protestant Historians words: Even from the days of Joseph of
Arimathia, and his fellows, or what other godly men first taught the Holinshed
Hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 19.
Britans the Gospel of our Savior, there remained among the same Britans
some Christians, which ceased not to teach, and preach the word of God most
sincerely unto them: But yet no King amongst them openly professed that
Religion, till Lucius. S. Marcellus a Brittan converted King Lucius.


6. Among these was S. Marcellus, or Marcellinus, afterward Bishop of Tungers;
and then Archbishop of Treuers, where he ended his days with Martyrdom for
the truth of Christ about the year 180. as diverse write, and Petr. Merssaeus
Catal. Episcop. Tungren. and Archiep. Treuer. in S. Marcell. Engl. Martyr. 4.
Sept. Anton. Democh. l. 2. Missae contra Calvin. Guliel. Eisengr. cent. 2.
Part. 4.
yet was Bishop of Tungers 29. years, before he was translated to Treuers,
where he was Archbishop some time. Therefore seeing we read that he preached
hear in Britain his Country, and to King Lucius as well before his going into
those foreign parts, as after, he must needs have preached hear, in, or
before the 150. year, and so might well be one of those Cambridge Doctors
before remembered. The Annals of the Arcbishops of Treuers say of this man, that
Lucius King of Britain, now England, was Baptized by his preaching: huius
praedicatione Rex Angliae, id est Lucius, Baptizatus est. The History of
Tungers speaks more plainly, that this S. Marcellus did by his preaching
convert Lucius Prince of Britain with all his Nation to Christ. S. Catal.
Archiep. Treu. in S. Marcello al. Marcel. lino.
Marcellus Lucium Britanniae Principem cum tota gente, sua praedicatione ad
Christum conuertit. And the same Catalogue of Treuers says, that King Lucius
was made a Christian, and Baptized by this our renowned Countryman S.
Marcellus. S. Lucius Britanniae Rex factus Christianus, atque ab hoc Marcello
Petr. Merssaeus Catal. Episcop. Tungren. in S. Marcello.
Treuirorum Doctore Baptizatus. And to give us notice, that S. Marcellus must
needs perform these holy offices hear, at, or about this time, the same
Annals of Treuers in his next and immediate Successor S. Metropolus, saying
that he was Archbishop there in the second year of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus:
Catal. Treuer. Arch. supr.
Metropolus caepit tempore M. Aurelij Antonini anno secundo: Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus beginning his Empire by accounts, between the years of Christ 158.
and 163. though S. Metropolus did presently succeed to S. Marcellus Matthew.
Westminster. an. 159. Marian. Scot. an. 163. Bar. Tom. 2. Annal. an. eod.
in the Archbishops See of Treuers, and S. Marcellus left that great chardge
to come hither, to return thither again, and be Martyred before the second
year of Marcus Aurelius, King Lucius must needs be a Baptized Christian before
the 165. year of Christ, long before Pope Eleutherius Papacy. And if we
follow the Annals of Tungers, telling us that when he was Bishop there, King
Lucius a Christian Baptized by S. Marcellus a Britain long before the Papacy
of S. Eleutherius assisting S. Timothy
long before he came to Treuers, he performed this holy office in Britain, we
are enforced to say, that he stayed hear very short time, which will not serve
to convert a King and Country: Lucium cum tota gente conuertit. And presently
posted bake with as great celeritie to Treuers, and without stay or ceremony
was admitted Archbishop, and as presently, was Martyred, very improbable
things; or else we most say he preached hear at the same time, S. Tymotheus
did, and assisted in the conversion of King Lucius, which the Annals Catal.
Archiep. Treuer. supr.
of Treuers themselves sufficiently prove, when they say, that S. Marcellus
after his rerturne from the Conversion of King Lucius, Sancte and prudentissime
praefuit; he ruled the Archiepiscopall See there, holily, and most prudently.
Catal. Archiepis. T^euer. in S. Ma^sueto.
Which to be truly, and so certainly affirmed, of the government of so great
and lardge a Province as Treuers then was, and still is, requires no short
experience, and space of time.

7. I may reckon in this number, our first Priest and Bishop I find of this
Nation S. Mansuetus, consecrated by S. Peter the Apostle first Bishop of Tullum
in Lorraine and after Archbishop of Treuers, before S. Marcellus, often coming
into Britain, as I have proved before, living very long even to S. Eleutherius
time, as many then did, and among others, S. Maternus his Predecessor Disciple
also of S. Peter governed the Sees of Treuers, Cullen, and Catal. Archiep.
Treuer. in S. Materno.
Tungers until the year 133. and so may not be deprived of all the glory of
the Conversion of King Lucius and his people. The like I may probably affirm,
of S. Thean, after Archbishop of London, S. Sampson, or Theodosius, or S.
Mansuetus, Thean, Sampson and others probably preached here in this time.
both, Archbishops after at York, and others. For if S. Eluan, one of King
Lucius his Ambassadors to Rome about the Conversion of Britain, and there
consecrated Bishop by the Pope did give place to Saint Thean to be Archbishop
of London before him, and he was his Successor, we must needs conceive that S.
Thean had been long time Bishop before, as many others hear were, otherwise
Saint Eluan in so great honor for his Ambassadge and consecration at Rome,
and that praise is given him in Histories, for his virtue and learning, would
before the death of S. Thean in the Vacancy of 3. Archbishopricks and 28.
Bishops Sees then in Britain have had a great honor before that time: and his
Companion S. Meduuinus so prime and excellent a man should have returned a
Bishop from Rome, and not only a Doctor, but that there were many worthy and
learned Bishops hear then in Britain deserving, or actually having that
Prerogative before him. And were or could so many Archflamens and Flamens be
converted in the general Conversion, and embraced Christian Religion, if none
of them had resigned their places before? Or who can imagine, that King Lucius
entered into such a Dispute of Learning without consultation with his learned
Flamens, and Archflamens, which then ruled not only in spiritual but
temporal affairs? Or how could he, and his temporal Nobles be converted,
except the others were first convicted to be in error? How can it with
credibilitie be conceived, that so many of those chief Gentile Priests should
willingly relinquish their professions, and most of them be made and
consecrated Christian Priests and Bishops by the common opinion, except many of
them had professed Christianity before? New Conuerties might not by the law
of Christ be admitted to that charge and dignity in his Church.

8. And of this opinion are, or ought to be, our Cambridge Antiquaries, in
express terms testifiing, that King Lucius sent Eluanus and Meduuinus Io.
Caius histor. Cantabrig. p. 22.
to Rome about his Conversion in the year of Christ 156. and it was in the
year 178. before they returned hither again to exercise their Preistly
function, which they had received at Rome, id egit anno Domini 156. and regni
sui 18. King Lucius sent these Ambassadors to Rome in the 156. year of Christ
and 18. of his Reign. Regem Baptizarunt anno Domini 178. and either they or
Damianus and Fugatianus Baptized the King, and his Subjects in the year of our
Lord 178. which was 22. years after the first sending of Eluanus, and
Meduuinus to Rome, by these men. The old Manuscript of the life of S. Helen
our contry Manuscr. Antiq. de Vita S. Helenae. Capgrau. in Catal. in eadem.
woman, and holy Empress, with Capgraue and others follwing it, testify the
same, when they say, that King Lucius soon after his Fathers death being but
young in years, in inuenili aetate, did send Epistles to the Pope of Rome
humbly entreating to be made a Christian by his direction. Lucius ex Patre
Coillo optimae indolis puer in Inuenili aetate senilem animo canitiem moribus
praeferebat. Qui cum defuncto Patre Regni diademate insignitus fuisset, exitum
suum praeferri volens principio, a Spiritu Sancto edoctus Epistolas Papae
humiliter direxit, petens vt ab eo fidem Christianam recipere mereretur. The
like has the Author of the British History, Galfrid. Monum. Hist. Reg.
Brit. l. 4. c. 19. Pontic. Virun. l. 4. Brit. Hist.
and Virunnius, who seems to allege Gildas in the same sense, when he says
he writes, many things in many places of King Lucius: de quo Gildas multa
tradit multis in locis. And allthough it is now in the Copies of these
Authors, or most of them, that this messadge was sent to Eleutherius, it
cannot be but that name is in them mistaken, Eleutherius being neither Pope,
nor probably Priest when by these Authors, these men and messadge was sent to
Rome by King Lucius a young man and newly crowned: for Matthew of Matthew. Westminster.
an. gratiae 124. Manuscrip. Antiquit. in the Church of S. Peter in Cornhill in
London Matthew. Westminster. supr. and an. 201.
Westminster, the Antiquity in S. Peter's Church in Cornhill in London, with
others witness, that Lucius was crowned King in the year of Christ 124. The
year of our Lord God (says the Antiquity of S. Peter's Church) 124. Lucius
was crowned King, and the years of his Reign were 77. years. To which the
Monk of Westminster justly agrees, crowning him King in the year 124. Anno
gratiae 124. Lucius Regni diademate insignitus est; And recording his death in
the year 201. Anno gratiae 201. Inclitus Britannorum Rex Lucius ab hac vita
migrauit ad Christum. This Monk is styled by our Protestant Antiquaries, to be
most exquisite in the true Supputation of years: Matthaeus Florigerus quantum
Io. Bal. l. de script. Britan. centur. 3. in Matthew. Floriger.
ad Historiam, in recta annorum supputatione singularis. And of all writers of
such matters, we may lawfully Judge, that the ancient Author, or Authors of
the Manuscript preserved in that Church dedicated to S. Peter, to testify to
all Posterity, how that Church was founded by King Lucius, and was the first
Archiepiscopall See or Church in Britain, as is contained in that Antiquity,
was most diligent, and industrious in searching out the truth of such things,
so publikly to be received. Such likely were the reasons which moved the
Cambridge Antiquarie, to affirm so resolutely as he has done, that King
Lucius sent Eluanus and Meduuinus to Rome about his, and this Countries
Conversion, so long before the days of the Papacy of Eleutherius, and they
returned hither again in his time, to help to effect that holy work. And I
hope such an University as Cambridge would still be accounted, and in
Catholic times has been, would not without great warrant from their own, or
some other Antiquities, which they remember not in particular, suffer it to be
published, and printed as the general saying and testimony of their whole
University; That King Lucius when the question of Religion was in hand, came
purposely to Cambridge about it, and there being resolved by the holy learned
Christians, which were students in Cambridge, that the Religion which they
professed was true, he sent Eluanus and Meduuinus to the Pope of Rome in the
156. year of Christ, and the 18. of his own Reign, for the receiving of
Christian Religion in Britain: Cantabrigiam Lucius, pius and moderatus
Princeps clementissimusque Hist. Cantabrig. Accadem. Auth. Ioanne Caio. ex
aedibus Io. Daij. An. Dom. 1574. page 22.
Britannorum Rex venit. Cui cum ex Sanctorum virorum, qui Christum professi
sunt, and Cantebrigiae studebant, praedicatione persuasum est, non fuisse vana
quae de Deo, deque Trinitate diuulgata sunt, fidei Christianae cupidus, a
Pontifice Romano, vt ad Christi fidem reciperetur per Legatos Eluanum and
Meduuinum petijt: id egit Anno Domini 156. and regni sui 18.

THE VII. CHAPTER.
DECLARING MANY HVMANE LETS and Impediments, hindering King Lucius, and his
Noble Britans some years from publicly professing Christian Religion, which
secretly they embraced: and the occasions of diverse mistakings either of
Historians, or their Scribes, in the Date, Times, and Titles of letters written
about the Conversion of Britain to the faith of Christ.

1. WHEN the Estate of Ecclesiastical affairs in Britain had taken so happy
proceedings, and effect, that both our King hear and many principal men were
thus converted to the faith of Christ, from their former errors, and
superstitions, and so great hope, and forwardnes there was, to have that faith
publicly professed, which they Diverse humane fears and Impediments now
chancing, and hindering King Lucius from open profession of Christian Religion
in Britain.
privately embraced, and acknowledged for the only truth: many wordly
temptations and oppositions did presently arise, to hinder these new and
vntrayned Soldiers of Christ, to make so bold and open Profession of their
holy Religion, as many holy Martyrs at that time, and they themselves not long
after did, and the glory of that required. For as we may probably with many
Antiquities affirm, that the favorable Edicts of diverse Emperors, and among
them Antonius surnamed Pius yet reigning had some what encouraged them in
temporal respects, actually to be baptized in that Religion, The Martyrdom of
the holy Popes S. Telesphorus, and S. Higinius.
which their internal understanding, and Judgment was by many invincible
motives, and Arguments convinced before to be only true: So now by like
contrary wordly events, and lets, they were for some time more slow and
Antoninus Pius Emperor incensed against the Britans.
dull to profess it openly. They did perfectly understand that notwithstanding
the pretended and expected favor of the present Emperor, either by his
command or permission, two holy Popes (to omit many others in other places) S.
Telesphorus, and S. Higinius, procures of their Conversion, cruelly Polydor.
Virgil. Vrb. Anglic. Hist. l. 2. page 42. Julius. Capitol. in Antonin. Nichol.
Vignier Biblioth. Histor. and An. 143.
were put to death for that Religion, even in Rome itself under the
Emperors sight, within the space of four years or little more by all
accounts. And because present and home dangers do most terrify, they did
see, and tasted, that the present Emperor Antoninus was at this time incensed
against the Britans, and had already sent Lollius Vrbicus with forces hither,
and he had fought some Battles against the Britans: As both our own, and the
Roman Historians testify. Pius Antoninus id temporis Imperator, Lollium
Vrbicum The superstitious education and disposition of Marcus Aur^lius
Antoninus adopted Successor in the Empire.
Legatum in Britanniam misit, qui factis aliquot praelijs, Insulanos in officio
manner coegit.

2. And to maintain, and foster these conceived and ingendered humane fears,
and Impressions to live and continue longer then Antoninus Pius was like to
live, now being old and long time Emperor, when he came first to the Empire by
the Adoption of Hadrian, he was commanded or directed by him that Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus, whom from his Infancy he had trained up in the Gentiles
superstitions, should succeed him in the Empire. Iul. Capitolin. in Marco
Aurelio Antonino.
When he was but 8. years old he was putt by Adrian into the College of the
Salij most superstitious Priests of Mars, and was made a Priest, a chief
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus his Persecution against Christians.
Prelate, or Ruler, a Southsayer, and Master among them: octauo suae aetatis
anno ab Adriano in Saliorum Collegium relatus est, and in Saliata functus
Sacerdotio, and Praesul and vates, and Magister, and nonnullos inaugurauit, and
exaugurauit, nemine praeeunte, quod ipse carmina didicisset. So that there
could be little hope, but this man; so superstitiously brought up, and such a
maker, and vnmaker of their Sacrificers, and Enchaunter, would still continue
in the same, and profess himself an enemy to all Impugners of such
proceedings, such as all Chrstians were, which he performed when he came to be
Emperor, raising a general Persecution against Christians; which to omit,
but as it concerned this kingdom, and Christians thereof, the holy house of
our glorious Countrywoman S. Praxedes in Rome, which until then both in the
time of S. Nouatus her brother, her holy parents S. Pudens, and S. Claudia
Sabinella or Priscilla, and likely as before under her parents also Christian
Britans, had been a safe refuge, and as a Sanctuary for persecuted Christians,
was now cruelly ransaked, and 22. holy Christian Martyrs together with the
sacred Act. S. Praxed. per S. Pastor. Martyr. Romans die 26. Maij. Bed. Vsuard.
and Ado, eodem die. Petr. Catal. l. 5. c. 58. Baron. Tom. 2. Annal. an. 164.
Priest S. Simitrius most barbarously without any trial, question, or Judgment
presently putt to death, of which blessed company, we may not but think diverse
of this kingdom to have been. And S. Timothy himself returning from hence to
Rome upon the death of his brother, and Sister, S. Nouatus, and S. Pudentiana
was martyred there, and before the 62. year of Christ, if we will allow of
Matthew of Westminster his computation, who says that S. Iustus Bishop of
Vienna after long exile was martyred that year: Anno gratiae 162. in Gallijs
plurimi pro Christo sanguinem gloriose fuderunt. Inter quos Iustus Viennensis
Episcopus, longo tempore exilio maceratus, Martyr efficitur. For S. Pius Pope
of Rome in his Epistle to this S. Iustus, writes of the Martyrdom Pius 1.
Papa Ep. ad Iustu^ Vienn. Episc. To. 1. Bibl. Sanct. and Baron. To. 2. Annal.
an. 166.
of our S. Timothy. And by no account he lived not above 4. years longer, but
was Martyred in this time. So by some accounts our glorious Countryman S.
Marcellus, so diligent a procurer of the Conversion of King Lucius, as I have
declared, was martyred in this Persecution. And to heap up the measure of
fears for Christian Britans, this Emperor did not only thus persecute us
abroad, but sent Calphurnius Agricola hither into Britain, with armed Troops
to keep the Britans in subjection, as Roman Pagan Iul. Capitolin. in Marco
Aurelio Antonin. Polyd. Virgil. Anglic. Hist. l. 2. p. 42.
Writers term it, but Britans may say, in a kind of flauery.

3. These and such were the worldly Temptations which allured King Lucius, and
many noble Britans, to be more timorous, and lingering to profess the
Christian faith with such constancy openly, as inwardly they firmly believed,
and honored, until the Emperor himself convicted by the written Marcus
Aurel. Anton. Emperor miraculously converted to believe in Christ, o^ at the
least, to be a Protector of Christians.
Apologies, and Miracles wrought by Christians, was enforced to yield the
honor to Christ, and abstain from Persecution, and many of his noble Pagans
embraced Christian Religion. Imperator victoriam suam Christo gaudenter
attribuit. And this I take to be the chiefest occasion of the mistakings in
some Historians, or their Scribes, setting down so many and several times
when King Lucius received the faith of Christ, or professed it. Many saying
Tertull. Apol. c. 6 Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 5. cap. 5. Matthew. Westminster. an. 174.
it was in the year of Christ 156. according as I have before related. Others
in the year 164. others 165. as William of Malmesbury with others. Henry of
Hartford in the year 169: And others in other and later times. All which be
true, if we speak of the Religion of Christ which he held, and believed from
the very first of these assigned times, but for his, and his Nobles public
profession thereof, and the kingdom general receiving it, with building of
Churches, placing Christian Bishops and Priests in them, and abandoning the
superstitious Rites of the Pagan Gentiles, we must expect a later date, in the
time of Pope Eleutherius. And the honor this holy Pope had, long before he was
Pope, and the often occasion of King Lucius, and others hear Occasions of so
often mistaking the name Pope Eleutherius in letters written to and from Rome
by Historians, or their Scribes.
writing and sending to Rome about this holy work, might occasion some error
in the Titles of letters to Pope Eleutherius, when he was not yet Pope, but in
high estimation with the Popes there, as a principal learned and holy Priest
of the Church of Rome, as appears in the first Epistle of S. Pius Pope to S.
Iustus Bishop of Vienna: wherein he only sends him salutations from S. Soter
after Pope and S. Eleutherius as the chiefest Priests then in Rome, and so he
recommendeth them: salutant te Soter and Eleutherius, digni Pius 1. Epist. 1.
ad Iustum Vienn. Episc. Tom. 1. Biblioth. Sanct.
presbyteri. Which Epistle was written, and this honor given to Eleutherius by
that holy Pope, almost twenty years before Eleutherius was Pope. And yet he
must needs be a renowned man long before that time, and so no marvel if
diverse letters were written to him from Britain, and from him hither before
his Papacy: especially if we reflect, to consider how probable a thing it is,
that he was most resident with our Christian Britans there and the Popes of
that time committed unto him, to have a peculiar care of this Country, which
his great credit and familiarity with Pope Pius conuersing so much Eusebius.
Hist. and Chronic. Matthew. Westminster. an. 157.
with our Britans there, and with such principal men as were sent into these
parts, such as S. Iustus of Vienna, then was, will induce to think: Iustus
Viennensium Episcopus and Lugdunensium Photinus, in Ecclesia Christi clari
habentur. And our own Annals do sufficiently witness, that the fame and
renown of S. Eleutherius was great hear in Britain before he was chosen
Pope: ab Ethelwerd. Chronic.
ortu solis vsque ad occasum exiuit sancta opinio eius. And that this his glory
was so great in Britain before he was Pope, those our both ancient and later
Historians prove, which say that King Lucius wrote unto him the first year of
h^s Consecration, to take Order for the general Conversion of this kingdom:
Marian. Scot. aetat. 6. in Eleutherio Papa. Harris in Theatro. to. 2.
So does the most authentical and approved Relation of this History testify,
that it was in the very beginning of his Papacy that King Lucius sent those
letters and solemn Ambassadge unto him about this Business: Huic initio
Pontificatus supplices litterae venerunt a Lucio Britannorum Rege, vt se, ac
suos Vita S. Eleutherij in Breu. Romans 26. die Maij.
in Christianorum numerum reciperet. Which plainly proves, this fame and
honor of S. Eleutherius so well known in Britain, did not now begin hear,
with his Papacy; but was of far more ancient continuance, and Antiquity.
For the very beginning of any Ruler, or Governor, cannot give him so singular
a commendation so soon, especially where his Regiment is so great, and ample,
that in so short a time he can hardly take notice of the state of those things
which belong unto his chardge, much less take so good Order for them all, that
his fame and honor should be for that doing, reported in all the world. And
King Lucius sending unto him in the first year of his Papacy, and the very
beginning thereof initio Pontificatus, could not possibly have notice of his so
renowned carriadge therein, consult with all his Nobles, Flamens, and
Archflamens so dispersed in this so large a kingdom, and have their general
consent, for a general Conversion, and send notice of this, by solemn
Ambassadors so long a Journey, to be there in the beginning of his Papacy, but
that this great honor, and fame of S. Eleutherius was renowned hear long
before, and this public and general assent to forsake Idolatry and embrace
Christian Religion had been formerly concluded, and agreed upon in Britain;
and very probably, as our Cambridge Antiquaries have told us before, not only
S. Timothy was sent, or returned to Rome about this business, but Eluanus and
Meduuinus also, as they write, being but Catechumens to be instructed and
consecrated there, toward the performing so great a work in this kingdom.

4. Neither can we with equality of Judgment think that among so many Britans
now converted, or so disposed hear, these two only went now from hence
thither to such end, and purpose, but allthough these be the only men
remembered in Histories to have been therein employed, as more worthy, or else
designed and sent by King Lucius: yet there went many others about this time
from Britain thither, the better to enable themselves for a general
Conversion of this their Country: and there continued to able themselves with
learning and Religion, to be made fit Instruments and workmen in so holy
labors, and were therein assisted both by the Popes of these times, (much
conversant with our Christian Britans, and in their houses at Rome) and others
the most renowned in the Roman Clergy at that time: Among whom S.
Eleutherius, after Pope, and happy Conuerter of this Nation, was a chief man.
And in their opinion (which hold the Title, Cardinal, was given to that holy
Priest which was the chief, and most eminent commanding Onuphrius Panuin. l.
de Episcop. Titul. and Diacon. Cardinal. Damasus. Et alij in Cleto, Euarist.
and Higinio. S. Pastor Epist. ad S. Timotheu^. Timoth. Epist. ad Pastorem. To.
1. Biblioth. Sa^ct. and Tom. 1. Ann. Baron. Pius Ep. ad S. Iustum Viennen.
Priest in every Church, or Titulus in Rome, according to the Institution and
ordinance of the holy Popes S. Cletus, S. Euaristus, and S. Higinius, in whose
time we now are) I cannot but probably think, that S. Eleutherius so high in
credit, and renown, both with S. Higinius, and Pope Pius, and his brother S.
Pastor, (to whose disposing and distribution the first Titles or Churches in
Rome, (founded by our Christian Britans, and still called by their names, S.
Pudentiana, and S. Praxedes, and to this day giving the names of honor to the
Roman Cardinals so styled) was left,) was an eminent, Cardinal, and chief
Priest presently after this time, in one of those our British Churches or
Tituli in Rome: which among other bonds, tied him so firmly in love to this
Nation, and this Nation to him, that he is so often honored in Titles of
letters, and otherwise by our Antiquaries above other Popes. Some add an other
testimony, which if it be true, it greatly makes, for the especial honor,
wherewith our Historians adorn him, thinking that S. Eleutherius came
parsonally into Britain, and preached hear. And this is that opinion which M.
Fox the Protestant writer, thus remembers: Timotheus in his story thinks
that Eleutherius came himself: Which wants ^oxe Act. and Mon. l. 1. p. 56.
not probable Arguments, by that is said before, if they speak of his
preaching hear before he was Pope, sent hither with S. Timothy our
Countryman, or some others sent by any of those Popes before him.

THE VIII. CHAPTER.
OE THE HOLY POPE S. PIUS, AND OUR renowned Christian Britans by their Mother
S. Claudia, S. Pudentia, S. Nouatus, S. Timotheus and S. Praxedes with their
holy families and friends in Rome.

1. S. Higinius having now gloriously ended his course by Martyrdom, S. Pius
the first of that name succeeded him in the Sea Apostolic, by the more
received opinion in the year of Christ 158. the 15. day of January, and the
19. year of the Empire of Antoninus Pius, and governed that holy Vita S. Pij
Papae 11. Iulij in B^eu. To. Baron. To. 2. Annal. in Pio. Seuerin. Binn. Tom.
1. Council. in S. Pio.
See until the 11. day of July in the 167. year of Christ, and 5. of Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus Emperor, in whose Persecution he then suffered Martyrdom.
All which time, and long after King Lucius still reigned in Britain.
Concerning this Pope, we are told by our Protestant Censurers of their lives
and doctrine, that as he was then called Pius, godly, so he was in act and
deed: he wrought many works of true piety in the field of Christ's The piety
and Religion of Pope Pius, by Protestants Judgment.
Church and obtained the glory of Martyrdom by effusion of his blood under
Antoninus Verus: Pius Aquiliensis sub Antonino Vero, multa verae pietatis
opera, in agro Christianae Ecclesiae fecesse perhibetur: Martyrij gloriam in
sui sanguinis effusione adeptus. Touching the seed of doctrine which this so
holy a workman did Io. Bal. l. 1. d^ act. Romans Pontificiu^ in Pio Aquile^en.
Rob. Barns l. de Vit. Pontif. To. in Pio 1.
sow in the field of the Christian Church, they thus inform us: Pascha die
Dominica esse celebrandum, per reuelationem Hermeti facta statuit. Sacerdotibus
negligentius Missae sacra facientibus, paenas statuit, vt si quis per
imprudentiam, de sanguine Christi, effunderet in terram, paenitentiam ageret
dies 40. si super altar, dies 3. si super linteum substratum calici, 4. dies:
si super aliud linteum, dies 9. sanguinem Christi effusum lambere, vel si id
fieri non possit, aut radere, aut cluere: and rasum, aut lotum, vel comburi,
vel in sacrarium repositum seruari: Thermas Nouati templo dedicauit. Sacrilegij
reos fecit, qui fundos, aliaue bona religioni dicata, in prophanos vsus
conferunt. Virgins ante annum 25. non esse consecrandas praecepit. Quae ad
Religionem spectant, a suae Diaeceseos Synodis audienda esse statuit: salua
tamen Pontificia authoritate: he decreed that Easter day should be kept upon
the Sunday, according as it ^as revealed to Hermes. He ordained punishments for
Priests which should negligently offer the sacrifice of Mass, as if any should
by improuidence spill any of the blood of Christ upon the ground, he should do
penance 40. days; if upon the Altar, 3. days: if upon the linen cloth which
is spredd under the chalice 4. days: if upon the other linen cloth 9.
days. That they should lick up the blood of Christ that was spilt, or if that
could not be done, either pare it, or wash it: and so pared or washed to be
burnt, or laid in the Sacrary, and preserved. He dedicated the Bath of Nouatus
for a Church. He made them guilty of Sacrilege, which converted lands or
other goods that were dedicated to Religion, to prophaine uses. He commanded
that virgins should not be consecrated before they were 25. years old. He
decreed that matters which belonged to Religion, should be heard by the Synods
of their Diocese, ever reserving the Popes Authority. This is our Protestants
Relation of this holy Popes piety, and doctrine, concerning the whole Church
of Christ. In which Narration there is one Act, and practice of his, more
peculiar to this kingdom; which is his converting and dedicating the house of
S. Nouatus, which these men term Thermas Nouati, Nouatus his Bathes some time
belonging to him, and adjoining near his house, to be a Church. Of which, and
this holy man, Son of our Noble Countrywoman S. Claudia, his Brother S.
Timothy of whom I have spoken before and their holy Sisters S. Pudentiana and
S. Praxedes, their due time and place now call upon me, to make some more
memory of them, which so honorably deserved of this Nation, and the whole
Church of Christ, in their days.

2. And because we are better assured, which of them died, then lived, first; I
will begin with S. Pudentiana, who as S. Pastor or Hermes which well knew them
all, and is supposed to have written their Acts, in his Epistle to S. S. Pastor
Epist. ad S. Timotheum fratrem S. Noua^i. Tom. 1. Biblioth. Sanct. and Tom. 2.
Annal. Baron.
Timothy, as it seems by the Tenor thereof in Britain sent to him from Rome
by Eusebius a Subdeacon of the Roman Church was the first of them, which
happily changed this transitory for immortal life. This holy Virgin by her
holy Mother S. Claudia of our British Nation borne in that her happy house in
Rome, which by the Roman Tradition, gave the first lodging and entertaynement
in that City to the glorious Apostle S. Peter, The R^ligious honor of the
house of ^ur British Lady Saint Claudia in Rome. The lodging and place of
entr^tainment of S. Peter, S. Paul, Popes, and other Saints.
was baptized and instructed in the faith by him, and probably some time by S.
Paul often making his aboade, and residence in her parents house. As her holy
Mother had before both in the presence and long absence of her Husband S.
Pudens in Cappadocia and other remote places made her house, domus amplissima,
a most ample and honorable house, as the Roman Historians term it, the prime
and chief Harbor and lodging of Christians then, and there, primum ac
praecipuum hospitium Christianorum. So that it being, in Monte Viminali the
ancient Poet of that time takes notice, that it was the ordinary place of
Entertayning the Pilgrims which came to Rome in those days: dictumque petunt a
vimine collem viscera magnarum domuu^: And founded that ever Baron. Tom. 2.
Annal. an. 159. and Tom. 1. and not. ad Martyrol. Iuuenal. Satyra 3.
memorable monument reverently to intoombe and bury the sacred bodies and
Reliks of holy Martyrs and other holy Christians: So this her blessed daughter
following the example of so worthy a Mother persisted in the like works of
piety. And allthough that honorable Living and reuenewe of her noble S.
Pud^ntiana her daughter insisteth i^ her Par^nts ^^^m^le of Piety.
parents was now divided to the Children into four parts, and the far
greatest by the Roman Imperial Laws unto their sons, her brothers S.
Nouatus and Tymotheus, yet wonderful was that charity she extended to all.
Christians both Britans, and others, both for spiritual and temporal releife,
in this time. She caused an Altar to be erected in her house, for the holy
Popes to whom the greatest resort and concourse of people was to offer the holy
Sacrifice of Mass, and the holy communicants there to receive the most
venerable Sacrament of Christ's blessed body: And kept those Apostolic Popes,
as S. Pius and others there, with temporal maintenance to the^ and those which
resorted to them, or continually remained there with the^, to those Religious
purposes and intents. Pius Pontifex in aedibus Pu^entianae cum Christianis
sacra Vit. S. Pudentianae ^n Br^^. To. die 19. M^^^. Adom Martyr. die 18. M^^^.
Surius eod. die and al.
celebrabat. There she and her family with these holy Popes and others served
God in all exercises of piety day and night: in omni exercitatione pietatis
ita ex^reuit* vt nocte dicque incessanter hymnis and orationibus cum familia
sua Domino inseruiret, Beat^s^imo Pio Vrbi^ Episcopo cum ea in laudibus Dei
participante. And to testify her long time spent in this Religeous
conversation, in entertayning the Popes, Priests, and other Christians
ministering unto them, in all necessaries, the worthy writers of her life do
witness, that she kept this Order even from the death of her Father S. Pudens,
when she was first at her own disposition, even to her dying day: post obitum
sancti Patris, probably Matthew. Westminster. an. 98. Martial. in Epigram. Godwyn.
Conuers. of Brit. c. 3.
the space of 60. years or more: for her Father by common opinion died in the
time of Domitian slain in his Palace in Rome in or about the year of Christ
98. And for the greater increasing the number of Christ's people, she caused a
Font to be made in this her house, for the baptizing of new Christians, and the
more to persuade all people to Christian Religion, it seems she redeemed many
slaves and Bondmen from the Pagans, and causing them to be catechized and
baptized in her own house, made them free. For we read in her life in Ado,
Surius, and others, that at one time S. Pius the Pope baptized 96. such parsons
in the Baptistery or Font belonging to her house, which she had made. Ad
nonaginta sex numero manumissos Beatus Pius aquis Ado. and Sur. supr. and die
21. Iulij in S. Praxede. Lipelous aut Cornelius Grasius die 21. Iul. in S.
Praxede.
salutaribus abluit. In this manner she spent all her ample Noble Wealth and
substance, and after very many afflictions for her holy Religion, and piety,
after she had reverently buried many Martyrs, and spent all her Riches upon the
poor servants of Christ, and his honor, she changed earthly life and things
for heavenly, and was buried near her holy Father S. Pudens, in the funeral
place mentioned before, founded by her renowned Mother. Post Innumeros Agones,
post multorum Martyrum venerabiliter exhibitas sepulturas, post omnes
facultates suas in visceribus pauperum inclusas, Christoque fideliter
commendatas, tandem de terris ad Christum migranit, quarto decimo Calendas
Augusti, and iuxta Patrem, sanctum Pudentem sepulta. About the year of Christ
160. Baronius Baron. Tom. 2. Annal. an. 162.
seems to hold it was in the next year 161. And by all accounts it must
needs be in a little before, or after this time, for all writers of her life
affirm, she died in the days of the Papacy of S. Pius, and Empire of
Antoninus Pius, who by all recknings of his Imperial Government died a little
before, or soon after this year.

3. Very soon after the death of S. Pudentiana died also her brother S.
Nouatus, S. Pastor Epist. ad S. Timoth. supr.
as among other testimonies, we read in that Epistle which S. Pastor or Hermes
sent to their Brother S. Timothy then far out of Rome, and probably by the
circumstances of time and others, hear in Britain, where he S. Nouatus Priest
a Brittan by his British Mother S. Claudia.
thus writes that S. Praxedes being afflicted much for the death of S.
Pudentiana, Pope Pius, many Noble Christians and her Brother S. Nouatus came to
comfort her, and within a month and 28. days after his return from her S.
Nouatus fell sick, and about 13. days after died of that sickness. Post mensem
and dies viginti octo aegritudine detentus est Nouatus, postquam abcesserat a
conspectu Virginis Praxedis. And tertio decimo die transiuit ad Dominum. It
seems by S. Pastor in this his Epistle to S. Timothy of his happy death and
disposing his temporal Riches, that he was a Priest, a Sacrificing Massing
Priest, as it is evident before S. Pius then Pope was, for S. Pastor there
plainly testifies, that both Pope Pius, and Nouatus did often remember S.
Timothy at the Altar of our Lord. Idemque (Nouatus) vos frequenter cum
Beatissimo Pio Episcopo ad altar Domini commemorabat. The chief cause of this
so often their remembering S. Timothy our British Priest, preaching hear in
Britain is often remembered in the Masses of S. Pius Pope, and S. Nouatus.
S. Timothy in the holy Sacrifice of Mass, especially by S. Pius the Pope, I
cannot ascribe, but to the great care that holy Pope had of the great chardge
he with his Predecessor had committed to S. Timothy, about his preaching and
labors in Britain, so much concerning the Apostolic See, and Church of
Christ, that an holy Pope and Pastor could not but often remember and commend
it, in his best office of Sacrifice to God. And S. Nouatus so holy a man, as
all Antiquities of him give evidence, so loving a Brother and careful of his
Countries Conversion, and good of the Christians then distressed, that he left
all his worldly wealth to be disposed by this his Brother S. Timothy,
diligently laboring in the Harvest of Christ in Britain, and S. Praxedes his
Sister, the chiefest Nurse and Releeuer of Gods servants in Rome, to be
employed to such holy ends, and uses, could not be unmindful in his prayers
and Sacrifice of such a Brother, and his Countries most important business which
he had in hand. This holy Saint was, as also his Father, Mother, Brother, and
Sisters instructed in the faith by the holy Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul,
Romae Depositio Sancti Nouati, filij Beati Pudentis Senatoris, and fratris
Martyrol. Romans 20. die Iunij. Bed. Vsuard. and Ado eod. die.
sancti Timothei Presbyteri, and Sanctarum Christi Virginum Pudentianae, and
Praxedis, qui ab Apostolis eruditi sunt in fide. That he was a Priest, the
Martyrologe is silent, but that which I have before cited from his renowned
acquaintance and friend S. Pastor gives us sufficient warrant to be of that
opinion. How The house of S. Nouatus an other Harbor for the Popes and Saints
in Rome.
he in herited his parents virtues in exercising all works of piety,
harboring and releyuing the persecuted and distressed Servants of God, that
his house which had been the first lodging of S. Peter, and harbor to diverse
his Successors and a Receptacle and fosterer of all Christians resorting
thither both for spiritual and temporal comforts, was so continued all his
time. Se suaque Act. S. Nouati. etc. in Antiq. cod. Baron. tom. 2. Annal. an.
159.
Christianorum obsequio mancipasse co^stat. And his most Noble house was open
to all Christians. Nobilissima Christianis patens, apud quam and Thermae
Nouati. This was a distinct house and place from that where his holy Sisters
formerly lived as both the two ancient Cardinals Titles in Rome S. Pudentiana
and S. Praxedes still continued from that time, as I have showed before, and
the visitation which saint Nouatus going from his own house to his Sister
saint Praxedes after saint Pudentiana her death registered by saint Pastor then
present in an other distinct house where she then continued in Harboring and
releyuing the Saints of Christ abundantly testify. S. Pastor to the great
honor of saint Nouatus and Praxedes also thus relates it.

4. That saint Nouatus accompanied with S. Pius the Pope and many Noble
Christians went to saint Praxedes her house to comfort her about her Sisters
death: Multi nobiles Christiani ad eam veniebant, and consolabantur eam vna cum
Episcopo Pio, ventique ad eam Germanus vester Nouatus. And saint Pius together
with saint Praxedes and saint Pastor, went from saint Praxedes her house to the
house of saint Nouatus when and where he was sick, and stayed with him there 8.
days. eamus ad eum fuimus in domo eius diebus ac noctibus octo. And until
after the death of saint Nouatus who gave all his substance to saint Timothy
and saint Praxedes, she had no Interest in that house. How charitable and
munificent saint Nouatus was to the poor Christians, may some what appear by
saint Pastor his Relation of him, when he went to comfort his Sister, where he
says of him to saint Timothy, Germanus vester Nouatus, qui est frater noster
in Domino, multos Christianos pauperes donis suis resecit, and ministrauit
omnibus de facultatibus suis: Your natural Brother Nouatus who is our Brother
in our Lord did relieve many poor Christians with his gifts, S. Nouatus dying
leaves all to S. Timothy and S. Praxedes, to be employed for releife of
Christians.
and ministered to them all out of his substance. And as in his life he had ever
an especial care of the spiritual good of this kingdom, his Country, so at
his death he was not unmindful of it, but gave all be had to his Brother
saint Timothy then laboring and preaching hear, and to his Sister saint
Praxedes as mindful of it though she was at Rome. Hoc placuit ei, vt vobis
vna cum beata Praxede omnem substantiam suam relinqueret. And made as it were
Superuisours of this his last Will and Testament to see it performed, the holy
Pope saint Pius and his renowned Brother saint Pastor, as appears by that
Epistle, the two most powerable and honorable then in the Church of Christ,
and most loving of this Nation of Britain, and spiritual good thereof, as
already appears, and will be more manifest in the next Chapter following.

THE IX. CHAPTER.
OE S. TIMOTHY STILL PREACING IN Britain, his disposing his temporal goods in
Rome for entertaining and releeuing persecuted Priests and Christians, his
house there being dedicated a chief Church, most Christians resorting to it.
And other Apostolic men sent from Rome into Britain in this time.

1. I Have spoaken before of the preaching and Apostolic holy labors of S.
Timothy Brother to S. Nouatus in this their Country of Britain. And it (more
then probably) appears even by the Epistle of S. Pastor to S. Timothy,
presently upon S. Nouatus his death, that he the^ both still continued hear
wholly employing his Travails for the Conversion of his Country Britain, and
S. Pius yet continuing Pope continued also the ancient fatherly care of his
Predecessors to us, sent hither at this time, a new Mission and supply of
Clergy me^ to increase the number of them, which with so great spiritual
fruit travailed in the work of our Conversion. The first, of S. Timothy
being S. Timothy our Apostolic Britan preaching in Britain at the death of
S. Nouatus his Brother in Rome.
still in Britain at this time, supposing what is proved before of his
preaching hear a little before, and no memory made in Histories of his
departing hence, or preaching in any other place but Italy and Britain before
this time, we must needs yield so much to the testimony of S. Pastor, that it
conuinceth his still continuance in this place so remote from Rome, that he did
not, nor could take notice of things there done, and nearely concerning S.
Timothy, but by letters and Messengers to be sent unto him, a long Journey. For
in this Epistle of S. Pastor to S. Timothy, he does advertise him, of the
death of his Sister S. Pudentiana, which was before S. Pius, S. Nouatus, and
the Christian Nobility of Rome came to her Sister S. Praxedes to comfort her
in her sorrows for so great a loss, and yet makes it almost two months
after, post mensem and dies viginti octo, before S. Nouatus fell sike, who died
not until above twenty days after this, diebus ac noctibus octo, and tertio
decimo die, all this together with that S. Nouatus had left S. Timothy and S.
Praxedes his Heirs, he writes to S. Timothy for News and late accidents
whereof he had no Intelligence before: This requiring so great a distance from
Rome where these things were presently known and acted to make them concealed
from S. Timothy, whom they so concerned until they were now after diverse
months written unto him by a man of such worthiness and Authority, as S. Pastor
was, does give me allowance to be of opinion, that S. Timothy was all this
while hear in Britain.

2. The second, of a new mission of Clergy men to be sent hither at this time
by Pope Pius has sufficient warrant in the later end of the same Epistle from
S. Pastor at Rome to S. Timothy in Britain, where the same Epistle is said to
be sent by Eusebius a Subdeacon of the Roman Church. Missa per Eusebium S. Pius
sent with Eusebius a Deaco^ of Rome, and other Apostolic man into Britain at
this time.
Subdiaconu^ sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae. Wherefore when I find in so worthy an
eye witness that a Subdeacon of the holy Roman Church, whose office is to be
subordinate and attendant upon sacred Priests and Bishops in their holy
Sacrifice, and function, and has no power committed unto him of himself in
such affairs, was sent into Britain so far distant, and then for the most
part, a Pagan Nation, and thus to be sent from that Apostolic See which ever
sent holy Priests and Bishops into all these parts of the world, I may not
make my self so ignorant in Ecclesiastical Histories, silent of such
examples, and unskillful in Divinity, which utterly disableth such men to
intermedle in reconciling people to Christ, and minister his Sacraments, to
have the least conceit this Subdeacon Eusebius was sent hither alone, but some
reverend Priests and Bishops, or Bishop at the least, on whom he with others
was to attend, were sent hither by Pope Pius at that time, to exercise those
powerable spiritual offices which Britain needed, and he could not perform.
Their names in particular I do not find, no more then of others sent in later
times by S. Eleutherius, and S. Gregory, whose sixth part is not to be found in
any of our Histories, Galfr. Monum. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 4. c. 20. Pontic.
Virun. l. 4. hist. in fine. Matthew. Westminster. an 186.
except the ancient true Gildas relating the names of those S. Eleutherius
sent, as the British History, Virunnius, and Matthew of Westminster testify,
can be produced. Yet I have set down the name of one, their Subdeacon
Eusebius, which probably is as much as any does for S. Eleutherius, or S.
Gregory their Missions, if we consider how far for number these by common
opinion did exceeded this Mission of S. Pius. And allthough iniquity of times
has buried both the names, and labors of most of these Apostolic men in
oblivion, for their particulars, yet we cannot but consider it was a great
comfort to the Christians hear, and motive to others to embrace the faith,
when they did so certainly understand by such approved warrant, that many
Noble men in Rome were become Christians, and boldly professed that Religion.
And among other matters concerning Britain cettified to S. Timothy by S.
Pastor, this was an other, that S. Pius Pope, S. Pastor and S. Praxedes being
present in the sikenes of S. Nouatus, he bequeathed all his Riches and
substance to his Brother S. Timothy and Sister S. Praxedes: his diebus cum ibi
essemus, hoc placuit ei, vt vobis vna cum beata Praxede omnem substantiam suam
relinqueret. And S. Pastor by the consent of Pope Pius and S. Praxedes wrote
hither into Britain unto him to know what order he would give in this affair:
de quo facto nos literas huius textus ad vos direximus vna cum beato Pio
Episcopo Sedis Apostolicae, and virgin Praxede, vt, quid tibi placuerit de
substantia Germani tui Nouati, facias nos certiores, vt tua ordinatio in
omnibus custodiatur. That they might certainly know from him, what order he
would set down for the disposing of so great wealth; for they undoubtedly
assured themselves, that he who had forsaken his holy Brother and Sisters, his
Fathers Country and friends, and his own temporal Estate there, for the
ardent love and desire he had to preach the Gospel in this kingdom his
Mothers Country, and to wine his Countrymen and friends hear to Christ, would
not give over so holy a work to take so long a Journey to dispose of temporal
things, which he had so contemned before, in respect of Religeous and heavenly
business.

3. And thus it proved true, for S. Timothy writing again to S. Pastor, his
brother in holy Preisthood, and his most holy Sister S. Praxedes: Timotheus
confratri presbitero Pastori, and sanctissimae Sorori Praxedi in Domino
salutem: S. Timothy committerh the disposing of his temporal Riches in Rome
to S. Pius Pope, S. Praxedes his Sister, and S. Pastor to Ecclesiastical uses.
desiring to be remembered at the memory of the holy Apostles, and to S. Pius
Pope, and all Saints there, refers the disposition of all that temporal
substance to S. Pastor and Praxedes, giving them full power and Authority to
dispose thereof. Oramus sanctimonium vestrum, vt nos commendare dignemini
memoriae sanctorum Apostolorum, and sancto Pio Episcopo, sanctae Sedis
Apostolicae Praesuli, and omnibus sanctis. Agnoscat Sanctitas vestra, quia quod
germano suo Nouato placuit, and nobis famulis vestris placet: vt in arbitrio
sanctae virginis sit, quod mihi dereliquit, and quod vobis, and sanctae virgini
placuerit, ex eo faciendi plenam per omnia habeatis potestatem. This power and
Epistle being received by S. Pastor at Rome from S. Timothy in Britain, he
delivered the Epistle to Pope Pius to read, who gave thanks to God to see so
great piety in our holy Countriman: accepta hac Epistola gaudio repleti
sumus, and tradidimus eam legendam His house that was S. Nouatus house
dedicated a Church by Pope S. Pius.
sancto Pio Episcopo. Tunc beatus Pius Episcopus gratias egit Deo omnipotenti.
And saint Praxedes so soon as she had received this warrant from saint
Timothy, entreated saint Pius the Pope to dedicate that house of Nouatus, for
a Church, because the building was great, and spacious, which saint Pius
performed dedicating a Church there at Nouatus Bathes, and constituted it a
Roman Title, consecrating a Baptisterie, or Font there, the fourth of the Ids
of May, Eodem tempore virgo Domini Praxedes, accepta Potestate, rogauit beatum
Pium Episcopum vt in Thermis Nouati, quae iam in vsu non erant, Ecclesiam
dedicaret, quia in eis aedificium magnum and spatiosum videbatur esse: quod and
placuit Pio Episcopo, and dedicauit Ecclesiam in Thermis Nouati, in vrbe, in
loco qui appellatur vicus Lateriorum, vbi and constituit Titulum Romanum, in
quo and Baptisterium, consecrauit quarto Idus Maias. This Title or Church
decayed with oldnes was decently reedified and renewed by Henry Cardinal
Caietan, Priest, and Baron. Annal. Ecclesiast. Tom. 2. an. 162. Ado Treueren.
Martyr. 12. Call. Aug. Sur. die ^1. Iulij in S. Praxede.
Cardinal of that ancient Title, when Caesar Baronius wrote his History of
this Age, anno, quo haec scribimus. Ado Archbishop of Treuers, and others
write, that this Church or Title was dedicated in her parents time, in titulo
quem Pater earum Pudens dedicauit: Which may be well said, in respect of the
continual residence and continuance of the holy Apostles, or their Disciples
and other Apostolic sacred Priests and Christians there continually serving
God. And after this solemn dedication by saint Pius, our holy Country woman
The honor of this our Brita^s Church in Rome, S. Praxedes, Martyrs and other
holy Saints there.
saint Praxedes continued there in great holiness both in time of quiet and
Persecution entettayning all Christians, and releeuing such of them as were
needy there. In so much that soon after this time Antoninus Pius being
departed out of this life and Marcus Aurelius Antoninus succeeding him in the
Empire, and persecuting Christians, and our blessed Countrywoman
notwithstanding the terror of Persecution continuing S. Pastor in Act. S.
Praxed. Ado. Treu. 12. call. August. Sur. and alij 21. Iulij. Bed. Vsuard. and
Romans Martyrol. die 26. Maij. Petr. Cat. l. 5. c. 58.
her ancient Religeous charity in harboring and maintayning the persecuted
Christians, the Emperor being informed of such meetings and assemblies to be
used, and continued in the house of saint Praxedes, sent his persecuting
Instruments thither, who apprehended many, among whom he commanded saint
Simitrius an holy Priest, and 22. others without any examination or Process of
law barbarously to be put to death in the same Church. Vulgatum est Antonino
Imperatori, quod conuentus fieret, in domo Praxedis: qui misit and tenuit
multos, inter quos Simitrium Presbyterum cum alijs viginti duobus, quos sine
interrogatione, gladio puniri praecepit in eodem Titulo. Whose bodies saint
Praxedes carefully gathered together and reverently in the night time buried
them in her holy Mothers funeral place. And she herself soon after, within
34. days of this great Martyrdom, departed this life to receive her eternal
happiness and reward in heaven, and was buried there also, near her holy Father
by saint Pastor the reverend Priest and Martyr, who also wrote her life. In
which place says he the prayers of Saints do flourish at this day. Vbi florent
hodie orationes Sanctorum.

4. Neither did this holy British Receptacle and Nursery of sacred Priests and
Christians, depart from this so long continued Religion, devotion, and
charity used there by the death of saint Praxedes, nor she, saint Pius and
saint Pastor upon that warrant or Resignation of saint Timothy, spoken of
before, so This Church bore the name of S. Timothy, and even by the Romans
confession was from S. Peter's first coming to Rome the greatest receptacle of
Christians there.
transfer the dominion and Rule thereof from him though erecting a Title or
Church there, but they still reserved a command thereof to him, and it bore
his name Balneum Timotheum, Thermae Timothinae, Timothies Bath, after saint
Praxedes death, and saint Timothies also, keeping long the name of the last
British owner thereof. Baronius freely confesses after this time that this
British house was then, and had been the common and usual lodging place of
Christians in Rome from the first coming of saint Peter thither, patebat
Pudentis Senatoris domus, vt alias meminimus, ab initio Petri Romam aduentus
hospitio Baron. Annal. Eccl. Tom. 2. an. 165.
Christianorum: And he very often times reiterats the like. And to make this
good, we have many worthy Writers, some in the life of S. Iustine the renowned
Christian Philosopher and Martyr, who as the Authors testify, did offer his
second Book for the Defense of Christian Religion to Marcus Martyrol. Romans die
13. Aprilis. Bed. Vsuard. Ado.
Antoninus Verus, and Lucius Aurelius Co^modus the persecuting Emperors, and
defended it publicly in disputation, after this time: secundum librum pro
Religionis nostrae defensione praefatis Imperatoribus Marco Antonino Vero, and
Lucio Aurelio Commodo porrexisset. This renowned man being openly, together
with the holy Christians Cariton, Caritina, Euelpistius, Hierax, Pean, and
Valerian, Menol. Graecor. call. Iunij. Metaphrastes die 1. Iunij. Sur. and
Lipol. eod. die.
or Liberian, conuented and examined by Rusticus, Prefect of the City of
Rome, under the named Emperors, in what place the Christians there used to
assemble, and his scholars came together to hear him: Iustine answered, that
he ever continued at Timothies Bath, near the house of one named Martius, and
having been now twice in Rome, knew no other place, and there he preached to
all, that resorted to him, Respondit Justinius: Ego prope domum Martij cuiusdam,
ad balneum cognomento Timothinum, hactenus mansi Veni autem in vrbem Romam
secundo, neque alium quempiam locum, nisi quem dixi, cognosco. Ac si quis ad me
venire voluit, communicaui cum illo veritatis doctrinam. By which it is
evident, that this our Christian British house in Rome after the death of S.
Praxedes, and S. Timothy his warrant to dispose of it, was employed to such
holy uses as formely it was and that it now continued notwithstanding the
great trobles and Persecution against it, the most famous and renowned place
in Rome, for entertayning and maitaining afflicted Christians, there preaching,
ministering Sacraments, and other holy exercises. And that it still continued at
our Countriman S. Timothy his disposition, as the still bearing his name as
owner or chief commander thereof, Balneum cognomento Timothinum proves, which
it could not truly bear until after the death of S. Nouatus, the immediate
and only Possessor of it, from his parents before. And it seems that
allthough S. Timothy had left it in the power of S. Pius, Praxedes and Pastor
to dispose of it, they still reserved the Right and Interest thereof to S.
Timothy, and though at the Consecration of it, for a Church it was termed
Titulus Pastoris, the Title or Church where S. Pastor was ordinary and chief
Priest, yet S. Pastor dying presently after S. Praxedes, as Baronius writes,
and by S. Pius Epistle to S. Iustus Bishop of Vienna, Baron. Tom. 2. Annal.
ann. 164. Martyrol. Romans die 26. Iulij. Pius Pap. Epist. ad Iustum Episcop.
Viennen.
where he says of S. Pastor, that S. Pastor having this Title or Church
conferred on him, deceased, presbiter Pastor titulum condidit, and digne in
Domino obijt. And so preserved the hereditarie Right together with the Title
and Church thereto S. Timothy the true heir and owner thereof, from his
Ancestors, by lawful and lineall descent.

THE X. CHAPTER.
OF THE LAST HOLY LABOVRS OF S. Timothy in Britain, his honor with S. Denis
the Areopagite, his return from hence to Rome, and Martyrdom there, and
Martyrdom of S. Pius Pope in the same place.

1. I Left saint Timothy diligently laboring in Christ's Harvest in Britain,
and now I must attend to do him honor at his glorious death, and Martyrdom
at Rome: but before we bring him hither, to take his heavenly reward for his
sufferings and travails there, we must for the greater glory of him, S.
Timothy his effectual last labors in Britain for the Conversion thereof.
and our Nation by him, make some esteem how far he profited, and prevailed
in that employment. We have heard before, that by the pains and preaching of
him, and our Countryman saint Marcellus, both our King Lucius became a
Christian, and a great part of Britain began to profess the faith of Christ:
S. Lucius Britanniae Rex S. Timothei eruditione ad Religionem Christi inductus
est. Britannia magnam ex part fidem Christi profiteri caepit: And the
perseuering of saint Timothy so seriously and with such intentive fervor,
that no thing could separate him from that most Heroical Enterprise, not the
death of his dearest Sister and Brother S. Pudentiana and Nouatus, nor so ample
and Noble a Patrimony now fallen unto him, assures us, if we had no other
testimony to adheare unto, that he was now Father of many spiritual children,
had many such Brothers and Sisters, and by laboring long hear among the
stones and Rocks of Britain, had found out and procured to this kingdom
greater and more enduring Mines of Treasure, then all saint Pudens and Claudia
his parents, or saint Nouatus his Brother their wordly Riches could yield unto
him. I can hardly be drawn to other opinion, finding no reason to warrant me,
but his inflamed love to the spiritual good, and happiness of Britain bound
and fixed him hear, with the chains thereof until with inexpressible Joy he
did see and reap that fruit of his holy works (my Authors before have told
us of) that by his means King Lucius was induced to Christian Religion, and a
great part of Britain professed it. And this was the occasion of his return
from hence and going to Rome, hoping by that Journey to be the happy Messenger
and Instrument of relating His return to Rome, and occasion thereof.
and procuring that, which was reserved for the honor of saint Eluanus,
Meduuinus, Damianus, Fugatianus and their Associats after, to see, and effect,
the general and publicly warranted, both by Pope and Prince, Conversion of
this Britain, now hindered for a time by a sodden and new raised storm of
Persecution under new Emperors. For allthough at the time of saint Timothy
his beginning his Journey from Britain to Rome the Church of Christ was at some
ease, and quiet, Antoninus Pius that friend to Christians, yet continuing his
Empire, or if Marcus Aurelius Antoninus the persecuting Emperor had begun his
Empire, yet he had not begun his Persecution at that time, or the knowledge
thereof had not yet travailed so far as Britain, to give warning and notice
to King Lucius, of any such thing, either acted or intended. But when he, and
his new Christian people hear had for certainty learned what barbarous and
cruel Persecutions were now in hand, as all Antiquities of that time do
witness, and to be silent in others, that our Noble British Christian house in
Rome, which had continued so long quiet, and been such a Seminary of Religion
for this kingdom, was now so cruelly afflicted, 23. renowned Martyrs
tyrannically and without all trial putt to death in the place and house
itself, as I have related, and saint Iustine and his sacred company after
that, carried also from thence to durance and Martyrdom, and saint Timothy
our Apostle Countryman and owner of that holy house together with saint Mark
his happy companion in Martyrdom, and likely in his Travails in Britain,
were taken from that place to Martyrdom, and Pope Pius also which much
conuersed there, and should have been a chief means in directing and
assisting our general Conversion, if it had then taken effect putt to death by
these Emperors for that cause.

2. These and such cruelties even against the Christians of this kingdom by
these persecuting Emperors being now known in Britain, there was no hope
left of our general Conversion to be compassed at this time, so many
principal Agents therein violently putt to death, and the Emperors, without
whose permission or conniuencie it could not probably be brought to pass, so
enraged and cruel against us, for such things. Yet cannot this stay and
adiourning of this greatest public good of this Nation be imputed to
pusillanimitie of mind, or want of Heroical Christian fortitude, and
magnanimity in our Christian King, and diverse of his people and Nobles among
them, who, as before, had received the Christian faith, and privately professed
it, but to the Iniquity of the violent and ouerswaying times and Pagan
Emperors with their Lieutenants, Imperiales, or Proimperatours, Proconsuls,
Propretours hindering that holy work. For allthough the state of Britain was
not so servile to the Romans as the condition of many kingdoms was but we ever
had our own Kings both by inheritance and descent of our former ancient
British regal Race, and with the desired allowance and agreement of the Roman
Emperors after the marriadge of King Aruiragus with Genuissa daughter of
Claudius, and the greatest duty they could demand, was their Tribute: yet
because in a public and authoritatiue change of Religion in a whole kingdom,
there must also be a change of such laws, and customs, as were contradicting
and repugnant unto the Religion to be received, this could not be done in such
persecuting days without great jealousy in the Persecutours Emperors, of an
utter revolt from them in all respects. And therefore our old Manuscripts both
of Nennius, and S. Gildas also, as they are commonly reputed, do tell us, that
when our general and public Conversion was, there was also an Imperial
allowance, permission, or tolleration for it, from the Roman Emperors or their
Lieutenants hear. Missa Nennius in M. S. Hist. Gildas in Hist. M. S. in
publica Biblioth. Cantabr. and in Colleg. S. Benedicti.
legatio ne ab Imperatore Romanorum: says Nennius. Missa legatione ab
Imperatoribus Romanorum: writes Gildas in two Several Manuscripts, one in the
public Library of Cambridge, the other in saint Benets College there. The
reasons hereof I shall deliver in due place hereafter.

3. That which is wanting yet, and to be added to the honor of our Apostle and
Countryman saint Timothy, is his glorious Martyrdom, so honored of saint
Pius the Pope then, and soon after also martyred, that writing to the renowned
Bishop of Vienna not long vnmartyred, and exhorting him to constancy and
perseverance in afflictions and Persecution in Christ, proposes only unto him
for the most worthy examples this saint Timothy, and his holy companion at
Martyrdom, and probably of his labors in Britain saint Mark, saying they
were Priests, brought up by the Apostles, continuing until this time, with
whom he had imparted the word of faith, men called of God and now living in
everlasting Joys in heaven. S. Timothy and Mark have ended their course by a
good Combatt. O Brother remember thou imitatest them S. Pius Epist. ad Iustum
Vienn. Episcop. Tom. 1. Biblioth. Sanct. and apud Baron. Tom. 2. Annal. an. 166.
in following them, and be not bound with the bands of the world: presbyteri
illi, qui ab Apostolis educati vsque ad nos peruenerunt; cum quibus simul
verbum fidei partiti sumus, a Domino vocati, in cubilibus aeternis clausi
tenentur. Sanctus Timotheus and Marcus per bonum certamen transierunt. Vide
frater, vt illos imiteris sequendo, ne vinculis mundi illigeris. This is that
great honor of Britain, and Gods Church, whom saint Dionisius the
Areopagite, that wonderful Divine and His honor with S. Denis the Areopagite.
glory of saint Paul's Scholars honored so much, as every Reader may see in
his divine Books, de diuinis nominibus and Ecclesiastica Hierarchia, of divine
names and the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, calling him most holy, sanctissime,
and the like, and dedicated them to him as the ancient Title, Compresbytero
Timotheo Dionisius Presbyter, Denis Priest to his fellow Priest, Timothy; and
in his Baron. Tom. 2. Annal. an. 109.
book de diuinis nominibus citi^g an Epistle of saint Ignatius, written after
the other saint Timothy Bishop of Ephesus his death, do witness, Baronius and
others so acknowledging: How before his death he disposed his wordly Pius Pap.
Epist. ad S. Just. tom. 1. Bibliot. Sanct. and Baron. an. 166.
wealth to the glory of Gods Church, and recommended the care of his Country
Britain to the most glorious lights then of Christ's Church saint Pius Pope and
his worthy friends and familiars saint Soter and saint Eleutherus or
Eleutherius after Popes, we may gather by his former love and labors for this
Nation. The Martyrdom of S. Timothy and S. Pius Pope.
And so after so many years of most holy life and travails for the Church of
Christ, after his releeuing and maintenance of so many Saints, lodged, Manu^cr.
Antiq. in Monast. S. Cirian. Martyrol. Romans die 24. Martij. and Tabul. Ant.
apud Baron. Tom. 2. ann. 162. Pius Pap. 1. Epist. ad S. Iustum. supr. 1. Epist.
2. ad eund.
fedd, clothed, and fostered both with temporal and spiritual sustenance, his
chardges and provision in his holy house, many of them also martyred there, he
was also martyred with his worthy Associate and fellow Priest saint Mark at
Rome the 24. day of March an. 165. And saint Pius the Pope of Rome was martyred
also soon after under the same persecuting Emperors, his death at hand being
revealed unto him as he writes in an other Epistle to saint Iustus of Vienna
in France, and Bishop there. Reuelatum mihi esse scias, collega beatissime,
citius me finem huius vitae esse facturum.

THE XI. CHAPTER.
OF THE HOLY POPES NEXT SVCCEEDING S. Pius, and their Religion. The favorable
Edict of Marcus Aurelius Emperor for defense and protection of Christians, and
the Christian Lieutenants Trebellius and Pertinax, with the forbidding the
Druids Religion, occasions of the public receiving and profession of
Christianity in Britayne by King Lucius and his subjects.

1. S. Pius having thus gloriously ended his holy life and Papacy, saint
Anicetus by the more common opinion after many Ancients, Iraeneus, Tertullian,
Hegesippus, Eusebius, Epiphanius, with others teaches that saint Anicetus
succeeded him in this hihest chardge. Yet there be very ancient Hieron. l. de
Scr. in Hegesippo. Optat. Mileu. l. contra. Parmen. August. Epist. 161. Rober
Barnes l. de Vit. Pontif. To. in Aniceto.
and worthy Authors as saint Hierome, Optatus, saint Augustine, with others
which hold that saint Anicetus was Pope between saint Higinius and saint Pius.
And an English Protestant writer though he follows the first and more common
opinion for the Order of his Succession, next after saint Pius, yet saying of
him that he was Pope in Antoninus Pius his Empire, sub Antonino Pio vixit, he
must fall to the second opinion by that I have spoken before of the time of
Antoninus Pius his Empire, and contradict himself, as also he is singular when
he says of saint Anicetus, that he was Pope but two years, four months, and
three days, Annos 2. menses 4. dies 3. others commonly tripling that time in
his Papacy. Therefore to avoid all the least inconvenience and exception, I
will join also in this place saint Soter in all opinions undoubtedly Pope
immediately before saint Eleutherus or Eleutherius, and next to saint Anicetus
by the more received, Damasus Pont. in Sotere. Martin. Polon. Suppu. in Soter.
and to saint Pius by the other, opinion. The space of his Papacy is not
agreed upon, the lives of Popes ascribed to Damasus, ascribes to him nine
years, seven months, and 21. days. Martinus allows him so many years and
days but detracteth four months: Sedit annis nouem, mensibus tribus, Matthew.
Westminster. an. gratiae 175.
diebus viginti vno. The very same has Matthew of Westminster: Sedit in
Cathedra Romana, annis 9. mensibus 3. and diebus 21. Baronius, and Binnius do
not afford him half so much time, saying he was not Pope fully and compleately
four years, but wanted twelve days of that term: defunctus habetur Baron.
Tom. 2. Annal. ann. 179. Seuerin. Binnius Tom. 1. Council. in Sotere.
Soter die 22. mensis Aprilis, cum sedisset annos quatuor, minus diebus
duodecim. And assign the year of his death 199. from the Nativity of Christ,
and 17. of the Empire of Marcus Aurelius, spoken of before, continuing Emperor
until the third year of the next Pope saint Eleutherius: All which time and
longer Lucius was still King in Britain. These two Popes as our Protestant
writers of their lives, are witnesses, were holy men and Martyrs. Saint
Anicetus painefully governed the Roman Church in the holy ministry of the
word, and in great constancy in the Christian faith, shedd his blood for Gods
truth. Anicetus Romanae Ecclesiae in verbi ministerio sacro laboriose praefuit,
and in magna Christianae fidei constantia pro Dei veritate sanguinem postremo
fudit. Io. Bal. l. 1. de Act. Pontif. Romans in Aniceto.
The like they testify of saint Soter: In armis Spiritualibus Christo
fideliter militauit: hoc vnum agens praecipue, vt animas per Baptismum Christo
dicatas doctrina, and exemplo, illi suo sponso saluandas adduceret: mortemque
sui corporis pro Christi ipsius testimonio pertulit. Thus we are secured that
both their example and conversation of life, as also their doctrine and
Religion, which they taught and professed, was holy.

2. What this was, some what in particular these men thus deliver unto us.
Robert. Barns l. de Vit. Pontif. Romans in Anicet.
Anicetus, decreed that if an Archbishop were accused by a Bishop, it should be
done either before the Primate or Pope of Rome. He appointed that Archbishops
should not be called Primats, but Metropolitans, except this prerogative of
name was granted The Doctrine and Religion of S. Auicetus and Soter.
to any by the Pope of Rome. He commanded that the crown of Priests heads
should be shaued round: Anicetus Archiepiscopum a suo Episcopo, aut coram
Primate, aut Romano Pontifice accusandum esse statuit. Archiepiscopos non
Primates, sed Metropolitanos appellandos esse dixit, nisi ista praerogatiua
Nomenclaturae ei a Romano Pontifice concederetur. Capitis verticem spherulae
instar radendum sacerdotibus praecepit. Soter appointed against that error of
the Gnostiks, that a Robert. Barns. supr. in Sotere.
Nun should not handle the Pall, nor put incense into the Censor: and
ordained that a Priest Should not say Mass except two at the least were
present: Ne Monacha Pallam contrectaret, neue Thus in Acerram poneret, statuit.
N^ sacerdos celebraret, nisi vt minimum duo adessent ordinauit. In these times
the persecuting Emperors still reigning, and Persecution raging, not only in
the Eastern parts, but in Italy, France, and Countries in the continent near
unto us. This our Island as an other world, was almost quite free thereof both
now before, and Gildas l. de Excid. and conq. Brit. c. 7.
after until the general Persecution of Dioclesian, as saint Gildas and
others after him do witness: vsque ad persecutionem Diocletiani Tyranni
nouennem, both in respect of the situation, remote distance and separation
from the chief British Kings ever favorers and friends of Christians, drew
many persecuted Christians hither.
commanding place of the Empire, and that it ever had Kings not so depending of
the persecuting Emperors, and so far from the name and nature of
Persecutours, that they ever were friends, and favorers of Christians, and now
the King and many both of his Nobility and other subjects had received
Christian Religion. This, as our Protestant Antiquaries and others have told us
of like former times, drew many worthy and learned Christians among others
hither, where for themselves they might more quietly enjoy the liberty of
their conscience and Religion, and for others desirous to be instructed in the
truth thereof, and not kept back with such terrors of Persecution as in other
Countries, they might with more confidence and boldness, and with great hope of
fruit, and increase, preach and teach it unto them. And so this Persecution in
other Nations, not sailing over itself but sending Apostolic men unto us
either to convert, or by their holy doctrine, conversation, and miracles which
they wrought, at the least so to dispose the minds and wills of many men in all
degrees, that it made our general Conversion now at hand, more easy to be so
speedely and universally performed.

3. That such was the state of Britain for spiritual affairs in this
Idolatry and superstition, daily diminishing and decaying, and Christian
Religion in all places and persons increasing, and multiplying both Authority,
and the known certain effect it self, the surest testimony in such cases
shall witness heareafter. And this was the condition thereof, until about the
beginning of the Papacy of S. Soter, or the end of the first year thereof
about the year of our Redemption 175. when as it appears by the Edict of
Marcus Aurelius Emperor before the strange delivery of him and his Army by the
Christians Literae Marci Aurelij Anton. ad Senatum. in fine operum S. Iustini.
Baron. To. 2. Annal. an. 176. Mat. West. an. gratiae 174. Tertull. Apol. c. 5.
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 5. Oros. l. 7. c. 15. Florent. Wigor. Chronic. an. 161. vel 184.
miraculous prayers, he suffered many Christians to live in quiet, and had a
great number of them about him, inuenique magnam eorum multitudinem. And seeing
himself and his Army in distress, sent for them and entreated them to pray
for his delivery: eos qui apud nos Christiani dicuntur, accersiui, ac rogaui.
Which he would not have done, being a wise and learned Emperor, but that
either by the Apology of Athenagoras, the virtues and Miracles of many
Christians, or some other invincible Argument, his Judgment was then wholly or
almost convicted that their Religion was holy and they also, and thereby
likely to be powerable with God to procure his safety, which his own prayers
and Sacrifices to his Pagan Gods were not able to do, Deos Patrios votis
susceptis rogaui, sed cum ab eis negligerer, As he himself publikly
proprofessed, and therefore preferring the prayers of the Christians, appealed
unto them. But after God by the prayers of the Christians which he procured
them to make, had so Miraculously delivered him and his Army consisting but of
four Legions, not 27. thousand men, environed almost with a thousand
thowsands of Enemies, as the common reading is, hostium Nongentorum and
septuaginta septem millia, and his people distressed with thrist and hunger,
not having drunk in five days, by sending a most cooling and comforting Rain
in the Camp of the distressed Emperor, and Hail like fire, and lightnings
among his Enemies confounding and discomfiting them, he presently sent out his
Imperial letters and Edict, chardging the Senate of Rome, to confirm them
with their Decree, wherein wholly asscribing this delivery of his Army and
himself, and confusion of his Enemies to the God of the Christians, and their
prayers unto him, wherein he gave free liberty for any man to be a Christian:
concedamus talibus, vt sint Christiani: and no man should be molested for being
a Christian: censeo neminem, quod Christianus sit, esse in crimen and in
Iudicium vocandum; And he that should accuse a Christian for his Religion
should be burned alive, and he that shall profess himself to be a Christian,
shall be freed from all danger intended against him for that cause; And no
governor of any Province shall punish any such for his Religion, or deprive him
of liberty. Volo eum qui Christianum accusauit, viuum exuri: Illum vero qui
Christianum se esse professus fuerit, periculo omni, quod ob eam rem ei
intendebatur, liberatum. Is cui Prouincia commissa est, nequaquam ad
paenitentiam adigat, aut libertatem ei adimat. And he willed these things to be
confirmed by the Senats Decree, and this his Edict to be proposed in the open
Marcet place, to be read; And that the Prefect of the City then Vetrasius
Pollio should cause it to be sent to all Provinces, and no man should be
forbidden to write it out. Haec autem Senatus consulto etiam sanciri volo,
atque hoc meum Edictum in Foro diui Traiani proponi, vt legi possit. Curae
autem erit Vetrasio Pollioni, Praefecto vrbi, vt ad omnes Prouincias haec
constitutio mittatur: neque quisquam qui eam exscribere, vel ipse vti voluerit,
prohibeatur. This was sent to the whole Senate and people of Rome, Senatui
populoque Romano, and by the Emperors public chardge, and command, as into
other Provinces, so likewise sent it into Britain for the privilege of all
Christians hear, by the Emperors public Officer in such affairs the Ruler
of the City of Rome, ad omnes Prouincias haec constitutio mittatur. Any man
that would, might freely be a Christian, and no man under pain of cruel death
to be burnt alive, might call any into question for that cause. And to give
greater testimony of these things in Britain, and see this Imperial Edict for
the freedom of Christians hear take place and effect, where as our English
Antiquaries and others tell us, that Trebellius and Pertinax the Roman
Lieutenants hear about this time were Christians, our Countriman Florentius
Wigorniensis plainly affirms, that Florent. Wigor. chron. an. 159. 181
Pertinax was a chief commander in the Emperors Army, when this Miraculous
Victory was by the Christians prayers, and this Edict written and decreed by the
Emperor for their freedom and liberty, and probably was then converted to
the Christian faith by this Miracle. Pertinaci, and exercitui qui cum eo in
Quadorum Regione pugnabat, siti oppressis, pluuia diuinitus missa est, cum e
contrario Germanos and Sarmatas fulmi na persequerentur, and plurimos eorum
interficerent. And the Emperor himself who in his public cited Edict, does
say of Christians, that in equity he must think them now to be defended by
God, whom before he accounted for wicked men, and alienated from God, must
needs be a Christian in conscience and Judgment. Equum est, vt, quos impios
esse, and a Deo alienos opinabamur, eos existimemus Deo munitos esse. And he
most needs at least internally believe in that true God, whom he said the
Christians did bear in their conscience, Deum in conscientia gestant. And in
no wise a learned Emperor or other would or could in Judgment, reason,
equity, and conscience make a law to condemn men to so cruel death as
burning alive, which he inflicted upon the accusers of Christians, except he
knew or probably thought their accusation was unjust, and the cause of the
accused Christians lawful, just, and holy.

4. Whereupon it came to pass that very many, both present at this Miracle and
the Emperors change upon it, or hearing it by so undoubted Relation as the
Emperors public and severe Edict for the quiet of Christians, began then to
love and embrace their Religion, so pleasing and powerable with God, and
honored by men of greatest command and judgment. And Marci Aurelij Edict. supr.
this Imperial Edict and Relation of these things by public Authority, and
warrant, both of the Emperor and the Consuls of Rome, was with all expedition
sent, proclaimed and diuulged hear in Britain, as in other Provinces, to King
Lucius and the Lieutenants for the Emperor hear, as his precept was. And this
I take to be that Ambassadge or Messadge which S. Gildas and Nennius before
have spoken of, sent from the Roman Emperor, or Emperors, as the diverse
readings have, missa Legatione ab Imperatore Romanorum, or, ab Imperatoribus
Romanorum, to exhort or warrant king Lucius to profess Christian Religion. For
howsoever we will understand these words Emperor or Emperors of the Romans,
whether for the chief Emperor, or his Substituts so sometime named by S.
Gildas, so it was concerning the high Emperor, his Edict publikly proclaimed
and diuulged in all Provinces, was come to King Lucius ^is knowledge, so that
he must needs take notice thereof by that means. And if we will take the
phrase of speech, Imperatores Romanoru^ the Emperous of the Romans, as S.
Gildas before in Claudius seems to use it, Gild. Histor. in Claudio.
when he says: in Tempore Claudij quieuit dari census Romany a Britannia: sed
Britannicis Imperatoribus traditur. Tribute ceased to be given to the Romans
from Britain in the time of Claudius: but it is delivered to the British
Emperors, which the Roman true Emperors seem to have deputed, as the Roman
Consuls had their Proconsules, and Pretors, Propretors, and Kings now have
their Proreges, Viceroyes in remote Kingdoms subject to them, supplying their
place and power. And in this sense also King Lucius had both Martyrol. Ant.
apud Baton. To. 1. Annal. an. 183. Holinshed. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 19.
^oscelin. Hist. Eccles. Ang. in Lucio. Matthew. Parker. Antiq. Brit. p. 4.
Galfri. Monum. l. 4. c. 19. Virun. l. 4. Harris Theatr. l. 2. cap. 18. Hect.
Boeth. Scot. Histor. l. 5. f. 85. Io. Goscelin. supr. c. de Rel. Lucij. Matthew.
Parker. Antiquit. Brit. p. 4.
notice and warrant given unto him of these proceedings by the Emperors or
Lieutenants of the Romans in Britain, as all Antiquaries give testimony
herein, our Protestant Historians thus write of this matter: King Lucius
perceived not only some of the Roman Lieutenants in Britain, as Trebellius
and Pertinax, with others to have submitted themselves to the Christian
profession, but also the Emperor himself to begin to be favorable to them
that professed it. An other says of King Lucius; comperit ex Legatis Caesaris
Praepotentes atque Illustres quosdam ex Romany Trebellium nempe ac Pertinacem,
aliosque no^nullos Christianae Religioni accessisse: immo etiam ipsum
Imperatorem aequum factum: King Lucius was assured by the Legates of the
Emperor, that very potent and renowned me^ of the Romans, as Trebellius and
Pertinax and others had embraced the Christian Religion; and the Emperor
himself was become indifferent herein. The like have Catholic writers of this
business. And some Protestants have published that the Roman Emperors had
forbidden all use, and profession of the Druyds Religion in their Provinces:
Edicto cautum Romanorum fuit, ne vsus aut existimatio in Prouincijs suis
Religioni Druidum vlla adhiberetur. An other writes that the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus, who had set out the favorable Edict for Christians, had
set out an other utterly to abandon the Druids Religion, which had reigned so
long with honor in Britain, where the chiefest professors and Masters
thereof remained, and that King Lucius was at this time great in favor, and
familiarity with this Emperor. Erat eodem tempore Lucius and Romanorum
fautor, and Marco Antonio vero Caesari summa been volentia, ac familiaritate
coniunctus cuius Authoritate and Decreto, cum profliganda esset tantae
Authoritatis Religio (Druydum) quae omnium memoriam superabat. Thus write these
Protestant Historians, but neither bringing Authority, or reason that the
Roman Emperors had made any such Edict, particularly against the practice of
the Druyds Religion in Britain. I dare not follow them therein. For there was
great difference between the government of Britain, Prouincia Regia, governed
by our own King only Tributary to the Romans, and other Countries, as France
Gallia where the Druyds also ruled, immediately subject to the Romans, Iure
belli, by Title of Conquest, which they never had over Britain, and so by
their own conditions of peace could not claim any such Prerogative hear to
bind the Britans, but only their Romans and Ciues, hear, to what Religion
they pleased to prescribe.

5. And therefore their own writers as Suetonius Tranquillus and our
Protestant Antiquaries also, knowing how offensive the Druids which ruled both
in matters of war and peace, and their Religion, were unto the Roman C.
Suetonius Tranquillus in Claud. Plinius l. ^^. cap. 1. Io. Seldom Analect. c.
5. p. ^^. ^8. Au^elius V^ctor Hist. abbreuiat. part. 2. an. ab vrbe condit.
794. cap. 4. Opimer. Chronograph. in Tyberio. Theater of great B^^t. l. 6.
Conquests and proceedings, and how desirous those Emperors therefore were to
suppress them, do tell us, that before they were such Conquerours in those
parts where the Druids ruled, Augustus did forbid all Citizens of Rome, and
those would enjoy the Immunities of being such, to profess the Druids
Religion: Druidarum Religio tantum ciuibus sub Augusto Interdicta. And after
they had made themselves Masters of Gallia, Claudius did quite abolish it from
thence what he could. And Aurelius Victor writing after this time, and of
suppressing the Druids by the Roman Emperors, extends this suppression no
further then Gallia, now France: compressae per Galliam Druidarum famosae
superstitiones. Which Suetonius had written of Claudius before. Druidarum
Religionem apud Gallos dirae immanitatis, and tantum ciuibus sub Augusto
interdictam, penitus aboleuit. So does Aurelius Victor and Opimerus of
Tyberius, showing one reason among others, because when they took any of the
Romans Prisoners they killed, and offered them in Sacrifice to their Idols: cum
Gallias possideret ea immanitas, vt Druides illorum homines immolarent, Tyberij
Cornelius Tacitus H^st. l. 14. in Vit. Iulij Agricolae. Ponticus Virun. l. 4.
Pol^dor. Virgil. Angl. Histor. lib. 1. page 11. Stowe Histor. in Suetonius
Paulin. Holinsh. Histor. of Engl. l. 4. c. 9. Hect. Boeth. Scotor. Hist. l. 3.
fol. 55. and 23. Iul. Caesar. Comme^t. l. 6. Robert. Caenal. Tom. 1. Gallic.
Hist. Perioch. 3. Diodorus Siculus rerum ant. l. 5. Io. Xiphi^in. in Epitom.
Dionis. in Nerone. Julius Caesar Commentar. l. 6. Boeth. Theat. of Brit. supr.
Matthew. Parker. Antiquit. Brit. p. 4.
Caesaris principatus sustulit Druidas. Of which their sacrificing of Romans in
Britain, both the Roman and our own Historians are witnesses; justly calling
them cruel superstitions: In quibus Insulani cruore captiuo adolere aras, and
hominum fibris consulere Deos fas habebant. And, Sacerdotes infando ritu
humanis mactatis hostijs, Deos consulebant. And the Druids were ever present at
these cursed, cruel and most Inhuman Sacrifices: horum erat publicis
sacrificijs interesse. For example our Protestant Historians, with others, thus
write of Bunduica, directed by the Druids, when she had stayne 80000. Romans:
she exercised all kind of cruelty one such men as she took. As for the Noble
women that she gate, she hanged them up, and cut of their pappes, and sewed
them to their mouths: besides this, she stretching their bodies out at length,
thrust sharp stakes clean through them: all which things were done in
despite, when they sacrificed, and feasted in their Temples. And whatsoever
cruelties, outrages, reuolts, tumults, or seditions, as the Romans termed or
interpreted not concurring with them by the Britans, the Druids having power
with seuerest punishments to Order and direct all things, all these were by the
Romans ascribed, and imputed unto them.

6. Therefore of all people in Britain these Druids were, and must needs be
most odious to the Romans; and their Religion which allowed and practiced such
Barbarous, cruel, and execrable devises, and was so hateful unto them, that
as our Protestant Historians write this Emperor by his Imperial Authority,
and decree had forbidden the Druids Religion in Britain: Marci Antonij Very
authoritate and decreto profliganda esset Religio quae omnium memoriam
superabat. In which opinion there was now no evasion to be found out, but the
Druids superstition must presently be abandoned in Britain. And not to build
too much upon these men's words, most evident it is, that although the Roman
Emperors had not published any Edict, for the abolishing the Religion of the
Druids in Britain, nor without the allowance and approbation of the King of
Britain, could by the agreed conditions between them, so far intermedle to
make any general law to bind all the Druids, or any other kind of people in
this kingdom: Yet now both our King Lucius consenting, and seeking it, and the
Roman Emperors so long desiring it, and far preferring Christian Religion
before that which they professed, the way is laid wide open, and ready prepared
for a common forsaking of the Druids superstition, and embracing the sacred
Religion of Christ in this Nation. For allthough we yield to them which hold
King Lucius did not Rule in all Britain on this side the wall or Trench of
Adrian, yet most certain in Histories it is, that he and the Roman Emperors
together possessed it all. And these Emperors and their Lieut^nants had
publicly, as before, given warrant for any man to be a Christian in all their
Territories, and Anton. Sabelicus Eunead. 7. libr. 2. Hector Boeth. Scot. Hist.
l. 3. f. 55 Ho^^nsh. H^st. of Engl. l. 4. cap. 9. Theater of great Britain l.
6.
they desired nothing more, then the Druids utter destruction, and extirpation,
and P. Suetonius not long before Lieutenant hear for the Romans had begun it
when in the Isle of Anglesey, which was the resident place of the most learned
and commanding Druids both for Britain and Gallia he had v^terly destroyed
them, their execrable places of Sacrifice, and sca^^ely left there any memory
of them. By which proceedings the chiefest difficulties of the Conversion of
Britain especially in temporal respects were now overcome. And for spiritual
further helps besides so many holy and Apostolic men preaching hear then
among the Britans, of whom I have made memory before, we find that many
among the Romans hear at that time were Christians, and so had their
spiritual guides to direct them; and which also gave Instructions to King
Lucius and his Britans. Lucius Britanniae Rex de Christianorum Hector Boeth.
Scot. Hist. l. 5. f. 55
pietate and miraculis a Romany in Britannia sub Trebellio and Pertinace
merentibus permulta audiuit. And we are further assured by forreyne Histories,
that in the time of this Pope S. Sote^ and Emperor about the year of Christ
174. Anno and quod excurrit 174. Pontifice Maximo Sotere: diverse Bishops were
Arnold. Merm. Theatro conu. gent. and alij apud eund. ib.
sent into these parts, which these Antiquaries bring on their Journey
hitherwards as far as Callice, Morinis, naming diverse of them, as S.
Fuscianus, Victoricus, Piato and their companions: Antistitibus S. Fusciano,
Victorico, Piatone, alijsque socijs. And to put us in mind of their coming
hither, they tell us, they had there the shortest passadge into Britain, and
they bring ancient witnesses thereof. Vnde breuissimus in Britanniam, nunc
Angliam, est Traiectus, vti Tacitus, and Julius Caesar meminere.

THE XII. CHAPTER.
HOW THE RELIGION OF THE DRVIDES in Britain made some hinderance for the
general receiving of the law of Christ; But convicted to be abominable
Idolatry, and Superstition, the Professors of it generally embraced the faith
of Christ, detesting their former Infidelities and Impieties.

1. WHEN matters were thus far proceeded for the general receiving of
Christian Religion in Britain, the King and his Nobles seeking it, the Roman
Emperors and Lieutenants giving consent there unto, and many holy Apostolic
Bishops and Priests now hear both among the Britans, and Romans which urged
it, and offered themselves daily to maintain and prove that to be the only
true and lawful serving of God, and way to eternal happiness, and salvation
after this life: And that profession of the Druids which the Britans hear
before this time, as also the Inhabitants of Gallia, and a great part of
Germany, had many hundreds of years followed, and practiced, was impious,
false, Idolatrous, damnable and diabolical, many of the chief Doctors and
teachers thereof were much troubled and perplexed hereat, and in te^porall
respects not without cause. For if a forsaking of their Rites and Ceremonies
should generally and with public warrant, and regal Authority, ensue, their
temporal honors, dignities, revenues, Immunities and privileges granted
unto them only in regard of their teaching, and maintaining that their
Profession, would not only be taken from them, but in all Judgment be
conferred and bestowed, (as they after were) upon the Christian Bishops and
Clergy to succeed, professed enemies of their callings. Hear upon to give a
quiet and peaceable Introduction to the holy Law of Christ, which alone
yields all true peace, and quietness to the souls of men in earth and heaven,
and not to bring it in with the only temporal swaye or power of the King of
Britain and Roman Emperors, as the custom of Mahumetans and some others is,
which have no thing but sword, penal Edicts, and Persecution, to vent and
supporte their bastardly Religions withal, diverse conflicts and disputations
were had in this kingdom between our Christian Apostolic men, and the best
learned of the Druids Law. These urged many reasons and popular, for their
manner and custom of worship, yet preserved in Histories. They had to plead
for themselves, that not only Britain and British Ila^ds many in number, but
France, and great parts of Germany joined with them in Religion: And in their
worshipping for Gods, Jupiter, Apollo, Mars, Mercury, Audate, Berecynthia and
some others, most of the gentiles conspired with them. Their Religion and
themselves by that name had continued, and flourished in the world from the time
of Druius that great King and high Priest, Druius Germanorum Pontifex. Who
reduced the gentiles Religion into Henric. Pantal. l. de Vir. Illustrib. Germ.
part. 1. p. 40. 41. Seldom Analect. Anglobr. l. 1. c. 1. c. 4. Berosus. Nichol.
Vignier. Biblioth. Hist. An. mundi 2200. Hist. aggregatiue des Annals fol. 3.
Bernard. Giunti Cron. in Driius. Ioa. Frisius Biblioth. Philos. Anno mundi
2070. Ante Christum 1892. Io. Bal. l. de Scriptor. centur. 1. in Samothe. Camd.
Brit. p. 12. Plini. l. 12. cap. 1. Lud. Caelius. l. 7. c. 1. Tacit. lib. de
morib. and popul. German. Andr. Altham. in schol. in Cornel. Tacit. supr. I^l.
Caesar lib. 6. Belli Gallic. Hector. Boeth. Scot. Hist. l. 2. f. 22. 23.
this order, founded them a College and gave them their denomination about the
year of the worlds Creation 2900. Druius ille apud Germanorum Celtas, vir
magnae Authoritatis gentilitiam Religionom in ordinem redegit, atque Druidarum
Collegium Religionis ergo instituit, a quo etiam Druides apud Gallos and
Germanos dicti. And the Town in Normandy, called Dreux, was also so named from
him, as their Histories say, and the River Druentia running thereby. What was
the certain time of their beginning is not so certain. Pantaleon before
says, it was in the year of the world 2900. Ioannes Frisius says, in the
year thereof 2070. and 1892. years before Christ. Bernado Giunti will have it
in the 420. year after the flood of Noe. Nicholas Vignier asscribeth the
Reign of King Dryus or Driuus to the year of the world 2200. Therefore I
cannot be of these late writers mind, which say, they were called Druides of
(...) an Oak in Greek, because they were some times under Oaks in the woods.
For so we might call all old Idolaters Druids, for the Scripturs witness, they
sacrificed in Groves and Woods, so does Pliny, Lud. Caelius and others Lucos,
and nemora consecrant. And the Greek writers, as Eutropius, Dio, Herodian,
Zosimus and the rest are silent of this Sect, as the Latins also, but when they
speak of Britain, France and some parts of Germany where only, and no where
else this Religion reigned. And Julius Caesar is plain, there were no Druids in
Germany, but they differed much from the Gauls in Religion. Germani multum a
Gallorum consuetudine differunt. Nam neque Druides habent, qui rebus diuinis
praesunt. And the Scottish Historians say, the ancient name of these men in
the languadge hear, was Durcerglijs, and they were Romans which spoke not
Greek which gave them first the name Druides of Druius, to make the strange
name to take Latyne declension: hos Romani Scriptores Druides vt peregrinum
vocabulum inflexionem caperet Latinam, appellant. And hear were no Greeks in
these parts to give them a Greek name, neither did their Sect come near a^^
^art of Greece, at any time, and howsoever we will pronounce the Greek word
(...) an Oak, drys or drus, we should by deriuing them from thence, call then
Drissets, or Drussets, as of Cus, and Hus, we call Cussits, and Hussits, and
not Druidae, or Druids: But for their Antiquity they might truly make it of
so great continuance.

2. Neither was their honor and glory in Britain, and where else they lived,
of a lower degree. Vestitus little valde pretiousus, atque ornatus insignis.
Henricus Pa^tal. l. de Vir. Illustr: Germ. part. 1. p. 40. 41.
Nam collo torques, manibus annuli, lacertis Armillae addebantur. Vestes erant
tinctae, and auro pictae: Their apparel was very precious, and attire
singular. For they wore chains of gold about their necks; Rings one their
hands, and bracelets one their Arms. Their garments were dyed, and embrodered
with gold. And their habitations and dwelling places were no less stately, the
cheifests of them seated Antiquit. Eccles. Landau. Bed. l. 1. Hist. c. 4.
Gildas l. de excid. and co^q. Brit. Galfr. monum. Hist. l. 4. c. 19. Pont.
Virun. libr. 4. Dicetus Hist. M. S. ann. 178. Matt. West. Hist. an. 185. 186.
Martin. Polon. Supput. in Eleutherio. Robert. Barnesin Vit. Pontif. Romans in
Eleuther. Matthew. Parker Antiq. Brit. Godwin. Conuers. of Britain. Stow. Hist.
in King Lucius. an. 179. Polid. Virgil. Hist. l. 2. Hector. Boeth. Scot. Hist.
l. 2. f. 23 Theater of great Brit. l. 6. Seldom Analect. Mich. Dract. Polyolb.
Io. Hard. Chron. c. 51. Ammianus Marcellin. l. 15. in Co^stantio. Julius Caesar
Belli Gallici. l. 6. Lucan. l. 1.
in the chief Cities of Britain, and their Mansions converted afterward to be
Archbishops, and Bishops Palaces, sometimes they resorted to woods as all
ancient Witches, Magicians, and Idolaters did, to exercise their Sorceries,
and offer their Sacrifices, especially to such Oaks, as bore Misseltoe,
naturally medicinable for diverse infirmities, and therefore to the rude people
they ascribed a certain Divinity to such Trees. Their houses, as themselves
also had exemptions from all services, exactions, and trobles. They were chief
Judges in all matters both spiritual and Temporal, having all men obedient to
their Order, sentence and determination under the greatest penalty of
abandoning, and exilement from the Society of men, and such like, and death
itself at their pleasures, designing whom they listed to be cruelly
sacrificed to their Devils, and Idols, whom they termed Gods. The chiefest of
them had for a singular sign of honor fire borne before him. Ante quem ignis
dignitatis, honorisque insigne deferretur. Ammianus Marcellinus speaking of
these men, gives this praise unto them, that they were of great wits, and
lived in companies or Colleges, according as Pythagoras ordained, they were
lifted up with questions of hidden and high things, and despising human
matters, pronounced that men's souls were Immortal. Druidae ingenijs
celsiores, vt authoritas Pitagorae decreuit, sodalitijs astricti consortijs
quaestionibus occultarum rerum altarumque erecti sunt: and despectantes humana,
pronuntiarunt animas immortales. Which opinion of theirs of the souls
immortality Julius Caesar with diverse others also confirms, but in a lewd
sense of Transmigration of going from one body to an other. Hoc volunt
persuadere, non interire animas, sed ab alijs post mortem transire ad alios.
And if any man was dangerously sike, in war or peril, and would offer
Sacrifice, or vow to offer it, they used the Druids as Ministers to offer it.
Qui sunt affecti grauioribus morbis, quique in praelijs periculisque versantur,
aut pro victimis homines immolant, aut se immolaturos vouent, administrisque ad
ea sacrificia Druidibus vtuntur. Diodorus Siculus who lived in the same time
with Julius Caesar gives his reason, that the Druids were thus used for
Priests in all the Sacrifices of the Gauls and Britans, much to their honor
in their opinion which were ruled by the Druids: because they hold that
Sacrifices should be offered by them, which be acquainted with the divine
Nature, and are skillfull of the languadge of the Gods: and they think that by
these men's intercession good things should be Diodor. Sicul. l. 5. ^^^um antiq.
asked of the Gods, by whose counsel they enjoy peace and war. Est apud cos
moris, nullum absque Philosopho Sacrificium facere. Existimant enim per diuinae
naturae conscios sacra fieri oportere, tanquam linguae Deorum peritos. Atque
horum intercessione bona a dijs censent petenda, quorum consilio, and pace, and
bello fruuntur. Our Protestant Authors of the Theater of great Britain make
Caesar and ancient writers to write in this manner: The Druids office was
employed about holy things: for they had the managing of public and private
Sacrifices, and to interpret Theater of great Brit. l. 6.
and discuss matters of Religion. Unto them do resort great numbers of young
men to learn at their hands, and they he had in great reverence, for they
determine almost, all controversies and matters in variance, as well public,
as private. And if there happen any thing to be done amiss, if there be any
murder committed, if there arise any controversy concerning inheritance or
bounds of lands, they take the matter into their power, and award either
recompense or penalties in the case. And if there be any, be he private parson,
or be it corporation, that will not stand to their Judgment, they interdict
him, which punishment amongst them is held most greuious. They that are so
excommunicated, are accounted in the number of the wicked, and ungracious. All
men shune them, all men eschew their company, and communication. This is one of
the chiefest things that they labor most to beat into men's minds, that the
souls dye not, but do after death pass from one to an other. And hereby they
think men should be most stirred unto virtue, when the fear of death, is
nothing regarded. Also they dispute many other things: as of the stars, and of
their mouings: of the bigness of the world, and the earth: of the nature of
things, of the strength and power of the Gods Immortal: and do therein
instruct the youth. Thus we have heard what those Druids and their followers,
which had not before submitted themselves to Christ, did or could plead for the
maintenance of their pretended Religion, and honor and glory which they
principally enjoyed by profession thereof.

3. Now let us a little examine their cause by their own Authors and their
own proceedings, for to write at lardge of their most gross and inhuman
absurdities would require a volume from me, as the like has done of other
writers against such Pagan Gentiles their superstitions. Whereas all creaturs
cry out unto us, especially the more Noble as the Celestial bodies (in
searching whose natures and effects these men were most conversant,) that there
is an eternal and omnipotent maker and causer which created all things, who
being without beginning or ending was made or caused by no other: caeli enarrant
gloriam Dei, and opera manuum eius annuntiat firmamentum. And divine worship is
only due unto him, for his almighty excellency, and the benefits, which
man a reasonable creature received, and further expects, and needs to
receive from him, which we commonly call Religion, a Religeinge, Religation, or
dutiful binding of man informed with a reasonable intellectual, and immortal
soul, ordained as it were the Lieutenant and Viceroy of God to govern this
inferior world, and by his better eternal part, assured that better and
eternal things are ordained for him, if he does not deprive himself of them,
but seek, find out and perform the will and commandment of so infinite good
and bountiful a Creator, Preserver and Maitayner of all things, especially
for the use and end of man so dignified and exalted among his creaturs. Which
these Druids and their Disciples were so far from effecting, that they gave
him noe honor at all, never remembering him among those they worshipped, but
doing the greatest dishonor they could unto him, in giving that glory and
majesty, which is only proper and due to him, to his rebellious creaturs and
professed enemies, damned and infernal souls hundreds of thowsands before
them, and diverse of these by probable Historical accounts of later time, and
Creation, then the Author of their own Sect, Druius was. And if we will
follow Julius Caesar, who of all writers writes most of their pretended
Religion, living in the time of their chiefest sway, and best knew what they
professed, he writes of the Germans, that they differed much from the French,
and their Druids in Religion: Having no Sacrifices, and only accompting them
for Gods, whom they see, and by whom they are manifestly known to be helped,
as the Sun, Moon, and such visible things, and heard not of any other God.
Germani multum a Gallorum consuetudine differunt. Neque Sacrificijs student,
Deorum numero Julius Caesar l. 6. Belli Gallici. Andreas Althanur. Bre^zius in
scholijs in Cornel. Tacit. l. de sit. Mor. Germ. Henric. Pantal. l. de Vir.
Illustrib. part. 1. p. 40. 41.
eos solos ducunt quos cernunt: and quorum aperte opibus in^antur. Solemn,
Vulcanum, and Lunam: reliquos ne fama quidem acceperunt. Yet the German writers
are so confident, that the Druids ruled there in Religion, that they show us to
this day in Germany, as far as Bauaria two especial places; where they were
wonted to assemble under great Oaks, to exercise their superstitions, and in
detestation thereof, two Monasteries called Oberaltaich and Nideraltaich, were
founded there, to blot out their memory. In Banaria quoque inferiore, sub
quereu magno superiore and inferiore suam superstitionem exercebant, quae loca
postea in Monasteria conuersa, etiamnum Oberaltaich, and Nideraltaich
appellantur. Therefore these could not be Professors and Teachers of the true
God, his worship and Religion, which for diverse people and Countries, and for
themselves also had such variety and change of Gods, and Religion, in diverse
times and places, and yet all of them professing most gross and stupid
ignorance, or wilful Idolatry, the greatest Irreligion to God that can be.

4. And as they thus proved themselves to be Athests leaving no possible true
God to be worshipped, so by their error of Transmigration of souls from one
body to an other, they fall into one of these absurdities, that one soul might
and should in the end inform many, even hundreds of bodies, or else cease at
the last to inform, cease to be, and made mortal. And as Chimericall a
fictio^ it was of the^ to say, as Lucan expounds them, that when a soul left
a body in this world, it went into an other world, and there informed an other
body.

Vobis Authoribus, vmbrae
Non tacitas Erebi seeds, Ditisque profundi Luc. l. 1.

Pallida regna petunt; Regit idem Spiritus artus
Orb alio long,
For so they must needs make more worlds, where generation and corruption is,
besides this terrestrial and sublunary, were we inhabit. And therefore justly
does the same Author call their profession Barbarous rites, a false manner of
worship, and singular against all the world besides.

Et vos barbari^os ritus moremque sinistrum
Sacrorum, Druidae positis repetistis ab armis.
Solis nosce Deos, and caeli sidera vobis,
Aut solis nescire datum.
And thus in their Religion we find neither true God to be worshipped, nor
true man to worship him. And their practice both took away all things, that
are required to true worship, and Religion, and they exercised in place of them
quite contrary and unlawful things. Which we shall evidently perceive if we
examine them by the Decaloge or Ten commandments given by God in the Law of
Moses, commonly thought both by Divinity and Philosophy to be the Law of
Nature except that of the Sabbath day to be observed.

5. The first of, one only God, we have heard how they transgressed it; so
likewise of not making any Idol to adore or worship, having the Idols and
false Gods before remembered. S. Gildas is an able witness that the monstrous
Idols of Britain in this time were not inferior in number to those of Egypt,
commonly esteemed the most Idolatrous Nation of the world, and some of them
with deformed lineaments remained to be seen in his time. And this blind
people of Britain gave divine honor even to Mountains, Hills and Gildas l.
de Excid. Brit.
Rivers. And yet besides these, had errors and Idolatries common with other
Nations. Non omittens priscos communesque cum omnibus gentibus errores, quibus
ante aduentum Christi in carne omne humanum genus obligabatur obstrictum, nec
enumerans patriae portenta ipsa diabolica pene numero Egiptiaca vincentia,
quorum nonnulla lineamentis adhuc deformibus intra vel extra deserta maenia
solito more rigantia, toruis vultibus intuemur: neque nominatim inclamitans
montes ipsos, aut colles, aut fluuios olim exitiales: nunc vero humanis vsibus
vtiles; quibus diuinus honor a caeco tunc populo cumulabatur. The same have
others both Catholic and Theater of great Brit. l. 6.
Protestant Antiquaries after him. And the Sacrifices which they offered to
these abominable Idols, were the most detestable, and for such not unworthily
ranked both by their own Pagan, and Christian writers, among the most cruel
and Barbarous savages of the world. Pro victimis homines immolant
administrisque ad ea Sacrificia Druidibus vtuntur. Publiceque eiusdem generis
Caesar l. 6. Belli Gallici. Cicero Oratione pro M. Fonteio.
habent instituta Sacrificia. They offer men for Sacrifices, and the Druids be
the ministers in such Sacrifices. And such Sacrifices be instituted by public
Authority among them. Thus has Caesar and others. Cicero speaking of these
Druids says: His quicquam sanctum, ac Religiosum videri potest, qui etiamsi
quando aliquo metu adducti Deos placandos esse arbitrantur, humanis hostijs
eorum aras, ac templa funestant? vt ne Religionem quidem colere possint, nisi
eam ipsam scelere violarint. Quis enim ignorant, eos vsque ad hunc diem retinere
illam immanem, ac Barbaram consuetudine^ hominum immolandorum? Quamobre^ quali
fide, quali pietate existimatis eos esse, qui etia^ Deos immortales arbitrentur
hominu^ scelere and sanguine facile posse placari? Can any thing be accounted
holy and Religious with these men, who when they are a fraid of any thing and
would have their Gods pacified, do prophaine their. Altars and Temples with
sacrificed men? So that they cannot exercise their Religion, except they first
violate it with wickedness. For who is ignorant, that even to this day, they
retain that savage and Barbarous custom of sacrificing men? Therefore can you
think those men to have any Religion, or piety, who think their immortal
Gods (so he a Pagan names their Pagan Gods and Idols) may be easily appeased
with the wickedness, and blood of men? The like has Dio Cassius, Ammianus
Mercellinus, and others among the Gentiles, all crying out against Dio Cass. in
Epitom. apud Xephelin. in Nerone. Ammian. Mercell. in eod. Iul. Caesar. lib. 6.
Belli Gallici. Io. Seldom Analect. p. 27. Plinius natural Hist. l. 3. Io. Seld.
Analect. Anglob. p. 35. Theater of great Britain l. 6.
these most Barbarous proceedings, and yet termed with them Religion. And to
fill up the measure of this their most inhuman Irreligion, as Julius Caesar
with others testifies, these men had Idols of an Huge greatenes whose members
being made of wands, they filledfull of men alive, and so setting them on fire
burned them: immani magnitudine simulachra habent, quorum contexta viminibus
membra viuis hominibus complent, quibus succensis circumuenti flamma
exanimantur homines. And Pliny with others is witness, that they were so far,
from doing any homage or duty to God, that they bestowed all such upon the
Devils his Enemies, and were so far and so long time in his days had been
practiced in Magike and Invocation, and worshipping devils, that he supposes
the Persians so far distant, and given over then to that most horrible
dishonoring of God, had learned and received it from hence, where the chief
Masters and practisers thereof remained.

6. And concerning the other commandments of the second Table, of honoring
Parents, not committing murder, adultery, theft, or wrong unto men, which are
warranted by the Law of Nature, these men were as far from performing the^,
as those of the first Table about divine worshipe, but this so termed Religion
gave either commandment or public allowance to break them all Julius Caesar
writes, that the men kept women as wives common unto them, and brothers the
women or wives of their brothers, and Iul. Caesar Bell. Gallici l. 6.
parents those of their children. Vxores habent deni duodenique inter se
communes, and maxim fratres cum fratribus, and parents cum liberis. The like
has Io. Zonaras in Seuero.
Zonaras; and how in some parts of this Country the people went naked. Nudi
degunt, mulieribus promiscue vtuntur. And this was accounted a virtue and
honor among them, as their Queen Bunduica did publikly profess, in her
prayer to her Goddess Andraste, or Andaste: Qui cum caetera omnia, tum
liberos, Bu^duica Regina in orat. ad Adasten apud Io. Xephilin. in Epitom.
Dionis. in Nerone. and in Seuero. Dio. and Xephil. supr. Io. Zonaras in Seuero.
Theater of great Britain lib. 6. S. Io. Chrysostom. Sermon. de Pentecost. Hier.
aduers. Iouinian.
and vxores communes inter se putant: The Britans did esteem children; wives,
as all other things to be common among them. And both Xephilinus, Dio, and
Zonaras say, it was as lawful for them to steal, libentissime latrocinantur:
If theft may be, where all things are allowed to be common. What they esteemed
of murder, and corporal violence may be collected by that is said, when the
Innocents were at command to be sacrificed to their devils. And to use S.
Chrysostoms and S. Hieroms speech as our Theater Protestants translate them: S.
Ihon Chrysostom says, the Britans fedd upon human flesh, making no difference
betwixt the blood of man, and beast. Of which barbarism S. Hierome also
complained, that some of those Nations (he expressly names the Scots) used to
eat the Buttoks of Boys, and Paps of virgins, which in their feasts were
served for the daintiest dishes. And this most sauadge and barbarous behavior
of this kingdom, under the Religion and Reignement of the Druides, was by
their government now become so notorious in the world, and odious, that, as S.
Gildas notes Pophyrie that great Pagan Philosopher and maintainer of their
superstitions, and so enraged against the Church of Christ, that he calls him
the madd dog, Porphirius rabidus orientalis aduersus Ecclesiam Porphir. apud
Gildam l. de excid. Britanniae prope Initium.
canis, living in the East names this Country, the mother of Tyrants.
Britannia fertilis Prouincia Tyrannorum.

7. These and such other most gross and hellish superstitions, errors, and
exercrable wikednes in practicing their pretended Religion, being so inuincibly
proved, that neither denial, nor excuse would be made, and seeing how all the
world had already, or now was to forsake them, the Roman Emperors and their
Lieutenants in France had bannished them, they sought their destruction hear
in Britain, and the King himself with his Nobility condemned them, and very
many of their best learned men both in this and other Countries had abandoned
their Rites, and vsadges, and now embraced and actually professed Christian
Religion, thus spurred forward, and thereby more seriously, and deliberately
reflecting upon those conuicting, and vnansweareable motives thereunto, which I
have remembered in the first Age, and more properly belonging to the Druides of
Britain, then any people of this or other Nation. They also with their
followers and Disciples gave a common consent to relinquish their so condemned
superstitions, and receive the law of Christ, and this in so general or
universal manner, that within short time after, few or none were to be found,
which professed their so condemned Idolatryes, and Impieties. And among their
own superstitions, they had some better observations and directions delivered
and proposed by a better spirit, to bring them more readily into the way of
truth, among which was that their ancient Tradition, which I have spoken of
before of picturing and reuerencing a Child in a Virgins Arms, which when the
Mysteries of Christ were preached and proved unto them more easily brought them
publikly and plainly to profess and follow that, which figuratively, and
prophetically in obscure manner and signs they had acknowledged long before
Christ's Nativity.

THE XIII. CHAPTER.
OF POPE S. ELEVTHERIVS, AND HOW IN his Papacy, and by his Papal order and
power Britain had the honor to be the first Christian kingdom in the world,
and eldest daughter of the mother Church of Christ, King Lucius by his
Ambassadors and petition to the Pope of Rome so obtaining.

1. ABOUT this time when matters were thus acting, or acted in Britain, S.
Soter the holy Pope of Rome was Martyred, not by the commandment, but rather
against the command and Edict of Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, having given so
severe and strict order and chardge that no Christian should be molested or
questioned for his Religion, by some malicious and false accusing Adversaries.
And S. Eleutherius, Damasus Pontif. in Eleuth. Martin. Polon. in Eleuth. Matthew.
Westminster. an. gratiae 185. Florent. Wigorn. Chron. an. 162. al. 184. Lampridius in
Commodo. Mar. Max. and Senate. apud eund. ib. Herodianus l. 1. Dio in Commodo.
or Eleutherus succeeded him in the Sea Apostolic, and by the common opinion
ruled the same, 15. years, or more. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus was yet
Emperor, and after him his son Commodus, who though he was a most wiked man,
exceeding all that went before him in impiety, as Marius Maximus, Lampridius,
and in them the whole Senate of Rome with others are witnesses, yet as a
scourge of God, to the Persecutors of Christians, he oppressed them, and was
favorable unto Christians, never molesting them; whether it was at the
mediation of Marcia a woman, whom he exceedingly affected, and was as Dio
says, most friendly to Christians, Christianorum studiosissima, or otherwise,
I do not examine, he remained Emperor all Pope Eleutherius his time. And
Lucius was still King in Britain, and so by general consent of Antiquaries
continued all the time of Pope Eleutherius, who as all our English Protestant
Historians, with others do willingly and freely acknowledge, was an holy
Bishop and studious to have the word of God published, a good Master of the
household of Christ, and so adhering to the Doctrine of the Apostles that he
confirmed the Britans therein. Pius Episcopus, Matthew. Parker. Ant. Brit. p. 4.
Io. Bal. lib. 1. de Act. Pontif. Romans in Eleutherio.
diuino verbo propagando studens. Bonus paterfamilias de thesauro suo noua cum
veteribus proferens effecit, vt confirmatis and consolidatis Britannis in
suscepta prius ab Apostolis Doctrina, totum illud regnum in eius fidei verba
iuraret. Thus write two Protestant Bishops, the one their first Archbishop to
whom the rest subscribe in this opinion of S. Eleutherius.

2. What was his Religion in particular concerning matters now questioned by
them, they are not so willing to utter in express terms, because they are
enforced by all Antiquity to yield that the Religion which he professed was
the same which was then by public Authority generally preached and embraced
in Britain. But he established among other things, the Florent. Wigor. Chron.
an. 181.
true Observation, of Easter, die Dominico a 14. vsque ad 21. celebraretur.
Acknowledging, as before, that he confirmed the Britans in the Doctrine of the
Apostles. And further testifying from Antiquities that his mother Authia
committed Magdeb. cent. 2. col. 133. cap. de Scholis. N^ceph. l. 3. c. 29. Pius
1. Epist. 1. ad S. Iustum. Vienn.
him to Anicetus Pope before S. Pius, by many Authorities, to be instructed in
Divinity: Authia Eleutherium filium suum Aniceto tradidit erudiendum, qui
sacras literas ab eo doctus, sacro Cleri numero inseritur: and so familiar, and
accounted renowned with Pope Pius, that famous Massing Pope, as is already
declared, they must needs grant he was as far a professor of that present
Roman Religion, which they name Papistrie or Poperye, as they have confessed of
those holy Popes his predecessors in the Sea Apostolic, and Tutors in
Religion. And for some chiefest particulars, they give us their particular
warrant, that it was so. For the Popes spiritual Supreamacie they write that
he claymed, and partised it, as the definition or Institution of the Apostles,
and their successors to his time: Romanae sedis Primatum arrogat, cum ait ab
Apostolis eorumque Magdeburgenses cent. 2. c. de primatu. col. 141. 142.
Robert. Barns l. de Vit. Romans Pont. in Eleutherio.
successoribus multorum consensu Episcoporum definitum esse: and provided that
in Bishops cases, and accusations, nothing should be determined, but by the
Pope of Rome. Accusationem contra Episcopos intentatam, Episcopos audire
permisit: sed vt nihil, nisi apud Pontificem definiretur, cauet. But this will
more plainly appear in the planting of Christian Catholic Religion hear, in
the ensuing History thereof. And this shall stand in place of a Sea Mark to
bring me into the true way of my British Historical Narration again.

3. For when matters of Religion had so far and prosperously proceeded in
Britain, as I have related in the former Chapter, and now nothing remained to
be concluded of in those affairs, but how the true faith and Religion of
Christ might be planted hear, by the most public, powerable, warrantable, and
uncontrollable Authority in such proceedings, it was generally agreed upon
according to those grounds and approved Rules which our Protestant Antiquaries
have proposed and prescribed unto us before, that so great important and
general a business of converting a whole, and so Lardge a kingdom neither
lawfully might, or could be establish in all things thereto required and
necessary, without the help, power and highest warranting prerogative of the
Roman See Apostolic. And therefore the final determination of our King, his
Nobles, and most Religious and wisest Aduisers in this Noble work, was, to
petition to the Pope of Rome by letters and Ambassadors from hence, that he
would accordingly as his high Pastoral charge and office called upon him in
such affairs, to take this great Action in hand, and effect it by such men
and means as should be thought most fit, and approved unto him. Whether this
Resolution and Ambassadge of King Lucius was made and directed first at this
time in the Papacy of S. Eleutherius, or toward the later end of Pope Soter, I
dare not to determine, because we read in the best and most allowed Relation
of this Ambassadge, that it was now acted in the very beginning of the Popedom
of Eleutherius, and then both King Lucius letters and Ambassadors were come to
Pope Eleutherius at Rome, with this suite. Huic (Eleutherio) initio
Pontificatus supplices literae venerunt a Act. Eleutherij Papae in Breuiar.
Romans die 26. Maij. Anton. Sabellicus l. 5. Ennead. 7. Platina in Eleutherio.
Lucio Britannorum Rege, vt se ac suos in Christianorum numerum reciperet.
Which gives Argument, that if such letters and Ambassadors were not sent in
the life of Pope Soter, and hindered of execution by his unexpected Martyrdom,
yet at the least the Resolution heareof was made in his time, otherwise those
Ambassadors and letters could not have been transported so far, and so soon,
if we should expect resolution to his days as to be there in the beginning of
his Papacy. The largnes of this kingdom, the diversity and manifold number
of parsons, even of chief account, both in spiritual and civil respect
commorant in distinct and much separated places, whose consent was requisite,
and many of them, their Judgments not presently convicted Stow Hist. in Lucius.
Matt. Park. Ant. Brit. p. 4. Io. Gosceln. Eccles. Hist. Io. Balaeus l. de
Script. cent. 1. in Lucio Pio. Act. S. Soteris in Breu. Romans 22. April. Baron.
Tom. 2. an. 179. in Sotere and Eleuther. Sever. Bin. notat. in to. 1. Council.
in Vita Soteris and Eleut. Anton. Sabellic. l. 5. Ennead. 7. Goscelin. and Bal.
supr.
for such a messadge, and other difficulties draw me deeper into this opinion
that this Ambassadge was attempted, or concluded, in Pope Soters time. For as
our learned Protestant Antiquaries write: haec contigerunt anno a Christi
aduentu in carne 179. vt veriores Annals commemorant: according to the truest
account in Histories this Ambassadge was in the 179. year of Christ, in which
year by the common account, S. Soter was put to death, on the 22. day of
April, and the Sea Apostolic was void before S. Eleutherius his Election 10.
days. So the remnant of this year from the second day of May is far too
short a time to assign for the managing of so many and important affairs,
especially if we add the sending hither again, from Rome by Pope Eleutherius,
Damianus and Fugatianus, which was also done in this year, as these men
affirm: and much more if Eluanus and Meduuinus, which were but Catechumens and
not Baptized when they were sent from hence to Rome were so perfectly
instructed, examined, and ordinarily as the course of the Roman Church was at
that time proceeded in taking Ecclesiastical Orders, Eluanus returning a
Bishop, and Meduuinus a chief Preacher and Priest, these things requiring a
longer time then is allotted before to be done in the Papacy of Eleutherius,
if they returned hither this year with S. Fugatius, and Damianus, as our
Antiquaries incline to deliver, I must needs also incline to hold this
Ambassadge was begun in S. Soter his time, and by his death hindered Bal. l. de
Script. cent. 1. in Lucio. Matthew. Parker. Antiq. Brit. p. 5. Stowe Hist. in
Lucius. Io. Gosc. Hist. Eccl.
from execution until this beginning of S. Eleutherius Ruling in the Church of
Christ.

4. But how soever this Ambassadge may be questioned, when it was taken in
hand, in the time of Pope Soter, or not before the entrance of S. Eleutherius
into that chardge, it is a confessed truth, and out of Controversy, among all
Historians, Catholics, or Protestants, both that this Ambassadge about the
public Conversion of Britain was from King Lucius, King in Britain to the
Pope of Rome, as also that at this time all Countries between this kingdom
and Rome, as France, Lorrayne, Germany, and Italy had many renowned learned
Bishops, and Priests, neither was Britain destitute of such as I have proved
before. And this was well known to King Lucius as our Protestant Antiquaries
thus assuer us hereof: Cumque cognouisset Lucius, Matthew. Parker. Antiq. Brit.
p. 4.
quamplures nobiles Romanos fidem Christi a Romano Pontifice accepisse,
eorumque exemplo Christianum nomen in singulas Prouincias sparsum and
disseminatum, statuit All Nations in the west part of the world as well as
Britain by all antiquaries received the Christian faith from Rome.
in eadem fide, sub Eleutherio tunc Romano Pontifice inaugurari: When King
Lucius knew that very many noble Romans had received the faith of Christ from
the Pope of Rome, and by their example the Christian name was dispersed and
sown into all Provinces, he appointed to be inaugured in the same faith by
Eleutberius then Pope of Rome. Where we see it justified by the first
Protestant Archbishop that ever was, whom the rest of our English Protestants
do willingly follow, that not only the Nobles of the Romans had received the
faith of Christ from the Pope of Rome, but all Provinces had followed their
example therein: Whereby it is evident both that there were many learned
Bishops and Clergy men between this and Rome, of whom King Lucius with far
less labor and difficulties might have received the faith of Christ, then
from the Pope of Rome, had not the Preeminency of that Apostolic See in such,
cases called upon him to appeal thither, for the general and Iuridicall
settling of himself and kingdom in the Christian faith. And by this narration
itself, without further Authority in this place, it is manifest, that if King
Lucius had not used the Roman Popes power, and direction herein, he had been
singular, having no example to warrant him, but the example of all Provinces
singulas Prouincias in this part of the world, receiving the faith from the
Pope of Rome to condemn him, even in the Judgment of Protestants themselves,
if he had otherwise proceeded in this business.

5. Therefore I can but maruayle what a Protestant Bishop means, first to
extol with great praise our King Lucius for this Action: and after as much
condemn him in the same respect. He commends him in this manner: great cause
have we with all thankfullnes to celebrate the memory of this excellent Godwin
conu. of Brit. p. 35.
Prince, by whom God did not only bless this Land with the knowledge of his
truth, but in such sort did it, as thereby he has purchased unto the same the
Title of Primogenita Ecclesiae, the most ancient, and first begotten of all
the Churches in the world, for that as Sabellicus has well noted allthough
Christ was preached elsewhere privately Britain the first Kingdom in the world
which publicly, and generally received the says of Christ.
in many other Nations, long before, yet, omnium Prouinciarum prima publicitus
Christi nomen recepit. Of all Nations it was the first that with public
approbation of Prince and State received the Profession of Christian Religion.
Thus far he commends King Lucius for the carriadge of this business,
afterward insinuating first to his Readers, that there were Christian Priests
and Preachers hear in Britain, when King Lucius sent to Pope Eleutherius
about the general Conversion of this kingdom, and (to use his words) there is
no doubt to be made, that at their hands (if he were not) he might have been
baptized, that were the Instruments of his Conversion: And then he immediately
thus adds to dishonor this Noble King, for this his most honorable
Ambassadge: But what shall I say? humanitu^s aliquid passus est: he thought
happily it would be some little glory unto him, and a countenance also to the
action, to fetch them that might seem to be the Authors of this design from
Rome, the Seat of the Empire, the Mistress of the world, yea and also happily
the vpholders of his Crown, and Authority regal. Thus far this Protestant
Bishop and Antiquarie: all which I have answered before, and now breifely
repeat; if King Lucius was or might have been baptized by any hear, (all they
as I have proved before of S. Timothy, Marcellus, Mansuetus, and others sent
hither, or converted being consecrated Priests, or Bishops hear, by Authority
from the Apostolic Roman See,) he must needs also be baptized by power from
thence, if he had not sent this solemn Ambassadge thither. So likewise if he
stayed the return of his Ambassadors, Eluan and Medwin, if the Pope had sent
no others hither, seeing by all Antiquities, these were but Cathecumens, and
not baptized, when they were sent to Rome, but there perfectly instructed,
baptized, and consecrated, the one a Priest, the other a Priest and Bishop, if
these or either of them baptized him, and his people, (if they alone had been
able to perform so general and great a work,) it had been done by the power
of the Pope of Rome, who consecrated them, and by Authority sent them hither,
to that end.

6. So if King Lucius had appealed in this business to the Bishops of France or
any Country between Rome and us, and if they had harkened unto him herein
without consulting with the Pope of Rome, yet all they being consecrated, and
directed thither by his Authority, as we have seen before, King Lucius and
his subjects resolved to be Christians, must become such by the labor, power
and warrant of the Pope of Rome. And by that which is said before, by the
warrant of our Protestants, of the both claymed and practiced supreme
spiritual power of all Popes from S. Peter, to this time of S. Eleutherius,
and of him also, it is evident that this kingdom nor any other could be in
such solemn and public manner converted, and all Ecclesiastical matters with
change of Temporal laws be established, without the warrant and approbation
of the Apostolic See of Rome, and Church thereof: in which respect and noe
other Sabellicus and others which truly call this our Britain, the eldest
daughter of the Church; primogemita Ecclesiae, so term it in respect of the
Church of Rome, our holy Mother, which brought forth this Country generally,
and publikly to Christ before any other in the world, by sending holy Preachers
and Apostolic men hither, which so brought it to pass to the great honor of
this Nation. Eleutherius Graecia oriundus, sed Neapoli Anton. Sabellicus l. 5.
Ennead. 7
in Italia ortus successit Soteri. Cum hoc nuper dignitatem adepto Lucius
Britanniae Rex per litteras egit: vt se and suos vellet Christianorum numero
addicere. Missi sunt eo Fugatius and Damianus viri pietate insigni, hi Regem
cum tota domo populoque vniuerso Baptismi Sacramento insignauerunt: sublatoque
malorum daemonum cultu, vera in gente pietas constituta est. Sic Britannia
omnium Prouinciarum prima publicitus Christi nomen recepit. Where it is
evident, that Sabellicus this Protestant Bishops Author gives this dignity
to Britain, to be the eldest and first borne daughter of the Church, because
the Roman Church, first, and before all other Nations, did bring it wholly
forth to Christ, wholly converting it: in which sense the King of France
accompteth and styles himself, primogenitus Annal. Galliae. in Claudio.
Ecclesiae, the first begotten child of the Church among Kings, because Stephen
a King in France rather a Duke, was in their opinion in the time of Claudius
the Emperor converted to the faith of Christ, by Apostolic men sent from the Sea of Rome. And our King James whom our Protestants would have to be the
fourth such supreme head of their Church in England after King Henry the
eight, the you^ge child King Edward the sixth, and Elizabeth a woman and Queen,
plainly and publikly in open parliament has thus confessed: I acknowledge the
Roman Church to be our Mother Church. Therefore except Mother and Daughter be
not correlatiues, and inseparable, Britain King James speech in his 1.
Parliament.
was the Daughter, and having no elder Sister, Daughter of that Church, was the
first borne Daughter of the Church, by this prerogative, primogenita Ecclesiae.

7. And the Arguments which this Protestant Bishop would have to accuse or
condemn King Lucius of vain glory, for sending to Rome to establish Godwin
Conu. of Brit. supr. p. 35.
the Conversion of Britain, because Rome was then, the Seat of the Empire,
Mistress of the world, and happily vpholder of his crown and regal
Authority do advance the honor of King Lucius his zeal in Religion, and
Duty to the Roman Church. For if the Conversion of Britain in so vinuersall
and established order, could have been compassed without allowance of the Pope
of Rome, it had been more secure for him, to have abstayned from that
Ambassadge, sent unto the Pope living in state of Persecution for his Christian
Religion, and chief office therein by the temporal and Imperial Rome,
temporal Seat of persecuting Emperors, their times of conniuency only
excepted, temporal Mistress of the world and temporal Vpholder, or friend to
the Regal crown of Britain, so far as it did nothing which tasted of
alienation from the Roman Pagan Imperours will, and dignity, with which King
Lucius his professing a Religion persecuted by them, and suing for establishing
and confirmation thereof by the Authority of the Pope of Rome, which above all
other things was most distasteful to the Roman Empire, and had for that cause
put all the Popes hitherto to death, did most tw heart, and disagree. And
therefore among diverse others Ihon Funccius the Protestant Antiquary does thus
freely acknowledge: That at this time there were many most renowned Bishops in
France whose help and assistance for the Conversion of Britain King Lucius
might far more easily have used then to have sent so far as Rome for
Preachers to be sent hither, and order to be given from thence for effecting
that work, but that the dignity and prerogative of the Pope of Rome called
upon him to appeal to him, for ordering and settling these affairs, and
gives this Act and example of King Lucius the most potent King of the Britains
as he styles him, for a sure and certain sign and Argument of the Popes of
Rome true honor at that time, when they were so dishonored by the Emperors
and worldly proceedings: Quo in honor Io. Funccius l. 6. commentarior. in
Chronolog. ad An. 178.
Romani Pontifices eo tempore fuerint, ex hoc satis apparet, quod pote^tissimus
Britanniarum Rex, Lucius, qui ea tempestate Christi fidem primitus ex
continenti vltra Germanicum Oceanum in Britannicam Insulam public vocauit, non
ab alio quodam Episcopo Doctores veritatis petijt, quam a Romano, cum tamen
eodem tempore multi per Gallias clarissimi haberentur Episcopi. And in this,
all Antiquaries do or ought to agree.

THE XIV. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN IS RELATED, HOW KING Lucius did not only sue unto the Pope of Rome by
his Embassadges, for the general settling of Christian Religion in Britain,
but for civil and temporal laws also to be allowed by him to rule hear in
Temporal affairs.

1. OUR ancient Historian Ethelwerdus, warranted as some think by S. Gildas,
and Nennius before cited, writes that Pope Eleutherius sent letters, and a
Legate to King Lucius of Britain, admonishing and calling upon him, to make
profession of the holy Christian faith, and Catholic Baptism: Eleutherius
beatissimus Christi famulus per Nuntium and literas Lucium adijt Insulae
Ethelwerdus in Chronico in Eleutherio. Gildas and Nennius in M. S. Historijs
supr.
Regem, ammonens eum de fide, and Baptismo Catholico, qui tum Britanniae Regni
potestate pollebat. To which Legacy and letters King Lucius did very soon
after send as pleasing and contenting an answer, both by Ambassadors and
letters to Pope Eleutherius, as the letters and Legacy of the Pope about so
great and holy business, which he had so much and long desired, were welcome
and grateful unto him, for allthough he most affected the accomplishing of
this blessed work before this incitation given him by this renowned Pope
according to this ancient Author of our Nation, who also say the fame of this
Pope was great in all the world, ab ortusolis vsque ad occasum exijt sancta
opinio eius: yet now receiving new couradge, warrant, and direction, without
any further delay, or procrastination, as this Author writes, yields to the
counsel and exhortation of Pope Eleuthererius: Qui concessit verisimili
ratione Christianum se esse futurum. And by the advice and consent of his
Nobles, and others of this kingdom whom it most concerned, sent two
Ambassadors with suppliant and humble letters to this holy Pastor of the Flock
of Christ, to give him thanks for that fatherly care, he had of his spiritual
children so far off, and to signify his most willing assent to godly
Admonition, and entreat his further and speedy care and provision for the
effecting thereof.

2. The most Authorized History of S. Eleutherius, and these letters warranted
unto us by the Church of Christ in the Feast of this holy Pope, delivers Act.
Eleutherij in Breuiar. Romans in festo eius. 26. die Maij.
the manner and tenure of them in this order: Huic Initio Pontificatus
supplices literae venerant, a Lucio Britannorum Rege, vt se ac suos in
Christianorum numerum reciperer. In the beginning of the Popedom of S.
Eleutherius, humble letters came unto him from Lucius King of the Britans to
receive him, and Damas. Pontif. in To. 1. Council. in Eleutherio.
his people into the number of Christians. The old Pontifical asscribed to S.
Damasus says of this Pope and this business: hic accepit Epistolam a Lucio
Britannico Rege, vt Christianus efficeretur per eius mandatum. Pope Eleutherius
received an Epistle from Lucius a British King, that by his commandment he
might be made a Christian. The ancient Ecclesiastical Annals or Martyrologes
do thus express it: Lucius Legationem misit ad Eleutherum Romanum Po^tificem,
Antiq. Tabulae Eccles. apud Baron. To. 2. Ann. an. 183.
per Eluanum and Meduinum Britannos: rogans per eos Eleutherum, vt per se
suosque ministros ad Christianam Religionem suscipiendam, aditum patefaceret:
King Lucius sent an ambassadge to Eleutherius Pope of Rome by two Britans Eluan
and Medwine; entreating Eleutherius by them, that by himself and such as he
should please to employ therein, he would make provision that his kingdom
might receive Christian Religion. I have cited Sabellicus before, that King
Lucius wrote to Anton. Sabellic. l. 3. Ennead. 7.
Pope Eleutherius to this purpose in the beginning of his Papacy: Cum
Eleutherio nuper dignitatem adepto Lucius Britanniae Rex per literas egit: vt
se and suos vellet Christianorum numero addicere. Martinus Polonus says: Pope
Eleutherius received an Epistle from Lucius a Britan King, that by his
commandment he might be made a Christian. Hic accepit Epistolam a Lucio Rege
Britanno, vt Martin Polon. Supput. in Eleut. Hartm. Schedel. Chronic.
chronicorum f. 114. p. 2. Ponticus Virun. Brit. Hist. l. 4. Magdeb. Cent. 2. c.
2. col. 8.
Christianus per eius mandatum fieret. Hartmannus Schedel writes, that
Eleutherius received an Epistle from Lucius a Britan King to receive him and
his subjects into the number of Christians. Eleutherius Papa a Lucio Rege
Britanno Epistolam accepit, vt se, ac suos in Christianorum numerum susciperet.
The like has Verunnius, and other foreign Catholic Historians, as also their
Protestants writing of British affairs; among which the Magdeburgians
witness: That Lucius King of Britain did send Eluan and Meduuin very Learned
Britans, to Eleutherius Pope of Rome, entreating him to send some Doctors from
thence, that might renew Christian Religion, and abolish Ethnicisme in his
kingdom. Ad Eleutherium Romanae Ecclesiae Episcopum, Eluanum and Meduinum
Britannos doctrina praestantes, mittit, ac rogat, vt inde Doctores quosdam
accipiat, qui Christianam Religionem in suo Regno abolito toto Ethnicismo
instaurent. And if we come home into Britain, our most ancient and approved
Historia^s both Britans, and Saxons make the same Relation unto us; S. Gildas
and Nennius have before told us, how the Pope of Rome wrote to King Lucius to
have Christian Religion planted hear, and he consented thereto. The old
Manuscript Manuscr. Peruetustum de primo statu Landauen. Ecclesiae.
British Antiquity of the first State of the Church of La^daffe thus
records it: Lucius Britannorum Rex ad Eleutherium Apostolicae Sedis Papam
Legatos suos scilicet Eluanum and Meduinum misit, implorans vt iuxta eius
Ammonitionem Christianus fieret. Lucius King of the Britans sent his
Ambassadors, Eluan and Medwne to Eleutherius Pope of the Apostolic See,
beseeching him, that Galfrid. Monum. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 4. c. 19. Antiquit.
Glast. Tabulis affixae. and Capgr. in S. Patric.
according to his admoniton, he might be made a Christian. The Author of the
old British History says: Lucius Epistolas suas Eleutherio Papae direxit,
petens vt ab eo Christianismum reciperet: King Lucius directed his Epistles to
Pope Eleutherius, desiring to receive Christianity from him. The old
Antiquities of Glastenbury citing other British Authors, do tell us, that
very cridible Antiquities deliver, that Lucius King of the Britans did send to
Pope Eleutherius to pray him, that he would illuminate the darkness of Britain
with the light of Christian preaching: Tradunt bonae credulitatis Annals, quod
Lucius Rex Britannorum ad Eleutherium Papam miserit oratum, vt Britanniae
tenebras luce Christianae Praedicationis illustraret. S. Bid says: King
Lucius did entreat Pope Eleutherius Bed. l. 1. Eccles. Hist. c. 4. Theat. of
Brit. l. 6. Radulphus de Diceto Hist. in Eleutherio. an. 188 Abbreuiat. te^p.
inter an. 170. and 180.
by his letters, that by his commandment, he might be made a Christian:
obsecrans vt per eius mandatum Christianus efficeretur. Dicetus in his ancient
Manuscript History writes: King Lucius of Britain obtained of Pope
Eleutherius by his Epistle written unto him, to be made a Christian. Ad
Eleutherium Papam Lucius Rex Britanniae missa Epistola se fieri Christianum
impetrat. The old Author of the Manuscript History termed, Abbreuiatio
Temporum, (if it was not the same Radulphus de Diceto) has the same words,
though not precisely at the same year (wherein the copy of Dicetus in the
Kings Library, as our Theater Protestants cite him) but as I have alleged him.
Marianus Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. an. 177. Florent. Wigor. Chron. an. 162.
and 184. Sigebert. Ge^bl. Chronogr. in Regno Britan. Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae
185.
says the very same also: Lucius Britanniae Rex ab Eleutherio Papa per
Epistolam Christianum se fieri impetrat. Florentius wigorniensis writes in the
same words. Sigibertus says, King Lucius request was the cause that the
Britans received the Mysteries of Christian Religion by the Legates of Pope
Eleutherius: Britanni instantia Lucij Britanniarum Regis per Legatos Eleutherij
Papae Mysteria Christianitatis perceperu^t. Matthew of Westminster gives the
like testimony to this petition of King Lucius to Pope Eleutherius: Lucius
Britannorum Rex ad Papam Eleutherium Epistolas direxit, petens ab eo, vt
Christianus efficeretur. Henry Archdeacon of Huntington says: When Eleutherius
was Pope of Rome, Lucius King of the Britains sent an Epistle unto him,
beseeching him that by his commandment Henricus Huntingt. Hist. l. 1. in Marco
Antonino Vero and Aurelio Lucio Co^modo. Harding Cronicle in King Lucius c. 51.
f. 43. Manuscr. Antiq. de Vita S. Dubtitij. Io. Capgrauius Catal. in eod.
he might be made a Christian: Cum Eleutherius Pontificatui Romanae Ecclesiae
praeesset, misit ad eum Lucius Britanniarum Rex Epistolam, obsecrans vt per
eius ma^datum Christianus efficeretur. Harding says this was done, at the
supplication of Lucius. The old Manuscript of the life of S. Dubritius, which
Capgraue and others follow, witnesses, that King Lucius sent two Ambassadors
Eluan and Medwine to Pope Eleutherius that he might be made a Christian
according to his direction: Lucius Britannorum Rex ad Eleutherium Papam Legatos
misit, stilicet Eluanum and Meduinum, vt iuxta eius ammonitionem Christianus
fieret. And in the life of S. Helen the Empress our Country woman: Lucius
Epistolas Eleutherio Papae humiliter direxit, petens vt ab eo fidem Christianam
recicipere mereretur, King Lucius did humbly direct Epistles to Pope
Eleutherius, desiring that he might be thought worthy to receive the Christian
faith from him. The like has Ado: Lucius Britannorum Rex missa ad Eleutherium
Romae Episcopum Epistola, vt Christianus efficeretur, petijt. Many others (and
they ancient Catholic writers of great credet) there be, both of this and
other M. S. in Vita S. Helenae. Et Capgrau. in ead.
Nations, which thus confidently for most certain deliver this History unto
us, which for avoiding tediousnes I omit, as I might have ouerpassed many of
these: but to show to my Readers, that the mistakings of some Scribes before
remembered, and reconciled, about times and Titles do nothing hinder Ado in
Chron. inter an. 163. and 181.
the undoubted, and unquestionable truth of the Relation hereof. That the
general Conversion of this kingdom to Christ was happily brought to pass in
the time of Pope Eleutherius, by his direction, warrant and Papal Authority.

3. For confirmation whereof by all manner of Antiquaries, even our Protestants
most adverse to the prerogatives of the holy Apostolic Roman See, they
generally consent unto it in this Order. Matthias Flaccus, Illiricus, Ioannes
Vuigandus, Matthaeus Index, and Basilius Faber the Magdeburgian Protestant
Historians have thus of this matter: Lucius ad Eleutherium Romanae Ecclesiae
Centur. 2. cap. 2. col. 8.
Episcopum, Eluanum and Meduuinum Britannos doctrina praestantes mittit, and
rogat, vt inde Doctores quosdam accipiat, qui Christianam Religionem in suo
Regno, abolito toto Ethnichismo instaurent. King Lucius of Britain sent two
excellently learned Britans, Eluanus, and Meduuinus, to Eleutherius Bishop of
the Church of Rome, and desired him, that he might receive some Doctors from
thence, that might establish Christian Religion in his kingdom, and abolish
Heathen superstition out of it. And they allege Gildas Albanius, that this
King was addicted to Christian Religion even from the beginnig of his Reign:
Non erat omnino iniquus Lucius Christianorum Religioni, statim initio sui
Imperijmouebatur enim nonnihil miraculis illustribus quae a Christianis in
testimonium and ornamentum suae doctrinae passim edebantur: vt Gildas Albanius
in libro de victoria Aurelij Ambrosij refert. A Protestant Bishop of England,
whom these Magdeburgians cite and follow, writes in like manner: cum Io. Bal.
l. de Scriptor. Brit. cent. 1. in Lucio and Eluano, and Meduuino.
audisset per ^^esaris Legatos Trebellium and Pertinacem Romanorum illustres
aliquot, quiescente Persecutione, Christianam Religionem admisisse, statim per
eruditos Britannos, Eluanum and Meduuinum, ad Eleutherium Romanorum Pontisicem
misit ac scripsit pro suscipiendo Baptismo Epistolam. When King Lucius
understood by the Emperors Ambassadors, Trebellius and Pertinax, that
Persecution against Christians was ceased, and some of the renowned of the
Romans had embraced Christian Religion, he presently sent and wrote an Epistle
to Eleutherius Pope of Rome by learned Brita^s Eluanus and Meduuinus, to have
Baptism received hear. And he sufficiently insinuates there as the
Magdeburgians before have done, that he would have done this sooner but for
fear of the Roman Emperors, by whose permission and Authority, as this man
Bal. supr.
says, he was King in Britain, making him little better then a King by
courtesy only: Lucius Pius, Coilli Regis filius vnicus, Romanorum fautor,
Caesaris Marci Matthew. Parker. Antiq. Brit. p. 4.
Antonini Very and beneuolentia and authoritate, Britannis post patrem
imperabat. The first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury setting down the same
motive, and how by the Romans example the Christian faith was now received in
all Provinces, adds for King Lucius: Ad Eleutherium Romanum Pontificem
illustres and facundos viros Eluanum Aualonium, and Meduinum Belgam, cum
literis and mandatis legauit: In quibus petijt, vt ad se iam doctrina
Christiana imbutum Nuncios ac Legatos, a quibus Baptismate lauaretur, mitteret:
King Lucius sent renowned Jewel against Harding. 119. Godwin conu. of Britan.
Catal. of Bishop. Theater of great Britain l. 6. Seldom Analect. Rob. Barn. l.
de vit. Pontif. Romans in Eleutherio. Stow Hist. in Lucius.
men Eluan of Aualonia, and Medwin a Belgian to Eleutherius Pope of Rome with
letters, and commandments, in which he requested, that he would send
Messengers and Legates to baptize him already instructed in Christian doctrine.
His Protestant Successors Whitegift against the Puretans and George Abbot
directour of Francis Mason in their Book of Consecration, as they followed him
in place, so in this opinion: So their Protestant Bishops Jewel, and Godwine:
So teaches the whole company of Protestant Antiquaries in their Theater of
Britain: So their particular Historians and writers Barnes, Seldom, Stowe with
others: Lucius Britanniae Rex Christiano coetui cum suis subditis adiungi
petijt, ^er litteras. An other says: King Lucius sent his two Ambassadors
Eluanus and Meduuinus, two learned me^ in the Scripturs, with his loving
letters to Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, desiring him to send some devout and
learned men, by whose Instruction both he and his people might be taught the
faith and Religion of Christ. And these Protestants do not stay their pens
hear, in giving this supreme prerogative King Lucius did not only send to
the Pope, to obtain the settling of Religion hear, but to establish the
temporal state and Laws of this kingdom, as our Protestant Antiquaries with
others acknowledge.
and preemine^cie to the Sea of Rome, for the ordering and settling of
spiritual affairs, but go further enforming us, that this holy King of
Britain Lucius, so renowned in all Antiquities, did appeal to the same Pope
of Rome to have the temporal and Civil Laws of this Nation to be framed, and
enacted, and so settled by his Authority. And diverse of them are so earnest
herein that they say King Lucius sent at this time, and by these Ambassadors
for obtaining thereof. Their first Protestant Archbishop is plain in this
opinion, for having, as before, set down the Ambassadge our King sent to Pope
Eleutherius, desiring to have Instructours sent hither to setle Christian
Religion; he immediately adds with a connectiue phrase of speech, entreating
that those Legates this Pope should send hither for establishing Religion,
should also Matthew. Parker. Antiq. Brit. p. 4.
bring with them the Roman Laws by which he might describe and establish the
state of Religion, and common wealth in his kingdom. Quique vna deferrent
Romanas leges, quibus Religionis and Reipublicae statum in Regno suo
describeret, atque stabiliret. This man's opinion together with diverse others of
the Protestant profession concerning this matter, is related by a Prot^stant
Bishop and Antiquarie, in this manner: Lucius some time after his Conuers^on
(but whether Godwin Conu. of Brit. p. 29. 30.
before or after his Baptism appears not) made request unto Eleutherius to
send him some kind ^^ ^bstract of the Roman Laws, whereby he might establish a
settled Order of Government in his Dominions.

4. Now whereas the Druids were the Judges of all matters both in Caesar com.
l. 6.
spiritual and temporal government: fere de omnibus controuersijs publicis
priuatisque constituunt, and si quod est admissum facinus, si caedes facta, si
de haereditate, de finibus controuersia est, ijdem decernunt praemia, poenasque
constituunt. The abolishing of these Druids made an alteration, in politic
matters as well as Ecclesiastical, or concerning Religion, so that the cause of
reformation in both kinds being one and the self same, I see no reason why we
should not think, that the remedy of both was likewise sought at once. And
true it is, that the Author of the book called Antiquitates Britannicae
(Matthew Parker their Protestant first Archbishop last cited) affirms, how
that Eluan and Medwin made the foresaid motion for the Roman Laws, at their
being with Eleutherius before the Baptism of Lucius, and then received
answer: So does Fox. Jewel contra Hard. p. 119.
M. Fox, and the Reverend Father of happy memory Bishop Jewel (thus one
brother commends an other) seems to be of the same opinion. Yet because the
Authors of our great Chronicle, Holinshead, and the rest deliver that this
motion was made after the Baptism of Lucius, but also setting down precisely
the particular time, do say it was in the third year of his Conversion, I
will not take upon me to pronounce either the one way, or other, but leave it
unto the Readers Judgment and discretion to determine of, hitherto this
Protestant Bishop for himself and his adherents in Religion concerning this
matter. This motion and request of King Lucius to the Pope about the temporal
^awes, was after his first Ambassag^ and receiving Christian Religion.


5. But bccause he leaves the determination hereof to his Readers Judgment and
discretion, I being one of his Readers will take upon me thus to determine
against him, his Brethren the Protestant Bishops, and the rest by their own
testimony and citation, for all these which he named as himself also cite at
lardge the letter of Pope Eleutherius to King Lucius about this business, and it
is all the light of this relation, which is left unto us in Histories: And
therein Pope Eleutherius tells us plainly that this motion, and answer
unto it, were after the public Conversion of this Country, and after it had
received also the holy Scripturs: suscepistis nuper miseratione diuina in Regno
Britanniae legem and fidem Christi: habetis penes vos in Regno vtramque
paginam. And seeing they were the Apostolic men, which were sent hither by
Pope Eleutherius to convert the kingdom to Christ, Which were principally to
be employed, for collecting and settling such laws, as appears by the same
Epistle, they had work enough of an higher nature, and greater necessity, the
spiritual Conversion of so great a Country, to attend unto, before any
leisure was left unto them, to take the other of lesser consequence in hand.
And until they could both be in due manner effected, no man of ordinary
Judgment, much less of happy memory may think, but those converted Britans
which had committed their souls unto the Censure and direction of those their
spiritual guides, and relied upon them for their eternal being and
blessedness, would and did most willingly refer themselves for civil debats,
until a settled Order could be publicly provided, to decide and end such
doubts, and difficulties. And they well knew, this was the Counsel and
direction, if not commandment of S. Paul to Christians in like case.

6. And diverse of these men differ, and err as much in delivering their opinion
of these two Ambassadors of King Lucius, of what Country, Province Matthew.
Parker. Antiq. Brit. supr. p. 4. Godwin. Conu. of Brit. p. 21.
or place they were. Their first Protestant Archbishop before has said, that
Eluanus was Aualonius, and Meduuinus was Belga. An other Protestant Bishop does
thus interpret him and others in this matter: The Author of the Book called
Antiquitates Britannicae, and Bale out of Leland report, how that Medwin was by
birth a Dutchman, but as for Eluan he was a Britain brought up in the College
or Monastery of Auallon amongst the Disciples and Successors of Joseph of
Arimathia. The Protestant Authors of the great Theater of great Britain
Theater of great Brit. l. 6.
speaking of the place given to S. Joseph of Arimathia Aualon, or Glastenbury
say: from hence were those two divine Doctors sent to Eleutherius What, and
from whence the Ambassadors of King Lucius, to the Pope, were.
by King Lucius, as by their Epithets does appear: one of them called Eluanus
Aualonius, or of Glastenbury: and the other Meduuinus of Belga, that is wells,
near unto this place; And they note in their Margin: Two Diuins sent by Lucius
to Rome from Glastenbury. And thus: wells called Belga. But is is great
ignorance first, and dishonor to this Nation, to say any of these was a
Dutchman. all Antiquaries, Catholics, and Protestants teaching they were both
Britans. And the word Belga there, has reference to those people in Britain
which were called Belgae, and inhabited the Provinces now named Somersetshire,
Camdenus in Belga.
wilshire, and part of Hampshire, as Cambden according to true Antiquity
relates unto them: Ad Belgas nostras qui long lateque habitarunt per Regionem
Sommersettensem, Wiltoniensem, Hantoniensisque agri partem interiorem,
accedamus. And for wells, which they say was then called Belga, is as far
wide from truth, the people of those places being only named Belgae, and no
especial Town or place to give denomination to all those Countries, and the
Town of wells as the same Protestant Bishop is witness, was a Villadge long
after that time, named Tiddington builded or named by the Saxons as that name
declares: thus he being an inhabitant there some time writes: wells, that
sometimes Godwin. Catal. of Bishops in dathe and Wells.
heretofore was called Tiddington, is not a Town of any very great
Antiquity. And there proves, how King Inas in the year 704. and King
Kenulphus 60. years after, first made it of any name, and took the
denomination wells of weluue or wielea a little River or Brook there, as
appears often in the Charter Chart. Regis Kenulphi Monasterio de Weluuean. D.
766. ^pud Godwin. supr. p. 358. 359. Godwin. Bathe and Wells p. 38. number. 49.
of King Kenulphus bearing date an. Dom. Incarn. 766. Indictione 12. to a
Monastery or College there, being a Town of no memory at this time, as says
this Protestant Bishop and Antiquary, most likely to learn and tell the truth
therein, because, to use his words, Thomas Godwyn his dear and most Reverend
Father was made Protestant Bishop there Sept. 13. 1584. So the people Belgae
could not take their name of this place, nor either of these Ambassadors of
King Lucius or any other be called Belga, by that imaginary Title. Neither was,
or could either of them, or any other at that time be truly said to be an
Auellonian, for I have proved before, and shall more plainly set forth
hereafter, that there was no Monastery, or Residence of any Christians there at
that time, but S. Joseph's Chapel was desolate, ferarum Latibulum.

7. Neither does any Antiquity to my reading and memory say, that these
Messengers or Ambassadors were of such places, as these men have styled them
by, but it is only a new Protestant Chimericall Invention of their own, and
if there had been any remnant of the Christian posterity and Succession from
S. Joseph left about Glastenbury, King Lucius would not have chosen a
Catechumen from them, to send about such important business: neither could this
imagined Glastenbury man have been ignorant of the Chapel of S. Joseph when
it was so diligently sought for, and found out by S. Damianus, and Fugatianus,
as the Antiquities of that place, and some of these Protestants Antiquitates
Glast. apud Capg^au. in S. Joseph and Patricio. Leland. in Arthur. Antiq.
Glast. tabulis ^igneis affixae in membr. Guliel. Malm. Hist. Manuscr. de Antiq.
caeno^^j G^ast. Io. P^^saeus l. de vir^^^ Illustr. aetat. 2. in Eluano. and
Meduuino.
themselves are witnesses, if he had instruction and education there. So I
cannot consent unto these Protestants in this point: Neither join in opinion
with that late Catholic writer, who citing no Authority, affirms of Eluanus
that he was brought up in the School of S. Joseph of Aramathia, and learned
the Mysteries of the Christian faith from the Disciples of the Apostles:
Eluanus Aualonius, natione Britannus, in Schola S. Iosephi Arimathensis
educatus, ab ipsis Apostolorum Discipulis fidei Christianae mysteria didicit
Junior. And of Meduuinus he says: He was a Belgian of that part of Britain
which is about wells, and was aunciently called Belgia. For to answer first
to the later, allthough the Country about wells, was part of those Provinces
which the Belgae inhabited, being part of Sommersetshire, which with wiltshire,
and Hampshire, or a great part thereof was inhabited by the Belgae, and so all
these together were, or might be named Belgia: Yet this does no more prove, if
he were a Belgian, that he was borne near unto wells, then to any Town or
Village else, either in Sommersetshire, wiltshire, or the parts of Hampshire
within that denomination, all of them being as truly and properly parts of
Belgia, as wells, or any part of that Country near unto it. Yet this Author
no more proves, that Eluanus was a Belgian, then the Protestants before,
against whom I have showed he could not be a Belgian. His other assertion of
Eluanus being brought up in the School of S. Joseph is too manifest a
mistaking, for I have proved in the first Age, that S. Joseph, and all of that
company, or School, as this Author terms it, were dead within the first
hundred years of Christ, long before Eluanus was borne. Neither is it credible
with me, that any of the immediate Disciples (for he speaks in the plural
number ab ipsis Apostolorum Discipulis) of the Apostles, were living hear in
Britain in the Papacy of Eleutherius when this man was but a Catechumen, by
them that hold he was first sent to Rome from King Lucius after Eleutherius was
now Pope: or by those which (as before) assign his going to Rome twenty years
sooner, for between this and the death of the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul,
are 87. years at the least, and whosoever were, or could be accounted their
Disciples in proper sense, were so old at the Apostles death, that if now
living, and hear in Britain, they were an hundred years of age. Of which age
in this Country I dare not take upon me to find Disciples of the Apostles.
Only I grant, (as I have done before) that by the great providence of God,
one of this Nation and S. Peter's Disciple S. Mansuetus, was probably then
living, but he was but one, and lived most at Tullum or Treuers, where he was
Bishop far from Glastenbury or any part of Britain.

8. And if there had been any probable Authority that these men had been borne
in that part, I would have thought my phrase harsh in History, if I had termed
the one of them an Aualonian, and the other a Belgian, for the I Will of Aualon,
is hard by wells, Glastenbury itself but three English miles from wells, and
part of Belgia, as well as wells and so every Aualonian was a Belgian, and a
Belgian borne about wells, in ea circa welliam part, was not improperly an
Aualonian, the I Will of Aualon there circuiting about it; and no Christian was
probably in that part of the Country but in Aualonia, the only Residency of S.
Joseph and his holy company, and only alloted and enfranchised for Christians
by the donation and privilege of our Kings then Aruiragus, Marius, and
Coillus. And Eluanus brought up and instructed where S. Joseph lived, as this
Author and our Protestants before have written, if it were so, could not
possibly be ignorant of that very place where he lived, and was instructed in
the Christian faith, neither so near a neighbor and companion unto him as
Meduuinus was, by these writers, could be without all knowledge thereof, yet by
all the Antiquities of Glastenbury before, neythe^ of them knew this Mansion of
S. Joseph, the most memorable and reverenced place of this kingdom then with
Christians. Therefore we must travail further then any part of Belgia to find
(but with probability) where these Ambassadors, were borne and instructed in
the Christian faith in Britain before they were sent to Rome. Cambridge has
pleaded for them before with more congruitie and less inconvenience, then any
part of the Belgae inhabitants can do, so perhaps might Stamford, Burton where
the Cambridge Scholars are thought to have been baptized, so might diverse
Schools of the Druids where were many learned men such as Eluanus and
Meduuinus are described unto us, so far remote from the Belgae and
Glastenbury, and lately instructed in the faith of Christ, that they might
plead Ignorance without sin or shame of S. Joseph his Chapel, and
Eremiticall habitation. I may likewise so say of the Court itself of King
L^cius, where so many learned Christians, and Catechumens were now, and (...)
whence these were sent, as the custom and vsadge of Kings is to send (...)
Ambassadors such as be in grace in Court with them. In all which places many
learned men then lived, but no such, no School or place of learning, at this
time for any thing I find in Antiquities, was about, or near to wells, or
Aualon, then it being a Desert. From whence in particular they were, I dare ^ot
yet for want of sufficient warrant, certainly determine.

THE XV. CHAPTER.
THE MISSION OF THE HOLY LEGATES S. Damianus, Fugatianus Bishops, and diverse
others from S. Eleutherius Pope of Rome, at the request of S. Lucius King hear
in Britain, by Authority to plant, and setle hear the true Christian
Religion.

1. THese renowned British Ambassadors of King Lucius, being now arrived at
Rome, with letters, Commission, and Instructions, for their proceeding, in so
great and important business, presented themselves with their Kings humble and
earnest petition to the holy Pope Eleutherius: Whether they came now
immediately from Britain, as most seem to affirm, or had been for some, and
no short time before in Rome, and in studies there and Instruction in Christian
Religion to enable them for such Ecclesiastical Degrees and functions, as they
were now shortly to receive, as our Cambridge Antiquaries and others assisted
with no contemptible reasons have already delivered, and now received these
letters and Commission from King Lucius about our general Conversion I refer
my Readers to that I have written before of this matter. But howsoever that is
to be resolved, it is generally agreed upon among Antiquaries, that upon the
delivery of this Ambassadge, the holy Pope Eleutherius appointed for his Legates
S. Damianus and Fugatianus, with power and Instructions to come hither, to
effect that happy business. And some say that among others designed for worthy
laborers in this renowned work, these Ambassadors of King Lucius were
presently employed about it. The old British Manuscript Antiquity of the
ancient Church of Landaffe thus relates it: Eleutherius gratias agens Deo
suo, quod illa gens, quae a primo Antiquit. Eccles. Landau. Manuscript.
Peruetust.
Regionis inhabitatore Bruto gentilis fuerat, tam ardenter ad fidem Christi
festinabat, consilio senioris vrbis Romae placuit eosdem Legatos baptizari, and
Catholica fide suscepta, ordinari Eluanum in Episcopum, Meduuinum autem in
Doctorem: Et propter eloquentiam, and scientiam quam habebant in sacris
Scripturis, Praedicatores ad Lucium in Britanniam reuersi sunt: Pope
Eleutheri^s giving thanks to God, that the Nation which from Brutus the first
Inhabiter of the Country had been ever Pagan did so fervently hasten to the
faith of Christ, it was agreed upon by the Counsel of the elder Rome, that
the same Ambassadors should be baptized, and having received the Catholic
faith, Eluan should be consecrated a Bishop, and Medwin made a Doctor or
Teacher: And in respect of the eloquence and knowledge which they had in holy
Scripturs they returned Preachers unto King Lucius in Britain. The old
Manuscript History of the life of S. Dubricius and Capgraue following it,
Manuscrip. Antiq. de Vit. S. Dubr^cij. Capgrau. Catal. in S. Dubricio.
have the very same words of that Antiquity, so far as it concerns this
narration.

2. I find few others that be ancient, which write of the consecrating any of
these Ambassadors of King Lucius to be a Bishop, but speak generally of the
Roman Legates, Damianus and Fugatianus presentl^ sent hither from Pope
Eleutherius with others to be Instruments in performing this great designment.
S. Gildas, Nennius, S. Bid, Marianus, Florentius wigorniensis, Ethelwerdus,
Matthew Westminster, William Malmesburie, Henry of Huntingto^, Radulphus de
Diceto, Martinus, Harding, Ado, Platina, with others writing of this Ambassadge
of King Lucius, and S. Eleutherius sending his Legates hither about the
effecting our Kings request, are silent of this consecrating, and sending
Eluanus and Meduuinus hither again at this time, or after in such manner, as
the others write. And the Roman Antiquities of this matter, which Baronius
terms the auncientest of King Lucius Acts, vetustiora de Lucio monumenta,
Monum. Vet. apud Baron. To. 2. Annal. an. 183.
though they say King Lucius sent these two Ambassadors Eluanus and Meduuinus
to Pope Eleutherius, about the Conversion of Britain, yet they only testify,
that King Lucius his suite was to have it effected by Pope Eleutherius, and
such as he should think fittest to undertake that labor, and how he thereupon
sent Fugatius, and Donatianus, otherwise called Damianus, to effect it as they
did, never naming further Eluanus or Meduuinus Agent herein. Lucius Legationem
misit per Eluanum and Meduuinu^ Britannos: rogans per eos Eleutherum, vt per
se, suosque ministros ad Christianam Religionem suscipiendam, aditum
patefaceret: quod and obtinuit. Nam Idem pontifex Fugatium and Donatianum,
aliter Damianum, in Britanniam misit. And diverse of our Protestants which
relate Magdeb. cent. 2. col. 8. Io. Funccius l. 6. comme^tar. in Chronol. ad
An. 178. Joan. Bal. li. de Scritp. Brit. ce^t. 1. in Lucio, Eluano, and
Meduuino. Idem l. de vitis Pontif. Romans in Eleuth. Rob. Barns l. de Pontif.
Romans in Eleutherio. Godwin Conu. of Britain p. 21.
this History, make no memory therein of Pope Eleutherius his consecrating,
and sending Eluanus and Meduuinus hither: such be the Magdeburgian writers,
Funccius, Barns, and their Bishop Bale, allthough in his book of writers
dedicated to King Edward the sixth, he expressly handles this matter, both in
King Lucius, Eluanus, and Meduuinus, and there speaks of these men sent to
Eleutherius at Rome, yet he is silent of their consecration there, seeming to
think they were consecratd in Britain before their going to Rome: per
Apostolicos viros in Christo renati, in dispensandis Dei ministerijs inter
primos haberentur. And in his Book of the lives of Popes written after, he
speaks not of them at all, when he handles this matter in Pope Eleutherius.
And an other 4. Protestant Bishop and Antiquary though he holds with them
that say Pope Eleutherius made Eluanus a Bishop, and sent both him, and
Meduuinus hither, yet he adds: by most it is affirmed, how that Eleutherius
sent with these two before named S. Elua^, and Medwin, two other, to order the
state of the Church, who had the honor of performing that office. The one of
them is called by some Damianus, by others Duuanus, and by others again
Deruianus, Dimianus, Diuianus, and Donatianus. the other is sometimes termed
Faganus, and sometimes Fugatius. And the other last cited Protestant Bishop
confirms Bal. sup. in Lucio. Eluan. and Meduuino. Matthew. Parker. Antiq. Brit.
p. 5. Stowe Hist. and Howes An. 179. in Lucius. Io. Goscelin. Hist. Manuscr. de
Archiep. Ca^t. in Lucio. Holinsh. Hist. of England l. 4. c. 19.
this, telling us, all things were ordered by those two Legates of Pope
Eleutherius.

3. This is sufficiently yielded unto, by their first Protestant Archbishop of
Canterbury, and by most, as the other has before acknowledgde. And Goscelin in
his Manuscript History of the Archbishops of Canterbury, relating this History
of King Lucius sending Eluanus and Meduuinus, is silent of any consecration or
mission they received at Rome, but asscribeth the ordering of all
Ecclesiastical matters hear to the Legates of Pope Eleutherius: Fugatius vna
cum Damiano ^uc remissus Christianam Religionem in Regno instaurant, and and
tota Ethnicismo abolito solid constituunt. Holinshed in his History of England
is also silent in this consecration of our Ambassadors, only saying of them:
King Lucius sent unto Eleutherius Bishop of Rome two learned men of the
British Nation ^^^an and Medwine requiring him to send some such Ministers as
might instruct him and his people in the true faith more plentifully, and to
Baptize them according to the Rules of Christian Religion. Heareupon were sent
from the said Eleutherius two godly learned men, the one named Fugatius, and
the other Damianus. How they performed this chardge committed unto them by Pope
Eleutherius in the opinion of this Protestant, he shall with others testify,
when I come to entreat of their proceedings hear. Our Protestant Authors of
the Theater of great Britain relying much upon the Authority of the
Manuscript History of Radulphus de Diceto, sometime Deane of S. Paul's Church
Theater of great Brit. l. 6.
in London, in the Kings library as they cite him, must be of the same mind,
that the chardge of this great business was committed by Pope Eleutherius to
his Legates, Faganus, and Damianus, for he writes so, and that all things hear
Radulph. de Diceto in Manuscr. Hist. inter ann. 170. and 180. Io. Leland in
assert. Arthurij. Priseus defens. Hist. Brit. p. 73. 74. Seldom Analect. c. 6.
Whitg. defens. of the Answer p. 323. Fox To. 1. f. 146. Mason l. 2. c. 3. p.
52. 55. Godwin Catal. of Bishops of York. ^n Panlinus. 1. Winchester 1.
were settled by their Legatine Authority. Leland in his Defense of King
Author, and Sir Ihon Prise of the British History, affirms the like, citing
diverse others for warrant. M. Seldom relates this matter as the others have
done before, that King Lucius craved the direction and assistance of Pope
Eleutherius herein, Pontificem Romanum, qui tunc fuit, Eleutherium vt cum suis
Christiano nomine obsignaretur, mandatis literis consuluit. And he sent
Fugatius and Damianus very learned, and holy men to convert this Country,
Fugatium and Damianum imprimis doctos, insignisque pietatis viros misit. So
write their two Archbishops white gift, and Abbots, M. Fox, and Francis Mason.
And that Protestant Bishop himself who before would not have this so undoubted
a truth, as these his fellows in Religion have made it, when afterward he
came to sounder Judgment, and better reflected upon this History and grounds
thereof, makes it a verity undeniable in this manner: It cannot be denied but
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome at the request of Lucius then King of Britain, sent
Damianus, Faganus and other learned Preachers to sow the seed of the Gospel
hear. And in other places proves from Antiquities, that these Legates of Pope
Eleutherius exercised Apostolic Legatine Power by Commission from that holy
Pope in this kingdom.

4. And of this their Power and Commission from Pope Eleutherius we are assured
by all Antiquities of this matter. I will epitomate some of them to show how
evident and clear a truth it is, and (though they be not first in prioritie of
time) begin with those which have written of the consecration, and mission of
Eluan and Medwin hither, from the Sea Apostolic of Rome, which I do not deny,
but only disallowe that they were the chiefest in this business: which these
very Authors also testify. For the Antiquities of Landaffe say, that King
Lucius made his petition to Pope Eleutherius to have his Country converted by
his direction, and obtained it. Implorans, vt iuxta eius ammonitionem Antiq.
Eccl. Landauen.
Christianus fieret, quod ab eo impetrauit. And it follows in the same
Antiquity, that Ecclesiastical matters were settled hear according to the
order or commandment of Pope Eleutherius: secundum iussum beati Eleutherij
Papae, Ecclesiasticum ordinem constituit. The Antiquity of the life of S.
Dubricius, Manuscr. de Vit. S. Dubricij. and Io. Capgrau. in cod.
and Capgraue, also the other Authors have the same first words, which
contain the second: vt iuxta eius ammonitionem Christianus fieret. And in the
life of S. Helen after, he makes it most manifest, that as the truth is, he
held with all Antiquity, that King Lucius did both humbly entreat Pope
Eleutherius, to give order and direction for the settling of Christian Religion
hear in Britain, and he sent hither his Legates, Damianus, and Fugatius with
direction and power to perform it, and they accordingly effected it in all
respects. Lucius Epistolas Eleutherio Papae humiliter direxit petens, vt ab eo
fidem Christiana^ Io. Capgrauius in Catalogo. in S. Helena Regina.
recipere mereretur. Beatus ergo Pontifex ille comperta eius maxima deuotione
duos religiosissimos viros Fugacium videlicet and Damianum ad illum misit.

5. How these Apostolic men did order and actually setle all Ecclesiastical
businesses hear, I shall deliver from this, as other Authors in due place.
Now I speak only of their Power and Commission granted unto them by Pope
Eleutherius. The old Roman Monuments cited by Baronius, and the Monum. Antiq.
apud Baron. To. 2. Annal. an. 183. Damasus in Eleutherio. Martyrol. Romans 26.
die Maij.
received Acts of Eleutherius, which the Church approves, and reads on his
Festiuitie say, he sent Fugatius and Damianus to convert Britain. Quamobrem
Fagatium and Damianum misit in Britanniam, per quos Rex and reliqui fidem
susciperent. The work asscribed to S. Damasus says, the Kings request was,
to have it done by the Popes commandment, per eius mandatum. The old Roman
Martyrologe says ^^is business was effected by Damianus, and Fugatius whom
Pope Eleutherius sent into Britain to that end: Sanctos Damianum and Fugatium
in Britanniam misit, qui Lucium Regem vna cum vxore ac toto fere populo
baptizarunt. Vsuardus, Ado, and others confirm it, Ponticus Virunnius
affirms Ponticus Virun. Hist. Brit. l. 4.
the Pope sent these hither, and they ordered all things hear for Religion:
Pontifex Faganum and Doeuanum ad Lucium misit. Martinus Polonus so affirms:
Papa misit duos religiosos viros, videlicet Faganum and Damianum. And if Abbot
Fecknam auouching it publikly in open Parliament in the first year of Queen
Elizabeth, and there offering to make it good against them that then brought in
Protestant Religion, may be admitted for a credible Author, Abbot Fecknam in
his oration in Parliament an. 1. Elizab.
S. Gildas did write as much or more: for these be the words of that worthy
Prelate: The Religion, and the self same manner of serving God, of the which
ye are at this present in possession, did begin hear in this Realine, 1400.
years past, and that in King Lucius his days by the first Christian King of
this Realm, humble letters sent to the holy Father Pope Eleutherius, who sent
into this Realm two holy men, the one called Damianus, and the other Fugatius.
And they as Ambassadors sent from the Sea Apostolic of Rome, did bring into
this Realm, so many years past, the very same Religion, whereof we are now in
possession, and that in the Latin tongue, as the ancient Historiographer D.
Gildas witnesses in the Prologue and beginning of his book of the Britain
Histories. And the Magdeburgian Protestants, Balaeus, and others of that
Religion, besides our Catholic writers, the Author Magdeb. cent. 2. c. 2.
col. 8. Io. Bal. l. de Script. cent. 1. ^^ Lucio. Galfr. Mon. Hist. l. 4. c.
20. Virun. Hist. Brit. l. 4. Matthew. Westminster. an. 186.
of the British old History, Virunnius, and Matthew of Westminster cite S.
Gildas for a witness in these things. And those Manuscript Copies of S. Gildas,
as our Protestants tell us, which are yet extant in their custodies both in the
Library of S. Be^nets College, and the University at Cambridge do testify,
that all matters hear in Religion were ordered by the Legates of the Pope of
Rome, missa legatione a Papa Romano. And we have far more ancient British
testimonies hereof, then S. Gildas time, even the Acts themselves of those holy
Legates written in their time, as both ancient Catholic writers and
Protestants Charta S. Patricij apud Leland. assert. Arthurij. Capgrau. Catal.
in S. Patric. Ant. Glast. Manuscr. Tabulis affixae in membranis. Io. Bal. l. de
Scriptorib. Brit. cent. 1. in Eluano and Meduuino.
are witnesses, so the Epistle asscribed by Protestants and others to S.
Patrick, so other British Monuments, as the old Manuscripts of Glastenbury
with others affirm: Venerunt Eleutherio mittente Praedicatores Britanniam duo
viri sanctissimi Phaganus, and Deruianus pro vt charta sancti Patricij,
gestaque Britannorum testantur hi verbum vitae euangelizantes, Regem cum suo
populo Sacro Font abluerunt. And a Protestant Bishop in his book of British
writers, as he acknowledges all Christian affairs then to have been ordered
by these two Legates, Fugatius and Damianus: omnia ordinatione quadam per
Fugatium and Damianum in rem Christianam permutata: so Eluanus and Meduuinus
did write in Parchement a Book of the Acts of these Legates, whereby the notice
of these things came to Posterity. Vt apud Posteros clariora perdurarent,
membranis hi dederunt Acta per Legatos li. 1. Inde ad nos, and non alio medio
peruenerunt.

6. And to make all sure that all things hear were effected by the Popes
Authority, and by power of their Commission from him; he adds immediately,
that this Conversion of Britain by the Popes Authority, was a Pattern and
President to other succeeding Popes, to divide other Provinces into Parishes
and Dioceses. Ex hoc and similibus fundamentis, caepere postea Romanorum
Pontifices occasionem Prouincias diuidendi in Paraecias, and Diocaeses. And S.
Patrike Epist. S. Patricij Antiq. Glast. apud Capgrau. in S. Patricio.
(as our Protestants with others allow that Antiquity) testifies that he
found this Legatine power of S. Faganus and Damianus, with effects thereof in
other writings of the Britans between their time and his. I^^^riptis
recentioribus inueni, quod sanctus Phaganus and Deruuianus ab Eleuthe^^o Papa
qui eos miserat december annos Indulgentiae impetrarunt. Nennius writes, as the
extant Copies of Nennius Hist. Manuscr. Bed. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 4. and in
Martyrol. 8. call. Iunij. Ethelwerd chronic. in Eleuther. Marian. Scot. l. 2.
^tat. 6. an. 177. Florent. Wigor. in Chronic. ann. 162. vel 184. Martin. Pol.
supput. an. 188. in Eleut.
S. Gildas before, that Christian Religion was settled hear by the Legates of
the Pope of Rome. Missa Legatione a Papa Romano. S. Bid in diverse places
affirms that Christianity was planted hear by Pope Eleutherius command or
Authority, and this was King Lucius suite: vt per eius mandatum Christianus
fieret, and effectum piae postulationis consecutus est. Ethelwerdus says, it
was done by the Legates and letters of Pope Eleutherius to King Lucius:
Eleutherius beatissimus Christi famulus per Nuncium and literas Lucium adijt
Insulae Regem. Marianus says, King Lucius obtained it of Pope Eleutherius.
Lucius Britanniae Rex ab Eleutherio Papa per Epistolam Christianum se fieri
impetrat. Florentius Wigorniensis has the same words. Martinus relates it by
Fuganus and Damianus having Mission or Commission from Pope Eleutherius. Papa
misit duos religiosos viros, videlicet Fuganum and Damianum, qui Regem and
populum Baptizarent. Radulphus de Diceto in his Manuscript History reports,
King Lucius petitioninge to Pope Eleutherius about this business, the Pope sent
Faganus and Diuuanus hither, and they affected it Ad Eleutherium Lucius Rex
Radulphus de Diceto in Manuscr. Hist. abbreu. Chronic. inter an. 170. and 180.
Henricus Huntingt. Hist. l. 1. in Marco Antonino Vero. Manuscrip. Hist. de
Romesey. Princ. Insula is^a q^^ nunc Anglia. Gulielm. Malm. l. de Antiquit.
cae^obij Glaston. Caxton H^st. part. 4. in King Lucius. Galfr. Monum. Hist. l.
4. c. 19. 20. Matthew. Westminster. an. 185 186 Hu^ting. Chronic. c. 31. f. 4^.
Britanniae missa Epistola se sieri Christianum impetrat: Eleuther ergo misit
Faganum and Diuuanum qui Regem Lucium baptizauerunt. Henry of Huntington his
phrase is, that it was done by Pope Eleutherius commandment. Per Eleutherij
Papae mandatum. The old Manuscript History of Romesey says: King Lucius did
humbly entreat Pope Eleutherius by an Epistle, that he would send him
faithful Doctors to Baptize him and his Nation, and he obtained his suite. Rex
Britannorum Lucius sanctum Eleutherium tunc temporis Papam per Epistolam
suppliciter expetiuit, and gratanter obtinuit quatenus fideles Doctores
destinaret, qui se ac gentem suam in Christo regenerarent. William of
Malmesbury in his Manuscript Antiquities of Glastenbury relates, that these
Legates Phaganus and Deruianus came into Britain to preach the Gospel, and
have preached and Baptized through all the Island. Phaganus and Deruianus
venerunt in Britanniam ad praedicandum Euangeliu^, Baptizantes and
praedicantes, and vniuersam Insulam peragrantes. The old English Chronicle
published by Caxton asscribeth the whole managing of these affairs to the
Legates of Pope Eleutherius. The British History also, the Monk of Westminster
and Harding are most manifest for these Legates and Commissioners of Pope
Eleutherius to have directed all these affairs by that Popes Authority.

7. Thus we have proved by Authorities the high Apostolic Legatine Power which
the holy Pope Eleutherius communicated to these his learned and renowned
Legates, and Commissioners Faganus and Damianus for the Conversion of this
kingdom; this Power being thus granted, and so many Episcopal Acts in
consecrating Bishops, Priests, and other Clergy men, and These Legates of Pope
Eleutherius were Bishops.
others proper to that highest function being to be exercised hear, as in all
other Nations, in such a state and condition, and which none but Bishops could
perform, and these worthy Founders of our Church performed hear by all
Antiquities, we must needs conclude they were consecrated Bishops by such
Apostolic Catholic manner, as I have before related. Therefore I can but
maruayle how the present Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury Directour of M.
Francis Mason, and his scribe were no better directed then to Franc. Mason
Pref. to his Books of Consecr. and l. 2. c. 3. p. 55. 56.
write: from Rome there came two Fugatius and Damianus, but we cannot learn
that either of them was a Bishop. Which is too weak a saying of an Archbishop,
or any writer directed by such a man. For so many Episcopal Acts, which by all
writers they effected were lessons plain enough to learn that they were
endowed with Episcopal Order and power to do such things, and so must needs
be Bishops. And if we must seek them Masters expressly to call them so, the
old British History calls them expressly Antistites, Bishops, Galfr. Monum.
Hist. Brit. l. 4. c. 20. Pont. Virun. Hist. l. 4. in fine. Matthew. Westminster. Anno
gratiae 186 Godwin Cat. of Bishops in Wincester. page 207. edit. an. 1615.
so does Virunnius: And Matthew of Westminster naming them the blessed Bishops
Faganus and Deruuianus: b^ati Antistites Faganus and Deruuianus. And to omit
others, that Protestant Bishop which before was most backward in these things,
produces an old Manuscript testifying they were Bishops, and exercised the
holy offices of that Function. The Cathedral Church of Winchester (says he)
as the same Author of an old Manuscript says, wash allowed and dedicated unto
the honor of our Savior October 29. 189. by Faganus and Damianus Bishops. And
diverse forrayne Historians, especially of France witness that the chief suite
of King Lucius, was for such, having otherwise of his own Nation many Priests
and Preachers of the Christian Religion. Mere des Histoires and Chroniques de
France l. 1. page 91. an. 182. Alan Bouchard in Annals de Bretaigne l. 1. fol.
19. p. 2.
Many Christians (say these Authors, being baptized and preaching the faith in
Britain, King Lucius sends to Pope Eleutherius, un Ambassadeur, an
Ambassador to make suit to him to send Prelates of his Church to instruct and
baptize him, And assure us the chief of these were Damianus and Faganus,
exercising Episcopal Function hear. And so according to their high calling
and dignity, and as the holy Popes before, even from S. Peter had practiced,
and ordained, these holy Bishops before had their sacred Priests, Deacons, and
other Many other Bishops employed by the Popes authority in this holy works.
Clergy men to assist them. And the case and condition of so lardge Dominions,
as Britain comprehended, to be converted, required, diverse other both Priests
and Bishops were sent by Pope Eleutherius with them to be workmen in this
happy harvest. And their names were diligently preserved and left to Posterity
in our Primative Church, and among others, our renowned Galfr. Monum. Hist.
Brit. lib. 2. c. 20. Ponticus Virun. l. 4. Histor. Brit. Matt. West. an.
gratiae 186. Mere des Histoires and Alan Bouchard supr.
Historian S. Gildas, as the old Author of the British History, Ponticus
Virunnius, Matthew of Westminster and these last recited French Antiquaries
with others testify, did committ them to writing. Which being performed by
him, they therefore omit to make repetition of. Eorum nomina and actus in
libro reperiuntur, quem Gildas de victoria Aurelij Ambrosij inscripsit. Quod
autem tam lucido Tractatu parauerat; nullatenus opus suit vt inferiori stylo
renouaretur. And this our most noble and ancient Historian, as these Authors
testify, did also Register the names and Acts of them, which came hither with
The second Mission of Pope Eleutherius into Britain.
them, at their second coming hither from Pope Eleutherius, when by Apostolic
power he confirmed that which these his holy Legates had done in Britain. I
have made mention of many of them before, in the sixth Chapter Supr. Cent. 2. p.
6.
of this Age, and needles to repeat them hear. Only I wish now to be
remembered, that so many Bishops as were sent hither with these his Legates and
most of this Nation, as Mansuetus Bishop of Tullum, Marcel^us or Marcellinus
Bishop of Tungers, S. Saluin Bishop of Verdune, S. Eluanus newly consecrated
Bishop by Pope Eleutherius, all proved before to have been now Bishops, and
employed in this holy work, besides the Legates of S. Eleutherius having their
Priests and Clergy men with them, as the Apostolic Institutions ordered,
amounted to no small number. To which if we make addition of them, which either
actually then also were Bishops, though not so evidently known, or most
certainly soon after, as S. Thean first Archbishop of London, S. Sampson, and
Theodosius of York which came in also with these Roman Legates, we shall
(notwithstanding the loss of the help of S. Gildas, of which our Protestants
by their ill handling Antiquities may be suspected to have deprived us) find
no improportionable number of most fit and worthy Ecclesiastical laborers
to undertake and perform so memorable and great a work.

THE XVI. CHAPTER.
HOW THESE HOLY ROMAN LEGATES by Power and Commission from the Pope, and
Apostolic See of Rome, converted and confirmed unto, and in the faith of
Christ, all manner of parsons in all places of Briaine, whether the Nobility,
Flamens, Archflamens, or of what Order or degree soever.

1. WHEN these holy Legates had thus received Consecration, Instruction and
Commission for this great chardge and business remitted unto them, they now
took their long and tedious Journey into Britain, where, being associated with
such worthy men to assist them in so honorable and great a business, as I have
related, they arrived within short time; and first with all convenient speed
both to satisfy the desire of King Lucius, and orderly to perform the
chardge, and trust which the holy Pope Eleutherius had recommended unto them,
they presented themselves unto our King, and his Nobles, long time expecting
and attending their desired coming. And so soon as they had delivered the
greetings Of the preaching of thos^ holy Legates and Assistants hear in
Britain, and many converted by them.
of the Sea Apostolic, and acquainted them with their Legatine Power, and
Commission, for the Conversion of this kingdom to Christ, and establishing all
things thereto belonging, they happily began this work, and putt these things
in Execution. It is almost the general assent and Harmony of our
Antiquaries, that they converted the King, Queen, Peers, and Nobility of
Britain: Yet I dare not affirm whether they may be said actually and first
Gildas Manuscr. Hist. Nennius Hist. Manuscrip. Ant. Eccles. Landauen. and alij
posteriores.
to have converted and baptized King Lucius, or this was before performed by
our remembered Christian British Priests, and Bishops, and these only
confirmed him in the faith he had received, which may be, and in Histories is
called a Conversion, and Baptism, because the Sacrament of Confirmation is the
perfection and complement thereof, as in our own Histories, King Cadwallader
is said to be converted and baptized by Pope Sergius at Rome, when the British
History only says he received Confirmation of him. Caduualladrus Galfrid.
Monum. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 12. c. 18.
abiectis mundialibus propter Deum, Regnumque perpetuum, venit Romam, and a
Sergio Papa confirmatus. Of this Question I have sufficiently before related,
what Antiquity has delivered unto us, thereof. And therefore pass it over
now without further repetition, supposing it either acted before, or so much
desired to have been presently effected by them, and so proceed to their other
labors, and effects of them.

2. Some Protestant writers would gladly diminish the glory of these Legates, in
persuading their Readers, that they ignorant of the British tongue preached
not to the Britans, but committed that office to our British Priests, and
Preachers, and so in this kind they little or nothing prevailed, or profited
this Nation. A Protestant Bishop thus writes of them: The men that were sent
from Rome were utterly ignorant of the British languadge, and so could not
possibly Godwin Conu. of Brit. p. 36.
preach any thing themselves, but were feign to committ that office altogether
unto others, to wit especially to Eluan and Medwin. And what is all this to
the Sea of Rome? Surely hitherto we see little cause to acknowledge our selves
any thing at all obliged thereunto. Thus far has Passion and malice carried
this people, not only against the present Roman Church, which they accuse of
error: But when in their own Judgments and Confessions, it was most pure and
unspotted, and Commandresse of all, and to which if we never had been
beholding, we never had been true Christians, never the legitimate children of
Christ, and his holy spouse. And to bewray these men's follies in their own
words: if these Legates of the Sea Apostolic had been so ignorant of the
British languadge, that they could not thereby have preached to the vulgar
people ordinarily understanding no other, were we not beholding unto Pope
Eleutherius for sending them, as our King desired? Then we were not beholding
to that holy King, to send so far with an humble and earnest petition for the
general good of this Nation, that it being obtained, we received no benefit
thereby. Were we not obliged to those Legates, that travailed so long a Journey
to unite us to Christ and his holy Church? Was it worthy no thanks, but
contumely and despite, if they by their Power committed the office of preaching
unto us, unto others which knew our languadge by this man's confession, and so
converted us? Did not duty oblige us, to the Sea of Rome in this man's
Judgment, when he himself thus confesses before. By most it is affirmed, how
that Eleutherius sent Damianus and Fugatius to Order the state of Godwin supr.
p. 21. Page 20.
the Church, who had the honor of performing that office? Does that make no
obligation, which he plainly with S. Bid and others thus confesses?
Eleutherius a holy man sitting Bishop of the Roman Church: Lucius a King of the
Britans writ unto him his letters, praying that by his appointment, and
direction, he might be made a Christian. And presently he obtained the effect
of his godly desire. Or how will this man persuade us, that these Legates did
not understand our languadge, and so preached not themselves being strangers,
but committed that office especially to Eluan and Medwin. And Pope Eleutherius
appointed Meduinus S. Eluanus and M^dwinus with other British Priests and
learned Cl^^^gymen as^ist them.
a Doctor or teacher: and says with his fellows in Religion Parker, Bale,
and Leland as he glosseth them: That Medwin was by birth a Dutchman, and
thereby as unfit a Preacher to Britans as the Italian Legates were.

3. But we are assured by better Authority and Antiquity then this man can
show us to the contrary, that both our King, his Nobles and all the chiefest
hear of the Britans at that time understood the Latin Roman tongue. Our
Antiquaries of Cambridge and others prove unto us, that there was an Imperial
Constitution decreed and received hear in these times, that every man that
would or should bear office must learn the Latin tongue. Institutum fuit, vt
qui Magistratum gerere vellet, Latinam linguam disceret. And long Io. Caius in
Hist. Cantabrig. p. 19.
before this time the Latin tongue was so usual in this Nation, as these
Protestants tell us, that the Romans Latin songs were sent hither, and sunge
hear even to the vulgar audience: And of this Martial the Poet speaks: when
he says his songs and Poems were sunge in Britain.

Dicitur and nostros cantare Britannia versus. Matthew. Parker Antiq. Britan. in
Claudia. Io. Bal. lib. de Scriptor. cent. 1. in Claud. Martial. in Epigr.
Theater of great Brit. l. 6.
Therefore these Latin songs being sent from Rome to our Brittans hear, as
these Protestants write to be sunge and heard, both the singers and hears of
them must needs be said to have understood that languadge of the Romans in
which they were penned by the Poet. So we need not seek any further for
Auditors to understand the preaching of these Roman Legates, though in the
Latin tongue, when we have found already the King himself, all his Nobles
and officers in Authority, and having command, all Scholars in our
Universities, or Schools, besides others by probable Judgment without number,
which understood them preaching, persuading, reasoning, disputing, instructing
or catechizing in that speech. And we may with strong reason from hence inform
and assure our selves, that this so usual and almost common knowledge hear
of the Latin tongue, the natural languadge in Rome from whence so many
Apostolic Preachers were sent into these parts, was a great help and
furtherance, to that so speedy Conversion of this kingdom, which otherwise to
have been effected as it is delivered in our Histories, may justly be termed
miraculous. And allthough both the King and very many of his Nobles learned
Druids, and others were either actually converted, or convicted in Judgment of
the undoubted truth of Christian Religion and falsehood of their Pagan
superstitions before the coming of these Legates hither, or King Lucius sent
for them to Rome, as I have showed before: Yet no small number and of the
learned among them still continuing in their old errors, and the Christian
Clergy then in Britain neither being so great or learned in that first Age,
and Infancy of our Church, that it was able to convert so many millions which
still professed Paganism in this kingdom, if our Ecclesiastical Hierarchy
could or might have been ordered, and settled without the Popes allowance, and
Authority, which almost every Chapter in this History disproueth, yet we
must needs acknowledge our selves obliged, and very much in duty obliged, to
the Apostolic See of Rome, for sending unto us so learned, reverend, and holy
Pastors as all Histories confess them to have been, to deliver us so happily
from that most damnable infernal darkness, wherewith we were blinded, and
without such spiritual Physicians help, and cure, desperately and
irrecouerably overwhelmed, infected, and diseased at that time. Therefore these
Renowned, and in all respects most honorable Legates, knowing well what chardge,
Power, and trust was committed unto them, by the Popes Authority and our Kings
entreatie, and perfectly informed hear of the state, and necessity of this
kingdom in spiritual affairs, presently disposed themselves, and the whole
Christian Clergy hear under them for the most speedy and perfect recovery,
and expelling the venime from so many almost deadly poisoned souls in
Britain. And the theifest places in Britain, where this infection principally
did reign, and was fostered, and from them dispersed into all the other parts
and members of the body of this kingdom, next unto the Court of the King now
converted, being our ancient Schools or Universities, and chief Residences
of the principal Pagan Idolatrous Priests, Flamens, and Archflamens in the
most ancient and commanding Cities of this Nation, they disposed and divided
themselves and our Clergy to stop these springs, and fountains of that foul
ouerflowing stream.

4. How they prevailed in our old British Vinnersities or Schools in
confou^ding the Pagan Philosophers and converting them, their followers and
Disciples to the Christian faith, we may take some notice by that which the
Antiquaries of Cambridge propose unto us, performed by them in their
University, where they say, they after long dispute with their Philosophers,
they Io. Caius Hist. Cantabr. p. 35.
converted them all to Christ, and baptized both them and three thousand others
there in one day. Cantabrigiam venerunt, vt fertur, vbi postquam multum The
Scholars of Cambridge now generally converted, and 3000. other Britans there
Baptized in one day.
varieque cum Philosophis disputatum est, baptizarunt vno die, and Philosophos
omnes, and tria hominum millia. And though they do not deliver the names of
their Authors for this Relation, yet they do sufficiently express, that they
found this narration of the disputing with these Cambridge Philosophers, and
the Baptising both of them and so many thousands at one time, there testified
by diverse Antiquities, for they say expressly that some asscribe it to Elua^
and Medwine after their return from Rome and Baptism of King Lucius, and by
others to the Legates of Pope Eleutherius: secundum quosdam qui ista ad Faganum
and Damianum, seu Fugatium and Deruuianum Eleutherij Nuncios referunt. And
record it done in the same year they came into Britain: Which they hold to
have been the 178. of Christ, id actum fuit anno Domini 178. And allthough
these men stand as much as Antiquities do warrant them, for the honor and
prioritie of their University, yet in this place they do not avouch this
History, as any singular grace or prerogative above other Schools in Britain
at that time, but do sufficiently insinuate, that these holy Legates and their
Associats did the like in all other such ancient Schools and places, and in
most of them before they came to Cambridge; per Insulam diuulgare verbum So in
other Schools and places of learning hear.
Dei, sementem Dei iacere. And after this, they came to Cambridge, Tandem
Cantabrigiam venerunt. By which and like testimonies of many others, we may
suppose they had so done at Stamford, Cricklade or Greeke-lade, and especially
by these men in Glamorgan-shire where they say learning flourished, as well as at
Cambridge before the coming of Julius Caesar hither: Ex quibus Caius supr. p.
20.
scire licet, claram fuisse scientiarum professionem in Britannia, ante
Caesaris aduentum in Britanniam, praecipue vero Cantabrigiae, and
Glamorgantiae. And the School of Clamorgan being so near to Caerlegion upon
vske in that Country, S. Eleutherius Pope grants Privileges and immunities
to the School of Cambridge.
where one of the three great Idolatrous Temples of Britain, and Seat of
their Archflamen of those Western Provinces was, and thereby a Nursery of
Paganism for that so superstitious place, it teaches us of itself without
further testimony, that a prime and principal care of the holy Legates, and
our Christian Clergy then was, utterly to root up, or alter the nature of the
Bulla Honorij 1. Papae dat. Romae An. D. 624. die 20. Februar. apud Caium l. 1.
de Antiq. Cantabrigiae p. 75. 76. 77.
infecting seeds and plants of that offensive Seminary. Of this, we have some
more particular testimony out of the Bull of Pope Honorius dated the. 20. day
of February in the year of Christ's Incarnation 624. granted for the privilege
of the School or University (for so he terms it) of Cambridge, which thus
begins: Honorius Episcopus Seruus Seruorum Dei, dilectis filijs Doctoribus
and scholaribus in Vniuersitate Cantabrigiae sedentibus, salutem and
Apostolicam benedictionem. Wherein is expressly said, that S. Eleutherius
granted Immunities, and Privileges to that University, then become Christian:
All Flamens and Archstamens of the Paga^stogether with their Cities c^nuerted.
An Argument that he extended the like favors, and Immunities to our other
schools or Universities then in the same condition with Cambridge, but that
they long since decayed and overthrown, could keep no memory of such things,
as Cambridge, clayming a never Interrupted continuance, has done. Galfr.
Monum. l. 4. Hist. Brit. p. 19. Pont. Virun. l. 4. Hist. Mart. Pol. Supput. in
Eleut. Radulp. de Dicet. Hist. Manuscr. inter an. 170. and 180. Matthew. Westminster.
an. gratiae 185. Vita S. Helenae apud Capgra. in Catalog. Bal. l. de Script.
cent. 1. in Lucio and Eluan. and Medu. Barns l. de Vit. Pont. in Eleuth.
Theater of great Brit. l. 6. Godw. Co^u. of Britain Seldom Analect. Stowe and
Howes Hist. in Lucius Harris. descript. of Brit. Martyrol. Romans 26. die Maij in
S. Eleutherio. Act. S. Eleutherij in Breu. Romans die 26. Maij.
This will be more and inuincibly evident by that which is affirmed with the
almost general assent of all Antiquities, testifying they parsonally visited,
preached unto, and converted all, not only the Metropolitan, but the other
Cities of this kingdom: and besides them the whole Nation, in such manner that
scarcely a Pagan was left to be found therein. Of our Cities, their Rulers, and
Inhabitants thus converted by them, we have the constant agreement both of
Catholic and Protestant Historians.

5. The British History Ponticus Virunnius and Martinus say, of these, that
they delivered the^ from Idolatry, and converted them to Christ. Hos
Idololatriae eripuerunt. Radulphus de Diceto in his Manuscript History proves
as much, that they converted all the Cities in Britain, as well their Flame^s,
and Archflame^s, by whom they were directed in their Idolatrous worship, as
others: so do the other Authors before, speaking more particularly of their
Flamens, or Archflamens converted by them, then any others. Matthew of
Westminster writes in like manner how they visited, and converted all the
Cities of Britain. So has the old Writer of the life of S. Helen and other
Catholic Authors. Which is seconded and confirmed by most of our Protestant
Historians, Bale, Barns, the Theater writers, Godwyn, Seldom, with others
consenting, that all these Cities of Britain with their Flamens or Archflamens
which then ruled in them, were now converted by these holy Legates, and that
Apostolic Mission from the Pope of Rome S. Eleutherius.

6. And the principal Stats and Members of this kingdom King Lucius, his
Nobles, Universities, Philosophers, Flamens, and chief Priests, and Teachers
of the Pagan subjects, and their chief places of commorancie and command
being thus converted, the conquest over the vulgar sort was easy and soon
effected. The old Roman Martyrologe says, that Fugatius and Damianus sent by
S. Eleutherius Baptized King Lucius, his wife, and almost all his people. Qui
Lucium Regem vna cum vxore, ac toto fere populo baptizarunt. The ancient and
approved Acts of S. Eleutherius say, that King Lucius and The Brittans here
were now generally conuer^ed, in all places.
all his subjects received the faith of Christ by these Legates: per Quos Rex
and reliqui fidem susciperent. The Author of the British History testifies,
that so soon as the people of Britain knew their King was a Christian, they
gathered themselves together to be catechized, and receive Baptism. Nec mora,
Galfr. Monum. Hist. Brit. l. 4. c. 19.
concurrentes vndique Nationum populi, Regis exemplum insequuntur, eodem
lauacro mundati, caelestique regno restituuntur. And says, that these holy
Legates did blot out Paganism, almost through out all the Island, then much
more where Ponticus Virun. Hist. Brit. lib. 4. prope finem. Guliel. Malmes. l.
de Antiq. Caenobij Glaston. Antiquitates Glast. Manuscr. tabulis affixae.
King Lucius ruled Beati Doctores per totam fere Insulam Paganismum
deleuissent. Ponticus Virunnius affirms as much, or more, that they baptized
all the people of Britain. Baptizarunt omnes gentes Britanniae. William of
Malmesbury in his Manuscript History of Glaste^bury teaches, that they
travailed all over the Island, preaching and baptizing. Phaganus and Deruianus
venerunt in Britanniam ad praedicandum Euangelium, qui baptizantes and
praedicantes and vniuersam Insulam peragrantes. The old Manuscript Antiquities
of Glaste^bury written in Parchment, and fixed to broad Bords do witness, that
these Legates baptized King Lucius, and his people preaching and baptizing
through out Britain, and cite other more ancient Histories for it. Phaganus
atque Deruianus prout charta sancti Patricij gestaque Britannorum testantur,
verbum vitae Euangelizantes, Regem cum suo populo sacro font abluerunt, huic
praedicando and baptizando Britanniae parts peragrantes. Matthew of
Westminster is witness, that after King Lucius was baptized, his subjects
followed his example Matthew. Westminster.
in such order that in a short time there was not hear any Infidel to be
found. Quod cum factum fuisset, concurrerunt ad Baptismum Nationes diuersae,
exemplum Regis sequentes, ita vt in breui nullus inueniretur Infidelis.
Hartmannus Schedel reports, Hartni. Scedel. Chron. Chronic. f. 115. p. 2.
Epist. S. Patricij apud Capgrau. in vita eius. Leland. assert. Arthurij. and
Antiq. Glast. Scriptor vitae S. Helenae apud Capgrau. in Catalog.
as others before, that these Legates baptized the King and his people: Regem
ipsum ac populum. The Historical Relation of S. Patrike, commonly called his
Epistle, witnesses, that they converted both the King and people, travailing
quite through Britain. Phaganus and Deruianus Regem cum suo populo ad fidem
conuerterunt, peragrantes Britanniam. The old Author that wrote S. Helen her
life records how upon the Baptism of King Lucius, all the people of the
whole Nation presently flocked together to be instructed in the faith of Christ
and were baptized. Nec mora concurrentes vndique totius Nationis populi Regis
exemplum insequuntur, eodemque salutari lauachro mun dati caelesti Regno
restituuntur. Harding thus sets it down in his old verses:

Eleuthery the first at supplication Harding Chron. c. 51. f. 43.

Of Lucius, sent him two holy men
That called were Faggan and Duuyen
That baptized him, and all his Realm throughoute
With hertes glad and labor devout.
Sigebertus says generally of the Britans without restriction, that they
Sigebert. Chron. in Regno Brita^norum.
received Christianity by the Legates of Pope Eleutherius, sent at the request
of their King Lucius. Britanni instantia Lucij Britanniarum Regis per Legatos
Eleutherij Papae Mysteria Christianitatis perceperunt. Walterus Rollwink in his
Fasciculus, writes that Fuganus and Damianus the Legates of Pope Eleutherius
baptized both King Lucius and his people, who upon the solemn Baptism of
their King submitted themselves to Christian Religion. Eleutherius Walter.
Rollw. in Fascicul. te^p. an. 184.
misit Legatos Lucio Regi Britonum, qui eum cum populo suo baptizarunt.
Solemniter Rege Lucio baptizato subiectus populus eius exemplo fidei colla
submisit pacifice.

THE XVII. CHAPTER.
HOW IN BRITAIN THESE HOLY LEGATES placed Archbishops and Bishops in our
Cities, Archbishops in the places of Archflamens, and Bishops for Flamens. And
how by all writers, such dignities were among the ancient Pagans, both in
Britain and other Nations.

1. WHEN the Ecclesiastical affairs of Britain had thus prosperously
proceeded, that the King, and all his Nobility were become Christians, as
Gildas, Nennius, the Antiquities of Landaffe and others after them testify.
Rex cum vniuersis Britanniae Regulis Baptismum susceperunt. And as an other
Copy of Gildas agreeing with Nennius reads: Lucius Britannicus Rex cum
vniuersis Regulis totius Britanniae Baptismum susceperunt. And in the
Antiquities of Landaffe: Lucius and totius Britanniae Primates Baptismum
susceperunt. And all Schools, Cities, Druids, Teachers and Scholars of
Idolatry were thus converted to Christ, as all our Antiquaries Catholics and
Protestants have delivered, so that all both Rulers and subjects both
temporal, and such as were then called spiritual, had now embraced that
Religion and worship of God, which as it was diametrically, as it were,
repugnant to the superstions of the Gentiles in Britain, about their Idols, and
termed Gods, so it utterly condemned many of their barbarous and prophaine
customs and observations in merely civil and human affairs, and proceedings,
as I have in very many things (intolerable to be practiced, or permitted)
given Instance before. Therefore as the state of Religion and reue^ence to God
was now changed, and only hear wanted an external Authoritatiue settling of
an Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of Bishops, Priests, and Clergy men to govern
in Religion, and places or Churches for professing and public practice of the
same, which were now to be provided by these holy Legates; so King Lucius as the
Vicar of Christ in this kingdom in temporal things, as S. Eleutherius styles
him in his Epistle about this business, wrote unto that holy Pope for his
direction also in this great affair of changing his temporal Laws, to make
all sure that nothing should be received and established hear, either
concerning the duty and office of man to God, or man to man, one toward an
other, but what should have direction or allowance Godwin Conu. of Brit. p. 26.
The Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, and other
Clergy men now settled hear by the Popes authority.
from the Sea Apostolic of Rome. Of this second I will speak, when I have in
some manner finished or delivered the first, the settling or founding our
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy and government in such affairs.

2. That these Roman Legates did presently upon our Conversion, appoint the
Sees of Bishops and Archbishops, according to the place and number of the
Flamens, and Archflamens of the Pagans, is so generally received for an
undeniable truth in Antiquities, as a Protestant Bishop singularly excepting
one other of his profession, hear naming him, that he perceives not any that
have gainesaid it, before Master Doctor Sutcliffe: But contrariwise diverse
both ancient and learned are to be found, that have partly broached it, and
partly applauded the same. And yet this bold faced man, against all learned
Antiquity, in his own confession, pleases to call it: a devise so childish
and ridiculous, as he cannot but wonder, that any man of Learning and Judgment
should approve it. And brings no more reason then he does Authority for this
his singularity. Only he says that Fenestella which directly teaches this
dignity of Archflamens among the Gentiles, is not the ancient Fenestella which
was in the time of Tiberius the Emperor: but a man of later time then that,
which Fenestella printed and published by the Protestants of Basile.
may not be so shuffled over upon the bare word of one Protestant of England
against all his Brethren in Basile, where by their Authority the book was
printed and published, for a true ancient Fenestella. And it is a strange
conceit of his to be uttered to vewe, to think to Father this opinion first
upon Gratian, as thus he does: The defendor of this conceit is Gratian, whom I
doubt not we may account the first Author of the same. For I have proved in
the first chapter of this Age at lardge both by Catholics and Protestants, that
diverse living and writing in the time of the Apostles were of this opinion, and
proved it by the practice of the Apostles themselves, which appointed Primats
for those chief Cities of Provinces, where in the time of the Gentiles, their
Archflamens were resident, and Ruled, and gave order this vsadge should be
observed by Posterity. And this Protestant Bishop contradicts himself in
this matter, for first making Gratian Author heareof, presently he thus adds
of him: True it is, that having first delivered it as his own opinion, in one
Godwin supr. p. 27.
place: afterward he cites, for the same Clement a Pope: wherein, either he
abuses us in citing that which never was written: or himself is abused by
some cou^terfeit Clement. Therefore whether this Clement be counterfeit or no,
this Protestant must needs be a counterfeit, for if this Clement were a
counterfeit he was cou^terfeited long before Gratians time, being cited by him
as ancient, and so the ancient counterfeiter of Clement must needs broach
this opinion before Gratian. But except the ancient Popes Anacletus, Anicetus,
Stephen the first, Lucius, S. Leo the second, S. Marianus Scotus and Florentius
Wigorniensis Cap. 1. supr.
our learned Countrymen all before Gratian were deceived are counterfeitors,
this was the true Clement Disciple of S. Peter, and so they cite and approve
him, even in this matter, and they confirm that not only S. Clement, but S.
Peter the Apostle thus both practiced, and ordained: and how in the time of the
Pagans there were Archflamens, and they were chief over the other Flamens, as
Patriarks and Primats be over Bishops in the Law of Christ.

3. And if this man had travailed no further into Antiquities, then those of
this Nation, he might have found both Archflamens in the Pagans time, hear in
Britain, and that the Legates of Pope Eleutherius did constitute and ordai^e
Archbishops in their places, and this affirmed by Authority more Abbas
Spanheymens. l. de Script. in Sigeberto Gembl. Bal. l. de Script. cent. 2. in
Henric. Hu^tingt. Henric. Huntin. Histor. lib. 1. and in Prologo Hist.
ancient then Gratian was. For both Sigebertus Ge^blacensis, Henricus
Huntingtoniensis, and others which wrote before Gratian, do take often and
express notice of our British History, in which we read of this matter in
these words: fuerunt tunc in Britannia octo and viginti Flamines, nec non and
tres Archiflamines, quorum potestati caeteri Iudices morum atque phanatici
submittebantur. Hos etiam ex praecepto Apostolici Idololatriae eripuerunt and
vhi erant Flamines, Episcopos, vbi erant Archiflamines Archiepiscopos
posuerunt. Seeds autem Archiflaminum in tribus nobilioribus ciuitatibus
fuerant, Londonijs videlicet atque Eboraci, and in vrbe Legionum: quam super
Oscam fluuium in Glamorgantia veteres muri and aedificia sitam fuisse
testantur: There were then (in the time of King Three Archbishops placed hear
for the ^. Archflame^s, in London, York, and Caerlegion.
Lucius) 28. Flamens, and 3. Archflamens, to whose power other Judges were
subject. These by the command of the Pope his Legates delivered from Idolatry,
and where there were Flamens they placed Bishops, and where there were
Archflamens they placed Archbishops. The Seats of the Archflamens were in the
three most Noble Cities, London, York, and the City of Legions which the old
walls and buldings do witness to have been upon the River Oske in
Glamorgantia. Hitherto this old British History, which is older then Gratian
by so many years, as were between the end and writing thereof at the death of
Gadwallader the last King of the Btitans where it ends, about the year of
Christ's Nativity 689. or 690. by Sigebertus and others computation when the
British Author thereof composed it, and the writing of Gratian above 400.
years after. And Sigebertus who ends his Chronicle in the year 1112. and
then dyed, as his Continuator there notes: Sigebertus Gemblacensis Monachus
Descriptor praecedentium Continuat^r Sigebertiin Chron. an. 1112. Sigebertus
Ge^blacens. initio Chronici c. de Regno Britannorum.
in hoc libro temporum obijt, cui nos illa quae sequuntur fideli narratione
subiecimus, is a sufficient witness even in the beginning of his History that
this British History then was an old History: narrat antiqua Britannorum
Historia, and usually and cheifely cites and follows it for the British
affairs. And Henry of Huntington, who by Baleus and others dyed before Gratian
had written, was well acquainted with this Historye, and wrote a Book of the
Kings of the Britans yet extant in the public Library of Cambridge, and so
conformable to the British History, that our Protestants which published his
works, thereby excuse themselves for not publishing that his work, because
there is nothing in it, but what is written by S. Bid and Geffery of Monmouth
more at lardge: quia nihil noui affert quod non in Beda and Monemuthensi
before Protestantium Annotatio inter librum 7. and 8. Histor. Henrici
Huntingtoniensis. Ponticus Virun. Hist. Brit. l. 6. in fine. Ciacon. (...).
Rossus. Bosto^ apud Godwin. in Assaph. Bal. l. de Script. cent. 2. in Galfrid.
Ar. Notatio in Manusc. exempl. Cantab. Io. Bal. l. de Scrip. Brit. cent. 2. in
Waltero Caleno.
reperiatur. And Geffery Archdeacon of Monmouth when he translated this Book
out of the British into the Latin tongue, and after Bishop of Assaph, and
Cardinal of the Church of Rome, as Virunnius, Ciaconius, Leland, Rosseus,
Bostonus, the Protestant Bishop Bale, and others say, was an excellent
Historian, Historicus egregius, and as the note upon the old Manuscript Copy
thereof in Cambridge witnesses, translated it most truly, simplicissime
transtulit. And this Book was brought out of little Britain by Walter Calenus
Archdeacon of Oxford a Britain by birth, a man most famous for learning, as
our Authors say, and the Book was, then he dying in the year of Christ 1120.
anno Incarnati filij Dei 1120. a most old Book, vetustissimum Britannici
sermonis Codicem: written above 400. years before* per quadringentos and eo
amplius annos. From which date unto his time the same Archdeacon of Oxoford
continued the British History cloquently, non incleganti sermon protraxit
Britannorum Annals.

4. So we evidently perceive that we can hardly find either more ancient or
credible Authority for any Historical truth in our British Antiquities, then
for this. For the Author both was a Britan, and wrote in that Languadge, and
the last passadges thereof written almost a thousand years since. The Agents
and Instruments of the translation thereof both Britans and the best learned,
and greatest Historians of that time, and this Bookew preserved by the Britans
of Armorica, or little Britain in France, driven thither by the Infidel
Saxons, with their Antiquities and other Riches most precious unto them. And
so the former parts of this Book wherein the History of these Archflamens is
contained, carries sufficient Argument of a far more ancient date. Which
the Author himself both in the Copy which is printed, and that which
Virunnius did epitomate* and was never printed, as the note upon it testifies,
does witness: for he expressly cites Gildas for this History. And Ponticus
Virunnius seems to make Gild^s Author of that part of this Book. For thus
he writes: ^orum no^^na and A^^us in libro reperiuntur, quem alter Gildas de
victoria Aurelij Ambrosij inscripsit: The names Ponticus Virunnius Brit. Hist.
l. 4. in fine.
and gests of them which came with Damianus, and Faganus are found in the Book
which the other Gildas did Entitle, of the victory of Aurelius Ambrose. Where
the distinction, alter Gildas, the other Gildas, having spoken of no other
before, but only the Author whom he did epitomate must needs make one Gildas
Author of that British History, and so both the one and other Gildas to
approve this narration of Archflamens in Britain. Which he further confirms
in the later end of his Books citing, for Authors of all which he had said,
both the Translation of Geffery of Monmouth, whom he names an excellent
Historian, and Cardinal, and Gildas the renouned Poet writing more then he did
epitomate, which were things most concerning the Romans, he being an Italian.
Haec autem and multa alia describit idem Gaufridus Monumetensis, Historicus
egregius, and Cardinalis: (...) and Gildas Poeta insignis. Sed ego Ponticus
Virunnius excepi, quae ad rem Romanam attinerent plurimum. And he speaks of
many things which Galfridus Translation has not, which he must needs by his
own confession have from Gildas. And for this History of our British
Archflamens; comprehend^d in the gests of the Brit. Hist. l. 4. c. 20.
Roman Legates, the Translation of Galfridus cites Gildas, as Virunnius did,
only omitting the distinction, alter, the other, of that name: and mentions
that Gildas did write more plainly or copiously of this m^tter then he does:
eorum nomina and actus in libro reperiuntur, quem Gild^^ de victoria Aurelij
Ambrosij inscripsit. Quod autemtam lucido Tractatu parauer^^, nullatenus
opusfuit, vt inferiori stylo renouaretur.

5. To this changing of Archflamens, three in number in Britain to so many
Archbishops, naming their places as before, and that Gildas in his Book of the
victory of Aurelius Ambrose, wrote of this matter of King Lucius so converted
then, is consented unto by many foreign writers, as in France the Author of
the History Entitled, Mere des Histories and Chroniques de France, Alan
Bouchard, Mere des Histoires l. 1. p. 91. Alan Bauchard Annals de Bretaigne l.
1. f. 19. p. 2. Ponticus Virun. Hist. Brit. l. 4.
and others; And to manifest that these Authors which cite and follow Gildas
in this Relation, as they have witnessed before, do speak as plainly of this
matter as the British History, Virunnius delivers it, in these the same
words: fuerant enim in Britannia octo and viginti Flamines, necnon and tres
Archiflamines, quorum potestati caeteri Iudices morum, atque phanatici
submittebantur. Hos etiam ex praecepto Apostolico Idololatriae eripuerunt: and
vbi erant Flamines, Episcopos: vbi autem Archiflamines, Archiepiscopos
posuerunt, mira sanctitate and incredibili deuotione. Sedis autem Archiflaminum
in tribus nobilioribus ciuitatibus fuerant, Londonijs videlicet atque Eboraci,
and in vrbe Legionum, quam super Oscam fluuium in Glamorgantia veteres muri and
aedificia sitam fuisse testantur. And to leave it without exception, that
Gildas, or whatsoever other old British Author he followed herein, went
further in this matter of Archflamens, the^ Galfridus his Translation does, he
there adds from this old British Antiquity, that the Religion of the
Archflamens, was the most ancient Religion. Archiflaminum quae fuit
antiquissima Religio. And Giraldus Cambrensis a most Noble Cosmographer,
Cosmographus nobilissimus, as a Protestant Bishop styles him, himself a
Britan makes this calling of Archflamen so ancient, Bal. l. descript. Brit.
centur. 2. in Syluestro Giraldo Cambren. Galfrid. Cambr. descript. Cambr. ^. 16.
that he constantly affirms; Helenus son of Priamus was Archflamen among
the Trojans before the destruction of Troy. Helenus Priami filius Archflamen
eorum erat. But I shall speak hereafter of the Antiquity of this state from
the Pagans themselves, hear I was only to Justify that such men were hear
in Britain in King Lucius time, and their Residences changed into the Sees of
Christian Archbishops, which I have performed, by the best and most received
Antiquities we have left unto us. Which is confirmed by those that have written
after namely among, strangers writing of British affairs, Martinus Polonus,
Philippus Bergomensis, Platina, Hartmannus Schedel Martin. Pol. supput. in
Eleuther. Philip. Bergom. Hist. in Eleuth. Platina in Eleut. Hartm. Scedel
Chron. chronic. f. 115. p. 2. Ptolomeus Lucens. in Vit. Pontif. in Eleuth.
Leland. assertione Arthu^ij f. 36.
with others, only this difference I find between these, and most of our
British writers, that these of our Nation are commonly interpreted to affirm
we had 28. Flamens, besides 3. Archflamens, when those strangers, I recited,
do write but of 25. Flamens besides the 3. Archflamens, which opinion will
appear the more probable, when I shall hereafter show from our most ancient
and approved Authors, that this our Britain as it contained only Loegria and
Cambria, now England and Wales, neither King Lucius nor the Romans then Lords
of more, had but 28. Cities in all to feate these 3. Archflamens and the other
Flamens in, and 3. Archbishops and Bishops after them.

6. For English Historians whether Catholics or Protestants I may pass The
great number of Bishops placed ^ea^e.
them over in this business, seeing this Protestant Bishop has before
acknowledged that he and one other only have opposed therein. Therefore very
unadvisedly has this Protestant Bishop before spoken, as he has done of this
Godwin supr. p. ^^.
thing, and with no less boldness further thus adds: no man I dare affirm,
is able to show out of any ancient writer or other authe^ticall Monument, that
ever there was any such office amongst the Gentiles as Archflamen or
Protoflamen. Look who list in that volume of ancient Incriptions published of
late, by Gruterus, Scaliger and others: he may there find oftentimes mentioned
Flamen, for a man, and Flaminica for a woman Priest: but of Archflamen,
Protoflamen or any other like, altum Silentium, there is no mention. For I have
proved by ancient, and the most ancient writers we have, that there was such
an office among the Gentiles even hear in Britain. And if there were no memory
of such in ancient Inscriptions, as there is not of many, which most
confessedly were, this is not able to discredit the truth hereof. And his
Author Gruterus is so far from discrediting this, that the Gentiles had
Archflamens, as well as Flamens, that upon the first Epistle of S. Clement
where Archiflamines be justified both by his own and S. Peter's testimony, and
that they were to be changed among Christians into Primats or Patriarchs, he
plainly writes, it is the true Epistle of S. Clement: Lambert. Grut. Verenad.
in Argumento 1. Epist. Clement.
omnino statuo, hanc Clementis veram esse Epistolam: And upon the very word
Archiflamines, as in his opinion Rufinus living in S. Hierome his time
translateth S. Clement, he notes in the Margin, that others called them the
chief Flamens Priests, or chief Flamens. Archiflamines. Alias primi
Sacerdotes (...). in Ann. (...). Ep. Clem in Verb. Archiflamines.
Flamines. Alias primi Flamines. And because this man has so peremptorily
affirmed that no ancient Incription proves Archflamen, Protoflamen or any
other like. All men know Pontifex and Metropolitanus are the like and same in
condition. Yet Wolfangus Lazius Historian to the King of Romans proves it,
both by the old ge^tile writers and Inscriptions out of Transiluania^ Wolfang.
La^ius in Comme^^arijs Re^public^ Romanae. p* 151.
Where one C. Tercennius is inscribed Metropolitanus. And M. Coninius Pontifex
Metropolitanus. And Carolus Sigonius publishes an old Inscription of a Pagan
Knight of Rome, imploring the aid of the Pontifex Maximus and Carolus Sigon.
Commentar. in Fast. and triumph. Romans p. 191. p. 121
Flamens. Manesque meae opem Pontificis Maximi and Flaminum, qui in Capitolio
sunt implorent. And shows also how Caecilius Metellus was both Flamen
Martialis, and Pontifex Maximus. Eutropius a Grecian (because the beginning of
Archflamen is so) says, that the high Priest, Archflamen or Chief of the
Priests was called with them Pontifex. (...). Eutropius Hist. Romans Breuiar. l.
2. p. 77. Zosimus Historiar. lib. 4. in Gratiano and Theodosio.
Zosimus says: that in the Colleges of the Priests or Flamens at Rome, the
Pontifex was Chief. In Collegijs Sacerdotu^ Romae Pontifices primas tenebant.
And after says, as Eutropius before, that the Pontifex Maximus and the
chiefest Archflamen were all one. (...). And speaks plainly of the
Archflamen, or Protoflamen: (...). Julius Capitolinus teaches also, how
besides the Flamens and Pontifices, there was an Archflamen, calling this,
Pontificem Maximum, the Julius Capitolinus in Opilio Macrino. Aelius Lampridius
in Commodo Antonino.
other Pontifices Minores, the greatest Flamen and lesser Flamens or
Pontifices. And Aclius Lampridius thus brings the Pontifex Maximus to speak
in the Senate, as commanding all the Flamens or Pontifices the less: Cingius
Seuerus dixit, unjust sepultus est, quia Pontifex dico: hoc Collegium
Pontificum dicit. And this in public Senate. Aurelius Victor is witness that
Numa Po^pilius ordained twelve Flamens or Priests of Mars, and made one of them
Archflamen. Aurelius Victor in Numa Pompil. Titus Liuius hist. l. 1.
And created a Pontifex Maximus. Salios Martis Sacerdotes, quorum primus
Praesul vocatur, 12. instituit. Pontificem Maximum creauit. which Titus Liuius
with others confirms, of the Pontifex Maximus, to whom he gave power over
the other Pontifices, or Flamens. And exemplifieth how when Lucius Cantilius
Scribe to the Flamens had committed sin with Feronia a Vestall virgin, the
Pontifex Maximus or Archflamen in public Judgment caused him to be beaten with
rodds until he dyed, L. Cantilius Scriba Pontificum, quos nunc Minores Tit.
Liu. lib. 22. p. 225.
Pontifices appellant, qui cum Feronia virgin Vestali stuprum fecerat, a
Pontifice Maximo eousque virgis in Concilio caesus erat, vt inter verbera
expiraret. And this Tit. Liu. l. 4. l. 10. l. 23.
was by the Institution of Numa Pompilius ordaining both many Flamens, and this
Pontifex Maximus or Archflamen, as their chiefest. Cornelius Tacitus relates
the like command, and Authority of the Pontifex Maximus over the Cornel.
Tacitus Annal. l. 3.
Flamens in the case of Seruius Maluginie^sis a Flamen Dialis, suing for the
Prefecture of Asia, by which he was to be an Archflamen, his case was
determined by the Pontifex Maximus, who, as there is expressed, ever ruled in
such censurs.

7. Besides these, it is manifest also by Aulus Gellius, Cicero and others
Aulus Gellius l. 15. c. 27.
that there were even among the Romans, Pontifices, Rex Sacrorum and Flamines,
the high Priests or Archflamens, King of holy things and Flamens. The Flamens
were subject to the King of Ceremonies, and he and they also were subject to
the Pontifex Maximus. And evident it is by Suetonius, Dionisius
Halicarnassaeus, and others that besides the Pontifex Maximus which was
highest, Sue^onius in Nerone c. 2.
there were diverse other Pontifices or Archflamens with the Romans, and when
any of those Archflamens died, these Archflamens or Pontifices did choose and
substitute an other in his place. Defuncto vno Pontifice alius sufficitur non a
populo creatus. And whereas the number of the Flamens was so great for the
number of their Gods, every one having a Flamen, and as this Protestant Nichol.
Grach. ^^b^^s de Conit^js Romans f. 11. p. 2. f. 87. p. 2. Cicero oratione pro
Domosua.
Bishop thinks an hundred such in Rome, yet there were but 8. Archflamens or
Pontifices, besides the Pontifex Maximus, and neither they nor the King of
Ceremonies were of their College, as Nicholaus Grachius proves at lardge. Yet
they satt in Judgment with them, as appears by an Oration of Cicero, made
before them all: discite orationem Pontifices, and vos Flamines, and tu Rex.
And how both the Flamins, and Rex were subject to the Pontifex is, besides that
is said before, expressly affirmed by Titus Liuius, where he teaches that the
Rex which was above the Flamins, was subject to the Pontifex; Regis sacrificuli
sacerdotium Pontifici subiectum. And in his seventh Book Tit. Liuius init. l.
2. 1. decad. l. 7. decad. 3.
he teaches the same in plain terms of the Flamens, when he delivers of
the Flamen Dialis, Jupiter his Flamen, the greatest of that rank was adjudged
and compelled to stand to the order of P. Licinius the Pontifex. Flaminem
Dialem inuitum inaugurari coegit P. Licinius Pontifex Maximus. Which is
confirmed Valor. Maxim. l. 6. c. 9. Lucius Florus Epitom. l. 19. Titus Liu. l.
7. decad 4. Cicero lib. 2. de legibus.
by Valerius Maximus, and Lucius Florus. And Titus Liuius in an other place
proves this to have been the Religion of the Gentiles: Religio ad postrenum
vicit: and dicto audiens esse Flamen pontifico iussus. Which distinction also
and subordination Cicero proved by the Roman Laws: Diuisque alijs Sacerdotes,
omnibus Pontifices, singulis Flamines sunto.

8. This is confirmed out of the Imperial and Civil Law, where it is written
of the time long before Christ, where the chief Power of interpreting all
their Laws, Tribunitian of the twelve Tables or other belo^ged to the College
of the Pontifices or Archflamens: omnium harum and interpretandi scientia and
actiones, apud Collegium Pontificum erant: ex quibus constituebatur, quis
quoquo Tom. 1. pandect. lib. 1. Titul. de Iustitia. and Iure. Iul. Caesar. l.
6. belli Gallici. Theat. of great Brit. l. 6. Ammon. de gest. Francor. l. 1.
c. 6.
anno praeesset priuatis. And to speak expressly of our British Flamens and
Druids: Julius Caesar as our Theater Protestants translate him, witnesses,
that in every government or Province: over all these Druids there is one
Primate which has chief Authority over them. Where the Marginall note
likewise is: among the Druids one Primate and chief over the rest. And
Ammonius speaking also in the words of Caesar, has the same, and adds
further, that when this Primate or Archflamen dyed, an other the most worthy
was substituted in his place by voices of the Flamens or Druids, and sometime
this Primacie or Principality was decided by arms. His autem omnibus
Druidibus praeest vnus qui summam inter eos habet Authoritatem. Hoc mortuo si
quis ex reliquis excellit, dignitati succedit: aut si sint plures pares,
suffragio Druidum. Nonnunquam etiam armis de Principatu contendunt. Which must
needs be understood of the Druids, and Flamens in one Province, where there was
also one temporal Governor, and not of all the Druids and Flamens that were
dispersed either in France, Germanye and Britain jointly together, or any one
of these great Nations having diverse Provinces, and several temporal
Regents, and Regiments at that time, as all Histories prove. After these
Pagans, so write our Christian Antiquaries even Protestants: habebant Druides
sui ordinis supremum Pontificem, H^^ric. Pantal. de vitis Illustrib. part. 1.
cap. 41. Magdeburgen: centur. 2. page 15. Beat. Rhenan. Re^. Germanic. l. 3.
page 123. 124.
quo mortuo alius, qui dignitate pollebat, eligebatur. Which supremus Pontifex
highest spiritual man, is as much as Archflamen or the like. The Magdeburgians
say there were diverse orders of such among the Gentiles, some Pontifices Maximi,
others Flamens and the inferior Priests, Alij Pontifices Maximi appellantur:
alij Flamines. Beatus Rhenanus delivers how the primative Christians did
place Archbishops and Metropolitans according to the Provinces of the Pagan
Romans, and particularly recites many, saying they had Archbishops, and
Metropolitans for their old Primacy in the Pagans times, propter ciuitatum
veterem primatum, and this is that, says he, which Pope Lucius says: Cities
and places in which Primats ought to govern were appointed long before Christ.
Atque hoc est, quod Lucius Papa dicit apud Gratianum did. LXXX. vrbes, inquit,
and loca in quibus Primates praesidere debent, non a modernis sed multis ante
Christi aduentum statutae sunt temporibus. Quorum Primatus etiam pro maiori^us
negotijs appellabant. And there acknowledges that both this S. Lucius which
was Pope in the year 155. and S. Clement Successor to S. Peter directed, that
these Metropolitans should be placed where Archflame^s were in the time of the
Pagans. The first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, his Successor there
Whitegift, Fox, Ihon Prise, Barnes, and other principal Protestants of
England acknowledge as much, and prove it from S. Anacletus Matthew. Parker Ant.
Brit. Whitgift against Cartw. Pris. def. hist. Britan. Rob. Barnes in Vit.
Pontif. in Anacl. Otto Frigens. Chron. l. 3. c. 2.
and others, that it was an Apostolical ordination, that such should succeed
in place of the Pagan Archflamens. Therefore, seeing there is so general a
consent herein of all writers, I will conclude with that ancient Noble and
learned Bishop Otto Frige^sis that wrote before Gratia^, or the Tra^ssator of
the British History, and speaks as plainly as either Fenestella did, or
any man can do, and with the general opinion of Christians in his time: vbi
sub principibus gentium Flamines erant, ibi postmodum a nostris locati sunt
Episcopi. Vbi illi Archiflamines, nos Archiepiscopos: vbi illi Protoflamines,
nos Primates seu Patriarchas habere caepimus, omnes quidem vnius ordinis, sed
pro differentia ciuitatum diuersae dignitatis: where under the Primas of the
gentiles there were Flamins, there by Christians, Bishops were placed. Where
they had Archflamens we began to have Archbishops. Where they had Protoflamens,
there we had Primats or Patriarks, all of one order, but of different dignity
for the diversity of the Cities.

THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
IN WHAT PLACES OF BRITAIN THESE chiefest commanding Archflamens were, to wit
at London, York and Caerlegion, and how these Roman Legates placed for them
Archbishops, with their several commands, and Jurisdictions, some of them by
the Apostolic power extending, and commanding over Provinces and Countries not
temporally subject to King Lucius of Britain, or the Romans, but rather
enemies unto them in cyuill affairs.

1. HAVING thus inuincibly proved, by all Antiquities, that there The ^ld
B^itti^h (...), the (...), Arc^flamens, Fla^es, A^chbi^^ops, and ^ishops with
their Sees.
were among the Gentiles, especially in this kingdom of Britain, not only
Flamins but Archflamens, and they seated in the principal governing Cities in
several Provinces, and how after the coming of Christ even from the Apostles
time, and by their ordinance and Institution, their Residences were to be
changed into Archiepiscopall or Metropolitan chief commanding Sees in the
Christian Religion: If we had no other particular proof for this, but in
general terms, S. Edwards Laws, the testimony of Gildas, Nennius, the
Antiquities of Landaffe, S. Isidorus, who as Pope Eleutherius also, calls
this Nation Gens Bruti. Thomas Archbishop of York a Norma^ by birth in the
time of King William the Leges S. Edward^ Reg. apud Gul. Lamb. l. de Pris^^s
legib. f. ^^6. Gildas apud (...). l. 1. cap. 17. V^r. l. 1. Cestren. Pontic.
Nenn. Hist. Ant. Land. Ecc. Isid. l. Etiml. Thom. Ebor. apud Stowe ^^^ofe of
Brute. ^hahessinus a^^d Pr^s page 27. Gu^iel. Malmes. apud eund. Henr. Hunt.
H^stor. de Reg^b. Britan. Gualt. Oxon. apud Harding. ca. 16. and Bal. 2. cent.
Sigeb. Gembl. Hist. and de Regno Brit. Maria^. apud Harding. c. 16. Literae
defenso^iae Eduardi Regis 1. ad Papam Romans apud Tho. Walsing. Hist. in Eduardo
1. and Ypodig. Neustriae an. 13* 1. Gildas apud Ra^. Higeden Manuscr. chron. c.
4^. Galfr. Mon. l. 1. Hist. Br^t. c. 17. and Pontic. Virun. l. 1. Sigebertus
An. 437. Ha^^m. Scedel. Chron. Chron. Ranulp. H^geden. ca. 47. Stowe histor. in
Brute. Harding. Chronicl. f. 16. c. ^^.
first, Thaliessinus above 1000. years since, William of Malmesbury, Henry of
Huntington, Gualterus Calenus, Sigebertus with many others before Galfridus
Monumetensis wrote, and himself Virunnius, and innumerable after both of this
and other Nations, and public Parlaments, as that in the time of King Edward
the first at Lincoln, where after most diligent search of Antiquities, and due
examination, as this greatest matter of the right of a kingdom required, sent
his Apologeticall letters to the Pope of Rome, sealed with an hundred seals,
and witnesses. Rex Angliae ex deliberato apud Lincolniam conuocato Consilio,
pro iure suo declarando literam huius tenoris rescripsit centum sigillis
signatam. Wherein is declared, and justified that in the time of Hely, and
Samuel the Prophet, Brutus the Trojan landed hear, and by his own name,
called the Country Britannia, before named Albion* de nomine suo Britanniam,
sociosque suos Britones appellauit. And having three sons, Locrinus,
Albanact, and Camber, did at his death divide the Ila^d into three parts, or
Provinces, Loegria, now England to Locrinus his eldest son: Albania, Scotland
to Albanact the second: and Cambria Wales to Camber the youngest. Locrino
primoginito dedit illam partem quae quondam Loegria, nunc vero Anglia
nominatur. Albanacto filio natu secundo dedit Albaniam, quae nunc Scotia
vocitatur, Cambro vero tertio filio dedit Cambriam, quae modo wallia nominatur,
reseruata Locrino Regia dignitate. This might suffice for this business, for
being testified with so many domestical and foreign, private and public
witnesses, that this Tripartited division was hear from the beginning and
first name of Britain, we must needs for every several part and Province,
assign a several government, and order therein, as their Rulers and
Governors were diverse and distinct.

2. But our Antiquities carry us further, and inform not only that London,
York, and Caerlegion were the several chief Cities in this division, but the
Kings which founded them, for such, ordained them likewise to be the Seats and
Residences of three several Archiflamens, or Protoflamens. For the glory and
Noblenes of London thereupon named Augusta, I have spoken before, and as it is
the common opinion in Antiquities, that it is the most ancient City of this
Island, builded by Brutus, as not only the British History, Galfridus,
Virunnius, and our English Antiquaries after them, but Gildas, Sigebertus, and
others sufficiently witness, and except M. Stowe is deceived in his Authors
Aethicus an old Pagan Philosopher testifies no less, affirming that Brutus
named this kingdom Brutannia. And Ihon Harding in his plain verse with others
records, how he there from the very beginning instituted an Archflamens Seat.

And Troynouant he made full especially
An Archflaume his S^e Cathedral certain
A temple thereof, Apolyne to optaine
By Trojan Law.
This is commonly written to have been 1100. years before Christ. And it is a
common received opinion among our Antiquaries, that Ebra^cus son to
Mempricius about 100. years after, builded the City of York, calling it
after his name, Kairbranke, as both Brittans and Saxons, Catholics and
Protestants consent. Whereas Harding, and Stowe with others affirm he seated
an Archflamen. Harding says.

He made a Temple in Ebranke City Harding Chron. c. 21. f. 22. Stowe Hist. in
Ebranke.

Of Diane, where an Archflamen he set
To rule Temples as that time was his dett.
In the twe^tith year of his Reign (writes Stowe) he builded Kayrbranke,
since by the Saxons called Euorwike, now corruptly York, wherein he builded a
Temple to Diana, and set there an Archflamen, and was there buried when he had
reigned 60. years. Thus ancient these our Historians make Archflamens in
Britain, and I have related their very words: not that I think the name and
word Archflamen, but only their office and calling among the Gentiles to be so
ancient, as the time assigned to our Brutus, but of you^ger continuance and
age by diverse hundreds of years, the word Flamen not known until the time of
Numa Pompilius, and taken from a kind of attire worn upon their heads on
Festival days, yet the office of Flamen, Ranulp. Higed. l. 1. c. 24.
and Pontifex, and Archflamen and summus Pontifex was always the same among
the Pagans.

3. The Institution of the third Archflamen at Caerlegion upon vske was of
later time, as also the Foundation of that City first builded by Belinus, as
the British History, Galfridus, Virunnius, Matthew Westminster. Ranulph. Higeden,
Caxton, Harding, Stowe, Hollinshed, and to write in his words, most part of
Holinshed Hist. Engl. l^b. 3. cap. 4. Galfr. Mon. l. 3. H^st. c. 10. V^run. l.
3. Matthew. West. aetat. 5. Ranulp^. Higeden l. 1. c. 48
all our writers, have delivered. Galfridus calls this City Kaerose.
Virunnius names it Caerusc, the Monk of Westminster. Kaerusc. Higeden terms it
Caerhuth. And such nake it kept until the coming of the Romans hither, when
of their Legions wintring there, it was named Caerlegion, as also Chester was
as the same Ranulphus which lived and wrote his History there with others,
witnesses. And this Caerusc was the Metropolis of those parts. And as diverse
of the Authors testify Belinus seated an Archflamen there as he also
confirmed the Archflamens of London and York. Thus among Harding Cron. f. 29.
c. 33.
others Harding relates.

Three Archflamens he made through all Britain
As Archbishops now in our Laws been:
There Temples all to govern and domaine
At Troynouant one Logres to ouersene
Her falls Gods to serve and to queme.
At Ebranke an other for Albany,
And at Caerleon for Cambre one soueranly.
So has Stowe with others. And their general agreement is, that these Stowe
Hist. in Bel^n.
were the chief, most renowned and Metropolitan Cities in Britain. which
being so amply proved, and so many consenting that there were Archflamens in
them all so long before the coming of Christ, less Authority then we have
for this matter, might serve us to confess, that seeing at the abolishing of
these Pagan Rulers, and Rites they ought to be and were changed into so many
Archbishops or Metropolitans in Christian Religion. And this is so evident a
truth in Histories, that the Protestant Bishop himself, which before with one
only opposed against Archflamens freely confesses, that at this time
Archbishops were placed in those three Cities in Britain, and in them only,
where so many have testified, and shall testify further hereafter, these
Archflamens were resident. Thus he writes: At what time Christian Godwin Cat.
of Bishops in London 1. p. 181. edit. an. 1615.
R^^^gion (...) first publi^ly received in this Island, there were established
in the same 28. Sees or Cathear^^i Churches, whereof three were
Archbishopricks, York whose Province was Scotland, and the North of England:
Caerlegion, now called Carlcon upon vsk, to which the Churches of Wales where
subject: and lastly London, that had Jurisdiction over the rest of England.

4. Therefore this, which is the chiefest matter in this business, being thus
granted by all, and the other so sufficiently proved, I will only add to the
former, for the more euidency hereof, the testimony of some few others, such
as either were before the time of Geffery of Mo^mouth the Translatour of the
British History, or took their notice from other Authors then that History.
Ranulphus Higeden in his Manuscript History citeh Alfridus Beuerlacensis, who
by a Protestant Bishop wrote an excellent History from the beginning of the
Britans and coming of Brute hither to his own time in the Reign of King
William the Bastard, almost 100. years before Geffery of Monmouth could
write. Ab origin Britannorum ad suam aetatem vsque contexuit Historiam Io.
Bal. l. de Scrip. cent. 2. in Alfrid. Beue^lacen. Alf^idus Beuerl. apud
Ranulph. ^^geden. l. 1. c. 52 de Episcop^t^b. in l^bro Manusc.
perpulchram: And writes, as Ranulphus cites him, that in the time of Lucius
the first Christian King of the Britans, there were in Britain three
Archbishops Sees: To wit, at London, York and Caer-hursc the City of Legions
in Glamorgan shire, to whom there were subject 28. Bishops then called Flamens,
that is to the Metropolitan of London were subject Cornwall, and all Loegria
to the River Humber. To him of York all Northumberland from Humber, with all
Albania. To the City of Legions was subject all Cambria then adorned with
seven Bishops, now with four Suffragans. Seeds Archiepiscoporum in Britannia
tres fuerunt tempore Lucij Regis Britannorum primi Christiani, videlicet apud
London, apud Eboracum, apud Caer-hursc vrbem Legionum in Glamorgancia. Quibus
tunc subiecti fuerunt 28. Episcopi Flamines tunc vocati. Videlicet Londoniensi
Metropolitano Cornubia and tota Loegria vsque ad flumen Humbrum. Eboracensi
vero tota terra Northimbrina ab arcu Humbri fluminis cum tota Albania. Vrbi
Legionum subiacuit tota Cambria 7. tunc Episcopis, nunc vero 4. Suffraganeis
insignita: Quam flumen Sabrinae tunc secernebat a Loegria. I have perused an
old French Manuscript History, whose manner of writing and Characters may well
give it a greater Age then any copy of Galfridus Translation, though it be
continued until within 400. years perhaps by some other, but whether so or
otherwise, this differs in very many things even in this History from that
Translation of the British History, whether we will follow that which our
Protestants have published, or that which Ponticus Virunnius did epitimate, and
so he cannot ground what he delivers upon Galfridus. First they differ in
the number of the Flamens, Galfride and Ponticus number 28. in Britain besides
the Archflamens, this History says, there were but 27. they say that King
Lucius was buried at Gloucester, dying by Galfridus in the year 156. and by
Virunnius an. 159. the French History delivers he died in the year 196. So
long after, and though he died at Gloucester, yet he was buried at Caerlegion:
Galfride calls this City Kaer-ose, and Virunnius Caer-usc: whereas the
French Author names it, the City of Legions which i^ upon the River of
Vsks, not as others term it, And he names York Euerwicks, as the Saxons did,
and not as Geffry, Ponticus and the Britans did of Ebranke. Therefore this
ancient Author whether before or after Galfridus, cannot be said to take his
directions from that Translation, Manusc. French H^st. very old pr. or que nous
sommes. c. 9. an. 18^.
with which he crosses so often both in these and other matters: Yet for this
business we have now in hand, he delivers it in these words: At that time
there were in Britain now called England 27. Flamins, and three Archflamins
according to the manner of their Paganism^, but the aforenamed Doctors *Fagan
and Damian, cast them out, and where were Flamyns, they made Bishops, and where
there were Archflamyns, they made Archbishops. The Sees to these three
Archflamins To what Archbishop what Bishops and Provinces were subject. The
Orchades Isles and Scotland subject to the Archbishop of York^. M. S. Francoise
supr. an. 180. Galfr. Monum. Hist. Brit. l. 5. c. 1.
being in the three most Noble Cities of Britain, which were London Euerwicks,
and the City of Legions upon the River vsks, in the Country of Glamorgan in
Wales, not far from Seuerne, which is in a place delitious, and passing in
Riches all other Cities. To these three were subject 27. Bishops. To the
Archbishop of Euerwicks were subject Deira, and Northumberland, Scotland and
Albania divided by Dieceses beyond Humber which parts them from Loegres which
now is called England. To the Archbishop of London were subject Loegres, and
Cornwayle. And he sets down with the truth and common opinion, that these
things were acted about the year of Christ 180. both in Pope Eleutherius and
King Lucius time, which the published Translation of Galfridus must needs
mistake, affirming King Lucius died in the year 156. when Eleutherius was not
Pope while long after. So this Author must needs follow others and not
Galfridus in this narration. And the Manuscript History named Abbreuiatio
Chronicorum, in that copy which I follow beginning at Adam and ending in the
year of Christ 1063. argues the Author far more ancient then Geffry of
Monmouth, and placing this History of planting Religion hear by Faganus and
Diuuanus Pope Eleutherius Legates between the year 170. and 180. writes more
truly of this matter then our published Galfridus Translation, and could not
imitate that herein: Yet this Author plainly testifies, that these two
Legates finding hear in Britain three Archflamens besides 28. Flamens, one of
them at London, a second at York, and the third at Caerlegion constituted
Archbishops in their places, conformably limiting their Circuits and
Jurisdictions. Erant tunc in Britannia 28. Flamines, and tres Archiflamines,
and vbi erant Flamines, Episcopos: vbi autem Archiflamines, Archiepiscopos
posuerunt. Manuscr. Hist. Abbreuiatio Chronicorum inter ann. 170. and an. 180.
Io. Bal. l. de Scrip. Brit. cent. 2. in Radulph. de Rizeto.
Londonensi Archiepiscopo subiacuit Loegria, and Cornubia. Eboracensi Deira and
Albania: Vrbi autem Legionum Cambria.

5. Unto these I may join Dicetus Deane of London, or as a Protestant Bishop
calls him Radulphus de Rizeto, who though he wrote a little after Galfridus,
dying about the year of Christ 1200. yet he did not follow Galfridus
Translation, but assigns this labor of the Popes Legates in placing Bishops
and Archbishops for Flamens and Archflamens to the year of Christ 178. above
twenty years after King Lucius death by Geffery his Translation. Theater of
great Britain l. 6. Dicetus Deane of London, a Manuscript in the Kings Library
ad an. 178.
Yet by our Protestant writers of the Theater of great Britain in his
Manuscript in the Kings Library at the year remembered 178. this matter is thus
registrid. There were in Britain eight and twenty Flamyns, and three
Archflamins, in stead of which so many Bishops and Archbishops were appointed:
under the Archbishop of London were the Provinces of Loegria and Cornubia:
under York Deira, and Albania: under vrbs Legionum Cambria. And Harding
differing above thirty years in his computation from the Bishop of Asaph his
Translation, and so in no manner to be thought his follower in this matter, yet
thus he agrees herein. Harding Chron. f. 4^. c. 51.


Of 3. Archflamens they made Archbishopricks
One at London, Troynouant that hight
For all Logres with Laws full autentikes
To rule the Church, and Christentee in right.
An other at Carlion a Town of might
For all Cambre, at Ebranke the third
From Trent North, for Albany is kvde.
I have cited Martinus Polonus, Bergomensis, Ptolomeus Lucensis, Platina,
Hartmannus Schedel and diverse French Historians before, all of them so far
differing from the British History in their calculation, and other
circumstances, that they cannot be called followers thereof: yet they all
agree, that the Flamens and Archflamens hear were now changed into Bishops and
Archbishops, and the three Archflame^s as also the Archbishops which were
ordained in their places were at London, York, and Caerlegion in Wales. So
also testify our English Cronicles, as the old English Chronicle published by
Caxton, Caxton History in King Lucius. Old Manuscript. Engl. Chronicle in K.
Lucius. Ho^^^h. hist. of Eng^. lib. 4. cap. 19. Stow. and Howes Hist. an. 179.
in Lucius. Theater of great Britain l. 6. Barnes in vit. Pontif. Romans in
Eleuther. Stowe supr. Godwin Conuers. of Brit. p. 26. Io. Seldom Analect. c. 6.
Pomp. Laet. de Sacerd. Romans c. 7. Fenest^^l. de Sacerd. Romans c. 5.
and thereby commonly called Caxtons Chronicle: likewise does an other more
ancient English Manuscript History. So testify our Protestant Historians,
Raphael Holinshed, Howes and Stowe, the Protestant Theater writers, Barnes,
Whitgift, Bridges, Barlowe and others against the Puritans, and to conclude
with two Protestants Stowe, and Godwine, the first says it is the common
opinion of the writers of that time: The other as before grants it is the
Judgment of diverse both ancient and learned, and so general, that he, a
great Searcher into Antiquities perceaueth not any that have gaynesaid it
before Doctor Sutcleffe. And he is wholly rejected therein by such Prorestant
Antiquaries, as have written since, among whom M. Ihon Seldom following the
general opinion of changing Flamens and Archflamens in Britain to Bishops and
Archbishops, and placing the Archflamens and Archbishops in London, York and
Caerlegion, and citing both Pomponius Laetus, and Fenestella, adds:
Quemadmodum autem Episcopis apud nos Archiepiscopi, sic Flaminibus
Archiflamines praeponebantur. As among us Christians, Archbishops are above
Bishops, so in the Pagans Law were Archflamens above Flamens. And he proves
with the rest before, that although neither King Lucius, nor the Roman
Emperors had any command in Scotland, yet these Legates submitted that Country
to the Archbishop of York his Jurisdiction; diuisis Parochijs subiacuit
Metropolitano Eboracensi Deira and Albania, quas magnum flumen Humbri a Loegria
fecerunt. And citing Polyder, and Camden, he adds that in Polid. Virgil. l.
13 H^st. Camden. ^n Brig.
ancient time the Archbishop of York was Primate of Scotland, and this was
reestablished in a Provincial Council hear by Hugo the Popes Legate in the
time of King Henry the second. Eboracensis autem Archiepiscopus in omnes
Scotiae Praesules ac Antistites iure Primatus olim fungebantur. Quod and
resancitum erat sub Henrico secu^do, and Hugone Legato Po^tificio. His first
Author says Polyd. Virgil. Angl. Hist. l. 13. in Henric. 2. page 234.
it was urged in this Council by Roger then Archbishop of York, that the
Right of that See to have Power over the Scottish Bishops might be restored
unto it, for the Popes of Rome had even from the beginning ordained the Bishop
of York to be Primate of all Scotland, and the Orchades and the rest of the
Islands. Which Law so made, the Bishops of those places had kept many years.
Agitatum est vt Rogerio Archiepiscopo Eboracensi qui id temporis eam tenebat
sedem, ius in Episcopos Scotiae restitueretur: Quandoquidem Romani Pontific^s
George Buc. kni^ht discourse of the 3. Vmuersitie. c. 6. of S. Pete^s in
Cornehill.
i am inde ab initio sanxerant ipsum Eboracensem Antistitem totius quoque
Scotiae atque Orchadum, caeterarumque Insularum Primatem. Quam sane datam legem
eorum locorum Episcopi per multos deinde annos seruarunt. The ancient Arms of
S. Peter's Church one Cornhill, as our Protestant Antiquaries deliver the^, will
keep in memory from whom Religion hear received Foundatian. Thus (...) and
Archi^pis^opall Church ^^ S. Peter in (...) Lo^d^n (...).
they write: This most famous School Church of S. Peter in Chornill, by right
of prioritie and precedencie, which belongs to Antiquity, should have the
first place, for it is held by our best Antiquaries to be the most aunci^nt
Christ^^n Church of London, being founded about the year of Christ 160. and it
is recorded, to be the most ancient See both of the Ar^hbishops, and also
Bishops of ^^ndon. The Arms of this Church and School of S. Peter in
Cornhill, be Argent a Cross gules, empaled with S. Peter's keys, or, the field
Azure. But Sulchardus a Monk of Sulchard. Monach. Westminster. an. 1061. Richard.
Vit. Hist. l. 5.
Westminster writing there in or about the year of Christ 1060. testifies,
with others after him, that S. Lucius King founded the first Metropolitan See
of Lond^^ at Westminster, out of the Ruins of a Temple there, formerly erected
to (...)

THE XVIV. CHAPTER.
OF THE EPISCOPAL SEES AND CITIES, of the Inferior Bishops subordinate to the
Archbishops, which, where, and how many they were, ordained by these Roman
Legates, and continued Bishops Sees in the Romans and Britans time.

1. HAVING thus seated, and disposed of our holy Primative, Arche, Chief,
Higher and commanding Bishops in their several Sees and Jurisdictions, Method
and Order by relative and mutual connection between such, Where other Bishops
were now placed in Britain in this time, with our ancient Cities, their Sees.
and Ordinary, Lower, Suffragan and Inferior Bishops, calls upon me to
setle these also, so well as a desolation of our Antiquities will permit in
their Cities, Dioceses, and Governments. We have had two Rules from Antiquity
delivered unto us before, to help us in this labor; One, that they were
placed, as the custom was from the beginning, in our British Cities; The
other, that they were ordained where the Pagan Flamens were before. Gildas
writes that Britain had eight and twenty Cities besides strong Castles, but
names them not. Bis denis, bisque quaternis ciuitatibus instructa. So do many
others, Gildas libro de conq. and exidio Brit. in initio. Nennius in proaem.
hist. Manuscript.
among whom Nennius or Nenius is one, and he delivers both the number, and
names of our British Cities in this Order. Haec sunt nomina omnium ciuitatum
quae sunt in tota Britannia, quarum numerus est 28. These are the names of all
the Cities which be in all Britain, being 28. in number: Cair Gnoricon. Cair
Guerthigirn. Cair Municip. Cair Megnod. Cair Eboranc. Cair Caratanc. Cair
Mauchguid. Cair Caint. Cair Peris. Cair Legion. Cair Regent. Cair Guerit. Cair
Lerion. Cair Pensanelcoit. Cair Celermon. Cair Gunting. Cair Luordijs. Cair
Colan. Cair Custemt. Cair Granth. Cair Lunden. Cair Guoirangon. Cair Danu. Cair
Legion. Cair Britto. Cair Droithan. Cair Vrnach. Cair Luitcoit. Thus they are
recompted by Nennius in one Copy. In an other more ancient, they are related
thus. Cair Guntgme. Cair miuncip. Cair Ligalid. Meguard, or, Meguid. Colun.
Ebranc. Custemt. Carntanc. Granth. Manuguid. Lunden. Guorchigirn. Gumigon.
Peris. Claun. Legion. Guricon. Segemt. Cair Legion. Guar Vsic. Guent. Brithon.
Lerion. Draithon. Cair Pensa Vell Coit. Vrnach. Celennon. Cair Luit Coit. Thus
they are severally written in those two several Manuscript Copies, of Nennius,
as I could with my best diligence observe. Only with this further difference,
that the note of their number to be 28. in all, is in the first and later
Manuscript written in the end, after the Cities recited, in the la^^ and
oldest, it is set down before the names of the Cities. And although at the
first vewe these Relations will seem to vary much, yet an indifferent Reader
though but meanly exercised in reading ancient Manuscripts, and observing how
often and ordinarily unlearned, or improuident Scribes do mistake, alter, add,
or detract letters in transcribing old writings, he will reconcile them with
little or no material difference.

2. And Henry Archdeaco^ of Huntington, who as Geffry of Mo^mouth writes,
Galfr. Monum. Hist. l. 12. c. 20. Henricus Hunting. historiar. l. 1.. Hucusque.
L. 1. Fere in Initio.
had written his History before he translated the British History, and had
not seen it, as he relates the coming of Brutus hither, as he found it in
other Authors, which had written it before, in alijs Authoribus reperi, says,
this our Britain which he called so after his own name, ex nomine suo
Britanniam vocauit, besides innumerable walled and strong Castles, had
aunciently in the Britans and Romans time 28. most Noble Cities: erat
ciuitatibus quondam 28. nobilissimis insignita, praeter Castella innumera, quae
and ipsa muris, turribus, portis ac seris erant instructa firmissimis.
Ciuitatum autem nomina haec erant Britannice: And these 28. Cities names in
British speech were these: Kair Ebrancid est Eboracum, York. Kair chent 1.
Cantuaria, Canterbury. Kair Gorangon 1. Wigornia, worcester. Kair Lundene 1.
Lundonia, London. Kair Legion or Lirion. 1. Le^^^ stria, Leicester. Kair
Collon, 1. Coleceastria, Colchester. Kair Glou. 1. Gloueceastria, Gloucester.
Cair Cei, 1. Ciceastria. Kair-Briston. Kair-Ceri, 1. Cicerceastria. Kair Guent,
1. winceastria, winchester. Kair Grant, 1. Granteceastria quae modo dicitur
Cantebrigia alias Grantebrigia, Cambridge. Kair Lion quam vocamus Carleuil,
Carlisle. Kair Dauri. 1. Doreceastria, Dorchester. Kair, Dorm. 1. Dormeceastria,
quae sita in Huntedonensi Prouincia super Flumen quod vocatur Nen penitus
destructa est. Dormanchester (not Godmanchester or Gormanchester) in Huntington
shire upon the River Nen, utterly destroyed. It was between Wansford and
Stilton, about twelve miles North from Huntington in the Road way to York.
Kair Loitchoit 1. Lincolnia Lincoln. Kair Merdin, quae nunc quoque sic vocatur.
Still so called. Kair Guorcon. Kair Cucerat. Kair Guortigern. Kair vraac. Kair
Celemion. Kair Meguaid. Kair Licelid. Kair Peris 1. Porcestre. Kair Kegion al.
Lerion in qua fuit Archiepis^opatus tempore Britonum: nunc autem vix maenia
eius comparent, Vbi vsca ^adit in Sabrinam, in which there was an Archbishops
See in the time of the Britons, now scarly appear the walls thereof where the
River Vsc falls into Seuerne. Kair Draiton. Kair Mercipit. Kair Segent quae
fuit super Tamesin non long a Reding and vocatur Silcestre. Haec erant nomina
Ciuitatum tempore Romanorum and Britannorum. Kair Segent which was upon the
River of Thems not far from Reding and is called Silcestre. These were the
names of the Cities in the time of the Romans and Britans. Thus this Archdeacon
of Huntington:

3. And the Monk of Chester Ranulphus Higeden citing Alfridus, thus writes in
the same manner. Regio Britanniae quondam erat ciuitatibus nobilissimis
Ra^ulph. Higid. Polychronic. l. 1. c. ^^. M. S.
28. insignita. The Country of Britain was in old times adorned with 28.
Cities besides an innumerable number of Castles defensed with most strong
walls, Towers Gates and Locks. The names of the Cities were these: Caerlud,
that is London. Caer Ebranc, York. Caerkent, Canterbury. Caergorangon,
worcester. Caerlirion, Leycester. Caer Clau, Glorcester. Caer Golden,
Colchester. Caerrei, Chichester. Which the Saxons aunciently called
Cissancester. Caerceri, Cirencester. Caerwent, Winchester. Caergrant,
Cambridge. Caerliel, Lugubalia, Carlisle. Caerperis, Porchester. Caerdrom,
Dorchester. Caerludcoit, Lincoln. Caermerthin, that is to say the City of
Merlin. Caersegen, Silcester which is seated upon Thames nor far from Reding.
Caerthleon, or Caerlegion, that is the Ci^ie of Legions, which first was called
Legecester, but now it is named Chester. Caer Badon, Bathe, which sometime was
called the City of Achamannus. Caer Paladur, Septoma now Shastesbury. There
are also others names of Cities found in Chronicles. Thus this Manuscript
Author speaking of Caerlegion upon Vsc where the Achiepiscopall See was in the
l. 1. cap. 48.
next Chapter. Diverse of these Cities had their Foundation, or at the least
took their denomition long after this time of the general ordaining Bishops
in our Cities, as Caer Golden, Colchester tacking the name from King Coel
Father to the holy Empress S. Helena, mother to Constantine the Emperor: Cair
Guortigern, of King Vortigern, and Caer Merthin of Merlin: so we may not number
these among our first Episcopal Cities. Diverse also of the others were so
unknown in the time of Henry of Huntington, that he a very learned and
ancient writer dares not to take upon him to deliver what or where they were,
as he and Ranulphus Higeden after him, does of the other remembered Cities,
Which we may take to be the reason that this later writer did not mention them
at all. But yet if we look into our Histories we shall find more ancient
Cities, as Ranulphus says, and among them diverse which were then Episcopal
Sees. Ihon Rous affirms, that Oxford first Io. Rous apud Stowe Hist. Brit. in
Ebranke Galfrid. Monum. Hist. l. 4. c. 16. Annals Duren: apud Leland. in
comment. Antiq. Britan. v. Doris. Leland. supra. verb. Couae. and verb. Manditi
Castrum.
called Caier Mennip, at building thereof, after Bellisitum, Caier Bossa
Rhidohen and lastly Oxford was founded by King Ebranke, as York was. Galftidus
calls it Caerpen huelgoit, Leland from the Antiquities of Dover writes, that
it was a City before the time of King Aruiragus that builded the Castle
adioyn^ing, and names it a most renowned City, and that King Lucius builded a
Church in that Castle, referunt and ijdem Annals Lucium Regem Britannorum. And
the same Author from Antiquities is witness, that there was an other ancient
City of the Britans called by them Cairbro by the I Will of Wight. He writes
also, that there was aunciently a Bishops See at S. Maus in Cornewayle, by
Famouthe, and that S. Manditus was Bishop there, giving that name to the place,
now a fisher Town. It is also evident in our Histories that besides the City
Venta that is Wincester called among other names Venta Belgarum, the
Inhabitants in those parts being called Belgae, there were diverse other
ancient Cities of that name among the Britans: as Venta Silurum, by Camd. in
Brit. in Belg. Io. Leland supr. in Venta, and Verolamium. Ptolom. Cosmograph.
descript. Britan. Hect. Boeth. in elucidatione Regionum, Oppid. ante Historiam.
some in South wales near Chepstow, quite destroyed: Venta Simenorum: Venta
Icenorum: and Verolamium where S. Albons stands was famous even with the
Pagan writer Cornelius Tacitus, and Ptolomaeus. So was Barwicke, which Ptolomy
names Tuesis, of the River thereby passing, and dividing England and Scotland.
Hector Boethius says, that Corinimum which now we call Shrewsbury was in
ancient time a most famous Town, oppidum olim celebratissimum. And at the
coming of S. Augustine hither besides their Archbishop, there were seven other
Bishops of several Sees, and Cities in that Jurisdiction; of which scarcely
any one in probable Judgment is before recited.

4. Therefore to travail no further in this enquiry, we have found more then a
sufficient number of old British Cities, to setle 3. Archbishops, and 28.
Bishops in, and yet not carry any of them into Scotland, but only where King
Lucius and the Romans ruled. Now I will endeavor particularly to The Episcopal
Sees and Cities in particular in that Age.
find out the several Cities and Sees of all, many, or most of them. A late
writer in a Manuscript History never yet printed, thus recounteth them:
Winchester, Gloucester, Cilicester, Worcester, Chechester, Bangor, Hereford,
Cardiffe, Landaffe, Morgan, Alclud, Canterbury, Godmanchester in Huntington
Ha^^is Manusc. Tom. 2. in Lucius.
shiere, where S. Machutus was Bishop, about the year of our Lord 550. for the
rest except the three Archbishop Sees London, York and Caerlegion he
confesses ignorance, where they were. A Protestant Historian William Harrison
in his Description of England has used some more diligence in this business.
And thus proceeds herein: in old time we read that there were eight William
Harrison description of England. c. 13. of Cities and Towns.
and twenty Flamins and Archflamins in the South part of this Isle, and so many
great Cities, under their Jurisdiction. Then to show where they were, and
where Archbishops and Bishops succeeded them, he adds: If any man be desirous
to know the names of those ancient Cities, that stood in the time of the
Romans, he shall have them hear at hand, in such wise as I have gathered them
out of our writers, observing even their manner of writing of them so near as
to me is possible, without alteration of any corruption crept up into the
same. Then he sets down the names of these ancient Cities in this order:
Lundon, York, Canterbury, Colchester, Lincoln, warwick, aunciently called
Cair Guttelin, Cair Line or Cair Leon, Cair Gwair, Cair vmber, Cair Gwaerton,
Chester or Cair Legion upon Vsk, Carleill, S. Albons aunciently named Cair
Maricipit, Cair Municip verolamium, Verlamcester, and Cair watteling of the
street whereon it stood, Winchester, Cisceter, Silcester, Bath, Shastesbury,
worcester, Chichester, Bristow, Rochester, Portchester, Cair Marden, Gloucester,
Leircester, Cambridge, formerly styled Grantabric, Cair Grant. After these 23.
he adds, Cair vrnach, peradventure Burgh castle, Cair Cucurat, Cair Draiton,
now a slender villidge, Cair Celemon, Cair Megnaid, pleading Ignorance of the
five last places, as likewise Cair Dorman, of which I have spoken before, and
Alcluid, of which more hereafter: But seeing both Britans and Saxons, Catholics
and Protestants before have agreed upon these Cities, and the division of this
Island into Loegria, Albania, and Cambria wales; and that in England or Loegria
alone there were so many Cities in the Britans time, as are remembered, only
two of them Cair Leon upon vsc and Cair Merthen to be found in wales, except we
will place Cair Guorchigirn there, we may not deprive the Archbishop there of
his Suffragan Bishops nor that ancient Country of the old Cities, but say,
these five not to be found in any part of Loegria by any Author, were Cities
of wales, howsoever their names upon many accidents be changed since Nennius
time, and diverse of them were Episcopal Sees: allthough Cair Draiton bewraieth
itself to be no older then the Saxons Languadge hear, and so could not be a
Bishops See in the Reign of King Lucius. For most of the rest, the only
Argument of this Protestant Author finding them called by diverse old British
names, if we had no other, gives them probable title to that Honor.

5. But I shall help him with more, both reasons and Authority herein. Harding
c. 25. 26. 27. Harding Cron. c. 23. 24. Stowe and Howes Hist. in Bladud Leir.
Harris Hist. Galfr. l. 2. Virun. l 2. Annal. Wintomen. Manuscr. Godwin Catal.
of Bishops Winchester 1.
For the ancient Cities of Canterbury, winchester, Shastesbury, Leircester,
Bathe, Carlisle and Alcliud, We have both British and Saxon, Catholic and
Protestant Antiquaries affirming they were the ancient Residences of Flamens,
and so must, by that is said before, needs be Bishops Sees in this time. And to
exemplify in some of them, the old Manuscript Antiquity of Winchester says,
King Lucius builded there a Cathedral Church: Lucius Rex fundauit Ecclesiam
Wintoniensem: dedicating it to our Savior: which a Protestant Bishop thus also
writes from the same or like Antiquity: The Cathedral Church of Winchester,
according to a report that I find in an old Manuscript, was first build and
erected by King Lucius. Seeing then a Cathedral Church and a Bishop are knit
together, we must needs acknowledge there was then a Bishop there. And to speak
in this man's and his Authors words: This Church was hallowed and dedicated
October 29. 189. by Faganus and Damianus Bishops. And he proves from the same
Antiquity, that in the year 309. one Constans was Bishop there. And in S.
Dubricius time by the British History Diuuanius was Hist. Brit. l. 9. c. 15
and l. 8. c. 17. Harding. Chron. c. 76. f. 67.
the Bishop of that place, Episcopatus Guintoniae Di^uanio decernitur. And
concerning the Bishoprike of Alcliud, it was then given to one named Eledanius,
Pontificalis Infula Alclud Eledanio decernit^r. Elednore by Harding was Bishop
there. Which proves it was a Bishiprock from the beginning, no change Harding.
Chro. c. 24. f. 21. Abbreuiatio Chron. inter an. 170. and 180. in Lucio.
of Sees, being before this time. For Canterbury it was first a Flamens seat;
And the old Manuscript History Abbreuiatio Chronicorum, says in this time and
settling Bishops in King Lucius Reign, that the old Church of S. Martin, which
lived in the Apostles time, was builded: Tunc constructa est extra Cantuariam
Ecclesia sancti Martini and to notify that he meant thereby a Cathedral and
Episcopal Church, he adds this when he speaks of changing Historia
Roffe^n. Manuscr. Lambert Pera^b. of Kent. p. 113.
Flamens into Bishops. And all Histories testify, that the holy Bishop
Lethardus, which came hither with Queen Bertha, before S. Augustins time used
it as his Episcopal See. And Canterbury besides the Archbishop had an other
Bishop in that Church of S. Martin diverse hundreds of years: and Harding.
Chro. c. 23. Harding. sup. c. 30. f. 24. Stowe Hist. Britan. in Morg. and
Cunedag. Lel. com. Brit. antiq. v. Manditi Castr. Cap. in Catal. in S. Kebio,
Meloro, Vrsula. Gul. Malm. l. 1. de Regib. c. 6. and l. 3. in Gul. 1. Contin.
Flor. Wigorn. in Praesul. Cridiat. Godwin Catal. in Exeter 1. Ann. Eccl.
Meneuen. apud eund. supra, in S. David's. Galfr. Monum. Hist. Brit. l. 5. c. 1.
Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 201. Hist. Manuscr. apud Harris Hist. Tom. 2. c. 21.
M. Lambert the P^otestant Antiquarie of Kent says from Antiquities: S.
Martins Church built by the Romans in Canterbury was a Bishops See, until the
Normans came in and so two in one City, this substitute to the Archbishop.
Likewise we may so say of Shastesbury, Bathe, Leicester, and Carleil, by the
same reason all of these as before, having Flamens, and being old ancient
British Cities: the first named Cair Paladour, and Septonia: The second Cair
Badon, Aquae Solis, and Thermae, by Ptolomaeus. Leircester before by Henry of
Huntington Cair Legion or Cair Lirion, Leicestria. Carlisle Cair Lueill, Cair
Leill, Lugubalia, Cair Doill: Which prove they were ancient Cities both to the
Britans and Romans, as Harding says:

In Britain tongue plainly
Cair is to say a City in their language,
As yett in Wales is their common usage.
As in the time of the Pagans there was a Flamen in Cornwaile: So in exordio
Christianae fidei, in the beginning of Christianity hear, as Capgraue and
others before him write there was a Bishop, and a Synod of Bishops there.
Diverse of their names be preserved Kebius, Manditus, Columbanus, Iwanus,
Dotharius with others in Succession: and the Sea some time at S. Manus, S.
Petroks, Crediton, or S. Germans upon diverse changes remembered by Antiquaries.
And a Protestant Bishop has produced an old Manuscript belonging to S. David's,
that in these times of the Britans, there was a Bishops See and Bishop at
Exceter in Devonshire. And that an other of these our first Primative Bishops
was seated at Gloucester, Cair Glowy, or Glou we have diverse Authorities: for
most of our Antiquities that entreat of the death of King Lucius, say he was
buried there in the Episcopal and Cathedral Church. In vrbe Claudiocestriae
ab hac vita migrauit; and in Ecclesia primae Sedis honorifice sepultus est. And
M Harris in his Manuscript History says, he had an old written Chronicle
which spoke of this Church. The Table of King Lucius hanging in S. Peter's
Church in Cornhill in London is witness, this Church stood where the Order of S.
Francis was placed in Gloucester. And no Author speaking either of change of
Sees, or new founding any there after in the Britans time, our Histories are
witnesses, that one Theonus Bishop of Gloucester, was made Archbishop of London
in the Britans time. So was Eldad long before Bishop of Gloucester in the Reign
of Aurelius Ambrosius. That Caer Segent, Segen or Silcester now only there
being a Farm house was a Bishops See in those Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae. 489.
Galfr. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 8. c. 7. Manuscript. Gallic. antiq. an. 477. c. 47.
Galfr. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 9. c. 15. Manuscr. antiq. apud Stowe Hist. Britans
and Sax. in Arthur. Galfr. Monum. l. 9. c. 1. Hist. Brit. and l. 6. c. 5.
Harding Chron. c. 76. f. 67.
days, besides the name, and place for a Flamen we are assured from the
British History, that in the time of S. Dubritius Archbishop, and King Arthur
when diverse old Bishops Sees were void, this was one among the rest, and that
Bishopric was given to one named Mauganius: Episcopatus vero Silcestriae
Mauganio decernitur. This City was so renowned in the Britans time, that as an
old Manuscript witnesses, Constantius son of Constantine was honorably
buried there, and Constantine and Arthur there crowned with such Pomp and
solemnity as our Histories declare. This place is 6. miles or there abouts
from Reading in Barkshire, the remnants of the wall, with 4. places where the
4. gates were, were two miles in compass: much Roman Money there was found in
digging.

6. Ihon Harding says, that Chichester was a Bishops See in the time of King
Arthur, and S. Dubritius and that Mangauero was Bishop there in those days.
And among these, I would take Dunwich, to have also been an Episcopal See
about that Age: the place in Suffolk no other Town assigned for a Bishops See
in that part of England, gives way unto it; our English Antiquaries confess
it was an ancient City, and in probable conjecture, that which our old
Nennius expresses among the most renowned British Cities, by the name of Caer
Daun or Dunn, after by the Saxons Danmocke or Dunwick, no other ancient known
City more answeareable to that British Appellation. And to give more life to
this opinion, when the Saxons became Christians and had Bishops, it was the
care of the Popes and spiritual Rulers then to place both Arcbishops and
Bishops where such had been in the Britans time. The two Archbishops Sees of
London and York which were void, were by S. Gregory appointed for such
again; and by this Title diverse decayed Cities, as I shall more express
hereafter, had also Bishops, being Episcopal Sees when the Britans and Romans
hear ruled. And so S. Faelix by Stowe sup. liber. Elu. Records. Dun.
this Title was first Bishop among the East Angles, and of that City, so
renowned, that it has had as a Protestant Historian writes from the Tradition
and Records of that City, two and fyftie divine houses, and very many of them
Parish Churches. Hear I have rather sought to setle a Bishop, then at
Colchester as one does, where besides the old name, Caer, common to very Will.
Harrison descr. of Brit. c. 13 Nenn. Histor. Henr. Hunt. Hist. l. 1.
many that never were Episcopal Cities, besides what I have said before, I
find no motive at all, to say it was at any time, much less then a Bishops
See: it is in a corner of that Country, an unwalled thing until S. Helen her
time, much to late to make it a Bishops City in King Lucius days, I can
neither find a Flamen there before, nor any Bishop since, either when the
Britans, Romans, Saxons, or any others ruled hear. And yet to give all to
Colchester which the aduauncers thereof require, that it was the Town called
Camulodunum, as also Colonia, of the Colonie planted by the Romans, which is
more then I dare to do to give two so several and distinct names to one
singular place by one people at one time; yet allowing it so, and a Municipium
enjoying the Romans privileges: yet all this does not sufficiently able it,
for being a Bishops See; for we do not find that the Romans were then such
friends to Christian Religion in those times, as with public allowance to
place such spiritual Rulers in their privileged Towns, as were contrary to
the privileges, and Immunities of them; so that of all Cities hear, those
which were Municipia to the Romans, as Verolamium, S. Albons, and others were,
they were the furthest from having Christian Bishops in them. And we see by
experience in Verolamium their Municipium, that within one hundred years after
this in the time of Dioclesian his Persecution, when S. Alban a chief man
there was martyred for the Christian faith, the City of Verolamium was by all
Histories so ignorant thereof, as if there never had been any Christian there
before, much less a Bishop, which should have very ill intended to his great
office, to suffer himself, and his chief chardge to have so presently
apostated from Christ.

7. But I must rather hold, that the rest of the Bishops Sees were where we
find Christians professing constantly even to death their holy faith, in that
most tempestuous time of persecution, and where we find any Bishop to have
been then, or where the first Bishops were seated when the Saxons were
converted, then where not any of these but a manifest privation or destitution
of these is found. And we have the old English History and others for witness,
Old English hist. part. 4. in K. Lucius.
that many Bishopriks of the time of King Lucius were still in this Land in
those days. So we may probably add to these Bishoprics, by these Titles, the
City of Lichfeild not improbably that which Nennius names Caerligalid, Io.
Ross. and Warwicen. l. de Episcop. Wigorn. Theater of great Brit. lib. 6. Stowe
Hist. Romans in Coill. Holinsh. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 26.
so constant in Christian Religion in the Persecution of Dioclesian, that at
one time it brought forth a thousand Martyrs, and thereuppo^ took in the Saxon
tongue the name Lichfeild, a field of blood, and in the Conversion of the
Saxons was at the first a Bishops See by the old Scottish or British Bishops.
The like I say of Dorchester now a Villadge near Oxford, but aunciently a
City Caer Dor, as before Dorcestria, and Ciuitas Dorchestriae, and in the
Primative Church of the Saxons a Bishops or the rather only Bishops See of the
kingdom of the Mercians, or Middle English diverse hundreds of years until
time of King William the first, when Remigius Bishop thereof removed his See to
Lincoln. That there was a Bishops See in Huntington shire either at the decayed
City Caer dorm, before named, or at Godmanchester, we have diverse testimonies
both of late and ancient time: a late writer speaking of the Bishops ordained
by these Legates of Pope Eleutherius absolutely affirms: They founded a
Bishopric in the City of Gumicastrum now called Godmanchester in Huntinghton
shire, where S. Machutus was sometime Bishop about the year of Harris Theatr.
Brit. Tom. 2. in Manuscr. Hist. Vit. S. Machuti. Theater of great Brit. in
descr. of Hunting. shire. Manuscr. Antiq. Harding Chron. f. 26. 27. c. 30.
our Lord. 550. So has the old written life of S. Machutus, as our Theater
writers testify, and diverse others, and among these an old Manuscript History.
Among these I may number besides the Archflamens, and Arcbishops See in London,
an other inferior place of a Flamen, and Bishop after, first founded as
Harding with others witnesses by Dunwallo, S. Paul's Church the Bishops See
now is seated there. He made six Temples, say Authors, in Logres, Cambre, and
Albanie, and as many Flamens to rule them of states as Bishops now done.

A Temple also in Troynouant sothely
Of peace and concord he made verily
In which when there fell any discord
Among his Lords, there were they made accord.
And thus notes: This Temple was S. Paul's Church in London. How the Pagans
dedicated it to Apollo, and there sacrificed to him, I have said before. And
this never being either the Arcflamens or Arcbbishops See, and yet presently
upon the Conversion of the Saxons made a Bishops seat gives strength to this
opinion: and we find in our Histories more Arcbishops of London in the time of
the Britans, then of York and Caerlegion both Joined together, yet was the
City of London more subject to tumults and alterations then either of these
was, some Argument that to make so great a number both Archbishops and Bishops
there be accounted together.

8. But though we leave London only to an Archbishops See, we shall otherwise
make up our common reckoning of 28. Bishops in that time. A Protestant Bishop
writes that Chichester was a Bishops See in the Britans time, and had a Bishop
at the coming of S. Augustine hither, and cites Roger Houeden for his
Author, which I do not find in him, but that Chester Godwin Catal. in S.
David's. 1. Roger. Houede^ Part. 2. Annal. in Rege.
was then a Bishops See, he affirms in the life of King Ihon, the place I
take it which this Protestant means, Where he also plainly affirms the
same of Worchester. The old City of Lincoln also to have been then a Bishops
See, we have the conueniencie of place, Antiquity of the City both with the
Britans, and Romans: Cair Lud Coit, Cair Loichoit, Lindum, Lindocollinum, and
that in the Conversion of the Saxons, next unto York it was made the first
Bishops See in those parts.

9. Now if we stay hear, before we proceed further, we have probably found all
the first Bishops Sees that were under the Jurisdiction of London, both in
Loegria and Cornewayle, besides some others: For Harding holding Hardin. Chron.
f. 29. c. 23. Sigebert. Gemb. Chron. ann. 445. Matthew. Parker. Antiq. Brit. p. 9.
there were 13. Flamens under the Archflamen of London, and others that there
were 14. we have Antiquities to direct us, that there were but 7. Bishops under
York, and no more under Caerlegion, so allowing 28. with the common opinion,
14. of these must needs be under the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of London:
to wit the Bishop of Cornwayle, of Exceter, Bathe, Gloucester, Worchester,
Silcester, Shastesbury, Winchester, Canterbury, Dunwich, or some other Bishops
Sees under the Archbishop of London in King Lucius, or the Brittans time.
place among the East Angles afterward, Godmanchester, Leychester and
Leichfeild. The other 4. Carleyle, Chester, Lincoln, or Leichfeild if we
subject Lincoln to London* and Alchlud were under York, this City of Alchlud
was very ancient, and renowned in the North parts, and by Harding and others,
stood at Harding supr. f. 20. c. 21. Bed. Hist. l. 1. c. 12. Galfrid. Monum.
Histor. Brit. l. 9. c. 5. 6.
the West end of the Picts wall, and by our British History and S. Bid, not
far from thence, and as is evident before, was both under the Spiritual
Jurisdiction of York, and the temporal Government also of our Kings in this
part of Britain, distinct from Scotland long after this time. And to speak as
our British History does, it was not in Scotland, Albania, but near or
toward it. Constituit Ebrancus vrbem Alclud versus Albaniam. And if it had
Hist. Brit. l. 2. c. 7.
been in that part, which now is called Scotland, yet when this City was
builded, Bishops Sees under York.
and when it was also made a Bishops See, the Scots, had nothing to do there
abouts, except as Thieves and Pirates then living in the out Islands as both S.
Gildas, S. Bid and others are ample witnesses. duabus gentibus transmarinis
Gild. l. de excid. Brit. Bed. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 1.
says S. Gildas of the Scots and Picts, the like has S. Bid, long after this
time of those people. Therefore they were Britans for the most part, though not
so subject either to King Lucius or the Romans which there inhabited: of which
Tertullian also is an Ample witness, so testifying: Britannorum loca Romany
in accessa: as our Protestant Theather writers tranflate him, and truly:
Tertullian (say they: who lived within 200. years of Christ's Nativity,
affirmed the Britans had received the word of life, the power whereof has
peirced into those parts Theate^ of great Brit. l. 6. Tertul. contra Iudaeos c.
7.
whether the Romans could not come. This Testimony of Tertullian is more
ancient then the Scots receiving the faith in the third Age in the Time of
Pope Victor. And by this we may be bold to seek and setle a Bishops See even
in those parts, which were after termed Scotland, having allowance from
Antiquity so to do. For our Histories tell us, that there was a Flamen settled
at Perch now S. Ihons in Scotland by our British Kings, diverse hu^dreds of
years before any Scot set footing there: Condage made a Flamyne, a Temple
also Harding Chron. f. 24. c. 30. Stowe Histor. Britan. in Morgan and
Cunedagius.
in honor of Mars, at Perch, that now is S. Ihons Town in Albany, that now
is Scotland Region. When Cunedagius was King of Britain, says an other, about
800. years before Christ, he builded a Temple of Mars at Perch that now is S.
Ihons Town in Scotland, and placed there a Flamen. Therefore by the common
consent of Antiquity before remembered, we must needs place a Bishop there
under the Archbishop of York.

10. And yet I grante what Hector Boethius writes from the Scottish
Antiquities, Hector Boeth. Scot. Hist. l. 6. f. 102.
that S. Amphibalus our holy British Bishop and Martyr in Dioclesian his time,
was the first Bishop the Scots had mentioned in their Annals: fuit id Templum
omnium primum, Christiano ritu, vbi Pontifex sacerque Magistratus sedem haberet
Primariam inter Scotos, cuius nostri meminere Scriptores, dedicatum; for this
was in the out Island where the Scots then lived, not yet Possessed in Britain,
where this Bishop of Perch or S. Ihons Town was seated. And allthough, that
further part of Britain, where the Scots now Inhabit was not so fully
converted at this time, as that under King Lucius, and the Romans was: yet
being subjected by Pope Eleutherius to the Archbishop of York, it must needs
have one Bishop at the least, to maintain the name and calling of a Bishop
Suffragan, or inferior Bishop subordinate to the Archbishop, or higher Bishop,
otherwise we shall not say easily, properly, and congruously, that so great a
Country was under the Jurisdiction of a See, so remote, and in an other
kingdom, and Kings Dominion. The other two Bishoprics subordinate to York, I
cannot more probably suppose to have been in other Capgrau. Catal. in S.
Niniano.
places, then those, or near unto them, where I find the first Bishops in
those parts, which be witerna, were S. Ninian was Bishop, being Apostle of the
Picts, and Lindisfarne or holy Island, where S. Aidan and diverse others were
Beda Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 5.
Bishops in the Primative Church of the Saxons coming out of Scotland, where a
succession of Bishops had long continued, and like best knewn and sought to
honor those places where their British predecessors Bishops had Bishops Sees
under the Archbishop of Cambria.
been before them.

11. Concerning the Bishops of Cambria, wales which were under their Archbishop
of Caerlegion, upon vske, many have written, affirming there were seven at the
coming of S. Augustine, and diverse, though some what diversely, have set down
the names of their Sees, most of them seeming to have been such from the
beginning. Roger Houeden thus recompteth them: Landauensem, and de S. Paterno
in Kardican, Bangorensem, and de S. Asaf, Cestrensem, Roger. Houede^ Annal.
part. Posterior. in Joan. Rege. Manuscr. antiq. apud Godwine Catal. in S.
David's. 1.
and Herefordensem, and Wigornensem: Landaff, S. Pattern in Cardiganshire,
Bangor, S. Asaph, Chester, Hereford, and Worcester, but grants these three
last especially Chester and Worcester did not belong to Wales. A Protestant
Bishop from an old Antiquity thus relates them: Exeter, Bathe, Hereford,
Landaffe, Bangor, S. Asaph, and Furnes in Ireland. Of Exeter and Bathe I have
spoken before, being subject to London. But likely it is, this old Author
remembered them hear, because in the desolation of Bishops and Religion hear
under the Saxons, these two near unto Wales kept their Bishops longer, as also
Worcester and Chester did by the same reason, and thereby are remembered by
Houeden. For Furnes in Ireland as it never did by old right belong to Wales, so
it now as little belongs to our purpose to speak further of it. The first
Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury speaking of this first Institution of
Bishops hear in King Lucius time, and how Loegria had 14. under the
Archbishop; York 7. and Cambria so many: sets down their names from that
time in this order: Diocaeses Cambriae hae Fucrunt, Herefordensis, Tauensis,
Paternensis, Banchorensis, Eluinesis, Wiccensis, ac Morganensis. The Dioceses
of Cambria besides the Archbishopric were these: Hereford, Taffe, Lanpatern in
Cardiganshire, Bangor, Elwy, Wicce, and Morgan. Harpesfeild, David David Pouel
annot. in l. 2. c. 1. Giraldi Cambren. Cambr. Itinerar. Harpesfeld. saecul. 7.
Matthew. Westminster. 712. Bed. l. 4 c. 23. Hist. Eccl. Angl. Godwin Catal. in
Worcester 1.
Powell a Welsh Protestant Antiquarie and others do also so recite them.
Tauensis was that we call Landaffe: Eluiensis named of the River Elwy, the same
with Asaph; Wicciensis as S. Bid calls it, Prouincia Victiorum, in the
kingdom of Mertia, in which Worcestershire, or part of it was. So we see that
Hereford, Landaffe, Bangor, S. Pattern, Glamorgan, S. Asaph, and Wiccia did
aunciently, and in the time of the Britans belong to the Archbishop of Cambria,
and most of them even from the beginning. For Hereford I have credibly heard
reported, that there is or lately was an old Antiquity there, testifying the
Church thereof to have been builded in King Lucius his time. For Landaffe the
Protestant Bishop thereof thus writes: The Cathedral Church of Fran. Godwin
Prot. Bishop of Landaffe Catal. of Bish. in Land. 1.
Landaffe is reported to have been first built in the time of Lucius, about the
year of Christ 180. The holy Bishops of Pattern and Bangor, S. Pattern of the
first changing, and giving name to the place for his Sanctity, and S. Daniel
of the other, are renowned among our ancient British Saints and Bishops. And
as our Antiquaries witness, Bangor was a Flamens seat, diverse hundreds of
years Harding Cron. f. 24. c. 30. Stowe Hist. in Cunedagius. Harding Chron. p.
24. c. 29. Stowe Histor. supr. Io. Caius Hist. Cantabr. accad. p. 20.
before Christ, and much honored by King Lucius, as more hereafter. Of the
glory and Antiquity of Glamorgan, taking the name of a King so called Morgan,
there slain above 2000. years since, and a School among the Paga^s of no
less continuance, as diverse writers teach, there can be little question in this
case. For the other two, though perhaps there is not so great testimony for
their Antiquity in this kind; yet these being joined with the rest in the
same degree in general by so many Authors, we cannot be of other mind, but
Bishops were also there, or not far from them of the like continuance,
otherwise we shall hardly justify the common agreed upon opinion of seven
Bishops placed in that Province in King Lucius time, but wander up and down
among mere coniecturs. For allthough we read in the life of S. Kentegern
Predecessor to S. Asaph, that in the time of S. David Archbishop in Wales, and
by his consent, he built a Monastary in this place of Elgn for 960. Monks, and
there remained Bishop, yet this does not improve, but rather confirm, there
was Bishops See there or not far from thence before. For it is recorded in
the same Author, supposed to be S. Asaph his scholar, and Successor, that
this Bishopric being void, the King and Clergy of Wales desired him for
their Bishop there: Rex and Clerus Regionis Cambrensis cum caeteris Christianis
ipsum in Pastorem and Episcopum eligerent. To which, S. David their Archbishop
his great friend consented. So his erecting that College, did honor and
beutifie and not alter or disgrace that Bishopric, and it is evident before,
that with this Bishops See there were but 7. besides the Archbishoprike: so many
there were long before as the Antiquities of Glastenbury and others prove, so
many at the beginning as I have showed before, therefore no addition of number
by the foundation of S. Kentegern.

THE XX. CHAPTER.
HOW S. ELEVTHERIVS POPE DID NOT only by his Papal Authority establish and
setle Religion, and Ecclesiastical things hear, but directed what temporal
Laws were to be used, appointed the bounds and limits of this kingdom,
sending an hallowed Crown to our King: and such Laws and Order continued
hear inmany Ages after

1. WHEN these things had so far and prosperously proceeded in Britain, King
Lucius intending a perfect Reformation in this kingdom, and knowing that
Religion being thus happily changed, there must also be a change or great
alteration in the old Pagan Laws, and, as it seems, observing, that in the
Municipall Towns and Places of Britain, which in some sort had received the
Roman Laws, and among the Romans which conuersed hear, there was much more
civil behavior and conversation, then in many Britans, wrote unto Pope
Eleutherius among other things to have the Roman Laws sent hither unto him, to
be received hear. These letters of King Lucius are not extant, neither the
answer of Pope Eleutherius unto him, and his Nobility, but in such a lame,
halting, and deformed manner, as it has pleased our Protestants, having
possession of that old Antiquity, to publish it to the world, without head,
foot, or perfect body, wanting both beginning, end, and middle in many things,
in such order as they thought it would any wise help, and least hinder Matthew.
Parker Ant. Britan. p. 5. Bridges in K. Lucius. Godwin Conu. of Brit. p. 30.
31. 32. Willam Lamb. in Legib. S. Eduardi. Fox To. 1. Act. and Mon. Theater of
great. Brit. lib. 6. lewell against. Hard. f. 119. Godw. sup. p. 30. Roger.
Houeden Annal. part. Posterior. in Henr. 2. Leg. S. Eduardi. cap. 1. apud Gul.
Lamb. and Stowe Hist. an. 179. in King Lucius.
and blemish their new Religion, when it came to vewe. And according to the
diversity of their own humors, they have as diversely put it in print, some
more, some less, some one way, some an other, as has best fitted their
fantasies, as you may read in there first Archbishop of Canterbury, their
Bishops, Jewel, Bridges, and Godwin, M. Lambert, the Antiquarie Fox, the
Theater writers and others, differing herein one from an other: of which one of
them a Protestant Bishop as mannerly as he might, thus complayneth: The Epistle
is as hear ensues: allthough I must acknowledge, that I find great varietye
in the diversity of Copies, some containing much more, then others. And yet he
himself does there further alter, chopp, and change it, both in his relation,
and translation of it, as every Reader may there easily observe, if he
understands but a little, the Latin tongue.

2. The Copies which bear most credit be those, which Stowe publishes in
English, and M. William Lambert in Latin, the first out of a Book of
Constitutions belonging to the Guildhall of London; the second as extant among,
and part of King Edward the Confessor his Laws, so called not because he made
them, as Houeden and others prove, but being the old Laws, of this kingdom,
and euacuated where the Danes had ruled, he revived them, and were most
Authentically proved, in the ti^e of King William the first, by the solemn
Oaths of Twelve Jurors out of every County in England, and so not likely to
deceive us in this point. The first Protestant Author, thus writes of them: I
only find the same entered in a Book Entitled, Constitutions, pertaining to
the Guildhall of London, misdated in the Latin as the English following
shows. The year after Christ's birth 169. Pope Eleutherius did write to
Lucius King of Britain for the amendment of the Kings and the Nobility of L.
Constable. Land.
Britain as follows. You required that we should send you the Roman and
Imperial Laws, that you might use them in your kingdom of Britain: But
those Laws we may disprove, and not the Laws of God. You have received lately
through Gods goodness in your kingdom both Testaments, out of them by Gods
grace, and the advice of your Realm take a Law, and thereby patiently govern
the kingdom. You are the Vicar of God in your kingdom, according to the
kingly Prophet. The earth is the Psalm. 45.
Lords, and his fullnes is the whole world, and all that dwell therein: And
again, Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity, wherefore God, even
thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. They
are the Kings children Christian Nations, and people of your kingdom that live
and consist under your protection, peace and kingdom according to the
Scripture, as an Hen gathers her Chikens under her wings, the people and
Nations of the kingdom of Britain is yours, such as are divided you should
gather them together to the Law of Christ, his holy Church, to peace and
coneorde: and cherishe, maintain, protect, govern, and defend them, from the
injurious, malicious, and their enemies. Woe be to that kingdom, the King
whereof is a child, and the Princes eat early in the morning. I do not call
a King a child, for his youth or Minority, but for his folly, Iniquity, and
madness according to the kingely Prophet. The blood thirsty and deceatefull men
shall not outlyue Psalm. 55.
half their days. By eating, We shall understand gluttony: by glouttonie
luxury: by luxury, all filthy wickedness and Mischeife, according to King
Solomon: wisdom will not enter into a spiteful soul, nor inhabit in a body
subject to sin. A King has Sapien. 2.
his name of governing, and not of his kingdom, so long you shall be a King
as you rule well, otherwise you shall not be so named, and loose that name,
which God forbid. God grant that you may so rule your Realm of Britain, that
you may reign with him everlastingly, whose Vicar you are in the said
kingdom. To whom with the Father etc. Thus this Epistle is related by this
Protestant Historian out of the Book of Constitutions of London. M. Lambert
sets it down among S. Edward his Laws in this order.

EPISTOLA DOMINI ELEVtherij Papae Lucio Regi Britanniae.
ANno 169. a Passione Christi, Dominus Eleutherius Papa Lucio Regi Britanniae
Al. 156.
scripsit ad petitionem Regis and Procerum Regni Britanniae. Petistis The
Epistle, and Order of S. Eleutherius Pope concerning Britain.
a nobis Leges Romanas, and Caesaris vobis transmitti, quibus in Regno
Britanniae vti voluistis. Leges Romanas and Caesaris semper reprobare possumus,
Legem Dei nequaquam. Suscepistis enim nuper miseratione Diuina in Regno
Britanniae, Legem and fidem Christi, habetis penes vos in Regno vtramque
Pagmam, ex illis Dei gratia per Consilium Regni vestri sum Legem, and per
illam Dei patientia vestrum Reges Britanniae Regnum. Vicarius vero Dei estis in
Regno iuxtae Prophetam Regem: Domini est terra, and plenitudo eius, Orbis
terrarum, and Vniuersi qui inhabitant in eo: Et rursum inxtae Prophetam Regem,
dilexisti iustitiam, and odisti miquitatem, propterea vnxit te Deus tuus oleo
latitiae, prae consortibus t^is: and rursum inxta Prophetam Regem, Deus
Indicium tuum etc. non enim Indicium neque institiam Caesaris. Filij enim Regis
gentes Christianae, and populi Regni sunt, qui sub vestra protectione, and
pace, and Regno degant, and consistant iuxta Enangelium, quemadmodum galina
congregat pullos sub alis etc. gentes vero Regni Britaenniae, and populi vestri
sunt, and quos diuisos debetis in vnum ad concordiam, and pacem, and ad fidem,
and ad legem Christi, and ad sanctam Ecelesiam congregare, reuocare, fouere,
manutenere, protegere, regere and ab iniuriosis, and malitiosis and ab inimicis
semper defendere. Vae Regno cuius Rex puer est, and cuius Principes mane
comedunt. No voco Regem puerum propter paruam and nimiam aetatem iuxta
Prophetam Regem: viri sanguinum and dolosi non dimidiabunt dies suos etc. per
come stionem intelligimus gulam, per gulam luxuriam, per luxuriam omnia turpta,
and mala inxta Salomonem Regem, in maleuolam animam non introibit sapientia,
nec habitabit in corpore subdito peccatis. Rex dicitur a regendo, non a Regno:
Rex eris dum been regis, quod nisi feceris, nomen Regis non in te constabit,
and nomen Regis perdes, quod absit. Det vobis Omnipotens Deus Regnum Britanniae
sic regere, vt possitis cum eo regnare in aeternum, cuius Vicarius estis in
Regno praedicto, qui cum patre and Filio etc.


THE EPISTLE OF LORD ELEVtherius Pope to Lucius King of Bri^taine.
IN the year 169. from the Passion of Christ, Lord El^utherius Pope wrote to
Lucius King of Britain, at the request of the King and Nobles of Britain. You
requested of us to have the Laws of the Romans, and Caesar, to be sent over
unto you, which you would have used in the Kingdom of Britain. We may
always reprove the Roman and Imperial, but the Law of God we may not
reprove. For you have lately by the divine mercy received in the kingdom of
Britain, the Law and faith of Christ, you have among you in the kingdom both
the Parts thereof, out of them by the grace of God, with the Counsel of your
kingdom take a Law, and by that, with the help of God, you shall Govern your
kingdom of Britain: You are verily the vicegerent of God in your kingdom
according to the Prophet a King. The earth is our Lords and the fullnes
thereof, and the globe of the earth, and all that dwell therein. And again by
the Prophet a King, Thou have loved Justice, and hated Iniquity, therefore thy
God has anointed thee with oil of gladness, above thy fellows. And again by
the Prophet a King, o God give thy Judgment to the King, and thy Justice to the
Kings son. Not the Judgment and Justice of Caesar. And the sons of the King
(there) are Christian Nations and people of the kingdom which may live and be
under your protection, and peace, and kingdom, according to the Gospel: even
as an hen gathers her chickens under her wings etc. for the Nations and
people of the kingdom of Britain be yours, whom now divided, you ought to
gather together, to concord, and peace, and to the faith, and to the Law of
Christ, and to his holy Church recall them, norish them, maintain, Govern and
defend them always from injurious and malicious parsons, and from their
enemies. Woe to the kingdom whose King is a Child, and whose Princes eat
early in the morning. I call not a King a Child for his little or greater age,
but for foolishnes, and Iniquity, and Madness, according to the Prophet a King:
men of blood, and crafty shall not live half their days. By eating we
understand glutonie, by glutonie luxury, by luxury all filthy things, and
evil, according to Solomon a king. Wisdom will not enter into a malicious
soul, nor dwell in a body subject to sins. A King is named of ruling not of
a kingdom: You shall be a King so long as you Govern well: but if you do
otherwise, the name of a King shall not remain with you, and you shall loose
the name of a King, which God forbid. God almighty grante, you may so govern
the kingdom of Britain, that you may Reign with him for ever, whose
vicegerent you are in the aforesaid kingdom, who with the Father and son
etc.


3. Hitherto this part of S. Eleutherius Epistle, which the Publisher in the
year 1568. thought to have ben^ written above five hundred years before, and
feemeth to say it was among the old Laws, priscis legibus, he then published,
in the Library of Matthew Parker the first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury:
Plane suscipio atque profiteor magna fide and Religione ex vetustissimis (vt
quae ante quingentos annos, vti coniectura autumo, Saxonicis depicta sunt
literis) exemplaribus fuisse desumptas, quorum pleraque in Reverend. in Chisto
Patris D. Matthaei Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi Bibliotheca, alia aliorum in
Librarijs visenda supersunt. And this Protestant Archbishop wtiteth, this
Epistle is commonly accounted among the Laws of S. Edward: Haec Epistola
communiter Matthew. Parker. Antiq. Brit. p. 5. in Margin. Gulielm. Lamb. in
Legib. S. Edwardi. Matthew. Parker. supr. p. 5. in Text.
habetur inter leges diui Edwardi: And the Protestant Lawyer which published
them, makes it a part of those Laws. And yet this Protestant Archbishop,
saying he will set down the whole Epistle renowned, and rare: Cuius Epistolae
quia tam rara and augusta est, totam seriem inseramus; And yet he recites
little more then half of that is before related. But yet these men will not
suffer us to doubt of the credit thereof: For besides that they have confessed,
it was both in the old Book of Constitutions, and commonly among S. Edwards
Laws, and as part of them: an other says, it was in an old Manuscript of
ancient Kings: Ex vetusto Codice Regum Antiquorum. The Cambridge Antiquarie
Fox Act. and Mon. p. 107. Io. Caius Antiq. Cantabr. l. 1. Theater of great
Brit. l. 6. c. 19.
found it in the old History called Brutus. Our Protestant writers of the
Theater, do seem to write, that the Autographon and Antiquity itself is in
the custody of Sir Robert Cotton Baronet of Conington in Huntingtonshire: but I
hear by others he only has an old Copy thereof. Yet a Protestant Bishop thus
confidently affirms. we have seen the Bishop of Romes own letter to King
Lucius, that is reputed to be the first Christian King of Britain. Ihon
Bridges def. of the gouernm. in the Church of Engl. l. 16. p. 1355. Guliel.
Lambr. l. de Priscis Angl. Legib. fol. 1. ante praf. f. 126. 131. Matthew. Parker
antiq. Brit. supr. p. 5. in Marg.
If he says truly, that he had seen it, it need not walk invisible in these
times, wherein he lives, or lately lived. And of so great creditt this
Antiquity is with our Protestant Antiquaries, as the Publisher a Protestant
professed, Lawyer and Antiquarie confesses, it was received as part of our
Law in England, both by our Saxon and Norman kings, as namely king William the
first, who confirmed that and other ancient Laws of this kingdom. And their
Archbishop before has aknowledged no less. And the Laws themselves of S.
Edward do as expressly so prove this part of Pope Eleutherius Epistle to be a
portion of them, as any part, parcel or sentence contained in any of those
Laws, making it the strongest and most warranting Authority for the 17. Act
or Article of them, which as the Title shows is of this greatest point, and
most material in a Temporal Government and Kingdom: Of the Duty of the
King, and of the Right and Appertinences of the Crown of the Kingdom of
Britain: De Regis of ficio, and de Iure and Appendicijs coronae Regni Leges S.
Edwardi Confessoris c. 17.
Britanniae. All which so material and concerning, being very long is wholly
and only warranted by the Authority of Pope Eleutherius, and Pope Ihon after
him in the time of Pipinus and Carolus his son in France, prescribing the
Duty of a King to them in France, as S. Eleutherius had before done to King
Lucius in Britain: as the very beginning of that Law does plainly witness
in these words: Rex autem quia Vicarius summi Regis est, ad hoc est
constitutus, vt Regnum terrenum, and populum Domini, and super omnia sanctam
veneretur Ecclesiam cius, and regat and ab iniuriosis defendat, and maleficos
ab ea euellat, and destruat, and penitus disperdat. Quod nisi fecerit, nec
nomen Regis in co constabit, verum testante Papa Ioanne nomen Regis perdet.

4. And because it is evident before that this Epistle of Pope Eleutherius did
contain more things then be delivered in that parcel thereof, which is
remembered, as the very beginning without any name of either the sender or to
whom it was sent, greeting, or such preambles, as Popes Epistles to Princes in
all Antiquity have, do prove, and we find further in this very Authentical
Law itself, and part thereof, that this holy Pope at, or about this time, did
send to King Lucius an hallowed Crown, with the Title of King of Britain, and
prescribed the very limits and precints of his kingdom, how far it did, and
was to extend, we cannot be of other Judgment. But these things also were,
either included in that Decretall Epistle of Pope Eleutherius, or some other
about that time, which the words of the Law rather incline unto, testifying,
the Decree of these later remembered things bore date two years before the
other: The very words of the Law be these: Debet vero de Iure Rex omnes terras
and honores, omnes dignitates, and Iura, and libertates coronae Regni huius in
integrum cum omni integritate, and sine diminutione obseruare, and defendere,
dispersa, and dilapidata, and amissa Regni Iura in pristinum statum, and
debitum viribus omnibus reuocare. Vniuersa vero terra and tota, and Insulae
omnes vsque Norwegiam, and vsque Daciam pertinent ad coronam Regni eius, and
sunt de Appendicijs and dignitatibus Regis, and vna est Monarchia, and vnum est
Regnum, and vocabatur quondam Regnum Britanniae, modo autem vocatur Regnum
Anglorum. Tales enim metas and fines vt praedictae sunt, constituit and
imposuit Coronae Regni Dominus Eleutherius Papa sententia sua, anno centesimo
sexagesimo septimo post Passionem Christi, qui primo destinauit coronam
benedictam Britanniae, and Christianitatem Deo inspirante Lucio Regi Britonum.
Debet enim Rex omnia rite facere in regno, and per iudicium Procerum regni.
Debet enim Ius and iustitia magis regnare in regno quam voluntas praua: Lex est
semper quod ius facit, voluntas autem, violentia and vis non est ius. Debet
vero Rex Deum timere, super omnia and diligere, and mandata eius per totum
regnum suum seruare. Debet enim sanctam Ecclesiam regni sui cum omni
integritate, and liberate iuxta constitutiones patrum, and praedecessorum
seruare, fouere, manutenere, regere, and contra inimicos defendere, ita vt Deus
prae caeteris honoretur, and prae oculis semper habeatur. Debet etiam bonas
leges and consu^tudines approbatas erigere, prauas autem delere, and omnes a
regno de ponere. Debet ^udicium rectum in regno facere, and iustitiam per
consilium Procerum regni sui tenere. Ista vero debet omnia Rex in propria
persona, inspectis and tactis Sacrosanctis Euangelijs, and super sacras and
sanctas reliquias coram regno and sacerdotio and clero iurare, antequam ab
Archiepiscopis and Episcopis regni coronaretur. Tres enim Rex habere debet
seruos, scilicet luxuriam, auaritiam, and cupiditatem, quos si habuerit seruos,
been, and illustre regnabit. Regno omnia debet praemeditari, and hoc Regis est.
Quia male cuncta ministrant impetus iuxta Euangelium, omne regnum in se diuisum
desolabitur: Truly a King ought of right to observe and defend all the Lands
and honors, all the dignities and rights, and liberties of the Crown of this
kingdom wholly with all integrity, and without diminution, and with all his
power recall to the ancient state, and due all the rights of the kingdom,
which were dispersed, dilapidated, and lost. And all and the whole Land, and
all the Islands unto Norwey, and unto Denmark do belong to the Crown of his
kingdom, and they are of the Appendences, and dignities of the King, and it is
one Monarchy, and one kingdom, and aunciently was called the kingdom of
Britain, but now is ^alled the kingdom of the English men. For our Lord
Eleutherius Pope who first by inspiration of God, did send an hallowed crown
to Britain, and Christianity to Lucius King of the Britons did ordain and
impose to the Crown of the kingdom, such bounds, and limits, as are spoken
before by his Decree in the year one hundred sixty seven after the Passion of
Christ. A King also ought to do all things in the kingdom truly, and by the
Judgment of the Peers of the kingdom. For Right, and justice ought to Reign
more in a kingdom, then wicked will. That is Law which always does right,
but will, violence and force is not right. A King ought to fear God, and love
him above all things, and keep his Commandments throughout the kingdom. He
ought also to preserve, foster, maintain, govern, and defend against Enemies,
the holy Church of his kingdom, with all integrity, and liberty, according
to the Constitutions of the Fathers, and Predecessors, so that God may before
all things be honored, and ever had before his eyes. He ought also to erect
good Laws, and customs allowed, and blott them out which be wicked, and
bannish them all from the kingdom. He ought to do right judgment in the
kingdom, and keep Justice, by the Counsel of the Nobles of his kingdom.
All these things a King must swear in his own parson, looking upon and
touching the holy Ghospels, and upon holy and sacred Reliks, before the Realm,
and Preisthood, and Clergy, before he be crowned by the Archbishops and
Bishops of the kingdom. For a King must have three things slaves unto him, to
wit, luxury, a^arice, and concupiscence, which if he makes s^a^es, he shall
reign well, and renownedly, he must premeditate all things for the kingdom,
and this is the office of a King. Because violences do minister all things
ill, according to the Gospel, every kindome divided in itself will be
desolate.

5. Hitherto this our holy and ancient Law, of the office and duty of our
Kings, used and practiced even from the beginning of Christianity, publikly
received hear, both in the Britans and Saxons government, founded, warranted
and grounded upon the Authority and direction of the holy Pope S.
Eleutherius, as appears by that part of his Epistle which I first recited,
immediately without any one sentence, word, or syllable interposed between
them, annexed and joined to this Law, as the original cause, motive,
allowance, and confirmation thereof. Whereby we may cleartly see, the great
power, prerogative, and Jurisdiction the Popes of Rome even from the beginning,
and first founding Christian Religion hear, claimed, had, and exercised, in
this kingdom, and from the first Christian King we enjoyed, a Saint and
blessed man, all our Kings Britans, Saxons, or whatsoever Christians to these
days, did with this whole kingdom allow to the Apostolic See of Rome, as
much as it claims now at our hands, and as any good and learned Catholics do
yield unto it. From that holy and eminent See we had by these greatest
Testimonies Christian Religion planted and Iuridically settled hear. Our
Episcopal and Archiepiscopall Sees assigned, our first Bishops and Archbishops
to enjoy them appointed, and consecrated. Direction given even in temporal and
civil affairs, what Laws we should take, our King Possessor but of a part of
this kingdom declared to be King of all Britain, and so many adjacent Islands
enjoyed by his enemies, and an hallowed Crown sent him to wear, as Monarch
and King of them all. A Protestant Lawyer, Bracton l. 1. de acquir. rer. Dom.
c. 8. Io. Seldom Analect. p. 46.
and Antiquarie says, that from this Popes donation our Kings had the Title,
viracius Dei, vicar or vicegerent of God, and cites Bracton for his Author,
who rather denies, then affirms it: only he says against the sense of
Protestants, that it is evident, a King ought to be under the Law, being but
Gods vicegerent: Quod sub lege Rex esse debeat cum ^it Dei vicarius. And Roger
Houeden who recites this very Law verbatim, has not that Title, Vicarius,
no^ the wo^de, Regert, to Rule, which our Protestants apply to the Church, the
Title is Regis Officium, the Kings duty, and is this: Rex atque Vicarius eius
ad hoc Roger. Houede^ Annal. part. poster. in Henric. ^. c. de legib. Angl.
est constitutus, vt regnum terrenum, populum Dei, and super omnia, sanctam
Ecclesiam reuereatur, and ab Iniuriatoribus defendat, and maleficos ab ea
euellat, and destruat and penitus disperdat. where, above all things he must
reverence the holy Church, and be ruled by it, and not Rule it. And this, all
our Christian Kings to King Edward the sixth a child did publikly profess
before their Coronation, as the old Order thereof is witness. And these Titles
to be Vicarius Cbristi in his Pontificale Roman. in Benedictione and
Coronatione Regis.
holy Church, is as fully before given to Pope Eleutherius by King Lucius, and
his Christians, and Regere to rule it under Christ, made by them the Popes
peculiar, as they were ever after to these Times.

6. And to speak more particularly of the civil and temporal Laws, which
King Lucius requested Pope Eleutherius to give direction in, and he accordingly
established in this kingdom, this holy King now a Christian, did not, and
could not by his Religion demand the Roman Pagan Laws, without alteration or
correction, of S. Eleutherius, but according to such moderation, change, or
alteration he should use in them, to speak in a Protestant Bishops words:
Lucius made request unto Eleutherius to send him some Kind of Abstract of the
Roman Laws, whereby he might establish a settled order of Government* Godwin
Conu. of Britain p. 29.
in his Dominions. And when Pope Eleutherius directed him, to take his Law,
conformable to the Law of God, by the advice of his kingdom, ex illis Dei
gratia, per consilium Regni vestri sum Legem, he meant as an other Protestant
Bridges defense l. 16. p. 1355.
Bishop expounds him, that this should be done principally by the Advice of
the clergy of his Dominion, the Bishops and Priests which he had ordained
hear, best Learned and conversant in the holy Scripturs, and Law of God. That
the Laws which they received and established hear were the old Britan Laws,
ascribed for their greatest part to Mulmutius Dunwallo, corrected and Galf.
Mon. l. 2. c. 17. Brittsh. Hist. l. 3. c. 5. Pontic. Virun. l. 23. Hist. Stowe
Hist. in Mulmut. Dunwall. Holinsh. Hist. Matthew. Westminster. aetat. 5. c. 2. Galfr.
Mon. l. 2. Hist. c. vlt. Pontic. Vir. l. 2. Hist. in fine. Stowe Hist. in Mulm.
Dunwallo. Holinsh Hist. of Engl. 3. c. 1. Fortescue l. de laudib. legum Angl.
c. 13.
made conformable to holy Christian Religion, we have all Kind of Antiquities
British, Saxon, French, Italians, Catholics, and Protestants for witnesses.
These Laws were translated out of British into Latin long before this time,
by the ancient Gildas that lived about the time of the birth of Christ, as
many both ancient and late writers agree, and continued hear until late
time, and in diverse respects at this present. So the Author of the British
History, Virunnius, and Matthew of Westminster write of their times: Dunwallo
Mulmutius Leges Mulmutinas statuit, quae vsque ^odie inter Anglos celebrantur.
Thus he wrote within these 300. years, that Mulmutius Laws were those which
were then used in England. Galfridus and Ponticus write the same, Quae vsque ad
hoc te^pus celebra^tur inter Anglos. The like have our Protestants Stowe,
Hollinshed, and others. And the best witness we can use in such a case of
Laws, Judge Fortescue most Learned in them, and Antiquities concerning such
affairs, he speaking in commendation of Laws, and our ancient Laws in
particular, first writes, how from the time of Brutus this kindome was Ruled
by Laws: sic (per leges) Regnum Angliae, quod ex Bruto comitiua Troianorum,
quam ex Italiae and Graecorum finibus produxit, in Dominium politicum, and
Regale prorupit: By Laws the kingdom of England from the company of Trojans
which Brutus brought from the Costs of Italy, and the Grecians came to be a
Political and Regal Dominion. And after, thus proves a continuance of these
Laws by all people which hear inhabited: Regnum Angliae primo per Britannos
inhabitatum est, deinde per Romanos regulatum, Fortescue supr. cap. 17.
iterumque per Britannos, ac deinde per Saxones possessum, and tunc per Danos,
Iterum per Saxones, sed finaliter per Normannos, and in omnibus Nationum harum,
and Regum earum temporibus, Regnum illud, eisdem, quibus iam regitur,
consuetudinibus continue regulatum est, quae si optimae non extitissent, aliqui
Regum illorum, Iustitia, ratione, vel affectione concitati, eas mutassent aut
omnino deleuissent, and maxim Romani qui legibus suis quasi totum orbis
reliquum iudicabant: The kingdom of England was first inhabited by the
Britans, after that ruled by the Romans, and again by the Britans, and after
possessed by the Saxons, and then by the Danes, again by the Saxons, but
finally by the Normans, and in all the times of these Nations and their Kings,
that kingdom was ruled continually by the same Customs, by which it is now
governed, which if they had not been the best could be made, some of those
Kings incited by Justice, reason, or affection would have changed them, or
utterly blotted them forth, and especially the Romans, who Judged as it were
all the rest of the world by their Laws. Ranulphus Higeden in his Manuscript
History says: sancciuit primum Leges Dunwallo Mulmutius, cuius Leges Mulmutnae
dicebantur vsque ad tempora Willielmi Conquestoris satis celebres. Inter quae
statuit Ranulph. Higeden in Manuscr. Polychr. l. 1. c. 50. de legib.
vt Civitates and Templa Deorum, viaeque ad villas ducentes, ac Aratrum colonum
immunitate confugij gauderent. Deinde Marcia Regina Britonum vxor Guithelmi
Regis, a qua Prouincia Merciorum putatur denominata legem edidit, discretione
and Iustitia plenam, quae lex Martia vocabatur. Has duas leges Gildas
Historicus transtulit de Britannico in Latinum, and. Rex Aluredus postmodu^ de
Latino is Saxonicum, quae Marchenelaga dicebatur: Dunwallo Mulmutius did first
ordain Laws, which from him were called Mulmutius his Laws and renowned
until the time of william, the Conqueror. Among which he decreed, that Cities
and the Temples of their Gods, and the ways that ledd to Towns, and the
Plough of husbandimen should have freedom. Afterward Martia Queen of the
Britans wife of King Gwitheline of whom the Province of the Martians is
thought to be so named, made a Law full of discretion and Justice which was
called Martia Law. These two Laws Gildas the Historian did Translate out of
British language into Latin, and King Alfred did translate them out of Latin
into the Saxon tongue, which was called Marchenlage.

6. The like have the British History, Virunnius, Matthew of Westminster with
others, and diverse Protestant Historians: among whom one for Holinsh. Hist. of
Engl. l. 3. c. 1.
the rest thus writes: Mulmutius made many good Laws, which were long after
used, called Mulmutius Laws, turned out of the British speech into the Latin
by Gildas Priscus, and long time after translated out of Latin into English
by Alfred King of England, and mingled in his statuts. And this is sufficiently
proved by the Laws themselves, of King Aluredus: wherein after he had set
down the Judicial Laws of the old Testament applied for the government of
this kingdom, as Pope Eleutherius had given direction to King Lucius, he
makes this mention thereof: haec ea sunt Iura quae rerum omnium praepotens
Deus ipse Moysi custodienda proposuit: These be those Laws, which the
Almighty Leges Regis Aluredi in praefatio^e, apud Gul. Lambert l. de priscis
legib.
God of all things himself did propose to Moses to be kept. Then he comes to
the New Testament, and Laws which after the preaching of the Gospel, the
Assemblyes of Bishops and renowned wise men decreed hear in Britain, then
England: In Anglia Episcoporum aliorumque; clarissimorum sapientum Conuentus
agebantur, atque hi diuina edocti miseratione cuique iam primum peccanti paenam
imperabant. And adds, that he has gathered them all together, Rex Aluredus
supra in praef.
and approves a great part of those ancient Laws, to be still observed, and
joins unto them some others which he enacted: Has Ego Aluredus Rex
sanctionesin vnum collegi, atque easdem literis mandaui, quarum bon^m c^rte
partem Maiores nostri Religiose coluerunt, multa etiam mihi digna videntur,
quae a nobis hac etiam aetate pari Religione obseruentur, nonnulla tamen, quae
nobis minus commoda videbantur ex consulto sapientum partim antiquanda, partim
innouanda curaui. And it is manifest by the Laws of King Edward the Confessor,
as they were solemnly proved and proposed to King William the first, by some
named the Conqueror, both as they are recorded by our ancient Historian Roger
Houeden, and M. Lambret the Protestant Lawyer, and Antiquarie, that he was so
careful to know, and make semblance also of establishing these ancient Laws
revived, and maintained by S. Edward the Confessor, that Leg. S. Edwardi c. 1.
apud Roger. Houed. part. 2. Annal. in Henr. 2. and Guliel. Lambert. in Legib.
S. Edwardi.
first he appointed a Jury of twelve sworn men in every Shire taking their
Oaths before the King, that to their power, they would truly and sincerly set
down the Decrees of their Laws and Customs, without any omission, addition,
or mutation, electi de singulis totius Patriae Comitatibus viri duodecim,
Iureiurando coram Rege primum confirmauerunt, vt quod possent, recto tramite
incedentes, Legum suarum and consuetudinum sancita patefacere^t: nihil praeter
mittentes, nihil addentes, nil praeuaricando mutantes. And this so solemnly
examined, presented, and performed, ^e did confirm in all things these
ancient Laws termed S. Edwards Laws for the reason before, to be kept and
continued as well as those which were added by himself, as appears in his
own still extant Laws: hoc quoque praecipio, vt omnes habeant and teneant
Legem sancti Leges Regis Gulielm. 1. apud. Gul. Lamb. in eod.
Edwardi in omnibus rebus, adauctis his quae constituimus ad vtilitatem
Anglorum. And so it is evidently true that many of those ancient Laws of
Mulmutius and King Lucius by Pope Eleutherius direction, did continue in the
time of Judge Fortescue, as also at this present, but where they have been
taken away by our Protestant Princes, to give way to their new Religion.

THE XXI. CHAPTER.
OF MANY ARCHIEPISCOPALL, Episcopal and other Churches, and Monasteries both
of men and women founded, and ritchly endowed and privileged in this time.

1. KING Lucius being thus informed and secured in conscience by these letters,
and declaration of the holy Pope and Pastor of Christ's Church Eleutherius, that
the whole kingdom of Britain with the Islands, belonged to his temporal
chardge and Government, and that so much as he could he was to wine his
subjects to the faith and Law of Christ, and his holy Church, and provide for
the peace and quiet of the same and the members thereof, he did first in
receiving and admitting these new corrected Laws by the advice of his Clergy
and Nobles of his kingdom see them so qualified, that they were for the
defense and propagation of Christian Religion, and further founded many Godly,
costly, and memorable Monuments, as Churches, Universities or Schools,
Monasteries and other such comforts* ^elps, and furtherances of Saint Lucius
King of great Britain, the first King (...) of Christ's Church.
that holy end: So that as he was the first King which publikly with his
kingdom professed Christ, so he won the honor, to be the first Nursing
Father among Kings, of his holy Church, as the Prophet had foretold: erunt
Reges nutric^ tui: Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers. He was first among Kings
properly termed, Vicarius Dei, the Viceg^rent of God, being the first King,
which so religeously performed his will. And that Title which the Pope gave to
King Henry 8. when he was better then he proved after, defensor fidei,
defendo^^ of the faith, was among Kings the first due and Right of King Lucius,
for his so Heroical Religeous fortitude and magnanimity in defending the
faith and Church of Christ. And as the British History, Virunnius, Matthew of
The Popes Legates change the Pagan Temples into Christian Churches.
Westminster and others write, of the holy Legates, that besides their changing
Flamens, Archflamens into Bishops and Archbishops, the Temples of the Gentiles,
which were founded in honor of many Gods, they dedicated the same to the one
true God, and to his Saints, and replenished the same with diverse companies
Churches dedicated to Saints.
of consecrated parsons: Templ^ quae in ho^orem pluri^orum Deorum fundata
fuerant, vni Deo eiusque Sanctis dedicauer^^t, diuersisque ordinatorum caetibus
repleuerunt. Galfr. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 4. c. 19. Po^tic. Vir. l. 4. Mat.
Westminster. an. 185. Manuscr. Gallic. Antiq. an. 180. Matthew. Westminster. Hist. an. 187.
So the same Authou^^ write of King Lucius: Gloriosus Britonum Rex Lucius, cum
intra Regnum s^um verae fidei cultum magnificatum esse vidisset, possesssiones
and territoria Ecclesijs and ^iris Ecclesiasticis abundanter conferens, chartis
and munimentis omnia communiuit. Ecclesias vero cum suis caemiterijs, ita
constituit esse liberas, vt quicunque malefactor ad illa confugeret, illaesus
ab omnibus remaneret: The glorious King of the Britans Lucius when he saw that
the worship of the true faith was advanced within his kingdom, bestowing
abundantly possessions and The Churches are furnished with other
Ecclesiastical Clergy men besides Bishops, and Priests.
territories upon Churches, and Ecclesiastical men, he confirmed all things
with charters and privileges. And appointed that Churches and Churchyards
should be so free, that whatsoever malefactor should fly unto them, should
remain without hurt from all. The British History thus relates it: Interea
gloriosus ille Rex Lucius, cum intra Regnum suum cultum vere fidei magnificatum
esse vidisset, maximo gaudio Galfr. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 5. c. 1.
fluctuans, Possessiones and Territoria quae prius Templa Idoloru^ possidebant,
in meliorem vsum vertens, Ecclesijs fidelium permanere concessit. Et quia
maiorem honorem Churches founded and endowed by King Lucius, And what Religion
they professed.
ipsis impendere debuerat, augmentauit illas amplioribus agris and mansis,
omnique liberate sublimauit: In the mean time when that renowned King Lucius
did see true Religion exalted within his kingdom, most greatly reioicing
thereat, converting the Possessions and Territories which formerlie the Temples
of Idols did possess to a better use, granted that they should remain to the
Churches of the faithful and because he ought to bestow more honor one them,
he augmented them with more ample lands and Mansions. Which how great and
ample they were, we may make some estimate, if we reflect upon the great
Riches of the Idol Temples hear before this Conversion, all which with an
ample addition were now left to the Christian Clergy, and Churches.

2. I will only exemplify in one solemnity of those Gentiles and in one place
of this kingdom London, at one time, and thus related in the old British
History, which our Protestants have published, litauerunt ibi quadraginta
millia Galfr. Mon. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 4. c. 8.
vaccarum, and centum millia ouium: diuersorumque generum volatilia, quae
leuiter sub numero non cadebant. Praeterea triginta millia Syluestrium ferarum
cuiuscunque generis collectarum: They sacrificed there, at Trinouantum London,
forty thousand kyne, and a hundred thousand sheep, and fowls of all sorts,
which could hardly be numbered and thirty thousand wild beasts, of every kind
which they had gathered together. And Po^ticus Virunnius has the very same
words in all things; except in the first Ponticus Virun. Hist. l. 4.
number, which he much abateth, vndecim millia vaccarum. This for thanks to
their pretended Gods for the repulse the Britans had then given to Julius
Caesar. Of the Riches, revenues, state and Pomp of the Pagan chief Druids,
Flamens and Archflamens I have spoken somewhat before: therefore all this wealth
and substance, and with so ample addition now converted by King Lucius to the
use of the Christian Clergy, as we must needs yield him the remembered Titles,
so he employing them, and so lardge immunities to Manuscr. Gallic. antiq. ann.
180. Antiq. Glascon. Manuscr. Capgr. in S. Joseph and S. Patricio.
such a Clergy, as builded, and dedicated Churches, and prayed unto Saints,
and for the dead, said Mass, and gave such Supreamacie to Pope Eleutherius,
we may not say, he was of the Protestant Profession, which has taken all from
that holy Religion, and left nothing but Persecution and Oppression unto it.

3. How in this time all the chief Temples in all the Cities of Britain
together with their Reuencwes were turned into the Sees of Archbishops, and
Bishops, is before related, and in diverse of those Cities new Cathedral
Churches founded, and erected, as I have exemplified before in Winchester,
Landaffe, S. Martins Church in Canterbury, and S. Peter's in Cornhill in
London, Manuscript. in S. Peter's Church in Cornhill in London.
for which the ancient Manuscript there still or lately hanging with diverse
other Antiquities thus pleads: Lucius the first Christian King of this Land
then called Britain, founded the first Church in London, that is to say, S.
Peter's S. Peter^ Church in Cornhill in London a Metropolitan See.
Church upon Cornhill, and he founded there an Archbishops See, and made that
Church the Metropolitan and chief Church of this kingdom, and so endured the
space of 400. years, and more unto the coming of S. Augustine the Apostle of
England, the which was sent to this Land by S. Gregory the Doctor: then was
the Arbishops See and Pall removed from the foresaid Church of S. Peter upon
Cornhill unto Dereberman that now is called Canterbury, and there it remains
to this day. Hollinsh. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. cap. 19.
Hollinshed writes that there were in his time Tables hanging in the Reuestry
of S. Paul's Church in London, which affirm the same. An other Protestant
citing the first cited Table in S. Peter's Church upon Cornhill, and inclining
to that opinion, and adds: Iocelyn of Furnes in his book of British Stowe
Histor. Romans in K. Lucius.
Bishops says, Thean was the first Archbishop of London, in the time of
Lucius, who builded the said Church of S. Peter in a place called Cornhill in
London, by the aid of Cyran chief Butlar to King Lucius. Godwin a Protestant
Godwin Catal. of Bish. in London 1. Polid. Virgil. Angl. Histor. l. 2. p. 41.
Richard. Vitus in Hist. l. 5. Holins. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. cap. 19. Will.
Harrison descr. of Brit. p. 24. c. 9. Sulcar. apud Vit. supr. Seldom Annal. c.
6.
Bishop has almost the same words, though not citing any Author in
particular. Others both Catholics and Protestants affirm, that the Church of
S. Peter at westminster by London was then founded, and used for the Cathedral
Church, as some write: There be that affirm; says a Protestant Historian, how
this Lucius should build the Church of S. Peter at Westminster. They add
further that Thomas (likely Theonus mistaken) Archbishop of London preached,
read, and ministered the Sacraments there to such as made resort unto him. And
of this opinion that this Church was then made or reedified (for that I have
written before) is Sulcardus a learned Monk of Westminster, most likely to
write the truth of that Church living in the time of S. Edward the Confessor,
and that it was the Cathedral Church to London. Both which may be true, if we
make the old Church, of Westminster the Cathedral Church until the other was
builded, not finished in the first Arbishops How it is probable that both S.
Peter's Church and Westminster, and in Cornhill were Archiepiscopall Churches in
this time.
time, but by his Successor Eluanus who builded the Library, and likely some
part of S. Peter's Church upon Cornhill. William Harrison a Protestant
Antiquarie, borne as he says in London, and so chalendging knowledge of the
Antiquities there, proves this by sundry reasons, and cites William of
Malmesbury for the same opinion. And Polidor Virgil with many others says, the
Cathedral Church in London was then Templum and ornatu, and opere magnificum,
a Church magnificent both for ornament and work. Which Stowe supr. from
others. Will. Harrison supr. c. ^. Gildas l. de Excid. and conq. Brit.
we do not find of S. Peter's Church upon Cornhill.

4. And the same Author witnesses, that the like magnificent Churches were
then founded at York and Car-legion, Londini, Eboraci, and in vrbe Legionum
templa and ornatu and opere magnifica condita sunt. And much like unto this we
must speak of all Churches in Cities that were Episcopal, and Cathedral,
whether they were new founded, or of Temples of Flamens converted to be such,
as also of all other Pagan Temples which then were, changed into Christian
Churches. For allthough all those temples were not destroyed and utterly
ruinated, but newly dedicated to Christ and his Saints, as our Antiquaries have
proved before: yet the superstitious and Idolatrous Altars, where upon their
profane and adhominable sacrifices were offered in them, to their false Gods,
were utterly overthrown, and left desolate, and as S. Gildas the most ancient
British Historian with others testify, Christian Altars which were the place
of Christian Sacrifice of the holy Mass, wherein Christ's holy body and blood
were offered, and therefore termed by him the Polidor. Virgil. l. 2. Hist. p.
41.
seat of the heavenly sacrifice, seeds caelestis sacrificij, and the Altars
whereon their first Primative Priests offered that most divine Sacrifice, which
we commonly call Mass: Sacerdotes inter altaria Sacrificantes, and in respect
thereof Galfr. Mon. Hist. Brit. lib. 11. cap. 4. Gildas supr. Stowe Hist. an.
542. Holinsh. Hist. of Engl. l. 5. c. 15. Mat. West. an. 543.
the chiefest of the immunities before remembered were granted to those sacred
Altars, in all Churches in this kingdom of Britain from King Lucius time. And
the ordinary Churches which were under the Jurisdiction of so many Bishops in
so lardge a kingdom could not be few, especially if we consider the multitude
of Gods the Britans worshipped, when they were Pagans, and the great number of
Temples dedicated unto them, which were changed into Christian Churches. Leland
writes, that King Lucius built a new Church in the Castle of Dover, and cites
the Annals thereof, for warrant. Io. Leland. assert. Arthurij c. 7. Annal.
Duren. ibid. Will. Lambard. peramb. of Kent. p. 158. Jacob. Genuen. Epis. in
Vita S. Aug. Cantuar. Archiep. Capgr. Catal. in eodem.
Tradunt Annals Dorensis Caenobij Lucium Regem Britannorum Christianum
Ecclesiam Seruatori suo in Durensi Castro consecrasse. William Lambard the
Antiquarie of that Country also says, King Lucius builded a Church within
Dover Castle. Iacobus Genue^sis Bishop of Genua, Capgraue and others writes of
an old Church at Compton in warwick shire, carrying argument of foundation in
that time. The Author says it was a Parish Church and had such a Priest for
the Pastor thereof receiving Tithes hundred of years before S. Augustine time,
which if it were so, we may make conjecture of an unsearchable number in the
same condition. Which our Antiquities sufficiently confirm before, teaching
that the Temples of all the Gods of the Gentiles which were in all parts of
Britain, were changed into Christian Churches. And Anacletus apud Rob. Barnes
in Vit. Pont. in eod.
our Protestants tell us, it was the old Decree of Pope Anacletus, which these
Legates of the Pope would not transgress, that as Bishops were to be in chief
Cities, so they should appoint Priests in Castles, Towns, and Villages,
binding them to Residencie there: Ne Episcoporum dignitati derogaretur, in
egregijs tantum vrbibus Episcopos constituendos censuit. Presbiteros vero ab
Episcopis in Castellis, Pagis, ac Villis constituendos esse ea lege, vt inibi
vitae suae spacium transigerent. Which to have been observed in this
Conversion, the multitude of Bed. Hist. Galfr. Mat. Westminster. and alij in Diocles.
Churches destroyed hear by Dioclesian within an hundred years after
sufficiently declares.

5. And we find in Antiquity that in this very time of King Lucius besides
the Cathedral Churches in the great Cities, there were others also builded in
them, as namely Gloucester, Worchester, Caerlegion, and others for we read, of
diverse kinds of Churches in them all, both Cathedral, and others. King Lucius
was buried at Gloucester in the Church of the chief Order; in Ecclesia primae
sedis. The same distinction is given for Winchester, which necessarily Galfr.
Monum. Hist. l. 5. c. 1. Mat. Westminster. an. 201. Galfr. l. 8. c. 17. l. 9 c. 12.
Bed. and Mat. supr.
infers other Churches, or a Church in either of them of inferious Order.
For the word, first proves a second: for the Inferior Churches besides the
Cathedral in Caerlegion they are remembered in Histories. So of other Cities,
not inferior unto these, Gloucester being then but a new and no great City.
We may find others, as at Abington in Oxfordshire, Ambsbury in Wilshire,
Cambridge, Stamford, and other places to be remembered hereafter where to have
been Christian Churches in that time, there is still sufficient Argument, and
Evidence left unto us. And the Pagan Temples being throughout, the whole
kingdom, and now with their Revenues increased by King Lucius, and changed
into Churches dedicated to Christ, and his Saints, as before is proved,
evidently conuinceth, these to have been more honorable, and as generally in
all places, and so not to be numbered, as the others were and all this
alteration made by King Lucius with the direction and Order of the Roman
Legates, S. Phaganus and S. Damianus. And this is that which our old Manuscript
Annals of Landaffe with other Antiquities testify; that our Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy was settled, Bishops ordained, and the Rule of well living taught in
Britain, according to the command and direction of Pope Eleutherius: secundum
Antiquitates Manuscr. Eccles. Landauen.
Iussum be ati Eleutherij Papae Ecclesiasticum ordinem constituit, Episcopos
ordinauit, and been viuendi normam docuit. And to provide as well for the
continual maintenance and repair of the house of God, at the first founding
and building thereof, those ancient Schools, Colleges or Universities of
this kingdom, which all now had received the faith and Religion of Christ, and
so were to be as Seminaries and Mothers of Christian Divinity, and holy
learning, for preservation, and Upholding of Gods Church, King Lucius endowed
with great Privileges and Immunities, that they might more quietly, and
diligently employ themselves, to their so profitable and holy studies.

6. This his Charter of privilege to the University of Cambridge, the
Antiquaries thereof prove by diverse ancient Testimonies, the Bull of Pope
Honorius Bulla Honorij Papae ann. 624. Charta Regis Cadwalladri An. 685. Charta
Regis Arthuri an. 531. die 7. Apr. apud Caium l. 1. de Antiq. accad. Cantabrig.
1000. years since, the Charter of King Cadwalladrus, and King Arthur long
before: wherein is contained that he granted to the University of Cambridge,
as King Lucius with other Kings had done before, to be free from all public
Vectigals and Burdens that they might more quietly and freely attend their
studies: consilio and assensu omnium and singulorum Pontificum and Principum
istius Regni, and Licentia sedis Apostolicae, statuo praesenti scripto and
firmiter decerno, vt Ciuitas Scholarium praedicta, vbi hactenus splendorem
scientiae and lume^ doctrinae, gratia fauente Conditoris mei Praedecessores
acceperunt, a publicis vectigalibus and operibus onerosis absoluantur, vt
quietudine Doctores inibi and Scholares valiant doctrinae studio inhaerere,
sicut gloriosus Rex Britanniae decreuit. The like I may Joan. Harding Chron. c.
25. f. 22. Io. Rosse Histor. Manuscript. Io. Caius Apol. accad. Cant. and de
Antiq. l. 1. William Harrison Descr. of Britain c. ^. Tit. of Universities
page 146. Stowe Hist. in Bladud. Bal. praefat. in lib. de Script. Twyn. l. de
Ant. Oxon. Harrison supr. Harris Manuscr. Hist. Grafton Chron. Bal. l. de
Script. Brit. cent. 1. in Congello, Bannachorren. Galft. Mon. Hist. Brit. l.
11. c. 12. Matthew. Westminster. an. 603. Io. Bal. Praef. in l. de Scri. Brit. Galfi.
Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 9. c. 12. Galft. Mon. Hist. lib. 4. c. 19. Matt. West. an.
185. King Lucius founded diverse Monasteries both of men and women.
affirm of Stamford, which from the time of King Bladud, until it was
interdicted by S. Gregory Pope, for Pelagian Heresy, continued an University:
So of Glamorgan, clayming but a little later Original, Greekelade and Lichelade
of such Antiquity, Bellisitum now Oxford as it pleads, Theodford where, as a
Protestant Antiquarie boldly writes, there were 600. students in ancient
times, and others not so well remembered. To all which, now converted to the
faith of Christ, and trayning up spiritual soldiers for the defense,
Profession, and maintenance thereof, we have sufficient grounds before, to
affirm King Lucius gave the like privileges, as unto Cambridge, one and the
same reason being for all. And yet besides these which he found founded before,
he himself was Founder of others, namely Bangor in Wales, which long continued
in that state, until it was after changed into so great a Monastery, of above
2000. Monks, as our Histories testify. A Protestant Bishop would have an
other University, for so he calls it, by the name of Accademia Legionensis
the University of Caerlegion, which he would have to be Westchester, others
rather take it for Caerlegion in Glamorganshire, to have been founded in this
time of King Lucius and to have ended in the time and manner that Stamford did.
The British History calls it Gymnasium Philosophorum a School of
Philosophers, and seateth it in Caerlegion upon Vske in Glamorganshire, making
it a fourth distinct place from the Metropolitan Church, and the Several
Churches of S. Julius, wherein were sacred Nonnes, and S. Aaron of Canons
Regular.

7. And whereas the Author of the British History, the Monk of Westminster,
and others have told us, that these holy Legates with the assistance of King
Lucius did not only change the Pagan Temples unto Christian Churches
dedicating them to the only true God, and his Saints, vno Deo eiusdem Sanctis
dedicauerunt, but, diuersisque Ordinatorum Caetibus repleuerunt: did replenish
them with diverse companyes of parsons ordered or living in order, that we
should not be ignorant, what they meant by this phrase of speech, the one of
them most ancient expounds himself after, in the like case that he meant
thereby, how they placed Religeous men and women, Monks, and Nuns in diverse
of those Churches: Ecclesias vsque adsolum destructas renouat, atque Religiosis
Caetibus viroru^ ac mulierum exornat, Speaking this of King Galfr. Hist. Brit.
l. 9. c. 8.
Arthur, after he builded again the Churches which the Pagan Saxons had
destroyed. And the very practice of these holy Legates and King Lucius does
prove no less, for we find diverse Religeous houses of both sexes, whose
Gulielm. Malm. Manuscr. Hist. de Antiq. Caenobij Glaston.
foundation must needs be referred to this time. First of the most ancient
Monastery of Glaste^bury (of which more hereafter) diverse Antiquities bear
witness that it being decayed, and in a manner forgotten, it was revived by
these Legates and king Lucius Assistance, and Religeous men placed there. A
Protestant Bishop produces an old Manuscript which restifieth of an other then
founded at Winchester: only his error is (which the Antiquity does not say)
that it was the Cathedral Church, confounding them as one, Godwin Catal. of
Bish. in Wincester 1. Galfrid. Mon. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 8. c. 17. l. 10. c. 4.
Mat. West. an. gratiae 498. Manuscr. Antiq. Eccl. Winton.
whereas both the British History and Matthew of Westminster make them two
several Churches: otherwise he thus truly writes, a Church in Winchester
according to a Report that I find in an old Manuscript, was first built and
erected by King Lucius, who abolishing Paganisine embraced Christ about the
year of our Lord 180. and placing Monks in the same, allotted for their
maintenance lardge Reuene^es, which hearetofore had belonged for the most part
unto the Fl^mins, and other Heathen Priests. And this Monastarie so continued,
until the Persecution of Dioclesian, when it was destroyed, and the Monks
Martyred or dispersed, yet upon the ceasing of the Persecution it was presently
within one year and thirty days new builded, and the Church hallowed and
dedicated unto the honor and memory of S. Amphibalus, that had suffered death
for Christ in the late Persecution by Constans Bishop of Winchester, in the
year 309. the 15. day of March at the request of Deodatus Abbot. The first
Dedication of that Church in King Lucius time by the two Legates Faganus and
Damianus Bishops, was by that old Antiquity October 29. 189. The Antiquities
of Winchester make it more ancient, and it thus continued a famous Monastary
until the year 519. at which time Cerdick the first King of the west Saxons,
being a Pagan converted the Church into the Temple of Dagon; and either slew
or chased away all the Monks. This was that holy Sanctuary, whether to the
Altar of this Church one of the sons of Mordred did fly for succor against
Constantine the You^ger, who there cruelly slew him before the Altar.
Constantinus filios Mordredi caepit, and alterum Iuuenem Guintoniae in
Ecclesiam Sancti Amphibali fugientem, ante altar trucidauit, in the year 543.
Galfr. Mon. Hist. Brit. lib. 11. cap. 4. Westminster. an. 543. Stowe Histor. in
Constable. Junior. Holinsh. Hist. of Engl. Pits. in Amphibal. Iuniore. Man. Script.
callic. and Angl. antid. Galfr. Mon. l. 8. c. 16. and 24. Hist. Gallic.
Manuscr. ant. Princ. or que nous. cap. 47. An. 477. Galfrid. Mon. Hist. l. 8.
c. 9. Annals Abingdon. apud Harpesfeld. decicimo saeculo page 203.
Others say it continued within 17. years of Augustins coming hither: others
continue Christians there far longer time.

8. And the like I may say of the Monastery in London, where the other son
of Mordred was cruelly put to death, by the same King Constantine before the
Altar. alterum vero Londonijs in quorundam Fratrum Caenobio absconditum, atque
tandem iuxta altar inuentum, crudeli more affecit. Th^se Sanctuaries and
privileges of these Churches and sacrifing Altars thus violated were of those
Immunities before remembered, which King Lucius endowed such sacred places with.
There was also an other Monastery at Anisbury where both Aurelius Ambrosius
prope Caenobium Ambrij, and by him Other Pendragon was buried by the Bishops
and Abbots of the Province: so, many Abbeys then. Conuenerant Pontifices and
Abbates, atque totus Clerus eiusdem Prouinciae, and tanti Regis funus
procurauerunt. This Monastery was builded there long before, and then had 300.
Monks in it, as diverse ancient Historians do warrant us. Besides these, we
read also in the old Annals of Abington near Oxford of the great Antiquity
thereof, that Constantine the great was brought up in, or by that house, that
it had in those primative times of Christianity hear, about 600. Monks,
belonging unto it, whereof above 500. lived upon their labor in the woods, and
Deserts adjoining, and came to the Monastery upon festival Euens, and days,
and 60. others which ever continued in the Monastery in serving God. De
Antiquitate illius caenobij and celebritate illius ante Anglorum Aduentum,
multa refert, and quod Monachi supra quingentos illi fuerant* asscripti, qui
per siluas and loca deserta, quae in vicinia fuere, manuum labor victitabant,
ad caenobium singulis Sabbatis and Dominicis conuenientes, praeter sexaginta,
qui assidue in ipso caenobio versanbantur, and quod Constantinus ille Magnus
Abingdoniae educatus fuerat. Wherefore seeing we find little S. Asaphus in
Manuscr. Vita S. Kentegerni. Capgr. Catal. in eod. Godw. Cat. in S. Asaph. 1.
founding, but rather desolation of such holy Monuments between the death of
King Lucius, and the You^ge of great Constantine, when this Monastery by the
ancient Records thereof was in such renown, I must needs assign the first
beginning of it to King Lucius days. And when we find in good Authors such
great numbers of Monks belonging to one only Monastary of Elgue in Wales
where S. Kentegern lived in S. David's time, that they then amonted to almost
1000. and this so evident that our Protestants themselves confess it, we must
needs give a very ancient being to that order there, or not far of. A
Protestant Bishop thus relates it: Kentegernus Godwin supr.
Bishop of Glascow in Scotland being driven out of his own Country, found
means to erect a Monastery for himself and his company between the Rivers of
Elwyd, and Elwy, where in process of time, having builded a Church and some
other edifices fit for his entertayneme^t: there flocked unto him such
multitudes of people, as the number of his Monks amonted unto no less then
960. whereof it is said, he appointed 300. that were unlearned to tilladge, and
husbandry abroad, other 300. he employed in sundry Kinds of labous, within
the Monastery at home, and the rest being divided into companyes attended the
service of God in the Church in such sort, as day and night perpetually service
was there continued, some while by some, and otherwhile by others according to
an order by him established and set down. An other Io. Bal. l. de Scri. cent.
1. in Kentegerno. Bed. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 2. Galfr. l. 11. c. 12. Godw.
Co^uers. of Brit. Bal. l. de Script. cent. 1. in Dionotho. Galfr. Mon. Hist.
Brit. l. 11. c. 13.
Protestant Bishop says, the number of these learned Monks in the Monastery
were 365: in Elguensi Collegio trecentos and sexaginta quinque literatos viros
semper ad id paratos habebat. All both Catholics and Protestants agree, that
notwithstanding the great Persecution of the Pagan Saxons, there were in one
Monastery of Bangor above 2000. Monks, when S. Augustine came hither, and as
the British History with others reports, there were then in those parts an
innumerable company of Monks and Eremites. Innumerabiles Monachi and Eremitae.
Therefore we may rather wonder to our own shame, and confusion of the Enemies
of Monastical life, that among so many Persecutions and trobles as fell among
the Britans, from the Reign of King Lucius to those days, the number of
Religeous men should in that space grow to so great a reckoning, then make
the least doubt that diverse Monasteries were founded hear by that our first
holy Christian King: which an old Historia Gallica antiq. Manuscr. c. 28.
French Manuscript History plainly affirms, when it witnesses, that the
Monasteries of Britain were destroyed in the Persecution of Dioclesian, as
other Churches were.

6. The like I affirm of Nunneryes and Monasteries of Religeous women, as well
as of men: which we may find in the first coming of the Pagan Saxons hither,
of which a Protestant Historian from Antiquity thus writes: all the Churches
in Kent were polluted with blood. The Nuns with other Stowe Hist. Brit. and
Saxons in Vortiger.
Religeous parsons, were by force put from their houses, and goods. And this
was not peculiar only in this Country, but general in all Britain, sacred
Nuns being in all parts thereof, as for brevity, for the Archbishop-See of
London, these in in Kent: for York we read that in the City it self when the
Pagan Saxons had destroyed the Churches, and Religeous houses, there both of
men and women, King Arthur did repair them, and placed diverse Conuents both of
men and women in the repaired Monasteries. Ecclesias vsque ad solum destructas
Galfr. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 9. c. 8.
renouat: atque Religiosis caetibus virorum ac mulierum exornat. And for
Caerlegion, the same and other Authors tell us, there was aunciently a Nunnery
in the very City, Templum Deo sacratarum Virginum: And a Queen Lib. 9. c. 13.
Mat. Westminster. an. gratiae 541. Io. Goscelin. Hist. Manuscript. Matthew. Parker
Antiq. Brit. page 8.
of Britain there received the habit of Religion among the Nun nes. Inter
Moniales habitum Religionis suscepit. As both ancient Catholic Historians and
new Protestant writers do witness, among which be Ihon Gosceline in his
Manuscript History, and Matthew Parker the first Protestant Archbishop of
Canterburye, both which also for Protestants expressly acknowledge that there
were Religeous parsons and Monasteries hear in Britainte in all Ages from the
very first Conversion. The first says, presbyterorum, Monachorum, Abbatum,
Praesulum, Episcoporum sedium nomina permulta quouis saeculo extiterunt, ab eo
tempore quo primo sit orta: from the first beginning of Christianity in
Britain there were in cuery Age very many names of the Seats of Priests,
Monks, Abbots, Prelates, Bishops. And proves from Antiquity, that within the
first 400. years of Christ, there were 11000. vowed virgins in Britain at one
time: puellae vere virgins and Deo consecratae. The Protestant Arcbishop
says. Tot tantaque presbyterorum, Monachorum, Episcoporum, Ecclesiarum,
Caenobiorum, sediumque vetusta nomina quae quouis saeculo extiterunt. Very many
old names of Priests, Monks, Bishops, Churches, Monasteries, and Sees have been
in every Age. Of such Religeous and Regular parsons and places, especially at
Glastenbury now renewed, or revived, I shall more and in particular hereafter
entreat.

THE XXII. CHAPTER
HOW AFTER THESE ROMAN LEGATES had fully settled the affairs, and estate of our
Church hear, they went again to Rome to procure the Pope there to ratify and
confirm what they had done, which he did, and they returned hither again with
that his Confirmation, and many other Preachers then sent hither from Rome.

1. WHEN these holy labors thus happily proceeded in, and all things required
to the foundation, and building the house of God, in Britain, taken so good
effect, Archbishops, and Bishops, with their Sees, consecrated, and assigned,
Churches builded, and endowed, Schools, and Universities erected, and
confirmed, Monasteries and Nunneries founded and finished, and all these holy
proceedings prescribed, taught, directed and hear settled by these Roman
Legates, and Legatine power, and most willingly and Religiously received and
embraced by our first Christian King and Saint, and holy Christian Britans his
Subjects, our late Nouelists, Enemies and Persecutors of this our old
Christian, Catholic, Apostolic, Apostles, Roman, and first holy Christian
Kings Religion, would have thought and taught, if they had then lived, that the
Popes Authority by his Legates, at our Kings suite and desire had taught,
allowed, commanded and confirmed too much, and would have been far from
seeking, sueing for, and requesting any further actual and express
confirmation, or ratification of the Pope himself; But those our holy Apostles
and so glorious and renowned King were of a quite contrary mind to such men,
for our King who had sent such humble petitions to Pope Eleutherius by his
Ambassadors and Embassadges before, to be instructed in the faith, his
kingdom, Country, Nobles, all his people and beloved Subjects to be converted
to Christ, to be directed by him in his civil Laws, had received an hallowed
Crown, and warrant and Limits of his kingdom from him, was as careful and
sollicitous to have all things now effected, to be approved and confirmed by
the same highest spiritual Papal Power, and Authority, which as he well knew
by the Testimonies of diverse Popes holy Saints, and Martyrs before, as our
Protestants have acknowledged, was instituted and ordained by Christ himself,
as a Rule and direction to all other members of his Catholic Church. And
therefore when it could otherwise be no Polecy or pleasure to our holy King to
spare from hence so long a time the Legates he had so much desired, no ease to
them now old, and weryed in Labors, to travail to Rome, and return hither
again, nor expedient for a new converted kingdom to want the Apostles and
conuerters thereof so soon, before it was perfectly settled in the Religion it
had received by them, but very dangerous to them all, in respect of the Roman
state, so Ieleous and violent an enemy to diverse things, now thus to be
confirmed, against their challendg and claim at that time, for the kingdom
either to have incited or allowed, that Journey and confirmation, or the Legates
to have undertaken it, with so much trouble, hazard, and peril, had it been
either a needless, or mere voluntary, and no necessary business, was in so
many and worthy parsons the greatest madness could de devised.

2. And yet our Antiquities assuer us, our Ecclesiastical state and affairs
were thus confirmed, and all things accounted as uncertain, until such
confirmation was procured and obtained. The old British History, Virunnius,
Matthew of Westminster with many others both Manuscripts, and printed
Antiquaries Galfr. Monum. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 4. c. 20. vlt. Pont. Vir. l. 4.
in fine. Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 186. Masnuscr. Hist. antiq. in Luci.
tell us: Beati Antistites Faganus and Deruuianus Romam reuersi; quae fecerant,
impetrauerunt a Papa beatissimo confirmari: The blessed Bishops Faganus and
Deruuianus returning again to Rome obtained to have the things which they had
done to be confirmed, by the most blessed Pope. Where we see that the Pope by
petition and proof made unto him of the orderly, and Religeous proceedings of
his Legates in Britain confirmed what they had done hear. What that was in
founding the Church of Christ in this kingdom, I have mentioned before; all
which was now confirmed by the Pope himself. And if a general confirmation
will not confirm and conform us in this truth, let us resort for the most
questionable things to those particulars, which chief Protestants with others
have delivered and warranted before out of our generally binding, and received
ancient Laws, and Pope Eleutherius own writings in which we often find
Lucius to be adjudged King of Britain, and the kingdom of Britain to be his
kingdom. And yet many Historians, Italians, Epist. Pape Eleutherij supr. and
leg. S. Edwardi apud Plur. Authors. Baron. Tom. 2. Annal. in Eleut. Hect.
Boet. Scot. Hist. l. 5. f. 83. Godwin Co^uers. of Brit. p. 22.
Scots, English, Catholics and Protestants have doubted thereof. Baronius would
have him, if any at all, but a pety King. Hector Boethius allows him but a
King by courtesy: Lucius Britonibus Caesaris beneuolentia and authoritate
imperitabat. A Protestant Bishop thus disputes it: It is made a doubt, and not
without good cause, whether ever there could be any such King, as Lucius or no.
In this very season that is appointed by our writers to the Reign of Lucius,
the Romans possessed Britain quietly, as may appear by all the Roman writers,
to wit, during the times of M. Antoninus and Commodus: and long after this
Britain was wholly subdued unto the Romans, and brought under the form of a
Province, to wit in the time of Domitian, as W. Malmesbury has delivered, and
amongst later writers two men of great judgment, Baronius and Master Camden:
which is partly confirmed by Tacitus, delivering that a great part of it was
reduced into the form of a Province, as a foresaid, in the time of Claudius.
These things being so, how should a King have any Government hear? Thus this
Protestant Bishop and Antiquarie. What force is in his allegations I have
sufficiently said for the honor of this kingdom in other places. But in this
case and question, if we allow him all for truth: both he and we thereby are
necessitated to allow so much the greater prerogative and power to Pope
Eleutherius, the Pope of Rome to have Authority in cases doubtful, or where a
kingdom or true Heir is by violence oppressed to declare a true lawful and
undoubted King, as this Pope in this Act did by our King Lucius and this
kingdom, which with all others this Protestant Bishop himself acknowledges:
per consilium Regni vestri sum legem: and per illam Dei patientia vestrum
Reges Britanniae Regnum: Vicarius Dei Epist. Eleutherij apud Godw. sup. p. 30.
31. Matthew. Parker Antiq. Brit. p. 5. Fox to. 1. Act. Guliel. Lamb. in Legib.
S. Edwardi. Stow Hist. in Eleuth. Leges S. Edwardi cap. 17. apud Gul. Lamb. l.
de Legib. Priscis f. 130.
estis in Regno. Gentes Regni Britanniae, and populi vestri sunt. Where
notwithstanding any claim or Title the Romans at that time did, or could make
to Britain, or any part thereof, King Lucius is by Pope Eleutherius openly
pronounced, and declared to be King of Britain, and all the people and Nations
of Britain to be his people, and subjects. And for further confirmation and
proof heareof he did expressly declare, as our public Laws still witness,
that all this kingdom or I Will of Britain was his kingdom, as also all the
Islands unto Norway, and Denmark belonged to the Crown of this his kingdom.
Vniuersa terra and tota, and Insulae omnes vsque Norwegiam and vsque Daciam
petinent ad coronam regni eius. And to secure King Lucius herein, he sent him,
as King of the Britans, an hallowed Crown, to wear as King of all these
remembered Dominions. Tales metas and fines constituit and imposuit coronae
regni Dominus Eleutherius Papa sententia sua, qui destinauit coronam benedictam
Britanniae and Christianitatem Deo inspirante Lucio Regi Britonum. How this
holy Pope did give direction, and instruction to this King, about his Laws I
have said before, as also of the former more at lardge. So likewise of the
settling three Archbishops in the three named places, with Bishops under them,
which was long before S. Eleutherius time, decreed by other Popes, and from the
Apostles, and so needed little confirmation, being by Apostolic Order long
before instituted.

3. Yet this being a chief and principal thing, in settling our Church
affairs, by the holy Legates, it was by the same evidence as carefully and
principally confirmed by this holy Pope, and so was observed throughout this
kingdom, upon this Institution and Confirmation many hundreds of years by all
Antiquities. The exception which some may make by finding Britain divided into
five Provinces, I have fully answered before, and our chief Protestants
namely Doctor George Abbots Archbishop of Canterbury, and such others as
directed and assisted Master Francis Mason in the Book entitled, Crosses and
Christian Images then certain tokens of Christians.
Of the Consecration of the Bishops of the Church of England, and he their
Scribe will thus secondemee therein: The Romans before this time of King Lucius
his receiving the faith, had divided Britain into three Provinces, one of the^
was called Maxima Caesariensis, the Metropolis whereof was York. An other
Britannia prima, the Metropolis whereof was London: the third Britannia
secunda, the Metropolis whereof was Caerlegio^. And proving besides so many
Authorities before cited, by Asserius Meneuensis, Schoolmester to King Alfred,
Ptolomaeus Luce^sis, William Read, and Ihon Lela^d, that the Archbishops of
this Ila^d were only seated in those three Metropolita^ Cities, London, York,
and Caerlogion, according to that division of Provinces hear; and to clear
the objection thus they had further in this business: Although Britain was
after the Nicen Council divided into five Provinces, Valentia and Flauia
Caesarie^sis being added to the former, yet there were no new Archbishops
erected. The reason whereof was, because those two new Provinces were taken out
of the former: and consequently could not have Bishopriks without the
diminishing of the Authority of the former, in whose Jurisdiction originally
they were, which was not sufferable, because it was against the Canon of the
Nicen Council, decreeing that in Antioch, and in other Provinces, the
dignity, prerogatives, and Authorities of Churches should be mainetained,
Hitherto these Protestant writers.

4. And to leave it without question, that this placing both of Archbishops,
and Bishops also, at this time in Britain, was both warranted and confirmed by
this highest spiritual Papal Power and Prerogative in Pope Eleutherius, among
so many hundreds of Archbishops, and Bishops as have been in Britain, as it
conprehendeth England, Wales, and Scotland, no History mentions, no
Antiquarie can prove, that from this time of King Lucius, until the Revolt of
King Henry 8. from the Church of Rome, any one Archbishoprik or Bishoprik was
either founded, translated, united, diminished, or any wise changed, but it was
either first done, or afterward confirmed or made frustrate by this great
Apostolic and Papal Power of the Roman See. I need not the Assistance of
Catholic Antiquities herein, our Protestant Bishops and Antiquaries which have
written of this subject, of Bishops and their Sees, Gul. Malmesb. l. de Ant.
Caenob. Glaston.
do leave and clear it for an evident truth. And because such an including
proposition without confession in particular would cost my Readers some labor
to examine it, let them take for pregnant witnesses hereof the two great
Flatterers of King Henry 8, Matthew Parker the first Protestant Archbishop of
Canterbury, a man of all Religions with that King, his son King Edward The
Popes Legates con inue diverse at Glastenbury, and renew and setle re^igious me^
there, in place of the first of S. Joseph his company.
and Queen Elizabeth, and Polidor Virgill a time Pleaser, and Servant thereof.
The first, speaking of King Henry 8. his Laws against the Popes Authority,
and the time of the Saxons, says, that by them then made, the Popes Power
which had ever until then continued in England, and was thought vnsuperable
was overthrown: his legibus potentia Papalis quae nongentis amplius annis in
Anglia durauit, and insuperabilis visa est, concidit. The other writes, then a
living witness, that the supreamacie, taken from the Pope and given to the King,
was a thing never heard of in any time before. Habetur Concilium Londini, in
quo Ecclesia Anglicana formam potestatis nullis ante temporibus visum induit:
Henricus enim Rex Caput ipsius Ecclesiae constituitur. By which also, as in a
glass, by a truly representing species, we may behold, that it neither was,
nor could be any other then the Pope of Rome, only clayming and exercising
such spiritual Power hear in those times, which did or could give a full and
final confirmation to those Universities, or Schools, and Religeous houses of
Britain, with the Rule and Order they followed and professed in these days.

5. Yet we are not altogether destitute of Instances in particular of such
Honorius Papa 1. in Bulla Vniuersitati Canta-Cantabr. co^cess. ann. 624. 20.
die Februarij apud Io. Caium l. 1. de antiq. Cantabr. Academ. p. 75. 76 77.
confirmation. For Schools or Universities, the Antiquaries of Cambridge
produce the ancient Bull of Pope Honorius the first, 1000. years since
co^firming that University, and privileges thereof, and in the same
affirming, that his Predecessors, Pope Eleutherius, in whose time we are,
Fabianus, Leo, Simplicius, Foelix, and Bonifacius gave the like confirmation
and exemption unto it: Praedecessorum nostrorum Romanae Ecclesiae Pontificum
Eleutherij, Fabiani, Leonis, Simplicij, Faelicis, and Bonifacij vestigijs
debite inhaerentes, authoritate omnipotentis Dei districtius inhibemus sub
paena excommunicationis, ne quis Archiepiscopus aut eorum officiales etc. Where
it is said, that these Popes gave these privileges against all parso^s, by the
Authority of God. For the School of Glamorga^ we have the like testimony,
that the Pope gave the chief charge thereof to S. Iltutus renowned both for
his learning and piety, as also his most worthy Scholars and their great
number, in which were both Gauls and Britans, in whom S. Sampson, S.
Paulinus, S. David, S. Gildas. Magistralis Charta Merchia^ni Regis. l. Sanct.
Wall. Caius sup. p. 147. Capgr. Catal. in S. Il^u^o Abbate and Confessore. Io.
Bal. l. de Script. Britan. cent. 1. in Elchuto Morgan. Manuscr. Antiq. Mona
sterij S. Aug. Cantuariae.
tibi cura concessa est a Pontisice, as King Merchiannus testifies in his
Charter of privilege unto him, and that his School or University. For our
Monasteries and Religeous houses then, that they were confirmed and privileged
by this holy Pope, I shall more fully show, when I come to these Legates
return, and visiting Glastenbury, bringing with them a confirmation,
Immunities, and Indulgences from S. Eleutherius, to that most ancient and
Religious Monastery, with an approbation of the holy Rule, and Order which
there and in all Britain after many hundreds of years was kept and followed.
In the mean time he that will but behold (if he may) the old Manuscript of S.
Augustins in Canterbury, shall there see above 100. particular Bulls of Popes
confirming the liberties and Immunities of that house. He may read in the
first Protestantically made Archbishop there, that as I have proved, and shall
prove of our Britans, how all their Archbishops had their ordination Power and
Authority from the Popes of Rome, so among the Saxons Matthew. Parker. Antiq.
Brit.
until he first brake that Rule and right, all their Archbishops then, were
there invested and settled by the Popes Authority, and swore obedience unto
him, this Protestant new Archbishop setting down their Oath, at lardge.

THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
OF THE ARCHBISHOPS OF LONDON, York and Caerlegion in this time in particular:
and many other inferior Bishops, and the Roman Church Discipline hear also
settled by Papal Authority.

1. THvs was the state of Christian Catholic affairs in Britain in all
matters, Callings and Degrees ratified and confirmed by this holy Pope, even as
our Protestants themselves do gloss our Histories, fides Christi in Britannia
confirmatur, and this business Prot. Annotati: in Matthew. West. an. 186.
performed with such diligence, and expedition, that the Monk of Westminster,
accounted one of our most exact Calculators of times, does recompt the Journey
of the holy Legates from Britain to Rome, their obtaining the Confirmation,
receiving further direction, procuring many other holy workmen to assist them,
in founding and framing the Church of Christ in this kingdom, the whole time
of their stay at Rome, Matthew. Westminster. An. gratiae. 186.
returning hither again, with a great number of divine laborers, and
effecting diverse things hear after their return, all to have been happily
performed within the space of one year, such was the fatherly care and
solicitude of that holy Pope and his sacred Legates our spiritual Parents
toward their children the converted Britans, as S. Paul's was in like case,
whom in Christ Jesus they had begotten: Anno gratiae 186. Beati Antistites
Faganus and Diruuianus Romam reuersi; quae fecerant, impetrauerunt a Papa
beatissimo confirmari. Quibus peractis redierunt in Britanniam praefati
Doctores, cum alijs quamplurimis, quorum doctrina gens Britonum, in fide
Christi, in breui fundata refulsit. Istorum autem nomina and actus in libro
reperiuntur, quem Gildas Historicus de victoria Aurelij Ambrosij conscripsit.
In the year of grace 186. the blessed Bishops Faganus, and Deruuianus
returning to Rome did obtain of the most blessed Pope to have all things which
they had done, confirmed. Which things being finished the foresaid Doctors
with very many others came again into Britain, by whose doctrine the Nation
of the Britans being founded in a short space, became renowned. The names and
Acts of these men are found in the Book, which Gildas the Historian did write
of the vistory of Aurelius Ambrosius. All this is set down as acted in that
one year by Matthew of Westminster.

2. The like Relation is made hereof in the British History, Ponticus
Virunnius, diverse Manuscript Histories, and others, all agreeing in these
things Galfr. Monum. Hist. ^ 4. cap. 20. Ponticas Virun. Hist. l. 4.
done together, allthough they do not so punctually proceed by the years, as
the other does. The greatest difference is this, that whereas the Historian of
Westminster says, the faith of the Britans was thus made renowned, refulsit:
the others say, corroborata fuit: it was corroborated or confirmed by receiving
this Confirmation from the Pope, by his Legates and so many their assistants
giving testimony thereof. Which breeds no variance in the matter, but more
plainly declares the means by which the kingdom of Britain was thus
renowned for Christian Religion, being the first kingdom in the world that had
then publikly professed the faith of Christ, publikly by petitions sought it,
and as publikly required and obtained Confirmation of the same, and their
proceedings therein from the high Vicar of Christ, yet not freed from
Persecution. What a comfort this was to our King, and Britain, to receive such
a Confirmation from the Sea of Rome, by so Noble and renowned means, such holy
learned and Noble Legates, with such solemnity, quampluribus alijs comitati; at
such a time when the sword of Persecution was still unsheathed, and dropping
with holy blood of Mattyrs, the very circumstances Io. Bal. l. de Scri. cent.
1. in Gilda Albani. Magdeb. cent. 2. c. 2. Col. 8. Fox. Act. and Mon. l. 2. p.
106. James lib. de Manuscr. in Bibliot. public. and Colleg. S. Benedict. Abbot
Feckna^ orat. in Parlam. 2. Elizabeth.
themselves and refulgent glory, refulcit, it won to this Nation, in all the
world, will give us some light thereof. But much more would the splendour of it
appear, if the Monuments wherein the names and Acts of so many worthy men,
penned by such a Secretary as S. Gildas was, might come to vewe. Many
Protestants would make the world believe, they have both seen and have that
most ancient and desired Monument in their custodies. If it be not so, they
are to blame to write it: if so, both blame and shame to conceal it. I can now
say no more, then Abbot Feckman did publikly deliver in solemn Oration in the
first Parliament of Q. Elizabeth, when Catholic Religion was condemned, in
these terms of that matter: Pope Eleutherius sent into this Realm Damianus
and Fugatius, and they as Ambassadors sent from the Sea Apostolic of Rome,
did bring into this Realm so many years past, the very same Religion whereof
we are now in possession, and that in the Latin tongue, as the ancient
Historiographer diuus Gildas witnesses in the Prologue and beginning of his
Book of the Britain Histories. These be his words, which a man of his worth
should not, and would not have uttered in such a time and place, if the Book
and such things therein had not been then extant to have justified his so
absolute, confident and so concerning speech in that Assembly, which by their
proceedings overthrew Catholic Religion in that Parliament, and was not
unwilling to contradict any thing they could which crossed with their Intention.

3. I have made as diligent enquiry as I could, and these times would permit
me, to be informed whether any such work of Gildas is to be seen, and cannot
find that any true or pretended History of his, or any other does now mention
the Names and Acts of any such men. Therefore I must rest contented, and
otherwise take, and give the best light I can in these matters. First we are
assured before, that at this time of these Legates Return, or thereabouts* King
Lucius was confirmed, and declared King of all Britain, and the Islands
adjacent, and an hallowed Crown was brought unto him from Pope Eleutherius,
most probably by them, the most honorable parsons mentioned as Ambassadors
between those two renowned Potentats, Pope and King, in the affairs which
passed between them, and by this means our holy King Lucius was in conscience
abled, and secured to give, or confirm any gift, grant, or donation* he
formely had bestowed, or afterward was to confer, or confirm for the good of
Christ's Church in Britain, or effect and do whatsoever, belonging to state
and office of a Christian King. They brought with them also a Confirmation, of
the three Metropolitan or Archiepiscopall Sees before remembered, as also such
Papal Approbation of the consecrated Our first Archbishop or Archbishops of
London with their See.
Archbishops, as had been before their going again to Rome, or now were here
to be settled, and confirmed in those Sees, with all such Rites, and Ceremonies,
as belonged to that highest calling in the Church of Britain. By virtue and
power whereof they placed and confirmed in the Sea of London S. Thean, one
Protestant writer calls him Thomas, he builded the Iocelinus l. de Episc.
Brit. Goscelin. Hist. Eccl. c. de Episcopis Londin. Harris M. S. Hist. to. 2.
Will. Harris. descrip. of Britain Stowe Histor. in King Lucius. Hollinsh.
hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 19. Godwin Catal. of Bish. London. 1. Godwin Catal.
supr. in York 1. Catal. Episcop. Hierosol. Nicephor. Continuator Flor. Wigor.
Eusebius Hist. Eccl. Harris Hist. l. 2. Will. Harriso^ descript. of Brit. c. 9.
Church dedicated to S. Peter in Cornehill in London, by the aid of Cyran
chief Butler to King Lucius, this some what draws me to their opinion
before remembered, which rather make his Cathedral See at Westminster, at the
least until the other was builded: and I have sufficiently insinuated before
from Antiquities, that all the Metropolitan Churches were either changed from
Archflamens Temples, or newly builded, at the chardges of our King, and no
subject named. Concerning York a Protestant Bishop writes: The first
Archbishop that ever York had, our Histories say, was one named Sampson,
appointed by the foresaid King Lucius. The verity whereof I cannot but
suspect in regard of the name. For I find not that the names of the old
Hebrews, or Christian Saints were yet in use. Which reason of his, is not
true, for even in Jerusalem itself, where S. James was made first Bishop, he
had his next Successors Simeon, Iustus, Zachaeus, Tobias, Benjamin, Ioannes,
Matthias. And in Britain itself I have proved before, that we had S.
Aristobulus, and S. Timotheus, and as some write, one Aaron, in this time which
came with the holy Legates hither, and soon after S. Aaron our holy Martyr
under Dioclesian. S. Stephen was shortly after Archbishop of London, and by
some the first of all was named Thomas. And as untrue it is, that either our
Historyes do say, there were only four Archbishops of York, in the Britans
time, Sampson, Taurinus Bishop of Eureux, Pyrannus and Tadiacus, or that
Sampson was the first Archbishop there; for the first of the number, many
recko^ diverse others, and more, and this Sampson could not possible be the
first, by his own account, The first Archbishops and Bishops of York.
placing Taurinus there in the time of Constantius Chlorus, 200. years before
S. Sampson was Bishop there. And by the account of the British History and
others S. Sampson which fledd hence into little Britain, was the seventh
Archbishop of York: Pastor Eboracensis septimus in Armorico regno
frequentabitur. So reads Matthew of Westminster and diverse others. Matthew.
Westminster. An. 490. Sigeb. Gemblacen. Chronico. 445. Galfr. Monum. Hist. l. 7. c.
3. Mat. Westminster. an. 464. Radulph. Niger. apud Harris Manuscr. Hist. l. 2. c. 20.
Will. Harrid^scr. of Britain cap. 9.
Wherefore I must rather harken to Radulphus Niger, as M. Harris in his
Manuscript History writes, to himself, ad William Harrison a Protestant
Antiquary, and others, who tell us that S. Theodosius was made the first
Archbishop of York in this time of King Lucius: So they co^fidently affirm.
And if this Protestant Bishop could prove that S. Taurinus Bishop of Eureux,
was Archbishop of York in Canstantius Chlorus time, we shall find 10.
Archbishops there from this time, 7. to S. Sampson, whom he names the first
but was long after, and beside S. Taurinus, Pyrannus and Thadeoceus, but S.
Taurinus of Eureux was not living above an hundred years before Constantius
Chlorus time.

4. Master Harrys says Eadnochus a Martyr was the third Archbishop there, and
S. Teruanus, the fourth. The second, fifth and sixth he names not. Trith. l. de
Scri. in Sedul. Manus. Hist. Vit. S. Niniani. Capgr. in eod. Bal. l. de Script.
cent. 1. in Niniano. Hector Boet. Hist. Scotor. l. 7. f. 119. and 133.
Trithemius calls Hildebertus, Master to Sedulius, an Archbishop: so do
others. Among these we may number. Ninian, sent by the Pope into those parts,
and exercising Archiepiscopall Power both among the Britans, Scots, and Picts,
which none but the Archbishop of York could do, and the Country of Pictland
never was an Archiepiscopall Province. So I say of S. Teruanus whom as our
Scottish Historians write, S. Palladius the Popes Legate made Archbishop,
neither Pictland, nor Scotland many hundred years after having any Archbishop,
but the Archbishop of York. And likely it is, this is the same S. Teruanus
whom Master Harris only numbreth among the Archbishops of York, not
yielding his reason or any Author. If there was any Taurinus or Sampson
besides him, that was the seventh and went into Armoca, they may be added to
this number, but I dare nor take upon me to set them in order as they
succeeded. How the Pope subjected all the Country now called Scotland to the
Jurisdiction of this See, I have said before, and now he confirmed the same,
making that Metropolitan the spiritual Superior of that Country, in which then
there were many Christians, and by the testimony of Tertullian and others
before this time, that the Christian Religion was preached and planted there,
from Rome, whether the temporal power of the Romans could not come, did truly
confirm that Tertullian. Apol. S. Le^. Sermon. 1. de Natali Apost. Petri and
Pauli.
saying of S. Leo speaking to Rome: per sacram beati Petri sedem caput orbis
effecta, latius praesideres Religione diuina, quam Dominatione terrena: Thou
being made the head of the world by the Sea of S. Peter, rulest further by
Divine Religion, then terreane Dominion. These streights we have passed, in
seeking to find Archbishops of Caerlegion.
the first Archbishops of London, and York in King Lucius time, and now
coming to Caerlegion, we fall upon greater difficulties in this travail. A
Protestant Bishop and Antiquarie would make this way impassable when he says:
we must account S. Dubritius the first Bishop. Not that I deny any other to
have sat Godwin Catal. of Bish. in Landaffe 1. and S. David's 1.
there before him, but because he is the first whose name is remembered. And it
is probable he had no Predecessors, because the memory of his Successors is so
carefully preserved. But as this man's Authority is so week to be rested upon,
that it has often before deceived them which builded upon it, so his reason
hear alleged is of as feeble strength. For the memory of the Successors have
been so carelessely preserved by his own confession after, that he having
cited two different Catalogues of their names only, above twenty in number
concludes in these terms against himself before: of these forenamed Bishops
until Harpesfeild hist. in fine 7. saeculi. Io. Bal. l. de Scri. Brit. cent.
1. in Samuele Beulano. Io. Lelan. apud Pits. l. de Vir. Illustr. in Elbodo.
Harris Hist. Ecc. Manuscr. lib. 2. c. 20.
Sampson, there remains little or no memorial, but their names only. And in
the names themselves there is difference in those Memorials of them. And both
of them omit their most renowned Archbishop Elbodus, who joined with S.
Augustine, and his company, and wrote against his own Britans, and Scots for
their untrue observation of Easter. Some think he was created Archbishop by
Augustine, M. Harris inclines to be of opinion, that S. Fugatianus one of Pope
Eleutherius his Legates was the first Archbishop of Caerlegion, and S. Damianus
the other Archbishop of London, yet with the common opinion he had placed S.
Thean there before both, which may stand with truth in due construction, if S.
Damianus resigned it to S. Thean, who as he says, was Archbishop there 18.
years. And seeing we find no final departure of these two holy Legates from
hence, but rather a continual aboade hear after their return from Rome, as
though they were wholly designed for the spiritual good of this kingdom, if
we join hearewith what eminent men and Bishops they were, we may not deny them
any chief place of honor hear, according to their worth and deseruings hear.

5. The old writer of Saint Gudwalus life, Surius, Haraeus, and others say
Anonym. in Vita S. Gudwali. Surius and Haraeus in eod. 6. Iunij.
he was Archiepiscopus Britannus an Archbishop of Britain, and by his life,
and aboade, of no other place but our old Caerlegion. And if we should follow
their opinions which hold, that Caerlegion was Augusta, where our renowned
Archbishop S. Augulus (of whom I have spoken before) was Martyred, we must
also make him Archbishop there. And the old British History with diverse
others testifies, that Tremonus was Arcbishop there, Tremonus vrbis Legionum
Archiepiscopus, long before S. Dubricius. And it was foretold Galfr. Monum.
Hist. Briton. l. 8. c. 10.
before S. Dubricius probably was borne, or Tremonus was Archbishop of
Caerlegion, that this Archbishops See should be translated from thence to S.
David's, and there the Archbishops Pall of Caerlegion should be worn. Meneuia
Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 464. Galfr. Monum. l. 7. c. 9.
pallio vrbis Legionum induetur. Which was after verified in the time of S.
David, as also the Prophesy of the Translation of London to Canterbury by S.
Augustine, and the seventh Archbishop of York going into Armorica performed in
S. Sampson, all foretold at one time together long before. Therefore as in
London, and York, there were Archbishops, so in this City Caerlegion, Girald.
Cambr. Catal. Archiep. Men. Antiquit. Meneue^. in ^atal. Godwin Catal. in S.
David's and Landaff. Capgr. in S. Dubrit. and S. David.
also there were such and wearing the Pall Archiepiscopall, iustifiing the
undeniable changed and performance of that prediction. After this time all
Historyes agree of S. Dubritius, S. David, Eliud, Theeliaus Kinocus immediately
succeeding each other, and Elbodus in S. Augustins time. Of these three new
Archiepiscopall Churches, a late Protestant Antiquarie upon diligent search, as
he would have his Readers inform themselves, thus writes more absolutely then
others: in which three Cities of London, York, and Caerlegion, upon vske,
there had been beforetime three Archflamins erected unto Apollo, Mars, and
Minerua, but now raced to the ground, and three other Churches builded in their
steeds by Lucius, to the intent that the Countries round about might have
indifferent access unto those places, and therewithal understand for
certainty, whether to resort for resolution.

6. Neither are we utterly left destitute of the names of the holy Bishops then
placed, in the inferior Sees; for we have sufficient Testimony, of Thomas Many
Bishops of other Sees not Archiepiscopall.
Rudburne, a Monk of Winchester, Moratus an old British writer and others,
that Denotus was then made Bishop of Winchester. And all the possessions of
Tho. Rudburne Chron. Maiore. Morat. l. 1. c. 9. Nichol. Harpesfeld. hist.
Eccles. p. 6. cap. 3.
the Pagan Flame^ there, were co^ferred upon him, and his Clergy, which were
so ample, that even about that City, all the Lands within 12. miles of it, on
all sides were belonging unto it, containing in number 32. Villadges. Besides
him we had diverse others, as S. Damianus, one of the holy Legates, S. Eluanus
our Countryma^ of Britain sent Bishop hither by Pope Eleutherius, Medwinus a
Brittan, S. Aaron sent also with the Legates, and Eusebius sent hither to S.
Timothy, all now probably Bishops, besides diverse of the old Archflamens,
Flamens, and other learned Druyds long since converted, for virtue and Radulph.
Niger. Harrison descr. of Brit. c. 9. Harris Hist. l. 2. c. 20.
learning and number sufficient to supply those Episcopal Sees, and dignities.
Besides among the so many, quamplurimis, which came hither with S. Damianus and
Fugatianus the second time, no man can question, but diverse of them were not
only renowned, and men in all respects worthy of Episcopal order, and
dignity, but de facto were there so promoted, and supplied some of those
vacancyes. The rest for the most part for want of the British languadge to
preach to the people hear, not so fit to be Pastors in Churches, were placed
in Monasteryes, and inferior Orders, Deacons, Subdeacons, Acoluthists,
Exorzists and the rest, then generally used in the Church of Christ, especially
at Rome by whose exemple the frame of our British Church was framed by the
Popes direction, his Legates execution, and his own after Papal Confirmation.

7. And so Britain neither had then, nor could have any other Religion,
Britain receau^th Church discipline from Rome at this time.
or Church Discipline, Laws, and order, but as the Church of Rome then
practiced. Which some of our Protestants have remembered, and confirm it, both
with King Lucius request and suite, and Pope Eleutherius grant, and allowance.
One of them expresses it in these Terms: The faith of Christ being Will.
Harrison description of Brit. c. 9.
thus planted in this Island in the 177. after Christ, and Faganus and Dinaw
with the rest sent over from Rome 178. it came to pass in the third year of
the Gospel received, that Lucius did send again to Eleutherius, requiring
that he might have some breife Epitome of the order of Discipline then used in
the Church. For he well considered that as it avails little to plant a costly
vyneiard, except it afterward be cherished, kept in good order, and such things
as a^noye, daily removed from the same: so after Baptism, and entrance into
Religion, it profits little to bear the name of Christians, except we do
walk in the spirit, and have such things as offend apparently, corrected by
senere Discipline. For otherwise it will come to pass, that the weeds of
vice, and vicious living, will so quickly abound in us, that they will in the
end choke up the good seed sown in our minds, and either enforce us to return
unto our former wickedness, with deeper security then before, or else to become
mere Atheists, which is a great deal worse; for this cause therefore did
Lucius send to Rome the second time, for a Copy of such politic orders as
were then used there, in their Regiment of the Church. Thus far this
Protestant Antiquarie; And then he brings the holy Pope S. Eleutherius, so to
understand King Lucius petition to be both for the Ecclesiastical Laws of the
Church of Rome, to Rule hear in spiritual affairs, and the Laws of the
Emperous for temporal government, and says, he finds it so in sundry very
ancient Copies, of Pope Eleutherius Answer to King Lucius, thus beginning by
his Translation: you require of us the Roman ordinances, and thereto the
Statuts of the Emperors to be sent over unto you, and which you desire to
practice, and put in ure within your Realm and kingdom. Then seeing the
Decrees of the Popes of Rome for Church Discipline, were generally general for
the whole Church, as many of them cited before by Protestants allowance, do
testify, and this our Britain was utterly ignorant in such things, but as it
had received them from Rome; Our Apostles, Preachers, and Conuerters came from
thence, and diverse of them still remained hear in chief spiritual cammande,
and many other Christian Romans were mixed with our Britans hear, and our
Brittans absolutely and wholly directed by the Pope of Rome, and his Legates in
such business, this considered, no man of Judgment will apprehend how any other
but the Roman Papal Church Discipline was then received or admitted it this
kingdom.

THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
OF THE COMING OF THESE HOLY Legates to Glastenbury, their holy labors, deeds
and long aboade there, their renewing there the old Religeous Order of S.
Joseph of Aramathia, and his brethren, great privileges and Indulgences by
them procured to that holy place, the glory, honor and renown thereof, in the
whole Christian world.

1. I Have made mention before, of diverse Monasteries, and Religeous houses in
Britain in this time; now to take some notice, in what honor and Reverence
such holy places, the parsons resident in them, and the Monastical Religeous
life which they there lived and professed, were, we cannot better come either
to the certain knowledge, or not to be denied opinion thereof, then to take
direction herein from these our Apostles, Founders, and Fathers in Christ, by
that little memory which is left in our Histories, of the Religeous pains, and
labor they took in finding, and founding them: the great zeal, and devotion
they exercised there, the Immunities, Indulgences, and privileges they
procured unto them from holy Popes, and Princes: what spiritual comfort and
pleasure they had in themselves, and what example of piety they left to
posterity by their heavenly Conversation in them, and what Pastoral care and
Providence they had to make this perpetual, had not the Impiety of late times
and parsons like wolves, as it was aunciently prophesied, destroyed that, which
the piety of our first Ancestors in Religion had so long and firmly founded.

Has aedes sacras pietas construxit Auorum, Antiq. Monast. Croy^andiae.

Quas Successores vastabunt more luporum.
I will principally, and chiefly for all, exemplify in the holy house of
Glastenbury, the first Mother of that contemplative holy profession, both in
this and other Nations, from which we may draw a proportion to others, the
sacred children thereof. How diligently these holy Legates sought to find out
this Religeous place, I have some what insinuated before, for they had heard of
the great Renown and Sanctity of S. Joseph and his companions first in
habiting there, and the Venerable Sanctity of the place, especially the
miraculously sacred Church, there builded by heavenly admonition in honor of
the most blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God, for the memory of it was almost
quite forgotten, the first Religeous men inhabitants there being all dead
before this time, and the holy Church so desolate, that it began to be a Denn
of wild beasts to lodge in, which was before an habitation of Saints. Sancti
memorati in eadem Eremo sic degentes affluentibus multis annorum curriculis
carnis Antiq. Glast. tabulis fixae. Gul. Malmes. l. de Antiq. Caenob. clast.
Io. Capgrau. in S. Joseph and S. Patricio.
erg astulo sunt educti, idemque locus caepit esse ferarum latibulum, qui prius
fuerat habitatio Sanctorum. This is the testimony and relation of the old
Antiquities of Glastenbury, William of Malmesbury in his Manuscript History,
of the Antiquity of that Monastery, Capgraue and others.

2. But it was the will of God, and the will of the blessed Virgin to have her
sacred Oratory come to the knowledge of their faithful Servants: donec placuit
beatae Virgini suum Oratorium redire ad memoriam fidelium. Which was in this
manner, these holy Legates travailing throughout Britain, teaching, preaching,
and baptizing, and receiving from the British people Information, where abouts
this sacred Habitacle was, as Moses they entered into this Desert to find it,
and at the last finding the old Church builded by the hands of Christ's
Disciples, and a Cross the sign of our Redemption, and other Christian
figures or Images, they were assured thereby, that this was the place where
those Disciples of Christ inhabited: Praedicando and baptizando, Britanniae
parts peragrantes in Insulam. Aualloniae, more Moysis Legislatoris interiora
Deserti penetrantes, sunt ingressi: Vbi antiquam Deo duce Britanniae repererunt
Ecclesiam, manibus Discipulorum Christ constructam, and humanae saluti a Deo
paratam. Figuram nostrae redemptionis, aliasque figuras manifestas repererunt,
quibus cognouerunt, quod Christiani prius locum inhabitauerant. This so
diligent searching and seeking for this holy place, by S. Phaganus and
Damianus, and their assured knowledge by the remembered Can. 6.
signs and badges there left and remaining, that they had found it, seems
by that which follows in this Narration, to have been before their return to
Rome to procure the confirmation of their proceedings hear. After this they
found the Antiquity of the coming of S. Joseph and his Brethren thither, as
also the Acts, and lives of them there, how religeously they lived, and how
three Pagan Kings ministered necessaries by a certain portion of Land for their
sustenation, the miraculous building and consecrating that holy place, as I
have showed in the first Age: whereupon filled with vnspeacable joy, they
continued there long time, nine years in praising God: oratorio illo sic
reperto, ineffabili sunt referti gaudio, ibidem in Dei laudibus moram
protrahentes diuturnam, per nouem videlicet annos. And in memory of the first
twelve in the time of S. Joseph, they did choose 12. of their own company, to
dwell there, in that Island, King Lucius consenting thereto. Which remained
there as Anchorits in diverse places, or Groaues (locis vel lucis) in the very
same, wherein the first twelve had formerly dwelled. But they came together
very often every day, crebro conuenerunt quotidie, reads William of
Malmesbury, Matthew. Parker in Antiq. Britan. Io. Goscelin. Eccles. Hist. de
Episcop. Godwin. Catal. of Bishops
that they might more deuoutely perform their divine offices. And as the three
Pagan Kings had long before granted the said Island with the Appertinances to
the first 12. Disciples of Christ, so the said Phaganus and Deruianus did
obtain of King Lucius to have it confirmed for ever to these their 12.
companions, and others their Successors after them. And so they continued by
Succession, yet always in the same number of 12. Locum ipsum prae caeteris
dilexerunt. Qui etiam in memoriam primorum 12. ex suis socijs 12. elegerunt,
and in praefata Insula Rege Lucio consentiente habitare fecerunt. Qui postea in
diuersis locis sicut Anachoritae manserunt ibidem, in eisdem videlicet locis in
quibus primi duodecim primitus habitauerant. In vetustam tamen Ecclesiam, ad
diuina obsequia Matthew. Parker. supr. 68. in Thoma Cranmero p. 329. edit. ann.
1605.
deuotius complenda crebro conuenerunt. Et sicut tres Reges Pagani dictam
Insulam cum adiacentijs suis, duodecim primis Christi Discipulis dudum
concesserant, it a praedicti Phaganus and Deruianus istis duodecim socijs and
alijs in posterum secuturis ab eodem Rege Lucio eandem confirmari impetrabant,
sic autem multi alijs succedentes semper tamen in numero duodenario per multa
annorum curricula in commemorata Insula permanserunt. Polid. Virgil. Angl.
Hist. l. 27. in Henric. 8. p. 689.


3. Cap grave and his Authors say that these holy Legates caused lodgings to be
builded there for these Religeous men: ex suis socijs duodecim elegerunt, and
in Insula illa L^cio fauente aed^ficia construere, and vsque ad finem vitae
perseuerare fecerunt. And the words both of the before cited Antiquitre, and
William of Malmesbury, that they inhabited, and dwelled there, inhabitare
f^cerunt, permanserant, proves as much, for every dwelling or habitation
infers some house, Cell, or Lodging to dwell and inhabit in. Which is
further confirmed out of the lame Antiquities, where it is proved that these
Religeous men there placed by the Roman Legates, did build an other new
Chapel, or Church of stone near the old Churh, and dedicated it to Christ,
and his Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. Huic Ecclesiae sic repertae, aliud
addider^nt sancti Neophitae opere lapideo oratorium, quod Christo sanctisque
Apostolis Petro and Paulo dedicauerunt. And it is proved by the ancient gests,
and Acts of these Apostolic men, S. Phaganus and Damianus, written in their
time in a Volume, or Book, that by admonition, and direction from heaven they
builded an other Chapel, or Oratory in honor of S. Michael the Archangel,
that he might there have honor one earth of men, who at the command of God
should bring men to eternal honors in heaven. In cuius fine voluminis
inuenimus Scripturam quae dicebat quod praedicti sancti, Phaganus and Deruianus
per reuelationem They build a new Oratory near, in honor of Saint Michael, to
be there honored, and protect such as honored him.
Domini nostri Jesus Christi idem oratorium ibi aedificauerant in honorem sancti
Michaelis Archangeli, quatenus ibi ab hominibus haberet honorem, qui homines in
perpetuos honores, iubente Deo est introducturus. Where we see the great
reverence was used to that holy place, even in our first Christianity. Three
Chapels there founded with sacrificing Altars in them for the celebration of
Mass, as those Antiquities with others sufficiently mention, one of them
dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mother of God; the second to S. Peter and S.
Paul Apostles; the third in honor of S. Michael the Archangell, all which to
have been confirmed by the holy Pope S. Eleutherius, it plainly proved by the
great privileges he granted to these sacred places, and parsons upon the
Information of his Legates hear, ten years of Indulgence to the Pilgrims which
should with devotion visit the old Chapel of our Lady: Sancti Phaganus and
Deruianus perquisierant Indulgences granted to the Church of Glastenbury by
Pope Elentherius, so to S. Michaels Chapel.
ab Eleutherio Papa qut eos miserat, deceni annos Indulgentiae. And to all
Bishops that should to the honor of S. Michael the Archangell visit with
devotion the place sacred to him, thirty years of Indulgence. Venerandi
Phaganus and Deruianus moram ibi fecerant per nouem annos, and quod ibi etiam
perquisierant triginta annorum Indulgentiam omnibus Episcopis ipsum locum, ob
honorem beati Michaelis pia voluntate visitantibus. This Religeous house was so
renowned in, or soon after this time, that Pilgrims came to visit it from all
parts, and so much honored it, both in their life and death, that before the
time of Melchinus, who others call Meuinus, who as Capgraue writes, lived
before Merlinus, qui fuit ante Merlinum, who lived in the year of Christ's
Incarnation Capgrau. Cat. in S. Joseph. Io. Bal. l. de Script. cent. 1. in
Ambros. Merlino.
480. Thousands of Saints were buried there: Insula Aualonia auida funeris.
Millia dormientium accepit: And so great a number and of so holy Saints were
buried there in the holy Churchyard, Sanctum caemiterium, as it is styled in
Antiquities, that even in our primative Church Age, as we find in the old
Monuments of that reverend place, a Chapel was there founded to S. Michael,
S. Joseph, and the Saints in general, whose bodies were there interted. De
Capella Sanctorum Michaelis and Joseph and Sanctorum in caemiterio
requiescentium, Thus the Title of that Relation in the old Manuscript of that
Abbey. And then it follows: Scientes Sancti Patres nostri dignitatem and
sanctitatem Prayer to Saints, and for the dead there used.
huius sancti caemiterij, quandam Capellam in eius me^io construxerunt, quam in
honorem sancti Michaelis and Sanctorum inibi requie scentium dedicari fecerunt,
sub cuius altar ossa mortuorum and sanctorum Reliquias licet incognitas magna
multitudine Altares and h^ly Sacrifice of Mass there used and frequented.
cumulauerunt, and missam de caemiteri^ in ea quotidie celebrari constituerunt:
Our holy Fathers knowing the dignity, and sanctity of this holy Church yard
did build a Chapel in the middle thereof, which they caused to be dedicated to
the honor of S. Michael, and the Saints which rested there, under the Altar
whereof, they heaped the bones of the dead, and the Reliks though unknown of
the Saints in great multitude, and appointed that an especial Mass of the
Churchyard should daily be celebrated in it.

4. And to testify to posterity the Religion and devotion that holy time had
to their Saints, and sacred Reliks, there is a great long Chapter in the
Manuscript Antiquities of Glastenbury, there styled and entitled: De Dignitate
and Sanctitate vetustae Ecclesiae Beat Mariae Glastoniae, ac eiusde^ sancti
Caemiterij: of the dignity, and sanctity of the old Church of blessed Mary at
Glastenbury, and the holy Churchyard of the same. Where it is thus among other
notable things registered: In that Church, and Churchyard, and the Chapel in
that Churchyard, are reserved the holy bodies of many Saints: The conpasse
about that Church: The pauement, the Altars under, above and within, are so
heaped with holy Reliks thronged together, that in all that Churchyard 16.
foot deep from the topp, there is no place, that is without the bodies of
Saints: In ea autem, and in caemiterio, and in eiusdem caemiterij capella
multorum Sanctorum corporales seruantur exuuiae adeo a beatorum reliquijs
illius fani ambitus, adeo pauimentum lapide constratum, adeo altaria, sub,
supra, and infra, Reliquijs confertissimis aggeruntur, nec in toto illo
caemiterio a profunditate 16. pedum vsque ad eius superficiem a Sanctorum
cineribus habetur locus vacuus: Our holy Ancestors had that place in so
great reverence, that they durst not speak in it, or spitt upon the earth,
except upon great necesstie, and then with great sorrow of heart. They durst
not bury any enemy of this Church, nor enormeous sinner so much as they could
learn in that holy Churchyard, for the horrible voices which were often heard
of them, until they were dug up, and cast out of the Churchyard. And many
of the Monks for reverence to this holy place, by the just Judgment of God
lost their burial there. No man brought hawke or dog thither, which escaped
unpunished. That place was aunciently reverenced with so great devotion, that
Kings, Queens, Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes, Knights, and Nobles of both Sexes,
of whatsoever Order, of whatsoever dignity they were, did think themselves
happy, which had endowed that place with any possessions, or might be buried
there, or in other place with any part of this holy earth. And it was in such
reverence, that they which were in health, and dwelled in other Nations beyond
the seas, that diverse of them did often send for little parcels of this holy
earth, and keep it most deuoutely for their burials. And often say to our
English Pilgrims in those parts, that if they knew the worthiness and holiness of
this holy Churchyard, they would not seek so many Pilgrimadges beyond the
seas. There be three causes especially, why that holy earth is with so great
greedines desired for the burial of Christians. The first cause is, in respect
our Lord with his presence did dedicate it for the burial of his servants. The
second because it is thought that great remission of sins, is granted by our
Lord by the prayers and merits of the Saints buried there, to such as be buried
in that place, or other with any part of this holy earth. The third cause is,
for the Masses and other prayers which are daily said for them. For these thr^e
reasons many even to this day come from diverse parts of the world, and humbly
ask pieces of this holy earth in little vessels and keep them most deuoutely
for their burials, some in purses, some in gloves, some otherwise, as we read
certain Saracens to have done in memory of S. Joseph and his companions, whose
bodies, as they and others testify, do rest in our Lord in that ground:
Inta^ta reuerentia hab^erun^ sancti patres ^ostri praedictum loc^m, quod non
audebantin eo loq^^; vel flegmain terram sanctam proijcere, nisi i^ magna
necessitate, vel cum magna cordis compunctione. Nec audeban^ alique^^ huius
Ecclesiae inimic^m, vel aliquem enormem peccatorem, secundum quod ^^^elligere
poterant, in praedicto sacro caemiterio sepelire, propter voces horribiles,
quae saepe ab e^^ audiebantur, donec effoderentur, atque de cae^^iterio
proijcerentur. Multi etiam ex Monachis propter reuerentiam huic sacro loco
factam iusto Dei Iudicio sepul^^ram inibi perdiderunt. Nullus Auem venatoriam
aduexit, vel quadru pedem i^d^xit, qui sui vel rei possessae indemnis adierit.
Locus ille ab Antiquis tanta colebatur deuotione, vt Reges, Reginae,
Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Duces, milites, and vtri^sque sexus Nobiles,
cuiuscumque ordinis, cuiuscumque essent celsitudinis se beat^^ fore
arbitrabantur, qui locum illum aliquibus possessionibus auxissent, vel qui
ibidem, vel alibi cum aliqua portione huius sanctae terrae sepeliri potuissent.
Et inter valentes in partibus transmarinis tanta reuerentia habetur locus ille,
quod quidam eorum pro particulis huius sanctae terrae saepe mittunt. Et pro
eorum sepulturis deuotissime custodiunt, and saepe dicunt Anglicis in partibus
illis peregrinantibus, quod si dignitatem and sanctitatem istius sancti
caemiterij scirent, non tantas transmarinas Peregrinationes quaererent. Tres
enim sunt causae notabiliter, quare terra illa sancta ad Christianorum
sepulturam tanta auiditate desideratur. Prima causa est, quia Dominus eam ad
seruorum suorum sepulturam praesentialiter dedicauit. Secunda, quia omnibus hic
vel alibi cum aliqua portione huius sanctae terrae sepultis, per Sanctorum
inibi requiescentium preces, and merita, creditur magna peccatorum remissio a
Domino concessa. Tertia propter Missas, and alias Orationes, quae quotidie pro
eis dicuntur: propter istas tres causas multi de diuersis mundi partibus vsque
ad hodiernum diem veniunt, and particulas huius sanctae terrae in vasculis suis
humiliter petunt, and pro eorum sepulturis deuotissime custodiunt. Quidam in
Bursis, quidam in chirothecis, quidam in ampullis stanneis and plumbeis, sicut
legitur de quibusdam Saracenis fecisse in memoriam sancti Joseph, and sociorum
eius, quo^um corpora illis ac alijs multis testantibus in eadem terra in Domino
requiescunt. Hitherto the very words of this ancient Manuscript, giving diverse
sure instances and examples, in particular of those things I have from thence
thus generally delivered. And showing how in all Persecutions of the infidel
Romans, Saxons, and Danes, this holy place was still preserved without
molestation, as it had been first endowed and honored by the Pagan British
Kings.

5. These Antiquities, as also William of Malmesbury in his Manuscript History
of the Antiquity, and dignity of this place, are ample witnesses, that from
this time of King Lucius to S. Patricks Age, there were ever without
interruption or discontinuance the whole number of the first Institution of
Religeous men there, multi alijs succedentes in numero duodenario per Tbe old
Eremits or Monks at Glastenbury thus settled ther^, continued many hundreds of
years without change or alteration.
multa annorum curricula vsque ad Aduentum Sancti Patricij in commemorata
Insula permanserunt. So we see the ouerraging Persecution of Dioclesian did not
disperse or hurt them. And in the general spoil of the Pagan Saxons, in this
kingdom, when an other abomination of desolation was hear in Britain, this
holy house still enjoyed both Monks, and an Abbot called Morgret, and was so
fare from destruction or ruin thereby, that it then received more liberty and
a new endowment, the King of Domnonia giving Gulielm. Malm. l. de Antiq. Glast.
unto it the land called Inswitrin in the 601. year of Christ's Incarnation,
Anno Dominicae Incarnationis 601. Rex Domnoniae terram quae appellatur
Inswitrin ad Ecclesiam vetustam concessit ad petitionem Morgret eiusdem loci
Abbatis. And it appears by this Author, that he had seen the original
Charter itself thereof: for besides his setting down the very names of the
Abbots, to whom it was granted, and the Bishop Manuto, who wrote the Charter,
and signed it with others, Ego Manuto Episcopus hanc Chartam scripsi: he adds
of the King that granted it, that the scedule was so old, whereon his name was
written, that it could not be known: Quis iste Rex fuit scedulae vetustas negat
scire. In the Danish Invasion and Persecution, some of those Infidels did
attempt to spoil it, but being Miraculously stricken blind, and thereupon
penitent for their wickedness, and receiving their sight by the means of the
blessed Virgin Mary, they caused a precious Cross of curious work of gold,
silver, and precious stones to be made, and offered it in the old Church in
memory thereof: multi eorum audientes sanctitatem huius loci, ne matrem
misericordiae, and alios, quorum inibi corpora pausant ad Iracundiam
prouocarent, recesserunt. Sed tamen intrauerunt nonnulli, nec impune. Nam Virgo
faecunda arma Iustitiae concutiens, omnes caecitate mulctauit, quos postea
paenitentes, and quod inique gesserant detestantes misericorditer illuminauit.
Denique facta collatione Crucem eleganti satis opere, ex auro, and argento, and
pretiosis lapidibus fabricauerunt, and Ecclesiae veteri ad huiusce miraculi
monumenta obtulerunt. And this holy place was made as a common Sanctuary to
Religeous persons, in such storms and tempests to preserve themselves, the
holy Relics of Saints, and such sacred things there, from Pagan Persecution.

THE XXV. CHAPTER.
OF THE GREAT HONOR, AND Renown of our old British Apostolic Order of
Religion, from the coming of S. Joseph of Aramathia, in the year of Christ's
Nativity 63. (without any discontinuance, or Interruption by some, and very
short time after his death by all) many hundreds of years in great perfection
without any change or alteration, (to be named a Mutation of Monastical Rule)
being the Mother or Nurse of Monastical holy life to many Nations, and
Religious Orders in them: by which also many Countries to Christ were converted.

1. IF after so long a Circuit of time and inuolued with so many difficulties
to hinder us from certain knowledge of such The most holy and ancient
Apostolic Order of Glastenbury there settled by S. Joseph. of Arimathia.
Chastity, obedience, poverty.
things, we are desirous to make some estimate, what was the Rule of this holy
Order, it somewhat appears by that is said, and is resembled in our
Histories, and diverse obseruances thereof kept in such strict Orders, as
afterward borrowed them from hence. The three Vows, or states of perfection,
of chastity, poverty, and obedience necessary in all such conditions of life,
were diligently and exactly performed in this Order. Concerning obedience, at
and before the first coming of S. Joseph of Aramathia, with the rest hither,
S. Joseph was ordained their Superior by the Apostle which directed them
hither: his praefecit amicum suum Joseph ab Aramathia, qui Dominum sepeliuit.
Flos Aramathiae Joseph est primus eorum. So writes William of Malmesbury, the
Antiquities of Glastenburye, Capgraue and others who keep a successiue
continuance of most of their Guliel. Malmes. l. de Antiq. Caen. Glast. Io.
Capgr. Catal. in S. Joseph. ab Aramat. Antiq. Glaston.
Abbots after, both in the Britans and Saxons time, who Ruled them, and to
whom they were obedient, Iure Abbatis rexit. The poverty which these men with
the contempt of Riches professed, is sufficiently declared, in forsaking all
they had of their own, and living by their labor and such things, as at the
first were given unto them by Infidels in a strange Country. And after King
Lucius was converted, they had nothing, but the Alms of Christians, and their
own pains and Industry to sustain them, and yet these not at their own,
but Abbots disposition. The holy place wherein they lived being left so long,
and strangely desolate without man, woman, or child, after the death of S.
Joseph and his companions, the substitution of Monks in the same number of 12.
by S. Damianus, and Phaganus, and the continued succession in that number,
their names registered, their so often assembling, and meeting every day in the
holy Church: The great chastity is remembered of them, which be most mentioned
by Historians, no married or unchaste woman ever inhabiting there, by any
Antiquity, gives a warrant boldly to say, they lived in perpetual sacred
chastity.

2. If we will follow the more common opinion of Antiquaries, that the
Miraculous man S. Patricke the Apostle of Ireland, was Abbot there, and give
allowance to the old Manuscript Epistle, asscribed unto him, we must Their
holiness, and austeritie of life.
say, their austeritie of life and devotion were wonderful: For he says of
the twelve which were there in his time, and whose names for their honor he
sets down, that he was not worthy to untie the buckles of their shows,
non dignus eram soluere corrigias calceamentorum eorum. And yet we read of him
in approved Authors, that he was one of the most holy, virtuous, and
Miraculous men, that ever lived: omni namque Die Psalterium cum canticis and
himnis and ducentis orationibus cantauit, and offerebat corpus Christi, docebat
Discipulos, turbis praedecabat, and in omni hora signo crucis Christi centies
signabat se. In prima vero noctis part centum Psalmos canebat, and ducentis
vicibus genua curuabat, and a pullorum cantu in aquis stabat donec adimpleret
orationes suas, post haec dormiebat super lapidem nudum, alterumque sub capite
eius posuit, and tunicam pelliceam habebat circa lumbos suos in aqua tinctam:
he did every day singe the Psalter, with canticles and himnes, and two hundred
prayers, he offered the sacrifice of Christ's body, taught his Disciples,
preached to the people, and in every hour signed himself an hundred times
with the sign of the cross of Christ. In the first part of the night, he
sunge an hundred psalms, and bowed his knees two hundred times, and from the
crowing of the cock he stood in the water until he had ended his prayers,
after this he slept upon a bare stone, and laid an other under his head, and
he had about his loins a leather coat dipped in water. And if we should
question S. Patrike his long living, being and dying Abbot at Glastenbury, and
so leaving such austeritie to the Monks as he exercised in himself, yet we may
not have any doubt but he being Nephew to S. Martine that great Apostolic
man, taught by him, and he himself being the Apostle of Ireland, where the
Religeous men were of the same Order they were in Britain, but this strict
manner of life was common to all Monks in these parts in his, and from this
time, we have in hands, no memory of change being found in Histories.

And we read that S. Brendon found in an Island of America a Monastery wherein
were 24. very holy Monks, Disciples of S. Patrike, and S. Albeus which had
lived there 80. years with bread, roots, and water, and had no Manuscr.
Antiq. and Capgr. in S. Brendan.
other food to entertain their worthy guest S. Brendan and his holy company
withal, a^^ yet their bread Miraculously provided for them. Parata mensa,
appositis^^^ panibus miri candoris, and quibusdam radicibus incredibilis
saporis comedebant: sedebant mixti fratres cum hospitibus per ordinem and inter
duos fratres semper panis integer ponebatur. Ex font facite charitatem cum
Iucunditate and timore Domini. And we find, that in an other Monastery in
these parts where there were many Monks, Plures monachi, there was no other
food, or sustenance for them, but appels, nutts, roots, and herbs. Nihil
aliud cibi monstrabatur, nisi poma, and nuces, atque radices, and herbae. And
to come to the holy root itself of this sacred Profession at Glastenbury,
which had so soon, so far extended and spreed the branches thereof, with
such severity and sanctity of life, what other thing can we hope to find in
such a Desert, and wilderness, as then it was: in the woodly wilderness corn did
not grow, the Bishops, or Archbishops themselves did not then, nor many
hundreds of years after eat flesh.

4. The first Archbishop of Caerlegion, or S. David's, which did eat flesh was
as both Catholic and Protestant Antiquaries write called Morgeneu, the 33. in
number after S. David, almost 1000. years after Christ's Nativity. A
Protestant Bishop thus relates the History. Morgeneu this man (says Giraldus
of all the Bishops of S. David's, presumed first to eat flesh, which none of
them Godwin Catal. in S. David's in Morgeneu.
had ever done before him. For punishment of which heinous offense, he
supposes it fell out, that afterward he was murdered of Pirates: reporting
withal, how that after his death he appeared to a Bishop of Ireland, using
these words: Quia carnes comedi, caro factus sum: for eating of flesh, I am no^
become nothing but flesh. The Art and skill of fishing was almost utterly
unknown in these parts of Britain, Bed. l. 5. Histor. Gent. Angl. Capgrau.
Catal. in S. W^lf^id. Godwin Catal. of Bish. Chichester in Wilfride. Antiquit.
Glast. Manus. and Capgr. Catal. in S. Patricio.
until when in the seventh hundredth year it was taught there by S. Wilfride.
These holy men planted fruit trees there, in great number to bring them
meat, whereupon that Desert was called Aualonia, or the Island Aualonia, the
Isle of fruits, because in the old British tongue Aualla signifies fruits,
Insula Aualoniae, id est Insula pomorum vocabatur, Aualla Britannice, poma
Latin. And the Inahbitants of those parts to this day do call great Nutts,
growing in that Country by the name of Aualons. Therefore our Antiquaries
knowing how strict and penitential life they sedd, and in carnal censure
exceeding ordinary humane ability, without heavenly help and assistance, do
deliver Their foodefruites Herbs and bread.
unto us, that S. Joseph and his companions, the first Religious Inhabitants of
this place, before Orchard or gardeine was planted there for fruits, roots or
herbs, to feed upon, offerring and performing there their devout duties to
God, and the blessed Virgin, in watchings, fastings, and prayers, were reliued
Antiq. Glaston. Manuscr. Tabulis affix. Capgr. Catalog. in S. Joseph ab Aramat.
S. Patric. Epist. and alij.
in all their necessities, by the help of the same blessed Virgin Mother of
God. Duodecim sancti praedicti in eodem loco Deo and beatae virgini deuota
exhibentes obsequia, vigilijs, Ieiunijs and orationibus vacantes, eiusdem
virginis Dei Genetricis auxilio in necessitatibus suis refocillabantur.

5. And this so strict Monastical conversation though likely in some places,
and times afterward some what mitigated from the first rigor, was the general
observation of our old British, Scottish, and Irish Monks, all of them The
Monks there drunk then no wine or such drink, but water.
drinking only water or milk, and never any wine, Ale, or such manner of
drink, for we read in approved, and Ancient Historians, that when King
Ceolnulfus left his terreane kingdom to be a Monk in the Monastery of
Lindisfarne about the year of Christ 764. the Monks there according to the
old Tradition and custom did drink nothing but water or milk, and then they
had dispensation at this Kings procuring to drink wine or Ale, hoc Rege iam
Monacho facto efficiente, data est Lindiffarne^sis Ecclesi^ Monachis licentia
Roger Houede^ Annal. par. Pr^o. an. 764. and an. 882.
bibendi vinum vel ceruisiam: ante enim non nisi lac vel (...) solebant,
secundum antiquam traditionem Sancti Aidani primi eiusdem Ecclesiae Antistitis,
and Monachorum, qui cum illo de Scotia venientes, ibidem donante Rege Oswaldo
mansionem acceperant, and cum magna districtione Deo seruire gaudebant. Where
we see this to have been the old received use and custom of those British and
Scottish Monks.

6. What their Mass and other public Church service was, I find in an Their
ancient Church service, that asscribed to S. Mark the Evangelist, or of Saint
Peter.
old British Manuscript Antiquity written almost 1000. years since and
Entitled the first Institution and variety of the Church service: prima
Institutio and varietas Ecclesiastici seruitij, that they were the same which
S. Mark the Evangelist by S. Peter his approbation, composed and practiced.
Cursum qui dicitur praesenti tempore Scotorum Beatus Marcus decantauit. This is
recorded for the office Ecclesiastical of Scotland in those times by this old
Manuscript, but for thee rest of this Island, now England and wales it rather
delivers, that the Roman use derived from S. Peter and S. ^lement his
Successor, which it calls cursum Romanum, was practiced hear, and sets
down how it was continued and derived to the Britans from S. Peter, and S.
Clement: Yet with some alteration and addition of Antiphones, Responsories and
Alleluias, but these taken out of holy Scripturs, or the works of the old holy
Fathers succeeding the Apostles, and not out of the Invention of those, though
wise men, which made such alteration or addition; Inde per diuersorum
prudentium virorum consilium, non de proprijs sed de serie scripturarum noui
and veteris testamenti, diuersorum prudentium virorum Paginis, sed de sacris
scripturis receperunt Antiphonas, and Responsoria, seu sonos and alleluias
composuerunt. That they continually Manuscr. Hist. Brit. antiquiss.
without intermission day and night perseuered in praying and serving God, one
company therein succeeding an other, especially where their number Gulielm.
Malm. l. de Antiq. Caen. Glaston. Antiq. Glaston. Tabulis fixae.
was great. I have declared before by the example of the Monasteries of
Abington, and S. Kentegerne: so I may say of the Monastery of S. Vuandilocus
and S. Gomogillus, wherein there were about 3000. Monks: Beatus Vuandilocus
and beatus Gomigillus habuerunt in eorum Monasterio Monachos circiter tria
millia. So of the Monastery of S. Brendan, that of Bangor, and Capgr. Catal. in
S. Brendano. Io. Bal. l. de Script. cent. 1. in Bre^dan. Capgr. supr. Bal.
centur. 5. in Io. Capgr. Girald. Cambr. Itinerar. Ca^br. l. 2. c. 6. Capgr. in
S. Brendan. Hector Boeth. Scot. h^st.
others. And in the least of them all there was little less devotion used. For
in this first of Glastenbury, when there were but twelve Religious men there,
we have heard before, that they often times in the day came altogether, to tho
old Church to perform divine office: in vetustam Ecclesiam ad diuina obsequia
deuotius complenda crebro conuenerunt quotidie. Many committed this holy Rule
(though with some difference) to writing, to be observed and kept of holy
Monks; among whom were S. Brendan directed by an Angel as both old and late,
Catholic and Protestant Antiquaries deliver, S. David, S. Kentigern, and S.
Colu^banus, which Rule of S. Colu^ban, Pope Honorius confirmed. And this Rule
with the Regulars professing it, continued hear in great sanctity in the
time of Giraldus Ca^brensis, in the time of Capgrauius, vsque hodie The
Apostolic Order and Monastery of Glaste^bury the most ancient.
manet, who lived in the year of Christ 1464. and after in Hector Boethius his
time in the days of Luther, as they plainly prove and witness, eue^to these
new Heresies. Whereby appears, it was the most ancient, holy and general S.
Asaphus in Vit. S. Kentegerni. Ca^gr. in eod. Io. Bal. l. de Scriptor. cent. 1.
in Kentegern.
Order of Religion, or ever was in the world. And from which very many
Religious orders especially in the west part of the world, have proceeded as
children of so blessed a mother, not only in Italy, Germany, France and others
in that Continent, but as both Catholic and Protestant Antiquaries have
delivered, in all Regions near to Britain, Orchades, Norway, Denmark,
Iseland, Script. Vitae S. Bre^da. and capg. in eod. La^b. in Leg. S. Edwardi.
Hackluit book of Engl. trauail. in Arthur.
and the Islands of America itself, the New found world, as it is termed by
some, but known unto, preached and inhabited in by these ou^ Monks 1100. or
1200. years since. No order of Religion in the world has or had so many
glorious Saints.

7. Many Infidel Nations were by these converted to the faith of Christ, and
among others, both by our own and forreyne Histories, they the holy Bishops,
and Clergy of Britain, have won and justly deserved the honor, to be the
blessed Instruments, of converting the far greater part of the Saxons in
this kingdom, before, at, and after S. Augustine and his holy Associats
preaching hear. And not only of the Saxons and Germans hear, but in the
Higher, and Lower Germany, and other peoples there, those which were of
England, Monks and Preachers in those parts, being trained up in Monastical
Order, in our Monasteries in our North England of our old Order, before any
other, but our old British Rules was settled hear. Neither shall I easily be
persuaded by any thing I find in Antiquity, that S. Augustine Greg. in
Dialog. Epist. ad Reg. Ethelbert. Resp. ad Interrogat. S. August. Honor. Pap.
Epistol. ad Honor. Ca^tuar. Bed. Hist. lib. 2. Capgr. in S. Honorio Cantuar.
with his Associats was of any other, but the old Apostolic Order and Rule
that was used in S. Gregory's Monastery, as S. Gregory himself, Pope Honorius
his Successor, S. Bid, Capgraue and other renowned Authors do plainly
affirm, and witness which easily joined and united the Professors of it,
with all other Apostolic Rules of S. Martine, S. Augustine, of Glastenbury,
Bangor, S. Columba, S. Brendan, S. Kentegern and others renowned hear in
Britain, which allthough they have not been well known, to remote and
forreyne writers, among whom, Britain was so unknown, to some, that they were
ignorant, whether it was an other world, or no, yet we the Inhabitants
indigenae thereof, which may not plead ignorance, nor be excused, in being ill
affected, to so worthy Ancestors and Parents in Christ, may not ignorantly,
or wittingely defraude them of their most worthily due, and deserved glory, or
give it from them to others.

8. No Regular Abbot in the School of Christ was more ancient, then our
Founder S. Joseph of Aramathia so renowned by holy witness of God All
Apostolic men and Orders that came after into Britain joined with that of
Glastenbury.
himself in sacred Scripturs, none more loving of Christ or forsaking more for
him, then he that seeing Christ forsaken, as it were of all, forsook him not,
but boldly begged his blessed body, shrouded, and honorably buried it in his
own Sepulcher, suffered so much of the wicked Jews, as Histores recompt for
that cause, and forsaking for Christ love, the love of himself, his Country,
Riches, Lands, revenues, and friends, because he would be a stranger to the
world and wordly things, so to live and die, came so far a Journey as from
Arimathia and Jerusalem, to live and die so strict a contemplative and
heavenly life, in the Desert I Will of Aualon in our Britain hear, and found
for this Nation the first Monastery, and be thereof the first Abbot in the
world: such as their Abbots, such were the Religeous under him as I have
remembered. And they continued there so long, as many hold, there was no
interruption between them, and these in King Lucius time, if there was, it
must needs be very short. All agree that Christ immediately himself, S. Peter,
or S. Philip Apostles sent them as Apostles hither, and certain it is before,
S. Peter hear approved them. And when these our Legates S. Damanus and Faganus
were sent Bishops hither, from S. Eleutherius Pope, the Antiquities of
Winchester, S. Gildas, as he was publikly cited in Parliament by Abbot Fecknam
of Westminster, and others hold, were Monks, and yet as before, and as the
Antiquaries and Antiquities of G^astenb^^y prone, Annals Win^on. Gildas apud
Abbot. Feckn. o^at. in 1. Parliament. Elizabeth. Antiquit. Glast. Guliel. Malm.
l. de Antiq. Caeno. Glast. Capgr. in S. Patricio and S. Joseph. Aram. Manuscr.
Ant. de prima Instit. Eccl. officij. Vit. S. Lupi. Sur. and Haraeus in eod.
Constant. in Vit. S. Germani Antisiodoren. Antiq. Glaston. Guliel. Malm. supr.
Capgr. in S. Patricio. Manuscript. Antiq. and Capgrau. in S. Brendano. Manuscr.
Brit. supr. Capgr. in S. Dubritio and S. David. Antiq. Eccl. Landau. Caius l.
1. Antiq. Cantabr. S. Asaph. in Vit. S. Kentigerni. Capgr. in eod.
they there submitted themselves, and diverse of their sacred company to this.
Apostolic first Rule and Order of S. Joseph, living in the same manner as he
and his Associats did. They themselves stayed there. 9. years, whether they
died there or not, the Antiquities do not determine, but clearly testify
they left there a Succession of their holy company, huing and dying there in
that Apostolic holy Order, and S. Eleutherius Pope granted diverse Indulgences
to that holy place. Our next Apostolic men sent hither from the Roman See, and
Pope Celestine, both S. German and S. Lupus, by an old British Antiquity, and
other Authors, were, before they were Bishops, Monks of the old Monastery,
and Order of Lirinum, which both by them, and others joined in one with our old
British Order hear: and all agree that without all question S. Lupus was a
Monk of that Order, Rule and place, and S. German lived even being a Bishop
and Legate a life as strict, and in as great austeritie, as any Regular then
did, used, gave, and left that example hear. S. Patrike the next Apostolic
Legate of these parts was Abbot of this our sacred British Apostolic Order
and Rule in our Monastery of Glastenbury. And then the Monks of Britain,
Ireland, and Scotland with other agreed in the same Order, and Rule: and of the
same Order, he sent Monks into America, and the Islands thereof. S. Gomogillus
and S. Vuandilocus had in their Monastary, monachos circiter tria millia, about
3000. Monks of the same Order; and besides others the Monastery of Bangor had
few less of the same Rule. After S. German and his Associates departure hence,
S. Dubritius and S. David were the Popes Legates, or greatest commanders
hear, by the highest spiritual Power. S. Dubritius was a famous Master to
such Scholars, and S. David living long in the next Age, founded many
Monasteries of this Order, and left his Rule after his death, which I have set
down in due place. S. Kentegern was renowned in his time, fot this Regular
life, and had in his Monastery continual learned Priests, and Preachers all
most 400. Apostolic men, besides others, whom he sent to preach in all these
western parts, and living unto the time of S. Gregory Pope, who approved,
confirmed and much commended his holy Order, state and course of life, as S.
Asaph his renowned Scholar, and Successor in his Episcopal See and dignity,
and Capgraue in his life are ample witnesses. At, before, and after S.
Augustines Jonas in Vit. S. Colu^bani. Capgrau. in eod. Bal. l. de Script.
cent. 1. in Columbano. Jonas in Vit. S.
coming hither, S. Columban a Monk of Bangor of this Order, with his holy
companions was renowned in France, Burgundy and Italy, and there founded many
Monasteries both of Monks and Nuns of this our old Order, and Rule, and Pope
Honorius confirmed it, ever in those places.

9. The Lirinum Monks of that learned Order united themselves with him in his
Rule, and among others, S. Attila, who succeeded him, Abbot in his Monastery of
Luxouium, was one. The Disciples and Scholars of S. Augustine, in Vit. S.
Attalae and S. Eustachij. Script. Vit. S. Liuini Archiepisc. Surius. Haraeus
and al. in eod. 12. die Nouemb. Antiq. Glaston. Tabulis fixae. Gul. Malm. l. de
Antiq. Caenob. Glaston.
sent into England by S. Gregory Pope joined in this holy Order, and Rule, such
was S. Liuinus made Priest by S. Augustine, and after a Bishop, and by some an
Archbishop, who lived with S. Foillanus, Helius and Kilianus, were holy Monks
of this our old Order, S. Liuinus being Disciple to S. Benignus the renowned
Abbot of Glastenbury, Disciple to S. Patrike, as the name, place, and time
agreeing prove. S. Paulinus the first Archbishop of York in the Saxons, time a
principal man in the Roman Mission with S. Augustine lived in our Monastery of
Glastenbury, with our Monks there, diverse months, and made new buildings or
reparations there for them, and their holy Order. Thus the Antiquities there
testify at lardge. S. Brithwald a Antiq. Glaston. Bed. Hist. Eccles. Catal.
Archiep. Cant. Godwin in Brithwaldo.
Monk of Glastenbury of our old Order was chosen to be Abbot among the Monks
that came from Rome, in their Monastery at Reculuer in Kent, and after
Archbishop of Canterbury. S. Benedict Bishop one of the first and most renowned
Abbots in Canterbury, the first Englishman Abbot there after those of S.
Augustins Mission, and was first instructed by Monks of our old Capgr. in S.
Benedic. Bisc. Bed. Histor. Florent. Wigorn. Chron. Matthew. Westminster. Chronic.
Antiq. Glaston. Gul. Ma^mesb. l. Antiq. Caenob. Glaston.
British Order in Northumberland, went thence to Lirinum Monastery that joined
then with S. Columbanus, and our old Order, was there two years, and there
professed long before S. Benedicts Rule came thither, went to Rome whence S.
Augustine and his Monks came, and there lived with the Roman Monks, was after
Abbot of S. Augustins in Canterbury, Monk and Abbot among our Monks in
Northumberland of our old Order, no Monastery then and there having received S.
Benedict his Rule. And above 40. years after his death, S. Ticca Abbot and
Successor in his Monastery with his Monks, Ticca venerabilis Abbas cum suis
Monachis, carrying with him in time of Persecution the bodies of S. Benedict,
and all the Abbots of that Abbey, went to Glastenbury of our old Order then,
and hundreds of years after, and was Abbot there many years: Cum suis
Monachis Glastoniam vsque peruenit eande^que Ecclesiam sub nomine Abbatis
plurimos annos rexit. It is evident by all Historians, that the Monks of S.
Benedict Biscop, in our North England, those of Glastenbury, and other
Monasteries hear much differed in many and much material things, from the
Monks of any late or new Order then in Italy or other place, or Nation: As in
Church service and observations, habit, diet, Abbots, Monks, and many things
distinguishing such Rules not to be mentioned hear, belonging rather to an
other place, and time, if need be thereof.

THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
THAT DIVERSE OF THE BRITANS WHICH lived in that part of Britain, then called
Albania now Scotland, were converted by the same means, and manner by these
Roman Legates, as the other Britans of Loegria and Cambria were at that time.

1. BY this appears, that as these Legates Commission was not confined within
the temporal limits, and bonds of King Lucius, and the Romans hear in
Britain, commonly by our Antiquities and Histories then, no further extending
itself, These Legates and Apostolic Misso^ of Pope Eleutherius preached in the
whole kingdom of Britain.
then to Seuerus wall, dividing and separating Albania, now commonly called
Scotland, from the other parts of Britain, now England: So they, or some of
their Associats, and holy company preached in the whole kingdom, or I Will of
great Britain, and the chief Islands thereof: for if Pope Eleutherius (as
before is proved) subjected that part of Britain, now Scotland, beyond the
wall, out of the temporal Jurisdiction of King Lucius, at whose request and
petition he sent Preachers hither, unto York a Metropolitan See in his
kingdom, and Dominion, he though highest judge, and Ruler in the Church of
Christ, and over such as believed in him: yet over such as had not received the
faith and Religion of Christ, he would use no such command, or Power, to
subject them either to the Archbishop of York, London, Cacrlegion, or any
other out of the temporal Dominion where they lived, nor within the same, if
any such had been there, except they had been Christians. So the same holy
learned Pope, in his allowing all the Islands between Britain and Norwey with
Denmark, vsque Noruegiam and Daciam to belong to the Crown of King Lucius in
Britain, the civil Law, and Ius gentium, adiudging Islands, especially lesser
Islands to be parts of, and belonging unto the next Continent, Norwey being a
great kingdom, and in the main continent, as a great part of Denmark
likewise was, and is, Britain being proved to the Romans before, to be an
Island, separate from the great Continent, though the greatest known Island, it
will bring many besides Protestants to defend this Donation of Pope
Eleutherius, and thereby the old right and Title of Britain, to the Islands
near Norwey and Denmark, to be of opinion, that diverse there, were then
converted to Christ, and Pope Eleutherius labored what he could for their
Conversion. Otherwise the Pope though supreme Pastor and Ruler of the Church
of Christ, did not, nor would claim such Power over Infidels never converted
to the true faith, or sheep of the fold of Christ, of which and not of
Infidels he is chiefest Sheephard under Christ, one earth.

2. The old Antiquities of Glastenbury, one of our best Records in such things,
assure us, that these our holy Legates, and Apostles did hear preach Christ,
and baptized the Inhabitants, throughout the whole Island of Britain, and not
only in King Lucius, and the Romans Dominion hear, Phaganus and Deruianus
venerunt in Britanniam ad praedicandum Euangelium, qui Antiq. Glast. Guliel.
Malm. l. de Antiq. Caeno. Glast. Capgrau. in S. Patricio.
baptisantes and praedicantes, and vniuersam Insulam peragrantes. Which
Tertullian, a learned witness, and writer in this time, within the first 200.
years of Christ, and writing in Afrike, so far from taking speedy and
certain notice, or Intelligence of the affairs of this so remote kingdom,
proves when he says, Britannorum Romany inaccessa loca, the places of the
Brittans, whether Tertull. l. cont. Iudaeos c. 7.
the Romans could not come, had before his writing, received the faith of
Christ, which must needs be performed at this time, before Pope Victor his
sending Preachers unto the Scots, at the request of their King, and first
Christian King of the Scots, Donaldus. And his Mission was unto the Scots, but
this Conversion of the Britans in the places inaccessable to the Romans, or to
which the Romans had not made access, must needs be of the Britans, as they
are so expressly named, by that ancient writer of that time, and these
Britans were the same, which then inhabited in the Country, now and long since
called Scotland, of the Scots afterward entering, and inhabiting there; for all
other places in Britain had before suffered and known the Romans Access, and
Invasion into them.

3. No other part of Britain is found in Histories, into which they had not
made access, and there obtained Rule, or thence received Tribute. And in this
our Protestant Antiquaries do agree, When thus they write: It is certain by
Chemnitius, citing Sabellicus, that the Britans were with the first Conuerts:
and Protest. Theater of great Brit. l. 6.. 9. Chemnit. in Exam. Council.
Tridentin. ex Sabellico.
Tertullian who lived within 200. years of Christ's Nativity, shows no
less: when the more to provoke the Jews against whom he wrote, calls to
witness the fruitful increase of the Gospel of Salvation, through many
Countries, and Nations, and among them, names the Britans to have received the
word of life, the power whereof, says he, has pirced into those parts whether
the Romans could not come. Where they allege Tertullian in the same sense for
the Conversion of the Britans, even in the places whether the Romans could not
come unto them, yet they do not plainly cite Tertullian as he wrote, and I
have cited him before, that the places hear converted, to which the Romans
could not come, The Britans the most ancient Christians in this part of the
world, or whole world, for a kingdom.
to have been places of the Britans, Britannorum Romany inaccess^ loca, and of
no other people or Nation. Therefore I cannot allow, what they without
controlle immediately thus write in that place: whence Petrus Cluniacensis
supposes the Scottish men, the more ancient Christians, as not being in the
like subjection to the Romans, as other then were. Which collection of Petrus
Cluniacensis, if these men, or any other should allow, and not reprove, they
should thereby prove themselves much ignorant in the Antiquities, honor and
privileges of our Britain, in this respect, contrary to all Historians, and
these men contrary to themselves, often in this their Theater teaching,
Britain and the Britans to have been the first Christian kingdom and Nation
in the world: No Scots or others, especially in these parts of the known
world the coming near unto them in that state or degree of glory.

4. And it is evident by our oldest British Historian S. Gildas, and others
Gildas l. de excid. and conquest. Britanniae.
after him, that the Scots were not seated, or dwelling in the great Island of
Britain, not in the most remote and Northren parts thereof until the
departure of Maximus hence with the chiefest power of the Britans hear, when
and not before they invaded the North parts unto the wall of division: omnem
Aquilonarem, extremamque terrae partem, pro Indigenis murotenus capessunt. The
Britans Indigenae were the general Inhabitants and Possessors there before.
And the picts did not until then inhabit any extreme part of great
Britain, Picti in extrema part Insulae tunc primum, and deinceps
requieuerunt, and yet by all were hear planted before the Scots. But they
lived until then: the Gild. Galfr. Monum. Hist. Brittan. Matt. West. Chron.
Harding. Chron.
Scots in Ireland, and the our-Ilands: as the Picts also in those lesser Islands
did. And the Britans dwelling beyond the wall, were as free from subjection to
the Romans, as any Scots now were, or rather more, when we find that in
Claudius the Roman Emperor his time, he with his Romans brought the Orchades,
and after, Anglesy to their subjection. And the Scottish Historians, Veremund.
Hist. Hector Boeth. Scotor. Histor. Georg. Buchan. in Donald. Raph. Holinsh.
Hist. of Scotland.
ancient and late, Catholics and Protestants freely and plainly confess,
that they received not the faith of Christ, until the time of Pope victor, and
their King Donaldus, the general conversion of the Brittans being prefected
before under S. Eleutherius, and S. Lucius King of Britain. So they as
generally confess, and acknowledge they had no Bishop, or Episcopal See,
among them until in Dioclesian his Persecution, S. Amphibalus was their first
Bishop, S. Amphibolus a Britan, the first Bishop of the Scots in the time of
Dioclesian his Persecution.
and his See the first among them in the I Will of Man, they then having no
Episcopal See or City within the British continent at that time to place
him, or any other in.

5. And allthough some Scottish writers labor to prove, that they were seated
in the continent of great Britain sooner, then the time I have limited unto
them, and were by Maximus utterly bannished hence, even with their Bishops and
Monks; this so easy and sudden bannishment of them all generally, which they
confess, to have been done by an Edict or Proclamation of Maximus, proves
they were rather in some few companies entered, a little before, then seated
hear: and after their bannishment hence, that part where they then were and
now are, was left only to the old Inhabitants thereof, the Brittans, and some
Picts, there continuing still by Maximus his permission. This their own
Historians generally acknowledge: and further, that S. Palladius sent unto the
Scots, in the fifth Age by Pope Caelestinus, was the first Bishop they had sent
unto them by such power: which does little agree with their conceit of their
Bishops hear in the time of Maximus, except they will yield, that as their
temporal people were hear then unjust Intruders upon the Brittans, So their
pretended Bishops were without due spiritual and Papal allowance, and so were
from hence bannished and exiled. But we are fully assured before, that this
part of Britain beyond The Britans then inha^^ting where it is now called
Scotland, had a Bishop, or Bishops in this time, and where.
the wall, had even in this time of Pope Eleutherius and King Lucius Episcopal
Sees, and Bishops, at the least one Bishops See, and Bishop, with Priests and
Clergy men: for all our Antiquaries have assured and delivered for an
undoubted truth unto us before, that in this time all the Temples of the
Flamens in Britain, without any Limitatio^, more in Loegria, and Cambria, then
in Albania, were changed into Episcopal Sees, and Bishops with Priests and
other Clergy men placed in them. So we are assured by all Kind of Histories,
ancient, late, Catholic and Protestant: That in Albania now Scotland,
Edinburgh was an ancient Flamens City, and Residence, and so now converted to
be a Bishops See. And by Foundation being of the same Antiquity with Ranulp.
Higede. Polichron. l. 1. Hector. Boeth. declarat. Scotiae. Regionum. ante Hist.
Scotor. Guliel. Malm. l. 3. de Pontif. Ranulp. Higed. Polychron. l. 1. c. 48.
Stow Hist. Britans.
York, both of them builded by one and the same British King Ebrancus. And
the old Flamens City Alcluid, or Alclutht was also, founded by the same King
of Britain. There is question where this City for certain was, but all
agree, near that wall of Division, and so the privileges and power thereof,
most probably extended on both sides of that Division: The City Caerliel or
Lugubalia was a place of this Prerogative, builded by Leil the seventh in
number of the British Kings, and out of doubt had power, and prerogative in
both sides of the wall, both in Loegria and Albania, having as our Antiquaries
deliver, and experience yet proves, in it part of that famous wall of
separation: habet haec vrbs aliquam partem illius Muri famosi qui transcindit
Northumbriam. Ranulphus Higeden and others places an old City vrbs Beble,
vrbs regia, a Regal City upon the River Twyde, super ripam Twidi, which
divides England and Scotland, and if it was a Flamens, and Bishops See, as the
ancient glory of it persuadeth to think, the Jurisdiction of it must needs
extend into Albania.

6. Besides we find both in Protestant, and other Antiquaries, to speak in
their words, that 800. years before the coming of Christ, Cunedagius King of
all Britain builded a Temple of Mars at Perch, that is now S. Ihons Town in
Scotland, and placed there a Flamine. Therefore we may not singularly deny unto
this old City, and Flamens Seat, which Antiquaries generally grant unto all
such in this time, to have been changed into a Bishops See. And Seuerus who
caused the wall of separation to be made or finished, and defended, coming
hither after the death of King Lucius, when this change of Temples into
Episcopal Sees was generally made and confirmed, this Temporal separation
could not in any respect hinder the extension, and practice of spiritual
power, and Jurisdiction, at that settling and establishing it hear generally in
Britain. And the Scottish Historians themselves, when they come to make
Relation of their Conversion in the time of Pope Victor, after S. Eleutherius
time, and after the Brittans, and Britain had generally received the faith of
Christ, and all Ecclesiastical matters hear established, they neither say,
that any one Bishop was sent unto them by Pope Victor, but rather the
Countrarye, when it is hard to find in Antiquities how any great, and
temporally independing people, or Nation, such as the Scots then clay me to
have been, except they were subjected to other Bishops, to rule and govern
them in spiritual affairs, which is properly belonging to that high
spiritual dignity, were converted without a Bishop, or Bishops.

7. And when S. Victor Pope sent Preachers unto them, they do say, that he
sent them unto them in, and throughout Albania, as if they, and not the
Brittans had then possessed, and inhabited there: but they say, the Scots were
then taught and instructed by Priests, which Pope Victor sent to Veremund. and
Hect. Boeth. l. 5. Scot. Hist.
preach the Gospel of Christ unto the uttermost part of Albion, Sacerdotibus
praeceptoribus, quos Victor Pontifex Maximus ad Christi dogma propalandum, in
extremam miserat Albionem; which furthest part of Albion is 300. miles distant,
from that part of Albania, which joined with Loegria, England. Therefore we see
clearly, that the Scots only then lived in the furthest and most remote part
of Albion, or some Islands thereof, and possessed not our great Albania, the
Brittans Country, and Possession: and in such sense they may call their small
place, or places of aboude Scotia, Scots land, which could Josephus orat. ad
Iudaeos apud Egesipp. l. 5. c. 15.
yet be very small when Josephus in the Age before, had testified that it had
no land at all: Scotia terris nihil debet: of which, and their place of
habitation at land, I shall speak more when I come to their Conversion in the
time, and by the means and help of Pope Victor, in the beginning of the next
Age; And for this present, and my purpose now concerning the Conversion of the
Brittans in Albania, this which I have said, suffices to let us be assured,
it was effected in the same time, and manner, as the other of our other
Brittans in Loegria and Cambria, and by the same means, Mission, and
Apostolic men, sent and directed hither, and hear their sacred Actions, and
labors were confirmed by the highest Papal power of holy Pope Eleutherius.

THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
OF DIVERSE BOOKS OR WRITINGS OF S. Phaganus, Damianus, Eluanus, Meduuinus, and
others: Charters and Immunities of Pope Eleutherius, and King Lucius: the
Scripturs hear received in the old Latin Translation, and the same Canon of
them, which Catholics now observe, and follow.

WHEN our holy Ecclesiastical state was thus settled in Britain, that the
memory and observation thereof might be more firmly fixed and impressed in the
understandings, and wills of men to have duly in mind, and perform those
duties which particularly belonged unto them in this Kind, these holy Legates,
as both Catholic and Protestant Antiquaries deliver, committed these their
Acts to writing, by which means they came, and not only by Tradition, to the
knowledge of Posterity; and the Popes of Rome (to write in a Protestant
Bishops phrase) took these their proceedings hear in Britain, of all
kingdoms their first begotten child in Christ, as a Pattern, to divide other
Provinces in to Parishes and Diocesses, Io. Bal. l. de Script. Brit. cent. 1.
in Eluan.
as they had done hear. Quum in fine essent omnia ordinatione quadam per
Fugatium and Damianum in rem Christianam permutata, vt and apud Posteros
clariora perdurarent, membranis Eluanus and Meduinus dederunt Acta per Legatos
l 1. 1. Inde ad nos, and non alio medio peruenerunt. Ex hoc and similibus
fundamentis, caepere postea Romanorum Pontifices occasionem Prouincias
diuidendi in Paraecias and Dioeceses. A late Catholic Collector of holy
Writers of this Nation, says, that Eluanus did write one Book of the
Original of the British Church: Eluanus Io. Pitseus l. de Illustr. Britan.
Script. aetate 2. in Eluan. and Meduino. Antiq. Glast. Manuscript. S. Patri.
Epistol. Capgrau. in S. Patricio. Leland. in Arthur. assert.
scripsisse perhibetur, de origin Ecclesiae Britannicae librum vnum. And that
Meduinus wrote a Book of the Acts of Fugatius, and Damianus in Britain.
Meduinus Posteris tradidit Fugatij and Damiani gesta in Britannia, librum vnum.
The old Manuscript Antiquities of Glastenbury make mention of three Books
found there, all which, or parts of every of them, were written in this time.
The first is called, Scripta Sanctorum Phagani and Deruiani. The writings of
the Saints Phaganus and Deruianus. The second, had among other things, how
these holy Legates procured 10. years Indulgence to that holy place. The third
was, Volumen, a Volume, wherein were written the Acts of the Apostles, and the
Acts, and gests of S. Phaganus, and Deruianus. Volumen vnum in quo scripti
erant actus Apostolorum pariter cum Actibus and gestis Sanctorum Phagani and
Deruiani.

2. I have mentioned before, how King Lucius wrote diverse Epistles to the Pope,
or Popes of Rome in his time, about the settling of Christian Religion in this
kingdom. And as S. Eleutherius Pope of Rome directed him by the Counsel and
advise of his Clergy, and Nobles, he caused a collection, and correction of
Laws temporal, to be compiled, and published, to govern The Christian
munifi^^nce and bou^tic of King Lucius in this time.
his Christian kingdom by, which continued long after in writing, among many
both British and other Kings of this Nation, allthough with some change or
addition, as the times and other circumstances required in such cases. This
holy King also granted, made, and signed many writings, Charters, and Donations
for the defense, maintenance, and preservation of Religion, and the chief
Teachers, and Professors thereof, as to the University of Cambridge, the
School of Bangor, Monastery of Shaftesbury, and such others, and to every
Archiepiscopall and Episcopal See in Britain, both for the assuring the old
Revenues, and Privileges of the Archflamens, and Flamens, as others new and
more ample, which he conferred unto them, and such as should sit and succeed
in them for ever. Pope Eleutherius granted many privileges, immunities, and
Indulgences hear.


3. In this time also the Rule of the holy Religeous men, I have spoken of
before, was written, and observed by them. And besides the general
confirmation of Pope Eleutherius, which I have formerly spoken of, for the
ratifying and approving the proceedings of his Legates, he granted very many
other particular Ratifications, and Immunities to certain Parsons, and Places
hear: such was his Bull of Confirmation, which the Cambridge Antiquaries
contend he granted to that University: such his grant of 10. years of
Indulgence at the request of his Legates to the pilgrims, that deuoutely visited
the old Church of Glastenbury: as likewise, that of 30. years pardon to all
Bishops, that should with devotion come one Pilgrimadge to the Chapel of S.
Michaell The old Decrees of the primative Popes received hear in this time.
there, as the Antiquities of that place give testimony.

4. The Order of the holy Sacrifice of Mass, and other public service of the
Church delivered, and established hear at that time, was the Roman Order,
which the holy Legates our Apostles brought from Rome, who also published hear
the Decrees of the holy Popes from S. Peter to their time, many of which, so
far as our Protestant writers would give me leave, and allowance unto, I
have remembered before. This time and Age also is the Eleuther. Epist. ad Regem
Luciu^. Leg. S. Edw. Lambert. de leg. Antiq. Godwin. Conuers. of Brit.
first, wherein either the Scripturs of the Old, or New Testament, were by any
ancient Author received, and published in Britain. For S. Eleutherius Pope
in his Epistle to King Lucius makes it, but a nuper, late thing to have the
holy Scripturs in this kingdom. By which also, as by the known ignorance of
the Britans in those days, either in Greek, or Hebrew language, it is evident
they were received hear in the Latin tongue, understood The holy Scriptures
received hear then, in the Latin tongue, with the same Canon of Books which
the Roman Church now uses.
by all the learned of this kingdom of Britain. Likewise we learn by the
same part of Pope Eleutherius his Epistle to King Lucius, that the Primitive
Church both at Rome, and Britain then received that Canon of holy Scripturs,
and those Books to be Canonical, which the present Roman Church embraces for
such, and not that maimed, and mangled new Canon which our English Protestants
with some others of their School, would only have received for that piece of
his Epistle, which is left unto us, being very short, and very few citations of
Scripturs used in it, only one out of the New Testament, and not above 4. or
5. out of the Old: yet among these so few, he cites for Canonical Scripture
such as these men disallow for such, namely these words by their Protestants
Translation: according to King Solomon: wisdom will not enter into a
spiteful soul nor inhabit in a body subject to sin. This is found only
in the second Chapter of the Book of Wisdom: which with Sap. 2.
diverse others the sixth Article of our Parliament Protestant Religion
disalloweth to be holy. And S. Gildas the most ancient Writer left unto us,
cites Articul. 6. of Prot. Relig. Gild. l. de excid. and conq. Britan.
as parts of holy Scripturs, received by our Primative Christian Brittans,
diverse Books of holy Scripturs, which the new Religion does not admite. The
old Antiquities of Glastenbury, which more plainly, and fully set down the
Apostolic Labors, and Travails of these holy Legates, then any other Monument
we have, and of many glorious Saints both of the Disciples of S. Joseph and the
Apostles, and of these Legates buried at Glastenbury, and the long living of S.
Damianus and Faganus there 9. years, and their great devotion to that holy
place, and how their Disciples there living Religious Eremits by Succession
267. years until S. Patrike his coming thither, died and were buried there,
but whether the Legates themselves there were interred, or returned thence, they
do not deliver, but leave it doubtful: hij vero duo sancti regionem istam in
principio ad fidem Christianam conuerterunt, sed vtrum ibi requiescunt, vel
inde redierunt, non inuenimus scriptum. Ibi multi ex Discipulis Sanctorum
Phagani and Deruiani requiescunt, qui per ducentos sexaginta and septem annos
quidem alij post alios vsque Aduentum sancti Patricij in praefata Insula sicut
Anachoritae habitauerunt. And so I end this second Age.

The end of this Second Age.
THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN.

THE THIRD AGE.

THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN.
THE THIRD AGE.
THE I. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN IS DELIVERED, THAT S. VICTOR being now Pope, Seuerus Emperor, and S.
Lucius yet King of Britain, but shortly dying, S. Victor was Supreme in
government of the whole Church of Christ, in Asia, Afrike and Europe, and
particularly in Britain, which so acknowledged, and received from him the true
observation of Easter, as it had done with other Catholic customs, from S.
Eleutherius before.

AS I closed up the second Age with the Renowned Pope S. Victor, Seuerus
Emperor of Rome, and that our most Illustrious and relucent Lucius King of
Britain: So I must open my way, and passadge to the Third and next Centurye,
by the continuance Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. An. 194. Baron. Tom. 2. An.
194. Sever. Binius Tom. 1. Council. in Vict. Jacob. Gordon. An. 194. Matthew.
Westminster. An. 198. Florent. Wigornien. An. 199.
of the same Rulers in the world. S. Victor began his Papacy in, or about the
year of Christ 194. as Marianus and diverse others write. But our Monks and
Contrimen Matthew of Westminster, and Florentius Wigorniensis give him a later
entrance to the Sea Apostolic. The former says, it was in the year of Grace
198. Anno gratiae 198. Victor Romanae Sedis Pontifex effectus. The other says,
that Pope Eleutherius lived until the year after this 199, when Victor was
chosen. Martinus Polonus makes him not Pope before the beginning of this Age,
in the year of Christ 203. And therefore finding no memorable thing of this
Pope belonging to the Ecclesiastical History of Britain until this time, I
do hear first remember him.

2. This holy Pope in his Epistle to Theop^ilus Patriarch of Alexandria,
Victor. Epist. ad Theoph. Alexand. Tom. 1. Council. Damasus in Victor. Papa.
Florent. Wigor. in Chronic. An. 200. Marian. Scot. aetate 6. An. 192.
styles himself Archbishop of the Roman, and Universal Church: Victor
Romanae ac vniuersalis Ecclesiae Archiepiscopus. This Epistle with this style
of Archbishop of the Universal Church, as our ancient and learned Historian
Florentius Wigorniensis witnesses, was written in the year of Christ 200, the
13. of the Calends of August: Victor Romanae ac vniuersalis Ecclesiae
Archiepiscopus Theophilo, and Fratribus Alexandrae Christo famulantibus,
salutem in Domino: haec Epistola data est 13. Calendas Augusti. Our learned and
renowned Countryman also S. Marianus has the same words, concerning this
Supreme Spiritual style, and power of Pope Victor over the Universal Church,
only differing in the year from Florentius: Victor Romae ac vniuersalis
Ecclesiae Archiepiscopus. To this dignity of Supreamacy both claymed, and
exercised Matthias Flacius Illyric. Io. Wiga^dus, Mat. Iudex. and Basil. Faber.
cent. 2. c. 8. col. 155. and cent. 3. col. 168. Barn. in Vit. Pontif. Romans in
Victore. Io. Bal. l. 1. de Act. Pontif. Roman. in eod. Robert. Barnes supr.
Damasus, seu Anastasius in Victore. Rob. Barn. l. de Vit. Romans Pont. in Pio 1.
Florent. Wigor. in Chron. Ann. 202. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. An. 194.
Robert. Barnes supr. in Victore. S. Victor. Epist. 1. Decret. ad Theophilum
Alexandriae Episcopum apud Sur. and Seuerin. Bin. to. 1. Conc. Magdeb. cent. 2.
Marian. Scot. aetat. 6. an. 194. Mart. Polo^ Supput. in Vict. Florent. Wigor.
An. 200. Robert. Barnes l. de Vit. Pont. in Victore.
by this holy Pope S. Victor, both foreign and English Protestants give full
allowance, when they plainly confess that he excommunicated the Churches of
Asia, for their obstinate error in the Paschall observation. Victor missis
literis, fratres omnes Asiaticos, and Ecclesias vicinas a se excommunicatione
Ecclesiae exclusos and reiectos palam denuntiat. The same Title and preeminent
power he both claymed, and executed by these men, when as they testify, he
excommunicated Theodorus for affirming Christ was only man: Victor Theodorum
dicentem Christum purum hominem sine Deo esse, Ecclesia eiecit. And Interdicted
all them, which upon an Injury done, would not be reconciled to him that had
hurt them. Sacris Interdixit illis, qui ob illatam Iniuriam reconciliari
nollent ei, qui laesit. And yet as both the Protestants, and all Catholics
acknowledge, he did not make any new ordinance in this, but as S. Pius had done
before: Pius Pascha die Dominica esse celebranda instituit. And his Immediate
Predecessor Eleutherius our Apostle had done the same: Victor Papa d^tis late
libellis constituit vt Pascha Die Dominico, sicut and Praecessor eius
Eleutherius, a 14. luna primi Mensis vsque in 21. celebraretur. And the first
general Council of Nice, a our Protestants confess, did approve this Decree
of S. Victor. In Niceno Concilio Victoris Decretum approbatum est. Et cautum
est, vt Pascha die Dominico celebraretur, and was hear received in our
Britain. And this is manifest, in that Decretall Epistle of Pope Victor,
received by Protestants before, where he plainly says, that his Predecessors
had commanded before him, that which he did for keeping Easter. Celebritatem
sancti Paschae Die Dominico agi debere, and Praedecessores nostri iam
statuerunt, and nos illud vobis eadem Die celebrari solemniter mandamus, quia
non decet, vt membra a capite discrepent, nec contraria gerant. Where we see,
he calls himself the head of the Patriarch, and Clergy of Alexandria, and
them his members. And giving other Rules in that Epistle both about solemn
Baptism in the time of Easter, and not solemn in time of necessity, and not
intermedling in Bishops causes, without the allowance of the Sea Apostolic of
Rome, proving it was so from the Apostles time, and confirming his Decree both
by the words of Christ to S. Peter, and the first Epistle of S. Clement, which
some have questioned, he utterly forbids any man to alter or gainesay these
Decrees. Haec vero statuta nulla debent improbitate conuelli, nulla nouitate
mutari: quia alia est ratio causarum saecularium, alia diuinarum. Ea vos
iudicare, ad Apostolicam delatum est sedem, quae praeter nostram vobis d^finire
non licet Authoritatem, id est Episcoporum causas. Vnde ita constitutum liquet
a tempore Apostolorum, and deinceps placuit, vt accusatus vel iudicatus a
Comprouincialibus in aliqua causa Episcopus, licenter appellet, and adeat
Apostolicae Sedis Pontificem, qui aut per se, out per Vicarios suos eius
retractari negotium procuret. Et dum, iterato Iudicio, Pontifex causam suam
agit, nullus alius in eius loco ponatur, aut ordinetur Episcopus: Quoniam
quanquam a Comprouincialibus Episcopis accusati ca^sam Pontificis scrutari
liceat, non tamen definiri, inco^s^lto Romano Pontifice permissum est, cum B.
Petro Apostolo non ab alio, quam ab ipso Matt^. 16.
dictum sit Domino: Quaecunque ligaueris super terram, erunt ligata and in
caelo: and quaecumque solueris super terram, erunt soluta and in caelo. Et
alibi in Institutis legitur Epist. 1. Clement.
Apostolicis. Si quis putauerit se a proprio Metropolitano grauari, apud
Patriarcham vel Primatem Diaeceseos, aut penes vniuersalis Apostolicae
Ecclesiae iudicetur sedem. Nihil aliud est fratres, talis praesumptio, nisi
Apostolorum suorumque successorum terminos trangredi, eoru^que Decreta violare.
Culpantur enim vt scriptum est, fratres, qui aliter circa Episcopos iudicare
praesumunt, quam Apostolicae Sedis Papae fieri placuerit. Et quis est qui
iudicat eum, quem Dominus sibi, and huic sanctae Sedi reseruari voluit
iudicandum? And as this holy and learned Pope, and Saint, claymed and exercised
that highest spiritual power and Jurisdiction over the Churches of Europe,
where he lived, and Asia, he took also upon him the same supereminent
superiority over the Clergy and Churches of Afrike, the other part of the
world, commanding them to peace, and concord and unity in Religion, and
either actually excommunicating, or threatening excommunication Victor Epist. ad
Vniuersos Episcopos Africae. Tom. 1. con. and apud Magdebur. cent. 2.
unto those, that should disobey him in those commands: perlatum est ad Sedem
Apostolicam, aliquos vestrum, nocere fratres velle, and vt cadant, decertare.
Similiter in Sacramentis discrepare, and ob id contentiones and aemulationes
inter vos fieri, a quibus dissensionibus vos auertere, and in his concordare,
and opem far vicissim, mandamus nam si hoc agere cito neglexeritis, and
vicissim reconciliari non studueritis, ab Apostolicae Sedis and totius
Ecclesiae communione vos pelli non dubitetis. where he expressly declares his
Authority, as Pope of Rome, to excommunicate the Bishops and Churches of
Afrike, as he had done to those of Asia, both from the Apostolic, Roman, and
Catholic Church of the whole world.

3. Now for his Power over the Churches of Europe, wherein his Apostolic Roman
See, was by all Antiquaries, Catholics and Protestants ever the only chief
Apostolic Metropolitan Church, it cannot be questioned, when we shall find,
how even by Ambassadge and entreaty, he sent Apostolic men into the furthest
parts of this Island to convert it to Christ. And Holinsh. Histor. of Scotland
p. 68. in K. Donaldus.
our Protestant Historians confess, of this holy Pope, that being glad to
increase the faith of Christ through all parts of the world, sent into Scotland
such well disposed parsons, as he thought most fit for that purpose. The
Scottish Historians say, he sent his Preachers to the uttermost parts of this
Western and Europian parts Veremundus apud Hector Boeth. and idem. l. 5.
Scotor. Hist. prope finem.
of the world, and the Barbarous Inhabitans learned Divinity of those
Apostolic Preachers which he sent. Incaepere and nostri tum primum, sacras
colere litteras, sacerdotibus praeceptoribus, quos Victor Pontifex Maximus, ad
Christ dogma propalandam in extremam miserat Albionem. This will sufficiently
declare, that the Primative Christian Britans, and Scots which were converted
to Christian Religion, by these two renowned Popes, and Saints, S. Eleutherius
and S. Victor, which so clearly and earnestly declared, and commanded the true
Apostolical observation of Easter, and had received also the first general
Council of Nice, where the same was defined, and published to the whole
Christian world, did not receive their erroneous Paschall observance from their
first Masters, and Instructers in Religion, but by long later accidents, and
ignorant Misinformations. Of Seuerus the Emperor, whether he was descended of
our Britans Race, or other, I shall more particular entreat, when I shall
bring him to continue long time, and to die in Britain. Only Method. apud Mar
Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. and Marian. ib. an. 203. in Seuero Martin. Polon.
Supputat. col. 51. florent. Wigorn. Chronic. an. 189. vel 211. Matthew. Westminster.
an. 195. Manuscript. of S. Peter's Church in Cornhill Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae
201.
hear I say that by common consent he was a great Persecutour of Christians,
as both our own writers, and others testify, and thereupon styled the fifth
persecuting Emperor after Nero. Post Neronem, Seuerus quintam Persecutionem in
Christianos exicita^it, plurimique Sanctorum per diuersas Prouincias Martyrio
coronantur. Concerning our most Noble Protochristian King Lucius, as we are
come to Joy of his Immortal glory, and honor in heaven, by his happy
Translation from a transitory terrestrial, to an eternal celestial and never
ceasing kingdom, so we must bewail the unspeakable want, and loss, which
this kingdom long time by many miseries, and afflictions suffered by the death
of so holy, just, and prudent a Prince, and Ruler happening by the most diligent
Calculatours of time we have, in the beginning and first year of this Age.
Anno gratiae 201. Inclitus Britannorum Rex Lucius in bonis actibus assumptus ab
hac vita migrauit ad Christum.

THE II. CHAPTER.
OF THE TIME, AND PLACE OF KING LUCIUS his death; That he did not die, or was
martyred in Germany. Neither had he any Sister called Emerita martyred there.
It was an other Prince of Britain after this time. This our first Christian
King Lucius died at Gloucester in Britain.

1. BEING come to celebrate the day of the death of our glorious King Lucius,
for the Joy that he enjoyed thereby, and bewail The time of King Lucius death.
it, for the unspeakable loss this Nation received thereby, we are to fall
into the like difficulties, both of the time, and place Matthew. Westminster. an.
gratiae 201. Manuscript. Antiq. Eccles. S. Petri in Cornhill Londin. Matthew.
Paris in Hist. maiori apud Io. Caium l. 1. Ant. Cantab. Acad. page 109. Martin.
Polon. Supputat. an. 188. in Eleutherio.
thereof, which we passed for the beginning of his Reign and Conversion to
Christ, before handled and dissolved: yet for the time of his death, the
ancient Manuscript of S. Peter's Church in Cornehill in London, and Matthew the
Monk of Westminster have given us particular intelligence, that it was in the
first year of this third hundred of years. Matthew Paris writes the same.
And Martinus Polonus, that testifies King Lucius wrote to Pope Eleutherius
concerning his Conversion in the year 188. must needs give evidence to that
opinion, for certain it is by all Antiquities, that King Lucius lived many
years after that, to see his kingdom converted to Christ. And our Protestant
Antiquaries with the best Authors (as they say) which confess this first
writing of King Lucius to Pope Eleutherius was not before the 178. year of
Christ: Haec contigerunt anno a Christi aduentu in carnem 178. vt potiores
commemorant Annals. For William of Malmesbury Io. Bal. l. de script. Britan.
cent. 1. in Lucio Pio. Caius supr. page 111.
in his Manuscript History of Glastenbury, and other old Antiquities thereof,
do prove, that after S. Damianus and Faganus had converted this kingdom, by
the Papal Commission of S. Eleutherius, they did continue 9. years at the
least at Glastenbury, King Lucius still living, and reigning hear. Guliel.
Malm. l. de Ant. Coen. Glaston. Antiq. Manuscrip. tab. fixae Glast. Polid.
Virgil. Hist. in Lucio. Lilius Hist. and alij Hollinshed Hist. of Engl. l. 4.
c. 19. Stowe Hist. an. 179. in Lucius. Io. Bal. l. de Scriptor. Britan. centur.
1. in Lucio Pio. Author of the Engl. Martyrol. 3. day of December. Martyrol.
Romans die 3. December. and alij.
Polidor, Lilly, Hollinshed, Stowe, and other Protestants lean to this opinion.

2. About the day of his death there is better Agreement, for both those which
say he died in Britain, both Catholics and Protestants, as also they which
deny it, affirming he died in Germany, agree, that this was upon the third day
of December: Lucius Pius Claudiocestriae tertia die Decembris vitae suae finem
accepit. So writes a Protestant Bishop of England, with others. And the Roman
Martyrologe with others, which otherwise write of the place of his death
consent: Tertio Nonas Decembris Lucij Britannorum Regis, qui primus ex ijs
Regibus Christi fidem suscepit, tempore Eleutherij Papae.

3. The place and manner of his death is more questioned: diverse forreyne
writers contend, that he forsook his kingdom, and being made a Priest, and
afterward Bishop, preached to the Rhetians in Germany, was Bishop there of
Curre, and died by Martyrdom. The Roman Martyrologe inclines to this opinion,
making his death to have been Curiae in Germania: At Curre in Germany, saying
plainly as I have cited before, that this Lucius which died there, was the
first of the Kings of the Britans which received the faith of Christ in the
time of Pope Eleutherius. This is the greatest Authority I find for this
opinion, yet this Author does not take upon him to say, that he was either
Bishop, or Martyr, which he would not, neither by his Order and rule of
writing, which might not omit such things, could have omitted, if he had known
or probably thought either of them to have been true. And whereas this Author
confidently says of King Lucius, that he was primus ex ijs King Lucius did not
preach in Germany, neither was he martyred or died there.
Regibus qui Christi fidem suscepit, the first of the British Kings which
received the faith of Christ, it does formerly appear, that diverse Authors
even of this Nation which might better learn the truth hereof then a stranger,
could have written otherwise both of Aruiragus, Marius, and Coillus British
Kings. And I have given sufficient warrant before, that for the faith and
Religion of King Lucius in particular, it was Christian, before the Papacy of
S. Eleutherius, and the general Conversion of the kingdom of Britain, and
not of King Lucius, was wrought in the time of Pope Eleutherius: And yet this
Author absolutely affirms that King Lucius himself did receive the faith of
Christ in the time of Pope Eleutherius: fidem Christi suscepit tempore
Eleutherij Papae. Neither does he in that, or any other place make any memory
of S. Author of the Engl. Martyrol. ex Eisengren. cent. 2. d. 1. and Breuia.
Curiensi 4. December. Caspar Bruch. Catal. Episcop. Curien. Io. Stumpff. in
Rhetia. Magdeburg. cent. Guliel. Eisengr. centenar. 2. Io. Naucler. gener. 6.
volum. 8. Petr. de Natal. l. 1. cap. 24.
Emerita, supposed by some others, to be Sister to our King Lucius, and
departing forth of Britain with him, to have been martyred in Germany, in, or
near Curre in Rhetia, to which in some Judgments the Ecclesiastical Office of
that Church seems to give allowance, at the least for one Lucius regio
stemate apud Britannos ortus, borne of the British Kingly Race, and his Sister
S. Emerita; but this proves rather, that it was not S. Lucius our King, but an
other of the Kingly Line, which I shall prove hereafter, to have been a Son
of Constantius, and S. Helena Empress, that honor of Britain, an elder
brother to Constantine the Great Emperor, who became an holy Clergy man, and
preached in those parts of Germany. Which together with the likeness, or
Identitie of name, Regal Race, and nearnes in blood, gave occasion to some to
think, it was the renowned first British Christian King of that name which
undertook that course of life and so ended it there.

4. That our first Christian King Lucius could not be Bishop there, is evident
before, when I have kept him so long in Britain, that for Age he was disabled,
for such a Journey. Further they which hold he was Bishop of Churr^ in Germany,
and Martyred there, say this Martyrdom of his there, was about the year of
Christ 182. when I have proved him living, and King still in Britain 9. years
after. Besides they say, that S. Emerita his Sister went with him, and was
Martyred there also. But it is evident by our Histories, that our first
Christian King Lucius had neither Brother, Sister, nor child, but he was
vnicus patris, and begotten of King Coillus in his old Age, having no other
child, Anno gratiae 115. natus est Coillo, Regi Britonum, vnicus filius,
Matthew. Westminster. an. 115. Pontic. Virun. Hist. Brit. lib. 4.
quem vocauit Lucium, qui factus est patri gaudium and exultatio, quia in
senectute, and quasi ab haerede destitutus, genuerat eum. Whereby is evident,
that this King Lucius had neither Brother, nor Sister named Emerita or any
other. And with what probability can it be affirmed that a King so holy, and
loving of his Countries good, and quiet, having no Christian heir to succeed
him, would, or in conscience could forsake his native Country, and subjects in
such a case, that were in justice belonging to his chiefest chardge, which no
other could execute, to preach unto forreyners, which many of his subjects and
others could, and at his request would most willingly have performed. We read
in Histories that many descended of Regal Race, have in such cases been taken
forth of their Monasteries, and Religeous Conversation, to govern kingdoms,
destitute of heirs, but that a King so virtuous, wise, loving, and beloved of
his Country having no such heir to succeed him, but by such course to expose
and leave his kingdom to so many certain miseries, and calamities, as fell
upon Britain by the death of King Lucius, and probably were foreseen of all
wise men, did, might, would, or could take such a course, Antiquities have no
example, justice denies it, charity cannot allow it. Further I shall prove
hereafter that S. Emerita called the Sister of S. Lucius, was the Sister of
Lucius Son of Constantius, and Helena, and so neither daughter of King
Coillus, nor Sister to our first Christian King Lucius, and so he could not be
that Lucius which preached in Germany. Aegid. Schudus in descript. Rhethiae
cap. 15.


5. And where they say, he was Bishop of Curia, Aegidius Schudus a German
Writer proves, that Curia was not then builded, no such City in that Country,
nor long after, and therefore with Caspar Bruchius in his Catalogue of the
Bishops of that City, and others as well German and other Writers makes
Caspar Bruchius in Catal. Episc. Curien. in Init.
the first Bishop of that place above two hundreds of years after the time of
our first Christian King Lucius. Bruchius says it was not a Bishops See,
until about the 440. year of Christ: Episcopatus Churensis vel Curiensis in
Rhetis vnus ex vetustissimis Germaniae Episcopatihus, caepit circa annum
Christianae Redemptionis 440. and makes Asimo the first and Puricius or
Pruricius the second Bishop thereof. Thus these German Writers themselves, and
others of them either doubt of, or deny that History. Johannes Nauclerus much
urged Ioannes Naucl. in Chron. gener. 6. page 565.
for this Relation, makes it only a report, fertur: and overthrows the
History of the Church of Curre, so much stood upon for this matter, in
confessing that by this History that Lucius, which is said to have preached in
Rhetia, was converted by S. Timothy the Apostle S. Paul's Scholar, dead long
time before our S. Lucius was borne. Sebastian Munster says plainly, that
Sebast. Monster. Cosmogr. l. 3. cap. 344.
whereas there is a vulgar report, a vulgo persuasum habetur (he makes no
more of any Lucius preaching there) that one Lucius peeached in that place, if
it were so, it could not possibly be our first Christian King Lucius, for he
never went out of Britain, but very godly lived and died hear. Britanniae
ille Rex qui circiter Annum Domini 190. floruit patriam nequaquam exiens, pie
apud suos obdormiuit. Caspar Bruchius also does plainly reject all that
History, as Caspar Bruchius in Catal. Episc. Curien. prope Initium. Manuscr.
Gallic. Antiq. An. 296.
it is applied by some to our King Lucius, and among other reasons adds that
the great difference of years will not permit it to be true, Numerus Annorum
non conuenit. An old French Manuscript History joins in the same, and
leaves him living, dying, and buried in Britain. And if we come home to our
own Historians, and Antiquities most likely to make the most true and King
Lucius died and was buried in Gloucester in the Cathedral Church there.
certain Relation of this their so renowned King, they set down the year,
the day, and particular place of his death, and the very Church, one of his
own foundation, where his body was enterred. The day and year they have
remembered before, the 201. year of Christ, the third day of December. Matthew.
Westminster. ann. 201. Antiq. Eccl. S. Petri in Cornhill Land. Galfr. Monum. Hist.
Brit. l. 5. c. 1. Ponticus Virun. Brit. Hist. l. 5. in initio. Matthew. Westminster.
201. in Chron. Compilatio M. S. de gest. Brit. and Anglo. in Lucio. Manuscr.
Hist. Gallicar. Princip. Or que nous sommes. In Lucius. Caxton. Histor. part.
4. in K. Lucius. Manuscr. Hist. Antiq. in Lucio. Antiquit. Eccl. S. Petri in
Cornhill Londini. Harding Cronic. c. 51. f. 44. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. c.
9.. 18. Aegidius Schudus de Prisca Rhetia: Hermanus Schedelius c. 3. Stowe and
Howes Hist. Titul. the Romans in Marcus Aurelius Antonius. Harriso^ Description
of Britain. c. 9. S. Lucius body after translated to other places, or some
part thereof.
For the place our old British History says, he died at Gloucester and was
with honor buried there in the Cathedral Church. In vrbe Claudiocestriae ab
hac vita migrauit, and in Ecclesia primae Sedis honorifice sepultus est. So
likewise writes Ponticus Virunnius; vitam finiuit in vrbe Claudiocestriae
sepultus. Matthew of Westminster setting down the time, as before, says also
he died at Gloucester, and was honorably buried there in the Cathedral Church.
Inclitus Britannorum Rex Lucius in bonis actibus assumptus, Claudiocestriae ab
hac vita migrauit ad Christum, in Ecclessa primae Sedis honortfice sepultus.
The same has an old Manuscript called Compilatio de Gessis Britonum and
Anglorum, where, in Lucio is said, in vrbe Gloucestriae obijt, and in Ecclesia
primae Sedis honorifice sepultus est. The old Author of the French Manuscript,
which begins, or que nous sumes: says: at the last he died at Gloucestre,
and was interred in the Church of the Chief See, Del primer See. Our old
English Chronicle says: he reigned with much honor, and after died, and lies
at Gloucester, so has an old Latin Manuscript History: mortuus est Lucius and
sepultus in Claudiocestria. The old Manuscript of S. Peter's Church in Cornhill
at London avouches from diverse Antiquities that he was buried at Gloucester
where the Church of S. Francis was after builded, being at the time of his
death the Cathedral and Episcopal Church of that City, as I have remembered.
Ihon Harding also witnesses of this Kings death and bury all at Gloucester.

At Cairglowe buried after his dignity. 6. And not to exclude the testimony of
our Protestant Antiquaries in this Relation, in their Theater of great
Britain, written and composed by diverse of their best Historians, and
published with their common applause, and Approbation, they make this History
of King Lucius his death in Britain a matter without question, true, and thus
scoffingly condemn those writers Which would carry him to end his days in
Germanye. That this Lucius should be the Apostle to the Bauarians, or that his
Sister Emerita was crowned with the Flames of Martyrdom fifteen years after
his death, I leave to the credit of Aegedius Schudus and Hermannus Scedelius
the Reporters. Others of them plainly say: Lucius was buried at Gloucester. Yet
this general consent of Antiquity for his first burial at Gloucester does
nothing hinder, but as the kuowne devotion both of the Britans and Saxons after
them toward holy Reliks did often and with great reverence and solemnity
remove the bodies of holy Saints, or parts of them for their greater honor. So
it might or did after fall out with the whole body of this renowned King, or
some part thereof. And the Tradition of Winchester is, that the whole body of
King Lucius, or a great part thereof, being once removed before, was the
second time Translated thither, and there lies in the body of the great
Church under a marble stone elevated about two foot from the pauement, the
same stone being now broken in two places, having upon ^t, and those holy
Reliks a Cross of 7. great brass buttons, whereof 5. are set down in
length, and the other two making the perfect figure and form of the Cross,
one on each side of the others making the length. And this reverent Translation
of King Lucius body to diverse places in Britain is sufficiently insinuated, by
the old Author of the French Manuscript History, I Manuscr. Gallic. sup. c. 9.
have cited before, who allthough he confidently affirms, that King Lucius
died at Gloucester, deuia a Gloucestre: yet he adds, that he was afterward
buried in the chief See in the City of Caerlegion: and En Leglise del Primer
See, cest assauoir en la city de Legions estoit enterres, and this he says,
was in the 196. year of Christ's Incarnation, l'an de l'Incartion 196. 4. or 5.
years sooner then others before have set down his death, except the forenamed
Manuscript Compilation which has the same Computation of his death saying,
sepultus Compilatio M. S. de gest. Brit. and Angl. in Lucio.
est Anno Incarnationis Dominicae 196. herede carens.

THE III. CHAPTER.
HOW NOTWITHSTANDING THE DEATH of King Lucius without Heir to succeed in the
government of the kingdom, the Brittans perseuered constantly in the Christian
faith: and the Scots by Preachers sent from Saint Victor Pope of Rome at the
entreatie of their King Donalde received the faith, and as the Brittans
continued in it until the Protestants time, even by their own confessions.

1. AND both to assure us further of the undoubted truth of those Histories,
which testify, the death and burial of King Lucius to have been in Britain,
and not in any foreign The great loss Britain had of King Lucius his death.
Region, as also to give us better notice and trial what honor, peace and
quiet spiritual and temporal with other happiness this kingdom enjoyed by
King Lucius blessed life, and lost them by the loss of him: it is the
constant agreement of Antiquities, Galfr. Monum. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 1.
Virun. l. 5. Histor. Matthew. Westminster. An. 201. Holinshed Hist. of Engl. l. 4. c.
19. Compilatio M. S. de gest. Brit. and Angl. in Lucio.
that Britain now made by his death destitute not only of so worthy a King,
but also of any certain Heir, or Successor of that Regal Race, fell to
intestine discord, and variance, by which it was miserably afflicted, long time
upon that occasion. Caruerat ille sobole, oritur seditio inter Britones de
successuro in Regnum: and Romana potestas infirmata est. A Protestant Historian
thus writes in general of this matter: King Lucius dyed without issue, by
reason whereof, after his decease, the Brittans fell at variance, which
continued about the space of fiftene years as Fabian thinks, howbe it the
old English Cronicle affirms that the contention betwixt them remained fifty
years, though Harding affirms but four years. Which his words of Hardings
opinion that this variance among the Brittans continued but 4. years, are to
be amended, for Harding sets down Matthew. Westminster. An. 205. Florent. Wigor. in
Chro. Marianus Scotus and Martin. Polon. in Seuero. Harding. Chronic. c. 51. f.
44.
the dissentions of the Brittans, as other Historians do, and makes them of
as long continuance, only he says, that Seuerus the Emperor came hither,
four years after the death of King Lucius, to seek to appease things, so
does Matthew of Westminster, Florentius and others as far as Harding does,
his words be these of King Lucius death.

For cause he had non heir to keep the land,
Through all Britain the Barons began discord
Unto the time that Romans took on hand
To chose a Prince by their steadfast accord:
But 4. year were gone or then they could accord,
In which then Sever the Senator
Hither came to be their Governor.
Where Harding does limit the four years, only to the Romans, to take notice
and deliberate of these things, and conclude to send Seuerus hither, saying.

But four years were gone or then they could accord, Meaning the Romans
about this matter, for it is evident both by Harding and all other Antiquaries,
that Seuerus did not accord the Britans, but the variance continued hear
during his whole life, and he was slain at York, in the same contention, as
both Harding and all others testify. Harding says:

But King Fulgen of Pightes and Scots again Harding Chron. c. 53. s. 45.

With host full great, seiged Ebranke city
Which Sever rescowed, and was slain
And Fulgen also for beten there did die.
And he continues the Brittans wars, and tumults hear long time after
Seuerus his death, and his sons after him, as other Antiquaries likewise
Christians in Britain quiet for Religion, until the Persecution of Dioclesian.
do, finding little quiet hear, until the later end of Constantius, Father of
Constantiue the Great, Emperor. Which will more appear hereafter, so far
as it carries any connection with our Ecclesiastical History.

2. And yet notwithstanding such a world of unquietness hear, and many most or
almost all our Kings in the mean time being Pagans, the Christians hear were
quiet for Religion by Antiquities. The ancient Manuscript of Winchester,
says, that from the first planting of the faith in Britain, in the
Antiquitat. Manuscr. Ecclesiae Wintonien.
time of King Lucius to the first year of Dioclesian, an hundred years
together, Christian Religion was quiet in peace, and the Religious men all that
while lived quietly in their Monasteries. Durauit Christianitas in Britannia a
tempore Bed. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 4. F^orent. Wigor. Chron. An. 162. 184. Henr.
Hunting. Hist. l. 1. in Marcus Anton. Verus. Peruetus. Antiq. Manuscr. de primo
statu. Landau. Eccles. Matthew. Parker. l. de Antiq. Britan. Goscelin. Hist. Io.
Bal. cent. 1. de Script. Brit. Godwin Conuers. of Brit. Theater of great Brit.
and alij. Gildas l. de Excid. and Conquest. Brit. c. 7.
vide licet a primo Anno Lucij Regis primi Britannorum Cristiani, vsque ad
primum Annum Dioclesiani Principis quieta in pace, centum annis and tamdiu
Monachi Deo seruientes praedictum vetus Caenobium (Wintoniense) quiet
inhabitabant. S. Bid absolutely affirms of the Brittans, that from the
planting of the faith of Christ, among them in the days of King Lucius, they
kept it inviolate, and whole in quiet peace until the times of Dioclesian,
Susceptam fidem Britanni vsque in tempora Dioclesiani Principis inuiolatam
integramque quieta in pace scruabant. Florentius Wigorniensis has the very
same words: so has Henry of Huntington. The old Manuscript History of the
first state of the Church of Landaffe justifies, that the Brittans kept this
their first faith sincere without any stayne of error until the Pelagian
Herisie. Quam Christianae Religionis fidem sine aliqua praui dogmatis macula
sinceram conseruauerunt vsquedu^ Pelagiana Haeresis orta est. This is also the
general opinio of our Protestant Antiquaries. Yet we must not make this so
universal a truth, to think that all which received the Christian faith in
those days of King Lucius, did Religiously observe the same, and that all the
Brittans without exception were Christians: for we read in S. Gildas, whose
Authority we may not easily reject: praecepta Christi licet ab Incolis tepide
suscepta sunt, apud quo sdam tamen integre, and alios minus vsque ad
Persecutionem Dioclesiani Tyrani nouennem, permansere: Allthough the Precepts
of Christ which the Britans received in the time of King Lucius, were coldly
entertained of the Inhabitants hear, yet among some they remained whole, and
with others not in such integrity, until the Persecution of Dioclesian the
Tirant.

3. We shall find hereafter many continuing hear in Britain in Paganisime,
both of the Princes, and people, before Dioclesian his Persecution began, in
this or any other Nation. Yet it will be remembered for ever to the eternal
honor of those our Primative Christian Brittans, that notwithstanding the
universal Inundation of licentious Paganism, which had reigned hear before,
the hazard of the disfriendship of the Idolatrous Roman Emperors and Senate
then swaying almost the known world, and diverse Persecutions of Christians
raging in that time, and civil dissentions now further by the death of King
Lucius falling out among our Brittans, yet in all these tempests of calamities,
and afflictions they still without any interruption, or corruption continued in
their holy Christian Religion, not only secretly, but with external glory,
and splendour of Bishops, Priests, Religious men, and women, Churches, Altars,
and their Ornaments, as I have before remembered. And at this present, when in
moral and wordly usual proceedings, nothing could have been more feared, then
a relapse to Idolatry, by the death of so worthy, and holy a governor as King
Lucius, a new zeal and devotion was kindled in the hearts of the Northren
Brittanes, and Scots in imitating the example of The Scots with their King
Donaldus receive the faith of Christ from S. Victor Pope.
him, and his happy Subjects in this kind. For at, or presently after his
death, King Donald then reigning over the Scots receiving from Pope Victor, as
King Lucius before had done from Pope Eleutherius, holy Preachers, and
Instructors, received and publikly with his wife, Nobles and Hector Boeth.
Scotor. Hist. l. 6. f. 89.
other subjects, professed the faith of Christ. Talem dederat Regi Donaldo
animum pacis Princeps and Author Christus Dominus, quod verae pietati
aspernato malorum Daemonum cultu, sese Paulo ante addixerat. Nam Seuero
imperante Romany apud Victorem Pontificem Maximum, qui quintusdecimus post
Petrum Ecclesiae praefuit, per Legatos obtinuit, vt viri Doctrina and Religione
insignes in Scotiam ab eo missi, se cum liberis and coniuge Christi nomen
profitentes, baptismate insignirent. Regis exemplum Scotica Nobilitas sequuta,
auersata impietatem, Christi Religionem complexa, Sacro font est abluta. Fuit
annus ille quo Scoti adlumen verae pietatis, Dei optimi maximi benignitate
vocati sunt and recepti, ab eo qui primus fuit humanae salutis tertius, supra
ducentesimum: Christ our Lord Prince and Author of peace gave such a mind to
King Donald, that contemninge the worship of wicked Devils, he addicted
himself to true piety. For when Seuerus was Emperor of the Romans, by his
Ambassadors he obtained of Pope Victor, the fifteenth after S. Peter, Which
ruled the Church, that men renowned for Learning and Religion to be sent from
him into Scotland, that might baptize him with his children, and wife
professing Christ. The Scottish Nobility following the example of their King
forsaking impiety, and embrasing the Religion of Christ, was baptized. This
year wherein the Scots by the mercy of God almighty were called, and received
to the light of true piety, was the third above two hundred from the first of
man's Salvation. Thus far this Scottish Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scoticar l. 4. c.
and Rege 27. Holinsh. Hist. of Scotl. in K. Donald.
Historian from the Antiquities of that Nation, to which their Protestant
Writers do also in substance consent, as also the Protestant Antiquaries of
England. Among which one writes in this manner: King Donald in the days of
the Emperor Seuerus, sent a Messenger with letters unto Pope Victor, being the
15. in number, as they say, after S. Peter, declaring unto him, that he was
fully minded to receive the Christian Religion, and utterly to forsake the
superstitious service of the Heathnish Gods, and therefore instantly required
him to send some godly learned men, to instruct him in the right belief. The
Pope hearing this, and being glad to increase the faith of Christ through all
parts of the world, sent with all speed into Scotland, such well disposed
parsons, as he thought most meet for that purpose, who at their arrival
there, did their endeavor in such diligent sort, that not only the King, but
also through his example, a great number of the Nobility were baptized, and
clearly forsook their former errors and Idolatry. This was in the year after
the birth of Will. Harrison descript. of Brit. cap. of Relig. Edw. Grymston
Book of Estat. in Scotland page 20.
Christ our Savior 203. The like have other English Protestants of this
matter, of whom one says: Scotland received the faith in the time of Pope
Victor the first in the year 203. and Idolatry did quite cease under King
Crakinte, who died in the year 313. Celestine the first sent Palladius thither
to root out the Pelagia^ Heresy, which began to increase there under Eugenius
the second, who died in the year 460. since this time the Realm continued
long in profession of the Romish Church until these later days, the Reign
of King James who now lives.

4. Thus we see how ignorantly, or rather impudently some Protestants have
written, in affirming that because some of the Britans and Scots of this Island
at the coming of S. Augustine hither were fallen into old and exploded error
of some Churches of Greece, that therefore without any warrant or Writer so
affirming, they received their first faith from the Churches of Asia, when it
is evident by all Antiquities, and these Protestants themselves, that the
Britans did receive Christian Religion from the Pope of Rome S. Eleutherius,
and the Scots from Pope S. Victor, the two greatest Promulgers, and Defenders
of the true Paschall observation, and greatest Enemies to the other erroneous
custom, and abuse that ever were. And being so plainly All Britain, both
Britans, Scots, and others, Christians, ever subject to the Pope in Spiritual
business until Caluins time.
confessed by these Protestants before, that the Scots which agreed in Religion
with the old Christian Britans of this kingdom, as all Protestants and others
agree, did continue in the Profession of the Romish Church from their first
Conversion, until the crowning of King James the sixth a Child in his Cradell,
what a childish new vpstart Profession of Protestants must that needs be, by
their own confession, which beginning with not contradiction of a yet
speachlesse Infant, to build one such a ground has rejected the Authority of
all Popes, Councels, Churches, holy learned Fathers, Saints, holy Kings and
Christian Rulers in so many hundreds of years? Or how can any man, Scot, or
other apprehend, that except King Donald his Nobles and Counsailers therein,
had been assured that the chief disposition of spiritual affairs belonged to
the Sea of Rome, and Pope thereof, that he a Christian in Judgment at the least
before, as so ancient and approved Antiquities prove, and in peace, and amity
with King Lucius of Britain, where so many renowned Bishops, and Clergy men
then lived, and to whom by the Testimony and Decree of Pope Eleutherius
before remembered, all Scots and Picts about this kingdom of Britain were
Feudatories and Subjects, and that in France and all other Nations between our
Scots, and Rome, there were many holy and learned Christian Bishops and Clergy
men, that he in prudence would, or could have sent so solemn Ambassadge, and
supplication to effect this suite to the Pope of Rome, whose Emperor then, or
presently after, and before this holy work was wholly effected, was the
greatest enemy in the world to the Scottish Nation, with all force, malice, and
Power he could, inuadinge it? Therefore we must needs conclude, even by
Protestant warrant, and allowance, that this whole kingdom of Britain from
the first Conversion thereof to Christ, did ever and continually until these
days of Ihon Calvin, that Father of the English Protestant Religion, in all
duty and obedience persevere in the unity, and doctrine of the Popes and
Church of Rome, by whom it was first converted to Christianity.

THE IV. CHAPTER.
THAT ALLTHOVGH THE BEING OF THE Scots in Britain in the time of S. Victor is
uncertain, and not proved, but rather otherwise, yet the Inhabitants of the
part now called Scotland, Britans or whosoever, were converted in King Lucius
and this time. The Bishops of the converted Scots were ever true Bishops, and
they ever obedient to the Sea of Rome.

1. BUT before we enter into any further particulars of the Conversion of the
Scottish Nation by S. Victor Pope, and his Apostolic Disciples employed
therein, which is very sparingly remembered in any Antiquities left unto us; to
deliver our selves so far as we can from Ambiguities, and uncertainties, it
is requisite to say some what, at least in general of what part, place, When
the Scots now supposed to be converted to the faith came first into Britain,
and where they now lived.
Country, or Island, in, or about this great Island of Albion, or Britain, these
Scots were, which are recorded to be converted at this time. For whatsoever the
Scots plead that this happened to their Nation long after their entrance into
this great Island, which they contend to have been in the year of the worlds
Creation 4617. Annum quo Albionem Scoti ingressi fe runtur ab orb condito
tradunt supra quater millesimum and sexcentesimum decimum septimum. This Hect.
Boeth. descript. Scot. Reg. fol. 4. Nicephor l. 1. Hist. cap. 10. Alphonsus
Rex. Eusebius. in Chron. Isid. l. 5. Origin. Cyprianus lib. Exhort. Martyr.
Hieron. in Epist. ad Tit. August. lib. 12. ciuit. cap. 10. Martyrolog. Romans
Marian. aetate 6. an. 1. Math. West. an. 1. Protest. Angl. marginal. Annotat.
in illum locum. Hol^insh. Hist. of Engl. l. 3. cap. 18. Jacob. Gordonus in
Apparatu cap. 2.
seems to be a strange calculation, and not firm enough to be builded upon:
for how could the Scots living in dark ignorance of God, and heavenly things
and knowing nothing of the Creation of the world, or such things, but by all
writers, a very unlearned, rude, and barbarous people, exiled, bannished and
wandering men, possibly have any such certain Tradition of their arrival in
Albion, in such a year of the worlds Creation, of which they were long time
after utterly ignorant? And Hector Boethius the Scottish Historian, which with
other writers sets down this Conversion in the 203. of Christ, and yet
makes that to be in 5399. year of the worlds Creation, differs from all
other Computations, either of Nicephorus, recompting the birth of Christ in the
5500. year of the world, K. Alphonsus in the 6984. Eusebius. 5199. S. Isid. 5220.
S. Cyp. to his time 6000. and S. Hier. and S. Aug. in their days 6000. long
after S. Cyp. By the Roman Martyrologe 5199. between the Creation and Christ.
By Marianus 4163. Matthew of Westminster makes an other account, some English
Protestant Antiquaries, make the distance between the Creation 3066. others
3807. Others of them reckon otherwise. And by some writers it comes to about
4000. years. Such and so manifold variances being among learned Christians in
this account, we may not easily admit for certain, what any man will therein
propose from a Scottish Paga^ surmised Tradition. Especially when we have many
Antiquities, both British, English, and forreyne, Christian and heathen, to
incline us to think, that the Scots were not long after this time, so seated
in any number in this great Island with such Power, or command, that they
could give the denomination of Scotland, to any great part thereof, or assume
the name of a King unto them, called Scotorum Rex, the King of the Scots, but
they still remained in the out little Islands, Hebrides, Mon^; Orchads, Iona, and
others. We find in an Oration of Josephus the Jew to his Countrymen in the
time of Titus, speaking Josephus orat. ad Iudaeos, apud Egesippum l. 5. cap.
15. Fascicul. Temp. Anno D. 74. Humf. Lhoid in Breuiar. Britan.
of the Roman Emperors Power at that time: Tremit hos Scotia quae terris nihil
debet, that our Scots then lived not in any great part of Land, but at Sea and
in little Islands near unto Britain. Walterus Rollewink Author of Fasciculus
Temporum writes, that the British Scots did begin hear, but in the year of
Christ 74. Scotagens oritur ex Pictis and Hiberis in Albania prope Angliam
circa Annum Domini 74. Which is manifest also by Matthew of Westminster, and
others writing, that the Picts coming hither about that time, and finding none
but Britans hear, desired to match with them in marriadge, which the Britans
refusing, the Picts went to the Sots of Ireland in the year of Christ 76. and
had wives from thence. And the Scots thus came first into Britain. Picti
vxores non habentes, filias and cognatas Britonum petierunt ab eis. Matthew
Westminster. Anno gratiae 76. 77. Bed. l. 1. Hist. Eccles. cap. 1.
At illi vt passi fuerunt repulsam, transfretauerunt in Hibernia^, and exilla
Patria mulieres reducentes, pueros* susceperant ex Pictis and Hibernensibus
Scoti originem habuerunt, quasi ex diuersis Nationibus compacti. Scot etenim
illud dicitur quod ex diuersis rebus in vnum aceruum congregatur. Our English
Protestant Historians Hollinsh Hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 15. Stowe and Howes
Hist. Romans in Marius. Humfry Lhoyd in Breui. Brit. cap. in descript. Scotiae.
thus relate this matter: King Marius having conquered the Picts, that came
into Britain, granted license to them, that remained, that they might inhabit
in the North part of Scotland, called Catnesse, being as then a Country in
manner desolate wirhout habitation: whereupon they withdrew thither, and settled
themselves in those parts. And because the Britans disdained to grant unto them
their daughters in marriadge, they sent unto the Scots into Ireland, requiring
to have wives of their Nation. The Scots agreed to their request, with this
condition, that where there wanted lawful Issue of the Kings Lineage to
succeed in the kindome of the Picts, then should they name one of the woman's
side to be their King. Thus the Picts next after the Romans, were the first of
any strangers, that came into this land to inhabit, as most writers affirm,
allthough the Scottish Chronicles avouch the Picts to be Inhabiters hear,
before the Incarnation of Christ. But the Victory which Marius obtained against
their King Roderike, chanced in the year after the Incarnation 87. neither was
there any Writer of name, that made mention either of Scots, or Picts, before
Vespasianus his time, about the year of the Incarnation 72. Henry of
Huntington Henric. hunting. Hist. l. 1.
following (as he says) Ancient Authors, haec sunt quae a scriptis veterum
traduntur, setting down the coming of the Picts into Britain, and their
marrying with the Irish, sets down the coming of the Scots out of Ireland
hither long after that time: procedente tempore venerunt and Scotti ab Hibernia
Harding Cron. fol. 42. cap. 50.
in Britanniam. Harding citing Mewinus the old British Writer for Author,
affirms, that the first Scots that came to Britain, came in the 75. year of
Christ. Giraldus Cambrensis makes the first inhabiting of the Scots in
Britain to have been in the time of great Nell, Nelli magni, King of Ireland,
who was Father to King Laegirius, in whose days S. Patrike preached Girald.
Cambr. Topograph. Hibern. cap. 16.
in that Country, which was not by any account before the year of Christ 418.
praedicto Nello Hiberniae Monarchiam obtinente, sex filios Muredi Regis
Vltoniae in class non modica Boreales Britanniae parts occupasse. Vnde and
gens ab ijs propagat^, and specisicato vocabulo Scotica vocata, vsque in
hodiernum diem Angulum illum inhabitant, Where he confidently delivers, that
the name of Scots, and Scotland in Britain began hear at this time.

2. And allthough the Scottish Histories contend, that the Scots in Britain
had gathered a great Army of men and women, as their use and need was,
against Maximus, which they had gathered ou^ of Ireland, the out Islands, and
such Scots as were then come into Britain, yet being overthrown in battle,
they were so far unable after to make resistance, even by their own
Chroniclers, that to use their own words, A Proclamation coming forth from
Maximus that all such as were natural Scottish men should by a certain day
avoid out of those Countries that they possessed in Britain, upon pain of
loosing life, and goods, and to deliver up their houses, and lands unto such
Brittans, and Picts, as were appointed by the Romans for to enjoy the same. The
Scots perceauing themselves not Boeth. Scotor. Hist. l. 7. Hollinshed Hist. of
Scotland in Eugen. an. 352. Georg. Buchan. Rerum Scot. lib. 4. in Reg. 39.
able to make any resistance, obayed this commandment, some of them passing
over into Ireland, some into the Western Isles, and some of them got over also
into Norway and Denmark, and many got entertainemen amongst the Roman
soldiers, and went over with them into France. And so there was neither man,
woman nor child of the Scottish Race left in Britain, their Priests also and
Religious men were banished and fled into the I Will of Iona. This was in the
year of Christ 352. Boethius says, this was about the 379. year of Christ,
and the Hect. Boeth. in Catal. Scotor. Reg. in Eugen. 1. and Fergusio 2. and l.
6. Histor. Hollinsh. Hist. of Scotland in Fethelmacus.
Scots had no King after this until the 422. year of Christ's Incarnation.
Scoti inde quatuor and quadraginta annis sine Rege ad Annum virginei partus
quadringentesimum vigesimum secundum fuere. And they confess, that Eugenius
which was thus overthrown by Maximus, was but an Ilander of Mona. Eugenius e
Mona Insula, and from thence made King of the Scots. Paulus Orosius scholar to
S. Augustine the Doctor, living long after this time, confineth the Scots to
Ireland, and the Isles Meuainae in his days: Hibernia proprior Britanniae a
Scotorum gentibus colitur. Huic etiam Meuania Insula proxima est, and ipsa
spatio non parua, solo commoda, aeque a Scotorum gentibus habitatur. S. Bid
also, both by Paulus Orosius Hist.
Brittans, Saxons and Scots judgments, the surest Author we can have in this
matter, setting down the coming of the Picts into these parts, first to the
Scots in Ireland, and then landing in Britain in the time of Marius, as I have
before related, long after the Nativity of Christ, proves that the Scots
came hither long after that time. Procedente autem tempore Britannia post
Britones and Pictos tertiam Scotorum Nationem in Pictorum part recepit. And
again: Hibernia proprie patria Scotorum est ab hac egressi vt diximus, tertiam
in Britannia Beda Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Britonibus and Pictis gentem addiderun^. And the Scottish Antiquaries which
would make so long, and ancient a Catalogue of their Kings, do not at any
time call them, or any of them in those times Kings of Scotia, or Scotland,
Hector Boeth. Scot. Hist. l. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scoticar. l.
1. 2. 3. 4. etc.
but Kings of the Scots, Scotorum Reges.

3. And to return to Ecclesiastical matters again. This is confirmed by this
present History of the Conversion of the King of Scots Donaldus by Pope Victor,
and his Apostolic Preachers, among whom we do not find any one Bishop to
have been sent, nor any Bishoprike erected in any place, where probably this
King Donald, or any King of the Scots ruled, long time after this. The
Scottish Antiquaries themselves that stand so stiffely for the Antiquity of
their Nation, do freely acknowledge that the first Episcopal See, that ever
was, where their Kings ruled, was erected in the time of Dioclesian his
Persecution, and this in the Island of Mona, and given to S. Amphibalus a
British Bishop by King Crathlint, King of the Scots at that time. Fuit id
templum Hect. Boeth. Scot. Hist. lib. 6. fol. 102.
omnium primum Christiano ritu, vbi Pontifex sacerque Magistratus sedem haberet
primariam inter Scotos, cuius nostri meminere Scriptores, dedicatum. Nunc S.
Palladius sent by S. Caelestine Pope, the first Bishop of Scots sent from Rome.
vocant Sodorense Fanum. And they both confess, that S. Palladius whom S.
Caelestine Pope sent to the Scots above 200. years after this, was the first
Bishop which any Pope made and sent thither, and the first that consecrared
other Bishops among the Scots. Erat Palladius primus omnium qui Sacrum inter
Scotos Hector Boethius Scot. Hist. l. 7. f. 133. Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scotic. l.
5. in Rege 42. Hector Boeth. supr. l. 6. Holins. Hist. of Scotland p. 88.
Manusc. Antiq. and Io. Capgrau. in Vita S. Niniani. Hector Boeth. Scot. Hist.
l. 7. f. 119. Io. Bal. l. de Scriptorib. Brit. cent. 1. in Niniano Beruicio.
egere Magistratum, a summo Pontifice Episcopus creatus. And: creditur idem
Palladius primus, Episcopos in Scotia creasse. And they set down the Bishops,
and places, which, and where he created them: Seruanus in the Isles of the
Orchades, and Toruanus for the Picts. Palladius Seruanum Episcopum ad Orchadas
Insulas creauit: Et Teruanum Pictorum Archiepiscopum constituit. These were the
first Bishops which the Scottish Antiquities remember to have been either among
them or the Picts, except S. Ninian, sent a little before from the Sea of Rome,
to convert the Pictish Nation. The old Manuscript, and Capgraue in S. Ninia^
his life say, that he there ordained Priests, consecrated Bishops, and divided
the Country into Parishes. Ordinauit Presbyteros, Episcopus co^secrauit, and
totam terram per certas Parochias diuisit. He being a Noble Britan by birth
preached both to the Scots, Picts, and Britans that were in those parts, and
dyed an old man about the year of Christ 432. about which time S. Palladius
came hither. Ninianus Episcopus sanctitate and Miraculis clarissimus, Scotorum,
Pictorum, Britouumque Doctor ad senium vsque, obijt faelicitatis nostrae Anno
432.

4. It is an evident falsehood which a Puritan Scottish Historian speaking of
this time of Paladius his preaching to the Scots affirms, that until then
the Churches were governed by Monks without Bishops. Ad id vsque tempus Georg.
Buchan. Rer. Scoticar. l. 5. Rege 42.
Ecclessiae absque Episcopis per Monachos regebantur. For I have showed before,
how from the beginning of Christianity the Churches of Christ in all places
were governed by Bishops, and such ever ruled hear in Britain also, thirty
or more in number hear in Britain, and how the Northren inhabitants of
Britain that were Christians, whether Britans, Picts, or Scots, were subject
to the Archbishop of York and the Bishops which were under him. And allthough
at the first Conversion of the Scots of this our Britain, whether continuing
in the out Islands, or in some small numbers within the maine kingdom, not
being Owners or Possessioners of any Cities, and places, which were, or by the
practice of the primative Church, might be allowed for Fpispall Sees, they
could not have Bishops of their own at that time, yet I have instanced before
that so soon as they came to enjoy such places as might be allowed for Bishops
Residences, they also enjoyed Bishops, with all other Holinshed Hist. of
Scotland in K. Eugenius. Io. Bal. l. de Scri. Brit. cent. 1. in Brigida Lagin.
Capgr. in S. Brig. Hector. Boeth. Scot. Hist. l. 9. f. 187. Holinsh. hist. of
Scotl. in Malcolme 3. Hector Boeth. Scotor. Hist. l. 7. f. 133. Henric.
Huntington. Hist. l. 3.
Christian Nations, so they had S. Amphibalus in Mona Bishop of Soder there, S.
Ninian and other Bishops consecrated by him. And a Protestant Antiquarie in his
History of Scotland writes, that the Scots had Bishops in the time of
Maximus, and were banished then with the other Scots. And we find many
Ancient Bishops, as Machillas, Bruno, and others Successors to S. Amphibalus
in Soder. And the Scottish Historians confess, that the Hebrides Islands,
Galloway and the adjoining Countries were subject to that Bishops See, till the
time of King Malcome the third, about the year of Christ 1057. Hebrides,
Gallouidiam, ac illis vicinus Regiones Sodorensi Episcopo, cui in Mona Seeds
erat Sacra, vsque ad Malcolmi tertij Regis tempora in rebus paruisse diuinis.
And the same Scottish Antiquaries with others prove, that allthough their
Bishops were commonly chosen at the first out of their Culdeis, holy Priests,
or Monks, yet they were consecrated and made Bishops, as others were. Ex
monachis and Culdeis Pontifices assumerentur. And to be assured, that these
Scottish Bishops were truly and ritely consecrated, it was an old custom of
the Scots in the time of S. Wiro almost a thousand years since that when
Manuscr. Ant. in Vita S. Wironis Episc. Capgr. Catal. in eod.
the Scots had any Bishop to be Consecrated, they sent him to Rome to be sacred
there: moris erat apud Incolas Pastorem a se electum Romam manibus Apostolicis
ordinandum dirigere, ordinatumque sedem and plebem reuisere. And that holy The
Bishops of Scotland ever truly consecrated, as the Roman use was.
Bishop, together with Plechelmus, which went with him, was so Consecrated by
the Pope according to that custom, a custom so long since with that Nation,
that it seems to have been there kept, and observed from the time of the
first Bishop there S. Ninian consecrated, and sent thither by the Pope of Rome.
For S. Bid says, that this S. Plechelmus which was thus Consecrated at Rome
with S. Wyro by the Pope, was Bishop of Candida Casa (S. Ninian his See, both
builded and founded by him) Plechelmus in ea quae Candida Bed. Hist. Eccl. l.
5. c. 24. Capgrau. in S. Ninian. Manuscript. and Capgr. supr. in S. Wyrone
Episcopo.
casa vocatur Episcopi Praesulatum tenet. Which stands in that I Will, or
Peninsula, where this custom was to send their elect Bishops to Rome to be
Consecrated by the Pope. Moris erat apud Incolas eiusdem Insulae Pastorem a se
electum Romam manibus Apostolicis ordinandum dirigere. Which is evident by the
words immediately following: ordinatumque sedem and plebem reuisere. That the
person thus elect and sent to Rome to be Consecrated Bishop by the Pope, should
after his Consecration return to his See and people of his Diocese, which
must needs be this Scottish Island where Candida Casa was; whether S. Pecthelmus
or Plechelmus returned, after his Consecration at Rome, and there held his
Episcopal See, as S. Bid witnesses, so this custom must needs be in that
Scottish Island. And except our Scottish Histories before deceive us, when they
call Teruanus Archbishop, who was Bishop hear by S. Palladius, Pope Celestine
his Legate, his ordination, all the Scots observed or were bound to this
custom. So that of all people in the world we may not call The Christian Scots
truly obedient to the Sea of Rome.
the validity of the Scottish Bishops Consecration into any question or enter
into the least suspicion of any wilful reuolte of that people from the Church
of Rome. Of Ignorance as in the Paschall observation, by distance of place, and
troblesomenesse of times they may be accused, of any wilful error or
disobedience they cannot be condemned.

5. Allthough I have been thus sparing upon the remembered reasons, to affirm,
that the Scottish Nation either in this great Island, or any the out Islands
thereof had before this time of S. Victor his sending Preachers to convert them
received the faith of Christ: yet I may be bold, upon better warrant to
deliver, that generally for the most part, the Inhabitants of that part, now
called Scotland, whether Britans, Picts, or Scots, did then or soon after
receive the Christian faith: for the Britans of that Country we have heard
before, that they were converted in the time of King Lucius by the Legates,
Manuscr. Antiq. de primo statu Landau. Eccles. Antiq. Glaston. tabul. ligneis
Fixae. Guliel. Malm. l. de Ant q. Caenobij Glaston. Tertull. l. contr. Iudaeos
c. 7. Magdeburg. centr. 2. cap. 2. Theat. of great Brit. l. 6.
and Apostolic Preachers sent by Pope Eleutherius. To pass over printed
Authorities in all men's hands, the old Manuscript of Landaffe says, that both
King Lucius and the Nobles of Britain, the name to the whole Island then, were
baptized, Lucius and totius Britanniae Primates Baptismum susceperunt. The
Antiquities of Glastenbury from old Annals of credit, Tradunt bonae
credulitatis Annals, do deliver that the Legates of Pope Eleutherius did
preach and baptize through all parts of Britain, huic praedicando and
baptizando Britanniae parts peragrantes. William of Malmesbury in his
Manuscript History of the Antiquity of that place, plainly teaches, that
they baptized, preached, and travailed throughout the whole Island. Baptizantes,
and praedicantes and vniuersam Insulam peragantes. And Tertullian speaks
directly of the Britans, when he says, Britannorum Romany inaccessa loca.
That the Britans in those places whether the Romans could never come, had
received the faith of Christ, which must needs be understood of the Britans
which were then in Albania, now Scotland. And I have proved before, that in the
time of King Lucius Pope Eleutherius and his Legates hear did make all the
Christians of that Northren part whatsoever they were, Britans, Picts or Scots,
Bishops, Priests, others of the Clergy or Laity subject to the Archbishop of
York. And the Scottish Antiquaries who plead so much for their honor, say,
that Pope Victor his Priests which he sent hither did not only preach the
faith of Christ unto the uttermost part of this Island of Britain or Albion:
but instructed the people in Learning and Divinity. Incaepere and nostri tum
primum, sacras Hector Boeth. Scot. Hist. l. 5. f. 89. 90.
colere literas, Sacerdotibus praeceptoribus, quos Victor Pont. Max. ad Christi
dogma propalandum in extremam miserat Albionem. And by these Apostolic men
thus sent from Rome by Pope Victor, many of the Picts also which inhabited in
the North of Britain, were converted at this time, or before in the Conversion
in the time of King Lucius: for allthough S. Ninian which came hither about the
end of the fourth hundred of years of Christ, is commonly reputed the first
Bishop, especially Consecrated at Rome, and expressly by the Pope sent to that
Nation, yet many of them were long time before converted to Christian Religion
and finding no other general conuersions hear, in our primative Church but
under Pope Eleutherius and Victor, we must asscribe these Picts Christianity
to them or their Disciples.

6. Christian Religion was so propagated among these Picts, in the later end of
this Age, that the very women of that Nation were able in dispute to confownd
the best Learned Pagans. Among them there was one most renowned Hector Boeth.
Scotor. Hist. l. 6. f. 104. 105. Ann. Scotici ibidem. Hollinsh. Hist. of
Ireland. Marcus Antonius de Dominis l. 2. de Repub. Christ. c. 8. p. 277. 278.
not only by our Irish, Scottish, British, or English Antiquaries, whether
Catholics or Protestants, but by the ancient Greek writers, among whom
Theodoret with others witnesses, that a Christian Pictish woman so with
reasons, and Miracles convinced a King and Queen with many others in Ireland,
in the time of great Constantine Emperor, that a Bishop was sent to that
Nation, to perfect that she had so happily begun. And we find that long
before the coming of S. Ninian, both the King namely Heirgustus and people of
the Picts generally were converted Christians, and at the coming of S. Regulus
thither with the holy Reliks of S. Andrewe the Apostle, entertained and
reverenced them with great zeal, and devotion, and built a Church in honor
of S. Andrewe, endowing it with great Hector Boeth. Scot. Hist. l. 6. f. 108.
109. Hollins. Hist. of. Scotland in Augusia^us An. D. 369. Will. Harris.
descrip. of Brit. c. 9. Will. Harrison supr. c. 9.
possessions, and pretiously adorning it with all things belonging to Christian
Religion, all this was long time before S. Ninia^ came hither, that the King
and people of the Picts were thus zealous in Christian Religion; which could
not probably proceed from any later or other Original the^ this sending of
preachers hither by Pope Victor, which a Protestant Antiquarie confesses
plainly by this his calculation of time: whilst these things were thus in
hand, the Mates, Picts and Caledoniens received the faith. This Conversion of
the North parts fell out in the sixth year before the wars that Seuerus had
in those quarters, and 170. after the death of our Savior Jesus Christ: Which
was the 203. of his Incarnation, the very year before assigned by all
Histories of Pope Victor his sending Preachers into those parts. Which is
further confirmed by the firm assistance and joining of the Picts and Scots
then with the Christian Britans against the Romans, testified by all
Antiquities. Which we cannot better impute to any other motive, then their new
union in Christian Religion, being enemies and at variance before. Arnoldus
Mermannius in his Treatise Of the Conversion of Nations to Christ, confirms
the same, for speaking of the Britans Conversion in the time of King Lucius and
Eleutherius, says, that the Scots, Picts, Irish, and other Ilanders of this
Climate did at, or about that time receive the Christian faith, though they
then had no Bishop. Scoti, Picti, Hiberni caeterique eius climatis Insulares,
videnter eodem tempore fidem accepisse, sed Episcopum Arnold. Merm. Theatro
conu. Gent. p. 123.
non ita, si venerabili Bedae credendum est. And this, with that is said
before, is sufficient for the Conversion of the Scots about Britain,
wheresoever they were seated.

7. But to allow them either habitation then in this great Island, or to have
had that time any Bishops, I dare not for the reasons and Authorities I have
alleged before: And yet might write more plainly, and not singularly of this
matter, if I should speak only in the words of Protestant Antiquaries, among
whom two principal men have with great applause with many men of their
Religion, thus published to the world. Neither was there Humfry Lhoyd Breuiar.
Brit. Thom. Twyne f. 35. 36.
any Writer of name, that made mention either of Scots or Readshanks before
Vespasians time, about the year of our Lords Incarnation threescore and
twelve, at what time Maurigus, or Maus, or Aruiragus reigned in Britain. For
our Chronicles do report of a Nation which lived by Piracie and Rouing one
the Sea, coming forth of Sueuia, or Norway, having one Rhythercus to their
Captain and landed in Albania, wasting all the Country with robbing and
spoiling so far as Caerleil, where he was discomfited and slain by Meurigus,
and a great many of his men also, and those which escaped fledd to their
ships, and so conveyed themselves into the Orchades, and the Isles of Scotland,
where they quietly abode a great while. These after they had taken heart of
grace, and were grown to some power, out of these Islands in their little
leathern boats, such as our fishermen do use now a days, a long Scotland
were wont to rob and spoil shephards and husbandmen. Until that about the
year of our Lord 290. when the Romans and Britans were both at civil wars,
for the purple Robe which Carausius woare, and after him Allectus, they entered
generally into Cathenesia, and Caledonia, and driving thence the British
Shephards, and Heardsmen Fol. 37.
and calling unto them the Gatheli out of Ireland, which are now called the
Scots, were so bold as to provoke the Britans in open war. Dion a man which
had been Consul, and familiar with Seuerus the Emperor, and unto him dearly
beloved, Fol. 40.
whilst he declares his expedition into Britain at lardge, not once speaks
of the Scots, or Readshankes, being very well known to all men, that he
conveyed all his force and Power into Albania or Scotland. For quoth Dion, the
Meati, and Caledonij Dion. Cassius in Seuero.
two diverse kinds of Britans, revolted from the Romans, and Seuerus calling
together his soldiers, commanded them to invade their Country, and kill all
that ever they met. If the Scots had been in Britain at that time, the
Reporter hereof being a friend, neither after him Herodian, who in sufficient
long discourse has set forth that voyage, would have defrauded an Emperor so
ambitious and thirsty of honor, as Seuerus was, of his due praise. Wherefore
it is as evident as Noone days, that at this time, which was about two hundred
and two years after the Incarnation of our Lord, the Scots had no seat in
Britain. Over and besides all this, neither Eutropius, neither Spartianus,
neither Capitolinus, neither Lampridius, neither Vopiscus nor Aurelius Victor,
who have all written the expeditions and wars of the Roman Emperors in
Britain, have in any place made mention of the Scottish or Readshanks name.
And they conclude in this manner: it appears manifestly that at this time,
that is to wit in the year of our Salvation 410. The Scots possessed no
certain Fol. 47.
place in Britain, but many times used to make Irruptions out of Ireland, and
by little and little subdued the North parts of the Island, and at lenght having
driven thence the Inhabitants, established their kingdom there under
Vale^tinian the you^ger in the year of God Incarnate 444. when as now the
Romans had left off the chardge and Holinsh. Hist. of Engl. l. 3. cap. 10.
Galfr. Monum. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 3. Hard. Cron. c. 54. Matthew. Westminster. an.
292.
care of Britain. An other Protestant Antiquarie says confidently: sure it is
that no special mention of the Scots is made, till about 300. years after the
birth of our Savior, And the old British History inclines to hold, that
Carausius gave the Picts their first place in Albania to inhabit, and they
matching with the Britans which dwelled there, continued to after Ages.
Victoria cessit Carausio. Qui vt triumphum habuit, dedit Pictis locum mansionis
in Albania, vbi cum Britonibus mixti per sequens aeuum manserunt. And Matthew
of Westminster with some others makes it the year of Christ 202. before
Carausius entered into this business.

8. And the Scottish Historians themselves do acknowledge that 48. of their
first Kings, as they call those their Leaders, were buried in a little Out-Ila^d
called Iona or Columkill: And also 4. petty Irish and 8. such Noruegian
Princes; and to this day there is evidence thereof. Eminent inter caeteros
Tumuli Georg. Buchan. Rerum. Scotic. l. 1. William Harrison descript. of Brit.
p. 40. in Iona.
tres, in Occidente cuiusque part lapis inscriptus, quorum Tumuli sint,
indicat. Qui medius est, Titulum habet, Tumulus Regum Scotiae, ferunt enim
quadraginta octo Reges Scotorum ibi fuisse humatos, an Argument sufficient,
what little interest they had in Britain, when their so called Kings had no
place of burial hear. Neither can the Scots say, they used that Island for
burial upon devotion, for the holiness thereof by the Monks there, and not
necessity, for by their own confession, their respect to that Island grew but
from the time of Fergusius the second, who first founded the Monastery, and
funeral place for the Scottish Kings there, as these men confess, Fergusius
Abbatiam condidit, vbi Scotorum Regum deinceps voluit esse sepulchrum; who, as
they write, was the 40. King, and Malcolme Cammoir after their 86. King changed
that place of burial, and Hector Boeth. in Catal. Reg. Scot. and Hist. Scot.
l. 7. and 8. Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scot. l. 4. 6.
it was time, for in the next King Donaldus his Brother his time, the Scots
lost that, and all those Hebrides Islands, the Danes and Noruegians driving them
from thence. Between which two Scottish Kings, we cannot find 48. to be
buried there, or where else. Yet these Scottish Antiquaries agree, that very
many of their Kings in that time were not buried there in that funeral I Will,
but in other places: neither deny, but diverse which were buried there, were
very wicked, and Impious men, far from being such as had any devotion to that
holy place, or any thing that was Religeous. Therefore we must needs
acknowledge, that this was not only a burial place of devotion, but some
necessity was intermixed with it. Therefore no marvel if these Scots had no
Bishops in Britain, when they had neither Sees nor Cities for either Bishops,
or themselves in this kingdom.

THE V. CHAPTER.
HOW THE EMPEROVR SEVERUS, WHICH came into Britain and ruled hear King, after
Lucius, was of the Regal Race of the Britans and true Heir to the Crown
hear, and so of others reigning hear after him.

1. WHEN Ecclesiastical affairs had thus proceeded with the Scots, and the
Britans continued in variance and contention about a Successor to King Lucius
in the kingdom, Seuerus Emperor came hither, some say, to quiet the debates,
others affirm, it was to win honor to himself, being accounted very greedy
and ambitious thereof, and to reduce the kingdom wholly to the Romans
subjection, not willing that any Britan hear borne should Reign, and
therefore as some write they made a Decree and Law among them against such
government. Eo fere temporis, post Lucium Regem Britonum extinctum, Romani
gnari Britannos Reges Hector Boeth. Scot. Hist. lib. 5. f. 86.
multarum in populo seditionum, and rebellionum in se fuisse Authors, vt res
Romana in Britannia foret quietior publico vetuere Decreto, ne quispiam
Britannici sanguinis deinceps regia insigniretur dignitate. If there was any
such Decree of the Romans, it could neither be upon this surmised motive, that
the British Kings had been occasion of many Rebellions, and Seditions against
the Romans, for it is evident that in the time of the three last Kings Marius,
Coillus, and Lucius, peace was duly kept with the Romans, and their Tribute
paid unto them, and these kings descended of Genuissa a Roman Lady of the
Emperors kindred, as well as from King Aruiragus the Britan, did participate
both of the British and Roman blood. And these were the only Kings were hear
after the composition between the Romans and Britans in the time of Claudius,
and Aruiragus, when Aruiragus marrying the daughter of the Emperor joining the
British and Roman Regal and Imperial Lines together thereby ended all
debates between them.

2. Neither did any such Decree probably pass the Roman Senate, that none
borne of British blood should afterward be King in Britain, if we will be
guided either by reason, or Authority herein. For how could the Romans the^
neither having such power, or possession, take upon the^ such a definitive
sentence? This had been the next way to have made a general defection from
them hear of all Britans. And I have proved before, that the Britans except in
some Municipall places, were governed by their own, and not the Romans Laws.
And for Authority, we want not those that write how both our Will. Harrison
descr. of Brit. c. 22. Harding Chron. c. 52. f. 44 and alij apud Harrison supr.
Raphael Hollinsh. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 21.
next Kings hear that came from Rome after this imagined Decree, Seuerus, and
Bassianus his son and successor hear, were, Britannici sanguinis, borne of
British blood, and yet both of them our Kings in Britain, and Emperors also,
and by some Antiquaries the next Heirs to the Crown of Britain: Harding in
his Chronicle thus testifies from Antiquity of Seuerus:

Seuerus thus the worthy Senator

Descended down right Heir to Androgeus,
The eldest son of Lud that with the Emperor
Out of Britain went with Julius,
Which Senator aforsaid Seuerus
To Britain came, and was intronisate
And with a crown of gold was coronate.
Therefore if Seuerus the Emperor was descended down right Heir to
Androgeus, the eldest son of King (Lud the words of these Authors so
absolutely and consequently not without good warrant affirming it) he must
needs both be descended of the Regal British Race, and be also the undoubted
next true Heir to the Crown of this kingdom at that time: all other Lines
which might by any probability make claim before him, being now extinct. And
this of itself (besides that I shall add hereafter) is more then any Author
of like credit to him I have alleged does bring to prove that Seuerus was
not descended by lineall and lawful birth from our British Regal Race, but
some other, in which I find a silence in Antiquity, only diverse write, (and
nothing hindering his Regal British Genealogy) that he was Florent. Wigor.
Chron. an. 181. and 203. Matt. West. an. 192. Marian. Scot. aetat. 6. Martin.
Polon. An. 213. Henr. Hunting. l. 1. Hist. in Seuero.
borne at Leptis in the Province of Tripolis in Afrike, and was the only
African that ever was Emperor: yet none of them denies thereby his descent
from British Parentadge, but some of them yield to that which confirms it,
and his Auncesters being strangers so long out of Britane, as from Julius
Caesar his time, no wonder if he was borne in that place of Afrike. For I have
showed before that in the time of Vespasian, we had many thowsands of Britans
went into those parts, and without question diverse of them married, and
continued there in their Posterity: so did diverse Britans at other times, even
with wives and children, go to Rome, and from thence were disposed into diverse
parts never returning hither.

3. Baronnius with others confessing that Seuerus was descended of most Baron.
Tom. 2. Annal. An. D. 195. Manuscr. Gallic. ant. c. 109. Matt. Westminster. an. 206.
Galfr. Mon. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 2. Rich. Vit. Hist. l. 4. Io. Seldom
Analect. c. 7. Galfr. Mon. sup. l. 5. c. 3. Prot. Cata. Reg. Brit. in Seuero.
Magdeburg. cent. 3. c. 16. Flor. Wigor. 198. 220. Matthew. Westminster. An. 205. 206.
noble Parents, constat Seuerum fuisse Maiorum claritudine nobilissimum: and
yet not able to describe his Auncestrie, does sufficiently prove him a stranger
to those Countries, and their Historians. And to make further Manifestation
herein, allthough he was borne in Afrike about Tripolis, so far from
Britain, yet he had Married a British Lady, as diverse of the same Authors
and others testify, and had by her Bassianus his son, after King of
Britain, and Emperor also. Some say her name was Martia, and the first wife
of Seuerus, and Sister of Fulgentius the Britan that warred against, and slew,
Seuerus at York, Fulgenius Matris Bassiani frater, as the British History
reports. And this British Lady could not be Married to Seuerus after his
coming into Britain, but long before, where he then lived in the East parts
of the world. For in Britain he lived but a short time, by our Protestants
calculation in their Catalogue of the Kings of Britain, 4. years. The
Magdeburgian Protestants have the like account, following Eusebius. Florentius
Wigorniensis makes his aboade hear but three years. The Monk of Westminster
scarcely allows him 2. years continuance hear. The like have others, all
agreeing he was old and feeble at his coming hither. Yet Bassianus his son
by our Dio in Caracalla.
British Lady was so old at his death, that he succeeded him both in this
kingdom and the Empire, who being Emperor but 6. or 7. years was, as Dio and
others write, at his death goeing on his 29. year of Age, aetatis annum agens
vndetrigisimum: Almost 20. years old, when his Father first landed in
Britain.

4. Therefore it is so far from being a disproofe of Seuerus his descent from
the Regal Race of our Brita^s, because he was borne in Afrike, that lived so
remote from hence, and with so many difficulties joining himself in Marriadge
with a Lady of Briraine, and of so Noble a Family that her brother claimed to
be King hear, is a pregna^t Argument that he also was of our British kingly
Race, and so descended as our Antiquarie has before described. And in this
respect being the fittest and most likely man, by his true Title to the Crown
of Britain, with the union of the Roman and British forces to appease the
Tumults hear, Galfr. Mon. Hist. l. 5. c. 2. Harding Chron. in Sever. c. 52.
and alij.
and by this his undoubted Right to the Crown of Britain, he was so confident
to effect this design, that he brought but two Legions of Roman Soldiers to
assist him. For the more willing enterprise whereof, Britain the Native
Country of his Empress she still living, and Bassianus their sonn's undeniable
Title to be King hear after his Father, called upon him to take this
expeditio^ in his own parson, otherwise most unfit for such a Journey and
attempt, for as diverse write he was not only old, but so lame and trobled
with the Gout, that for the most part he was carried in his bed-couche. Senex
iam and morbo articulari Hector Boeth. Scot. Hist. l. 5. f. 87.
laborans, lectica plurimum vehebatur. Thus it appears how probable it is,
that Seuerus was not only descended of the Line of our British Kings, but was
immediate true Heir to the Crown of Britain, for being granted, that he was
right Heir to Androgeus the eldest son of King Lud, there could be Galfrid.
Mon. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 3. c. 20. l. 4. c. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Matthew.
Westminster. aetat. 5. ca. 25. 26. 27. 28. Hard. Chron. c. 41. 42. 43. 44. Holinsh.
Hist. of Engl. l. 3. c. 10. Stowe and Howes Hist. in Lud. Cassibelan.
Theomantius. Balaeus l. de Scri. Brit. centur. 1. in Fulgenio.
none to claim it before him. For it is the general consent of our
Historians, British or Saxons, Catholics or Protestants, that King Lud left
two sons behind him young at his death, the forenamed Androgeus being the
eldest and undoubted Heir of Britain, and Theomantius, or Tenancius the
second: and two Brothers, Cassibelan which next ruled in respect of the
Minority of his nephews, (Androgeus the eldest going a way with Julius
Caesar) and Nennius: after Cassibela^ (by the departing hence of the eldest
brother Androgeus) Theomantius ruled. After whom Aruiragus, Marius, Coillus,
and Lucius by whose death without Issue or Heir in Britain, the immediate
true Right of this kingdom belonged to Seuerus. And after Seuerus his death
Bassianus his only son by the British Empress his wife, Sister to
Fulgenius of the Regal blood of Britain, Fulgenius vir sanguine Regio clarus,
and so near Titler to the Crown, that he with great assistance advanced his
claim unto it, being both by Father and Mother (his Father and Uncle taken
away by death) the next immediate Heir was both King of Britain and Emperor
by all Antiquities. And by this we find how untrue, or to no purpose the
supposed Decree of the Roman Senate was to disable those to govern hear,
which descended of British Parents.

THE VI. CHAPTER.
OF THE STATE OF CHRISTIANS ESPECIALLY, in Britain in the time of Seuerus,
under whom allthough in some parts there was great persecution of Christians,
yet not hear in Britain, but the Christians were hear in quiet without
affliction.

1. NOW to speak somewhat of Seuerus his Alienation or affection, from, or to
Christian Religion, it is the common opinion, and our own Antiquaries be of
the same, that in diverse places of the Empire, he was an enemy so far unto
it, that many term him the fifth Persecutor among the Emperors after Nero, and
many Christians in diverse Provinces were Martyred in his Empire. Post Neronem
Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. an* 283. Matthew. Westminster. An. 195. Flor^nt. Wigor.
in Cron. An. 189. and 211. Judas Scr^ptor. Eccle. te^pore Seueri apud Eusebius. l.
6. c. 6. and Baron. To. 3. Annal. An-204. Spartianus in Seuero. Eusebius. in
Chron. and l. 6. c. 2. Hier. l. de Scrip. Eccl. in Origene c. 54. Magd. co^t. 3
Dio. Hist. Romans l. 51. Acta S. Phil. Martyris apud Baron. To. 2. An. 204. and
nota^. in Martyr. 13. Sept. Martyr. Romans 13. September. B^d. V^nard. and Ado.
eod. die. Act. S. Philipp. supr. and Cornel. Tacitus l. 17.
Seuerus quintam Persecutionem in Christianos excitauit, plurimique Sanctorum
per diuersas Prouincias Martyrio coronantur. And it is so certain by all
foreign Antiquities, that there was such Persecution in his time, that it was
almost a common opinion that the coming of Antichrist was at hand, as an
Ecclesiastical Writer of that time has left to Posterity: propterea quod
persecutionis tumultus contra nos excitatus multorum mentes, tam grauiter
perturbaret, Antichristi aduentum, omnium ore atque sermon iactatum, iam tum
appropinquare arbitratus est. Yet we do not find any express Edict or
Prohibition of him until about the tenth year of his Empire. When as
Spartianus writes in his Journey from Syria to Alexandria, he made many Laws,
forbidding under great penalty, any man to be either a Jew or Christian. In
Itinere Palaestinis plurima Iura fundauit. Iudaeos fieri sub graui paena
vetuit: Idem etiam de Christianis sanxit. And as Dio and others witness, he
consented even by his Imperial letters, both to the depriving of S. Philip of
the Augustall Prefectship of Egypt, being become a professed Christian, and
giving Authority to Terentius his Successor secretly to martyr him. But for
Seuerus excuse, we find the greatest, and almost only Persecution of this
time, to have been either in, or about Jury, occasioned by the tumults of the
Jews, or in Afrike where Seuerus was borne, and principally in Egypt then full
of Christians, the Prefect himself S. Philip a professed Christian, and so
potent, as the letters of Seuerus unto him say, he lived more like an absolute
King, then Prefect, that Prefecture of Egypt being of so great Authority, and
dignity: te tanquam Regem potius quam praefectum elegit Egipti Praesidem: and
Cornelius Tacitus affirms as much of the Prerogative of that Presidentship:
Aegiptum a diuo Augusto Equites Romani obtinent loco Regum.

2. Therefore Africa being the Country of Seuerus birth, and so formidable an
^nemie in former times to the Romans, as all Histories report, and now so
abounding with Christians, slanderously accused by their Pagan Enemies to be
Enemies to the Roman Empire, Seuerus may seem by such acclamations against his
own inclination to have given way to Persecution. And the rather because the
Gnostick Heretics given then over so far to all filthiness, that as Irenaeus,
Nicephorus, and others write, they did publikly profess, and so practice, that
all which would come to perfection in their Sect, which they only allowed,
must commite all filthiness: omnem eos oportere perpetrare Nicephor. l. 4. c. 2.
Hist. Eccl. Iraen. apud eund. and aduers. Haeres. l. 1. c. 24.
turpitudinem, and infandis omnibus faeditatibus satisfacere. These Heretics
being accounted Christians with Pagans, might sooner provoke the Emperor by
such men's informations, against the most holy Professors of Christian
Religion: Which were so free from being such as they were falsely reputed with
those their Enemies to be, that as Athenagoras in his defensive Oration for
the^, in the name of the Christians desired no mercy or favor but to be
utterly rooted out, if those impious slanders could be proved true against
them. Si vera ista sunt, nulli parcite generi, animaduertite in eiusmodi
facinora, Athenagor. orat. pro Christianis. Niceph. l. 5. Hist. c. 26. Tertull.
l. ad Scapul. c. 4.
vna cum coniugibus and liberis radicitus nos extirpate, and occidite.
Nicephorus says Christianity flourished in his time. Cum Seuerus successit
satis bono loco res nostrae fuere. Vniuersae multitudines and domus totae ad
fidem accedebant. And Tertullian then living says: Ipse etiam Seuerus Pater
Antonini Christianorum memor fuit, nam and Proculum Christianum qui Toparcion
cognominabatur, qui eum per oleum aliquando curauerat, requisiuit, and in
Palatio suo habuit vsque ad mortem The Emperor Seuerus a lover of Christians,
and in Britain no Persecutor of them but protected such.
eius, quem Antoninus optime nouerat lacte Christiano educatus. Sed and
clarissimas faeminas and clarissimos viros Seuerus sciens huius Sectae esse,
non modo non laesit, verum and testimonio exornauit, and populo furenti in os
palam restitit: Seuerus also himself Father of Antoninus was kind to
Christians, for he sought for Proculus a Christian, who had some time before
cured him with oil, and kept him in his Palace with him so long as he lived.
He was exceedingly well known to Antoninus, that was nursed by a Christian
woman. And Seuerus knowing both most renowned women, as also most honorable men
to be of this Profession, was so far from doing them any hurt, that he
commended them, and openly resisted even to their face the raging people.
Therefore if Seuerus the Emperor was of his own disposition so great a lover
of Christians in general, if he honored Proculus in his Palace so long as he
lived, gave allowance that his Son and Heir Antoninus Bassianus Tertull.
supr. Dio in Seuero. and Antonino Caracull. Baron. To. 2. Annal. An. 195
King of Britain, and Emperor after his Father, should both be nursed by a
Christian woman, and be so familiar with such known professed Christians, as
Proculus was, and was the Ouerseer of Euodus the Tutor or Bringer up of
Bassianus his Son, as may be gathered both by Tertullian, Dio, and The
Empress Lady Martia wife to Seuerus a Britan, and in profession, or affection
a Christian.
others, and both Seuerus himself so great an honourer both of most renowned
Christian men and women, and his Lady and Empress Martia of Britain, so far
affected and disposed to Christian Religion, that if she did not profess it in
Act, yet in affection and desire so honored it, that she would not permit her
Son and Heir to be nursed by any, but a Christian woman, and the Ouerseer of
so great a chardge to be a Christian, so famous and renowned for his faith, as
Proculus was known of all men to be. These considered I dare not boldly say,
that Seuerus did in any time or place of his own inclination wittingly and
willingly without great incitation condescend to such Persecutions, as are
remembered in Histories to have been in his Empire.

3. And after his coming into Britain, we do not find the least suspicion
in our Antiquities, that he did of himself, or suffer any other to persecute
any for Christian Religion: But rather both of himself, and at the Instance of
his British Empress, at the least a Christian in affection, and both
powerable with him and their Son Bassianus his Heir and Successor, and for
that love and trust he found in the British Christians of all that part of
Britain, South to the wall and Trench which Adrian and he made joining with
him, against his Enemies to possess him of the Crown of Britain, he was a
greatefull friend to them, and their holy Profession. And all our Histories are
clear, that Religion was hear in quiet without molestation or affliction,
until the Empire of Dioclesian, that great Persecutor. Yet we cannot deny,
but all places in Britain being now full of warlike miseries, and the
Christians hear both in Albania, Loegria, and Cambria mixed and joined both
with Roman, and Scythian Infidels, many of them fell both to wickedness, and
Paganism also. Which occasioned holy Gildas to write, that Christianity was
received but coldly of the Inhabitants of Britain, and with some continued
perfect, but not so with others, before Dioclesian his Persecution. Praecepta
Christi ab Incolis tepide apud quosdam tame^ integre and alios minus, vsque
Gild. l. de excid. and conqu. Brit. c. 7.
ad Persecutionem Diocletioni Tiranni. And not only in the time of Dioclesian
his Persecution, following in this Age we find even whole Cities and Towns,
as Verolamium and others utterly destitute of Christians, but long before, and
about this time we are assured, that there were very many Britans, and not of
mean estate, but such as were publikly employed about the affairs of S. Mello
a Britan, Archbishop of Roan in Normandy
the kingdom, and sent from hence to Rome about it, that either were fallen
from Christianity, or never forsook their Pagan Religion. For we read both
in ancient Manuscripts, and other Authors, in the life of S. Mello a Britan
and after Archbishop of Roan in Normandy, sent thither by S. Stephen Pope, not
only that he and his British Companions, which were then sent to Rome to pay
the Tribute of Britain there, were Pagans, and sacrificed in the Temple of
Mars, but it was then the custom of the Britans coming thither about that
office, so to do, which to be a custom could not be Manuscr. antiq. in Vita
S. Mellonis Episc. and Confessoris. Io. Capgrau. Catalog. in eod.
younger then these days, time short enough between this and that time to
make a custom. Tempore Valeriani Imperatoris Mello quidam de maiori Britannia
oriundus Romam venit, vt Patriae suae Tributu^ solueret, and Imperatori
seruiret. Ibique sicut mos erat cum socijs suis ad templum Martis ductus est,
vt sacrificaret. And it seems this custom had been from the first submission
of the Britans to the Romans, for both Protestants and others affirm, that in
Octauius Augustus time: Ambassadors came from Britain to Rome, swearing
Fealty in the Stowe and Howes Hist. in Octauius Augustus.
Temple of Mars, offering gifts in the Capital to the Gods of the Romans. And
we have Testimony in our Histories, that after King Lucius death, and this
very time, which we have now in hand, it was the use and custom of our Britans
hear, when any of their Nobility or Gentry, were to obtain the dignity of
Knighthood, to send them to Rome, to receive that honor there, and after such
Pagan Rites and ceremonies, that Christians could not in conscience, so accept
thereof. And yet such multitudes even in this time flocked thither from hence
so to be created, that in this time when S. Amphibalus was converted Jacob.
Genuen. Episc. in Catal. Sanctor. in S. Amphabel and Alban.
to the faith by Pope S. Zepherine, as Iacobus Genuensis a learned Bishop
writes, 15. hundred were so created. Of all which we find no memory that any
more were Christians, then S. Amphibalus, and S. Alban, and yet both these
converted after they had thus professed Paganism, S. Amphibalus by Pope
Zepherine, who after made him Priest at Rome, and S. Alban S. Alban descended
of the Romans.
long after his return from Rome, by the same holy Saint Amphibalus sent
hither by Pope Zepherine, in Britain. And yet as the old British Writer of
Author Britan. Antiq. in Vita S. Albani. Capgr. in eod.
S. Alban his life, Capgraue and others witness, S. Alban was rather descended
of Noble Roman, then British Parentage: Albanus ex illustri Romanorum Prosapia
originem ducens, probably both of Roman and British Ancestors.

4. And it seems the condition of many of others was not unlike, and thereby
a great allurement for them to continue in the Romans Religion of whose blood
they were descended, in whose municipall and privileged Towns many of them
lived, and from whom they hoped and expected to receive terreane honors and
Aduancements. The Britans generally or, for the most part professing the holy
Christian Religion, preferring heavenly before earthly honors. Yet it is
evident by this is said, that in this short tract of time, after the death of
King Lucius many of the Britans by the continual trobles of that time and
conversation with Pagans, were either fallen from Christianity, or, as holy
Gildas says, professed it but coldly, tepide in respect of that zeal and
fervor which was used in the days of Saint Lucius. And yet Seuerus of
himself was not so much given to wicked life, but renowned Martin. Polon.
Supput. in Seuero.
not only for warlike affairs, but for learning and studyes. Praeter bellicam
gloriam ciuilibus studijs and scientia Philosophiae clarus fuit. And so great
an enemy to Incontine^cy, that he puished Adultery by Law with death, with
such severity, that Dio writes that when he was Consul he found by Records,
Dio in Seuero. Herodianus in Seuero. Herodianus l. 3.
that 3000. had been put to death for that offense. Ego cum Consul essem,
inueni scriptum in Tabulis tria millia Maechorum morte fuisse mulctata. And was
after his death made a God among the Pagans. And Herodianus says, he died
rather of grief for his childrens wickedness, then of sickness. Maerore magis
quam morbo consumptus, vita functus est. Which grief for the sins of his
sons, as also Galfr. Mon. l. 5. c. 2. F. or. Wigorn. An. 195. 217. Mat.
Westminster. an. 205. Harding. Cron. c. 53. f. 44. Galfr. Mon. Hist. l. 5. c. 2.
Matthew. Westminster. an. 206. Hard. sup. Pont. Virunn. l. 5. Dio Hist. l. 55.
of his own in permitting the Christians in many places to be greuiously
persecuted, I would not deny: but that he died of any such grief, is untrue,
being most certain, that he after so many Conquests in other Countries, when
he came to fight against his Country Christians, he was enforced dishonorably
to make a Wall and Trench of above 130. miles in lenght to keep his Enemies
back from inuading him, and slain in battle by Fulgenius (others call him
Fulgentius) brother, by some before, to his first lawful true wife the
Empress Martia a Briton, Interfectus est Seuerus Imperator. In acri certamine
interficitur Seuerus. And by the Roman Writers themselves, he was at this time
when he was so slain at York 65. years old. And allthough he left 32.
Legions as Dio writes, to defend that his temporal Empire, which had so
persecuted the Church of Christ, yet that temporal Empire with all those
propes began to stagger, and notwithstanding so great Persecution the kingdom
of Christ, as Tertullian then living witnesses, was adored and ruled in all
places. Cum Romani tot Legionibus suum Imperium muniant, nec trans istas gentes
Tertullian. aduers. Iudaeos c. 7.
porrigere vires regni sui possint: Christi autem Regnum, and nomen vbique
porrigitur, vbique creditur, ab omnibus gentibus supranominatis colitur, vbique
regnat, vbique adoratur. And particularly hear in Britain, as he has said
before, Christianity reigned whether the Pagan Romans could not, nor durst
come, but walled and trenched in themselves for fear.

5. He left behind him two sons, Bassianus his eldest by his lawful wife of
Britain, before remembered, and Geta by Iulia his second wife a Roman, if she
may be termed a wife, his first and lawful still living. He reigned as
Baronius contendeth 17. years 8. months and 3. days. But our Historians make
Baron. An. D. 195. 213. Flor. Wigorn. Chron. An. 180. 202.
his Empire somewhat longer. Matthew of Westminster makes him Emperor
complete 18. years: Romanum consecutus Imperium, imperauit annis 18.
Florentius Wigorniensis citing Cassiodorus, and the Roman History says, he
was Emperor 18. years, and 3. Months, Seuerus regnauit annis 18. test
Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. in Seuero Galfr. Mon. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c.
2. Pontic. Virun. Hist. l. 5. Matthew. Westminster. an. 206. Joan. Harding. Chron. c.
53. Bal. l. de Script. Brit. cent. 1. in Fulgenio Audaci.
Cassiodoro mensibus etiam tribus secundum Historiam Romanam. Marianus Scotus
says, he held the Empire 19. years, Cum 19. annis Seuerus tenuisset Imperium,
decessit. And whereas it is generally agreed upon, both by our British and
Saxon Historians, and Antiquaries, whether Catholics or Protestants, that
Fulgenius after his former discumfiture by Seuerus, went over into Scythia,
interpreted to be that Country which now is called Denmark, and brought with
him a great Army of the people of that Nation, which our Antiquities call
Picts, before he fought with Seuerus, and they both there were slain, or died
at York: Fulgenius cum diutius resistere nequiuisset, transfretauit in
Scythiam, vt Pictorum auxilio dignitati restitueretur. Cumque ibi omnem
Inuentute^ Patriae collegisset, reuersus est cum maximo nauigio in Britanniam,
atque Eboracum obsedit: these were none of the Christian Picts, or Scots which
lived in our Islands, who had joined with Fulgenius before, and many of them
were slain, as the same Authors testify: con^ucebat in auxilium sibi quo
scumque Insulanos populos inueniebat: but they were Pagan Picts, of whom many
remaining hear after the death of these two Generals, they had a place given
unto them to Inhabit in the Country Albania. Carausius vt triumphum habuit,
dedit Pictis locum mansionis in Albania, vbi cum Britonibus mixti per sequens
aeuum Galfr. Mon. supr. c. 3. Fabian. Hist. Polychron. Will. Harrison descri. of
Brit. c. 22. Hollinsh. Histor. of Engl. l. 4. c. 23. Bed. Hist. Eccles. l. 1.
Capgr. in S. Niniano. Hect. Boeth. Scotor. Hist. l. 7. Bal. l. de Script. cent.
1. in Ninia. Bernicio.
manserunt. Thus write our British Historians, and our Protestant Antiquaries
agree, when they say, that, Carausius gave unto the Scots, Picts and Scithians
the Country of Cathnesse in Scotland, which they afterward inhabited. And these
were those Pagan Picts, and people which S. Ninian and others sent from Rome,
did long after convert to the faith of Christ, as S. Bid and others testify,
for the Ilanders which were Picts, and Scots, were converted in Pope Victor his
time as I have declared before, which is an other Argument against the Scottish
writers, which would have themselves seated in the Country now called Scotland
so long a duration of years, as they have claymed before.

THE VII. CHAPTER.
HOW IN THE TIME OF BASSIANVS SON of Seuerus being Emperor he was both in
Britain, whence he was descended, and other places: he was a friend to
Christians, and Persecutour of their Persecutours. How S. Zepherine the Pope
then sent diverse Apostolic men into Britain.

1. AS soon after the death of the Emperor Seuerus, the Te^porall state of
our Britans being freed from many surges, and waves of calamities did find a
calm; So the Church of Christ especially in this kingdom, e^tered thereby
into an harbor of some ease, and quietness from such enormities and
afflictions, as usually grow and happen in such times. For the Quarrel for
this kingdom being principally between Seuerus, and Fulgenius their Accomplices
and Confederats, allthough Seuerus was actually slain in that bloody conflict
at York, yet Fulgenius followed presently after, being by all Writers mortally
wounded in the same Battle. Fulgenius laethaliter vnlneratus est. And for
Posterity the Galfr. Mon. Hist. l. 5. c. 2. Pontic. Virun. l. 5. Matt. Westminster.
An. 206. Harding. Chron. c. 53.
condition of Seuerus was far berter then that of Fulgenius, for whether the
Britons or Romans should prevail in choosing a King, or Emperor, Seuerus
leaving two Sons, one of the British, the other of the Roman blood, left
provision for both events: When the case of Fulgenius was not such, he himself
not noted to have had any true Title to the Crown of Britain, but chosen King
or Captain of them, which would not admit the Romans Government, duce
Fulgenio, and Fulgenius Dux populi profligati: And King Fulgenius Galfr. Mon.
Hist. l. 5. c. 2. Pontic. Virun. l. 5. Matt. Westminster. supr. Hard. supr.
elected to be King rather of Love, and necessity, then by any Title he had so
to be. And if he had any Right by descent to the Crown of Britain, seeing we
read of no child, or Brother, he left behind him, that Title which he
claymed, must needs descend to the eldest Son of Seuerus, which was
Bassianus, Son also to the Sister o^ Fulgenius, as some before have written,
now having by the death of his Father Seuerus, and uncle Fulgenius, both their
Titles with the allowance of the Empress Martia his Mother, lawfully invested
in him.

2. Therefore to decide, and end all Controversies in this business, the Britans
with common assent did choose and accept Bassianus, both for their King, (being
the next and undoubted Heir, whether we shall stand either upon his Fathers or
uncles Title) and also for Emperor, as the Eldest Son and Heir of Seuerus
undoubted Emperor, and for his leaving Sons behind (as the chiefest cause)
made a God among the Romans; So writes Herodian with others: Mos est Romany
consecrare Imperatores, qui superstitibus filijs vel successoribus Herodian. l.
4.
moriuntur. And an English Protestant Antiquarie though not citing Authority,
delivers the same in these words: The Romans accustom to consecrate Stowe
Hist. Romans in Seuerus.
with Immortality such Emperors as at their death leave either children, or
Successors in the Empire behind them. And those which are endued with that
honor they canonize amongst the Gods. Therefore to use the speech of an other
Protestant Historian from Antiquity, Seuerus by birth a Roman, but in blood a
Harrison descr. of Britain c. 22. Manuscr. Gallic. Antiq. cap. 109. Galfr.
Mon. l. 5. c. 2. Pontic. Virun. l. 5. Matthew. West. an. 206. Harding Chron. in
Seuerus and Bassianus. Holinsh. Hist. of Eng. l. 4. cap. 22. Harris. descript.
of Brit. c. 22. Tertull. ad Scapul. c. 4. Spartian. in Caracall.
Briton, and the lineall Heir of the body of Androgeus Son of Lud, and
Nephew to Cassibelan, was Emperor and King of Britain. Geta borne of a Roman
woman Iulia, was chosen Emperor by diverse Romans, but soon after slain by
his half Brother Bassianus the Briton. This Bassianus reigned alone both
Emperor and King of Britain until his death. Besides his hereditarie Title
to this kingdom, it seems, that the Christian Britans hear, were not a
little moved to choose, and receive him for their King, for the hope they had,
that he would either become a Christian, or at least a friend and no Enemy to
that Profession, of which in his youth and tender years he had given no vulgar
Argument: for besides many other hopeful graces, and gifts he was then endued
with, and brought up by a Christian Nurse, and Christian children, when he did
see any Christian Martyrs brought to wild beasts to be killed and devoured, he
would weep or turn his face away, as Spartianus is an ample witness, Si quando
feris obiectos damnatos vidit, fleuit, aut ocolos auertit. And being but seven
years old, hearing that one of his Christian Playfellowes was grievously
beaten for that his Religion, as the common interpretation is, he could not
long after enduer the Procurers of his beating, by the same Author: Septennis
puer, cum collusorem suum puerum ob Iudaicam religionem grauius verberatum
audisset, neque patrem suum, neque patrem pueri vel Authors Spartian. supr.
verberum diu respexit. Where the Pagan Author by the Jews Religion, as often
such men do, understands Christian Religion, which both his Nurse and this
Playfellow of Bassianus her Son did profess. And in this hope of the Britans
now Christians, that ^assianus would rather be a friend then Persecutour of
such, they were not deceived: for allthough contrary to his first education,
when he was with Christians, being separated from them he fell to such and so
many kinds of Impiety, as Histories do recompt, and putt an innumerable
company of the Pagan Roman Nobles to death, and many of them, which had been
greatest Enemies to Christians, yet he died innocent from Christian blood and
Persecution, and by his seueare punishment toward their adversaries, justly to
be interpreted a Revenger of their wrongs, and former calamities. The common
opinion is, that he reigned between 6. and 7. years. Allthough I find in an
old French Manuscript History, entreating Manuscr. Gallic. Antiq. c. 109.
much of the affairs of this kingdom, written above 400. years since, that
he was King of Britain 29. years: Bassian tenoit le Roilme de Bretaine 29.
ans.

3. All Bassianus his time, and diverse years before, in the Empire of Seuerus,
S. Zepherine was Pope of Rome, who as our Protestant Antiquaries acknowledge,
being given wholly to the service of God, more then earthly things, ended his
life with holy Martyrdom. Zepherinus rei diuinae magis, quam Ioh. Bal. l. 1.
de Act. Romans Pont. in Zephermo. Robert. Barns in Vit. Pont. Romans in eod. Matthew.
Parker. Antiq. Brit. c. 17.
humanae intentus Martyrio coronatus est. These Protestants also, do relate
many worthy Acts of this holy Pope, amongst which, these they set down at
large in their public Writings. He Decreed (say they) that Priests should not
consecrate the blood of Christ in a Chalice of wood. That all which were of
years of discretion, should communicate at Easter at the least every year.
That Priests should be present when the Bishop said Mass. That a Bishop
accused should not without the Authority of the Pope of Rome, be condemned in
Judgment, either by Primate, Patriarch, or Metropolitan. Sanguinis Christi
co^secratione^ no in calice ligneo fieri debere statuit. Omnes ia^ Puberes vt
semel in Anno ad Paschatis Ferias Eucharistiam sumerent, edixit. Cu^ Episcopus
celebraret Missae sacra, iussit omnes Presbyteros adesse. Sine Romani
Pontificis authoritate accusatu^ Episcopu^, nec a Primate, nec a Patriarcha,
nec a Metropolitano in iudicio co^demnandu^ esse. This holy Pope as I have
cited before, from Iacobus Genuensis (others consenting thereto) converted our
renowned Countryman S. Amphibalus which Jacob. Genuen. Episc. in Catal. Sanct.
in S. Amphibalo. Author of the Engl. Martyrol. die 25. Iunij. Io. Lidg^te
Monac. Bu^iens. in ^ius Vita. Gerar. Li^gh. in ^udim. Insignium.
won by his preaching, life, and death after, so many thowsands of this
Nation to Christ. Of whom a late Writer citing diverse Antiquities thus
writes: S. Amphibale being a Noble young man of Britany, and going to Rome
with Bassianus Son to Seuerus Viceroy of the Britans, was there by Pope
Zepherinus instructed secretly in the Christian says, baptized, made Priest,
and sent back into Britain, there to preach unto others. Neither may we with
prudence judge, that so great a concourse of our British Nobility, being
then at Rome, and S. Amphibalus thus converted (a great Noble man termed in
Antiquities, the Son of a Prince, and so not without attendance) that he
alone was thus converted, and employed by that holy Pope at this time. And not
improbable but some of those holy Apostolic men which are yet remembered in
Histories to have assisted S. Amphibalus afterward in preaching Christ in
Veremu^d. apud H^c^or. Boeth Sco^or. Hist. l. 6. f. 102. Hol^insh. Hist. of
Scotl. in Chrathlint.
these parts, received their Ordination, and Instruction for the same at Rome,
now or about this time, such as were Modocus, Priscus, Calanus, Ferranus,
Ambianus, and Carnocus, there is no repugnancie in time, for these were old men
when the Persecution of Dioclesian raged hear, and S. Alban was martyred in
the year of Christ 282. passus est gloriosus Martyr Albanus anno Domini
Manuscr. Antiq. Vit. S. Albani. Capgr. Catal. in eod. Bar. Annal. An. 221.
Robert. Barnes in Vit. Pont. Romans in Zeph. Io. Bal. l. 1. Act. Pont. Romans in
eod. Dio in Caracal. Spartian. in Caracalla. Dio in Macrino. Manuscr. Gallic.
Antiq. c. 14. Co^pilatio M. S. de gest. Brit. and Ang. in Carausio.
ducentesimo octogesimo secundo: And S. Zepherine continued Pope as both
Catholic and Protestant Antiquaries agree, until the year of Christ's
Nativity 220. when as a Protestant Bishop writes, he was crowned with
Martyrdom: anno Domini 220. martyrio coronatus est. About this time also, or a
little before, Bassianus Emperor and King of Britain was murdered between
Edessa, and Carras by Mardianus a Centurion, he marrying with the Sister of the
holy Christian Lady Mammea, left their Son Heliogabalus behind him, who soon
after was Emperor. An old French Manuscript History says, that Bassianus was
slain by Carausius, who after reigned 38. years. The same has the Manuscript
Compilation in these words, and tandem fauentibus Britonibus (Carausius)
dimicauit cum Bassiano, and interfecit eam, and sic gubernaculum regni in se
suscepit.

THE VIII. CHAPTER.
HOW VERY MANY KINGS WITH VARIABLE proceedings Ruled hear in Britain before
Constantius Father to the Great Constantine by S. Helen our British Lady: yet
the Christians hear were quiet from Persecution, in all or most of their time.

1. AFTER the death of S. Zepherine Pope, Calixtus the first of Lamprid. in
Diadame. and Iul. Capitolin. in Macrino. Matthew. Westminster. an. 214. Flor. Wigorn.
Chron. an. 226. Marian. aetat. 6. in Macrin. Mart. Polon. in Macrino. Henr.
Hunt. Hist. l. 1. Dio in Macrino. Eusebius l. 6. c. 15. Henr. Hu^t. Hist. l. 1.
Matthew. West. An. 215. Martin. Polon. and alij Marian. aetat. 6. in Heliogabalo.
Florent. Wigor. Chron. an. 229. 207.
that name succeeded in the Sea Apostolic of Rome. And Bassianus being, as
before, murdered, Macrinus a Mauritanian, or Moriscan by Nation, with his
son Diadumenus, or by some Diadumenianus, obtained the Empire; but they were
both slain by their own soldiers, rebelling against them, when they had been
Emperors but one year, and two months. After whom Marcus Aurelius Antoninus
Heliogabalus, or Elagabalus son of Bassianus Caracalla, before spoken of, was
chosen Emperor by the Army, his Mother was named Soemiades, or Semiamira, the
daughter of Mesa Sister to Iulia the Empress the second wife of Seuerus, and
this Soemiades or Semiamides was Sister to that most renowned Christian Lady
Mamea Mother to Alexander the Emperor. Henry of Huntington and Florigerus
asscribe 4. complete years to the Empire of Heliogabalus: adeptus imperium,
tenuit 4. annis. Martinus allows him not fully so long a Regiment. Yet
Marianus says with Roman writers, that he was Emperor 4. years and 8.
Months. Marcus Aurelius Heliogabalus Antonini Caracallae filius regnauit annis
quatuor, me^sibus 8. iuxta Historiam Romanam. Florentius Wigorniensis has the
same words, both for that continuance of his Empire, and Authority of the
Roman History affirming it, that he was true and immediate next King of
Britain, not only during the time of his Empire, but in that space also when
Macrinus and his son Diadumenus were Emperors, even from the death of
Antoninus Bassianus Caracalla his Father, the undoubted King of Britain, both
by his Fathers and Mothers Title. For allthough Martinus says, that Seuerinus
son of Bassianus was Emperor with his Father: Antonius Caracalla imperauit
annis Martin. Polon. Supput. An. 212. in Anton. Caracalla. in Macrino and Marc.
Anton. and alij.
Septem, and Seuerinus filius eius: yet seeing this Author who so writes
consents with all others, that Macrinus immediately succeeded to Bassianus
Caracalla, and Heliogabalus to Macrinus, he must needs, to justify that his
testimony of Seuerinus being Emperor with Bassianus his Father, say, that
this Seuerinus died with his Father, or before, or was the same son of
Bassianus which others do call Heliogabalus, Marcus Antoninus and other names,
which Heliogabalus is styled by in Histories.

2. While these things were acted with the Romans, the state of Britain was
also unquiet, and allthough Heliogabalus, and his brother Seuerinus also (if
Bassianus had any such son) was next true King of Britain, yet neither of
them enjoyed it. For by all writers, one named Carausius was King of Britain
not only next after Bassianus, but by diverse Authors some time also while he
lived, giving an overthrow either to Bassianus the Emperor, or Matthew. Westminster.
an. 286.
rather some Lieutenant or general of his of the same or like name hear in
Britain, and so made himself King of Britain. After whom by our British
History and Ponticus Virunnius, Asclepiodotus Duke of Cornwayle was made King,
deposing Alectus sent hither against Carausius, with three Legions, Galfr.
Monum. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 4. Pont. Virun. l. 5. Matthew. Westminster. An. 292. 293. 294
Harding. Cron. c. 56. 57. Galfrid. Mon. l. 5. Pontic. Virun. l. 5. Hard. Chron.
cap. 59. Matthew. Westminster. 302. Catal. Reg. Brit. and alij. Matthew. Westminster. Ann. 286.
Will. Harris. Descript. of Brit. Hollinsh. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 23.
and as Matthew of Westminster and Harding write, was King three years until
Asclepiodotus deposed him. Next to Asclepiodotus was King Coel Father to the
most renowned Empress S. Helena married to Co^stantius Emperor, and Mother to
Great Constantine their son, our most glorious King, and Emperor, after
which time our History will not be so obscure and confused as now it is. For as
in the Succession of these I have remembered, there is question, so concerning
the time of their government, and their conversation also whether it was
Christian, or otherwise, it is not free from difficulty. Antiquaries agree,
that Carausius was next King to Bassianus. Therefore when Matthew of
Westminster, and some others would not have Carausius to be King until about
the 286. year of Christ, it must needs be an error, either in them, their
Scribes, or Printers: for it is evident before, and all the Roman Writers
prove, that Bassianus was dead many years, and diverse Emperors had succeeded
long before this time, and Matthew of Westminster himself says, that
Bassianus making war against the Parthians was circumuented and slain of his
Enemies between Edessa and Carras in the year of Christ 213. Anno gratiae
213. Bassianus Imperator contra Parthos bellum mouens, Matthew. Westminster. An. 213.
Otto. Frising. Chron. l. 3. c. 29. Floren. Wigorn. an. 204. and 226. Marian.
aetat. 6. an. 218. in Caracallo.
inter Edessam and Carras ab hostibus circumuentes occisus est. which was above
70. years before he brings Carausius to attempt any thing for the Crown of
Britain. Florentius Wigornie^sis follows the like account, and sets down
the very place of his death there to be Osdroena. And Marianus affirms the
same, with the Roman Histories, saying it was in the year of Christ 218. And
both our old British History, and Ponticus Virunnius who give the greatest
light in this matter, say plainly that Carausius lived in Bassianus time.
Bassianus regno potitur. Eo tempore fuit in Britannia Inuenis quidam Galfrid.
Mon. Hist. Reg. l. 5. c. 3. Pont. Virun. l. 5.
nomine Carausius. And add further that Carausius joining with the Picts, which
Fulgenius had got together against Seuerus, Father to Bassianus, fought with
his Army, and overthrowing it, was made King of Britain. Prodiderant Bassianum
Picti quos dux Fulgenius matris suae frater in Britanniam conduxerant. Nam dum
ei auxiliari debuissent, promissis and donarijs Carausij corrupti, in ipso
praelio diuerterunt se a Bassiano, and in commilitones eius irruerunt. Vnde
stupefacti caeteri, Galfr. and Pontic. supr.
cum ignorarent, qui socij, qui hostis, ocius dilabuntur: and Victoria cessit
Carausio. Qui vt triumphum habuit, regnique gubernaculum suscepit, dedit Pictis
locum mansionis in Albania, vbi cum Britonibus mixti per sequens aeum
manserunt. And these Picts and Scots must needs be those of which the Scottish
Historians write, when they say Bassianus made peace with them, and the Britans
which followed Fulgenius, and so went from hence to Rome. Icto cum Scotis and
Pictis Hector Boeth. Scotor. Hist. l. 6. fol. 88. 89. Galfr. and Virun. sup.
faedere, dataque pace Fulgentio, and ijs qui cum eo coniurauerant Britonibus
Romam cum patris vrna contendit. And whereas the British History and Virunnius
say, that Carausius did kill Bassianus, dimicat cum Bassiano, and eum
interemit: This was not Bassianus our King and Emperor son of Seuerus and
Martia, but one Quintus Bassianus a Legate of the Romans. Perierunt eo
tumultuario Hect. Boet. Hist. Scot. l. 6. fol. 100. Holinsh. Hist. of Scotl. in
Chrathlint.
praelio Quintus Bassianus Legatus, Hircius Caesaris Procurator in Britannia,
and cum illis praeter Romanorum militum ingentem numerum, gregariorum magna
multitudo. Now being the common received opinion both of Roman and other
Writers that Seuerus died in the year of Christ 213. the Author of the
Catalogue of our British Kings thus sets down their Successions and
Regime^ts with their continuance. Bassianus Caracalla 6. years. Carausius 7.
years. Alectus 6. Catal. Reg. Brit. ante Hist. Galfr. Monum.
years. Asclepiodotus 30. years. Coelus 27. years. After whom Constantius
his son in Law by marrying his daughter S. Helen succeeded in the Crown. By
which account we have between the death of Seuerus and Constantius his
reigning hear 76. years and from Carausius his death, and the beginning of
Constantius Reign 65. years. Harding makes the distances Joan. Harding.
Chron. c. 53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 59.
shorter, asscribing to Bassianus 7. years, to Carausius 4. Alectus 3.
Asclepiodotus 10. and Coile 11. years: Yet by this account also Carausius was
dead many years before that time, wherein Hector Boethius and some others make
him to have first advanced any title to the crown of Britain.

3. Yet we may make some part of Atonement between these opinions, if we shall
say with the British and other Histories, that Carausius was but a young man
in the time of Bassianus, or Heliogabalus, the true Kings of Britain: eo
tempore erat quidam Iuuenis in Britannia nomine Carausius. And he went to Rome
to procure his Commission there of the Senate to be Admiral, to keep the
British seas: Romam profectus petiuit lice^tiam a Senatu vt Maritimam Matthew.
Westminster. an. 286. Stowe Hist. Titul. the Romans an. 285.
Britaniae ab incursione Barbarica nauigio tueretur. Quae petijt impetrauit,
and cum chartis sigillatis Britanniam petiuit. And after he was thus admitted
Admiral, long time, and diverse years, must needs be spent before he could
come to that power by sea and Land, with Britans, Picts and Scots, to be King
of Britain, allthough he was as diverse hold of the kingly Race, ex Regio
stemmate, Hector Boeth. Scot. Hist. lib. 6. Hollinsh. Hist. of Scotl. in
Crathlint.
and Uncle to that renowned Christian King of the Scots, Crathlintus, though
some style him to have been of base Linadge, ex infima gente procreatus,
improbable in a man obtaining such honor of the Roman Senate, and renown
among Princes, Kings, and Emperors, and diverse of them Christians. But to go
no further out of my way into a matter of temporal History, whether
Bassianus, or his son Heliogabalus, both Emperors and Britans by Parentage,
or Carausius was in Britain at this time, we are by this which is said,
assured, that the Christians hear were in quiet and peace: for if Bassian us
still continued Hector Boeth. and alij sup. Harding cap. 53.
King, he had made peace with all Christians hear, whether Britans, Picts, or
Scots, before his departure hence to Rome, as I have before remembered. And
allthough Heliogabalus was otherwise a man of such wicked conversation, that I
had rather to refer any man desirous to know the manner both of his own and
Fathers life to foreign Writers, then fill my pen with the dishonor of their
Race in them, yet no History makes mention that he was any Persecutour of
Christians. If Carausius was King, it is not improbable, but he was a
Christian, advanced, chosen, and honored with that kingely dignity by the
Christians, confederate with, and assisted by the Christian Scots and Picts
their Kings or Rulers, and against the Pagan Romans a professed Patron and
Propugnor of the Rights and privileges, and Revenger of the wrongs and
Injuries of the Christians hear, contending by all means he could even with
the adventure of his life, loosing it in that Quarrel, to restore the
Christians of this kingdom to that quiet and honorable estate to be free from
thraldom of foreign Pagans, which they happily enjoyed in the government of
King Lucius, and the Roman Senate began now to infringe, and violate. This was
the pretended end and scope of his designs, allthough by some Writers, not
with a little desire of his own greatness and exaltation, no strange disease
among great Princes in any Age*

4. Neither do we finde^ that Alectus sent hither with three Legions against
Carausius, allthough he slew him in Battle and overthrew his army making
himself King, and so continuing three years, insulam tenuit per triennium,
Compilatio M. S. de gest. Brit. and Angl. in Al^ect. Galfr. Monum. Hist. Reg.
Brit. l. 5. c. 4. Pont. Vir. l. 5. Ma^th. West. an. 292. Compilatio M. S. Supur.
did persecute the Christian Britans under pretext of Religion, but for
following Carausius, and not yielding subjection to the Romans, as they
required. Alectus maxima^ intulit Britonibus cladem, quia relicta Republica,
societati Carausij adhaeserant. Where we see the reason of that affliction of
the Britans by the Romans, because, quia, they had forsaken the common wealth
and Government thereof, and followed Carausius an Usurper, as the Romans
esteemed him. And other Historians maKe it plain that only the followers of
Carausius and no others were thus prosecuted by Alectus. interficitur
Carausius, and in eius sequaces saeuitum est. And Matthew of Westminster also
says, that Alectus did afflict only those Britans who forsaking their
Country, had committed themselves to the command of Carausius. Alectus
Carausium interfecit. Pont. Virun. l. 5.
Deinde cladem maximam Britonibus intulit, qui Republica relicta, Carausij se
co^miserant Iussioni. Which Harding more plainly confesses when he says
Matthew. Westminster. an. 292. Harding Cron. cap. 56.
of Alectus: Alecto then crowned and made King of all Britain reigning fully
years three; and well he ruled in all manner werking. And if Alectus or his
Pagan Soldiers, and Vnderrulers, did unjustly persecute any Britans for
Religion, neither he, nor they did escape the Just vengance of God executed
upon them by the Christian Britans in the like kind, for when Alectus and his
Infidel consorts were at London gathered together to make solemn Sacrifice to
their Idols, they were by the Christians driven from their Sacrifice, Alectus
Pontic. Vir. l. 5. Galfr. Mon. l. 5. c. 4. Mat. West. an* 294. Harding Chron.
cap. 56. Holinsh. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 23. Stowe and Howes Hist. Romans in
Asclepiodotus
shamefully putt to flight, and slain, his army scatered, and though by Leuius
Gallus his Colleage in some part renewed again, yet both their General,
Gallus and all his Romans were slain by the Christian Britons in one day.
Factoque agmine denso, inuaserunt Romanos, and vna die omnes interfecerunt. And
their Leader Gallus co^temptuously thrown into a brook taking name thereof,
as our Protestant Antiquaries with Antiquity thus deliver. Asclepiodotus
recovered Britain, and slew the Romans Captain named Liuius Gallus, near
unto a brook there at that time running, into which brook he threw him, by
reason whereof it is called in British Nant Gallon, since in Saxon tongue
Gallus or Wallus Harding. supr. c. 56. Galfr. Monll. 5. c. 5. Virun. lib. 5.
Matthew. Westminster. an. 294.
brook, and to this day the street, where some times the brook ra^re, is
called Walbroks. And proves the History of this Brook both by public
Records, and Inquisitions.

5. Asclepiodotus upon this Victory was crowned King of Britain, by Parliament
says Harding, and by common consent of the people, as both the British
History, Virunnius, and Matthew of Westminster write, being Duke of Cornwall
before, Triumphatis Romany caepit Asclepiodotus regni diadema, and capiti suo,
populo annuente, imposuit. All these last Writers, except Matthew of
Westminster, say, Dioclesian his Persecution began hear in his time, of which
I shall speak hereafter. And it seems, that diverse Historians not observing,
that Constantius was hear twice, marrying S. Helen the first time, and the
second time receiving her again, when Maximian the persecuting Emperor had
forced him to putt her away, do there upon vary much about the years of our
Kings in those times. An old Manuscript Chronology does say Bassianus reigned
27. years, Carausius whom yt calls Care^cius 39. years, Alectus 15.
years, Asclepiodotus 10. years, Coel 4. years. And after him his
Sonne-in-Lawe and daughter, Constantius and Helen 11. Matthew. Westminster. an. 295.
Catal. Reg. Brit. supr. Hollinshed Hist. of Engl. c. 23. in Asclepiod.
Hollinsh. Hist. Engl. supr.
years. The Protestant Cataloge of our Kings has told us, that Asclepiodotus
reigned 30. years. The same has Hollinshed calling it the common account of
our Chroniclers. And by the same Authors and diverse others, King Coel, in the
later end of whose reign the Romans by Constantius came in again, was King
27. years. Thus he writes of this matter, Coelus Earl of Colchester, began
his Dominion over the Britans, in the year of our Lord 262. Thus Coelus or
Coell ruled the Land for a certain time, so as the Britans were well content
with his Government, and lived the longer in rest from Invasion of the Romans,
because they were occupied in other places: but finally they finding time for
their purpose, appointed one Constantius to pass over into this I Will with an
army, the which Constantius putt Coelus in such dread, that immediately upon
his arrival, Coelus sent unto him an Ambassadge, and concluded a peace with
him, couenanting to pay the accustomed Tribute, and gave to Constantius his
daughter in marriadge, called Helen, a noble Lady, and learned. Shortly after
King Coell died, when he had reigned as some write Cap. 27. supr. Fabian.
Matthew. Westminster. Galfrid. Monum. Pont. Virun. Harding. supr. Manuscrip. Antiq. pr.
Regnu^ Brit. Compilatio M. S. de gest. Bri. and Angl. Lib. M. S. qui vocatur
Scala mundi. Sozomenus Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. vlt. Eusebius. l. 4. de Vita
Constantin. Socrates Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. vlt. Eutropiusl. 10. Hier. in
Chron. Ruffin. l. 1. c. 11. Bal. ce^t. 1. in Flauio Constantin. Stow. Histor.
in Constant. Holins. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 29. Bal. Cent. 1. in Helena Flauia.
27. years. And then he sets down, as all other Antiquaries do,
Constantius Father of Constantine the great, our next King. And this he
calls the common opinion of our Writers. Which I find not only in our
printed Historians, but in diverse Manuscripts, not wanting Antiquity for their
warrant, though among them there is difference about the years of the reigns
of those Kings, all consenting they reigned, and succeeded one to an other
hear, as has been related.

6. And we must either say, Coelreigned long, was twice King, or not King when
Constantius married S. Helen his daughter, but after toward his death, or else
contradict all Antiquaries, Greeks, or Latins, Christians or Pagans, Catholics
or Protestants in the History of the Age and Empire of the most renowned,
noted and honorably remembered Emperor that ever was in the world Constantine
the Great. For they all agree, that he dying about the year of Christ 340.
was then 65. years old, having been Emperor above 30. years, and as Sozomen
with others prove, was at the least when he began to reign 34. years of Age:
Constantinus circiter quintum and sexaginta aetatis suae annum moritur. Ex
quorum annorum numero triginta and vnum regnauit: The like has Eusebius: duos
and triginta annos extra paucos menses and dies cum Imperio fuit: eundemque
annorum numerum vita duplicabat. Socrates says: vixit Imperator Constantinus
annos sexaginta quinque: triginta vnum regnauit. Eutropius says, his Age was
66. and his Reign 31. years. S. Hierome and Ruffinus for the Latins, agree
with them. Our Protestants say he died in the 66. year of his Age, and the 32.
of his Reign. e vita decessit senex aetatis suae anno 66. and Imperij 32. a
Christi Incarnatione 339. the 339. year of Christ. And by all in the year
340. at the furthest. The like Argument I may use, by the life and death of his
blessed Mother S. Helena in all Judgments dying before her Son, being about
80. years old then, and but a young Virgin when she was married to Constantius
his Father. One of our chiefest Protestant Antiquaries, and not so plainly
receiving the former Order in our Kings, does confirm it further, saying,
Helena lived 79. years and then departed Holinsh. supr. l. 4. c. 29.
this life about the 21. year of her Sons reign. Her Son the Emperor
Constantine lived till about the year of Christ 340. after he had ruled the
Empire 32. years and odd months. Therefore both he and all others must needs
allow the Reigns and Successions of our Brittih Kings before remembered, and in
a manner free this kingdom from the Romans in their times, as also make it
evident, that the Roman Emperors neither did, nor could raise any Persecution
against our Christians in Britain, except in the time when Constantius first
came hither in the days of the Emperor Aurelianus, about the 3. year of his
own Empire, and year of Christ 273. and married Helen Daughter of Coel, then,
or after King, or both, which no Antiquity affirms, but all deny it, or the
short Reign of Alectus, until the coming of Maximian the Tyrant hither in
the time of Asclepiodotus, as the common opinion is.

THE IX. CHAPTER.
OF THE POPES OF ROME IN THIS TIME, how by all writers, even the Protestants
themselves, they were holy men, and both they and other learned holy Fathers in
this time, were of the same faith and Religion, which the present Roman Church
and Catholics now profess, and Protestants deny and persecute.

1. AFter the Martyrdom of S. Calixtus, S. Vrbanus the first of The Religion
of the Popes then the same that is now, by their adversaries.
that name was Pope of Rome. This man, as Protestant Antiquaries, English and
others write, lived in the time of that licentious Emperor Heliogabalus, and
by the sanctity of his life, and singular learning did bring many in all
places to Io. Bal. l. 1. de Act. Romans Pontif. in Urban. Pap. 16. Rob. Barnes in
Vit. Pont. Romans in V^bano. 1. Magdeb. cent. 3. c. 10. c. 277.
true Religion: for which he was often bannished, but secretly recalled by the
faithful Christians, and at he last received the Cro^ne of Martyrdom in the
year of our Lord 233. Vrbanus Romanus sub libidinosa bestia Heliogabalo
Caesare vixit, vitaeque sanctitate and doctrina singulari multos vn^iquaque
mortales ad Euangelium traxit. Hic saepenumero pro fide Christiana ab vrbe
proscribebatur; sed a fidelibus iterum cla^ reuocatus, Martyrij coronam anno
Domini 233. tandem accepit. His Decretall Epistle is extant, written to all
Bishops S. Vrbanus Pope Martyred in the year of our Lord 233.
of the common life, and offering of the faithful. He plainly makes mention
of such a common life as was under the Apostles, and defe^deth by his Decrees
the goods ^^ the Church, that no man should invade them by force or fraud. And
he speaks ^^ the vo^^e of them which promise to possess nothing proper to
themselves, he instituted that Confirmation should be ministered after Baptism.
He says that by Imposition of the Bishops hands therein, the holy Ghost is
received: Extat vna eius Epistola Decretalis scripta ad omnes Episcopos, de
communi vita and oblatione fidelium. Plane enim eiusmodi vitae communis
meminit, qualis sub Apostolis fuit. Munit deinde Edictis bona Ecclesiae, ne
quis ea vi aut fraud inuadat: and aliqua dicit de voto promittentium, se nihil
rerum propriarum possessuros. Instituit in fine Confirmationem post Baptismum:
dicit, per manus Impositionem Episcoporum accipi Spiritum sanctum.

2. Next unto S. Vrbanus succeeded Pope Pontianus, who as these Protestants Io.
Bal. lib. 1. de Romans Pont. Act. in Pontiano.
tell us, was Christi minister, ac dispensator Mysteriorum Dei: exilium and
supplicia pro Euangelio, proque Ecclesia passus est, post multas calamitates
and grauia tormenta, Anno Domini 239. pro Christi fide, martyrij paena subijt.
The Minister S. Pontianus Pope suffered Martyrdum an. D. 239.
of Christ and dispenser of the mysteries of God, suffered exilements, and
punishments for the Gospel, and the Church, and after many calamities and
greuious Torments suffered the pain of Martyrdom for the faith of Christ, in
the year of our Lord 239. He taught that God would have Priests so familiar
with him, that he Magdeburgen. centur. 3. col. 278 in Pontian.
would accept of other men's Sacrifices by the^, and by them forgive their
sins, and reconcile them to him. And that Priests do make with their own
mouth, the body of our Lord, and give it to the people: Sacerdotum dignitati
multa tribuit. Eos, inquit, Deus familiares in tantum sibi esse voluit, vt
etiam aliorum hostias per eos acceptaret atque eorum peccata donaret, sibique
reconciliaret. Ipsi quoque proprio ore Corpus Domini conficiunt, and populis
tradunt.

3. After S. Pontianus succeeded S. Anterus, who as our Protertants say,
attributed S. Antherus Pope and Martyr succeeded S. Pontinus.
such supreme Privilege to his holy See, that he ordained that Bishops might
not go from one Bishopric to an other, without the Authority of the Pope of
Rome. Episcopos ab vno Episcopatu ad aliam transfer, si id Ecclesiae
necessitas vel vtilitas exigat licere: sed ne id sine summi Pontificis
authoritate Robert. Barnes l. de Vit. Pont. Romans in Antero. Io. Bal. l. 1. de
Act. Pontif. Romans in eod.
fiat, cauit: and beatified the Church with his blood in Martyrdom in the
year of our Lord 243. decorauit hic Antherm anno Domini 243. Ecclesiam suo
sanguine, quam antea pauerat verbo: which he had before fedd with the word of
God.

4. S. Fabian as these men say was Miraculously chosen Pope, the form of a
Dove sitting upon his head, when he was sought for to be Pope. Cum ad S.
Fabianus miraeulously chosen Pope.
Po^tificatum designatus quaereretur Columba super eius caput sedere visa est.
He buil ded a Churchyard for the honor of Martyrs. He decreed that every
year upon Maunday Thursday, new Chrisme should be consecrated, and the old
Barnes and Bal. sup. in Fabiano. Magdeb. Cent. 3 c. 10. col. 279. 280 etc. 5.
col. 144.
burnt. That Priests should not be accused or punished in the te^porall, but
Ecclesiastical Court. He forbad marriadge within the first degree of
co^sanguinitie. That every Christian should communicate at the least thrice
every year. He decreede about satisfaction, the Rite of penance, and
Excommunication, of the Age of such as were to be made Priests, or admitted to
holy Orders, of oblations or Masses every day. Caemiterium pro Martyrum
dignitate extruxit. Singulis annis in caena Domini Chrisma vt renouaretur,
vetere combusto, statuit. Sacerdotes causam dicere, and mulctari in Sacro, non
prophano foro debere edixit. Ne vxorem quis ducat intra quintum
consanguinitatis gradum, statuit. Quisque Christianus vt singulis annis ter
Eucharistiam sumeret, praecepit. Quaedam de satisfactionibus, de ritu
paenitentiae, and de excommunicatione statuit, de aetate presbyterorum
ordinatorum, de oblationibus per singulos dies. They add further how he
condemned the Heresies S. Fabianus condemned the Heresies of the Nouatians and
Helchites.
of the Nouatians, and Helchites. And that he both baptized Philip the
Emperor, and after put him to public penance, among the ordinary penitents.
Whereas these men say, that S. Fabian appointed that every year upon
Maunday-Thursday new Chrisme should be hallowed, and the old burnt, no man may
thereby fantasy, that he was the first Author either of consecrating, or
yearly renewing of Chrisme, for in the very place from whence these
Protestants derive this Constitution, which is the second Decretall Epistle of
this holy Pope, he plainly says, that upon that day when Christ supped with
his Disciples, and washed their feet, Christ himself taught this consecrating
of Chrisme, and that the Popes of Rome thus received it from the Apostles. And
for the yearly renewing of it upon that day, he says also, that it descended
from the Apostles by all his Predecessors Popes of Rome, and so from the
Apostles both the Church of Rome, Antioch, Jerusalem, and Ephesus, where the
Apostles lived, did ever observe. In illa Die Dominus Jesus postquam caenauit
cum S. Fabian. Epist. 2. ad omnes Orient. Episc.
Discipulis suis, and lauit eorum pedes, sicut a sanctis Apostolis
praedecessores nostri acceperunt nobisque reliquerunt, Chrisma consicere
docuit. Sicut ipsius diei solemnitas per singulos annos est celebranda, ita
ipsius sancti Chrismatis confectio per singulos annos est agenda, and de anno
in annum renouanda, and fidelibus tradenda: quia nouum Sacramentum est per
singulos annos, and iam dicto Die innouandum, and vetus in sanctis Ecclesijs
cremandum. Ista a sanctis Apostolis and successoribus eorum accepimus, vobisque
tenenda mandomus. Haec sancta Romana Ecclesia, and Antiochena a temporibus
Apostolorum custodit: haec Hierosolymorum and Ephisinorum tenet. In quibus
Apostoli praesidentes, haec docuerunt, and vetus Chrisma incendi, and non
amplius quam vno anno vti permiserunt, atque dinceps nouo frui, and non veteri
iubentes docuerunt. And this holy Pope so Miracously chosen, and teaching and
practicing these Doctrins, was as glorious in his death, as these Protestants
S. Fabianus put to death an. D. 250.
confess, ending his life with a glorious death of Martyrdom in the year of
our Lord 250. Sub Decio saeuiente in fratres capitis obtruncatione, anno Domini
250. vitam gloriosa morte consummauit.

5. Of the doctrine or Decrees of the three next Popes, S. Cornelius, S.
Lucius, and S. Stephen our protestants are very sparinge in relating them,
being repugnant to their proceedings, only they say of the last, S. Stephen.
That diverse Authors testify that he was celebrating of Mass, when he was
apprehended by the Pagans, and carried to be martyred: Stephanum in
celebratione Io. Bal. l. 1. de Act. Romans Pont. in Stephano.
Missae ad martyrium raptum. Yet for all this they freely confess, that both
he and the others were renowned Saints and Martyrs. Of Cornelius they witness,
that he was a man of God, and though banished in exile, he was never wanting to
Christ's kingdom his Church, but as his most worthy champion, suffered S.
Cornelius Pope Martyred an. D. 253.
death for preaching the truth in the year of our Lord 253. Homo Dei,
Cornelius, licet in exilium deportatus, regno tamen Christi minime vnquam
defuit. Quin optimus eius Athleta, in veritatis assertione Anno Domini 253.
Decij mucro ni Io. Bal. supr. in Cornel. Rob. Barn. l. de Vit. Pont. in eod.
Magdeb. cent. 3. c. 10. col. 282. Bal. and ijdem alij supr. in Lucio and
Stephano.
ceruicem, vt ouis mansueta, praebuit.

6. Of Pope Lucius they say, that he did enrich the Church, with wholesome
Doctrine, and made white in the blood of the Lamb, penetrated the heavenly
Paradise in the year of our Lord 255. Ecclesiam salubri Doctrina locupletauit,
ac Paradisum caelestem anno Domini 255. sub Valeriano occidi iussus, and in
sanguine agni dealbatus, penetrauit.

7. S. Stephen, as they write, having converted many Pagans to the faith of
Christ, became a sacrifice to God, and thereby received a crown of Justice S.
Lucius Pope and Martyr. an. D. 255. Saint Steven Pope crowned with Martyrdom
an. D. 257.
in the year of our Lord 257. Stephanus anno Domini 257. cum multos Gentilium
ad Christi fidem conuertisset, capite mulctatus, cum plerisque alijs, fit
victima Deo, accepta iustitiae Corona.

8. And allthough these Protestants do not, nor dare, for betraying their
cause, particularly set down the Doctrine of these Popes, yet confessing of
them all, that they were of the same Religion and opinion therein with S.
Magdeb. cent. 3. c. 7. col. 164. and alibi saepe. ca. 3. Bergomen. l. 8. and
alij apud Magd. ce^t. 3. c. 8. col. 191.
Cyprian, except in his error of Rebaptization (which they, and truly, say he
recanted, many Epistles passing between them) they do sufficiently prove,
that they did plainly hold with S. Cyprian, all those points of Catholic
Doctrine, which they to omit others, do asscribe unto him. Some of them be
these, as these Protestants confess, and thus recompt them. Cyprian is every
where a vehement affirmer of Freewill: liberi Arbitrij vehemens est vbique
assertor. Magdeb. cent. 3. col. 247. c. 10. and alibi.
They assure us also, that S. Cyprian held that Christ Jesus in his last
Supper, being our high Priest, did offer sacrifice, and commanded Priests
should do the same. Cyprianus de caena Domini sic inquit libro secundo,
Epistola tertia: nam Jesus Christus Dominus noster ipse est summus Sacerdos Dei
Patris, and sacrificium Deo Patri ipse primus obtulit, and hoc fieri in sui
commemorationem praecepit. Vtque ille Sac^rdos vice Christi vere fungitur, qui
id quod Christus fecit imitatur: and sacrificium verum and plenum tunc off^rt
in Ecclesia Deo Patri, si sic incipiat offerre secundum quod ipsum Christum
vi^eat offerre: and that both the true body, and blood of Christ is there
present, and by Transsubstantiation or changing of bread into his body, and
wine into his blood: sentit in caena corpus Christi verum and Sanguinem, in
sermon de caena Domini. Cyprianus inquit imitari non effagie sed natura. S.
Cyprian Magdeb. supr. and Parkis Proble. p. 153. 154.
his words in this place they cite are these. panis iste communis in carnem and
sanguinem mutatus, panis iste quem Dominus Dis^ipuli^ porrigebat, non effigy,
sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia Verbi factus est c^ro. Noua est huius
Sacramenti Doctrina, and scholae Euangelicae hoc primum magisterium
protulerunt, and Doctore Cyprian. lib. de caena Domini.
Christo primum haec mundo innotuit Disciplina, vt biberent sanguinem
Christiani, cuius esum l^gis antiquae Authoritas districtissime interdicit: lex
quippe esum Sanguinis prohibet, Euangelium praecipit vt hibatur. Vniuersa
Ecclesia ad has epulas inuitatur, aequa omnibus portio datur, integer erogatur,
distributus non demembratur: Incorporatur non iniuratur: recipitur non
includitur. Dominus vsque hodie hoc veracissimum and sanctis^imum corpus suum
creat, and sanctificat, and benedicit, and pie sumentibus di^u^i^it: Bread is
changed into Christ's body. The bread which our Lord did give to is Disciples
being changed not in shape but nature was made flesh by the omnipotency of the
word. The Doctrine of this Sacrament is new, and the schools of the Gospel
first brought forth this Masters office, or instruction, and Christ first
taught this Doctrine to the world, that Christians should drink blood, whose
eating the Authority of the old Law did most strictly forbid. The whole
Church is invited to this banquet, equal portion is given to all. Christ is
given whole, distributed he is, not dismembered: he is incorporated not injured:
he is received, not included. Our Lord even to this day does create this his
most true and holy body, blesses it, and divides it to the godly receauers.
And the words of S. Cyptia^ cited by the Magdeburgea^ Cyprian. Epist. 63. ad
Caecilium.
Protestants before out of his 63. Epistle, which is to Caecilius, are grossly
corrupted by them: for S. Cyprian does not say as they cite him before,
sacrificium Deo patri ipse primus obtulit and hoc fieri in sui commemorationem
praecepit: Christ was the first that offered sacrifice to God the Father, and
commanded it to be done in commemoration of him. For in so saying S. Cypian
should have evidently written untruly, for many before Christ, both in the
Law of nature, and Moses, offered sacrifice to God before Christ was
Incarnate. But S. Cyprian most truly says that Christ in his last supper was
the first, that offered himself his blessed body and blood to God in
sacrifice, and commanded the same to be done after him. Jesus Christus ipse est
summus Sacerdos Dei patris, and sacrificum patri seipsum primus obtulit, and
hoc fieri in sui commemorationem praecepit. And then follows immediately,
that which they have cited from thence, that Priests supply the place of
Christ, in the offering of this Sacrifice, and must offer it, secundum quod
ipsum Christum videat obtulisse, as they see Christ offered it in his last
supper, by the omnipotency of the word of Christ changing the bread into his
blessed body, and wine into his precious blood as S. Cyprian has told us
before, and this most holy Catholic Doctrine he teaches in diverse Cypr. l. de
Orat. Dominica. Epist. 34. Epist. 11. 54. l. delapsis Epistol. 56. Magdeb.
cent. 3. c. 4. col. 83.
other places. And among the rest in his 54. Epistle which he and the Council
of Carthage wrote unto Pope Cornelius, to assure us, these holy Popes and he
agreed in these Mysteries, they plainly affirm Christ's body and blood to be
present and received there by the mouths of commuricants. He taught also by
these men, that the Eucharist is sanctified on the Altar. The Priests sanctify
the Chalice, supply the place of Christ, and offer Sacrifice to God. Cyprianus
ait Eucharistia in altari sanctificatur. Rursus ait sacerdotes sanctificare
calicem. Item sacerdotem inquit vice Christi fungi, and Deo patri sacrificium
offerre. They also acknowledge S. Cyprian gives diverse examples of communion
only in one kind, and how both in, and before the time of Pope Cornelius it
was usual with the Bishops of Rome, or Italy at the least, and others to
minister this Sacrament to communicants only under the form of bread, and to
give them no other liquid thing at that time, but water, which all men know
could be no part of that Sacrament; potest ex Cypriani libro 2. Epistola 3.
Magdeb. cent. 3. c. 5. col. 149. tit. de ritibus circa caenam.
ad Cornelium aperte colligi, cum tempore Cornelij, tum ante eum, Romanos, aut
etiam Italicos and alios Episcopos in administratione caenae Dominicae, plebiin
calice tantum aquam porrexisse, and non vinum seu sanguinem Domini.

9. It is also evident by S. Cyprian, that not only in his time but even from
the Apostles, the Sacrifice of Mass was usually offered for the faithful
departed, Magd. supr. col. 82. Cypr. Ep. 66. ad Plebem and Clerum Furnitanorum.
Epist. 57. lib. de mortalitate tractat. de disciplina and habita Virg. de
Stella and Magis and Innocent. Mart. Magdeb. cent. 1. c. 4. col. 84. and col.
82. Magdeb. cent. 3. c. 4. col. 86. tit. de castitate and virginitate.
and they therein prayed for. The like he teaches of Intercession to Saints in
heaven, and their prayers for them that live, which these Protestants confess
to have been S. Cyprian his doctrine. Cyprianus libro tertio, Epistola 15.
lapsos dixit auxilio Martyrum apud Deum adinuari. And thy confess, that S.
Cyprian plainly holds, that the Martyrs and Saints deceased pray for them
that live. Certe in fine prioris Epistolae libri primi, non obscure sentit
Cyprianus, Martyrs and Sanctos defunctos pro viuentibus orore. These
Protestants further confess that S. Cyprian aequaled or rather preferred the
true Virginal life to that of Angels, and calls the chaste and single life
of Clergy men a state of Angelike condition. And allthough Marriadge is good,
and instituted by God, yet continency is better, and Virginity more excellent.
Cyprianus Virginitas, inquit, aequat se Angelis: si vere exquiramus excedit,
dum in carne luctata victoriam, and contra naturam refert, quam non habent
Angeli. In libro de dono pudicitiae. Liber de singularitate Clericorum eodem
modo castitatem statum vocat qualitatis Angelicae. Et sermon de Natiuitate
Christi: etsi bona sunt and instituta a Deo coniugia, melior tamen est
continentia, and virginitas excellentior. They tell us further that he teaches
the doctrine of meritt, and good works, to take away sin, and justify.
Cyprianus l. 3. Epistolarum, Epistola 25. sentit meritorum praecedentium
defensione obuelari peccata. Et in sermon de eleemosinis ex professo sentit,
peccata commissa post Baptismum, eleemosyna, and bonis operibus extingui. And
both to prove this doctrine, and justify those Books of Tobias,
Ecclesiasticus, and others which our Protestants deny to be Canonical
Scripture he teaches the contrary, and cites them as holy Scriptures with
others for these opinions. Id probare conatur dictis Scripturae, vt Tobiae
quarto: sicut aqua extinguit ignem, sic eleemosyna peccatum. And all the other
Books and parts of them, which the present Roman Church admits for holy
Scripture, and our English Protestants disallowe for such, S. Cyprian does
receive them as Catholics now do, as appears in these Marginall citations,
where besides Tobias and Ecclesiasticus before granted, he approves in
express terms the Book of Wisdom (a) the Book of Baruch the Prophet l. 2.
aduers. Iud. c. 6. de orat. Domin.
the song of the 3. children; Cyprian. Ep. 62. 52. exhort. Mart. c. 12. ad
Quirin. l. 3. c. 59. l. de mortalitate
de orat. Dom. Sermon. de lapsis.
the History of Susanna Epist. 40. l. de bono pudicitiae.
of Bell and the Dragon in the Book of Daniel, Epist. 56. l. de Orat. Dominica.
Ser. de eleemosina
and Books of the Machabees. Epistol. 55. 56. exhort. Mart. cap. 11.
And yet that he did not ascribe all to Scripturs and reject Traditions, as our
Protestants do, they have sufficiently confessed before, when they
acknowledge, S. Cyprian taught so many points of doctrine, which as they say,
are not contained in Scripturs.

10. To which they add many more of great moment, as of the validity,
number, ministration, and true Ministers of the Sacraments, the principal
essential things belonging to the true Church of Christ, by our Protestants
confessions, in all which, and diverse other questions by their own Testimony,
S. Cyprian, those Popes of Rome, and the Church of Christ then differed from
them, and agreed in them all with the present Roman Church. First for the
validity of Sacraments these men confess, that by the doctrine of S. Cyprian,
and the Church then, the worthy receauers of them were united to Christ armed
against the world, the devil, and human concupiscence, grace was given, and
sins forgiven in them. This was also the received old doctrine of the Church
and Popes of Rome, namely of Pope Cornelius, as both he, Eusebius, the
Magdeburgian Protestants, and others witness by whose agreeing testimony also
both Pope Cornelius, S. Cyprian, and the Church of Rome and Affrike with all
others differed from our Protestants, and consented with the present Roman
Church, about the number of Sacraments. First they say that both Cornelius, and
S. Cyprian taught, that Confirmation was a Sacrament, and by the Bishops
Unction with Chrisme the Magdeb. in Indice cent. 3. v. Sacramenta. and ce^t. 3.
c. 10. col. 246. 247. 248. Cornelius Epist. 2. Tom. 1. Conc. Eusebius. l. 6. c.
42. Magde. cent. 3. in Cornel. etc. 10. col. 240. Cypria. Epist. 72. Cyprian.
Ep. 52. ad Antonianum. l. 1. Ep. 2. and ep. 54 Cyprian. de Ablutione pedum.
Cornel. Epist. apud Eusebium. Magdeb. and alios supr. Magdeb. in Indice ce^^.
3. in Lucio Papa. and ce^t. 6. col. 148. and col. 149. tit. de caelibatu and
Vita monastica.
holy Ghost, and Grace were given. S. Cyprian also makes Penance a Sacrament
and plainly affirms, that sins are loosed and forgiven in it. And both he
and S. Cornelius then Pope give as much to Preisthood, and holy Orders. S.
Cyprian makes it and others, Sacraments equally as Baptism. Docemur quae sit
Baptismi and aliorum Sacramentorum stabilitas. Nam Baptismum repeti
Ecclesiasticae prohibent regulae: and semel sanctificatis nulla deinceps manus
iterum consecrans praesumit accedere: nemo sacros Ordines semel datos iterum
renouat: nemo sacro oleo lita, iterum linit, aut consecrat: nemo Impositioni
manuum vel ministerio derogat Sacerdotum. Where he sets this down for a
general Ecclesiastical Rule, which no man was ignorant off, or did disobay.

11. And S. Cornelius then Pope by all the witnesses before, Protestants and
others, sets down the honor, and dignity of this Sacrament in the Church
of Rome, when he affirms, that in those days of Persecution, there were in
it, besides the Bishop, 46. Priests, 7. Deacons, 7. Subdeacons, 42.
Acoluthists, Exorchists, Lectours and Ianitours 521. And to make all sure, that
all these Orders then were Ecclesiastical, he sets down some of their
Offices, and how these Exorcists did dispossess Nouatus by these Protestants,
being possessed by Satan. These Protestants also testify the same of S.
Cyprian his doctrine in this point, and these Deacons and Subdeacons did live
unmarried: of this, Pope Lucius (as they confess) made a Decree. Lucij
Decretum de caelibatu Sacerdotum. So they acknowledge of Pope Stephen, that no
Priest, Deacon, or Subdeacon might marry: nullus Sacerdotum a Subdiacono vsque
ad Episcopum licentiam habet coniugium sauciendi. Likewise they do
sufficiently prove, that S. Cyprian and these Popes agreed in the Supreamacie
Magdeb. cent. 3. c. 4. col. 84. 85. Tit. de Eccles. and Primatu Romano.
of the Pope of Rome: First for S. Cyprian, in that very Treatise which they
entitle: de Ecclesia and Primatu Romano: of the Church, and Roman Primacy; they
acknowledge he expressly writes, that the Roman Church is to be acknowledged
of all, for the Mother and Root of the Catholic Church, he calls the Chair
of Peter, the principal Church, from which Preistly unity is risen. And says
in diverse places that the Church was founded upon Peter. Cyprianus libro
quarto, Epistola 8. nominatim ait Romanam Ecclesiam ab omnibus alijs pro
matrice and radice Catholicae Ecclesiae agnoscendam esse. Quemadmodum and libro
primo, Epistola tertia and in tractatu de simplicitate Praelatorum, principalem
vocat Ecclesiam Petri Cathedram, a qua vnitas sacerdotalis exorta sit. Alibi
passim dicit, super Petrum Ecclesiam fundatam esse, vt libro primo, Epistola
tertia: libro quarto, Epistola nona. Tractatu secundo de habitu Virginum,
sermon tertio de bono patientiae, and in Epistola ad Quirinum. And they add
further, utterly to overthrow their own new found Ministerial calling and
Church, and Princes proceedings against Clergy men, that S. Cyprian taught an
Ordinary Succession in Pastoral dignity, and that Bishops and Rulers of the
Church were not to be judged by others. Habet Cyprianus and alias opiniones
periculosas, vt quod Pastoratum ad ordinariam successionem, libro 1. Epistola
6. allegat: Item quod negat Episcopos and Praepositos Ecclesiae iudicandos,
libro 4. Epistola 9. and in Concilio. These they call dangerous opinions, and
so they are for their new Religion, which has no Ordinary Succession, but in
all places has overthrown it, and so far proceeded, to adiudge and condemn
Bishops, and Prelates of the Church, that in the whole world there is not any
one of that most sacred, or Preistly calling, or any inferior holy Order, none
but mere Lay men, which by their own definitive Article cannot make a true
visible Artic. of Englis. Protest. Religion art. 19.
Church, to be found in all their Congregations. And yet this doctrine of S.
Cyprian, so periculous with these men, is so far from being really and truly
dangerous, that not only by all Catholic Authors, but by our English
Protestants also (both their particular Writers, and public Articles with
their Art. sup. Art. 36. Prot. publ. gloss there. Prot. Book of Consecration
in Pref.
allowed gloss, and authorized Book of Consecration) it is justified to be
unquestionably true, and most necessary. And this already proved by all
Authority: as also the doctrine of exemption of Bishops, and Clergy men, from
being conuented before Lay Judges and Tribunals. The same is evident before of
the Popes of Rome Spiritual Supreamacie. And diverse of these testimonies of S.
Cyprian therein, are in his several Epistles to Pope Cornelius. That place
where he calls the Roman Church the Root and Mother of the Catholic Church
is in his 45. Epistle, which is to Cornelius Pope, where he plainly says, he
exhorted all to follow that Church: Vt Ecclesiae Catholicae radicem and
matricem agnoscerent, ac tenerent. Likewise his testimony that Rome is the
Chair of S. Peter, the principal Church from which Preistly unity is risen,
is in his 55. Epistle, which is to the same Pope Cornelius. In which he
affirms further that it is the Church of Rome, whose faith the Apostle
commended, and to which false doctrine cannot have access: Eos esse Romanos,
quorum fides, Apostolo praedicante, laudata est, ad quos perfidia habere non
possit accessum. And there plainly says, that Heresies and Scismes have only
had original, because men would not obey Gods Priest, nor allow only one
Chief Priest, and Judge the Vicar of Christ in his Church. And calls the
Judgment of this Priest, Christ Vicar, the Pope of Rome, the Judgment of God,
not to be disobayed of any, and from such disobedience Scismes and Heesies do
spring. Neque aliunde haereses obortae sunt, aut nata scismata, quam inde quod
Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur, nec vnus in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, and ad
tempus Iudex vice Christi cogitatur. Cui si secundum ministeria diuina
obtemperaret Fraternitas vniuersa, nemo aduersum Sacerdotum Collegium quicquam
moueret: Nemo post diuinum Iudicium, post populi suffragium, post Coepiscoporum
consensum, Iudicem se iam non Episcopi, sed Dei faceret: nemo dissidio
vnitatis, Christi Ecclesiam scinderet: nemo sibi placens, ac tumens seorsim
foris Haeresim nouam conderet: nisi ita est aliquis Sacriligae temeritatis ac
perditae mentis, vt putet sine Dei Iudicio fieri sacerdotem.

12. Now that these holy Popes stood upon the same supreme privilege for the
Church of Rome being the common doctrine and practice of them all, as
Protestants confess, we need not to stand upon these in particular: yet these
Protestants do assure us first, that Pope Cornelius maintained Appeals to
Rome: Cornelius Epistola 2. facit mentionem Appellationis ad Apostolicam
Magdeb. cent. 3. c. 7. col. 181. Rob. Barnes l. de Vit. Pontif. Romans in
Cornelio.
Sedem. And made a general Decree to free Priests from swearing, except in
matter of faith. And condemned the Africa^ Bishops Decree about Rebaptizatio^.
Pope Lucius, as they confess, makes the Church of Rome the Mother of
Churches, and affirmed that the Popes of Rome never erred, and contended that
they cannot err, proving it by that place, where Christ said to S. Peter, I
have asked for thee, that thy faith may not fail. Lucius Romanam Ecclesiam
Matrem Magdeb. Cent. 3. col. 183. c. 7.
Ecclesiarum facit: and Apostolicos Pontifices nunquam errasse asserit, and ne
quidem errare posse contendit, ex eo loco quod Christus Petro dixerit: rogaui
pro te, ne fides tua deficeret. And Pope Stephen made a general Decree as
these men affirm, for the whole Church, about receiving penitent Heretics,
how they were to be received. Stephani Papae Romani sententia and rescriptum
hoc Magdeb. cent. 3. c. 8. col. 190. Robert. Barnes l. de Vit. Pont. Romans in
Stephano. Io. Bal. l. 1. Act. Romans Pontif. in Stephano.
fuit. Si a quacumque haeresi ad Ecclesiam veniant, nihil innouetur nisi quod
traditum est, vt manus illis imponatur in paenitentiam. And generally for all
Priests in all places, that they should not use at Mass, any other then sacred
vestments, Ne Sacerdos alia vest quam sacra, in sacris vteretur, statuit: By
this holy Pope, which our Protestants confess was an holy Saint, and Martyr,
and received a Crown of Justice thereby after he had converted many Gentiles to
Christ. Cum multos Gentilium ad Christi fidem conuertisset, capite mulctatus,
fit victima S. Sixtus Pope and Martyr.
Deo, accept a Iustitiae corona.

13. The like they testify of all his Successors in this Age. S. Sixtus the
Ambr. l. 1. Oshc. c. 41. Prudent. in Hymno de S. Laurent. Magd. cent. 3. cap.
10. in Sixto. cap. 12. in Laurent. col. 297 298.
next was Christi discipulus, and e terreno coelestis aeconomus factus,
Christiani gregis decus, atque imitandum exemplar, and preached the true word
of God, salutare Dei verbum populo proponens. And yet this doctrine of this
holy Pope, by all Antiquities, and these Protestants themselves, was
sacrificing preisthood, Sacrifice of Mass, Deacons assisting at the Altar,
Christ really present there, and offered in Sacrifice, with Lights upon the
Altar. Hic primus e septem viris, qui stant ad Aram proximi. Hunc esse vestris
orgijs moremque and artem proditum est, hanc Disciplinam foederis libent vt
auro Antistites. Argenteis scyphis ferunt fumare sacrum sanguinem, auroque
nocturnis sacris adstare fixos cereos. And this was so common and publikly
received and known, that the Pagans themselves were not ignorant of it. S.
Dionisius Pope and Martyr. Bal. l. 1. de Act. Romans Pontif. in Dionys. Robert.
Barnes in Vit. Pont. in eodem.


14. Of S. Dionysius the next Pope, these Protestants say, he was famous for
preaching the true faith, and dilating of Christ's Church, and converted many,
and among others the daughter and wife of the Emperor Decius, Cyrilla and
Triphonia, and dyed an holy Martyr: Yet they also acknowledge, he was a Monk
and Eremite before he was Pope. He divided Parishes and Dioceses, assigning
their limits, and made other general Laws for the whole Church, concerning
Heretics and others to be accused, and conuented.

15. S. Faelix which was his next Successor was also, as these men confess, S.
Foelix Pope and Martyr.
an absolute virtuous man, and renowned, for he preached the word of God and
died a glorious Martyr. Yet they also say, he was a Massing Pope, and Bal. l.
1. de Act. Pontif. supr. in Foelice. Rob. Barnes in eod.
took order, that none but consecrated Priests should say Mass, he ordained
that Masses should yearly be said in honor of Martyrs on their Anniuersary
days, and no where but in sacred places.

16. They say of Eutichianus, the next Pope, that he was, vir Deo deditissimus,
a doctrina and virtutihus Ecclesiae commendatus, diuini verbi praedicatione
salutem S. Eutichianus Pope and Martyr.
multis attulit populis: A man most devoted to God, renowned for learning, Bal.
l. 1. Act. To. Pontif. in Eucichiano. Barn. in eod.
and virtue, and by preaching the word of God, brought salvation to many
people, and died a Martyr. Yet as they acknowledge, he took order for sacred
Vesturs of Clergy men, so honored he Martyrs, that with his own hands he
buried 300. and made general Laws for the whole Church.

17. Of S. Caius the next, and by common opinion the last of this Age, they S.
Caius Pope and Martyr.
say he was kinsman of Dioclesian the persecuting Emperor, yet a most worthy
Ruler of the house of God, in the Roman Church, and died a Martyr: Bal. and
Barnes supr. in Caio.
praepositus domus Dei in Ecclesia Romana probatissimus. And yet he exempted
Clergy men from lay Judges, and as S. Euaristus had done before, gave order,
that none should be a Bishop which had not before been Ostiarius, Lector,
Exorcista, Acolythus etc.

18. If our Protestants will have S. Marcellinus to have been Pope in the S.
Marcellinus Pope and Martyr.
end of this Age, seeing they bring him to the great Council of Sinuessa of
300. Bishops, besides many other great Clergy men: They have this great
Barnes supr. in Marcello. Magdeburg. cent. 4. c. 9. To. 1. Conc. in Marcellino
and Conc. Sinuessano in 3. exa^plar. antiq.
general Council the first that ever was in the world, in all Copies
plainly pronouncing: no man ever Judged the Pope of Rome. The first See is
indged by none, Nemo vnquam iudicauit Pontificem: Prima Seeds non iudicatur a
quoquam. Now I will return again to the time of Pope Stephen, where I left.

THE X. CHAPTER.
OF S. MELLO, OR MELLON A BRITAN, SENT Archbishop by Pope Stephen from Rome to
Rhoan in Normandy. Of S. Mellorus a Noble British Martyr, and a Provincial
Council of British Bishops hear in Cornewalle in this time.

1. THE History of out renowned Britan S. Mello, or Mellon, by most Authors,
fell our in the time of S. Stephens being Pope. And it should seem by out
Histories (which speak of many, and long defections of the Britans in these
days, and their withdrawing their Tribute, and obedience from them, except
when Quintus Bassianus, Alectus or such men were sent hither with power from
the Romans to keep Britain in their subjection) that S. Mello S. Mello went
to Rome.
his going from hence to Rome with others of this kingdom, to pay the Brittans
Tribute there, was in the time of that Bassianus, or some such Roman: our
Antiquities being sparing to give us warrant to say, that the Britans did so
carefully pay their Tribute, under their other Rulers which loved not the
Romans, but labored to free themselves, and this Kingdom rather from that
subjection. And this the rather, because as I have proved before, it is
probable the other Britan Rulers hear were Christians, and so would not easily
employ Pagans in such a business, and service. For it is the constant agreement
of the Writers of this Relation, that this Mello with his Associats was at his
S. Mello was first, a Pagan.
going to Rome, and being there also at the first, a Pagan, and at the
performing of his temporal duty there, did after the manner of the then
Infidel Romans Manuscr. antiq. in Vita S. Mellonis. Capgtau. in codem. Anual.
Eccl. Rothomagen. Dionys. Alexandrin. and Eusebius. l. Eccl. Hist. cap. 9. Matthew.
Westminster. an. 25^. Trebellius. Aurelius Victor. Eutropius and alij in Galeriano.
Eusebius. in Vita Constantini l. 4. Co^stan. orat. ad Sa^ctorum caetum c. 24.
Florent. Wigor. an. 250. 272. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 12.
sacrifice in the Temple of Mars, being a soldier by profession, and this was
in the time of Valerian the Emperor, Tempore Valeriani Imperatoris Mello
quida^ de Maiori Britannia oriundus Romam venit, vt patriae suae Tributum
solueret, and Imperatori seruiret, ibique sicut mos erat, cum socijs suis ad
Templum Martis ductus est vt sacrificaret. And by the History of this renowned
man, it seems, to have been in the beginning of this Emperors reign, about
the year of Christ 256. when by the testimony of Dionysius and Eusebius, he
was more friendly to Christians, then any of his Predecessors, even those that
were Christians, as the two Philips, the Father and son, and all his Court
was full of Christians, and as a Church of God, Valerianus prae Antecessoribus
suis sic comparatus fuit initio, vt erga homines Dei placidus esset, and animo
amico praeditus. Neque enim quisquam Imperatorum ante eum tam clementer ac
placide erga eos affectus fuit, ne illi quidem qui palam facti Christiani
dicebantur, sic initio ille familiarissime and amantissime, idque palam nostros
complectebatur, and tota illius aula referta erat pijs, and Ecclesia Dei facta.
For (Valerian after seduced by the Magicians) became a most greuious Persecutor
of Christians, until being taken Prisoner by the Persians, was detained there
Prisoner, until his death, made a Footestoole for their King when he took his
horse, who caused this cruel Emperor to have his skin to be pulled of, and
his body powdered with salt By which miserable life and death of Valerianus
being Father to Gallienus, who was also a persecuting Emperor, the son
recalled all Edicts against Christians, and gave them free use and exercise of
their Religion: publicis Edictis Persecutionem contra nos motam remisit, and vt
doctrinae nostrae Praesides cuncta libere pro Consuetudine sua obirent. So
there was not such freedom after in the time of Galerianus, for S. Mello or
others to be present at the Sermons either of S. Stephen, then Pope, or any
Christian Preacher, as the life of S. Mello witnesses he was an hearer of Pope
Stephen, and by him converted. Neither can it well appear, how this British
Saint being a Soldier, and a Pagan at his coming to Rome in the time of
Valerian, not 8. years enjoying the Fmpire, and both converted to Christ, and
baptized by S. Stephen, and by him promoted to Preesthood, by all
Ecclesiastical Orders, and degrees, Quem Stephanus Papasibi adhaerentem per
omnes Ecclesiae gradus vsque ad Sacerdotium promouit, and after made him
Bishop, could come to such perfection in the Papacy of S. Stephen, who suffered
Martyrdom about the 257. year of Christ, by common conputation, long before
the death of Valerian, except he had been converted in the beginning of his
Empire.

2. This Mello, Mellon, or Mellanius coming to Rome with others of this
kingdom, to pay the Tribute thereof to the Romans, as I have said before, and
to serve the Emperor, and resorting to the Assemblyes and meetings of S. Mello
converted by S. Stephen Pope.
the Christians not yet forbidden in the beginning of Valerianus his Empire,
hearing S. Stephen Pope preaching, was converted by him to the faith of Christ,
and baptized, and being thus instructed, he sold all that he had, eu and the
Armor which he wore in the wars, and distributing the money which he received
Saint Mellomade Priest. and Bishop. Act. and Vit. S. Steph. Pap. apud Baron.
Tom. 2. Annal. Ann. 259. Damasus in Po^t. in Stephano 1. Baron. Tom. 2. Annal.
An. 260. Martyr. Romans 22 die Octobris. Vsuard. Martyr. 22. die Octobris. S.
Mello miraculously sent to be Archbishop of Rohan in Normandy.
to the poor, following his Conuerter S. Stephen, and giving himself wholly
to Christian devotion, and study of Diuinty profited therein so much, not being
ignorant in human Learning, which he had obtained in Britain, (ever renowned
for studies, and Learned men) was by S. Stephen, by all inferior Orders (which
I have before remembered) promoted to holy Preisthood and after Miraculously
chosen of God thereunto was by the same holy Pope Consecrated Bishop, and both
extraordinarily by God, and ordinarily by Pope Stephen sent to govern the
Church of Rhoan in Neustria, now called Normandy in France, after he had
suffered many miseries, and afflictions for his holy faith with S. Stephen, and
others of his Clergy imposed upon them by Valerianus, as may plainly be
gathered out of the Acts and life of S. Stephen. And whereas S. Damasus, or
whosoever the ancient Writer of the lives of the Popes, commonly asscribed to
him, does testify, that S. Stephen did Consecrate three Bishops only,
speaking of no more, Episcopos per diuersa loca tres. Baronius does, and well
conclude, that our holy Britan S. Melanius was one of them and renowned for
sanctity, Ex ijs vnus fuit Melanius Episcopus Rhotomagensis, sanctitate
celebris: Citing for that, the old Roman Martyrologe Manuscr. antiq. de Vita S.
Mellonis. Jacob. Genuensis in Catal. de eodem. Capg. in S. Mellone. Petrus de
Natalibus l. 9. cap. 93. Tabulae Episcoporum Rhotomagen. Vincent. l. 11. c. 74.
which says of this holy Bishop, that he was Consecrated by Pope Stephen, and
by him sent to preach the faith about Rhoan, where he was Bishop in France.
Rhotomagi S. Melanij Episcopi qui a sancto Stephano Papa ordinatus, illuc ad
praedicandum Euangelium missus est. Vsuardus also has the same, upon the same
22. day of October.

3. The manner of his Miraculous Mission and sending to be Archbishop of Rhoan
in Normandy, is thus registered in the old Manuscript of his life, the ancient
Learned Bishop Iacobus Genuensis, Capgraue, Petrus de Natalibus and others:
Cumque Ieiunijs and vigilijs instaret quadam Die Missam co celebrante viderunt
ipse and Papa Angelum Dei stantem ad dexteram altaris. Qui peracta missa dedit
ei virgam Pastoralem, quam manu tenebat dicens, accipe virgam, sub qua reges
populum Rhotomagensis Ciuitatis in sinibus Neustriae. Tibi enim illic
praeparatus est a Deo locus: and licet labor incognitae vitae sit tibi
onerosus, nequaquam tamen tibi timendum, quoniam sub vmbra alarm suarum
proteget te Dominus Jesus Christus. Tunc accepta benedictione a Papa Iter
arripuit: As he continued in fastings, and watchings when he said Mass, on a
certain day both he and the Pope did see an Angel of God, standing at the
right hand of the Altar. Who when Mass was ended, gave unto him a Pastor all
staff which he held in his hand, saying, take the rodd with which thou shall
Rule the people of the City of Rhoan in the borders of Neustria. For there a
place is prepared for thee by God: and allthough the Labor of the unknown
life be burdensome unto thee, yet be not a fraide, because our Lord Jesus
Christ will defend thee under the shadow of his wings. So receiving
benediction from the Pope, he took his Journey. In which coming to
Antisiodorum he Miraculousely cured S. Mello cured alame man, he died and was
buried at Rhoan.
a man there most grievously wounded. Coming to Rhoan he there faithfully
performed his sacred office, renowned for virtue, and Miracles, he ended his
life there, about the year of our Lord 280. his body is there still kept with
great reverence in the Cathedral Church of that City near to the body of S.
Nicasius first Bishop there, sent by S. Clement Pope Successor to S. Peter,
Tab. Eccl. Rhotomagon. apud Anton. Democharez contra Calvin. Io. Molan. in
addition. ad Vsuardum 22. Octobr. Martyr. Romans die 11. Octobris. Bed. Martyrol.
Pride. Idus Nouembr.
and this the second, as the Annals of that Church give testimony. Molanus
says, he was Archbishop of Rhoan and was there most honorably buried. In
Gallijs ciuitate Rothomagi notalis Sancti Meloni, qui eiusdem vrbis primus
Ecclesia^ Archiepiscop us rexit, ibidemque sepultus gloriosissime quieuit. But
the Roman old Martyrologe says plainly, that S. Nicasius was Bishop there:
Nicasij Episcopi Rhotomagensis. S. Bid in his Martyrologe sets down the
Festiuitie of this holy Saint on the 12. day of November, pridie Idus Nouembris
Sancti Melani Rodouicae ciuitatis Episcopi. All others, place it upon the 22.
of October. What spiritual benefit the rare example of this holy British
Bishop by his strange conversion in neglecting the service of the Emperor, and
honor thereof, to be the poor servant of Christ in persecution, his
Miraculous calling, and Mission in Episcopal dignity, his life renowned for
virtue, and Miracles, multis virtutibus and Miraculis clarus: and so long
continuing so glorious and Archbishop so near to this our Nation his Country,
we may in prudence apprehend, though Iniquity of times has deprived us of
their memory so far, that for this his short History we are forced to appeal
to foreign Antiquities.

4. And yet we have sufficient warrant left unto us by our own Histories, not
only in general, assuring us that our Britans continued their first faith
quietly and inuiolably until Dioclesians bloody Persecution, but particular
testimony, that even in this time, by arguments, we had such a flourishing
Church hear in Britain, that we had not only Bishops and Priests in great
numbers, but (which few other Nations can so soon for themselves give instance
in) both public Counsels of Bishops and diverse Religious houses, both of men
and women. We read in the old Manuscript History of the life of S. Melorus
living in the beginning of the Britans Christianity, cum in exordio Manuscr.
Antiq. de Vita S. Melor. Io. Capgr. Catal. in eod. Harris. Hist. of Brit. to. 3.
Christianae fidei conuersa est Britanniae gentilitas, that there was a
Council of British Bishops kept in Cornewayle, but a corner of this kingdom,
In Cornubia Concilium Episcoporum congregatu^. And this holy Saint was there
brought up, and instructed in a Monastery nutritus in quodam Monasterio
Cornubiae: A Council of Bishops in Cornwaile in this time.
where the distinctiue word quodam, one certain Monastery of Cornewayle, does
sufficiently notify, that besides all others in other parts of Britain there
were then more Monasteryes in that Province of Cornewayle. Which is further
proved by that which follows in the same Authors, what an especial care the
Abbot of that place had of this Noble glorious Saint yet a child: Abbas illius
loci: sufficiently proving there were then other Abbots of other Abbayes in
that Country. There, also mention is made of the Church, Nunnery, Altar, and
Abbess of Anbesbury, whether the Reliks of that holy Saint were brought, after
they had been honorably buried by the Bishops and Priests: sepulto ab Episcopis
and Clericis capite cum Sacro corpore. That these Bishops, Priests,
Monasteryes, and Religious men and women of Britain were in this time, I am
urged to think, because these Historians have told us before that these things
were in the beginning of Christianity hear, and add, that then many believed,
and following the Apostles Precepts, were famous for Miracles, and that S.
Melorus was one of that number Multi Domino credentes, and Apostolica praecepta
sequentes varijs virtutum Miraculis fulserunt de quorum numero beatum Melorum
fidenter credimus extitisse. Which is further confirmed in the same
Antiquities, testifying that after many years the Reliks of this holy Saint
were with great reverence translated to the Church of Amsbury, and there in
their shryne laid upon the Altar. Post multorum annorum curricula
Praedicatores Alienigenae scrinium cum Reliquijs sancti Melori circumquaque
deferentes peragratis terrarum tractibus iniunctum sibi officium exercentes
Ambrisburiam tandem deuenerunt, and super altar Reliquias sanctas posuerunt.
The removing of these Reliks to the Church and Nunnery of Amsbury must needs be
before the preuayling of the Pagan Saxons, and Hengist his murdering our Noble
Britans, and taking King Vortiger Prisoner hard by that place, at Stonehendge
by Treachery. For at that time, both that and all other Religious houses, and
Churches, those Pagans could enter to, were destroyed. Yet the Historyes have
told us before, that many years were passed over, between the burial and
removing these holy Reliks thither. Neither dare I affirm, that this History
is more ancient then this time. For excepting the Religious house of
Glastenbury, all others had their Foundation after the Conversion of King
Lucius, who dyed in the beginning of this Age. And probably we may conjecture,
this Translation of these sacred Reliks was in the time of S. Germanus and
Lupus the Legates of Pope Celestine, being and preaching hear, for they were
praedicatores Alienigenae: Strange Preachers, and the most renowned strange
Preachers we can think these to be, much devoted to the reverence of our holy
British Reliks by all Historyes making solemn Pilgrimadges unto the^. And if
we affirm, these holy Reliks were first interred in these days, the circuit
of many years, post multorum annorum curricula, after which they were removed
by strange Preachers, will well agree with the coming of those strangers, the
Popes Legates hither about the year of Christ 432. which was before the Nunnery
of Amsbury was destroyed.

5. The History of this holy Saint is thus set down by the ancient writers
S. Meliorus his Martyrdom.
thereof: Melorus or Meliorus was the only Son and Heir of Melianus Duke of
Cornwayle. Who in the seventh year of his Government, calling an Assembly of
the Nobles, to consult about the affairs of his Country, was in the same
assembly murdered by his own Brother, named Rinoldus, his Son Melorus being
but 7. years old at that time. This Rinoldus having thus killed the Father,
and knowing his Son to be the only true Heir, and fearing if he should live
to ma^s estate he might take the Dukedom from him, being his just inheritance,
sought to murder him also: and bringing him into Cornewayle where there was a
Council of Bishops and others gathered together, whose consent he labored to
have for the putting of Melorus to death, to make himself secure in his so
wickedly procured dignity: But when the holy Bishops assembled, detested so
barbarous impiety, and cruelty, and would in no wise assent unto it: This
wicked usurping Uncle, to make this child loathsome, and so incapable or unfit
for Government, caused his right hand, and left foot to be cut of. After
which he had an hand of silver, and a foot of brass, and was brought up in a
Monastery in Cornewayle until he was 14. years old, daily profiting and
increasing in virtue, and holy learning as well, as in years. And this his
silver hand did miraculously bend too and froe, and stretch out itself to do
the office of a natural hand, as if it naturally consisted of bones, sinews,
veins, blood, and flesh, Mirumque in modum manus illa argentea quasi reflexus
carneos habere, and manum extendere and recludere caepit quasi natiuam ossibus,
neruis, venis, sanguine atque pelle. Whereupon the wicked Tirant his Uncle,
taking him from the Abbot, and Religeous men, committed him to one, named
Cerialtanus to be brought up, bribing him with promises of many possessions and
rewards to putt Melorus to death, which he most wickedly and barbarously
effected, cutting of his head. Which done the Son of Cerialtanus with the
consent of his Father, bearing the head of the holy Martyr upon the wall of the
Castle, fell down from the wall, broke his neck, and died. Cerialtanus then
took up the head of the Saint, and brought it to the Tirant his Uncle. Who
with joy receiving it, badd the wicked Murderer go to the topp of an hill
adjoining, and whatsoever he could there see he would give him to possess,
Cerialtanus going to the hill thinking to see round about, suddenly was struken
blind, one both his eyes, and presently died. And the wicked Uncle touching
the sacred head brought unto him, within three days after ended his wretched
life with a miserable death. The Bishops and Clergy buried his holy body, and
head, with great honor together. Where they which faithfully prayed unto him,
did obtain their desire. Sepulto ab Episcopis and Clericis capite cum sacro
Bishops, Priests and others pray to S. Meliorus Martyred.
corpore. Corpus sanctum cum honor sepelierunt: vbi opem eius cum fide
implorantes, optatum remedium gaudentes consequi solebant.

THE XI. CHAPTER.
CONTAINING AN ABREVIATE OF SOME ROman Emperors, and inuincibly proving that
the most holy Queen and Empress S. Helen, was a Britan of Regal Race, the
only true and lawful wife of Constantius Emperor: and Constantine the Great
their true lawful Son and Heir, borne in Britain.

1. I Have spoken before, how the Roman Emperors after the death of
Heliogabalus, until Constantius married, first, or after received again Helen
daughter of Coel had little command in this kingdom, and so not so necessary
to be much remembered, in the Ecclesiastical History thereof, none of them,
except the two Philips, the Father and Son, dignified in Histories, with name
of Christianity; therefore it will suffice, to set down breefely their
names, and continuance of their Empiers, which our Protestant Antiquaries do
thus propose unto us: After Seuerus, Bassianus Surnamed Antonius Carracalla
succeeded Hows and Stowe Hist. Titul. the Romans. in Seuerus.
in the Empire, he was murdered by Martialis, when he had governed six
years. Macrinus one year. Antonius Heliogabalus three years. Alexander
Seuerus 13. years. Julius Maximus 3. years. M. Antonius Gordianus one year.
Julius Philippus (they omit Philip the second his Son) the first Christian
Emperor, 5. An Epitomie of the Roman Emperors.
years. Decius 2. years. Trebonianus, Gallus, and Vibius Hostilianus two
years. Iu lius Aemilianus four months. Licinius Valerianus six. Lacinius
Gallicinus fifteen. At this time there arouse in diverse Countries thirty
Usurpers which are called the thirty Tirants, of the which Lollianus
Posthumus, Victorianus Tetricius, as it is supposed, kept Britain from
Gallicinus. Flauius Claudius two, Aurelianus five. Tacitus six months.
Florianus three months. This year 276. Aurelian the Dane was chosen Emperor,
he hated Christians, and in the fourth year of his Reign, he stirrid up the
ninth Persecution, upon the Church of God, he reigned five years, and six
days. And after, Tacitus succeeded him in the Empire, being a very fit and
worthy Governor, and after, Tacitus Probus Equirius Son to Delinacius a
Clown, and Gardener by profession, this Probus Equirius was a most valiant man
at arms, and as good a Iusticiar, as any that had the public Government, he
began his Reign in the year of Christ 282. and reigned six years, and four
months. Aurelius Probus five years. In which time Bonesus a Britan borne,
usurped the Empire, with Proculus at Cullen, and would have exempted from the
Romans, Britain, Spain and part of France, but being vanquished by Probus, he
strangled himself. This Probus, after he had reigned five years, was slain
of the soldiers. Carus was created Augustus, he made Carinus and Numerianus
his Sons, Caesar's. To Carinus he assigned Britain, Gaul, Illiricum, Italy,
and Spain, but Carinus was slain by lightning, and the other two within three
years space lost their lives. Dioclesian was then chosen Emperor, who
adjoined Maximianus unto him in like Government. The two Emperors elected two
Caesar's, Valerius Maximus, and Constantius Chlorus, to which Constantius they
committed the recovery of Britain. Hitherto these Protestants Epitome of the
Roman Emperors, from Antiquity. And so being come to this Constantius, by
whom Britain, and the Romans were united again in so happy an union, that
thereby this our Noble Nation assisted more then any kingdom before had done,
or after did for the union of the world with Christ, I must hear more enlardge
my style, for our Countries honor.

2. Some there be, whether to detract so great a glory from this Nation, or to
give it to an other, or of Ignorance in Histories, do both say, that one
Theodora was the first lawful wife of Constantius, and the blessed S. Helen
Mother of that happy Emperor the Great Constantine, was not only a stranger
to this Nation, but of mean estate, and which is unworthy to be Marian. Scot.
l. 2. aetat. 6. col. 304. in Constantio. Flor. Wigorn. Chron. an. 321. and 299.
written, not the wife, but Concubine of Constantius. Which name and attribute,
Concubina, this most Noble Empress and Saint Helen is styled by, not only
among diverse forreyne Writers, but of this Nation also, as Marianus Scotus, and
Florentius Wigorniensis, as they be published by our Protestants, many of which
do not to the dishonor of that most holy Lady and this her S. Helen borne of
noble Parents in Britain.
Country abstain from the same phrase of speech. This error being
overthrown, overthrows the others that she was a stranger, and basely borne.
For excepting those that wander in that Tract, all agree she was the sole
Capgrau. Catalog. Praefat. in Vit. S. Helenae. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetate 6. in
Auteliano. Baron. Tom. 2. Annal. an. 306. Jacob. Gordon. An. 273. in Aureliano.
Harris. Hist. Eccles. Brit. Tom. 4. c. 2. Zosim. l. 2. Suid. in Constant. Matt.
Westminster. ann. 273. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. in Aureliano. Martin. Polon.
Caxton f. 38. Hollinsh. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. Capgr. in S. Helena Niceph. lib.
7. Cap. 18. Andre Chesne l. 4. Hist.
daughter and Heir of the Noble British King Coel, far from being either an
Alien, or of base Parentage and descent, and the more easily to overthrow
them, it first fights with, and so overthrows itself. Some which incline
to this error, say, that she did secretly fly out of her Country, and went to
Rome, and there was so familiar with Constantius the Emperor. Multi eam clam
patriam fugisse affirmant ac raptam, apud Romam ab Imperatore: But it is
evident by all Histories, that Constantius at his first acquaintaince with
Helena, was not Emperor, nor long after, neither was he at Rome, but in
Britain in this time, sent hither, by Aurelianus the Emperor in the year of
Christ 273. and as both Zosimus and Suidas say, lived most part hear: In
Britannia plerumque viuebat. And being sent hither by Aurelianus Emperor, as
so many agree, to have long employment, and great cause of stay hear, he must
needs come hither about that time, for by all Antiquities, Aurelianus died
soon after, and was Emperor but a short time. So that neither Constantius nor
Queen Helen could be either at Rome, or in any place, but in Britain at this
time.

3. Nicephorus and some later after him, would have her to be borne in
Bithinia, at Drepanum, and the daughter of an Inkeeper there, with whom
Constantius passing that way to the Persians fell in love. But this is made
impossible, by that is said before of the being both of Constantius and Helena
in Britain, so remote from any part of Bithinia at that time. And neither of
them coming to, or near Drepanum, or any part of Bithinia, at, or after this
S. Helen was not burn in Bythinia.
time, but when she an holy widow, many years after Constantius his death,
passed by Greece in her Pilgrimadge to Jerusalem, as is evident in all Marian.
l. 2. aetat. 6. in Constan^io. Flor. Wigorn. C^ron. Regino An. 243. Martin.
Polon. in Supputat. An. 30^. Otto Frigen. l. 3. c. 45. Bed. l. 1. Hist. c. 8.
kind of Antiquaries, and will most manifestly appear when I shall entreat
thereof. Others there be which do term this renowned Empress by the name of
Concubina as Marianus, and Florentius Wigorniensis as our Protestants have
published them, and Regino without speaking any thing of her parentage, or
Country, and Martinus Polonus, who confesses she was daughter to the King of
Britain, Constantius filiam Regis Britanniae, nomine Helenam accepit in
concubinam, de qua genuit Consta^in^m Magnum: But it is evident that either
Martinus, or his Protestant Publisher has with gross Ignorance abused the
Readers, for he says, as I have cited, that Constantine (not Constantius)
begott Constantine the great in the year of Christ 307. when by common
opinion Constantius was dead before. And not content Martin. Polon. supr. An.
309. col. 66.
with this, they bring in Constantine the Great, to be Emperor in the year
309. when by their account he could not be two years old. The other three, if
their Protestant Publishers have not abused them, speak in the phrase of the
Pagan Romans, who in those times, called all wives of their Lieutenants taken
from strangers, though never so lawfully joined in true Mariadge, by Papinian.
l. Praefectur. ff. de ritu nuptiarum.
that rude term of Concubine, as their old Pagan Decree is still witness
against them. When I shall make it as clear as the Sun, that S. Helena was
from the beginning the only true lawful wife to Constantius. This I have S.
Helen the true lawful wife, to Constantius and no Concubine.
written hear, to answer these frivolous Cauills against that blessed woman,
and with Ihon Capgraue call their allegations no better then dreams, talia
somnijs similia. And to speacke still in his words: That opinion does not only
blemish the fame of so holy a woman, but makes that most Noble Constantine to
be a Bastard, begott out of Marriadge, and so disableth him to have been the
Heir of Io. Capgr. in Catal. in praefat. in Vit. S. Helenae.
Constantius, either King or Emperor, when all men know he came to the
Imperial dignity by right of inheritance: Talis opinio non tam ipsius tam
sanctae faeminae denigraret famam, quam ipsum quoque nobilissimum Constantinum,
spurium ac extra sponsalia genitum, comprobaret, cum tamen ipsum iure
haereditario culmen ascendisse Imperatorium, neminem lateat. And thus taxes
the Authors of Ignorance. Ipsis forsan qui ista scripserunt, talia placuerunt,
quia potiora and veriora inuenire mi nime potuerunt. Diverse forreyne Historians
as Baronius, Spondanus, and others write, as plainly in this matter; And may
with great warrant. For as Cassiodorus is an able witness, it was but a Pagan
report, dicitur, and raised first by Zosimus that most malicious Ethnic, and
Rayler against Constantine, for professing and advancing of Christian Religion,
and renouncing Idolatry, Desertorem Deorum. And this is evident by the best
learned Authors M. Aurelius Cassiodorus in Chronic. Zosimus Comes in
Constantino. l. 2.
themselves, which in any sense called S. Helen by that name: for they do
plainly confess, as namely Marianus, that S. Helen was the true wife of
Constantius, and he forced by Maximian the Emperor to putt her away, and take
Theodora his wives daughter: Constantius vxorem quam habuerat repudiare,
compulsus est. And further says Constantine was true Son and Heir Whence it
came first that S. Helen was called Concubine.
of Constantius, and by that Title succeeded him in the kingdom, and Empire.
Merito Religiosus Pater Religiosiorem filium Constantinum videlicet regni been
parti reliquit haeredem. Which could not be truly said, if Helen had not been
his lawful wife, neither could Constantius by this learned, and holy Author,
Marian. an. 292. c. 301. Marian. l. 2. aetat. 6. Ann. 305. col. 303.
be named Religiosus Pater, a Religeous father, if he had not begott his Son
in lawful in true marriage. And S. Bid confesses from Eutropius, that
Constantine succeeded his Father in the kingdom in Britain. Scribit autem
Eutropius, quod Constantinus in Britannia creatus Imperator, Patri in Regnum
successerit. And so by him also must needs be his lawful Son. Florentius
Wigorniensis writes in the same manner, and confesses, S. Helen to have been
hear in Britain, long after her Son Constantine was Emperor. Yet these be
the chiefest Authors that in any sense have termed S. Helen by that Bed. Hist.
l. 1. c. 8.
name.

4. It is evident by all Historyes, not only of Christians, that S. Helen was
Flor. Wigorn. Chron. An. 328. and 306.
a most chaste and holy woman, and that Constantius also lived in conjugal
chastity marrying when he was but vou^ge but also eue^ by the Pagan Writers
Gallic. Orat. Panagyr. ad Constantinum apud Baron. Tom. 2. An. 306. Henric.
Spondan. ibid. and al. Harris Hist. Eccl. Tom. 3. Nichol. Vignier Biblioth.
Histor. ad An. 306.
themselves, as witnesses Gallicanus the Orator, that lived in his time, in
his public Oration to his son Constantine, and others: ab ipso fine
p^eritiae Matrimonium inisse. Therefore S. Helen being the first woman was thus
wedded unto him in Marriadge, she must needs be his true lawful wife by their
own testimonies. And the same Author witnesses before Constantine at the
public Solemnity of his Marriadge with Fausta, in most plain and express
words, that Constantine was borne in Britain: sane ipsum Constantinum in
Britannia fuisse ortum, diser it is verbis coram amplissimo Conuentu testatus est
celebris ille Gallic anus Orator in Panegyrico dicto in publicis nuptiarum
eiusdem Constantini cum Fausta solemnitatibus. So testify diverse Writers, even
of the Roman Pompon. Laetus in Compend. Hist. Romans in Constant. Maximo.
Historye: among who me one plainly says, that Constantine was the Lawful
son of Constantius and Helena, and borne in Britain, and that his Father
Constantius was compelled by Herculius the Emperor to be deuorced from Helen
his true wife to take Theodora daughter-in-Lawe of that Emperor: Constantinus
natus est in Britannijs, Patre Constantio, matre Helena, quam vir coactus fuit
repudiare, vt Theodoram priuignam Herculij duceret. Eutropius plainly says
that Constantine was the son of Constantius in true Matrimony. Eutrop. l. 10.
Hist. Romans
Constantinus ex Matrimonio eius filius in Britannia creatus est Imperator.
Constantinus Manasses says, S. Helen was the wife of Constantius, and a
Constant. Manass. l. Annal.
most blessed woman, Habebat iam tum Constans Helenam vxorem faeminam
beatissimam. Hunibaldus above 1000. years since, relates the History of the
composition between Constantius, and our British King Coel, as our own
Writers Do: Constantium vt Coelus audiuit littori appli cuisse, Nuntios misit,
pacem Hunibaldus apud Trithem. l. de Orig. Francor.
petijt, Romany Tributum promisit, ta^tum vt regnum habeat. Assensit
Constantius. His compactatis, Coelus intra 40. dies moritur, cuius mox filiam
nomine Helenam, cui pulchritudine, scientia liberalium artium, peritia
instrumentorum musicalium, puella simulis non fuit in Britannia, Constantius
duxit vxorem, de qua genuit filium nomine Constantinum, qui patri postea
successit in Regno, non solum Britonu^, sed etiam contra Maxentium praeualuit
ad Imperium Romanum. Again both Victor, Eusebius, Eutropius, and other
ancient Authors are witnesses, that when Dioclesian made Constantius, and
Galerius, Caesar's, he compelled them to put away both their lawful wives, and
Constantius to put away S. Helen, Eusebius. Chronic. An. 294. Eutro-l. 9. Hist.
Romans Victor in Diocl. and Constantio. Iornand. lib. de Regn. succ. Seucrus
Sulpitius l. 2. Hist. sacrae in Dioclesiano and Maximiano. Theoph. Ceram. in
Chronogr. Egbert. Abbas Ser. 3. de increm. and manif. Catholicae fidei.
Berengosus Abbas l. de Inuentione. and laud S. Crucis c. 1.
and take Theodora Maximion Herculeus his daughter-in-Lawe, and Galerius to
take Valeria his own daughter, Ambo vxores quas habuerunt repudiare compulsi
sunt. Which account of theirs, that S. Helen was thus put away in the year
294. inuincibly proves, how according to Eusebius and many others before
setting down the Age of Constantine to have been above 60. years, that S.
Helen had then been 20. years the wife of Constantius. Seuerus Sulpitius does
not only call S. Helen the true wife of Constantius, but says, she was
Empress both in her husbands, and sons time, Helena matter Constantini, quae
Augusta cum filio co^regnabat. Which proves her, daughter and Heir to Coel,
our British King, by which Title only she reigned with Constantine.
Theophanes Cepameus an old Greek Writer says, they were Arrian Heretics and
Pagans which denied Constantine to be legitmate, and that they lied therein.
Ariani and Pagani calumniantur vti spurium Magnu^ Constantinum: quin and ipsi
mentiuntur. Egbertus says, she was Queen, and Mother of Constantine.
Berengosus an eye witness of the most things, writing, of her, says, first
she was a Queen, Helena Regina, and so the lawful wife of Constantius, for
the Concubine of the greatest King or Emperor that ever was, is not thereby a
Queen, in such sense as these Authors name her, Queen to Rule and govern,
Augusta cum filio conregnabat. Nor can the lawful true wives of Kings be
termed Queens by such worthy Authors, except they were Queens by Title of
Inheritance, or such like, as our Antiquaries write of Queen Helen, that she
was daughter and Heir to her Father King S. Helen her sumptuous Palace.
Coel. Which this worthy Author does also, though a stranger to us, confirm,
when he proves she was of a most Noble Parentage, and by experimental Idem
Berengosus l. 3. c. 2. sup.
Arguments, because he had seen the old buildings of her stately Palace,
continuing in his time, the pauement whereof was Marble, and Toochstone, the
most Regal Palace in all those parts, the walls were gilded with gold. Her
chamber was so sumptuous, that the like was not in the world, and to free her
from all slanders, the chamber of her heart, and soul was far more pure,
and in all things she was obedient to the will of God, and yet externally
pleasing her husband Constantius, although more pleasing to God, then to her
husband, Nobilitatem eius apud Treuiros aedificiorum suorum adhuc antiqua
testatur gentilitas: vbi pauimentum domus illius varijs Marmoribus and Pario
quondam lapide stratum, been declarat, quantum ibi prae aliis videretur habere
Primatum. Praeterea vero ipsa planities parietum fuluo auro velut Hiacinthino
textu depicta been testabatur insignia nobilitatis eius inuictae: Insuper etiam
Praediorum eius copiae Ecclesijs Dei olim collatae been declarant, quam
nobilissima generis polleret Antiquitate, sed and cubile ipsius aureis setis
instructum and insignitum, nobilitatem quoda^modo in ea, quasi Romanorum
testabatur Quiritum, maxim cum ab ortu solis vsque ad vltimam Thyle cubili
huic simile non posset inueniri. Quia cubiculum cordis sui cubicularius ille
nulla vnquam inquinauit pollutione, de quo scriptum est: in Cubili suo astitit
omni viae non bonae. Quoniam intrinsecus tantis ac talibus decorata fuit
virtutibus, idcirco per omnia in omnibus diuinis placebat obtutibus, quia vero
specie sua and pulchritudine forinsecus erat ornata, ideo viro suo Constantio
amabilis videbatur and grata, quoniam internae pietatis and aeternae
pulchritudinis ita instructa est norma vt and Deo placeret in anima, and
Constantio in forma, secundum enim opinionem vulgi and veritatem rei, officiosa
erat in obsequio viri, sed officiosior ad obsequium Dei: quoniam amor
Constantij and Dei ita in cord illius duplici ratione fuit distinctus, vt and
Constantio exterius, and Deo subderetur interius.

5. Thus we see how far this most blessed, and Noble Queen and Empress, was
in all times from being base, either by birth or conversation, such sanctity of
life could never agree with that foul name by which some have so wrongefully
termed her; such Parentage, Palaces, and Revenues, able to entertain the
greatest Princes, according to their state, and dignity, must denominate their
Noble Owners with better terms, and attributes, then Hostess, Inkeeper,
Stabularia, Except we will expound them in so lardge a sense, that we shall so
style Abraham and Loath that lodged the Angels, those that entertained Christ,
all Receauers of Kings, Princes, and Emperors, and all harbourers, and
exercisers of Hospitality, for so both S. Helen and King Coel entertained
Constantius, the one an Husband, the other a son in Law, as Princes use. It
seems this Palace and lands in, and about Treuers to have descended to S.
Helen by her Mother, or some Ancestor of that Country, for both Beringosus
says, S. Helen was brought up at Treuers, Helena Treuiro-Indigena ciuitatis.
And Ottho Frisingensis says, she was by some of her Ancestors Berengos. supr.
l. 2. c. 1. Ottho Frisingen. Chron. l. 4. c. 45.
come from thence, Helena ex Pago Treuirorum oriunda. And Treuers being at that
time, the most renowned place of those Countries for Nobility, Learning, and
Christian Relegion, and she the only child of her Father King Coel, and to
succeed him in the kingdom of Britain, he sent her thither to have the most
Noble education: and there it was probably, where she first came to be
acquainted with Constantius then living in those parts: And this made the
Atonement between Constantius for the Romans, and king Coel to be so soon,
and peaceably effected, without any effusion of blood, as our Antiquities
testify, whereof it will be a difficult thing to give any other reason, in any
moral judgment.

6. This Marriadge between Constantius and S. Helena daughter of King Coel is
proved by many other foreign Historians: so has the ancient Bishop Jacob.
Genuen. in S. Helena. Trithem. l. de Orig. Francorum. Io. Naucler. Chron.
generat. 6. p. 565. Hist. Manuscr. Gallic. Antiq. c. 29.
Iacobus Genuensis and Trithemius. So plainly writes Nauclerus. Constantius
Caesar in Britanniam missus, Insulam Romany pacauit, eamque post interitum
Coelis, ducta illius filia Helena vxore, solus administrauit. A very old French
Manuscript has thus: Constans came into Britain, and after the death of King
Coelreigned over Britain, and took Helen daughter of Coel to wife. This Helen
was a woman of great virtue, and passing in Beuty all the Maids of the
Province of Britain, and there was not found any other so learned in
Instruments of Music and the 7. liberal Arts. For her Father Coel had no
other child, which might govern the Realm after him, and therefore procured,
that she was so learned, that she might Reign after him. Bouchet says: Cohel
Duke of Cohelcester slew Asclepiodotus in Bouchet Annals de Aquitaine l. 1. c.
5. Nicholas Giles Annal. de France f. 8. p. 2. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. in
Diocletiano and Constante. Zonar. sup. in Constantino Magno.
Battle, and was made King of Britain. Constantius married his daughter
Helena, and had Constantine by her. An other French Historian says: Helena
Mother of Constantine the Great was daughter of Coel King of the Britans. And
whereas some would have Zonaras to be a mouer of this question, it is most
clear that Zonaras plainly says, S. Helen was the first and true wife of
Constantius, Constantine his eldest Son, and so declared his lawful Heir
and Successor. Filio natu maiore, Magno videlicet Constantino, ex priore
coniuge, Imperij Successore declarato. And says futher, that Constantine was
the Son of Constantius by blessed Helena, Eum ex beata Helena procreauit
Pater. Which could not be truly said, if she had not been his lawful wife,
for otherwise she had rather deserved the name of cursed, the^ blessed Helen.
And he confirms this truth, not only by terrestrial but heavenly
testimony, showing, that when Constantius Zonar. supr. in Constante.
was sick an Angel appeared unto him, commanding him to leave the Empire to
Constantine, Fertur Constanti aegrotanti Angelus astitisse, qui iuberet vt
Constantino relinqueret Imperium. Which is also testified in this manner by
Pompon. Laet. Romans Hist. compend. in Consta^tino Magno.
Pomponius Laetus: Eum Pater Caesarem fecerat, caelesti nuntio admonitus, quum
aegrotaret vt primum Constantinum successorem faceret, qui esset ab tyrannis
Romanum Imperium liberaturus, and militibus Dei opem laturus: Constantius the
Father had made Constantine his Son Caesar, being thereto admonished by an
heavenly messadge, when he was sick, who was to deliver the Roman Empire from
Tyrants, and help the souldiars of Christ. And although Baronius and his
Epitomer Spondanus citing this Angelical vision, and admonition from Zonaras,
and seem to think that Eusebius did not remember it: mirum haec praeterijsse
Eusebium: Baron. Tom. 2. An. 306. Spondanus ibid.
Yet if the Translator and Notator of Eusebius deceaueth us not, even by his
testimony, Constantine was made Emperor by the Counsel of God: diuino
consilio Constantinus Imperium consecutus est. And Eusebius himself expressly
Jacob. Grynaeus in c. 18. l. 1. Eusebius. l. 1. de Vit. Co^st. supr.
says: God the Author of all things, and Governor of the whole world, did by
his own will choose Constantine Prince, and Emperor: Constantinum Principem
and Imperatorem Deus omnium Author, and totius mundi gubernator, suo solum
arbitrio delegit. Therefore we may not call that holy marriadge into question,
which so many human testimonies, and God himself has thus approved to be
lawful. And so it is confirmed by other forreyne Authors. The old Inscription
of the Church of S. Gereon at Cullen founded by her, proves her to Petr.
Merssaeus in Catal. Archiepisc. Colonien.
be a Queen, and so an example to Kings.

Regibus exemplum sacroque Chrismate plena.
Condidit hoc templum Sancti Gereonis, Helena.
And by the same Author, she is called Empress also: pia Helend Augusta.
Petr. Merss. Catal. Archiep. Treuer. Anton. Sabelic. Ennead. lib. 8. Ennead. 7.
Walter. Rollew. Fascul. temp. Ann. 234. Io. Baptis. Egnat. in Constantino
Magno. Gonstant. Manass. in Annal. and apud Camden. in Romans in Britannia in
Constant. Baron. and Spond. An. Christi 306.
And her Palace mentioned. Sabellicus also makes her the true wife of
Constantius. The like has Walterus Rollewinke saying: Queen Helen was Mother
of Constantine, and then an holy woman. Helena Regina Matter Constantini sanctae
and admirandae deuotionis and ciuilitatis. Ioannes Baptista Egnatius says,
that Constantine was borne of Helena, wife of Constantius. Rerum Constantinus
potitur ex Helena Constantij vxore susceptus. And Constantinus Manasses, as our
Protestant Antiquaries confess, long before Nicephorus time, proves S. Helen
to have been the true wife of Constantius, and separated from him for a time
only for fear of the Emperor: The same have Baronius, Spondanus and other
late forreyne Writers, expressly calling the other assertion figmentum a
forgery, and unworthy of confutation. Teaching it is evident, that she was a
British Lady, eandem fuisse Britanniam constat. And they rely upon our Britan
and English Antiquaries, as most fit Relators of so memorable a matter of
their own Queen and Country, directly testifying, she was the daughter and
Heir of King Coel, the undoubted and true lawful wife of Constantius, and
named Stabularia, Inholdresse by the friends of Theodora the Concubine of
Constantius, putt to him against his will. When she was so honorable by birth,
that her Father King Coel received Constantius in all Regal manner. So far
she was from being an Inholdresse, or daughter of such a man. Eandem
stabulariam fuisse a nonnullis assertum S. Ambrosius tradit. Sed eo plane
nomine vulgo dicta, quod hospitis apud quem diuertit Constantius Ambros. orat.
in funere Theodos.
in Britannia filia fuisset. At qualis hospitis, qui Ducem totius exercitus
domi exciperet? Quamobrem qui antiquas res Britannicas sunt prosecuti, quod
compertum habuerunt ex antiquis Annalibus, Helenam tradunt fuisse filiam vnius
ex Britanniae Regulis Coel nomine: apud quem hospitatus Constantius, quam
pulcherimam nouit eius filiam accepit in coniugem. How they have freed her from
the imputation of the name of Concubine, by some Writers laid upon her by
misapplying a Roman Pagan Edict they have witnessed before, and thus further
clear it: Inde manasse videtur illa opinio, quod Helena fuerit Constantij
Concubina, L. Praefectus D. de Ritib. nupt. L. eos qui. D. eo.
quia non creditae sunt nuptiae quas Ciuis Romanus cum peregrina contraxisset:
atque amplius, quod Romanorum legibus cautum esset, vt si aliquis Praefectus
vxorem duceret in ea Prouincia, in qua officium gerebat, Matrimonium non esset,
quod ratio Potentatus eiusmodi nuptias prohiberet. Verum cum ijsdom legibus
iustae efficerentur nuptiae si post depositum officium in eadem voluntate
perseueraret: constat Helenam vere fuisse Constantij coniugem, ac Matrimonium
ratum, quod ille sic eam duxit, vt cum a prouincia discessit, ac Magistratu^
deposuisset nunqua^ illam dimiserit vsque ad nuptias Theodorae. That opinion,
that Helen was the Concubine of Constantius seems to have proceeded from
thence, that it was not esteemed with some Pagans, Marriadge which a Citizen of
Rome had contracted with a stranger: and the rather because it was provided by
the Laws of the Romans, that if any Prefect should marry a wife in that
Province, where he bore office it should not be Matrimony, because the reason
of Principality did forbid such Marriadges. But when by the very same Laws
the Marriadges were made lawful, if after the Office given over or ended, the
Husban^ perseuered in the same will: It is evident, that Hele^ was the true
wife of Consta^tius, and the marriadge between them lawful: Because
Constantius so married her, that when he went out of that Province, and left
his Office, he never dismissed Helen, until he was compelled by the Emperor
to take Theodora. Thus these Roman Writers have cleared this our glori^us
British Queen, and Empress from that imputation, which some by pretext of
such Pagan Edict of the Romans, have laid upon her unjustly.

7. To which I add, that both that Law, and the reason thereof, was from the
beginning void in the case of Constantius, and Helena. And they were truly
Husband, and wife, not only by the Law of God, but by the Heathen Romans
themselves. First, because when Constantius married S. Helen, he was not
admitted Prefect hear, but after. Secondly, S. Helen a Britan enjoying by old
compositions between the Romans and Britans the Roman Privileges, was not by
their Law a stranger. Thirdly, if she had so been, yet being also next Heir
to the Crown of Britain, and this marriadge between her and Constantius
agreed upon, and publikly confirmed by both Romans and Britans, and their
Laws, no exception could be made against them by any Law. Fourthly,
Constantius claiming the kingdom of Britain by his wives Title, she neither
was, nor could be a subject to him in that respect, and so the pretended reason
of that Pagan Edict, ratio Potentatus, Soueraintie had no place in this case.
Fifthly, this reason did disable all Roman Kings, Emperors, and Prefects to
marry, for by marriadge their wives were as others under their Principality,
and so the Law in itself void by the ground thereof. Sixthly, this Law
only concerned Pagans, but both Constantius and Helena were now Christians (as
hereafter) in conscience, and Judgment: And so must needs interprett that Pagan
Constitution, to be both against the Law of God, and Nations and far from
hindering the undoubted lawfulnes of their true and most necessary, desired,
and allowed marriadge, both by the King, Nobles, and Lawiers of Britain, and
the Emperor and Senate of Rome, whose grant and consent was a full euacuation,
or Dispensation of that their Law, in their own proceedings, to prevent and
appease the great contentions, and bloody wars between the Romans and
Britans, at that time by no other means to be qualified but by this marriadge
and union.

8. If from forreyne Antiquities we will come home to the Historians of this
Nation, most likely to know and write the truth of this their most honorable
Country woman, they will putt us out of doubt, that she was the daughter of our
King Coel, and the true wife of Constantius, King Coel and he so couenanting,
that Coel should continue the kingdom during his life, and Constantius
marrying his daughter and Heir Helen, should with her succeed him therein.
Constantius duxit filiam Coel, cui nomen erat Helena. Pulchritudo eius
Prouinciales puellas superabat, nec vspiam reperie batur altera, quae in Music
Hist. Brit. l. 5. c. 6. Pontic. Virun. l. 5. Hist. Matthew. Westminster. an. 302. Old.
Eng. Hist. part. 3. f. 34. Henr. Hunting. Hist. l. 1. Necham. apud Camden. in
Essex in Colcester. Io. Capgr. Catal. in S. Helena. Annal. Manuscript. antiq.
plurim.
is instrumentis, sieve in Liberalibus Artibus doctior illa censeretur. Caruerat
Pater altera sobole, quae Regni solio potiretur. Vnde eam ita docere
laborauerat, vt Regnum post Patris obitum facilius tractare quiret. So writes
the old Author of our British History, Ponticus Virunnius, Matthew of
Westminster, our old English History, Henry of Huntingt on writing before
Galfridus translated the British History, Necham, Capgraue, with very many
old Manuscript Histories which I have seen. And they all agree, she was the
daughter and Heir of King Coel of Britain, that she was solemnly married to
Constantius, upon publikly agreed Articles, and Hostages given one either side,
datis obsidebus, between the Romans and Britans. That she was by her Husband,
an Empress by her Father a Queen: Helena sanctissima faemina ex marito
Imperatrix, ex patre Regina, Coelis Regis Britanniae vnica fuit filia. And in
ancient Insciptions so generally styled, In antiquis Inscriptionibus pijssima,
and venerabilis Augusta passim nominatur. This is the old tradition of the
Town of Colchester, bearing to this day for the Arms thereof, in memory
Camden and Necham. supr. and Manuscr. antiq. pr. Britannia quae. nunc Anglia.
Henric. Hunting. Archidiac. l. 1. Hist. Andre de Chesne Hist. l. 4. Michael
Drayton Polyolbion Song 9. Seld. Illustrat. p. 144. Io. Seldom Analect. c. 7.
p. 50. 51.
of her, and her finding the holy Cross, a Gross knotty, between 4. Crowns.
Ciues Helenam Constantini magni matre^ suam alumnam esse asserunt ex Coelo Rege
natam, and in memoriam Crucis ab illa repertae, crucem nodo sam inter quatuor
Coronas interpositam publico in Clipeo gerunt. And she both made the old wall
of Colchester, and London, and paued the great way in Merioneth-shire, called
in that languadge of the Britans Sarn Helen, the high way of Helen, to this
day.

9. This is the common opinion of our Protestant Antiquaries Bale, Gosceline,
Leland, the Theather Writers, Hackluit, Hollinshed, Harrison, Camden, Seldom
and others, too many to be recompted; therefore I will only cite the two last,
as of chief name and latest time among them: The one speaking of the
Persecution of Dioclesian hear, says, that this kingdom brought forth a
Prince Constantine the Great of British blood, the greatest honor of this
Island borne in true Marriadge between Constantius Chlorus and Helen daughter
of King Caelus, and cites a Panegyrist living and writing in that time, for an
undoubted warrant hereof. Terra ista nostra Principem cui nihil prius erat quam
Christianam fouere Religionem, Britannico sanguine natum (summum Insulae duces,
tunc t^mporis nutriuit, atque in Imperium euexit, Constantinum nempe illum quem
ex Helena Coeli Reguli qui Asclepiodotum regno spoliauerat, filia primis
nuptijs ducta Constantius Chlorus Caesar du^ Britannijs agebat, susceperat. De
re illa Christiana maxim meruit, and de Britannica, de quo Britannia patria. O
fortunata and nunc omnibus beatior, inquit Anonymus Panagyrestis, terris
Britannia, quae Constantinum Caesarem prima vidisti. And in an other Book, and
place Panegyric. Constantino dictus. Io. Seldom Illustr. upon Polyolbio^ p.
129. 130.
speaking of this renowned woman, he says: She was wife to Constantius, or
Constans Chlorus the Emperor, and Mother to Constantine the Great, daughter
to Coile King of Britain, where Constantine was by her brought forth. Do not
object Nicephorus Callistus, that erroneously affirms him borne in Drepanum of
Bithynia, or Iu lius Firmius, that says at Tarsus, upon which testimony not
uncorrupted a Lips. de Roman. Magnitud. l. 4. c. 11. Nimiu^ lapsus.
great Critique (he means Lipsius) has violently offered to deprive us.
both of him, and his Mother, affirming her a Bithynian: nor take advantage of
Cedrenus, that will have Dacia her birth soil: But over Histories, and with
them, the Latin Ecclesiastique relation in passadges of her invention of the
Cross, and such like, allowed also by Cardinal Baronius, make her thus a
British woman. And for great Constantius birth in this land, you shall have
Authority, against which I wonder how Lipsius durst oppose his conceit. In an
old Panegyrist speaking to Constantine, liberauit ille he means his Father,
Brita^nias seruitute, tu etia^ nobiles illic oriu^do fecisti, He freed Britain
of bondage, thou enoblest it with thy birth. And an other, o fortunata and nunc
omnibus beatior terris Britannia, quae Constantinum Caesarem vidisti. O happy
Britain that first of all saw Constantine. Of this Helen her Religion,
finding the Cross, good deeds in walling London, and Colchester, which in
honor of her they say, bears a Cross between four Crowns, and for the
Invention, she is yet celebrated in holy Roode-day in May, and of this
Constantine her Son, a mighty and Religous Emperor, that in this air
received his first light and life, our Britons vaunt not unjustly, as in that
spoken to King Arthur. Rob. Cloestren.


Now it worth iended that Sibile the sage biuore
That there ssold of Britain three men be ybore
That ssold win the aumpire of Rome, of tweye yed it is
As of Belly and Constantine, and thou art the thredde ywis
Which very words were publikly justified also by Hoelus King of little
Britain, Hist. Brit. l. 9. ca. 17. Galfr. Mon. Hist. Bri. l. 9. c. 16. Old.
Engl. Manuscr. Hist. c. 52. Caxto^ Hist. part. 5. f. 50. Harding. Chron. c. 80.
f. 74. Camden Romans in Britain page 74. edit. ann. 1610.
and it is registered both in our old British and Saxon Histories, both
Manuscripts and others, that Constantine son of S. Helen was Ancestor to King
Arthur, and others of this kingdom. Which must needs be by his Mother S. Helen
a Britan, and of the Regal Race of this kingdom, for by Constantius his
Father a stranger hear, Constantine could not be Ancestor to our Kings of
Britain. The other chiefest Protestant Antiquary writes in this manner even
in his last Edition. Constantius what time he served in Britain under
Aurelian, took to wife the daughter of Caelus, or Caelius a British Prince,
on whom he begatt that Noble Constantine the Great in Britain. For so
together with that great Historiographer Baronius, the common opinion of all
other Writers with one consent bears witness: unless it be one or two
Greek Authors of late time, and those dissenting one from the other, and a
right learned man grounding upon a corrupt place of Julius Firmicus. This is
that Helen which in antike Inscription is called venerabilis and pijssima
Augusta, and for Christian piety for clea^sing Jerusalem of Idols, for
building a goodly Church in the place where our Lord suffered, and for finding
the saving Cross of Christ is so highly commended of Ecclesiastical writers.
And yet both Jews and Gentiles termed her, by way of ignominy and reproach
Stabularia: because she a most godly Princess sought out the Cribbe or Manger,
wherein Christ was borne, and in the place where stood that Hostelry, founded a
Church. Heareupon S. Ambrose: they say that this Lady was first an Inholder or
Hostess etc. Capgraue Manuscr. antiq. in Vit. S. Helenae Capgr. in ead. Annal.
Aquitan. apud Bouchet l. 1. cap. 5.
and the old Manuscript of S. Helens life affirm the like, saying, the Jews
in hatred of her, in doing so many holy Christian deeds derogatory to their
profession, and building so glorious a Church over the holy Cribbe where Christ
was borne, raised that slander. Impijssimi Iudaei cum tanta bona ab
Imperatrice in eo rum opprobrium facta cernerent, ipsam inter se ex inuidia
stabulariam vocauerunt eo quod supra stabulum and tam vilem locum eis admodum
exosum tam nobilem Ecclesiam aedificauit. The Annalls of Aquitane where her
children lived, and say she descend from our King S. Lucius, shall be cited in
the next Chapter. The error of them which defer her marriadge until
Constantius coming hither after Asclepiodotus death, is palbable. For by that
account, as of Matthew Westminster, Constantine was but an Infant 5. years
old, when after Constantius his Fathers death he was both King of Britain,
and Emperor. For he sets down their marriadge in the year of Christ 302.
and in the year 307. says he was declared Emperor. Anno gratiae 307.
Constantinus Matthew. Westminster. an. 302. 307. Harding Chron. ca. 62.
Constantij and Helenae filius, in Britannia ex Rege Imperator creatus. And
others by that mistaking make him little older; But they are to be understood,
of the reconciliation of Constantius to S. Helen, after the death of Theodora,
and not his first taking her to wife, being almost 30. years before in the
time of Aurelianus Emperor, for after he had married S. Helen in Britain at
that time, and had ruled this kingdom no short space, he went again from
hence to Rome, and returned hither the second time, as is manifest before, when
be dyed hear. Which many more Authors both Manuscripts and Manuscr. antiq. in
Vit. S. Helenae Io. Capgr. Catal. in eadem.
others confirm, in this manner: Cum illam (S. Helenam) in Thori societatem
accepisset Constantius, generauit ex ea filium quem appellauit Constantinum.
Ipse vero Constantius cum regno Britanniae aliquandiu potiretur, Romam
reuersus. And then they bring him hither the second time, and living hear
diverse years. and dying at York, as others have done before. Britanniam
rediens, post annos Manusc. and Cap. supr. Pomponius Laetus compend. Romans Hist.
in Constantio Chloro.
vndecim apud Eboracum morti subiacuit, and regnum filio Constantino reliquit,
Leaving the kingdom to his eldest son Constantine. And this is evident by
the time of Constantine his Age, and Reign before remembered, out of the most
ancient Histories of this matter, and such as no man willing to retain the
name of an Antiquary may deny. I add to this, that Constantine at his Fathers
death, was a married man, then married unto Fausta, daughter of Maximianus
Herculius the Tyrant, and by him made Augustus, and yet Panegyric. 1. in
nuptijs Constantini and Faustae. Baron. Annal. an. 307.
was married to an other wife before, as the Authors of that time are
witnesses, and had Priscus his eldest son by this former wife named
Mineruina. Of which all Histories both Christian and Pagan are plentiful.

THE XII. CHAPTER.
OF THE OTHER THREE CHILDREN, OF CONstantius and S. Helen; and particulary of
two of them S. Lucius and S. Emerita, renowned and glorious Martyrs for holy
Christian Religion, among foreign Pagans, S. Lucius an holy Bishop preaching
it to them in Germany.

1. HAVING thus evidently cleared the History for the birth, and Education, of
these two great Glories of the world, the Mother, and son, in Britain: I am to speak some thing of other children this happy Empress S. Hele^ had in
this Nation by her husband Co^stantius, for allthought the greatness of that
great Emperor Constantine does in the Histories of that time draw all men's
pens, and eyes to describe and behold his splendour and renown, and in some
sort eclipse the honor of diverse others, renowned in those days, yet we find
in ancient memorable Antiquities, that S. Helen had other children besides
Constantine, whereof some were in their lives renowned in S. Lucius son to S.
Helen.
this world, and now great Saints in heaven, by forsaking terreane, and
temporal dignities, to purchase spiritual and eternal. We find she had
four children hear in Britain by her husband Constantius, three sons,
whereof Annal. Eccl. Cathedralis Lucion. in Aquitania. Ion. Bouchet de
Poictiers Annals Aquitan. l. 1. c. 5. will. Harrison description of Brit. c.
9. p. 25. col. 2.
Constantine after surnamed the Great, was the youngest, S. Lucius the second,
the name of the eldest slain, or dying when he was but Young is not so
readily preserved in Antiquities, and one daughter S. Emerita. This S. Lucius
is he, that was Apostle to diverse peoples, and places in Germany, mistaken by
some, through I dentitie of name, and Nation, Regal descent, and nearenes in
time, for King Lucius our first Christian King, Grandfather to this Prince
Lucius, as the Annals of Aquitayne, where he long time lived a most
penitential and holy life in a Monastery, which he there founded called after
his name, has testified before, and he also took his name Lucius from him: de
son Bisageal Roy d' Angleterre. And this Lineal descent of Queen Helen from
King Lucius, proximitie in blood to him, and thereby true Titler to the crown
of Britain may seem to have been a strong motive for the Romans so easily
and desirously to consent unto, and procure the uniting Mariadge between her
and Constantius. The History of this S. Lucius, S. Helen her son is thus
recorded in those Antiquities, as the Antiquarie of Aquitane relates it from
thence. I find by the foundation of the Church of Lucon, Bouchet. l. 1. c. 5.
supr. Annal. Eccl. Cathed. Luc. and al.
or Lucius in Poycters, contained in an Hymn, beginning, gaude Lucionu^, the
said Lucius killed his elder brother, son friar aisne and for that cause, was
bannished the Country and to live in perpetual Religion, a tenir Religion
perpetuell and embarked on the sea in a ship with great riches, and Relics,
with many Priests, and devout parsons: Who all landed at Lucon which is upon
the sea, and there Lucius founded a fair Abbey, and Church to the honor of
our Lady, which he called by his name. Where he lived with his Priests
Religiously. And it was after erected into a Bishops See. An English Protestant
Historian thus relates the occasion of Will. Harrrison description of Britain
p. 25. c. 9
Prince Lucius his forsaking Britain his native Country: It happened that Lucius
by means of a quarrel grown between him and his elder brother, either by a
fray, or by some other means, did kill his said brother, whereupon his Father
exiled him out of Britain, and appointed him from thenceforth to remain in
Aqnitayne in France. He became a Bishop in the Church of Christ. He erected a
place of prayer, wherein to serve the living God, and is still called even to
this our time, after Lucion, or Lucius the first Founder thereof, and the
original beginner of any such house in those parts. In this also he and diverse
others of his friends continued their times in great contemplation, and
prayer, and from hence were Translated, as occasion served unto sundry
Ecclesiastical promotions in the time of Constantine his brother. So that even
by this short Narration it is now easy to see that Lucius the King, and Lucius
the son of Chlorus, were distinct parsons. He had expressly said before in
his merginall notation: Chlorus had three sons and a daughter by Helena. And
thus more at Lardge in his Relation hereof: Constantius Chlorus being at the
first matched with Helena, and before she was put from him by the Royal power
of Dioclesian, he had by her three sons, besides one daughter called Emerita,
of which the name of the first is perished, the second was called Lucius, and
the third Constantine, S. Lu^ius converted the Curienses and there was Martyred.
that after was Emperor. And he after adds: Hereunto Hermannus Schedelius
adds also, how he went into Rhetia with Emerita his Sister, and near unto
the City Augusta, converted the Curienses unto the faith of Christ, and there
likewise (being put to death in Castro Martis) lies buried in the same Town,
where his Feast is holden upon the third day of December, as may readily be
confirmed, whereas the bones of our Lucius were to be seen at Gloucester. That
Schedelius erreth not herin also, the ancient monuments of the said Abbay,
whereof he was the original beginner, as I said, do yield sufficient
testimony, beside an Hime made in his commendation, entitled, gaude Lucionu^
etc. The said Schedelius furthermore sets down, that his sister was
martyred in Trinecastle, near unto the place, where the said Lucion S. Emerita
S. Lucius his Sister Martyred.
dwelled, whereby it appears in like sort, that she was not sister to Lucius
King of Britain. Hitherto this Protestant Antiquarie. But whereas he would
make Hartmannus Schedel a witness, that this was S. Lucius son of
Constantius, and S. Helena, he is deceived therein, for that Author says
expressly, it was S. Lucius our King, that was converted by Pope Eleutherius
means. Lucius Anglorum Rex Coilli Regis filius: but supposing as it has been
already Hartman. Schedel. Ch^onic. Chronic. f. 115. p. 2.
proved, that it was S. Lucius son of Constantius and S. Helena, he, goes
further, and says, he converted all Bauaria, and Rhetia, between the Alps,
Totam Bauariam and Rhetiam inter Alps Christo acquisiuit.

2. But there be many german Authors, which this Protestant might have better
cited for this purpose, as Gaspar Bruchius Sebastian, Munster, with others, who
with diverse other Writers they allege, asscribe as much to S. Lucius, that
preached to the Rhetians, as Schedel does, and more; and yet plainly prove,
this could not be S. Lucius our King of Britain, who as Munster truly says,
never went out of Britain but lived, dyed, and was buried hear. Britanniae
ille Rex, qui circiter annum Domini 190. floruit, patriam nequaquam exiens, pie
apud suos obdormiuit. And to demonstrate it could be no other Sebastian. Mu^st.
Cosmogr. l. 3. c. 344. p. 735.
S. Lucius a Britan, but this son of Constantius, and S. Helena, he brings
from the German Antiquities, that the Lucius which preached there, continued
his preaching until the most bloody Persecution of Dioclesian. Ad vsque
Dioclesionam illam cruentissimam persecutionem. Which this only S. Lucius did,
and could do, the other King Lucius being dead before Dioclesian was borne by
all Antiquities. And to clear it further, he writes that diverse affirm, he
was of the kingely Race of the Britans, and borne among them, never mentioning
that he was a King, Lucium hunc aliqui regio stemmate apud Britannos Cap. 214.
ortum and natum esse affirmant. Gaspar Bruchius also has the very same words,
for the opinion of diverse writers: That S. Lucius which preached to the Gaspar.
Bruch. l. de Episcop^^b. Ge^maniae Catal. Episcopor. Curien. Ecclesiae.
Germans was borne of the Regal Race among the Britans, and to propagate the
faith of Christ, came out of Britain into Germany, and preached first at
Salisburge, then at Ausburge, from whence he was cast out by the Infidels
there, and then went with his sister S. Emerita to the City of Chur, where
preaching again both he and his Sister Emerita were Martyred by the Pagans, S.
Lucius at Chur in the castle of Mars, and S. Emerita at Trine-castle. And that
there is without the walls of Chur a very old Monastery, called S. Lucius,
which was begun by him, and was his Oratory: Lucium hunc aliqui regio stemmate
apud Britannos ortum, and natum esse affirmant, venisse autem illum amore
propagandae doctrinae, de filio Dei Jesus Christo, ex Britannia in Germaniam: vt
Christum Germanis etiam adhuc Idololatris concionaretur, and eos ad Christum
conuerteret. Id aiunt illum primum fecisse Salisburgi, postea Augustae
Vindelicorum: vbi cum eijceretur ab Infidelibus, dicitur Churam cum sorore S.
Emerita cessisse: vbi cum itidem Idololatricas opiniones reprehenderet, and
aliquamdiu concionaretur Christum liberatorem, ab Infidelibus tum Rhetis caesi
and Martyrio coronati sunt S. Lucius and S. Emerita. S. Lucius Churae in Martis
Castro, S. Emerta apud Trimontium. Est Churae extra vrbis muros Caenobium S.
Lucij preuetustum, in vitifero colle situm, quod ab eo caeptum, and Oratorij
loco conditum aiunt. And he utterly disliketh their opinion, which hold that
this was our first Christian King S. Lucius. And that only Tradition that the
S. Lucius which was the Apostle of that people was Martyred, Curae in Martis
Castro, at Chur in the Castle of Sebast. Munster. Cosmogr. l. 3. ca. 214. de
Episcopatu Curiensi. Aegyd. Schud. in descript. Rhaetiae Alpinae c. 15. and
alij.
Mars, do make it impossible, to be our King Lucius, so does their Tradition,
that this S. Lucius which first preached unto them, was their first Bishop of
Chur, for both Sebastian Munster, Egidius Schudus, and others do demonstrate,
that the City of Chur was not builded until after King Lucius time: so he
could neither be Bishop of, nor Martyred in that City, then not extant.

3. And how would, or in conscience could so wise and Religious a King as
Lucius, having no child, or Heir fit, or able to govern Britain, or which
the Romans would allow, forsake his own kingdom, to leave it in such
certain distress, and troble both temporal, and spiritual, as after his
death ensued and could not but be morally foreseen in his prudence, with the
Apostasy of so many Britans his subjects, to adventure upon uncertain
success, to preach in foreign Countries? or what Antiquity does prove, that
he was either Bishop, Priest, or Clergy man? all our Historians set down
the time, and place of his death, and buryall in Britain, making him only a
glorious King, Lay parson, and Confessor, no Clergy man, nor Martyr. And
those foreign Writers which inclyne to hold he went out of Britain into
Germany, either for the most part mistake their Authors, or ground upon
heare-sayes and unsound reports. Nicholas Viginier uses S. Bid for witness,
which Nich. Vign. Biblioth. H^st. page 765. Naucler. Chron. Genera. 6. p. 565.
Petr. Merssaeus in Episc. Treuer. and in Episcop. Tu^gar. in S. Marcelio.
Henric. Patal. de Vir. Illust. Germ. part. 1. p. 110. Magdeb. cent. 2. c. 2.
col. 9.
has no such thing. And he himself believes it not, rather teaching the
contrary. Nauclerus says, fertur, it is only reported, and sets down King
Lucius death as our Historians do. Petrus Merssaeus writes doubtfully, some
times saying, S. Lucius of Britain that preached in Germany was a King,
otherwhiles only a Prince, as Constantius and S. Helens son was. Henry
Pantaleon, the Annals of Chur as he cites them, and Stumphius only say, that
S. Lucius the Apostle of Chur, was borne of the Regal Race among the Britans,
ex Regio Britannorum sanguine prognatus, which is true of the second S. Lucius.
The Magdeburgian Protestants term it a very fable to think that King Lucius
left his Country, and kingdom to preach in Germany: fabulam omnino resipiunt,
quod Lucius Rex Imperio suo sponte abdicato, factus sit Concionator: qui in
Gallijs and in Germania, nempe Augustae and in Sueuia, passim praedicarit
Christum: ac denique Curiensis Ecclesiae Doctor effectus, Martyrio occubuerit.
And they say it is one of the fables, with which the Devil defiled the Church
of Christ, His fabulis Diabolus conspurcauit Ecclesiam Christi: when and where
King Lucius dyed, and was honorably interred in Britain in the Cathedral
Church of Gloucester, I have set down in his time before.

4. And a very great mistaking it is of Auentine, Feuardentius, Gaspar
Bruchius, and Sebastian Munster, if they incline to think, that this Apostle
Auentin. apud Magdeb. cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10. Feuardentius Annot. in Irenaeum. l.
1. Har. c. 3. Gaspar. Bruch. Cata og. Episc. Curien. and Augustano. Martyrol.
Romans die 3. Decembr. Annal. Ecclesiae Churie^. Breu. Eccl. Churie^. die 3. and
4. Decembr. in festo S. Lucij, and Emeritae. Martyrol. Romans die 6. Maij. Bed.
Vsuard. and Ado eod. die Sebastia. Munster. l. 3. cap. 217. Act. Apost. c. 13.
Naucler. gener. 6. Volum. 2. page 565.
Bishop and Martyr of Chur, and the Rhetians, named Lucius, was Lucius
Cyrenensis S. Paul's Kinsman, and mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles: For
besides all those Authors, named before, the old Roman Martyrologe, the Annals
of Chur, and their public Church office, one the Feasts of S. Lucius, and his
Sister S. Emerita with others do fully assure us, that S. Lucius the Apostle
there was borne in Britain, of the Regal Race there, brother to S. Emerita, a
Martyr, and Martyred at Chur. Of which not any one agrees with S. Lucius
Cyrene^sis, for he was borne at Cyrena in Lybia, poor by birth, son of S.
Simon Cyrenaeus, that bore the Cross of Christ, Bishop of Cyrena, where he was
borne, no Martyr, and died the 6 day of May, on which his Feast is kept, when
they of Chur celebrate their Apostles solemnity, upon the third day of
Dece^ber. And it is proved before, Sebastian Mu^ster himself urging it, that
the City of Chur was not builded until long time after the death of S. Lucius
Cirene^sis. No other S. Lucius (though many of that name) is remembered in any
Martyrologe, or other Monument to have preached and suffered Martyrdom, in, or
near that place, or this time, nor any other a Britan borne, or of such Noble
Parentadge, but this our renowned S. Lucius son of Constantius, and S. Helen,
therefore of necessity we must yield, as his due this honor only to him: And
glorify God, that so great a Prince of this Nation, eldest Son to an
Emperor, our King, and Empress our Queen, and by just descent Heir both to
the kingdom of Britain, and the Roman Empire, abandoning all that and such
terreane honors, preferred the poor Religeous life, founded Monasteries, and
conuersed in them with great devotion, suffered so many miseries and
disgraces, for preaching Christ, stoned and cast into a pit at Ausburge by the
Infidels, living some time in a Cliffe by Chur ingreate austeritie, still
called Lucius Cliffe: cliuo illi ad tempora nostra nomen Aegid. Schudus
Clarouen. in descript. Rhaetiae Alpinae cap. 15.
mansit, Sancti Lucij Cliuus.

5. Allthough his memory has been almost omitted in Antiquities on earth, yet
he has enjoyed his deserved honor in heaven, and the very foundations of his
Monasteries the one at S. Lucius in Aquitaine, the other S. Lucius in Rhaetia,
and the hard stones of his S. Lucius Cliffe do call upon us to honor, and not
bury in oblivion so noble and worthy a Saint of our Nation, the first among
the Kings and Princes of Britain, that for love of the heavenly kingdom left
his Title to so great a Temporal Throne, and scepter, to bear the Cross of
Christ, and preach his Law to his Enemies. Which wonderful zeal, and
devotion in this most holy Saint, being of the same name, Country, and kindred
with King Lucius, and undoubted Heir to the same kingdom, he enjoyed, and
lived to see it converted unto Christ, and thereby renowned in all the world,
and this S. Lucius for the most part muring up himself in Cloisters and
Clifts, and concealing his Regal Right, and descent, gave occasion to some to
asscribe that to S. Lucius King in Act, which belonged to S. Lucius King and
Emperor by Hereditarie Right and Title. Whereupon I boldly say, for the glory
of Britain our Lucius the first, was the first King in the world, which for
himself and his subjects publicly received the Law of Christ: Our S. Lucius
the second, was the first owner or Heir of a kingdom and Empire in the world,
which forsook them to preach, and purchase the heavenly kingdom and Empire,
and S. Emerita his Sister the first daughter of so great Parents, which
publicly professed and practiced such holy conversation. And allthough we do
not find in Histories, so exact Eutrop. l. 10. Eusebius. l. 1. Vit. Constant. c.
14. Victor in Constantino. Zonaras in Dioclesiano. Pomponius Laetus Roman.
Hist. comp. in Constantino Max. Io. Baptista Egnat. in Co^stantino Magno.
Anton. Sabellic. Ennead. li. 8. Ennead. 7. Niceph. l. 7. c. 49 50. Nich. Har.
pesfeld. Hist. Eccl. in 6. primis scaecul. c. 12. p. 19.
account, and memory of the chiefest procurers and prosecutours of the
Martyrdom of these two glorious British Saints, Brother and Sister, S.
Lucius, and S. Emerita, nor the certain time of their death; yet if we call to
mind, that which is common in Writers of those days, that Maximianus
Herculeus their mortal Enemy, was then Emperor in the West, and raised most
grievous Persecutions there, and having forced Constantius before to putt his
true lawful wife their holy Mother S. Helen away, to take Theodora his
daughter in Law, and what hate he bore to the children of S. Helen, seeking to
deprive them of their Regal and Imperial Right, and Title, as well appears
in his plotts and proceedings against Constantine, still living, and happily
escaping them, injuriously to advance his own titlesse and unworthy creaturs,
it will be void of presumption to think, that he countriued the death of
these holy Saints about that time, when he sought to murder their Brother
Constantine, a little before the death of Constantiustheir Father, known to be
sickly, and unlikely long to live, and so they received a double Crown of
Martyrdom, one for the kingdom of heaven which they diligently preached, an
other for their Title to a kingdom and Empire one earth of which they were
thus unjustly deprived. And we find that among other Churches, which the
Emperor Constantine the Great, their Brother founded in honor of Saints, he
founded one to S. Lucius, not improbable to this his renowned Brother then
Martyred. A late Author sets down S. Emerita Sister of S. Lucius to have
been dead before the Empire of Constantine the Great, citing some, though not
naming them, that she was burnt to death for the faith of Christ, Ante haec
tempora quidam Emeritam Lucij sororem, pro Christi fide exustam tradunt. But
that which he alleges others without name to think she was not putt to death
for Religion but in the time of Tumults hear after King Lucius death: alijid
adscismata and factiones potius, quae hoc regnum totos, post Lucium quindecim
annos misere distrahebant, quam ad vllam Christianae fidei causam referunt.
Besides that wants Authority is confuted before.

THE XIII. CHAPTER.
THAT S. HELEN WAS ALL HER LIFE AN holy and virtuous Christian, never infected
with Iudaisme, or any error in Religion. And that Constantius her Husband long
lived and dyed a Christian, and protected both Britain and other Countries
under him from Persecution.

1. BY this we do not only see the great and wonderful Sanctity of these
most holy children of Constantius and Helena, with a new confirmation of their
true and lawful marriadge, but the extraordinary great love, and affection of
these great Parents themselves toward Christian Religion. For these blessed
children receiving their Education, as birth and being, from them, and by them
both allowed and furthered in so sacred, and holy course of life, in their
young years, if we had no other Arguments but this, and that S. Helen was
Grandaughter to S. Lucius our first Christian King for his most singular
piety, a spectacle to all after Princes, and Constantius her Husband even
against the liking of many of the Roman Nobility, and by diverse before,
against their Laws so far enamoured with the rare virtues of that
unmatchable Lady, that above all others, he chose her to wife, to live with her
in so remote and strange Country, especially professing Christianity, which
the Romans then persecuted, we must needs at the least conclude from hence,
that this our King and Queen were very far from being Persecutours of that
Religion, if they were left to their own Judgments, and disposition and not
incited or enforced by others against their consciences and propensions.

2. Of Queen Helen there can be no question, for being borne in a Christian
kingdom, descended from such Parents, her self Mother of such children, and
by all Antiquities brought up in Britain in extraordinary learning and
knowledge, where after the Druides and their Rites extinct by King Lucius, and
their maintenance and revenues bestowed upon Ecclesiastical learned
Christians, and our Universities and Schools replenished with such, we shall
hardly with good congruence think otherwise but Queen Helen was in that her
prime and flourishing Age; rather an holy professed actual Christian, then in
mind and affection only. If any man will hold and affirm, that for the
sumptuous Palace Queen Helen had in Treuers in Germany, Annal. Treuer. Sigeb.
Chron. and alij.
her love to that City, and in respect of learning then there flourishing, as
in the Metropolis of those parts, she had part of her education and instruction
in so great learning there, this will rather confirm that she was then
actually an holy Christian. For this Noble City receiving the faith of Christ
by S. Maternus and his Associats, Disciples of S. Peter the Apostle, sent
thither by him, had ever since faithfully continued therein so generally, and
constantly, that about the year of Crist 288. when that bloody Tyrant
Maximianus Herculius Galerius which forced Constantius to putt away his true
wife S. Helen, to take the profane Strumpett Theodora his daughter or daughter
in Law, by his Prefect Rixiouarus persecuted the Christians in those parts,
all the Inhabitans of Treuers were found to be Christians, and Pamachius
Governor of the City being also a Christian with 11. Senators thereof, so
encouraged them in their holy faith, that all the Citizens, men, women, and
children, not one excepted, were putt to death for that glorious cause. Haec
vrbs a D. Materno ac eius socijs lege Christiana imbuta est, inde tempore
Maximiani Tyranni qui fuit anno Domini 288. agente truculentissimo Rixiouaro
Petrus Merssaeus Catal. Archiep. Treu. in encom. eiusdem. Francis. Irenicus ib.
To. Martyrol. die 5. and 6. Octobr. Sigebert. in Chron. An. 1071. Tabul.
Eccles. Treuer. Petr. Merssaeus in Annal. Archie. Treuer. in Vale^tino.
Praefecto, tota ob Catholicam fidem interempta est. Tum vrbis Gubernator ac
Princeps fuit in clitus Pamachius, Senator Pius, qui ob Cristi Religionem cum
vndecim Senatoribus ac tota Ciuitate interfectus est. Hij enim optimi viri
ciuitatem illam ad Christi Religionem ita animauerant, vt pro ea constanter
occumbere non dubitarent: hic nulli aetati, nulli sexui parcitum, sed omnes ad
vnum interempti. The Roman Martyrologe and Sigebertus call that Christian
Governor of Treuers and Martyr, Palmatius, and not Pamachius, nor Palmachius.
And this opinion is more strengthened by the great Religeous love of S. Helen
to that City after this desolation there, procuring S. Agritius Patriarch of
Antioche, a man of admirable holiness, and learning, to come forth of the East
to be Archbishop there, with allowance of S. Siluester then Pope of Rome,
enritching him, and that City with most precious Reliks, the Seamelesse Coat
of our Savior, one of the Nails wherewith he was fixed to the Cross, the
Knife he used at his last Supper, a great parcel of the holy Cross, the body
of S. Annal. Archiep. Treuer. in S. Agritio. 27.
Matthias the Apostle, and others, causing her Palace to be converted and
dedicated a Church in honor of S. Peter. The old Christian Writers and
Inscriptions which before call her even from the time of her Marriadge with
Constantius, and before, sancta, pijssima, holy, most Godly, and the like, will
not be justified in a Christians mouth, pen, or pencell, except such esteemed
her then a Christian, for no other can by Christians be styled and honored
with those Titles.

Neither may we with prudence conceive, that King Coel at her Marriadge with
Constantius, having possession of, or Title unto Britain, a Christian
kingdom, nor the Religeous Christian Archbishops, Prelates, and Nobles
thereof, then at freedom in Religion, would have condiscended to such a match,
if neither Constantius nor she had been a Christian: that had not been the way
to procure to themselves peace, and freedom which they sought, but hazard of
new trobles, Tumults and Persecution, which they thereby hoped to avoid.
Experience gave a good Argument hereof to the Christians of this Nation, for so
long as this holy Lady and Queen was permitted to continue with her Husband,
the State of Christianity was quiet hear, and the persecuting Emperors
Dioclesian and Maximian could compass nothing against it in this kingdom, but
when they had forced Constantius to forsake her, and take a Pagan in her place,
she herself was persecuted, her Christian children bannished, and that
general affliction, and desolation of Religion ensued in this Nation, that no
semblance of the like is left in Histories to Posterity. The Christian
Antiquities of Aquitaine will give new strength to this, in these their own
words: Because Constantius was enforced to take Theodora daughter of Herculius,
he putt Queen Helen away, who patiently Antiq. Aquitan. apud Bouchet in Annal.
c. 5.
bore the Injury, and lived in merueilous holiness, separated from all worldly
curiosities, and Royal honors by the space of 17. or 18. years. Such
holiness, and merueilous holiness no Christian may or will asscribe to any, but
true Christians, among whom only such holiness is to be found, and with no
others. Besides our learned Antiquarie Ioannes Capgrauius, does freely
confess, that before she was married to Constantius she was instructed and
taught in the Christian Catholic faith, in fide Catholica instructa atque
edocta, and lived Io. Capgr. Catal. in S. Helena.
Christian like, repraesentabat in sua conuersatione gloriosa sacri Baptismatis
mysteria. And was a great means, to bring her Son Constantine to be a
Christian: he says further of her, that she was a most holy woman, a most
firm bulwark or foundation of Christian Religion, by her Husband an Empress,
by her Father a Queen. Helena sanctissima faemina, Christianae Religionis
Eusebius. de Vita Constant. l. 3. c. 42.
basis firmissima, ex marito Imperatrix, ex patre Regina. Eusebius says, that
Helen the Empress was an holy Mother of the holy Emperor, Helena Augusta, pij
Imperatoris pia matter. And adds further, that through all her life she
brought forth those true fruits of piety, which the Precepts of our Savior
prescribe, and this both in words and deeds. In omnium bonorum affluentia, omne
vitae suae tempus ad extremam vsque senectutem obijsset. Et tum verbis tum
rebus ipsis veros pietatis fructus, quos Praecepta Seruatoris praescribunt,
extulisset. Therefore if all her life both in word and deed she lived as Christ
commanded, by the testimony of this old Author well acquainted with her, and
her Son, both he, and all that will receive him for an able witness, must
confess she was a Christian all her life, for no other does or can keep the
Precepts of Christ in word and deed all their life. And whereas the greatest
Caesar Baron. Annal. An. 315. Sponc^n. ^b. Sever. Bin. Tom. 1. Council. in Ann.
in Council. Romans sub Syluest^o.
objection against this has been urged by some out of the Acts which some
would have S. Siluesters, where it is said that S. Siluester baptized S. Helen,
the best Roman Writers themselves Baronius, Spondanus, Seuerinus Binius, and
others prove them to be erroneous, even in these particular respects,
concerning this matter, in teaching Constantine was a Christian before Helena.
And that she was borne in Bithynia, and show that S. Helen was never seduced to
Iudaisme, nor baptized by S. Siluester, but only confirmed in her Christian
faith, as all Christians present were by the Disputation between S. Siluester
and the chiefest Jews, publicly, inuincibly, and miraculously by all men's
Judgments, and their own also convinced by him. And prove how among other
evident falsehoods those supposed Acts contain these that follow. Constantius
and Constans were Emperors in the East at this time. Isach was high Priest
among the Jews. That S. Siluester did abrogate the Fast of Satterday, and
instituted the Sunday, and that he was ordained Pope by Melchisedech, with
other such like monstrous fictions. Therefore we may not loose the honor of
our Country, and most renowned British Christian Queen and Empress by such
dreams, and forgeries. The wonderful and exceeding great zeal and devotion
of this most Noble Lady, her piety and charity to all with her bounty and
munificence to the Church of Christ, her restless pains, Pilgrimadges, and
labors to suppress Idolatry, and advance the true honor and serving of God,
when she was a free woman, after her Husbands death, I shall entreat in the
next Age, when I come to that time. This which I have said will redeem and
set her free from the calumnies and aspersions which some would lay upon her
Parentage, Country and Conversation in her young and wedded life.

4. And to give to Constantius her husband his due otherwise, especially for
his carriadge toward Christians and their Religion, considering those
ouerswaying times of Paganism and Persecution against Christianity allthough
he was far from giving due to his Noble holy wife Queen Helen, when for
fear of the persecuting Emperors Dioclesian and Maximian he putt her away,
and took Theodora a Pagan Concubine under the name of a wife, in her place,
except this his great compelled blemish, we must needs say, he was a worthy
Prince, and in respect of Religion, one of the best of all forreyne Kings, or
Rulers, which Britain had tasted of the Romans Imposition upon it. For
allthough by the unhappy yelding of Constantius unto the persecuting Emperors
Dioclesian and Maximianus, in, or about the 292. year of Christ, thereby
making himself a Caesar, to putt away Queen Helen, and take Theodora, he
deprived himself of that Regal power in Britain, which he obtained by his
match with Queen Helen, the true Heir and Queen of this kingdom, and so
armed the persecuting Emperors to extend their rage and fury against the
Christian Britans, which had been exempted from that their usurped Tyrany
hear, if Constantius had continued with his Christian Eusebius. in Chron. An.
292. Matthew. Westminster. An. 296.
wife Queen Helen and rested upon her Title, and the conditions between the
Romans and Britans at that Marriadge, and so cannot be excused herein: yet
otherwise their Persecution preuayling in his time, we cannot find he was any
Instrument, or Furtherer, but rather an Asswager, and to his power a Mitigator
thereof, even whilst Theodora lived with him, being a great Instrument to
procure him to continue a Pagan, as Fausta her Sister was to Constantine his
son, and both of them employed by their persecuting Father Maximian Emperor
to that purpose. Eusebius living in that time, says of him, that he was the
most renowned of all the Emperors in his time. Fuit Constantius inter
Imperatores nostri temporis facile illustrissimus. And gives Eusebius. de Vita
Constant. l. 1. c. 8. cap. 9.
his reason: Cum quatuor in Romani Imperij gubernandi societate iungebantur,
solus hic faedere amicitiae cum Deo omnium Gubernatore pacto, modum vitae, a
caeterorum institutis alienum disparemque consectatus est. Illi enim, Dei
Ecclesias obsidione vastare, euertere radicitus, solo aequare, ac templa
concussis fundamentis disturbatisque prorsus delere aggressi sunt: hic autem a
nefando and detestabili illorum scelere manus integras and inuiolatas
continuit, neque vlla ex part se similem illis praebuit. Illi Intestina
virorum simul ac mulierum pietatem maxim excolentium caede, Prouincias suae
ditioni subditas scelerate contaminarunt: when four were, at one time joined
together to Rule the Roman Empire, this man only Constantius among them making
his leage of friendship with God, the governor of all, ledd his life diverse
and different from the Institutions of the rest. For they went about to pull
down the Churches of God, utterly to overthrow them, equal them with the
ground, and destroy them. But Constantius kept his hand, free, and unspotted
from their abominable, and horrible wickedness, and in no respect behaved
himself as they did. They pulled out the bowels of men and women, that were
the true worshippers of God, and impiously defiled the Provinces subject to
their Jurisdiction, with slaughter: hic suam ipsius animam asceleris labe
vacuam assidue conseruauit. Constantius kept daily his soul free from
infection of sin. The others to heap all sins together, with certain
execrable words which they used to pour forth in worshipping their Idols,
devoted first themselves, and then all that were under their Rule to the cursed
worshipping of devils. When Constantius contrariwise permitted free power to
all under his government to exercise the true Religion of God without
molestation: Illi quo mala omnia in vnum c^a^eruarent, vocibus quibusdam
execrabilibus, quae in simulachrorum cultu fundi so ^ent, primum seipsos,
deinde omnes qui ipsorum obsequebantur Imperio, nefariae daemo number venerationi
deuouerunt; hic pacis tranquillissimae, illis qui ab ipso regebantur, Author
factus, libera^ eis verae in Deum Religionis sine molestia excolendae permisit
potestatem. The other three Emperors hear insinuated by Eusebius, were the
the great persecutours Dioclesian, Maximian, and Galerius, Actors in that most
greuious Persecution, commonly called the Persecution of Dioclesian, he being
the first and principal Mouer and prosecutour thereof. The Eusebius. Hist. Eccl.
l. 8. c. 14.
same Author speaks of him again in the name of Christians: nec belli
aduersum nos praesumpti vllo modo particeps fuit, sed quos sub se habuit pios,
indemnes, and ab omni calumnia securos seruauit, and neque domos Ecclesiaru^
demolitus, nec aliud quippiam contra nos* operatus. He was not in any means
partaker of war against us, but those godly men which he had under him, he
kept them safe, and secure from all troble, neither pulling down Churches, nor
working any thing against us. Constantine the Great his son, gives this
testimony of him, that in all his business, Constable. Magn. apud Eusebius. l. 2. De
Vita Constable. c. 48.
and affairs he called upon the true God with wonderful devotion. Pater meus
admirabili cum pietate, in omnibus suis rebus gerendis, Deo Patre inuocato,
clementiae opera executus est. And in an other place witnesses, that his
Father Consta^tius did worship all his life the true only God, Ruler of all
things: eius patrem, ipsum solum Deum, omnium rerum administratorem, toto vitae
spatio, obseruantia veneratum esse. And concludes by his Fathers example to
do so Apud Eusebius. l. 1. Vit. Constable. c. 21.
likewise. Deumque quem Pater sancte adorauisset, solum obseruandum,
colendumque statuit. Memorable is that Act of his own, testified by so many
ancient Authors, to make trial of true Christians, and advance them, by
first bannishing forth of Court, all that would not worship the Pagan Gods, and
after receiving Eusebius. l. 1. de Vit. Constant. c. 11.
and honoring those that refused it, and affirming they would not be true to
the Emperor, which would be false to God Almighty: Quomodo inquit fidem erga
Imperatorem seruare poterunt inuiolatam, qui aduersus Deu^ optimum Maximum
perfidi esse manifesto conuincuntur? and placed those true Christians in
greatest Offices, and next unto him. Eusebius thus concludes this matter: cum
iam longo temporis spatio eximia and spectata satis regiae virtutis indicia
dedisset, tandem repudiata penitus impiorum in varijs dijs cole^dis
superstitione, Deum omnium Mod^ratorem, vltro agnouit, and sanctorum virorum
precibus suam firm muniuit familiam: and reliquum vitae cursum expeditum,
perturbatione vacuum, magna cum laud transegit. Omnemque suam familiam vni
Regi Deo consecra^it: adeo vt multitudo quae intra regiam ipsam coiuerat, nihil
ab Ecclesiae forma distare videretur: in qua inerant D^i ministri, qui
continuos culius pro Imperatore etiam tum obierunt, cum piorum hominum genus
and vere Deo inseruientium, alibi apud Gentilium multitudinem ne nominari
quidem absque periculo poterat. When Constantius had now by the space of long
time given notable tokens of his kingely virtue, at the last utterly abandoning
the superstition of the wicked in worshipping diverse Gods, he of his own
voluntary will acknowledged God, Ruler of all things, and firmly defended his
family, with the prayers of godly men: and lived the rest of his time free and
void of troble with great praise, and Consecrated his whole family to one
King God: in such manner that the company which continued together in his
Palace, did nothing seem to differ from the form of a Church: in which there
were Ministers of God, which exercised continual worship for the Emperor,
even at that time, ^hen in other places among the multitude of Pagans, the
manner of godly men, and such as truly served God could not be named without
danger. Sozomen^s also witnesses, that when the Churches of Christ, in other
parts of the world, were tossed with the waves of Persecution, only
Constantius the Father of Constantine permitted (...) men. Hist. Eccl^s. l. 1.
c. 6.
to the Christa^s under him, free exercise of their Religion. Cu^ Ecclesiae in
alijs Orbis partibus persecutionem fluctibus iactarentur, solus Constantius
Constantini Pater permisit Christianis potestatem libere suam Religione^
excolendi. And relating his trial of Christians, who of the^ would be constant
in their Religion, as others do, he shows Constantius admitted them to be
his near Friends, and of his Council. Decreuit secum, his qui se fideles erga
Deum Optimum Maximum declarassent in amicorum, atque adeo Consiliariorum numero
habere. And heareupon thinks, that in his time it was not against the Laws
for the Britans, and diverse others under his government to be Christians, but
their Persecution was raised rather by Tyranny, then Law. Hinc capere
coniecturam licet, neque Gallis neque Britannis, qui long vltra fines Italiae
habitant, neque alijs qui circiter Pyrenaeos ad Oceanum occidentalem vsque
incolunt, contra leges visum esse, Christianam Religionem, dum adhuc vita
Constantio, profiteri. The like has Cassiodorus Cassiodorus in Tripartit.
Hist. l. 2. c. 7. Godwin-Conuers. of Brit. page 18. cap. 3.
thus warranted and Translated by our Protestant Antiquaries: Constantius
Chlorus yet reigning, it was not counted unlawful for those to be Christians,
that dwelt beyond Italy, and France, as in Britain, or near the Pereney
mountains, and so to the Western Ocean. Whereby undoubtedly it came to pass,
that many professing Christ, not daring to abide near unto the heart of the
Empire, as in Italy, France or some other of the nearest Provinces, made choice
of our Britain and some other remote places, where to lead their lives in
such sort, as they might enjoy liberty of conscience.

5. Regino says, that Constantius gave peace to Christ's Church, restored
Bishops to their Sees, and granted much favor to Christian Religion, and
Regino Chron. in Constantio patre Constantini magni.
how among other things of such nature, the Abbey at Treuers was then begun,
and by his assent Ihon an Abbot of great hollines builded it. Huius Constantij
temporibus pace Ecclesijs reddita, Episcopi priuatis sedibus restituuntur, and
alia plura Christianae Religioni profutura ceduntur. Inter quae etiam Caenobium
seruorum Dei Treueri inchoatur, cui praescripti Principis assensu, inter
contiguos vrbi muros, Ioannes Abbas mirae sanctitatis vir, initia dedit. Cuius
Caenobij beatus Augustinus in lib. Confessionum mentionem fecit. S. Marianus
Scotus writes, that this Constantius succeeding in the Empire to Dioclesian,
and Maximian, used Marian. Scot. aetat. 6. l. 2. col. 303.
great clemency toward men, and most great Religion toward God, and being a
Religious Father, left a more Religious son Constantine his Heir. Quibus
subrogatus est Constantius, qui multa clementia erga homines, erga deum vero
Religione maxima vtebatur. Vnde merito Religiosus Pater Religiosiorem filium,
Constantinum videlicet Regni been parti, reliquit haeredem, qui Maxentij Victor
extitit Tyra^ni filij Maximiani. Thus write other Catholic Antiquaries, too
many to be cited, to whom also Protestant Historians consent. I have alleged
one principal man of them before. And the Magdeburgians plainly say, of
Magdeburgen. cent. 4. cap. 2. col. 47.
him: That he granted to the Christians, that they might freely, and securely
live according to their Religion. And that he himself was a sinceere
worshipper of Christian piety: Proving it by his trial of true Christians,
with other arguments Constantius Christianis libere and secure secundum
Religionem suam viuere conces^it. Pietatis enim Christianae sincerum eum fuisse
cultorem praeter alia, etiam hoc admirabile eius factum testatur. An other of
our Britains says, that allthough before he was Emperor, when he could not
resist it, the persecuting Emperors Dioclesian, and Maximian with their
Officers ouerswaying him, David Pouelus Annotat. in cap. 5. l. 1. Giraldi
Cambr. Itinera^ij Cambr.
many Christians were putt hear to death: yet when he came to be Emperor, his
Cities were so free from such slaughter, that Britain was the most Refuge for
afflicted Christians. Ista fiebant anno Christi 292. regnante in Britannia
Constantio Chloro. Sub cuius postea regimine, cu^ Imperator esset, a tanta
clade ita immunes eius vrbes erant, vt Asilum Christianis afflictis tutissimum
foret illa ipsa Britannia. And to prove he continued in this true Christian
affection, and faith even to his death, an other taking upon him, only to be
an Interpretor of old Authors, thus relates his last Actions: whilst he lay
on his death bed, hearing Hollinsh. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 27.
that his son Constantine was come, and escaped from the Emperors
Dioclesian, and Maximian, with whom he remained as Pledge, he received him
with all Joy, and raising himself up in his bed, in presence of his other
sons and Counselors, with a great number of other people and strangers,
that were come to visit him, he set the Crown upon his sons head, and
adorned him with other Imperial Robes, Niceph.
and garments, executing as it were himself the office of an Herald, and
withal spoke these words unto his said son, and to his Counselors there
about him: Now is my Tripart. Hist.
death to me more welcome, and my departure hence more pleasant: I have hear
a lardge Epitaph, and monument of burial, to wit mine own son, and one
whom in earth I leave to be Emperor in my place, which by Gods good help
shall wipe away, the tears of the Christians, and reuendge the cruelty
exersed by Tyrants. This I rekon to chance unto me instead of most felicity.
And we find how his body being found at Caernaruon, likely Translated thither
from York, where by common opinion he dyed, in the time of King Edward the
first, was honorably Matthew. Westminster. 1283. Thomas Walsingh. Vpodig. Neustriae an.
1283.
by his commandment buried with other Christians in the Church: Apud
Caerneruon, corpus Maximi Principis, patris nobilis Imperatoris Constantini,
erat inuentum, and Rege Iubente, in Ecclesia honorifice collocatum. Which
Christian duty and obsequy would not have been performed unto him, especially
so honorably, and publikly in so Christian Catholic a time, without either
certain knowledge, or very probable opinion of his Christian Catholic
Religion. The Ceremonies, solemnities, and prayers used in such a case, could
not in conscience so be performed, for a man dying in any other Profession. The
Harris Manuscr. Hist. l. 4* c. 2.
Writers of this relation are of too great Authority to be questioned. And
some Writers there be which hold his first burial, and funeral at York was
with Christian solemnities, and obsequies, such as could not be used but for a
Christian. And they produce Eusebius to testify no less: Who speaking of
Constantius death, and funeral says, that he being a most holy man, was
buried Eusebius de Vita Constant. lib. 1. c. 16.
with great pomp, with Hymns and praises, as a most blessed man. Genitorem
sanctissimum cum omni splendore, and maxima pompa extulit: faustis acclama
tionibus, suaui hymnorum concentu omnes beatissimum illum celebrant. And makes
his death as his life also, so holy and Christian like, that he says, God gau^
evident testimony thereof to all men then living. Hunc morum vitaeque pie and
Religiose ad virtutem institutae exitum esse, in Imperatore Constantio,
vniuerso generi mortalium, qui nostra memoria vixerunt, Deus euidenter
monstrauit.

THE XIV. CHAPTER.
BY WHAT WICKED PLOTTS, PRACTICES, and devises Dioclesian and Maximian began
and prosecuted their wicked Persecution of Christians in Britain and how
Constantius was innocent, and free therein

1. WHEN Dioclesian and Maximian the most infensiue Enemies of the faithful
Servants, and Church of Christ, intended their mercylesse, and matchless
persecution against the^, the easilyer to make it as universal, and general,
as it was bloodly, and Tyrannical; And perceauing that neither Nero, nor any
other their Predecessor in that profane Impiety, had or could before them
tra^sporte their rage in that kind over our Ocean into this kingdom,
protected, and Rampired both by cituation, Sea, Christian Kings, and Rulers, or
favorers of Christianity, and Immunities from the Roman seuerities in such
nature, their study and practice was, first to surprise and overthrow these
firm Bullwarks, and Forts against them. And therefore assuredly knowing that
by the Regal claim, and Title of Britain Queen Helen was the lawful and
undoubted Heir, and Owner thereof, that she was a Christian and descended of
such parents, and absolute Queen of such a Country, the rare virtues and
wisdom she was endued with, her potency thereby, with her Victorious and
triumphant husband Constantius, that they had children to succeed them in the
government and kingdom of Britain, and such, as by credible Antiquities
before, were Christians, and thereby more likely to enlardge, and dilate, then
restrain or hinder the profession of Christianity, they knew these
Impediments to their wiked designements, must be taken away before they could
take effect. Whereupon beginning with the chiefest and principal propugnacle,
the Title of Queen Helen, her marriadge with Constantius, and Love between
them, they first assaulted this by pretended disabilitie in that Title and
Marriadge. Her lawful Title by Regal Lineall descent and Inheritance they
frustrated in their Judgment, which then had no Judge on earth, by their
pretended, and not to be examined Imperial claim, and Preeminencie, taking
and reckoning for their own, whatsoever they could get, and keep by force
and sword. And their more then Panegyricall Orator Mamertinus says plainly in
his Oration to Maximian the Emperor, that the Britans were not only subject
unto him, but that he landing in Britain, The Britans receued him with great
Triumph, offered themselves to his presence, Mamertin. orat. Panegyric. ad
Maximian. Imper.
with their wives and children, reuerencing not only himself, but even the
sails and tacklings of that ship which had brought his divine presence unto
their coasts: and when he should set foot on land, they were ready to lie
down at his feet, that he might as it were march over them, so desirous they
were of him. That both the Britans, and Nation, adjoining to the bounds of
that Isle were obedient to his commandments: And gives nothing to
Constantius, but as in the Right and Title of that Emperor.

2. Like to this: have some others of the flattering Roman Writers, by which we
see they went about, utterly to disable Queen Helen to have any S. Helenae
compelled to depart from Constantius.
Title to this kingdom. This they so urged to Constantius, and so disgraced
his Marriadge with that renowned Lady, that in the end they compelled him to
putt her away, and take Theodora the Pagan daughter of the persecuting S.
Lucius and his Sister S. Emerita banished out of Britain.
Emperor Maximian in her place. Then they bannished S. Lucius and S. Emerita
their holy children, and after martyred them, and to make all sure in their
prodeedings, detayned Constantine their other child, afterward Emperor,
Hostage at their command, and placed hear in Britain none to be Magistrates
to bear office, but such as were Pagans most ready to execute the cruel and
sauadge Resolutions of that bloody persecuting Tyrant against the holy
Christians hear. These things thus complotted, the State of Britain by such
means was now brought into the same condition, for Persecution Eusebius. in
chron. An. 292. Ma^th. Westminster. Chron. and alij. Spartian. in Aelio Vero.
Spondan. An. Chr^sti 139. Ma^th. Westminster. an. 296. 302. Florent. Wigorn. Chronic.
Marian. Scot. l. 2. an. 292. 293. 295. 304 305. Cassiodor. and Flor. Wigorn. in
Chron. an. 292. 295. 297. Baron. Annal. Tom. 2* An. 298. Iaco. Sponda^. ib.
Annal. Winton. Eccl. antiq. Manuscr. Manuscr. Antiq. de Vita S. Albani. Io.
Capg. in eod. Bal. lib. de Script. cent. 1. in Amphib. Pitzeus l. de Vir.
Illustr. aetate 4. in eod. Stowe and Howes Hist. Tit. Romans in Coill. Hollins.
Hist. of Scotl. in Crathlint Hollinsh. Histor. of Engl. l. 4. c. 26. 27. Annal.
Winton. Manuscr.
with other Nations, or rather worse, the number of Christians hear then being
far greater, both in respect it was a Christian kingdom, and so had both
more Christian Inhabitants then other Nations, and by the Immunities and
Privileges it should have enjoyed, many Christians of other Regions fledd and
resorted hither in hope of quietness, and security from Persecution.

3. And allthough the Persecution in Britain by our Histories began about that
time Constantius was compelled to putt away S. Helen and take Theodora, and was
thereupon made a Caesar: Yet he did not thereby receive any Imperial Power or
Authority, more then he had before: for the name Caesar in such sense died
with Nero, and was not renewed until the time of Adrian, who adopted Antoninus
Pius for Caesar, only a name of honor and Titular to be Emperor, and not of
present Power and Authority, as it was in, and before the time of Nero. And
Constantius was not at this time in Britain, but came hither the second time,
diverse years after by our Historians, and after the beginning of Dioclesian
and Maximian their Persecution hear. And was one of the Consuls at Rome after
that taking of Theodora and Persecution begun in Britain: For as these
Authors say, he was Consul in the year of Christ 297. All which year he must
needs be at Rome, when the Roman Histories themselves confess the Persecution
of Dioclesian began long before. And in the next immediate year 298. before
Constantius could be transported into Britain, they confess, that Persecution
was dilated into all the Roman Empire. Anno Christi ducentissimo nonagesimo
octauo Persecuti^ in Christianos milites saepe grassari caepta totum inuasit
Romanum orbem. And many of our Antiquaries, both in Manuscripts, and other
writings, do constantly affirm, that S. Alban was Martyred hear long before
this time in that Persecution. So testify both ancient and late, Catholic
and Protestant Historians. And of this mind must that Protestant Historian
Raphael Hollinshed be, which in his History of Scotland inclines to think
that Constantius had been a Persecutour in Britain, except he will contradict
himself: for in his History of England he holds, and proves with others,
that S. Alban and many others were Martyred hear long before the second
coming of Constantius hither, placing diverse years between them. The old
Manuscript Annals of Winchester say, S. Alban was Martyred in the eight year
of Dioclesian and Maximian. Passio Sancti Albani iuxta ciuitatem Verolamium,
quae alias Warlamchester sieve Watlingchester a Saxonibus vocatur, Anno
Dioclesiani and Maximiani octauo. And yet the same Antiquity tells us, that
the Monks of Winchester were Martyred by the Officers of Dioclesian, six
years before that, in the second year of his Empire. Interfecti sunt Monachi
in Wentana Ecclesia destructa, a Ministris Dioclesiani Persecutoris anno
Imperij sui secundo: And their Church then destroyed. A Protestant Bishop, as
he cites from some Antiquities of that Church, says: this happened in the
year of Christ 289. and adds, that at this time Dioclesian endeavoring to
root out Godwin Catal. of Bishops in Wincester. in Praef.
Christian Religion in Britain, not only killed the Professors of the same,
but also pulled down all Churches any where consecrated unto the exercise
thereof. And it is evident by our Scottish Histories also, and others, both
that Dioclesian persecuted hear in this time, and that not Constantius, but
Quintus Bassianus Hircius, Alectus, and Gallus were his Instruments therein, as
the most H^ctor Boeth. Scot. Hist. lib. 6. Hollinsh. Hist. of Scotl. Harris
Hist. Manuscr. l. 3. cap. 35. Galfrid. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 5. c. 3. 4. Caxton
Hist. part. 4. f. 33. Manuscript. antiq. Mamertin. Paneg. sup. Hollins. Hist.
of Engl. l. 4. Ioa. Lydgat. l. 8. Harding Chron. c. 57. f. 47.
principal with others of inferior Degree, all being Pagans by Profession.

4. And Mamertinus the Panegyrist has avouched to Maximian the Persecutour
before, that he was hear in Britain in his own parson, which is confirmed by
our own Antiquaries, adding further, that he petsecuted in these Occidentall
parts by commission, and warrant from Dioclesian, so testifies Ihon Lidgate
the Monk of Bury with others. Harding in his Chronicle says plainly.

The Emperor Dioclesian
Into Britain sent Maximian.
This Maximian to surname Hercelius
A Tirante false, that christenty annoyed
Through all Britain of work malicious.
The Christened folk felly and sore destroyed:
And thus the people with him foul accloyed,
Religeous men, the Priests, and Clerks all,
Women with child, and bedred folks all,
Children souking upon the Mothers happis,
The Mothers also withouten any pitee,
And children all in their Mothers lappis,
The Crepiles eke, and all the Christentee
He killed, and flewe with full great crueltee,
The Churches burnt, all Books, or ornaments,
Belles, Relikes, that to the Church appendes.
And sets down S. Alban, Amphibalus, Julius, and Aaron to have suffered
Martyrdom under this Tyrant Maximian at his being hear in Britain, so does
our British History, Ponticus Virunnius and others, setting down this
History before the second coming of Constantius hither. And our Protestant
Historians say, that Dicetus Deane of S. Paul's in London does set down this
Persecution in Britain in the year of Christ 287. and interpret Galfr.
Monum. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 5. Pont. Viru^. Hist. l. 5. Manus. Ant^q.
Prot. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. 9.. 18. Bed. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 6. 7.
Abbreu. Chron. M. S. ad An. 280.
S. Bid, William of Malmesbury and Ranulphus, that S. Alban was Martyred soon
after this time, their words be these: about the year 293. as we read in
Bid, Malmesbury, Ranulphus and others, Alban with his Teacher Amphibalus were
both of them Martyred. And S. Bid seems plainly to be of that opinion. So
likewise does the Author of the old Manuscript entitled Abbreuiatio
Chronicorum. And most certain it is, out of the received Acts of S. Sebastian,
and other Martyrs with him, written in that time, and justified by many
Authorities, that Diocletian coming to the Empire but in the year of Christ
284. did within 2. years after begin his most terrible Persecution: declaring
and forbidding by his bloody Edict, that no man should bye, or sell Acta Antiq.
S. Sebastiani and alior. Martyr. Baron. Annal. Tom. 2. An. 286. Spondib. Law.
Surius. in festo S. Sebast. die 2. Ianuar. Zachar. Lippol. eod. die. and alij.
Gildas l. de Excid. and conquest. Brit. c. 7.
any thing except he did first offer Incense to the Statues of the Pagan Gods,
placed to that purpose. And there were Executioners appointed in the Islands,
Villadges, and Waters, that no man should grind his corn or draw water,
except he first offered to their Idols. And the old Roman Martyrologe with
others proves, that S. Sebastian himself. though a principal Commander under
Dioclesian, was this year with others most cruelly martyred, only because
they were Christians: S. Sebastiani Martyris qui Dioclesiano Imperatore cum
haberet Principatum primae Cohortis sub titulo Christianitatis iussus est
ligari in medio campo, and sagittari a militibus, atque ad vltimum fustibus
caedi donec deficeret. And all Histories are full of the Martyrdomes and
Persecutions of Christians under Dioclesian at that time: and this not only in
those remoter places, and Britain, as I have cited from our Histories, but in
the next confining Nations unto us even by the commandment, and execution of
that wicked Tyrant himself Maximinian, which wrought such desolation in this
kingdom. For in this very year 286. as the old Annals of the Cathedral
Church of Treuers testify, all the Inhabitants of that renowned City, not one
excepted, were martyred for Christian Religion. Haec vrbs tempore Maximiani
Tyranni Annal. Ecclesiae Treuer. and Gaspar Bruch. in Praef. ad eosdem.
Anno Domini 288. tota ob Catholicam fidem interempta est. The earth itself
was moist with the blood of Martyrs, the great River Mosell passing thereby
was redd therewith six miles space, and diverse pitts were filled with the
bodies of Martyrs. Haec Tyra^nis tam fuit crudelis vt tellus ipsa maderet
cruore, Mosella fluuius per sex milliaria ruberet, acputeos aliquot Martyrum
cadaueribus repleuerint. And about this time in the year of Christ 291. S.
Mauritius and Manuscr. Gallic. Antiquit. Ann. 286. cap. 28. Annal. Colonien. c.
1. Sur. Tom. 4. Men's. Iul. Lipp. die 22. September. Baron. and Spond. an. 297.
Damasus in Vit. S. Marce^lini Tom. 1. Conc. and alij. Constant. Mag. and Eusebius.
l. 2. de Vit. Constant. c. 49. 50. Gild. l. de Excid. and conq. Brit. c. 7. and
8.
the whole Theban Legion, consisting of many thousands of Christians, 6666.
were Martyred by the same Tyrant in those parts, as their Histories prove unto
us. S. Gereon ac tota illo Chrictiana Legio, pro Christo Martyrs facti sub
duobus iniquissimis Tyrannis Diocletiano and Maximiano, anno Domini 291. qui
Christi nomen extirpare funditus, sed frustra studebant. And S. Damasus, or
whosoever the ancient Writer of the lives of the Popes, witnesses in the life
of S. Marcellinus the great encourager of this Christian Legion, that there
were then within the space of 30. days seventeen thousand Christians
Martyred. Quo tempore fuit Persecutio magna, ita vt intra 30. dies 17. millia
hominum promiscui sexus, Martyrio coronarentur. And both Constantine and
Eusebius are ample witnesses, that Dioclesian was a Persecutour from the
beginning of his Empire. Therefore seeing I am assured by the best, and most
ancient Historian we have, S. Gildas nearest to those times, that Dioclesian
and Maximian their Persecution did last but 9. years in Britain: Vsque ad
persecutionem Dioclesiani Tyranni nouennem: and bilustro turbinis necdum ad
Integrum expleto: And that presently after Constantius came hither to govern,
the Christians hear lived in quietness, and liberty, I must needs by Order of
History set down as in the proper place thereof the Persecution of Dioclesian
and Maximian hear, in this third Age.

THE XV. CHAPTER.
WHEN, AND BY WHOM, THE PERSECVTION, called Dioclesians Persecution, began in
Britain: long before the Martyrdom of S. Alban, and many hear then martyred
before him: and in what sense the Title Protomartyr, or prioritie in Martyrdom
is yet duly given to him.

1. IT is a common opinion among our Antiquaries, that this Persecution, called
Dioclesian his Persecution, began in this kingdom in that time when
Asclepiodotus ruled hear, and that Maximian the Tyrant, fellow in the Empire
with Dioclesian, was the chiefest and principal mouer and prosecutour thereof,
being hear some time then present in his own parson, about that wicked
business. This is sufficiently expressed by Eutropius in the life of Dioclesian,
Eutrop. in Diocles. Mamertin. supr. pan^gyr. Galfr. Monum. Hist. Reg. Brit. l.
5. c. 5. Pont. Viru^. Hist. l. 5.
Mamertinus the Pagan Orator, even to Maximian himself, our own Historians,
as Harding before cited plainly affirming it; so has the Author of the
British History, so Ponticus Virunnius: In diebus Asclepiodoti orta est
Dioclesiani Imperatoris Persecutio, qua fere deleta est Christianitas in tota
Insula, quae a tempore Regis Lucij integra, and intemerata permanserat.
Superauerat Maximianus Herculius Princeps militiae praedicti Tyranni, cuius
Imperio omnes subuersae fuere Ecclesiae, and cunctae sacrae scripturae quae
inueniri poterant, in medijs foris exustae. The very same has Ponticus, both
of them assuring us this Persecution was when Asclepiodotus had Government
hear, and by the procuring of Maximian. Matthew of Westminster also writes,
that Maximian Herculius caused all this our Western Persecution, but much
mistaketh the time, as I have proved before, when he says that Dioclesian his
Persecution began in the 21. and last year of his Empire. Anno gratiae 303.
qui est annus Imperij Matthew. Westminster. An. 303.
Dioclesiani 21. orta est Persecutio Christianorum post Neronem decima, qu^
fere deleta est Christianitas per orbem vniuersum. Nam Dioclesianus in Orient,
Maximianus Herculius in Occidente, vastari Ecclesias, and Christianos intersici
praeceperunt. And it needs no further confutation, then he himself gives
unto it, for the last year of Dioclesian must needs be also the last year of
his Persecution, having no Power to persecute, his Empire being ended then, and
so that year must needs be both the first and last also of his Persecution,
when it is evident before, and by all Histories, his Persecution endured many
years.

2. I will demonstrate hereafter, that as soon as Constantius came hither to
govern, the Persecution ceased, and was either quite calmed, and taken away,
or so much as he could, hindered by King Coel his Father in Law before. And
that Asclepiodotus himself was no actual Persecutour, allthough perhaps he
gave more way to the Romans Tyranny in that kind, not being able to resist
them therein, then King Coel and some others would have done. Which together
with his just Title moved Coel to take Arms against the Romans, and him in
that quarrel. So he was no agent in that Persecution. Therefore Manuscr. Ant.
in Reg. Coelo. Ponticus Virun. Britan. Hist. l. 5. Galfr. mon. l. 5. cap. 5. 6.
Theat. of great Britain l. 6. c. 9. Stoweand Howes Hist. Tit. Romans in
Asclepiodotus and Coill. Hollinsh Hist. of Engl. l. 4. cap. 25. 26. Fox. Acts
and Monum. Tom. 1.
I only yield, that this Persecution hear was in his time. Which is proved
before, by our Protestant Antiquaries also producing S. Bid, William of
Malmesbury, Dicetus, Ranulphus with others, that this Persecution was hear at,
or before the 293. year of Christ, about which time Asclepiodote ruled hear
by the common opinion of Historians. They themselves be of the same opinion. So
are other Protestants, Stowe, Howes, Hollinshed, and others plainly affirming
it to have been in his time, and Maximian the chief Mouer and Maynetayner
thereof. And to make his way more easy and without resista^ce, he transported
from hence into Gallia to do him service there, both a great number of
Artizans, and an Army of soldiers, so weakening his opposites hear, and
fortifying himself there against his Enemies: he maintained diverse Legions
within the kingdom, and an unmatchable Navy without, and so being now
absolute Commander both of See and Land, he began his long intended most cruel
Persecution in this Nation. Wherein he exceeded the Tyranny of Dioclesian his
Master and Predecessor both in Empire and most profane proceedings against
holy Christians in this kingdom. For if we may believe Eusebius, living in
that time, and saying he will truly Eusebius. Histor. Eccl. lib. 8. cap. 1. 2. 3.
deliver the state of such things therein, he plainly says, that even in the
Eastern Countries and other places, which were undoubtedly under the command
of the Empire, it was the 19. year of his Reign, not two years before the
end thereof, before his Edict of destroying Churches, burning holy Scripturs,
disgracing Christians that were in any place of honor, and depriving them of
liberty, all Bishops and Rulers of Churches were committed to prison, and all
means was used to force them to Sacrifice to the Idols. Agebatur annus
decimus-nonus Imperij Dioclesiani, mensis Dystros, qui Cap. 3.
Romany Martius est, passim Imperialia Edicta proposita sunt, quibus
praecipiebatur, vt Ecclesiae ad pauimentum vsque destruerentur, and sanctae
Scripturae igni consumptae comburerentur: and qui in honor essent, despecti
redderentur: Et in familijs constituti, si propositum Christianismi retinerent,
liberate priuarentur. Et tale quidem erat primum contra nos Edictum: verum in
illis quae post subsequuta sunt, adiectum est, vt omnes vbique locorum
Ecclesiarum Praesides primum vinculis traderentur, deinde quouis conatu ad
sacrificandum cogerentur. But the fury of Maximian in Britain, then questioned
whether under the Empire or no, could not be thus confined, but he began his
Persecution hear long before this time, as we have heard already, and far
exceeded the cruelty contained in those Edicts of Dioclesian. First having
brought the Britans to temporal subjection, or rather Manuscr. Ant. in vita S.
Helenae Io. Capgrauius Catalog. in ead. Chronolog. Ecclesiasticopol. an. 295.
Baron. Annal. an. 304. Spondan. ib. Florent. Wigorn. Chronic. an. 293. Jacob.
Gordon. Chronic. an. 294. Matthew. Westminster. an. 302. 297.
thraldom, the easelyer to bring them to spiritual slavery to his Devils and
Idols, Constantius that lover of Britans and Christians and by his Father in
Law and true Lawful wife a Titler hear, was employed in other places, and
affairs of the Empire, as in France, and Germany in tedious and terrible Wars
there tasting both fortunes, sometimes conquering and overthrowing, otherwiles
conquered and overthrown, even at that time when Persecution against
Christians most raged hear. One of our old Historians sets down
particularly his employments there, the same year that Maximianus came hither
into Britain to persecute the Christians. So likewise do others. Others set
down his Wars there, when our Persecution was almost ended in the year 297.
when he slew 70000. Allmans. And all Antiquities keep him out of Britain
until Persecution hear was ended, as I shall plainly demonstrate. But
Maximian well knowing his cruelty against our Christians would not, nor could
be executed by Britans, that were Christians, and in Office and Authority, he
therefore generally deprived all such of command, and Power, and did putt in
their places his own Pagans or persecuting Instruments, throughout this
kingdom, as we may easily and evidently inform our felues from those few
Antiquities of those times, and affairs that be left unto us. For we find
both in old Manuscripts, and other published Histories, that in Manuscr. Ant.
de Vita S. Albani and S. Amphibali. Capgrau. Catal. in eisdem. Bed. Hist. Eccl.
l. 1. c. 7 Matthew. Westminster. An. 303. Manusc. Antiq. Gallic. c. 28.
all those holy Martyrs of Britain then, whose names be best preserved, as S.
Alban, S. Amphibalus, S. Julius, and S. Aaron, with others, there is not the
least memory of any Christian or friend of Christians, King, Judge or Officer
that was agent in those things against them, but all joined herein with cruel
and persecuting Pagans: and these in diverse and all places, where any holy
Martyr was then persecuted, as at Verolamium, Lichfeild, Caerlegion and others,
and all interiacent places between them.

3. And in the lamentable destruction, and overthrowing of so many Cathedral,
and other Churches, and Monasteries, as were at that time in Britain, and then
utterly overthrown and equaled with the ground, as our Histories pitifully
relate, none others were, or could be Instruments, Officers, and Agents, in so
foul and unchristian work, but wicked and persecuting Pagans. And this was
one of the next and first Tragedyes in this persecution, after the settling of
Pagan Officers, and Magistrates to deface and utterly ruinate, and pull down
all Christians Churches, Religious houses, and Oratoryes, where Christians
lived or assembled to serve God, thinking thereby the sooner, and with less
difficulty to take away all profession and professors of Christian Religion.
This is sufficiently testified by S. Gildas, S. Bid, the British Gildas l. de
excid. Brit. c. 7. Bed. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 6. Ga^frid. Hist. Brit. l. 5. c.
5. Ioa. Lydgate lib. 8. Matthew. Westminster. An. 303. Manusc. Gallic. Antiq. c. 38.
An. 286. Manuscr. Hist. apud Godwin Catal. Bish. Winchest.
History Ihon Lydgate, Matthew the Monk of Westminster, and others, all of
them without exception placing the destruction of Churches vastari Ecclesias:
incendijs Ecclesiarum: destructae sunt Ecclesiae: as the first entrance of our
British Persecution. And some Antiquities there be, as the old written Annals
of the Church of Winchester, which set down this burning and destroying
Churches, and martyring the holy Priests of them, long time before the
Martyrdom of S. Alban, commonly called our first Martyr in those days. A
Protestant Bishop thus relates the Testimony of one Antiquity. The Church of
Winchester was hallowed and decicated October 29. 189. by Faganus and Damianus
Bishops. About the space of 100. years, the Church of Christ had the^ peace in
this La^d, until the reign of Dioclesia^, who endeavoring to root out
Christian Religion, not only killed the professors of the same, but pulled
down all Churches, and Temples, any where consecrated unto the exercise
thereof. Amongst the rest, this of Winchester at that time went to wrake, the
building thereof being ruinated and made even with the ground, and the Monks,
and all the Officers belonging unto it, either slain, or enforced to fly. This
happened in the year of Christ 289. An other Manuscript of that ancient
Church which begins: Paganitas in Britannia, sets down this Manuscr.
Antiq. Eccl. W^nton.
desolatio^ of Churches, and Monasteries hear 6. years before the Martyrdom
of S. Alban, particularly remembering them both, with their several times. And
says as the other does, that there were 100. years between the building of
these Churches and endowing them by King Lucius, and the sacking and destroying
of them in this Persecution, and reports the martyring of their holy Priests
the^: and concerning that Church of Winchester, it relates, how the Monks
thereof after an hundred years of their placing there in King Lucius time,
were now cruelly putt to death, Durauit Christianitas in Britannia a primo anno
Lucij Regis primi Britannoru^ Christiani centum annis, and tam diu Monachi Deo
seruientes praedictum vetus caenobium quiet inhabitabant. Interfecti sunt
Monachi in Ventana Ecclesia destructa a Ministris Dioclesiani persecutoris Anno
Imperij su^ secundo, Long by all accounts, before the Martyrdom of S. Alban.
And it is Anonymus Brit. Script. Vitae S. Albani. Manusc. Antiqu^t. in Vita
eius. Capgr. Catal. in Eod. and alij.
evident by the words themselves of S. Alban to S. Amphibalus, related by the
old Writer of S. Alban his life, Capgraue, and diverse other Authors, that
there had been great persecution of Christians hear in Britain before S.
Alban was a Christian, and before his harboring of S. Amphibalus. For at their
meeting, he makes it a wonder how S. Amphibalus a Christian could pass, and
come through so many persecuting Pagans to his house at Verolamium. Quomodo cum
sis homo Christianus per gentilium fines transitum habere, and ad vrbem
illaesus peruenire potuisci: And S. Amphibalus did asscribe his preservation to
the especial protection of Christ, among so many dangers. Dicit ei Amphibalus,
Dominus meus Jesus Chris^us filius Dei viui securum inter discrimina me
custodiuit. This is further evident in that History, wherein we find, that S.
Alban would not suffer S. Amphibalus at any time, during their being together,
to go forth of his house, but in the night time; And when they were to part
one* from the other, would not permit S. Amphibalus to go forth, but in the
night time he himself accompanying and guyding him, and giving him his own
Coat to wear, which had a Privilege and immunitie by the fashion thereof,
and dignity of the Owner from all persecutours. Dans ei chlamydem auro textam
qua tutior ab hostibus redderetur. Vestis enim huiusmodi Capgr. and alij sup^.
Mat. West. 3^3.
tantae tunc temporis apud omnes dignitatis, tantaeque fuit reuerentiae, vt
illa indutus, hostium Cuneos penetraret illaesus. And it is evident by S. Bid,
and others, that these persecutours Edicts were published, prosecuted and
executed in Britain, before this time when S. Alban was still a Pagan. Albanus
Paganus adhuc, Bed. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 7. Matthew. Westminster. An. 303. Martyr.
Romans die 22. Iunij. Bed. V^ua^d. and Ado eod. die. Capg^au. and alij sup. in S.
Albano.
cum perfidorum Principum mandata aduersum Christianos saeuirent, Clericum
quendam persecutores fugientem hospitio recepit. And S. Amphibalus was then
actually and particularly persecuted. And S. Alban himself when at the first
S. Amphibalus preached Christ unto him, is witness that if others of that
City should know it, they would presently have putt him to cruel death for
professing Christ. Si noscent viri huius ciuitatis te talia locutum fuisse de
Christo sine mora pessima morte te occiderent. This is evident, both by the
Pagan Magistrates, immediate and present prosecution after S. Amphibalus to putt
him to death, and their merciless, and most cruel martyring of S. Alban for
no other cause, then receiving and concealing a Christian Priest, and he
himself professing the same Religion. This is made manifest by the Soldier,
which, miraculously converted by S. Alban his Martyrdom, and confessing
Christ, was presently for the same cause putt to death, and baptized with his
own blood in place of Baptism with water. These and such Arguments and
Authorities do inuincibly prove unto us, that this Persecution against the
Christians in Britain was raised, and by public Edicts, and Authority, or
power of the Tyrant Maximian most barbarously prosecuted some years before the
Martyrdom of S. Alban, and many Martyrs hear, as the Monks and Priests of
Winchester, and others in so many Churches, and Monasteries, at the same time,
being in the same state destroyed, and left desolate, did gloriously obtain
the Crown of Martyrdom before S. Alban, whose happy names and memoryes being
by Iniquitities of times lost upon earth, are to be found in heaven, where
there eternal glory is.

4. Yet I am far from detracting any honor from S. Alban, which Antiquity
does, or can give unto him. I do with humble reverence allow him his Title of
our Protomartyr, Primus, Principalis; Praecipuus, first, chief, or principal
In What sense S. Alban is commonly termed the first Martyr or Protomartyr in
Britain.
Martyr, whether we will follow the Greek, Latyne, or our English phrase, if
we respect his temporal worthiness, his strange Conversion, his admirable
charity, so soon Learned in Christian Religion, to rescue the persecuted and
deliver them, to give his own life, to redeem an other, being but a Neophite
to be so constant in that most greuious Persecution, and with such wonderful
patience, and constancy to endure those torments he did, and be so honorable
for Miracles, it is his deserved due, so to be styled: and prioritie of time
would be but a little honor to him. I have proved before we had diverse Martyrs
before this Age, and in this Persecution we did not want those that suffered
Martyrdom before him: yet if we speak of prioritie in time of Martyrs, whose
names are kept in Histories, this also is his own in that sense in this
Persecution: for he is particularly the first that is registered by name in our
Annals, to have suffered Martyrdom in this time. For S. Amphibalus, S. Julius
and S. Aaron, and what other soever certainly known and recorded to have been
Martyred in this raging tempest of Persecution, obtained their triumph, and
glory of Martyrdom after him. And in this sense and meaning which I have
expressed, does our most ancient Antiquary call S. Alban, the first or chief
Martyr hear reckoning him for his exceeding charity, constancy, Miracles and
other worthiness in the first place before the rest: Quorum Gildas l. de excid.
Brit. cap. 8.
prior: meaning S. Alban first named in those respects. Otherwise both he, S.
Bid, the British History, Matthew of Westminster and others only say that
S. Alban suffered Martyrdom among others hear in that Persecution, but none
of them affirms he was the first in time which then suffered. Britanniam
Gildas supr. Bed. l. 1. Hist. cap. 6. 7. Galfr. Monum. l. 5. Hist. c. 5. Matt.
Westminster. an. 303.
cum plurima confessionis Deo deuotae gloria sublimauit, in ea passus est
Sanctus Albanus. Inter caeteros vtriusque sexus summa magnanimitate in Acie
Christi perstantes, passus est Albanus. And S. Bid makes it plain, that the
Persecution especially about Verolamium, did rather end soon after S. Alba^
his death, then begin with him, bringing in the Judge to be so much moved with
the Miracles wrought at S. Albans death, that he caused the Persecution to
cease, Tunc Iudex t^^ta Miraculorum caelestium nouitate perculsus, cessari mox
a Persecutione Bed. sup. cap. 7.
praecepit. And the old Writer of S. Alban his life affirms, he was
imprisoned six months between his apprehension and death, in which space
that raging Persecution made many Martyrs hear. And the same Author, diverse
Manuscripts, and Capgraue testify, the Edicts against Christians were long
time published, and received for Laws, when S. Alban was putt to death, and
produce him thus to prove as much, when the persecutors delayed to proceed to
Judgment against him. Quid sustinetis? Si non nostis far sententiam, Anonym.
Script. Vit. S. Albani Manuscr. in eius Vita and Capgra. in eod.
Leges vestras consulite: ciuitatis vestrae statuta requirite: ipsa vobis
insinuent quid agere debeatis. Quid moras patimini? sciatis vniuersi deorum
vestrorum me grauem existere inimicum. Ve Idolis, and ve cultoribus eorum. And
then immediately follows that so soon as they heard him thus renownce their
Idols, and profess himself a Christian, they pronownced sentence of death
against him, His auditis vnanimi consensu in sanctu^ virum mortis tulere
sententiam. And Manuscr. antiq. and Capgrau. in Vita S. Amphibali. Aliud
Manuscr. Antiq. an. 286. Girald. Cambr. Itiner. Cambr. l. 1. c. 5.
Idolatry is there termed the Law of the Country: cultura Deorum Lex patria.
An other old Manuscript says, Maximian did almost destroy all Christianity
in Britain, and sets down S. Albans Martyrdom afterward, as Capgraue and
others in the year 286. Maximianus omnem fere destruxit Christianitatem in
Britannia, qui interfecit and martyrizauit Sanctum Albanum anno Incarnationis
Domini 286. And if we insist upon the word Protomartyr, usually given to S.
Alban: Giraldus Cambrensis gives it also to S. Aaron, and S. Julius. Duo
nobiles Maioris Britanniae Protomartyres Julius and Aaron: meaning by it chief
Martyrs.

THE XVI. CHAPTER.
THE WONDERFVLL EXCESS, AND Extremity of this Persecution of the Christians
in Britain, in general, and the most greuious torments, miseries, and
afflictions they endured, with their renowned sanctity, constancy, and
patience.

1. THOSE Histories and Antiquities which be left unto us of those times, being
so sparing in relating the particulars of that Persecution, that in probable
judgment where they remember only the name of one Martyr, they omit a
thousand and more that suffered in that Tyrannical time, and so in other
particular afflictions and calamities our holy Christians then suffered: It
will be the easiest and redyest way for us to come to some proportionable
estimate and apprehension of those miseries and persecutions, if together with
the malice of the most powerable Tyrant, and his Inferior Instruments, raging
9. years in those cruel proceedings, we breifely recall to mind that
Illustrious glory of Christ's Church in Britain wherein King Lucius left it,
not one hundred of years before, as I have already delivered, and compare it
with that lamentable state and condition, which by our Antiquities, it fell
into, by this most pitiful desolation. We remember King Lucius left unto us 3.
Archiepiscopall Sees and Churches, with 28. Episcopal, besides other inferior
^hur^hes not to be nu^bred, they were all ritchly endowed, and provided for
with renowned Archbishops, Bishops and holy Priests and other Clergy me^. We
had our Christian Universities, and Schools, Monasteries for our Religious me^
and women, Britain was then so Christian in the Inhabitants thereof from the
King to the meanest, that scarcely a Pagan was to be found. Christ's Law and
the holy Scripturs, with as full and common renuntiation of Paganism, were
hear generally received by public Authority. The faith of Christ being thus
publikly received did continue with the Britans, as S. Bid is witness,
inuiolated, and perfect in quiet peace until these times of Dioclesian.
Susceptam (...). ^^cl. Hist. l. 1. c. 4. Galf^. Mon. Hist. Reg. Briton. l. 5.
c. 5. G^ld. l. de excid. c 7. Flore^t. Wigorn. Chron. an. 184.
fidem Britanni vsque in tempora Dioclesiani Principis inuiolatam, integramque
quieta in pace seruabant. So says our British History: Christianitas a
Tempore Regis Lucy integra and intemerata permanserat. So has S. Gildas, only
excepting that some kept it not so well and perfectly as others did. Praecepta
Christi ab Incolis suscepta, apud quosdam integre, and alios minus vsque ad
persecutionem Dioclesiani Tyranni nouennem permansere. Flore^tius Wigorniensis
has the very same words with S. Bid. So likewise has Henry of Huntington:
that the Britans kept sound and inuiolate in quiet peace the faith of Christ
which they received Hen^ic. Huntin. H^st* l. 1. in Marco A^^^nino. Ve^^.
in the time of King Lucius, until the Persecution of Dioclesian: susceptamque
fidem Brita^ni vsque in tempora Dioclesiani Principis inuiolatam integramque
quieta pace seruabant. Our Protestant Antiquaries generally consent herein,
with these Antiquites, so do our later Catholic Historians.

2. Now let us appeal to the same, our most ancient and worthy Antiquaries,
to relate unto us, some of the manifold miseries, and afflictions the
Christians of this kingdom suffered in that Persecution. S. Gildas says:
subuersae sunt Gild. l. de excid. cap. 7.
Ecclesiae, and cunctae sacrae scripturae, quae inueniri potuerunt in plateis
exustae, and electi sacerdotes gregis Domini cum innocentibus ouibus trucidati:
ita vt ne vestigium quidem, si fieri potuisset, in nonnullis Prouinciae locis
Christianae Religionis appareret. Diuersis crutiatibus torti sunt, and inaudita
membrorum discerptione lacerati, vt absque cunctamine gloriosi in egregijs
Jerusalem veluti Portis Martyrij sui trophaea defigerent. Qui superfuerant
siluis ac desertis, abditisque speluncis se occultauere: The Churches were
overthrown, all the holy scripturs that could be found, were burned in the
streets, the chosen Priests of the flock of our Lord were slain with their
innocent sheep, and the Persecution was so violent, that if the persecutors
could have effected it, in diverse places of the Province no sign or token of
Christian Religion had been left. The Christians hear were tortured with
diverse Torments, and torn in pieces with such rending their nembers a soonder,
as was never heard of. That the glorious Martyrs might presently set up the
trophies of their Martyrdom in renowned gates of Jerusalem. They which were
left alive hidd themselves in woods; deserts, and secrett caves, so to save
their lives, expeactntes sibi animarum tutamina. Galfridus speaks in the same
manner: so likewise does S. Bid, both expressing Galfr. Monum. Hist. l. 5. c.
5. Bed. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 7. 8.
the wonderful Torments, our Christian Martyrs hear endured, and how they
which escaped death, were forced to hide themselves in woods, wildernesses, and
secrett caves in the earth. Diuersis cruciatibus torti, and inaudita membrorum
discerptione lacerati, animas ad supernae ciuitatis gaudia perfecto agone
miserunt. Fideles Christi se tempore discriminis siluis ac desertis, abditis ac
speluncis se occultauerunt. Virunnius says, the Malice of Maximianus Herculius
Virun. l. 5. Hist.
was so enraged in this Persecution in Britain, that he did his uttermost
utterly to blott out the name of God in it, Volebat enim nomen Dei delere.
Henry Henr. Hunting. Hist. l. 1. in D^oclesiano and Her. Maximiano.
of Huntington has the same words with S. Gildas, and S. Bid, and adds that
the persecution was very often in that extremity of Torments, Haec persecutio
crebra erat. So has the old Manuscript, and Capgraue in the life of S. Alban,
both of them setting down both the generality and extremity of that
Persecution hear, as our Saints and other Antiquaries have done. So likewise
does the Author of the old Manuscript, Abbreuiatio Chronicorum, and the
Manuscript History of Rumsey: The later says, the Britans kept their
Christianity, Annal. Manuscr. de Rumsey pr. Insula ista.
which they received in the days of King Lucius, and Pope Eleutherius,
unspotted very many years. Britones Christianitatem quam temporibus Lucij
Regis eorum and Papae Eleutherij receperant, immaculatam annos perplurimos
obseruabant: Which very many years must needs extend to this persecution. The
former says, that from the first planting of Christian Religion hear, in
Britain it remained quiet without any troble: But in the time of Dioclesian
Churches were overthrown, holy scripturs burned openly in the markets, and the
Priests with the Abbreu. Chron. Manuscr. Ann. 280. in Dioclesiano.
Christians under them putt to death: hucusque sine perturbatione quicuit in
Britannia Christiana Religio. Sed Dioclesiani tempore subuersae sunt Ecclesiae,
scripturae sacrae medijs foris exustae, Sacerdotes cum fidelibus sibi subditis
trucida^i. The old French Manuscript cited before, says, that Christian
Religion which from the time of Pope Eleutherius and King Lucius had continued
untouched, and pure in the Manuscr. Hist. Gallic. c. 28. in Diocle^. and
Maximian. an. 286.
Land of Britain, was almost now extinguished there in this Persecution.
There by the commandment of Maximian Herculius the Monasteries were destroyed,
all holy Scripturs burned that could be found, and the Noble Prelates with
their subjects most cruelly tormented in all their members and whole bodies and
putt to death. This is the time, of which our old Poet is most properly to be
understood, saying that the holy Christians of Britain lived in the out
Islands, willdernesses, and Anonymus apud Bal. and Theater of great Brit. l. 6.
c. 9.
craggy places especially about Wales, and Cornwaile.

Britannica tellus patribus fuit inclita sanctis,
Qui Neptunicolum campos and Cambrica rura,
Corineasque casas, loca desolata colebant.
Of which manner of life of many renowned Christians, an other Christian Poet
thus speaks in this time.

Tunc plerique Patres sancti, cum tale viderent
Excidium, fugere vrbes, and more ferarum
Per deserta vagi, caecis latuer^ cauernis.
Where we see nothing left, for their either dwelling, or food, but such as
wild beasts enjoyed as well as they, all human habitation, diet, and sustenance
with clothing, but such as they first fledd away in, with time consumed, taken
from them, they thus left naked to nature, to dwell in dark Dens, and Caves,
and feed upon wild roots, leaves, hipps, hawes, nutts, crabbs, and such like
fruits, as the Deserts, and little barren desolate Islands brings forth. One of
these happy receptacles and refuges then for our holy persecuted Christians
seems to have been the little Island beyond Northwales, toward Ireland out of
the walk of the Pagan Persecutours, named by the Britans Enhli, and by the
Saxons, and English, Berdesey, where in the time of Giraldus Cambrensis there
lived most Religeous people, called Culdeis as such persecuted Christians were
then named. Iacet autem extra Lhyn Insula modica quam Girald. Cambr. Itiner.
Cambr. l. 2. c. 6.
Monachi inhabitant religiosissimi, quos Caelibes vel Colideos vocant. Haec
Insula Enhli Cambrice vocatur and lingua Saxonica Berdesey. Et in ea, vt fertur
infinita Sanctorum sepulta sunt corpora. Ibique iacere testantur corpus beati
Danielis Banchorensis Episcopi. In this Island as the Tradition is, are buried
infinite bodies of Saints: And as they testify, the body of S. Daniel Bishop
of Bangor lies there. By the merits of those Saints this Island has this
miraculous prerogative, that in it the oldest do soonest die, because diseases
are there most seldom, and seldom or never any man there dies, except worn
away with long old Age. Haec autem Insula ex miraculo ex Sanctorum meritis, hoc
mirandum habet, quod in ea seniores praemoriuntur, quia morbi in ea rarissimi:
and raro vel nunquam hic nusquam moritur, nisi longa senectute confectus.

3. These so ancient miraculous privileges, and sanctity of that holy Island,
Hector Boeth. Scotor. Hist. l. 6. Hollinsh. and Georg. Buchan. in Fincom.
Harris. descr. of Brit. c. 10. David Powel Annot. in Geral. Cambr. Itiner.
Camb. l. 2. ca. 6. Capgr. in S. Dubritio.
the Eremits termed Culdeis, a denomination appropriate in Histories to the
Religeous of this Nation in Dioclesian his Persecution, and the devotion that
holy Bishop had to be buried there, long time before the slaughter of the
Monks of Bangor, when diverse Christians fledd thither, as some write, give
testimony sufficient to hold, ^t was a Refuge and receptacle for our holy
Christians in the Persecution of Dioclesian, which is more plain by the old
British Antiquities affirming, that many thousand Martyrs and Confessors
bodies lay there. Asserunt Antiquae Britonum Historiae multa Sanctorum Martyrum
and Confessorum millia in illa Insula nomine Enhly sepulturam habuisse.
Therefore these old Martyrs must needs be in that only famous time of
Martyrdom hear under Dioclesian, no other such to be found in Histories,
Saint Dubritius also with many others lived and died there. The miseries and
wants such numbers endured there, may be coniectured by the the streitnes of
the I Will, doubtful whether it has one Parish Church or no. So Harrison supr.
c. 10.
I say of S. Lides Island, where a Church is dedicated to him. So of I Will Bree,
corruptly Hilbery, renowned for Pilgrimadges thither in ancient times. So
Harrison supr. c. eod. Manusc. antiq. and Capgr. in Vita S. Kebij.
of Englsuash or holy I Will so named of the Brita^s, as a Protestant Antiquarie
confesses of the great number of holy Saints, whose bodies are buried there,
and was also called Cairkyby of Kyby a Monk that dwelled there, as he
confesses. This S. Kebius was consecrated Bishop by S. Hilary, and lived there
some time, moved by the ancient holiness of that place. So of the Isles of S.
Barri, and S. Dunwen, old British Saints, giving names unto them by their
living there. So of the Hebrides or Euboniae Isles 43. in number. All which
belonged William Harrison. descript. sup. c. 10. Hect. Boet. Hist. lib. 6.
Hollinsh. Histor. of Scotl. in Fincomarke. Bal. cent. 1. in Amphibalo. Hect.
Boeth. Hist. l. 6. Ho^^^ns. Hist. of Scotl. in Crathl. Georg. Buchan. Rege. 35.
to the Jurisdiction of the Bishop in Man at the first, as a Protestant
confesses, the first there being S. Amphibalus in this time. And so of other
out Islands, upon the Coaste of this kingdom divided from Scotland (of which
Isles hereafter) then desolate, gave also such entertaynment to those our Saints
in that time, whose particular memory is not so well preserved. And as our
Scottish Historians write, many of them fledd into the Country, now called
Scotland, Magnus piorum numerus: No small number of the faithful among the
Britans fledd unto the Scots and Picts to avoid Persecution. Where, as a
Protestant Antiquary with others confesses, they being many of them, renowned
both for learning and piety lived in poor Cells, in such austeritie and
holiness of life, that thereupon they were honored with the name of the
worshippers of God, Culdeis, that name being given unto them, and after their
deaths their Cells changed and dedicated into Churches. Multi ex Britonibus
Christiani saeuitiam Dioclesiani timentes ad Scotos confugerunt: e quibus
complures, doctrina, and vitae integritate clari, in Scotia substiterunt,
vitamque solitariam, tanta sanctitatis opinione, apud omnes vixerunt, vt vita
functorum cellae in templa commutarentur, ex eoque consuetudo mansit apud
posteros, vt prisci Scoti templa cellas vocent. Hoc genus Monachorum Culdeos
appellabant. And for those that lived still in that part of Britain, where the
Romans then reigned, they write as our own Historians have done before.
Euagata est rabies illa, non Hector Boeth. Scotor. Hist. l. 6. fol. 100.
modo ab orient in Occidentem, sed etiam per alterum Orbem Britanniam, vnde
Christiana pietas truculentis and inhumanis eius ingenij adinuentis plagis
concussa, immani tortorum vesania, ac Persecutionis diuturnitate, tota ferme
est eiecta: pijs viris ac Religiosis persecutionum metu in Eremos ac ferarum
lustra concedentibus, vbi expertes iniuriarum vere Monasticam sanctissimamque
exegerunt vitam. Where we learn that our holy Christians then were put to such
miseries, that flying into the woods, and wildernesses they did rather chose to
live Hungry and naked in the Dens of devouring wolves, hoping to find more
mercy among sauadge ravening beasts, then the persecuting Pagans almost
extinguishing Christian Religion hear with their cruelty. Which may most
truly be affirmed, for, to omit particularities to their place, the
unspeakable malice of the Persecutours was so enraged, that without all color
or pretense of iuridicall proceedings, they most tyrannically Martyred the holy
Christians, that were to be found even by a thousand, and thousand at a time,
in distinct times and places, as we read in the History of one only blessed
Martyr S. Amphibalus 2000. at two several murtherings. So we must apprehend of
other times and places, Manuscr. Antiq. in Vita S. Amphib^^^. ^apgr. Catal. in
eod.
otherwise so great and general a desolation in so lardge a Christian
kingdom could not have been effected in 9. years Persecution. The Antiqua^ies
of Cambridge tell us, how among other desolations in this time by Maximian
hear, their University and City was burned, as also all Churches were at
that time. Inter caeteras praeclara illa vrbs, Philosophiae parens Cantabrigia,
palatijs Io. Caius Hist. Cantabrig. p. 24.
aedificijsque pulcherrima ab Herculio Maximiano, homine impio and sanguinario
Dioclesiani Exercitus Principe, and Imperij socio exustaest, vnaque omnia
templa euersa, omnes Sacrosanctae Scripturae, and bonarum Artium libri, qui
occurrebant public in foro concremati. And he that was then hear King at the
devotion of ^^cobus Genue^. io Vita S. Albani and Amphibali. Anglic. Antiq.
sc^iptor. ibid.
the Romans, Asclepiodotus, whom the Italian Writer, Iacobus Bishop of Genua,
and his old Translatour into English hear, in the life of S. Alban, and S.
Amphibalus call Askepodot, joined in this Persecution with Dioclesian, and
Maximinian, and gave sentence and Judgment against them, and putt them, and
diverse thowsands of Christians then to death, extending his Rge and malice
against the Christians in all places he could, as these and others witness:
Yet others there be that speak otherwise, and better of King Asclepiodotus, as
I shall relate hereafter.

THE XVII. CHAPTER.
OF DIVERSE HOLY MARTYRS, MOST CRVELLY putt to death at Winchester, Caerlegion,
and other places in Britain, long before the Martyrdom of S. Alban, with
their great honor and renown.

1. THE first Persecution of Christians hear in Britain, which I Annal.
Manuscr. Eccles. Winton.
find in particular, was that which I have before remembered, out of the
Antiquities of Winchester, in which the holy sacred Priests of the Cathedral
Church being then destroyed, were putt to death. Interfecti sunt Monachi in
Ventana Ecclesia destructa, The Martyrdom of the Monks of Winchester by the
Annals of that Church, was diverse years before S. Albanus.
which by the computation of those Annals was 7. or 8. years before the
Martyrdom of S. Alban: and yet the same Antiquities do sufficiently
insinuate, that this Persecution of Dioclesian began in Britain in the year
before their Martyrdom. Some before refer the Martyrdom of S. Augulus,
Archbishop of our old Augusta London to this time, but not finding that name
among the Archbishops of that place, which were since the Conversion Much
persecution and Martyrdom was in Londen, before this.
under King Lucius in any History, and for other reasons before mentioned, I
have rather made him far more ancient. Yet it is apparent enough, that
London tasted of this Persecution, even in the first arising thereof; for we
read, that in the time of Alectus, to whom Asclepiodotus succeeded, Paganis
Galfrid. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 5. c. 4. Virun. l. 5. Hist. Harding Chron. c. 56.
Mat. West. An. 294. Manuscr. Antiq. in Vit. S. Albani. Jacob. Genuen. and
Capgrau. in ^od.
me was publikly professed there, which could not easily be done without great
Persecution of Christians, especially the sacred Priests of the Arehiepiscopall
See in that City. And in the Town of Verolamium, where S. Alban was Martyred,
it was a strange thing at the time of his death to hear of Christianity, and
they which were converted by his miraculous death, had never been Christians
before, but were unbaptized, as that History relates. This Persecution being
general to all Churches, and places, even in the beginning thereof, came to
the City of Caerlegion, where the Church being destroyed, and the School
founded by King Lucius overthrown, the holy Priests and other Christians there
had their part therein.

2. Among others S. Julius and S. Aaron were then cruelly Martyred in that
City, being by all Citizens and Inhabitants there, Aaron and Julius Legionum
Gild. l. de excid. c. 7. Bed. Hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 7. Galfrid. Mon. l. 5. c.
5. Girald. Cambr. Itin. Cambr. l. 1. c. 5. Henric. Hunting. Hist. l. 1. in
Diocletian. Capgrau. Catal. in S. Alban. Io. Bal. Praef. in l. de Script. and
cent. 1. in Amphibalo. David Powell. Annot. in c. 4. Girarld. Cambr. descr.
Cambriae.
vrhis ciues, most cruelly then torn in pieces with Torments never heard of
before, passi sunt, inaudita membrorum disceptione, in testimonium Dei excelsi.
Others say, it is evident in Histories that they were learned me^, brought up
in the College or School there founded by King Lucius; thus write two of our
chiefest Protestant Antiquaries: Ex Sanctorum Historijs constat Amphibalum,
Aaronem, and Iulium sanctissimos Dei Martyrs caelestem Christi doctrinam apud
vrbem Legionum inter litteras tradidisse. Ex nobili Gymnasio vrbis Legionum
viri multi summa pietatis and doctrinae laud conspicui prodierunt, vt
Amphibalus, Julius, Aaron. By which Authorities, and testimonies, joining these
holy Martyrs for education, School, learning, preaching and professing Christ,
with that most renowned Pr^ist and Bishop S. Amphibalus, they incline to hold,
and teach, that they also were Clergy men. And if we remember what I have said
before, how S. Alban was not our Protomartyr in respect of time but otherwise,
and this Persecution at Caerlegion, when these holy Martyrs were putt to death,
was at the destruction of the Cathedral Church there, being at the same time,
as the like desolation was at Winchester, long before S. The old school of
Caerlegio^ brought forth many glorious Martyrs in this time.
Alban his Martyrdom, I must needs say the same of these Saints, as the Annals
of Winchester do of their Martyrs. And this the rather because our Antiquaries
before have told us, that S. Amphibalus that converted S. Alban, was borne,
bredd, instructed in learning, and remained at Caerlegion, and being there in
all probable judgment, when these trobles began there, was, as our British
History witnesses, pursued and in present danger to be apprehended by the
Persecutours, when S. Alban gave him first entertaynment, and succor, and
adds plainly, that when S. Amphibalus thus fledd from Caerlegion, S. Julius,
and S. Aaron, were, absque cunctamine, presently Martyred there, S. Julius and
S. Aaron martyred at Caerlegion with many others before S. Alban. Galfr. Mon.
Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 5.
having their members so torn in pieces, as the like had not been heard of
before. Inter caeteros vtriusque sexus, summa Magnanimitate in acie Christi
perstantes, passus est Albanus Verolamius, Julius quoque and Aaron vrbis
Legionum ciues: quorum Albanus charitatis gratia feruens, confessorem suum
Amphibalum a Persecutoribus insectatum, and iam iam comprehendendum in domo sua
occuluit. Caeteri vero duo inaudita membrorum discerptione lacerati ad egregias
portas Jerusalem absque cunctamine cum Martirij trophaeo conuolauerunt. The
very same testimony Gildas l. de excid. c. 8.
is given hereof by S. Gildas, both for S. Amphibalus then flying the
Persecutours, and the Martyrdom of these Saints at that time, S. Bid also is
witness that S. Alban entertained S. Amphibalus flying the Persecutours:
Clericum quendam Persecu^ores fugientem hospitio recepit: And that S. Aaron and
S. Julius were martyred at that time: Passi sunt ea tempestate Aaron and Julius
Bed. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 7. Matthew. Westminster. an. 303. Girald. Cambr. Itiner.
Cambr. l. 1. c. 5. Gildas excid. B^^t. c. 8.
Legionum vrbis ciues. The like have others. Therefore Giraldus Cambrensis does
worthily call them, our two Noble Protomartyrs in this time, only in dignity
second and next to S. Alban and Amphibalus, but in time first and before them
Duo nobiles, and post Albanum and Amphibalum praecipui Britanniae Maioris
Protomartyres. These our two Protomartyrs are wonderfully commended in our
Histories. S. Gildas says of them, that they stood out in the Army of Christ
with greatest magnanimity: summa magnanimitate in acie Christi perstantes
dico. Giraldus Cambrensis is witness, that among the Martyrs of that time, they
were the chiefest next to S. Alban and S. Amphibalus. Post Albanum and
Amphibalum praecipui Martyrio coronati Julius and Aaron. How Girald. supr.
Itiner. Cambr. l. 1. c. 5.
they were honored of the holy Catholic Christians of that time with Churches
dedicated unto them, Pilgrimages to the places of their Martyrdom, and they
both there, and in other places honored, inuocated and The Martyrs then
honored with prayers, and Pilgrimages to them.
prayed unto, presently upon the ceasing of the Persecution, I will declare
among other memories of that time, in their place in the beginning of the next
Age.

3. Now it will suffice to conclude with that their Title of glory and renown,
Girald. Cambr. supr.
which the ancient and learned Bishop of their Nation before has given them,
as their due and honor to the place of their triumphant death: Iacent hic duo
Nobiles Britanniae Maioris Protomartyres, and ibidem Martyrio coronati Julius
and Aaron. Hear lie at Caerlegion the two Noble Protomartyrs of great
Britain, and crowned with Martyrdom there Julius and Aaron. This Title to be
the first Martyrs of Britain in that most terrible Persecution, and with such
exceeding magnanimity, and Christian constancy, as has been before remembered,
in enduring Torments never until then heard of, without any example going
before them, but giving themselves the first example hear of so wonderful
patience, love of Christ, and Heroical true fortitude to so many thowsands,
which by their singular example with invincible couradge imitated them therein,
is the greatest honor we can yield to such blessed Saints one earth. Their
Festiuitie is celebrated by the old Roman Martyrologe upon the first day of
July. On which day as Baronius plainly writes, many Martyr. Romans die 1. Iulij.
others suffered Martyrdom with them. Julius and Aaron Martyrs cum alijs
plurimis in Britannia sub Dioclesiano primo die Iulij. So likewise affirms a
Caesar Baron. in Indice Nominu^ Sanctorum in Iulio and Aarone. Author of Engl.
Martyr. 1. Iul.
late English Wtiter: And the Roman Martyrologe, which Baronius glosseth, may
well carry that construction for setting down for a certain truth, that these
two holy Martyrs were putt to death in Britain upon the first day of July:
Primo die Iulij in Britannia Sanctorum Martyrum Iulij and Aaron qui in
persecutione Dioclesiani passi sunt: it presently adds: Quo tempore ibidem,
quamplurimi diuersis crutiatibus torti and saeuissime lacerati ad supernae
ciuit atis gaudia consummato agone peruenerunt. At the same time, in the same
place, very many tortured with diverse torments, and most cruelly torn, having
ended their combat, came to the Joys of heaven. And S. Bid says, that ea
tempestate, Martyrol. To. 1. die Iulij. Bed. l. 1. Hist. c. 7. Henr. Hunting.
Hist. l. 1. in Diocles. Matt. West. an. 303. Io. Capgr. in S. Albano. and alij.
Girald. Ca^bren. Itiner. Camb. l. 1. cap. 5. Ranulph. Higed. l. 1. c. 48.
David. Powel. Annot. in Girald. supr. Harrison Descript. of Brit. c. 13. Humfr.
Lhuyd. Br^uiar. Britan. Et Tho. Twyne ib. f. 82. The glory of Caerleg^^n^ur
Archie^isc^^all see before this time.
at that time when S. Aaron and S. Julius were Martyred, diverse others both men
and women were putt to death. Alijque vtriusque sexus passi sunt ea tempestate.
So has Henry of Huntington: passi sunt co tempore Aaron and Julius alij quo
que plures vtriusque sexus. So have others. And we cannot probably think, that
those raging Persecutours which in places where there were not in any degree so
many Christians as in this renowned City an Archiepiscopall See and Christian
University putt them to death by thowsands, sent these hear by cruel
Martyrdom to heaven alone. These holy Martyrs by all Antiquities suffered
Martyrdom at Caerlegion; and both Giral^us Cambrensis, Ranulphus Higeden
writing at Westchester, as also our Protestant Antiquaries of the same Country
plainly say it was at Caerlegion, in Monmouthshire, which was the
Archiepiscopall City and School, distinguishing it from Westchester, by some
called Caerlegion also. I will only cite one thus Englished to my hand by a
Protestant Historian: In this Region Monmouthshire, is situated the most
ancient, and Noble City of Legions, which our Countrymen call Caerleon are
Wish, that is to say the City of Legions upon Vsk, for difference sake,
between it, and the other which is builded in Northwales, upon the River Dee.
Of whom Giraldus writes thus: The same was an ancient, and noble Town, the
tokens whereof remain as yet, an huge Palace, a Giantlike Tower, goodly
Bathes, and hotehouses, Relics of Churches, and places like Theaters,
compassed with beautiful walls, ^artly yet standing. Also buildings vnde^ the
ground, Conducts, secre^^e passages* and Vaultes under the earth, framed by
wonderful workmanship. Th^^^ ^^th two Martyrs Julius and Aaron which had
Churches dedicate^ (...). The like and more plainly have many others, ancient
and late, Catholics and Protestants. Therefore that Protestant Bishop which
singularly says, it was at Chester, apud vrbem Legionum, Cestriam nun
vocatam, is much deceived in this matter. Io. B^l. Pr^fat. in l. de Scriptor.


THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
HOW SAINT AMPHIBALVS A BRITISH Bishop, and many holy and learned Priests of
the Britans in this Persecution went to the Scots and Picts, were reverently
received of them, and preached, lived and continued there in great Sanctity,
and left great Succession of such, there after them.

1. UPON this Persecution, and Martyrdom of these holy Saints, Gildas l. de
excid. c. 8.
and others at that time, as S. Gildas with others writes, they which escaped
death hidd themselves in Woods, Deserts, Dens, and fledd into Islands, and to
the Scots for refuge. Qui superfuerant Hector Boeth. Hist. Scotor. l. 6. f.
102. Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scot. l. 4. in Rege 33. Hollinsh. Hist. of Scotland.
in Crathlint and Fincomarke.
siluis ac desertis, abditisque spelnncis se occult a^ere. Our Scottish
Historians say, a great number of our British Christians to avoid the
cruelty of the Persecutours, fledd to the Scots and Picts. Magnus piorum
numerus persequentium saeuitiam declinare cupiens, ad Scotos and Pictos
concessit. They have preserved the particular names of diverse of them, whom
they recompt among the most renowned learned men of that Age, such were
Amphibalus a Bishop, Modocus, Priscus, Calanus, Ferranus, Ambianus, and
Carnocus, worshippers of God, called in the old Scottish languadge, Culdeis,
which by their preaching taught the Religion of Christ with many labors
throughout the Scots Countries. There were then very many more, but these the
chiefest of them whose names came to posterity. Inter Nostrates eadem fuere
tempestate, sacra doctrina pollentes Ampbibalus Amistes, Modocus, Priscus,
Calanus, Ferranus, Ambianus, and Caroncus Dei cultores, Culdei prisca nostra
vulgari lingua dicti, Christi Seruatoris doctrinam, omnes per Scotorum Regiones
concionando multis pijsque sudoribus seminantes. Fuere tunc and alij permulti:
sed hij quorum nomina ad Posteros delata praecipui. Many of these holy British
Christians lived in poor Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scotic. l. 4. Reg. 35. Hollinsh
of Scotl. in Fincomarke.
Cells, professing the most austeere penitential cremiticall life, in so great
sanctity, that as these Scottish Antiquaries have before delivered, their very
Cells were dedicated into Churches after they were dead, and with such reverence
observed with that Nation, our Protestants so confessing and testifying, that
from the time of those holy British Saints, which thus lived there, the old
Scots called Churches by the name of Cells, Ex ^^que cons^etudo mansit apud
Posteros, vt prisci Scoti templa Cellas vocent.

2. Among these, our holy Bishop S* Amphibalus a man of singular piety and
excellent in divine learning, Amphibalu^ Brito vir ^^sig^^ pietate, sacra
doctrina pollens, preached the word of Christ throughou^ the Scots and Picts S.
Amphibalus a Brita^ and Martyr, a learned and holy Bishop in Mona I Will with the
Scots.
Countries, speaking and writing much against the Pagans Religion, (...) dogma
per Scotorum Pictorumqae Regiones prop^^a^do, m^l^a a contra Ge^^^^um
Religionem dicendo scribendoqu^. Crathlint then King of the Scots entertained
this holy Bishop, and his company with great love, and builded for them a
church in the I Will of Man, being the first Cathedral Church that was among the
Scots, and he the first Bishop they ever had, as their own Historians
acknowledge, being placed Bishop there in this time. That Church was dedicated
to our Savior, Seruatori, Sotheri in Greek, and thereupon by corruption in
time called Sodorens^^ for Sotherensis. This King adorned this Episcopal
Church with most ample gifts, Chalices, Patens, Candlestycks, and others the
like fit for the Sacrifice of Mass, made all of Silver and gold: with an
Altar closed with Copper, and Brass, and appointed Revenues out of the
places adjoining for the mayntenance thereof. Hos Crathlintus Rex, ad se
confugientes beneuolo affectu suscepit, and vt in Mona Insula considerent,
sacra ibidem aede ipsius opera Seruatoris nomine erecta, concessit. Amphibalus
Brito vir insigni pietate, primus Antistes ibi creatus, Christi dogma per
Scotorum Pictorumque Regiones The holy Sacrifice of Mass with sacred vessels,
ornaments and rites then used in it.
propalando, multa contra Gentilium Religionem dicendo, scribendoque gloriosum
and Christiano viro plan^ dignum, multa senectute viuendo fessus, faelicemque
sortitus est finem. Sed and Chrathlintus Rex, facram Antistitis aedem,
muneribus ornauit amplissimis, calicibus, patenis, candelabris, alijsque
similibus, ad sacrorum vsum commodis, ex argento auroque fabrefactis. Altarique
cupro and aere ^lauso: prouentus ad ea ex agris in sacre aedis vicinia
constituit. Fuit id templum omnium primum Christiano ritu, vbi Pontifex
sacerque Magistratus sedem haberet primariam The great^ zeal and devotion of
King Crathlint of the Scots toward Christian Religion, and holy British
Priests, and others flying to the Scots in that time.
inter Scotos, cuius nostri meminere Scriptores, dedicatum. Nunc vocant
Sodorense fanum, cuius nominis rationem sicut aliorum complurium rerum and
locorum vetustas ad posteros obfusc^it. By this we perceive the great zeal,
and devotion of that poor King Crathlint, how to his Power he relieved the
persecuted Servants of Christ in that time, not fearing thereby to offend their
most potent Enemies, and Persecutours Emperors one earth, so he might thereby
please the King of heaven, and succor his afflicted friends. He placed them by
probable opinion in one of the most worthy and fruitful Isles he had, at that
These our British Priests preached then throughout all places of the Scot^.
time not being possessed, or at the least much interessed in this great
Island, Mona then being the fittest I Will he had for a Bishops See: For which most
charitable foundation, it remained afterward unto Posterity an Episcopal
Seat. And by this ministering of his temporal goods, he received much greater
and spiritual. These holy Saints together with our holy Bishop S. Amphibalus
preached and taught Christian Catholic Religion throughout all those Scottish
Isles, per omnes Scotorum Regiones.

3. And the Religion which in particular they are remembered to have The
Religion they taught, the same which Catholics now profess. Their admirable
Sanctity.
taught, was the chaste and single life of the Clergy, Monastical and
Eremiticall Conversation, Sacrifice of Mass with Altars, Chalices, Patents,
and all other necessaries thereto belonging, honoring of Saints and dedicating
Churches unto them after their death, and visiting their places of dwelling in
this life, with Pilgrimadges and prayers, Vere monasticam sanctissimamque
exegerunt vitam. And for this manner of life and Religion they were esteemed
most holy Saints with all men, as Protestants themselves confess, ap^d Buchan.
and Hollinsh. supr.
omnes, and by a kind of excellency called then, and with posterity Culdei,
true worshippers of God, and both their name and Order continued with honor
after them, Mansitque nomen and institutum. Giraldus Cambrensis had testified
Giral. Cambr. Itiner. Camb. l. 2. c. 6. Bal. in Giral. Cambr. cent. 2. l. de
Script.
before that their Order and name continued in his time in the year of Christ
1190. And the Antiquaries of Scotland, though no enemies of their own glory,
are sparing in Histories to make so honorable a memory of so many renowned men
of their own in any Age, as they have done before of these British Saints, S.
Amphibalus, Modocus, Priscus, Calanus, Ferranus, Ambianus, Hector. Boeth. Hist.
l. 6. sup.
and Carnocus Dei cultores, Culdei. And yet they add: fuere tunc and alij
permulti: There were then very many such holy and learned Britans preaching and
conuersing among the Scots and Picts. This is confirmed by diverse English
Historians, even Protestants, among whom one writes in this manner: No small
number of the faithful amongst the Britans fledd unto the Scots, Holinsh.
Hist. of Scotland. in Crathlint and Fincomarke.
and Picts to avoid Persecution. Whom Crathlint received for his part most
lovingly. He erected a Temple in the I Will of Man, which he dedicated unto Jesus
Christ, our Savior, wherein the Christians might celebrate their divine
service according to their profession. This Church being ritchly endowed, was
the first Bishops See amongst the Scots, and thereupon was taken for the Mother
Church of the Realm. Amphibalus a Britan borne, was first Bishop of Saint
Saviors Church in Man: This Amphibalus did very much good amongst the Scots
and Britans in setting forth the word of life. There were others also of right
famous memory that ceased not in preaching and instructing the people in the
right belief, as Modocus, Priscus, Calanus, Ferranus, Ambianus, and Carnocus
called by an old ancient name in the Scottish tongue Culdei, that is to
understand Cultores Dei, or as you would say in English, the worshippers of
God. An other says, that he fled in that Persecution, and went to the Scots
and Picts with a great number of Godly men, and was there the first Bishop in
the I Will of man, and settling Christian Religion there, returned afterward into
this part of Britain, and to Verolamium, Saeuiente mirum in modum Io. Bal. l.
de Scrip. Britan. cent. 1. in Amphibalo.
apud Britannos Persecutione ad Scotos and Pictos cum magno piorum numero
diuertebat, Apud quos sub Rege Crathlinto, in Mona Insula primus Druidum loco
Episcopus constitutus. Post multa illic Christiano ritu instituta, in
Britanniam reuersus, Virulamij Martyrij compleuit cursum. At this time those
Scottish Islands which had not received the faith in the time of Pope Victor, or
having then received, it by diverse Pagans coming unto them, had slacked
therein, were now converted, or confirmed by these holy British Saints, and
diverse of them, the Archbishop of York being driven from his See, were with
their Priests and Pastors, under this their new Bishop, as other Islands also
of Britain, namely the Islands called Euboniae, Hebrides, or Western Islands
accounted to Will. Harris. descript. of Brit. c. 10. Hollinsh. descr. of Scotl.
cap. 10. Hect. Boeth. in Nominib. Region. V. Hebrides. and descript. Scotiae,
f. 4. Harris. descr. of Scotl. c. 10. Hect. Boeth. descrip. Scotiae f. 14.
Ha^r. descrip. Brit. c. 10. Boeth. Hist. Scot. l. 10.
be 43. in number, as a Protestant Antiquarie thus testifies thereof: There
has some time been, and yet is a Bishop of this I Will, who at the first was
called Episcopus Sodorensis, when the Jurisdiction of the Hebrides belonged
unto him; Whereas now he that is Bishop there, is but a Bishops shadow. And
this most probable, allthough this man cites no Author, this Island Mona or
Man being esteemed one of the chiefest, nearest to great Britain, and the
ancient Seat of the principal Druids, which ruled those Islands in their
Religion.

4. And the ancient and miraculous Altars and Churches of S. Peter and S.
Clement in the I Will of Lewyes the greatest of them, whose first foundations for
their Antiquity are not remembered in the Scottish Histories, and diverse of
them yet bearing the names of ancient Saints. So I may say of the I Will of May,
renowned for holy men there inhabiting. So of Iona, honored both for the holy
Saints there living, and Christian Kings there buried upon that devotion, Iona
tum viris sanctissimis, tam Regum communi sepultura insignis. Fergusius the
second King of the Scots of that name, was buried there with Christian Rites,
Christiano Ritu, about the year of Christ 430. and all their Kings long time
after. He restored the bannished Monks, builded a Monastery there, and Cells,
such as the Culdeis used, endowing them, Structis patrio ritu Hector. Boeth. l.
7. f. 123. 126.
Cellulis ad vitae necessaria praedijs donauit. And to come to the Orchades
Islands, they were so full of Christians, when S. Palladius was sent into this
Island by S. Celestine Pope, that he ordained and sent thither for their Bishop
S. Seruanus. Hect. Boeth. sup. l. 7. f. 133. Bal. ce^t. 1. in Palladio Boeth.
descript. Scot. and in Nominib. Reg. Oppidorum etc. v. Orchades. Harris.
descript. of of Britain p. 42.
So he sent S. Teruanus to be Bishop, or Archbishop as some call him, to the
Picts, Which were also seated in those Islands: as our Scots themselves
confess. The Bishops See was there at Kirkual in Pomonia the greatest of those
Isles, Harum maxima Pomonia dicitur, in ea Kirkual Ciuitas vbi Episcopalis
Seeds. So we may conclude of Holy Island, Hoy or Hij, so f^mous for Religeous
Monks of this old British Order, by whom most part of the Saxons were
afterward converted, about the time S. Augustine was sent hither. For we are
assured by Antiquities, both that this Island then belonged to the Picts, and
they were then converted by these our British Culdeis, and gave that The
Successors of them which our Britans then converted, did afterward convert most
of the Saxons hear.
I Will unto them, from whence, and that their holy Order there, so many renowned
Saints did after proceed. Est Insula quae vocatur Hij, quae ad ius Britanniae
pertinet, non magno ab ea freto discreta, sed donatione Pictorum qui illas
Britanniae plagas incolunt, iam dudum Monachis Scotorum tradita, eo quod illis
praedicantibus fidem Christi perceperunt. Which by that is said before of the
Picts B^d. Hist. Eccle^. Angl. l. 3. c. 3. Manuscr. Antiq. and Capgr. in Vit.
S. Aidani. William Harrison descr. of Britain c. 10.
Conversion by these our British Culdeis and Religeous Priests, preaching unto
them in this Persecution, makes it evident, that they converted that People,
and those Scottish Monks being of the same Order came from them, there living,
preaching and dying, as is before remembered. For the Scots being also
instructed then in the faith by these Monks, the first of that profession and
Institution there could have no Monks of that Order, but from them. And S. Bid
speaking of S. Oswald his time, says, this I Will was given by the Picts to these
Monks, iam dudum, long before, and yet before that, dudum long Bed. supr. l. 3.
c. 3.
time that Island received the faith by those Monks: illis praedicantibus fidem
Christi perceperunt.

THE XIX. CHAPTER.
THE RETVRNE OF S. AMPHIBALVS FROM the Scots to the Britans; his coming to the
house of S. Alban at Verolamium, and preaching unto him: the miraculous vision,
and Conversion of S. Alban, their exceeding zeal and devotion, and delivery of
S. Amphibalus at that time.

1. SAmphibalus and our other holy Priests and Religeous men, having thus
happily begun their preaching to the Scots and Picts, and obtained happy
success therein, allthough this renowned Bishop was so well, safely, and
honorably provided for by that most worthy King Crathlint, and S. Amphibalus
his return into Britain from the Scots.
knew by so certain experience before, both the miseries which all Christians
in this our Britain endured under the persecuting Tyrant, and the extreme
hatred, they bore unto him above others, endeavoring by all means they could,
to putt him to cruel death; yet neither could these certain dangers fear or
hinder him, nor any honor, quiet, or security persuade and move him so to
continue, but as Moses, whose life being sought in Egypt, and his friends and
Countrymen there persecuted, would rather go to be persecuted with them, then
live in peace and honor with Iethro his Father in Law, saying he would
return thither: vadam and reuertar ad fratres Exodus c. 4.
meos in Aegiptum; So S. Amphibalus, allthough God did not say unto him, as to
Moses, that all they which sought his life were dead: Mortui sunt omnes qui
quaerebant animam tuam: But he knew the contrary, they were all still living,
and still raging in their madd fury* against him, and all the Servants of
Christ in this his Country and Egypt. He took the best Order he could, with
that great and high chardge, and honor he had among the Scots, instructing
and directing his holy Priests, and brethren there, in their sacred labors,
and returned hither again, to comfort the distressed Christians, help to lift
them up again which were fallen, and convert the misbeleeuers, and himself to
suffer all afflictions, and death, how cruel soever in that most glorious
cause. Long and painful was his Journey from the I Will of Man, by Sea and Land,
to many places which he visited in that his preaching, and Pilgrimadge, passing
for the most part by, and lodging in the Woods, Deserts, and Dens where the
persecuted Christians then lived, and sustained with such food, as they lived
by, seldom, and then not without exceeding danger, otherwise fedd and
harbored. For his comfort and company in this his preaching and professing of
Christ crucified, and imitating our blessed Savior in his trobles, and
torments, he carried still with him a Crucifixe, Imadge of Christ crucified and
fixed to his holy Cross, crucem Domini secum habebat.

2. Matthew the Monk of Westminster says, the Roman Histories are silent even
of the name of this glorious man, which the British Antiquities
notwithstanding do expressly set down: Istius Clerici nomen, licet Romanae
Matthew Westminster. An. gratiae 303.
taceant Historiae, in Historia Britonum tamen express continetur. Which, were
Title enough to claim him to be of this kingdom. But this Author is deceived
herein; for allthough in the Roman Martyrologe there is no more memory of his
name, and calling, but only this, that he was Clericus, a Clergy man: yet
Iacobus Bishop of Genua, and so to be termed of that City in Italy, a Roman
Writer, and writing fourscore years, or thereabouts, before Matthew our
Monk, testifies that his name was Amphibalus, a Britan of Jacob. Genuen. in
Vita S. Amphibali. Harris Manuscr. Hist. of Brit l. 3. c. 35.
this kingdom, and son to a Prince thereof, relating his History, and life
at lardge. But our Monk might without blame be ignorant of that Author. And
this forreyne Bishop adds, that he went from hence to Rome with Bassianus in
the time of Seuerus, and was there knighted amongst that Noble A Monastory now
at Caermerden, and S. Amphibalus a Monk^ there, and probably Bishop there.
company, most of this Nation recompted in number 1540. of which S. Alban was
also one; And that S. Amphibalus was there made Priest by the Pope of Rome, and
sent home into this his Country. Giraldus Cambrensis says he was borne at
Caerlegion, the renowned City and School in Wales, Fuit Amphibalus hinc
Caerlegion oriundus. So have diverse others. The old Manuscript Antiquity of
the Church of Winchester says, he was an holy Monk Girald. Cambr. Itiner.
Camb. l. 1. c. 5. David Powell Annot. ib. and in c. 4. descr. Cambriae. Annal
Manuscr. Eccl. Wintonien.
and Doctor in the Church of Caermerdin in Wales, Amphibalus sanctus Monachus
and Doctor in Ecclesia Caermerdin, alias nominata Ciuitas Merlini, in Wallia.
And this is the last certain place of his Residency, which that Antiquity
gives unto him, before his Persecution and going to the Scots, and so it
seems not improbable, but he was also Bishop of that City Caermerdin, or
without question, of some other City hear. For otherwise, how he could be
consecrated Bishop among the Scots, by whose Annals he is before accounted the
first Bishop they had resident among them, is not so easy to be resolved;
except we should conjecture that he was consecrated among the Scots by other
British Bishops, then flying unto them, for which we do not find any warrant
in Histories, to uphold us in that opinion. And there is a silence in all
Martyrologes, and Authors of that time of any S. Amphibalus, but this our
renowned Britan, and both the Scottish and our own Historians have proved unto
us, that he was a Bishop, and of this our Britain. How reverend a man he was
now for years, as well as for virtue and learning, we may know, if we reflect
upon that, which is said before, that he was knighted with Bassianus, and
consecrated Priest by Saint Zepherine Pope, who was Martyred in, or about the
218. year of Christ, by all accounts: so that allowing S. Amphibalus then the
youngest years wherein preisthood may be given, and this his and others
Persecution hear in Britain to have been in such time, as I have set down
before, we must needs grant S. Amphibalus now to have been almost 100. years
of Age, and much more, if we should with some defer his Martyrdom to the
beginning of the fourth next following Age.

3. But this most worthy Bishop thus in all respects so reverend, and now
laden with the burden of many years, feeble in body, fainted not in his holy
profession in preaching Christ, and being now come so long a Journey, as
between the I Will of Man, and Verulamium, where S. Albans now stands, and by
all writers being pursued by his persecutours was driven thither, being then a
Municipall place, all professing Roman Paganism, and then there upon named
Caermunicip, and not without the great mercy of God and harbowred by his old
acquaintance, and fellow in Chivalry Alban a man eminent in that City, and
descended from Noble Romans: erat Albanus ciuis verolamius vir eminens in
ciuitate, ex illustri Romanorum Prosapia originem duce^s: he boldly preached
Christ unto him, though a man in that eminency under the Roman Pagan
persecutors, that some, though not perhaps with greatest warrant, have termed
him: high Steward of the Britans. And allthough this Engl. Martyrol. die 22.
Iunij.
Noble Alban did for old acquaintance, or Hospitality sake courteously
entertain and relieve him, hic sanctum Virum hospitio benign suscipiens vitae
necessaria S. Amphibalus preaches at Verolamium to be Alban.
ministrauit: yet when S. Amphibalus began to speak of Jesus Christ the son
of God, and Incarnate for man's Redemption, he was so far off from being a
Christian, that he had scarcely heard of Christ before, but said this testimony
of Christ was strange unto him; Quis est, inquit, iste filius Dei? quid est
quod Deus natus esse asseritur? noua sunt haec and mihi hactenus inaudita. And
S. Amphibalus more particularly declaring the mysteries of Christ his
Nativity, Passion, Resurrection and Ascension, Alban was yet so far from
believing, that he told S. Amphibalus, he was madd, to preach such things that
understanding did not apprehend, nor reason allow, and if the Citizens of that
place did know what he speak concerning Christ, they would most cruelly putt
him to death, and feared much, that he would fall into troble before he could
go forth of his house. Albanus ait quid est quod loqueris? Insanis, nescio
quid dicis. Assertionem tuam non capit intellectus, ratio non admittit. Si
noscent viri huius ciuitatis te talia locutum fuisse de Christo sine mora
pessima morte te occiderent. Ego vero pro te omnino sollicitus, ne quid tibi
contingat aduersi, priusquam de domo mea recesseris vehementer pertimesco. But
what the preaching of Saint Amphibalus S. Alban his holy vision to persuade him
to be a Christian.
prevailed not in, his earnest prayer and watching obtained of God for Alban
For as the old British Writer of his life, living in that time, relates this
History, S. Amphibalus watching in prayers all the night following, a strange
and admirable vision appeared to Alban, with which he being exceedingly
terrified, and perplexed, he presently arose, and went to S. Amphibalus thus
declaring his vision, and desiring the exposition thereof in this order, and
these words in English. O my Friend, if the things which thou preachest of
Christ, are true, I beseech the be not afraid to tell unto me the true meaning
of my dream or vision. I did atte^d, and behold a man came from heaven, whom
a great or innumerable multitude of men apprehended, and laid diverse kinds of
Torments upon him. His hands were bound with cords; his body worn with whips,
and greuiously torn. His body hanged upon a cross, and his hands stretched
cross upon it. The man which was thus tortured, was naked, and had no shoes
upon his feet. His hands and feet were peirced with nails, his side thrust
through with a spear, and as it seemed to me blood and water did flow out of
the wound of his side, they set reed on his right hand, and putt a crown of
thorn upon his head. And having done all things which man's cruelty could
work against him, they began to mock him with words, saying unto him. Hail
King of the Jews, if thou art the son of God now come down from thy Cross,
and we believe thee and when they used many reuilings against him, that young
man answered not one word unto them. At the last when they had said what they
would against him, crying out with a great voice, he said. o Father into they
hands I commend my spirit, and having so said, gave up the ghost, his dead body
was taken down from the Cross the blood still lardgely issuing out of his
wounds, they shutt it n a Tomb of stone, and covered it with a stone scaled,
appointing watch men to keep it. And a wonder to see, his body thus being dead
came to life again, and receiving strenght, did go forth of the Sepulcher, it
still remaining shutt. How he arose from death, I did behold with m^ own eyes,
Men clothed with garments as white as snow did come from heaven, and taking
that man with them, returned from whence they came, and an Infinite Army of men
clothed all in white does follow him, which ceased not in all that Journey to
sing praises, and continually blessed a Father, I know not whom, and his
son, saying: blessed be God the Father, and his only begotten son. Great
Joy and unspeakable gladness was among them, so that none might worthily be
compared unto it. These and many other things, which I neither will, nor is
lawful for any mortal man to tell, have been showed to me in vision this
night, what they do signify, I beseech thee not to conceal from me, be not
afraid. S. Amphibalus hearing these things, perceauing that his heart was
visited by God, exceedingly rejoiced in our Lord, and forthwith pulling out a
Cross of our Lord, which he had about him, he says, behold in this sign thou
may manifestly see what thy vision this night means, what it signifies.
For this man coming from heaven is my Lord Jesus Christ, who did not refuse to
undergo the punishment of the Cross, that he might deliver us by his blood
from the guilt, wherewith we were held bound by the preuarication of our first
parent Adam. And so prosecuting the manner of Christ's Incarnation, life, and
passion for man's Redemption, and the mystery of the holy Trinity, which I need
not particularly to relate, writing for Christian Readers, to speak in this
old British Authors words again, Alban greatly meruayling upon the speech
of Amphibalus brake out into these words. The things which thou relatest of
Christ are true, and cannot in any respect he reproved as false, for I this
night have evidently known, how Christ overcame the devil, bound him, and
thrust him down to the botome of Hell: I have seen with my eyes, how that
Horrible one lies bewrapped in the knots of chains, hereby knowing that all
things thou have spoken are true. I believe, an^ from this time, this is my
faith, that there is no God but my Lord Jesus Christ who for the salvation of
men, vouhsafing to take humanity upon him sustained the Passion of the Cross.
He with the Father and the holy Ghost is one God, and there is no other. And
having thus said, he falls down postrate before the Cross, and as if he had
seen our Lord Jesus hanging upon the Cross, the blessed penitent craves
pardon for his sins. So reverently he uses with continual kissing of them the
feet and places of places of the wounds, as though he had been laid at the
feet of our Redeemer himself, whom he had in his vision seen to be
crucified. Tears mingled with blood, run rownde about his face, and in great
quantity fall down upon the venerable wood of the Cross. I, says he,
renownce the devil, and detest all the Enemies of Christ, S. Alban his
Conversion, and great d^uotion.
believing in him, and commending myself to him, who, as thou affirmest, arose
the third day from death. Amphibalus says unto him, be of courage, our Lod is
with thee, and his grace will never be wanting unto thee. That faith which
other mortal men have deserved to receive by the tradition of man, thou have
not learned it either of man, or by man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ.
Therefore being now secure of thee, I determine to go further to preach unto
the Gentiles, but Alban entreating him to stay at the least one week longer,
that he might in that time be more perfectly instructed in the faith of Christ,
he did so.

4. Thus writes this old British Author of S. Alban his Conversion, which
both S. Gildas, S. Bid and others do in effect, and substance also deliver,
allthough not in so ample manner. During the time of their abode together
Gildas l. de excid. Brit. cap. 8. Bed. Martyr. die 22. Iunij. in S. Albano.
Bed. l. 1. Hist. Eccl. c. 7. Matthew. Westminster. an 303.
afterward, they spent the time as S. Amphibalus, by S. Beds relation did
before S. Alban his Conversion in continual Watchings and Prayers day and
night: orationibus continuis ac vigilij^ diu noctuque, a great motive to S.
Alban to receive the faith of Christ: For every day toward evening, they
withdrew themselves from the City, and company of men going to an house which
S. Alban had, without the City, where they spent the whole night in serving
God, Singulis diebus cum iam in vesperam hora declinaret, Magister and
Discipulus hominum frequentiam deuitantes, ad domum remotiorem, quae tugurium
vulgo solet appellari, seproripiunt, noctem totam ibidem in Dei laudibus
transigentes. Et haec faciebant, ne secretum suum palam fieret Infidelibus, qui
cultores Christianae Religionis non in fide sequi, sed persequi fideles
contendebant. And allthough they observed this cautelous diligence, to keep
themselves secret from the Persecutours, yet it was by a wicked Pagan there
revealed, and told to the persecuting Judge and Ruler there, which coming to
the knowledge of S. Alba^, before the Pagan Prince and Persecutour could
execute his designement, as at his first receiving of S. Amphibalus, when he
was yet a Pagan, as our most ancient Histories say, he hidd him in his house
being pursued by Gild. l. de excid. c. 8. Bed. l. 1. Hist. c. 7. Galfr. Mon.
Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. cap. 5. Matthew. Westminster. an. 303.
his Persecutours, and presently had not S. Alban so prevented it, to be
apprehended, so now being a Christian exposed himself unto danger of death for
him, imitating Christ, that gave his own life for his sheep, Albanus
charitatis gratia feruens, Confessorem suum Amphibalum a Persecutoribus
insectatum, and iam iamque comprehendendum primum in domo sua occuluit, and
deinde se discrimini mortis obtulit, imitans in hoc Christum animam suam pro
ouibus ponentem. For when these Enemies of Christ had raised their Troops,
even an army magna manu, as our Antiquities term them to apprehend S.
Amphibalus, S. Scriptor. Vitae S. Albani. Manusc. Antiq. and Capgr. in vita
eius.
Alban in the night before conducteth him forth of his house, and past danger,
and shifting garments with him, to save him from all peril, caused S.
Amphibalus to were his garment of dignity, and privilege, in that time free
from all trouble and molestation, dans ei clamidem auro textam quo tutior ab
hostibus redderetur, vestis enim huiusmodi tantae tanc temporis apud omnes
dignitatis, tantaeque reuerentiae fuit, vt illa indutus, hostium cuneos
penetraret illaesus. And the garment of S. Amphibalus wherein the danger was,
(being a Caracalla, a Priests vesture, as they say,) having been discried, he
put it upon himself, together with the danger, and so returned to his own
house alone, having thus freed his holy Master and Tutor in Christ from that
peril.

THE XX. CHAPTER.
OF THE HOLY AND MOST CONSTANT faith, devotion, charity, sufferings, miracles
and Martyrdom of S. Alban.

1. S. Amphibalus being thus at this time delivered, by S. Alban the King,
Prince, or Judge (for S. Bid, Matthew Bed. l. 1. Hist. c. 7. Matthew. Westminster. an.
303. Jacob. Genuen. in Vit. S. Albani and S. Alphib. Capgr. in S. Albano
of Westminster, and others give all those Titles, to that persecuting
Magistrate) sent his Souldiars to convent these two holy Saints; the old
British Writer of S. Albans life says, there were horsemen with an Army,
great multitude or Power of footmen, which were thus sent about this business,
Equites cum magna manu peditum a Iudice missi. The rage of the persecuting
Judge and Paga^s against S. Alban.
And S. Alban being so renowned a man in this kingdom then, and S. Amphibalus
so famous a Prelate, as before appears, and so known to the Persecutours,
that they pursued him, to the furthest parts of the Roman Jurisdiction, in the
parts now called Wales, and from thence forcibly brought him by Authority to
Verolamium again, there to be Judged and Martyred, Manuscr. Antiq. in Vita S.
Amphibali. Capgr. in eodem. Matthew. Westminster. an. 303. and alij.
which none but the highest Roman Power hear could do, make it an opinion
sufficiently warrantable, both that such forces were levied for this exploite,
and the prime Magistrate himself supplied the place of Judge and Sentencer in
this cause of so Noble parsonadges; the one spiritual, the other temporal,
the greatest that are remembered in our Histories to have suffered Martyrdom in
Britain in that raging Persecution. The troops of Soldiers nephandi
Principis, of the wicked Prince, cateruatim irruentes, rushing into the house
of S. Alban by troops, like madd men efferatis animis, and searching every
place, and corner, at the last found him in his Country house, where he used
to watch and pray with S. Amphibalus, Ipsum tandem in tugurio reperiunt, The
great devotion of S. Alban, and his reverence to the Crucifixe.
nudis pedibus ante crucem Domini quam sibi Magister suus reliquerat precibus
incumbentem, bare footed praying before the Cross of our Lord, which his
Master had left with him, wearing his Caracalla or coat upon him, and so
representing S. Amphibalus, who before was conveyed from them by Saint Alban,
which they understanding manus ei iniecerunt, rapitur, trahitur, dirisque
nexibus cathenarum constrictus, ab alijs vestibus, ab alijs Bed. lib. 1. cap.
7. Matthew. Westminster. An. 303. Script. Antiq. Vitae S. Albani. Capgr. in eod.
trahitur and capillis: They lay violent hands upon S. Alban, fetter him with
locks, and Chains, some of them hayling him by his Coats, others by the hair
of his head. And being thus contumeliously used, he continually carried in his
hands the Cross, which S. Amphibalus gave him, openly to pronounce and
profess himself a Christian. Vt se seruum crucis palam cunctis ostenderet,
signum dominicum iugiter in manibus praeferebat. And being thus despitefully
brought before the Judge, who labored by all means he could, to persuade and
induce S. Alban to forsake his Christian Religion, and Sacrifice to their Pagan
Gods. But this was all in vain, for to speak in the old British Author his
words: S. Alban answered the judge that his words were vain and superfluous,
he did not repent him for receiving the faith of Christ, for the miracles
wrought in it in restoring the weak and sick to health, do teach it by their
testimony, to be the way of Salvation. He would not Sacrifice to their Gods,
and being supported by the help of God The torturs and long Imprisonment S.
Alban suffered, and the miraculous punishment upon his persecutors.
feared not their threats nor torments. Upon which words the company gathering
together whipped him greuiously. Who being thus beaten, said with a cheerful
countenance. O Lord Jesus Chtist, I beseech thee keep my mind ftom wavering
from that state which thou have given me. O Lord I desire to offer my life an
Holocaust, and with effusion of my blood to be thy witness. And when the
Tormentours hands were weary, the holy man was thrust into the bottom of
prison, and there kept six months, whereupon the Elements themselves did
testify the Injury done to the Martyr. For from the time of his apprehension
unto his death, neither rain nor dew did f^ll upon the earth, the winds did
not blow. But every day continual, the Land was parched up with most fervent
heat of the sun, and in the nights also was exceeding and intolerable
heat. Neither feilds nor trees bore any fruit, the whole world did fight for
the just one against the wicked. The Citizens not able to endure this
affliction, said it was Christ whom Alban does worship works this, that no
grass nor corn does grow unto us, and taking pity upon the Injuries done to
the holy man, by the Judgment of them all, he is delivered from his bonds of
chains. For which S. Alban was very sorry, and greatly fearing least his
Martyrdom might thereby be hindered, looking up toward heaven with groaning,
said. O Lord Jesus Christ suffer not the malice of the devil so much to
prevail, that by his crafty devises, and assent of this people, he may hinder
my passion. And turning himself to the people, said unto them: Why do you
stay? If you know not to give sentence take Counsel of your Laws; examine
the statuts of your City, they will insinuate unto you, what you ought to do.
Why do you make delay? Be it known to you all, that I am a great Enemy of
your Gods. For how can they be worthy any honor, which are known to have no
divine thing in them, being the Works of men's hands? You yourselues are their
witnesses, that they see nothing hear nothing, understand nothing. O greatly
to be detested vanity, to hope for life of them, that never lived, to pray unto
them, wbich never heard, to seek health of things, that never were well
themselves. Whereupon I absolutely pronounce, that he which worshippeth such is
most mad. I demand of you, what can be more unhappy, then that man, over
whom his own works have dominion? Therefore woe unto Idols, and woe to the
Worshippers of Idols. When they heard these things, with a general consent
they give sentence of death against the holy man, and bring him to a place
called Holinhirst. Thus far this old British Writer, Matthew of Westminster,
Capgraue and others consenting.

2. Matthew of Westminster expressly further adds, which others do Matthew.
Westminster. an. 303. in S. Albano.
also sufficiently testify, that as before his Judgment, so now after it, S.
Alban often kissing the Cross of Christ which he held in his hand, and
worshipping it, he commended his cause to God. Ipse Crucem Domini, quam manu
tenebat, Reverence to Crosses and holy Images.
frequenter deosculans, and adorans, causam suam Domino commendabat. And
continually kept, and reverenced this Crucifixe until his head was stricken of,
when all to be sprinkled with his holy blood, it fell upon the grass, and was
secretly taken up, and preserved by a Christian there present. Crux quam vir
sanctus iugiter in manibus far consueuerat, faelici iam cruore respersa,
super herbam decidit, eamque quidam Christianus occulte rapuit, and
ignorantibus Paganis abscondit. This Author, as he adds this which the old
Britan Writer wants, so he wants some thing before related from him. For
whereas the British Antiquarie said, that the Citizens of Verolamium upon
strange punishments, wherewith God afflicted them, in the time of the
Imprisonment of S. Alban, did set him free, and at liberty, the Monk of
Westminster, as S. Bid likewise, omitteth this, as also the most constant
profession of his faith, which S. Alban then made before them, which they had
set down before, and now remembered only how they gave the sentence of death
against him. Iudex autem and ciues Verolani, plagam huiusmodi non ferentes,
Albano crimen imponunt, congregatisque in vnum omnibus, ipsum sibi praesentari
fecerunt. Et dum staret in medio multitudinis, omnes vnanimi consensu in
Sanctum Dei mortis tulere sententiam. But it is evident by the circumstances of
the History, that they all agree, and the short liberty which they gave to S.
Alban, was only to see whether he would in hope of continuance thereof, deny
his Religion, or not speak against their Idolatry, which when he so resolutely
as before refused to do, they gave sentence of death against him.

3. Now therefore to return to the British Author, where I left him, Script.
Brit. supr. Manuscr. Antiq. Vitae S. Albani. Beda. lib. 1. cap. 7. Matthew.
Westminster. an. 303. Capgr. in S. Albano Henr. Hunting. l. 1. Hist. in Diocletian.
thus he with others proceeds in the narration of the Martyrdom of this holy
Saint; So great a company of people resorted to the place of his Martyrdom,
that although it was lardge in itself, yet in respect of the great multitude
coming thither at that time, it seems straight and little; and yet the heat
of the sun was so ardent, that the ground burned under their feet, in their
passadge to the place there was a most swift River, to pass over and the
multitude so great, that they could scarce before night pass over, and
thronging one an other many fell into the water, and were drowned. Which when
S. Alban perceived, falling down upon his knees, thus prayed for their
delivery. O Lord Jesus Christ, from whose most holy side I have seen blood,
and water to flow, grant I beseech thee, that the waters decrease, and the
River may go away, that all this people may safe, and sound be present at my
passion. A wonderful thing to behold, while S. Alban thus kneeled, and prayed,
the stream was dried up, and the tears of Saint Alban left no water in the
channel. The Power of his prayer consumed the River, and made away for the
people between the waters. And they whom the violence of the River had taken
away, enclosed and destroyed, were found in the bottom of the River without
any hurt, having no sign of death in them. The soldier which dr^w S. Alban to
these torments, seeing this strange miracle, was as strangely thereby converted
to the faith of Christ, threw away his sword, and prostrating himself at the
feet of the Saint, craved pardon. But the other Pagans draw S. Alban up and
down among the briars, and rough places, so that the thorns and roots of
trees do pull pieces of flesh from his feet. And yet this most merciful and
miraculous Saint seeing the people to be afflicted with thirst in the
mountain, thus prayed for their releife: O God who did create man of the
slime of the earth. I beseech thee, suffer no creature to sustain any hurt for
my cause. And presently a well of water sprung up before his feet, by which
they were refreshed.

4. The Executioner cut of S. Albanus head, but his eyes fall out of his
Hiericus Gallus in Vita S. Germ.
own head therewith: many so witnessing. Among whom Hiericus Gallus in S.
Germans life:

Millia paenarum Christi pro nomine passus.
Quem tandem rapuit capitis sententia caesi:
Sed non lictori cessit res tuta superbo:
Vtque caput Sancto, reciderunt Lumina saeuo.
So has the British Writer of S. Alban his life, then living a Pagan, as
himself Anonym. Britan. Script. Vitae S. Albani.
confesses, and as may be gathered by his own narration, present at his
Martyrdom. For thus he writes of himself in the same place, Least they
which shall come after, may be doubtful of my name, they shall call me a
wretch, and the greatest sinner. And I go to Rome, that casting of the error
of Paganism, I may be baptized, and deserve to obtain pardon of my sins. And
this my short Treatise I will offer to the Examination of the Romans. That if
any thing has been uttered in it, otherwise then it ought, our Lord Jesus
Christ who lives, and reigns God world without end, may vouchsafe by them to
amend it. Where we see the great honor and reverence which the Christians,
and Cristianly minded men of that Age, even hear in Britain, did acknowledge
as due to that holy See, that they referred the Examen, and Censure of their
writings, even of Historical and practical things, acted so far from
thence, to the Iugdment thereof. And thought it their safest way, though with
so great travail thither, and danger there, the Popes and Christian Romans
then above all others persecuted, to receive baptism, and direction for their
salvation there.

5. But to finish the funeral honor of this our glorious Martyr: allthough we
do not find any man then, which for fear of the persecutours presented
himself to bury his holy body, but the valiant Soldier, now the Soldier of
Christ converted unto him, which had boldly before them all reverenced the
Reliks of S. Alban, who there dug a grave, and laid the Martyrs body
therein: terram apperiens, humo Corpus Albani operit, and tumulum desuper ipse
Matthew. Westminster. An. 303.
composuit, which was all he could do then: yet God almighty in whose sight
the death of his Saints is precious, as he had now glorified his Martyrs soul
in heaven, so yielded from thence extraordinary honor to his body so meanly
buried, making his poor grave more glorious then the sumpteous Tomb of Author
Brit. Vitae S. Albani. Manuscr. Antiq. in Vit. eius Capgr. in eodem Matthew.
Westminster. sup. Manuscr. Antiq. in Vit. S. Amphibali and Capg. in eod.
any Roman Emperor, his persecutour, or other, for in the next night now
following, a Pillar of Light was seen of all the Pagans themselves, to stretch
up from the grave of the holy Martyr unto heaven, by which Angels discending
and ascending spent all the night in praising God, and among other things which
they did singe, these words were often repeated and heard. The renowned Man
Alban a glorious Martyr: nocte insecuta visa est columia lucis e tumulo beati
Martyris caelos penetrare, per quam descendentes Angeli, and ascendentes, totam
noctem in Dei laudibus deducebant. Inter caetera vero quae canebant, vox ista
frequentius est audita, Albanus vir egregius Martyr extat gloriosus. Ad hoc
spectaculum Honor of Saints.
subito fieret concursus. And a thousand Paga^s, ad mill homines, were thereby
converted to Christ. S. Bid witnesses, that from the Martyrdom of S. Bed. l.
1. Hist. c. 7.
Alban unto his time, cures and often Miracles were wrought, in the place of his
Martyrdom. In quo loco vsque ad hanc diem curatio infirmorum, and frequentium
Henric. Huntin. l. 1. Hist.
operatio virtutum celebrari non desinit. So has Henry of Huntington long
after him for his days also.

6. The Cross which he had in his hand, when he suffered Martyrdom, Matthew.
Westminster. an. 303. Manuscr. Antiq. in V^ta S. Amphibali. Capgr. in eod. Bed. l. 1.
Hist. c. 18 Thomas Walsingh. Hist. Angl. in Eduard. 2. R^uerence of holy Reliks.
and was thereby sprinkled with his holy blood, was reverently preserved by the
Christians then, and presented to S. Amphibalus with great honor. The very
ground where S. Alban suffered, retained drops of his blood when S. German was
sent hither by Pope Celestine, and he carried part thereof away for a great
Relike. De ipso loco, vbi beati Martyris effusus erat sanguis, massam pulueris
secum portaturus abstulit: in qua apparebat cruore seruato, rubuisse Martyrum
caedem. His Coat, Caracalla, which he had of S. Amphibalus, and wherein he
suffered Martyrdom, was kept for a great Relicke, and in the time of King
Edward the second (the King himself with many Nobles present witnesses) was so
freshly bespotted with this Martyrs blood, as if it had been done Thom.
Walsing. supr.
but the day before. So Miracously preserved, as the blood in the place of his
Passion. Fas est credere quod ad honorem Sancti, diuino Miraculo sanguis eius,
sic in hac vest seruatus, sicut in puluere sui sepulchri per multa secula
legitur conseruatus. Cuius pulueris massam, in qua rubebat adhuc sanguis
Martyris, Sanctus Germanus Altissiodorensis Episcopus secum abstulit, and
detulit ad natale secum, capellam construens in honorem Martyris memorati. But
of Churches and Chapels founded unto his honor, with Pilgrimadges unto, and
reuerencing, his holy Relics, I shall speak hereafter, when I come to the
ceasing of this Persecution, and to speak of our other Martyrs.

THE XXI. CHAPER.
THE CONSTANT PROFESSION OF CHRIST, by the holy Soldier Heraclius, converted
by the Miracles of S. Alban, and his Martyrdom, in, and at the same time and
place, with S. Alban.

1. GREAT is the honor which both our own, both British and English, and
foreign Historians also yield to the Soldier until then a Pagan, and being
one that ledd Saint Alban to his Martyrdom and converted by his Miracles in
the way, was then and there also most cruelly Martyred: The old Roman
Martyrologe thus remembers him: one of the Souldiars which ledd S. Alban
Martyrol. Romans die 22. Iunij.
to his punishment being converted to Christ in the way, suffered with him,
deserved to be baptized in his own blood, Passus est etiam cum illo vnus de
militibus, qui eum ducebat ad supplicium, qui in via conuersus ad Christum,
proprio sanguine meruit baptizari. S. Gildas says this Martyr being converted
by the Miracle S. Alban showed when by his prayers the deep River gave place
to him, and a thousand with him to pass over, not wetting their feet, the
waters on both sides standing like walls, as they did to the people of Israel
to give them passadge, was of a wolf made a lamb, and did both vehemently
Gild. l. de excid. c. 8.
desire, and valiantly endure Martyrdom with him, Iterignotum trans Tamesis
nobilis fluuij alueum cum mill viris sicco imgrediens pede, suspensis vtrimque
modo praeruptorum fluuialibus montium gurgitibus aperiret, and priorem
carnificem tanta prodigia videntem in agnum ex lupo mutaret, and vna secum
triumphalem Martyrij palmam sitire vehementius, and excipere fortius faceret.
S. Bid relates, this History in like manner, yet with more Emphasis of his
glory, for having spoken of the same strange Miracle, by which this Soldier
was converted calling him Carnifex, the designed Executioner to put S. Alban to
death, as S. Gildas and others do, to show how wonderfully the grace of Christ
wrought in him, he adds, that by divine Inspiration he made all speed he
could to come to S. Alban, and casting away his sword that was drawn to behead
S. Alban, Bed. l. 1. Hist. Eccles. c. 7. Matthew. Westminster. an. 303.
prostrated him see before his feet, the whole assembly beholding it, greatly
desiring that he himself might be worthy to be put to death with the Martyr,
or in place of the Martyr, which he was commanded to strike, Quod cum inter
alios ipse carnifex, qui eum percussurus erat, vidisset, festinauit ei, vbi ad
locum destinatum morti venerat occurrere: diuino nimirum admonitus instinctu,
proiectoque ense, quem strictum tenucrat, pedibus eius aduo luitur, multum
desiderans, vt cum Martyr, vel pro Martyr, quem percutere iubebatur, ipse
potius mereretur percuti. And so of a persecutour he became a companion in
Truth, and Faith, Ex persecutore factus collega viritatis and fidei. Thus
writes Matthew of Westminster, and others, allthough with suppressing the name
of this holy Martyr, which the old British Writer of S. Alban his life,
Capgraue and others call Heraclius, and I am now to name him by it: for
allthough it was not given him in Baptism, Brit. Script. Vitae S. Albani.
Manuscr. Antiq. and Capgr. in eodem.
in water, which he wanted, yet his surest Baptism in his own blood for
Christ his holy and most courageously and constantly sustained Martyrdom
happily made him renowned and honorable thereby.

2. This S. Heraclius having resolutely denied his Paganism, craved pardon for
his error, and confessed Christ openly before so many persecutours, and in the
highest of their Malice, and rage against S. Alban, fell thereby into the same
degree of Hatred with them: for presently thereupon, to speak in our old
Authors words; Inimici veritatis hominem arripiunt, dentes excutiunt and os
eius sacrum dilacerant, and omnia eius ossa confringunt, and si nihil in
corpore remansit illaesum, fides tamen quae feruebat in pectore, laedi non
potuit: The enemies of truth apprehend him, beat out his teeth, rend his holy
mouth, and break all his boues, and allthough nothing remained in his body
without hurt, yet his fervent faith remained without harm. And being thus left
so maimed, lame, and half dead, with all the power and strength he could with
his hands crept up to the hill, where S. Alban was Martyred, whom when the
Judge espied, he said unto him, obsecra Albanum tuum, pray to they Alban to
set thy bones in order, and lay his head, hear stricken off, to thy body, and
thou shall receive perfect health from him. Bury him, and let him cure thee.
Heraclius answered I most firmly believe, that S. Alban by his merits is able
to heal me, and easily perform that you mock us with. Tunc caput Martyris
reuerenter assumens, illudque corpori deuotus apponens, desperatum corporis
robur recuperare caepit, sanus effectus. Then reverently taking the head of S.
Alban, and deuoutely laying it to his body, he began to recover the former
strenght of the same despayred before. And being thus miraculouslie recovered
and made hole, ceased not in the hearing of all the people to preach unto them
the meritt of S. Alban, and Power of Christ and digging the earth, buried the
body of S. Alban before them there. Which the Pagans seeing, said among
themselves, what shall we do? This man cannot be putt to death with sword, we
have already broken his body, and he has now received his former strength
again. And apprehending him, with horrible Torment, they tear his holy body
in pieces, and lastely cut of his head. And so this happy soldier perseuering
in the faith of Christ, together with most blessed Alban deserved to be
honored with the Crown of Martyrdom.

3. Hitherto the Relation of those our renowned ancient Historians; whereby we
do not only find an example of Heroical Christian fortitude in general,
but learn even in particular, the holy and approved doctrine and custom of
the Primative Christians of this kingdom, as well as of others, to pray unto
holy Saints glorified in their Souls in heaven, and reuerencing their sacred
Relics, on earth, thus miraculously allowed, and approved of God before, and
for the everlasting shame and confusion of so many his Persecutours and Enemies
then present, and all after comers, that would oppose against those most
Catholic doctrines, and practices of the Church of Christ, so publicly and
inuincibly confirmed and warranted by his omnipotent and highest divine Power,
before such a multitude both of Christians and Pagans so testifying: the first
by that means strengthened in the true faith: the others, in great numbers, as
I shall presently declare, converted to Christian Religion. And the Judge
himself was hereby so moved and convinced, that he presently commanded the
Persecution to cease, Iudex tanta miraculorum Bed. l. 1. Hist. c. 7.
caelestium nouitate perculsus, cessari mox a Persecutione praecepit. Iacobus
Genuensis, Bishop of Genua, and his old English Translatour, say, this
soldier, called Jacob. Genuen. Episc. in Vita S. Albani and S. Amphibal.
Anglic. Translat. ib.
by some before, Herculius was a knight. And they yield a reason besides their
Assertion, which was the noble renown of S. Alban, who as they say, was Lord
of the City of Verolame, and Prince of the knights, and Steward of the Land,
and the Judge dred de for to slay him, because of the great love that Emperor
had to him, and for reverence of his dignity and Power of his kindred, unto
the time that he had informed Dioclesian. And therefore when Judgment was
pronounced against him, the which was deferred 6. Weeks until Maximian his
coming into Britain, to see such wicked executions, thus they deliver it,
Than Maximian, and Askepodot gave final sentence on him, saying. In the the
time of the Emperor Dioclesian, Albon Lord of Verolomie, Prince of knights,
and Steward of Britain, during his life has despised Jupiter, and Appollyn
gooddes, and to them has done derogation, and disworship, wherefore by the
Law he is judged to be deed by the hand of some knight. And the body to be
buried in the same place where his head shall be smitten of, and his sepulcher
to be made worshipfully, for the honor of knighthood whereof he was Prince,
and also the Cross that he bare. And sklauin that he ware should be buried
with him. And his body to be closed in a chest of Ledd, and so laid in his
Sepulcher. This sentence has the Law ordained because he has renyed our
principal Gods. These Authors say, Maximian and King Asclepiodote gave this
sentence.

THE XXII. CHAPTER.
OF VERY MANY CONVERTED TO CHRIST, by the miraculous death of S. Alban, and
after going to S. Amphibalus to be fully instructed by him, suffered
Martyrdom, and being a thousand in number, were diverse from the 1000. Martyrs
at Lichfeild, and those near Verolamium.

1. THAT we may take some notice of the great numbers, and multitudes of
people converted by the death and miracles of these two holy Martyrs, we have
heard from approved Antiquities, that even many thousands had been present eye
witnesses of the miraculous dividing of the water to give free, and dry
passadge to S. Alban, and those that were with him at his prayers, when many
drowned and lying in the bottom of the deep River, were either miraculously
preserved from death, or so restored to life again by his intercession, the
waters standing one both sides of their passadge like walls, after their going
over presently joined together again, and returned to their natural current,
and flowing downward as the propensitie of such liquid and heavy things
requires, the fountain one the topp of the hill, as strangely arising, the
Executioner his eyes falling out of his head upon the earth, S. Helaclius so
wonderfully cured by S. Albans prayers, and Reliks, the heavenly light
streaming from S. Albans grave up to heaven, and the Angels there descending,
and ascending, and singing all the night, honoring God, and S. Alban, whom
the Pagan Persecutours had so much dishonored the day before. Such concourse
of people there was, which came to see the Martyrdom of S. Alban, and so
consequently were present at the miracles then wrought, that as the old
British Writer of his life witnesses, the place where he was putt to death
being lardge and spacious, which S. Bid and others also witness, that it
could scarcely receive them that then resorted thither, Tanta congeries illuc
confluxerat populorum, vt loca illa spatiosa prae multitudine hominum, angusta
videretur. The multitude was so great even of those that went out of that
City besides others from other places, that as S. Bid with others write Bed.
l. 1. Hist. c. 7.
being to pass over the River by a Bridge, if S. Alban had not so miraculously
dried up the River, they could hardly have gone over by the Bridge before
night, Ita fluminis occupabat pontem, vt intra vesperam transire vix posset.
Pilgrimage unto, and honor of Martyrs.
There was scarcely any left in the City, Cunctis pene egressis. A great
multitude of both sexes, diverse estates and Ages, came thither by instinct,
Vtriusque sexus conditionis diuersae and aetatis quae sine dubio diuinitatis
instinctu, ad obsequium beatissimi Confessoris, ac Martyris vocabatur, to do
service to the blessed Confessor and Martyr.

2. Therefore so many of diverse conditions, and Age, being thus called by the
Inspiration of God to such an holy purpose, we cannot but think many of them
were converted there at that time. And yet S. Bid sets this to be done at
S. Albans death, before the great Miracle of Angels appearing and praising of
God, and honoring S. Alban the night following, at his place of buryall. And
so soon as this Miracle appeared, the Pagans presently came thither in great
numbers to hear and see it, publicly professing, that these Miracles were
wrought by the Power of Christ, the son of God, and so being converted unto
him, a thousand of the^ at one time took their Journey to seek S. Amphibalus
in the parts now named Wales, so far distant from Verolamium, where by the
help and Intelligence of diverse Christians, in their company, as among others
him that took up S. Albans Cross, which Matthew. Westminster. An. 303. Manusc. Antiq.
in Vita S. Amphibali. Capgr. in eod. and alij.
he held in his hands at his Martyrdom, which, all to be spotted with his holy
blood, they presented to S. Amphibalus, whom they found preaching to the people
of that Country, and they were instructed, catechized and baptized by him in
Christian Religion, Cum ad hoc spectaculum subito fieret concursus Paganorum,
vnus ex omnibus in hanc vocem prorupit. Haec miranda quae vidimus, Christum Dei
filium liquido constat operari. Eamus and inquiramus virum Dei, quia sicut
nostis, Albanum praedicando conuertit ad Christum. Cumque omnibus ista
sententia placuisset, ad mill hominum versus Walliam Iter arripiunt, and virum
Dei Amphibalum ibidem inuenerunt, regionis illius hominibus verbum Dei
praedicantem. Cui aduentus sui causam exponentes, Crucem, quam suo quondam
Albano comendauerat, Manuscr. Antiq. in Vit. S. Amphibal. Capgr. in eod. Jacob.
Genucn. in Vit. S. Albani and S. Amphibali.
cruore respersam obtulerunt. At ille Deo gratias agens, nouis Auditoribus
fecit de Religione sermonem. Cui mox illi consentientes, signaculum quod in
Christo est, ab eius sacris manibus alacriter susceperunt. The old Manuscript
of S. Amphibalus his life, Capgraue and others affirm, that this great
number, a thousand or more, did before their going to S. Amphibalus, moved with
the miracles before related, openly detest their old errors, and preach the
faith of Christ, Errorem pristinum detestantur: Christi fides ab omnibus
praedicatur.

3. The fame of this came quickly to Verolamium, and the Princes knowledge,
whereupon the Pagans thereabouts with the Rulers Authority, with all Power
they could make, with great fury and tumult, as though they had gone forth to
war begin their Journey to seek and persecute S. Amphibalus, and the newly
converted Christians by his preaching: ciues nimio furore commoti totis viribus
cum in genti strepitu iter ineunt, ac si essent ad praelia processuri. And
after many days travail, at the last they find S. Amphibalus preaching to
these New Christians, their carnal friends and Countrymen, for the Renown of
S. Amphibalus, as our Antiquities say, would not suffer him long to be
concealed. And presently this Pagan Army or Troop of Persecutours enraged with
deuelish fury, diabolica inuecti furia, most barbarously rush upon the Innocent
Christians, cut their bodies in pieces, and with unspeakable cruelty putt
them to death: The son not sparing his Father, nor brother his brother, no
man his neighbor or kinsman, but without any respect of Age, kindred,
friendship, or any natural bond or obligation thus martyr a thousand holy
Christians, at that time, and place. Only one man which detayned with
infirmity in the way could not come speedily enough to be present, escaping,
sine respectu aetatis, sanguinis, aut reuerentiae, vicini vicinos and Jacob.
Genuen. in Vit. S. Amphibali. Matthew. Westminster. an. 303. Manuscr. Antiq. and Capgr.
in S. Amphibalo.
amicos neci tradunt, and atrociter in ore gladij mill viros pro Christo
occidunt. Sicque Pater a filio, fratres a fratribus, ciues a ciuibus
trucidantur. Ex hoc sacro Collegio, vnus omnino superfuit, qui in via corporis
infirmitate detentus, adesse non potuit. And least any man reading in our
Histories of the like number a thousand Christians, martyred at Lichfeild in
this Persecution, and that Town in our old languadge thereupon taking and
still keeping that name, as a Field of blood, and bearing Arms accordingly
should take this to be the same Martyrdom; this doubt is decided before, when
our Historians assured us it was in the Country now called Wales, in which
Lichfeild never was, nor can be accounted, neither was it the way of these
Persecutours thither, from Verolamium, nor so long and tedious a Journey, Iter
tam laboriosum, as they went. And our Antiquities plainly say, the Martyrdom
of this thousand of Christians, was in the uttermost border of Britain, and
these Persecutours went thither, and there putt them so cruelly to death,
Dictum est, quod omnes pro Matthew. Westminster. An. 303.
quibus iter tam laboriosum assumpserant, in extremis finibus perierunt. When
all men know, Lichfeild to be no bordering, but a midland Town. So these were
not one, and the same, but two distinct Martyrdomes for time, place, parsons
and other circumstances different, only in number agreeing. So I must likewise
say, of a third Martyrdom, of so many Christians, near to Verolamium of which
I shall speak, when I bring S. Amphibalus thither again. Who at this bloody
Massacre, being compassed round about with the bodies of his Christian hearers
thus martyred, commended their blessed souls to God, Sanctus Amphibalus
vallatus corporibus occisorum, beatas animas Domino commendabat.

THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
THE MARTYRDOM OF S. AMPHIBALVS, and many others with him, or at that time and
place; and wonderful numbers converted then to Christ, by the Miracles then
there showed.

1. THese bloody persecutors having thus barbarously and without Matthew. Westminster.
an. 303. Manuscr. Antiq. in Vita S. Amphibali. Iac. Genuen. and Cap. grau. in
eod.
all compassion of Lynage, kyndred, friendship, Country or whatsoever relation
of love or mercy, put these holy Saints to death, they now power out the
bottom of their malice upon S. Amphibalus, neither regarding his Noble
descent before remembered, venerable and old years, learning or whasoeuer, but
bind his arms with thonges, and drive him barefooted before their horses so
long a Journey from the Borders of Britain, where they apprehended him, unto
the City of Verolam, where the Prefect and Lieutenant then was resident,
Brachia loris dirissimis co^stringentes, ante equos suos versus Ciuitatem
Verolamium, nudis incedere pedibus compulerunt. And as they thus contemptibly
carried him barefooted and bound, a sick man lyeing in the way, in the sight
and hearing of them all, cried out unto him, o Thou servant of God almighty
help me, that I which lie oppressed by my own infirmity, may be relieved by
thy intercession. For I do believe that by thy calling upon the name of
Christ, thou art able presently to restore my health unto me. And forthwith
the man which lay thus sick before the eyes of them all, arose up joyful and
perfectly well.

2. When these wicked Pagan persecutors had thus barbarously brought him within
the sight of the Walls of the City, as though this holy Saint had been
unworthy to enter into it, and their troops so great, by that is said
before, that they could not conveniently be received therein, they stay
themselves, as it were pitching their Tents in a place then desert, now called
Redburne three miles from S. Albans, throwing down their sheelds, and sticking
their spears in the ground, scuta reclinant, and hastas telluri defigunt. And
thus resting themselves, only S. Amphibalus rested not, but preached
continually the doctrine of Salvation to his enemies. Who in the meanetime gave
notice to the Prince, and those of the City of their return, and bringing
with the^ the Instructor of S. Alban, and that they had put all those
Christians before spoken off to death in the uttermost parts of the kingdom,
after their long Journey thither. Which when the Governor heard, he called the
people together, and thus exhorted them: Let us all go forth, and meet our
enemy, that he which offended may receive revenge of us all. And so hasting
forth, striving as it were who should go first, went by the way leading of the
North, tendentes per viam, quae de Ciuitate vertit ad Aquilonem, as our
Antiquities say, the better to set down the old place, and situation of that
ancient City, which they then left almost vacant, vrbem fere vacuam
reliquerunt. And coming in this raging madness, and multitude, to torment and
Martyr this S. Amphibalus Martyred.
holy Saint, they find him all wrapped in chains, or bonds, vinculis
irretitum, and presently stripped him naked, slitt his belly and pull out his
Intrals, tying them to a stake, which thy had fastened in the ground, enforcing
him to be ledd round about it. And the holy Saint of God showing no sign of
grief at all among such and so many afflictions, the wicked persecutors more
thereby enraged set him for a mark, as it were, and with their knives and
spears pierced and brake the rest of his body. After all which, this holy
Martyr stood with as cheerful a countenance, as if he had suffered no hurt at
all, and more constant though he now bore the signs of his Martyrdom in all
his body: Giving a miraculous spectacle of himself, that he could still live
after so great Torments, and so many kinds of death. Whereupon very many
beholding, and more and more wondering at the constancy of the blessed Martyr,
renouncing their Idols, submitted themselves to Christian faith, and prayed
Many converted to Christ at S. Amphibalus martyrdom. And prayer to martyrs.
with a loud voice to God, that by the merits, and intercession of the blessed
Martyr, they might be worthy to be partakers of everlasting life. Which when
the Prince perceived and knew, he presently called for the Tormentors, and
commanded all that had rejected, and forsaken the worship of Jacob. Genuens. in
Vita S. Amphibali. Manuscriptum Antiq. and Capgr. in eod.
their Gods, and embraced the doctrine of Amphibalus, to be put to death.

3. Which savage Edict the Paga^ souldiars effected, and killed a thousand
such, S. Amphibalus beholding it, and commending their souls to God, and
persuading his persecutors to renounce their errors, and be converted to
Christ, without whom no salvation can be had, nothing but Hell and eternal
damnation A thousand of the converted now to Christ are martyred with S.
Amphibalus.
to be expected. But the Persecutors did still persevere in their impiety, not
ceasing, so to torment this holy Saint with cruel stoning him, besides so many
torturs before remembered, that when his body was afterward miraculously found,
there was not one whole bone to be found in it, Nullum ex ossibus eius integrum
apparebat. Allthough it seems by the History of his life, that many of his
bones were broken with stones by these his so enraged Persecutors, that after
his blessed soul was separated from his body, thus lying still bound and tied,
they ceased not to break it more, with their casting great stones upon it,
Pagani Corpus exanime in vinculis constitutum lapidibus adhuc obruere con
cessabant. But so long as he lived in such extremity of Torments, as I have
related, allthough the stones were cast at him, as thick as hayle, saxorum
grandine, as some write, he still preserved in prayer never moving himself, on
one side or other, nec in partem alteram declinauit. And being now come to the
Periode of his punishments, and to yield his soul to God, looking toward
heaven, as an other S. Stephen saw Jesus standing on the right hand of his
Father, and heard a consorte of Angels in heaven, and among them knew S. Alban,
whom he inuocated to assist him. Saying, o holy Alban, pray unto our God, that
he will send a good Angel to meet me, that the dreadful Robber let me
not, nor the wicked part hinder me in my Journey, Inter eos Albanum suum
recognouit, quem sibi in auxilium inuocans. S. Amphibalus prays to S. Alban.
Sancte, inquit, Albane Deum nostrum depreceris, vt mihi Angelum bonum obuiam
mittat; ne mihi praedo truculentus obsistere, nec Iter meum pars iniqua valeat
impedire. And a voice spoke unto him from heaven in the hearing of all, in this
manner: Verily I say to thee, this day thou shall be with thy Disciple Alban in
Paradise. And two Angels shining with an heavenly brightness came down to him,
and taking with them the soul of the blessed, resplendant with a wonderful
whitenes, with Hymns, and praises carried it to heaven. Which done to make him
both glorious there, and honorable one earth, a Christian secretly conueying
away his holy body reverently buried it, Quidam fidelis in Christo, beati
Martyris Corpus clam auferens, sub terra reuerenter occultauit.

4. And God himself now began to honor him hear, and be revenged upon his
Enemies and Persecutours. Those lips of theirs which had been opened before to
blasphemies toward God and reuilings to his holy Saint, are now miraculously
drawn awry, that their speech is hindered, distorquentur labia. The tongues
which had so abused him, now burn, ardent linguae: and the faces of them which
had so deformed him, are made deformed, Varia The strange punishments God laid
upon the Judge and persecutors of S. Amphibalus.
deformitas vultus apprehendit. All their members are so stiff, that the
stoners and tormentours of the holy man could not now lift one stone from the
ground, Omnium membrorum flexibilitas ita repent diriguit, vt ne lapidem
quidem de terra leuare iam possent. And the Judge or Prince himself loosing
his understanding of reason, became madd, Iudex amisso rationis intellectu,
amens effectus est. And how many soever had lifted up their hand against our
Lord, did of him receive due reuendge for their demeritts, Quotquot manum
erexerant contra Dominum, dignam pro meritis a iusto Iudice senserant vltionem.
Hereupon, The whole City of Verolame converted to Christ by S. Amphibalus
miracles and martyrdom.
the whole City received the faith of Christ, and desired to be baptized. And
many by the Inspiration of God forsaking their goods, go to Rome, Romam
adeunt, bewail their sins and confess their errors. With S. Amphibalus 9.
other Christians were martyred, as Matthew of Paris writes. Neither is it
probable, that so renowned a Bishop as S. Amphibalus, was apprehended alone,
being taken as he was preaching to the people, or such Matthew. Paris Hist. p.
179. 180. 181. 182. 183.
rage as then reigned in the Persecutours, would yield them much more favor
then they did to S. Amphibalus. But their malice being most unto him, and he so
famous, all our Histories remember him, almost forgotting the others.

5. Yet diverse Manuscripts, and Ihon Capgraue with others write, that at
Manusc. Antiq. and Capg. in Vita S. Amphibali.
the finding of S. Amphibalus his body, the bodies of two other Martyrs were
found in the same place by him, but not so broken, and mangled as his body was,
aliorum Sanctorum ossa fere illaesa perdurassent: But S. Amphibalus body was
stoned and broken even after he was dead, Lapidibus conquassatus occubuit: and
post eius mortem persecutorum immanitas exanima membra saxorum ictibus obruit
and confregit. He suffered Martyrdom in the same year, with S. Manuscr.
Eccles. Winton. Author of Engl. Mart. 25. June. Matthew. Paris Hist. p. 183.
Alban, as the old Manuscript of Winchester relates: eodem anno passus est
Amphibalus. But upon what day, I do not find for certain. For whereas a late
Writer sets down the day of his Passion to have been upon the 25. day of
June, Matthew Paris proves this was not the day of his Passion, but Invention,
which being diverse hundreds of years after, I am not now to entreat thereof.
And this is disproued by the Antiquity of Winchester before. For if as it
teaches S. Alban and S. Amphibalus were both martyred in one year, S. Alban
being putt to death as we read in the approved History of his life, decimo
Kalendas Iulij, which is the 22. day of June, S. Amphibalus by that is said
before, could not possibly be Martyred upon the 25. day of the same month in
the same year, being but two days between. And if we defer it until the
same day the next year, they suffered not, eodem anno, the same year, as that
old Record affirms.

6. Of S. Augulus, S. Stephen, and S. Socrates, which some would have, to have
been Martyred in this time, I have spoken in my first Centenary, and dare not
defer their glory to this time. It is no marvel though few names of so
great numbers, and thowsands are left unto us, when by some Writers the
Persecution was so great in Britain, that except those which hidd themselves,
and could not be witnesses of things publikly done, all the Christians of
Britain were then Martyred, Sunt qui tradunt vniuersos in Britannia
Christianos martyrio Harpesfeld. Hist. Eccl. Anglic. in 6. primis soeculis c.
10. p. 17. Gildas lib. de excid. c. 8. Gild. supr. c. 7.
defunctos, sepositis ijs qui occultis and secretis locis se abdidere. And S.
Gildas himself does seem to affirm no less, when he says, they which were
then left alive, had hidden themselves in woods, deserts and dens: qui
superfuerant siluis ac desertis, abditisque speluncis se occultauere. Yet he
tempereth this hard assertion, where he says this Persecution was so rigorous
only in some, not all places of this Country, Ita vt ne vestigium quidem si
fieri potuisset, in non nullis Prouinciae locis Christianae Religionis
appareret. And those parts of Britain which were then absolutely under the
Romans command, were by their merciless cruelty in this estate. So many
mutations of times, changes of the names of places, and rages of Infidels,
Romans, Saxons, and others have deprived us both of the names, and holy Reliks
of those Martyrs, Lugubri Galfr. Mon. l. 5. Hist. c. 5.
Barbarorum diuortio ciuibus adempta. The Country now called Walls where so
many changes have not been, in some places, will yield us some memories of such
things, more then England can, subject to so many and general almost
alterations, which it has suffered.

THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
HOW BY COILVS BEING KING, AND preuayling against the Roman Persecutours, and
their adherents hear, the Persecution in Britain ceased.

1. NOW to calm these tempests of troubles, I suppose (by our best Histories)
that this Persecution of Dioclesian, and Maximian hear raged about the space
of 9. or 10. years in the time of Asclepiodotus principally, and that now at
the Martyrdom of S. Amphibalus, so great miseries and afflictions had been
laid upon our holy Christians hear long time, as their flying from hence unto
other Nations, their aboade there, return hither again, and hear continuing
no short space, before they were putt to death, as is manifest in the case of
S. Amphibalus, not martyred until almost a year after S. Alban, who was kept
in prison 6. months before his Martyrdom, that now thowsands were converted
to Christ, and the chief Municipall Cities themselves, where Idolatry so
reigned, that a Christian was rare to be then found in them as in Verolam,
were now only inhabited by Christians, fidem Christi tota ciuitas deuote
suscepit, and not a Pagan to be seen, and this by the omnipotent working of
God. And the Idolatrous Judge or Prince himself, that ruled hear under the
Pagan Romans, and persecuted by their Power even to the uttermost bounds of
Britain, was madd amens effectus, that he was unable to Rule, and govern any
longer, but needed to be ruled and governed himself by others. And yet as is
manifest before, by his Persecutions in all places of Britain, in such
powerful and tumultuous manner, with great troops, and military companies of
his persecuting vassals, and Instruments, which none but a Roman Lieutenant, or
King hear then could raise and command. This Judge, King and Roman
Lieutenant, as the Scottish Historians with others call him, was King
Asclepiodotus, thus greeuiously either of malice or for fear of the Romans
then persecuting, and for so doing hated of God and man.

2. Therefore King Coel having now such warrant and way to advance his true
Title to the Crown of his kingdom, and help to free the afflicted Christians
thereof, from the miseries of their so long and grieuious Persecution (as it
seems most probable) at this time, and upon these occasions he took arms
against Asclepiodotus reputed King in this Persecution, slew him, and was
crowned King, as our ancient Historians deliver unto us, In tanta autem
Persecutione, insurrexit Coelus Dux Caercolun, id est Colcestriae in
Asclepiodotum, Pontic. Vir. Brit. Hist. l. 5. Galfrid. Monum. Hist. Reg. Brit.
l. 5. c. 5. and 6. Manuscr. Gallic. antiq. c. 28. an. 286. Boet. lib. 6.
Harding. Chronic. c. 58. f. 47.
qui eum interfecit, and Regni diademate potitus. Harding also plainly says,
that Coel took Arms against Asclepiodotus, by reason of this great
Persecution.

For which Duke Coil again him rose full hot, Yet he excuses Asclepiodotus,
for being any mouer of that Persecution, but suffering the Tyrant Maximian so
cruelly to prosecute it, and not resisting him therein, which he rather
imputes to want of Power, then will, and desire in him, when he says.

Who for great fear suffered all this pain
(Of Christians)
And durst nothing again this Tyrant steare,
But him withdrew to hyde him, was full feign.
Where he does rather insinuate that Asclepiodotus was in Judgment a friend,
rather then Persecutour of Christians, and himself in some sort persecuted by
the Roman Paga^s, in that respect which seems expressed, in that this Author
says of him, that he was enforced to hide himself, from the Pagan Roman
Persecutours. Whereof some may take the reason to have been, because he was not
so foreward in persecuting Christians hear, as was expected o^ desired of the
Roman Pagan Persecutours: and we find diverse Antiquities testifying, that
before, there was not any persecution hear against Christians, but their
Religion was in peace and quiet, publicly professed, and this Asclepiodotus to
redeem and preserve such Britans liberty in that and all other privileges,
warred against Alectus the Pagan Roman Governor, and in sign of his
detestation of their Idolatrous profession besett and assaulted him, and his
Confederats Galfr. Mon. hist. Reg Brit. l. 5. c. 4. Po^t. Vir. l. 5. Hist.
Matthew. Westminster. An. 294.
when they were doing their greatest and most solemn Sacrifices to their Gods.
And preuayling against him by common acclamation of the people, then
Christians, to take upon him the Diadem, was created King: clamante populo, vt
diadema caperet, Rex creatur. And this with consent of all the Nobility, then
also Christians, omnibus Ducibus Britanniae. And thus generally and solemly
crowned King by our Christian Britans, did in the time of his Reign rule in
Justice, and equity, suppressing cruelty and doers of Injury, as our same
Christian Antiquaries deliver, Tractauit Patriam recta iustitia and pace december
an^is: raptorumque saeuitiam, atque latronum mucrones coercuit. And was most
just by the space of 10. years, Rex creatur and per december annos iustissimus
fuit. Which Christians neither would, nor in conscience could have written of
him, if he had been all ways known unto them to have been a Persecutour, and
Worker of such injustice, as is practiced in unjust Persecutions.

3. But I have made memory before, that Asclepiodotus was King hear a far
longer time, then ten years, and by some three times ten, 30. years, and
th^se Authors themselves with others acknowledge that in the mean time
interea, and in his days, in diebus ipsius, this great Persecution of
Christians Galf. Mon. Vir. and Matthew. West. supr.
was raised hear: oritur ingens illa Christianorum Persecutio. And it is
evident before, that howsoever Asclepiodotus in some part of his Rei^gne hear
behaved, and carried himself well, and justly to the Christian Subjects of
Britain, yet it is undeniably evident by that I have written of him before,
being by diverse witnesses, both the persecuting King, Lieutenant and Judge in
that cruel Persecution, that howsoever he was in internal judgment affected,
being externally a condemned Persecutour both by God and man, King Coel might
justly pursue his right to Britain, with hope thereby in better manner to
redeem the afflictions of his Country Christians, being more potent and able,
and likely more willing then Asclepiodotus was, not so foreward in any
judgments as he should have been in defending Innocents, if he had not been an
Actual Persecutour, which Harding himself thus in these plain Terms
expresses.

This Persecution, as some Chroniclers saine,
The ten year was of Asclepiodote, Harding Chron. c. 58. f. 47.

For which Duke Coile again him rose full hot,
The Duke Cair Colun that hight Coylus,
Which City now this day Colchester hight,
Then Crowned was that slew Asclepiodotus,
For cause he came not forth with all his might
The Tyranute fell to againstande, as he hight,
Wherefore Britains were all full glad and fain,
Of King Coilus that succored all their pain.
4. And howsoever Asclepiodotus concurred with the Roman Persecurours, Galfrid.
Mon. Hist. Reg. Brit. c. 6. Manuscr. antiq. in Vit. S. Helenae. Capgr. in
cadem. Pontic. Virun. H^st. l. 5. Galf. Mon. sup. c. 6. Matthew. Westminster. an. 302.
Ga^frid. Mon. Hist. Reg. Briton. l. 5. cap. 6. Vir. lib. 5. Man. Gallic. Antiq.
c. 28. An. 286. Harding. Chron. Marian. Scot. aetat. 6. l. 2. in Dioclesiano.
Matthew. Westminster. an. 302. Manuscr. Gallic. Antiq. c. 28. Old. Engl. Hist. f. 38.
Hect. Boeth. l. 6. Hellinsh. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 27. Stowe and Howes Hist.
Titul. Romans in Coil. Galfr. Mon. lib. 5. c. 6. Hist. Reg. B^^t.
and pleased them in vexing, and tormenting Christians hear in Britain: yet
otherwise he was very unpleasing to them, per omnia Romanam potestatem
turhauerat: He troubled the Roman Power in all things, and therefore they were
glad of his death. Ponticus Virunnius, himself a Roman says, they did esteem
him their great enemy, and as for such an one rejoiced of his death: Romani
gauisi sunt tanto host interfecto. And this Joy was not only of particular
Roman Persecutours, but of the whole Senate which ruled cheifely in matters of
Estate, Cumque id Senatui nuntiatum est, gauisi sunt propter Regis mortem, quia
per omnia Romanam potestatem turbauerat. Therefore when our Antiquities assure
us, that Coel obtinuit Regnum, obtained the kingdom, Regni diademate se
insigniuit: And Regni diademate potitus, was Crowned, and as an old French
Manuscript speaks, reigned over Britain, regna sur Bretaigne, and was thus
enabled, and made powerable to redress what he found offensive, and wicked,
being absolute King, and joyfully so received of the Britans, as our Historian
said before.

Wherefore Britains were all full glad and fain,
Of King Coilus that succored all their pain:
And he himself taking exception to Asclepiodotus, next to his chardging him
with usurping the Crown, for being too barkward in resisting the Roman
persecutors, would not now fall into the like error with him, but as is proved
already, succored all their pain, and utterly ceased the Persecution against
the Christians of Britain, which were thus Joyful of his Coronatio^, and
thereby releiued and redeemed the^ from their afflictions all his time. Which
both by our own and foreign Historia^s, Catholics and Protestants continued
to the end of this third hundred of years, the Romans having no power hear
either to persecute Christians, or to any other purpose. But as our British
and other Histories testify, wholly lost their government hear, until after
the death of King Coel, or the coming of Co^sta^tius, his son in Law hither
the second time, very little before King Coel his death, Recolentes damnum quod
de amisso regno habuerant. Our Scottish Historians say, that King Coel utterly
destroyed both the Romans, and all the Britans also, which were their
Favorers, and set forth a severe Edict, to search forth all Romans and
Britans, which had followed them hear, and caused them to be punished and put
to death, and so with most joyful and general applause of the people, Nobles
and others, that the crown of Britain was thus restored to the true Heir of
their Regal blood, was crowned King, and Hector Boeth. Scot. Hist. l. 6. f.
101.
he established the kingdom in the British government again, Coel Victor
factus, Asclepiodotum Romanum Legatum cum Romany Praesidijs, and quibusdam
Britanis Nobilibus Romanorum fautoribus interemit. Confectoque praelio, and
Britonibus caeteris in fidem receptis, vt summa potestas ad regiam progeniem,
cui impie fuerat adempta, aliquando rediret, populus omnis laetis
acclamationibus, Patribus authoribus, ipsum Coelem regnare iubet. Ille
Primoribus regni, ac populo quod regnum sibi detulissent, gratijs actis, vt
regnum sibi stabiliret, atroci iubet Edicto, Romanos, and qui eorum sequebantur
parts, quoscunque Britannici sanguinis viros perquiri, and inuentos varijs
extingui supplicijs. So that now, so severe a Law being made, and executed,
both against the persecuting Romans, and all such Britans, as had joined with
them against the Christian Inhabitants of this Nation, and all this done by the
Authority of our King, and with the consent both of the Nobility, and people,
Primoribus regni, and populo, we must needs end the persecution of Christians
hear, with the beginning of King Coel his Reign.

5. And it could not be singular in this point, if we should hold, that King
Coel was actually a Christian, and not only a friend to such: for first, all
they, which affirm him to have been Kinsman, or Heir to our first Christian
King S. Lucius, easily prove him a Christian, for such a man would not lead
either child, or any Kinsman which by him had that Title, to have any other
the^ Christian education. Secondly, by the time of his age, whether he was to
King Lucius, so near, or no, we must needs confess, he lived most part of his
life, when Christianity flourished in this kingdom, being an aged man, before
Dioclesian his Persecution began. Thirdly, our Historians say, that his
daughter S. Helen, which had her education by his direction, was instructed and
taught in the Christian faith, in fide Catholica instructa at que edo^cta. A
late writer thus speaks of this with his older Author: Helena was first
instructed in the faith of Manuscript. antiq. in Vit. S. Helenae Capgr. in ead.
Harris. Hist. l. 4. c. 4. Petr. de Natal. l. 7. c. 73.
Christ by Coil her father, as Petrus de Natalibus says. And yet if we incline
to this opinion, we may easily answer them, that will object, the public and
universal restitution of Christian Religion, as building Churches,
Monasteries, and such holy Foundations, was not in his time: For by the common
opinion, his reign was short, little, or not above four years. A great part
whereof was spent, in extirpating the Persecutors, and the rest in preparation
Matthew. Westminster. an. 302. Galfrid. Mon. l. 5. Hist. c. 6. Virun. l. 5. Harding.
Chron. c. 60. f. 48.
to resist a new Invasion of the Romans, not reigning in quiet and security
from these troubles and fears the space of two months by any Writers. And so
after so great and terrible tempest of Persecution, it was a wonderful
comfort, and happiness for the British Christians, to enter into such a calm,
and quiet, to live in security, and rest, freed from their former miseries,
under so renowned a King, which was all he could do, or they expect in such
times and circumstances.

THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN.

THE FOVRTH AGE.

THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN.
THE FOVRTH AGE.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
OF THE GREAT PEACE, AND QVIET THE Church of Britain enjoyed, during the
whole life, and Reign of Constantius Emperor, and King hear in Britain; and
Constantine his son by Saint Helen was hear brought up in Christian
Religion.

1. BEING now to enter into the History of the fourth hundredth of years, we
find the estate of the world, and Church of Christ, as we left the^ in the
last Age, S. Marcellinus Pope of Rome, chief Ruler in the house of God on
earth, the holy Clergy and other Christians living in Persecution, and
Dioclesian and Maximinia^ the persecuting Emperors in all places, where they
did or could ouersway, afflicting them with most cruel miseries; in Britain
(lately redeemed from their bloody tyranny by King Coel, still reigning hear)
we lived still in rest and quietness, free both from Persecution in Religion,
and such other greeuances, as were ordinarily suffered under the Pagan Romans
government. But the Romans greedy of their own honor, and thereby impatient of
our British ease, and peace (as our Histories deliver unto us) began now to
bethink themselves of the loss they had of Britain, which had forsaken them:
Romani recolentes damnum quod de amisso regno habuerant, and falling Galfrid.
Mon. l. 5. Hist. c. 6.
into deliberation, whom they were best to send with their forces hither, to
regaine it unto them again, concluded Constantius to be the fittest
Constantius father of Constantine the Great his coming into Britain and when.
man, both for his long experience, and success in Martial affairs, being
made a Caesar before in the 292. year of Christ, when he forsook S. Helen,
and took Theodora, and for the great love of the Britans unto him after he
married S. Helen, and his kindness unto them, until by the compulsion of
Maximinian he left that his holy true wife; which old love and liking between
them was now most like to be renewed and restored again, Theodora (the breach
and occasion of the discontinuance thereof) Berengos. Abbas l. 3. c. 3. de
Invent. and Laud S. Crucis. Matthew. West. an. 302. Galfrid. Mon. Hist. Brit. l.
5. c. 6. Pont. Vir. Hist. l. 5. Hard. Chron. c. 60. f. 48. Matthew. Westminster. sup.
an. 302. Manuscr. Gallic. antiq. c. 23. Marian. Scot. aetat. 6. l. an. 293.
295. 298. 303. 304. 305. Baron. Annal. An. 304. Spond. ib. Marian. Scot. aetat.
6. l. 2. an. 305.
being now lately dead. And therefore they sent Constantius hither to procure
the regaining of Britain unto their Empire, Romani legauerunt Constantium qui
Hispaniam aliasque terras quamplures ipsis subdiderat, vt Britanniam Romanae
redderet dignitati. Matthew of Westminster sets down this his second
coming into Britain to have been in the second year of this Age, anno
gratiae 302. An old French Manuscript also makes it much about this time.
Marianus Scotus keeps him out of Britain a little longer, and all they which
before have proved, he was in foreign Countries until the end of the last
Age, or after, make this undoubted, and certain; And seeing all agree he was
sent hither by others of higher dignity, he must needs come into Britain in
this voyadge, when he was a Caesar, and before he was Emperor, which was in the
year of Christ 304. Dioclesian and Maximinian then relinquishing the Empire,
and leaving it to Constantius and Galerius. Marianus places it in the year
following 305. And it is most manifest in this account, that Constantius could
not make this his second Journey into Britain, until this Age was entered, and
so was most free from our Persecution ended hear before this time. But so
soon as he now came hither, Ambassadges of peace, without any hostile Act,
were sent between our King Coel, and Constantius. And Constantius free from
all persecution of Christians in Britain.
with great love and liking on both sides, this honorable peace was concluded,
to wit, that King Coel should during his life quietly possess, and enjoy the
kingdom of Britain, only paying unto the Romans the ancient Tribute, and
nothing else: nihilque aliud praeter solitum Tributum Romanae dignitati Galfr.
Monum. Hist. Reg. Brito: l. 5. c. 6. Pont. Virun. l. 5. Hist. Manusc. Gallic.
sup. Matthew. Westminster. Ann. 302. Hard. Chron. c. 60. 61.
solueret. And that Constantius should take again his wife S. Helen, daughter
and Heir to King Coel, and by her right be King hear after the death of her
Father King Coel. By which covenant and Article agreed upon, and truly
executed, as it was, the first marriage between Constantius and Helen was even
by Roman Pagan laws themselves proved, and declared to be true and lawful,
and the children therein begotton legitimate, and the taking of Theodora living
with her, and children by her to be adulterate, and utterly The first marriage
between Constantius and S. Hele^ true marriage by the Roman Paga^ law, and
the children therein begotten legitimate, that with Theodora adul^^^ate.
vnallowable in any sense, even by their own Pagan Constitutions. For although
those Paga^ wicked Decrees did allow to the Presidents of Provinces which were
unmarried without penalty to keep Concubins, prophanly thinking (as some new
protesting Christians have done) that men unmarried could not live chaste, yet
they never permitted it to married Prefects and Presidents, such as Constantius
was, as their own Historians witness: vt Praesides Prouinciarum si vxores non
haberent, acciperent singulas concubinas, quod sine his esse non possent. By
which Roman Heathnish law, Theodora was not only the Concubine, and no wife
of Constantius, but a Concubine prohibited Aelius Lampridius in Alexandro
Seuero.
in their own proceedings, and her children in like case of reproach with her.

2. Therefore Constantius being against his will by the power of Maximinian
before separated from S. Helen, his true wife, and a Christian from Matthew.
Westminster. Galfr. Monum. and alij supra. ^ Manuscript. Histor. Eccl. Wintonien.
Caius Histor. Cantabr. Accademiae p. 19.
that time ever in his affection, could not but be most ready and joyful to be
so quietly and honorably reconciled unto her again. Which is sufficiently
insinuated by our cited Antiquaries, testifying that Constantius in all things
granted to King Coel his demands, requiring nothing of him for the Romans but
their old Tribute, Cuius petitionibus adquiesce^s Consta^tius, nihil praeter
solitum tributum ab ipso petebat. Which, as our Antiquaries say, was 1006.
pounds only in money. One of our Historians says of this matter in this
manner: Harding supr. c. 60.


Of which Coustance was glad of his entente
And here abode at prayer of the King.
Whereby he did sufficiently declare, the great content and joy he had of this
reconciliation to his wife S. Helen, and her Father, his Father in law King
Coilus, rather choosing and preferring during his life to make his abode hear
as a subject, then now being chosen and designed Emperor to continue in any
other Nation with that greatest temporal glory, and command.

3. Thus he signified this so long and much desired atonement, Helenam Coeli
Regis filiam in societatem Thori recepit. Which word, recepit, that
Constantius did at this time receive Helen again, if we had no other Argument
or authority used by diverse our ancient Antiquaries, proves, that this was
the reconciliation, and not first marriage of these noble parsons, which is
inuincibly proved already to have been above 30. years before. And impossible
it is, that any of these Authors which speak of this union, should take it for
their first Union in Marriage; for all of them Matthew, Westminster. an. 302. 305.
Marian. Scot. Ann. 305. 306.
acknowledge, that Constantius died soon after this reconciliation. The Monk
of Westminster says within 3. years, by Marianus within 2. years. By
Martinus Polonus the same year. The like have others, by which account and
Confession, Constantine should either be unborn, or not above 2. years old at
the most when he was King of Britain, and Emperor also after his Fathers
death: When it is proved before by all Antiquity, and the best Historians
which have written of this matter, Greek, Latin, Catholics and Protestants,
that he was above 30. years of age at this time: and his Mother S. Helen, whom
Matthew of Westminster seems at this reconciliation to call, virginem valde
speciosam, an exceeding beutifull virgin, and Harding, both good and young, had
been Constantius his wife 35. or 36. years before, and brought him diverse
children, whereof Constantine the Great now so old, as I have remembered, was
the youngest. shortly after this coming of Constantius, and this Atonement
between him, and King Coel thus made, King Coel died, within five weeks,
says Harding: a month and eight days says Galfridus, Hard. Chron. c. 6.
Galfrid. Monum. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 6. Po^t. Virun. Hist. l. 5. Harding
Chron. c. 61.
Emenso mense grauissima infirmit as occupauit Coel, ipsumque intra octo dies
morte affecit. Virunnius says within one month, Intra mensem emortiur Coelus.
So likewise has the Monk of Westminster: Coelus elapso mense vitam finiuit.
Harding writes that Co^stantius was Emperor before he was King of Britain:

But King Constance of Rome was hie Cheiftain
By the Senate first made the Emperor
And after King of Britain and Governor.
4. And all Historians agree that he was Emperor next and immediately to
Dioclesian and Maximinian, who as Baronius, Spondanus and others prove, gave
over the Empire in the 304. year of Christ, Marianus says in the 305. year,
when by common account before Constantius was come into Britain, and continued
hear, and not enjoying the Empire above 2. years, if he had then been first
married to S. Helen, and Constantine had been their first, or only son or
child, he could not have been above one year old at his Fathers death to be
both king of Britain and Emperor. When it is certain out of Eusebius and
others before, that Constantine was above thirty years old, and had been
general of an Army before his Fathers death, which the same Author further
confirms, when comparing Constantine the Great with Alexander the Great
saying that Alexander lived but 32. years, and reigned little more then the
third part of that time; Constantine was as old as Eusebius. l. 1. de Vita.
Constantini c. 3. 4.
Alexander was at his death, when he began to reign, doubled Alexanders time
of life, and reigned thrice as long, At noster hic Imperator, eo aetatis
tempore regnum obtinuit, quo ille Macedo cessit e vita: illius autem vitae
spatium, temporis propagatione duplicauit: regnique longitudinem triplo
reddidit diuturniorem. Therefore Alexander living 32. years complete,
compleuit duos and triginta annos: Constantius finding the Christian Britans
free and quiet at the death of King Coel, so preserved them.
Constantine must needs be so old at his Fathers death, when he began to
reign, and so his Father and mother Constantius and Helen married together a
longer time.

5. But King Coel having freed the Christians of Britain from Persecution, and
now dying, left them thus quiett, and secuer from those vexations to
Constantius. Who during his life continued and maintained them in the same or
rather in better condition, as I have sufficiently remembered before not only
in giving them tolleration and freedom from trouble and molestation, as
Sozomen with others witness: Constantius Constantini pater permisit
Christianis Sozomen. Hist. Ecclesiast. l. 1. c. 6
potestatem libere suam religionem excolendi, And was not against the law for
Christians in Britain to profess their Religion in his time, Britannis non
contra leges visum esse, Christianam religionem dum adhuc vitae suppeditabat
Constantio profiteri: But he preferred the most constant Christians to the
highest Eusebius. l. 1. de Vit. Constantini c. 11.
offices, and greatest trust: stipatores suos, and ipsius regni custodes
constituit. He himself confessed the true God, abolished Idolatry, Repudiata
penitus impiorum in varijs dijs colendis superstitione, Deum omnium moderatorem
vltro agnouit. And so consecrated his whole family to God, that his Court was
as a Church, wherein were both Clergy men and godly Christians truly serving
God, Omnem suam familia^ vni Regi Deo consecrauit: adeo vt multitudo quae intra
regiam ipsam coiuerat, nihil ab Ecclesiae forma distare videretur: in qua iner
ant Dei Ministri, qui continuos cultus pro Imperatore etiam tum obierunt, cum
piorum hominum genus and vere Deo inseruientium, alibi apud Gentilium
multitudinem ne nominari quidem absque periculo poterat. This blessing and
benefit he brought into Britain and to our Christians hear, and publicly
maintained it even in those times, as this ancient Author is witness, when
the name of Christians in other places was so odious that without danger it
could not be spoken off. Which he further confirms in an other place, where
speaking in the name of Christians he says, that among the Emperors of that
time, only Constanstius did neither in any sort persecute Christians, or
participated with them which did, but kept all them which were under him
without hurt and secure from all trouble, neither pulled down Churches, or did
any other thing Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 14.
against them, Constantius solus ex nostri temporis Imperatoribus nec belli
aduersum nos praesumpti vllo modo particeps fuit, sed quos sub se habuit pios,
indemnes, and ab omni calumnia securos seruauit, and neque domos Ecclesiarum
demolitus, nec aliud Idem Eusebius apud Baron. and Spondan. Ann. 304.
quippiam contra nos operatus. And else where he teaches again, that the parts
of the west Empire did generatly receive quietness from Persecution when
Constantius reigned. which allthough Baronius and Spondanus do not so well
allow upon Eusebius his words, in all places of the west, because as they
alleidge, Constantius neither presently would, nor could be against the Edicts
of the Emperors still living, when he himself remained in Britain in the end
of the world, and Italy was then full of wars. But Eusebius writes not this
Sozomen. l. 1. c. 6.
singularly, but Sozomen and others testify as much: that when the Churches of
God were persecuted in all other parts of the world, only Constantius granted
liberty of Conscience to the Christians under him, Cum Ecclesiae in alijs
orbis partibus persecutionum fluctibus iactarentur solus Constantius
Constantini pater permisit Christianis potestatem libere suam religionem
excolendi: And again generally of all Christian Churches in the part of his
Empire, Ecclesiae quae erant in ea Imperij part quae Constantino parebat, in
summa laetitia vitam egerunt. And were not only quiet under him, but thus
lived in great Joy, and did increase being honored and rewarded by him:
creueruntque in dies magis magisque tam beneuoli, tamque pacis and concordiae
studiosi beneficijs ornatae.

6. And relating his experiment to prove constant Christians before remembered,
and how he admitted such for his nearest friends, and Counsailers, in amicorum
atque adeo Consiliariorum numero habere decreuit. He gathers from hence that
the Gauls, Britans and others under him were by him exempted from the penal
Laws of the persecutors, he taking them away, and making them frustrate in his
Dominions, Hinc capere coniecturam licet, neque Gallis, neque Britannis, neque
alijs, qui circiter montes Pyrenaeos ad Oceanum Occidentalem vsque incolunt
contra leges visum esse Christianam Religionem, dum adhuc vita suppeditabat
Constantio, profiteri. And the objections which Baronius makes, do rather
prove then improve the quietness of Christians in this Nation, when Constantius
was hear. For first the unquietness of Italy rather helped, then hindered our
peace, our Persecution proceeding from thence, now not able to persecute us,
nor take reuendge of Constantius for protecting us. And his being in Britain,
he being so friendly always to Christians as Baronius often confesses, must
much more procure ease and freedom to our Christians, where there was noe man
of power to contradict or resist it, Constantius being both King and Emperor
hear, and the kingdom of Britain a Christian kingdom: Therefore howsoever
his reasons make doubt of some other places, whose state and condition was not
like unto ours, of Britain Bed. l. 1. Hist. c. 8. Galf. Mon. Hist. Reg. Brit.
l. 5. c. 5. 6. Manusc. Galli. antiq. c. 28. 29. Virun. l. 5. Hist. Harding
Chron. cap. 57. 58. 59. 60. Henricus Hunting. Hist. l. 1. Socrates Eccles.
Hist. l. 1. c. 1. Eus. l. 1. Vit. Co^stantini c. 9. Theodoret. Hist. Eccl. l.
1. c. 24.
they do not move any question of the quiet thereof in cause of Religion, but
establish and confirm it. And therefore our own best allowed and ancient
Historians S. Bid, Galfridus, Henry of Huntington, an old French Manuscript,
Viru^nius, Harding, and others setle Constantius hear in Britain after all
our Persecution ended, and nothing but all favor to Chrstia^s hear in his
time, and not only a tolleration granted, but public profession of
Christianity generally allowed, and by Regal and Imperial warrant of
Constantius used, and exercised, as shall immediately more plainly appear in
the next Chapter.

7. And if we had rather harken to foreign writers in or near that time, we
have sufficient warrant, not only that he recalled himself from the worship of
the Pagan gods, as diverse are witnesses: Constantius se a Deorum Gentilium
veneratione auocauerat, But as Eusebius and others testify of him, he gave
free power and license to all under him to exercise Christian Religion without
any molestation: illis qui ab ipso regebantur, liberam verae in Deum religionis
sine Constantine the great first instructed in Christian Religion in Britain.
molestia excolendae permisit potestatem. And this as he writes, when the
greatest Persecution was in other places. And had care to instruct his son
Constantine the Great, which he left his Heir, in the same faith as we may
easily conclude, from the words of Constantine himself registered by Theodoret:
huius Dei adiutus open, orsus ab vltimis Oceani finibus vniuersum orbem terrarum
Sozom. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 5. Chronicon Monast. Abingdonien. apud Nich.
Harpesfeld. Hist. Eccl. 10. saecul. p. 203. c. 9.
firmae salutis spe erexi, that eue^ from the ends of the Ocean (meaning
Britain) he was assisted by God. And Sozomen says, it is evidently known
unto all men that great Constantine was first instructed in the Christian
faith among the Britans, Apud Britannos liquido constat inter omnes
Constantinum primum religione Christiana imbutum. And the Cronicle of Abington
near Oxford testifies he was brought up in that old Abbey, which we must
needs asscribe to his parents Constantius and Helena. And we find not any other
but Constantius, except we will apply it to King Coel, and then it was received
and approved by him, who hear in Britain caused the persecutors to be putt to
death, and the Persecution therevppon ceased, as S. Gildas writes:
emarcescentibus Gild. l. de conq. Brit. c. 8.
nece suorum Authorum nefarijs Decretis: For this must needs be applied to
Persecutors in Britain, and not to the Tyrants Dioclesian, and Maximinian, the
Persecution hear endeed long before their death, as is proved before, and
neither of them nor any other Emperor, but Constantius having power or command
hear at this time. And hereupon our Protestant Historians themselves thus
testify of him, Constantius abolished the superstition of the Stowe and Howes
Hist. tit. Romans in Constantius, and Constantine.
Gentiles in his Dominians. So that afterward Britain felt no persecutions.
Constantius renounced the Idolatry of the Gentiles.

THE II. CHAPTER.
OF THE FINDING THE HOLY CROSS by S. Helen in Constantius his time. His
Christian life and death, and crowning his son Constantine Emperor hear in
Britain.

1. I Have showed before out of S. Gildas and others, as well that the
Persecution, called Dioclesians, did not continue ten years in this kingdom;
in one place he terms it, Persecutionem Dioclesiani Tyranni nouennem: the
nine years Persecution of Dioclesian the Tyrant; and in the next Chapter not
wholly ten years long, bilustro turbinis necdum expleto: As also that it
wholly ended Gildas l. de excid. and conquest. Brit. c. 7. 8.
in the time of King Coel, those Persecutours then having no power or
Authority hear, and so together with their other ouerruling and commanding
Decrees, the bloody Edicts of persecuting Christians hear were utterly
extinct, and made inualidate; and as is evident before never being renewed, but
altogether omitted by Constantius, this great friend of Christians: such of
this Nation were fully and undoubtedly thereby restored to their ancient
liberties, Privileges, and Immunities in matters of Religion, if Constantius
and Helen our Emperor and Empress, King and Queen had then given no further
and express approbation unto them: Which we may not reasonably call into
question, when we remember their absolute and independing regal right and
possession without contradiction, they had in this kingdom, the natural love
and affection they bore unto it, and that to them, with their Religious care
and desire they had to defend and advance Christian Religion, even in times,
and places when, and where they were not so enabled, nor drawn thereto with so
many and strong bands of duty, and affection. We have heard before, that other
Churches under his Empire were endowed by his benefits and munificence, thereby
they lived in great Joy, and increased; the choysest Christians were his
dearest Friends and made his Counselors; His whole Court was like a Church.
And except we should with very much boldness deny the testimony of S. Eusebius
then Pope, affirming that the holy Cross was found in the time of his Papacy,
and he instituted the Eusebius. Epist. 3. ad Episcopus Tuscul. and Campaniae Tom.
1. Council. Gratian. can. Crucis did. 3. de cons. Martin. Polon. supputat. col.
67. in Eusebius. Papa. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. in Constantio. Florent.
Wigor. Chron. in Galer. Regino Chron. an. 243.
Feast of the Invention thereof, Gratian and Martinus saying the like, S.
Damasus or Learned Anastasius, S. Marianus, Florentius Wigorn: Regino, and
diverse others which plainly write, that the holy Cross was found in their
days: sub huius tempore inuenta est crux Domini sub Constantio patre
Constantini Magni, vt in gestis Romanorum Pontificalibus habetur, ita sub huius
tempore inuenta est crux Domini 5. Nonis Maij, we must not neglect this opinion.

2. And this is not to deny, or question that public, and famous (in
Historyes) Solemnity about the holy Cross, in the days of Constantine the
great, better allowing such Christian Assemblyes and Festiuities in so
honorable manner, then the times yet permitted, but to reconcile so many
worthy Authors, give Constantius and S. Helen their due in their professing
their love of Christian Religion, before Constantine either reigned, or was
borne; and some of these Authors, which I have Cited, as namely Marianus
Scotus, sets down both these Acts of deuotious as before, and the other in
the days of S. Helen found the holy Cross in the time of Consta^tius, before
the reign of Constantine her son.
Constantine, after the death of Constantius, citing diverse Authors for these
distinct and diverse Actions of Religion. And it is but a weak objection,
derogatorie to the honor of S. Helen, and this Nation which a late writer
makes when he says; test Eusebio libro 3. cap. 46. constat Helenam post
Constantinum Christianam Religionem amplexatam esse. Si igitur hoc tempore
Eusebij Papae Marian. Scot. aetat. 6. an. 325. col. 300.
Constantinus necdum Christianus fuerit, quomodo Helena Deoru^ adhuc cultrix
inueniendae crucis Christi adeo studiosa fuisse potuit? as Eusebius witnesses
in the 46. Chapter of his third book (he means of the life of Constantine)
it is evident, that Helen embraced Christian Religion after Constantine.
Therefore if in the time of Sever. Binius Annot. in Epist. 3 Eusebij Papae Tom.
1. Council.
Pope Eusebius, Constantine was not a Christian, how could Helena a worshipper
of the Pagan Gods be so careful to find the cross of Christ. But Eusebius
allthough a sufficient and greater prayser of Constantine, more then of his
Mother (in all Constantius a friend and restorer of Christian Religion in
Britain and other places also.
Constantius, and S. Helen both were able to give, and actually gave their
greatest regal both allowance and help for the public exercise and
advancement of Christian Religion to Britain, where no impediment or
hindederance can be pretended they being absolute commanders hear.

3. And diverse even of this Nation have before delivered, that this our now
King and Emperor did particularly place S. Taurinus Archbishop in York,
wherein allthough they be mistaken (if they understand S. Taurinus Bishop of
Eureux consecrated by S. Clement Pope, neither the time nor place allowing) yet
we cannot safely say, but he might, or did place some other of that name there,
and if both this should fail, yet so many more Authorities concur, that
Constantius gave consent and assistance to the public restitution of Religion
hear in his time. For this, we have the warrant of our most ancient and
approved Antiquaries S. Gildas, and S. Bid, and after them Matthew of
Westminster with others. S. Gildas writes, that before the Persecution had
been hear ten years, the wicked Decrees against Christians were annulled and
frustrate, and all the servants of Christ, as after a long winter night with
joyful eyes receive the clear light of the heavenly air, they renew their
Churches which were thrown down to the ground, they found, build and perfect
others in honor of their holy Martyrs, and as it were set forth every where
their victorious enseignes, celebrate festival days, offer sacrifice with a
pure heart and mouth, all of them rejoice as children cherished in the lapp of
their mother the Church: bilustro supradicti turbinis necdum ad integrum
expleto, emarcescentibusque nece suorum Authorum nefarijs decretis laetis
luminibus omnes Christi Tyrones quasi post hyemalem ac prolixam noctem,
temperiem, lucemque serenam aurae coelestis excipiunt, renouant Ecclesias ad
solum vsque destructas, Basilicas Sanctorum Martyrum fundant, construunt,
perficiunt ac velut victricia signa passim propalunt, dies festos celebrant,
sacra mundo cord, oreque conficiunt, omnes exultant filij gremio ac si matris
Ecclesiae confoti. S. Bid says, that so soon as the tempest of Persecution
ceased, the Christians which had hidden themselves in woods, Deserts and secret
Dens presently came forth and showed themselves in public, doing those public
works of Christian Religion, which S. Gildas before remembered, Vbi turbo Bed.
Hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 8.
persecutionis quieuit, progressi in publicum fideles Christi, qui se tempore
discriminis siluis ac desertis, abditisue speluncis occultauerant, renouant
Ecclesias ad solum vsque destructas, Basilicas Martyrum fundant, And the rest
as S. Gildas before, and writes plainly, that this was done in the time of
Constantius, and that he died hear, while these things were thus in Acting,
His Temporibus Constantius, qui viuente Dioclesiano Galliam Hispaniamque
regebat, vir summae mansuetudinis and ciuilitatis in Britannia mortem obijt.
The Monk of Westminster has Matthew. Westminster. An. 313.
the same words with S. Bid of this public profession of Christian Religion
hear, presently upon the ending of the Persecution, during ten years,
elapsis december annis. And adds that then the Church of S. Alban was builded to
his honor within ten years of his Martyrdom, december annis post passionem eius
elapsis, and yet temporum Christianorum serenitate in the quiet of Christian
times hear, which by that is said before, must needs be in the days of
Constantius.

4. Likewise we find in the Antiquities of the old Church of Winchester,
Manuscr. Antiq. Eccl. Winton. Marian. Scot. an. 306. Martin. Pol. An. 307.
Manuscr. Ant. Gall. ann. 306. Matthew. West. ann. 305. 307. Baron. and Spondan.
an. 306 Gordan. an. 306. Jacob. Grynaeus annot. in c. 15. l. 1. Eusebius. de Vit.
Constantini Anno. 308. Henric. Hunt. l. 1. Hist. in Diocletian. and Constantio.
Regino Chron. l. 1. in Constant. an. 253. Stowe and Howes sup. Hist. in
Constantius.
that being destroyed with the rest in this late Persecution, it was perfectly
reedified in the year of Christ 309. and so either was in building, or
warranted to be builded in the days of Constantius, then or so lately before
by all accounts living and reigning hear, that it could not be done without
his warrant, or allowance. The like we say of the Churches of S. Julius, and S.
Aaron, and other Martyrs of that time, and all both Cathedral Churches, and
others destroyed hear by Maximian that most cruel horrible faced man, as
Henry of Huntington calls him: Maximinianus vir crudelissimus and vultu
horrendus, after whose leaving the Empire, Christians were quiet hear, as he
says, and restored to their former liberties. And as Regino writes, not only
in Britain, but generally where he ruled, both Bishops were restored to their
private Sees, and many other things granted for the profit of Christian
Religion: Constantij Temporibus pace Ecclesijs reddita, Episcopi priuatis
sedibus restituuntur, and alia plura Christianae Religioni profutura. And
particularly says, that the Monastery of Treuers was begun in his time. Then
much more in Britain, where he was both absolute Emperor and King to
command, and no man daring to resist him. To this our Protestant Antiquaries
have given sufficient allowance, when they granted unto us, that Constantius
abolished the superstition of the Gentiles in his Dominions, especially in
Britain, where he now lived King and Emperor, and so in abolishing the Pagans
Rites, and obseruances for dislike of them, and love to Christian Religion,
must needs for his short time be an extraordinary Aduancer thereof. But when he
had thus The death of Constantius in Britain: and his great love then of
Christians and that Religion.
happily begun this holy work in reparing the ruins of the Church of Christ
in this kingdom, and before he could bring it to due, and his desired
perfection, he fell sick at the City of York, where soon after he deceased.
Yet in this short time of his sickness, his greatest care was to leave and
commit this his charge both concerning his Empire, and this kingdom to his
eldest son Constantine now living, son of S. Helen, who as he hoped for
many reasons, would be most ready and willing to maintain and defend true
Religion, and with Justice govern his subjects.

5. And to this happy choice, as both Zonoras and Pomponius Laetus do Zonaras
Annal. Tom. 2. in Constantino. Pomp. Laet. Romans Hist. comp. in Consta^tino Max.
Eusebius. l. 1. de Vit. Constantini c. 18. Iac. Grynaeus annot. in eum locum.
plainly testify before, and Eusebius and others sufficiently insinuate, he
was admonished and iustructed by Gods direction, and an Ange, Ilas is before
related. Which is confirmed by the effect and event itself, not only of the
general establishing of Christian Religion in the world by Constantine in the
time of his Empire, but his extraordinary and Miraculous preservation before he
came unto it, and at this very time of his Fathers sickness strangely escaping
the Tyrants hands in Italy, and coming safely to his sick Father Constantius
at York in our Britain, by the great providence of God, as Eusebius notes,
who had often preserved him, to bring him hither so long and dangerous a
Journey at that very time, to succeed his Father, Deus omnia eius causa
faciebat, provide prospiciens, vt in tempore praesto esset ad Patri
succedendum. Eusebius. Vit. Co^st. l. 1. c. 14.
And this Author immediately adds: for presently when Constantine had
escaped the stratagems of the deceipts, he came with all speed to his Father
and Cap. 15. supr.
after a long space of time which he had been absent from him, presented him
to his sight at that moment Constantius was ready to dye: but when contrary to
all hope he saw his son, lepinge out of his bed, he embraced him, saying,
that he had now cast that out of his mind, which only troubled him at the
point of death, which was the absence of his son: And therefore did ernestly
pray and give thanks for it to God: affirming that now he rather desired to dye
then live, and setting himself in the midst of his children, and in his place
lying upon his kingly bed, giving over the Inheritance of his kingdom to his
eldest son departed this life. Thus has Eusebius then living, in that time.
Our Protestant Historians citing other ancient writers Hollins. Hist. of Engl.
l. 4. c. 28. 27. cit. Eutr. Sext. Aurel. Vict. Niceph. Tripart. Hist.
not differing from Eusebius, thus translate and epitomate this History from
them, Whilst Constantine remained at Rome, in manner as he had been a pledge
with Galerius in his Fathers time, fledd from thence, and with all post haste
returned to his Father into Britain, killing or hewghing by the way, all such
horses as were appointed to stand at Innes, ready for such as should ride in
post, least being pursued, he should have been overtaken, and brought back
again, by such is might be sent to pursue him. Constantius whilst he lay on
his death-bedd, somewhat before he departed this life, hearing that his son
Constantine was come, and escaped from the Emperors Dioclesian and Maximian,
with whom he remained as a Pledge, he received him with all Joy, and raising
himself up in his bed, in presence of his other sons and Counselors, with
a great number of other people, and strangers that were come to visit him, he
set the Crown upon his sons head, and adorned him with other Imperial
Robes and garments, executing as it were himself the Consta^tius crowns
Constantine his son Emperor, and prophesies how he should advance Christian
Religion.
office of an Herald, and withal spoke these words unto his said son, and
to his Counselors there about him: Now is my death to me more welcome, and
my departure hence more pleasant: I have hear a lardge Epitaph and Monument of
burial, to wit mine own son, and one whom in earth I leave to be Emperor
in my place, which by Gods good help shall wype away the tears of the
Christians, and revenge the cruelty exercised by Tyrants. This I reckon to
chance unto me in steed of most felicity. Thus careful was this holy Emperor
even at his death, to advance the honor of Christ. Thus he did prophesying how
his son after him should advance Christian Religion, now by his Father
declared Emperor, but as Eusebius writes, long before designed to that
dignity by God, King of all, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 14.
Augustus multo antea ab ipso Deo Rege omnium declaratus fuit.

6. This renowned Emperor Constantius died by diverse in the 306. year of
Christ, by others in the 307. and by some in the year 308. as is mentioned
before, and by all at such time, that as I have proved already, it must needs
be he which among the Roman Emperors first gave order and warrant for the
restoring and reestablishing Christian Religion hear in Britain after the
desolatio^ thereof by Dioclesian and Maximian, and died happily and most
blessedly: faelicem acter Eusebius. supr. l. 8. c. 14.
beatum vitae finem consecutus. And was so renowned, that even by the Pagans he
was accounted a God: ac primus apud eos in numerum deoru^ relatus. And had all
Constantius buried as a Christian in York with great and Imperial honor.
honor after his death given unto him which belonged to an Emperor, Cuncto
post mortem Imperatori debito potitus est honor. He was most honorably and
Christian like buried, in the City of York, Constantine his son the new
Emperor present at his funeral, going before his corpse with an infinite
number of people and Souldiars, attending with all honor and pomp, some
Eusebius. l. 1. de Vita Constantini c. 16.
going before, others following with most sweet harmony of singing,
Constantinus paterna purpura indutus magna paternorum amicorum turba eum
comitante, funeri praeiuit, patremque produxit: quinetiam populi infinita
multitudine, militumque constipanti agmine partim antecedentium, partim
subsequentium, genitorem sanctissimum cum omni splendore and maxima pompa
extulit: faustis acclamationibus, suaui hymnorum concentu, omnes beatissimum
illum celebrant. This was the Eusebius. supr.
end which God showed of this Emperors godly and Religious manners and life
evidently to all people then living, as Eusebius witnesses then also living:
hunc morum vitaeque pie and religiose ad virtutem institutae exitum esse, in
Imperatore Constantio, vniuerso generi mortalium qui nostra memoria vixerunt,
Deus euidenter monstrauit. And calls him, as before, Sanctissimum: most holy:
which he a learned Christian Bishop could not give to any but an holy professed
Christian, in his knowledge or Judgment: and therefore atrributeth so much to
Constantius in this kind, that he calls Constantine the Great himself,
(whom he so extolleth for his Christian Religion, and advancement thereof)
Eusebius Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 14.
a follower of his Fathers piety in such affairs: paternae pietatis Imitator.

THE III. CHAPTER.
OF THE CORONATION AND CHRISTIAN beginning of Constantine the great Emperor,
and the general restoring and profession of Christian Religion in all places
of Britain then.

1. CONSTANTIVS having thus honorably ended his days, and declared Eusebius. lib.
1. de Vit. Constantini c. 15. Marian. Sco. in Constant. Martin. Pol. in eod.
Constantine his eldest son successor in his Empire, his whole Army does
presently with mutual consent and Joy proclaim him King and Emperor.
Exte^plo secundo and prospero applausu nouu^ Regem Imperatorem and Augustum
ipsa prima voce co^tentius praedicant. Co^sta^tine proclaimed Emperor in
Britain.
And all Nations subject to his Fathers Empire were filled with incredible Joy
and unspeakable gladness, that they had without intermission so worthy and
renowned an Emperor, Omnes gentes quaeipsius obsequebantur Imperio, incredili
Eusebius. lib. 1. Vit. Constable. c. 16.
laetitia efferuntur, and gaudio pene inexplicabili propterea complentur, quod
illustri and praeclaro Imperatore ne breuissimo quidem temporis momento
caruissent. Of the coming of this most noble Britan to the Empire, escaping
and preserved from so many dangers, and difficulties before, so generally and
joyfully chosen and accepted, and proving afterward so happy a Ruler, Eusebius
says Chosen and designed thereto by God himself.
that he was chosen by God himself, and that no mortal man could glory of
this only Emperor his advancement, Constantinum Principem and Imperatorem,
Deus omnium Author, and totius mundi Gubernator, suo solum arbitrio delegit:
Eusebius. supr. c. 18.
eo consilio vt cum alij omnes Imperatores, hominum suffragijs, ad eum
dignitatis gradum ^scendere consueuerint, de hoc Imperatore solo ad honorem
efferendo, nemo mortalis omnino gloriaretur. For allthough he was generally and
orderly chosen and accepted by men, yet as the same Author writes, he was
Miracoulously preserved by God, and by his extraordinary protection brought
safely from all danger to his Father hear in Britain, old and ready to die,
to be invested in the Empire after him, Constantius cum ad summam prope
senectutem prouectus, Eusebius. l. 1. Vit. Constable. c. 12.
communi naturae quod debebat, esset persoluturus, and iam migraturus e vita,
Deus tunc rursus facinus quoddam admirabile eius causa edidit: qui ei mortem
oppetituro sua prouidentia curauit, vt filius eius natu Maximus Constantinus ad
capessendum Imperium praesto esset. And so soon as he was Emperor, as the
same Author then living, and well ^^owen unto, and knowing Constantine
testifies, and so declared by the Armies, as the custom was, being chosen of
God long Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 8. c. 14.
before to that end, insisted in his Fathers steps in favoring and advancing
Christian Religion, Huius (Constantij) filius Constantinus mox atque Imperator
Britain now quiet for Religion. And all holy places ^^stored.
perfectissimus ac Augustus ab exercitibus; and multo antea ab ipso Deo Rege
omnium declaratus fuit, paternae erga nostram Religionem pietatis imitator esse
caepit. So that in this part of the world, as Britain and France, where
Constantine succeeded his Father, and now reigned, there was no Persecution
used against Christians, but all favor and Indulgence toward them. And that
assertion Eusebius. in Chronic. Floren. Wigorn. in Chron. Mar. Scot. aetat. 6. l.
2. in Constant.
of diverse Historians both of this and other Nations, which affirms that the
Persecution begun by Dioclesian and Maximinian, did continue after their
forsaking the Empire, and until the seventh year of the Reign of
Constantine, vsque ad annum septimum Constantini, is to be understood of those
parts, which until about that time were not under the Rule of Constantine, but
to Galerius, Seuerus and Maxentius Persecutours, and so Florentius, Marianus
and others expownd it. And it can have no other construction to be true: for
evident it is in Histories that not only from the beginning of the Reign of
Constantine, but in his Fathers time, all Christians under their government
were free from Persecution: And so soon as Constantine had conquered Maxentius
and was sole and absolute Emperor, all Christians in the world under him were
delivered from Persecution, and set at liberty even publicly to profess
their Religion. And from his first entrance into the Empire and to be King of
Britain, the Christians hear in this Nation did not only enjoy freedom and
Immunitie from all penalties, and Persecution against Christian Churches and
Monasteries that were ruinated, restored, and new builded.
Religion, but, as in the time of his Father, made, and freely had public
exercise and Profession thereof, as our old Churches reedified, new builded and
erected, Bishops, Priests, and all Clergy and Religious men restored to their
former quiet, Revenues, honors and dignities.

2. Of this we have diverse testimonies and examples in particular yet left unto
us, as out of the old Annalls of Winchester, where we find of that old Church
builded in the time of King Lucius, and destroyed in the late Persecution, the
Church of Winchester builded in the time of King Lucius and hallowed and
dedicated Annal. Eccles. Winton. Godwin Catalog. of Bishop Wincester in initio.
October 29. 189. By Faganus and Damianus Bishops, amongst the rest at this
time of Dioclesian, went to wrack, the buildings thereof being ruinated, and
made even with the ground, and the Monks and all the officers belonging unto
it, either slain, or enforced to fly for the present time, in the year 309.
the Church a foresaid was again reedified, and that with such wonderful
forwardness and Zeal, as within one year and thirty days, both it and all
the Edifices belonging unto it, as chambers, and other buildings for the Monks
and officers, were quite finished in very seemly and convenient manner. The
15. day of March following, it was again hallowed and dedicated unto the honor
and memory of Amphibalus, that had suffered death for Christ in the late
Persecution, by Constans Bishop of Winchester, at te request of Deodatus Abbot
of this new erected Monastery. It is evident by this Relation, and that is
said before, that this holy work so public and with freedom and zeal was
quite finished in the time of Constantine his being hear before he went hence
against Maxentius. And yet we see both Bishop, Abbot, Priests and Religious men
publikly and honorably restored to their former condition. The Church with
unspeakable devotion builded, and dedicated to that holy Saint and Martyr,
which in the late Persecution was most hated by the enemies of Christ. So I say
of the Church of S. Alban, Ecclesia, a Church, as S. Bid writes, mirandi
operis, atque eius martyrio condigna extructa est, a Church Bed. Eccl. Hist. l.
1. c. 7. Mat. West. An. 313.
of wonderful workmanship and worthy of his martyrdom, was builded so soon
as the Christians were hear at quiet, Redeunte temporum Christianorum
serenitate. Matthew of Westminster has the same words, and explaneth this time
of the quiet of Christians hear, when this Church was so sumptuously builded,
to have been ten years after his Martyrdom, december scilicet annis post
passionem eius elapsis: the perfect finishing whereof he sets down to have
been in the same year, in which Constantine went from hence toward Rome
against Maxentius. Which was by him in the 6. year of Constantine, and before
the general ceasing of Persecution in other places. Constantine not being
absolute and sole Emperor until his victory against Maxentius, nor the
general quiet then presently ensuing. Both S. Bid and the Monk of
Westminster write, that in their several times, often curing of infirmities
and Bed. and Matthew. supr.
other miracles were wrought there: in quo videlicet loco vsque ad hanc diem
curatio infirmorum, and frequentium operatio virtutum celebrari non desunt. The
old Churches of S. Julius, and S. Aaron martyred in the late Persecution, in
the City of Caerlegion, derive their ancient Foundation from this time. So
do many others founded in honor of several Martyrs, then cruelly putt to
death, for the name of Christ. So I affirm of all the Cathedral Churches
Archiepiscopall and Episcopal which I have before remembered, with their
Particular Sees and Cities founded in the time of King Lucius, and destroyed in
the Persecution of the Tyrants Dioclesian and Maximinian, as also those that
were not Episcopal, but subordinate and inferior overthrown with that tempest
of Persecution: for S. Gildas, S. Bed and others testify without exception,
that all they which were then pulled down even to the ground, were now
reedified: renouant Ecclesias ad solum vsque destructas. Matthew of Westminster
Gild. l. de excid. and conquest. Brit. ca. 8. Bed. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 8.
Mat. Westminster. an. 313.
plainly writes that besides the new Churches builded in honor of their late
Martyrs of which S. Gildas and S. Bid also make this memory, Basilicas
Sanctorum Martyrum fundant, construunt, perficiunt: The Christians hear at
this time renewed and builded again all the Churches dedicated to former
Saints, which had been so destroyed and thrown down to the ground: Sanctorum
Ecclesias ad solum vsque destructas renouant.

3. And when we are warranted both by Protestant and Catholic Antiquaries
Matthew. Parker. Antiq. Brit. pa. 8. Io. Goscel. Eccl. Hist. Manuscrip. de
Archiep. Can. tuar. prope Init. Manuscr. Gallie. Antiq. cap. 28.
also, that from the beginning of Christianity hear, we had many Abbots,
Monks, and Monasteryes in every Age, tot tantaque Abbatum, Monachorum,
Cenobiorum vetusta nomina quae quouis seculo extiterunt: And that these
Monasteryes were all destroyed in Dioclesian his Pesecution: we must needs
assign their restoration to this time, as I have first exemplified before in
the old Monastery of Winchester now reedified with so great speed and
devotion, the Abbot thereof being called Deodatus. To this I join the
Monastery of Abingdon, already spoken of, where this our great King and
Emperor Constantine, as the old Annalls thereof do plead, had his education,
when he was young, wherein there where (as it testifies further) above 500.
Chron. Monast. Abingdon. apud Nich. Harpesf. Eccl. Hist. saecul. 10. c. 9.
Monks living by the labor of their hands in the woods and Deserts adjoining,
upon son days and festival days coming to the Monastery, besides 60. which
did continually abide in the same, serving God there, Quod Monachi supra
quingentos illi fuerant adscripti, qui per syluas and loca deserta quae in
vicinia fuere, manuum labor victitabant, ad Coenobium singulis Sabbatis and
Dominicis conuenientes, praeter sexaginta qui assidue in ipso Coenobio
versabantur, and quod Constantinus ille Magnus Abingdoniae educatus fuerit.
Therefore we cannot doubt, if we will accept this ancient Record for witness,
but of all other Monasteries, this great Emperor had an especial care of
restoring and endowing this his nursing place of education.

4. To this time we may assign the reedificing of the noble Monastery, first
builded by the Founder Ambrius or Ambry, after called Amsbury in Wiltshire,
where at the coming of the Saxons hither there were 300. Religious men,
Coenobium trecentorum fratrum in monte Ambrij qui, vt fertur, fundator Galfr.
Monum. Hist. Brit. l. 8. c. 9.
eius olim extiterat. Whose foundation being olim, long before the time of the
Saxons, argues it was builded before the time of Dioclesian and Maximinian, by
them destroyed, and now restored. So we may conclude of the Religious houses
both of men and women in Kent and other places renouned hear at the Saxons
first entrance, even by our Protestant Historians thus delivering from
Antiquity: Hengist slew the good Archbishop Vocine, and many Stowe and Howes
Hist. Titul. Britans and Saxons. in Vortiger. Gul. Malmesb. l. de Antiquit.
coenob. Glaston. Manuscr. Antiq. Glaston. Eccles.
other Priests and Religious pursons. All the Churches in Kent were polluted
with blood the Nuns with other Religious parsons were by force putt from
their houses and goods. Thus we must conceive of all other Religious houses,
wh^^her of men or women being very many in number, by that which is said
before, all of them being now repaired and happily again employed to their
first Institution and holy use. Whether the old Religious house at Glastenbury
is to be accounted in the number of those that were destroyed by Maximinian,
and now builded again by Constantius and Constantine, I dare not make so
ready a resolution: likely it is the poverty of the house builded of writhen
wands, the penitential and eremiticall life those Religious there ledd, their
place of abode being separate in private Cells, and in private Cells, and in a
wilderness, in which kind of places other Christians as before hidd
themselves in that Persecution, might both preserve them in that raging storm,
and their manner of life considered now not require reparation. Which both
William of Malmesbury in his written History of the Antiquity of that holy
place, and the old Manuscript Antiquities of Glastenbury seem to consent unto,
when they absolutely deliver, that from the time of King Lucius until the
coming of S. Patrick thither, not speaking of the least intermission or
discontinuance, there continually rema^ned a Succession of 12. Eremits in that
Island, Multi alij succedentes, semper tamen in numero duodenario per multa
annorum curricula vsque ad aduentum sancti Patricij Hibernensium Apostoli in
memorata Insula permanserunt.

THE IV. CHAPTER.
OF CONSTANTINE HIS PROFESSION of Christ, his miraculous victories against his
Pagan Enemies, restoring and establishing Christian Religion, and exalting the
Professors thereof in all his Empire.

1. WHEN Constantine had reigned but a short time Constantine in Britain
prepares Wars against the Infidel persecutor.
in Britain, and France, and such Western parts, as his Father before him
possessed, Maxen^ius being proclaimed Emperor in Italy, Rome, and other
places, and falling to Tyranny and usurpation, putting many Eusebius. l. 1. de
Vit. Constable. ca. 20. 21. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 1. Otto Frigen. Chron.
l. 4. c. 1. Galfr. Monum. Hist. Brit. l. 5. c. 7. Pont. Vir. l. 5. Hist. Matthew.
Westminster. an. 312. Henr. Hunting. l. 1 Hist. Hollinsh. Hist. l. 4. c. 28. Stowe
and Howes Hist. in Constant. Harding Chron. c. 62. f. 49.
Innocents to death, and exiling many both Christians and others, diverse even
of the Nobility fledd into Britain unto Constantine for succor, and releife,
complaining of the cruelty and usurpation of Maxentius, humbly inciting and
entreating Constantine, as undoubted true Heir to the Empire, even of that
part which Maxentius had intruded himself unto, to take arms against him, and
solely to enjoy the Empire. And he was not only thus solicited by the
Christians and other persecuted resorting hither, but by the Romans, which
still continued at Rome enduring the Tyranny of Maxentius, as some write in
this manner:

The Senators of Rome by letters well endit^
Prayed him to come to Rome as Emperor
For to destroy Maxence and disinherit^
Of Christen folk the cruel Tormentour
Of Christen faith the cursed confoundoure
For of his birth they said it set thim so
Maxence to stroy that was his Fathers foe.
Zonoras, Cedrenus, and other foreign Historians write the like in this matter.

2. Hearevpon Constantine to reuendge the Injuries done to holy Christians, and
unspeakable wrongs to diverse others, even the most Noble of the Romans, and
the enormeous sins of this Tirant, for number not to be recompted, Eusebius. l. 1.
de Vita Constant. c. 27. 28. 29. 30. Socrat. Hist. l. 1. c. 1. Otto Frigen.
Chron. c. 1. Matthew. Westminster. an. 312. Eutropius in Constantino. Eusebius. in Chron.
Baron. and Spond. Annal. An. 312.
and for their horrible and loathsome greuioussnes, to be suppressed with
silence, assembled a great Army both of Christian Britans, and of other
Nations subject unto him (by Eutropius) and others with him in the fifth, but by
the more common opinion, the sixth year of his Empire; Having entered into these
affairs, the better to procure the help and assistance of heaven, as Eusebius
with other strangers confess, before he had his Miraculous visions, presently
to be remembered, he resolved to have that true God whom his Father had
deuoutely adored, to be only worshipped and reverenced. Wherefore by his
prayers, he entreated his help, him he prayed, him he beseeched, to declare
himself unto him, and assist him in this enterprise: Deum quem Pater sancte
adorauisset, solum obserua^dum colendumque statuit. Quocirca huius opem
precibus implorauit, hunc orauit, Constantine a worshipper of Christ before his
miraculous vision.
hunc obtestatus est, vt tum quinam esset, ipsi vellet significare: tum rebus
quas apud animum proposuisset, dexteram velut adiutricem porrigere. Otto
Frigensis and others also strangers say, that Constantine at this time was a
Religious Emperor Eusebius. l. 1. Vitae Constant. c. 21. 22. Otto Frigen. Chron.
l. 4. c. 1. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 9. c. 9.
and favorer of Christian Religion, when he prepared himself for this war,
as I have showed before both by our own and other Historyes: Constantinus
Imperator Religiosus, fautorque Christianae fidei bellum parat. Eusebius has
so witnessed, and plainly says, he only received, worshipped and prayed unto
the God of his Father, the God of heaven, and Jesus Christ the Savior of all
men: Deo caelorum, illiusque verbo, ipso omnium Seruatore Jesus The miraculous
apparition of the triumphant sign of the Cross to Constantine.
Christo, auxilij gratia inuocato. Which none but a Christian would or could
do. And Eusebius receiving what he wrote from Constantine, and swearing that
it was true, thus proceeds in this History: Imperatori igitur ista precanti,
obnixeque flagetanti visio quaedam diuina and inprimis admirabilis apparuit:
etc. Therefore whilst the Emperor prayed and earnestly beeched these things,
a divine and Eusebius. supr. c. 22.
exceeding admirable vision appeared unto him: which if any other had reported
he would not have been so easily credited, but seeing the Emperor himself and
Conqueror did long time after (when he did vouchsafe me acquaintance, and
familiar speech with him) both tell me, and by Oathe confirm what he said,
this very History which we now commit to writing, no man can be doubtful, but
the narration is certainly to he believed, especially when we see the effect
to have given testimony thereto. When the sun had ascended to the midst of
the heaven, and the day a little inclining to the afternoon, he said, he did
see a sign of the Cross, made of the brightness of light manifestly appearing
to his eyes in the heaven, over the sun, with an evident Inscription which
contained these words: (...)* In this thou shall over come, a great admiration
fell upon him, and his whole Army, all of them beholding this wunder.
Constantine earnestly meditating upon this vision, in the night following
Christ appeared unto him in his sleep with the sign of the Cross, which he
had Cap. 23.
seen in the heaven, and commanded him to make an other sign of the Cross
like Cap. 24. Sozo. Hist. l. 1. c. 3. conuocatis Christi Sacerdotibus.
unto it, and to use it as a safeguard in his wars with his enemies. He so soon
as he arose imparted the vision unto his Friends, and sent for Artizans,
skillfull Engrauers in gold and precious stones, and describing the shape of
the sign, which he had seen, unto them, commands them to make the like of
gold and precious stones which Image I myself have seen, for the Emperor
himself was pleased to show it unto me. Thus far Eusebius in the next
Chapter lardgely setting down the proportion, Eusebius. supr. c. 25.
manner and glory of this Ensign so honorably preserved in that time.

3. To this Relation if it needed more testimony, Socrates, Zosomen, Otto
Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 1. Sosomen. l. 1. c. 3. Otto Frigen. Chron. l.
4. c. 1. Stowe and Howes Hist. Tit. Romans in Constantine.
and other old foreign Writers are witnesses. And if any man desires
Protestants consent herein, those of our own Nation do thus relate this
matter: About noone the day somewhat declyning, Constantine saw in the sky a
lightsome Pillar, in form of a Cross, wherein these words were engraven: In
this overcome, the which vision so amazed the Emperor* that he mistrusting his
own sight, demanded of them that were present, whether they perceived the
vision: which when all with one assent had affirmed, the wavering mind of the
Emperor was settled, with this divine and wonderful sight. The night following
in his sleep, he sees Christ, which says thus unto him: Frame unto thy self
the form of a Cross after the example of the sign which appeared unto thee,
and hear the same against thy Enemies, as a fit Banner or toaken of victory:
he being fully persuaded with this Oracle, commands the victorious sign of
the Cross, which as yet is reserved in the Palace of the Emperor, to be
made, and therewith proceeds forward with great courage. Eusebius Eusebius. l.
1. de Vit. Constant. c. 26.
and others say that presently upon this vision Constantyne concluded with his
Christian Priests to have only their God which appeared to him, and no other
to be worshipped, Constantinus admiranda illa visione obstupefactus, nullum
alium Deum, quam qui ipsi apparuisset colendum esse statuens, Dei Sacerdotibus
sibi tanquam assessoribus ascitis, statuit Deum qui sibi apparuisset omni
genere cultus and obseruantiae venerari.

4. And thus preparing himself with all his Army to suppress the Tirant, Cap.
31.
having God the Governor of all things for his Patron before his eyes, and
Constantine his Miraculous Victory by the sign of the Cross against his Pagan
enimyes.
calling upon Christ our Savior and helper, placing the Image of the Cross,
as a sign of Victory before his armed souldiars, and guarde, marched foreward
with his wbole Army: Constantinus omni apparatu militari se ad delendam
tyrannidem armauit. Atque Deo omnium moderatore sibi patrono ante oculos
proposito, and Christo Seruatore adiutoreque inuocato, and salutari signo
tanquam Victoriae Trophaeo ante armatos suos and satellites collocato, cum toto
exercitu procedit. And Zosim. l. 2.
thus trusting in the help of God, his Army not being more the^ half the
number of Maxentius, this consisting of 170. thousand foot and 18. thousand
Panegyric. 2. Constan. Baron. and Spondan. Annal. an. 312. Eusebius. l. 1. Vit.
Constable. c. 31. 32. Hist. Eccl. l. 9. c. 9 Zosimus. Baron. Spondan. An. 312
horse, and that of Constantine of 90. thousand foot and 8. thousand horse,
and yet (as an old Panegirick has) Constantine not fighting with more then the
fourth part of his Army against 100000. of Maxentius men, he set upon the
Armies of Maxentius, three of them, and presently overthrew them, and so
passing through Italy hard by Rome where Maxentius was, he so prosecuted him,
that in his flight he was with his greatest forces drowned in the River of
Tyber there, Miraculously (as Eusebius and others testify,) like to Pharao and
his Egiptians in the read Sea swallowed up with the waters, by Constantine
restores and aduanceth Christian Religion in all places destroying Idolatry.
his own Engyne of a new devised Bridge, which he had made of Botes to entrape
Constantine withal, strangely fayeling to his own miserable destruction.

5. So soon as Constantine had thus obtained Victory (as Eusebius, Socrates,
and others are able witnesses) he gave thanks to God, who had so
extraordinarily Eusebius. l. 1. de Vit. Constant. c. 35. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 9.
c. 9. Socrates Hist. l. 1. c. 1. 2.
preserved, and assisted him, he delivered the Christians from persecution,
those which were bannished he recalled home, the goods of those which were
confiscate he restored, those which were put in Prison he delivered, the
Churches which were destroyed he caused to be reedified, all which he effected
with great care and speed. His care was wholly fixed in things belonging to
the glory of Christ, he began to execute all the duties of a Christian man: to
build Churches, and to adorn them with magnificent and renowned Monuments: to
shut up the Pagans Temples, pull them down, and abandon the Statues erected in
them, Constantinus tam ampla beneficia a Deo adeptus, ea officia, quibus ei qui
tam benignus in eum extiterat gratias ageret, sedulo obire caepit. Quae huius
generis fuere: liberare a Persecutione Christianos: eos qui patria exulauerant,
domum reuocare: occlusos in carcere dimittere liberos, his, quorum bona
publicata erant, fortunas restituere: dirutas Ecclesias denuo erigere. Quae
quidem omnia valde propenso studio and voluntate transegit. Cogitationes suas
in illis rebus quae ad Christi gloriam spectabant, penitus defixerat, omnia
Christiani hominis officia exequia caepit: aedificare de integro Ecclesias, eas
magnificis and illustribus monumentis exornare: gentilium delubra occludere,
eaque demoliri: Statuas in illis erectas publicare.

6. Eusebius proceeds further, and says, that presently upon this Victory
Constantine making his prayers with thanksgiving to God, Author of his Eusebius.
l. 1. Vita. Constant. c. 33.
Victory, published unto all in famous Inscriptions and Pillars publicly
erected the power of the Cross of Christ: and even in the midst of the City
in Constantine his great honor to the sign of the Cross Ensign of his
victories.
the most principal place thereof, erected a great Trophy against Enemies,
and causing this sign of salvation to be engraued in it, with Characters that
could not be blotted out, did demonstrate it was the Propugnacle of the Romans,
and all subject to the Empire: and did openly propose it to be seen of all
men. And his own Image being erected in a famous place of the City and much
frequented holding in his hand a spear shaft like a Cross, commanded this
Inscription to be engraued on it, in Latin letters: with this saving sign, a
true token of fortitude, I have delivered your City from the Youke of Tyranny,
and setting the Senate and people of Rome at libettie I have restored them to
their ancient honor and renown: hanc Inscriptionem Latino sermon in eo
mandat incidere. Hoc Salutari Signo, vero Fortitudinis Indicio, Ciuitatem
Vestram tyra^nidis Eusebius. sup. c. 34.
Iugo liberaui, and S. P. Q. R. in libertatem vindicans pristinae amplitudini
and splendori restitui. And it immediately follows in Eusebius that
Constantine hearevpon with great boldness did openly profess and publishe
Christ the son of God unto the Romans, Pius Imperator ita Crucis victricis
confessione nobilitatus, cum magna dicendi liberate filium Dei ipsis Romany
palam diuulgare caepit. He also published in all places his Edict for restoring
all men to their goods, which had been unjustly deprived of them, recalling The
wonderful devotion, care, and expodition Constantine used to establish
Christian Religion, and destroy Idolatry. Cap. 35.
Exils and delyuering Prisoners, Imperatorium passim diuulgabatur Edictum, quod
quidem and his qui erant fortunis suis spoliati, concessit authoritatem rebus
suis and facultatibus potiundi: and eos qui iniquum Exilium perpessi fuissent,
ad proprios lares reuocauit: alios item vinculis, omnique periculo ac metu,
quibus per Tyranni crudelitatem vexabantur, penitus eripuit: he reverenced
Ecclesiastical men with honor causing them to sit at his table, and go with
him whether soever he went, and endowed Christian Churches with great
revenues, adorning them with very many monuments. All these and more of such
things of like Religious Christian nature this our noble King and Emperor
performed presently upon his Victoryes against Maxentius, commonly taken to
have been in the seventh year of his Empire, begun first in his Country of
Britain.

7. And so their opinion which before have told us, that the Persecution
continued in some Western parts ten years from the last most cruel Edict of
Dioclesian, and until the seventh year of Constantine, vsque ad Annum Marian.
Scot. Ann. 306. and alij supr. Idem Marian. an. 312.
septimum Constantini, is expounded by themselves, affirming, that this
general peace to all Christians in the Western world was procured and granted
unto them by Constantine in the seventh year of his Empire, and after the ten
years of Dioclesian his Edict after prosecuted by Maxentius was ended, Anno
Constantini septimo, pax Ecclesiae reddita a Constantino post decennium Marian.
Scot. aetat. 6. Ann. 312. Florent. Wigor. in Chron. ann. 299. 306. al. 321. 328.
persecutionis. Florentius Wigorniensis writes, that in this year S. Helen
Mother of Constantine, then being hear in Britain wrote to her son to
persecute the Jews which denied Christ, Scrip sit ei sua matter Helena de
Britannia vt negantes Christum Iudaeos persequeretur. Matthew of Westminster
says, this general peace of Christians was effected by Constantine anno S.
Helen writes to her son out of Britain to persecute the Jews persecutors
of Christians.
gratiae 313. in the 313. year of Christ. Marianus will have it in the year
312. so has Baronius, Spondanus and others. Harding relates it done in the
year of Christ 310. Martinus polonus says, Constantine became a Christian in
the year 309. and then, both gave liberty to Christians, and caused Churches
to be builded in honor of Christ, Anno 309. Constantinus Magnus dictus,
Christianus effectus, and licentiam dedit Christianis libere congregari, and
Basilicas in honor Marian. Scot. an. 312. Baro. and Spo^dan. An. 312. Harding.
Chron. c. 62. f. 49. Flor. Wigor. an. 306. in Chronic. Io. Bal. l. de Scri.
Brit. centur. 1. in Flauio Constant.
Jesus Christi construi fecit. Our Countryman Florentius Wigorniensis by
Dyonisius his computation sets it down three years sooner in the year
306, Anno 306. pax nostra a Canstantino reddita est post annos december
persecutionis. Our English Protestant Antiquaries will easily give assent to
this. A principal man, and named a Bishop among them saying, that Constantine
learned his Christian faith in Britain of his most Christian Mother S. Helen,
and at his going from hence against Maxentius, behaved himself like a
Christian in the midst of the Pagans superstitions, and honored them which were
professed Christians, Constantinus a christianissima matre Helena, Christi
fidem edoctus, eos honorabat praecipue qui in Christiana Philosophia vitam
reclinassent. Vnde ab Oceani finibus nempe Britannis incipiens, open fretus
diuina Religionis curam in medijs superstitionum tenebris caepit.

THE V. CHAPTER.
THE MIRACVLOVS BAPTISM OF CONstantine at Rome by S. Siluester Pope. He was an
holy and Orthodoxe Emperor to his death, and both in the Greek Church and
with those of the Latin honored and styled an holy Saint.

1. HAVING thus cleared our most glorious Countryman, and Emperor Constantine
from the Imputation of his so long delaying his holy Baptism, as some have
pretended, and so near as I can and dare, proposed the most probable time
thereof, I must now speak though more breifely of the Solemnity itself, and
his most charitable Religious Christian Acts and conversation which ensued
thereupon. The common opinion concerning Constantine before his Baptism is the
same which the Scripture witnesses of Naaman the Syrian Prince, though he was
great, honored, valiant, and ritche, yet he also was a Leper, vir magnus and
honoratus, fortis, and dives, sed leprosus, before he was by direction of the
Prophet washed and healed in Iordane. Yet great difference 4. Reg. 5.
there was between these two Lepers, of Syria, and Britain. The Leper of
Syria was magnus: great, but apud Dominum suum: with his own lord the King of
Syria, chief commander of his Armies, Princeps militiae Regis Syriae, and he
procured the quiet and safety of Syria, per illum dedit Dominus salutem Syriae.
He was only cleansed from his corporal Leprosy: But our British Leper was
cured both in body and soul, he was not only great with a particular King,
but a great, and the greatest King and Emperor, and so styled, Constantinus
Magnus, and Maximus, that ever was in the world. He did not only bring
temporal safety and quiet to one kingdom and Nation, but both temporal and
spiritual happiness and salvation to the whole Empire, and to all kingdoms.

2. Constantine being troubled with this Infirmity, if I may call that so,
which S. Augustine says is a defect of color, and not of health or integrity
of senses and members: coloris quippe vitium est, non valetudinis out
Integritatis sensuum atque membrorum, and seeking remedy, yet finding none
among his Aug. Quaest. Euangel. l. 1. c. 40.
bodily Physicians, the Pagan Flamens advised him to make a Bathe in the
Capitole and therein wash his body with the warn blood of Infants, Plyny
Edictum Constantini Tom 1. Council. Act. Syluestri Papae. Plin. l. 26. c. 1.
Adrianus 1. Epist. ad Constant. and Iren. Simeon Metaphrast. in Vita S.
Syluestri. Zonaras in Constable. Menol. Graecor. Kalend. Ianuar. Gregor. Turon.
and others writing that this grief has been so healed, which to effect,
these Idolatrous Ge^tils prepared a great number of such children, inte^ding
to kill the^, and fill the Bathe with their blood, which when Constantine
considered, and beheld the tears and lamentations of the Mothers for their
children, he abhorred so great cruelty and wickedness, causing the children to
be restored to their Mothers with rewards, and means to carry them to their
dwelling places. In the night following the holy Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul
do appear and say thus, unto him: O Emperor because thou have detested to
shedd the blood of Innoce^ts, we are sent unto thee by Christ to teach thee
means to recover thy health. Send for Bishop Syluester, and he will provide an
holy Bath, in which he will baptize thee, and thou shall be cured from thy
Leprosy and all diseases. Which Constantine presently performed, sending for
S. Siluester, who showed there unto him the Picturs of The apparition of S.
Peter and Saint Paul to Constantine.
S. Peter, and S. Paul, which when the Emperor diligently beholded, he openly
before his Nobility confessed, that these were they which appeared unto him,
and being perfectly instructed by S. Syluester, was baptized by him, and
Miraculously cleansed from his Leprosy, an hand from heaven, as he himself
did see and testify, touching him. And when he was thus wonderfully cured and
Christened, S. Syluester ministered the The Images of the Apostles then
reverently used by Christians.
holy Sacrament of Confirmation unto him, anointing and signing his forehead
with sacred Chrisme as the Roman Church now uses: Benedicto font, illic me
trina mersione vnda salutis purisicauit positoque me in fontis gremio, manum de
caelo me contingentem proprijs oculis vidi. De qua mundus exurgens ab omni me
Leprae squalore mundatum agnoscite, l^uatoque me de venerabili font, induto
vestibus candidis, septiformis The Sacraments of Baptism and Confirmation how
ministered to Constantine with miracle.
gratiae sancti spiritus consignationem adhibuit beati Chrismatis unction, and
vexillum sanctae Crucis in mea front liniuit, dicens: signat te Deus sigillo
fidei suae, in nomine patris, and filij and spiritus Sancti, in consignatione
fidei. Cunctusque Clerus respondit, Amen. Et adiecit Praesul, pax tibi. Simeon
Metaphrastes a Greek Writer says, that at the time of Constantine his
Baptism by S. Syluester, a light Sim. Metaphr. in Vit. S. Syluestri.
more bright the^ the sun, did suddenly shine about all the house, Lux
repent totam domum circumfulsit and lucis splendour plusquam sol enituit. And
the Emperor being baptized, his flesh was pure and sound without any hurt or
scarr, and the water wherewith he was baptized was full of such filth as came
from his sores, like scales of fishes, exijt Imperator ex diuino Lauacro,
habens carnem puram and sanam, neque plaga, nec vlla apparente cicatrice, aqua
autem piscinae erat plena ijs, quae ex vlceribus exciderant, membranis ac
pelliculis non secus ac squammis pisciu^. Diverse both Greek, and Latin
Writers say, that his son Crispus was then babtized with him, Magnus
Constantinus cum Crispo filio Romae a Siluestro baptizatus est.

3. These things being of so great note and consequence in so great a Prince
Theophan. Cerameus Chronolog. Platina in Mar.
and Commander, and so concerning all people, were not, nor could be done in
secret. The infirmity of Constantins Leprosy was generally known, Physicians
had often been consulted, and done their best practice about it, the place of
the Capitole where the children should by the Pagans have been murdered about
it was famous, the gathering them from many places, and Provinces was known of
all, the open outcries and lamentations of their Mothers could not be
conceled: the sending and seeking for S. Siluester were with honor and
solemnity performed, so was his entertaiment and conference with the Emperor
in presence of his Nobility. The present conversion of Constantine thereupon,
his preparation in penance seven days before his Baptism, this solemnized in
the public Imperial Palace, and in an holy Font so curiously provided, as
all Hictories agree, and so Miraculously curing his corporal disease, which no
Art of man could heal, made this Conversion of Constantine renownedly known,
and manifest unto all; To the Christians for their unspeakable Joy and
comfort; to the Jews and Pagans to the shame and confusion of their obstinacy,
and salvation of many of them converted by this means.

4. And Constantine himself did not only send his Imperial Edicts into all
Eusebius. l. 2. de Vita Constant. cap. 47. and seq. Bar. An. 324. Acts S.
Syluestri. Nicephor. lib. 7. c. 34.
Countries both East and West, for embracing Christian Religion, but made his
public persuading Oratio^s to that purpose, as namely in the open Church, to
the Senate and people of Rome, in Basilica vlpia. Whereupon as Nicephorus a
Gretian writes, in the only City of Rome there were converted and baptized
above twelve thowsande men, besides women and younger people in the same year.
Egbertus from old Antiquities, sicut antiqua nobis scripta commemorant, seems
to deliver, that all the Senators were then converted to Christ, for he
plainly says, that Constantine gave the honor of the Senate of Rome to the
Christian Clergy thereof, and he withal the Senators departed from thence to
Bizantium, Totius Senatus honorem Clero, qui cum ipso (S. Siluestro) Eckbertus
Abb. Flor. Sermon. 3. de Incremento and manisestat. Cath. fidei.
erat, tradidit, and ipse cum Senatoribus omnibus de vrbe egrediens Bizantium
transmigrauit.

5. Therefore a wonder it is how some Greek Writers, which I have remembered
before, should or could plead ignorance of so concerning and memorable a
thing, so publikly acted with so many circumstances, which could Constantine
without all doubt baptized by S. Siluester Pope at Rome.
not be concealed in the great commanding City of the world, by the sole
Emperor thereof, and S. Syluester the highest Ruler in the Church of Christ:
and testified, by almost all Ecclesiastical Historians too many to be
remembered being recompted to be above 40. Classical Christian Writers for this
matter, Iodoc. Cocc. in the saur. Cathol. Tom. 1. l. 7. art. 9.
omitting many of great name, Antiquity, and Authority. The Pagans
themselves even of the same Age, as Ammianus, Marcellinus, Zosimus, and others
give plain Testimony unto it, the first expressly speaks of Constantins
Font, Constantinianum Lauacrum in Rome. The other sets down Ammian. Marc.
lib. 27. cap. 2.
the whole History at lardge after his ethick manner. Zosomen also testifies
that this History was common among the Pagan Writers in his time, memoratum
Zosom. lib. 2. de Constantino. Zosom. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 5. R. Abrah.
leuit. in Chron. Iudaic. R. Abrah. Esra in c. 11. Daniel. Michael Glycas part.
4. Annal.
a gentilibus. And the Jews also even their most malicious against Christians,
as R. Abraham Leuita; and R. Abraham Aben Esra do confess and prove the same.
So do the best Greek Historians Theophanes, Metaphrastes, Zonaras, Cedrenus,
Glycas, Nicephorus and others. Some of these as Michael Glycas calling them
Arian Heretics, who say he was baptized at Nicomedia by the Arian Bishop
thereof: Ariani quidam constanter asserunt eum ab Epicopo Nicomediae baptizatum
esse: and says, it is out of doubt that he was baptized at Rome, his
Baptistery there still continuing to prove it inuincibly true, Non dubium est,
quin magni Imperatoris huius Baptisterium, quod adhuc Romae conspicitur
illustri ratione veritatem commonstret. So have the rest. And Theop. Ceram.
supr. in Chrono.
Theophanes plainly says, this was one of the Arian Heretics fictions and
lies against Constantine to stain his glory untruly with. And their
Authentical and publikly received Menologion of the Greek Church does not
only say, that S. Syluester baptized Constantine at Rome, clensing him both
from his Leprosy of Soul and body: Syluester propter summum virtutis gradum
Menol. Graecor. Kalend. Ianuar.
defunsto Melchiade antiquiori Romae creatus est Episcopus. Hic multorum
patrator Miraculorum, Constantinum Magnum ad fidem conuertit, cum animae and
corporis Constantine a Saint with the Greeks in their Menologie.
morbos diuino Baptismate ab eo expulisset: but it receaueth and enrolleth this
Glorious Emperor in the Catalogue of holy Saints, and so he is generally
honored among them, and in the Latin Church his name was ever enrolled in the
Ecclesiastical Tables called Dyptica, and publikly recited at Mass, Nichol.
Papa Epis. ad Michael. Imperatorem.
which was not allowed to any but Orthodoxe and holy Christians.

6. Therefore he must needs be free from all such suspicion, wherewith those
suspected Gretians have charged him, the chiefest of them Eusebius, as I have
proved before, contradicting himself herein, and making Constantine a professed
Christian, receiving Sacraments many years before this pretended Baptism at
his death. Therefore I may worthily say of this renowned Emperor with our
learned and ancient Historian: That he was the flower of Henric. Hunt. Hist.
l. 1. in Constantino. Harding. Chro. c. 63. f. 50.
Britain, a Britan by blood, a Britan by Country, before whom, and after
whom never any the like went out of Britain: Constantinus flos Britanniae,
hic Britannicus genere, and patria, ante quem, nec post, similis est egressus
de Britannia. And an other in his old Poem, of the same our renowned King and
Emperor, first testifing he was baptized at Rome by Pope Syluester, and there
cured of his Leprosy, adds:

He died after that at Nichomeid
In Cataloge among the Saints noumbred
Of May the twenty and one day indede
Under shryne buried and subumbred
Among all Christen Kings worthy to be remembered
Whose day and feast the Greeks have each year
Sol^mply, as for a Saint full clear.
Our old English Chronicle also testifies of this Emperor: This Constantine
Old Engl. Hist. part. 4. f. 38.
was a glorious man and a Victorious in Battle. In governing of the common
people he was very wise, and in the necessity of believe he was without
comparison devout, his piete and his holiness be so written in the books of
holy Doctors, that without doubt he is to he nobred among Saints. And the
Greeks say that in the end of his life he was made a Monk. S. Aldem says
great Constantine was corporally and spiritually S. Aldelm. lib. de Laudib.
Virgin. c. 12.
cured in Baptism at Rome by S. Syluester: Imperatoris Constantini diuturna
valetudo and Elephantiosa corporis incommoditas, accepto baptismatis Sacramento
a S. Syluestro citius curata est. And as Niphorus a Gretian writerh, this is
Niceph. Hist. l. 7. c. 35. and l. 8. c. 5. 4.
the consent of the whole Church, that he was baptized at Rome by S. Syluester.
Ecclesia a Syluestro eum Romae baptizatum esse certo praedicat. And again: nos
Ecclesiae vinuersali consentientes Romae eum sacro Lauacro tinctum esse
Siluestro administram ei imponente manum diximus.

THE VI. CHAPTER.
THAT S. HELEN EVER PROFESSED HERself a Christian: never joined with, but
against the Jews. Was in Britain when Constantine was baptized in Rome, and
after going from Britain to Rome, was there with Constantine present at the
Roman Council, consenting to the Decrees thereof.

1. THIS our Triumphant Emperor, and glory of Britain, having thus
victoriously conquered his spiritual, as well as corporal Enemies, and by
Baptism, thus happily made so glorious, and profitable a member of the Church
of Christ, the joyful news and tidings thereof was soon diffused, and known
to the holy Christians, though far distant from Rome, as that thing they most
desired to be effected, and as much rejoiced to hear it was so religiously
performed. And among the rest his blessed mother S. Helen then living hear in
Britain her natif Contry, after the death of her husband Constantius dying
hear, who as before had in the best manner she could instructed her son
Constantine in the true Christian Religion, and desired nothing more, then to
understand he publikly and with so great zeal now openly professed that,
which she had so often and earnestly exhorted him unto, was not a little ioyed
with the certain notice hereof. And with all have she could, prepared herself
for so long a Journey, by her corporal presence to be both a more effectual
partaker, and encreaser of such Christian comforts. And to give argument of her
Joys by message in the mean time writing unto him from Britain, as our
Antiquaties affirm, and among other things to express her great zeal in
Christian Religion, and to exhort her son to the like, understanding of the
great malice of the Jews against Christians, especially at that time, the
Emperor being so solemnly and miraculously baptized, persuaded him to
persecute those Jews which denied Christ, Constantino a Papa Syluestro
baptizato, scripsit ei sua matter Helena de Britannia, vt negantes Christum
Florent. Wigor. Chron. an. 306. and 328.
Iudaeos persequeretur. Marianus Scotus writes also that S. Helen did write
out of Britain to Constantine when she heard he was baptized by S. Syluester,
Constantino autem a Papa Syluestro baptizato, scripsit de Britannia sibi sua
matter Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. an. 321.
Helena. But the protestant Publisher, as he is charged in many other things by
M. Harpesfeild to have done, either has mistaken him, in that which follows;
S. Helen never any Jew or corrupted by such, but always an holy Christian.
or published some Copy not so to be approved, for he brings in S. Helen in
the next words, to request her son, to deny Christ, and follow the Jews: vt
negando Christum, Iudaeos sequeretur. Which cannot be the words either of
Marianus, or any learned Antiquary, such as he was, confessing S. Helen to have
been at this time in Britain as he does, for neither at this time, nor diverse
hundreds of years after S. Helen her death there is mention in Histories of
any Jews at all to have been in this kingdom: Then much more it must needs be
Historially a thing impossible, and altogether untrue, that there should then
be one huntred forty, and one of the most learned of the Jews hear, and S.
Helen should bring them with her to Rome from hence, as seems by some to be
set down in the Relation of the Dispute between S. Capgrau. in S. Helena.
Syluester and the Jews before Constantine and S. Helen in Rome: adduxit secum
Sancta Helena Romam centum quadraginta vnum doctissimos Iudaeorum. But quite
otherwise is proved before, that S. Helen was an holy Christian, when she was
in this Nation before her going to Rome, and at the time of her writing from
hence to her son Constantine there, after his Baptism. When in the other
sense, that S. Helen wrote unto her son to congratulate his Baptism,
encouradge him constantly and religiously to profess Christian Religion, to be
a friend to the servants and friends of Christ, and a suppressor of Jews, and
whosoever their Enemies, we have her own religious education, and all the
Christian Clergy and Nobility of Britain, a Christian kingdom and her
native Country so calling upon her: and neither Jew nor Pagan of note,
learning or power, for any thing we read, continuing hear, either to hinder
her in this, or advise her to the contrary, to follow and favor either Jews
or Gentiles in their proceedin^*

2. The like I may answer to them, which allthough they with the truth S.
Helen w^nt not forth of Britain with her son Constantine but after.
acknowledge S. Helen to have been the daughter of King Coel of Britain, and
borne in this Nation: yet they say she went hence with Constantine toward
Rome, at what time he went against Maxentius the Tyrant, and with the children
of Constantine travailed to Bizantium, and dwelling there was perverted by the
Jews, and so hearing of the Baptism of Constantine in that City of Bithinia,
did write to him from thence, comme^ding him for renowncing Idolatry, but
reproving him for reproving the Jews Religion, and being a Christian. But this
is evidently confuted before, when by so worthy authorities and many arguments
it was proved, that S. Helen was in Britain so far distant from Bizantium at
this time.

3. And what man of Judgment can admit with any show of reason, that if S.
Helen so wise a Princess had left Britain at that time, the contrary whereof
is already manifest, that she would also have left her only living child, so
renowned an Emperor, Constantine and her three Uncles Ioelim, or by some
Leolim, Trahern and Marius with a most mighty Army of her Country G^lf^.
Monum. Hist. Brit. l. 5. c. 8. Pont Virun. l. 5. Capg. in S. Helena. Hard.
Chron.
Britans, cum maximo ^c fortissimo Britannorum exercitu, under the conduct of
Constantine, in his own Empire, where he triumphed, and she was in security
and honor, to have lived at Bizantium in Bithinia in the Territories, and
command of a Tyrant, professed Enemy to her son and her, and many hundreds
of miles from any part of her sons Dominions, or if she could have been so
careless of her own good, and quiet, would she have been so regardlesse of
her most beloved sons Succession, and Posterity, as to have carried with her
into those dangers and troubles all the children of Constantine Emperor, which
should succeed him, as that Relation says she did, and Capgr. Catal. in S.
Helena.
was at Bizantium persuaded to be a Jew, Matter eius Helena sanctissima mulier
cum fui^ ^epo^ibus Constantini filijs apud Biza^ntiam ciuitatem, quae postea
Constantinopolis appellabatur aliquandiu commorata est, vbi ab impi^s Iudaeis
circumuenta, Iudaicae perfidiae fortius adhaerebat. Would or could such a most
holy woman by the narration it self, sanctissima mulier, have done so unholy,
and unadvised an Act? or would Co^sta^ntine so wise and loving both son and
Father have hazarded himself to have been so deprived both of mother and
children. But to manifest the apparent untruth of this narration in all, as it
is evident before that S. Helen was still in Britain, so it is far from
question in History that his children were with him in Italy. Priscus his
eldest son was diverse times Eusebius. l. 4. Vitae Constantini. ca. 68. Marian.
Scot. aetat. 6. l. 2. in Co^stantino. Martin. Polon. in eod. Floren. Wigorn. in
Chron. an 309 Baron. and Spond. Annal. Tom. 4. Act. S. Agnetis in Bre^iar. die
28. Ianuar. Surius Tom. 1. Zachar. Lipel. Tom. 1. die 21. Ianuar. and al. I. 1.
C. Th. de Iudae. Baron. Anna. an: 315. Baron. and Spond. Ann. an. 315. Conc.
Romans sub. Syluestro. can. vlt. and 1.
Consul, and made Augustus, so were his other sons Constantinus, Consta^s and
Constantius. Constantia also his daughter was at Rome, and there healed at S.
Agnes her Tomb. So we must needs say with our worthy Antiquaries, that S.
Helen was in Britain when her son was Baptized, and from thence wrote unto
him to congratulate his Baptism, encourage him in the profession of Christ,
and to persecute the Jews his enemies.

4. And most probably upon these letters and counsel of S. Helen, her son
Constantine set out that his Edict against the Jews remembered both in the
Imperial laws, and Histories, that those Jews which stoned or persecuted any
of their company for being converted to Christianity, as then many of them
insolently did, should with all their Accomplices be burned. And if any
Christians should go to their Sect, they should be subject to the same
punishment. For Baronius himself confesses that this Edict of Constantine was
made in the 315. year of Christ: hoc anno 315. idem Constantinus Iudaeorum
procaciam Edicto cohibuit: which was abo^^ the time of his Baptism, by that is
proved before, and about the time of his mothers writing unto him to such
purpose, and upon her advise, for if the Edict had been granted before her
writing, she would not have written and advised as she did, to persuade him to
that, he had performed with so great authority, and severity before. Again
Baronius holds that the Disputation between S. Syluester, and the Jews
before Constantine, and S. Helen was at Rome in the 315. year of Christ. And
the Roman Council kept in the third Consulship of Constantine, Both
Constantine and S. Hele^present at Rome at the time of the Roman Counsel, and
consenting to it.
sooner rather then after this year, is witness that both Constantine and S.
Helen, were there at Rome and that Council. And commonly it is held that the
Dispute, was in the time of that Council, and S. Helen for the greater glory
of Christ might be some means of that Dispute, but in no wise by that is said
either a Jew or doubting in her holy Christian Religion: and more confirmed
Metaphr. 2. Ian. Glic. Annal. Niceph. l. 7. cap. 36. Cedren. Comp. Capgr. supr.
in S. Helen. Baron. An. 315. Marian. Scot. aetat. 6. l. 2. an. 321. Manuscr.
Gallic. antiq. c. 30.
by that Dispute, seeing the best learned Jews so plainly and publicly
confuted, that both they, and all the Pagan Philosophers then present, were
converted to the faith of Christ, Omnes Iudaei Iudicesque and caeteri omnes
conuersi sunt ad fidem. An old French Manuscript History says 3000. Jews were
converted. Thus far was this our holy British Queen and Empress from
approving the profession of the Jews at any time, that she was the occasion of
that Law not only against them enacted by her son, but also of such
Christians as should receive Iudaisme to be burned, and she herself had fallen
into that danger if she had entered into their Sect. And was further by
obtaining or occasioning this Dispute, occasion also of the great honor of
Christians and confusion of both Iudaisme and Paganism whereby both the best
learned Jews, and Pagans being there present were converted to Christ.

5. And because this Dispute was by common opinion, at, or in the time of the
Roman Council, and this both called by the help and assistance of S. Helen and
Constantine, bearing the chardges of the Bishops there assembled, as is
expressed in the same Council, who also subscribed unto it with Conc. Romans
can. 1. 20. and vlt.
284. Bishops besides others, subscripser^nt 284. Episcopi and 45. Presbyteri,
and 5. Diaconi and Augustus Constantinus and Matter eius Helena. Therefore it
appertains Diverse Catholic Decrees of the Roman Council in the presence of
Constantine and S. Helen under S. Sylnester Pope.
to the History of this kingdom to know what doctrine concerning us, was
concluded there. In this Council are set down all Ecclesiastical Orders and
Degrees which the Church of Rome now observes, Ostiarius, Lector, Exorcista,
Acolithus, Subdeacon, and the superior Deacons, Priests, Bishops with their
peculiar offices, and functions: And a Law, that Subdeacons might not marry:
nullus Subdiaconorum ad n^ptias transire praecipimus. Then Can. 7. 8. 9. 11.
much more unlawful it was for any of the higher Orders to de married. In this
Council also it is decreed, that the Roman See is the chiefest See, and can be
judged by none, neither by Emperor, Clergy, Kings, or people, but all Can. 2.
other Sees are to receive Justice from it, Nemo iudicabit primam Sedem,
quoniam omnes Seeds a prima Sede Iustitiam desidera^t te^perari. Neque ab
Augusto, neque ab omni Clero, neque a Regibus neque a populo Iudex Iudicabitur.
And allthough this Council was called by the assent of Constantine the
Emperor, or his Mother S. Helen, cum consilio August^ vel Matris eius, and
they both subscribed Can. 1.
unto it: subscripsit Augustus Constantinus cum matre Helena Augusta: yet this
was not by any claim or Title they pretended to be Judges in spiritual
Questions, Can. 7. and 20.
but only to approve by their temporal Power, and Authority, what S.
Syluester Pope and the Bishops assembled did decree and conclude: as is evident
by the same Council both testifying that S. Syluester Pope called the
Council: Syluester Episcopus vrbis Romae collegit vniuersam Synod^m
Episcoporum: And made the Decrees as appears almost ineuery Canon set out in
his name: constituit Syluester Episcopus vrbis Romae. And plainly forbad any
lay parson to be present and intermedle in those affairs, voluit vt nullus
laicorum Can. 1. Epilog. Council. Romans Tom. 1. Council. ante Council. Romans de
cons. did. consulto omnium. 2. quaest. 7. nulius laicus.
praesens esse videretur. But only assembled the Bishops and Clergy to deal
in those matters, Hos omnes ad examen sanctitatis colligeret: Decreed that the
Sacrifice of the Altar should not be offered but upon a linen cloth hallowed
by a Bishop. Omnium consultu constituit in Synodo vt sacrificium altaris non in
serico panno aut tincto quispiam celebrare praesumeret, sed in puro lineo ab
Episcopo consecrato. And that in the Sacrament of Confirmation by anointing
with holy Chrisime, and Imposition of Bishops hands, grace of the holy Ghost is
given by Bishops only: nemo nisi Episcopus sacrosancto chrismate, per
Episcopalis manus Impositionem, sancti spiritus gratia confirmaret. And S.
Syluester De Conse. did. 1. nullus presbyter Missas.
in the same Council with all their consents decreed, that no Priest should
say Mass but in places consecrated by a Bishop, Hic in memorata Synodo
constituit omnium cum consensu, vt nullus Presbiter Missas celebrare praesumat,
nisi in Rob. Barnes in Vit. Pontif. Rom in Syluestro.
sacratis ab Episcopo locis.

6. These Decrees our Protestant Antiquaries themselves do asscribe to this
holy Pope S. Syluester, and to have been confirmed in this Council, where our
renowned King and Queen, Emperor and Empress, Constantine and B. Helen were
present, and in which S. Syluester confuted the chief Doctors and Rabins of
the Jews, as our learned and ancient holy Bishop S. Aldelm. lib. de laudib.
virginitat. cap. 12.
S. Aldelme with others witness. Syluester Constantino orbem gubernante ad
Synodale Concilium populis cateruatim confluentibus duodenos Iudaeorum
Praeceptores, and Pharisaeorum Rabbites dira disputationum spicula contra
Christi Tyronem truciter torquentes, diuino confisus clypeo confutauit.
Therefore of all Nations we of Britain by greatest obligation are bound to
receive, retain and practice the holy doctrins decr^^d in this Council,
whether Catholics asscribing Supremacy in spiritual affairs unto the Pope,
or Protestants unto the temporal king and Prince, both being present in, and
giving allowence to the Decrees of this Council, so famous in all Contries
both in respect of it self, as the confusion of the best learned Jews therein,
which as S. Aldelme writes, was known in all parts of the world: celeberrimum
spectaculi genus per totos mundi Cardines vulgatum.

THE VII. CHAPTER.
OF THE PRESENCE AT, ALLOWANCE AND receiving of general Councels by our
Emperor Constantine, our Archbishop and other Bishops of Britain: together
with the doctrine, then professed in those Counsels and after practiced in
Britain.

1. ABOUT this time, and among such holy Christian works Matthew. Westminster. an.
321. Baron. and Spond. Annal. an. 314. Seuerin. Binnius Annot. in Council.
Arelat. 1. Tom. 1. Council.
of Constantine, or effected by his help and assistance, the first great
Council of Arles in France, consisting as Nicephorus, Ado and others say, of
600. Bishops, was celebrated, as Baronius, Spondanus and others from Antiquity
do gather, in the 314. year of Christ, the 9. of the Empire of Constantine,
and second of the Papacy of S. Syluester. In this Council was present and
subscribed Restitutus Archbishop of London, and in all probable judgment diverse
others of this our Britain: for in that subscription unto that Council which
is left unto us, and Restitutus is subscribed, Ex prouincia Britanniae ciuitate
Londinensi Restitutus Episcopus, there be not the names of 30. of those 600.
Bishops there assembled, registered and preserved. And so Britain being so
near unto the place of this Council, and replenished with Bishops at this
time, as I have before remembered, may well make claim for a greater number of
the Bishops thereof to have been present there. A Protestant Antiquary of
England, would by this subscription of Restitutus infer, or have it to be
doubtfully thought he was no Archbishop, nor that Title then used: he writes
not himself, (says this Protestant Historian.) Archbishop, and therefore
makes that matter of Archbishops doubtful, or rather overthrows that
opinion. Stowe Histor. Tit. Romans in Lucius.
But I have proved this Ecclesiastical high dignity before to have ever been
in the Church of Christ, and hear in Britain from the Apostles time.

2. And concerning the subscription to this Council, where it is most
certain, many Archbishops were present, not any one so subscribeth. In this
Council, as I have related already, were present for the Pope of Rome S.
Syluester, Claudius and Vitus Priests, and Eugenius and Cyriacus Deacons, and
Constantine the Emperor. And allthough it was cheifely assembled for the cause
of Caecilianus Archbishop of Carthage, yet it Decreed diverse other Canons, some
of which concerned even this kingdom touching things Council. Arelat. 1. can.
1. Tom. 1. Council.
questioned by some of our Protestant Writers: as namely in the first Canon
directed to S. Syluester Pope, it has that all Churches should keep the day
of Easter upon one day with the Church of Rome, and that the Pope of Rome by
his letters should give Order herein, De obseruatione ^aschae Domini, vt vno
die and tempore per omnem orbem obseruetur, and iuxta consuetudinem, literas ad
omnes tu dirigas. Where we evidently see that the Church of Britain then kept
the true observation of Easter with the Church of Rome, and not with some
Churches of Asia erroneously, as some of our Britans after did, at the coming
of S. Augustine hither, and that the Church of Rome then by old custom, iuxta
consuetudinem, directed both our British and other Churches in such things. In
the 8. Canon, Imposition of hands, usually called Confirmation, is proved to be
a Sacrament, and to give grace to those that are baptized, Si peruiderint Can.
8. Cau. 15. 20.
in Patre and Filio and Spiritu sancto eos baptizatos, manus eis tantum
imponatur, vt accipiant spiritum Sanctum. It disableth all but Priests to say
Mass, and appoints that every Bishop a stranger, so many then there present,
should have a convenient place to offer Sacrifice in, vt peregrino Episcopo
locus sacrificandi detur.

3. Some have thought this Counsel was kept about the the same time wherein
the Nicen was celebrated: But Baronius, Spondanus, Sepherinus Binnius Baron.
and Spondan. Annal. ann. 314. Sever. Bin. Annot. in Conc. Arel. 1. Tom. 1.
Council.
and others do directly prove it was kept in the 314. year of Christ, and
first year of S. Syluester Pope, presently after the death of Melchiades.
Which is also evident by the Epistle of Constantin himself extant in Eusebius,
written to Chrestus Bishop of Siracusas, warning him to be present at that
Council, and gives him power to take of Latronianus his Prefect of Sicile a
publik wagan for him and his company, sayeing, that against the first day of
August following he had given direction for very many Bishops from diverse and
innumerable places to assemble at the City of Arles in France, Quamplurimos
Episcopos Epistol. Constant. Magni ad Chrest. Episcop. apud Eusebius. l. 10.
Histor. c. 5.
ex varijs and innumeris locis ad Ciuitatem Arelatensem, Calendis Augusti
conuenire iussimus, etiam tibi scribendum esse iudicauimus, vt accepto ab
Illustrissimo Latroniano Siciliae Praefecto publico vehiculo ac vna cum duobus
quibusdam ex ijs qui secundi ordinis sunt, quos tu ipse seligendos putaueris,
quin and cum tribus seruis qui vobis in itinere seruire valiant, intra eundem
diem ad locum iam dictum accurras. This Epistle of Constantine to Su^man this
Council, must needs be written in the later end of the year of Christ 313. or
in the beginning of the year 314. for Pope Melchiades died in the Month of
December the year 313. And S. Damas. in Melchiad. and Syluest. Sever. Bin.
Tom. 1. Council. in eisde^. Baron. and Spond. an. 313. 114. In appendic. ad
Optat. Baron. an. 314. Eusebius l. 4. de Vit. Constantini cap. 27.
Syluester in whose first year this Council was kept was chosen Pope the
first day of February in the year following 314. The like letters and
liberties to assemble other Bishops to this Council were written and granted
at this time by Constantine, as appears in his Epistle to Ablauius Proconsul
of Afric. This Council as others of the holy Bishops of this time, and the
whole Age of Constantine, was approved and privileged by his Imperial
authority, as Eusebius witnesses, that no other Prince or Potentate might
abrogate and make them inualiditate, Quae ab Episcopis in publicis Conuentibus
editae erant regulae, sua consignabat and confirmabat authoritate: ne
reliquarum Gentium Principibus liceret, quae ab eis decreta essent abrogare,
cuiusuis enim Iudicis sententiae, Sacerdotum Dei Iudicium ant^ponendum est.
Where it is evident, that the Decrees decreed in Councels were the Decrees of
the Bishops assembled in them, and not the Decrees of Constantine the Emperor,
but only defended by his Imperial power, and authority from being abrogated
by any Civil or temporal Prince, or Consistory, but to be duly reverenced
and observed by all parsons.

4. Very many there be among which, diverse English Protestant Antiquaries
Matthew. Parker Antiquit. Britan. cap. 1. Io. Goscel. Histor. Ecclesiast.
Manuscript.
are to be numbered, which affirm it was the second Council of Arles held, as
they say, in the 326. year of Christ, in the time of this Constantine Emperor
where Restitutus Archbishop of London, was present, and subscribed. Accedit
Arelatensis secundi Concilij authoritas, in quo diserte exprimitur, Restitutum
quendam Londinensem Episcopum ei Concilio e Britannia vocatum interfuisse,
eiusdemque Decretis subscripsisse. Thus Matthew Parker the first English
Protestant Stowe Hist. Tit. Romans in Lucius.
Archbishop, and Goscelin in his Manuscript History. An other says, I read of
a Bishop of London in the year of Christ 326. to be present at the second
Council at Arles, in the time of Constantine the Great, who subscribed
thereunto in these words: Ex Prouincia Britanniae ciuitate Londinensi
Restitutus Episcopus. Diverse others there be, who allthough they do not
particularly name what Council of Arles first or second, this our Archbishop
was present at in France, yet they plainly deliver, that he was at this
supposed, to be the second in the year of Christ 326. so a Protestant Bishop
writes: Restitutus was Hollinsh. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 29. Godwin Cat. of
Bish. London. in Restitutus 12.
present at the Council of Arles in France, the year 326. and subscribed unto
the Decrees of the same Council, which he brought over with him. That is
utterly and impudently spoken false, which this English Protestant Bishop and
Antiquarie immediately adds from this Counsel: one Decree amongst the rest
was, that if a Deacon at the time of his ordering did protest, he intended to
marry, It should be lawful for him so to do. Restitutus himself was married.
For in this Council there is not the least mention of any such Decree. And it
is as boldly affirmed of Restitutus marriadge without any Author so
testifying. And this very Council bears good witness that by the Decrees
thereof, neither Restitutus nor any other Bishop or Priest might marry, nor any
man that was married might be admitted to be Priest or Bishop, except by
consent leaving his wife which he had before, assumi aliquem ad Sacerdotium non
posse in vinculo coniugij Conc. Arelat. 2. Can. 2.
constitutum, nisi fuerit promissa conuersio. Whereby it is evident, that the
sufferance or permission which Socrates, and Sozomen and our Protestants from
them upon the words and persuasion of Paphnutius in the first Nicen Council,
allowed unto some Eastern Bishops, Priests, and Deacons which were married
before their Consecration, that after their Consecration they might Socrat.
Histor. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 8. Sozomen. Hist. l. 2. cap. 22.
keep company with such wives: ab vxoribus quas habebant minime separarentur,
was never admitted hear in Britain, and these West Countries, is plain by
this Canon of the Council of Arles, kept in the very next year to that Nicen
Council, as our Protestants with others before acknowledge, and diverse times
citing that former Council defyning the contrary, that no married man, except
forsaking his wife might be a Priest.

5. And Socrates best Interpreter of himself does prove, that this permission
or tolleration was not practiced, or executed by the most renouned Priests and
Bishops of the East, but they contained themselves from the wives they had
married before, and says, that in some places, as Thessalia, upon his certain
knowledge, the custom was, to degrad such Clergy men as would not abstain
from such wives, Ipse in Thessalia consuetudinem inualuisse noui, vt Socrat.
Histor. l. 5. cap. 21.
ibi qui clericus sit, si cum vxore, quam cu^ esset laicus ducebat, postquam
clericus factus sit, dormierit, clericatu abdicatus sit: omnes Illustres
presbyteri in Orient, and Episcopietiam ab vxoribus abstineant. Neither is
there any such license, or tolleration registered in any Canon, or Copy of the
Nicen Council. When in this Council of Arles subscribed unto, and brought
into Britain by our Archbishop, as our Protestants confess before, the
co^tinency of Clergy me^ even from formerly married wives, is plainly decreed
for a general Law unto all. So that from the beginning, by these men's grant
from this Council, our Ecclesiastical men ever lived in perpetual chastity,
both from those wives, and after Consecration were disabled to marry by their
own Authors, both by the Churches Tradition and the Nycen Council proving,
that in no part either East or West such men might marry, but were prohibited
by the old Tradition of the Socrates and Sozom. supr.
Church, which being old in that time must needs be from the Apostles days: vt
qui in Clerum ante ascripti erant, quam duxissent vxores, hi secundum veterem
Ecclesiae Traditionem, deinceps a nuptijs se abstinerent. So that our English
Protestants must needs confess, that Article of their Religion, which is: It
is lawful Protest. Articles of Religion Articul. 32.
for Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, as for all other Christian men to marry at
their own discretion: to be utterly false both by this holy Council, the
Council of Neyce, the practice of our primative Christian Britans, and the
Tradition of the whole Church of Christ.

6. We read likewise in this Council subscribed unto by our Archbishop
Arelaten. Council. 2. Can. 15. Nicen. Council. c. 14. 18. Arelat. 2. can. 25.
Can. 26.
Restitutus, as our Protestants have told us before, that the sacred body of
Christ, Corpus Christi, is given to Communicants in the holy Eucharist: and
there it receaueth the Doctrine of the Nycen Council teaching that consecrated
Priests, and such only, offer the body of Christ in their Sacrifice of Mass.
It condemns all them to penance, who after their Vow of Religious life
forsake it: Disableth those that have been twyce married to receive any
Ecclesiastical Order above Subdeacon. And those women which after Vow of
chastity do marry it debarreth from Communion.

7. A late Writer would place this Council in a later time, after the death of
Seuerin. Bin. not. in Arel. 2. Council. Tom. 2. Council.
S. Syuester, but being therein singular against the common opinion both of
Catholics and Protestants, and finding in the very Council itself, that it was
kept in the days of S. Syluester in the year of Christ 326. I dare not for
such reasons as do not convince prolonge it to a later Age: But rather think
with Seuerinus Binnius and others, that our Archbishop Restitutus was as well
present a the first, as with the common voice of Antiquity, that he subscribed
to the second, seeing there was no greater distance then of 11. years between
them. And this second Council where all agree Restitutus was, affirms that
in the former Council 11. years before, Bishops were assembled out of all
parts of the world, Ad Arelatensem vrbem ex omnibus mundi partibus celeb^atum
Council. Arel. 2. 1 can. 18. Arelat. Council. 1. can. 7.
fuisse Conciliu^. In which we find a Decree for all Nations, that the
Presidents of Countries being Christians were to be at the direction of the
Bishops in such places, concerning Religion. Which must needs, besides that is
said before, give us sufficient Argument, that in this year 314. Constantine
was a professed Christian. I have somewhat out of Order of time joined this
second Council of Arles to the first, in regard they were by the common
opinion kept so near together, in one place, under one Pope S. Syluerster, one
Emperor of our Country Constantine, and our Archbishop with others of this
kingdom was present in them, such men as he never going alone without others
of their Clergy to any Council Bishops or Priests: and in this time especial
care being taken by our renowned Emperor, as I have showed before Epistol.
Constable. ad Chrest. supr. Council. Roman can. 1. Histor. Tripartit. l. 3. c. 2. l.
2. cap. 3.
from his own public order, that they should at his charge and cost so be
safely conveyed with their due Attendance to that place, where these Councels
were to be assembled: and there also to be provided for, during the time of the
Counsels at his cost, Quibus Augustus Constantinus vehicula and annonas
praestari praecepit.

THE VIII. CHAPTER.
THE GENERAL ESTABLISHING, ENDOWing and honoring of Christian Religion,
Bishops, Priests other Clergymen, chaste and Religious parsons in all places of
the Empire by Constantine.

1. NEITHER did this renowned Emperor confine his love, and favors toward
Christian Religion, unto the Christians of his own the west Empire, but unto
all, as God by an holy Angel before revealed, (both Catholics and Protestants
so acknowleding) that Christians in the whole world should be at peace, and
Idolatry was generally to Baptist. Mantuan. l. 2. de vita S. Blasij. Io. Bal.
l. 1. de Act. Pont. Roman. in Sylu. 1.
be overthrown by this Noble Emperor:

Nunc bonus, expulsis Romana in regna Tyrannis
Adueniet Princeps, sub quo pacabitur orbis:
Et finem accipiet veterum cultura Deorum.
This Noble Emperor and Instrument of God, the more easily and peaceably to
procure and setle this general quiet, and security of Christians, Licinius
being now Emperor in the East, he married his half Sister Constantia daughter
of his Father Constantius by Theodora unto him: she was by common opinion a
Christian at this time, by which means, and at the least in respect of other
favors received from Constantyne, Licinius professed himself a Friend to
Christians, and joined with Constantine in diverse Edicts, Edicts of Constantine
and Licinius Emperors for Christians quiet in all places. Eusebius. Histor. l. 9
cap. 9. l. 10. cap. 5. Zozomen Histo. l. 1. cap. 7. Eusebius. sup. l. 10. c. 5. l.
9. cap. 9.
for their quietly enjoying and professing their Religion, restoring to them
their Liberties, lands, goods, Churches and other freedoms. And that these
their Privileges to Christians might come to the knowledge of all, they caused
them to be published in all places: vt autem Constitutionis huius and
honestatis nostrae determinatio omnibus innotescere valeat, haec scripta nostra
passim proponi, and ad omnium cognitionem duci conueniet, ne quenquam
honestatis huius nostrae constitutio latere queat. And as Eusebius witnesses,
both Constantine and Licinus did send these their Laws for the Immunities of
Christians even to Maximinus the Tyrant in the East to be observed by him: Cum
ipse Constantinus, tum and Licinius Imperator cum eo Deum bonorum omnium
Authorem vtrique placantes, vna sententia ac voluntate legem pro Christianis
perfectissimam, ac plenissimam constituunt, ac ipsam legem Maximino, qui adhuc
Orienti dominabatur, and amicitiam erga ipsos praetexebat mittunt. And he
either for love or fear, caused it to be promulged, and published by his
Authority to all Presidents under him. All this was done by Constantine the
year next after his Victory against Baron. Annal. An. 313. Spondan. ibidem.
Marian. Scot. aetat. 6. l. 2. an. 309.
Maxentius, as Baronius and others write in the 313. of Christ, but by Marianus
setting down the death of Maximinus in the year 309. it must needs be sooner
if his account be true.

2. But howsoever, it is evident by Eusebius and others that Maximinus soon
after moving war against Licinius by instigation of his Idolatrous Priests,
being overthrown and brought to misery, did put those his Seducers to death,
Eusebius. Histor. l. 9 cap. 10.
worshipped the God of Christians, and published a most absolute Law for their
liberty, and freedom. His Constitution is extant in Eusebius, and all this
was effected, and he miserably died in the 313. or 314. year of Christ, by
Baronius Baron. and Spond. an. 313. and 314.
and Spondanus largest reckoning. And by the same Computators Licinius
afterward violating his faith, and falling to war with Constantine, and
persecuting Christians, being brought to distress and desolation* hanged
himself in the year of Christ 318. Constantine must needs be acknowledged
Baron. and Spond. an. 318.
to have been the sole and only commanding Emperor in the world before this
time, for Sozomen with others witnesses, that Licinius the last, then bearing
that name utterly overthrown both at Sea, and land, by the forces of
Constantine, first hopeless of recovery, fledd to Nicomedia, and some time
Sozom. Histor. l. 1. cap. 7.
after lived an obscure and base life at Thessalonica, before he came to that
desperate end, Licinius pedestribus copijs and naualibus amissis, se Nicomediam
recepit, and postea vitam priuatam Thessalonicae ad tempus degens, ibi e medio
sublatus est.

3. Eusebius from the Testimony of Constantine himself, writes strange
Miracles wrought by the Banner of this Emperor, bearing the Cross, that
Eusebius. lib. 2. Vit. Constant. cap. 7. 8. 9.
in what part soever of the Army it was seen, the Enemies fledd, and rane
away. And if in any part of his Army, the Souldiars began to faint, presently
The miraculous Banner of Constantine having the sign of the Cross in it.
upon the bringing of this holy Banner thither, they recovered, and obtained
Victory: whereas there were 50. men appointed to attend this Banner, and in
turns to bear it, never any one of them in executing that office, did miscary:
Among these only one which bore it, seeing the War to be great, and in his
Judgment dangerous, delivered this Ensign to an other, and departing from it,
was wounded, and died, but he which took the Banner from him, had no hurt at
all. And when very many darts were cast at him, they all missed his body, and
were Miraculously received in the slender shaft or staff of the Banner to the
exceeding adm^ration of all men, Istud omnem plane superat admirationem, tum
quod tela ab hostibus iacta sic intra exiguum ill um and angustum hastilis
ambitum prouolabant, vt in eodem fixa inhaerescerent: tum quod ille qui illud
ipsum gestabat, mortem effugeret: imo vero, vt qui hoc ministerium obibant,
nihil damni incommodiue aliquando acciperent. Neque certe haec nostra est
oration, sed ipsius Imperatoris, qui praeter alias res, hanc etiam nobis coram
memorauit. And the Eusebius. l. 2. Vit. Constant. cap. 16
glory of this Cross, as Eusebius writes, was known so evidently even to
Licinus the Enemy thereof, that when he was to fight with Constantine, he
commanded his souldiars not to look upon that Ensign, but by all means they
could, to avoid it.

4. Constantine thus by the great mercy, and power of God, which had given him
so many and great Victoryes, even from the Sea of Britain to the Countries of
the East, a mari Britannico, ad Regiones vsque in orient sitas. And Sozomen.
Histo. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 8. Eusebius. Vit. Constant. l. 2. cap. 23. Constantine by
public Edicts ascribes his victories to Christ and freed Christians.
by the aid and protection of his Fathers Constantius God, had made all
Nations subject unto his Empire, did openly publish unto them all, that he was
the Author of his Conquests, and signified so much to all Nations by his
Imperial Edicts both in Latin and Greek, Postquam omnes gentes Dei patris
virtute Imperatori subiectae fuerunt, bonorum sibi suppeditatorum largitorem
omnibus palam praedicauit: cumque victoriarum quas esset assecutus Authorem
agnoscere, constanter testificatus est: hocque ipsum per Edicta quae literis
Latinis Graecisque mandata erant, and ad omnes gentes missa, manifesto
denuntiauit. In these Decrees he ordained that all Christians should be
restored to their former honors, and Sozom. Eccles. H^stor. lib. 1. c. 8.
estates, all Exiles recalled, all punishments and afflictions imposed upon
them by Persecutors quite remitted. Those that had been put to death, and
spoiled of their goods for Christian Religion, their children or next of
kindred should have them restored to their use, and if none of their kindred
were living, the Church in every such place should be their Heir. And no
private man or Magistrate should detain any part thereof: And what soever had
been forfaited in that respect should be repayed. All which things were
presently decreed by this Emperor, and by Law confirmed, and without delay
effected, Ista vt primum ab Imperatore, vti demonstratum est, decreta fuere,
legeque confirmata, absque mora sunt ad exitum decorum consentaneumque
perducta. For almost all Christians of the Roman Empire began to bear office,
and forbad all men to offer sacrifice to Idols, use the wicked exercises and
ceremonies of the Gentiles, Nam Christiani omnes fere Romani Imperij Magistratus
gerere caeperunt: interdixeruntque omnibus ne de caetero, vel simulachris
immolare, vel diuinationibus nefandis mysterijs vti, vel statuas erigere, vel
festa gentilicia celebrare aggrederentur.

5. And concerning Christian Churches, they which were lardge enough, How
generally and wonderfully Constantine honored and established Religion.
and had been ruinated in the time of Persecution, were repaired, others were
builded higher, and with honor made greater, where there were none before, new
were erected even from the foundation, and the Emperor out of his Tresury
afforded money thereto, and wrote both to the Bishops and Presidents of every
Province; To the Bishops, that what soever they would, they should command:
and to the Presidents, that they should diligently do what they commanded. And
so with the prosperous Estate of his Empire, Religion greatly increased, Quod
autem ad sacra templa attinet, quae satis haberent laxitatis, reficiebantur:
alia altius erigebantur, latioraque non sine splendoris accessione fiebant.
Noua etiam, vbi nulla ante fuissent, ab ipsis fundamentis extruebantur.
Pecuniam autem ad hanc rem ex Aerario regio suppeditauit Imperator, scripsitque
tum ad Episcopos, tum ad Praesides cuiusque Prouinciae: ad illos quidem, vt
quae vellent, imperarent; ad hos autem, vt morem gererent Episcopis, eorumque
imperata studiose facerent. It aque vna cum prospero Imperij statu, magnopere
creuit Religio. Out of the Lands of his own Tribute in every City he took a
certain Pension that was accustomed to be paid into the Tresury, and
distributed it to the Churches, and Clergy and by Law decreed that his gift
to be perpetual:

6. He caused the sign of the Cross to be made upon the Armor of his
Constantine his honor to the sign of the Cross.
Souldiars, to accustom them thereby to serve God. He builded a Church in his
Palace, and used to have carried with him when he went to War, a Pauilion
after the manner of a Church, that both he and his Army being in field might
have a Church to prayer, and pray unto God, and receive the sacred Mysteries:
for Priests and Deacons which according to the Institution of the Church should
execute those duties continually followed that Tent. He took away by Law the
old punishment of the Cross used by the Romans. He caused that sign to be
made on his own Image, whether impressed on money, or painted on tables.

7. And whereas the Romans had an old Pagan Law against the single Sozom.
supr. l. 1. cap. 9. How he honored the chaste and virginal life.
and unmarried, after the Age of 25. years, disabling them to make a Will, or
their kinsmen to enjoy their goods by any Legacy, or Testament, and confiscated
half their goods, which died without children (this Law was made by the old
Romans, to replenish not only their City, but their whole Dominions with
multitude of men, having lost many by civil Wars not long before the making of
this Law (this Emperor perceauing that they which determined to profess
Virginity, and live without children for the love of God, by this Law to be
in worse condition then others, enacted and published a Law that both the
unmarried, and they which had not children, should enjoy equal liberty with
others, and further decreed, that they which had vowed virginity and chastity,
should have greater Privilege then the rest. And which was a most great
Argument of this Empeperours reuence toward Religion, he freed all Clergy men
in all places from that Law, and gave power unto all such which should be
called before civil Magistrates, to appeal to the Judgment of Bishops; And
their sentence should be of force, and have more Authority then of other
Judges, Vetus He exempteth Clergy men from secular Judges.
erat apud Romanos lex, quae vetuit caelibes, si annum vigesimum quintum
praeterijssent, paribus cum his qui nuptias contraxissent, Priuilegijs frui:
iussitque praeter alia multa, etiam vt nihil commodi, etiam si genere proximi
essent ex testamento suorum caperent. Quinetiam eos qui nullos habebant
liberos, dimidiata part bonorum quae erant reliqua mulctauit. Haec lex a
veteribus Romany sancita fuit eo consilio, vt non vrbem Romam solum, verum
etiam caeteram suam Ditionem hominum multitudine complerent: quandoquidem haud
longo tempore ante legem latam, quamplurimos bellis intestinis ac ciuilibus
amiserant. Quare Imperator cum videret eos qui and virginitatem excolere, and
sine liberis esse propter Dei amorem, in animum induxissent, hac de re in
deteriort esse condition: legem plebi promulgauit, quae iubebat, vt cum
caelibes, tum liberis carentes, pari iure cum caeteris omnibus fruerentur: Immo
vero etiam decreuit, vt qui castimoniae and virginitati se consecrassent,
Priuilegio quodam prae caeteris donarentur. Illud porro est plane maximum
reuerentiae Imperatoris erga Religionem argumentum, quod clericos vbique per
legem ob eam rem conditam immunitate donari voluit: quodque illis, qui erant in
iudicium vocati, dedit potestatem, si modo animum inducerent Magistratus
ciuiles reijcere, ad Episcoporum iudicium prouocandi, atque eorum sententiam
ratam esse, and aliorum Iudicum sententijs plus habere Authoritatis. All these
and more such public Acts, and duties of a Christian Emperor, Eusebius,
Sozomen, and others Eusebius. l. 2. de Vit. Constant. c. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44.
45. 46. l. 3. c. 4. 5. 6. 7. 9. Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 8. 15. 16. 17.
Ruffin. Hist. l. 1. c. 1. Socr. l. 1. c. 2. 3. 4. 5.
prove to have been done by Constantine, diverse years before some Roman
Writers affirm he was baptized by Pope S. Syluester in the year before the
Nicen council the 324. of Christ.

THE IX. CHAPTER.
CONSTANTINE DID NOT PROLONG HIS Baptism so long as some write. He was not
baptized, by an Arrian Bishop, never fell into Arrianisme, or any Heresy.

1. THEREFORE for the honor of this our Emperor, and Country, Baron. and
Spond. An. 324.
to examine this more particularly: Baronius, Spondanus and others both late,
and more ancient Writers do demonstrate against some Gretia^s, not a little
suspected of that great sin, and Heresy of Arrius, or Favorers thereof,
with which suspicion they have not abstained to seem to accuse this our
renowned Emperor, especially toward his later days, that he was both
innocent of that crimination, and not baptized a little before his death at
Nicomedia by an Arrian Bishop, but long before, and somewhat before that
Heresy was condemned in the Nicen Council, and by S. Syluester Pope of Rome,
and in that his then Imperial City, of which I shall more plainly entreat
hereafter. Among their Arguments besides Authors of all kinds, Greeks and
Latins Pagans, and Christians with other invincible testimonies, a reason of
chief importance is, that so Religious and verruous a Prince and Benefactor,
of the Church of Christ by Religion would not, and in conscience could not so
long hazard his salvation, by deferring his Baptism, the door to enter into
^^. The same Argument by proportion I may use against Baronius, and all those,
that delay the Baptism of this renowned Emperor until the 324. year of
Christ, when he had been Emperor almost 20. years before, and so long, and
more a Christian in Judgment and affection at the least, as I have inuincibly
proved. He that had sought by so many, and chardgeable means, to take away,
prevent, and hinder negligences and sins in other Christians, in all places of
his Dominions, may not be thought so negligent, and forgetful of his own
good, and happiness eternal, so many years in so many dangers as he underwent
to play his soul at hazard, and tempt God so long and often in so high a
degree.

2. And these Authors Themselves set down many Christian Acts and Baron. and
Spond. in Annal. an. 313. 314. 315. 316. 317. 318. 319.
professions of Constantine which free him from such neglect. In the next year
to his Victory against Maxentius, being the year of Christ 313. he gave his
sister Constantia a Christian, as these men say, wife to Licinius, not then
probable that he could be so mindful of his Sisters spiritual good; and
careless of his own, when especially, as all Histories testify, he made this
match for the propagation of Christian Religion, Licinus by this means
Ioyening with him in this business, by his procureme^t. He gives the greatest
reverence, and highest honor to the Decrees and Sentence of Bishops, gave his
Palace Laterane to Pope Melchiades in Rome, and Revenues to all other Bishops
in the tenth year of his Empire, he celebrated the Feast and solemnity
thereof Christiano ritu, as a Christian should, and rejects the wonted Pagan
exercises. He grants great liberty to all Bishops. Warreth against Licinius,
for defense of Christian Religion, pro defensione Religionis Christianae. He
was the only Emperor, none to resist him in the year of Christ 319. and then
every where he gave peace to the Church of Christ, pace^ Ecclesiae vbique
restituit, abolishing the Witches and Southsayers of the Pagans. All these
besides other Christian works and Acts, Baronius confesses Constantine
publikly performed 5. or 6. years before the Nicen Council. How then can he
probably teach, that he was batized the year before. He confesses there were
by his procurement 600. Bishops at the Council of Arles in the year 314. in
the year 325. 318. Bishops at Nyce in Bithinia, and 377. at Rome.

3. If Constantine chief Agent to abolish the Pagan Flamens, to whom these
Bishops succeeded had not been a Christian much longer, how could so many
Bishops be so soon assembled together, or have been in the whole world. The
very summoning and assembling them from so many, so remote, and separated
Nations into two places, must needs demand a far longer warning. Again it
is evident both by Greek and Latin Authors, that Constantine was in the
East, and not at Rome, where he was baptized, when the Nicen Council was kept,
and at the City of Nice before the Bishops were assembled there. So many
Disputs both with Arrians and Pagan Philosophers as were had in that Council,
so many matters there handled and concluded, and Canons by all Registers and
Authors decreed in such public affairs of so great consequence, in the
whole Church of Christ, after so long and difficult iornies before they could
be assembled, and many private differences and contentions first ended, before
matters of faith were handled, sufficiently warrant us by example of all other
Counsels, that this so general, and first of that nature that ever was, must
needs be of a longer continuance answeareable to the difficulties thereof, and
so this Council ending in the 325. year of Christ, and Constantine baptized
before the calling thereof, he must needs be baptized long sooner then the 324.
year of Christ.

4. I add further, that it is evident both by Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen, and
others ancient, and by Baronius and Spondanus themselves, that the year of
dissoluing and ending the Nicen Council did occur with the 20. year
Eusebius l. 3. de Vita Constant. cap. 14. 15. l. 4. c. 40. 47. Socrates l. 1.
c. 12. Sozomen Histor. l. 1. ca. 24.
of the Empire of Constantine, wherein his great Feast, of vicenalia kept
every tenth year of an Emperor, was celebrated, after the Council was ended:
his rebus a Concilio ad hunc modum decretis, accidit, vt dies festus iam anno
vigesimo Imperij Constantini vertente ageretur, erat enim Romany in more
positum vt decimo quoque anno Imperij cuiusque Imperatoris diem festum
celeberrimo hominum conuentu agitarent. Thus has Sozomen, and Socrates is
plain that this great Festiuitie of the twenteth years Reign of Constantine,
which Baronius and Spondanus with others affirm to be the 325. year of
Christ, was begun and celebrated after the Nicen Council was ended, Imperator
post confectum Concilium Socrat. lib. 1. Sup.
festum solemn ad vigesimum annum Imperij sui, vt assolet, celebrauerat.
Therefore if this great Feast and solemnity continuing all that year, was not
begun until the Council was ended, and yet celebrated in that 325. year of
Christ, wherein they say this general Council was only kept and ended, we
have neither a whole year, nor any great part of it, for celebrating the
Nicen Council in the same, yet if a whole year could be assigned hearevnto,
Baron. and Spond. Annal. an. 325.. 3
I should not be bold to say with Baronius and Spondanus; that this Council
was begun and ended in one year, and that no Antiquity allows more unto it,
then a year, Affirmanda est vno eodem que anno inchoata ac pariter consummata:
nec apud Antiquiores vllum est reperire exemplu^, quod vltra annum Synodus
perdurauit. For besides the reasons before made, Baronius and Spondanus. 2.
supr. An. 325. Eusebius. in Chron. Niceph. lib. 8. ca. 26. Metaphrast. apud Lipom.
confess, that both Eusebius, Nicephorus and others write otherwise, Eusebius
says it began the 15. year of Constantine: By the others it held about three
years, Synodus Niceae annis tribus and paulo longius est acta.

5. To these I add of our own Antiquaries, Florentius Wigorniensis, Matthew of
Westminster, and others. The Monk of Westminster says, that Constantine was
baptized by S. Syluester at Rome in the year of Christ 318. Matthew. Westminster. an.
gratiae 318. 320. Florent. Wigorn. Chron. an. 306. 315. 319.
anno gratiae 318. and the Council of Nice was called in the year 320. anno
gratiae 320. Florentius writes, that Constantine was baptized Christian, and
by S. Syluester Pope 8. years before the Nicen Council was called: and that
this Council was called five years before the vicenalia feast year of that
Emperor, when as before it ended. Marianus Scotus writes in the year of
Marian. Scot. aetat. 6. l. 2. An. 321. 322.
Christ 321. that then the baptizing of Constantine by S. Syluester Pope was
known in Britain, as no late thing, and citing Saint Bid, for the same,
sets down the calling of the Nicen Council to have been in the year 322.
three years before the agreed time of the ending thereof. One of our old
Manuscript Histories says, that Constantine relieved the Church of Manuscript.
antiq. An. 312.
Christ in the 312. year of his Nativity: Anno Domini 312. Constantinus
Magnus Ecclesiam Christi releuauit. Anastasius Bibliothecarius says,
Constantine was baptized in the 18 year of his Empire, Constantinus Anno 18.
Imperij sui est baptizatus. Cedrenus says it was done by S. Syluester in the
seventh year of Anastas. Biblioth Chron. Georg. Cedren. in Constantino. Flor.
Wigorn. sup.
his Reign, Septimo Imperij sui anno Magnus Constantinus a Syluestro
sanctissimo Romae Papa baptizatus Lepraque hoc pacto liberatus est. Our Contry
man Florentius Wigorniensis makes him a baptized Christian, and by S.
Syluester in the same seventh year of his Empire, when as before, all
Persecution ceased in the West Empire. Berengosius also is of the same mind,
writing that Constantine presently upon his vision of the Cross and Victory
against Maxentius, being the same seventh year of his Reign, presently sent
for S. Syluester, and was baptized by him: Constantinus autem ad placandum
totius operis Berengos. de Invent. Crucis l. 2. cap. 3. Damasus in vita S.
Syluestri. To. 1. Council. Martyrolog. Roman. die 31. December. Menolog. Graec.
eod. die. Baron. Annal. An. Christi 312. An. Constantin. 7. Eusebius. Histor. l.
10. cap. 1. 6. 7. Binnius Annot. in Council. Romans Tom. 1. Council. Baron. An. D.
313 Constant. 8. Augustine. Epist. 152. and collat. cap. 3. Epistol. Consta^tini
apud Eusebius. l. 10. Histor. cap. 5 Eusebius. supr. c. 5. cap. 6.
opificem, continuo ad se Romanum fecit accersiri Pontificem a quo confirmatus
and baptizatus. And S. Damasus or whosoever the ancient Writer of the Popes
lives asscribing many years and Acts to S. Syluester, sets down this of
his baptizing Constantine for the first of all. So does the old Roman Marty
raloge and Menologion of the Greeks also. And Baronius himself confesses
that in this his very seventh year Constantine set forth many Edicts both for
the restoring the goods of Christians, Privileges, and Immunities of their
Clergy, as also to relieve the Christians that had been persecuted out of his
own Treasure; And the next year after, he gave to Pope Melchiades immediate
Predecessor to S. Syluester his Palace Lateran in Rome, to be his See, and
allowed Appeals unto him, even of the Bishops of Afric, as namely in the
cause of Caecilianus Bishop of Carthage with above 20. other Bishops with him,
and wrote his letters to Pope Melchiades to that purpose, to hear, judge, and
decide the cause. His particular Epistle unto him about that business is extant
in Eusebius, so is his Decree and order given to Anilinus Proconsul of Afric,
to command him, presently upon the receite of those his letters, he should
cause all goods that had been taken away in any City, or other place from
Christians, and their Churches to be restored to them again, whosoever usurped
them, and gives him strickt charge, and command herein.

6. There also be other commands of his one to Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage,
signifing unto him, that he had given commandment to Vrsus Prefect of Afric,
that great sums of money should be given to the Christians of Afric,
Numidia, and Mauritania, and he should see it distributed according as he had
given him direction, sent unto him by Osius before. The cap. 7.
other is to Anilinus before named, commanding him, that all the Christian
Clergy there should be free from Tributs, and Vectigals, and all this was
done as he sets down, before the overthrow Constantine gave to Licinius,
or Licinius opposed against him. Which Baronius affirms was in the 316. year
of Christ. And in the very next year 314. of Christ, the same Author Baron.
Annal. An. 314. Matthew. Westminster. An. 321. Ado in Chronic.
Baronius sets down the first Council of Arles, where as he from Ado and
others writes, there were 600. Bishops assembled, together with Claudius,
Vitus, Eugenius and Cyriacus the Popes Legates, and adds further from
Eusebius, that Constantine himself was there present with the Bishop, Sed and
ipsum Imperatorem Constantinum cu^ Episcopis interfuisse Eusebius declarat.
Which presence and sitting of Constantine with the Bishops in Council Eusebius.
l. 1. de Vita Constant. cap. 37.
Eusebius plainly confesses, Tanquam communis Episcopus a Deo constitutus,
ministrorum Dei coegit Con^^lium, and in media istorum frequentia ac congressu
adesse, and vna considere non dedignatus, in medio consessu quasi vnus e multis
assedit. And yet affirms, that diverse other Councels were called, and kept in
Baron. An. 315.
this year: as at Ancyra in Galacia, Neocaesarea in Pontus, and Laodicea in
Phrigia. In the next year 315. he affirms Constantine published a Decree in
preventing murdering of children, like a good Christian Prince, Constantinus
Imperator dignam plane Christiano Principe edidit sanctionem. And an other
against the Jews, which persecuted such of their Profession, as became
Christians, commanding therein all such Jews with their partakers to be
burned. And subjected all Christians which should forsake their Religion, and
profess Iudaisme to the same punishment. So we might proceed to the other
years between this and the 324. year, wherein Baronius would have him to be
baptized, needles to be related in this place, these being more then sufficient
to prove he was baptized long before that time. Which Ensebius does give
plain testimony unto, even by Baronius his own calculation: for Baronius
setting down the war between Constantine and Licinius, to have been in the
year 316. Eusebius says, that Licinius did then oppose against Eusebius. Hist.
l. 10 cap. 8. 9.
God Almighty, whom he knew Constantine did worship, Licinius vbi belelum
Constantino infer decreuit, etiam ipsum omnium Deum quem a Constantino
colisciebat, impugnare aggreditur. Eusebius thus writes immediately after
those Letters written to Anilinus Caecilianus, and others before about the
seventh year of Constantinus, as Baronius before has witnessed. Eusebius
there also calls Constantine a man renowned for all kind of piety, omnis
pietatis virtute clarus.

7. And to put us out of all doubt in this business Eusebius. does manifestly
prove, Eusebius. l. 1. vit. Constant. c. 34. 35. 36. 37. 41.
that Constantine had given such freedom and donations to the Church of
Christ, as be remembered: honored Bishops, builded Churches, caused Councels to
be called, and was present in them with the Bishops, and many things of like
nature, before the tenth year of his Empire. Heremias Sozomen before Sozom. l.
1. Hist. cap. 8.
has witnessed, that he received the Sacraments in the Church in this time,
Sacra mysteria percipere. Which none but actually and really Baptized
Christians might do, or did at any time. If any man shall object that S.
Melchiades Pope was a Maryr, and so not likely to receive such favors from
Constantine: Baronius well answeareth, he was accounted as many others were for
the great Persecution he endured under Maximian, and not because he Baron. An.
313.
was violently put to death for Religion, but dyed in a peaceable time. Which
the old Roman Martyrologe confirms: Romae S. Melchiadis Papae, qui in
persecutione Martyrolog. Roman die 10. Decembr.
Maximiani multa passus, reddita Ecclesiae pace quieuit in Domino. Which
proves that Constantine had given Liberty to Christians before S. Melchiades
death, which was within a year and little more of Constantine his Victory
against Maxentius. After which time there is a silence in Histories of any
Persecution, where Constantine reigned. And therefore S. Syluester being fled
to the Mountain Soractes, in Persecution, when he was sought for to christen
Constantine by Divine Vision, argues for them that hold before, that the was
baptized in the seventh year of his Empire, and by S. Syluester, not then Pope
but soon after, and so said to be baptized by S. Syluester Pope, because a
litter after, by the death of S. Melchiades, he was chose^ to that dignity.

8. The opinion of Constantine his Leprosy and miraculous curing thereof at
his Baptism, can be no argument for the deferring thereof to a later time, for
we find that his daugter S. Constantia, or Constantina was also infected with
that desease, as most probable from her Father, and as miraculously cured
thereof at S. Agnes her Tomb by her prayers, as her Father was by S. Syluester
his baptizing him. So that we may rather say of them both, so miraculously
cured to the great glory of God, and Conversion of many, as Christ said of the
man borne blind, whom he gave sight unto, that neither he, nor his Parents in
that respect had sinned, but that the works of God might be manifest in him:
Then with Pagans impute such punishment to the demerits Io. cap. 9.
of Constantine, which Euagrius ernestly contendeth to clear him off. And the
greatest matter that is objected, being the death of Crispus his son, this
Euagr Hist. l. 3. cap. 40. 41.
could be no cause to deserve that Leprous punishment, Crispus death being
long after Constantine his Baptism, wherein he was cleansed from that
infirmity. Which both Baronius and Spondanus confess, and affirm. Sozomen
Baron. and Spo^d. An. 324.
proves by many Arguments, that Crispus lived many years after his Father
Constantine was a Christian: Costantini ad Christum conuersionem, plurimis
argu^entis demonstrat long ante Crispi obitum contigisse, ipsumque C^^spum
plures vixisse annos postquam Pater Christo nomen dedisset.

9. Therefore I marvel how they could write before, that Constantine was not
baptized until the 324. year of Christ, in which they say Crispus his death
was, and now thus confidently teach, that which I only contend, that
Constantine was a Christian long and many years before that time. And
Nicephorus, Platina and others teach, that this Crispus was baptized by S.
Nicephorus lib. 7. cap. 33. in fine Platina in Marco
Syluester, together with his Father Constantine, when Maxentius was
overthrown in the seventh year of Constantine, Vna cum ipso Crispus eius
filius diuinum participauit lauacrum, and ambo candidam vestem induerant,
pulsis vrbe Tyrannis. And Sozomen plainly affirms, that Crispus died in the
20. year of the reign of Constantine, and before in his life, being Caesar,
joined with Sozomen Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 5.
his Father in many Laws for the liberty of Christians, Crispus vicesimo anno
imperij paterni mortem obijt: qui dum viueret, multas leges cum patre vna,
vtpote qui secundas Imperij parts, Caesar enim erat, obtinuisset, pro
Christianorum liberate sanciuit. And says Constantine was instructed in
Christian Religion in Britain, before he came to Rome against Maxentius in the
7. year of his Empire. And says this is evidently apparent among all men:
Apud Britannos and Gallos and reliquos illius orbis Incolas, liquido constat
inter omnes, Constantinum primum religione Christiana inbutum esse anteiter
faceret, quam Constantinus aduersus Maxentium bellum gessisset, peragrasset
Italiam, and Romam vsque venisset. Further certain it is that Crispus was
taught and instructed by the renowned Christian Lactantius. And both Eusebius
and Euagrius say, this Crispus was a most Godly man, and most beloved of God,
pientissimus, Deo charissimus, before the Eusebius l. 10. Hist. cap. vlt. Euagr.
l. 3. cap. 41.
time Constantine his Father and he obtained their victories in the East about
the year of Christ 314. And as Eusebius with others ancient, and Baronius and
Spondanus after them are witnesses, in the beginning of the tenth year of
Constantine, which was the 315. of Christ, Constantine kept the Feast and
Solemnity Eusebius. l. 1. vit. Constant. cap. 41. Baron. and Spondan. an. 315.
Ammian. Marcellinus lib. 27. c. 2. Zosimusl. 2. de Constantino Euagrius l. 3.
Histor. cap. 40.
of his decennall reign, as a Christian ought to do, vt Christianum decebat.

10. To this, the very Pagan Writers themselves of that Age give sufficient
Testimony: Ammianus Marcellinus makes memory of the Font wherein Constantine
was baptized at Rome, Constantinianum Lauacrum: And Zosimus says plainly he
was converted to the Christian Religion by a Spannish Christian, which upon
good reasons Baronius and Spondanus make it a thing without Question, was that
great learned and renowned Osius of Corduba in Spain, so familiar with
Constantine in this time of S. Melchiades and S. Syluester first being Pope:
his verbis magnum illum Osium Cordubensem in Hispania Baron. and Spond. An 324.
Episcopum ipsi Constantino charissimum, intelligi nulla est dubitatio. This
greatness and familiarity of Conftantine with Osius, we do not find to have
been more at any time, then when he sent him into Afric, about the liberty
of the Christians there, and his great Alms to be disposed unto their poor,
Epist. Constant. apud Eusebius. l. 10. Hist. cap. 5. 6. 7.
as appears in his own letters extant in Eusebius, and others written by all
Writers soon after the Victory of Constantine against Maxentius, and before
Licinius opposed against him. About which time he was baptized by S. Syluester,
having been thereto formely persuaded by Osius and others. And Constantine in
his Epistle to Pope Melchiades, next Predecessor to S. Syluester, Epist.
Constant. ad Melchiad, Pap. apud Eusebius. l. 10. Hist. cap. 5.
before remembered is witness, how great reverence he then bore to the
Catholic Church of Christ, before S. Syluester was Pope, non later vestram
diligentiam tantum me reuerentiae Ecclesiae Catholicae tribuere, vt velim vos
nullum prorsus scisma vel dissidium aliquo in loco far. And concludes his
Epistle, that God almighty would preserve him many years, diuinitas magni
Dei multis vos annis custodiat. This was about the time he sent Osius into
Afric, and presently upon his Victory against Maxentius, for so long as he
lived Emperor, Afrike was under him, and no part of Constantine his Empire.

11. Again it is current in Historyes, that Maximinus Emperor, or Tyrant in
the East miserably dyed in the 314. year of Christ, yet Constantine in that
Eusebius. l. 4. de vit. Constant. cap. 32. Constant. orat. ad Sanct. caet. cap.
22. cap. 23. 19.
his renowned work warranted by Eusebius, and named, Oration ad Sanctorum
c^tum, does speak of this Maximinus as then living and persecuting Christians,
where he plainly professes himself a true Christian, often calling Christian
Religion, his Religion, nostram Religionem. There he publicly and learnedly
more like an old Professor, and Doctor thereof, then a Catechumen therein,
defends and proves it against Pagan Philosophers, and all adversaries, by
the Law of Moses, the Prophets, and their most certain and evident
Predictions and Prophesies of Christ, by his own and his Disciples Miracles,
the sanctity of his life, and Doctrine, the Prophesies of the Sybils and
others among the Gentiles: the Impiety, Insufficiency or Inualiditie of all
other Profesons in Religion, and all usual Christian Arguments in this cause.
Breifely in particular, in the very beginning of this Work he professes
himself to celebrate the Feast of Easter, and such Solemnities of Christ as
the renowned Christian Bishops did, in the very first words thereof, Salutaris
dies festus Paschalis, qui est velut clarissimum diei and solis lumen,
primordium Resurectionis vniuersae carnis, pignus promissionis, and semita ad
aeternam vitam deducens, nobis, charissimi Ecclesiae Praesides, reliquique
omnes amici, vosque frequentes and beatae Religiosorum multitudines, qui ipsum
Deum Religionis Authorem, tum intimis animi cuiusque sensibus, tum expressis
vocum praeconijs, secundum ea quae prophetarum oraculis praedicta sunt, sine
intermissione celebratis, nobis inquam adest, ad sacte augusteque celebrandum.
Where he plainly expresses, that he celebrated this holy Christian Feast, and
Solemnity with such holiness, and devotion, as the Christian Bishops, and other
Religious men and people did. And thus proceeding in his whole Work of 26.
Chapters, concludes as he began: That both he and all which profess true
Religion, both for their own salvation, and prosperity of the Common wealth
must give thanks to our Savior, and Cap. 26. and vlt. supr.
obtain of Christ by holy prayers and often supplications, that he will be
pleased not to cease, to bestow his benefits upon us. For he is the
invincible Defe^dor of the Just, he is the most strong propugner, he is the
best Judge. And finally he is the Captain, that leads to Immortality, and
giver of everlasting life. Par est omnes qui pietatem sectamur, nostrae ipsorum
salutis, and rerum publicarum prosperitatis causa, Seruatori gratias agere, and
Christum sanctum sanctis precibus atque orationibus crebris nobis placatum
efficere, vt beneficia eius in nos confer non desinat. Iste enim est Iustorum
Defensor inuictus: iste Progugnator fortissimus: iste optimus Iudex: iste
denique immortalitatis dux, and vitae aeternae Largitor. Thus Constantine
himself has testified in his own cause. And Batonius Baron. and Spond. An.
324. Zosimus l. 2. Sozomen. l. 2. Histor. Ecclesiast cap. 2. Bed. l. de locis
sanct. cap. vlt. Glic. l. 4. Zonar. Annal. Tom. 3. Cedren. in Comp an. 18.
Constant. Nicephor. l. 8. ca. 4.
with others writes both from old Pagan and Christian Authors, that
Constantine after his Baptism by S. Syluester, stayed no little time in Rome
openly professing himself a Christian, and before his departure thence
bestowed such great Riches and Principality upon S. Syluester and the Roman
Church as many Antiquites testify, and left the City of Rome to S. Syluester.
After which he went to Ilium, where old Troy stood, intending to make it his
Imperial City, 800. miles or little less from Rome, and builded the gates for
a City there upon an high hill still remaying in Sozome^ his time, as he
witnesses: profestus ad campum pro Ilio situm, non long ab Hellesponto vrbis
formam and magnitudinem descripsit, inque praecelso and edito portas extruit,
quae adhuc etiam a mari illac nauigantibus cernuntur. And having thus far
proceeded therein building a new City, was, as the same Sozomen testifies,
and Baronius admitteh, admonished by an heavenly vision to desist from that
work, and build his intended chief City at Bizantium in Thracia, which he
did, and going to this Bizantium so Miracoulously assigned unto him, began his
Magnificent buildings there, as Baronius and Spondanus themselves acknowledge,
Baron. and Spond. in Indice Annal. v. Constantinus an. 324. Jacob. Gedeon. An.
324. Bin. Tom. 1. Council. in Syluestro. ^ Cedr. supr. Conc. Romans c. 1.
in the 324. year of Christ, Consilium inijt de noua vrbe condenda, in quam
transferat Imperium, and post tentatum Ilium, diuinitus eligit Bizantium Anno
Christi 324.

12. Cedrenus sets down this building of Bizantium two years sooner, the
Roman Council, Baronius and others say, that after Constantine was baptized he
stayed the whole time of that Council in Rome before he went into the East.
And the Donation itself of Constantine after he was baptized is dated in his
4. Consulshipp, which Baronius, Binius and others confess to have been in the
year of Christ 315. Marianus says it was in the 312. year of Baron. and Bin.
sup Marian. Scot. aetat. 6. an. 312. Council. Roman. c. 1. Barthol. Carranza
ante Romans Council. Roman. Council. c. 20. and vlt.
his Incarnation. And the Roman Council wherein he, a baptized Christian, both
as the same Council and others testify, was present, and bore the chardges of
the Bishops assembled there: Constantinus vehicula vel annonas omni loco
praestari praecepit, was kept, as the same Council delivers, in the third
Consulship of Constantine, which was by all men before the 315. year of
Christ, 3. Kalend. Iunij, Donno Constantino Augusto tertio and Prisco Consule.
By which it also appears, that his son Priscus was living long after his
Baptism. And so the opinion of them, which say he was dead before, is
answered by this Council, subscribed unto by 284. Bishops, 45. Priests, 5.
Deacons and 2. Cap. 10. and 20.
Acoluthists together with Constantine one Emperor, and S. Helen his Mother
after them, as appears in all Copies of that Council, Et subscripserunt 284.
Episcopi, and 45. Presbiteri, and 5. Diaconi and duo scquentes, and Augustus
Constantinus and matter eius Helena. Therefore this Council being kept in Rome
after Constantine was baptized, as all agree, and is evident in the same
Council in express words, Constantinus baptizatus a Syluestro Episcopo vrbis
Romae, Cap. 1.
and in the third Consulship of Constantine, and this Emperor there present in
Rome, and two years after at the least, as appears by the Act of his
Donation to S. Syluester granted there before his going into the East, bearing
date the year of his fourth Consulship and at Rome: Datum Romae Donatio
Constantiniin fine
sub tertio Die kalendarum Aprilium Domino nostro flauio Constantino Augusto
quater et Gallicano viro clarissimo Consulibus, he must needs be baptized long
before the 324. year of Christ, about the beginning of S. Syluester his
Papacy. For this Roman Council is clear, that he was baptized before the
calling thereof, and provided wagons to transport so many Bishops thither,
which required no small time, diverse of them coming from remote parts and
Countries. Again there was so generally a Conversion of the Romans to Christ
Roman. Council. can. 1. 10.
before this Council, that the Prefect of Rome himself was converted, and
present in this Council: erat ibi and Calphurnius Christianus, Praefectus
vrbis. Besides, whereas this Council testifies, that S. Helen our Empress
was also there, it proves a long time between the Baptism of Constantine,
and then assembling of this Council. For our renowned Historians, Marianus and
Florentius Wigorniensis prove, that S. Helen was in Britain, when her son
was baptized at Rome by S. Syluester, and hearing of it, wrote unto him from
hence: Constantino a Papa Syluestro baptizato scripsit de Britannia sibi sua
Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. an. 321. Floren. Wigorn. in Chronic.
matter Helena. And without question had answer from him again, before she
addressed herself for so great a Journey, and afterward was no short time in
that Travail. And before we bring either S. Helen, or Constantine, or any
other to this Council, we must, except we will unreasonably with some deny
that History, say that the longe-prouided-for dispute between S. Syluester and
the Jews in the presence of both Constanstine and S. Helen was solemnly
summoned and kept after S. Helen her coming to Rome, and before the beginning
of that Council we must allow no short time for so great a Council. And
yet Constantine, by the date of his own Edict and Donation, was in Rome 2.
years at the least after all these things ended, which will bring his Baptism
to the time of my former computation. Otto Frigensis, besides so many others
before, does plainly say, that Constantine Otto frigen. Chronic. l. 4. cap 2.
was a Christian before Licinius joined with him for the peace, and Privilege
of Christians in their public Edicts, Constantinus Christianus factus pacem
Ecclesijs reddidit, cui etiam ad hoc Licinius consensum praebuit.

THE X. CHAPTER.
THE VNDOVBTED TRVTH OF THE DOnation and munificent enritching of the Church of
Rome by Constantine the Great Emperor.

1. AMONG other the bounties and magnificences of Constantine to the Church of
Christ, especially the Apostolic See of Rome, before he departed thence to
Bizantium, and the Eastern Countries, that which is called his Donation or
gift to S. Syluester, is renowned in Histories, and bearing date in the year
of his fourth time being Consul, except it be misdated, it must needs be
granted in the 315. of Christ, as Historians commonly consent. Diverse,
especially Protestants of this Age, have called the credit hereof into
question. Yet except we shall disallowe Seuerin. Bin. To. 1. Council. notat. in
Edict. Constant. in S. Syluestro.
both the Testimony of God, and men of great credit, and in no small number
even of this Nation, besides an almost nu^berlesse company of other Countries,
we may not deny the honor thereof to that our Emperor, and this kingdom his
native soil. A Protestant Bishop with others do thus cite how this donation
was prophesied of before Constantines time.

Adueniet Princeps, sub quo pacabitur orbis,
Et finem accipiet veterum cultura Deorum.
Constantinus apud Thraces, qua Bosphorus aequor
Thracius Euxinis aegeum ingurgitat vndis, Io. Bal. l. 1. de Act. Roman. Pont.
in Syluestro. Baptist. Ma^tuan. l. 2. de Vita S. Blasij.

Constituet sedem Imperij: Latiumque relinquet
Christo, and Romuleam septem cum collibus vrbem.
Saint Bid is a manifest witness, that long before the days brechtus King of
the Longabards long before his time the Cottian Alps and other parts of Italy
did belong to the Sea Apostolic of Rome, until the Lo^gabards by violence
took them away, and this King of theirs Herebrechtus restored them,
Herebrechtus Rex Longobardorum multas curtas and patrimonia Alpium Cottiarum,
quae quondam ad Ius pertinebant Apostolicae sedis, sed a Longobardis Bed. de 6.
aetatib. mundi. in Tiberio 2.
multo tempore fuerant ablata, restituit iuri eiusdem Sedis. Which long time of
the right of the Roman Church to this Patrimony thereof, not finding any other
donation of them unto it, will bring us to the days of Constantine. Our old
English History says, S. Syluester received the Patrimony of S. Peter, that is
for to say, the kingdom of Italy, with the City of Rome of Constantine the
Emperor, Old. Engl. Hist. part. 4. fol. 38.
and to the whorship of the Church of God he turned it. Harding thus writes:

Constantine gave his own Palace royal
With Rome all whole, and all the dignitee
Through out Romany, with-Sea Imperial Harding. Chron. cap. 63. fol. 50.

To Syluester, that had the Papal ^ea,
He gave it to him all quite and free,
And to his Successors perpetually.
2. William of Malmesbury citing S. Aldelmus and others says, that herein S.
Aldelm. l. de virginit. Guliel. Malmesbur. l. 4. de Regib.
Constantine obeyed Gods command, paruit Augustus visioni, professus non
debere Imperatorem Romae principari, vbi a Christo principabantur coronati
Apostoli. Henry of Huntington and others set down at lardge, an Epistle of S.
Gregory Pope of Rome to King Ethelbert of kent, converted by S. Augustine,
wherein he testefieth no less, when he says, this great Emperor Constantine
made the Roman Commonwealth and himself subject unto our Lord Gregor. Epistol.
ad Ethelbert. Reg. apud Henric. Hunt. Histo. l. 3. Matthew. West. an. 335.
Manuscript. antiq. in Constantino.
Jesus Christ, Constantinus quondam pijssimus Imperator Romanam Rempublicam
omnipotenti Deo and Domi no nostro Jesus Christo secum subdidit. And Matthew of
of Westminster plainly says, that Constantine gave by his Donation old Rome,
the head of the world, to the blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, Imperator
Constantinus Caput mundi Romam beatis Petro and Paulo sub testamento tradidit.
I find in an old Manuscript History principally of this Nation in this
manner: Constantinus omnes dignitatis Imperiales Papae contulit and ipse Sedem
Imperialem apud Constantinopolim constituit, dignitatem tamen sedis Apostolicae
apud Romam Successoribus beati Petri reliquit. Constantine gave all Imperial
dignities to the Pope, and placed his Imperial Seat at Constantinople, yet
left the dignity of the Sea Apostolic at Rome to the Successors of S. Peter.
An other written in French thus relates this matter: Constantine founded 12.
Churches in Rome in honor of the 12. Apostles, and after, with the Nobility
of Rome went to Constantinople, but before his going, gave his Privilege to
the Papal See, and his Palace with all the Regalitie to S. Peter Prince of the
Apostles, and to S. Syluester and his Successors for ever, Constantin faisoit
12. Eglises Manuscript. Gallic. antiq. cap. 30.
en la City de Rome en l'honneur des 12. Apostres, and apres que ses nobles de
Rome s'en alla a Constantinoble, and auant s'en aller donnason privilege du
Siege Papale and son Palais ou toute la regalite a S. Pierre Prince des
Apostres, and a S. Syluestre Abbreuiat. Chro An. 310.
and ses Successeurs perdurablement. The old Manuscript Abbreuiatio Chronicorum
has the same with with S. Aldelmus and William of Malmesbury before. Johannes
Salisburiensis says, that Constantine is renowned with Ioh. Salisberien. lib.
4. Polycrat. cap. 6. apud Iodoc. Cocc. Tom. 1. l. 7. art. 10. Anselm. l. 4.
cap. 32. in Rubric. eiusde^ apud Coce. sup. Iodoc. Cocc. in Thesauro Catho lico
Tom. 1. l. 7. articul. 10. Abraham Leuita Chron. Iudaic.
everlasting blessedness for founding and endowing the Church of Rome, besides
other excellent deeds, Constantinus Romana Ecclesia findata and dotata vt
caetera eius taceantur egregie, perpetua benedictione insignis est. And S.
Anselm. our renowned Archbishop plainly testifies: Constantinus Imperator
Papae concessit coronam and omnem regiam dignitatem in vrbe Romana, and Italia,
and in partibus Occidentalibus.

3. The number of foreign Writers, both ancient and later, which affirm this
donatio^, is much too ample to be cited in History, Coccius has gathered
many, but left no small company unremembered. And not only Christians but their
most professed enemies the Jews themselves much to their shame, and confusion
give manifest testimony to this Donation. Abraham Leuita plainly says, that
Constantine went from Rome, and gave it to the Priests of the Christians, which
he terms Idumaeans, and builded Constantinople, Ipse exijt Roma, and dedit
eam sacrificis Idumaeorum ad hanc diem aedificata Constantinopoli. R. Abraham
Abin Esra ad cap. 11. Daniel.
Rabi, Abraham, Aben, Esra, says of Constantine: decorauit locum Romae, quae
erat Seeds eius, and reliquit eam Petro. He adorned the place of Rome, which
was his seat, and left it to Peter.

4. Therefore no man may say, that this History wants authority, when so
many Writers of great authority affirm it. We may not say it is a late
invention, many of these Authors want not antiquity. And the Epistle written
Epistol. primitiuae Eccl. apud S. Isodor. in collect. Council. and Tom. 1.
Council.
about that time entitled, de primitiua Ecclesia, and munificentia Constantini
Magni Imperatoris erga candem, of the primative Church and the munificence of
Constantine the great Emperor toward it, which S. Isidor sets down at
large, plainly says of this Noble Emperor: religiosissimus Constantinus
donaria immensa contulit and Fabricam Templi primae Sedis beati Petri Principis
Apostolorum instituit, adeo vt Sedem Imperialem, quam Romani Principes
possederant, relinqueret, and beato Petro suisque Successoribus profuturam
concederet. That he left his Imperial Seat among other munificent gifts to S.
Peter and his Successors. Ioa. Diacon. in Vita S. Gregorij and alij. Gregor. l.
1. Epist. 73. l. 5. Epist. 11. l. 2 Epist. 40. 41. 44. 61. Epist. 10. 52. 55 l.
1. Ep. 72. 2. 68. 70. 23. 62. l. 5. Epi. 12. Bed. de 6. aetatib. in Tiberio 2.
Paul Diacon. de gest. Longobard. l. 6. Bed. sup. in Anastasio. Paul. Diac. l.
6. sup. Otto Frigens. Chron. l. 4. cap. 3.
We find in the life of S. Gregory the Great such munificent and chargeable
alms by him, that argues the exceeding Riches of the Church of Rome at that
time, even when the Longobard had vfurped upon great part of the Patrimony of
S. Peter. And this notwithstanding S. Gregory himself in his several Epistles
gives undeniable testimony, that the Church of Rome then had ample revenues
in Afrike, Naples, Campania, Dalmatia, France, Sicily, Ital^, Sardinia and
other Countries.

5. I have related before how the Cottian Alps did of ancient time belong to
the Roman Church, and being wrested from it by the Longobards, their King
Herebrechtus, or by others Aribertus, restored them again, and as both S.
Bid, Paulus Diaconus, and others write, sent the release thereof to Rome
written in golden letters, Donationem aureis scriptam literis Romam misit. And
Luitprandus did the like, and Otto Frigensis near in kindred to the Emperors
and well acquainted with their affairs, says; that from the time of
Constantine his leaving Rome to S. Syluester, as the Romans History
testifies, and going to Constantinople, the Roman Church affirms, that the
most parts were given unto it, as a Right by Constantine, and in Argument
thereof claimed Tribute of them unto his time, excepting of the French, which
had assisted it in that demand, Vt Romanorum habet historia Imperator
Constantinus in tantum Romanam exaltauit Ecclesiam, vt beato Syluestro eiusdem
vrbis Pontifici, insignibus Regni traditis, ipse se Bizantium transferret
ibique Sedem Regni constitueret. Exhinc Romana Ecciesia Occidentalia regna
tanquam sui Iuris a Constantino sibi tradita affirmat, in Argumentumque,
Tributum, exceptis duobus Francorum Regnis, vsque hodie exigere non dubitat.
Many Arguments and vnanswearable also there be of this Donation. The freedom
of the French Nation from that Tribute for assisting Regin. in Cronic.
Sigebert. Chron. Baron. Annal. in Constant. Binn. Tom. 1. Council. not. in
Edict. Constable.
the Roman See to recover great parts of the Patrimony thereof, proves such a
Donation. The Palace of Constantine called S. Ihon Laterans, a Noble Church
ever in the Popes power from that time proves it. No Emperor since then having
either Palace or Residency in Rome, when before this Donation it was in all
Historyes the known chief Imperial City in the world, makes it manifest.
The especial Reverence and honor which Constantine ever performed toward the
Roman Church above all others, compared with his bounty and magnificence to
all, bears no small testimony in this kind. So do the Examples of other
newly converted Kings, especially of this Nation, as King Lucius, King
Ethelbert, and others, all most reverently honoring that See Apostolic.
Therefore our Protestant Writers themselves, though disliking all Princes, and
others Donations and bou^ties to the Church of Christ, the Riches and honor
thereof, do confess this great gift of Constantine unto S. Syluester. One a
late Poet writes for their common opinion:

From Constantius and Helen proceeded Constantine
The most undoubted heir Will. Warner. Albions England cap. 18.

Both to the Roman Monarchy, and this his Parents Reame.
He turned the Empires ebbing pomp into her fllo^ing stream,
And was a Prince Religious: yet (with reverence be it said)
If less Religious, then not he the Empire had decaid
By largess to a^ponpous Priest, and seized him of Rome.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
OF THE SETTLING OF THE IMPERIAL Seat at Bizantium, or Constantinople, and
Conversion of, or settling the Christian faith in many Nations by the help of
our British Emperor Constantine: But Ireland not then converted.

1. CONSTANTINE having thus disposed of his Imperial Palace in Rome, and
bestowed so magnificent gifts, and revenues upon that holy Apostolic Church,
departed from thence toward the Eastern Countries, having a resolution to
setle his Seat of Empire at, or near the place of old Troy Ilium, not far
Sozom. l. 2. Hist. Eccles. cap. 2. Baron. and Spond. Annal. an. 324. in Indice.
Sebast. Munster. Cosmogr. l. 4. in Graecia page 937. 938.
from Hellespo^tus. And as Sozomen with others delivers, laid the platform
there of his chiefest City, building the Gates upon an high hill, which
remained in the days of Sozomen, and were seen to such as sailed upon that
Sea, a mari illac nauigantibus cernuntur. But was admonished by an heavenly
vision to desist from that design, and build his commanding City at
Bizantium, in Thracia, which he according to the direction given him by God
performed, Ei ista molienti Deus noctu visus, alium locum quaerere iubet: atque
cum Bizantium, oppidum Thraciae vltra Calcedonem vrbem Bithyniae situm, in
memoriam ei redigisset, eam vt habitatoribus complendam, quippe quae nomen
Constantini mereretur, curaret admonuit. Itaque verbis Dei obsecutus oppidum
quod Bizantium vocabatur, dilatare, and maximis amplissimisque moenibus cingere
coepit. This divine vision, and direction was, as Sozomen has plainly
testified before Constantine went to Bizantium: and after he came thither, and
before he laid the foundation of his Imperial City there, he had an other
heavenly apparition, and admonition about the same matter in the City of
Bizantium, as our own ancient and approved Antiquaries Saint Aldelmus a
renowned Bishop, and William Malmesbury with others deliver unto us, Imperator
in Ciuitate quae Bizantium S. Aldelm. lib. de laudib. Virg. cap. 12. Guliel.
Malmesburiens. lib. 4 de Regib. in Gulielmo 2. and alij apud eund.
vocabatur cum membra sopori dedisset, and debitum naturae solueret. Which
vision was in this manner: A very old woman, decrepite and almost dead appeared
unto him, whom Saint Syluester commanded to raise her up by prayer: And
Constantine praying the old woman arose, and became a most beutifull young
woman, who by her chaste look pleasing his Princely sight, he cast his cloak
upon her, and put a Diadem adorned with gold and precious stones upon her
head. And Helena his mother said unto him, she shall be thine, and shall not
dye until in the end of the world. Constantine awaking and troubled with the
vision, ignorant of the meaning thereof, gave himself to fasting, and in the
seventh day of his fast, in his sleep saint Syluester appeared unto him, and
said: The old decrepite woman is this City named Bizantium, in which thou now
remainest, whose walls are consumed with Age, and are almost fallen down.
Ride upon that thy horse whereon thou did ride in thy white vestures when
thou were baptized in the City of Rome, visiting round about the Tombs of
the Apostles, and Martyrs, and carry thy Labaru, or Ensign that is embrodered
with the sign of Christ of gold, and precious stones in thy right hand, let
the bridle of thy horse loose, and go as the Angel of God shall lead thee.
And draw the point of thy Labarum so on the ground that it may draw and leave
a line behind it, by which trace and circuit shall tho cause walls to be
builded, and this old City, and almost dead thou shall raise to be new, and
thou shall call it by thy name, and make it the Queen of all Cities. The name
of Lord Jesus Christ shall be magnified in it, and in it Churches of God shall
be builded to the honor of all Saints, and thy sons after thee, and the
sons of thy sons shall reign in it, Tu fixam cuspidem Labari in terra sic
trahe, vt semitam faciat transitus sui, per quam semitam extrui facias muros,
and hanc veteranam ciuitateni, and pene mortuam in iuuenculam suscitabis: and
tui nominis vocabulum suscitabis, ita vt Reginam illam facias o mnium vrbium.
Erit enim in ea nomen Domini Jesus Christi magnificum, and erant in Gul.
Malmesb. l. 4. sup.
ea templa Dei ad honorem omnium Sanctorum constructa and filij tui post^te,
and filij filiorum tuorum regnabunt in ea. William the Monk of Malmesbury
says, that the answer was, that an Imperial Posterity should reign in that
City for ever Et regnabit in ea perpetuo imperatoria progenies, as we have
seen many hundreds of years performed. And he adds that Constantine by
fasting and alms deeds procured the solution of this vision from heaven, Huius
somnij solutionem Augustus ieiunijs and eleemosynis extrahebat e coelo. And
among other reasons did greatly joy also for this, because he borne hear in
Britain a colder Nation, could not so well endure the heat of the son, he
was by Gods commandment to build his chief permanent City there, where both
the fruitefulnesse of the soil, and temper of the air were agreeable unto
health, Gratumque admodum fuisse ferunt Imperiali animo, vt illic vrbem diuino
iussu fundaret, vbi and soli vhertas and coeli temperies mortalium saluti
conueniret. Quia enim in Britannia natus fuerat, ardores solis exosus est.

2. But the chiefest cause of his Joy in this designment unto Constantine was
this, to see his own will so to have concurred with the will of God, and to be
thus Miraculously confirmed, that the great Liberties and Dononations which he
had conferred upon the Apostolic See of Rome, and his leaving that his
Imperial City to S. Syluester then Pope and his Successors, in honor of S.
Peter and S. Paul ruling and Martyred there, and to found an other for
himself and his Imperial Posterity, plainly expressed as well by this our
English, as other Authors: paruit Augustus visioni procliue, and ciuitatemae
quam Guliel. Malmes. supr.
Romae constituit, professus non debere Imperatorem Romae principari, vbi a
Christo principabantur coronati Apostoli. And as S. Aldelme adds, this
worthy Emperor S. Aldelm. l. de laudib. Virgin. cap. 12. supra.
presently upon this heavenly vision, and direction went to the Church, and
acquainted the Bishop of that place, an holy man named Sisaminus therewith, and
offering there gifts unto God, and receiving the holy Sacrament of Christ's
body, took his horse, and Labarum, as he was directed, and went as the Angel
of God did lead him, and caused the foundation to be laid as the mark of the
Labarum prescribed. And the City was called the City of Constantine,
Constantinople, in the Greek languadge to this day, Euigilans Constantinus
statim ad Ecclesiam perrexit, indicansque Episcopo ciuitatis viro sancto,
nomine Sisamino, somnium quod prius viderat, and offerens Deo munera, and
communicans Sacramentum Dominicum ascendit equum, and perrexit, quo eum duxit
Angelus Domini atque per semitas Labari, fundamenta creuerunt. Appellata est
autem ciuitas Constantini, quod Graeco sermon interpretatur Constantinopolis
vsque in hodiernum diem.

3. Great was the honor and glory both temporal and spiritual of this
City. William of Malmesbury says, the Wall was twenty miles in circuit,
Viginti millia passuum muro complexa. And thereupon termed by the Turks as
Gul. Malm. supr. Sebastian. Munster. Cosmogr. l. 4. in Graecia and
Constantinopol. Sozomen. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 2.
Cosmographers have written, Stampolei, or Stampolda, id est, ampla ciuitas the
great City. Sozomen witnesses that in all men's Judgments in his time, it
far excelled Rome both for number of people, abundance of money and Riches,
Tum frequentia hominum, tum pecuniae and diuitiarum abundantia Romam omnium
consensu long superaret. And for spiritual Dignity the same Author writes
of this City: the faith of Christ so increased there, that very many Jews,
and almost all the Gentiles there were converted to Christian Religion. And
this City being made the chiefest of the Empire at that time, when the
Religion of Christ was so generally dilated, it did not afterward defilc
itself either with the Altars or Temples of the Gentiles, except only while
Julian did reign a short time, the error of the Gentiles was renewed, but
presently after extinguished again. Constantine placed a Court called a Senate
in it, and assigned to the Senators the same honors, and Privileges, which
were given to the old Romans, and labored to make this City called by his
name equal to Rome, which is in Italy. He adorned it with many and most great
Churches, to whose labor herein God himself gave assistance, and by certain
visions confirmed that the Churches founded in that City were holy and
bringing salvation, cuius propenso studio Deus ipse opem tulit and visionibus
quibusdam confirmauit, Ecclesias in ea vrbe aedisicatas, sanctas and salutares
esse. He sets down one of these Churches principally to have been then in
great reverence even with Pilgrims resorting unto it in pilgrimadge and
devotion, called Michaelium, because S. Michael the Archangell appeared there,
and in this Church Sozomen himself received great help. And diverse others
fallen into inevitable mischances, and dangers, into diseases and unknown
greifes of body so soon as they prayed in that place were prefectly delivered
from the calamities where with they were oppressed. Which would be too long to
mention particularly, being so many, Eam quae in loco qui vestae sacer obim
dicebatur, in maximo honor tum a peregrinis, tum a ciuibus ex illo tempore
habitam fuisse constat. Idem locus iam Michaelium nominatur. Loco vero istud
nomen eo impositum est, quod pro certo creditur, diuum Michaelem Archangelum
ibi apparuisse. Quod etiam ipse equidem non paruum in eodem loco beneficium
adeptus, verissimum esse confiteor. Atque idica se habere argumento praeterea
esse possunt multae aliae res, quas compertum est ibidem gestas esse. Nam
nonnulli in graves casus and peric^lae quibus nullo modo possent emergere, alij
in morbos aut perturbationes corporis incognitas dilapsi, simul ac in eo loco
Deum precati essent, calamitatibus quibus premebantur, penitus liberati sunt.
Verum quo pacto ista, and quibus hominibus euencrint, singillatim persequi
longum esset.

4. And to give some notice to Posterity what manner of divine service was
used then in these holy Churches, to assuer us, it was the Sacrifice of Mass,
which was offered there on sacred Altares, and they adorned with Crosses and
holy Images: the same Author testifies that in this Miraculous Church there
was an Altar for offering that blessed Sacrifice, with Cross or Crucifix
placed upon it, Crucis effigies in altari illius Ecclesiae statui solet. And
that usage and custom was confirmed by divine Miracle, testifiing that from
the time of Christ's suffering upon the Cross what soever things were done
either for the common profit of mankind, or the private of some, either by holy
Angels or godly and perfect men, they were not rightly done, without the virtue
of the saving Cross, Visio diuinitus oblata, quandam Crucis effigiem, quae in
altari illius Ecclesiae statui solet, ante oculos proposuit: declarauitque
manifest, res quaecunque a tempore quo Christus in Crucem actus erat, velad
vtilitatem humani generis communem, vel ad priuatam quorundam, seu a diuinis
Angelis, seu a pijs and perfectis hominibus gestae fuerunt, non sine virtute
Crucis salutaris recte gestas esse.

5. Where we find as great honor and reverence given to the Cross, from
Christ, as after. And this Author living in this fourth hundred of years
near the days of this Emperor testifies, with diverse others, that in the
Empire of Constantine, and by his means, the faith of Christ was not only
dilated throughout the Roman Empire, but into the whole world, Christi nomen
Constantino rerum potiente, in orbem vniuersum propagatum sit. Christi Religio
etiam ad ipsos Barbaros peruasit. The Celts, the uttermost people of the Gauls
by the Ocean, the Goths, and people bordering upon them, the Inhabitants by
Ister, Armenians, Perfians, and others were then converted to the faith of
Christ. The Kingdom of Ireland by some Writers not converted in the time of
Constantine the Great.


6. Among the Countries and Kingdoms then converted, diverse do recko^ the
Kingdom of Ireland to have been one, and by this means and manner, as both
Catholic and Protestant Historians relate it, Ireland received the faith of
Christ in the year 335. when as Fincomarc reigned in Scotland, and this
happened by means of a woman among the Picts, who growing famuliar with the
Queen in the year 322. preached the Christian faith unto her: the Queen
won the King, showing him what had been preached unto her. And the King
disposed his people to receive Edw. Grymston. book of Estat. in Ireland. page
36.. 15.
Baptism about the year 335. The Irish have lived since in the Romish
Religion until the time of King Henry the eight, when as the Protestants
Religion began to be preached, the which has been since in that Country
planted by Queen Elizabeth and King James. Thus has a late Protestant Writer.
An other says: the Hollinsh. l. of the first Inhabitation. of Irel.
Scottish Chronicles avouch that in the days of their King Fincomarke, who
departed this life in the year of our Redemption 358. Ireland was conuerred to
the faith by this means. A woman of the Pictish blood, chanced, say they, to
serve in those days the Queen of Ireland, which woman being a Christian
herself, first instructed her Mistress in the faith and true points of
Christianity, and the Queen her Husband, who conuerred the whole Irish
Nation. Hector Boethius for the Scottish Historians relates it in the same
manner: Hiberniam Hect. Boeth. Scot. Hist. l. 6. fol. 104.
vnde Scotis origo per id tempus Christi cultum accepisse ferunt: res a modico
principio orta, vt Nostratium scribunt no^nulli miraculis coaluit. Mulier
Christian^ pietatis cultrix (Pictici eam fuisse sanguinis Scotici asseuerunt
Annals) Reginae insinuata, Christi nomen illi mirifice praedicauit,
reuerendumque effecit. Regina Regem docuit: Rex vniucrsum populum, Fincomarco
Rege Scotis adhuc imperante. And Not Ireland but Iberia in Armenia rather
converted at this time.
adds, that this was at the same time, when so many other Nations, remembered
before, received the Christian faith, Complexi sunt and eadem tempestate
complures Orientis Occidentisque populi, laetis animi^ verae Religionis cultum.
But I dare not affirm this History to be true of the Irish Nation: for either
the Theodoret. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. cap. 24. Sozomen Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. cap.
6. Hist. Tripart. l. 3. c. 1. Russin. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. cap. 10*
same, or the very like is related by Theodoret, Sozomen, Russinus, Cassiodorus
and others, as done in the Country of Iheria, and the people Iberes then
inhabiting Armenia, by many degrees separated from our Hibernia or Iberia,
Ierna, or whatsoever name it ever had, and only resembling it in demonination,
Eodem Imperatore (Constantino) regnante, fertur Iberes ad Christi fidem
deductos esse. Est haec quidem Gens barbara, robusta and bellicosissima
Armeniam interiorem incolit versus Septentriones.

7. And the same ancient Author living near that time and the days of S.
Patrike the Apostle, and Conuerter of our Irish Nation, does take upon him
particular knowledge, being a mere stranger to our Hibernia, that the Sozomen
supr. c. 6.
Iberes then, and so converted, did worship Christ with great devotion from
that to his time: ad hunc modum Iberes fuere ad fidem in Christum inducti and
eum adhuc permagno studio colunt. When the contrary is witnessed by all Writers
of the adjoining Irish people. And the Relators themselves of this opinion to
be understood of the Island of Ireland, confess as much. One of them a
Protestant Hollinsh. supr.
thus writes even from the Irish Antiquaries, By the report of the Irish
Writers themselves, this should not seem altogether true: for they affirm,
that their Country was rather still esteemed, as one of the unchristened
Islands, till about the year 426. whilst Celestine the first of that name
governed the Sea of Rome. Who sent S. Palladius and after his death S. Patrike
thither to convert that people. When it is evident both by Sozomen, Theodoret,
and the Composer of the Tripart History, all the whole Nation of Iberia was
converted in the time of Constantine, and preserved in the true says, long
after the days of S. Celestine, S. Palladius, and S. Patrike the Irish
Apostles. Again it is evident in the life of S. Patrike by all Antiquities
that S. Patrike being a Christian in his youth, was Manuscr. antiq. in vit. S.
Patricij Capgrau. in cod. Holinsh. supr.
taken a Prisoner out of Britain, and so kept by the Irish Pirates and
Infidels, both Princes and subjects there being such at that time. Further
whereas they say it was a Pictish woman that was so prefect and learned a
Christian then to convert that kingdom of Ireland, it is made certain in
Histories, that S. Ninianus the first Apostle and Conuerter of the Picts, was
not borne at this time.

8. How then is it credible that there was such a woman among them having
Theodoret. supr. Ruffin. Histor. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 10.
Apostolik gifts, as Theodoret writes of that woman, which converted the
Iberians in Armenia: Apostolica dona consecuta est. And Ruffinus living in this
Age says, she cured the sick by laying them upon her sackcloth, and adds
further that this Iberia was far from our Ireland, Iberorum gens quae sub axe
pontico iacet. And he relates this History from the mouth of the King of that
Country, named Bacarius, Governor of Palestina living with him in Jerusalem,
as a familiar friend, Haec nobis ita gesta, fidelissimus vir Bacarius, gentis
ipsius Rex, and apud nos domesticorum comes exposuit, cum nobiscum Palaestini
tunc limitis Dux, in Hierosolymis satis vnaminiter degeret. When we find no
such King of Ireland, much less that went then to Jerusalem, and was so
employed there by the Emperor. Wherefore seeing our Scottish Chroni^lers
themselves make this History, as it appertains to Ireland, but Ferunt, a
report: and our Boeth. Scotor. Hist. l. 6. fol. 104. Hollinsh. supr.
English Antiquaries before have it but from them, which thus received it, and
give it no more credit then it had from them, and not any otherwise allowing,
but rather improuing it by the Irish Tradition itself, I dare not say, that
Ireland was thus and then converted, but the Identitie or nearenes of name gave
first original of that opinion unto some Writers in these parts, to apply that
to Ireland, which is meant in Histories of Iberia in Armenia. Whosoever desires
to know how many Kingdoms and Countries in the world were converted, unto,
or confirmed in the faith of Christ in, and by the happy Regiment of
Constantine, may make some conjecture thereof, by the names and number of
Bishops subscribing to the Nicen Council, besides so many of the Western
parts, as I have remembered before: Eusebius and others testifiing, that out of
all Europe, Afrike, and Asia were present there. Their Subscriptions Socrat.
Histor. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 5. Eusebius. vit. Constable. l. 3. cap. 7. Council. Nicaen.
Tom. 1. Council. in subscript.
are out of Egypt, Thebes, Libia, Palestine, Phaenicia, Syria, Arabia,
Mesopotania, Persia, Cilicia, Cappadocia, Armenia the lesser and greater,
Po^tus both the one and other, Galatia, Asia, Lydia, Phrygia, Pisidia, Licia,
Pamphilia, Rhodes, Cous, Lemnius, Corcyra, Caria, Isauria, Cyprus, Bythinia,
Dacia, Misia, Macedonia, Achaia, Thessalia, Calabria, Carthadge, Dardania,
Thessalia, Dalmatia, Pannonia, Gallia, Gothia, Bosphorus.

THE XII. CHAPTER.
OF THE CALLINC OF THE NICEN COUNCIL by the temporal assistance of
Constantine against the Arrian Heretics. The Decrees thereof, highest
spiritual Power of the Popes of Rome and general Councels, by general
agreement of all, Pope, Emperor and others.

1. THE external wars, and conflicts of holy Christians with Jews, and
Pagans, being thus happily appeased, and quieted, by this our most blessed
Country King, Emperor, and chiefest nursing Father, that ever was in the world,
of the Church of Christ, as was foretold by the Prophet, erunt Reges nutricij
tui. An other kind of combat and civil Sedition was raised against them by
domestical Adversaries, the Arian Heretics, for appeasing whose rage, and
fury, not only the spiritual Power of the highest See Apostolic, and other
sacred Catholic Bishops, but the brachium seculare, and temporal assistance
of this most worthy and magnificent Emperor, was necessary, and to be used.

2. How needful the authority of the chiefest See was in such an Assembly,
and for decision of such Controversies as were there debated, is sufficiently
proved before, this Council itself gives pregnant testimony unto, making it
a rule and Square to all Churches: Antiqui mores seruentur. Quandoquidem and
Nic. Conc. Can. 6.
Episcopo Romano hoc est consuetum. And Eusebius confesses, that although the
Bishop of Rome was old: yet the chief rule belonging to that City, he sent
Priests thither to supply his place, Quanquam vrbis illius, penes quem Imperium
Eusebius. l. 3. Vita Constant. c. 7.
est, Episcopus, ingrauescente aetate praepeditus, abfuit: eius tamen
Presbyteri, qui aderant illius locum suppleuerunt. So have others. And in the
Council they being only Priests, and no Bishops, they did not only and
singularly definitiuely subscribe, which no other Priests were allowed to do,
but subscribed before the Bishops in the name of S. Syluester then Pope, Victor
and Vincentius, Presbyteri vrbis Romae, pro venerabili viro Papa and Episcopo
nostro sancto Syluestro, Nicen. Conc. in subscr. Tom. 1. Conc.
subscripsimus, ita credentes sicut supra scriptum est.

3. That the Assembly of all, or so many Bishops, as could be called together
The highest spiritual authority of general Councels, and Popes of Rome.
in general Council was necessary in that and such times of contention, to
embrace true faith, sinceare charity, and due worship to God, that without
such means those duties could not firmly and certainly be observed, that
holy Emperor himself gives a public testimony in his general Epistle to all
Churches, Vna fides, concors dilectio, ac erga omnipotentem Deum pietas, aliter
Epist. Constant. apud Eusebius. l. 3. de Vit. eius c. 16. and Theodor. l. 1. Hist.
c. 10.
stabili firmoque ordine constitui non potuit, quam in Caetu omnium, aut saltem
plurimorum Episcoporum coacto. His ita institutis suscipite lubentibus animis
coel^stem gratiam, and plane diuinum mandatum. Quicquid enim in sacris
Episcoporum Concilijs constitutum fuerit, id ad diuinam voluntatem est
referendum. Neither has he given less dignity before, by his Imperial
Constitutions to the Sea of Rome, then the primative Popes thereof have claymed
unto it from the beginning, by the Donation and gift of Christ to be the
chiefest and commandresse of all Churches; Which this glorious Emperor does
often reiterate: vt Principatum Constant. in Priuileg. Romans Eccl.
teneat super omnes in vniuerso orb terrarum Ecclesias. And this he declared
publikly not only by his own Imperial Authority, but with the consent of
all his Nobles, and the Roman Senate: cum omnibus nostris Satrapis and vniuerso
Senatu, Optimatibus que meis.

4. This renowned Emperor was far from clayming Primacie in spiritual
affairs, in authoritatiuely assembling Councels, or any other respect. Yet
were not the te^porall duties and offices of this good Emperor wanting unto
this sacred Council: But as our ancient Christian Kings from our first
Conversion did ever publikly at their Coronation promise, profess, and swear
upon the holy Ghospels, and Reliks of Saints, that all the days of their
lives they would Leg. S. Eduardi apud Gulielm. Lamb. l. de leg. Roger. Houede^
Annal. part. postr. in Richardo 1.
preserve peace, honor, and reverence to God and his holy Church, and the
Ecclesiastical parsons thereof, kneeling before the Altar: coram
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and Clero and populo flexis genibus ante Altar
cora^ positis sacrosanctis Euangelijs, and plurimorum Sanctorum reliquijs, vt
moris est, iurauit, quod ipse omnibus diebus vitae suae pacem and honorem,
atque reuerentiam Deo and sanctae Ecclesiae, and eius ordinatis portaret.

5. So this our most Noble Emperor, and King, seeing the great troubles and
contentions were like to fall upon the Church of Christ by the Arrian Heretics,
and Quartodecimans, about the observation of Easter, and no other means left
to prevent and appease these calamities, but by a general Council of Bishops,
as he has testified before: and these could not conveniently either be called,
or continued together, but by the temporal aid, and assistance of so
general, and potent Commander, to provide means for their coming forth of so
many different and remote Countries, to prepare a convenient and secure place,
for so great and worthy an assembly, to furnish them with victuals and other
needful provision and defense there, and to take order that whatsoever those
holy Bishops should conclude and determine by their spiritual power in matters
of Religion, should be defended and maynetained by his temporal sword, and
Authority, in an eminent Religious manner, and he magnificently performed
these Imperial and Regal obseruances.

6. Eusebius then living is witness, that to bring this Assembly together,
this holy Emperor helped much giving Power to some of the Bishops to use the
horses provided for public affairs to bring them thither, and to others sent
a great number of beasts with furniture for their Journey, in ea re peragenda
Eusebius. vit. Co^st. l. 3. c.
multam attulit subsidij Authoritas Imperatoris, ac nutus: qui nonnullis fecit
po^estatem, equis public ad Iter celeriter conficiendum dispositis vtendi:
alijs permagnum Iumentorum instratorum, quibus veherentur, numerum
suppeditauit. The place for their Assembly he provided to be his own Palace in
the City of Niece, and in the great Hall thereof on either side convenient
seats were placed for that number, Cum vniuersi conuenissent, praeparatus erat
a Rege locus amplus in Regia Eusebius. supr. c. 10. Theod. Histor. Eccl. l. 1. c.
7.
instructus subsellijs and solijs quae Episcoporum numero sufficere. And doing
his due reverence to them, willed them to enter and consult of the matters
questioned: atque it a debito ipsis honor habito, iussit introire and
consultare de re proposita. So long as the Council continued, he largely and
liberally ministered diet Eusebius. supr. l. 3. c. 9.
unto them all, Quibus omnibus cibaria in singulos dies Imperator large and
liberaliter suppeditari mandauit. Coming into the Council in his Imperial
habit, would not sit down, until the Bishops caused him so to do, Non prius
consedit, qua^ Episcopi adid innuissent. He appointed his armed Souldiars with
drawn Cap. 10.
swords to keep the Bishops from hurt or danger, Satellites armati districtis
Cap. 14.
gladijs, vndique Regiae vestibula obseruabant: per quorum mediam turbam sancti
Dei homines absque formidine ingressi sunt and ad interiores Palatij aedes
perrexerunt.

7. The Council being ended, he made them a great and solemn banquet, Eusebius.
sup. c. 14. 15. Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 10. Sozomen. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c.
14. Sozom. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 20.
and rewarded every one of them with honorable gifts, Quisque pro dignitate
muneribus honorifice donatus fuit. And the Council having by their spiritual
Power condemned Arius and his favorers, and decreed he should not cume to
Alexandria, Concilium tum Arium, tum suae opinionis fautores pariter abdicauit,
decreuitque ne veniret Alexandriam: this holy Emperor assisted herein with his
Civil Power bannishing Arius, and setting forth an Edict to all people that
they should account both him and his favorers for wicked men: and if any book
written by them should be found, it was to be burned, that no monument might
remain of him, or his opinion: Imperator non solum Arium mulctauit exilio:
verumetiam Episcopis omnibus and populis Edictum scriptum misit, vt tum illum,
tum cius opinionts fautores impiorum numero ducerent: and si qui liber
reperiretur ab illis scriptus, in ignem conijcerent; quo neque ipsius, neque
opinionis cuius Author fuerat vllum monumentum extaret. And that who soever
should be proved to hide or conceal any of his books, and not presently bring
it forth to be burned, should be put to death: Quod si quis aliquem librum eius
occultare deprehenderetur, ac non illico in publicum productum incenderet, vt
capitis mulctaretur supplicio. And he makes the Decrees of the general
Council by so many and worthy Bishops to be his warrant and direction for
such proceedings, affirming that such a sentence is the sentence of God,
confirmed by the holy Ghost with the assent of so many renowned Bishops, Eam
enim nihil aliud esse quam Dei sententiam Constable. Epist. ad Eccles. Alex.
Sozomen. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 24. Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 6.
consensu tot tantorumque Episcoporum per spiritum sanctum stabilitam. And by
Socrates his Relation, he plainly avouches that Decree of the Bishops
assembled at Nice was to be thought no other thing, then the sentence of God,
the holy Ghost being resident in the minds of such and so many excellent men,
and revealing unto them the will of God, Nam quod trecentis Episcopis visum
est, non est aliud putandum, quam Dei sententia: praesertim cum in talium and
tam praeclarorum virorum mentihus sacer insideret spiritus, qui illis diuinam
voluntatem aperuerit. These be the words of Constantine himself: which
Socrates the Relator of the^, so expounds as they plainly signify. And I
have before declared, that the will of the Bishops there assembled was the will
of God, and Socrat. supr. cap. 6.
that such a number of Bishops did by the divine inspiration of the holy Ghost
agree in the same mind and sentence, Vt summatim dicam, omnium qui ibi
conuenerant voluntem, Dei voluntatem appellat: nec dubitat quin tanta
Episcoporum multitudo, diuino spiritus sancti afflatu, in eadem mente and
sententia consenserit. So likewise does Ruffinus relate, and expound other
words of Constantine, uttered thus to the same Bishops in that Counsel: God
has ordained you Priests, Ruffin. Histor. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 2.
and given you Power also to Judge of us, and therefore we are rightly Judged
by you. But you can be Judged by none, for God has given you as Gods unto us,
and it is not convenient, that a man should Judge Gods, but he alone of whom
it is written: God stood in the Sinagoge of Gods, and in the midst judged Gods.
Ait ad Episcopos: Deus vos constituit Sacerdotes, and potestatem vobis dedit de
nobis quoque iudicandi, and ideo nos a vobis recte iudicamur. Vos autem non
potestis ab omnibus iudicari. Vos etenim nobis a Deo dati estis Dij, and
co^ueniens non est, vt homo iudicet Deos, sed ille solus de quo scriptu^ est:
Deus stetit in Synagog a Deoru^, in medio aute^ Deos discernit.

8. And yet such Assemblyes of Bishops so dignified could not either in this or
any other Council without the consent and sentence of the Pope of Rome, decree
and impose upon the Church any Canons, and this was a received Law and Canon
before this time, as Pope Julius, Socrates, and others then living witness,
Canon Ecclesiasticus vetat, ne Decreta absque sente^tia Episcopi Romani
Ecclesijs sanciantur. And in that time, and before, this Church of Julius Papa,
and Socrat. Hist. Ecc. l. 2. c. 13. c. 11.
Rome had Primacie, before, and above all other Churches, Ecclesia Romana
Priuilegium praeter caeteras obtinebat. And this was acknowledged by those
Bishops of the East themselves, in their Public Epistle to Pope Julius, which
were the greatest Enemies to S. Athanasius, and the Roman See, protesting the
Roman Church was chief and principal above all others, even from the
beginning, being the School of the Apostles, and Metropolis of piety, Literis
Sozom. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 7.
suis fatebantur Romanam Primas apud omnes far, vtpote quae Apostolorum
schola and pietatis Metropolis iam ab initio fuisset. Thus Protestants
themselves translate these Greek Writers, and thereupon are forced to make
this their Jacob. Grynaeus in Interpret. Socratis and Sozom. supr. Athan. Apol.
2. contra Arian. and epist. ad Marc. Pap. Athan. and Episcop. Egypt. Theb. and
l. epist. ad Foelic. 2. Pap. Tom. 1. Council.
own note and gloss from them, Ecclesiae Romanae Primatus: The Supremacy of
the Church of Rome.

9. And not only Saint Athanasius, which was present at this Nicen Council,
does in diverse places give this Supremacy to the Roman See, but he and all the
Bishops of Egypt, Thebaida, and Lybia do acknowledge, that both they and their
Predecessors did then and ever depend of the Roman See: and this according to
the Decrees of the Canons: Pater beatissime quia semper Antecessores nostri,
and nos a vestra Apostolica sansta Sede auxilium hausimus, and nostri vos curam
habere agnouimus, praefatam Apostolicam and summam expetimus, iuxta Canonum
Decreta, Sedem, vt inde auxilium capiamus, vnde Praedecessores nostri
Ordinationes, and dogmata, atque subleuationes ceperunt. And there call the
Church of Rome their Mother, to give them suke, and plainly say, that the
Canons command, no great cause may be Decreed without the Bishop of Rome:
Canonibus iubentibus, absque Romano nos de maioribus causis nihil debere
decernere Pontifice.

10. And the same Bishops of Egypt in their Epistle to Pope Foelix the 2. in
this time writ, that it was Decreed in this Nicen Council by general consent
of all, that no Council might be called without the consent of the Pope of
Rome: and speak this of their own knowledge, as some of the^ then present
there: scimus in Nicaena magna Synodo 318. Episcoporu^ ab omnibus co^corditer
esse roboratu^, non debere absque Romani Pontificis sententia Concilia
celebrari, nor Bishops Episc. Egypt. ep. ad Foelic. 2.
to be condemned, nec Episcopos damnari. And complain that the Heretics then
within 25. years of that Council, had burned the Canons thereof, Synodica
Capitula incensa, nobisque sublata.

11. They testify also, that in the same Nicen Council was Decreed, that from
all Bishops and Metropolitans, appeals were to be used to the Bishop of Rome,
and that from Christ our Lord himself power of binding and loosing by
especial privilege above all others, was given unto that See, Similiter and a
praedictis Patribus (Nicaenis) est definitum consonanter, vt si quisquam
Episcoporu^, aut Metropolitanorum Comprouinciales vel Iudices suspectos
habuerit, vestram sanctam Romanam interpellet Sedem, cui ab ipso Domino
Potestas ligandi and soluendi speciali est priuilegio super alios concessa.

12. This doctrine and practice also is allowed and confirmed in the great
Conc. Sardicen. Can. 7.
Council of Sardice, held within 22. years of that of Nice, wherein both
Osius, Athanasius and others which were then present, were also present,
consented and subscribed, granting not only Supremacy to the Pope of Rome,
and Appeals to him, but that by any Priest, his Legate, he might inualidate and
disannull the Acts of Councels in all places. To which Decrees the Bishops of
this kingdom of Britain consented being present there. And this is evident
Epist. S. Athanasij and Episc. Aegypti ad S. Marcum Papam and Epist. eiusdem ad
eosdem. Tom. 4. oper. S. Athanasij.
by the proceedings of the Nicen Counsel itself, not thinking that the
Authority of so many Bishops there assembled together with the Popes Legates
were of sufficient credit to make Decrees unquestionable, except they were
confirmed by the Pope of Rome himself. And therefore as is manifest by the
Epistle of S. Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, and the Bishops of Egypt to
S. Mark Pope of Rome, and his Answer unto them, the very authentical Copy
of the Nicen Council containing 70. Canons, with the very Subscriptions of all
the Bishops therein assembled, was sent to S. Syluester then Pope of Rome.
Which can carry no other gloss or interpretation, then which the Epistle it
self of the same Nicen Council to S. Syluester, dated Paulino and Iuliano
Co^sulibus does give, entreating him to confirm their Decrees, Quicquid
Epistol. Synod. Nic. ad Syluest. Pap. and Syluestri. Rescript. Tom. 1. Conc.
apud Sur. and Bin. and M. S. Ant. Colonien.
constituimus in Concilio Nicaeno, precamur vestri oris consortio confirmetur.
And his confirmatorie Rescript, confirmo, gives the same, dated in the seventh
Consulship of Constantine. Which Authority of the Sea of Rome, the same
Epistle of S. Achanasius the great Patriarch of Alexandria, and all the
Bishops of Egypt does sufficiently prove, calling the Church of Rome the Mother
and Head of all Churches: quae est matter and caput omnium Ecclesiarum.

13. And add further, that allthough one of them was Patriarch of Alexandria in
a distinct part of the world from Europe, wherein Rome is, in the Council of
Nice itself set down for one of the chiefest Sees, yet they were all of mean
degree in respect of the Pope of Rome, and they were, and ever would, with all
committed to their charge, be obedient unto him, Qui licet Athanas. and Epis.
Aegipti epist. ad Marc. Pap. supr.
exigui ordinis, tamen vestri sumus, vobisque obedientes cum omnibus nobis
commissis, and sumus and essesemper volumus.

14. Therefore those Protestants which after so many hundreds of years, would
give so large an extension to the sixth Canon of the Nicen Council, as thereby
to make the Patriarch of Alexandria to have equal power, and preeminencie with
the Pope of Rome, do most ignorantly, or rather maliciously wilfully err
therein. For hear we see the most holy and learned Patriarch there, living in
that time, and present in that Council, and so best knowing the mind thereof,
testifing that the Patriarch of Alexandria, and all Egypt subject unto it, were
and ought to be subject and obedient to the Sea of Rome.

15. The like has the same learned and holy Patriarch, together with the
Athan. and Episc. Aegipt. Theb. and Lib. supr.
same Bishops of Egypt, Thebris, and Libia ackdowledged before. And the Canon
is plain, that the subjection of Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis to the Bishop of
Alexandria, was by the permission of the Pope of Rome, his preeminence over
them, thus by them all confessed, reserved and no otherwise, Antiqua consuetudo
seruetur per Aegiptum, Libiam, and Pentapolim, ita vt Alexandrinus Episcopus
Council. Nicen. can. 6. in trib. Lection.
horum omnium habeat Potestatem, quia and vrbis Roma Episcopo parilis mos est.
So have two several readings of that Canon, and the third is more plain,
Quandoquidem and Episcopo Romano hoc est consuetum.

16. Therefore allthough we give the greatest honor and dignity to that our
greatest King, and Emperor, Constantine the Great, or greatest that ever was,
due or truly given to any temporal Monarch, or Commander in the world: yet
we may not use the Pope of Rome S. Sylnester so dishonorably, whom he so
honored, to take from him so great and Noble a Portion of the highest
spiritual Pastoral charge, and office, iuridically to call and confirm
Councels, only and peculiarly belonging to that Apostolic chiefest See, by so
many Titles, to bestow it upon a Civil Governor, both having no, and
renowncing all such power, how soever potent, worthy and deserving in other
respects. And it is evident by Ruffinus, Eusebius, and others, that Constantine
was not present in, but absent from the Nicen Council, when it gave Judgment
in the Questions of Religion: But the chiefest place in such Ruffin. l. 1.
Hist. Eccl. cap. 5.
affairs, as before is manifest, belonging to the Pope of Rome, and he then
being old and absent, it was supplied hy his Priests and Vicars Deputies, Et
Eusebius. l. 3. de vit. Constantini. cap. 7. Socrat. Hist. l. 1. cap. 5.
quanquam vrbis illius, penes quam Imperium est, Episcopus ingrauescente aetate
praepeditus abfuit, cius tamen Presbyteri qui aderant, illius locum
suppliuerunt.

THE XIII. CHAPTER.
HOW BRITAIN RECEIVED THE NICEN Council, and agreed with the whole Catholic
Church, both in the observation of Easter, and all other holy Doctrins and
Observations.

1. AS Constantine had hitherto been most religiously careful for the
assembling this Council, assisting what he could in so glorious a work, as I
have related before: So it now being ended, and the Bishops dismissed, he did,
as Sozomen and others testify, exceedingly rejoice to see the whole Church
consenting in faith and Doctrine: Cum iam Concilium Herm. Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l.
2. cap. 1.
Nicaenum venisset ad exitum, and Sacerdotes omnes domum, Imperator supra modum
ideo laetatus est, quod Ecclesiam vniuersam de doctrina fidei consentientem
viderat. And endeavored as much to have the Canons and sacred Decrees thereof
now duly observed, and executed in all places, as he was desirous to have them
concluded.

2. And therefore besides his general Edicts, and Epistles to particular men,
and States he sent Imperial Letters unto all Bishops, which were absent from
Epist. Constant. ad absentes Episcopos de Act. Council. Nic. apud Theodoret.
Hist. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 10. Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 6.
that Council, of the proceedings thereof, the whole Epistle is extant in the
Histories of Theodoret, and Socrates with others, and begins: Constantinus
Augustus Ecclesijs. In these Letters he makes an honorable memory of the
faith, and Religion of his Countrymen the Britans, or the whole Nation or
Islands of Britain, or both the one and other, showing how they consented with
all Catholic and orthodoxe Countries in matters of Religion, and particularly
in the true observation of Easter, as S. Eleutherius, and S. Victor Popes had
before decreed, and the Nicen Council, now generally received proposed, and
confirmed, and Constantine had promised to the Council to cause all others to
consent to the same, Ipse in me recepi vestram sapientiam facile assensuram, vt
quod in vrbe Roma, Italia, in Africa, in tota Egipto, Hispania, Gallia Britayne
receaue^ the doctrine and Decrees of the general Council of Nyce, and agreed
withal orthodoxall Churches in all things and particularly in the observation
of Easter.
and Brita^nia, in Libya and vniuersa Graecia, in Diaecesi Aseatica and
Po^tica, in Cilicia denique vna and consentienti sententia conseruatur, hoc
etiam a vobis quoque lubentibus animis approbaretur: in Theodoret It is, in
Britannis or, Britannijs in all the parts or divisions of Britain, being then
diverse, as is before remembered, and yet all and every one of them, whether
where the English, Scots or Welsh now inhabit, did agree in this as in other
Catholic doctrins and custom, with Rome, Italy, Afrike, Egypt, Spain,
Gallia, Libia, all Greece, the Diocese of Asia, Ponticus and Cilicia. And a
little before he says, that all Churches, the parts of all the world,
inhabiting either the West, South or North, and diverse in the East observed
this manner and use, Quem omnes Ecclesiae, totius orbis Constable. in Epist. supr.
parts, vel ad Occidentem, vel ad Meridiem, vel ad Septentriones incolentes
servant, ac nonnullae quoque quae in locis ad Orientem spectantibus habitant.

3. S. Athanasius also in his Epistle to Iouinian the Emperor plainly
affirms, that the Church of Britain held the same faith with the Nicen
Council, Athanasius epist. ad Iouinian. Imp. de fide.
and before the Nicen Council, as the words of Constantine also prove, and
from the beginning of Christianity: cognosce Religiosissime Imperator, hanc
esse quae a condito aeuo praedicata fuit, and quam Nicaeae Patres congregati
agnouerunt, eiusque Suffragatrices esse omnes omnibus in locis Ecclesias sieve
in Hispania sunt, sieve Britannia: and not only the Churches of the West,
South, and North, but of the East also, except a few which were of the Arrian
faction: nec non and Orientis Ecclesias, paucis admodum exceptis, quae
Arianicae opinionis sunt. Therefore very gross or wilful and malicious to
the honor of this their Noble Country of Britain, is the Error of those
English Protestants, which are not ashamed to suggest unto ignorant Readers,
that against so many evident and undeniable arguments and Authorities formerly
alleged, this kingdom first received the faith from some Scismaticall Church
of Asia, and only upon this poor and simple pretense, because at the coming
of S. Augustine hither, almost 300. years after this time, diverse among the
Britans observed the Feast of Easter, as those few Eastern Churches did, and
otherwise then the Nicen Council received, and decreed; when it is most clear
and evident by these great witnesses, Constantine our Emperor, S. Athanasius,
Theodoret, Socrates and others, that all Britain generally held, and observed
the true observation of Easter, both at the time of the Nicen Council, long
before, and after.

4. And S. Bid calculating the time of the continuance of that Error among the
Scots and Britans hear, from the beginning to the end thereof, proves that it
had been hear but 30. years at the coming of S. Augustine hither, for he
plainly affirms that in the year of Christ seven hundred and sixteen, when
it was extinct in the Scottish-irish Christians the greatest Promoters of it in
these parts, it had continued only one hundred, and fifty years: Bed. Hist.
Eccl. l. 3. c. 4.
permansit autem huiusmodi obseruantia Paschalis apud eos tempore non pauco,
hoc est vsque ad annum Dominicae Incarnationis septingentesimum decimum
septimu^, per annos centum quinquaginta. Which was 30. years before S.
Augustine came into this Nation, and no more. When this kingdom first
receiving the faith from S. Peter, and the Sea of Rome, must needs also receive
from them that observance they ever used in this Solemnity, which was the same
the Nicen Council received, as Ceolfridus in his Epistle to Naitanus King of
the Picts Ceolfred. Abb. Epist. ad Naitan. Reg. Pict. apud Bed. Eccl. Hist. l.
5. c. 22. Wilfrid. apud eund. l. 3. c. 25
with others learnedly proves, teaching S. Peter taught it for an Apostolical
Tradition at Rome, and from him S. Mark at Alexandria, Decreuit Apostolica
Traditio, quae per beatum Petrum Romae praedicata, per Marcum Euangelistam and
interpretem ipsius Alexandriae confirmata est, vt adueniente primo mense,
adueniente in eo vespera diei quartae decimae, expectetur etiam dies Dominica a
quinta decima vsque ad vicesimam primam diem eiusdem Mensis. In quacunque enim
harum inuenta fuerit, merito in ea Pascha celebrabitur. And great must needs
their Error or willfulnes be, which if the Error of the Britans and Scots
herein had been more ancient, that therefore they would thereby make any
Argument to derive either that, or any practice, or opinion they had, from that
part of Asia, which erred in this point, for they were quite different Errors:
that in Asia the same with the Jews, not observing our Lords day, but an other
through ignorance of Canons and Ecclesiastical Computations, as S. Bid and
others prove, Paschae diem non semper in Luna quartadecima cum Iudaeis, vt
quidam rebantur, sed Bed. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 4.
in die quidem Dominica, alia tamen, quam decebat hebdomada, celebrabant:
sciebant enim vt Christiani Resurrectionem Dominicam, quae prima Sabbati facta
est, prima Sabbat: semper esse celebrandam, sed vt Barbari and rustici, qua^do
eadem prima Sabbati, Wilfr. apud Bed. l. 3. cap. 24.
ea quae nunc Dominica dies ^ognominatur, veniret, minime didicerant And yet as
S. Wilfrid witnesses, this Error was not hear general, but only with some
of them, and not all: and his non totis: And singular against all the world,
even those parts of Asia, from which our Protestants would bring it hither:
contra totum orbem stulto labor pugnant.

THE XIV. CHAPTER.
OF THE FINDING THE HOLY CROSS AND Sepulcher of Christ by S. Helen, our
British Queen, and Empress, and the great honor done to them, and other
holy Reliks of Christ's Passion.

1. WHEN these holy and Religious works and duties were thus in Action, and
performance by our Renowned King, and Emperor Constantine, his sacred and
blessed Mother S. Helen our Queen and Empress was noe less careful, and
diligent in advancing the honor of Christ: And having, as I remembered before,
forsaken and left her native Country of Britain to visit Rome, and exercise
her great Acts of piety and devotion there, and those parts, could not
contain and confine the effects and labors of her zeal and charity within
those allthough so large and ample limits. But knowing what blessings and
happiness were grown to the world, by the Passion and death of Christ in
Jerusalem upon his holy Cross hitherto by all means either Jews or gentiles
could procure, obscured and suppressed, could not end her painful and pious
pilgrimage, until she had visited the parts where Christ had labored and
suffered so much for man's Redemption, and as the Prophet had written, and in an
excellent manner above others was performed by her, to worship Christ in the
places themselves where his sacred feet Is. c. 60.
had stood on earth: adorabimus in loco vbi steterunt pedes eius. Which
Eusebius and others after a singular manner in devotion do apply unto her:
postquam Eusebius. l. 3. de Vit. Constant. c. 41.
locis, in quibus Seruatoris erant impressa vestigia, debitam venerationem
adhibuerat, idque conuenienter prophetico Sermoni dicenti, adorabimus in loco
vbi steterunt pedes eius: she began by all means and industry she could, to
find out his holy Cross to redeem it from reproach and obscurity, and
present it to public honor, and due luster of glory.

2. The difficulty of this business was great, for besides her tedious Journey
and Travail thither, and diligent enquiry to find out the place where the
holy Cross remained, by all means the Infidels could make concealed from the
knowledge of Christians. For as Socrates with others testifies of the holy
Sepulcher, and the Cross of Christ therein hidden, or near to it, as they
which embraced the faith of Christ did after his Passion worship his Sepulcher
with great honor: So they which were enemies to his Religion, did cover the
place with a great heap of earth, and the more to suppress the memory
thereof, did there erect a Temple to Venus, and her Idolatrous Statua,
Quemadmodum illi qui Christi fidem amplexarentur, post tempus illius Passions
illud Monumentum in magno honor habuerunt: sic qui ab eius Religione
abhorrere^t, loco illo aggere and ingenti terrae mole obruto, delubrum Vener^^
in eo Socrat. Hist. Ecc. l. 2. c. 13. Theod. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 18. Sozom.
Hist. Eccl. l.. 2. cap. 1. Cassiodor. in Tr. Hist. part. l. 2. c. 18. Ruffin.
Hist. l. 1. c. 7. Ruffin. supr.
extruxerunt: and loci illius memoria suppressa, Idoli simulachrum erexerunt.
Sozomen. says this holy Empress went to Jerusalem, to pray and visit the
holy places, Helena Imperatoris matter venit Hierosolymam, cum precandi causa,
tum sancta illa loca visendi, and to find out both the holy Cross and divine
Sepulcher of our Lord: lignum crucis venerandae and diuinum Domini sepulchrum.

3. This Pilgrimage and Religious Journey of this blessed Queen, was, as our
ancient Authors say, warranted both by divine commission, diuinis admonita
Visionibus, Herosolymam petit atque ibi locum in quo sacrosanctum corpus
patibulo affixum pependerat, ab Incolis perquirit: and the Imperial Letters of
Theod. l. 1. c. 17. 18.
Constantine her son: has literas pertulit ipsa Imperatoris Matter. Yet it
seems by these Letters of Constantine to Marianus Bishop of Jerusalem,
principally about the building of a Church in the place of the holy Sepulcher,
that both Eusebius. l. 3. de Vit. Constantini c. 29 Theod. Hist. Ecc. l. 1. c. 17.
Eusebius. c. 28. supr.
this and the holy Cross were found before, for so these Letters testify as
they are extant in Eusebius, Theodoret and others. And Eusebius says that this
renowned Emperor did make a Law for edifing a famous Church about the place
of the Sepulcher of Christ, sacratis legibus sanciuit, vt templum augustum
circa salutare illud antrum extrueretur. And adds, that he had this purpose
long time before, Hoc opus longo iam tempore apud animum proposuerat. By which
it is evident, that S. Helen had two Iorneyes at the least to Jerusalem, and
that she had found the holy Cross and Sepulcher long before her second
Pilgrimage, when she carried those Letters of Constantine to Macharius, and by
Eusebius and others also, his Imperial Mandate to his Prefects in those parts
for building that Church: gentium Praefectis Orientem versus habitantium Eus.
supr. Herm. Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 1.
mandat, vt adiumentis necessarijs abu^danter and copiose subministratis, opus
eximium, amplum and magnificum fabricandum curarent: All written together at
the same time, and long time, longo iam tempore, after his blessed Mother did
first find these sacred Reliks, as is before remembered.

4. And the History hear of which the Church of Christ publicly receaueth
and reads in the Festitie of the Invention of the holy Cross, does seem to
hold, that this finding thereof by S. Helen was long before the Nicen
Council, and soon after the Apparition of the Cross to Constantine, and his
Victory against Maxentius, she being admonished by heavenly Vision to perform
that Religious duty, Post insignem victoriam, quam Constantinus Imperator,
diuinitus Breniar. Romans in Fest. Invent. S. Crucis 3. Maij.
accepto signo dominicae crucis, e x Maxentio reportauit, Helena Constantini
matter in sommis admonita, conquirendae crucis studio, Hierosolymam venit. And
yet both Sozomen and others testify, that S. Helen had the Emperors warrant
to dig, and purdge the place where the holy Cross was found, Locus ille
Imperatoris Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 1. Nicep. Callist. Eccl. Hist. l. 8. c.
29.
mandato fuit purgatus. Which gives more probability, to that opinion of many
Authors before, that the holy Cross was found out, at the least where it was
hidden long before the glorious publishing of it about this time to the world,
and this before Constantine was Emperor in the East, or had Power to give
Authority to do so many things as were required for redeeming those holy
Relics from that great obscurity and oblivion, wherein they were buried
before, an hundred and fourscore years, post centum circiter octoginta annos,
as the Church History before, S. Hierome, Marianus Scotus and others witness.
And if we will allow theirs and others, witness, and reckoning these 180.
years, ab Adriani temporibus, from the time of the Emperor Adria^, wherein by
all those superstitious buildings were erected, until the end of them, when
these holy Monuments of Christ were honorably seated in their places, Adrian
dying by all Accounts in the year of Christ 139. or 140. these must needs be
both found by S. Helen, and so honored Marian. Scot. l. 2 aetat. 6. an. 139. in
Imper. Adrian. Hier. apud eund. Capgr. in S. Helena.
in, or before the year 320. and all the other superstitions that were placed
there, by the Pagans to take away the memory, name, and honor of Christ, were
utterly extinguished and desolate.

5. And to give us more warrant, and security herein, those renowned Authors
which have delivered these Relations, set down this abomination of desolation
to have stood in this most holy place in the 139. year of Christ, so that the
term of the continuance of it there 180. years, expireth 5. or 6. years
before the Nicen Council ended, by all Accounts. Our English Co^tinuator of
Florentius Wigornie^sis, who has written before that the holy Cross was first
found out in the time of Consta^tius, Father to Constantine the Great,
affirms, that Quiriacus, otherwise named Judas, was the 26. Bishop of
Jerusalem, Continuator Flor. Wigorn. in Catal. Episcoporum Hierosolymitanorum.
and found the holy Cross at the ernest request of S. Helen, Episcopus
Hierosolymorum 26. Quiriacus, qui and Judas. Ab hoc, sancta exig^n^e Helena,
Crux Domini cum clauis est inuenta. When by others it is commonly held, that
Macharius was Bishop of Jerusalem at this time, and a diligent Agent in this
holy labor.

6. Therefore I dare not absolutely determine of the certainty of the time of
this holy Pilgrimage and labor of S. Hele^ in this kind. But it is agreed for
certain, that she undertook this Journey by the admonition of God: Helena
Imperatoris matter diuinitus admonita Hierosolyma^ Iter caepit. She went to
pray, to visit Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 13. Ruffin. Hist. l. 1. c. 7.
Sozom. l. 2. Hist. c. 1. Eusebius. Vit. Constant. l. 3. c. 41. Theod. Hist. Eccl.
l. 1. c. 18. Eusebius. de Vit. Constant. l. 3. c. 13. 14.
the holy places, do due Reverence or worship unto them, Venit Hierosolymam
cum precandi causa, tum sancta illa loca visendi, locis in quibus Seruatoris
era^t impressa vestigia debitam venerationem adhibuit. This devout Journey so
long and tedious she undertook when she was very old, almost fourscore
years of Age: ea taedium Itineris, senectae etiam labor contempta suscepit:
non enim diu post illud mortua est, nata annos octoginta.

7. In this Pilgrimage, as Eusebius writes, she travailed all the East part,
giving infinite gifts in all Cities, and places, what she bestowed upon poor
people, can scarcely be reckoned: To some she gave great sommes of money,
others she abou^dantly clothed, those which were in Prison or distressed
anywise or oppressed by fraud or Injury, she delivered, those that were
bannished she caused to be restored to their Countries again. Wheresoever she
came she adorned the Christian Churches with renowned Monuments, and in all
godly duties of life offered true worship unto God.

8. And concerning her finding out the holy Cross, Sepulcher, and other sacred
Monuments and Relics of Christ, her labors and pains were wonderful, and by
diverse Authors Miraculously assisted by God, so says Sozomen: monstratione
Dei optimi Maximi, God almighty showed her the place. Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l.
2. c. 1. Ruffin. Hist. l. 1. c. 7. Niceph. Callist. Eccl. Hist. l. 8. c. 29.
Sozom. and Nicephor. supr.
And Russinus: locus sibi diuino indicio designatus. And Nicephorus: Deo signis
quibusdam and visionibus nocturnis ostendente. Yet this nothing hinders but
she might also use the humane help of an Hebrew dwelling in the East, who by
an old Writing was informed of the place, and so informed Queen Helen thereof:
Indicio vti quidam memorant, Hebraei cuiusdam versus Orientem habitantis, qui
auito quodam scripto admonitus, locum commonstrauit. Which opinion both Sozomen
and N^cephorus recite from others but deliver for their own sentence, that is,
was by divine Revelation. But neither of these hind^reth, but rather assist and
further one the other, so well agreeing together. The testimony of God giving
infallible verity and truth to humane witness, in itself questionable and not
known for certain, nor easily to be followed in a business of so great
difficulte and consequence, as this was. For as Eusebius, Eusebius. vit. Constable. l.
3. c. 25. Ruffin. Hist. l. 1. cap. 7. Socrat. l. 2. c. 13. Sozom. l. 2. c. 1.
Theod. l. 1. Hist. cap. 18. Nicephor. Callist. l. 8. Hist. cap. 29.
Ruffinus, Theodoret, Sozomen, Socrates and others are ample witnesses: not
only wicked men, but by their aid, all the damned devils did labor with all
devices they could to hide, and utterly to blott out with oblivion that sacred
Monument of Immortality. Impious and wicked men did think to make the
Sepulcher of our Savior to be forgotten, and not to be remembered. And in this
manner they endeavored to conceal the truth.

9. They first began with great toil and troble to dig strange earth in
other places, and bring it thither to cover all the place. Then they raised a
great heap of earth exceeding high, and paued it with stones, covering our
Lords Sepulcher with a great Rampire: after, that nothing might be wanting to
finish their intended wickedness, upon that huge heap of earth they made an
horrible and execrable burying place for bodies of lewd people. And erected a
secret Temple to the devil of wanto^ Venus, filling it with Idols. Then they
there offered detestable Sacrifices upon their impure Altars polluted with all
abomination. For they thought they should not otherwise compass their
intention, except by these horrible impieties they could utterly suppress that
holy Sepulcher, Olim viri impij, imo vero istorum subsidio vniuersum daemonum
genus omni studio incubuit, vt illud diuinum immortalitatis monumentum tenebris
obrueret, obliuioneque penitus deleret. Illud Seruatoris sepulchrum impij
quidem and scelerati homines ex hominum memoria delere cogitabant, and (quae
eorum ins^itia fuit,) censebant veritatem ad hunc modum se posse occultare.
Itaque primum permultum capere laboris caeperunt in terra aliunde and
extrinsecus inueh enda, qua locum vniuersum obducerent. Deinde cum molem terrae
in immensam altitudinem erexissent, constrauissentque lapidibus, diuinu^ sepul
chrum, inge^te aggere supra iniecto, obtegere, post, cum nihiliam illis ad opus
explendum deesset, super illum terrae cumulum, nefandum reuera and execrabile
bustum animarum construere, and recessum lasciuae veneris daemoni vna
aedificare, simulachrisque mortuis complere. Tum detestabiles ibi victimas,
super impuras aras, and omni nequiciae labe pollutas immolare. Nam non aliter
illud, quod instituerant, se putabant ad exitum posse perducere, quam vt per
ista nefaria scelera, salutare illud sepulchrum penitus obruerent.

10. And so far they had prevailed, by their most malicious prophaine
proceedings, in obscuring those sacred and holy Relics, and Instruments of
Christ's Passion, and Resurrection for man's Redemption, that allthough ever
since then there had been many Christians, and a continual Succession of
Bishops there 26. in number, from S. James to Macharius then Bishop by common
computation, this sacred Sepulcher wherein the blessed body of our Savior was
buried, and other honorable Monuments of him were so secretly buried, and
interred in the dark grave of oblivion, that they were utterly unknown as I
have remembered before, until it pleased God so to honor this Nation of
Britain, that he miraculously revealed them to the holy Queen and Empress
thereof. S. Helen, and by Eusebius and others also not improbably to
Constantine that glorious Issue of this Kingdom. For they say that he gave
order and commandment by divine instinct and inspiration, diuino afflatus
spiritu, Eusebius. l. 3. de vit. Constant. cap. 25. 26.
diuini numinis instinctu impulsus, to have all those prophaine and heathnish
vile Impurities by which their knowledge and honor were suppressed to be
removed, and abandoned.

11. In this sacred work peculiarly and most graciously by Gods divine
providence reserved for the perpetual glory of our Britans, the Emperor by
his highest terreane Power needful therein was chief Co^mander, and his
blessed Mother the principal happy effecting Commissioner and Instrument,
Filio suo (Constantino) ei (Helenae) opem per regiam suam potentiam, and
Authoritatem Cap. 42.
porrigente. And no other Potentate or whatsoever mighty and powerable in the
world, as Eusebius well notes, thought worthy to perfect that holy duty,
Nemo enim vel ex Praefectis, vel ex Ducibus, vel ex ipsis Imperatoribus Lib. 3.
cap. ^5. supr.
ad eorum conatus euertendos satis idoneus repertus est, praeter vuum solum:
qui quidem vtpote Deo omnium Guhernatori charus, and diuino eius afflatus
spiritu, locum omni impura materia obductum, and obliuione, ignorationeque
obrutum iri non est passus.

12. So that as Britain, allthough placed in the end of the world, and by
some accounted an other world, had above all Nations the honor to bury Saint
Joseph of Aramathia hear, who above all others had the honor to take down
from the holy Cross the sacred body of our Savior, embalme it, shrowde and
entombe it in his most holy Sepulcher: So it won this honor from the whole
world besides, to give life and being to that blessed Emperor, and Empress,
who took so long and great a Journey and labor: she in her old Age, to
propose and restore to due reverence and honor, the reverend and sacred
monument of the saving Resurrection of Christ, and his most holy Sepulcher, as
the Writers then affirm, those Relics Eusebius. l. 3. vit. Constant. supr. cap.
27.
were worthily called, Ipsum venerandum and sacrosanctum salutaris Christi
Resurrectionis monumentum, and sepulchrum quod merito sanctissimum appelletur.

13. As this work was undertaken by S. Helen with Pilgrimage, prayer, and
great devotion, as is before remembered, so Constantine did the like, Deo Cap.
25. supr.
adiutore inuocato. And so being armed they overthrow and pull down to the
ground all those Rampires, Temples, Idols, and whatsoever the Pagans had
there framed and erected to obscure, and keep from reverence the holy Relics
of Christ, and caused them with great charge and difficulty to be carried
far from the holy place, as infected with the impure contagion of devils,
Neque satis habebat Imperator, in istis solum rebus expediendis progredi, sed
rursus diuini numinis instinctu impulsus, iubet vt ipsum solum ad ingentem
altitudinem defossu^ quippe impura daemonum contagione infectu^ erat, for as
procul cum ipso aggere exportaretur.

14 When all these strange works of the Pagans were thus destroyed, and
removed in such manner, as I have related they were framed there, and the place
wholly purged until they came so low, as where our Savior was buried, they
found his holy Sepulcher, and near unto it, the Cross of Christ, and the
Title that was set upon it by Pilate upon a piece of wood, Jesus of Nazaeth
King of the Jews, and other two Crosses of them which were crucified with him:
So write Theodoret, Sozomen, and others; the first says: oppresso Theodor. l.
1. Hist. cap. 18. Sozom. Histo. Eccl. l. 2. cap. 1.
sepulchro iam apparente, visae quoque sunt iuxta Domicum monumentum tres
defossae cruces. Sozomen writes: vt primum locus ille Imperatoris mandato fuit
perpurgatus, in profundo quadam in part illius antrum, vnde Christus
resurrexit, emersit: in altera autem part eiusdem loci, tres inuentae sunt
cruces, and aliud ligniculum separatum quod tabulae gessit similitudinem verbis
and literis non hebraicis solum, verumetiam graecis and latinis inscriptum,
quae verba ac literae non aliud complecteba^tur, quam Iesum Nazarenum Regem
Iudaeorum. Haec ipsa verba sicut in sacro Euangeliorum libri commemoratum est,
mandato Pilati Praesidis, super caput Christi scripta fuerunt.

15. Socrates seems to affirm, that both the blessed Cross of Christ, as he
Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. cap. 13.
terms it, and the two others, as also the Table in which Pilate in diverse
languages did testify, that Christ was the King of the Jews, were all found
in the holy Sepulcher: Christi monumentum in quo sepultus est, and ex quo
resurrexit diligenter peruestigat, ac tandem, licet valde aegre, Deo tamen illi
opem ferente reperit, tres cruces in monumento offendit, beatam illam quidem,
in qua Christu^ expansus fuit: alteras duas quibus duo latrones suffixi
occubuerant. Cum quibus vna reperta est tabula Pilati, in qua varijs variarum
linguarum characteribus scripserat, palamque declar auerat, Christum crucifixum
Regem fuisse Iudaeorum.

16. This was warrant and testimony sufficient, that this Sepulcher was the
sacred Sepulcher of Christ, and that Cross to which the Table of Pilats witness
so recorded in Scripture belonged, was his holy Cross. But Christ Jesus who
had given by his sacred body sacrificed upon the one for man's Redemption, and
rested it in the other until he had happily obtained and won Victory over
sin, death, devil, hell, and damnation, so great sanctity and cause of
worship unto them both, gave a better and more sure a Miraculous witness unto
their revelation. Of the holy Sepulcher, Eusebius thus records: Eusebius. l. 3.
de vit. Constant. c. 27.
sepulchrum quod merito sanctissimum appelletur resurrectionis Seruatoris apt
propterea expressit effigiem, quod post tenebrarum caliginem, quibus quasi
sepultum iacuisset, in lucem de nuo prodijt, and illustrem sane miraculorum ibi
editorum visum, qui reuera omni voce clarius, Seruatoris Resurrectionem
testificatus est, sub aspectu eorum qui ad illud ipsum contemplandum veniebant,
subiecit. The sepulcher which worthily may be called most holy, did therefore
fittly express the likeness of the Resurrection of our Savior, because after
the dymnesse of darkness in which it had been as buried, came again to light,
and before the eyes of all which came to see it, showed a famous sight of
miracles there done, more clearly thereby then any voice testified the the
Resurrection of our Savior. So have others.

17. And the Prophecy of Esaias the Prophet was now perfectly fulfilled: That
the Gentiles should believe in Christ the Messiah, and his sepulcher should be
glorious: Ipsum gentes deprecabuntur. Et erit sepulchrum eius gloriosum. The
Hebrew Is. cap. 11. v. 10.
cabod, and Greek reading Timi, signifiing honor itself, are more evident
for honoring this holy Sepulcher, so long before most plainly prophesied. And
the holy Cross was as miraculously proved to be the true Cross of Christ, and
known from the others, by all Writers of that History. One Breui^r. Romans in
fest. Invent. S. C^ucis 3. Maij. Theod. Hist. l. 1. c. 18. Sozom. Histor. Eccl.
l. 2. c. 1. Socr. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 13. Ruffin. Hist. l. 1. c. 8. Niceph.
Call. Eccl Hist. l. 8. c. 29. Panlin. Nolan. Ep. 11. ad Sever. Seu. Hist. l. 2.
Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 1.
Miraculous proof amongst the rest they relate to have been in restoring to
health in public Assembly, before Macharius the Bishop there, and a great
multitude, a desperately diseased Noble woman, with only the touching thereof,
which neither of the other, (first trial made of them) could perform, Queen
Helen herself being present at this miracle. Nicephorus relating this miracle
as others do, writes further, how among the other Miraculous effects of the
holy Cross at that time, it being laid upon the body of a dead man, it
presently restored him to life, Dicunt quoque mortuo prorsus crucem impositam,
in vitam illum de repent reuocasse.

18. The honor and reverence which then, and after was given to this holy
Cross, was prophesied, and known even among the Gentiles, before the coming
of Christ, that it might not be any strange thing for Christians to perform
that duty, Ista vt olim praecognita a sanctis Prophetis, praeuisaque fuere:
sic postea factis plane admirabilibus tum confirmata, cum Deo tempus visum est
eiusmodi rebus opportunum, neque certe tantoperc mirandum est, praesertim cum
ipsi gentiles ingenue fateantur hoc esse Sibyllae carmen:

O lignum falix, in quo Deus ipsc pependit. Istud enim ita esse, nemo, etiamsi
acri studio-contra pugnare voluerit, pernegabit. Quare and lignum crucis, and
eius veneratio, a Sibylla praesignificata est.

19. And therefore our holy Empress to have the glory of this sacred Relike
more renowned, and diffused to many parsons and places, sent part of this
sacred Cross to her son, the other part she enclosed with silver and left it
in the place where it was to be reverenced there; Ligni ipsius salutaris partem
detulit filio, partem vero thecis argenteis conditam dereliquit in loco: quae
etiam nunc Ruffin. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 8.
ad memoriam solicita veneratione seruatur. And that part which Queen Helen
sent unto Constantine, was received and reverenced with no less honor by him,
esteeming that City wherein that precious Jewel was kept to be safe and sure:
ratus ciuitatem in qua illa seruaretur, omnino saluam and incolumem Socrac.
Hist. l. 2. cap. 13.
fore.

20. The like honor and reverence this renowned Empress and Emperor performed
and yielded to the holy Nails, not only wherewith the blessed body of Christ
was fastened to his Cross, but others also with which it was nailed together.
For both Theodoret, Ruffinus, Socrates and others are witnesses, Theod. Hist.
Eccl. l. 1. cap. 18. Ruffin. l. 1. Hist. cap. 8. Socrat. Hist. l. 2. cap. 13.
that S. Helen sent unto her son Constantine 4. such Nails at the least,
further entreating, how he disposed them for the defense and safeguard of
himself, by wearing them one his own Armor, and his horses which he used in
war against Christ's Enemies, such honor he gave unto these holy Nails, and
so great opinion he had of their virtue and power, they dividing them into two
parts and divisions, reackon either of them in the plural number, and
Theodoret, Sozomen, Nicephorus, and others do cite Zacharias the Prophet in
his 14. Chapter, where he plainly speaks of Christ Theodoret. supr. Sozomen.
Hist. l. 2. cap. 1. Niceph. Hist. l. 8. cap. 29. Matthew. Westminster. chron. an. 324.
Zachar. cap. 14.
to prophesy of the glory and reverence of these holy Nails, Imperatoris matter
Clauorum alios Galeae Regiae inseruit, qui praesidio essent capiti filij sui,
and hostiu^ tela repellerent, alios fraenis equestribus coniunxit, and Regi
protectionem parans and priscum vaticinium implens: longum enim est cum
Zacharias Propheta clamat: Et quod in fraenis fuerit, sanctum erit Domino
Omnipotenti. And yet Nicephorus says, that S. Helen sent not all, but some of
the holy Nails to Constantine: misit illa ad eum ex sacris clauis quosdam,
quos ad monumentum repererat. Nicephor. supr.


21. Therefore I must needs draw to be of this mind, that besides the three
holy Nails, with which Christ's most sacred body in the common opinion was
fixed to his Cross, there were others also thereto belonging, and reserved
with great Reverence. The Latin vulgar Translation in the place of Zacharias
reads as Theodoret, Sozomen, and Nicephorus before have cited and expounded
it: In die illa erit quod super fraenum equi est sanctum Domino. Like unto this
is the Greek and Hebrew text also, even as Protestants translate Zachar. 14.
v. 20. in Latin. Graec. and Hebr. textu. Sebast. Castal. ib. Et alij. Engl.
prost. ibid.
them, In eo die erunt equorum phaler ae fab ae sacrae. Our English Protestants
with King James his approbation read: In that day shall there be, upon the
bells of the horses Holiness unto the Lord. But the Greek and Hebrwe words
Chalinos and Metziloth do as plainly signify the bridle or bitt thereof, as
fraenum in Latin does, and so do the words for holiness. And the Hebrwe is to
be translated, fraenum aequi Sanctitas Domino. And howsoever the Hebrewe word
may be extended to signify tintinnabula, or any part of furniture then used
for horses of war, to which this holy Relike was applied, to make that to
which it was annexed holy, the Interpretation and Gloss of the remembered
Fathers is thereby sufficiently approved, and the holiness of those sacred
Nails and reverence due unto them, as plainly expressed in the Prophets words.

22. The great honor and reverence which was from that time used to the holy
Cross, the Fathers living in that Age do manifestly declare: S. Hierome did
think it to be a great dignity and happiness but to lick or kiss that
sacred wood: Crucis lambere lignum. S. Paulinus clearly testifies, that the
Bishop Hieron. Epist. 17. c. 8. Paulin. Nolan. Epist. 11. ad Seuerum. Cyrill.
Hierosol. Catech. 13. 4. 10. Cyrill. Eremit. in Vit. S. Euthimij. Paulin.
Nolan. Epist. 11. ad Sever. Ado Treu. in Martyrol. 3. Maij.
of Jerusalem did every year at Easter propose it to be adored by all
Pilgrims, and he himself was the chiefest worshipper thereof, Quam Episcopus
vrbis eius quotannis cum Pascha Domini agitur, adorandam populo, Princeps ipse
venerantium promit. And S. Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem in this time does often
witness, that the Pilgrims which came thither to worship this most holy
Relicke and others there, had carried parcels thereof into all places of the
world: Lignum Crucis per particulas ex hoc loco per vniuersum orbem sparsum
est: Yet notwithstanding, as S. Paulinus and others testify, that part of it
which remained in Jerusalem, from which parcels innumerable were taken, was
nothing diminished, but still remained in the first form and quantity, Crux
in materia insensata vim viuam tenens ita ex illo tempore innumeris pene
hominum votis lignum suum commodauit vt detrimenta non scntiret, and quasi
intacta permaneret, quotidie diuiduam sumentibus, and semper totam venerantibus.

23 Gregorius Turonensis, and other Au^cients write the like of worshipping
Greg. Turon. de Gloria Martyr. l. 1. c. 5. 6. 7. 8.
the Spear, Reed, Sponge, Crown of thorns, the Pillar to which our Savior
was bound and there beaten, and his Coat without seame. And how the holy
Thorns 500. years after Christ was crowned with them, were green and
flourished, Ferunt ipsas coronae sentes quasi virides apparere: quae tamen si
videantur aruisse folijs, quotidie tamen reuire scere diuina virtute. So I
might relate of other sacred Relics of our blessed Savior.

THE XV. CHAPTER.
OF THE GREAT AND WONDERFVLL zeal, and devotion of S. Helen our British
Queen, and Empress. The long and painful Pilgrimages she performed to many
far and remote holy places, and Reliks. The sumptious and manifold Churches,
Monasteries, and Oratories she founded in many places. And after her long and
holy life, her happy end and death.

1. BUT because I only write the History of Britain, I must leave those
things though never so memorable in themselves unto others, that be not
properly or principally belonging to this Country, or the worthy Natives
thereof, and yet not want means to make it truly one of the most renowned
Kingdoms of the world in this Kind of glory. And for this time, places, and
parsons I now speak of, it is an eminent and singular honor of this Land,
that the City and Temple of Jerusalem being both destroyed, and desolate for
^he sins of that people toward our Savior, as he had prophesied of them;
Matthew. cap. 24. Marc. cap. 13. Luc. cap. 22.
non relinquetur lapis super lapidem qui non destruatur, To be the Mother and
Nurse of that happy Empress and Emperor which labored so much in building
the new Jerusalem, the Church of Christ, that in honor of the very places
where our Savior was crucified, and buried, they builded so Noble Eusebius. l. 3.
de Vit. Constant. c. 32.
and renowned a City there, naming it also Jerusalem, that as Eusebius then
living, and a learned witness of the magnificence and glory thereof, testifies,
it was literally by some taken to be the glorious new City Jerusalem, so
renowned among the holy Prophets, Quae fortasse est recens illa and noua
Jerusalem, Prophetaru^ Oraculis praedicata, de qua vaticinationes pluribus
verbis explicatae, plurima spiritus sancti instinctu canere videntur. Which
Interpretation though it is not admitted, the holy Prophets speaking of the
internal glory of the Church Christ Jesus our Messiah, yet it much aduanceth
the external glory of that City, and honor of this Kingdom, to have such a
City so resembling the spiritual Jerusalem, builded in honor of Christ's
sacred Reliks, and memoryes founded so far hence by Princes of this Kingdom.

2. And allthough the Prophecy of Aggaeus, that the glory of the second house
should be greater then of the former, the old Temple of Jerusalem: magna erit
gloria domus istius nouissimae, plus quam primae, dicit Dominus, is commonly
understood of the spiritual splendour and glory of Christ's Church, yet Aggaeus
c. 2.
if we give but credit unto Constantine himself, and Eusebius, and other
Relators of his Edict and order for the building of the Church in the place of
Christ's burial, and Resurrection, and to what a wonderful excellency of
sumptuosnes it was erected, we shall not find it inferior to the Temple of
Salamon, but rather exceeding it in terreane resplendance. Constantine in his
Epistle to Macharius Bishop of Jerusalem, thus gives him charge, and
Constant. in ep. ad Machar. apud Eusebius. lib. 3. De Vit. Constant. cap. 30.
Socrates Hist. Eccl. l. 2. cap. 13. Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 17. Niceph.
Callist. Eccles. Hist. l. 8. cap. 30. Eusebius. supr. l. 3. cap. 28. 29. 30. 31.
32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39.
Power, the Emperor and Empress bearing the charges thereof, to make it far
more glorious and honorable then any Church in the world: par est vt tua
prudentia it a opus disponat, and provide res quasque accuret necessarias, quo
non modo Sanctuarium Te^pli reliquis omnibus quae vbique sunt, pulchritudine
antecellat: sed etiam caeterae eius parts tales sint, vt omnia templa quae in
singulis ciuitatibus Primas tenent, huius aedificij dignitate long superentur.
And gives commandment to all his Presidents, and Rulers in the Eastern parts
of the world, abundantly to provide and minister all things necessary for so
worthy a work, Gentium Praefectis Orientem versus habitantium mandat, vt
adiumentis necessarijs abundanter and copiose subministratis, opus eximium,
amplum, and magnificum fabricandum curarent.

3. Eusebius in diverse Chapters prosecuteth the magnificence, and excellency of
this Church, to as high a dignity as I have related, and yet confesses the
History thereof was so long, that he had not leisure to set it down, Quorum
apparatum tum magnitudine, tum multitudine, denique adeo artificiose
elaboratum, l. 3. supr. cap. 39.
sigillatim iam oratione prosequendi orium non datur. The Pillars, Pauement and
inward walls were of Marble stoane, the Ornaments and Monuments were almost
infinite, made of silver, gold, and precious stones, Monumentis auri, argenti
and lapidum pretiosorum materia distinctis, and quasi depictis, quae erant
numero Cap. 39. supr.
infinita, adornauit. The Roof was gilded, the holy Altares for the Sacrifice
of Mass were made of Gold, Aureis dives altaribus. The amplitude and greatenes
may be coniectured, when we consider it comprehended and contained Paulinus
Nolan. Epist. 11. ad Sever.
within the circuit thereof, both the place of Christ's death and Passion in
Mont Caluary, and the sacred Reliquarie of his Sepulcher, wherein he was buried
in a Gardaine distinct and separated from the other, as the Evangelist which
was present, witnesses, Erat autem in loco, vbi crucifixus est, hortus; and in
horto monumentum nouum, in quo nondum quisquam positus erat, ibi posuerunt Ioh.
cap. 19.
Iesum.

4. And the festival Dedication of this Church was as solemnly performed about
the 30. year of the Empire of Constantine, when this so termed great Church
of Jerusalem was finished, Circiter tricesimum annum Impe^ij Constantini, cum
templu^ Hierosolymis quod magnum vocabatur in Caluariae loco extructum esset: a
Council of Bishops being assembled at Tyrus in the Borders of Sozom. Histor.
Eccl. l. 2. c. 25.
Arabia, far from Jerusalem, Constantine wrote letters unto them by his
noble Secretary Marianus, to go to Jerusalem to consecrate this great new
Church: Marianus vir nobilis and Scriba Imperatoris, accedens Tyrum, concilio
tradidit literas, quibus erat mandatum, vt Episcopi quam maturime Hierosolymam
peterent, nouu^que templum consecrarent. Whereupon the Bishops went so long a
Journey to Jerusalem, and consecrated not only the Church, but also the
treasues and Momuments which were sent thither by the Emperor: which until
this time (says Sozomen) are preserved in that Church, and move much
admiration to the be holders, in respect of their magnificence and noblenes.
From which time the Church of Jerusalem does yearly with great honor
celebrate that festival day. Holy Orders are given in it, and the Celebritie
is kept 8. days together: and very many that come out of all parts of the
world to visit the holy places, resort thither in the time when this Octaue
Feast is there celebrated, Episcopi contendunt Hierosolymam, and non templum
solum verumetiam and the sauros and monimenta ab Imperatore illuc missa
consecrant: quae ad hoc tempus in eo templo manent reposita, multumque
admirationis propter suam magnificentiam and amplitudinem spectatoribus
excitant. Ex quo tempore Ecclesia Hierosolymitana quotannis diem festum
splendide admodum celebrat: adeo vt in eo initiationes sacrorum peragantur, and
dies octo deinceps conuentus fiant. Compluresque ex omnibus totius orbis terrae
partibus, qui vndique ad Sacra loca visenda confluerent, tempore, quo hic
festus dies celebratur, eo conuenirent.

5. This holy Empress left an other Noble memory of her Religious devotion at
Jerusalem: fecit and aliud dignum memoria laudatissima illa and suspicienda
Theod. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 18. Ruffin. Hist. l. 1. Sozo. Hist. Eccl. l. 2.
c. 1.
Regina. Which she showed toward two Sacred Nuns, and virgins in Jerusalem,
inuiting them to a banquet, waiting and ministering all things unto them in her
own person, and with her own hands, and she the Queen of the world and
Mother of the Empire, as Ruffinus notes, made herself the hand may de to the
maidens and virgins servants of Christ, Reliquit etiam hoc Indicium religiosi
animi Regina venerabilis: virgins quas ibi reperit Deo sacratas, inuitasse ad
prandium, and tanta eas deuotione curasse dicitur, vt indignum crederet, si
famulorum vterentur officijs, sed ipsa manibus suis, famulae habitu succincta,
cibum apponeret, poculum porrigeret, aquam manibus infunderet, and Regina orbis
ac matter Imperij, famularum Christi se famulam deputaret and haec quidem
Hierosolymis gesta.

6. Which humble reverence ^owards Religeous persons her Son Constantine
learned and practiced, especially toward Saint Anthony the Eremyte then
living, writing unto him, as to one of the Prophets, humble Letters, to
entreat him to pray for him, and his children, desiring to be commended unto
God, not only by his own merits and devotion of his Mother, but by the
Intercession of Saints, Constantinus ad Antonium Eremi habitatorem, Ruffin.
sup. c. 8.
velut ad vnum ex Prophetis, literas suppliciter mittit, vt pro se ac liberis
Domino supplicaret. Ita non solum meriti^ suis, ac Religione matris, sed and
Intercessione Sanctorum, commendabilem se Deo fieri gestiebat.

7. S. Helen did proceed further in these holy works, and besides this
Ruffin. Hist. l. 1. c. 8.
marvelous Church, as Ruffinus calls it, Regina templum mirificum in eo
loco, in quo crucem repererat, regia ambitione construxit: And she herself
named it new Jerusalem, Nouam Jerusalem nuncupabat: she builded others of
great Socrat. Hist. l. 2. c. 13.
honor in other places of Christ's memories, as one in Bethlem, where Christ
was borne, not inferior to the other so renowned, as Socrates and others
witness, and a third in the holy Montayne whence Christ ascended into heaven,
Matter Imperatoris simulac te^plum, quod nouam Jerusalem appellauerat, Socrat.
sup. Soz. Hist. l. 2. c. 1. Eus. l. 3. de Vit. Constable.
absoluisset, apud Bethlem in antro illo vbi Christus natus erat secundum
carnem, alteram Ecclesiam illo non inferiorem extruxit: quinetiam alteram in
monte vnde Christus ascenderat. This later was builded in the topp of Mount
Olyuet, In summo vertice montis Oleueti, vnde ad caelum Christus ascendit.

8. Besides these, Eus ebius then living writes, that she builded an other
Church, where as the Scripturs testify our Savior instructed his Disciples,
and Apostles in all Mysteries beneath mount Oliuet, Imperatoris Matter, quo
Eusebius. lib. 3. de Vit. Constable. c. 42.
omnium nostri Seruatoris in caelos Ascensionis memoriam celebraret, excelsa
quaedam aedificia in monte Oliuarum extruere parat: ac primum in summo totius
montis vertice Sanctuarium Ecclesiae Dei erexit: templumque in ferius etiam
exaedificauit in eo ipso antro, in quo vt vera and sacrata Dei testantur
Eloquia, Discipuli and Apostoli ^ Seruatore omnium Arcanis mysterijs initiati
fuerunt.

9. These two sacred places, others seem to make but one Church* and we may
reconcile Eusebius unto them, if we consider well his words, and the great
largnes which others give to the Church builded by S. Helen in Mount Oliuet:
For Eusebius says, she builded the Sanctuary one the top, and the Church at
the foot of the hill, and the whole building in, or about the Mountain, as
his words before are plain. And more plainly he says in the beginning of the
same Chapter, that S. Helen builded but one Church on Mount Eusebius. supr. c. 42.
40.
Oliuet, Duo dicauit templa: quorum alterum aedificauit in monte vbi
ascenderat, alterum ad obscurum illud antru^ Natiuitatis eius. So he does a
little before, saying this was founded with magnificent charge and ornaments,
Magnifico apparatu sumptuque. Quod fuit Christi in caelos Ascensionis
monumentum, in summo montis vertice situm, praeclaris ornamentis illustrauit.
Eusebius calls it templum memoria perpetua celebrandum, augustum and eximium,
a Church to be renowned with everlasting memory, noble and excellent: And as
others likewise do, compares and equalleth it, with that S. Helen builded in
Bethlem. Which as Socrates writes was not inferior unto that glorious Church
before described, which she erected at the holy Sepulcher, which she named new
Jerusalem, Matter Imperatoris simul ac templum, quod nouam Jerusalem
appellauerat, Socrat. Hist. l. 2. c. 13.
absoluisset, apud Bethlem alteram Ecclesiam illo non inferiorem extruxit: quin
and alteram in monte vnde Christus ascenderat.

10. And the building of the Sanctuary in the top of the Mountain, and the
body of the Church below these having contiguation together, and making but
one Church, proves no less. Seuerus Sulpitius calls it a most Magnificent
Church, Magnificentissima Ecclesia, in the same terms wherewith he Seuerus
Sulpitius Hist. sacrae l. 2.
remembers the Church of Mount Caluary and the sacred Sepulcher. Relating this
great miracle there still continued, that the place whereon the feet of our
Savior stood, when he ascended to heaven could not by any art or Industry be
Joined to the rest of the pauement: But when and whosoever attempted to cover
it, the marbell stones did presently miraculously bound against the faces of
the workmen, Illud mirum quod locus ille in quo postremum institerant diuina
vestigia, cum in caelum Dominus nube sublatus est, continuari pauimento cum
reliqua stratorum part non potuit. Siquidem quaecunque applicabantur, insolens
humana suscipere terra respueret excussis in ora apponentium saepe marmoribus.

11. This Author living in that Age, adds further, that the prints of
Christ's Feet were still seen in the sand, allthough the Pilgryms resorting
thither upon devotion in great abundance did carry away the earth where
Christ stood at that time of his Ascension, Cum quotidie confluentium fides
certatim Domino calcata diripiat, damnum tamen arena non sentiat: Et eadem
adhuc sui speciem, velut impressis signata vestigijs, terra custodit. Which
testified also by the ancient Bishop of France Arcuulfus an eyewitness
thereof in his Arcuulf. and Ada^nan l. de locis sanctis. Beb. l. 5. Hist. Eccl.
c. 18.
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, our learned Religeous Countryman Adamnanus, S. Bid
and others relate, In cuius Ecclesiae medio vltima Domini vestigia caelo
desuper patente vbi ascendit visuntur, quae cum quotidie a credentibus terra
tollatur nihilominus manet, eandemque adhuc speciem veluti impressis signatam
vestigijs seruat.

12. And they further witness, that the Roof of the Church by which Christ
ascended could not be covered, Interior domus propter Dominici corporis meatum
camerari and tegi non potuit. By which passage every year upon the Festiuitie
of Christ's Ascension, when the Sacrifice of Mass is ended, a storm of great
wind uses to descend and enforces all that be in the Church to lie prostrate
one the ground, In die Ascensionis Dominicae per annos singulos Missa peracta
validi flaminis procella desursum venire consueuit, and omnes qui in Ecclesia
adfuerint terrae prosternere. Sacrifice of Mass and prayer for the dead at an
especial Altar of such foundation.


13. They affirm that in these Churches there were many holy Altars, and among
the rest in the Church of Golgotha, there was an Altar one which Sacrifice was
specially offered for noble parsons newly dead, their bodies remaining in the
street during the time of Mass, Infra locum Dominicae Crucis excisa in petra
Crypta est, in qua super Altar pro defunctis honoratis Sacrificium solet
offerri, positis interim in platea corporibus.

14. She builded also at Jerusalem, but after the building of these and other
Churches in other places presently to be related, a most ample and spacious
Church both for breadth and lenght in Mount Syon. Within the Niceph. Callist.
Eccles. Hist. l. 8. c. 30.
Portch thereof, she enclosed round about the house, in which the doors being
shut the Disciples of Christ were gathered together for fear of the Jews, in
which Christ's his last supper, washing his Apostles feet, and the coming of
the holy Ghost was, and in which S. James was ordained first Bishop of
Jerusalem. In that Church also was the Marble Pillar, to which our Savior was
bound when he was whipped. One the left side whereof the Sepulcher of the
Prophet David was magnificently seated in an high place, In vrbem sanctam
reuersa in Sion amplissimum long lateque construxit Templum, in cuius Postico
domum conclusit, in qua, foribus clausis, propter metum Iudaeorum, Discipuli
fuerunt congregati: In qua etiam sacra caena peracta, sacraque pedum lotio, nec
non Spiritus sancti in caenaculo aduentus, in qua primus quoque Hierarcha and
Episcopus Iacobus renuntiatus est. In eo Templo Marmorea quoque fuit Columna,
ad quam cum flagellis caederetur, alligatus est Seruator. In cuius part
sinistra, diui Prophetae Dauidis sepulchrum magnifice in sublimi collocatum.

15. She founded an other Church to S. Peter Prince of the Apostles in the
Palace of Caiphas, In Palatio Caiphae, Petro Apostolorum Principi Templum aliud
constituit. She builded also Churches dedicated to the holy Infants, which were
putt to death for Christ, and where the Angel brought the gladd tidings of
Christ's Nativity, unto the Shephards and to the Mother of God, and an other to
S. Joseph her Husband, Sanctis itidem infantibus, and vbi Angelus Pastoribus
laetum attulit nuntium, in eis ipsis locis sacras extruxit aedes: Infantibus
videlicet ipsis, and verbi puerperae, necnon aliam quoque sponso Iosepho aedem.

16. And going to Bethania where Christ raised Lazarus from death to life, she
builded a fair Church to Lazarus the friend of Christ, Lazaro Christiamico
insigne aedificauit delubrum. About the Den where S. Ihon Baptist sometime
had a dwelling place, she erected unto him a very beutifull Church. And an
other at the Cliffe of the Mountain to Helias Thesbites. In the place where
Christ miraculously fedd five thousand men, she made a Church of twelve
Thrones, duodecim thronorum Templum statuit. In the places where the miracle
was showed in the Centurian, where the man sick of the Palsy let down by the
roof of the house was healed, where the miracle by seven loves of bread and a
few fishes was wrought, where Mary Magdalen was cured, in every of these places
she founded diverse Churches to the Apostles, Et quouis loco diuersa Apostolis
construxit Templa.

17. In the City of Tiberiadis, in the house of S. Peter his Mother in Law,
where she was restored to health, she builded a fair Church to S. Peter. So
she did in Mount Thabor, where Melchizedech is said to have blessed Abraham;
and an other most bewtifull Church in the place of Christ's Tra^sfiguratio^
there, to those three Apostles which were then present and beholded it, and
left much money there for the Inhabitants. Then she went to Nazareth, and in
the house where the Angel saluted the blessed Virgin, she erected a very
pleasant Church to the Mother of God, Dei genitrici peramaenum excitauit
Templum. And builded an other in Chana of Galilie where at the Matriage, Christ
did miraculously change water into wine. She founded an other at the Tree of
Mambre, where as certain fame and Tradition teach, Abraham met the Angels
going to the destruction of Sodom, and Isaac and Christ also were foretold to
come, this Church was most adorned, ornatissimum Templum, and all the horrible
Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Gentiles there practiced were quite abandoned.

18. The like she did at Aphaca, at the foot of Mount Libanus. So in Cilicia
and other holy places she builded other Churches above thirty in number, Quin
and plures Ecclesias alias, in sanctis illis locis, supra triginta, amantissima
Dei faemina Imperatoris Matter condidit, And that she might daily, whether
soever she went, even in the Wilderness itself, have always a Church to serve
God, and have the sacred Mysteries therein celebrated daily, she caused a
Church to be made of diverse linen clothes and carried about with her, as Moses
did the Tabernacle, non tantum Ecclesias e fundamentis terrae extruxit,
verumetiam pro suo erga Christum flagranti desiderio and amore, vt in
solitudine quoque sancta haberet Symbola, aedem sacram ^ varijs linteis fieri
curauit, eamque veluti priscus Moses, secum circumtulit.

19. Thus does Nicephorus and other Eastern Greek Writers recompt the Niceph.
Histor. Eccles. l. 8. c. 29. 3. Socrat. Hist. l. 2. cap. 13. Sozom. Hist. Eccl.
l. 2. c. 1. 2. Eusebius. l. 3. de Vit. Constantini.
Religeous labors and Foundations of this our renowned Queen and Empress,
assisted by the Authority and help of her glorious son, and how she also
made other maruaylous works in the pit of Hieremias and the well, Siloe in
fouea Hieremiae, and ad fontem qui Siloe dicitur, mirifica construxit opera.
And in all places she destroyed the Idols and Superstitions of the Gentiles. And
caused the Potters feilde mentioned in Scripture to be prepared for the burial
of strangers and Pilgryms, Postremo and agrum figuli apparari curauit in
aduenarum and peregrinorum sepulturam.

20. But our Latin and Western Writers better acquainted with the piety and
Acts of devotion, which S. Helen exercised in, and near this Kingdom, where
she was borne, then the Gretians and Eastern Historians so far hence, and
only setting down, as appears before, her labors and holy Pilgrimage in
the East, do recompt her such foundations to more then a double number of
those the Gretians remember. The old Author of our old English Chronicle
says: Helena the Queen Modor to Constantine repaired Old. Engl. Chro^. part.
4. fol. 38. page 2. Antiq. Eccl. S. Gereonis Colo^.
again the holy Cross, and she made 70. Colleges, and she glorified the state
of all holy Church. The Antiquities of S. Gereon his Church in Collen, say she
founded 72. beutifull Religious houses and Churches, and endowed them with
lands: Inuentrix sanctae Crucis almo Pneumate flante septuaginta duo Collegia
fundat amaena, dotans perpetuo Constantis Matter Helena. Among these she founded
one a very stately Church at Collen in honor of S. Gereon, and his Petr.
Merssaeus Catal. Elect. Eccles. in Annal. Archiep. Colon. and Carmin. in Valu.
Eccles. S. Gereon ^nsculpt. Antiq.
fellow Martyrs there in the Persecution of Diocletian and Maximian; two
others she founded at Bonna and Xanctos in Cliueland which were Monasteries,
Sancta Helena matter Constantini Magni inter alias Ecclesias, quas in toto orb
condidit, Coloniae permagnificum construifecit in honorem diuorum Gereonis
sociorumque basilicam: eadem quoque apud Bonnam and Xanctos in Cliuensium terra
instituit Collegia, quae ^lim Monasteria fuere. This was long before her
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, about the year of Christ, as these Antiquities
conceive 310. And at her being in the East Countries on her Pilgrimage she
obtained Annal. Archiep. Treueren. apud Petr. Merssaeum in Catal. Elect.
Ecclesiastic.
of S. Syluester Pope of Rome, that S. Agritius Patriarch of Antioch, a man of
wonderful sanctity and learning, mirandae sanctitatis and doctrinae vir, as
she had requested him instantia optimae Helenae, ac beati Syluestri Pontificis
iussu, might be sent Archbishop to Treuers, and was Primate of all Germany, and
France totius Germaniae ac Galliae Primas, Whom S. Helen furnished for his
Journey with many most precious Reliks, the Coat of Christ without seame, one
of the Nails, the knife which Christ used at his last supper, a great part
of the holy Cross, the body of S. Mathias the Apostle, and others, and
assisted this holy Bishop further in building other Oratories, and Churches in
that Country, and converted her Palace which she had at Collen unto a Church
dedicated to S. Peter, Cuius etiam Palatium in diui Petri Templum conuerti
fecit.

21. How great her devotion and bounty was in executing such holy works in
Britayne, her native and most beloved Country, we may make conjecture, though
our lost Histories have suffered their names in particular to be without
memory, by her unmatchable zeal and piety, in this kind to so remote and
strange Nations, so great a part of the number recited of her Foundations not
found in Histories except in Britain, and the great number of stately
Churches hear, either new founded or repaired, as I have before remembered, and
ritchly endowed both by restoring their old revenues unto them, which were
confiscate in the Persecution of Maximian and Dioclesian, which none but she
and her son, Empress and Emperor hear could do, and by giving new lands
and maintenance unto them, which she, Queen of Britain was best able to
perform, and better in other places in which she most honorably effected it,
allthough by assistance of her son, sole Franc. Modius. lib. de origin
ordinis Eccles.
Emperor, and Commander there, by his Imperial Election and Title When in
Britain she was Heir and Queen thereof, clayming therein nothing from her
son, but he from her: She also was then actually a Christian, and Constantin
not until diverse years after by common opinion. And Berengos. Abb. lib. 2. de
Invent. and laud Crucis cap. 11.
as Berengosus and others well and truly observe, allthough Constantine had
great care in building Churches, and builded many, yet his Mothers care was
greater herein then his, she builded more then he, and as one star exceeds
an other in brightness, so the Mother exceeded her son in meritts, Sicut
stella a stella differt inclaritate, sic matter a filio meritoru^ differt
enormitate. Si enim gesta vtriusque velimus pensare subtilius, coram Deo
maioris pretij creditur matter esse, quam filius. Quia postquam vtrique caelesti
reconciliati sunt, in construendis Ecclesijs Dei magna cura filio, sed mayor
inerat matri. Quamuis enim filius multas Ecclesias in Graecia construxisset, ac
Roma, quibus in the sauris and allodijs multa regalia contulit dona: matter
tamen vt adhuc diuersa Sanctorum testantur Martyria multo plures Ecclesias, in
Gallijs aedificauit, ac Syria. And therefore as this learned Author observes,
and experience in all places proves to testify her sanctity, Churches were
founded in all Countries in honor of her, Quapropter Ecclesiae in honore^ eius
Deo vbique sacratae been testantur, quanta coram Domino polleat sanctitate.

22. Therefore if S. Helen in this kind of piety exceeded her son, the most
potent, able, devout Emperor, that ever was in building Churches to God, and
his holy Saints, as all agree, building most sumpteous Churches almost in all
places, especially chief Cities, in alijs ocis fere omnibus pulcherrima Sozom.
Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 2.
Templa Deo aedificauit, tum maxim in vrbibus primarijs; we must needs make
his holy Mother the most excellent, that ever was in such devotions, and
bestow no small part thereof upon this her most beloved Country.

23. With what reverence she used the Religeous Nuns at Jerusalem, I have
before mentioned, and Franciscus Modius and others write, that she Francisc.
Mod. lib. de origin Ordinis Eccles.
foonded a Religeous Order of Nuns called S. Helens Order, there habit white
with a yallowe Cross, S. Helenae Ordo institutus est post Inuentionem
dominicae crucis, ab Inuentrice eius Helena Constantini Magni matre sub
Syuestro 1. Pontifice, donatusque vest alba, and in ea cruce crocei coloris.
Thus she perseuered in her painful Pilgrimages, allmes, holy foundations,
devotions and piety, until about the 80. year of her Age, and then returning
unto her son, and giving him many precepts of piety, and her last blessing,
went out of this into a better life, His and alijs consimilibus peractis,
redijt ad filium, and multis praeceptis Theodor. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 18.
Sozom. Histor. Eccl. l. 2. cap. 1. Eusebius. l. 3. de vit. Constant. Socrat. l. 2.
c. 13.
de pietate filio datis, valedicendique benedictionibus comsummatis, ex hac
vita in meliorem transi^t. And was not only rewarded of God with eternal
felicity in heaven, but had such honor and renown also hear on earth that
greater she could not have: she was Empress, the Coin stamped with her Image,
she had power over the Imperial Treasure, to use it at her pleasure, and being
gloriously to dye about fourscore years old, left her son Emperor, and
grandsonnes Caesar's, and the better to perpetuate her memory on earth, two
Cities were founded of her name, one in Bithinia, the other in Palestina, Pro
quibus rebus videtur digne a Deo remunerata esse. Nam vita quam hic degebat,
eius generis fuit, vt neque splendidior, neque illustrior esse potuerit.
Augustaitem fuit appellata, eiusque Imagine nummi signati. Thesauri quoque
Imperatorij potestatem a filio adepta, eo pro arbitratu vsa est. Mortem
gloriasam obijt tum, cum and annos circiter octoginta confecisset, and filium
simul cum nepotibus Caesaribus totum Imperium Romanum gubernantem post se
relinqueret. Denique nomen eius iam mortuae, obliuione minime obrutum est: sed
sunt duae vrbes: altera in Bythinia, in Palestina altera, vtraque eius nomine
nsuncupata, velut pignus ad illius memoriam perpetuandam aetati posterae
relict^.

24. At her death her son so great an Emperor diligently waited on her, and
held her hands, and so most blessed woman she seemed unto wisemen not to dye,
but leave a worse for a better life, Suo filio tanto tamque eximio Imperatore,
ipsi praesto assistente, sedulo inseruiente, and manus ipsius tenente, finem
ita viuendi fecit, vt beatissima quidem iure optimo, non mori prudentibus
videretur, sed vitam caducam and fragilem cum caelesti and aeterna reuera
commutare. Her body Eusebius. lib. 3. de vit. Constable. c. 46. Martyrol. Romans 18.
Aug. Socrat. Hist. l. 2. cap. 13. Niceph. l. 8. c. 31.
honored with renowned obsequies, attended with a wonderful company of wayters
on it, was so conveyed from Rome, unto Constantinople, and there laid in an
Imperial Sepulcher, Eius autem Tabernaculum splendidis exequijs decoratum, nam
maxima satellitum turba ad ciuitatem quae principem locum tenet Imperij,
deportatum fuit, ibique regali Sepulchro conditum.

25. As she is glorious in heaven, so on earth her Feast in the Latin Church
is Martyrol. Romans supr. Vsuard. and Ado. eod. die Menolog. Graec. 12. Call. Iul.
Inscript. Antiq. ante valuas Eccles. S. Gereonis Colon. Petr. Merssaeus Catal.
Elect. Eccl. in Archiep. Colon. Io. Pitseus de Illustr. Brit. Scr^pt. aetate 4.
in sancta Helen. Io. Bal. l. Script. Brit. centur. 1. in Helen. Flauia.
celebrated the 18. day of August, in the Greek the 20. of June: and in old
Monuments proposed for, and most honorably and singularly named a Pattern and
Example for great Kings and Princes, and an Empress full of grace: as in the
old Church of S. Gereon, in Collen one of her Noble foundations.

Regibus Exemplum Sacroque Chrismate Plena,
Condidit hoc templum Sancti Gereonis Helena.
Consta^tinus Manasses calls her, faeminam beatissima^. A late English Writer
writes, that from Christ to her time there scarcely was to be found a woman
more adorned with all virtues, and learned in all sciences, A Christo nato
vsque ad illud tempus vix viderat sol faeminam omnibus virtutibus ornatiorem,
and in omnibus scientijs doctiorem. And to give unto her Protestants praises,
not too lavish in commending such holy Saints, they are enforced to confess:
Helena Augusta Seremissimi Coeli Regis haeres and vnica filia, Magni
Constantini Caesaris matter, incomparabili decore, fide, Religione, bonitate and
pia magnificentia (Eusebio etiam test) per totum resplenduit orbem. Inter
omnes aetatis suae faeminas, nulla inueniebatur ea in liberalibus artibus
doctior, nulla in instrumentis musicis peritior, aut in linguis Nationum
copiosior. Innatam habebat ingenij claritudinem, oris facundiam, ac morum
ornatissimam compositione^, hebrice, graece, and Latin erudita. Marito
Constantio Chloro Caesare Eboraci defuncto, cum Anna illa Euangelica in sancta
viduitate perdurauit ad vltimum vitae diem, tota Christianae Religioni dedita.
Sunt enim Authors qui narrent peristam cessante persecutione, pacem Ecclesijs
datam, ad tantam Philosopbiae cognitione^ eam ferunt peruenisse, vt ediderit de
Prouidentia Dei, Librum vnum. De immortalitate animae, librum 1. etc. The
Empress Helena Mother of Constantine the Emperor for her incomparable beauty,
faith, Religion, goodness, and pious magnificence, as Eusebius himself
witnesses, was renowned throughout all the world. Among all woman of that Age
none was found more learned in Liberal Arts, none more skillfull in musical
Instruments, none more copious in the languages of Nations. She had a natural
promptnes of wit, eloquence of speech, and most commendable conversation in
life. Excellenlly learned in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. Her husband
Constantius Chlorus Emperor dying at York with holy Anne, spoken of in the
Gospel, she perseuered in holy wydowe hood until her death, wholly devoted
to Christian Religion. And Authors say, that by her, peace was given to
Churches. She is reported to have come to so great knowledge in learning, that
she wrote a Book of the Providence of God: one, of the Immortality of the
soul: one, the Rule of well living. One of Epistles to her son Constantin:
one of her Revelations: one to S. Anthony the Abbot: one of Greek Pontic.
Virun. Hist. Brit. l. 5.
verses, extant in Ponticus Virunnius his time, as he writes, extant adhuc
Carmina quae dam graeca quae illius fuisse perhibentur. Thus this glorious
Saint and Empress ended her life so holy and virtuous, as Sozomen writes,
that none could Sozomen. Hist. Eccl. lib. ^. cap. 1.
be more honorable and renowned then it was: vita quam hic degebat eius generis
fuit, vt neque splendidior, neque illustrior esse potuerit.

26. Baronius and the Roman Writers dare not for certain deliver, or in Baron.
and Spond. Annal. an. 326.
particular set down the year of her death, but say it is not known: quoto
anno Domini defuncta fuerit incompertum habetur. But our English Historians
both Catholics and Protestants are more confident, and say, she dyed in the
337. year of Christ, being then as others also testify 80. years old,
Octogenaria Io. Pitseus aetat. 4. in S. Helena Ioh. Bal. l. de Script. Britan.
in Helena Flauia. Baron. and Spond. supr. Sozomen. l. 2. Hist. cap. 1. Eus. l.
3. vit. Constable. cap. 45. Eusebius. l. 4. vit. Constable. Baron. and Spo^d. Annal. an.
335. Marian. Scot. aetat 6. an. 385. Eusebius. supr. cap. 40. Socrat. Hist. Eccl.
l. 1. cap.
obdormiuit in Domino quinto Calendas Septembris, anno Redemptionis humanae
337. And Baronius does not write to the contrary, but rather inclines to
confirm it, when writing of the year of Christ 326. he boldly affirms she
lived some years after that time, Haud tamen affirmare dubitamus adhuc aliquot
post haec vixisse annos. And that she lived until the 335. of Christ, or
after, it is evident by Eusebius, Sozomen and others, affirming that she left
her three Nephews, sons of Constantine, Caesar's when she dyed. And yet it is
manifest by Eusebius and others, that Constans his youngest son was not
Caesar until the 30. year of Constantine, when his Tricennall Feast was kept
in the 335. year of Christ, the eldest, Co^sta^tine being created Caesar in
the 10. year of his Empire at the decennall festiuitie, and Constantius the
second in the 20. year when the vicennall Feast thereof was celebrated, Cum
triginta ipse annos in Imperio compleuisset, filij eius numero tres Caesares
diuersis creabantur temporibus. Primus qui Patris erat cognominis decimo
paterni Imperij anno honorem hunc adeptus est. Secundus, Aui nomine appellatus
Constantius vicesimo fere Imperij paterni anno, quando publicus solennisque
omnium hominum conuentus agebatur, renuntiatus est. Tertius Constants suit, qui
tricesimo paterni regni anno ad honorem euectus est. The Age of S. Helen by
Eusebius and others about fourscore years old, octogesimum fere aetatis suae
annum confecisset, does prove as much, for as is proved before, she was a young
Virgin when she was married to Constantius, about the year of Christ's
Nativity 272. And the Age of Constantine her son, being above 30. years of
Age before he was Emperor, and reigning Emperor no less time gives good
allowance unto it, suruiuing after her death, by all accounts. To which the
reckening of Onuphrius and Onuphr. in Roman. Principib. page 57.
others, that Constantine the Great was borne in great Britain in the year
of our Lord 272. according to my account before, gives more confirmation.

THE XVI. CHAPTER.
OF THE HOLY DEVOVTE LIFE OF Constantine, his Religion in many particulars. His
death glorious, and not so soon as some relate it.

1. SOME late Writers grounding upon the Relation and Authorie Socrat. l. 1.
Hist. cap. vlt. 26.
of Socrates, do seem to hold, that Constantine dyed the same year 337.
Felicianus and Titianus being then Consuls, Anno Christi trecentesimo trigesimo
septimo Feliciano Baron. and Spond. Annal. an. 337.
and Titiano Co^ss. Constantinus Imperator ex hac vita migrauit, vt diserte
Socrates testatur, addens and diem nempe vndecimum Kalendas Iunij. But I cannot
assent either unto Socrates, so to think nor this Constantin^ the Great died
not so soon as some recompt.
Interpretation of him, for the reason for which Baronius and Spondanus assent
unto him; for that after this year, Laws were rather found inscribed in the
name of his Sons, then of Constantine their Father: Vt Socratis
Chronographiae de die and Co^ss. consentiamus, illud imprimis maxim persuadet,
quod leges posthac datae nominibus filiorum reperiantur inscriptae potius qua^
ipsius Constantini Patris. For Eusebius then living does witness, that
Constantine did give this Power, and Authority, whilst he lived, Liberum eis
fecit vt per se aliquid Eusebius. l. 4. de vit. Constable. c. 52. and l. 10. Hist.
cap. vlt.
ad Reipublicae vtilitatem gererent. And this is evident by the example, and
instance it self, which these Authors object, that Laws were made in the
Month of December in the year of these two named Consuls Felicianus and
Titianus in the name of his Son Constantius: Leges extant in Cod. Theodor.
datae a Constantio ijsdem huius anni Co^ss. mense Decembri. For Socrates their
holds, that these Consuls were in the next year to the Tricennall Feast, as
they affirm, when Eusebius a present living witness, and acquaintance to
Constantine the Great and others affirm, that Constantine was Emperor almost
32. years, much more then a year after his Tricennall Feast, Duos and
triginta annos, extra paucos menses and dies, cum Imperio fuit. Eusebius. l. 4. de
vit. Constable. supr. Theodoret. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 31.
And these Authors themselves which pretend to follow Socrates do much differ
from him, in their Account in this matter, for they plainly teach, that the
Tricennalia of Constantine wherein his youngest Son Constans was created
Caesar, were kept in the 335. year of Christ, Anno Christi trecentesimo Baron.
and Spond. Annal. an. 335.
trigesimo quinto celebrata sunt Tricennalia eiusdem Constantini, and Constans
tertius eius filius ab ipso creatus est Caesar. And then bring in the named two
Consuls Felicianus and Tiatianus, as also the death of Constantine to have been
in the year 337. when Socrates says plainly, that in the immediate next
year to the Tricennall anno post, both those men were Consuls, and Constantine
Socrat. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 25. 26.
dyed, Anno post Constantinus mortem obijt Feliciano and Tatiano Co^ss. ad
vndecimum Calendas Iunij. Which cannot possibly agree together.

2. Besides the opinion of those two to be Consuls in either of these years is
very doubtful, and not to be followed for certain; for both Marianus Scotus,
Florentius Wigorniensis and others confidently write, that their year of
Consulship was before the Tricennall year of Constantine in the 29. year of
Constantine, and 334. of Christ: Anno Christi 334. and 29. Constantini. Co^ss.
Faelicianus Titianus. And that Vrsus and Polemius were Consuls in the next
following Tricennall year, and in the year 336. wherein as Socrates says,
Felicianus and Titianus were Consuls, and Constantine dyed, not they or any one
of them but Constantius and Constans were Consuls. And the year 337. in which
by Baronius and Spondanus, Constantine deceased, in the Consulhips of
Felicianus and Tatianus, neither of them, but Acindinus or Aridinus Marian.
Scotus aetat. 6. an. 334. 335. 336. Florent. Wigorn. Chron. in ei^d. Consulib.
and Proculus were Consuls.

3. Therefore diverse English Historians do confidently hold, both Catholics
and Protestants, that Constantine lived until the 339. or 340. year of
Christ: And both Eusebius, Theodoret, and others deliver unto us so many
Edicts, Acts, and worthy labors of this renowned Emperor after his Tricennall
year, and the time of his death by Socrates, that we must needs hold, he lived
longer after that time then he prescribes. This is manifest in the History
Matthew. Westminster. an. 340. Stowe and Howes Hist. Romans in Constable. Pits. l. de
Illustr. Brit. Script. in Constable. Magno. Bal. centur. 1. in Flauio Constant.
of that most glorious man S. Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria his unjust
Banishment unto Treuers in Germany, and honorable restoring again after two
years, and four months Exile at Treuers, as Theodoret and others testify,
Diuus quidem Athanasius post annos duos, and quatuor menses Treuerensis exilij
Alexandriam redijt. Yet Baronius and Spondanus freely grant that he was
bannished in the 336. year of Christ, when by Socrates reckening Constantine
the Great dyed. When Theodoret says plainly, that this great Constantine
restored S. Athanasius by his Decree: restituit autem Alexandriae decreto suo
Athanasium, quamuis adesset Eusebius and summis Theodoret. l. 2. Histor. cap. 1.
viribus dissuaderet. And Sozomen also does evidently testify, that the Great
Constantine in his life time commanded S. Athanasius to be restored, and so
left it in his last Will and Testament, and records this return of S.
Athanasius as the first matter of moment done after his death, Dum haec
geruntur, Theodoret. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 31.
Athanasius ex Gallia, ad solemn Occidentem vergente, Alexandriam reuertitur.
Quem Constantinus, dum adhuc maneret in vita, reuocari in patriam iusserat.
Fertur etiam, eum hoc idem in Testamento suo praecepisse. Which Constantine the
Son then ruling in those parts speedely and honorably for S. Athanasius
performed, testifying in his Public Letters extant in the Works of S.
Athanasius, Sozom. Histor. Eccl. l. 3. cap. 2.
Theodoret, Sozomen, and Socrates himself, that it was his Fathers Ordinance
and Command, Cum Dominus noster faelicis memoriae Constantinus Augustus Pater
meus haberet in animo Episcopum illum ad propriam Sedem locumque restituere,
and morte ante occupatus occumberet, quam id quod erat sibi in optatis,
Epistol. Constable. filij apud Athan. Apol. 2. Theod. l. 2. c. 2. Sozom. l. 3. c.
2. Socrat. l. 2. c. 2. Niceph. Hist. Eccl. lib. 9. c. 3. and l. 8. c. 54.
explere posset: consentaneum existimaui, vt ipse institutum tam pij
Imperatoris mihi exequendum susciperem.

4. And the same Socrates manifestly proves, that this return of S.
Athanasius to Alexandria from Treuers after his so long continuance there, was
presently upon the death of Constantine the Father, so soon as the certain
notice thereof did come to his son Constantine in France. Eusebius sets
down many memorable things of this great Emperor done by him yet living
after the time of his supposed death by Socrates. Namely the marriage of his
second son with great sumptuousnes, the Father Emperor leading his son by
the hand to that Solemnity, the Ambassages and gifts sent Eusebius. lib. 4. de
vit. Constable. c. 49. 50. 51. 56. 57.
unto him from the Indians. His dividing the Empire between his sons. His
daily making of Laws, both concerning civil and warlike affairs, assidue
leges ferebat, aliquando de rebus ciuilibus, aliquando de bellicis. He prepared
his great Expedition against the Persians, in so forcible and victorious
manner, associating diverse Bishops with him to give assistance both by their
counsel and prayers, that the Persians understanding thereof, fearing
themselves not able to make resistante, sent Ambassadors unto him, to entreat
for peace; Oratores ad eum de petenda pace mittebant, which they obtained upon
conditions for the quiet of Christians among them.

5. Among these provisions he caused a moveable Church magnificently to be made
to carry with him in his Army for his Clergy and himself to serve God in, Ad
bellum illud suscipiendum, Tabernaculum ad Ecclesiae similitudinem
magnificientia faciendum curauit, in quo Deo victoriarum datori, ipse cum
Episc^pis supplicaret. And further to explode the error which holds he was
not baptized until a little before his death; when these Ambassadors came
unto him, it was the holy time of Easter, and Constantine watched all night
with Constantine his great devotion at the feasts of Easter.
other Christians in the Church, magna agebatur diei Pasch^ eo tempore
celebritas: and Imperaror cum caet^ris pernoctans, vota precesque Deo
persoluebat. And this custom he yearly used in this great Festiuitie, as the
same Author, and present witness thereof, thus testifies, Statis quotidie
te^poribus, soluscu^ sololoquebatur Deo Cap. 21. 22. supr.
and supplici voce in genua proiectus, humili vultu, and deiectis oculis a Deo
petebat, ve quibus egeret rebus, per illum consequeretur. Sed hanc Religionis
executatione^ salutaris festi temporibus auge^s, omnibus viribus cum animi tum
corporis diuinos sacroru^ ritus obibat: quasi qui huius magnae solemnitatis
exemplu^ omnibus praeberet. Nocturna^ vero in hoc festo per vigilatione^ tam
claram reddidit, quam diurna^ lucem: accensis tota vrbe per certos homines,
quibus hoc munus delegatum fuit, quam celsissimis cereis ca^delis, etiam
la^padibus, igneis omnes latebras collustra^tibus vt ill^ mystica pernoctatio
long clarior ipsa solis luce redderetur. Ad hunc modu^ Deo ille s^o quasi
sacerdos quidam sacra faciebat. He did daily at certain usual times humbly
upon his knees pray unto God, but this exercise of religion he increased in the
times of the Feast of Salvation with all The ceremony of lights in the Church
used by Constantine in great abundance of them, and watchings.
power of soul and body, executing the sacred ceremonies, giving as it were an
example unto all of this great Solemnity. In this Feast he made the watching
in the night, as bright as the light of the day, most high wax condels were
set up burning in all the City, as also la^pes shyning in every corner, diverse
me^ being assigned to execute that office. So that this mystical watching
through all the night was made far more bright then the light of the son.
After this manner, as if he had been a Priest he served God.

6. Upon the opportunity before remembered of the King of Persia, sending
Constantine procures quiet for the Christians in Persia.
Ambassadors unto Constatine to procure peace, he also wrote unto that King
Sapores, that the Christians in his Dominions, which were there in great
numbers at that time, cum accepisset apud Persas frequentes esse Dei Ecclesias,
and infinitum pene populum Christi gregibus contineri: might live at liberty
and freedom Eusebius. l. 4. supr. Sozomen. lib. 2. Hist. cap. 14.
for their Religion. And if we may believe Eusebius then living, and best
knowing the affairs, and proceedings of this most Noble Emperor, after all
these things were compassed, and brought to end, he began that glorious and
renowned work and foundation of the most sumptuous Church of the twelve
Apostles in Constantinople: vbi iam haec peracta fuerunt omnia, Eusebius. supr c.
58.
Apostolorum templum in fui cognomine, ad perpetuam illorum memoriam
conseruandam, aedificare caepit. Where it is evident by this then living
Author, and witness, that he did not begin to build this Church until long
after his tricennall Feast, first finishing and ending those things I have
remembered, and others. And yet the glory and statelines of that work, as it is
described by the same Writer, was such, that it could not be effected and
finished in many years, Cap. 60. supr.
and yet that it was finished before his death, it is certain, for he there
erected a Tomb for his own body to be buried in, and there was interred,
Cappas He erecteth stately Images of all the Apostles.
illic duodecim quasi sacras quasdam columnas ad Apostolici Collegij honorem
memoriamque attollens, medium inter ipsos conditorium suum locabat, quod
vtrinque seni claude^ant Apostoli: sano, certe vt dixi, consilio praecogitans
quod mortui corporis Tabernaculum ibi digne decenterque quiesceret, atque haec
ille longo ante tempore cogitatione cum depinxisset, Ecclesiam Apostolis
dedicauit, quamplurimum vtilitatis illorum memoriam animae suae conciliaturam
existimans. There he erected (says Eusebius) Constantine held* prayers and
protection of saints in heaven and help to the dead by them. And prayer for the
dead by the living.
twelve monuments to the honor and memory of the twelve Apostles, and in the
midst between them he placed his own Tomb, which six Apostles compassed on
either side. Suerly as I said before, considering with discreet counsel,
that the Tabernacle of his dead body should worthily and decently rest there.
When he had considered these things long time before, he dedicated the Church
to the Apostles, thinking that their memory would bring much profit unto his
soul. Thus far this Author then living: and where he mentions, he spoke
before, vt dixi, of this matter, that which he said; is this, that Constantine
by this manner of burying his body, did with incredible fervor of faith
provide, that after he was dead, he might be made partaker of the prayers which
should there be offered to the glory of the Apostles: incre^ibili fidei
propensione prouidens, cum iam corpus suum communem cum Apostolis appellationem
post mortem participaret, fore vt defunctus quoque precationum quae ibi essent
ad Apostolorum gloriam offerendae, particeps efficeretur. Socrates also says,
that Constantine builded this Church, that Emperors and Priests might not be
destitute of the Reliks of the Apostles, Quam Socrates Histor. Eccl. lib. 1.
cap. vlt.
quidem Ecclesiam ob eam ipsam causam Constantinus aedificauerat, ne
Imperatores and Sacerdotes Apostolorum Reliquijs aliquando destituerentur. And
to that end he Constantine reverenced Relics.
caused many Reliks of the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, and diverse of
their bodies, as S. Andrews, S. Lukes, and S. Tymothies, to be kept their and
many S. Hierom. l. de Script. in Luca and aduers. Vigil. and in Chronic.
Chrysostom. orat. quod Christus sit Deus. Baron. and Spond. Annal. in an. 336.
Emperors were after buried there.

7. And both Baronins and Spondanus confess, that Constantine did not begin
this great and wonderful work, until the 336. year of Christ, and after
his concluding peace with the Persians, had not before so much as resolved it,
Pace ab eis per Legatos petita, and obtenta, ad aedificandam Constantinopoli
Apostolorum Ecclesiam in qua sepeliretur, adiecit animum: quam
magnificentissime construxit, and aere texit. Therefore this Church being so
costly and magnificent, as these men confess, and Eusebius at large proves,
and yet Constantine lived to see it Roofed and quite finished, he must needs
live a longer time, then until the next year, the 337. of Christ, which they
limit unto him, to live, and much more longer then Socrates their Author
continues his life: for by his reckoning, setting down his death the same
year, wherein the Persian Ambassadors came to him for peace, we must be forced
to say, this admirable Church was quite finished in the space of seven weeks;
or if we should adventure as Baronius does to make Socrates our Author, and
yet add unto his account a whole year, as he does, it must needs be yielded
unto, by such calculation, that it was not begun, or any materials prepared for
it, and yet quite finished within one year and seven weeks: for, as before it
was not begun at the Feast of Easter, and yet ended the same year by Socrates
before the Feast of Pentecoste, when by Eusebius Constantine dyed, and by
Socrates the eleventh of the Calends of June the 22. day or May: mortem obijt
ad vndecimum Calend. Iunij. And by Baronius before the Feast of Pentecoste,
Eusebius. l. 4. de vit. Constant. cap. 64. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. vlt.
and the 22. day of May in the year following, which is morally impossible to
be true. For besides the amplitude thereof, and ornaments therein, Eusebius who
had feene it, and knew the building of it, says that Constantine erected it
to an infinite altitude: and made it from the ground with all variety of
Stones, even to the topp, the roof was curiously wrought and within covered
Eusebius. supr. cap. 69.
with gold throughout, and covered above with brass and much gold, Illud vero
cum in infinitam extruxisset altitudinem, lapidumque omnis generis ac crustarum
varietate, ab ipso solo ad superiorem contignationem collustrasset, summo
artificio factis laquearibus tectum intus complexus est, auroque vniuersum
contexit Supra vero pro tegula inductuctum as; a toto opere imbrium iniurias
arcebat. Quod ipsum etiam multo auro fulgebat, ita vt long Contemplantibus,
per reciprocatos solis radios incredibilis splendour offundi videretur.

8. And Therefore Nicephorus also a Greek Writer, who had diligently examined
Socrates, and cites his very words of this matter before related: vicesimo
Niceph. Hist. Eccl. l. 8. cap. 54.
primo me^sis Maij Die, Feliciani, and Tatiani Co^sulatu, affirms plainly,
and constantly, notwithstanding that opinion, that Constantine did not dye
until the 342. year of Christ, A natiuicate Domini tum agebatur annus
trecentesimus quadragesimus secundus. In the Feast of Pentecoste, toward the
end of it Cap. 55. vlt. supr.
about Noone time of the day, to speak in Eusebius his words, this Emperor
Eusebius. lib. 4. vit. Constable. cap. 64.
was received to his God, leaving his mortal part, like to other mortal men,
to the earth, but joining his intelligent and divine part of his soul unto
God, huius celebritatis sacratae Pe^tecostes extremo fere Die Imperator ipsa
meridie ad Deum suum assumptus est, partem sui mortalem mortalibus cognatam
relinquens humi, sed animi partem intelligentem and diuinam Deo coniungens suo.
He dying in Bythinia The great Christian pomp observed about Constantine his
dead body.
his Souldiars enclosing his body in a golden Coffe^, covered it all over with
purple, and conveyed it to Constantinople, and placed it in the Imperial
Palace, adorned with imperial Robes, Purple and a Dyadeame, lights set upon
golden Candlesticks round about it, which gave such an admirable show unto the
beholders, as was never seen, luminibus circum funus aurea supra candelabra
accensis admirabile spectatulum intuentibus praebebant, and sane eiusmodi,
quale numquam Cap. 66. supr.
in terris vllum a condito mundo sub sole visum est. All the Nobles of his Army
which worshipped him when he lived, kept their old manner and custom at
certain times entering in, and prostrating themselves one the groond saluted
the Emperor, after his death lying in his Coffen, as if he had still been
Great reverence given by the Christians to the de ad body of Constantine.
living. The Senate and all other Magistrates worshipped his body with like
reverence. All kind of people even women and children in infinite number came
to see this Solemnity, and these things were thus performed many days. This
blessed Emperor, was he alone, which reigned when he was dead; and to him
alone God himself being Author thereof, all honors which were wont to be
given him when he lived, were given after his death. For he being the only
Emperor, which in all the Actions of his life piously and Religiously
worshipped God, the King of all, and his son Christ Jesus, he alone by right
obtained this honor by the will of God, to have that which was buried in death
to reign among men, Totius exercitus Duces and Comites, omniumque Principum
caetus, quibus antea in more fuit Imperatorem venerari, pristinum morem and
consuetudinem conserua^tes, statis temporibus introeuntes, Imperatorem in
capsula iacentem tanquam viuum etiam post mortem humi procumbentes salutabant.
Horum reuerentiam eodem pietatis officio subsequutus est Senatus, and omnes
reliqui Magistratus. Tum vero cuiusuis ordinis hominu^ etiam muliercularum and
puerorum infinita turba ad idem spectaculum confluebat. Haec per multos dies
factitata. Solus vero iste beatus Imperator etiam mortuus regnauit: cum ei soli
post hominum memoriam, vel ipso Deo Authore, omnes qui solebant, honores
tanquam superstiti tribuerentur. Number cum is solus ex omnibus Imperatoribus,
Regem omnium Deum, and Christum eius, omnibus vitae actionibus pie sancteque
coluerit: iure sane etiam hunc honorem solus adeptus est, vt Dei voluntate,
quod in eo morte sepultum erat, tamen apud homines regnaret.

9. They also made his Picturs, and in them worshipped him as though he Cap. 69.
were still living. And painted him as reigning in heaven, Neque haec voce
tantum and clamoribus significabant, verumetiam re ipsa declarabant: cum ea
vita functum pictis tabellis tanquam viuum colerent. Nam cum caeli effigiem in
tabella proprijs Constantine worshipped in his pictures after his death.
coloribus expressissent, depingu^t eum super caelestes orbs in ethaereeo
caelo requiescentem. Thus his body was honorably kept unburied, until his
son Constantius came, none of them being present at his death. Then being
with great solemnity brought to the Apostles Church, where the Priests and
people The Priests and others pray for the soul of their Emperor Constantine
deceased.
with tears and mourning prayed unto God for the soul of the Emperor,
Populus frequens vna cum Sacerdotibus non sine lachrymis, and sane magno cum
ge^mitu, preces pro animo Imperatoris. Deo fundebant. And so with sacred
ceremonies, and the sacrifice of Mass, and holy prayers he was joined to the
people Cap. 70. 71.
of God in heaven, Licet contemplari ter beatae animae tumulum Apostolici
nominis Mass said for him deceased.
appella^ione decorari, and Dei populum aggregari, diuinisque ceremonijs and
mystico sacrificio sanctarumque precationum societate perfrui.

10. Nicephorus writes, that the holiness and piety of this renowned Emperor
The Relics of Constantino work many miracles: so his Image.
were so Miraculously approved after his death, that God gave such an
infallible gift of healing and Miracles, both to his grave, and Image; that all
diseases whatsoever were certainly cured by the only touching of them, Magna
gloria bonorum conciliator Deus virum eum, veluti fidelem ministrum
accumulauit, Niceph. Hist. Eccl. l. 8. cap. 55.
sanationum and Miraculorum gratia and vrnae and statuae ipsius, quae in
porpheretici marmoris columna posita est immissa, vt deinceps nulla aegri tudo
contrectatis eis non cederet, and fides verbi illius Christi adimpleretur,
dicentis: ego glorificantes me, glorifi^^bo. The memorable works and
foundations of Christian piety, Arguments of Constantine his Religion, the
most honored Emperor that ever was.
Churches most sumptuous, Altars, Chalices, Patens, Candelsticks and other
vessels of gold and silver, which he founded, Privileges, Immunities and aims
which he bestowed upon Religion are innumerable. Eusebius has written his life
in 4. Books, and many others have entreated of them able in themselves to
minister subject of a whole History; therefore I must pass them over only,
saying in general with that Author of this Noble Emperor, Solus ex omnibus
Romany Imperatoribus, Deum omnium Regem incredibili Eusebius. l. 4. vit. Constable.
cap. 75.
pietatis studio honorauit: solus omni cum liberate vocis and linguae Christi
verbum personuit: solus vt ita dicam Ecclesiam eius praeter caeteras ab omni
aeuo honoribus effecit. Solus Impium multoru^ deorum ficticium cultum sustulit,
omnesque vias Idololatriae refutauit: Igitur and dum viueret, and postque est
mortuus, his honoribus cumulatus est, quales neminem aliquando nec apud Graecos
nec Barbaros, sed ne antiquissimis quidem Romanorum temporibus, cum neminem cum
isto conferendum vlla vnqua^ seculorum memoria nobis profuderit, adeptum esse
quisquam commemorare potest. Among all the Roman Emperors Constantine only
did with incredible fervor of piety honor God the King of all: he alone with
all liberty of voice and tongue sounded forth the word of Christ: he alone
that I may so say more then all the rest in all Ages endewed his Church with
honors. He alone took away the feigned worship of many Gods, and refuted all
the ways of Idolatry: Therefore he alone both when he lived, and after he was
dead, had such honors heaped upon him, that no man can make relation that any
man at any time either among the Greeks or Barbarians, or in the most ancient
time of the Romans obtained the like. It is not found in the memory of all
Ages, that any man was to be compared unto him. He left his three sons before
remembered to serve, and reign, Emperors after him in the S. Constantia
d^u^hter to Cons^an^ine an holy Nunne^ example to many Noble Nu^^^.
world, but his holy daughter S. Constantia, some call her Constantina, he
left to serve God in perpetual virginity among sacred Nuns, who as I have
insinuated before, being infected with Leprosy and going on Pilgrimage to the
grave of S. Agnes Martyred in the Persecution before Constantins time, and
there continuing in prayer all night, was Miraculously cured of her infirmity,
S. Agnes appearing unto her, and encouraging her according Ambros. sermon. 90. de
passione beatae Aguetis Virg.
to her name to be Constant in the faith and love of Christ: spe recuperandae
salutis venit ad Tumulum Martyris nocte, and preces fideliter fundebat. Quod
dum faceret, repentina sommi suauitate corripitur, and videt per vifum
beatissimam Agnetem talia sibi monita praeferentem: constanter Age Constantia,
and creed Dominum Iesum Christum filium Dei esse Saluatorem tuum, per quem modo
consequeris omnium vulnerum quae in corpore tuo pateris sanitatem. Whereupon as
S. Ambrose living in that Age, and others witness, Constantine at the request
of his cured daughter S. Constantia, there erected a Church and Tomb to S.
Agnes, and Constantia perseuered in virginity, and by her, many virgins both
mean and Noble and renowned received the holy veales, Perseuerauit autem
Constantia Augusti filia in virginitate, per quam multae virgins and mediocres
and nobiles and illustres Sacra velamina susceperunt. Our holy and ancient
learned Countryman S. Aldelmus with most honorable Titles remembers her among
the most Aldelm. l. de laudib. virginitat. cap. 25. Ado. Vienn. in Chron.
Fascicul. Temp. an. 294. Harris Hist. Tom. 4. Libell. de munificent. Constant.
Tom. 1. Council. Baron. and Spond. Annal. an. 330.
sacred virgins, saying that by her persuasion, and example, almost all the
daughters of the Roman Pretors, and almost all Noble and beutifull virgins
professed virginity, and among these Attica and Arthemia daughters of
Gallibanus, by others Gallicanus most potent in the Empire, Quarum genitore
Gallihano nullus in Romana Monarchia praestantior extitit. And cites the life
of S. Constantie written long before, Quod before de conuersatione illius
scripta opuscula produnt. She erected a Monastery of Nuns near the place
where she was cured, and there shutting up her self with many other Nuns,
served God with great devotion and sanctity of life in the same place all her
life: after her death, her body was buried by S. Agnes. Therefore I may boldly
say The honor of Britayne by the great Emperor Constantine.
with our Monk of Bury in his old verse of this most glorius Emperor:

Rejoice ye folks that borne be in Britain
Called otherwise Beutus Albion.
that had a Prince so notably sovereign
Brought forth and fostered in your Region, Ihon Lydga^e lib. 8. cap. 12.

That whilom had the domination,
As chief Monarch, Prince, and President
Over all the world from East to Occident.
THE XVII. CHAPTER.
THAT THE POPES AND CHVRCH OF ROME in this time were of the same Religion they
now are, and all Christian Catholics then professed the same with them, and the
Supremacy of that See Apostolic.

1. SOME even of our own Historians write, and namely the Monk of
Westminster, that S. Siluester continued Pope until the year wherein
Constantine deceased, and both of them died in the same year 340. That as they
had both labored together in their lives, for advancing the honor and Church
of Christ, so they died together Matthew. Westminster. Anno gratiae 340.
to receive the merited reward of their labors, Anno gratiae 340. magnificus
Imperator Constantinus vitam laudabilem glorioso fine terminauit. Quo etiam
Anno Sanctus Syluester, viam vniuersae carnis ingressus, migrauit ad Dominum.
Dignum plane and omnino conueniens, vt qui simul circa incrementum Ecclesiae
perseueranter laborauerant, simul reciperent promeritam pro labor
retributionem. And if we should approve the opinion of Baronius and Spondanus
so expounding Baron. and Spond. Annal. an. 314. S. Damasus in S. Syluestro to.
1. Council.
the old Roman Pontifical in this point, that S. Syluester entered the Papacy
in the year of Christ 314. Anno Christi trecentesimo decimo quarto Calendis
Februarij Syluester Romanus subrogatus, in locum Melchiadis sedere caepit, and
allow unto S. Syluester so long possessing thereof as the same Pontifical
does, three and twenty years, ten months, and 11. days: Syluester sedit
annis viginti tribus, Mensibus december, we should conclude in Baronius opinion of
the death of Constantine, that S. Syluester and Constantine died in one and the
same year, Baron. and Spond. supr. Anno. 337.
as Matthew of Westminster affirms, although not the same 340. in number
which he has delivered. But to follow the other opinion which seems more
common, and better pleases Baronius, Binius, and our Protestants also, Baron.
Annal. an. 336. 337. Binius annotat. in Marc. and Iul. lib. 1. Hier. in Chron.
Marian. aetat. 6. an. 333. Sozom. Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 19.
that after the death of S. Syluester before Constantine dyed there were two
othr Popes, Marcus and Julius, the first being Pope a very short time, but 8.
Months by S. Hierome and Marianus: by Sozomen, a little space, Cum Marcus post
Syluestrum ad exiguum tempus Episcopatum Romanum gessisset, Julius in illam
Sedem successit. And Julius was Pope but in the last year of Constantine,
being as these Authors hold, the first year of his Papacy. By which account,
the reckening of our Monk before, that S. Syluester and Constantine dyed in
the same year, is rather confirmed, then infringed. So if, as these men say,
Marcus was Pope within 15. days of the death of S. Syluester, and continued
the Papacy Baron. and Binn. supr.
but 8. Months, and Julius immediately succeeded him, but a little before the
death of Constantine, it is apparent that S. Syluester and Constantine might or
did dye in the same year.

2. And to our present purpose, which is to be perfectly satisfied, and
instructed of what Religion these Popes were, which lived in this time, when
the true Christian Religion was not only permitted, but publicly and with
authority both spiritual and temporal, Papal and Imperial generally
professed in all Nations, whether the same which we have heard of Constantine
before the public grant and warrant of the Popes Supremacy, Roman Religion of
the Sacrifice of Mass, prayer, and erecting Churches to Saints, prayer for the
dead, Purgatory, Pilgrimage, honor to holy Reliks and Images, and such other
chief points, as Protestants now call into Question, or the new doctrins of
these men. And it can be no Question but the Masters and Scholars, Teachers
and Learners, Catechizers and Catechized, Baptizers Both Popes, Emperor and
all but Heretics were then of the present Roman Religion even by enemies unto
it, so testifying. Io. Bal. l. 1. and 2. de Romans Pont. in Syluestr. Mar. co.
and Iul. Bal. sup. l. 1. in Syluest. Robert. Barnes in vit. Pontif Roman. in
^od.
and Baptized, as their condition was, must needs be of one and the sance mind
and judgment in such things, they were all Holy men and Confessors, as our
Protestant Writers are witnesses, and to make them also to give both evidence
and judgment that they were of the Catholic Roman Religion, now professed in
that our Mother Church, thus they testify, and first of S. Syluester, that
Pedagoge ad Tutor of Constantine in these words, There be very many Decrees of
Pope Syluester of consecrating Chrisme, confirming children, adorning Churches,
covering Altars, ordaining Massing Preist^, anointing and vesting them, of
worshipping, adoring, and reserving the consecrated Hosts, also of Deacons
vesturs, Albes, Miters, Palls, Sacrifices, Ceremonies, Asiles, Extreme
unctions, and other Rites. Huius Syluestri permulta feruntur Instituta de
Chrismate consecra^do, Ordinibus dandis, pueris confirmandis, templis ornandis,
Altaribus tegendis, Missatoribus constituendis, vngendis, vestiendis,
Hostijsque, vt vocant deificandis, adornandis, seruandis. Item de Dalmaticis,
Cappis, Corporalibus, Albis, Mitris, Pallijs, Pannis, Peplis, Sindonibus,
Sacrificijs, Ceremonijs, Asilis, Extremis vnctionibus, alijsque ritibus: How a
Priest should be vested, when he said Mass, that no lay man might empleade any
of the Clergy. That no Clergy man should be conuented before Magdeburgen.
centur. 4. cap. 6. cap. 7. cap. 9. cap. 10.
a secular Judge. If the Reliks of Saints or Martyrs were to be translated from
other places they should be brought into Cities and Villages religiously in
singing; per Psalmodias Religiose acciperentur ac deducerentur. He approved and
exercised the Primacy of the Pope of Rome as all other Popes then did. The
chaste and Religious conversation of Monks and Nuns were then used, and
livers Monasteries of men and women then in Rome. In the Clergy were these
Degrees, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Acoluthists, Exorcists,
Lectors, Ostiarij. The Bishops, Priests, Deacons and Sub^eacons were unmarried,
and lived in chastity: Episcopi, Presbyteri, Diaconi, aut virgins eliguntur,
aut certe post Sacerdotium in aeternum pudici. That the sacrifice of Mass
might not be celebrated but in places consecrated by a Bishop, Missae
celebrationem in nullis praeterquam ab Episcopo sacratis locis faciendam
Concilium Rom^num sub Syluestro constituit. And in the same Council to which
both S. Syluester, and Constantine subscribed, it is defined, as I have Council.
Roman. can. 20.
before cited, that the Roman See is the chiefest See, Judge of all, and to be
Judged of none, Emperor, Clergy, Kings or people: nemo iudicabit primam Sedem,
quoniam omnes Seeds a prima Sede iustitiam desiderant temperari. Neque ab
Augusto, neque ab omni Clero, neque a Regibus, neque a populo Iudex
iudicabitur. These Protestants Magdeburgen. c. 6. ^upr. cent. 4.
also deluer for the doctrine and use of this time, for penitents to make
sacramental Confession of their sins, and Priests to enjoin pennances, and
give absolution unto such Penitents. Concerning holy Scripturs, the third
Council of Carthage in the beginning of the next Age apprehending the same
Canon of holy Scripturs which the present Roman Church now receaueth, Council.
Carth. ^. can. 47.
faith plainly, that it received it from the Fathers which were before them,
Pro confirmando isto Canone innotescat, quia a Patribus ista accepimus in
Ecclesia August. l. 2. doctrine. Christian. cap. 7.
legenda. And S. Augustine living in this Age is witness that the Apostol^ke
Sees, Rome the chief, received it so. How vain and Idle our Protestants and
their Article of Religion in rejecting Traditions, and only admitting
Scripturs in matters of Religion is evident, in so many recited Articles, which
these men have granted, and yet deny them to be contained in, or to be deduced
from Scripturs, as also their Article and doctrine against Communion only in
one kind, contending as though it could not be practiced or permitted, when
these Protestants themselves confess, that in this time even in the Roman
Church, Communion only under one kind was used, Ambros. orat. Funebri de
morte Satyri.
and by the greatest Doctors then in the Church of God, namely S. Ambrose, who
so writes, and at his death practiced it in himself, only receiving under
the form of bread, as Catholics now use, and his brother Satyrus and others
often so accustomed, even when they were in health. Which these Paulin. in vita
S. Ambrosij.
Protestants thus confess, Peregrinantes ac Nauigantes Eucharistia^ secum
circumtulisse Christianos, ex Ambrosio apparet, ex oratione Ambrosij in funere
fratris Satyrij. Magdeburgen. cent. 4. cap. 6. col. 429. 430.
Ab honorato Ecclesiae Vercellensis Sacerdote, Ambrosio morituro oblatum esse
corpus Domini, quo accepto, expiraret, Paulinus tradidit in vita Ambrosij.
These men also teach, that the doctrine of the Sea of Rome and the Fathers at
this time concerning freewill, and original sin, was the same with that of
the Magdeburgen. cent. 4. cap. 4. cap. 10.
Roman Church in these days. So that if any man will compare but these points
of doctrine which S. Syluester and Constantine then held, and practiced with
the English Protestant Religion, as it is set down in the privilege Book of
the Articles thereof, warranted by Parliament, Kings Authority, Convocation of
their Protestant Bishops, Oath and Subscription of them and their whole
Ministry, he shall not find any one true Article then among them all, which
are opposite to the Church of Rome, and Religion thereof at this time. But
whether we are Catholics placing spiritual Primacie in the Sea of Rome then in
S. Syluester, or Protestants asscribing it unto their Christian Kings,
Constantine then both King and Emperor hear, we must be of this holy
Religion, wherein these two great Rulers were so united together in all
points; especially seeing these Protestants have warranted these two Princes
were holy, and of themselves worthy paterns to be imitated now as the whole
Catholic Christian world then joined with them in doctrine, S. Syluester
Magdeburgen. cent. l. 4. cap. 10.
being Pope (say our Protestants) did faithfully perform his office in
teaching, and amended many things in the Clergy, was renowned for working
Miracles, and by them converted many to the faith, at seven Ordinations he
consecrated 65. Bishops all joining with him in Religion. Syluester factus
Episcopus, docendi munere fideliter functus est, and vitiosa in ordine
Ecclesiastico multa emendauit, miraculis claruit etiam, quibus multos ad fidem
conuertit. Ordinationibus sacris septem perfectis, creauit Episcopos sexaginta
quinque. So likewise did all other known Catholic Bishops in the whole world,
either actually assembled in, or consenting unto the renowned Councels of so
many hundreds of Bishops of Nice, Rome, Arles and other places, in his time
agreeing and consenting together for themselves and the whole Christian world
committed to their charge in Religion. Like was the case of Constantine so
far as temporal Prince had to deal in these affairs. Of all Emperors that
ever were he was he greatest in Power, and Dominions, and the greatest
Reuerencer, we find in Histories, of the Sea Apostolic and Popes of Rome in
his time, and all other Godly Bishops, and assisted all he could the assembling
of those Councels, honoring and consenting unto their Decrees, as the Law and
Decrees of God himself, as appears by Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen,
Theodoret, and his own Imperial Letters and public Edicts before cited. And
was occasion of preaching the word of life, and the holy Gospel of Christ and
overthrowing Idolatry in all Nations, from one end of the known world to the
other, erecting Christian Churches, and endowing the^ in all places, as our
Protestants themselves acknowledge, Ab Oceani finibus, nempe Britannis
incipions diuinae Religionis curam Magdeburgen. centur. 4. cap. 3. Bal. l. de
Script. centur. 1. in Flauio Constantino
in medijs superstitionu^ tenebris caepit, ab Occiduis ad Indos innumeras ad
aeternae spe^^ vitae erige^s ge^tes, egregius disciplinae Christianae praeco,
falsoru^ Deoru^ euersor per Graecia^, Aegypta^, Persidem, Asiam, and vniuersam
ditionem Romanam, repetitis abrogabat legibus, iubens per Edicta Christum coli,
Euangelium praedicari sacrum, ministris honores and alimenta dari, atque
Idolorum vbique destrui templa. Ecclesijs infinita praestitit, agros, annonam,
stipem egenis, aegris, viduis, ac Orphanis, pro quibusque solicitus. Which
general destruction of Idolatry and planting the true Religion of Christ the
Messiah, so often and manifestly foretold by the holy Prophets, never any other
comparable unto this in any degree, except the late Conversion of America, and
other Nations unto the known present Catholic Religion. Io. Bal. lib. 1. de
Act. Pont. Romans in Syluestr.
And in the late Persecution before Constantine expressly and plainly
foretold to S. Blasius, the glorious Bishop and Martyr, as both Protestants and
others confess, that this Constantine should be the happy man and means, by
whom, and in whose days and Empire, this great alteration of Religion, in
planting the true Religion of Christ Jesus the Messiah, and confusion of the
Pagans superstitions, so often and clearly foretold in holy Scripturs, should
be so generally effected.

Nunc bonus expulsis, Romana in Regna, Tyrannis Baptista Mantuan. l. 2. de vit.
S. Blas.

Adueniet Princeps, sub quo pacabitur orbis,
Et finem accipiet veterum cultura Deorum
Constantinus.
4. S. Mark was Pope but a short time, yet he continued as our Protestants
Robert. Barn. l. de vit. Pont. Romans in Marc. and Iulio. Io. Bal. l. 2. de Act.
Pontific. Romans in Marc. and Iul.
confess, in S. Syluester his Religion, gave the Pale to the Bishop of Hostia
a Consecrator of the Popes of Rome, caused the Nicen Creed to be read in the
Church after the Gospel, he builded Churches and adorned them.

5. Pope Julius did exempt Priests from being conuented before any but
Ecclesiastical Judges, Maintained the privilege of the Roman See, that no
Council might be called without allowance thereof, Hic Julius acriter
reprehendit Orientales Episcopos, quod sine sua authoritate Concilium
indixerant. Cassiod. in Eccl. Hist. Tripart. l. 4. cap. 19. and cap. 9.
But the Greek Writers of that Age make this matter most evident, that it was
not only the claim of Pope Julius, but the old Law and Apostolical Rule and
custom, that no Council might be called, nothing decreed without the
authority of the Pope of Rome, Canonibus iubentibus praeter Romanum Sozom. l.
2. c. 9.
nihil decerni Pontifice^. And again, Cu^ Regula Ecclesiastica iubeat non
oportere praeter sententia^ Romani Po^tificis Co^cilia celebrari. And more
manifestly in Sozome^, That the old Canon of the Church pronownced all such
Acts to be void, which were decreed without the Authority of the Bishop of
Rome, Legem esse ad sacerdotij dignitatem spectantem, quae pronuntiat acta illa
irritaesse, quae Sozom. supr. l. 2. cap. 7.
praeter sententiam Episcopi Romani constituuntur. And this is plainly
confessed by those Arrian Bishops themselves thus reprehended for such
attempts. For writing to Pope Julius, they freely confess the Primacie of the
Pope of Rome, and See thereof, being the School of the Apostles, and
Metropolitan City of Theodor. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. cap. 4. Cassiod. Hist.
Tripart. lib. 4. cap. 6.
piety even from the beginning, Literis suis fatebantur Ecclesiam Romanam
Primas apud omnes far, vtpote quae Apostolorum schola, and pietatis
Metropolis iam ab initio fuisset. And both Theodoret and Cassiodorus testify,
that the Arrians themselves sent their accusations against S. Athanasius to
this Pope of Rome Julius, to be judged by him, as highest Judge, and Pope
Julius according to the Ecclesiastical Law, commanded both them and S.
Athanasius one a certain day to appear before him at Rome to receive
sentence, Julius Ecclesiasticam secutus Legem, and ipsos Romae adesse iussit,
and diem dixit diuo Athanasio. And by Cassiodorus, and venerabilem Athanasium
and Iudicium regulariter euocauit. So that it is evident, this Supreamacy of
the Pope of Rome, was not given to that holy See by Constantine, or any late
Pope his claim or challeng, but from the beginning. And Constantine, though a
most worthy Christian King and Emperor, did neither call nor confirm any
Council, as a supreme Judge, and Sentencer, but as an Assistant Temporal,
such as good Kings are, and should be in providing security, quiet, protection
and bodily necessaries for the Bishops assembled, as I have before remembered he
did. The calling of the Counsels was, as that great general of Nyce by the
Bishops order, and direction, Ruffinus Eusebius and others testify,
Constantinus ex Sacerdotum Ruffin. l. 1. Hist. Ecclesiast. cap. 1. Eusebius. l.
10. Hist. cap. 1. Cap. 5. supra.
sententia apud vrbem Nicaeam Episcopale Concilium conuocat. Where we see both
the calling, and Assembly to the Episcopal, as all others were, and the
sentence and Judgment by them only, post diutinum multumque tractatum placet
omnibus, ac velut vno cunctorum ore and cord decernitur, (...) scribi debere,
id est eiusdem cum patre substantiae filium confiteri idque firmissima omniu^
sententia pronuntiatur. Defertur ad Constantinum sacerdotalis concilij
sententia. Ille tanquam a Deo prolatam veneratur. Cui si quis tentasset obniti,
velut contra diuina statuta venientem, in exilium se protestatur acturum. Where
we see this greatest temporal Commander that ever was in the world, was so
far from usurping, or clayming any spiritual Power to decide, and judge of
Questions in Religion, that he was not present when they were determined by the
Bishops, but leaving all such decisions unto them, as their servant, conseruus,
as Sozom. l. 1. Hist. Eccl. c. 18.
he calls himself, most reverently embraced, and with his temporal Power
executed what they concluded.

THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
THE CONSTANCY OF BRITAIN IN THE true Catholic Religion, before, and after
the Nicen Council, it had Bishops there, consented unto, received, and kept
inviolable the Decrees thereof, not admitting Heresy hear.

1. WE have thus far travailed, in remembering the great peace, and glory
these two Noble British Princes the Mother and Son, Queen Helen and
Constantine procured to the universal Catholic Church of Christ in other
Nations of the world in such manner, that the general Conversion of the
Gentiles spoken of by Malachy the Prophet, seems to have been reserved for the
honor of this Nation, by the help and assistance of those two most renowned
children thereof, ab ortu solis vsque ad occasum, magnum est nomen meum in Gen
Mal^ch. 1.
tibus, and in omni loco sacrificatur and offertur nomini meo Oblatio munda,
quia magnum est nomen meum in gentibus, dicit Dominus exercituum. For even from
this last Nation in the west, then known to the furthest hence in the East,
the Gospel of Christ was happily by their help and in their days embraced.

2. Now it is time to return into Britain again, where we shall by the long
absence of Constantine our King and Emperor from hence, and many of our chief
Nobility and others atte^ding him in his Wars and Travails, find the state
of this Kingdom, especially in civil and temporal affairs distempered, and
(...) unquiet, by the testimony of our own Historians. First Constantine going
hence toward Rome against the Tyra^t Maxe^tius carried with him from Britain
to serve him in those wars, as our Antiquaries agree, a great Power of his
Country British souldiars, as most true and faithful unto him, by whose
prowess and valor he obtaining Victory, he gave them in recompense of their
loyal and valiant service, as both our own Antiquaries, and others write, a
dwelling and living in the west part of France, bordering upon the Sea, most
probably in little Britain, where they continued in his days with some little
difference from the Britans of this Kingdom, Constantinus ab Exercitu
Imperator consalutatus, expeditione Gulielm. Malm. de gest. Reg. Angl. l. 1. c.
1. Hollinsh. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 28.
in superiores terras indicta, magnam mana^ militum Brita^^orum abduxit, per
quorum Industriam, triumphis ad vota fluentibus breui rer^m potitus, emeritos
and laboribus functos in quadam part Gallia ad Occidentem super littus Oceani
collocauit: vbi bodieque Posteri ^orum man^ntes immane quantum coaluere,
moribus linguaque nonnihil a nostris Brittonibus degenores. And this was the
first planting of our Britans in that little Britain, by these Authors, long
before the settling of them there by Maximus: which (to a great weakening of
this Kingdom to have a great Army of selected Souldiars to be carried away,
planted in an other Country, and never return again, as the like in the time
of Maximus) occasioned the spoiling and desolation thereof.

3. The remnant of whose British Souldiars which were left unslain, as also
those of an other Constantine after him, went and joined themselves with the
former Britans in little Britain, which went hence with Constantine the Great,
as the old Monk of Malmesbury writes, Copiarum quae illos ad bellum Guliel.
Mal^^es. supr.
secutae fuerant, pars occisa, pars post fugam ad superiores Britones
concessit. But by the common opinion of our Antiquaries, there was an other and
Greater occasion of the weakening and disquieting of Britain about this time,
by reason of domestical and civil wars in this Land. For Constantine the
Great at his departure hence leaving the government of this Kingdom, as our
old English History records to a Noble man, some style him a King, named
Octauian, when Constantine went from this land to Rome, he took all his land to
keep to the Old. Engl. Chronic. f. 34. p. 1.
Earl of Cornewayle that was called Octauian. And anon as this Octauian wist
that his lord dwelled at Rome, incontinent he cesed all the land into his
hands, and therewith did all his will among by and low, and they held him for
King. But other Historians both British and English, domestical and foreign
affirm, that Constantine at his going from Britain to Rome, committed the
government of this Kingdom to the Roman Proconsuls, and the named Octauian, or
Octauius took Arms against them, slew them, and so obtained to be King
hear, Octauius Dux wisseorum insurrexit in Proconsules Romanae dignitatis,
quibus Insulae regimen Galfr. Monum. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 8. Pont. Vir.
Hist. Britan. l. 5. Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 314. Hard. Chron. c. 63. f. ^0.
permissum fuerat, and solio Regni, ipsis interfectis, potitus est. The Monk
of Westminster says, this Octauius was a King before, Octauius Geniseorum Rex,
a Regulus or Prince of the people in and about Worcestershire. Harding says he
was Duke of westesex, he must mean where the West Saxons after Ruled, for they
came not into Britain until long after this time.

But after his day came one Octauius
Duke of weste sex that crowned was for King
That sl^ugh the werdins of Constantinus
Which that he set for Britain governing
In his absence, to keep it in all thing.
4. Besides this, there be other difficulties among the Historians about this
Octauius, and such as will discredit him for having had any great chief and
long command as a King in this Nation. Matthew of Westminster sets down
his conquering the Roman Proconsuls hear in the year of Christ 314. when as I
have proved before by diverse more ancient and received Historians, that S.
Helen our Queen and Empress continued hear long after that time. And her
son Constantine Emperor now at the highest of his glory, power, and
Victories, and having so many British Souldiars without employment in France,
so near unto us, cannot be imagined to have suffered any Enemy in his own
native Country so to have prevailed. Or how could such a man as this Octauius
is supposed to be, assemble such an Army in Britain, where that most
victorious Emperor was undoubted King, and whence he had so great an Army of
Britons so lately before, that by them, as our Historians write, he vanquished
almost inmunerable Companies of his most potent Enemy, Magnam manum Britonum
abduxit, per quorum industriam, Guliel. Malm. l. 1. de gestis Reg. c. 1.
triumphis ad vota fluentibus breui rerum potitus. And as these Relators of
Octauius proceedings themselves are witnesses, the power which Constantine
carried from Britain was so great, that the Romans which came hither unto
him, seeing his power, said no Prince in the world was comparable unto him for
strength, Quis Princeps Regi Britanniae conferri queat in fortitudine
robustorum Galfr. Monum. l. 5. c. 7. Matthew. Westminster. an. 312. E^^eb. lib. 1. vit.
Constant. cap. 4. Eusebius. libt. 4. de Vit. Constant. c. 51. Matthew. Westminster. an.
390. Baron. and Spondan. in Annal. an. 383. Sigebert. Chron. an. 383.
militum? by an other, est tibi robustissimorum militum maxima multitudo. Where
then in Britain could Octauius gather an Army so soon so encounter and
overthrow three Legions of Roman Souldiars, besides their adherents, as these
men say? And Eusebius says, that Constantine himself came hither again, in
Britanniam inuasit, and was hear longer after this pretended Revolt: and at
his death gave Britain, his ancient Patrimony, to his eldest son,
assignabat auitam sortem grandiori natu filio. Again these men say, Octauius
was King hear until Maximus his time, and married his only daughter and
Heir unto him. When it is a common consent in Antiquities, that this Maximus
or Maximianus was not King in Britain until after the 380. year of Christ.
Therefore he must needs be granted to have been very you^ge, and of too few
years at the going of Constantine hence, for him to commit the government of
Britain unto him, or for himself to have so soon usurped it, against so
righfull and a potent King and Emperor.

5. And our most ancient and best Historians S. Gildas, S. Bid, Marianus,
Gild. l. de Excid. and conq. Brit. c. 10. ^^^gebert. Chron. Eutrop. Hist.
Polyd. Virgil. Angl. Hist. l. 3. p. 49. Stowe and Howes Hist. in Constant.
Constantius, Julian. Hollinsh. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. Fast. Reg. and Episc. Angl.
Ammian. Marcelli. l. 20. in init. l. 26. 28.
Florentius Wigorniensis, Ethelwerdus, Henry of Huntington and William of
Malmesbury, allthough as diligently as they could, reco^pting our Kings of
Britain, never mention any such Octauius or Octauian. But the chiefest and
most ancient of them S. Gildas plainly says, that this Island was at this
time, and until Maximus or Maximian a Britan took upon him the Empire, a
Roman Island, Insula nomen Romanum tenens. And diverse Historians both late and
ancient, Catholics and Protestants, do particularly set down our Kings after
Constantine the Great, and Roman Lieutenants hear until these days, as
Constantine, Constantius, Julian, Valentinian, Gratian, Emperors our Kings:
Martinus, Lupicinus, Nectaridius, Theadosius, Fraomarius and other Roman
Lieutenants, and Governors hear. And when the Council of Ariminum was kept
about the year of Christ 360. and the 23. year of Constantius son of
Constantine the Great, it is certain, that this Constantius was our King in
Britain, and bore the chardges of the poorest Bishops of this Kingdom, as
then under his government, which were present there, and he was so far from
loosing Britain, or any other Country of his Empire then, that as Sozomen and
others testify, that Council thus wrote unto him at this time, sic tuum
creuit Imperium, vt vniuer si orbis terrar^m gubernacula teneas. Epist.
Ariminen. Council. ad Consta^tiu^. Imp. apud Sozom. Histor. l. 4. c. 47.
His Empire was so increased, that all the world was under his Government. This
was above 20. years after the death of the great Constantine, in whose time
this Revolt of Britain from him is thus supposed, and above twyce so long
time of the imagined usurpation hear by Octauius. And Zonaras writes that
this Constantius in the 14. year of his Empire bannished, or rather carried
with him S. Athanasius into Britain, at his coming hither. Eodem anno 14.
Magnus Ath^nasius a Constantio in Britanniam deportatur. Ioa. Zonar. tom. 3.
Ann. f. 117. c. de Constantio and Constante.


6. Therefore I dare not to assent, that in this time of the greatest
flourishing Estate of the Roman Empire, and the Power thereof in Britain,
especially from whence the glory of it grew to that greatenes, either Octauius
or any other so much prevailed hear to bar the Emperors of that honor. But
he might toward the time of Maximus or Maximianus, when the Empire had more
enemies and less power, prevail in some such sort, as these Historians have
written of him, allthough they differ also in Maximianus as well as in Octauius.
One says, he was the son of Trahern uncle to S. Helen, Maximian Harding.
Cronc. c. 63. f. 51. Galfr. Monum. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 9. Pontic. Vir.
H^st. l. 5. Matthew. Westminster. An. 379. Harding supr.
King Traherne his son to Constantine next Heir: others affirm he was son
of Leolinus an other uncle of S. Helen, great uncle to Constantine, Leoninus
Constantini auanculus ipsum genuerat. And erat patre Britannus a Leolmo
Constantini auanculo procreatus, matre vero Natione Romanus, ex vtraque part
regalem originem ducens. And one of them says, Octauius was King but 14.
years ending with the beginning of Maximian his reign. And so we may well
allow such an Octauius to have borne the name of a King in Britain in those
troblesome days of the Romans ruling hear, diverse petty Kings being probably
at that time in this Nation, as well by the testimony of these Authors, which
then make Octauius King, as others. So they term Conanus a King, and that
Maximian took his Kingdom from him, cui Regnum Britanniae eripuerat. So was
Dionotus King in Cornwayle, Dionotus Rex Cornubiae. So was his Galfr. Monum. l.
5. c. 1^. 15. Pontic. Virun. l. 5. Matthew. Westminster. an. 390. 392. Manuscr. Antiq.
in vit. S. Niniani. Capgr. in eod. Bal. l. de Script. cent. 1. in Niniano.
brother Carodocus before him, Dionothus qui fratri suo Caradoco in regnum
successerat. And yet under our chief King and Emperor Maximian at that time,
Cui Maximianus Insulae principatum commendauerat. And S. Ninian who lived
Bishop hear in the end of this Age had Kings for his Ancestores, Regali ex
prosapia beatus Ninianus extitit oriundus. And yet the great distance of the
place of his birth from King Coel, and these remembered, argues he was not of
their Line. And all these Kings or Regents hear were most certainly by our
Antiquities Catholic Christians.

7. Therefore the Temporal State in respect of any of the^, could not be any
The falling of Co^stantius Emperor to the Arrian Heresy a great hurt to
Catholic Religion in many places.
hinderance, but rather help and furtherance to the increase of Christian
Religion in their time. But it was rather the Heresy of Constantius the Arrian
Emperor, which hindered the glory of true Religion then in this Kingdom, as
it did in other places and Countries of the world, if it did not so much
flourish hear the^ as in his blessed Father Constantine the Great his Empire.
And yet we may be bold to affirm, that the State of our British Church, even
in The kingdom of Britain as free as any from the Arrian Heresy.
those distempered days, when the holy Writers of that Age complain, the
almost whole Christian world to have been polluted with the Arria^ Heresy,
was as renowned for our Bishops, and Clergy, and as free from that infection,
as any Nation was. We have heard before that our renowned Archbishop of London
Restitutus with diverse others Bishops of this Kingdom was present at the
great Council of Arles, celebrated diverse years after Constantine went from
Britain to Rome. And allthough we do not expressly find it written of
Britain, that the Bishops thereof were at the Council of Nice, bishops of
Britain at the first Nicen Council, as at others.
no more then of diverse other Countries less replenished with Bishops at that
time, then Britain was, and yet without question had Bishops there to make up
that great number there assembled, which the Provinces whose Bishops are
particularly related to have been there, could not perform, yet there be many
Arguments, and some of them almost plain evidences, that our British Bishops
were there also, as at other Councels in that time. First it was a general,
and the first general Counsel, which requires general presence of all
Christian Nations, the Decrees of such an Assembly binding all, therefore
Britain being so great and glorious a part of the Christian world then, and
having the King thereof borne and declared Emperor in it, so great an
Instrument of this sacred Assembly, and so, as much interessed in that Council
as any Kingdom was, may not be said to have been absent. And Eusebius then
living says, Constantine called Bi^^ops thither from all places, Concilium
generale, tanquam quendam Dei exercitum instruens, in vnum locum coegit: and
Episcopos Eusebius l. 3. de Vit. Constable. c. 6.
vndique per literas honorifice scriptas, vt eo maturarent, acciuit. Therefore
of all Nations Britain would, and did most willingly embrace and satisfy those
letters sent hither into it from their Country Emperor. Again the same
Author a living witness plainly affirms, not only that the Imperial
Edict for calling this Council was published in every Province of the Empire,
such as every Province in Britain then was, but that all the Bishops with all
willingness and speed they could hasted to the place assigned, Vbi Edictum in
quaque Prouincia diuulgatum erat, omnes summa cum animorum alacritate, tanquam
e carceribus ad cursum emissi, propere aduolarunt. And he adds plainly that
the chiefest Bishops of all Churches in all Europe where Britain is, naming it
Cap. 7. supr.
the first, Asia, and Afrike were there, Ex omnibus namque Ecclesijs, quae
frequentes in tota Europa, Africa, and Asia extiterunt, Dei ministri, qui
facile Primas far putabantur, in vnum conuocati. No distance or separation of
Country or Nation hindered the Bishops from being there, Non solu^ qui animorum
dissensione erant, sed etiam qui corporibus, regionibus, locis, gentibus
longissime disiuncti, Cap. 6. 7. 8.
vnum in locum aggregati sunt. The extreme Scythians were not absent, nec ab
hoc Choro Scytha abfuit. All known Christian Nations had Bishops there, Ex
omni Natione quae sub sole est, quorum domicilia multo longiore locorum
interuallo distabant, e^ aduentarunt. And no man can be a better witness for
the presence of our British Bishops there, their true and holy observation of
the Christian Catholic Rites and customs, and number of Bishops and Churches
hear, then our renowned King and Countryman Constantine the Great Emperor,
who in his solemn Oration in that great Council expressly names our
Britain with the most Noble Nations, whose Bishops were in that Council,
professed the truth, and had greatest number of Churches, more then
Constantinus Mag. orat. habit. in Conc. Nicen. apud Euse. l. 3. de Vit.
Constant. c. 18.
other Countries at that time, Ipse in me recepi, vestram sapientiam facile
assensuram: vos videlicet quod in vrbe Roma, in Italia, in Africa, in Aegipto,
in Hispania, Gallia, and Britannia, in Libia, and vniuersa Graecia, in Diaecesi
Asiatica, and Pontica, in Cilicia denique vna and consentiente sententia
conseruatur, hoc vestram prudentiam lubenter approbaturam: illud sedulo
reputantes quod in locis quae modo citaui mayor Ecclesiarum numerus existat.
Where we see Britain to be numbered with the most flourishing Kingdoms, whose
Bishops were present in the Nicen Council, to be given for a Rule and
President to other Nations in Christian holy doctrine and piety, and at that
time, in the year of Christ by common account 325. to have been one of the
Principal Countries, which had the greatest number of Churches, and
consequently of Bishops and other Clergy men to supply their sacred functions
in them. And this testified in open Council, by him which of all others must
needs best know the Estate of this his native Country under his temporal
government, is sufficient and abowndant testimony in this matter.

8. For if he had not expressly put Britain in the Catalogue of the chiefest
Nations, which had Bishops there, by all Antiquities, but only said, as he
clearly does that Britain the^ was one of the chiefest places, in which the
greatest number of Churches with their Bishops was, every man would have
infallibly concluded, that this Council so general from all Nations, had
diverse British Bishops there. And if Constantine had been silent in this
matter, the very subscription of the Bishops of Nice, as it is left lame and
maimed unto us, would have proved as much. For although it does not particularly
name any Bishops from Britain there, no more the^ the Council of Sardice
subscription, or the Council of Ariminum does, wherein most certainly
Britain had diverse Bishops, as diverse also in the Council of Arles, and only
one Restitutus is remembered in it: yet it gives us sufficient proof, that
Britain had Bishops also at Nice, or else we shall want very many of the
number assembled there. For it says with the common opinion that 318. were
there, and thereto suscribed, and subscripserunt trecenti december and octo
Episcopi qui in eodem Subscript. Council. Nicaeni To. 1. Council.
Concilio conuenerunt. And yet setting down the Bishops of all other places
besides Britain, remembered by Constantine before, Italy, Afrike, Egypt,
Spain, France, Lybia, Greece, Asia, Pontus, and Cilicia, and 30. others which
had Bishops there; it cannot find out, above 225. Bishops from all these
Countries, but leaves almost an hundred wanting of the full number. Therefore
we must needs say, that Britain, there forgotten, did remember, and furnish
that The Nicenfaith received and daly observed in Britayne.
sacred Council with diverse Bishops, which with many others of other Nations
are now wanting in that Subscription.

9. And this great glory of Britain for worthiness and number of Bishops, and
constancy in that holy faith, which they had consented unto, and received in
this Nicene Council, remained ever after in this Kingdom until the decaying
time of our Britans government: As will appear in the following History. For
the time of Constantine the Great, and Constantius his soon, that great
friend of Arians and their Heresies, it shall suffice in this place to use for
warrant the testimony and words themselves of the Bishops of this Nation,
joining therein with 400. other Bishops in the Council of Ariminum thus
vpbraiding that Arrian Emperor, and pleading their Innocence in their Public
Epistle unto him. That his Father Constantine labored all he could even till
his dying day, to have the holy faith of Nice continue stable, and permanent
for ever, and to innouate any thing therein, should be to conteme so many holy
Confessors and Martyrs which had professed it, and the old Institution and
observation of the Catholic Church, continuing until his Empire, Cum
intelligamus Constantinum Principem omnium Posterorum memoria Epist. Council.
Arimin. ad Constant. Imperat. apud Socrat. l. 2. Hist. cap. 29.
post mortem celebrandum, diligenter elaborasse vt fides illa Nicaae literis
prodita, accuratissime perquisita, explorataque esset: absurdum plane
videretur, eo iam post acceptum Baptismum vita functo, and ad tanquil^itatem
sibi debitam profecto, aliquid in ea nouare: and tot sanc^os Confessores and
Martyrs, qui huius doctrinae Authors, inuentoresque fuerunt, quique vt vetus
Ecclesiae Catholicae institutum poscebat, omnino senserunt, inque eo
perstiterunt perpetuo, prorsus contemnere. Quorum fidem ad tui Imperij tempora
Deus per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum perduxit. And there earnestly exhort
him, that no Innovation be made, but suffer them to persevere quietly in the
faith of their Predecessors, directed by the holy ghost: and neither to add
nor detract any thing to those ancient Decrees, which by his Fathers piety
had been observed and kept so long inviolate, Tuam clementiam obtestamur, vt
non permittas quicquam nouari ad eorum contumeliam, qui vita excesserint: sed
nobis facias potestatem in his quae sunt a Maioribus quos quidem ingenuose and
prudenter spiritu sancto illis opem ferente, omnia transegisse constat, Decreta
sancitaque firm perseuerandi. Flagitamus, ne quid veteribus Decretis vel
detrahatur, vel adijciatur omnino: sed omnia quae patris tui pietate vsque ad
hoc tempus obseruata fuerunt, rata, firmaque permaneant, neque de caetero nobis
quicquam de ijs rebus facessus molestiae, aut a nostris ipsorum Ecclesijs nos
abesse sinas. By this great evidence of 400. witnesses both our renowned
Constantine both living and dying, and this Kingdom of Britain is hitherto
free from all suspicion of Heresy. Of the continued Innocence of Britain from
that foul and almost general Infection, I shall speak more heareafter; that
which I have said before sufficiently excuses Constantine. And both Theodoret
and Sozome^ do most plainly clear him: The first affirms, that he was so
earnest a Professor and Patron of the Nicen faith all his life, that so long
as he lived no man durst openly deny it, dum vixit Constantinus, nemo ^am
aperte reijcere ausus est. The other does evidently prove, that he was so
grounded in the true Catholic faith, established Sozom. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. c.
1.
at Nice, that the Arrian Priest which seduced his Sister Constantia, and his
son Constantius afterward, being by his Sisters means present with him at
his death, and trusted to deliver his last Will to his son Constantius, never
durst bewray himself to Constantine, that he was an Arrian, much less
persuade that holy Emperor to that Heresy, pe^ceauing how firm and constant
he was in the true Catholic faith, non fuit ausus palam facere Theodoret.
Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 3.
malum suum, cum videret quanta esset regiae mentis in re diuina firmitas: But
he reserved the vomiting of that his poison to Constantius, whom he infected
after his Fathers death.

THE XIX. CHAPTER.
HOW BRITAIN HAD MANY BISHOPS at the true great Sardican Council: they and
the other Bishops, Priests, and Christians hear professed the true Catholic
faith, and were free from Heresy.

1. NEITHER was Constatius soon after his Fathers death infected with the
Arrian Heresy, either to endanger Britain, or any other Nation under his
Dominion: but consented to the recalling of S. Athanasius from Exile, Epist.
Constantij ad S. Athanas. apud Socr. l. 2. Histor. c. 18. and Athan. Apolog. 2.
Socrat. l. 2. c. 16. Sozo. l. 3. c. 10. 11. Nicephorus Histor. Eccl. l. 9. c.
12 Sozom. supr. c. 11. Conc. Sardic. ep. to. 1. Conc. Athanas. epist. ad
Antioch. Tom. 1. oper. S. Athan. and apud al.
and some time to his continuing his dignity at Alexandria. And whether it was
for love of S. Athanasius, or fear of his Brother Constans, writing earnestly
unto him in favor of S. Athanasius, he wrote diverse friendly letters unto him
after this, of which Socrates sets down three, and consented to the calling
of the great general Council of Sardyce 10. or 11. years after the death of
Constantine the Great his Father, as Socrates and Sozomen affirm, wherein S.
Athanasius was proved innocent, and as he then present with many others
proves, the Nicen faith was confirmed, and utterly forbidden to be questioned,
Sancta Synodus quae Sardis conuenit, Decreto sanciuit, ne quid vlterius de fide
scriberetur, and sese contentos esse Nicaena fide declarauerunt: vt cui nihil
deesset, and in qua integra and solida pietas contineretur: neque edendam esse
aliam professionem fidei, ne illa quae Nicaae scripta est, suos numeros non
habere videretur, neue illis, quibus libido est, semper noua statuere, occasio
huiusmodi suppeditaretur, vt iterum atque iterum de fide definiant. Athanas.
Apol. 2. contra Arrianos.


2. And at the calling of this Council, the same renowned Catholic Doctor
calls this Constantius, as also his Brother a known Catholic Emperor,
Diverse Bishops of Britain, 5. at the least present at the general Council of
Sardice: But probably diverse more.
a most Religeous Prince, in Magno Concilio Sardico ad Edictu^
Religiosissimorum Principum Constantij and Constantis. And we are sure, that at
this time our Kingdom of Britain retained the former glorious estate and
glory of Religion it had before in the days of Constantine, and was still free
from the Arrian Heresy. For the same glorious Confessor S. Athanasius present
in that Council, says, that among more then 300. Bishops assembled there
which Sex. Ruf. Breuia. Rer. gest. po. To. ad Valentiniani. Aug. Sigonius l. 4.
de Occid. Imperio p. 89. 90. Arnold. Mylius in Antiq. nomin. Region. Insular.
etc. Sepher. Bin. Annot. in Conc. Sardic. to. 1. Co^c. Baron. and Spond. An.
347. Athanas. Apol. 2.
freed him, and professed the Nicen faith, the Bishops from the Provinces of
Britain, ex Prouincijs Britanniarum, were there. And as the Roman Writers
testify, there were from the division of the Empire by Constantine, and as
many suppose before, five Provinces hear in Britain, Britanniae quinque,
Maxima Caesarie^^^s, Valentia, Britannia prima, Britannia secunda, Flauia
Caesariensis. So that if we should allow but one Bishop out of every of these
Provinces, to have been at the Sardyce Council, and there to have subscribed
for the rest of their Provinces or Diocesses, we must grant five British
Bishops to have been there, and supplied this duty, and office for the rest of
Britain. But we shall find more by the Rule of proportion, in respect of the
great number of Catholic Bishops assembled in that Council, or in regard of
our neighboring Countries, namely France in many places thereof as far
distant from Sardice in Thrace where this Council was kept, now by the Turks
reigning there, named Triadizza or Triaditze, as Britain is, and far then
from exceeding this Nation for number of Bishops, proportion of quantity, and
Provinces in them observed, for S. Athanasius present at this Council
testifies, there were 344. Catholic Bishops there, in vniuersum trecenti and
quadraginta quatuor: Yet recompting the names of the Bishops of Italy, Spain,
France, Egypt, Cyprus, Affrike, Palestina and diverse other Nations present in
that Council, in omitting the names of the Bishops of Britain, and some other
Countries, wants above 60. of his own number to be supplied from this our
Britain and other places of far meaner note. And out of France he sets
down the names of 34. Bishops of that Nation there present, and yet no
Antiquity of that Age does triple France unto Britain either for Provinces,
or Bishops in those days.

3. Sextus Rufus in his Breuiarie of the Roman gests to Valentinian the
Emperor, Sext. Ruf. Breui. ad Valentinian. Augustum.
finds in France, divided from Belgia, and Germany, only ten Provinces twice
so many, as I have alleged to have been then in Britain, and it will be more
then a difficult thing for any man to prove that France then had as many more
Bishops as Britain had. Therefore I cannot find it any inconvenience or
incongruitie to hold, that Britain so devoted to Catholic true Religion, and
so furnished with Bishops then, as is declared, had half so many Bishops
thereof at Sardice Council, as S. Athanasius has remembered from France. And
the rest of our Bishops which were not at that Council, but remained still in
Britain subscribed unto, and received the Catholic Decrees of that Council,
as is manifest by the Epistle of that holy Council to all absent Bishops so
exhorting them, vos quoque studete fratres and comministri Council. Sardic.
Epist. omnib. Catholic. Eccl. Epis. Tom. 2. oper. Athanas. Athanas. supr. Apol.
2. Vrsac and Valens Epist. ad Athan. To. 2. oper eius.
nostri in sacris obe^ndis, vt spiritu praesentes in nostra Synodo ide^
suffragium conferatis, per vestras subscriptiones. Which, as S. Athanasius
writes, they performed, Haec ita scriptis mandata, sacrum Sardicense Concilium
ad eos qui interesse non poterant, misit, qui ipsi quoque suis suffragijs
Decreta Synodi approbarunt. And Vrsacius and Valens in their Epistle, written
to S. Athanasius, freely confess, that he was freed by above 400. erant plures
in hoc numero quam quadringenti, out of all Britain and other places, ex
vniuersa Aphrica, Gallijs, Britannia, etc. And Socrates relating how this
general Council was called by the Authority of Julius, then Pope of Rome,
with the consent of the two Emperors, and Brothers Constans and Constantius, de
sententia duorum Imperatorum, it was so general, that the Bishops of Britain,
and the other western Nations which were absent, did plead no other excuse,
but infirmity of body, and over short warning given them by Pope Julius, Alij
corporis infirmitate^ cansantur: alij de te^poris Socrates Histor. Eccl. l. 2.
c. 16.
prastituti queruntur angustia, culpamque illius rei in Iulium Episcopu^
Romanum conferunt. And yet the same Author proves that they had a years and
an half summo^s or notice, that it was to be, Cu^ tamen ex eo tempore quo tu^
Concilium editu^ Socrat. supr.
fuerat, tum Athanasius Concilium expectans Romae commoratus erat, annus and
sex Menses praeterissent. And it is styled, and Ecumenicall Council, great
Synod, plenary Titul. Conc. Sardic. to 1. Council. Athan. Apol. 2. Aug. Epist.
162. Sulpit. l. 2. Sacrae Hist. Socrat. c. 16. Conc. Sard. can. 21. vlt. and in
Tit.
Council of all the Church, a Council gathered out of all the world, and
commanding the Decrees thereof to be observed in all the world. Oecumenicum
Co^cilium. Mana Synodus. Plenarium vniuersae Ecclesiae Concilium. Concilium ex
toto orb conuocatum. Generale Concilium. Vniuersa quae constituta sunt,
Catholica Ecclesia in vniuerso orb diffusa custodiat. And was approved as the
Counsel it self witnesses, by 376. Bishops, Approbatum a Trecentis
septuaginta sex Episcopis. Some have not thought so reverently of this great
and holy Council of Sardice, finding an Assembly bearing that name to have
been Heretical: But this suspected or The Council of Sardice Orthodoxall, and
Catholic with our British Bishops.
rather damned Conciliable was an other quite different, and opposite to this
true and lawful Council, by which both that and the Semiarrians therein
assembled were condemned. And this false Council only kept by a few Eastern
Arrian or Semiarrian Bishops about 76. in number, which seeing themselves to be
in danger to be condemned by the great holy Council, separated Epist.
Sardicen. Concilij apud Theod. l. 92. Hist. c. 8. Epist. Conciabul. Philppen.
ad Donat. apud Hilar. in Frag. Baron. Tom. 4. Socrates l. 2. c. 16. Sozom. l.
3. c. 10. Sever. Bin. Tom. 1. Conc. annot. in Conciliab. Sardicen. Niceph.
Hist. Eccl. l. 9. c. 12.
themselves from thence, as their own Epistle to Donatus of Catharge,
Socrates, Sozomen, and others witness at large, and there conclude their
Arrian errors condemning S. Athanasius, Hosius, Julius Pope of Rome, Maximus
Archbishop of Treuers, Protogenes Bishop, of Sardice, and Gandentius by name,
and all in general which received the holy Nicen faith, and would not
communicate with them in Arrianisme, but with S. Athanasius and the Catholic
Bishops which they had bannished, and persecuted. But our holy British Bishops
joining all with the sacred Council, degraded the unjust Accursers of S.
Athanasius, condemned those Arrians, established the Nice^ faith in all things,
Postquam Sardicae conuenerant Episcopi Orientis, in conspectum Episcoporum
Occidentem incolentium venire noluerunt: dixerintque se non alia condition in
colloquium cum illis venturos, nisi Athanasium and Paulum e Conuentu
expellerent. Episcopi Orientales confestim decedunt. cumque ventum esset ad
vrbem Philippi, quae est in Thracia, priuatum inter ipsos Concilium
constituere; de caetero aperte verbum consubstantiale anathemate damnare:
opinione^ quod filius patri dissimilis esset, per literas scriptas vbique
disseminare caeperunt. Episcopi autem Sardicae coacti, primum istos indicta and
deserta causa damnare: deinde Athanasij accusatores dignitatis gradu dimouere:
tum fidei Nicaenae decisione^ constabilire: opinionemque quod filius esset
patri dissimilis, prorsus explodere: postremo verbum consubstantiale multo
notius and illustrius efficere. Nam literas scribunt illi de ea re, and passim
ad omnes mittunt. And having thus proceeded, they return home in the same
Socrat. Hist. Ecc. l. 2. supr. c. 18. Niceph. Hist. Eccl. l. 9. c. 13.
mind to their own Cities, Episcopi qui Sardicae conuenerunt rebus
constitutis, ad suas eorum Civitates re^erterunt. And after that time as
Socrates, Nicephorus, and others testify, our Bishops of Britain, and others
of the West separated themselves from the Heretical faction in the East,
Deinceps Occidens ab Orient per secessionem diuisus est. Non amplius enim
Occidentales cum Orientalibus, haud eadem secum sentientibus, negotij sibi
quicquam and coniunctionis esse voluere. Yet Niceph. cap. 14. supr.
many of the most glorious men of the East also perseuered in the same
Catholic profession, as our British and other Western Bishops did: as Paulus
Patriarch of Constantinople, S. Athanasius of Alexandria, S. Anthony, and
generally the Monks of Egypt, Eusebius Emissenus, Titus Bostrensis, Serapion,
S. Basile, Eudoxius, Acacius, S. Cyrill, Theodorus, Perinthius, S. Ephrem, and
others without number. S. hitherto we see the state of Christ's Church in
Britain to have been glorious, both for number of renowned Catholic Bishops,
and freedom from all contagion and infection of the wicked errors ad Heresies
of that time.

THE XX. CHAPTER.
HOW BRITAIN HAVING MANY BIshops at the great Council at Ariminum, all were
free from Heresy; And very few Brittans consented to Arrianisme: But were free
from Heresy until that of Pelagius.

1. THAT this Country of Britain after this flourished with great numbers of
Worthy Bishops, no City then vacant hear of such a Pastor, and Ruler, we may
gather from diverse Antiquities, as from the Epistle of the great Council of
Ariminum in Italy, not long after this time written to Constantius the
Emperor, where our Bishops were present, testifying unto him, that they were
assembled there, forth of all Cities toward the West, most properly and
significently to be applied to this kingdom most West from thence, Cuncti
Episcopi ex omnibus Ciuitatibus ad Occidentem sitis, Arimini in vnum
conuenimus. And the words, all Bishops out of Epist. Concilij Arimini ad
Constantium Imperat. apud Socratem l. 2. Hist. c. 29. Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 4.
c. 16. Sever. Sulpit. sacrae Hist. lib. 2. Cap. 21. supr. apud Sozomen. Lib.
Notitia Ep. orb. Christiani. sieve Cod. Prouinc. Romans
all Western Cities, cuncti Episcopi ex omnibus Ciuitatibus ad Occidentem
sitis, cannot carry any other true construction, but that our Episcopal Cities
in Britain were then so furnished, and many or most of them present at that
Counsel. This is confirmed by the number of Western Bishops above 400. as
Sozomen and others write, assembled at Ariminum, ad Concili^m Arimini
congregati sunt amplius quadringenti Episcopi, besides 160. of the East at the
same time gathered together at Seleucia in Isauria: dum haec geruntur, Episcopi
Orientis numero circiter centum and sexaginta, Seleuciam, quod est oppidum
Isauri^ conueniunt. When it is evident in the old Manuscript Catalogue of
Bishops called, Notitia Episcoporum orbis Christiani, or Codex Prouincialis
Romanus, that Britain and all the Western Nations present in that Council of
Ariminum had not at that time, many more then four hundred Bishops. Therefore
we must needs grant, that the Bishops of all Cities, as well of Britain as
other Countries of the West, which had not excusable letts, and impediments,
were there present, in such sense, as the Epistle of that Council is cited
before. And Seuerus Sulpitius Sever. Sulpit. sacrae Hist. l. 2.
is sufficient witness for this our Britain in particular, that it had many
Bishops there; for relating the number to have been above four hundred out of
the West, quadringenti and aliquando amplius Occidentales Episcopi Ariminum
conuenere: And the Emperor, the better to incline them to his Arrian faction as
it seems, commanded provision should be made for them all at his cost, quibus
omnibus annonas and cellaria dare Imperator praeceperat: But the Bishops of
France, Aquitaine, and Britain refused it, and rather made choice to live at
their own chardges, then to be maintained by the Emperor, and this refusal
was general to all the Bishops of Britain, Aquitaine, and France, except
three only of Britain, which received allowance from the Emperor, and
refused maintenance by the other Bishops, themselves being poor, id Aquitanis,
Gallis, ac Britannis indecens visum: repudiatis fiscalibus, proprijs sumptibus
vinere maluerunt. Tres tantum ex Britannia inopia proprij, publico vsi sunt,
cum oblatam a caeteris collationem respuissent: sanctius putantes fiscum
granare, quam singulos.

2. This affirmation that all the Bishops of Britain excepting only three
which were poor, and were proffered to be maintained by their fellow Bishops
which were generally rich as I have declared before in the Foundation of King
Lucius giving them both all the Flamens and Archflamens Lands and Revenues.
And others does evidently testify, that Britain had many Bishops at Ariminum,
when the number of three is but a tantum, almost nothing in respect of the
othrs. And the same Author there proving that the British Bishops were both
acciti and attracti, Cited and drawn or forced to come to that Council by the
Officers of Constantius now after his brothers death a professed friend of the
Arrian Heresy, or rather a professed Arrian, then reigning in Britain, makes
it evident, that our British Bishops which could not plead sufficient cause
of excuse, and absence, were generally present there. And if those few poor
Bishops of Britain which were not able to bear their own charges, were
drawn thither to be maintained by the Emperor, how much rather must we judge
the same of so many potent and rich in this Country which could pretend no
such excuse. So that we see no excuse but Harris Eccles. Hist. tom. 4. cap. 24.
infirmity, either by Age, or sickness to have caused any British Bishops
absence thence. A late Writer thinks, Iltutus then as he coniectureth
Archbishop of London, the Archbishops of York, and Carleon, the Bishops of
Winchester, Cilicester, and Gloucester with others were there. I see no
particular warrant he brings more for these, then any other of so many
Episcopal British Cities of that time, which I have before remembered, all of
them being in the same condition for presence or absence, but where just
excuses and letts were singular to any in particular above the rest: for good
Authors before have testified, that all in general were urged to be there,
without any exception, or to be expempted. And almost all Bishops in the
world, were then caused to be either at Ariminum in Italy, where those of the
West were, or at Seleucia appointed for the Earstern Bishops, Interim in
Orient exe^plo Occidentalium, Imperator iubet cunctos fere Episcopos apud
Seleuciam Isauriae oppidum Sulpitius Sever. sacrae Hist. l. 2. Epist. Concilij
Ariminen. ad Constantiu^ apud Theod. l. 2. Hist. c. 19. Sever. Sulpit. l. 2.
sacrae Hist. Ambros. l. 5. Ep. 32. ad Valentinianum Imperator. Council. Arimin.
Ep. 2. ad Consta^tium Imper. apud Theod. l. 2. c. 20. and alios. Epist. Arimin.
Council. ad Constant. apud Theodot. supr. Socrat. l. 2. c. 29. Sozom. l. 4. c.
17. Niceph. l. 9. c. 40. 41. Sozom. sup. c. 18.
congregari. And the command was general for all Bishops to be present, Iussio
generalis, qua omnes Episcopos ad Concilium cogere iubebantur. This was the
Emperors command to his Presidents of Provinces to compel all to be present.
And the Council of Ariminum it self in their Epistle to Constantius the
Arrian Emperor testifies plainly, that all the Bishops of the West were there
assembled, Arimini omnes Occidentales Episcopi conuenimus. The far greater
part of these were Catholic Bishops, and of the whole number above 400. There
were not by Seuerus Sulpitius Relation above 80. Arrians, Arriani non amplius
quam octoginta, Reliqui nostrarum partium erant. S. Athanasius says, they were
fifty and more, quinquaginta and eo plures. And S. Ambrose witnesses, that the
greatest part of the Bishops there confirmed the faith of the Nicen Council,
and condemned the Arrians Errors, Certe mayor numerus Arimini, Nicaeni Concilij
fide^ prohauit, Arriana decreta damnauit. This is testified by the same
Counsel in two several Epistles to the Emperor, that they neither could nor
would swerve from the Doctrine of the Nicen Council, Nos tibi significauimus
nullo modo a proposito nos discessuros, quod and ipsum iterum his literis
docemus. And in their first Epistle they speak as though all the Western
Bishops had herein consented, Cuncti Episcopi ex omnibus ciuitatibus ad
Occidentem sitis, Arimini in vnum conuenimus, vt and fides Ecclesiae Catholicae
fieret illustrior, and illius aduersarij perspicue deprehenderentur.

3. And allthough the Emperor both by his Epistle to that Council, and
otherwise by fraud, and terrors, endeavored to remove them from that holy
mind, and communicate with the Arrians, they plainly wrote answer again,
constantly auerring they would change nothing they had Decreed, and gave their
Legates charge to tell him as much in words, Quibus rescripsit Concilium,
constanter affirmando, se neutiquam a decretis quae statuerat velle discedere:
idemque Legatis suis tum scripsisse, tum praecepisse. Et non modo scripsit, sed
id quoque dicere Legatos iussit. And to make it manifest, that allthough by
many Writers diverse of these Bishops being conuented and overcome both with the
deceit of the Arrians, and Persecution of the Emperor, did afterward subscribe
to a Material error; our Bishops of Britain were free both from imputation
and suspicion thereof. Socrates, Sozomen, Nicephorus and others prove, that the
Emperor neglecting to return answer to their second absolute Resolution and
Epistle, the Council staying some time for answer, and having none, they all
departed to their Countries and Sees and wholly dissolved that Council, Ista
vbi scripsissent, and paululum temporis essent commorati, cum Imperator illis
respondere dedignaretur, singuli ad suas ipsorum Civitates reuerterunt. Socrat.
Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 29. Sozomen. l. 4. cap. 18. Niceph. Hist. l. 9. c. 41.
Hilarious l. contra Arrianos and Argent.
S. Hilary says plainly, this Council ended religeously by all, Ariminensis
Synodus ab omnibus est religiose dissoluta. So our Bishops most remote from
Ariminum, none being returned home, or so far from recalling by any new Edict
or strategeme of the Emperor, then at Constantinople very far from Ariminum,
and further from our Bishops Travail into Britayne, they could be none of that
number, which were circumuented or terrified to subscribe to the wicked
Emperor, and his Arrian Fauourits designs.

4. Socrates and others make this clear, by relating the Persecution of
Co^stantius against the Catholics, though before desired: Yet now to have
flamed forth, and been made public upon this occasion of the Councels
breaking up, and dissoluing without his allowance. And thereupon gave
Authority to Vrsacius to execute what cruelty he pleased against the
Catholic Bishops Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 29. 41. Sozom. Hist. l. 4. c. 18.
of Italy, which could not subscribe to their erroneons Profession, which the
Arrians had composed, Dixit se ab illis propterea penitus contemptum, quod
contra eius voluntatem Concilium dimiserant. Quocirca Vrsacio potestatem
permisit, libere contra Ecclesias omnia pro arbitratu admittendi: praecepitque
vt fidei formula, quae in Concilio Ariminensi perlegebatur, ad Ecclesias
Italiae mitteretur, and illi qui ei subscribere nollent, expellerentur ab
Ecclesijs, alijque in eorum loca suffic^rentur. So that the Bishops of Britayne
being departed from Ariminum, before any intelligence thereof could be given,
and sent from thence to the Emperor at Constantinople, and he not presently,
but with advise of his Heretical Adherents concluding the manner of his
Persecution, before these things could be concluded, and Vrsacius and his other
persecuting instruments could come into Italy, our British Bishops must needs
both be come from thence and returned into Britayne.

5. And it appears before, that the chief and principal malice of the
Emperor, and Arrians at this time, was against Liberius Pope of Rome, and the
other Catholic Bishops of Italy. And it is manifest by Socrates and others
that Vrsacius the chiefest Executioner of this Tyranny came no further into the
West, then Italy, and from thence returned into the East again, Vrsacius
Italia r^licta iter parts Orientis capit. Neither is there the least mention
in Socrat. supr.
Histories of any part or particular of this Persecution to have been acted in
Britayne. And our own Historians have made it doubtful before, whether
Constantius had so much Power in Britayne after this time, to execute such
cruelty in this Country, where they say he had no command or Authority at
all in these days. Besides if Constantius was King and Commander hear, yet
after the end of the Council of Ariminum he had no time left to persecute the
Bishops of Britain, so far distant from his Eastern Residency; first
because Iulianus, afterward an Apostata from Christian Religion, who had
Ammian. lib. 15. Baron. and Spo^d. an. 315. Herm. Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c.
1. Socrat. Hist. l. 3. c. 1. Niceph. l. 10. c. 1. Theodor. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c.
2.
married Constantius his Sister Helena, was now both Caesar, and by many,
Emperor also both in France and Britayne likewise (if Britayne was then subject
to the Empire) and in such renown there for his victories against the Allmans
inuading the Empire, that he was soon after choasen Emperor, and was so
favorable to the Catholics, that so soon as he came to be Emperor he recalled
and restored all the Catholic Bishops which Constantius the Arrian had
bannished, as Theodoret and others testify, Iulianus Episcopos qui fuerunt in
exilium a Constantio in vltima terrarum loca missi, ad suam quemque Ecclesiam
capessendam renocauit: And declared Emperor in France and the West in
Consta^tius his time, when he and his Accomplices raged most against the
Catholic Bishops, soon after the dissoluing of the Council of Ariminum, as
Sozomen Sozom. Socrat. and Niceph. supr.
Socrates, Nicephorus and others prove, was so far from concurring with him
or his Agents either in this or any other design by his Authority or
Commission, that in all places in the West, and as he went toward Constantius
in the East he discharged his Officers, and Commissioners in all Provinces,
disgracing him in every City, so that all people revolted from Constantius,
and submitted themselves unto Iulianus, His rebus prospere and faeliciter
gestis, Imperator a militibus declaratur. Iulianus ad hunc modum regnare
caepit. Neque Legatos ad Constantium mittere, neque vt patronum and beneficum
colere, sed omnia pro suo ipsius arbitrio agere in animum induxit. Magistratus
in singulis Prouincijs commutare, Constantium in quaque Ciuitate infamia notare
conatur. Quocircailli omnes se dedere, a Constantio deficere caeperunt.

6. S. Hilarious the best Calculator of those times, and Tragedies, wherein he
suffered so much, by the Arrians for the Catholic doctrine, can give the most
certain evidence in this business; he in his Book of Synods written to the
Bishops of Britain, Germany, and France after the summons of the Council of
Hila. l. de Synod. contra Arrianos.
Ariminum: cum comperissem Synodos in Ancira atque in Arimino congregandas,
says, that he had been exiled three whole years, toto iam triennio. In his
Book offered to Constantius after the Council of Ariminum, when he was by him
Hilar. l. ad Constantium Augustum. Hilar. l. contra Constantium defunctum.
sent home free into France, he justifies he remained then in communion with
all the Churches, and Bishops of France with which our Britans then also
communicated by all Antiquites, Episcopus ego sum in omnium Gallicarum
Ecclesiarum atque Episcoporum communione, licet in exilio permanens, and
Ecclesiae adhuc per presbyteros meos communionem distribuens. And in his Book
against Co^stantius, being then dead he writes, that after the Bannishment of
the Catholic Bishops Paulinus, Eusebius Vercellensis, Luciferus, and
Dionisius, five years before he with the Bishops of France had separated
himself from the Communion of the Arrians, Saturninus, Vrsatius and Valens,
which two last were Constantius choasen chief Instruments publikly to
persecute the Catholics after the Ariminum Council ended, Post Sanctorum
virorum exilia Paulini, Eusebij, Lucifiri, Diosij, quinto ab hinc anno a
Saturnini, and vrsatij and valentis Communione me cum Gallicanis Episcopis
seperaui. And particularly for our Bishops of Britain, in his Epistle, or
Book to them, with others directed to the Hilar. l. de Synodis prope I^itium.
Lords his most blessed Brethren, and fellow Bishops of the Provinces of
Britain, Dominis and beatissimis fratribus, and Coepiscopis, Prouinciarum
Britanniarum Episcopis, he testifies from their own letters of their sincere
faith, sent unto him in Exile, beatae fidei vestrae literis sumptis, that they
continued unspotted, and free from all contagion of Heresy, were partakers of
his Exile, and would not communicate with wicked Saturninus, which had procured
his Ba^nishment, and denied Saturninus communion all that while, three whole
years, Gratulatus sum in Domino incontaminatos vos and illaesos ab omni
contagio detestandae Haereseos perstitisse, vosque comparticipes exilij mei, in
quod me Saturninus ipsam conscentiam suam veritus, circumuento Imperatore
detruserat, negata ipsi vsque hoc tempus toto iam triennio Communione, fide
mihi ac spiritu coherere. And that they had actually rejected and condemned the
Heretical Decrees of Syrmium, and missam proxime vobis ex Syrmiensi Oppido
infidelis fidei impietatem, non modo non suscepisse, sed nuntiatam etiam
significatamque damnasse.

7. And both after the Ariminum Council and death of Constantius and Julian
his short Rule, in the shorter Empire of Iouian, commonly named Iouinian, when
that Persecution ended, we have an other the best witness of those days; S.
Athanasius confidently upon his own certain experience, and knowledge
auouching to that Emperor, that among many other Countries which he there
recounteth, all the Church of Britain did inuiolably hold the faith of the
Nicen Council, Cognosce Religiosissime Auguste, hanc esse fidem quae Athanas.
epist. ad Iouinian. Aug.
a condito aeuo praedicanda fuit, and quam Niceae Patres congregati agnouerunt,
eiusque Suffragatrices esse omnes omnibus in locis Ecclesias sieve in Hispania,
sieve Britanuia. Omnium enim istoru^ animos experimentis cognouimus, and scripta
habemus. Thus it is made evident, that our Churches and Bishops of Britain
both before, at, and after the Council of Ariminum, were free from this
infection of the Arrian Heresy, even at that time, when S. Hierome says of
the whole world besides, that the flame of this Heresy had destroyed it, totum
orbem eius flamma populata est. And ingemuit totus orbis, and Artianum se esse
miratus est. The whole world groaned, and maruailed to see itself an Arrian.
Which was soon after the Council of Ariminum, when Vale^s and Vrsacius by the
Arrian Emperors Authority, and Power used such cunning strategems, and
violence toward the Catholic Bishops, especially in Italy and the Eastern
Countries, where S. Hier. l. 3. in Epist. ad Galat. Hier. aduers. Luciferian.
Hierome lived and wrote.

8. Yet neither dare I, or do I affirm, that Britain was absolutely and
perfectly free in all the members thereof, Ecclesiastical and temporal, or
all such as were directed hither by the Arrian Emperor, or had civil command
under him hear, were unspotted with this Heresy, and that it did not at all
invade this Kingdom in some parsons and places: it is a sufficient glory, and
singular prerogative unto us, in so general an Inundation, to have proved our
Bishops and their Churches Innocent: for besides diverse testimonies before, of
a common infection in all the world with this Pestilence, we have our own best
and most ancient Writers S. Gildas, and S. Bid, who as they do confess,
that from the time of Dioclesian his Persecution ended, the Church of Britain
was in peace, and quiet, until the Arrian Heresy: So they bewail, and
complain that this infecting all the world, sailed over the Ocean in this
Kingdom, and other Heresies followed it afterward, Mansit haec in Ecclesijs
Christi Bed. Hist. Eccles. Gent. Angl. l. 1. c. 8.
quae erant in Britannia, pax, vsque ad tempora Arrianae vesaniae, quae
corrupto orb toto, hanc ^ti^m Insulam, extra orbem tam long remotam, veneno
sui infecit erroris and hac qu^si via pist^len^iaetrans Oceanum patefacta non
mora, omnis selves Haeresios cuiusque, infulae (...) semper aliquid audire
graudenti, and nihil certi firmiter obtinenti insudit. S. Gildas before him
writes to like purpose, calling that Heresy Gild. l. de excid. Brit. c. 9.
in respect of this Nation, transmarinum venenum, a foreign and beyond sea
poison transported hither, not bred hear, nor naming any one particular
British Bishop, Ruler of Church, or Church infected with it. And to grant this
Kingdom then to have been under the Empire, and Emperor Constantius, then an
Arrian, which many of our own Historians have before denied, all this will
probably argue no more then that I have yielded unto, that some were infected
hear, but not of Bishops and learned Clergy. In which sense Sozomen, one of
the best Examiners of those proceedings says, that he thinks no Nation under
the Roman Empire was quite free, and clear of that calamititie, Nulla gens
Romano subiecta Imperio ab hac calamitate, credo, vacua liberaque fuit. And we
have a better witness for Britain to keep it undefiled Sozom. l. 4. Hist. c.
26.
from this, and all other Heresies until that of Pelagius, long after this
time, for so testifies the old Manuscript Antiquity of the Church of
La^daffe, written as it seems by the things therein handled before S. Gildas
his time, all being more ancient which plainly says, that the Britans never
changed any point of faith, which they received in King Lucius time, nor were
infected Antiquit. M. S. Eccl. Landauen.
with any spot of wicked Doctrine until Pelagius his Heresy arose, Quam
Christianae Religionis fidem, sine aliqua praui dogmatis macula sinceram
conseruauerunt, vsque dum Pelagiana Haeresis orta est. Therefore if the Arrian
Heresy had any entrance hither, it must needs be only in some few particular
men, not in Public parsons and Churches.

THE XXI. CHAPTER.
CHIEFLY ENTREATING OF LIBERIVS Pope and Constantius Emperor, manifestly
clearing S. Liberius, making him an holy Catholic Pope, and Saint: and the
Emperor Constantius a true penitent and to dye a Catholic.

1. THE Pope of Rome which succeeded to S. Julius, in the Heretical time and
Empire of this Constantius, was Liberius, and by them which number Saint Faelix
substituted by the Arrians for Pope Liberius exiled in the Catalogue of Popes,
the same S. Faelix is likewise reckoned among the Bishops of that See Baron.
and Spond. Annal. an. 357. Sever. Bin. Tom. 1. Conc. Annot. in vit. Liberij.
Apostolic. Diverse even Catholic Writers do seem to hold, that Liberius
being bannished by the Arrian Emperor for refusing to communicate with the
Arrian Heretics, did by troble and vexation yield to communicate with them
externally, but never consented unto, but ever in judgment condemned their
Heresy, and so make him guilty of a fault in fact, but not in faith, in
which he ever remained constant and immovable. And S. Athanasius whose
testimony is great, and on whom they most rely in this opinion, allthough he
makes Pope Liberius a most excellent pattern, and example of constanty against
those Heretics, yet in one place he writes, that either he by violence and
threats of death, consented to some material error, by subscribing, or the
Arrians flandered him with such a fact, testifiing Liberius was ever most free,
even at this supposed time from Heresy, and if any fault of fact was
committed, it was to be imputed to the wills of the Arrians, and not of
Liberius, and Pope Liberius was no Arrian or consenter to them but an holy Pope.
yet Liberius then did not supply the Papal See, but Felix was by the^ reputed
Pope, and by them substituted into the Papal See in place of Liberius, being
by them exiled, Liberius post exactum in exilio biennium inflexus est, minisque
mortis Athanas. Epist. ad Solitariam vitam agentes. Tom. 2. oper.
ad subscriptionem inductus est. Verum illud ipsum quoque and eorum violentiam,
and Liberij in Haeresim odium and suum pro Athanasio suffragium, quum liberos
affectus habebat, satis coarguit. Quae enim per tormenta contra priorem eius
sententiam extorta sunt, eaeiam metuentium, sed ita cogentium voluntates
habendae sunt. Ruffinus Ruffin. l. 1. Hist. c. 27.
leaves it doubtful, whether Liberius was restored because he subscribed, or
at the instance of the Romans refusing to obey any other Bishop, Liberius vrbis
Romae Episcopus Constantio viuente regressus est. Sed hoc vtrum quod
acquieuerit voluntati suae, ad subscribendum, an ad populi Romani gratiam, a
quo proficiscens fuerat exoratus, indulserit, pro certo compertum non habeo. By
this it is evident, that it could not be proved in those days, that Liberius
made any subscription or yielding at all, such as pleased or could please the
Arrian Emperor and his Heretics. But Sozomen, Socrates, Theodoret, and others
coming to more certain, and prefect Intelligence of these things, then
Ruffinus, confesses he had attained unto, do more clearly testify, that
this report of Pope Liberius subscription, was but the invention and fiction of
the Arrians, who knowing Sozom. Histor. Eccl. l. c. 4. 14.
the great Power of him, and his See, and that Constantius was so urged by the
Romans, and Western Bishops to restore him, that he could not deny it,
fathered this lie against Liberius for the Emperors and their excuse,
Imperator compellere tentauit Liberium fateri, filium patri non esse
consubstantialem. In which he could not prevail, and then they raised this
Rumor and slander: rumorem dissiparunt Liberium verbum consubstantiale
reiecisse, asseruisseque filium patri dissimilem esse. When this holy Pope at
that very time, as the same Author proves, to disprove this slander,
int^rdicted all which allowed of that error, Confessionis fidei formulam a
Liberio adduxerunt, quae illis qui filium patri non substantia, and caeteris
rebus omnibus similem asseuerarent, interdixit Ecclesia. Yet the Imperour
rather moved by fear, then love, gave him leave to return to Rome, Emperator
dat Liberio potestatem Romam reuertendi. For the Romans so loved and honored
Liberius for his excellent gifts, and principally for so constantly defending
the true faith, and courageously resisting the Arrian Emperor, that they took
Arms for his exilement, Populus Liberium, tum quod in alijs rebus vir
excellens and spectatus erat, tum quod Imperatori animo adeo excelso and
constanti in fide defendenda contradixerat, tam eximie charum habuit, vt
seditionem plane maximam eius exilij causa conflaret, resque ad caedem
prorumperet.

2. Socrates says plainly, that Liberius was restored, because the Romans
caused sedition for his Bannishment, and threw Felix, whom the Arrians had
Socrates l. 2. Hist. c. 29.
putt in his place, out of the Church, and the Emperor thereupon against his
will consented to his return, Liberius ab exilio reuocatus, sedem Episcopatus
propterea recuperauit, quod populus Romanus seditione conflata, Felicem
Ecclesia illa eiecerat, Imperatorque ipse etiam inuito animo illis consenserat.
Where we see, it was rather the Act of the Romans Catholics, then the Arrian
Emperor that Liberius was restored with the Romans, and against the Emperors
will. Theodoret shows, that the Matrons of Rome were also Agents herein,
protesting to their husbands, that if they would not procure the return of
Liberius, they would forsake them, and go unto him, Cum Romae esset
Constantius, Magistratuum and Primariorum ciuium coniuges obsecrant maritos, vt
supplicent Constantio, pro Pastore qui restituatur Ecclesiae suae, seque nisi
impetrassent, desertis ipsis, ad magnum illum Pastorem deuenturas minantur. And
they themselves Theod. l. 2. Hist. c. 17.
went to the Emperor to urge him hearein, and not to suffer such a City to
want their Pastor, and though the Emperor answered, they had Felix a worthy
man, which kept the Nicen faith, and only communicated with Arrians, this
could not content them, iustifiing that no Citizen of Rome would come into the
Church while he was there. And hearevpon the Emperor consented to his return
to Rome, Accedunt laudabiles Matronae ad Imperatorem pretiocissimis vestibus
ornatae, quo magis Imperator nobiles ratus precibus voluntatique ipsarum
gereret morem. Erat autem deprecatio talis. Misereri vellet tantae ciuitatis
spoliatae Pastore suo, and expositae Luporum insidijs: sed Imperator Respondit,
non illam Pastore alio indigere quae prudentem bonumque haberet: fuerat autem
creatus post Liberium vnus ex Diaconis illius, vir fidelis, Faelix nomine, qui
incurruptam quidem seruabat Niceae expositam fidem, sed violatoribus illius
coniungi non verebatur: nemo tamen omnium ciuium Romanorum in aedem orationis
est ingressus, cum ipse intus foret. Quod ipsum and matronae tum Regi
significarunt. Itaque flecti se passus, iussit optimum quidem Liberium de
Exilio reuocari.

3. Therefore seeing both the Western Catholic Bishops by their letters and
Legates made Intercession for Liberius his restoring, the Romans made Tumults
for him, and their wives did thus urge his return, and none of them would
communicate with Felix, communicating with the Arrians, and Liberius being
restored did so much detest subscription, or communication with Arrians, that
after the Assemble of Ariminum, he did rather and most willingly by all
Authors chose to be exiled again the second time, then to subscribe unto, or
communicate with them. I dare not think that so worthy a man by all
witnesses, was ever guilty of so foul a fact And Constantius which had by all
means tempted his constancy both by fears and flatteries, would not have been
unwilling, but most willing with his return upon that condition, he whom he
and his Arrians put in Liberius place performing no more, but otherwise so
firmly continuing in the Catholic faith and hating Arrianisme, Damasus Sen.
Anastas. in Vit. Faelic. 2. Tom. 1. Conc. Martyrol. Romans Iulij 29. Bar. Annal.
ann. 357. Sever. Bin. Tom. 1. Conc. in eod. Marian. Scot. aetat. 6. in
Constant. Martin. Polon. Sup. put. in Faelice. Regino Chron. Sozom. l. 6. Hist.
c. 22.
that by many Writers and of great worth, he excommunicated that Emperor for
that Heresy, and for that same cause suffered Martyrdom under him, Hic fuit
Catholicus, hic declarauit Constantium filium Constantini esse Hereticum. Et
propter hoc ab eodem Consta^tio capitis decollatione, martyrio coronatus. His
Marble Tomb found in the Church of S. Cosmas and Damian had this Inscription
in old Characters, hic iacet corpus sancti Faelicis Papae and Martyris, qui
Constantium Haereticum damnauit.

4. And concerning Liberius his faith to the end, Sozomen the most diligent
Relator of his Actions, sets down for his last memorable Act, that when
there was Question in Syria, and some other places, about the
consubstantialitie of the holy Ghost with the Father and the son, Pope
Liberius having notice thereof, wrote his Decretall Epistle to the Eastern
Bishops, that they should with the Bishops and Priests of the West confess the
holy Trinity. And they all yielded to the judgment of the Pope Liberius, Quae
controuersia cum in dies magis magisque cresceret, Episcopus Romanus de e^
certior factus, scripsit ad Ecclesias Orientis literas, vt vna cum Sacerdotibus
and Episcopis Occidentis Trinitatem and consubstantialem esse, and gloria
aequalem existimarent. Quo facto, singuli rebus ab Ecclesia Romana semel
indicatis acquieuerunt, haecque controuersia finem habere visa est.

5. The Macedonian Heretics, as the same Sozomen, Socrates and others testify,
submitted themselves to his Papal sentence. And all the Bishops of the West
except Auxentius Bishop of Millan, embraced the doctrine and Decrees Sozomen.
l. 6. c. 11. Socrat. l. 4. c. 11 Sozomen. supr. c. 23.
of the Nicen Council, together with Pope Liberius, De doctrina autem, neque
Romani, neque vlli alij in Occidente inter se dissentiebant, sed omnes Concilij
Nicaeni Decreta approbaba^t, atque Trinitatem tum honor aequalem, tum potentia
censebant: Auxentio solo excepto, qui cum esset eo tempore Ecclesiae
Mediolanensis Antistes, vna cum alijs quibusdam res nouas moliri, and contra
communem Episcoporum Occidentis consensum doctrinam Arrianam defendere, and
idem cum his qui non filium solum, sed spiritum sanctum quoque patri dissimilem
(quae controuersia Posteris excitata erat) existimabant, sentire in animum
induxit. Therefore have the Fathers before justly called him an excellent
renowned man, and inferior to none, vir excellens, spectatus, optimus. Saint
Ambrose calls him a man of holy memory, Sanctae Ambros. lib. 3. de Virg.
Epiphan. Haere^. 75. Basil. Epist. 74. Bed. in Martyrol. 8. Call. October. Martyr.
Vuandelbert. 23. September. Niceph. lib. 10. Hist. cap. 1.
memoriae. S. Epiphanius, a blessed man, beatum. And S. Basile, a most blessed
man, beatissimum. In ancient Martyrologes he is a Saint. So S. Bid and this
Country among others has received, and honored him.

6. Some also there be, which labor to free Constantius the Emperor himself,
from being a formal, and obstinate Heretic, among whom Nicephoras says, he
was seduced by giving too much credit to the Arrian Bishops conuersing with
him, and yet allthough he caused the word (...) consubstantiall, for peace sake
to be put out of the Creed, yet he still professed the true Constantius Emperor
by some excused to be no Heretic but a professed Catholic a^ his death.
sense and meaning of that word, saying and holding, that Christ was the true
son of God begotten from Eternity, and was a professed and open Enemy to all
which durst call God the Son a Creature, Quamuis facilitate ingenij, and
illecebris Religionis ab Episcopis, in quorum potestate fuit, seductus sit, and
(...) consubstantialis verbum ex fidei Symbolo, sub vnionis coniunctionisque
omnium praetextu sustulerit, sinceram tamen dictionis eius sententiam est
professus. Quum etenim Deum verbum germanum filium, and ante secula ex patre
genitum dixit, tum certus, manifestusque eorum qui creaturam illum vocare ausi
fuissent, hostis extitit. The like Niceph. l. 9. c. 50.
he has in other places, and cites S. Gregory Nazianzen to like purpose, who
does as much, or more excuse him; he says he died an holy death, was buried
with all honor, and reverence, with holy Christian singing, Himes and lights:
sanctis carminibus nocturnis, himnis, and lucernarum ignibus Christiani obitum
pium cohonestandum censent. He calls him the most holy of all Emperors and
most loving of Christ, Imperatorum santissime, and Christi amantissime. He
says he was after his death glorified in heaven, changing his earthly for an
heavenly Empire, Qui ad Deum translatus sis gloriae caelestis haeres, and tanto
longius a nobis secesseris, quanto Imperium illud quod cum hoc commutasti, est
augustius. Thus S. Gregory Nazianzen is cited by Nicephorus: But in his own
works Greg. Nazien. l. de Laud. S. Athanasij. orat. 1. and 2. in Julian.
he is more plain for the excuse, and co^mendatio^s of Co^stantius; defe^ding
him or excusing him in all matters objected against him. Which were three
things, that he caused the death of his son in Law: the second for making
Iulia^ which proved an Apostate, Emperor: the third for his professing or
favoring the Arria^ Heresy. All which he confessed at his death, and in his
last words repented, Tria haec Greg. Nazian. l. in Laud. Athan.
mala Imperioque suo and principatu indigna ipsu^ agnouisse narrant, vnu^ quod
generi suo necem attulisset: alteru^ quod Iulianu^ Apostata^ Imperatorem
nominasset: tertium quod nouis fidei dogmatibus studuisset: simulque cu^ his
vocibus e vita aiscessisse. The word narra^t, me^ testify, proves this was
the testimony of others besides S. Gregory, and yet he living in that time, and
those parts a man of so great reno^ne, his own Authority if it had been
singular, is not to be lightly esteemed. Yet diverse others besides those
witnesses confess as much. Zonoras says of this Constantius citing others as
much as S. Gregory did, that this Emperor at his death professed himself to
be penitent for those Errors, Constantius obijt, Io. Zonar. Tom. 3. Annal. in
Constantio.
trium, vt aiunt, se paenitere professus, caedis propinquorum, collati in
Iulianum Tituli, and mutatae Religionis. And for this chief point for changing
his Fathers Religion, and following the Arrians, Nicephorus says, he did not a
little repent Niceph. Hist. lib. 10. c. 1.
him, Quem non parum quod aliquid de paternae fidei professione mutauerit,
paenituit. And Theodoret one of his greatest Accusers herein, confesses as
much, and more, affirming he did bitterly complain, that he had changed his
faith, acerbe fuit conquestus, quod fidem immutasset. And again, he died with
groaning and Theodor. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 32. vlt. Theod. l. 3. c. 1.
bewayling, that he had changed his Fathers faith, Co^stantius cu^ gemitu, and
queremonia, ob mutatam fidem paternam, excessite vita. S. Gregory Nazianzen
says, that at his death he purged and excused himself both before God, and
man in many words, and Deo, and hominibus multis verbis se excusasset, atque
purgasset, Greg. Nazian. orat. in Julian.
conatuque suo animique impetu testacum Christianis reliquisset, quanto
pietatis tuendae studio impelleretur. Whereupon this holy learned Father says,
he had pleasure to think of his end, Ex postremis voluptas nascitur. He says,
this was the Orat. 2. in Julian.
more common opinion quod communius est, that he died an holy death, pio fine
vitam clauserat, he was buried with such solemnities, as Catholics use in the
Funerals of them which make an holy end, Publicis laudibus faustisque
ominationibus pompisque deducitur, ac Religiosis etiam his nostratibus
cultibus, nocturnis cantionibus, faciumque gestationibus, quibus nos Christiani
pium e vita discessum honor prosequi consueuimus.

7. And to confirm the opinion of men with the Authority and testimony of
heaven, and Angels, he says, it was commonly related, multorum auribus
diuulgatum est, that as his body was with such solemnity carried to
Constantinople to be buried there, an Angelical Harmony was heard by many, as
a reward of his piety, Vox quaedam summis e locis a nonnullis exaudiebatur,
velue psallentium and prosequentium (Angelicorum, opinor, caetuum) quod
pietatis illi praemium erat, funebrisque remuneratio. The same is related by
Nicephorus and others. Niceph. l. 9. Hist. c. 50. Greg. Nazian. orat. 1. in
Julian.
Whereupon the same holy Father styles him the Emperor most excellent, most
divine, and most loving of Christ, o Imperatorum praestantissime, ac
diuinissime, Christique amantissime. And confidently affirms; he was after
his death, joined to God, had received the Inheritance of the heavenly glory,
and departed hence to change his Empire for a better, Qui Deo-coniunctus sis,
celestisque gloriae haereditatem acceperis, atque hactenus a nobis migraris, vt
Imperium Greg. Nazian. orat. in laudem Athanasij.
cum meliore commutares. Which no good and learned man, such as this S. Gregory
was, could or would say, of an irrepentant Heretic. Therefore when he says of
this Emperor in an other place, that some reported, that he had unprofitable
repentance at his death, inutili vt ferunt, paenitentia in extremo vitae
spiritu affectus: he must needs speak as his own words, vt ferunt, prove in
the opinion of others. And yet there speaking of the three things before cited
which he repented him of, two of them were the^ remediless to wit, the
disinheriting of the next Heirs to the Empire now being dead, and giving Title
to Julian, who had then usurped the Empire and by force kept it. But for his
own salvation, there was no time too late in his life, to have true effectual
and iustifiing repentance. And S. Athanasius then in exile, far from the
place of Constantius his death, and writing presently after that he was
baptized by Athanas. Epist. de Synodis A^ia. and Seleuc.
Enzoius an Arrian, and not hearing of his repentance after testified both by
men and Angels, as his silence thereof proves, might have probable cause to
think and write, that he died as he lived an Arrian, Constantius Haereticus
suit, ad finem vsque permanens in ea impietate. This also may and very probably
be gathered by his extraordinary favor and love toward that great light of
Christ's Church in that time S. Hilary, most famously known to be the greatest
Propugner and Defendor of the Nicen faith, which was the^ in the world, and had
written much against the Arrians, and among the rest twelve Books of the
blessed Trinity, and openly still professed himself a Catholic, and the
Arrians damnable Heretics, and both dedicated and delivered this his Profession
and Apology in a Book even to the hands of Constantius, and was by him with
great liberty, freedom, and honor restored, and sent to his Bishoprike in
France. And in that his Apology proves, that Constantius of himself, but
that he was much abused and violented by the Arrians, had long desired to know
the true Catholic faith in that Controversy; Recognosce fidem quam olim,
optime ac religiosissime Imperator ab Episcopis optas audire, and non audis.
Hilar. l. ad Constantium Augustum.
Dum enim a quibus ea requiritur, sua scribunt, and non quae Dei sunt
praedicant: orbem aeternum erroris, and redeuntis in se semper certaminis
circumtulerunt.

8. And allthough being suddenly taken with sickness and death, no Catholic
Bishop in any probable judgment being present, he was in extremity baptized by
Enzoius an Arrian, as S. Athanasius writes, yet this proves not, but as S.
Gregory says, he might be saved, allthough he had repented before that
Baptism. For the same S. Athanasius grants in the same Epistle, that those
Arrians, or Seminarrians which Constantius joined with, did then keep and use
the Catholic form of Baptism, in the name of the Father and the son and
the holy Ghost, Qui in Ecclesia credunt and baptizantur in nomine patris and
filij and Spiritus sancti^^ and not that condemned form, in nomine patris
maioris, and filij minoris etc. A^^ besides S. Gregory Nazianzen cited before,
Theodoret and others testifice, that allthough Constantius being deceived by
them which could lead him as they listed, did not admit the word of
Coessentialitie yet he manifestly confessed the sense, Christ to be the
natural son of God, begotten of the Father from eternity, and to be God,
utterly rejecting and condemning them, which durst call him a Creature; which
were they which used that inualide form of Baptism, Etsi Constantius non
admittebat vocem Theodor. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 3.
Coessentialitatis, circumuentus ab ijs qui quouis ducere eum poterant,
significationem tamen manifest co^fitebatur, quod diceret filium germanum ante
secula ex patre genitum, Deum verbum: prorsus abdicatis ijs, qui auderent
condituram dicere filium. Thus has Theodoret. And S. Gregory, Nazianzen and
Nicephorus the same Greg. Nazian. supr. Niceph. l. 10. Hist. c. 1.
before, saying that he professed the true and sinceere meaning of the word
(...), consubstantiall, sinceram dictionis eius sententiam est professus. And
declared himself an open and known Enemy of them who durst call Christ a
Creature, Tum certus manifestusque eorum qui creaturam illum vocare ausi
fuissent, hostis extitit. And add, that in all things he was a pattern of his
holy Father, but cheifely in piety, and worship of God, and in abolishing
Idols, error and superstition, Is fuit patris sui exemplar in omnibus rebus,
maxim vero in pietate and Dei cultu, atque in simulachrorum erroris and
superstitionis abolitione.

9. This Consta^tius was at the time of his death, by Sozomen about 45. years
old, annos natus circiter quadraginta quinque, full 45. says Socrates vixit
Constantius Sozom. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 1. Socrat. l. 2. c. 37. vlt. Socr.
and Sozom. supr. Nicephor. Hist. Eccl. l. 9. c. 50. Baron. and Spo^d. Annal.
Tom. 4.
annos 45. besides the time he reigned with his Father, after his death say,
Socrates, Sozomen and Nicephorus he was Emperor 25. years, viginti Annos and
praeterea quinque post patris mortem imperauit, he died on the third day the
Nones of November, tertio Nonas Noue^bris, by Nicephorus his account in the
367. year of Christ, Quum a Christo nato trecentesimus sexagesimus septimus
ageretur. Some set down his death somewhat sooner, as they have done his
Fathers before above 25. years soonerthen this Account of Nicephorus, of the
year of Christ 367. for Constantius his death: yet grant he was Emperor 25.
years after his Father died.

THE XXII. CHAPTER.
IVLIAN THE APOSTATA NEVER PERSECVTED the Christians of Britain: But they,
during the whole time he was Caesar or Emperor, were hear in peace and quiet,
both from Persecution, Paganism, or Heresy.

1. CONSTANTIVS the last ouerlyuing son of Constantine being dead, Iulianus
Brother to Gallus and son of Constantius Chlorus by Theodora, a man by no
Title of descent Heir or King of Britain, was acknowledged for Emperor, for
allthough this Constantius last Emperor by the instigation and persuasion of
Eusebia Empress made him a Caesar in the Empire, he himself not able to
discharge the whole charge for manyfold trobles and Invasions of the Barbarous,
as the Romans termed strangers, into (...) places of the Empire especially in
Gallia, now France; where as Zosimus says, they took 40. Cities, near the
River of Rhene: Francos, and Alamanos and Saxones quadraginta sitas ad Rhenum
vrbes coepisse, prorsus easdem deuastasse, Ciues and Incolas infinitae
multitudinis cum innumerabili spoliorum copia secum abduxisse, and gave unto
him in Zosimus Hist. l. 3 Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 1. Cassiodor. Tripart.
Hist. l. 6. c. 1. Niceph. l. 10. c. 1. Ammianus l. 21. Baron. and Spo^dan.
Annal. ann. 360.
Marriage his Sister Helena. And sent him to govern the part of the Empire, on
this side the Alps, postquam Iulianus in Italiam accersitus aduenisset,
Caesarem Constantius declarat, and Helenam ei sororem in Matrimoniu^ tradit,
and ad Nationes Transalpinas eum dimittit: yet it is evident by Ammianus and
others, that he had no child by her, which lived, but she herself died before
her brother Constantius Emperor. Nevertheless the Ecclesiastical State of
Britain rather gained, then lost by his being Caesar in these Western parts,
and Emperor afterward. For allthough Constantius had married his Sister Helena
unto him, and in that respect so long as she lived might seem to have a care
rather to preserve then destroy him, yet she dying as before, during her
brothers life, that imagined love of Constantius could not longer endure in
that respect: and both Socrates, Cassiodorus and others testify, it was
thought that when Constantius sent him into the dangerous Wars of Gallia, he
did it to have him slain by the cruel and potent Enemies, Dicitur a
nonnullis, Constantium illum, Socrat. l. 3. cap. 1. Cassiodor. Tripartit. Hist.
l. 6. c. 1. Niceph. Hist. l. 10. c. 1. Socrat. supr. and alij. Ammian. lib. 21.
Baron. an. 361. and alij. Socrat. l. 3. c. 1.
(Iulianum) contra Barbaros hac de re misisse, vt cum illis confligens, ibi
interiret. Nicephorus calls this the common conceit and opinion, sermonibus
vulgatum fuit. And Constantius limiting his Authority to do nothing without
consent of others, dedit illi in mandatis Imperator, vt nihil sine Ducu^
consilio moliretur. And not only this but he secretly incited Vadomarus King
of the Frankes to take Arms against Julian; and incited others by his letters,
which they sent to Iulia^ for their excuse, to invade the Romans where Julian
ruled, Illi Legatum ad eum (Iulianum) mittere, literas Imperatoris, quae eos in
fines Romanorum ire iusserant, ostendere caeperunt. Which when Julian
perceived, and remembering the old hatred he had borne him from his childhood,
he requited him with the like measure, showing most love and favor to those
under his government, whom Constantius hated, or disfauoured most; which among
Christians were the Catholic Bishops and others whom he had persecuted,
Iulianus quo pacto populum sibi deuincire, eiusque conciliare beneuolentiam
posset, cogitat. Ad quam rem tali vsus est astutia. Nouerat pro certo,
Constantium vniuersae illi populi multitudini, quae fidem Consubstantialis
amplexabatur, maxim inuisum esse, tum quodillos Ecclesijs ipsorum
exturbauerat, tum quia Episcopos, qui ad illos spectabant, proscriptos, in
exilium eiecerat.

2. And this his favor, and kindenes toward Catholics had continued with him
even from his first being Caesar in these parts, as evidently appears in the
case of S. Hilary, that renowned glory of Gods Church, who at the same time he
was exiled, by procurement of the wicked Arrians and consent of Constantius
Emperor unjustly, was by Iulianus, whom he calls his Lord and Religeous
Caesar, adiuged Innocent, and for his love and defense of S. Hilary did suffer
more reprouch of the Arrian Persecutors, then S. Hilary Hilar. l. ad
Constantium Augustum.
endured Injury by that Exilement, as he himself, the best witness, avouched
to Constantius, Exulo non crimine, sed factione, and falsis nuncijs Synodi apud
te Imperatorem pium, non ob aliquam criminum meorum conscientiam per impios
homines delatus. Nec leuem habeo quaerelae meae testem, Dominum meum Religiosum
Caesarem tuum Iulianum: qui plus in Exilio meo a malis contumeliae, quam ego
iniuriae pertulit. And S. Hilary returning into France, in the end of the
Empire Fortun. in Vit. S. Hilarij. Sever. l. 2 Ruffin. Hist. l. 1. c. 31.
Socrat. Hist. l. 3. c. 8. vit. S. Hilarij. Sozom. l. 5. c. 12. S. Anton. ad
Didymum apud Sozom. l. 3. c. 14. Vit. S. Hilar. sup. in Breuiar. Baro. and
Spondan. An. 369. and al.
of Constantius, and beginning of Iulianus by calling diverse Synods, in which
Saturninus and Paternus the chief Agents of Arianisme there were
excommunicated, France was delivered from that Infection, and Britayne still
joining with S. Hilary and the Catholics of Gallia, was free from thar venime,
Ad hunc modum doctrinam Concilij Nicaeni in ea Imperij part, quae ad solemn
Occidentem vergit, ab Hilario and Eusebio (vercellensi) defensam and
propugnatam accepimus. And as S. Seuerus writes: Illud apud omnes constitit,
vnius Hilarij beneficio Gallias nostras piaculo haeresis liberatas. Which must
needs be in this time of Julian his being Caesar and Emperor, S. Hilary dying
in the year 369. anno post Christum natum trecentesimo sexagesimo nono, Soon
after the end of Julian his short Empire, having commanded others by his in the
West an unity in Religion, by many Counsels of the Bishops of France and
other Provinces in these Occidentall parts. Diverse of those Counsels assembled
after Julian was Emperor, and had revolted from Christian Religion, the whole
time of his Empire being by no account above two years and 8. months. An
Argument sufficient that the Persecution which he raised against Christians did
not extend to these Western Nations, especially Britain, likely by his revolt
from Christ, and death of his wife Helena, and Constantius Baron. An. 363.
the Posterity of our S. Helen the Heir of this kingdom, now revolted from
him. But howsoever this was, Julian quite leaving these Western Nations,
before he either persecuted Christians, or left the Profession of their
Religion, living so short a time Emperor, not two years by two months and
three days, as Baronius thinks he does demonstrate, and never returning
westward again, Socrat. Hist. l. 3. c. 18. Cassiodor. Hist. Tripart. l. 6. c.
47.
but these Countries in those days settled in Catholic Religion, Britayne
could not be afflicted by his Apostasy. But rather gained, then lost in
Religion by him, being all the time he was Caesar a friend to Catholics, and
dying as Socrates, Cassiodorus, and others write in the seventh year, after he
was declared Caesar: occubuit anno septimo posteaquam a Constantio Caesar
renuntiatus fuisset.

3. So that he was above twice as long a friend to the Catholics in Britayne,
as he was a professed Enemy to Christians in any place. For Ammian. Marcellin.
Speed Theater l. 6. c. 47. Stowe Hist. in Julian. Harris Theater Tom. 4 c. 26.
if we grante unto some what they contend, that he ruled in Britayne, and that
Lupicinus and Alipius whom he employed to build Jerusalem in favor of the
Jews, and their Religion, did govern hear as Lieutenants in his time, or
Constantius, this hinders not the quiet of the British Catholics in his
either Caesarship, or Empire. For the Authors themselves which most insist upon
these instances, do freely confess, first, that Lupicinus was a very
Christian man, and Enemy unto Heretics. One Harris supr.
of them thus writes: At what time Julian was received Emperor by the Senate
and people, he began also to Reign over Britayne under whom Lupiciniuc
Praeter a Christian governed the Land. And if I be not deceived this was the
same Lupicinius Epiph. l. de Haeres. Haer. 80.
(the name, time, and other circumstances so plead) which Epiphanius makes
mention of, who persecuted to death in the time of Constantius the Massilian
and Martyrian Heretics, who denied the grace of Baptism, fasting, and many
other Ammian. Marcellin. l. 20. cap. 1. Haeres. Speed and Stowe supr.
points of Catholic Religion. And for the other, Alipius, it is manifest by
Ammianus Marcellinus, and our own Historians, even Protestants, that he could
not molest the British Catholics in the Empire of Julian, how soever he stood
affected, friend, or foe to their Religion, for he was sent hither by Julian
being Caesar in the time of Constantius to resist the Invasions of the Picts,
and Scots, into the Marches of the Britanes, Julian himself not daring to
leave Gallia as much infested by the Almans, and Julian himself at that time
(as before is proved) was a friend to the Catholic Christians. And Alipius was
gone hence, never meddling in matters of Religion, hear in Britayne, for any
thing we find in History, and come to Antioch in the East before Julian began
his Persecution against Christians, and from them was sent by Julian to
Jerusalem, to help the Jews to build again their Temple there, which God did
so miraculously prevent, and hinder, as all Histories agree. Storre supr.
One of these Authors says: Julian sent Alipius who had been a Lieutenant of
Britain to repair Jerusalem. Others write: to repair these cursed Walls,
Speed supr.
against the providence of divine Justice Alipius of Antioch was sent.
Therefore both Julian and he then being in the East, and entreating about this
business, Socrat. l. 3. Hist. c. 17. Sozomen. Hist. l. 5. c. 21.
with the Jews there, as both Socrates, Sozomen and others teach, all of them
then being so far from Britain, Alipius could not possibly bear any office
of command hear after the Apostasy of Julian, nor some time before.

THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
OF DIVERSE RENOWNED SAINTS HEAR in Britayne in this time, S. Kebius a glorious
Catholic Bishop, a great and long acquaintance of S. Hilary of France, S.
Decumanus and others.

1. MANY were our renowned and holy Bishops in this time, as I have before
remembered, allthough in general terms, not mentioning their names, which
continued firm and constant in the Catholic faith, joining with the Popes of
Rome, S. Athanasius, S. Hilary, and the rest, which confuted and condemned the
Arrian Heresy. Among these S. Kebius was one, son of Solomon Duke of
Cornwayle, who continued hear in Britayne until he was about 29. years of
Age, profiting much and proceeding in learning: then hearing of the fame of S.
Hilary, went over into France, and joined himself unto him, then renowned for
Sanctity, and holy learning. This was the motive which drew him thither, and
from his Country, and not to avoid the venime of Arrianisme then arising and
breeding in this Country, as a late Writer coniectureth Io. Pitseus l. de
Illustr. Britan. Script. aetat. 6. in Kebio Corinio.
rather, then proves, or can be proved: propter tum pullulantem in Britannia
Arrianam Haeresim, adhuc inuenis in Galliam secessit. For I have before freed
Britayne from any such dangerous infection, and rather France then Britayne was
subject to such danger. And at the time when S. Kebius went into France, the
Arrian Heresy was not yet risen either in Britayne, or any part of the world
in probable Judgment. For both by this Writer, and Io. Pits. supr. Magdebur.
cent. 4. cap. 10. Harr. Hist. Tom. 4. cap. 32. Io. Lela^d. and alij.
others both ancient and late, S. Kebius dyed in the year of Christ 380. an
old man, in senectute bona, operibus bonis plenus, one says, diverse years
sooner, in the year 368. And yet the old Manuscript of his life, Capgraue and
others affirm, that he conuersed with S. Hilary 50. years, transito mari apud
Hilarium Pictauensem Episcopum per quinquaginta annos manens. Therefore S.
Hilary dying in the year of Christ 369. as is proved before, and S. Kebius
living with him 50. years, he must needs be gone out of Britayne before the
Nicen Council, Manuscr. Antiq. de vit. S. Kebij. Capgrau. Catal. in eodem.
and Arrian Heresy, allthough he had continued with S. Hilary unto his death,
which no Writer affirms, but the contrary. And his living Bishop in Britayne
after his return hither many years evidently so conuinceth. So likewise does
the bannishment of S. Hilary into Phrygia, many years before he dyed, by which
argument we must needs hold, that either S. Kebius of Britayne was bannished
with him, or followed him in that exile, for which we have neither Authority,
nor warrant of reason; or say, that S. Kebius was consecrated Bishop by S.
Hilary before his exilement by Constantius, and then returned into Britayne.

2. And yet it is as improbable in my opinion, which the same Author seems to
hold, that this Kebius then a Bishop was at that Council of Arles in France,
wherein S. Restitutus our Archbishop of London subscribed, and before his going
thither from Britayne was one of them which resisted Pelagius his Heresy hear,
Britones Pelagium in Exilium eiecerunt, eiusque doctrinae inter Proaemium
universe. in l. de vir Illustr. Britan. page 6.
alios restiterunt Restitutus Archiepiscopus Londinensis, and Kebius Corinius
Episcopus Mannensis. Qui quoniam in Britannia res turbatae fuerint in Galliam
ad sanctum Hilarium Pictauiensem Episcopum: and deinde ad Concilium Arelatense
secundum, super his, and alijs fidei negotijs sese contulerunt. For I have
proved before, that this Council of Arles to which S. Restitutus subscribed,
was long before this time, and before S. Hilary himself was either Bishop,
Priest, or Clergy man, or of any fame in such affairs. And this Author
himself sets down Pits. aetat. 5. in Restituto.
the death of S. Restitutus in the year 350. before either S* Hilary was
Bishop, or Pelagius vented his Heresy. Therefore I may choose the middle, as
the safest way to walk in, for S. Kebius being made Bishop by S. Hilary, and
his return into Britayne to have been about the time of S. Hilary his Exile
into Phrygria. For it is evident by S. Hilary himself that it was long before
he applied himself to the study of Divinity, or probably was a Christian; and
by no Author was Bishop 20. years. And if we might write by coniecturs Hilar.
l. 1. de Trinitate. Baron. and Spond. Annal. an. 355.
not wanting probability, we should rather be of opinion, that this holy S.
Kebius was one of our poor British Bishops, spoken of before in general
terms, which were present at the Council of Ariminum, then of Arles, the last
without all probability, but for congruently thinking him to have been present
at Ariminum so general an Assembly as is related, we have the circumstance of
time agreeing, that he was familiar with S. Hilary and the Bishops of France,
that he was a Bishop of Britayne, and for his long conversation in forreyne
Countries more fit then others for that employment now, and further he was a
poor Bishop, such as Britayne had but few at that time, and yet S. Seuerus
Sulpitius has proved unto us, that Britayne had among the rest, three poor
Bishops there, Tres tantum ex Britannia, inopia proprij, publico S. Sever.
sacrae Hist. lib. 2.
vsi sunt, not able to bare their own charges. For allthough S. Kebius was
son of the Duke or King of Cornwayle, and as the Writers of his life affirm,
refused the Principality of Cornwayle, due, and offered unto him: Manuscr.
Antiq. and Capgrau. in vit. S. Kebij.
Gradu Episcopali ab Hillario accepto, admonitus est ab Angelo in suam patriam
remeare. Quo cum peruenisset, rogatus est vt ipse veniret Regnum Cornubiae
suscepturus. Potestatem tamen saeculi praesentis omnino accipere renuit. But
lived a poor penitential life with his 10. Disciples, cum december Discipulis
suis, which by some were termed Monks, monachi sunt, as his History
witnesses, some time under a Tent, and almost unto his death in a Cottage, or
Cell until the King of Venedocia moved with his piety and miracles gave unto
him a Castle, Contulit viro Dei Castellum suum, Deo and sancto Kebio in
perpetuum.

3. The miracles which God showed by him were many, and wonderful: Caecos
illuminauit, leprosos mundauit, paraliticos, mutos and demoniacos sanauit. His
most abode and residency was in Venedocia, now Northwales, and the Isle of
Mona, Man, and as diverse write, Bishop there; if that Island is not mistaken
Anglesey Island where S. Kebius both lived and dyed being auntiently so called
Mona. In this Mona now Anglesey is the place called holy head of that holy
Bishop: where his Tomb still is, or lately was, and visited with reverence, as
a late Writer confidently, and as by experimental knowledge thus testifies:
He dyed at a place called Holy Head in Wales where his To^be Harris Theater.
Tom. 4. cap. 32.
is yet visited in Pilgrimage by the Inhabitants of that Country. And as the
Welsh Writers even Protestants do freely confess, that this place of S.
Kebius his abode and death, which the English men call Holy Head, is by the
Welsh or Britans still called S. Kebius City, because he was Bishop there, and
of so great Sanctity, Quod illi (Angli) holy head quasi sacrum caput, nos
vero Caercibi Humfr. Lhuyd in Mona Insula: apud Abraham. Ortelium in fine
Theatri. Will. Harrison Descript. of Brit. c. 10. in Anglesie.
id est ciuitatem Kibij dicimus: Which an other Welsh Antiquary a Protestant
also thus confidently confirms, The Welsh men call it Tiremone or Mon, and
herein is a Promontorye or Byland, called holy head, which has in times past
been named Cair Kyby, of Kyby a Monk that dwelled there.

4. Yet to make union between these Authors, both those Islands some time of the
same name, situated in the same Sea, and near one to the other, we may, and
not improbably grant, that this holy Saint was Bishop of them both at the same
time. The names of his holy Disciples in particular I do not find for
certain, except of S. Caffo, to whose Sanctity God gave this S. Caffo.
miraculous testimony, that in time of need being sent by S. Kebius for fire,
and the wicked Smith where he was to have it, denying it unto him, except he
would carry it in his bosom, which being enforced unto, he so carried it unto
his Master, without any hurt to himself or his coat, S. Kebius misit
Manuscr. antiq. and Capgr. in S. Kebio.
Discipulum suum nomine Caffo vt ignem afferret. Qui cum a quodam Fabro ignem
peteret, renuit ipse dare, nisi in sinu suo portare vellet, and posito igne in
sinu ei us reuersus est ad Magistrum suum sine laesione vestis suae ignem
portans.

5. But Master Harris in his Manuscript History, noting the year of Christ
Harr. Hist. tom. 4. c. 33.
370. confidently writes as having Authorie for it, which he cites not: about
this time lived also an holy Saint of the British Nation, named Tefredaucus,
S. Tefredaucus.
in the I Will of Moan, where after his death he had a Church erected and
dedicated in his name, of whom Giraldus Cambrensis writes this miracle. In
this I Will of Moan says he, there is a Church in honor of S. Tefredaucus, the
Confessor, into which on a time when Hugh Earl of Shrewsbury and the Earl of
Chester came in by force, and placing their hounds in the Church all night, in
the morning they found them all madd. And the chief Earl himself with in
one month after was slain and dyed a miserable death. Giraldus thus truly
has this History, but speaks nothing of the Girald. Cambr. l. 2. Itenerar.
Ca^br. c. 7.
time when this holy Confessor lived: Est and in hac Insula Ecclesia Sancti
Tefredauci Confessoris, in qua Hugo Comes Slopesburiensis, cum semel vna cum
Comite Cestrensi hanc Insulam vi ingrederetur, canes nocte quadam posuisset,
insanos omnes mane recepit. Et ipsemet infra mensem miserabiliter extinctus
occubuit. If this Author is not deceived in the time, we may probably suppose
this Sa^nt Tefredaucus (the circumstances as well of time, place and profession
agreeing thereunto) was one of the Disciples of S. Kebius, then so conuersing,
living, and dying in that Island of Mona or Anglesey. The same History of this
Church, and Saint, with Giraldus has Humfrey Lhuyed in his Treatise of Mona,
only he differs, in calling this Saint with a little difference, Saint
Fefridaucus, Humfr. Lhuyd. in Mona Insula. Druidum. Harris Tom. 4. c. 17.
Ecclesia Sancti Fefridauci.

6. M. Harris is of opinion, that the holy Eremite and Martyr S. Decumanus
lived in this Age, and before this time, either in, or soon after the 312.
year of Christ. And Capgraue with the old Manuscript of his life does
testify, S. Decumanus.
that he was of the old Primative Christian Britans. This man borne in the Io.
Capgr. Catal. in S. Decumano. Heremita and Martyr.
West part of Cambria, of Noble and renowned Christian parents even when he was
very young abstayning from the pleasures and recreations of this life, even
those that be void of sin, the more freely and wholly to deuote and dedicate
himself to the service of Christ, love of heaven, and contempt of this world:
And knowing how difficult a thing it is, for a man especially of Noble and
great parentage, in his own Country, and among his carnal friends, Riches,
and delights continually apposing themselves against Christian perfection, to
serve God in so secure and holy estate, in one conflict vanquished and subdued
them, secretly for fear of being pursued and hindered in his sacred course and
enterprise, stealing away from them, and going into a Wilderness of a strange
Country, separated from his own, by the River or Sea of Seuerne, where he
Miraculously began his Miraculous Eremites life: for coming to the River side,
and neither finding Ferry-man, nor boat, and fearing to be stayed by his
friends pursuing him, cut a great bundell of wandes growing there, and
binding them together in one faget, passed upon them to the other side, near
Dorostor Castle, as Capgraue names it, now likely called Dunster adjoining
upon Seuerne Sea, where he landed, Defuit Naulum, defuit and Nauigium, and
maturanda erat fuga e vestigio subsequentium vir Dei Misericordia Dei
confidens, and nequaquam haesitans de potentia, virgas secus mare in frutecto
quas reperit crescentes, colligauit in fasciculum, and tali vtens vehiculo
misit se in profundum. Et sic diuiua gubernante prudentia, prouectus est ad
littus oppositum prope castrum Dorostorum. This place of S. Decombes or
Decumanus either Miraculously Auth. of Engl. Mart. die 27. August.
landing, or living is not, as one has lately written, in Glocestershire,
which neither is adjacent unto Seuerne Sea, mare Sabrinum, which he passed, but
only the River Seuerne, not having in any part of Glocestershire the name of
Seuerne Sea, but still the River Seuerne, nor is opposite to any part of the
Country now called Southewales from whence he came. Nor had his passadge over a
River in such manner as is related, been so Miraculous, as the History thereof
declares it was. Neither was the part of Glocestershire adjoining to Seuerne
River, being the most pleasant and fruitful part of that Province by all
descriptions, and ever most inhabited, such a craggy, vaste, or rude wilderness,
and Desert as he landed and lived in, Eo tempore quo Sanctus Decumanus
diuinitus perductus in Anglia^ venit, erat in eo territorio in quo applicuit
vasta Eremi solitudo, frutetis and vepribus obsita, and densitate siluarum in
longum and latum spatiose porrecta montium eminentia sursum educta, and
concauitate vallium mirabiliter interrupto. Haec ei seeds complacuit: haec pio
eius proposito videbatur accommoda.

7. Neither is-there any such C^stle in Gloster-shire either by Seuerne side or
far of, named Dorster, or Du^ster or near to that name whereby he la^ded, or
any place of, or like to his name, Church, villadge, or any other such Monument
Speed. and alij in Descrip. Angliae and Comi^atus Somerseten.
dedicated unto him, in any Antiquity. When quite otherwise in Sommersetshire,
we find all these things agreeing: it adioyneth to Seuerne Sea, it is oppisite
to Southe-wales, it was there abouts long time desert and uninhabited, as the
names of the villadges there now builded, old Cleue, Wethicombe, and
Nettlecombe prove, there is Dunster Castle upon Seuerne Sea, there, very
broad, and making such a passadge there, Miraculous. Within three English
Manuscr. Ant. in vit. S. Decumani. Io. Capgrau. in eod.
miles of that, is a place called to this day S. Decombs, with a Church
dedicated to his honor, named S. Decombs or Decumans Church. Therefore we may
safely say, that this place in Sommerset-shire was the holy habitation of this
glorious S. Decuman, or Decomb. Hear he lived many years by herbs and
roots, and as some hold on Festival days with the milk of a Cow which he
kept, in sackcloath, fastings and watchings, until by a wicked Pagan much
enueying his Sanctity, hating true piety, and detesting the sacred name of
Christ, being at his holy prayers, and devotions, he was beheadded, and
martyred, Vir Sanctus patriam commutans exilio, antra des^rti pro fastu
palatij, caepit thidem commanere, herbis and radicibus victitare, ieiun^^s and
orationibus insistere, carnem cilitio domans, vigilijs paenaliter affligens.
Tali sub tenore vitam ducens Heremiticam in iam dicta solitudine multis vixerat
annis. Fertur etiam vaccam habuisse cuius lacte pro necessitate corporis saltem
praeclaris festiuitatibus magis sustentaretur, quam aleretur. Cum igitur
Sanctus Decumanus multimodis signorum floreret virtutibus, vir quidam sed and
ipse vir Belial, aspide saeuior, vipera truculentior tanti patris inuidens
sanctitati, in odium verae virtutis and in detestationem Christiani nominis,
furiali mente debacchatus bestialiter accurrit, and inter verba orationis and
preces sanctae deuotionis, sanctum Domini capitis obtruncatione ad caelestia
Regna transmisit.

8. The same miracle is written of him, as of S. Denis the Areopagite Saint
Paul's Scholar, that his head being stricken of, his body stood upright, and
with the Arms carried the head from the place where it was cut of, unto a
Fountain of most clear water, in which when he lived he used to wash it.
Which unto this day says Capgraue in memory and reverence of him is called S.
Decombs well, sweet, useful and wholesome for the Inhabitants to drink,
Truncus laceri corporis se erexit, and caput proprium rexit pendulis brachijs
vectitare a loco decollationis vsque ad f^tem limpidissimi liquoris, in qno
caput suum proprijs manibus abluere pro consuetudine habebat. Qui vsque hodie
ad memoriam and reuerentiam ipsius, fons Sancti Decumani nuncupatur, dulcis,
necessarius and salubris incolis ad potandum. In quo loco caput simul cum
corpore postmodum a fidelibus quaesitum and inuentum, sepulturae honorifice
tradebatur. Where both his head and whole body being sought and found by the
Christians, were honorably buried. And a Church afterward there builded in his
memory and honor, called still S. Decombs Church, as the Town or Village also
honorably termed by his name.

9. There is also and other Church dedicated to him in the Town of Wells in
the same Shire, still standing, and preserving his name and memory. A
sufficient Argument of itself, besides so many others before, that he lived
and dyed in that Country, no other giving so much testimony unto him. And the
honor and reverence which at that time and ever after, until Protestants New
Religion so much as it could defaced or obscured such holy memories, was given
to the sacred Eremites, their Church, and Reliks at Glastenbury, in the same
Country and near the place of S. Decombs Heremitage, occasioned him to make
choice of that Desert to live and die in, where or near so many renowned
Saints had gloriously triumphed over this world, and all Enemies therein, and
with whose Religeous Successors he might some times meet for his spiritual
good, and comfort especially seeing, as our Protestants themselves do
sufficiently acknowledge, Saint Damian or Deruian sent hither by Pope and Saint
Eleutherius with Saint Phaganus, had there a Church very near S. Decombs
abode, by the same Castle or Town of Stowe and Howes Hist. Tit. Romans in Lucius.
Dunster, where he landed, True it is (say these Protestant Writers) that till
this day there remains in Sommerset Shire in the Denaery of Dunstor a Parish
Church bearing the name of S. Deruuian, as a Church either by him founded, or
to him dedicated. A sufficient motive both for him to choose this place, and
commend his choice thereof, as Capgraue relates or conceaueth thus he did:
Haec Capgrau. in S. Decumano.
ei seeds complacuit, haec pio eius proposito videbatur accommoda: adeo vt
reipsa videbatur dicere: Haec requies mea in seculum seculi, hic habitabo
quoniam elegi eam. I shall speak more of more, such renowned holy Britans
hear both Bishops, Priests and others, when I have first spoken of our
chiefest Rulers both Spiritual and Temporal, Popes and Emperors our Kings
hear in this Age.

THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN MAXIMUS OUR KING AND Emperor is cleared from many imputations, and
slanders especially concerning true Catholic Religion, which he both
professed in himself, and maintained in others, all the other Emperors and
Popes were of the same Religion the Roman Church now professes.

1. IVlian the Apostata ending his wicked and Tyrannical Ruffin. Hist. l. 2.
c. 1. Theodoret. l. 4. c. 1. Socrat. Hist. l. 3. c. 19. Matthew. West. an. 366.
life, with a strange punishing death, Iouianus a Christian was chosen Emperor,
and as Ruffinus, Theodoret, Socrates and others testify, refused it, and being
thereto taken by the Souldiars against his will, openly protested that he being
a Christian, would not be Emperor over Infidels, but all of them confessing
themselves to be Christians, he accepted of the Empire, Iouianus ad Imperium
delectus illud Iouinian Emperor commended.
repudiauit. Et cum a militibus inuitus raperetur, clamauit se, qui Christianus
erat, nolle omnino hominum gentilitatem profitentium Imperium suscipere. At vbi
omnes vna voce confessi sunt, se esse Christianos, capescit Imperium. This
Christian magnanimity appeared evidently in this new elected Emperor, before
in the time of Julian, by the same Authors: For Julian apostating, and making a
Decree, that Souldiars should either sacrifice to Idols, or leave the wars, he
being then a Tribune, rather made choice to forsake all hope of temporal
preferment, then obey that wicked Edict. Whereupon Julian then standing in
need of such Assistants, retained him still in the number of his Commanders
notwithstanding he so courageously professed himself a Christian, Iste cum
esset Tribunus militum, cumque Iulianus militibus lege data optionem daret, vel
Idolis sacrificandi, vel deserendi militiam: balteum deponere maluit, quam
impium and nefandum Imperatoris edictum exequi. Attamen Iulianus belli
impendentis necessitate compulsus, eum in Ducum numero retinuit. This renowned
man was at Ruffin. supr.
one and the same time, as Ruffinus calls him, a Confessor, Emperor, and
Extinguisher of Error, Is sub vno, eodemque tempore Imperator, and Confessor,
and male illati extitit depulsor erroris. And God wonderfully honored his
constancy even in this life, not only in conferring the Imperial honor upon
him; but in the manner thereof, that being so professed a Catholic Christian,
the whole Army with one voice did choose him Imperor, Exercitus Theod. supr. l.
4. c. 1.
omnis vna voce Imperatorem postulat Iouianum. Which joined with that is said
of them before upon Iouianus refusing to be Emperor over Pagans, how with one
voice they all confessed themselves to be Christians, omnes vna voce confessi
sunt se esse Christianos, sufficiently proves that either the Edict of Julian
to force his Souldiars to Sacrifice to Idols was never received, or generally
observed, or they sinned only in the external Act of Idolatry, by that
compulsion, still perseuering in Judgment and affection Christians.

2. This is more confirmed by their unanimous declaring Valentinian for
Emperor, after the short Empire of Iouianus, of seven months by Socrates,
Socrates Hist. l. 3. c. vlt. 22. Ruffin. Hist. l. 2. c. 1. Socrat. l. 4. c. 1.
septe^ menses regnauit; eight months says Ruffinus post octo menses apud
Cilicia^ diem obijt; milites omnes vna voce Valentinianu^ Imperatore^
declarant. This Valentinian was in the time of Co^stantius the Arria^, a
professed Catholic, and in the Apostating days of Iulia^ so earnest and holy
a Co^fessor of Christ that Iulia^ therefore deprived him of his honor, for
which Christ rewarded him afterward in this world with the Empire thereof, Post
Iouianum Valentinianus Imperium Socrat. l. 3. c. 11. Ruffin. Hist. l. 2. c. 2.
Martin. Polon. in Valentiniano.
suscepit, qui pro fide nostra a Iuliano militia fuerat expulsus. Sed compleuit
in illo Dominus quod promisit, plus etiam quam centupla in praesenti seculo
restituens ei. Nam quia militiam pro Christo reliquerat, recipit Imperium.
Matthew of Westminster and some others write, that this Army of Julian which
elected Iouian, and Valentinian Emperor.
Valentinian Emperors, had denied their faith in the Persecution of Julian,
and moved with Iouinian his constancy professed themselves also Christians,
Quibus auditis totus exercitus qui per Iulianum nomen Cbristi abiecerant,
Christianos Matthew. Westminster. an. 366.
sese esse confessi sunt.

3. Now therefore allthough Iouianus was a worthy Christian Catholic
Emperor, ever following the Catholic Religion and doctrine against the
Arrians, as Socrates and others prove, Imperator quoniam perpetuo fidei
consubstantialis Socrat. l. 3. c. 20.
adhaeserat, omnibus respondet, se eam praelaturum. And shutting up the Pagans
Temples, and forbidding their Sacrifices: omnia gentilium delubra occlusa
fuere. Cruenta illa and scelerata sacrificia quorum labe se palam
contaminabant, and quibus regnante Iuliano se exaturauerant, omnino fuere
sublata: yet being Emperor so short a time, and chosen, living, and dying in
the East Countries, far remote from Britain, it did not receive so great
benifits by so good an Emperor, as nearer Nations did, but during his short
Regiment continued much after the same manner it did before, until Valentinian
was chosen Emperor: who being a Catholic, and reigning diverse years even over
Britain, and his son Gratian after him, this Kingdom in their times was
free from Heresies, which they persecuted, for Valens himself being brother of
Valentinian and by him chosen Assistant in the Empire, was then a Catholic,
and so constant in the time of Julian, that he forsook all preferment under
him, rather then his Religion, Qui recta voluntate Christianam fidem
profitebantur propenso Socrat. Hist. l. 3. c. 11.
animo balteum pro fidei defensione deponere, omniaque crutiamentorum genera
subire maluerunt, quam Christum Seruatorem denegare, in quorum numero fuit
Iouianus, Valentinianus, and Valens, qui postea sunt Imperij gubernaculis
potiti. And although Theodor. Hist. l. 4. c. 12.
by the persuasion of his Arria^ wife and others, he after fell into Heresy,
he being Emperor of the Eastern remote Nations from hence, this Kingdom was
free from his afflictions, being under the Empire of the Catholic Emperors
Maximus Emperor a Britan excused, and defended.
Valentinian and Gratian his sons, until Maximus descended of our British
Race was both King of Britain, and Emperor also, who also being a Catholic
Britain could not then be endamaged in spiritual affairs by the temporal
Ruffin. l. 2. c. 14. Socrat. Hist. l. 5. c. 11.
Rulers thereof: allthough in Civil respects it was much infested by the
Scots, and Picts, from which Maximus freeing it in his time, by his clymbing
and aspiring mind to be Emperor, and to compass that ambition, spoiling
Britain of the armed force, and power thereof, transporting it into foreign
Nations, gave occasion of greater miseries hear afterward, both by the
Scottish, Sigeb. in Chron. an. 383.
Pictish and Saxon Pagans.

4. This Maximus a Britan by birth, Maximus ex partibus Britanniae oriundus,
Socrates and other foreign Authors, as well as our own Writers testify, and
Baron. Annal. Tom. 4. an. 383.
allthough Baronius does seem to think he did untruly derive his descent
from S. Helen, affirmant alij Maximum Britannum genere, ex Helenae Constantini
matris propagine origin mentientem, Britanniae Regulorum open fultum: yet he
gives some way to that opinion, when he confesses, he claimed descent from
great Constantine her son, de stemmate vero Constantini sibi aliquid
arrogasse Sigebert. Chron. an. 383.
cognomen Flauium indicium est: dicebatur enim Flauius Clemens Maximus. And
Sigebertus Gemblacensis painely confesses, that he both was descended of the
Imperial Race, and was kinsman of Constantine the Great, Maximus ex
Imperatorio genere desce^derat, and Magni Constantini consanguineus fuit, vnde
and Pontic. Virun. Brit. Hist. l. 5.
parte^ Imperij sibi competere calumniabatur, clayming part of the Empire by
that Title. The like has Po^ticus Virunnius in his British History, he being
an Italian, erat aute^ Maximus patre Brita^nus: matre vero and Natione Romanus
vtraque part regalis vir. And adds, that he was the son of Leolinus Uncle
of S. Hele^ and great Uncle of Constantine, Leolinus Auunculus Constantini eu^
genuerat. In which as in many other things he differs from the printed
British History translated by Galfridus by common opinion. Which calling him
Maximianus and not Maximus makes him both true Heir of Britain, and
Grandchilde descended from King Coel Father of S. Helen, borne both of the
Regal Race of the Britans and Romans, bringing in Caradocus Duke of
Cornewayle, so persuading Octauius to marry his daughter and Heir unto him,
making his Title to Britain better then that Octauius had, Dignatus est Deus
istum subuectare Iuuenem, and ex Galfrid. Histor. Brit. lib. 5. cap. 11.
Romanorum genere, Regalique prosapia Britanum creatum, cui filiam tuam meo
co^silio maritare non differes. Quanquam autem illud abnegares, quid Iuris tibi
contra illum in Regnum Britanniae fieret? Constantini enim consanguineus est,
and nepos Coel nostri Regis, cuius filiam Helenam nequimus abnegare
haereditario Iure regnum istud Pontic. Virun. l. 5. supr. Theater of great
Britain l. 6. page 272. Camd. ib. citat. Socrat. Hist. l. 5. cap. 11. Ruffin.
l. 2. cap. 15. 16. Bed Hist. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 9. Guliel. Malmesbur l. 1. de
gestis Reg. alij apud Boeth. Scot. Histor. l. 7. Ado in Chron Galfrid. Histor.
Brit. l. 5. Ponticus Histor. l. 5. Stowe and Howes Hist. Tit. Romans in Maximus.
Hollinsh Histor. of Engl. lib. 4. cap. 30. Fabian. ib. cit. Hect. Boeth. Georg.
Buchan. Hist. Scot. Hollinsh Hist. of Scot.
possidere. And Ponticus himself does after confess as much, howsoever he can
be accorded to himself before, saying that Leoline was his Father, Huic
neminem potes praeponere: ex sanguine nostro est, and sanguine Romanorum
Imperatorum, nepos Coeli nostri Regis, cuius filiam Helenam nequiuimus abnegare
haereditario iure regnum istud possidere. Our Protestant Writers of the Theater
of great Britain, alleging Camden also for their opinion, affirm of this
Maximus. Clemens Maximus descended lineally from Constantine the Great. And
Socrates with others does free him from the name of an Usurper of the Empire,
when he confesses, that Valentinian did admit him for Emperor, Valentinianus
Maximum ad Imperij societatem admittit. And S. Bid writes of him, that he was
a valiant and worthy man, and so far from intruding himself into the
Empire, that he was by the Army created Emperor almost against his will,
Maximus vir quidem strenuus and probus, inuitus propemodum ab exercitu creatus
Imperator. Which William of Malmesbury also with others confirms, Maximus
quasi ab exercitu impulsus purpuram induit. Which is sufficiently confirmed not
only by the triumphant Army of our Catholic Britans, and other such Nations
assisting him, but our British History, Virunnius and others prove, that he
was first incited, invited, and sent for into Britain, both to be King hear,
and afterward to take upon him the Empire, as his Right. Yet as some plainly
say, Maximus a valiant and worthy man was forced in Britain to take the
Empire upon him. And if any one says, he was infamed by writers for
persecuting Christians, I dare not assent unto him, for even from his first
power and greatenes he honored and favored Religion. Hear in Britain, making
it all subject to him, when he expelled the Scots, he gave or allowed, by their
own Histories, the I Will of Jonas to their Bishops, Priests, other Clergy and
Re^igious men, and it is evident before that the British Christians as
Catholic and sincere, as any in the world, were they he most loved and
favored, and by whom with other Catholic Countries, as France, Spain and
others he was assisted in his wars, and by their aid and assistance became
so potent, Contracto ex Britannis, and finitimis Gallis and Iberis ac vicinis
gentibus copiosissimo exercitu. And he was so far from being a Persecutor of
Christians, especially Catholics, that even by the ancient Writers of the
Roman Histories themselves, that excepting his Title to the Empire, he made it
a chief Sozom. supr.
motive of taking Arms against Valentinian the younger, seduced by his Arrian
Mother Iustina, because they went about to set up Heresy and persecute
Catholics, ^o quidem praetextu quasi passurus non esset, vt in fide patria, and
ordine Ecclesiastico quicquam inuouaretur. So writes Sozomen. And Theodoret
relating the ^ereticall proceedings of this Valentinian, and his Mother,
especially against S. Ambrose, that holy Doctor and Catholic Bishop of Millan,
testifies, that Maximus understanding thereof, wrote unto Valentinian,
persuading him to desist from such persecuting, and heretical proceedings,
otherwise he would war against him, in defense of Catholic Religion. Which
he performed, and Valentinian forced to fly, dearly tasted what his mothers
Heretical Counsails had brought him unto, Cum resciuit Maximus, quae
audacissime Theodor. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. cap. 13.
aduersus vocalissimum praeconem veritatis mota fuerant, perque lite^^s
hortatus est Valentinianum, vt bellum aduersus pietatem omitteret, neue
proderet paternam pietatem, addidit and belli minas, nisi pareret quinetiam
orationem re ipsa confirmauit coactumque exercitum Mediolanum versus duxit, vbi
degebat Valentinianus: qui cognito aduentu illius, in Illiricum fuga se
contulit, doctus experientia quem s^bi fructum materna consilia attulissent.
Paulus Orosius also, and Paulus Diaconus Paul. Orosius l. 7. cap. 34. Paul.
Diacon. l. 1. c. 3.
call this our Maximus, a valiant, and a good man, and worthy to be Emperor,
Virum strenuum, and probum, and Augusto dignum, A worthy Emperor. S. Seuerus
Sulpitius is a sufficient witness also, how renowned a man this our British
Emperor was in many respects, first concerning that great blemish, which some
cast upon him, for usurping the Empire, and for deposing one Emperor, and
killing an other, which were the great exceptions which S. Sever l. de vit. S.
Martini cap. 23.
that great and Apostolic holy Bishop Saint Martine took unto him, and
therefore though often invited to his Table, refused to come unto it, a
conuinio eius frequenter rogatus abstinuit, dicens, se mensae eius participem
esse non posse, qui duos Imperatores, vnum regno, alterum vita expulisset. He
thus clears himself, that the Empire was not sought by him, but rather
against his will, imposed upon him by his Souldiars, and pleasure of God for
defense and necessity of the Empire, God himself sufficiently giving
testimony thereto, by the incredible event, and Victory following, and that he
slew none of his Adversaries but in the field, Maximus se non spo^te sumpsisse
Imperiu^ affirmat, sed imposita^ sibi a militibus; diuino nutu regni
necessitate^ armis defendisse, and non aliena^ ab eo Dei volu^tate^ videri,
penes quem tam incredibili euentu Victoria fuisset, nullu^que ex aduersarijs
nisi in acie occubuisse. Upon which satisfaction S. Martine came to his Feast,
ad conuiniu^ venit, and was far more honored of this Emperor there, the^ any
Prince, the Emperors Uncle, Brother and such others there p^ese^t, sitting next
unto the Emperor himself, Ipse sellula iuxta Rege^ posita co^sederat. And his
Priest and Chappline satt among those Princes, Medius inter hos Martini
presbiter accubuerat.

5. And such was the honor, and ^euerence our Emperor yielded publikly to that
holy Bishop, that in that solemn F^ast he refused to drink, until S. Martine
had drunk out of the same Bo^^^ before, pateram Regi minister obtulit: ille
sancto admodum Episcopo potius dari iubet, expectans atque ambiens vt ab illius
dextera poculum sumeret. And the cause of Priscillianus the Heretic S. Sever.
sacrae Hist. l. 2. Prosper in Chron. Baron. an. 385. Ado in Chron. Sever. l. 2.
supr.
and his Sectaries being committed to this Emperor by some Bishops, he
condemned them to death, gestis ad Palatium delatis, censuit Imperator
Priscillianum, sociosque eius capitis damnari oportere. And among these,
diverse, as Instantius, and Tiberianus were bannished into our British Islands,
named Silley, Instantius quem superius ab Episcopis damnatum diximus, in
Sylinam Insulam, qua vltra Britanniam sita est, deportatus. Tiberianus,
ademptis bonis in Sylinam Insulam datus. A late Writer cites Paulinus in the
life of S. Ambrose, as though S. Ambrose had excommunicated him for bannishing
the old Fathers and Harris Theat. l. 4 c. 34.
blessed Bishop Higinus, but Paulinus has no such thing. Only Paulinus says,
that S. Ambrose barred him from Communion, as he did also the Emperor
Theodosius, for the death of Gratian, whom he had slain in Battle, and
excused himself before to Saint Martine, ipsum Maximum a Communionis Paulin.
in vit. Diui Ambrosij. Harris supr.
consortio segregauit, admonens, vt effusi sanguinis Domini sui, and quod est
grauius, innocentis, ageret poenitentiam. The same late Author thus further
accuses him: This maximus after he had attained the Empire, took on himself
to decerne and Judge in causes Ecclesiastical, being only a secular man, and
to define, and give sentence therein, says Seuerus: nouum est and inauditum
nefas vt causas Ecclesiasticas Sever. sacr. Hist. supr. l. 2.
Iudex sae^^li iudicaret. It is a new wickedness, and never heard of before, for
a secular Judge to give sentence in Ecclesiastical causes. But Seuerus does
not so affirm of Maximus. The words cited were spoken by Saint Martine unto
Maximus to prove that Temporal Princes in the School of Christ did never
Judge in Ecclesiastical causes. Which Maximus precisely observed, while S.
Martine was present. And all that he is said to have done otherwise afterward
was in the cause of the Priscilli^n Heretics, committing many things, as well
against the Temporal, as Ecclesiastical Regiment, for which his Power
Imperial and Civil to putt them to death and Exile was requisite, as the
brachium saeculare now uses in the Catholic Church. And this Emperor Maximus
Imper. Epist. ad B. Siric. Pap. to. 1. Council.
in his Epistle to S. Siricius Pope, plainly protests he meddled not to Judge
in Ecclesiastical things, but left them to the Bishops to determine, and uses
him there with such Religeous respects, and Titles, as good and Religeous
Emperors, Kings, and others did the Popes of Rome in all proceedings, Maxim.
Epist. ad Valentinian. August.
confessing himself a Catholic Prince in all points, as he likewise does in
his Epistle to Valentinian utterly condemning Arrianisme, and all Heresy.

6. Yet do I not so contend to free Maximus that I would wash him clean from
all spotts and aspersions, wherewith he is stained by some Writers. I rather
excuse him in profession of Religion, then Conversation of life. Yet Harris
Hist. Tom. 4. c. 34. Magdeb. cent. 4. c. 16. Syluius Bon. l. Maximi Caesaris
Lauds. Io. Leland. and Io. Pits. in Syluio Bono. Harris supr. Zosim. l. 4.
Baron. and Spond. an. 382. in Annal. Annal. Scot. apud Hect. Boeth. l. 7. Scot.
Hist. in initio.
both Symmachus Consul of Rome, and our British Writer Siluius (styled the
good Siluius, bonus) living in his time wrote Books in his praise. And the
very Scottish Antiquaries the greatest Enemies he had for conquering and
expelling them out of Britain, are forced to confess that his carriage was
such, that it drew even his Enemies to love, honor, and follow him, Placidus
in omnes, fama and gloria quadam singulari, plures ad amicitiam,
beneuolentiamque allieiebat. Milites in eum veluti supremum Imperatorem ad vnum
intendentes, in eius fidem nomenque vltro iurarunt: sese quamcunque vellet
expeditionem subituros: And give him that honor hear in Britain, which never
any Emperor, King, or Ruler in it, since the first inhabiting thereof enjoyed
before him: Which is, that ruling hear 17. years, he possessed and ruled over
all Albion or Britain, Septemdecim exinde annos tenuit Albionem: contigit ei
quod nulli illucusque post Insulam inhabitatam, vt cunctae Albionis Regiones
All Britain belonged to the Empire in this time of Maximus.
ipsius vnius audirent Imperio. And in this his general command hear, was
such a friend and favorer to good Christians, that Heirgustus being then King
of the Picts, and both he and all his subjects Christians, as I shall prove at
that time, he freely for a small Tribute, to testify the whole Island belonged
to the Roman Empire in his time, suffered, th^^gh a stranger, quietly to Reign
as King among his Picts, Heirgustum libere permisit regnare, modico tributo
Imperij nomine populo imposito ex agris vltimo in Albionis recessu sitis, vt
monumentum id esset, Insulam totam Romano Imperatori aliquando paruisse. And
plainly confess that in Britain diverse years he behaved himself and in all
men's Judgment governed virtuously, corageously, and as a good Emperor ought to
do, Maximus probe, strenue Augustoque omnium sententia dignum Magistratum in
Albione aliquot annos gessisset. And that both the Christian Britans Harris
Histor. Eccl. Tom. 4. Baron. and Spond. Annal. in Maximo.
and Picts, the only then Inhabitants hear, did meruailously well love him,
Britones ac Picti mirifice Maximum Imperatorem diligere. His British wife
Queen and Empress daughter of Octauius is commended in Histories to have been
a very virtuous Lady.

7. Maximus being dead, Theodosius the Elder as he was Emperor so Theodosius
Emperor commendad.
King and Ruler in Britain, this man is most renowned in Histories, for his
honoring the Church, especially of Rome, and hate of Heresies, his praises be
too many among Catholic Writers, therefore I will only and breifely use
Protestants testimonies in his behalf in their own words: Theodosius the
Elder, the most Christian Emperor. Theodosius did open penance in Millan* and
Stowe and Howes Hist. Tit. Romans in Theodosio. Magdebur. cent. 4. c. 7. col. 568.
fasted and prayed eight Months together, according as Saint Ambrose had
enjoined him, because in the first year of his Empire, he had commanded five
thousand Citizens of Thessalonica to be slain, and for executing the Innocent
with the wicked, in form of civil justice, therefore the Archbishop would not
permit him to enter into the Church, nor to receive the Sacrament, until he
had performed his penance. What Sacrament this was which he might not receive,
and good Christians Magdebur. cent. 4. c. 10. Theod. Hist. l. 6. cap. 8. Sozom.
l. 7. cap. 24. Ambros. apud eosd. supr.
then received, the Protestants of Germany do tell us from Theodoret, Sozomen
and S. Ambrose himself, that it was the most sacred Body of our Lord, and his
pretius Blood, Sacratissimum Domini corpus, pretiosus Domini sanguis. And that
S. Ambrose did not admit him to Sacraments, v^^ill after long penance in the
place of penitents, he prostrated himself on the pauement The B. Sacrament of
the Altar Christ's most holy boby and precious blood.
in the Church Portch, and with tears desired absolution, Nec post tantum
temporis receptus prius est, nisi ab Ambrosio iterum duriter reprehensus,
doloris sui in templi vestibulo, in pauimentum se deijciens and plorans, certa
fecit indicia; ac in loco paenitentium subsistere non recusit. And yet they
more plainly and pathetically thus deliver from many renowned Authors, the
great and austeere Magdebur. cent. 4. cap. 7. cap. 3. Theodor. l. 5. c. 17.
Sozom l. 7. c. 24. Paul. Diac. lib. 13. Aug. l. 5. de ciuitate Dei c. 26.
humble penance of this Emperor, before he was reconciled by S. Ambrose,
peccatum suum agnoscens, octo luxit mensibus, quo paenitentiae curriculo
completo ad Templum postea cum lachrymis redijt, Domino supplicans, non stans,
nec genu flectens, sed in terram pronum se prosternens, ac sic cum Dauide
orans: adhaesit pauimento anima mea, viuifica me Domine secundum verbum tuum.
Surgens vero manibus barbam and capillos euellit, frontem caecidit, and
pauimentum lachrymis suis conspersit, ac veniam tandem petens, receptus ab
Ambrosio est populo pro eo deprecante. And yet this most Christian Catholic
and Religious Emperor, as these Protestants style him, was so far from
sicking to exempt himself from the censure of S. Ambrose, neither Pope nor
Patriarch, but only Bishop of Millan, having no jurisdiction at Thessalonica
in Greece, where the offenc^ was committed, but for Millan where the Emperor
then was resident, o^ disobey S. Ambrose, reject, or persecute him, as diverse
late meaner Princes of the new Sect have used higher Prelates, and Popes, that
he most humbly submitted himself to his Censure, religiously performed his
enjoined penance. And as these Protestant Historians from Antiquity confess,
S. Ambrose was of all others the most worthy Bishop in Theodosius judgment,
and Magdebur. cent. 4. cap. 10. col. 1169.
beloved of all the Emperors in his time, even Honorius son to this
Theodosius, Quam charus fuerit quinque laudatissimis Imperatoribus,
Valentiniano maiori, Gratiano, Valentiniano Iuniori, Theodosio and Honorio, cum
quibus omnibus familiarissime vixit, non est opus commemorare, Theodosium de eo
dixisse, Sozomenus Sozom. l. 5. cap. 18.
retulit, nosse scilicet se solum Ambrosium dignum Episcopi nomine. And yet
neither Theodosius the Emperor, nor any of the others remembered for S. Ambrose
his acquaintance in his time, nor he himself did either in the judgment of any
learned Protestants or others deny or doubt of, but plainly and religiously
confessed and practiced the doctrine of the Supremacy of the Popes of Rome in
spiritual affairs. Three of those Emperors Gratianus, Valentinianus Edict.
Gratiani, Valentiniani and Theodos. Impp. l. 1. C. de summa Trinitate, and fide
Catholica.
and this Theodosius joined together in this Law, for all under the Roman
Empire, among which the Britans hear were contained, to exercise and profess
that holy Christian Religion, which S. Peter delivered to the Romans, the Popes
there had there published, and S. Damasus then Pope did follow, Cu^ctos
populos, quos cleme^tiae nostrae regit Imperiu^, in tali volumus religione
versari, quam D. Petrum Apostolu^ tradidisse Romany Religio vsque adhuc ab
ipso insinuata Honorius the last Emperor that reigned in Britain.
declarat, quamque Pontifice^ Damasum sequi claret. Honorius son of
Theodosius being the last Emperor in this Age, and the last of all which
reigned in Britain, was of his Fathers mind in this duty toward the Roman
See, as is manifest Honor. Imper. Epist. ad Bonif. Pap. Tom. 1. Council.
Ambros. ad cap. 3. 1. ad Timoth.
both by his Epistle to Pope Bonifacius the first, and S. Ambrose so beloved of
him, who testifies that the Church is the house of God, and the Pope of Rome
then Damasus the Governor thereof: Ecclesia est domus Dei, cuius hodie Rector
est Damasus. Such is the doctrine of all the renowned Fathers both Greek and
Latin in this learned Age, S. Gregory's Nazianzen, Nicen, S. Basile, S.
Chrysostom, The Popes of Rome then as the Emperors of the same Religion with
the presa^t Roman Church.
S. Jerome, S. Augustine, Optatus, Prudentius and others.

8. The holy Popes which succeeded to S. Liberius, and Felix before remembered,
in this Age, were saint Damasus, and saint Siricius known to have been
famous Professors and aduancers, as our Protestant Antiquaries acknowledge, of
that Religion, which with them is termed Papistry. Damasus, say these men, was
an holy Confessor, a diligent Supputator of times, and he set Io. Bal. l. 1. de
Act. Romanor. Pontif. in Damaso. Robert. Barns l. de vit. Pontif. Roman. in
Damaso. Magdeburgen. cent. 4. cap. 7. Manuscr. Ant. in Biblioth. public.
Cantabrig. James l. 1. de Manuscr. B^d. Martyrolog. in mul^. Pontif. Roman.
down in order the lives and Decrees of his Predecessors Popes of Rome, and
having written this work sent it to saint Jerome to be perused, Damasus
diligens temporum Supputator, vitas and statuta suorum praedecessorum Romanorum
Pontificum succincte digessit. Et scriptum opus misit Hieronymo cognoscendum.
Obijt sanctus Confessor. A great credit to that book by Protestant
Antiquaries, where their Religion by their own confession is so generally
condemned, and the Roman Catholic doctrine as universally approved, and
confirmed, to have two so holy, learned, and glorious ancient Saints and
Doctors of Christ's Primative Church and Approuers thereof. Yet so it is further
asscribed to this so renowned Pope in our old Antiquities, termed, Gesta
Pontificum Romanorum, Authore Damaso, both by our English Catholic and
Protestant Historians. And saint Bede which lived above an hundred years
before Anastasius Bibliothecarius, to whom some attribute this History,
follows it in diverse places. They also confess that the holy Scripturs, on
which they so much, or only rely, especially in the Hebrewe, and Greek tongue
being Bal. and Barns supr. in Damas.
translated into Latin by saint Hierome, were generally approved and preferred
by this holy Pope, Hieronymi Translationem approbauit. Hieronymi Biblia tum
caepta est primum legi, antea septuaginta Interpretum scripta authoritatem
habebant. He also, as these men acknowledge, used and celebrated the sacrifice
of Mass, and generally appointed the Confiteor to be used by all Priests in
the beginning thereof, in which there is most plain and undeniable invocation
and prayer to Saints, and Angels, and their prayer and intercession for people
living hear on earth, Precor batam Mariam semper Virginem, beatum Michaelem
Archa^gelum, beatum Ioannem Baptista^, sanctos Apostolos Petrum, and Paulum and
omnes Sanctos orare pro me, ad Dominum Deum nostrum. They testify Magdebur.
Bal. and Barns in Siric. Papa.
as much of saint Syricius Pope, and how the unmarried and chaste life of
Clergy men, was generally commanded by him to be observed.

THE XXV. CHAPTER.
OF MANY RENOWNED, HOLY, AND LEARNED Bishops, Apostolic men, and other great
Saints hear in Britain in this time.

1. IN this Age, this Kingdom of Britain had also many wrothie men, Bishops
and others renowned both for piety and learning. I have written of our two
great lights of the world the happy Mother and son S. Helen and
Constantine, Empress and Emperor, before; who besides their other endless, and
unmatchable cares, and labous for the Church of Christ, already remembered, are
honored in the Cataloges of renowned Writers, for their holy and learned pains
in that kind. S. Athanasius also and S. Hilary those two greatest Sigebert.
Gemb. Chron. an. 432. Polychronic. lib. 4. cap. 29. Nichol. Harpesfel. Hist.
Eccl. cap. 21. page 33. M. S. Antiq. in vit. S. Patricij Capgrau. in eod. Flor.
Wigorn. Chron. an 371. and 394. Probus in vita S. Patricij inter opera S.
Bedae. Richard. Stanihurst. Sur. and Lippol. die 17. Martij Walrer. Rolwinck.
Fascicul. tempor. an. 423.
glories of the Church of Christ in that time, one in the Greek, the other in
the Latin Church, how much they honored this Nation is already remembered. To
whom I may next add that great S. Martine Bishop of Tours it France, compared
for his worthiness by worthy Antiquaries to the most glorious Apostles
themselves, who honored this Kingdom with his presence and abode hear, and no
short time, as we are sufficiently warranted by diverse Arguments, first his
Sister named Couche was married in this Kingdom and was the happy Mother of
that glorious man S. Patrike, Sanctus Patricius, genere Brito filius Couches
sororis Sancti Martini Turonensis. So with others writes Sigebert an old
French Historian, where S. Martine was, and dyed an holy Bishop. The old
Manuscript of the life of saint Patrike, and Capgraue confess as much when
they say that Couche was his Mother, matter Couche, or Couhos dicta est.
Florentius Wigorniensis is most clear that S. Martins Sister Couche was Mother
to S. Patrike in Britain, Sanctus Patricius nascitur in Britannia, ex patre
Calphurno nomine, matter autem erat Patricij Couches, soror Sancti Martini de
Gallia. The same is justified by those Authors which Surius and Zacharias
Lippolous follow, and themselves also, Calphurnius ducta in matrimonium
Couchessa S. Martini Turonensis Episcopi sorore, vnicum ex ea suscepit filium,
in maritimo Britanniae Territorio, Patricium. So has Baronius and Spondanus
from Antiquity, Patricius, vt tradunt, Scotus genere, natus ex sancti Martini
Baron. and Spond. Annal. an. 431.
Turonensis Episcopi sorore, ab eo Clericus ordinatus. So have our late English
Writers both Catholics and Protestants.

2. Hearevpon if we will calculate the time of saint Patricius and saint
Martins Io. Pits. de Illustr. Brit. Script. aetat. 5. in S. Patricio. Io. Bal.
cent. 2. in eodem. Prosper. in Chro^. Sigebert. an. 402. 399. Baron. and alij
Girald. Cambr. Topograph. Hib. c. 17.
life and death, we must needs gather that saint Martine was hear in Britain,
his Sister following him. It is the common opinion that saint Martine died
about the 400. year of Christ, as also that saint Patricke lived 122. years,
and yet by Giraldus Cambrensis died in the year 458. obijt beatus Patricius
anno ab Incarnatione Domini 458. But to follow the most received opinion, that
he lived longer, until, or near the year 490. and so be above 30. years of
Age at the death of saint Martine his Uncle, he was by all acco^pts borne hear
in Britain of saint Martins Sister diverse years before his Uncle saint
Martine was Bishop of Tours, that gift being in the year of Christ 375. as
saint Gregorius Turonensis Bishop there, after Baronius and others, prove. And
a far longer time before Maximus the Emperor went from hence into France,
Gregor. Turon. Hist. Francor. l. 2. cap. 14. Baron. and Spond. an. 375.
Veremund. and Hector. Boeth. Scot. Hist. lib. 7. fol. 119.
and gave the name to little Britain. The Scottish Historians write, that saint
Martine was also Uncle to our renowned Britan saint Ninian, and so by that is
said, borne of an other Sister of saint Martine hear, which may be confirmed
by the extraordinary honor, and reverence he, as also S. Patricke, ever yielded
to S. Martine. Which if it be true, will prove S. Martine with his Sisters was
hear long before. For I shall demonstrate that saint Ninian was an holy
Bishop in this Britain in this Age. And therefore many Historians S. Martine
Bishop of Tours Uncle to S. Patrike, and S. Ninian, lived hear some time in
Britain.
have expressly delivered that saint Martine did not only live some time in
Britain, but was among other his singular gifts and graces in that time
endowed with the spirit of Prophecy, and thereby foretold unto the Emperor
Maximus hear in Britain, before his going from hence, the unhappy end he
should come unto, Martinus Turanensis Antistes vir pietatis eximae Maximo
praedixisse fertur, quum in Britannia adhuc esset infelicissimum eius vitae
exitum. So Sabellic. l. 9. Ennead. 7. Polydor. Virgil. Angl. Hist. l. 3. page 5.
writes Sabellicus, and Polidor Virgil in the very same words, and diverse
others before them, as the word, fertur, used by them both sufficiently
proves, for which we may be bold to use Seuerus Sulpitius, who wrote saint
Martins life, living in that time, and familiarly acquainted with him, for
witness; for he speaking of the coming of saint Martine to Maximus at
Treuers, before his attempting any thing against Valentinian in Italy, that he
should at the first prevail, but shortly after be overthrown and perish, he
adds that saint Sulpitius Sever. l. de vit. S. Martini cap. 23.
Martine Prophesied this unto Maximus long before, S. Martinus eidem Maximo
long ante praedixit futurum, vt si ad Italiam pergeret, bellum Valentini ano
Imperatori inferens, sciret se primo quidem impetu futurum esse Victorem, sed
paruo post tempore esse periturum, quod quidem ita vidimus. Which Prophecy
uttered by saint Martine to Maximus, long before, must needs be hear in
Britain; for after such time as saint Martine was thus renowned, Maximus was
not long time before this, long ante, any where, but in this our Britain.
And were it not, that the History of saint Martine usually read in the Church
on his Feast says he was borne in Pannonia, now called Austria, we might give
no feeble reasons, that he was borne in Pomonia one of our Islands, for hear we
are sure he was, hear was his Sister, or Sisters, hear many of his kindred,
hear many Churches and Monuments of honor founded in his name, his name and
memory far more celebrated hear, then in Pannonia, now Austria, or any other
Nation whatsoever excepting France, where he was long time a most glorious and
worthy Bishop. Our Island Pomonia near those places in Britain, where saint
Patrike the son of his Sister Couche, and saint Ninian son of an other his
Sister, by the Scottish Antiquities was borne, often intercourse being between
our Britain and France at that time, and of our learned and holy men with
saint Hilary Tutor to saint Martine, which we cannot by any warrant of
Antiquity affirm of Pannonia or Austria especially Sabaria, now Lazius and
Abrah. Ortelius de Ant. Regionib. oppid. and alij in descrip. Austriae.
named Stain or Stein in the furthest part thereof, set down for the place of
his birth by Sulpitius Seuerus not always holding the soundest opinion in all
things, and others afterward from him, from his Authority.

3. And except we should utterly and very rashly deny the Authority of S.
Bid, William of Malmesbury, the old Manuscript History of the life of saint
Ninian, and others, whose Authority we may not neglect, or altogether
condemn the best Scottish Antiquaries in relation of their own ancient, and
Religious affairs and proceedings, which would bring all our Antiquities into
question, we must needs say, that saint Martine and his Sisters were in
Veremund. Hist. Scot. Willelm. ab Elphinscun. and Hect. Boeth. Hist. Scot. l. 7.
Britain hear long before his seating himself in France: for these Scottish
Antiquaries tell us, that S. Martine was Uncle to saint Ninian Ninianus
Episcopus sanctitate and Miraculis clarissimus, ac Casae Candidae pontificalis
in Galdia sedis primus Institutor, aedem condidit diuo Martino suo Auunculo
sacram. And saint Ninian wonderfully allways honored saint Martine, Sanctum
Martinum miro M. S. Antiq. in vit. S. Ninian. Capgrau. in eod. Bed. Hist. Eccl.
l. 3. c. 3. Henric. Hunting. Hist. l. 3. Gul. Malmes. l. 3. de gest. Pont.
Angl. vit. S. Nin. Capgrau. in eod. Pits. and Bal. cum alijs in Ninian. Hect.
Boeth. Hist. Scot. l. 6. f. 108. 109. Hollinsh Histor. of Scotl.
semper venerabatur affectu. The Historians both of Scotland and England have
warranted us sufficiently before, that the Picts whose first Apostle was saint
Ninian, as saint Bede, Henry of Huntington, William of Malmesbury and others
write, Nima Natione Brito primus ibidem Christi praedicationem Euangelizauit,
did receive the faith of Christ at the least in the time of their King
Heirgustus, when he and his people about the year of Christ 369. or 370. were
converted Christians. By which account, if it be true that saint Ninian was
borne of a Sister of saint Martine, married to saint Ninian his Father hear a
Noble and holy Christian Britain, this Sister of saint Martine must needs be
married hear in Britain before such time as S. Martine came first into France
by Sulpitius Seuerus and other foreign Historians. And it further inuincibly
proves, that saint Ninian was in this Age many years brought up at Rome, made
Bishop there, and by the Pope sent Apostle unto the Picts, long time sooner,
then the common opinion of Antiquaries assigns to his coming hither. And
evident it is, by all Histories, that saint Martine dying, as before, S. Ninian
Apostle of the Picts a Britan son of S. Martins Sister renowned in this time.
about the 400. year of Christ, was living at Tours in France many years
after saint Ninian the Apostle of the Picts was sent unto them by the Pope from
Rome, and had converted them also. Therefore I may boldly with the Scottish
Histories account him among the holy and learned Fathers of this Age, whereof
he spent a great part in most holy and austeare conversation of life,
preaching the Gospel of Christ, and converting Infidels to his true Religion,
allthough living long as the Secretaryes of this great Saint say, he suruiued
until the next Age, where I shall more remember him. In this place I shall
only entreat of him and his proceedings as they belong unto, and were done in
this fourth hundred of years.

4. This holy man borne hear in Britain in the Western part thereof, where
the Sea divides England and Scotland, so now called, his Father was Manuscr.
Ant. in vit. S. Ninian. Io. Capgrau. in eodem.
a noble Christian and so great, that the old Writer of his life writing
presently after the Saxons settling there, as his words of British Kings there
ruling within the memory of some then living, quorundam memoria comprobatur,
do sufficiently prove, calls him a King, Pater eius Rex fuit Religione
Christianus. His Mother, as his Neighboring Antiquaries of Scotland have told
us, was Sister to saint Martine, not Couche the Mother of saint Patrike, being
great difference M. S. Antiq. Laurent. Surius, and Zachar. Lippol. die 17.
Martij in S. Patricio and alij.
even in time between their births, and saint Patriks Mother having no other
son but him, as Historians agree Calphurnius ex Couchessa S. Martini
Turonensis sorore vnicum concepit filium S. Patricium, but an other, whose name
I do not find particularly, neither what his Father was called, in any
Writter, but only that he was so Noble, that he is styled Rex, a King, and his
son saint Ninian, regali ex prosapia Ninianus extitit oriundus, descended by
his British Parents of Regal Race. Who when he was very young, cum annos
pueriles transegisset, contemning all worldly things, went on Pilgrimage to
Rome, where the Pope, which then was saint Siluester as it will show by the
time hereafter, committed him to be instructed in holy learning, and Religion
to chosen Tutors in such things; he continued in these sacred Studies at Rome
diverse years, until he was perfectly there endued with the knowledge of
Christian Mysteries, Erat Romae regulariter fidem and mysteria veritatis
edoctus, Bed. Hist. l. 3. cap. 4.
as saint Bede writes of him, and by the old Writer of his life, he continued
there many years in these sacred Studies, and worthy Conversation, and
perfect piety, that the Pope hearing there were some people in the West parts
of Britain, the Pictish Nation, which had not yet received the faith of
Christ, consecrated him Bishop, and sent him for their Apostle unto them,
pluribus annis in vrbe laudabiliter conuersatus and in sacris Scripturis
sufficienter eruditus ad virtutum summa prouehitur, and pennis charitatis
subuectus ad caelestia contemplanda sustollitur. Audiens deinde Pontifex
Romanus quosdam in Occidujs Britanniae partibus necdum fidem Christi
suscepisse, ad Episcopatus gradu^ Ninianum consecrauit, and praemissae genti
data benedictione Apostolum destinauit. This old Writer of saint Ninian his
life, says, that in his return from Rome toward his Country of Britain,
greatly desiring to visit saint Martine his Uncle, by some before, he went to
the City of Tours, and was honorably entertained by him, knowing by divine
revelation the worthiness of his holy Nephew and how he should happily procure
the salvation of many, Rediens autem vir Dei ab vrbe actus desiderio videndi
sanctum Martinum Episcopum, ad Ciuitatem Turonensem iter diuertit. Quem sanctus
Martinus honorifice suscipiens eum a Deo sanctificatum and multorum saluti
profuturum Deo reuelante cognouit.

5. But whereas this Antiquity calls S. Martin the^ a Bishop, it may be
questioned, Bed. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 4. Alred. in vit. S. Ninian. Guliel.
Malmes. l. 3. de gest. Pont. Angl. Henric. Hunt. Hist. l. 3. Capgrau. in S.
Ninian. Hect. Boeth. Histor. Scot. l. 7. Io. Bal. cent. 1. in Nin. Bernic. Io.
Pits. l. de vir. Illustrib. aetat. 5. in S. Nin. Nichol. Fitzherbert l. de
Antiq. Cath. Relig. in Anglia.
whether S. Martin was then at that time a Bishop there, or that it so calls
him because not long after he was Bishop, for it partly appears already, and
will more hereafter, that by our own Histories, S. Ninia^ was come a Bishop
into Britain before such time, as by foreign Authors S. Martin was Bishop of
Tours. Coming into Britain says this old Author, he was entertained with
great applause and co^course of people, as a Prophet, cu^ ad locu^ Legationis
suae venisset magnus populoru^ fit co^cursus, ingens cu^ctis laetitia, mira
deuotio, laus quoque vbique resonat Christi, quonia^ sicut Prophetu^ eum
habeba^t. So the Popes Legates were honored in Britain in those days, that
this holy Legate did convert those Picts, which were the^ in Britain called
commonly the south Picts, the Northre^ Picts coming hither afterward, and long
after this converted to the faith of Christ, it is the common consent of all
our Antiquaries ancient and later, after S. Bid, Catholics or Protestants,
Australes Picti, relicto errore Idololatriae, fide^ veritatis acceperunt
praedica^te eis verbum Nyma Episcopo reuerendissimo and sanctissimo Viro de
natione Britonu^, qui erat Romae regulariter fidem and mysteria veritatis
edoctus. Thus saint Bid and diverse more. The old Manuscript of saint Ninian
his life, Capgraue and others do more particularly deliver the manner, and
order of converting that people by saint Ninian, not only by holy preaching,
but many and strange miracles he wrought, in curing the blind, lame, Lepers,
and uexed with wicked spirits, and raising those which were dead to life,
ordaining and consecrating Bishops, Priests, and other Clergy me^, dividing
the Country into Parishes, and committing the^ to their cure and charge,
Sa^ctus Ninianus Australes Pictos, quibus adhuc error Ge^tilis inhaere^s Idola
venerari ac colere co^pellebat aggredie^s Eua^gelij veritate^ sequentibus
signis praedicabat. Caeci vident, claudi ambulant, leprosi mundantur, surdi
audiu^t, mortui resurgu^t, oppressi a daemonibus libera^tur. Sicque fides
suscipitur, error abdicatur, destructis te^plis Ecclesiae erigu^tur, curru^t ad
salutis lauachru^, diuites and pauperes gratias Deo agunt in Insulis quae
procul sunt habitantes, ordinauit Presbyteros, Episcopos consecrauit, and totam
terram per certas Parochias diuisit, confirmatis in fide omnibus. By which
testimony, that even the Inhabitants in the Islands out of great Britain were
converted, and all confirmed in the faith, we take notice, that not only Picts
which were their in this Britain, but such also as lived in the out Islands
thereof, were by saint Ninian, and his holy Assistants then converted. And his
commission before from the Pope of Rome to preach unto all in those parts,
without limitation, which had not received then the says of Christ, will give
proof unto it, for so it extended unto all Pagan^ in our West Countries,
whether Picts, Scots, Britans, or of what Nation soever in those places.
Whereupon diverse, and among them some Protestant Antiquaries are bold to write,
that not only the Picts were instructed, and first converted by him, but
diverse others both Scots and Britans did by him receive the Christian Roman
Religion, or confirmation therein, Ninianus Bernicius Io. Bal. l. de Script.
Britancent. 1. in Niniano Bernicio. Hect. Boeth. Scotor. Hist. lib. 7. fol. 119.
ex Regio Britannorum sanguine procreatus, Italiam adhuc adolescens, literarum
studio petijt. Romae apud diuini verbi ministros, mysteria verit atis edoctus
ad plenum, celer in patriam remigrabat. Vbi Magister and Paedonomus non
vulgaris, concreditum a Deo talentum per Britannoru^, Scotorum, Australiu^que
Pictorum terras latissime profudit. Huius pia industria, Picti primum relicto
Idololatriae cultu, veram Christi fidem percepere. And for those holy labors,
was in Catholic times, as our Histories testify by all, through out all
Britain reverenced by the Title of the Doctor and Instructor of the Scots,
Picts, and Britans, Scotorum, Pictorum, Britonumque Doctor and Paedonomus non
vulgaris, and eo nomine omnibus qui Albionem incolunt, vel hac nostra aetate in
multa veneratione habitus.

6. If we will inform our selves, when, and about what time, he first
preached, and what was the doctrine in particular, which he learned, and was so
soundly and perfectly instructed in at Rome, brought from thence, and preached
hear, we cannot better be secured in them, but to find out so near as we can
by Antiquities, when the Picts hear were first converted to Christ, because we
have been assuredly warranted before, that he was the first which preached
Christ unto them, converted them to him, and thereby is honored by the name of
their Apostle. His Religion, which he professed and preached hear, must needs
be the same, which by all Authors he learned at Rome, and had his commission
from the Pope there to publish it hear in The Picts hear converted in this
Age, and how soon.
Britain, the same which I have before proved to be the known Christian
Religion of the Popes and Church of Rome in those days. Which did not in any
point agree with that Protestant new learning, which is now practiced in
England, or any so termed Protestant Country, which will more plainly appear
hereafter, by the publikly professed Religion of all of this kingdom, Britans,
Scots or Picts in those days. I have insinuated before, that both Heirgustus
King of the Picts, and his Pictish people and subjects were Christians, and
publikly professed that Religion. This is plainly and inuincibly proved both
by our Scottish and English Historians, as also that in the year of Christ
Veremund. Hist. Scot. Hector Boeth. Scot. Hist. l. 6. Hollinsh. Hist. of Scotl.
369. fuit annus virginei partus nonus supra trecentesimum sexagesimum, at what
time Heirgistus King of the Picts was obseruantissimus a perfect and most
obseruant Christian Prince, a sufficient sign and Argument, that he was no
young Scholar in the School of Christ, but had made great progress and much
profited therein, so likewise had all the Inhabitants of those Northren parts,
whether Picts, Scots, or Britans: for the Historians of those places, and
others also assure us, that not only Britans, but Scots and Picts had many
Monks. And first for Scots when Maximus had both conquered, and quite
bannished them from this Island, both Scottish and English, Catholic, and
Protestant Historians thus speak of them: The same time the Scottish Bishops
and Priests Boeth. supr. Hollinsh Histor. of Scotl. in Eugen. Bucan. Histor.
Scot. l. 4. in Reg. 39.
being bannished, as well as the other sort of the Scottish people, a number of
their Mo^ks got them into the I Will of Iona, now called Colmkill, where they
erected a Monastery for their own habitation, the worthiness whereof has
been right famous even to these our days, as that which was afterward endowed
with many fair revenues by diverse of the Scottish Kings, who had their
burials there after the return of the Scots into Albanie. This was in the time
of Maximus his being King hear, and before he assumed the Empire by all
Antiquaries. This was in the year of Christ 379. Annus a Christi aduentu in
carnem trecentesimus septuagesimus nonus. Hect. Boeth. l. 6. Histor. Georg.
Buchan. Rer. Scot. l. 4. in Reg 39.
And at that time, as their Historians prove, the Picts were generally, and
publicly instructed, and professed Christians, nec a Sacerdotibus and
Monachis, qui tum in summo erant honor, Picti etsi public Christianis
institutis imbuti Iniuriam abstinuerunt. And ten years before this time,
both the Picts and their King were professed Christians, as is showed before,
and professed the same Religion, in the most strict Order of Monks, and
otherwise, as the Roman Catholics now do. Among those that were famous then in
this Profession diverse of their names be these with honor preserved, Inter
nostros Damianus Presbyter, Gelasius, Thebaculus, and Merinatus Damiani
Germanus Diaconi: Nerius, Hect. Boeth. l. 6. Hist. fol. 108. Boeth. supr.
Buchan. l. 4. in Reg. 35. Holinsh. Hist. of Irel.
Elusenius, Merinus, Machabaeus and Syluerius Monachi. And yet long before this
time also in the days of King Fincomarke of Scotland, who reigned 47. years,
and died multis virtutibus nobilis, noble for many virtues, in the year of
Christ 358, Salutis humanae a^no trece^tesimo quinquagesimo octauo, the Picts
had received the faith of Christ, and before that time, for whilst King
Fincomarke reigned, Fincomarco Rege Scotis adhuc Imperante, by diverse Writers,
diverse of the Irish Annal. Scotic. Hect. Boeth. sup. l. 6. fol. 104. Hollinsh.
Hist. of Ireland.
people received the Law of Christ by means of a worthy Christian woman of
the Picts as the Scottish and other Histories testify, Per id tempus mulier
Christianae pietatis cultrix, Pictici eam fuisse sanguinis Scotici asseuerant
Annals Regina insinuata, Christi nomen illi mirifice praedicauit,
reuerendumque effecit. This or the like memorable History I have placed before
in the days of Constantine the Great, for other parts, by ancient Writers of
great authority; But our Scottish and English Historians applying it to these
parts, and in the time of King Fincomarke, must needs hold their Picts
Conversion very ancient, in the time of King Fincomarke, as I have related
making his Reign 47. years, Hect. Boeth. l. 6. Scotor. Hist. fo. 101.
Hollinsh. Histor. of Scotl. in Finkomarke.
and yet affirming that he began to Reign in the first year of the Empire of
Constantine the Great, and was immediate Successor to King Crathlint, which so
religiously entertained our British Christians, flying to the Scots for
succor and releife in the great Persecution of Dioclesian before mentioned,
and this King Crathlint reigning but 24. years, decessit Crathlintus, postquam
rei Scotieae praefuisset annos viginti quatuor. Some say he Georg. Buchan. l.
4. rer. Scot. in Reg. 34. Hector. Boeth. Histor. Scot. l. 6. f. 102.
reigned not complete 24. years, but died in that last year nor complete,
and Fincomarke was not only by him choasen his Successor, but by public
applause and acclamation presently accepted and crowned King, Crathlinthus
vicesimo quarto, sui principatus anno fato concessit. Quo anno Fincomarcus eius
Patruelis Cormacho Crathlinti Patruo prognatus, regno per manus morientis
accepto, cunctis conclamantibus, vt faustum faelixque foret, fatali Marmori,
progenitorum more insidens, Rex ab omnibus est salutatus. Therefore joining
these received opinions of Historians together, that the Picts were so timely
and perfectly converted to the faith, that in King Fincomarke his Reign they
had even their women so learned and excellent in Christian Religion, that they
were so singularly powerable and honorable therein, that the like instance is
not found in Histories, and that S. Ninian by so many S. Ninian Apostle of the
Picts brought up at Rome in the times of S. Siluester Pope, and Constantine the
Great Emperor.
Authorities was the first Apostle and Conuerter of that Nation, we must needs
make him no less ancient, then I have before remembered him to have been,
borne in Britain and brought up at Rome in the days of saint Syluester Pope,
and great Constantine Emperor. Which the time of his death by all accou^pts
will also confirm, if we consider the long lives of our holy men, as saint
Patrik, David, Kentigerne and others in those and near succeeding days, and
this worthy man is remembered particularly in Histories to have lived until he
was very old, ad senium vsque, plenus dierum, aetate maturus; and yet some
place Io. Bal. cent. 1. in Ninian. Pits. aetat. 5. in eodem. S. Alred. and
Capgrau. in vit. eius.
him for his death with S. Ambrose and others in this Age, others to have dyed
in the year 422. and they which make his death latest, say it was in the year
of Christ 431. or 432. which is far from making him an extraordinary old man
for those days from that time I suppose his birth to have been in. And by all
reckenings in Historians, saint Palladius, and saint Patrike were sent hither
from Rome in those years 431. 432. when the longest accoumpt sets Hect.
Boeth. l. 7. Anton. Fitzharbert. l. Ant. Rel. Cath. in Ang. page 17. Bal. cent.
1. in Nin. Pits. in eodem.
down the death of saint Ninian. And yet no Historian writing of their coming
hither, either makes saint Ninian then living, or lately dead, which could not
have been omitted in so singular and rare a man, as S. Ninian was, sent from
the same place and authority of Rome, and preaching in the same Countries and
parts, whether they came, and where they preached by Commission from the same
Apostolic Roman See, if he had not been dead some time before; neither had
their sending thither been so needful, as it is made in Histories, if his
death had not been known at Rome before their coming and sending from thence,
to perform the same Apostolic office and duty in the same Provinces, which
and where saint Ninian in his life time so nobly and gloriously supplied and
executed by the same Legatine Power and authorite from Rome.

7. Therefore I must needs set down this renowned Britan, Apostle of the Picts
and most of his holy labors, with the Conversion of that people to Christ to
have been in this Age, and before the Empire of Maximus. And yet it appears
S. Ninian preached also to his Country Britans.
hy the old Writer of saint Ninian his life, that although he was principally
sent by the Pope to be their Apostle, he preached unto others in Britain
before he converted the Picts, for at his first coming, as I have insinuated
from that Author before, S. Ninian was received hear, as a Prophet, sicut
Prophetam eum habebant. Great co^curse of people came unto him, great joy
with all meruaylous devotion, and praise of Christ every where, Magnus
populorum fit concursus, ingens cunctis laetitia, mira deuotio, laus quoque
vbique resonat Christi: all of these are sufficient Arguments, that these first
e^tertainers of S. Ninian hear, were our Christian Britans, and not the Paga^
Picts. Which is made more manifest by that, which immediately follows: capit
mox male plantata enellere, male collecta dispergere, male aedifica^a
destruere. Purgatis ab omni errore fidelium mentibus, omnia quae fidelibus
agenda verbo docuit, operibus and exemplo monstrauit, and multis miraculis
confirmauit: He began to p^ll up things ill planted, scatter things ill
gathered, and destroy things ill builded, and purging the minds of the
faithful from all error, whatsoever he taught by word the believers to do, he
showed it in deeds and example, and confirmed it with many miracles. Where it
is evident, that they were believing Christians, although by near cohabitation
or converse with Pagans, defiled with some Heresies, or errors, to whom he thus
first preached, and people different and distinguished from the unbelieving
Picts, as they are expressly thus set down, and his preaching to these was
afterward, as thus it is remembered diverse from the other in the same History,
Interea Sanctus Ninianus Australes Pictos quibus adhuc error Gentilis inhaerens
Idola venerari ac colere compellebat aggrediens Euangelij veritatem sequentibus
signis praedicabat, caeci vident, claudi ambulant, leprosi mundantur, surdi
audiunt, mortui resurgunt, oppressi a daemonibus liberantur. Sicque fides
suscipitur, error abdicatur, distructis templis Ecclesiae eriguntur, currunt ad
salutis lauachrum diuites and pauperes gratias Deo agunt in Insulis quae procul
sunt habitantes. Ordinauit Presbyteros, Episcopos consecrauit, and totam terram
per certa^ Parochias diuisit: In the mean time S. Ninia^ going to the Picts,
which yet were Paga^s, and worshipped Idols preached the truth of the Gospel
unto the^ with these signs following. The blind se^, the lame walk, lepers
are cle^nsed, the dead are raised, and they which were oppressed with devils
are delivered. And so the faith is received, error abandoned, Pagan temples are
destroyed, Christian Churches erected. Rich and poor are baptized, those that
inhabited the Islands a far off give thanks to God. He ordained Priests,
consecrated Bishops, and divided the whole land by certain Parishes.

8. And having thus converted and confirmed this people unto, and in the faith
of Christ, being the chiefest end of his Mission and coming hither, he
returned to his Church, confirmatis in fide omnibus ad Ecclesiam suam est
regressus. This house and Episcopal Church which he now returned unto, was the
same which he had builded before of stone, called for the rarenes of such
building in Britain, that being the first, as our Histories say, and thereby
named Candida Bed. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 4. Capgrau. in S. Niniano. Guliel.
Malmes. lib. 4. de gest. Pont. Angl.
Casa, the White House or Church at a place called Witerne, between Scotland
and England, as they are now termed, upon the Sea coast almost quite environed
with the Sea, excepting the passadge on the North side thereof, Candida Casa
vocatur locus in extremis Angliae iuxta Scotiam finibus vbi beatus Confessor
Nima requiescit, Natione Brito, qui primus ibidem Christi praedicationem
Euangelizauit. Nomen loco ex opere inditum, quod Ecclesiam ibi ex lapide polito
Brit^nibus miraculum fecerit. This Church saint Ninian dedicated to S. Martine
of Tours, so soon as he understood he was dead, which was in the end of this,
or beginning of the next Age, by all accounts, this Church being quite finished
before that time, Quoniam iam Sanctum Martinum quem miro semper venerabatur
affectu a terri^ ad caelos migrasse didicerat, ipsam Ecclesiam in eius honor
dedicauit. By the Scottish Histories thus related, Inter nostros Ninianus
Episcopus sanctitate Hector. Boeth. Hist. l. 7. Bal. cent. 1. in Nin. Bernic.
and miraculis clarissimus, ac Casae Candidae Pontificalis in Galdia Sedis
primus Institutor, vbi and aedem condidit diuo Martino suo Auunculo sacram.
Where we see that saint Ninian was the first Founder of that Episcopal See,
most renowned for sanctity and miracles, and dedicated his new Church unto the
honor of saint Martine, his Uncle, as they write.

9. There was also an a^ncient Church in the same place, dedicated to saint
Ninian, of which, besides others, both old and late Writers, saint Alcuinus or
Io. Pits. aetat. 5. in S. Nin. Gul. Malmes. l. 3. de gest. Pont. Angl. Alcuin.
Epistol. ad fratres Candidae Casae.
Albinus in an Epistle to the Religeous men inhabiting there; makes this
memory of the sanctity of that place, and worthiness of the miraculous man there
buried, as William of Malmesbury cites him, Scribit Alicuinus in Epistola ad
Fratres eiusdem loci (Candidae Casae) dicens: deprecor vestrae pietatis
vnanimitatem, vt nostri nominis habeatis memoriam in Ecclesia sanctitissimi
patris vestri Nimae Episcopi, qui multis claruit virtutibus, sicut mihi nuper
delatum est per carmina metricae artis, quae nobis per fideles nostros
discipulos Eboracensis Ecclesiae scholasticos, directa sunt, in quibus and
facientis cognoui eruditionem, and facientis miracula sanctitatem. Where we
have the most learned Author of this Land and his Age an ample witness of the
learning, holiness, and miracles of this renowned Bishop, Apostle, and first
Conuerter of the Picts, and by some of the Southern Scots also Io. Pits. supr.
to Christ, Omnium primus Pictos and Australes Scotos ab Idolorum cultu, ad
fidem Christi perduxit.

10. We find in this Age also many others, renowned men and Saints of this
Manny Brothers and Sisters children of Prince Bragbam Saints in this time.
Kingdom. Braghan styled King of Brecknocke a Noble Brita^ who had 12. sons,
and so many daughters, all of them holy Servants of Christ, and happy Saints,
Rex Breghenocensium: Fuerunt Regi illi filij duodecim, and filiae totidem,
omnes Deo placentes and vitae sanctae. Among these saint Canoch his eldest
son and Manuscr. Ant. in vit. S. Keinae Virg. Capgrau. in eadem. Manuscript.
and Gapgrau. supr. and in S. Cadoco. and in S. Gundleo.
Heir forsaking his wordly honor, and glory, gave himself wholly to the
contemplative and Religeous life and estate, therein long living, and dying a
glorious Saint. His eldest daughter S. Gladus or Gladusa was married to King
Gundleus also a Saint, and they were the happy Parents of that our Illustrious
Eremite, Monk, Bishop, and Martyr saint Cadocus. The second daughter named
Melari or Melaria was Mother to saint David our great and renowned Archbishop
his Father. An other of the holy daughters was saint Keina who living a sacred
virgin in a most strickt and austeare course of life, was Miraculous at her
birth, in her whole life, at and after her death. The rest of these holy
children are not so well remembered in our Histories, but so in general, as I
have related. King and Saint Gundleus husband of the eldest daughter and Father
of saint Cadocus, leaving his Rule and dignity to his son saint Cadocus, S.
Gundleus how holy and Religeous.
who shortly after also resigned it, for the love of the heavenly Kingdom,
builded a Church, and there lived in great austeritie and penance all his
life, many years: his food was bread of Barley the third part of Ashes, and
water: his inward clothing, sackcloth, he having forsaken all, and so much as
the State of such a King, never received any thing from others but lived by his
labor, ever at midnight rissing; and diuing himself in the cold water, Regale
Palatium deseruit, and regno Cadoco filio suo commendato, ad monticulum sibi ab
Angelo nuntiatum peruenit, and Ecclesiam construxit, and ibi in magna
abstinentia and vitae sanctimonia viuere caepit: Vtebatur autem cilicio and
pane hordeaceo and cinere in tertia part admixto, aquamque potare consueuit,
nocte vero media surgens in aquam frigidam se immersit, and nihil de alieno
sumens, proprio labor vitam duxit. And thus M. S. Antiq. and Capgr. in S.
Cadoco. Caradoc. in vit. S. Gildae Capgr. in eod. and S. Dauide M. S. and
Capgrau in S. Carautoco.
perseuered to his death, being very old in the next Age, where I shall speak
more of him, and his holy son S. Cadocus, who in this Age also began to be
famous.

11. So was S. Gildas Albanius both a renowned Preacher and Miraculous man in
this time. S. Carautocus also Son and Heir to king Kederic, hearing that his
Father being very old, intended to resign his Rule and government unto him,
fledd secretly a way in poor atty^e and embraced the Relig^ous life, and
proved so excellent a man, even in this time, that he preached in Ireland 30.
years before S. David was borne, whose birth was in this time. T^^ginta S.
Gildas and S. Caratocus were now renowned.
annis ante natiuitate^ sanct. David Episcopi in Hibernia co^uersari ^^pit.
Multos populos in Hibernia ad fidem co^uertit. And it seems by the old Writer
of S. Cadoc his life, that he was even in this Age a renowned man, having
besides S. Cadocus now renowned.
his holy conversation and preaching in Britain, both in the part now named
England, as that called Scotland 7. years. He went on Pilgrimage three times
to Jerusalem, seven times to Rome, and once to the holy Relics of S. Andrew,
newly brought hither in this Age by S. Regulus, as I shall set down So S.
Goudwall an holy Bishop or Archbishop.
heareafter, where he was admonished by an Angel to stay and preach 7. years.
S. Gudwall also was renowned in this Age both in Britain and other place
Gudwalus Brita^niae finibus ortus ex nobili prosapia, of Noble pare^tage, he
was Manuscr. Ant. de vit. S. Gudwal. Capgrau. in eod. Sur. Tom. 3. Molan. add.
ad Vsuard. Franc. Haraeus 6. Iun. Auth. of Engl. Martyr. die 22. Febr. and 6.
Iunij.
brought up in learning, was consecrated Priest, and after Bishop, and by some
an Archbishop in this Kingdom. And that he might more quietly give himself
over to the contemplative life, placing a worthy Bishop and Successor in his
Pastoral charge, and place, went into a Monastery within his Diocese, hard by
the Sea, and there with an hunded and fourscore Monks lived a most holy and
Miraculous life. He and his holy company in seven ships went over into
Flamders, and preached there, where, by some, he died, and was first buried at
Bla^dine near Ga^t; but Capgraue with the Antiquities which he follows,
affirms his body was buried hear in Britain, in an I Will called then Plecit,
where it rested with great honor, until the Christian Britans, bannished out
of their Country by persecuting Pagans, carried his holy Relics with them, and
buried them in that Monastery of Blandine, Peractis annorum multorum curriculis
ob infestationem Barbarorum and Paganorum gens Britannica magna ex part hinc
and inde dispersa relictis sedibus per orbem diffusa est. Hinc fratres assu^pto
corpore sancto mare transeuntes Franciam adeunt, and apud Clarum montem in
Monasterio Blandinion locum perpetuae reliquiarum sanctarum quietis eligunt. It
is agreed by all, that he died on the sixth day of June, sexto Idus Iunij. A
Engl. Martyr 6. Iunij.
late writer says in one place, he finally reposed in our Lord, about the
year of Christ, four hundred and three. Through forgetting himself, or,
mistaken by his printer, in an other place he writes, full of venerable old
Age, in great sanctity and Febr. 22.
holiness of life, he rested in our Lord, about the year of Christ, three
hundred and forty, and was one of the first of our Island that preached the
Christian faith in Flanders. But by all, this Age is the time of his holy life.

12. We find also in the authentical life of S. David used in his
Ecclesiastical Breuiar. Eccles. Sarisb. in Festo* S. Dauidis lect. 6.
Office in the British and English Church, that Eluueus was Bishop of Meneuia,
after called S. David's, before S. David was borne, and had the honor to baptize
that renowned man, when he was newborn and for his performing Elueus Bishop
of Meneuia in this Age.
that holy office, a most clear Well never appearing before sprang up to
baptize him in, ad ipsius baptizandi ministerium fons limpidissimae aquae
emanauit, qui nunquam antea visus fuit. And this Bishop at that time was newly
returned out of Ireland, cum baptizaretur ab Eluueo Meneuensi Episcopo redeunte
de Hibernia. And so had gone thither as it seems about some Episcopal
business belonging Men^uia probably an Episcopal See before S. David's time.
unto his chardge and office there. Which approved testimony sufficiently
proves unto us, that Meneuia was an Episcopal See long before S. David his
settling the Archiepiscopall See there. And if this Bishop S. Eluueus had then
charge in Ireland, that it was even then the Sea Episcopal, the Archbishop
some time reside^t there, some time at Caerlegion. I shall speak more of more
both of this, and our other Archiepiscopall Sees, of other Bishops heareafter.
And hear now also may I probably place S. Liephard a British Bishop, S.
Liephard a Bishop of Britain a Martyr in this Age.
Saint, and Martyr, glorious even in foreign Countries. For it is read of
him, that being borne hear in Britain, and consecrated Bishop in our
Primative Church, and going on Pilgrimage to Rome, in his return from thence
in the Territory of Cambray in Hennalt, at a place called Hu^court, four miles
from the named City, was put to death by Pagan thieves; and his Feast is
celebrated in the Church of Cambray on the fourth day of February. That he was
a Molan. addit. ad vsuardum. Index SS. Belgij. Hereb. in fastis SS. Engl.
Martyrolog. 4. Febr.
Bishop in our Primative Church of Britain, and put to death by Pagans in that
Province, where Pagans will not easily be found in later times, will give some
warrant to place him in this Age.

THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
OF THE HONORABLE TRANSLATION OF the Relics of S. Andrew Apostle from Achaia
to Britain by S. Regulus. The great reverence both Princes and others hear
gave unto them, and such, and professed in other matters the Religion, which
Catholics now do.

1. AS this our Britain was made happy in the time of the Apostles, with the
presence, and preaching of the chief Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul: So now in
this Age and time, so long after their deaths, and the rest of those chosen
disciples of Christ, to teach us that they which be happily deceesed out of
this mortal, and entered into the heavenly life, and triumphant Church, may
and do by many means help, assist, and comfort his militant Servants, and
Souldiars in this world, it pleased his divine Majesty, Miraculously, as our
Antiquaries and Arguments undeniable prove unto us, to honor this Nation and
great Island with Epiphan. Haeres. 51.
the sacred Relics of that glorious Martyr and Apostle S. Andrew, by natural
birth elder brother to S. Peter.

2. And to testify how great a Jewel they and such are, he caused the^ to be
transported so far and long a space and distance, as between the place of
Eusebius. l. 4. vitae Constant. Socr. l. 1. cap. vlt. Hier. de Script. Eccles. in
Luc. aduers. Vigil. in Chron. Chrysostom. Or. quod Christus sit Deus. Veremun.
Hect. Boeth. Scot. Hist. l. 6. Hollin. Hist. of Scotl. in Fethelmacus.
his Martyrdom in Achaia, to the remote parts of this Kingdom, and in this
order. Constantine the great Emperor fou^ding at Constantinople the Church of
the 12. Apostles with their Images, and memoryes, and his own place of burial
between them, as Eusebius, Socrates, S. Hierome and others are worthy
witnesses, and providing to translate many of their holy Relics thither,
hoping thereby to procure great profit to his soul, quamplurimum vtilitatis
illorum memoriam animae suae conciliaturam existimans. Neque vo^a eius
expectationemque fefellit Deus: Among others employed in this Religious work
S. Regulus an holy Abbot, and Father of many virtuous Monks at Patras in
Achaia, where S. Andrew was Martyred, multorum verae pietati addictoru^ in
Patris ciuitate Pater atque Praeceptor, and his sacred Relics kept with great
reverence, who watching and praying at S. Andrews Shrine th^re, being the
chiefest man, which by the Edict of the Emperor were sent to worship those
Relik^ Relics of Saints reverenced.
of the Apostle, which the Emperor himself meruailously reverenced, ex ill^^
praecip^us, qui Imperatoris Edicto, diui Andreae Apostoli Reliqu^^s
venerationi^^^^ sain quos ipse mira d^cebatur pietate assisterent, fuerant
destinati, was ^dmonished from heaven, to take part of those holy Reliks, a
bone of the arm, three fingers, and three Toes of that Apostle, and bring them
decently into the Island of Albion, in the remote part of the world, that the
people there deuotely reuerencing saint Andrew, might by the goodness of God by
his Ietercession obtain both earthly and heavenly blessings, Cum sacras ad
Scriniolum ageret vigilias superne monitus est, vt accepto sacrati brachij
oss^, tribus digitis, totidemque alterius pedis articulis, ac in vasculum
decenter repositis, Albionem Insulam in extremo orbis recessu sitam peteret:
futurum enim vt illie aliquando, populus pia veneratione, in diuum Andream
ductus, Dei beneuolentia and terrena and caelestia, eius suffragio assequeretur
charismata.

3. By which direction S. Regulus taking the holy Reliks with diverse other very
holy men for his Associats, took this long Journey in hand, and after many
dangers landed with these holy Relics, and his companions in that part of this
Island now called S. Andrews, from that time of his holy Reliks taking that
name of honor, then a poor Village in Pictland, now in the division of
Scotland. The fame hereof being spreed through the Country of the Picts, very
many resorted to visit and reverence these holy Reliks, and from all places
thereabouts, brough gifts to offer to the holy Apostle, Confluxeru^t illuc
vndique donaria Christi Apostolo offerentes. Among these was Heirgustus King of
the Picts, whom S. Regulus and his Religious company entertained with a joyful
manner of Procession, in Hymns and Canticles. The King Prostrating himself
upon the ground kissed the sacred Reliks, with great reverence, and after
Mass, whereof the King was most obseruant, ended, he gave his own Palace to
S. Andrewe, S. Regulus, and the Priests, to serve God Sacrifice of Mass, with
vestiments and ornaments belonging to Priests at Mass.
there. And he builded an other Church not far off dedicated to S. Andrew the
Apostle. Which he did endowe with most ample gifts, as Chalices, Lauatories,
and other vessels of gold, and silver with very costely Preistly, and Church
Ornaments to continue for ever, belonging to the holy Sacrifice, ornauit and id
templum Donarijs amplissimis, pateris, cyphis, calicibus, peluibus, laxacris ex
argento auroque, ac alia praetiosa supellectili in sacrorum vsum quaesita
sacerdotibus ad diuina perpetuo exequenda ibidem costitutis. This example of
King Heirgustus was long time followed by the Kings of the Picts, so long as
they continued there, and by the Kings of the Scots after possessing those
parts, honoring S. Andrew for the Patron of their Country, Heirgusti exemplum
longa Regum series primo, Pictorum deinde Scotorum, qui deletis Pictis ea loca
tenuerunt religiose est insequuta, Diuum Andream pro numine habentes tutelari.
Which the Protestant Historians themselves, both Scots and others, do freely
and plainly confess, as being a certain and undeniable true History,
agreeing both in Boeth. l. 6. fol. 109. Hollinsh. Hist. of Scotl. supr.
the time, place, and other circumstances of the miraculous sending and
transporting these holy Reliks into this kingdom in the place remembered, from
Patras in Achaia about the year of Christ 369. and the great devotion, and
reverence, wherewith they were received and preserved hear.

4. The first Religious men which were placed in this new Monastery with
Culdeyes the old Monks hear, most holymen.
S. Regulus and his company, were those which the Scots and Picts for their
singular piety and Religion honored with the Title Culdeis, Sacerdotes
Deicultores vulgo appellati, Priests commonly called Worshippers of God, these
were first placed in it, Fuere in eo a primae^a eius condition primum
Sacerdotes Dei cultores vulgo appellati. These Culdeis were Britans of those
parts, where the Romans ruled, and the Persecution of Dioclesian extended it
self and raged, which fled to the Scots not so subject to the Romans, for
succor in that raging time, and many of them after the Persecution ended,
continued there still preaching unto the Scots, many of these converted,
joining with them in that holy Religious life, and remained there to many
generations in great honor and Sanctity reverenced both of Kings and
Subjects, as all Antiquaries even Protestants thus confess in the Reign of
King Finchormach, or Finchomarke a little before this time, and diverse hundreds
of years after, Scoti liberati Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scoticar. l. 4 in Reg. 35.
Finchomarcho. Holinsh. Histor. of Scotl. in Fincomarke.
curis externis, nihil prius habuerunt, quam vt religionem Christianam
promouerent, occasion illinc orta, quod multi ex Brittonibus Christianis,
saeuitiam Diocletiani timentes, ad eos confugerant: e quibus complures,
doctrina and vitae integritate clari in Scotia substiterunt, vitamque
solitariam ta^ta sanctitatis opinione apud omnes vixerunt, vt vita functorum
cella in templa commutarentur, ex eoque consuetudo mansit apud Posteros, vt
prisci Scoti templa cellas vocent. Hoc genus Monachorum Culdeos appellabant:
Mansitque nomen and institutum, donec Monachorum genus recentius eos expulit.
By which testimony of Antiquaries even Protestants, it is both proved, that
our ancient learned and Religious Britans, as S. Ninian and his Associates,
and our British holy Priests, and Culdies were principal instruments in
converting, as well the Scottish, as Pictish Nations to the faith of Christ,
and that the Pope of Rome which directed S. Ninian Religion then hear, the
same with that of the present Roman Church.
hither, he, and the Picts whom he converted, our British Priests and Culdeis,
and the Scots receiving instruction in Religion from them, and the Church of
Greece with whose Monks all these joined, were Professors of one and the same
Catholic faith in the Sacrifice of Mass, and Ceremonials thereof, prayer and
invocation to Saints in heaven, their protection toward men on earth,
worshipping their Reliks, Pilgrimages to holy Places, Religious Monastical
life, and such others before expressed by them. From these Monks and Culdeis
the Bishops of those parts were chosen until Pope Celestine sent Boeth. l. 7.
f. 133.
S. Palladius hither, Antea ex Monachis and Culdeis Pontifices assumerentur.
And they preached and taught the Law of Christ throughout all the l. 6. f. 102.
Scots Countries, Christi Seruatoris doctrinam per omnes Scotor^m Regiones
concionando multis pijsque sudoribus seminantes.

5. And although this History of S. Regulus in coming so long a journey with
those sacred Reliks, and the great reverence the Northren parts of this
Kingdom then gave unto them, may seem strange to men not well affected to
such holy duties, and ignorant in the devotion and Religion of these times: yet
they may learn this was not singular to the Gretians, Picts, and Scots, but to
all other Christan Nations, especially the Britans, not to seek further then
belongs to their History. For as S. Regulus brought those holy Reliks
Pilgrimages to holy Reliks of Saints.
out of Greece, so our Britans in these times went into Syria, as far as
Antioch on Pilgrimage to S. Simeon Stellita to worship sacred things there, and
took it for a great happiness and blessing to bring from thence any little
piece Nicen. Council. 2. Theod. Hist. Sanctorum Patrum in S. Simeone. Euagr.
Hist. Eccl. l. 1* c. 13.
of a Thong cut from his leather Coat, and in Rome itself they thought it to
be a great protection, to have but a little Image of him to stand at the
entries of their houses, as both the second Nicen Council, and Theodoret are
ample witnesses, Non solum confluebant qui nostram habitant Regionem, sed and
Ismaelitae and Persae and Armenij qui sunt eis subiecti, and Iberos and
Homeritae, and qui illis sunt interiores. Venerunt autem multi quoque qui
habitant extrema Occidentis, Hispani inquam, and Britanni, and Galli, qui quod
est intermedium occupant. De Italia enim superuacaneum est dicere. Aiunt enim
Romae, quae est long maxima, eum fuisse adeo omnium sermon celebratum, vt in
officinarum omnibus vestibulis and Porticibus ei paruas posuerint Imagines,
hinc sibi praesidium and tutelam parantes. Cum ergo venirent innumerabiles,
conabantur omnes contrectare, and ex pelliceis illis vestibus aliquam percipere
benedictionem. Where we see yet the Religion and devotion not of Manuscr.
Antiq. and Capgr. in Vit. S. Cadoci Episcopi and Martyris.
a few, but many Britans then, multi Britanni to go so far on Pilgrimage to
holy parsons, places and Reliks: among those, our glorious, Monk, Abbot,
Bishop and Martyr S. Cadocus went thrice on Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, seven
times to Rome, and to these Reliks of S. Andrew in Scotland, staying preaching
there seven years, as is also before remembered.

THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
OF MANY RENOWNED ARCHBISHOPS OF all our Archiepiscopall Sees hear, many other
learned and holy Bishops and Apostolic men hear in this time: and their
Religion, the Catholic Religion.

1. WE read in this time there was a learned Bishop, or as Trithemius styles
him, Archbishop of the Scots, called Hildebertus, Tutor, and Instructor of that
renowned learned Father of this Nation Caelius Sedulius, Sedulius Hildeberti
Scotorum Archiepiscopi ab ineunte aetate Discipulus. Io. Trithem. l. de Script.
Eccl. in Sedulio. Ioa. Bal. lib. de Scrit. Britan. in Caelio Sedulio.
Others give him only the Title, a very learned Bishop of the Scots,
Hildebertus eruditus Scotorum Praesul. But if we understand this in that common
sense, and meaning as Bishops and Archbishops of places are taken, and
understood, that Hildebertus should be Archbishop of any See or City among the
Scots, saint Palladius being by all Antiquities set down to be their first
Archbishop, excepting the Archbishops Hildebertus the learned Tutor of Caelius
Sedulus probably Archbishop of York.
of York, and he sent by Papal and extraordinary Authority, as Apostle to
that Nation, I dare not join with them further in opinion herein, then say he
was in this Age one of our Archbishops of York, and by that right and Title
Archbishop of all, Scots, or whatsoever Christian people in the North parts,
and Islands of this kingdom Britain under that Archiepiscopall Jurisdiction,
by Pope Eleutherius first order and Institution.

2. Which I may further confirm by the authority of all them which call him
Archbishop of the Scots, they also teaching that he was Instructor of Author.
apud Bellarm. lib. de Script. in Sedul. Io. Trithem. in Caelio Sedul. Bal. in
eod. cent. 1. Iodoc. Cocc. in Catal. Scriptor.
Sedulius in his you^ger years, a tenera aetate, and those that write of
Sedulius the time wherein he flourished and died; some place his death under
Co^stantius son to Constantin the Great, some in the 430. year of Christ,
others in the year 460. by none of these Accounts could Hildebertus be
otherwise called Archbishop of the Scots, then in that meaning I have
delivered. At the time of the first account, the Scots were not in this
kingdom, as I have made manifest before, and before Hildebertus could be Tutor
to Sedulius by either of the later reckonings, the Scots were probably driven
out of Britain by Maximus, about the year 379. when Sedulius being long time
Scholar to this Bishop, must needs be old in the 430. of Christ and much
older, near an hundred years old, if he lived unto the year 460. yet he is
not by any Writer noted for an old man. We cannot say, that this Hildebertus
was Archbishop of the Scots in Ireland; for although diverse hold, that diverse
of the Scottish Irish had received the faith of Christ before saint Palladius,
or S. Patrike were sent unto that Nation by Pope Celestine, yet it is made
plain by the old Writer of the life of saint Modwenna and others, that at the
coming of saint Patrike thither, the Irish people there were either Pagans
for the most part, or not well instructed in Christian Religion: gentes illae
partim Paganicis erroribus M. S. Antiq. de vit. S. Modeuen. Virg. Capgrau.
Catal. in eadem.
inuolutae, partim fidem nondum plene intelligebant. Which could not be
probably truly said of any Nation having so learned an Archbishop, as
Hildebertus is proved to have been, with other Bishops, Priests, and Clergy
men as that great dignity infers, and brings with it. And the
Antiquaries not only of this, but other Nations agree, that saint Palladius
was the first Archbishop, or rather Bishop that was ever sent into Ireland in
the time of Pope Io. Trithem. l. de Script. Eccl. fol. 26. in Pallado.
Celestine, and by him long after this Age, Palladius Britannorum seu Scotorum
Insulae Hiberniensis a Caelestino Papa primus ordinatus Episcopus. Where
Trithemius calls him the first Bishop, no Archbishop of that people, yet he
confesses that saint Patrike was immediately after, and by the same Pope made
Archbishop there, Post quem sanctus Patricius genere Brittus a sancto
Caelestino Papa consecratus in Archiepiscopum Hiberniensem.

3. I do not find the names of any others, either certainly, or probably
remenbred in Histories to have been Archbishops of York in this Age, except
Archbishops of London in this time.
Taurinus spoaken of before, did in the beginning thereof supply that place of
dignity there. The names of the Archbishops of London have been better
preserved, among which in this Ce^tenary of years we find first S. Stephen,
commonly Will Harrison. descript. of Engl. Stowe Hist. in Lucius. Godwin.
Catal. of Bishop London. Harris Hist. Manuscr. l. 4. cap. 7.
by our Protestant Antiquaries accounpted the seventh Archbishop there, to
which some Catholic Historians, as M. Harris in his Manuscript History seems
to agree: But seeing I have proved S. Augulus our holy Archbishop, and Martyr,
whom they pass over to have been Archbishop there, joining with Theanus,
Eluanus, Cadar, Obinus, Cona^, and Palladius, all which they place and recko^
before Stephen, there be found seven Archbishops there before him, and he
cannot be the seventh, but the eight in that See. Next to Stephen they accoumpt
in this Age, Iltut or Iltuta, after him Restitutus, which was at the Council
of Arles spoken of before, then Dedwyn, Theodwyn, Tadwyne Tatwyne or Tacwyne,
then Thedred Tidred or Theodred. An old Manuscr. Hist. Gallic. an. 427. Gennad.
in Catal. honor. ib. Philip. Berg. Hist. Io. Trith. l. de Script. Eccl. in
Fastidio.
French Manuscript History testifies, that one named Gouncelyn was Archbishop
of London about this time. And whereas both Gennadius, Honorius, Philippus
Bergomensis, Trithemius and other strangers tell us, that Fastidius about this
time was a British Bishop very learned, a devout and worthy both Preacher
and Writer, and therefore by them registered among the holy Writers of his time:
Fastidius Episcopus Britannorum in Scripturis sacris eruditus, and verbi Dei
Praedicator egregius, vita quoque and conuersatione illustris, sermon
Fastidius not improbably Archbishop of London.
and ingenio clarus, scripsit nonnulla deuota opuscula: some of our own
Writers say, he was Archbishop of London, which the recited Authors rather
approve, then impugn, when they style him Bishop of the Britans, meaning Io.
Bal. l. de Script. Brit. cent. 1. in Fastid. Prisc. Io. Pits. aetat. 5. in eod.
by that phrase properly spoaken, that he was chief or Archbishop of them,
Fastidius Episcopus Londinensis Metropolis, and, ad Archiepiscopatum
Londonensem euectus. Aluueus spoaken of before, that baptized S. David,
Tremaunus vrbis Legionum Archiepiscopus, and Amaloers, are thought to be
Archbishops Galfr. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 8. c. 10.
of Caerlegion. Very little memory besides their names of those of London is
left except those I have spoaken of before. Yet by good Arguments though
Archbishops of Caerlegion in this time.
more general, both from ancient foreign, and domestical Writers, we are
assured they were learned and holy Catholic Archbishops, governing the people
under them in virtue, and true belief. This is confessed by Protestant
Antiquaries before, making the Britans both Clergy and others orthodoxe, true
believers, and good people long after this Age, by our British Histories in
the greatest sway of liberty, and wickedness hear by the Saxons entry, the
Archbishops Bishops and others of the Clergy. Hear were holy and truly
Religious, and so continued so long as their temporal government continued,
in so much that when saint Augustine came hither The Bishops of Britayne now
learned, truly Catholic, and holy men.
and there was then but one Archbishopricke, and seven Bishoprics left by the
Pagan Saxons, they were all furnished with most Religious Prelates, In part
Britonum vigebat Christianitas, quae a tempore Eleutherij Papae habita, nunquam
inter eos defecerat. Augustinus inuenit in eorum Prouincia septem Episcopatus
and Archiepiscopatum religiosissimis Pr^sulibus muni^os, and Abbatias complures
Galfrid. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 11. cap. 12. Bed. Hist. l. 2. cap. 2. Io.
Goscelin. Hist. Eccl. Parker l. antiq. Brit. p. 8.
in quibus Grex Domini rectum ordinem tenebat. And S. Bid also testifies,
these Bishops and others of the British Clergy were most learned men, Septem
Britonum Episcopi and plures viri doctissimi. And other our Historians even
Protestants do prove, that not only in that Age, and this we have now in
hand, but in every other, in quouis saculo, Britain had such learned Prelates.
And for foreign Writers, even those which were most renowned in the world in
their days even in this very time, they witness as much of our British
Bishops. I Britain now an holy and Religious kingdom.
have cited S. Hilary for the Latin, and S. Athanasius for the Greek Church
before, to such proof and purpose. S. Chrysostom often speaks of the
Chrysostom. Tom. 4. Hom. 28. co^m. in c. 18. Epist. 2. ad Corinth. apud Speed
Theat. of Brit. l. 6. Sermon. de Pentec. Tom. 3.
great devotion and Religion of our Britans, how firm they were in the true
faith of Christ, builded Churches, and Altars, and offered the holy Sacrifice
on them, and not only our Prelates and Priests were thus Religious, but our
Kings themselves did lay down their Crowns at the Church door, and made the
sign of the Cross on their forehoods, Reges ingredientes Limen Ecclesiae
deponunt coronam, and Crucem Christi depingunt in suis frontibus. And name our
two Kings and Emperors Theodosius the Father, and son, for Paterns of
Basilius Epist. ad Occidentales Episcopos. in fine Tom. 3. edit. Basil. 1565.
such Religion, Theodosius pater, filius Theodosij, religione ac pietate
insignes. The Epistle of S. Basile to the Western Bishops, Occide^talibus,
translated by Wolefangus Masculus the Protestant, in which our British Bishops
were comprehended, proves that our Bishops then were known unto all the
world, to be men instructed and endued with the grace of God, unspotted in
matters of faith, and keeping the Apostles Tradition, Vos cunctis mortalibus
praedicamini viri gratia Dei instructi, quod in fide illibati permaneatis, and
Apostolorum depositum Our British Bishops not only renowned hear and in
these Western Nations, but in the Eastern also, there teaching true Religion,
and conde^ning Her^si^.
illaesum seruetis. And therefore most earnestly entreats them, as he did in
other Epistles, to come into the East Countries afflicted with Heresy to
confound the Heretics, and comfort others, Obsecramus vt nunc tandem manum
Orientalibus porrigatis Ecclesijs, quae iam velut in genua depressae inclinant:
ac viros aliquos mittatis, qui illas de praemijs admoneant, quae patientiae, ac
passionibus pro Christo toleratis reseruantur. Vos o dilecti, ac desiderati
fratres, sitis vulneratorum medici, and eorum qui adhuc sani existant
Praedotribae, quod morbidum est curantes, and quod sanum ad pietatem
instruentes. Therefore having proved by most worthy witnesses before, that not
only among the Western Nations, but all others in the then Christian world,
this Kingdom of Britain was most free from Heresy, and by S. Basils judgment
as well in that respect, as that our Bishops were learned, and trauayled into
remote Countries, even to Councels, and as Theodoret has testified, multi
Britanni, many holy and learned Britans went in that time to the Eastern
Countries, whether S. Basile so exhorted them to come, and where so great
necessity was then of their help, and assistance in so great and important
affairs, we may not do that wrong to our Noble Nation, but acknowledge that
diverse of our learned Britans took in hand and performed those worthy
offices, as S. Basil so vrgently desired. And among these we may boldly name
and place Coelus Sedulius, a very Sigebert. and Bostius apud Bal. cent. 1. in
Coelo Sedul. Io. Trith. l. de Scrip. Eccles. in eod. Conr. Gesner. Bibliot. in
Caelio Sedul. Magdeb. cent. 5. c. 10. Henric. de Erford. hist. Sedul. in Princ.
lib. Epistol.
learned man, and by Sigebert, Bostius, Trithemius, and others, a Bishop for
one. He being brought up under our Archbishop Hildebertus hear in our Britain
though he himself, as he and others write, Scotigena, come of the Scottish
Nation, proved a man of great, and extraordinary knowledge, in all kind of
learning, especially divine, and trauayled into those Eastern Countries,
Italiam perlustrauit and Asiam, postremo Achaiae finibus excedens, in vrbe Roma
mirabili doctrina clarus effulsit. And did not only by his words and preaching
confirm the Catholics confounding Heretics, but by his many learned Writings
refuted all Heresies of those times, and places, as is plainly extant in them,
leaving unto Posterity an undeniable testimony, in his own Parson of his
labors and written Books, that all Countries then where he These our Bishops
of Britain agreeing with all Catholic Churches, professed the same faith with
the Church of Rome now.
lived, Britain, France, venit in Franciam, Italy, Rome where he was so
famous, and the Eastern Churches agreed in such holy doctrine as he preached,
and committed to writing, being the very same as Protestants themselves
confess, which the Church of Rome now professes, condemning the opinions of
Protestants, as he had any cause to speak of such points, beginning with the
first and chief Article of their Religion Justification, by faith, as they
confess, solam fidem ad salutem sufficere negat. So of others. And yet they
say he had most diligently read, and agreed with the Fathers of this Age, the
most learned, Patres diligentissime legit Originem, Augustinum, Hieronymum,
Ambrosium, Eusebium, and Gennadium. Nam ex horum interpretationibus, suarum
ipse in Paulum explicationum collectanea congessit, and ex alijs proculdubio,
And agreed with them in matters of Religion.

4. Therefore this our renowned Doctor agreeing in all this with the best
learned Magdebur. cent. 5. cap. 10. col. 1284. Sedul. in cap. 5. ad Ephesians. 5.
ad Phil. 3. and 4. ad Romans Magdebur. cent. 5. c. 4. col. 505.
in that Age, both of the Latin and Greek Church, with the Pope and Church of
Rome where he was of so great fame, mirabili doctrina clarus, as also in the
other both Eastern, and Western Christians, where he had travailed and
preached, and so glorious. that the Protestants themselves acknowledge, he was
most rare for gifts of learning, his works approved by Pope Gelasius, some of
the^ received and still used in the public Church service and he styled by
that learned Pope, as S. Bid after was for the like worthiness, venerabilis,
venerable. Vir erat faeli^i ingenio praeditus, acri iudicio, and facu^dia
indicibili. Breuiar. Roman. Him. ad Laud. in Natiuitate Domini, and Epiph. and
ad Vesper. Epiphan. Sedul. Hymn. de Christ. l. 1. cap. peperisse Christum.
Neque minus ei cognita extitere diuina quam humana. Adeo vt in Decretis,
Distinct. 15. Gelasius Pontifex, venerabilem Sedulium eum vocauerit, eiusque
non mediocri laud commendauerit scripta. The Hymns which the Catholic Church
still uses in the public Service thereof at the Lauds in the great
Festiuitie of Christ's birth, and vigil of the Epiphany, beginning, A solis
ortus cardine, ad vsque terrae limitem Christum canamus principem, natum Maria
virgin, and that of both the Eue^songs of the Epiphany which begins, hosts
Herodes impie, Christum venire quid times, non eripit mortalia, qui regna dat
caelestia, were composed by him, part of his works, and from him thus
generally honored in the Church of Christ, as that in honor of the blessed
Virgin, Salve sancta pare^s enixa puerpera Regem, Qui caelum terramque tenet
per saecula. cum virginitatis honor, nec primam similem visa es, nec habere
sequente^ sola sine exemplo placuisti femina Christo. Besides his great
travails, and pains in preaching, he wrote much. Our Protestant Historians
and others asscribe above 40. books to him. Aldus Manutius who published
diverse of his works above 100. years fince in the year of Christ 1501. or
1502. gives many reasons, that he lived above 1100. years before that time,
Sedulium ab hinc mill and centum annos, ac plus eo fuisse colligimus; Ald.
Manut. Epist. ante opera Iuuenci Sedulij. etc. Sedul. Epist. ad Macedonium
Presbyterum.
and to have lived in the same time with S. Hierome, puto Hieronimum and
Sed^lium eisdem fuisse temporibus. Which Sedulius himself in his Epistle to
Macedonius seems sufficiently to prove, speaking therein of S. Hierome, as
then living, and writing, as also of some holy parsons then in life to whom he
wrote. Therefore I place him in this Age, yet not denying but he might live to
the beginning of that which follows. This our Sedulius much esteems in that
Epistle Vrsinus a Bishop, Vrsicinus, Laurentius and Gallicanus Priests, and
Faelix whom according to his name, he names a truly happy man, vere
Faelicem, for his contempt of this world, cui mundus crucifixus est. And others
do say, they were his familiar friends, and worthy men, as he and they
likewise do Magdeburgen. centur. 1.
of this Macedonius to whom he wrote. Therefore not finding any Historian
clayming these or any of them for any other Nation, and having heard before,
that many Britans then went into those parts, that they were entreated thereto,
and besides our own, foreign Antiquaries write that in those days our
Arnold. Merm. Theatr. conuers. gent.
Britans did often go on Pilgrimage to the holy Land and Rome, and preach
every where as they went, Britanni olim dum terram sanctam, aut Apostolorum
Limina visitarunt, passim Euangelio praedicando seruiebant, we may and not
improbably presume, that these, or some of them were also of this Kingdom. And
some write that saint Fridolin a Princes son of this Country, some say a
Scot, S. Patrike very renowned in this Age.
did in this Age, when saint Hilary was Bishop of Poicters, apud Pictauos
Hilario Episcopo, preach in Belgia, Argentine, Chur, Rhetia, Burgundy, Basile,
Sigebert. Chron. an. 394. Fascicul. tempor. ad An. 384. Nen. Hist. M. S.
Floren. Wigorn. an. 490. Probus in vit. S. Patricij. Capgrau. in eod. Genebr.
Chron. Sigebert. Chron. an 491. Fascicul. tempor. an. 423. Marian. Scot. aetat.
6. an. 491. Sur. and Lippol. 17. Mart. Baron. not. Mart. eod. die. Io. Bal.
cent. 1. in Patric. Io. Pits. in eodem. Matthew. Westminster. an. 491. Flore^c. Wigorn.
Chronic. an. 372.
and other places, and founded many Monasteries by the River Rhine. I may also
join saint Patrike borne in Britain hear in this Century, wherein he was not
only borne, but lived in most holy conversation many years, both in this his
native Country, and Ireland, whether he was by Pagan Scottish Irish Pirates,
with his Christian Sisters and others violently carried hence, and there sold
to serve. Sigebert says, this was in the year of Christ 394, Sanctus
Patricius in Hibernia cum suis sororibus ve^ditur, vbi cum esset Regis
Porcarius, Angeli saepe alloquio fruitur. The Author of Fasciculus Temporum
says, he was sold thither with his Sisters ten years sooner, and they were
reverenced there, An. 384. Patricius magnus pater Hibernorum Apostolus circa
haec tempora in Hibernia veneratur, cum suis sororibus, Angeli saepe colloquio
fruitur.

5. But if we calculate, and compare the years of his life and death, we shall
certainly find, that he was sold into Iereland from hence, long before
either of these times, and was above 30. years old in this Age. All Historians
agree, that as he lived 122. years, so he died in the year 491. by which
account he must needs be borne in the year of Christ 368. or 369. and be above
30. years old in this Age. Marianus Scotus, Probus, Capgraue, and others
write, he was 16. years old, when he was carried into Ireland, and was kept
there in servitude 6. years, Cum esset annorum 16. venditus est: sex annis
vixit in seruitute. So he returned into Britain being 22. years old, about
the year of Christ 390. Florentius Wigorniensis agrees in the years of his
Age 122. that he died in the year 491. and was borne in the year 372. and
that he was carried Prisoner into Ireland in the 16. year of his Age, as
others do, and says, An. 410.
that his two Sisters stolen away with him, were named the one Lupuit, and the
other Tigris. He was sold to Miluc called a King in the North of Ireland, and
his Sisters into an other part; but he placing his death in the 491. year, and
sayin An. 491.
the was the^ complete 122. years old, Anno 491. Sanctus Patricius Hiberniae
Archiepiscopus annorum 122. beatissimo fine obijt, does miss his calculation,
and must say as I have written before, that he was borne in the 369. or 368.
year of Christ.

6. There where diverse other Christian Prisoners carried hence at that time
with him into Ireland by those Pagan Pirates, Cum esset annorum sexdecim cum
caeteris in captiuitate ducitur. Whose virtuous behavior there made such way
and disposition to that wild Pagan Nation, that theit Conversion after by
saint Patrike was made more easy. For to speak cheifely of this holy You^ge
man, allthough he was borne of a Noble Lineage, Caphurnius vir and morum
honestate conspicuus, and diuitijs ac honoribus inclitus, being his Father, and
his Mother Sister to the renowned saint Martine Bishop, yet now sold among
Pagans and put Probus in S. Patric. M. S. in vit: eius. Capgrau. in eod.
Surius. and Lippom. die 17. Martij.
to the servile office of keeping Swine, though he began thereby to forget his
Noble carnal birth, yet of his spiritual Nativity in Christ he was so
mindful, that every day and night he prayed an hundred times, Centies in Die
and centies in nocte Deum exorabat. By which great and extraordinary devotion
we may gather, though not otherwise expressly remembered in what piety, and
Religeous conversation he had been brought up hear by his holy Parents,
Nennius Histor. Briton. in S. Patricio. Matthew. Westminster. an. 491.
and he exercised in Britain before he was carried Prisoner hence. Ne^nius our
old British Writer, Matthew of Westminster, and diverse others compare him unto
Moises, especially in four respects: first, for the Angel appearing unto
Moses: secondly, for his fasting 40. days and 40. nights: Thirdly, for the
years of his Age 120: fourthly, for his grave and sepulcher unknown. The
first of these of the holy Angel often times appearing unto, and comforting
saint Patrike keeping his cattaile, as unto Moses, was perfectly and in an
excellent manner performed, not once or seldom but often times declaring his
name, Victor, Conqueror conuersing with him: victor Angelus saepe loquebatur
cum eo. And Flore^t. Wigorn. Chronic. supr. Manuscr. Antiq. and Capgrau. in S.
Patricio.
testifying unto him how acceptable his prayers and fastings were in heaven,
and he should shortly be delivered from his Captivity, Apparuit ei Angelus
Domini Victor nomine qui frequenter eum Visitans dixit, been ieiunas, cito
exiturus ad patriam tuam. And brought him money for his Ransom. The Writer of
S. Patricks life testifing that in his time the prints on the earth where the
Angel stood, were still continuing, Stetit Angelus super terra^, and vsque
hodie manent vestigia eius. And allthough I dare not set down his fast of 40.
days and 40. nights which Nennius relates to have been on the topp of the
hill Eile, Quadraginta diebus totidemque noctibus in cacumine montis Eile
ieiunauit, Wherein he secondly compares him to Moises, to have been at this
time; yet we have heard his fasting now was such, that the Angel commended it,
been ieiunas. Yet the old M. S. Antiq. de vit. S. Patricij. Io. Capgrau. in eod.
Writer of his History, Capgraue and others are witnesses that he fasted
together in this time 30. days, neither eating nor drinking, and yet was well
and merry, Mansit Patricius diebus triginta non manducans, neque bibens,
hilaris tamen perseuerabat. The other two things wherein they compare him to
Moises for his Age of 120. years, and his place of buirall unknown must be
reserved to their time at, and after his death, when they cha^ced Only this
hear I add, that whereas Nennius gives unto him only with Moises 120.
years, others 122. or 123. the old Manuscript of his life, Probus with others
say, he lived 130. or 132. years, completis a Natauitate sua annis centum
triginta migrauit ad Dominum. Which gives me more warrant to place a great
part of his life in this Age. M. S. and Capgr. supr. Probus in vit. S. Patricij
Baron. and Spond. an. 491.
For these Authors are so far from making his Nativity later then I have
done, that they say in the year of Christ 425. he was. 64. years old, Anno
Domini quadringe^tesimo vicesimo quinto hic erat annus aetatis suae sexagesimus
quartus. and so 39. years old in the end of this Age. Neither did S. Patrike
in those his often and continual prayers, day and night, centies in Die and
centies in nocte, Prayer to Angels and Saints, and their protection of lyuers
one earth.
die nocteque precibus intentus, pray only to God, omitting his Angels and
Saints, but unto these also, to his Angels by their often visiting and
assisting, and to his Saints, as namely to Elias, to help and deliver him,
against the devil tempting and afflicting him, who heard his prayers, and so
freed him that the devil confessed he should never have any power over him,
Patricius vocauit Heliam bina voce in adiutorium: venitque Helias and liberauit
eum, and ait ad eum, diabolus, ab hac die non habeo Potestatem in te, vsque ad
diem mortis tuae.

7. The old Irish Writer of saint Patrike his life called Probus, whomesome
Probus in vita S. Patricij Tom. 3. oper. Venerab. Bedae.
do untruly take to be saint Bede, the Book being placed among his Works,
the Author disclosing therein both his name Probus, and Country Ireland,
affirms, that saint Patricke was three times taken Prisoner, and ledd
Captive, and the second time also Miraculously delivered, and restored to his
Country Britain. Where he was diligently instructed in learning, by the best
Professors thereof, optimus vsus praeceptoribus, among whom saint Martine his
Uncle Probus supr. Sur. and Lippom. die 17. Martij. Bar. and Spond. in S.
Pa^ric. Bal. cent. 1. in Patricio Pits. in eod. Hollinsh. Hist. of Ireland.
was one, staying with him four years until his death, as it seems by the
time thereof before related. A late Writer then brings him to Glastenbury,
and to have lived there many years, above thirty, says this Author, in
Religious habit, in patria^ redie^s, ad Glasconie^se Monasteriu^ secessit and
ibi in vita and habitu Religioso caelestia conte^plans plusquam annis triginta
vixit. Having been some time with saint German, and after this went to Rome to
S. Celestine Pope. But this belongs to the next Age, where it shall be more
fully entreated. Only, hear I say, that his living at Glastenbury before his
going to Rome, Guliel. Malm. l. 2. de gest. Pont.
is no incredible thing in History, even by the best Writer of the Antiquities
of Glastenbury William of Malmesbury. For after he had written that book, he
discrediteth saint Patricks living and dying at Glastenbury after his
Conversion Gul. Malm. l. de Antiq. caenob. Glast. Manuscr. Antiq. Glaston. in
Tab. ligneis M. S. Gallic. Antiq. cap. 39.
of Ireland, making it unworthy of credit: si credere dignum. And in his
Manuscript of Glastenbury, citing others for the same, and the Antiquities of
Glastenbury say, he was borne of Couche Sister to saint Martine Archbishop of
Tours in the year of Christ 361. by that account leaving him time sufficient
to have lived 30. years at Glastenbury before his going to Rome. Which if it
may be admitted for good, will salve very many difficulties which are in the
other opinion.

8. An old French Manus. Hist. thus sets down S. Patricke long before he
was Bishop in they ear. 427. among the worthies of the Christian world, In
this Histor. Gallic. Manuscr. Antiq. an. 427.
time S. Patricke a Brito^ by Nation son to Conches, Sister to S. Martine of
Tours was renowned for holiness, and miracles and learning. Our Protestant
Historians themselves confess as much, saying that before he went to Rome he
was renowned through the Latin Church for his wisdom, virtue and skill. He
was borne in the Marches betwixt Hollinsh. Hist. of Irel. page 53. Pits. aetat.
5. in S. Patric.
England and Scotland in a town by the Sea side called Eiburne (in Pembroke
shire by some) his Mother named Conches, was Sister to S. Martine that famous
Bishop of Towers in France. Patrike of a child was brought up in learning, and
well instructed in the faith, and much given to devotion. And relating his
captivity, and deliverance from it, as I have done, they add, as affliction
commonly makes men Religeous, the regard of his former education printed in
him such remorse and humility, that being thenceforth weaned from the world,
he betook himself to Contemplation, ever lamenting the lack of grace and
truth in that Land: and hearewith not despayring, but that in continuance some
good might be wrought upon them, he learned their tongue perfectly. And
alluring one of that Nation to bear him company for exercise sake, he got him
into France, ever having in his mind a desire to see the Conversion of the
Irish people, whose babes yet unborn seemed to him in his dreams from out of
their Mothers wombs to call for christendom. In this purpose he sought his
uncle Martine, by whose means he was placed with Germanus the Bishop of
Auxerre, continuing with him as scholar or Disciple for the space of 40.
years. All which time he bestowed in like study of holy Scriptures, prayers,
and such godly exercise. At the Age of 62. years being renowned through the
Latin Church for his wisdom, virtue and skill, he came to Rome bringing
letters with him in his commendation from the French Bishops unto Pope
Celestine, to whom he uttered his full mind, and secret vo^e, which long
since he had conceived touching Ireland. Celestine invested him Archbishop and
Primate of the whole Island. These men in this Narration approve and follow
much Giraldus Cambrensis in his Topographie of Ireland, by many much commended
and if his opinion is as much to be allowed about the time and days of S.
Patrike, we shall find that he was come to this renown, and spent the most
part of his life in this Age. For he makes him with others 120. years old at
his death, and to have dyed happily in the year of Christ 458. obijt beatus
Girald. Cambr. Topograph. Hibern. c. 17. lib. ad Reg. Henric. 2. did. 2. Tit.
de mirac. Hibern. Harpesfel. Hist. Eccl. p. 32. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. c.
9.. 9.
Patricius and in Domino quieuit anno aetatis suae 120. ab Incarnatione Domini
458. ab aduentu Hibernensiu^ 1800. Our English Protestant Writers of the great
Theater of Britain, whom I dare not allow, make him far more ancient then
this time. That which our Protestants have before set down of S. Patrike, that
the babes yet unborn seemed to him in his dreams from out of their Mothers
wombes to call for Christendom, is testified more plainly and credibly by
old and better Authors, that it was a true vision, and calling of S. Patrike
to be the Apostle of that Nation. In a vision an Epistle was represented unto
him, and the beginning of it was, this is the voice of the people of Ireland,
haec est vox Hibernensium. And reading this beginning of that letter, at the
same instant, and moment of time the voice of Infants from their Mothers wombs
in diverse Contries of Irelande crying as it were with one mouth, o holy Father
we beseech thee, that thou will come and walk among us. By which
extraordinary vocation S. Patrike was most certainly assured, that God had
called him thereby to be the Apostle of that Nation, to convert it to Christ:
gratias egit Deo certissime sciens quod Dominus vocasset eum ad saluandos illos
qui ipsum inuocabant. The old Writer of Script. vitae S. David is apud Capgrau.
in eod. Manuscr. Antiq. Britannic.
the life of S. David, speaks of this, or the like vision to have been made
to Saint Patrike, when the birth of that glorious man S. David, to be so
renowned in the Country now called wales, was revealed unto him, which was as
those Antiquities say 30. years before S. David was borne, filio nondum nato,
nec nisi peractis annis 30. nascituro. Yet S. David, as I shall prove
hereafter, was born^ in this Age. Therefore an old British Antiquity says,
S. Patrike lived 153. years, Vixit annis centum quinquaginta and tres.

9. Our old English History which the Continuator of Florentius Wigorniensis
Continuatio Flor. Wigorn. in Geneologia Reg. West-Saxonum.
above 400. years since does seem to cite by the Title Chronica Anglica; does
tell us o^ an Archbishop of London called Ternekin, which is not found in any
Cata^oge o^ the Archbishops there, neither have I before made memory of him, he
lived Archbishop as that Author testifies, in the beginning of the Reign of
Aurelius Ambrosius, by which Account, although it is not probable that he was
Archbishop there in this Age, yet not vnlike^y but Old English Hist. fol. 44.
he was a worthy man of renown, in, or not long after this time. So I may
say of Guitelinus and S. Vodinus glorious Archbishops of that See, famous in
our Histories. But of these as also of S. Patrike I shall speak more in the
next hundred of years. We find memory of an other renowned Bishop in this
Age, Aluueus spoken of before that baptized S. David, and at his Baptism, Vit.
S. David Episcopi.
and in the place thereof a Miraculous Well sprang suddenly up at that time
curing diseases. Whether this Bishop peculiarly assigned to baptize this
Infant, so prophetically and Miraculously long before foretold, was one of the
Archbishops of Caerlegion, whose names are not remembered, as I have said
before, and the rest, I leave to others to decide. Our Historians relating the
life and History of S. Patrike say, he was consecrated Bishop in these parts,
by one Antiq. Script. in vit. S. Patricij. Capgrau. in eod. Nennius Hist.
Manuscrip. Matthew. West. An. 491.
the principal among his Consecrators, named by some Amatus, but by Nennius,
Matthew of Westminster, and others, Matheus or Amatheus. Nennius calls him
Amatheus, and mirabilis summus Episcopus Rex, an admirable high Bishop and
King or Prince. The Monk of Westminster terms him Matthaeus and says he was
an Archbishop, and relates S. Patrike his Mission from Pope Celestine, how he
preached both to Britans and Scots, by that Commission, and that he was made
Bishop by this Matthaeus, or Amatheus in these parts afterward, Patricius,
Theodosio and Valentiniano Imperantibus a Papa Celestino ad parts Occiduas
missus est, vt vexillum sanctae crucis gentibus praedicaret. Cumque ad
Britanniam peruenisset, praedicauit ibi verbum Dei, and a gentibus Incolis
gratanter est susceptust deinde ad Scotos se conferens praedicauit verbum Dei.
Tandem a Matthaeo Archiepiscapo ad Episcopalem gradum permotus. Wherefore
seeing we find that he was consecrated Bishop in these parts by such an
Archbishop, and find that Archbishop named for no other Nation, and being
assured by Antiquities that Caerlegion had diverse Archbishops, whose names are
not remembered in Histories, I may name this, Amatus, Matthaeus or Amathaeus a
confessed Arch bishop to have been one of them, and a renowned man, if not
Archbishop in this Age. And this the rather because whereas this Archbishop is
called Rex a King, we had hear diverse Kings or Heirs to such little Kings
which forsook their temporal states, and honors to be Religeous and Clergy
men, and were Manuscript. Ant. in vit. S. David. Capgrau. in eod. and S.
Carantoco.
renowned in Ecclesiastical Order, at, and before the time, when S. Patrike
was consecrated Bishop. Such as I have proved before were the worthies of this
Nation, S. Cadocus, S. Canochus, and Carantocus. To whom I add King Keredick
Father to S. Carantocus and S. David voluntarily leaving and renowncing their
earthly Kingdoms, for the love of Christ, and to be crowned in heaven.

THE XXVIII. CHAPTER.
OF VERY MANY AND RENOWNED MOnasteries and holy Monastical parsons in Britain
in this Age.

1. IN this Age also we had hear in Britain very many Monasteries, and
Religious houses, both of men and women, even as the Protestant Antiquaries of
this Nation, professed enemies of such holy Monuments and profession, with
others do freely confess, Monachorum, Io. Goscel. Hist. Eccl. Matt. Parker.
Antiq. Britannic. p. 8. Antiq. Glast. Capgr. in Vit. S. Patricij. Guliel.
Malmefb. lib. de Antiquit. Caenobij Glaston.
Abbatu^, Caenobiorum, Sediu^que nomina permulta extiteru^t, no Catholic
Historian calls it into Question, but all such are witnesses, that as in
other Christian Nations, so hear in Britain there were many Religious houses
in this time. Our old Religious house of Glastenbury continued in this Age, as
in the former having twelve Religious men Eremites belonging unto it dwelling
in the places and Cells of the first 12. in the time of S. Joseph of Arimathia,
and very often daily resorting to the old Church to perform their public
service and devotions. This is testified by the old Manuscripts of that place,
and William of Malmesbury in his Book of the Antiquity thereof, witnessing
that these holy men in the number of twelve successively thus lived and served
God there vutill S. Patrike his coming thither, Sic multi alijs succedentes
semper tamen in numero duodenario per multa annorum curricula vsque ad aduentum
Sancti Patricij Hibernensium Apostoli in memorata Insula permanserunt, Which
some before have placed in this Age. These Religious men were of so great
Sanctity in this time, as the Epistle asscribed to S. Patrike testifies, that
he, such a wonder in the world for piety, confessed, he was not worthy to
untie the Latchets of their Shoes, Non dignus eram soluere corrigias
calceamentorum eorum. The names of the 12. then living there in this holy Order
are thus Registered, Brunbam, Dyregaan, Viwal, Wenreth, Bamtonneweng,
Adeloobred, Loyor, Wellias, Breden, Swellwes, Hinloermus and Alius. All of them
descended of Noble Families, rather preferred this poor penitential
Eremiticall life then worldly honor, Hij cum essent Nobilibus orti natalibus,
nobilitatem suam fidei opibus ornare cupientes, Heremiticam vitam ducere
elegerunt.

2. The Antiquities of Glastenbury further witness, that about this time there
was new founded, or renewed an other little Religious house in honor of S.
Michael the Archangel and particularly to honor and pray to him, Vt honorantes
inuocent adiutorium Archangeli Michaelis. And that Arnulphus, and Ogmar, two
Religious holy men were the first, which supplied that office and duty there.

3. I have spoaken of the ancient and famous Monastery of Wincester in the
beginning of this Age, how it was destroyed in the Persecution of Diocletia^,
and with great devotion, State, and Magnificence reedified, when that Tempest
ceased, in the space of one year and thirty days, and dedicated to S.
Amphibalus lately martyred before. This Monastery now flourished, and long after
this time, until the time of Cerdic the Saxon, and first Pagan King of that
Nation over the West Saxons, as the old Manuscript Antiquity of that place
Antiquitat. Eccl. Wintonien.
proves, being 210. years from the death of Dioclesian, Monachi sic
introducti inhabita^t Ecclesiam Wintoniae in quieta pace a morte Dioclesiani
vsque aduentum, Cerdicij Saxonici and Pagani ac Westsaxonum Regis primi, hoc
est 210. annis. So Matthew. Westminster. in Chron. Flore^t. Wigorn. in geneolog. Reg.
Westsax. Fast. Reg. and Episcop. Angl. Gildas l. de Excid. Brit. Stowe Histor.
Matthew. Westminster. an. 433. Matthew. Westminster. an. 445. Galfr. Monum. Hist. Brit. l. 6.
c. 5. Holinsh. Hist. of Engl. l. 5. Hardin. Chron. c. 65. 66.
that Cerdic not being King there by the common opinion until about the year
519, this Monastery flourished in quiet all this, and the next Age also, it
being the year of Christ 495. when Cerdic first landed hear, and so long
after before he was King. And our most auncent Historian S. Gildas, and others
after him, are witnesses, that in the time of King Constantine there was a
glorious Abbey and holy Abbot there, Sancti Abbatis, complaining how
sacrilegiously this King killed one of the sons of Mordred between the holy
Altars, intra ipsa sacrosancta Altaria, flying thither for Sanctuary and
sauegard, and he himself having three sons Constans, Aurelius Ambrose, and
Vtherpendragon, perhaps for remorse, and in satisfaction for that impiety
delivered his eldest son Constans, to be a Monk in that Abbey, Constantem
Primogenitum tradidit in Ecclesiam Amphibali intra Guintoniam, vt Monachalem
ordinem susciperet, and there, he was a Monk, Vbi Monachalem ordinem suscepit.
And so continued until Vortigerne took him by force out of his Cloister, and
made him King without the peoples consent, because he was a Monk, Vortigernus
perexit Wintoniam, and Constantem Monachum, Constantini filium de Claustro
extractum duxit Lundonias, and eum vix annuente populo eo quod Monachus esset,
erexit in Regem.

4. There were then diverse Monasteries in London, and Constantine mutthered an
other young Prince in one of the^, Vnum Wintoniae in Ecclesia S. Amphibali ante
altar trucidauit, Alterum Londoniae in quorundam fratru^ Caenobio absconditum
Matthew. Westminster. an. 543. Stowe and Howes Histor. Brit. and Sax. in Constan. and
Vortiger.
crudeli morte da^nauit: Which our Protestants thus acknowledge, Constantine
followed, and one of the young men he found in an Abbey at London, slew him
near the Altar cruelly. And how in Kent at the coming of Hengist the Pagan
Saxon thither, soon after this, there were many Religious houses both of men
and women, and many of them were glorious Martyrs by the Saxon Persecutors,
Hengist slew the good Archbishop Vodine, and many other Priests and Religious
men. All the Churches in Kent were polluted with blood, the Nuns with other
Religious parsons were by force put from their houses and goods.

5. These Religious houses must needs be builded, and so furnished with goods
and consecrated parsons before the Saxons entered, and so in, or before this
Age, these men being then, when they were Pagans no Founders, but destroyers of
such Momuments, not only in Kent, but in all places where they prevailed, by
all Histories. Among these, the sumptuous and stately Church Bed. l. 1. c. 6.
Mat. Westminster. an. 313. and 586.
and Monastery of S. Alban, builded within 10. years of his Martyrdom, was
one, for the Monastery there was not, as Matthew of Westminster proves,
founded first by King Offa, but being destroyed by the Saxons was reedified by
him, Hac tempestate Ecclesia beati Martyris Albani, quae post Passionem suam
miro tabulatu lapideo, atque eius Martyrio condigna, legitur fabricata, deiecta
penitus cum alijs creditur and deleta, donec per ministerium Offae Regis Angelo
sibi reuelante, corpus gloriosi Confessoris ac Martyris inuentum est, and
Monasterium eis denuo fabricatum. Therefore being, by King Offa restored, and
builded again, denuo, it was builded before, and consequently before the
Saxous time, Ouertrowers, and not Erectors of Monasteries.

6. There was also now a noble Monastery at Amsbury in Wilshire, near
Salisburie, in which as an old French Manuscript, and others say, there were
Manuscr. Gallic. An^iq. cap. 24. Galfr. Monum. Hist. Brit. l. 8. c. 9.
at this time, and after 300. En cel licu d' Ambri estoit a cel temps vne
Abbaye de 300. Moignes. This was founded, olim, long before by one named
Ambrius near, Kaercaradoe, Salisbury: quae nunc Salesberia dicitur. Erat ibi
Caenobium trecentorum fratrum in Monte Ambrij, qui vt fertur fundator eius olim
extiterat. Our old English Chronicle entreating of the desolation, which the
Pagan Old Engl. Chronic. part. 5. f. 43.
Saxons wrought in this kingdom in destroying Religious houses, and Churches,
and how Aurelius Ambrosius restored and builded them again, thus delivers
that in general, and particularly of this Monastery, King Aurilambros went
through out the Land, and put away the name of Engyst Land, that Engyst after
his name had called it before. Then he let call it again great Britain, and
let make again Churches, and houses of Religion, Castles, Cities, and Borowes,
and Towns that the Saxons had destroyed. The Britons ladd him to the mount of
Ambrian where some time was an house of Religion, which then was destroyed
through the Paynyms, whereof a knight that was called Ambry that some time was
founder of that house, and therefore the hill was called the mount of Ambrian,
and after it was called Ambesbury. The King Aurilambros let amend and redress
the house of Ambesbury, and put therein Monks, but now there be Nonnes. By
this it is evident, that this Religious house destroyed by these Pagans,
flourished in this Age.

7. That there was a Monastery of great renown at Abingdon in Barkeshire
Chron. Abingd. apud Harpesfeld. Hist. Eccl. 10. saecul. p. 203.
in this time, before the coming of the Saxons into Britain, the old
Chronicle of that house is witness, testifying that then there were 500.
Monks, and more belonging to that Abbey, living in the Woods and Deserts,
getting their living by their labors, and upon the holy days, and sondaies
coming together in their Monastery, all excepting 60. which continually abode
in the Abbey serving God there. And that before King Cissa was a Christian he
put these Monks either to death, or forced them from their Monastery, and
cruelly persecuted all Christians. And allthough our Antiquities by Pagans
Persecutions and Protestants are so perished, that we have a small part of our
Ecclesiastical memorable things preserved: yet we may make conjecture of these
matters with sufficient probability, that seeing Monastical life came hither
in the Apostles time, and still increased except in the 9. years of Dioclesian
his Persecution, that the Religeous houses in Britain were now come to a
great number; especially when we find the greatest Enemies they have, our
Protestants, and among them the best Antiquaries they have, thus to testify,
In ancient time, even the greatest parsonadges held Monks, Friars, William
Lamb. perambulation of Kent. p. 330.
and Nu^nes in such veneratio^, and liking, that they thought not City in case
to flourish, no house likely to have long continuance, no Castles sufficiently
defensed, where was not an Abbey, Pryory, or Nunnery either placed within the
walls, or planted at hand and near adjoining. And that such was the devotion
of this time, we may gather by our old Writers, testifing, that after the Pagan
Saxons had destroyed the Churches, and Abbeyes in Britain, yet many still
remained, and their Abbots were honored and numbered among our Nobles, and as
spiritual Lords before the temporal. So it was in that great Solemnity when
Aurelius Ambrose kept the Feast of Pentecost at Ambesbury, he had there many
Bishops, Matthew. Westminster. an. 490. Matthew. Westminster. An. 498. Galfr. Monum. Hist.
Briton. l. 7. c. 16.
Abbots, and other Noble parsons, Venit cum Episcopis and Abbatibus and alijs
Magnatibus in montem Ambri; vbi die Pentecostes coronam portauit. And after
Britain was more decayed by these Pagans, yet there were still both Bishops
and Abbots hear, and they buried the body of their King Aurelius Ambrosius in
Regal manner, Ipsum ab Episcopis and Abbatibus regni more regio Sepultum. And
thus it was in all places, and Provinces of this Kingdom, where these Pagans
raiged most, London, Winchester, Lincoln, York and others Provinces, quasque
Prouincias, Where they destroyed Churches, and all holy Monuments, Matthew.
Westminster. an. 462.
Martyred the Priests at the Altars, burned holy Scripturs, and defaced and
obscured Martyrs Tombs. They found every where Religious parsons, which
flying their Persecution hid themselves in Caves, woody places, and desert
craggs of hiles, and Mountains, carring with them Saints Relics, Ecclesias and
Ecclesiastica omnia ad solum vsque destruebant, sacerdotes iuxta altaria
trucidabant, sacras scripturas igne concremabant, super Sanctorum Martyrum
sepulturas cumulos terrae congerebant: viri Religiosi, qui ab hac clade euadere
potuerunt, speluncas and nemorosa loca, atque deserta montium, and collium
praerupta, Sanctorum secum Reliquias portantes petierunt. And yet this raige of
the Saxons Infidels was not so general, that it destroyed all such holy
places, for we find in the Antiquities of Glastenbury, that this house then
remained in some sort, and had both Monks and Abbot, before and at S.
Augustines coming hither: and that in the year 601. with in three years of
S. Augustine his coming into England, and before, either he, or any of his
Mission came into those parts, Morgret was Abbot there, and a Noble man called
a King of Danmonia, Devonshire, gave to that Abbot and Abbey the land called
Inswitrin to the old Church, and one named Manuto was then Bishop there, wrote
and signed the Charter, thus Guliel. Malmes. I. de Antiq. Caenobij Glaston.
writes William of Malmesbury in his book of the Antiquities of that
Religeous house, and for his Authority cites an other so ancient Monument
thereof, that the name of the King, or Noble man could not be expounded, Capgr.
in Vit. S. Petroci. Harpesfeld. Hist. Eccl. in fine 6. saecul. Harpesfel. Hist.
Eccl. saecul. 10. Annal. Abingd. apud eu^d. Matthew. Westminster. an. 590. Stowe and
Howes Hist. in South Saxons an. 514. Polidor. Virgil. Hist. l. 4. M. S. Antiq.
and Capgr. in Vita S. Kebij. Harris. descript. of Brit. c. 10.
Quis iste Rex fuit scedulae vetustas negat scire. S. Petrocke also was an
Abbot in his Monastery by the River of Seuerne with diverse Monks, when the
Inhabitants were Pagans. So likewise S. Sampson, an Abbot or Eremite lived then
in those parts, as also an holy Bishop not named, well known to S. Petrocke.
And both Catholic and Protestant Writers make King Cissa a Saxon the first
Founder or Renewer of the Monastery of Abingdon, and yet he died diverse years
before the coming of S. Augustine hither, and Iteanus was then Abbot there
over diverse hundreds of Monks, by the Annals of that place. S. Kebius also in
this Age had many Monks under his Rule, living with them at diverse times, in
diverse places, and among the rest at holy head, or Cairkiby names given from
him and his Religeous men, as our Protestant Antiquaries themselves thus
acknowledge, a Promontory or Byland called holy head, which has in time past
been named Cairkyby, of Kyby a Monk that dwelled there.

8. We may have some apprehension of the great devotion of our Britans both
men and women in this Age to chaste and Monastical life by the Example of S.
Vrsula and so many thousands of holy virgins with her, by so many Authors
before, devoted to that profession. Which we may further confirm unto us, by
the example of the Britans which were then in that part of Britain now called
Walls more free from the Saxons Persecution, whose Antiquities although not
well preserved, not naming many Archbishops of Carlegion before those I named,
and very few Bishops in that Province, having many from their first receiving
the faith of Christ, yet they do record, and propose unto us many Monasteries,
and of great name and honor, as that of Bangor, stiling it, famatum collegium,
where Pelagius before his Heresies lived, and by some was Abbot, Praepositus,
there, having 2100. Monks in it, and divided as it were into 7. Monasteries,
every of them having 300. Monks. Which Monastery as S. Bernard, our Protestant
Antiquaries and others write, was the head or chief of Principal
Monasteries, and brought forth many thowsands of Monks, In vita Malachiae
Hiberniensis Episcopi, Bernardus Clareuallensis hunc Io. Bal. cent. 1. in
Pelag. Calp^ur. Agric. and Co^gello. Bed. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 2. Galfrid.
Monum. Histor. Brit. l. 11. cap. 12. Matthew. Westminster. an. 603. Bed. l. 2. c. 2.
Galfrid. and Matthew. Westminster. supr. Galfr. Monum. Hist. Brit. l. 9. c. 12. and l.
11. c. 1. Matthew. Westminster. an. 541. Galfr. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 11. c. 3. Manuscr.
antiq. and Capgr. in vit. S. David. Bal. ce^t. 1. in David Meneuie^. Pits
aetat. 6. in eod.
locum tradit primorum extitisse Monasteriorum caput, and multa generauisse
Monachorum millia. This was the most Noble Monastery of this Country,
nobilissimum Monasterium, as S. Bid and others term it, and so justly did,
having so many Monks that being divided into 7. companies under 7. Priors
under their chief Abbate, every one had 300. or more Monks, and among them
most learned men, Viri doctissimi plures de nobilissimo Monasterio Ba^cornaburg
lingua Anglorum. Inter caeteras erat in ciuitate Bangor quaedam nobilissima
Ecclesia, in qua tantus fertur fuisse numerus Monachoru^, vt cum in septem
portion^s esset cum Praepositis sibi Prioribus Monasterium diuisum, nulla harum
portio minus quam trecentos Monachos haberet.

9. There were in this time 2. famous Monasteries, one of Monks, the other of
Nuns, in Caerlegion: in that of Nuns dedicated to S. Julius our Martyr,
Queen Guenhumar wife to King* Arthur did after receive the habit of Religion,
Guenhumara Regina in Monasterio Iulij Martyris inter Moniales habitum
Religionis suscepit. There was an other in Meneuia called afterward S. David's,
founded by S. Patrike, as it seems in this Age. For as our British Writers
say, S. Patrike prophesying of S. David before he was borne, founded this
Monastery in that place to bear his name. By which, S. David living 146.
years by all accounts, and dying in the year 540. this Monastery was founded
in this Age. There was also an other Monastery in these parts then called
Mancani Monasterium, or Depositi Monasterium, 30. years and more before S.
David's birth. So there was a Monastery of Nuns in North Wales the name of the
place I do not find, but Nonnita or Nominta was a Nun there in this Age.
The Abbey also of S. Carilefus was builded, and governed by him, Abbot there in
this time. We may add to these, S. Gildas Albanius his Abbey or Cell. For the
old Writer of his life with others testify, that S. Gildas was a most holy
Manuscr. antiq. and Capgr. in vit. S. Gildae in narratione in sin. Caradoc. in
Vit. S. Gildae. Io. Capgrau. Catalog. in S. David.
Religious man, a famous Preacher, before S. David was borne, which was in this
Age, as before appears and publicly by miracle declared unto his Auditors,
at a Sermon in the Church where he preached, S. David's Mother then being with
child with him, and present, what a wonderful Man he should be. It seems
also by the History of S. Cadocus a Prince by birth, an Eremite, Monk, Abbot,
Bishop, and Martyr, that although he lived long, and suffered Martyrdom in
the next Age, yet he builded a Monastery, was Abbot, and had many Monks in
this Age, Monasterium construxit and Fratres multos congregauit. Manuscr.
antiq. de Vit. S. Cadoc. Io. Capgrau. in eod.
Abbas multos sub se monachos regeret. His Monastery was in Northwales, he
being son to S. Gundleus the son of a Father a Saint, King, or Prince of
that Country, his Mother called Gladusa. He having Riches by his parents daily
fedd an hundred Clergy me^, 100. poor people, and so many wydowes besides
strangers. S. Carantocus was famous in this Age, son to Keredic, styled a
King in these parts, and was in this time so old, that in Ireland he Manuscr.
antiq. and Io. Capgrau. Catal. in S. Carantoc.
preached above thirty years in this Age. Where, as the Writer of his life
testifies he converted many people before S. Patrike was ordained Archbishop
there, Multos in Hibernia populos ad fidem conuertit, His Monastery or Cell
where he lived, with many clergy men was in his own Country Northwales, whose
Principality he refused to live a poor Religeous life, Venit ad regionem suam
Kereticam ad suam speluncam cum Clericis multis. S. Canoch and S. Keyna Son
and daughter to Braghan, King of Brecknocke, S. Canoch being his eldest Vit. S.
Keynae Virg. apud. Capgrau. and al.
son and Heir, were renowned also in this Age, with their Monasteries or
Cells, the one for a Monk or Eremite, his Sister for a Nun, or rather most
strict Eremiticall life at diverse times on both sides of the River of Seuerne.
King Kerdick in this time left his Kingdom in Northwales, to lead and M. S.
in vit. S. David. and Capgr. in eod. Manuscr. in vit. S. Gundlei and S. Cadoci.
Capgr. in eisdem.
live a Religeous life there. We find also a Noble Monastery at Naucaruan in
Wales in this time, where S. Cadocus was Abbot, either in this, or the
beginning of the next Age, and fedd there 100. Clergy men, 100. poor people,
and so many wydowes daily. And being to leave that place, to be an Abbot, and
Bishop afterward in Italy, he ordained Ellenus son of a Queen, Abbot there.

10. S. Bernac was also a renowned British Abbot in this time, both in the
Country of Wales, where the King enfranchised his Monastery, and the Manuscr.
Antiq. in vit. S. Bernar. Capgrau. Catal. in eod.
whole Territory belonging unto it, to be free for ever from all Regal
exactio^, In nomine Dei and Domini nostri Jesus Christi te and locum tuum,
totumque territorium ad locum tuum pertinens, nec non omnes in eo manentes ab
omni Regia exactione in perpetuum libero. This Holy Abbot was of such renown
at Rome for his Sanctity, and a most memorable and Joyful Miracle to the
Romans, and Inhabitants thereabouts, when he went one Pilgrimage thither, in
killing a most raging pestiferous venomous serpent, which destroyed infinite
men, and beasts, and could be suppressed by no means, but by his prayers, that
to avoid the applause, and honor was thereupon there given unto him, he
secretly went away from Rome; coming first into the little Britain, and after
hither into his own Nation, living long time in them both glorious for his
Holy and Miraculous life. We may garher what a number of Religious people, and
Monasteries were in this part of Britain, if we consider that one Archbishop
thereof S. David, borne in this Age, founded there 12. Monasteries. Not long
after this, S. Vuandilocus and S. Gomogillus Capgrau. Catal. in S. David. Pits.
aetat. 5. de vir. Ill. in S. David. Bal. cent. 1. in eod. Godw. Catal. in S.
David 5. 2. Manuscr. Britan. antiq. Manuscr. Gallic. Hist. antiq. c. 48.
holy Abbots had in their Monastery about 3000. Monks, as an old British
Antiquity, near that time is witness, Beatus Vuandilocus senex, and beatus
Gomogillus habuerunt in eorum Monasterio, Monachos circitertria millia. And
after the Saxons had made their uttermost invasion, and Persecution of our
Christians, they ever did, or could, when S. Augustine came hither, we have
hard before that there were 2100. Monks in one Monastery of Bangor. An old
Manuscript French History adds 700. more unto this number, making the whole
Convent 2800. Monks, divided into 7. Governments, or Priors, yet under one
Abbot, every such company having in it 400. Monks.

11. I have spoken before how there were many Monasteries, and Monks in that
part of Britain in this time, which now is named Scotland. This is testified
both by ancient and late, Catholic and Protestant Antiquaries; even Veremund.
Hist. Scot. Hector. Boeth. Scot. Hist. l. 6. Hollinsh. Histor. of Scotl. Georg.
Buchan. Rer. Scotic. l. 4. in Rege 35.
these men confessing that diverse of our Religeous Britans, which went from
hence thither in the time of Dioclesian lived there long in this Age, in most
holy and Religeous, and so great honor, that their Cells were converted into
Churches, and Monasteries, and these were most Religeous Monks, and Eremites,
Multi ex Britonibus Christiani, saeuitiam Diocletiani timentes, ad Scotos
confugerant, e quibus complures, doctrina and vitae integritate clari, in
Scotia substiterunt, vitamque solitariam tanta sanctitatis opinione apud omnes
vixerunt, vt vita functorum cellae, in templa commutarentur. Ex eoque
consuetudo mansit apud Posteros, vt prisci Scoti templa Cellas vocent. Hoc
genus Monachorum Culdeos appellabant. Mansitque nomen and Institutum, donec
Monachorum genus recentius, in plures diuisum Sectas, eos expulit: tanto
doctrina and pietate illis inferius, quanto diuitijs and ceremonijs, caeteroque
cultu externo, sunt superiores. Neither were these holy Monks which were in
the Country now named Scotland only of our British Christians, but the
Scottish and Pictish people also, so soon as they embraced the faith of
Christ, embraced also, and practiced this holy state of perfection, and
Monastical life. This we have heard before in the Scots, who when Maximus
bannished them out of this Island of Hect. Boeth. l. 6. Scot. H^st. Holinsh.
Hist. of Scotl. in Maximus.
Britain, they had very many Monks and Religeous men of their own Scottish
people, which by the common and general Edict of Maximus to bannish all Scots
whatsoever Ecclesiastical or temporal, without exception or limitatio^, were
exiled with the rest, and they erected new Monasteries in the out Islands.
Among, which one above the rest in the Hebrides Islands in the I Will of Iona was
most renowned, both for holy Monks, and Nuns where the common funeral place
was of the Scottish Kings. There was an other such Monastery in the I Will of
Mona, where S. Briget even by our Protestant Antiquaries Io. Bal. cent. 1. in
Brigida Lagmesi. Hector. Boeth. Scotor. Hist. l. 9. Capgr. in S. Brigida.
with three other Virgins at one time became Nuns being professed by
Machillas then Bishop of Soder, or Soter, this was when she was but 14. years
old, Brigida sanctissima virgo decimo quarto anno vix superato ad Sodorensem
Episcopum in Monam Iusulam paternis fortunis, quae amplissimae erant,
contemptis, aufugit, precibus non sine lachrimis petens vt perpetuae
virginitati, Pontificia authoritate addiceretur. Which time being compared with
that of her life, being very old at her death, and that she had been first
buried in Mona, and her body translated to Dune in Ireland in the year 518.
must needs prove unto us, that there was a Religeous house in Mona in this Age.

12. And not only in Mona, Iona and the Hebrides Islands, but in other out
Islands and places these Scottish Monks made abode, and had Cells, or Monasteries
in this time. For our Scottish Historians delivering unto us, how they were all
by Maximus bannished with the other Scots out of the Country now called
Scotland, confess also that there came but a part, allthough a great part,
for the nearnes and conuenie^cy of those Islands into the Hebrides, Veremund.
and Hect. Boeth. l. 6. Scot. Hist. Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scoticar. l. 4. in Rege
39.
Quorum magna pars in Hebrides delata. The others then must needs have other
resting places, which the Antiquaries of Scotland even Protestants confess,
saying that the Scottish Priests and Monks, then held in great honor and
reverence, were dispersed into all Countries, round about, and many of them
came into Iona, Ne^ a Sacerdotibus and Monachis qui tum in summo erant honor,
Picti, and si public Christianis institutis imbuti, Iniuriam abstinuerunt.
Illi vero profugi cum in omnes circumcirca Regiones dispergerentur, multi in
Ionam Aebudarum vnam deuenerunt, atque ibi in Caenobium collecti, mag^am suae
sanctitatis and eruditionis ^amam ad Posteros transmiserunt. Some of these
Scots went into Ireland, in Hiberniam, from whom came the Irish Monks so
famous afterward, and some of our British Monks also preached there in this
time, as I have proved of S. Carantocus called by the Irish Cernath, before.
And when in the beginning of the next Age the Scots came into this Island
again, the Monks of Iona and Mona continuing there still, there came so many
Scottish Monks in^o the part called Scotland, in the time of Fergusius their
King the second of that name, from their places of Bannishment in so great a
number Veremund. and Hect. Boeth. Scotor. Hist. l. 7.
by the Scottish Writers, that their King Fergusius founded and endowed for
them, being a virtuous Prince, many Cells, or Monasteries, Restituit Fergusius
templa dirut^^^ut populi defectu neglecta, sacris ministris ad Dei cultum,
sacerd^tij^ donatis. Qui ^^ularant Monachos, redu^es mira charitate amplexus,
vt popu^um vera im^u^r^nt ^ietate, structis ad id patrio ritu, Cellulis
quibusdam, ad vitae ne^^ssari^ prae^^^s don^uit. Where besides the Priests and
their Churches we see many Religeous houses founded, and endowed for the exiled
Monks, returning in the beginning of the next Age. Not improbable but diverse of
these Boeth. supr. Georg. Buchan. l. 4. 5. Hollinsh. Hist. of Scotl. in
Fergusio. 2.
Monks came with him from Scandia and Denmark where he was borne, and whether
the Scottish Monks with others fledd in the time of Maximus, and other adjacent
Contries and Islands, they then being dispersed into all parts about this
Kingdom, in omnes circumcirca Regiones. And yet at the time of this dispersion
of the Scottish Monks, the British Monks with their Cells and Monasteries
were in quiet in the Country now termed Scotland, as I have proved before, and
were many.

13. The same is evident of the Religeous people of the Pictish Nation, now
being Christians, the exilement by Maximus only extending to the Scots. Among
these some about saint Andrews were famous. One had been the Palace of the
Kings of Picts, and at the coming of saint Regulus thither with the Reliks of
saint Andrew the Apostle, Heirgustus their King converted it to a Church or
Monastery, Heirgustus Regium Palatium amplis structuris, vti ea patiebatur
aetas, ornata^ diuo Andreae, Regulo, ac Sacerdotibus ibidem deinceps optimo
Maximo Deo famulaturis libere erogauit. An other Monastery was that, which the
same King founded near to the same place, Struxit and haud procul a palatio
sacram aedem diuo Apostolo dicatam: And furnished them both with precious
Ornaments and holy Vessels of gold and silver, Ornauit and id templum donarijs
amplissimis, Pateris, Cyphis, Calicibus, Peluibus, Lauacris ex arge^to auroque,
ac alia pretiosa supellectili in sacrorum vsum quaesita, Sacerdotibus ad diuina
perpetuo exequenda ibidem constitutis. A third Monastery was founded there, or
very near the same place, either in this Age, or the beginning of the next by
our renowned British Abbot saint Manuscr. Antiq. in vit. S. Cadoci. Capgr. in
eod.
Cadocus after Bishop and Martyr, who going one Pilgrimage to the Reliks of
saint Andrew in Scotland, stayed preaching there 7. years, and founded a
Monastery. I have spoken of saint Gudwal and his 180. Monks before, who founded
diverse Monasteries hear in this Age.

THE XXIX. CHAPTER.
OF CERTAIN HERETICS AND HERESIES, the Trimothian and Pelagian Britain in
this time.

1. BUT as Britain had many glorious Saints and Martyrs in this Age, so it
wanted not some Heretics, to disturb the peace and quietness of Christ's Church,
both in this and other Nations. Timotheus the name given to the Timotheani
Heretics, was as Sigebert with others writes, of this kingdom, and held that
the Divine Nature in Christ was changed into his Human Nature, and by a show of
Continency and Religion deluded many, In Britannia Timotheus quidam
Continentiae and Religionis imagine multis illude^s, eos in errorem suae
Haeresis induxit, dicens, Christum verum quidem Deum and verum hominem de
Virgin Maria natum fuisse, sed mentiens dicendo, quod Diuina Natura conuersa
sit in Humana^ Naturam. The Collectors of our ancient Writers affirm; that
our Country man Leporius Agricola did write a Book against him still extant,
and confuted Aug. in l. de Haeresibus in fine Haer. 89. in exe^plari Gembl.
Sigeber. Gembl. Chron. an. 428. Harpesfeld. Hist. Eccl. in 6. primis saecul. c.
18. Joan. Bal. cent. 1. in Leporio Agricola. Io. Pits. de Vi^. Illustrib. in
Lepor. Agricola.
his Heresy. In some Copies of saint Augustine his Book of Heresies, this
Heresy called the Timotheans is set down in the end thereof, and there
affirmed, that one Timotheus was Author of it, and he then lived an exile in
Bithinia at Biza there, Timotheani dicunt filium Dei verum quidem hominem ex
Virgin Maria natum, sed non ita vnam reddidisse personam, vt non in vnam sit
redactus naturam: conflatorium quoddam volentes fuisse interiora Virginis, per
quod duae naturae, id est, Deus and homo, in vnam resolutae and compactae
Massam, vnam Dei and hominis exhibuerint formam. Et ad confirmanda huiusmodi
impietatem, quae Deum asserit a sua versum natura cogunt Euangelistae
testimonium dicentis: Et verbum caro factum est, quod ita interpretantur:
diuina natura in humanam versa est. Huius impietatis initium, Timotheus apud
Bizam Bithiniae modo exulans ciuitatem. His confuting hear, and bannishing
hence, seem to make him so little remembered in our Antiquities, if he was a
Britan. Veremund. Hist. Scotor. Hector. Boeth. Hist. l. 9. f. 179. p. 1. Georg.
Buchan. Rerum. Scot. l. 5. Reg. 52. p. 160. Holinsh. Hist. of Scotl. in
Frequahard page 112. Aug. Epist. 106. Bed. Hist. l. 1. c. 10. Henr. Hunting.
Hist. lib. 1. Matthew. Westminster. Chron. an. 404. Floren. Wigorn. Chron. an. 413.
ali. 435. Marian. Scot. aetat. 8. l. 2. An. 414. Prosper. in Chron. Sigeb.
Gembl. an. 404. Regin. Chron. an. 350. Hacluyt. p. 3. 4. in Pelagi. Bal. de
Script. Brit. cent. 1. Io. Pits. in S. Keb. in not. M. S. antiq. de Vit. S.
David. Capgrau. Catal. in eod. Girald. Cambr. Itinerar. Camb. l. 2. c. 4. David
Powell annot. ib. Gennad. and Honor. de Scriptor. Eccl. in Pelag. Joan. Bal.
centur. ^. in Pelag.


2. The Heresy of Pelagius, and he the first Author, and Name-giuer unto it,
have given the greatest stayne and blemish in that kind to this Nation, and in
this time. For as his Heresies were most pestilent, dangerous, and infectious,
so they took first root, and afterward fixed themselves so deeply in this
Britain, that they were not rooted out, until after the coming of saint
Augustine hither above 200. years after, notwithstanding we had so many and
worthy men hear both of our own Nation, and others, diverse of them sent
hither by the Apostolic Roman See, Power, and Authority thereof, to oppose,
and suppress it, as both our Scottish and English Writers, Catholics and
Protestants do testify. It is the common consent of the Historians both of
this and forreyne Countries, that this Pelagius was a Britan of this kingdom.
Diverse of our Antiquaries not only Catholics but Protestants hold, that he was
a Monk, and Abbot after in our old renowned Monastery of Bangot. Which is made
more probable, both in respect that Leporius Agricola his Scholar and follower
in his errors a long time, though after recanting them, was a Priest and Monk
of the same Monastery: Factus est Sacerdos and Monachus in celebri Banchorensi
Caenobio. And of all places in Britain, the parts thereabouts were most
infected with that Heresy, reigning there long after the time of saint
Germanus and Lupus sent hither by Pope Celestine to suppress it, and was in a
Sinod of all the Bishops, Abbots, and chief Clergy men of Cambria there
confuted and confounded by saint David. And as I have mentioned before, diverse
Clergy men in that Country were long after saint David's death, in the time of
King Frequahard of Scotland still infected therewith. All Authors agree this
Pelagius was very learned, and the Title Archereticke, Heresiarches, which is
commonly given unto him does so testify. So does his dispersing his Heresies
into so many learned Nations, venena suae perfidiae long lateque dispersit. So
do the great number of Councels assembled in diverse places to condemn him.
So do the particular best learned men in those days, saint Augustine, saint
Hierome, saint Innocentius, Orosius, Gennadius and others which wrote against
him. So do they which write of learned Writers, both ancient and later
Catholics and Protestants, witnessing that he wrote many and learned Catholic
Books before he fell into Heresy. By which we may gather, that this Nation in
such troblesome and tempesteous times had Schools to breed up learned men, by
whom so soon as Pelagius was fallen into Heresy, and noted thereof he was
bannished from hence, into foreign Countries, never returning hither again.
His Heresies are set down by saint Augustine in diverse places of his Works,
(especially in his Book of Heresies among which this of Pelagius Aug. l. de
Haeres. Haer. 88. l. 2. de pecc. origin. c. 11. Epist. 106. l. 2. de pecc.
orig. c. 8. 9. 14. l. 2. Retract. c. 47. Hier. Epist. 79. and ad Alip. Dial.
Contr. Pelag. Prosper. de Ingrat.
is commonly set there down for the last heintreated of,) by saint Hierome,
Prosper, and other ancient approved Authors, by diverse holy Councels assembled
against him and his Errors, especially the Diospolitan Council, where many of
them wherewith he was chardged, are recorded and condemned, and by himself
renownced and anathematized, haec omnia Pelagius anathematizauit, as also by
the best Historians of this Nation before cited, and in those places cited,
besides many others Manuscripts and printed Catholic and Protestant
Antiquaries all agreeing in the substance of his Heresies, allthough some do
more breifely, others more largely deliver them in the Diospolitan Council,
where he was charged presently to renownce his errors, or to be excommunicated,
and condemned, quae nisi remota omni tergiuersatione anathematizaret ipse
anathema sit factus.

3. These following are the Articles objected against him to hold, and which he
was compelled to renownce, Primo, obiectum est, cum diceret, Adam mortalem
Pelagius his Heresies, and renounced by him.
factum: qui sieve peccasset, sieve non, mortuus esset. First, hew as charged to
hold that Adam was made mortal, and should have died whether he had sinned or
no. Secondly that his sin did only hurt himself, and not human kind. 3. That
Infants newborn are in the same state, wherein Adam was before his fall. 4.
That by the death and preuarication of Adam, all mankind does not die, nor all
man kind rise again by the Resurrection of Christ. 5. Children may have
eternal life, though they be not baptized. 6. Rich men that be baptized,
except they renownce all their goods, if they are thought to do any good
thing, it shall not be reputed to them, neither can they have the Kingdom of
God. 7. That the grace and help of God is not given to every act, but it is
from freewill, or in the Law and Doctrine. 8. That the grace of God is given,
according to our own meritts. 9. That men cannot be called the children of
God, except they be altogether without all sin. 10. And that it is not
freewill, if it wants the help of God: because every one has in his own
will to do any thing, or not to do it. 11. That our Victory is not from the
help of God, but from free will. 12. That to them which seek pardon, pardon is
not given according to the grace and mercy of God, but according to the merits
and labor of them, which by penance are worthy of mercy.

4. S. Augustine in diverse places speaks of this Council, and sets down
Aug. l. Epist. Epist. 106. l. 2. Retract. c. 47. l. 2. de pecc. orig. contr.
Pelag. and Celsum c. 11. Aug. and Hier. apud Baron. ann. 415. Binius to. 1.
Conc. Annot. in Conc. Diospolit. Hilar. Epist. ad Aug. inter Ep. Aug. Epist.
88. Aug. l. de Haeres. Haer. 88.
these very Articles, whereof Pelagius was charged, and recanted by Pelagius,
though disse^blingly for fear, as appeared by him afterward, Haec omnia
Pelagius sic Anathematizauit. So do diverse others, and add more errors, which
he held, as that before Christ, man was without sin. Prayer is not necessary.
Man is able by the Power of freewill not only not to sin, but not to be
tempted. That women ought to sing in the Church. That all men ought to be
clothed as Monks. S. Augustine adds: That man might not swear at all. Non
debere iurare omnino. The life of just men in this life to be altogether
without sin; And that the Church of Christ in this world consists of such.
Vitam iustorum in hoc saeculo nullum omnino habere peccatum, and ex his
Ecclesiam Christi in hac mortalitate perfici. He denied that the Church should
offer prayers either for Infidels, and such as resist the doctrine of God, that
they might be converted unto him: or for the faithful that their faith might
be increased, and they persevere in it. Destruunt orationes quas facit Ecclesia,
sieve pro Infidelibus and doctrinae Dei resistentibus, vt conuertantur ad Deum:
sieve pro fidelibus, vt augeatur eis fides, and perseuerent in ea. Their wicked
grownd whereof was this, because he held, that men receive not these things
from God, but have them of themselves, and that the grace of God, by which we
are delivered Hect. Boeth. l. 9. Scotor. Hist. fol. 179. Hollinsh. Hist. of
Scotl. in eod. 52. Reg. and Buch. in eod. Henric. Hunting. Hist. l. 3. August.
l. 3. contra Pelagian. fere in initio c. 1.
from impiety, is given by our own merits, Haec quippe non ab ipso (Deo)
accipere, sed a seipsis homines habere contendunt, gratiam Dei qua liberamur ab
impietate dicentes secundum merita nostra dari.

5. From which wicked and damned Heresy he also denied the virtue and
necessity of holy Sacraments, as well Baptism as the rest, as is evident in
our British Pelagian Heretics sprung from him, and particularly denying the
Sacrament of Confession to a Priest and Penance, as our Historians testify in
King Frequard of Scotland son of Eugenius, and diverse British Priests,
thereupon noted and condemned of Pelagian Heresy. Thus Pelagius at the least
before his fall, as S. Augustine testifies, was both a learned and holy man,
and his works especially upon S. Paul's Epistles much commended, Legi Pelagij
quaedam scripta, viri vt audio sancti, and non paruo profectu Christiani, quae
in Pa^^^ Apostoli Epistolas Expositiones brcuissimas continere^t. And writes
further, that he was, casta vita, moribusque laudabilis, Of a chaste life, and
laudable conversation of life, and doubted not to do as Christ commanded the
rich man, requesting counsel to obtain eternal life, saying, he had
fulfilled all August. supr. lib. 2. cap. 16. Hier. in Praef. l. 3. in Hieren.
Isodor Pelusiot. Epist. 314. August. l. de peccat. Origin. c. 5. 6. lib. 2.
cont. Pelag. c. ^. de peccat. Orig. c. 8. 22. and Epist. 157. Prosper. contr.
Col^^t. Caelestin. Epist. ad Episc. Galliae Gomad. de Eccl. Dogm. Possid. in
vit. S. Aug. c. 18. Marian. Scot. aet. 6. l. 2. an. 419. Martin. Polon. Supput.
an. 413. Matthew. Westminster. an. 415. Bal. l. de Script. Brit. cent. 1. in Pelagio
Haeresiarca. Gennad. and Honor. de Script. Bal. sup. Io. Pits. aetat. 5. de
vir. Illustr. Brit. in not. page 84. Bed. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 10. Matthew.
Westminster. Chron. an. 404.
the commandments of the Law, that he should sell all he had, and give it to
the poor, and tra^sferre his Treasure into heaven. Yet to free our Kingdom
now England and Wales also of giving life to such a man, S. Hierome says he
was by Nation a Scot, progeniem haberet Scoticae gentis, and a voluptuous
Monk, voluptuosus Monachus as Isidorus Pelusiota notes. Both which may be
reconciled, if we say, he was borne among the Scots, and bredd in our great
Monastery of Banger in Britain, and there long time an holy Monk, but after
falling both into Heresy, and lewdenes of life, he was often condemned both by
the Popes of Rome, S. Innocentius and others and in diverse Councels in Asia,
Afrike, and Europe, whither he had spredd his Heresies, and not perfectly in
him some times teaching and maintaining, other whiles excusing or denying them,
until in the time of Pope Zosimus, about the year of Christ 418. being by him
finally condemned both he and his followers were driven into Exile by Honorius
the Emperor. And that Heresy condemned in all the world, Concilio apud
Carthaginem habito 214. and eo amplius Episcoporum, ad Papam Zosimum Sinodi
Decreta perlata sunt, quibus probatis, per totum mundum Haeresis Pelagiana
damnata est.

6. Yet after this it arose again even in Britain, and was then and there
condemned by Pope Celestine and his Legates, as now it was by Pope Zosimus and
the remembered Council of above 214. Bishops, approved by him, and by other
Councels, which some Writers even of this Nation, and Protetestants term
general Councels, Condemnatus per Episcopos in Ephesino, Carthaginensi, and
Milleuitano Concilijs generalibus. Before his Heresy he wrote many Works
agreeing with Catholic doctrine, and for them 25. in number, as they are
recompted by some, is placed by them among Catholic Writers, even those of
Britain his own Country, which in the first beginning of his falling into
Heresy, did so detest and abhore it, not having been infected with Heresy
before that time, that it presently by some Authors bannished him from hence,
Vt videtur, Britones Pelagium eiusque sequaces in exilium eiecerunt, ipsis mali
principijs mature occurrentes. Which seems to be confirmed by saint Bid and
others, testifying how in a very short time he spread his errors very far,
venena suae perfidiae long lateque dispersit, and yet used no coadiutors that
were Britans, for anything we find in Antiquities, but only strangers of
remote Nations, an Argument that his own Country had condemned and exiled him:
otherwise that famous Monastery of Bangor where he had his education, so much
flourishing with learned men, and Monks, as all Authors that write thereof
agree, and he being Abbot and Commander among them, and Britain so abounding
with learning at that time, as our very women, as saint Helen and saint Vrsula
are thereby glorious in the world, some would have followed him in those
errors, preached and published them as he did. Which is confirmed by their
carriage, afterward when Leporius Agricola revived those errors hear, when by
reason of wars and tumults, learning was much dacayed by the Infidel Saxons,
yet our Britans would not the^ admit of Pelagius his Heresy, but by all means
they could resisted it, Britanni suscipere dogma peruersum, gratiam Christi
blasphemando nullatenus vellent. And the Reuiuer of that Heresy hear Leporius
Agricola did in Bed. l. 1. Hist. c. 17 Matthew. Westminster. Chron. an. 442. Pits.
aetat. 4. p. 85. Bal. l. de Script. cent. 1. in Pelag.
a Book written and published thereof utterly recant and condemn it,
emenda^us correctionis suae librum vera fide Catholica composuit. A great
honor to this Nation, that it had such learned men, that even one of them
falling into error, did so much prevail and dilate it both in Europe, Afrike,
and Asia, and yet in his own Country could nothing prevail, but was at the
first convinced, rejected and exiled, and did only endeavor to infect Britain
his Native Country, but could not effect his desire therein, In Britannia
Pelagius execrabili Sigebert. Gemb. Chron. an. 404.
doctrina Ecclesiam Christi maculari nititur. And therefore as Historians
testify he took others of other Nations, as Celestius and Iulianus to vent
his errors, Hac tempestate Pelagius Brito, dogma nominis sui contragratiam
Christi, Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. an. 414. Bed. supr. l. 1. c. 10*
Celestio and Iuliano adiutoribus exerit. Therefore as saint Chrysostom
notes of all in general, which withstood, him, that they deserved great
Crowns of honor, seeing many holy and godly men were deceived by him: Quot
quantisque coronis dignisint qui forti animo in acie steterint, cum viri tam
pie ac Chrysostom. Ep. 4. Baron. and Spond. Annal. an. 405.
sancte, tantaque cum tolerantia viuentes abripi, at que in fraudem impelli
cernerentur. So we must needs give the greatest glory to our Britain, which
from the beginning so contemned his errors, and kept itself free, and
unspotted from that so violent and common infection, never defiled with it,
until Leporius Agricola long after revived it, and soon recanted it. Which
our old Historians writing of this Heresy, thus further and plainly confirm,
Ab hac and ab alijs pestibus Haereticis immunis semper extitit Anglia, cum in
alijs mundi partibus tot pullularint Haereses. Et quidem haec Insula cum
propter Guliel. Neubrig. Rer. Angl. l. 2. c. 13.
incolentes Britones Britannia diceretur. Pelagium in Orient Haeresiarcham
futurum ex se misit, eiusque in se processu temporis errorem admisit: Ad cuius
peremptionem Gallicanae Ecclesiae pia prouisio semel and iterum beatissimum
direxit Germanum. And saint Prosper himself sets down the first rising of
the Pelagian Heresy in Britain to have been in this time, in the year 432.
Prosp. in Chron. an. 432. Bed. l. 1. Hist. c. 17 Stowe Hist. in Theodosius. Io.
Bal. l. de Script. Britan. cent. 1. in in Leporio Agri.
when it had reigned diverse years in other Countries. And saint Bede is
plain, it was brought hither by Agricola: Haeresis Pelagiana per Agricolam
illata: And our English Protestant Antiquaries do plainly thus acknowledge:
The Pelagian Heresy was brought into Britain by Agricola about this time, the
year of Christ 446. as they plainly calculate, and express in their commonly
received Histories. And the old Manuscript of Landaffe plainly teaches, that
the Britans kept their holy faith, which they received Manuscr. Antiq. de primo
statu Landau. Eccl.
in the time of King Lucius, inviolable, without any spot^ of wicked doctrine,
sine aliqua praui dogmatis macula, until the Pelagian Heresy began to rise
hear, and that was not until a little before saint Germanus and Lupus came
hither, out of France to suppress it, and the Britans did not then Parker.
Antiq. Brit. p. 6. 45. 46. Bal. l. 2. de act. Pontif. in Greg. 1. and l. de
Script. Brit. cent. 1. in Aug. Dionotho. Godwyn. Conuers. of Britan. Powel
annot. in 2. l. Girald. Ca^b. Itiner. Cambr. c. 1. Fox Act. Monum. p. 463.
edit. an. 1576. Holins. Hist. of Engl. c. 21.
consent unto this wicked Heresy, prauae doctrinae Haereticorum non
adquiescebant. Our English Protestant Antiquaries in great number affirm our
Britans to have been free not only from the Heresies of Pelagius, in his time,
but both from that, and all other Heresies, and Errors in Religion, during all
the first six hundred years of Christ, two hundred years or there abouts,
after the rising up of the Pelagian. Heresy.

FINIS.
AN INDEX. OF THE MEMORABLE THINGS contained in these four hundred AGES OF
THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN.
Note gentle Reader that the first number in the Index directs thee to the
Page, the second to the Paragraph. And because some Pages by the Printers
negligence are false ciphered, I have for thy greater facility set down in
this Index both the true and false Number of the Pages cited, in this sort,
444. 3. or 445. 3. the first number whereof is true, the second false.

A
AAron vid. Julius. Abbots nu^bered amongst our Nobility. 601. 7. Abingdon
Monastery when destroyed, and when renewed. 469. 3. Abingdon Monks manner of
life; and number. 469. 3. 601. 7. Adminus banished by his Father Cunobeline out
of Britain. 23. 7. Adminus received into protection by Caius Caligula. ib.
Adoniram King Salomons servant, died in Spain, being sent thither for Tribute.
10. 4. Adrianus succeeded Traian in the Empire. 195. 1. Adrianus ruled the
Empire 21. years. ibid. Adrianus came into Britain about the beginning of his
Empire. 196. 2. Adrianus caused the Picts Wall to be made, and why. 196. 2.
Adrianus erected statues of devils in the place of our Lords Passion. ib.
Adrianus raised a persecution against Christians. ib. Adrianus his motives to
leave of persecution. ib. Adrianus leaves of persecution. ib. Adrianus
intended to receive Christ for God. ib. Adrianus builded Temples without Pagan
Idols which he intended to the honor of Christ. ib. Adrianus hindered from
performing his intention, either by fear, or flattery of the Idolaters. ib.
Africa a fearful enemy to the Romans. 365. 2. Agricola conquered the
Britans, under Domitian. 171. 3. Agricola v. Leporius vel Calphurnius. Agritius
Patriarch of Antioche. 407. 2 Agritius made Archbishop of Treuers by S. Helens
intercession. ib. Alba in Scotland a Primats See. 178. 6. Alba taken by some to
be the City now called S. Andrews. 178. 6. 187. 2. S. Alban descended from the
Romans. 367. 3. S. Alban harbors S. Amphibalus. 435. 3. S. Albans Vision to
persuade him to turn Christian. ib. S. Albans Conversion and great devotion.
436. 3. S. Alban delivers S. Amphibalus from the Persecutors by changing of
cloths. 437. 4. The rage of the judge and Pagans against S. Alban. 438. 1. S.
Albe^s reverence to the Crucifix. ib. S. Albans torturs, and long
imprisonment. 421. 4. 438. 1. etc. The form of the sentence pronounced against
S. Alban. 444. 3. or 445. 3. S. Albans Persecutors miraculously punished. 438.
1. etc. Two miracles wrought before S. Albans execution. 440. 3. S. Albans
Executioner lost his eyes. 440. 4. The Soldier who drew S. Alban to execution
converted. 440. 3. S. Alban buried by the same Soldier. 441. 5. A Church
erected to saint Alban, and when. 468. 2. Miracles wroght in the same. 469. 2.
S. Alban in what sense the first Martyr of Britain. 421. 4. The judge moved
with the miracles performed at saint Albans death, caused the Persecution to
cease. 421. 4. Alcluid City founded by King Ebrancus. 336. 5. Alectus sent
into Britain with three Legions against Carausius. 375. 4. Alectus ouerthrows
Carausius, and makes himself King. 375. 4. Alectus continued King for three
years. ib. Alectus persecuted Catholics not for Religion, but for following
Carausius. ib. Alectus being at Sacrifice in London overthrown and flaine.
375. 4. S. Alexander the first succeeded Euaristus in the Papacy. 195. 1. S.
Alexander converted to the faith a great part of the Roman Nobility. 197. 3. S.
Alexander renowned for working S. Alexander Martyred. ib. miracles. 199. 7. How
long he Ruled the Apostolic See. 195. 1. S. Alexanders Decrees in Religion by
our Protestants confession. 199. 7. Alexandria the second Episcopal See. 187.
2. Alipius employed by Julian the Apostata to build Jerusalem for the Jews.
564. 3. Alipius sent into Britain to resist the invasion of the Picts. ib.
Alipius departed out of Britain before Julian began his Persecution. ib.
Alredus Riuallensis his worth, learning, and piety. 75. 11. Altars to say
Mass on erected, and used. 136. 2. 306. 4. 325. 3. 524. 13. Amatus, Matthaeus,
or Amathaeus Archbishop of Caerlegion. 598. 9. Ambassadors from Britain before
Christ his berth, demand and obtain peace at Rome. 1. 1. These Ambassadors
left Noblemen for Pledges. ib. The Ambassadors of King Lucius to the Pope,
what, and from whence they were. 257. 6. S. Ambrose a worthy Prelate. 576. 7.
S. Ambrose his manner of dealing with the Emperor Theodosius. 575. 7 Ambrosius
v. Aurelius. America when inhabited by the Monks of Glastenbury* 331. 6. S.
Amon, and S. Alca S. Mansuetus his associats, probably were Christians in
Tiberius days. 24. 9. S. Amphibalus a Britan. 335. 4. S. Amphibalus borne at
Caerlegion. 434. 2. S. Amphibalus knighted at Rome. ib. S. Amphibalus converted
to the faith by S. Zepherine Pope. 367. 3. S. Amphibalus consecrated Priest by
S. Zepherine. 434. 2. S. Amphibalus his piety, and learning. 430. 2. S.
Amphibalus a Monk, and probably Bishop at Caermedin a Monastery in Walls.
434. 2. S. Amphibalus flies into Scotland from the Persecution of Diocletian.
429. 1. S. Amphibalus lovingly entertained by the Scottish King. 430. 2. S.
Amphibalus the first Bishop of the Scots, in the time of Dioclesians
Persecution. 335. 4. 430. 2. S. Amphibalus Bishop of Soder in Mona. 357. 4.
Saint Amphibalus Religion which he preached unto the Scots the same that
Catholics now profess. 430. 3. S. Amphibalus returns from the Scots into
Britain. 433. 1. S. Amphibalus harbored at Verolamium by S. Alban. 435. 5. S.
Amphibalus preached the faith of Christ to S. Alban. ib. S. Amphibalus
converted a 1000. Pagans. 445. 2. All those Martyred, one excepted in Walls.
446. 3. S. Amphibalus apprehended, and brought to Verolamium. 447. 2. S.
Amphibalus cures in the way an infirm man. ib. S. Amphibalus his cruel
martyrdom. 448. 2. A 1000. newly converted to Christ martyred with him. 448.
3. S. Amphibalus miraculous Vision at his martyrdom. ib. S. Amphibalus prays
to S. Alban. ib. S. Amphibalus his Persecutors, and judge strangly punished by
God. 449. 4. Amsbury Church, and Nu^nery. 389. 4. Amsbury Monasteries
antiquity. 309. 8. Amsbury Monastery founded by on Ambrius. 469. 4. 601. 6
Amsbury Monastery had 300. Religious men at the coming of the Saxons. ib.
Amsbury Monks manner of living. 310. 8. Amsbury Monastery when destroyed, and
restored. 310. 8. 601. 6. S. Anacletus consecrated Priest by S. Peter. 186. 1.
S. Anacletus S. Clemens Successor in the Sea of Rome. 185. 1. S. Anacletus sent
diverse Archbishops and Priests into Britane. 191. 6. S. Anacletus martyred, and
when. 192. 1. S. Anacletus e^ioyed his See 9. years, 3. months, 10. days.
185. 1. S. Andrew elder brother to S. Peter. 587. 1. S. Andrews Relics
translated into Britain. 587. 2. By whose means, how, and from whence. ib. S.
Andrews Relikes greatly worshipped in Britain. 588. 3. S. Andrews Town from
whence so called. ib. Anglesey Island the Residence of the most learned Druids.
239. 6. or 234 6. S. Anicetus succeeded S. Pius in the Papacy. 234. 1. A
Protestants error concerning his Papacy. ib. The lenght of S. Anacletus Papacy.
ib. S. Anicetus martyred. 235. 1. S. Anicetus his doctrine and Religion. 235.
2. S. Antherius Pope. 378. 3. S. Antherus Martyred, and when. ib. S. Antherus
ordained that a Bishop should not go from on Bishoprike to an other, without
the Popes authority. ib. Antioche the third See for eminency in authority, and
why. 187. 2. Antoninus Pius succeeded Adrian in the Empire. 200. 1. Antoninus
began his Empire in the year. 138. 198. 4. The lenght of Antoninus Empire.
201. 1. Antoninus his love to Christians, and their Religion. 202. 3 Antoninus
labored to save Christians from Persecution in all places. ib. Antoninus
acknowledged the Christians to worship the true God. ib. Antoninus imitats his
Father in Law in cleme^cy toward Christians. 202. 3. Antoninus incensed
against the Britans. 219. 1. Antoninus his time of death. 205. 7. Apparitions
of Saints. 98. 10. etc. S. Aphrodisius Prefect of Egypt at the entry of our
Savior. 6. 7. S. Aphrodisius sent Bishop by saint Peter into France. 6. 7.
Apologies written unto Adrian the Emperor in defense of Christian Religion.
196. 2. The Apostles divided the world to preach in. 39. 5. Archbishops, and
Bishops placed in Britain, in the place of Archflamens, and Flamens. 272. 2. A
Protestant affirming the contrary confuted. 273. 2. Archbishops placed in
London, York, and Caerlegion, for the three Archflamens of the same places.
274. 3. Archbishops, and Bishops placing in Britain confirmed by Pope
Eleutherius. 314. 4. or 316. 4. To which of the Archbishops in Britain, the
other Bishops were subject. 283. 4. Diverse Archbishops of London numbered.
591. 3. Archflamens antiquity. 275. 5. Archflamens were called Priests amongst
the Gentiles. 276. 6. Archflamens were the same that Po^tifices Maximi. ib.
Archflamens and Flamens in Britain, ruled not only in spiritual, but also in
temporal affairs. 217. 7. All Archflamens and Flamens in Britain converted,
together with their Cities. 270. 5. Archflamens, and Flamens for the most part
made Bishops after their Conversion. 217. 7. S. Aristobulus ordained Bishop.
92. 1. S. Aristobulus consecrated by diverse Authors before S. Paul. 94. 3. S.
Aristobulus his death in Britain by Martyrdom. 171. 3. King Arthur descended
from Heluius nephew to S. Joseph of Arimathia. 124. 1. Aruiragus King of
Britain. 2. 2. 23. 7* Aruiragus put away his wife Voada Sister of Cataracus
King of the Scots. 132. 3. Aruiragus married Genuesse Claudius his supposed
daughter. 2. 2. 132. 3. Aruiragus leaves his kingdom to his son Marius. 2.
2. 132. 3. Aruiragus write a book in defense of plurality of wives. 132. 2.
Aruiragus worshipped the Emperor Claudius as God. 132. 2. Aruiragus dedicated a
Temple unto Claudius. ib. Aruiragus granted Privileges to S. Joseph of
Arimathia. 108. 1.. 128. 2* Aruiragus was not a Christian converted by S.
Joseph. 131. 1. etc. Aruiragus small benevolence toward Christians. 132. 2.
Aruiragus liberality toward the Pagan Gods. ib. Aruiragus in some sense may
largely be termed a Christian. 134. 7. Aruiragus buried in the Church he
builded to Claudius. 132. 3. Asclepiodotus Duke of Cornewayle, King of
Britain. 373. 2. Asclepiodotus slew the Romans Captain Lucius Gallus. 375. 4.
Asclepiodotus deposed Alectus sent hither against Carausius. 373. 2.
Asclepiodotus excused by some from any furthering of the Persecution of
Dioclesian. 451. 2. Asclepiodotus slain by Coel. 451. 2. Asclepiodotus a
Perturber of the Romans. 452. 4. Asclepiodotus his death grateful to the
Romans. 452. 4. The lenght of Asclepiodotus reign. 376. 5. or 373. 5. S.
Athanasius recalled from exile. 548. 1. S. Athanasius proved innocent by the
Council of Sardice. ib. S. Attila Abbot next to S. Columban in his Monastery
of Luxouium. 332. 9. Aualonia so called from Aualla in the British tongue
signifying fruits. 329. 4. S. Augulus Archbishop of London. 94. 4. S. Augulus
probably the first Archbishop of London. 179. 7. S. Augulus probably sent into
Britain by S. Clement Pope. 180. 8. S. Augulus Martyred, though not in the
Persecution of Dioclesia^. 179. 7. S. Augustine our Apostle of England with his
Associats was of no other but the old Apostolic Order, and Rule, that was used
in S. Gregory's Monastery. 331. 7. S. Augustins Disciples joined in our
ancient British Order. 332. 9. S. Augustine placed himself at Canterbury.
210. 4. S. Augustine orda^ned only tow Bishops. ib. S. Augustine did not
prevail so far as to convert half the British Nation. 210. 4. Augustus the
Emperor established peace through the whole world. 1. 1. Augustus consulteth
with Sibilla Tiburtina about being made a God. 3. 1. Sibyllas answer. 4. 1.
Augustus his strange Vision. ib. Augustus erected an Altar with this
inscription, Haec Ara est primogeniti Dei. 4. 2. Augustus great esteem of the
Sibils books. 4. 3. Augustus would not be called Lord, and why. 5. 3. Augustus
answer which he received from Pithius Apollo. 6. 6. Auitus the second Bishop
of Tungers. 198. 5. Aulus Plancius the Emperor Claudius his Lieutenante in
Britain converted. 88. 2. Aurelian the Emperor raises the 9. Persecution.
391 1. Aurelius Ambrosius renewed the decayed Monasteries of Britain. 601. 6.
Aurelius Ambrosius celebrateth the Feast of Pentecost with great solemnity.
601. 7. Aurelius Ambrosius buried in a regal manner. ib. Aurelius vid. Marcus.
Auxentius Bishop of Millan, an Arrian. 559. 5.
B.
BAngor a famous Monastery. 620. 8. Bangor Monasteries great number of Monks.
ib. Bangor Monasteries Monks divided into 7. companies, under 7. Priors. 603.
8. The miraculous Banner of Constantine having the sign of the Cross in it.
487. 3. S. Barnabas S. Aristobulus brother preached in Italy only by direction
of S. Peter. 63. 1. S. Barnabas sent from the East to Rome, to diuulge the
coming of Christ. 19. 1. Bassianus Seuerus his son chosen both King of
Britain and Emperor. 370. 2. Bassianus slew his half brother Geta chosen by
some Romans for Emperor. 370. 2. Bassianus brought up by a Christian Nurse.
ib. Bassianus accustomed either to weep, or turn his face when any Christians
were put to death. ib. Bassianus innocent of Christian blood. 371. 2.
Bassianus causes innumerable Roman Pagans to be killed. ib. Bassianus slain,
where, and by whom. 372. 3. Bassianus married the Sister of the holy Christian
Lady Mummea. 372. 3. Bassianus left a son named Heliogabalus. 372. 3. S.
Beatus a Britan, Apostle of the Heluetians. 63. 1. S. Beatus consecrated Priest
by Pope Linus. ib. S. Benedicte Biscop the first Abbot at Canterbury after
those of S. Augustins Mission. 333. 9. S. Benedicte went hence to the Monastery
of Lirinum, thence to Rome, and lived among the Roman Monks. ib. S. Benedicte
was a Monk of our ancient British Order. ib. S. Bernac a holy Abbot. 604.
10. S. Bernac renowned at Rome for killing a pestiferous serpent. ib. S. Bernac
flead from Rome to avoid human applause. ib. A Bishop imports as much as an
ouerseere, or chief Commander. 98. 9. Bishops consecrated with anointing with
holy oil. 103. 2. The same Unction a Sacrament. 105. 5. Used by the Apostles.
ib. In this external ceremony the grace of the Sacrament given. 104. 3. This
Unction the general use both of the Greek, and Latin Church in the first
unspotted days of Christianity. 105. 4. 190. 5. Bishops function acknowleged
by Protestants to be a divine ordinance. 91. 1. Bishops superiority, and
authority exercised in ordering of Bishops, and Ecclesiastical Ministers by
Protestants confession grounded in the word of God. 93. 1. No true Bishops or
Priests, among Protestants. 106. 5. One Bishop in the primitive Church used to
preach in diverse Countries. 178. 7. All Bishops may appeal to the Sea
Apostolic. 344. 2. Bishops not to be judged. 383. 11. or 393. 11. The Bishops
of Scotland always trewly consecrated as the Roman use was. 358. 4. Bishops
Sees founded in France by S. Peter which are for the most part Archbishops Sees
at this time. 67. 5. The places, and names of diverse ancient Bishoprikes. 288.
5. Bishops Sees under the Archbishop of London in King Lucius time. 292. 9.
Bishops Sees under York. 292. 9. Bishops Sees under the Archbishop of Cambria.
293. 11. or 263* 11. Bishops of Britain present at the first Nicen Council.
545. 7. Diverse Bishops of Britain, five at the lest present at the general
Council of Sardice. 548. 2. The Bishops gathered at the Counsel of Ariminum
refused to be maintained by the Emperor Constantius. 551. 1. Bishops of
Britain present at the Council of Ariminum. 551. 1. The Bishops of Britain
sincere faith testified by S. Hilarious. 555. 6. The same testified by S.
Athanasius. 555. 7. The Bishops of Britain before S. Augustins time learned,
and truly Catholic, and holy men. 592. 3. Bishops of Britain renowned in the
Eastern Nations, teaching there true Religion, and condemning of Heresies. 592.
3. Vide. Archbishop. Braghan a noble Britan; styled King. 585. 10. Braghan had
12. sons, and 12. daughters all happy Saints. ib. S. Brendon found in an
Island of America a Monastery of disciples of saint Patrike, and saint Albeus.
328. 3. Brennus commonly supposed to be a Britan, and brother to our King
Beline. 119. 4. S. Briget became a Nun in the I Will of Mona. 605. 11. or 608.
11. Britain the Queen of Islands. 32. 4. Britain called by some an other
world. 141. 3. Three Britains of old. 48. 6. Britain divided into Cambria,
Loegria, and Albania by Brutus. 280. 1. Britain divided also into 5.
Provinces. 35. 8. 187. 2. Britain divided into 3. Provinces by the Romans:
their names and Metropolis. 314. 3. Britain had aunciently 28. Cities. 285. 1.
Their names. 285. 1. etc. The number of Britan Islands. 141. 3. Britain subject
to diverse petty Kings. 127. 1. Britain made Tributary to the Romans by Julius
Caesar. ^1. 1. Britain kept under the Romans with a small garrison. 1. 1.
Britain never so seruil to the Romans as other kingdoms. 232. 2. Britain
never subjects to the Romans Iure belli. 238. 4. All Britain belonged to the
Romans in the time of Maximus. 575. 6. Britain had always its own Kings both
by inheritance, and descent from their ancient British Regal Race. 232. 2.
The old right, and Title of Britain to the Islands near Norway, and Denmark.
334. 1. Britains Conversion foretold by the Prophets of the old Testament. 31.
3. Britain began to be enlightened with the sun of the Gospel even in the
days of Tiberius. 21. 4. Britain enjoyed diverse Bishops and Priests after
saint Aristobulus death. 171. 3. Manifold lets of the general Conversion of
Britain. 232. 1. etc. Britain generally converted under S. Eleutherius. 255.
3. 270. 6. Britain received in king Lucius time the old Decrees of the
primitive Popes. 338. 4. Britain the first kingdom in the world that
generally, and publikly received the faith of Christ. 250. 5. Britains general
Conversion neither lawfully might or could be established without the help and
Power of the Roman Apostolic See. 248. 3. Britain received Church discipline
from Rome; and when. 320. 7. Great increase of Christians in Britain, in Pope
Higinius time. 209. 3. Britain a Pattern to divide other Provinces into
Diocesses, and Parishes. 338. 1. Britain at variance by reason of King Lucius
death without a successor. 250. 1. Britain distempered in civil affairs by
the long absence of Constantine. 542. 2. Britain at civil wars. 542. 3.
Little Britain probably the place given by Constantine to the British
Souldiars which had served him in his wars. 542. 2. Britain as free as any
Nation from the Arrian Heresy. 544. 7. Britain received, and observed the
Nicen faith. 546. 9. All Britain not perfectly free from the Arrian contagion.
555. 8. Britain in S. Ninians time did agree in Religion with the present
Roman Church. 589. 4. All Britain subject unto the Pope in spiritual business
until Caluins time. 353. 4. Britans carried as Prisoners, and Hostages to
Rome. 1. 1. The Britans temporal dependence on the Roman Empire, occasion of
their greatest spiritual good. 2. 3. The Britans belief of Christ to come,
did not diminish in the inhabitants after the death of Iosinas, and Finnanus.
11. 6. Many Britans lived in perpetual chastity before the Nativity of Christ;
and why. 16. 7. Some Britans came to more knowledge of Christ in Tiberius
days. 12. 1. Many Britans converted at Rome. 19. 2. A reason out of S. Ambrose
of the Roman Britans so quick Conversion. 20. 3. Britans of the Northren parts
Conversion before those of the South. 34. 6. The Britans first Apostle
necessary to be known. 40. 1. With what Nations the Britans had commerce at
Rome. 21. 4. The Britans well affected to the Rom^ns under Tiberius 23. 4.
Diverse Britans probably converted with S. Mansuetus by S. Peter. 32. 5. Diverse
Brita^s probably accompaned S. Peter from hence to Rome. 162. 2. The first
Christian Britans honor, and love toward S. Peter. 164. 3. Our Britan
Christians probably buried S. Peter. ib. Britans both at home, and else where
enjoyed quietly under the Romans the free use of Christian Religion until the
Persecution of Dioclesian. 164. 3. 20000. Britans served under Vespasian at the
sacking of Jerusalem. 166. 2. Credible that many of these Britans were
Christians. ib. Many Britans received the faith in the time of Antoninus Pius.
203. 4. Britans ever loved learning. 206. 8. Many Britans went to Rome to
enable themselves in learning, and Religion for the general Conversion of
Britain. 222. 4. Britans the first Christian people in the world. 335. 3.
Britans and Scots received not their first faith from any Church of Asia. 353.
4. Many Britans fall again into Paganism. 367. 3. Britans sent to Rome to pay
Tribute accustomed to sacrifice in the Temple of Mars. 367. 3. Britans knighted
at Rome, with Pagan rites, and ceremonies. 367. 3. The Britan Christians
manifold miseries in Dioclesians Persecution. 423. 2. etc. Britans fly to the
Scots, and Picts to avoid Persecution. 429. 1. The Britan Christians care in
restoring Religion after the Persecution of Dioclesian. 180. 8. The Britans
devotion to S. Simeon Stellita. 589. 5. The Britans detested the Pelagian
Heresy. 610. 6. S. Brithwald a Monk of Glastenbury. 333. 9. Saint Brithwald
chosen Abbot in the Monastery of Reculuer in Kent. ib. S. Brithwalds Vision of
S. Peter. 76. 12. Brutus a Trojan landed hear in the time of Hely and Samuel.
280. 1. Brutus called this Country before named Albion, Britannia. ib. Brutus
divided at his death the Island to his sons. ib.
C.
S. Cadocus Bishop and Martyr, a Prince by birth, his Monanastery where
builded. 603. 9. S. Cadocus large alms. 604. 9. Caelius Sedulius a Scot, a man
of great learning, and by some a Bishop. 593. 3. Caelius Sedulius preached in
the East. ib. Caelius Sedulius professed the same faith with the present Roman
Church. 593. 3. Caelius Sedulius his works approved by saint Gelasius Pope.
ib. Caelius Sedulius styled by S. Gelasius Venerabilis. ib. Some of his
writings used in the Church public service. ib. Caerlegion first builded by
Belinus. 281. 3. Caerlegions diverse names. ib. Caerlegion not so called from
any Roman Legion. 181. 10. Caerlegion an Archflamens Seat. 281. 3. Caerlegions
Archbishops. 319. 4. The glory of Caerlegion. 428. 3. or 425. 3. Caerlegion
School brought forth many glorious Martyrs during the Persecution of
Diocletian. 427. 2. S. Caffo saint Kebius Disciple. 567. 4. A strange wounder
performed by him. ib. Saint Caius Pope, and Martyr. 385. 17. S. Caius Kindsman
to the Emperor Dioclesian. ib. S. Caius his Decrees. ib. Caius Caligula the
Emperor a friend to Christians. 30. 1. Caius Caligula profains the Temple of
the Jews. ib. Caius Caligula bannished Pilate, and deposed Herod. ib. Caius
Caligula makes only a show of war against the Britans. 30. 2. Calixtus
succeeded fainct Zepherine in the Apostolic See. 372. 1. Calphurnius Agricola
sent by M. Aurelius to keep Britain in subjection. 220. 2. Cambridge once
Granta or Grantha. 205. 6. Cambridge builded, and founded by Cantaber a
Spaniarde. 206. 7. Cambridge Walled by Grantinus. 206. 7. Cambridge a renowned
ancient university. 205. 7. etc. Cambridge men instruct King Lucius and other
Kings of Britain in the Christian faith. 205. 7. Charters of privileges, and
immunities of King Arthur to Ca^bridge 205. 7. The Charter of Cadwalladar to
Almericus Rector of the Scholars of Cambridge. 205. 7. Cambridge burned in the
Persecution of Dioclesian. 425. 3. or 428. 3. Cambridge Scholars generally
converted. 269. 4. Cambridge privileges granted by, the Popes Honorius and
Eleutherius. ib. Cambridge privileged by King Lucius. 308. 6. Canobeline, or
Kymbeline King of Britain. 1. 1. S. Canoch the eldest son of Bragha^ a noble
Britan. 585. 10. S. Canoch gave himself wholely to the contemplative life. ib.
Canterbury first a Flame^s seat. 289. 5. Canterbury a Primats See. 178. 6.
Ca^terburys old Church of S. Martin built in King Lucius time. 289. 5. The same
Church a Bishops sea^. ib. S. Carantocus son, and heir to King Kederic. 585.
11. 603. 9. S. Carantocus embraced a Religious life. 586. 1. S. Carantocus
preached in Ireland, and when. 586. 11. 603. 9. S. Carantocus diverse
Pilgrimages. ib. Carausius succeeded Bassianus in the the kingdom of Britain.
373. 2. The time of Carausius reign. 373. 2. Carausius joined with the Picts
which Fulgentius had gathered together against Seuerus. ib. Carausius slew Q.
Bassianus a Legate of the Romans. 374. 2. Carausius but a young man in the time
of Bassianus. 374. 3. Carausius procured at Rome to be Admiral of the British
seas. ib. Carausius according to some of a kingly, according to others of a
base lineage. ib. Carausius probably a Christian, and defender of Christians.
375. 3. Carinus created Caesar. 391. 1. Carinus slain by lightning. ib.
Cathecumens not admitted to Apostolical function. 24. 9. King Ceolnulfus
became a Monk in the Monastery of Lindisfarme. 329. 5. Ceolnulfus procured a
dipensation for the Monks to drink wine, or ale. ib. Cerialtanus murderer of
S. Melorus. 390. 5. Cerialtanus sons unhappy death. 390. 5. Cerialtanus falls
blind, and dies. ib. Tow miraculous Chapels in the I Will of Lewys. 102. 3. The
Charters of our Kings the most credible testimony in things o^ Antiquity. 108.
1. The Charters of diverse Kings do testify, and approve the History of S.
Joseph of Arimathia. ib. Chrestus a wicked Pagan by some translated Christus.
83. 4. Chrisme according unto Protestants appointed by Saint Fabian to be hal
owed on Maunday Thu^sday. 378. 4. He not the first Author of consecrating
thereof. 379. 4. Consecrating of Chrisme taught by Christ, and received by the
Popes from the Apostles. ib. Christ borne in the 42. year of Augustus the
Emperor. 1. 1. Christ in his last supper offered himself in sacrifice, and
commanded Priests to do the same. 380. 8. Christ his coming publikly preached
in Rome before his Passion. 19. 1. Christ after his Ascension actually
consecrated no Bishops. 98. 9 Christ committed that function to his Apostles.
ib. Christ appeared to S. Peter near to the gate of Rome. 163. 2. The
Christian faith promulgated without any hinderance under Tiberius. 15. 5.
Christians accused as enemies of the Roman Empire. 365. 2. Many Christians in
the Persecution of Dioclesian fled into Britain. 170. 2. 17000. Christians
martyred by Dioclesian in 30. days. 416. 4. Churches builded in Britain in
honor of the Nativity of our Savior, and when. 9. 2. The most ancient
Churches of Britain dedicated to Saint Peter. 45. 3. A Church in Cornhill at
London dedicated to S. Peter. 101. 1. The antiquity of the same. 284. 5. The
same a Metropolitan See. 305. 3 The Church of fainct Peter at Westminster
probably an Archiepiscopall Seat in King Lucius time. 306. 3 A Church dedicated
to our Lady at Glastenbury. 99. 11. Other Churches dedicated to the honor of
our Blessed Lady. 128. 2. 136. 2 Churches dedicated unto Saints. 128. 2. 136.
2. 304. 1. 524. 15. etc. Churches hallowed. 288. 5. Diverse Churches yet
remaining in Walls dedicated to saint Socrates, and saint Stephen. 180. 9.
Churches founded by King Lucius. 305. 1. The number of our British Churches in
King Lucius time. 306. 4. etc. The Church called Michaelium in Constantinople.
502. 3. The Church of Michaelium adorned with Altars, and Crosses. 503. 4. The
Church builded by saint Helena at our Sauiou^s Sepulcher, exceeded in beauty
the Temple of Solomon. 521. 2. A short description of the same. 521. 3. The
Dedication of it. 522. 4. In the Church built on mount Oliuet the print of our
Saviors feet could no ways be continued to the rest of the pauement. 523. 10.
In the same Church that place of the Roof where our Savior ascended, could
not be covered. 524. 12. Churches destroyed in Britain by Maximian. 419. 3. or
410. 3. The Protestants description of Christ's visible Church. 90. 2. Three
things according to Protestants essential to a Church; and what they are. ib.
The Church founded upon S. Peter. 383. 11. or 393. 11. The chief care of the
Church committed to saint Peter, and his Successors. 161. 1. Out of the Church
no salvation to be expected. 90. 1. Churches never ruled by Monks without
Bishops. 357. 4. King Cissa persecuted the Monks of Abingdon. 601. 7. Cissa
the first Renewer of the same Monastery. 602. 7. Many Cities called Augusta in
respect of the nobility of the place. 181. 10. These Cities not so named from
the Roman Legion Augusta. ib. S. Claudia with her Britan Parents a Christian.
33. 5. S. Claudias Britan Parents the first entertainers of saint Peter at
Rome, and their house the first Church for Christians there. 33. 5. 55. 2. 56.
4. S. Claudia a Christian before saint Paul's first coming to Rome. 143. 5.
S. Claudia yet but young deserved the style of one of the 4. principal
Christians. 58. 5. All objections to prove Claudia honored by S. Paul for a
renowned Christian, not to be our British Lady Claudia, disproued. 154. 2.
etc. S. Claudia called Sabinella, and why. 155. 4. Saint Claudia never sent
saint Paul's Epistles, or Martials Epigrams into Britain. 156. 6. etc. Saint
Claudia condemned Martials Epigrams for their scurrility. 156. 6. S. Claudia
renowned for her learning, and skill both in Latin and Greek. 158. 8. 160. 9.
S. Claudia, did not translate S. Paul's Epistles. 158. 8. Saint Claudia her
house in Rome brought great profit to Christian Religion. 159. 9. The same as a
Christian Schooll to teach the Christian faith in Britain, and the Western
Nations. 160. 10. Saint Claudia had a second place at Rome for burying of
Martyrs. 182. 11. S. Claudias childrens pains, and charges in furthering the
Conueruersion of Britain. 199. 6. S. Claudia endeed her days at Sabinum in
Vmbria. 161. 10. Claudius the Emperor banished the Jews from Rome. 82. 3.
Claudius brought the Orcades, and Anglesie into subjection. 335. 4. S. Clement
goes into Jury to receive instructions about our Savior. 19. 2. S. Clement
converted by S. Peter. ib. S. Clement was personally with S. Peter in Britain.
164. 3. 176. 5. S. Clement succeeded S. Cletus in the government of the Roman
See. 173. 1. S. Clement constituted by saint Peter his successor. 173. 2. S.
Clement numbered after S. Cletus, and S. Linus, and why. 174. 2. etc. S.
Clement yielded the Papacy to S. Linus. 175. 4. S. Clement twice Pope. 176. 5.
S. Clement sent Bishops into Britain 177. 6. Saint Clement sent Bishops into
France. ib. S. Clement by the prerogative of the Sea of Rome commanded the
Bishops of the East to se^d Bishops and Preachers into the West. ib. S. Clemant
ba^nished by Traian into the Island Chersonesus. 185. 1. S. Clement Martyred.
ib. S. Cletus succeeded S. Linus in the Sea Apostolic. 169. 1. Coel King of
Britain. 373. 2. 452. 4. Coel Father to the Empress Helena. ib. Coel slaines
Asclepiodotus. 451. 2. Coel cease the Persecution against Catholics. ib.
Coel frees Britain from the Power of the Romans. ib. Coel enacteth a seueare
Law against the Romans, and their favorers. 453. 4. Coel in dread of
Constantius. 376. 5. or 373. 5. Coel concludes a peace with Constantius. ib.
Coel gave Constantius his daughter Helena in marriage. ib. Coel either twice
King, or else not King until toward his death. 376. 6. or 373. 6. Coel
propably a Christian. 453. 4. Coel his death. 459. 3. Coillus when King of
Britain. 196. 1. Coillus begot Lucius in his old Age. ib. Coillus confirmed
the Privileges of the Monastery of Glastenbury. 198. 6. Coillus supposed to
have been a Christian King. 198. 3. Coillus was no Christian King. 133. 5.
Coillus in some sense may largely be called a Christian. 134. 7. Coillus did
probably write unto Pope Alexander that he was willing to give way to Christian
Religion. 198. 6. S. Columbanus write a Rule of Monastical life. 330. 6. S.
Columbanus his Rule confirmed by Pope Honorius. 330. 6. 332. 8. S. Columbanus a
Monk of Bangor, of our ancient British Order. ib. S. Columbanus founded many
Monasteries both of Monks, and Nuns of our old Order. ib. The Monks of
Lirinum united them selves with S. Columbanus in his Rule. 332. 9 The 10.
Commandments given by God in the Law of Moses. 244. 4 The 10. Commandments
all of the Law of Nature, excepting that of observing the Sabbath. ib, Commodus
succeeded his Father Marcus Aurelius Antoninus in the Empire. 247. 1. Commodus
exceeded all former Emperors in impiety. ib. Commodus favorable to Christians.
ib. Communion under one kind used in the time of Pope Cornelius. 381. 8. or
391. 8. Communion under one kind used in S. Syluesters time in the Church of
Rome. 539. 2. Conche S. Martins Sister, and S. Patrikes mother. v. Couche.
Sacramental Confession in S. Syluesters time. 538. 2. Confirmation allowed for
a Sacracrament by S. Cyprian. 382. 10. or 392. 10. Confirmation defined to be a
Sacrament in the Council of Arles. 483. 2. Constantius Clorus elected Caesar.
391. 1. Constantius employed in cruel wars in Germany. 418. 2. Constantius
has the recovery of Britain committed unto him. 392. 1. 458. 1. Constantius
twice in Britain. 376. 5. or 373. 5. Constantius concluds a peace with King
Coel. ib. Constantius marries King Coels daughter Helena at his first coming
into Britain. ib. Constantius marriage with S. Helena true marriage even by the
Roman Laws. 458. 1. Constantius put away S. Helena. 409. 4. Constantius by his
diuorchment of Saint Helena deprived himself of regal Power in Britain.
409. 4. Constantius receaues Theodora a Pagan Concubine under the name of wife.
409. 4. Constantius marriage with Theodora adulterate. 458. 1. Constantius
receaueth again his wife S. Helena. 458. 1. This was at his second being in
Britain. 376. 5. or 373. 5. Constantius no instrument of Persecution. 409. 4.
460. 5. Constantius finding the Christians in Britain free at the death of
King Coel so preserves them. 411. 4. etc. 460. 5. etc. Constantius always a
worshipper of the true God. 410. 4. or 419. 4. Consta^tius memorable act to
make trial of true Christians. ib. Constantius restores Christian Religion in
Britain, and other places. 463. 2. etc. Constantius permits Churches to be
erected. 464. 4 Constantius falls sick at York. 465. 4. Constantius warned by
an Angel to leave the Empire to Constantine. 396. 6. 465. 5. Constantius
crowns his son Constantine Emperor, and prophesies, that he should advance
Christian Religion. 465. 5. Constantius dies at York. 401. 9. The time of
Constantius death. 466. 6. or 464. 6. Constantius sumptuous burial at York.
ib. Constantius burial performed according to some with Christian solemnities.
412. 5. Constantius body found at Caernaruon, and honorably emtombed among
other Christians. ib. Constantine the Great, son of Co^stantius, and S.
Helena. 396. 6. Constantine a Britan by birth. ib. Constantine escapes from
Dioclesian, and Maximian. 465. 5. Constantine arriues safely at York. ib.
Constantine crowned Emperor. ib. Constantine proclaimed Emperor in Britain.
467. 1. Constantine designed to be Emperor by God himself. 467. 1. Constantine
kept Britain quiet for Religion. ib. Constantine restored all holy places in
Britain. ib. Constantine had his education at Abingdon. 469. 3. Constantine in
Britain prepares war against the infidel Persecutor. 470. 1. Constantine
carried with him from Britain a great Power of his Country British
Souldiars. 542. 2. Constantine committed the government of Britain to the
Roman Proconsuls. 542. 3. Constantine a worshipper of Christ before his
miraculous Conversion. 471. 2. Constantins miraculous Vision of the Cross. ib.
Constantins Vision of Christ in his sleep. ib. Constantine commands Christ
only to be worshipped. 472. 3. Constantins miraculous Victory against his
Pagan enemies by the sign of the Cross. 472. 4. Constantine aduanceth
Christian Religion in all places, destroying Idolatry. 472. 5. Constantins
wonderful care, devotion, and expedition in establishing Christian Religion,
and destroying Idolatry. 473. 5. Constantins great reverence to the sign of
the Cross, the ensign of his Victories. 473. 6. 488. 6. Constantine troubled
with a Leprosy* 475. 2. Constantine counseled by the Pagan Flamens to wash
himself in a Bath of childrens blood. 475. 2. Constantine abhors the fact,
and restores the children with rewards. ib. Constantins Vision of Saint
Peter, and S. Paul. ib. Constantins Baptism, Confirmation at Rome by Saint
Syluester. ib. The miracles which happened thereat. ib. Constantine did not
prolonge his Baptism so long as some write. 489. 1. etc. Constantine made a
public Oration persuading to embrace Christian Religion. 476. 4. Constantine
puts out an Edict against the Jews. 480. 4. Constantine consented, and in dew
manner subscribed to the Roman Council under S. Syluester. 481. 5. Constantine
subscribed in the Council of Arles. 483. 3. Constantine did never call, or
confirmed any Council as a supreme judge, or sentencer. 541. 5. Constantine
put out an Edict for the quiet of Christians in all places. 486. 1. Constantine
ouerthrows Licinius. 487. 2. Constantine by public Edicts ascribes his
victories to Christ. 487. 4. Constantine honoreth the chaste, and virginal
life. 488. 7. Constantine exempted the Clergy from secular Judges. 489. 7.
Constantins donation, and munificent enriching the Church of Rome. 497. 1. l
etc. Constantine determined to place his Imperial seat at Troy. 500. 1.
Constantine in a Vision commanded to build his Imperial City at Bizantium.
501. 1. Constantine calls his Imperial Seat Constantinople. 502. 2. or 495. 2.
Constantine acknowledge the Primacy of the Church of Rome. 506. 3. Constantine
furdereth the Council of Nice. 507. 6. Constantine refuses to sit down
until the Council had caused him so to do. ib. Constantine bannished Arrius.
507. 7. Constantins humble reverence to S. Anthony. 522. 6. Constantine made
peace with the Persians. 531. 4. Constantine procures quietness for the
Christians in Persia. 532. 6. Constantins great devotion at the feast of
Easter. 532. 5. Constantine frounded a famous Church to the 12. Apostles in
Constantinople. 532. 6. Constantine erected in the same stately Images of all
the Apostles. ib. Constantine held prayers and protection of Saints, and help
to the dead by them, and prayer for the dead by the living. 533. 6. Constantine
reverenced Relikes. ib. Constantine commanded S. Athanasius to be restored.
531. 3. Constantins death. 534. 8. Constantine died not so soon as some write.
530. 1. Constantine lived until the year. 339. or 340. 531. 3. Constantins
dead body used with great Christian pomp. 534. 8. Constantius dead body
greatly reverenced by the Christians. 534. 8. Constantine worshipped in his
picture after his death. 535. 9. Constantine prayed for by Priests, and others
after his death. ib. Constantins Relics work many miracles. 535. 10.
Consta^tins Image works many miracles. ib. Constantine enrowled among the
Saints in the Greek Meneologe. 477. 5. S. Constantia Constantins daughter a
Virgin, and holy Nun. 535. 10. S. Constantia cured from a Leprosy by S.
Agnes. ib. S. Constantia erected a Nunnery by the place where she was cured.
536. 10. Constantius not presently after his Father Constantins death infected
with the Arrian Heresy. 548. 1. Constantius consented to the recalling of S.
Athanasius from exile. ib. Constantius sent diverse friendly letters to S.
Athanasius. ib. Constantius falling into Heresy a great hurt to Catholic
Religion in many places. 544. 7. Constantius consented to the calling of the
great Council of Sardice. 548. 1. Constantius labors to pervert the
Council of Ariminum. 553. 4. Constantius persecuteth Catholics. 553. 5.
Constantius commands Vrsatius to persecur the Bishops that would not
subscribe to the Arrian Heresy. ib. Constantius malice against Liberius Pope.
ib. Constantius his Persecution came not into Britain. ib. Constantius by some
excused to be no Heretic, but a professed Catholic at his death. 559. 6.
Constantius confessed Christ to be the natural son of God. 561. 8.
Constantius acknowledged three faults at his death, and which they were. 559.
6. Penitent for the same. ib. Constantius his holy death. 560. 6. An Angelical
harmony heard at his burial. 560. 7. Constantius baptized by Enzoius an
Arrian. ib. Constantius baptized with the true form of Baptism. 561. 8.
Constantius Age, and time of death. 561. 9. Constantius sent Julian the
Apostata to the dangerous wars of Gallia with intention to have him slain
562. 1. Constantius secretly incited Vadomarus King of the Frankes to take
arms against Julian. ib. S. Cornelius Pope maintained appeals to Rome. 384.
12. or 395. 12. Saint Cornelius his other Decrees. ib. S. Cornelius Martyred.
379. 5. Couche or rather Conche S. Martins Sister married in Britain. 577. 1.
Couche S. Patrikes Mother. ib. Couldeis men so called by the Scots, and who
they were. 588. 4. Couldeis the principal instruments in converting the
Scottish, and British Nations. 389. 4 Couldeis chosen for Bishops. ib.
General Counsels necessary. 506. 3. No general Council to be gathered
without the authority of the Church of Rome. 540. 4. The first Council of
Anthioch ordained that in every Province their should be a Metropolitan. 188.
3. A Council of Bishops in Cornwall. 388. 4. A Council gathered by S.
Syluester at Rome. 480. 4. This Counsels Decrees concercerning Orders, the
Primacie etc. 481. 5. The first Council at Arles in France consisting of 600.
Bishops. 482. 1. The Legates of the Pope their present. ib. This Councels
Decrees. 482. 2. The Council of Nice gathered. 505. 1. etc. The Popes Legates
subscribed first in the same. 506. 2. The Council of Nice desires the
Confirmation of the Pope. 509. 12. The Council of Sardice confirmed the Nicen
faith. 548. 1. The Counsel of Sardice Orthodoxall. 550. 3. The general
Council of Sardice quite different from an heretical Conciliable of the same
name. ib. The Council of Ariminum gathered. 551. 1. The number of Bishops
there both Catholic, and Arrian. 552. 2. The Council of Ariminum subscribed
to a Material error. 553. 4. The Council of Ariminum dissolved. ib. Crathlint
King of the Scots builded S. Amphibalus a Church in the I Will of Man. 430. 2.
Crathlint his great zeal and devotion. ib. Creete an Island in the Adriatike
Sea. 142. 4. Creete aunciently known by the name of Hecatompolis. 143. 4. 210.
3. The Metropolis of Creete, Metropolis to the adjacent Islands. 143. 4. Crosses
made, and worshipped. 138. 5. 328. 5. etc. Crosses and Images certain tokens
of Christianity. 323. 2. or 321. 2. The Cross of our Savior found out by S.
Helen. 515. 8. etc. The Cross of our Savior known by a miracle. 520. 22. The
Cross of our Savior diminished not for being cut, and carried away. 520. 21.
Crucifying never used by Britans. 45. 3. Curia a City in Rhetia when builded.
348. 5. Curia when first a Bishops seat. ib. A custom amongst the Romans to
have all strange events related to the Emperor at Rome. 3. 3.
D.
S. Damasus Author of the Pontifical. 174. 2 S. Damasus an aduancer of that
Religion which Protestants call Papistry. 576. 8. S. Damianus, and Fugatianus
appointed by S. Eleutherius for his Legates into Britain. 260. 1. S. Damianus,
and Fugatianus their Power, and Commission. 260. 2. etc. S. Damianus and
Fugatianus planted Christian Religion in Britain. 263. 5. etc. S. Damianus and
Fugatianus were both Bishops. 265. 7. S. Damianus and Fugatianus preaching in
Britain, and many converted by them. 266. 1. etc. A Protestant confuted for
affirming them to have prevailed little in preaching. 267. 2. S. Damianus and
Fugatianus conuerteth universities. 269. 4. Saint Damianus and Fugatianus
change the Pagan Temples into Christian Churches. 304. 1. S. Damianus and S.
Fugatianus returned to Rome, for the Confirmation of what they had done. 312.
2. S. Damianus came back again with the same. 316. 1. etc. We find nothing
of their final departure. 319. 4. S Damianus, and Fugatianus ^ad places of
honor here according to their worth. ib. S. Damianus, and Fugatianus search
after the Monastery of Glastenbury. 323. 2. or 321. 2. S. Damianus and
Fugatianus contitinued long at Glastenbury. ib. S. Damianus and Fugatianus
appointed 12. to dwell at Glastenbury in honor of the first 12. inhabitants.
ib. S. Damianus and Fugatianus submitted themselves to the Rule of S. Joseph.
332. 8. S. Damianus and Fugatianus preached likewise to the Scots. 334. 1. etc.
S. Damianus and Fugatianus Acts committed to writing. 337. 1. S. David the
Popes Legate in Britain. 332. 8. S. David founded Monasteries of our ancient
British Order. ib. Deacons not to marry. 382. 11. or 392 11. Deacons to
assist at the Altar. 384. 13. or 394. 13. S. Decumanus Parents, and birth
place. 567. 6. S. Decumanus flies the world. 368. 6. S. Decumenus miraculous
beginning of an Eremiticall life. ib. S. Decumenus manner of life. ib. S.
Decumanus Martyred. ib. S. Decumanus carried his head after it was cut of to a
fountain. 569. 8. The same ever since called by his name. ib. The same
healthsome for the Inhabitants. ib. S. Decumanus buried, and a Church dedicated
to him in the same place 569. 8. S. Decumanus had a Church dedicated to him in
the Town of Wells. 569. 9. What happened to one Demetrius a Grecian
travailing in Britain. 17. 8. Denotus made Bishop of Wincester and when. 320.
6. Denotus his great possessions. ib. Diadumenus v. Macrinus. Dioclesian chosen
Emperor. 391. 1. Dioclesian adjoined Maximianus unto him in government. ib.
Diocleans, and Maximians wicked plots wherewith they began their Persecution in
Britain. 413. 1. Dioclesian forebad any to buy or sell without offering
sacrifice. 416. 4. Dioclesians Persecution lasted but 9. years in Britain.
416. 4. Dioclesians Persecution when first raised in Britain. 420. 3.
Dioclesians Persecution exceeding cruel. 422. 1. etc. S. Dionisius Pope, and
Martyr. 384. 14. or 395. 14. S. Dionysius a Monk and Eremit before he was
Pope. ib. S. Dionysius converted the wife, and daughter of Decius. ib. Domitian
created Emperor. 169. 2. Domitian commanded himself to be worshipped as a
God. 170. 2. Domitian raises a cruel Persecution against Christians. 160. 2.
Domitians Persecution did not extend inselfe into Britain. 170. 2. Donaldus
the first Christian King of the Scots. 334. 2. Dover Castle builded by
Aruiragus. 287. 3. The Druids prophesied of a virgins Conception. 9. 1. The
Druids chief Schools, and Doctors were in Britain. ib. The Druids ancient
residence in the I Will of Man, by whom, and when given unto them. 10. 3. The
Druids dedicated temples Ignoto Deo. 16. 7. The Druids acknowledged after their
Pythagoricall manner that men's souls were immortal. 17. 9. 242. 2. The Druids
great learning. 206. 8. The Druids Religion not prohibited by Marcus Aurelius.
238. 4. The Druids Religion prohibited to Citizens by Augustus. 238. 5. The
Druids Religion oppressed in France by diverse Emperors. 238. 5. The Druids
accustomed to sacrifice Romans Prisoners. 239. 5. or 234. 5. By the Druids
direction Bunduica slew 80000. Romans. ib. The Druids Religion odious to the
Romans. 239. 6. or 234. 6. Druids the greatest hinderers of Christian Religion.
1^^. 1. The Druids for temporal respects justly troubled for fear of the
Conversion of Britain. 240. 1. Diverse disputations in Britain betwixt the
Druids, and Christian Apostolic men. 241. 1. The Druids reason for defense of
their Religion. ib. What Nations joined with the Druids in Religion. ib. The
Druids worshipped the Gentiles Gods, Jupiter, Apollo. etc. ib. The Druids
flourished from the time of Druins that great King, and high Priest. ib. The
Druids from whence so called. ib. The Druids precious attire. 242. 2. The
Druids statly houses. ib. The Druids sometimes resorted into woods. ib. The
Druids exempted from all exactions. ib. The Druids, chief judges in temporal,
and spiritual affairs. 242. 2. The Druids had one chief over the rest. 278.
8. The Druids great wit. 242. 2. The Druids used as Ministers by all that
would offer sacrifice. ib. The Druids deprived the true God of all worshipe.
243. 3. The Druids neither taught, nor worshipped the true God. 244. 3. The
Druids absurd opinion of the transmigration of souls. 244. 4. The Druids
Chymericall fiction of souls informing bodies in an other world. ib. The
Druids took away all things which are required unto a true Religion. ib. The
Druids Idols were not inferior in number to those of Egipte. 244. 5. The
Druids immolated men in their execrable sacrifices. 245. 5. The Druids
diabolical practice of Magic. ib. The Druids wives, and children common.
246. 6. The Brittans of the Druids Religion fedd on man's fleash. ib. The Druids
abolishing, made an alteration in politic matters. 256. 4. S. Dubritius the
Popes Legate in Britain. 332. etc.
E.
EAster to be observed on the Sunday. 244. 2. Easter to be celebrated the same
day with the Church of Rome. 482. 2. Easters erroneous observation not received
by our Britans from their first instructors in Religion. 345. 3. Edenburge in
Scotland a Flamens Seat. 336. 5. Edenburge founded by King Ebrancus. ib. The
Egyptians adored a child, and a virgin, and why. 6. 7. S. Edwine King of
Morthunberland Christened at York. 100. 1. S. Eleutherius was not Pope, or
probably Priest when King Lucius sent Ambassadors to Rome. 219. 8. S.
Eleutherius in great estimation for his learning. 221. 3. S. Eleutherius
renowned in Britain long before his Popedom. ib. S. Eleutherius probably a
Cardinal of one of our British Churches in Rome. 222. 4. S. Eleutherius
probably personally in Britain. ib. S. Eleutherius succeeded S. Soter in the Sea Apostolic. 247. 1. S. Eleutherius established the true observation of
Easter. 247. 2. S. Eleutherius a Professor of that Religion which Protestants
call Papistty. 248. 2. S. Eleutherius claymed the Popes spiritual supremacy.
ib. S. Eleutherius ordained that in the Bishops causes nothing should be
determined but by the Pope of Rome. ib. S. Eleutherius by letters exhorted King
Lucius unto Christian Religion. 252. 1. S. Eleutherius employed diverse Britans
in the Conversion of Britain. 265. 7. S. Eleutherius sent to King Lucius a
hallowed Crown with the title of King of Britain. 299. 4. S. Eleutherius
prescribed King Lucius the precincts of his kingdom ib. S. Eleutherius granted
many privileges, and Indulgences in Britain. 338. 3. S. Eluanus a Catechumen
when he was sent to Rome by King Lucius. 213. 2. S. Eluanus consecrated Bishop,
and that sent back into Britain. ib. S. Eluanus praised for virtue, and
learning. 217. 7 S. Eluanus was not brought up in the School of S. Joseph of
Arimathia 258. 7. S. Eluanus gave place to S. Thean to be Archbishop of London
before him. 217. 7. S. Eluanus and S. Medwin were not the chief in the
Conversion of Britain. 262. 4. S. Elueus Bishop of Meneuia. 586. 12. S. Elueus
baptized S. David. ib. S. Emerita whose Sister she was. 348. 4. S. Emerita
bannished out of Britain. 414. 2. S. Emerita martyred. 402. 2. An Epitome of
some Roman Emperors. 391. 1. Eridon or Criclade an University in Britain.
206. 8. S. Euaristus succeeded to S. Anacletus in his Papal dignity. 192. 1 S.
Euaristus borne of a Jew called Judas. 192. 1. S. Euaristus ruled the Church in
greater quietness then any before. ib. S. Euaristus sent a Legate to persuade
Coillus King of Britain to become a Christian. 193. 2. S. Euaristus by all
accoumpts died in the time of Coillus. ib. S. Euaristus martyred. 195. 1. S.
Eubulus named by S. Paul, probably the Father of S. Claudia, a Britain. 58. 6.
S. Eusebius Pope instituted the Feast of the Invention of the holy Cross. 463.
1. Eusebius a Subdeacon of Rome sent into Britain by S. Pius. 228. 2. S.
Eutichianus Pope, and Martyr. 385. 16. S. Eutichianus buried with his one
hands 300. Martyrs. 385. 17.
F.
S. Fabianus miraculously chosen Pope. 378. 4. S. Fabianus his Decrees. ib. S.
Fabianus condemned the Heresies of the Nouatians, and Helchites. ib. S.
Fabianus martyred. 379. 4. The Faith of Christ preached in America, and by
whom. 32. 4. Fastidius not improbably Archbishop of London. 591. 3. Fasting
used in the primative Church. 136. 2. 190. 5. S. Felix Pope, and Martyr. 385.
15. S. Felix Decrees. ib. S. Felix 2. substituted in the Papacy for Liberius by
the Arrians. 556. 1. S. Felix thrown out of the Church by the Romans. 557. 2.
S. Felix excommunicated Constantius for his Arrian Heresy. 558. 3. S. Felix
martyred. ib. Fergusius King of the Scots a restorer of Monasteries. 605. 12.
or 608. 12. Fincomarke King of Scotland. 582. 6. Fincomarke Successor to
Crathlint. 583. 6. Finnanus King suffered any that would to adore the true God.
10. 3. The word Flamen not known until Numa Pompilius days. 281. 2. Flamens
why so called. ib. The Flamens malice against Christians. 197. 3. The Flamens
Sees turned into Bishops seats. 275. 5. Flamens v. Archflamens. France never
esteemed a barbarous Nation. 117. 2. France once called Galatia. 119. 5. The
Romans altered the name into Gallia. 120. 5. The limits of France. 118. 3.
France far remote either from the Artike, or Antartike Pole. 117. 2. France
the place where the Romans children were accustomed to be instructed in
learning, and ciuility. 118. 2. The French had learning before the Gretians.
118. 2. Free Will taught by S. Cyprian. 380. 8. S. Fridolin a Princes son of
Britain. 594. 4. S. Fridolin preached in Britain, and else where. ib. S.
Fugatianus v. Damianus. Fulgenius contends with Seuerus for the Kingdom of
Britain. 369. 1. Fulgenius gathered an army of Picts against Seuerus. 369. 5.
Fulgenius slew Seuerus in a Battle at York. 368. 4. Fulgenius mortally wounded
in the same battle. 370. 1. Fulgenius had no Title to the kingdom of Britain.
ib.
G.
GAlba Emperor but 6. mo^ths. 165. 1. Gallienus recalled all Edicts against
Christians. 387. 1. or 397. 1. Gallienus gives free liberty for Christian
Religion. ib. The Gauls divided into the Gauls of Europe; and those of Asia.
118. 3. Gauls in Asia described. ib. The Gentiles general Conversion mentioned
by the Prophet Malachy, reserved to the honor of Britain. 541. 1. Genuessa
Queen of Britain, Aruiragus wife. 121. 8. S. German a Monk of Lirinum. 332.
8. Germany when first so called. 119. 4. The Germans worshipped none for Gods
but such as they could See. 243. 3. Gildas a British Writer styled* The wise.
194. 2. Tow other Britan Writers of the same name. 112. 1. Who they were, and
where they lived, and died. ib. Gildas Cambrius a noble Britan Poet. 158. 7.
Gildas Cambrius probably brought Martials Epigrams into Britain. ib. S. Gildas
Albanius a renowned Preacher in Britain, and when. 385. 11. S. Gildas Albianus
famous for miracles. 603. 9. S. Gildas Albianus builded himself a Cell. 603.
9. S. Gladusa Daughter to Braghan a noble Britan. 585. 10. S. Gladusa married
to King Gundleus ib. Glamorgan an University in Britain. 206. 8. Glastenbury
a Town in Somersetshire. 127. 1. Glastenbury Monastery once a solitary desert.
123. 1. Glastenbury called the second Rome for the multitude of Saints buried
their. 106. 5. 324. 3. Glastenbury Monastery renewed by the assistance of King
Lucius. 309. 7. Glastenbury Religious men all dead before the time of King
Lucius. 322. 1. Glastenbury found out by S. Damianus, and S. Fugatianus. 323.
2. or 321. 2. Glastenbury inhabited a new by 12. of S. Damianus, and Fugatianus
companions. 324. 3. The Churches builded their by them. ib. Glastenbury
Churches Indulgences. ib. Glastenbury Monks continued their many hundread
years. 326. 5. Glastenbury not ruinated either by the Roman, Saxon, or Danes
Persecution. 326. 5. Glastenbury miraculously preserved from the destruction of
the Danes 327. 5. or 328. 5. Glastenbury Monks chastity, poverty, and
obedience. 327. 1. or 328. 1. etc. Glastenbury Monks holiness, and austerity of
life. 328. 2. Glastenbury Monks eat only fruits, herbs, and bread. 329. 4.
Glastenbury Monks did drink only water. 329. 5. Glastenbury Order, and
Monastery the most ancient of all the world. 330. 6. Glastenbury the Mother of
diverse Orders. ib. Many Apostolic men, and Orders that came into Britain
joined with those of Glastenbury. 331. 7. Glastenbury Monks much different
from the Monks of any new Order that came into Britain. 333. 9. Glastenbury
Monastery wether destroyed by Maximian, and renewed by Constantine doubtful.
470. 4. The names of the Monks living at Glaste^bury in S. Patriks time. 599.
1. Gloucester, once Caerglou built by King Aruiragus 132. 2. Gnostik Heretics
given to all filthiness. 366. 2. Gnostikes accounted for Christians with
Pagans. ib. Gnostikes the cause of Persecution against Christians. ib. God
without beginning or ending was caused by no other. 243. 3. God only to be
adored. ib. The Celestial bodies witness that there is a God. ib. No God could
be consecrated by the Emperor amongst the Romans without approbation of the
Senate. 15. 6. S. Gudwall brought up, consecrated Priest, and Bishop in
Britain. 586. 11. S. Gudwall enters into a Monastery. ib. S. Gudwall preaches
in Fla^ders. ib. The time of his death. ib. The place of his burial. ib.
Guiderius King of Britain. 27. 7. Guiderius denied tribute to the Romans. 23.
8. Queen Guenhumar received the habit of a Nun, and where. 603. 9. S.
Gundleus leaves his Kingdom to his son Cadocus. 585. 10. S. Gundleus great
austerity of life. ib.
H.
THe Hand-kerchif wherewith S. Veronica wiped our Saviors face brought to
Rome. 13. 3. The same received with great reverence by Tiberius. ib. It healed
his incurable disease. ib. Where it is to be seen at this present. ib.
Heirgustus King of the Picts a Christian. 575. 6. Heirgustus suffered by
Maximus to reign quietly for a small tribute. ib. Heirgustus great reverence
to S. Andrews Relics. 588. 3. Heirgustus builded a Church to S. Andrew. ib.
S. Helena borne of noble Parents in Britain. 392. 2. S. Helena the sole heir,
and daughter to King Coel. ib. S. Helena was not borne in Bithinia. 392. 3. S.
Helena but young when she married Constantius. 377. 6. S. Helena the lawful
wife of Constantius. 392. 3. From whence it came that she was called Concubine.
393. 1. 397. 6 S. Helens sumptuous palace. 395. 4. S. Helenas lands about
Treuers probably descended to her by her Mother. 395. 5. S. Helenas Sanctity
of life. 395. 4. S. Helenas beauty, learning and other qualities. 398. 8.
Whence first called Stabularia. 400. 9. S. Helena in some sort may be called
and Inholdresse. 397. 6. S. Helena the Mother of 4. Children. 401. 1. S. Helena
always a Christian. 406. 1. etc. S. Helenas gifts to the City of Treuers.
407. 2 S. Helena not baptized by S. Syluester. 408. 3. S. Helena compelled to
depart from Constantius. 414. 2. S. Helena persuades Constantine to persecute
the Jews. 478. 1. S. Helena never a Jew or corrupted by such. 478. 2. S.
Helena departed not out of Britain with her son Constantine. 478. 2. etc. S.
Helena present at Rome at the Roman Council and consented to it. 480. 4. S.
Helena visits the holy land. 513. 1. S. Helenas great labors in finding out
the holy Cross. 515. 8. etc. The time she found the Cross 463. 2. S. Helena
sent part of the Cross, and the Nails to her son. 519. 20. S. Helena
builded a new City called Jerusalem. 521. 1. S. Helena builds a sumptuous
Church at our Saviors sepulcher. 521. 1. S. Helena waits on two Nuns in
Jerusalem. 522. 5. S. Helena founded a Religeous house of Nuns. 527. 23. S.
Helena builded a Temple where she found the holy Cross. 522. 7. S. Helena
founded diverse other Churches 522. 7. and sequent. S. Helena turned the
Potters field into a burial place for strangers. 525. 19. S. Helenas happy
death. 527. 23. The year of the same. 527. 26. Two Cities builded in her name.
527. 25. S. Helenas body carried from Rome to Constantinople. 528. 24. The day
of her festiuity. 528. 25. Heliogabalus, Bassianus son chosen Emperor. 372.
3. Heliogabalus name and linadge. ib. Heliogabalus true heir to Britain but
never enjoyed it. 373. 2. Heluius S. Joseph of Aramathias nephew. 124. 1.
Heluius came in S. Joseph's company into Britain. ib. Hengistus his murders.
600. 4. Hengistus destroies Monasteries. ib. Heraclius a Soldier converted,
and how. 440. 3. 442. 1. Heraclius his desire of Martyrdom. 442. 1. Heraclius
beaten, and cruelly bruised. 443. 2. Heraclius cured by touching S. Albans head.
ib. Heraclius buried S. Alban. ib. Heraclius martyred. ib. Hermes the chief
Prefect of Rome converted by S. Alexander Pope. 197. 3. Herod declared by the
Senate King of the Jews. 5. 5. Herod builded Cesarea in honor of Augustus. ib.
Hiberia a Country so called in Armenia. 28. 5. A Hierarchy acknowledged by
Protestants in the Church. 93. 1. etc. The Hierarchy of Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. settled in Britain by the Popes Authority. 272. 1. etc. The Hierarchy of
the Church of Britain derived from S. Aristobulus. 93. 2. The Hierarchy
instituted by S. Peter in Britain, did continue without interruption until
Queen Elizabeth's Protestant Persecution. 41. 1. S. Higinius Successor in the
Papacy to Saint Telesphorus. 208. 2. S. Higinius his Religeon by English
Protestants testimony in things now questioned by them. ib. S. Higinius
careful of the conversion of England. 209. 3. S. Higinius sent a letter to
King Lucius to further his conversion. 211. 5. S. Higinius Martyred. 219. 1.
Hildebertus the learned Tutor of Coelius Sedulius probably Archbishop of York.
590. 1. or 560. 1. Historians deputed unto the Emperors reign the year
werein he died. 201. 1. Historians mistook in setting done the time of King
Lucius conversion. 220. 3. Historians often mistaking the name of Pope
Eleutherius. 221. 3. Hugh Earl of Shrewsbury dies a miserable death; and why.
567. 5.
I.
S. James the Apostle preached not in Ireland. 25. 1. S. James preached in
Spain. 26. 2. S. James preched only to the Jews in Spain. 27. 5. S. James
converted according to some but 9. persons in Spain. 26. 2. Idolaters
sacrificed in Groves, and woods. 241. 1. All Idols fell to the Ground at the
entry of our Savior into Egipte. 6. 7. S. Joseph of Aramathia enclosed by the
Jews in a close Prison. 136. 1. S. Joseph watched by the high Priests
themselves. ib. S. Joseph Miraculously delivered from them. 136. 2. S. Joseph
came into Britain, and when. 22. 6. 106. 1. S. Joseph the first fou^der of a
Monastical life in Britain. 110. 4. S. Joseph the most ancient of any
Regular Abbot in the school of Christ. 331. 8. S. Joseph's coming made
doubtful by some, others wholly deny it. ib. S. Joseph was not sent hither out
of France by S. Philip the Apostle. 111. 1. S. Joseph with S. Philip amongst
the Gauls of Asia. 120. 7. S. Joseph came from parts not far distant from
where S. Philip preached. ib. S. Joseph landed about the North part of
Britain. 121. 7. S. Joseph probably directed into Britain by S. Peter. 121.
9. S. Joseph was present at the Assumption of our Lady. ib. All S. Joseph's
Associats vowed chastity until their arrival in Britain. 124. 1. Diverse of
S. Joseph's companions Noble personadges, and some of our British kings
descended from them. ib. S. Joseph imprisoned in Venodocia. 125. 2. 127. 1. S.
Joseph set at liberty by a Noble man whom he converted to the faith. 125. 2.
S. Joseph extremely persecuted by the Jews. 126. 2. S. Joseph with his
associats preached little. 128. 2. S. Joseph and his companions at the first
gave themselves to a Monastical, and eremiticall life. 128. 2. etc. S. Joseph
admonished by an Angle builded a Church to our Lady. 109. 2. 128. 2. 129. 3.
136. 2. S. Joseph releiued in his necessities by our B. Lady. 329. 4. S. Joseph
did not actually convert to the faith of Christ either King Aruiragus, Coillus,
or Marius. 131. 1. S. Joseph how named an Apostle. 135. 1. S. Ioseps prayers,
and duties to our B. Lady. 136. 2. S. Joseph makes Crosses, and other pictures.
138. 5 S. Joseph brought hither, and reverenced Relickes. ib. S. Joseph his
death. 170. 3. S. Joseph buried, and where. ib. S. Joseph his son a Bishop in
Britain. 97. 9. S. Joseph's son consecrated Bishop by S. Peter, or his
Disciples. ib. King Iosinas overthrew Idolatry: 10. 3. Iouinian created
Emperor. 570. 1. Iouinian refused to be Emperor over Infidels. ib. Iouinian
made choice rather to leave the war, then sacrifice to Idols. ib. Iouinian
allwaies a constant Catholic. 571. 3. Iouinians short reign. 371. 2. Ireland
named Ierna. 28. 7. Irelands other names. ib. Ireland by Britain not converted
in Constantins time. 503. 6. etc. In Ireland no Christian to be named before S.
Patritius his time. 26. 2. The Irish derive their first preaching of the faith
from such as came out of Britain. 25. 2. Diverse Islands converted immediately
after the promulgation of the Gospel. 32. 4. Islands about Britain the refuges
of persecuted Christians. 425. 3. or 428. 3. Iteanus an Abbot. 602. 7. Iulianus
Apostota son of Constantius Clorus by Theodora. 562. 1. Iulianus created
Caesar. ib. Iulianus married Helena Constantius his Sister. ib. Iulianus
inuadeth the Empire. 554. 5. Iulianus renowned for his victories. ib. Iulianus
chosen Emperor. 554. 5. 562. 1. Iulianus favorable first to Catholics. 554.
5. Iulianus recalled Bishops banished by Constantius. ib. Iulianus his short
reign. 563. 2. Iulianus his persecution never extended to Britain. ib.
Iulianus went about to build Jerusalem in favor of the Jews. 564. 3. S.
Jude Martyred in Persia. 46. 4. Pope Julius exempted Priests from secular
judges. 540. 5. Pope Julius maintained that no Counsel might be called with
out the allowance of the Roman See. ib. SS. Julius and Aaron Martyred at
Caerlegion. 426. 2. SS. Julius and Aarons education. ib. SS. Julius and Aaron
honored with Pilgrimages and prayers. ib. SS. Julius, and Aarons heroical
magnanimity. 428. 3. or 425. 3. SS. Julius and Aaron Martyred, and on what day.
ib. Julius Caesar made Britain tributarie to the Romans. 1. 1. Julius Caesar
carried Britans to Rome as hostages. ib. Julius Philippus the first Christian
Emperor. 391. 1. S. Iustins Apology for Christians. 202. 3. 230. 4. S. Justin
defended the same publikly in disputation. 230. 4. S. Iustus ordained Bishop.
210. 4. S. Iustus Bishop of Vienna Martyred. 220. 2.
K.
S. Kebius son unto Solomon Duke of Cornewaile. 565. 1. S. Kebius refused the
principality of Cornewaile. 566. 2. S. Kebius went into France, and why. ib. S.
Kebius consecrated Bishop by faint Hilarious, and when. ib. S. Kebius present at
the Council of Ariminum. ib. The time of his death. 565. 1. The place of his
death. 566. 3. S. Kebius his Miracles. ib. S. Kebius place of abode. ib. S
Keina a Noble Britans daughter. 585. 10. S. Keina lived allwaies a holy virgin.
ib. S. Keina renowned for Miracles. ib. S. Kentegern renowned for his regular
life according to our British Order. 332. 8. S. Kentegern erected a Monastery
in Wales. 310. 8. The manner of living of his Monks. ib. The number of
Priests, and Preachers in his Monastery. 332. 8. S. Kentegerns state of life
approved by saint Gregory. ib. The Kings of Britain were rather friends, then
enemies to Christian Religion in Tiberius days. 23. 7. No King of Britain
after our Saviors Passion joined with the Romans in their Religion. 164. 3.
The King of France styles him self Primogenitus Ecclesiae, and why. 251. 6.
Kings must reverence the Church, and not rule it. 301. 5. Kimbeline King of
Britain. 1. 1. Kimbeline present at Rome, at the strange reports of our
Savior. 8. 9.
L.
THe Latin tongue frequent in Britain. 268. 3. None could bear office that
understood it not. ib. The skill in the Latin tongue a great healp to the
Britans conversion. ib. A Law amongst the Romans about the worshipping of their
Gods. 15. 6. A Law amongst the Romans concerning the illegitimation of wives.
397. 6. The ancient Laws of Britain for the most part ascribed to Mulmutius
Dunwallo. 301. 6. The old Laws of Britain translated out of the British
language into Latin. ib. Lentulus Writes to Tiberius Concerning Christ. 12. 2.
Leporius Agricola a Monk of Bangor. 607. 2. Leporius once a Pelagian. ib.
Leporius converted, and made priest. ib. Liberius succeeded saint Julius in the
Papacy. 556. 1. Liberius was no Arrian, or consenter to them. ib. Liberius
exiled by the Arrians. ib. Liberius slandered by the Arrians to have subscribed
unto their Articles. 557. 1. The people in Arms for his return. ib. The
Matrons of Rome seek for his return. 558. 2. Liberius permitted to return.
557. 1. Liberius interdicted those who affirmed the error of the Arrians. ib.
Liberius exhorts the Eastern Bishops to confess the holy Trinity. 558. 4.
Lich-feild why so called. 446. 3. Licin^us Emperor in the East. 486. 1.
Licinius married Constantia. ib. Licinius professed himself a friend to
Christians. ib. Licinius fell to war with Constantine. 487. 2. Licinius
overthrown. ib. Licinius hangs himself. ib. S. Liephard a Bishop and Martyr
of Britain. 587. 12. Lights used in the Church. 552. 5. S. Linus care of
Britain. 167. 4. S. Linus consecrated diverse Priests of this Nation. 167. 4.
S. Linus conuersed most with Britans at Rome. 164. 3. S. Liuinus Disciple to
saint Benignus. 332. 9. S. Liuinus made Priest. ib. Liuius Gallus slain. 475.
4. Lollius Vrbicus sent with forces into Britain. 219. 1. Lollius Vrbicus
fought some battles against the Britans. ib. London once called Augusta. 94.
4. 178. 7. London called Augusta in respect of the Nobility of the place. 181.
10. London builded by Brutus. 280. 2. London the most ancient City of
Britain. ib. London an Arch-flamens Seat. ib. London a Primats See. 178. 6.
London oppressed with the persecution of Dioclesian. 426. 1. S. Lucius King when
converted. 193. 2. S. Lucius beginning of his reign. 201. 2. S. Lucius makes
intercession to Rome to become a Christian. 210. 4. 217. 8. S. Lucius consented
at least to be a Christian in the time of Pope Higinius. 211. 5. S. Lucius the
first Christian King in the world. 212. 1. S. Lucius persuaded to Christianity
by the Christians of Cambridge. 212. 7. S. Lucius not converted by S. Eluanus
or Meduuinus. 213. 2. S. Lucius converted by S. Timothius, and Marcellus
Britans. ib. S. Lucius consulted with the Archflamens before he entered into
disputation concerning Religion. 217. 7. S. Lucius hindered by diverse human
fears from open profession of of Christian Religion. 219. 1. S. Lucius
professed not Christian Religion publicly until the time of Pope Eleutherius.
221. 3. S. Lucius deals with Pope Eleutherius about a general Conversion of
Britain. 221. 3. S. Lucius certified of the Emperors, and Roman Nobilities
good liking of Christian Religion. 238. 4. S. Lucius his Embassage to Rome, and
time thereof. 248. 3. A Protestant answered for blaming his Embassage. 250. 5.
etc. S. Lucius did write to Rome for the establishing of his temporal Estate.
256. 3. S. Lucius did write to Pope Eleutherius for the Roman Laws. 295. 1.
Pope Eleutherius his answer corrupted. ib. S. Lucius his Laws were for the
most part our old Britan Laws. 301. 6. S. Lucius the first King Nutricius of
Gods Church. 304. 1. S. Lucius first deserved the Title of Defender of the
faith. ib. S. Lucius founded the University of Bangor in Wales. 380. 6. S.
Lucius founded diverse other Monasteries both of men, and women. 308. 7. S.
Lucius careful to have things in Britain confirmed by the Popes authority.
312. 1. S. Lucius kingly munificence, and bounty. 338. 2. S. Lucius death.
346. 3. The day of his death. 347. 1. 349. 5. S. Lucius preached not in
Germany, neither was he Martyred or died there. 347. 3. 403. 3. S. Lucius had
neither brother, Sister, nor child. 348. 4. S. Lucius buried in Gloucester. 349.
5. S. Lucius translated to other places. 349. 6. S. Lucius Pope Martyred. 379.
6. S. Lucius Pope maintained the Popes supremacy. 384. 12. or 395. 12. S.
Lucius son to S. Helen mistaken by some for our King Lucius. 401. 1. S.
Lucius Apostle to a great part of Germany. ib. S. Lucius departed Britain,
and why. 402. 1. S. Lucius banished from Britain. 414. 2. S. Lucius founded a
Monastery in Aquitane of his one name. 402. 1. S. Lucius converted the
Curienses. ib. S Lucius Martyred. ib. Lupuit saint Patrikes Sister stolen by
Pirates. 595. 5. S. Lupus a Monk of Lirinum. 332. 8.
M.
MAcrinus with his son Diadumenus succeeded Bassianus in the Empire. 372. 1.
Macrinus, and Diadumenus slain by their rebellious Souldiars. ib. The
Magdeburgenses falsely take Hiberia for Hibernia. 26. 3. The Magdeburgenses
deprive both Ireland, and Spain of the presence of S. James. 27. 3. The
Magdeburgenses corrupt S. ^yprian. 380. 8. Mahumetans, and others have nothing
but the sword to support their bastardly Religion. 241. 1. S. Mansuetus the
Disciple of S. Peter, a Britan. 29. 8. S. Mansuetus consecrated Bishop by S.
Peter. 30. 2. 216. 7. or 217. 7. S. Mansuetus sent to Tullum in Lorraine. ib.
S. Mansuetus passing by Rome visits the Britans their. 33. 5. S. Mansuetus
preached in Britain. 35. 8. and came thither often. 216. 7. or 217. 7. S.
Mansuetus made Bishop of Treuers. 216. 7. or 217. 7. S. Mansuetus lived unto
saint Eleutherius days. ib. S. Marcellinus Pope and Martyr. 385. 18. S.
Marcellus a Britane Disciple to S. Peter. 164. 3. S. Marcellus probably buried
saint Peter. ib. S. Marcellus helped to the conversion of King Lucius. 198. 5.
216. 6. or 217. 6. S. Marcellus preached in Britain, and when. 216. 6. or 217.
6. S. Marcellus the third Bishop of Tungers. 198. 5. S. Macellus made Bishop of
Treuers. ib. S. Marcellus Martyred. 198. 5. 220. 2. S. Marcellus a Roman who
some times followed Simon Magus, converted by saint Peter. 164. 3. S. Marcellus
wrote the Acts of saint peter, and saint Paul. ib. S. Marcellus Martyred by
Nero. ib. Marcus Aurelius Antonius ordained by Adria^ to succeed Antonius Pius
in the Empire. 220. 2. Marcus Aurelius trained up in his infancy, in the
Gentiles superstition. ib. Marcus Aurelius put into the College of the Sali. ib.
Marcus Aurelius made Priest, Southsayer, and master among them. ib. Marcus
Aurelius raised a general persecution against Christians. ib. Marcus Aurelius
Miraculously converted to be at least a protector of Christians. 220. 3. 236.
2. Marcus Aurelius and his army reliued by Christians and in what manner. 236.
2. Marcus Aurelius his Edict, and Letters unto the Senate in the behalf of
Christians. ib. Marcus Aurelius Edicte sent into Britain. ib. S. Marie
Magdalen arrived at Marsiles in France. 65. 3. Marius King of Britain, had no
true Title to his kingdom. 134. 6. Marius brought up in his infancy at Rome.
133. 5. Marius came into Britain, and when. ib. Marius forced to marry his
own Sister. 134. 6. Marius was no Christian. 133. 5. Marius in some sense may
largly be called a Christian. 154. 7. Marius was no persecutor of Christians.
165. 2. Marius confirms saint Joseph's immunities. 166. 2. Marius his death.
169. 1. S. Mark he Evangelist seated him self at Alexandria by S. Peter's
authority. 187. 2. S. Mark saint Timothies worthy associate and fellow
Priest. 232. 1. S. Mark Martyred. 233. 3. S. Mark Pope. 540. 4. S. Mark gave
the Pale to the Bishop of Hostia, and caused the Nicen creed to be read in the
Church. ib. Martia the Empress wife to Seuerus a Britan. 366. 2. Martia by
profession or in affection a Christian. ib. Martials Epigrames no lessons
befitting Ladies. 136. 3. Martial desirous of fame. 157. 7. Martial acquainted
with Q. Ouidius who came into Britain. 157. 7. Martial presented his Epigrams
to particular persons. ib. S. Martianus and Pacatius sent by S. Peter to preach
in Sicilie. 63. 1. S. Martine disciple to the Apostles probably a Britan, or
preached in Britain. 96. 6 S. Martine Bishop of Tours borne in Pannonia. 578.
2. S. Martine lived some time in Britain. ib. S. Martine foretells the
overthrow of the Emperor Maximus. ib. S. Martine refuses to come to the
Emperor Maximus his table, and why. 573. 4. S. Martine upon satisfaction made
unto him by Maximus comes unto his fe^s^. ib. S. Martine honorably entertained
by Maximus. ib. The Mass and other Church service in Britain the same that
the Romans derived from S. Peter, and S. Clement. 330. 6. The holy Ma^se used
with sacred vessels, ornaments, and r^tes. 430. 2. 588. ^. The (...) of the
Mass offered. 160. 10. The Sacrifice of the Mass allowed by the Council of
Arles. 485. 6. Mass offered for the dead. 381. 9. or 391. 9. 524. 13. 535. 9.
S. Maternus disciple to S. Peter. 217. 7. S. Maternus sent into Germany by S.
Peter. 640. 1. S. Maternus conuerteth Holsatia. 64. 1. S. Maternus governs
the Sea of Treuers, Collen, and Tungers. 172. 5. 217. 7. S. Maternus probably
sometime in Britain. 172. 5. The time of his death. ib. S. Mauritius, and his
Theban Legion martyred. 416. 4. Maxentius his tyranny. 470. 1. Maxentius hated
by the Romans. ib. Maxentius great overthrow. 472. 4. Maxentius miserable
death. ib. Maximianus a persecutor of S. Helens children. 405. 5. Maximianus
forced Constantine to put away S. Helena, and marry his daughter Theodora. ib.
Maximianus plotteth against Constantine. ib. Maximianus in Person in Britain.
415. 4. Maximianus his cruel persecution. ib. Maximianus deprived all Britans
of command. 419. 2. or 410. 2. Maximinus caused Constantins Edict for
Christians to be published. 486. 1. Maximinus publishes a Law for Christians.
487. 2. Maximinus overthrown by Lucius. 486. 2. Maximinus his death. 487. 2.
Maximus the Emperor a Britan by birth. 571. 4. Maximus his parents. 572. 4.
Maximus no usurper of the Empire. ib. Maximus no persecutor of Catholics. 573.
4. Maximus warreth against Valentinian the Younger in defense of Catholic
Religion. 573. 5. Maximus excuses him self from crimes objected to him by S.
Martine. 573. 4. Maximus greatly honored S. Martine. ib. Maximus comdemneth the
Heretic Priscillianus. 573. 5. Maximus barred according to Paulinus from
communion by S. Ambrose, and why. ib. Maximus meddled not to judge in
Ecclesiastical affairs. 574. 5. Maximus ruled over all Britain. 575. 6. S.
Meduuinus but a Catechumen when he was sent to Rome by King Lucius. 213. 2. S.
Meduuinus made priest, and sent again into Britain. ib. S. Melaria a Noble
Britans daughter, and Mother to S. David. 585. 10. S. Mellitus ordained Bishop
by S. Augustine. 210. 4. S. Mello a Britan. 367. 3. S. Mello once a Pagan. 386.
1. S. Mello a Soldiar by profession ib. S. Mello Sent to Rome to pay Tribute.
367. 3. 386. 1. S. Mello before he was converted sacrificed in the Temple of
Mars. ib. S. Mello converted by S. Stephen Pope. 387. 2. or 397. 2. S. Mellos
Christian life. ib. S. Mello made Priest, and Bishop. ib. S. Mello Archbishop
of Rohan in Normandy. 367. 3. 387. 2. or 397. 2. S. Mello Miraculously sent to
that See. 387. 2. 3. or 397. 2. 3. S. Mello cured a wounded man. 388. 3. S.
Mello died, and was buried at Rhoan. ib. S. Melorus son and heir of
Mellianus Duke of Cornewaile. 389. 4. S. Melorus brought up in a Monastery of
Cornewaile. 388. 4. 390. 5. S. Melorus his hand, and foot cut of. 390. 5. S.
Melorus Miraculous hand. ib. S. Melorus murdered. ib. S. Melorus buried by the
Bishops, and Clergy. ib. Meneuia probably an Episcopal See before S. David's
time. 586. 12. Metallanus King of the Scots. 1. 1. Metallanus sends gifts to
Augustus Caesar. 2. 3. Metallanus dies after a peaceble reign. ib. S.
Metropolos Archbishop of Treuers. 198. 5. Miracles wrought. 136. 2. 327. 5. or
328. 5. There were Monasteries of Religious men in Britain, in all Ages. 311.
9. A Monastery dedicated to S. Julius. 603. 9. A Monastery at Meneuia founded
by S. Patrike. ib. A Monastery at Naucaruan in Wales. 604. 9. A Monastery
called Mancari Monasterium. 603. 9. A Monastery of Nuns in Northwales. ib.
Monks holiness, and austoritie of life. 328. 2. etc. Monks continued night and
day in prayers. 330. 6. The Monks of Britain converted many Nations. 331. 7.
The Morauians settled in our Northren parts. 120. 7. Mordraius sets S.
Joseph at liberty. 125. 2. Mordraius converted by S. Joseph. ib. Mordraius
King of the I Will of Man. ib. Morgret Abbot of Glastenbury. 602. 7. Doctor
Mountagues entertainment of Queen Anne. 110. 4.
N.
S. Nathaniel probably preached in Britain. 97. 8. S. Nathaniel succeeded S.
Aphrodisius in the Sea of Burdges in France. ib. Nennius Helius brother to King
Lud, and Cassibelam. 131. 1. Nennius Helius time of death. ib. Neophits not
admitted to Episcopal, and Priestly functions. 207. 8. Nero put S. Peter, and
S. Paul to death. 165. 1. Nero murdered himself. ib. Nerua reuockes all
Domitians Edictes. 170. 2. Nerua recalled all, whom Domitian had banished. ib.
The time he kept the Empire. 171. 4. S. Nicasius first Bishop of Rhoan. 95. 5.
S. Nicasius preached in Britain according to some. ib. S. Ninian a Noble
Britan by birth. 357. 3. When borne, and who his parents. 579. 3. S. Ninians
pilgrimage to Rome. 580. 4. S. Ninian brought up at Rome in the time of S.
Syluester. 583. 6. S. Ninian consecrated Bishop, and sent unto the Picts. ib.
S. Ninian visits his uncle S. Martine. ib. S. Ninian joyfully received in
Britain. 580. 5. 584. 7. S. Ninians Miracles. 58^. 5. S. Ninian preached also
to his Country Britans. 583. 7. S. Ninians Episcopal Church called Candida
casa. and why. 584. 8. S. Nouatus S. Claudias eldest son. 199. 6. S. Nouatus
instructed in the faith by S. Peter, and S. Paul. 226. 3. S. Nouatus furthers
the Conversion of Britain. ib. S. Nouatus house a harbor for Saints at Rome.
229. 3. S. Nouatus death. 225. 3. S. Nouatus was a sacrificing massing Priest.
225. 3. S. Nouatus left all his worldly wealth to relieve Christians. 226. 3.
S. Nouatus house turned into a Church. 224. 1. 229. 3. S. Nouatus Church made a
Roman Title. ib. S. Nouatus Church decayed with oldnes. ib. S. Nouatus Church
decently renewed by Cardinal Caietan. ib. Numa Pompilius ordained the order of
Flamens. 277. 6. Nunneries renewed in Britain. 310. 9.
O.
OCtauian recorded to have slain the Roman Proconsuls in Britain. 542. 3.
Diverse difficulties concerning this Octauius. 543. 4. Octauius doubtful
whether he were ever King in Britain. 543. 5. etc. King Offa restored S.
Albans Church, and Monastery destroyed by the Saxons. 600. 5. S. Onesimus S.
Timothies successor in Ephesus. 215. 4. or 216. 4 Oracles silent at the birth
of our Savior. 16. 7. The Orcades subject to the Archbishop of York. 283. 4.
Orders, and degrees acknowloged by Protestants to have been in the Church of
God, even from Christ. 91. 4. 180. 4. Orders a Sacrament. 382. 10. or 392. 10.
Orders not to be iterated. ib. The honor and dignity of this Sacrament in the
Church of Rome in Pope Cornelius time. 328. 11. Inferior Orders were to assist
at Mass even in he Apostles time. 189. 4. Orders given with imposing of hands
even in the Apostles time. 190. 5. Osees Prophecy of our Saviors coming. 7.
7. Otho overthrew Vitellius in three Battals. 165. 1. Otho overthrown in the
4. battle. ib. Otho impatient of disgrace kills him self. ib. Otho
Emperor but three Months. ib. Oxford builded by King Ebrancus. 287. 3.
Oxfords diverse names. 287. 3.
P.
THe Pagans confess the miraculous Stare at our Saviors berth to have showed
the coming of Christ into the world. 6. 6. S. Palladius the Scots first
Bishop. 336. 5. S. Palladius sentinto Scotland by the authority of the Sea of
Rome. 336. 5. 357. 3. Pamachius Governor of Treuers Martyred. 407. 2. Paternus
a defender of Arianisme excommunicated. 563. 2. S. Patrikes birth time. 594. 5.
S. Patrike descended of a Noble linadge. 595. 6. S. Patrikes parents. ib. S.
Patrikes birthplace. ib. S. Patrike carried out of Britain by Pirates. ib. S.
Patrike sold to Miluc named a King in the North of Ireland. 595. 5. S. Patrike
set to keep cattaile. 595. 6. S. Patriks extraordinary devotion. ib. S. Patrike
in 4. things compared to Moses and what they are. ib. S. Patrike three times
taken Prisoner. 596. 7. The second time Miraculously restored to his Country.
ib. S. Patrike lived at Glastenbury, and when. 328. 2. 596. 7. S. Patrikes
strange calling to be the Apostle of Ireland. 597. 8. S. Patrike consecrated
Bishop where, and by whom. 598 8. S. Patrike sent into Ireland by S. Celestine
Pope. 25. 2. S. Paul excluded from any part in the ordinary partition of the
world among the Apostles. 39. 5. S. Paul accustomed to write to none but
Christians. 158. 9. S. Paul preached in Italy, Spain, and France. 144. 1. S.
Paul preached in Britain. ib. S. Paul could not be the first that preached
in Britain. 41. 2. S. Paul came not into Britain in the 4. year of Nero.
147. 1. etc. S. Paul came not into Britain presently after the return of
Claudius the Emperor unto Rome. 148. 1. S. Paul came not into Britain,
until he had performed his promise of going to Spain. 148. 2. S. Paul a long
time Prisoner at Rome. 150. 4. S. Paul after his first imprisonment went into
the East. 149. 3. S. Paul made but a short stay in Britain. 150. 5. etc. No
sure ground of any memorable thing performed by S. Paul in Britain. 151. 6.
S. Paul ordained Prists only where the other Apostles came not. 152. 6. S.
Paul put to death. 150. 4. The year of his Martyrdom. 151. 6. S. Paulinus
the first Archbishop of York in the Saxons time. 332. 9. S. Paulinus lived in
our Monastery of Glastenbury. ib. Pelagius the Heretic a Britan. 607. 2.
Pelagius according to some a Scot. 609. 5. Pelagius once a Monk of Bangor.
607. 2. Pelagius a good Scholar, and first a Catholic Writer. ib. Pelagius,
his Heresies. 608. 3. or 605. 3. Pelagius banished out of Britain. 608. 2. or
605. 2. Pelagius Heresies condemned by Diverse Counsels, and Fathers. 607. 2.
Penance a Sacrament. 382. 10. or 392. 10. Penance loses sins. ib. Perch now
S. Ihones town in Scotland. 336. 6. A temple builded at Perch unto Mars. ib.
Perch a Flamens seat. ib. Pertinax a Roman Lieutenant in Britain a Christian.
237. 3. Pertinax a chief commander in the Roman army when it was Miraculously
preserved by Christians. ib. S. Peter Prince of the Apostles. 54. 1. Peter, a
name rather of signification, then usual denomination. 122. 10. First given by
Christ himself to Simon Bariona. ib. S. Peter the chief spiritual Pillar of
the Church of Christ. ib. The Church committed to S. Peter. 143. 5. S. Peter
converted 3000. at one sermon. 20. 3. S. Peter the first preacher to the
Gentiles. 28. 5. S. Peter first entertained at Rome by Britans. 55. 2. S. Peter
founded diverse Churches, and consecrated diverse Bishops for the West before he
was resident at Rome. 31. 3. S. Peter came to Rome, before he came into
Britain. 50. 2. S. Peter's seating himself at Rome, foretold by holy
Scripturs, Rabbis, and Sibills. 50. 2. S. Peter's great labors in Britain.
52. 6. S. Peter's personal preaching in Britain proved by all human Authority.
68. 1. S. Peter's apparition to a holy man. 75. 10. S. Peter's Prophecy of King
Edward. 78. 13. S. Peter testifies in a vision his being in Britain. 80. 14.
Protestants objection against S. Peter's being in Britain answered. 80. 1. S.
Peter preached in Britain in the time of Claudius and Nero Emperors. 86. 2.
Probable that he came into Britain the second time, and when. 89. 5. S. Peter
in a vision commanded to return to Rome. 161. 1. S. Peter his Pastoral care
of Britain, founding Christ's Church in it. 162. 2. 163. 2. S. Peter at his
return to Rome received in our Britans house. 162. 2. S. Petrocke an Abbot,
and where. 602. 7. Petrus one of S. Joseph of Aramathias kinesmen. 122. 10. He
received that name in Baptism by S. Peter. ib. Petrus came into Britain. ib.
Petrus of such note, that he is called King. ib. Petrus father to Kings, and
Princes of Britain. ib. S. Philip the Apostle never came into France, or near
unto it. 48. 7. 116. 1. etc. In what Gallia he preached. 118. 3. In what sense
he may be called the Apostle of the French men of Sicambria. 120. 6. S. Philip
could not send saint Joseph into Britain from Sicambria, or any other place.
120. 7. S. Philip a Christian deprived of the prefectship of Egipte. 365. 1.
Philippus v. Julius. The Philippin Islands under the King of Spain. 141. 3.
The Picts converted, by whom and when. 581. 6. Pictures honored. 138. 5. etc.
Pilgrimages to holy relikes. 509. 5. Pilgrimage unto Saints. 324. 3. 448. 2. S.
Pius the first succeeded saint Higinius in the Sea Apostolic. 223. 1. The time
he ruled thar See. ib. S. Pius piety, and Religion. ib. S. Pius Decrees in
matters of Religion according to Protestants. 223. 1. S. Pius often remembered
saint Timothy in the sacrifice of Mass. 225. 3. The reason of his special
care of S. Timothy. ib. S. Pius sent a new supply of Clergy men into Britain.
227. 1. S. Pius had his death revealed unto him. 233. 3. S. Pius Martyred. 223.
1. 233. 3. Plancius. v. Aulus. Pliny the 2. Traians Lieutenant in Bithinia.
192. 1. Pliny certifieth Traian of the number, Constancy, and piety of
Christians. 192. 1. Pomponia Gracina wife to the Emperor Claudius his
Lieutenant in Britain converted. 88. 2. S. Pontianus Pope. 378. 2. S.
Pontianus doctrine. ib. S. Pontianus Martyred. ib. Pontius Pilate writes unto
Tiberius of the passion of Christ. 12. 2. The tenor of his letter. ib. Pontius
Pilate reproched at Rome for our Saviors death. 14. 3. Pontius Pilate as some
write became a Christian. 5. 5. The Popes supremany. 186. 2. 344. 2. 353. 4.
The Pope his Supremacy acknowleged by S. Cyprian. 383. 11. or 393. 11. The
Popes supremacy not given by Constantine. 541. 5. The Pope to be judged by
none. 385. 18. The Pope has no authority over Infidels. 334. 1. The Popes
authority ordained by Christ as a rule to all other members of the Church. 312.
1. The Popes great power, prerogatives, and jurisdiction over Britain. 300. 5.
The same acknowledged by all our Christian kings until these days. 300. 5.
Potentiana v. Sauinian. Prayers, and reverence to our B. Lady. 136. 2. Prayers
unto Saints. 136. 2. 324. 3. 448. 2. etc. Prayers unto Saints allowed by S.
Cyprian, 381. 9. or 391. 9. Prayers to Angels, and their protection of us. 596.
6. Prayers for the dead. 324. 3. Prayers for the dead allowed by saint Cyprian.
381. 9. or 391. 9. S. Praxedes S. Claudias daughter. 160. 10. S. Praxedes
charity toward Christians. ib. S. Praxedes house ransaked in the time of M.
Aurelius. 220. 2. 229. 3. S. Praxedes death. 230. 3. S. Praxedes burial. ib.
The Prefect of Egipts great authority. 365. 1. Priests are to offer the body,
and blood of Christ. 380. 8. Priests prohibited to swear except in matters of
faith. 384. 12. or 394. 12. Priests are to use holy vestiments at Mass. ib.
Priests ordained to say Mass in the Apostles time. 190. 4. Priests then
consecratad as the Roman Church now consecrateth. ib. Priests are not to marry.
382. 11. or 392. 11. 484. 4. Priests commanded to leave their wives by the
Council of Arles. 484. 4. Priests in Britain never kept company with their
wives. 484. 5. Preistly order never interrupted since saint Peter's time,
continues still in England. 41. 1. Diverse orders of Pagan Priests, amongst the
Romans. 277. 7. Their division, and subordination. ib. S. Priscillas British
parents converted. 20. 3. S. Piscilla foundresse of the Churchyard of her name
in Rome probably Mother of saint Claudia. 60. 8. S. Priscillas Churchyards
admirable Architecture. 62. 6. Priscillianus an Heretic condemned to death by
Maximus the Emperor. 574. 6. Priscus Prince of Charters placed amongst the
Statues of the Gods the image of a virgin holding a child in her arms and why.
10. 2. The Protestants vpstart Religion. 353. 4. Protestants have no true
Church, and why. 191. 6. Protestants have no true, and lawful Bishops, and
why. ib. Protestants have none but lay men in their Congregation. 383. 11. or
393. 11. The Protestants 32. article proved to be false. 485. 5. Protestants
idle denying of Tradition. 538. 2. Protestants can assign no other, but such
as were sent by saint Peter, who preached in Britain in Tiberius time. 22. 6.
Protestant Antiquaries Historical grounds to know what Apostle first preached
in Britain. 36. 1. Protestants grant Britain to have received the faith from
one of the 12. Apostles. 39. 4. Protestants confess that only either saint
Peter, saint ^aule, or saint Simon preached here. 41. 1. Protestants deny all
priority of power amongst the Apostles. 43. 1. Protestants grante Bishops to
have succeeded the Apostles both in doctrine, and Episcapall power. 40. 6.
Protestants arguments to weak to bring saint Paul into Britain. 140. 3. etc.
The Protestant English Theater Writers much ouerseene in diverse things of
History. 204. 5. Protestants errors Concerning the Ambassadors of King Lucius.
257. 6. Publius Suetonius utterly destroyed the Druids in the I Will of Anglesey.
239. 6. or 234. 6. S. Pudens by birth a Sabinete. 55. 3. S. Pudens a Municeps
of Rome. 165. 4. S. Pudens not borne when saint Peter came to Rome. 55. 3. S.
Pudens house in Rome fell unto him by his wife Claudia. 55. 2. S. Pudens a
soldiar for the Romans. 159. 9. S. Pudens husband to our British Lady Claudia.
154. 2. S. Pudens compelled Martial to correct his Epigrams. 156. 6. S. Pudens
never came into Britain, or near it. 158. 9. S. Pudens never preached any
where. 158. 9. S. Pudens reported to have died in Cappadocia. 154. 2. S. Pudens
either returned from Cappadocia, or else his body was brought from thence to
Rome. 154. 2. S. Pudentiana baptized, and instructed in the faith. 224. 2. S.
Pudentianas piety. 160. 10. 224. 2. S. Pudentianas charity toward Christians.
199. 6. S. Pudentiana entertained during the Persecution 96. persons in her
house. 160. 10. S. Pudentiana erected an Altar in her house. 224. 2. S.
Pudentiana made a Font in her house. 225. 2. Saint Pudentiana redeemed many
slaves. ib. She set them at liberty after Baptism. ib. S. Pudentianas Chruch
the ancients Title of Cardinals in Rome. 199. 6. S. Pudentiana died the first
of saint Claudias Children. 224. 2. S. Pudentiana buried by her Father saint
Pudens. 225. 2. Puritans deny even the Apostles to have been consecrated
Bishops. 92. 1.
R.
S. Regulus a holy Abbot in Achaia. 587. 2. S. Regulus sent by Constantine to
worship saint Andrews Relics. 588. 2. S. Regulus admonished from heaven to
carry some of those Relikes into Britain. ib. S. Regulus his safe arrival in
Britain. 588. 3. S. Regulus entertainment by King Heirgustus. ib. S. Regulus
obtained Heirgustus Palace for a Monastery. ib. What Religion is. 243. 3. The
Religion taught in Britain by the Apostolic men sent by Pope Alexander. 199.
7. Religion not changed in Britain at least until the coming of S. Augustin^
even according to Protestants. 103. 2. Religion in Britain kept from any
stain of error until the Pelagian Heresy. 351. 2. Christian Religion not
brought into Britain by the only temporal swaye of the King. 241. 1.
Religious flourishing Estate in Britain in King Lucius time. 422. 1. Religious
greatly esteemed in Britaino. 601. 6. Relikes honored. 325. 4. 588. 2. etc.
Restitutus Archbishop of London subscribed to the Counceil of Arles. 482. 1.
Restitutus without authority affirmed by a Protestant to have married. 484. 4.
Rinoldus killed his brother Melianus. 389. 5. Rinoldus sought to murder his
nephew Melorus. 390. 5. Rinoldus laboreth for the Bishops consent thereto. ib.
Rinoldus maimeth him, and lastly kills him. ib. Rinoldus his miserable death.
ib. Rome horribly afflicted for almost 300. years and why. 16. 6. Rome the
Mother of all other Churches. 53. 6. Christ's extraordinary love to the City of
Rome. 19. 2. The Roman Church has Power over all other Churches. 186. 2. The
same derived not from the Apostles, but from Christ himself. ib. The Roman
Church acknowledged to be our Mother Church by King James. 251. 6. The Romans
used to bring up at Rome the Britan chief Nobility, and why. 2. 2. The Roman
people strive who should first honor Christ as God. 15. 5. Many Romans go
into Jury to be instructed in the faith. 19. 2. Romans did not intermedle with
the Britans in Matters of Religion. 164. 3. The Romans accustomed to make those
Emperors Gods, who left a Successor behind them. 370. 2. The Roman Law
against such as were unmarried. 488. 7.
S.
S. Sabinus consecrated by saint Peter Primat of France and Archbishop of
Sens. 65. 4. The Sacraments validity. 65. 10. A sacrifice offered at London for
the repulse of Julius Caesar. 305. 2. Saints bodies translated. 349. 6. etc.
Saints make intercession for the living. 381. 9. or 391. 9. Salii
superstitious Priests of Mars. 220. 2. S. Saluine probably borne in Britain.
198. 6. S. Saluine the third Bishop of Verdune in Loraine. ib. S. Sampson
Archbishop of York. 217. 7. S. Sampson not the first Archbishop of York but
the seventh. 318. 3. S. Sampson consecrated in a vision and by whom. 98. 10.
S. Sampson consecrated afterward with external rites. 99. 10. S. Sampson
preached in Britain, and when. 217. 7. Sanctuaries violated. 309. 8. S.
Saturnine saint Peter's Disciple first Bishop of Tholose. 64. 2. Saturninus an
Arian excommunicated. 563. 2. S. Sauinian and Potentian easily converted the
people about Charters, Orleons etc. and why. 10. 2. The Saxons destroyed
Churches, and Monasteries. 601. 7. etc. The Saxons cruelty toward Priests,
and others. 602. 7. Scholars of Cambrige converted, and converting others.
203. 4. etc. Many other learned Scholars of Britain converted. 206. 8. Scota
King Pharaos daughter. 11. 5. Scota driven out of Egypt. ib. Scotland called
Valentia from Valentinian. 188. 3. More concerning the name of Scotland. 29. 7.
Scotland subject to the Archbishop of York. 283. 4. Scotland had aunciently
many Monasteries. 601. 11. Scots deduce their name from Scota King Pharaos
daughter. 11. 5. The Scots original. 355. 1. All Scots banished out of their
Country by Maximus. 356. 2. When the Scots came first into Britain, and where
they then lived. 354. 1. etc. The Scots not seated in Britain until the
departing of Maximus. 335. 4. The ancient Scots the same people with the old
inhabitants of some of the maritimate parts of Spain. 28. 6. The Scots
received not the faith of Christ until the time of Pope Victor. 335. 4. 352.
3. Scots in some sense more ancient Christians then Britans. 125. 2. The Scots
called Churches Celles and why. 429. 1. The Scots accustomed to send their
Bishops unto Rome to be consecrated. 358. 4. The Christian Scots truly
obedient to the Sea of Rome. 358. 4. Scripture will not make an Infidel a good
Christian without a Preacher, or Interpreter. 158. 8. Scripture received here
in King Lucius time in the Latin tongue, with the same Canon of Books which
the Roman Church now uses. 339. 4. S. Sebastian martyred. 416. 4. Sedulius v.
Caelius. The Senate refused the consecration of Christ, and why. 14. 3. etc. The
Senate puts out an Edict against Christians. 13. 5. The Senate could make no
Decree against the Private worshipping of Christ. 15. 6. The Senate most horribly
afflicted for the space of almost 300. years, and why. 16. 6. The Senate never
disinabled those to govern in Britain who were descended of a British Line.
362. 2. Seuerus borne in the Province of Tripolis in Africa. 363. 2. Seuerus
descended of the regal British race. ib. Seuerus true Heir to the kingdom
of Britain. ib. Seuerus Married a British Lady. 363. 3. Seuerus had by her a
son named Bassianus. ib. Seuerus came into Britain to repress their
discords. 350. 1. 362. 1. Why he took this expedition to his one person. 364.
4. Seuerus causes the wall of Separation to be made. 336. 6. 368. 4. The time
of his aboade in Britain. 363. 3. Seuerus ambitious of honor. 362. 1. Seuerus
the first persecutor after Nero. 346. 3. 365. 1. Seuerus commanded none to be
either Jew, or Christian. 365. 1. How moved thereunto. ib. Seuerus otherwise a
lover of Christians. 366. 2. Seuerus protected the Christians in Britain. ib.
Seuerus honored Proculus a Christian in his palace. ib. Seuerus renowned both
for warlike affairs and Learning. 368. 4. Seuerus a seuear punisher of
Adultery. ib. Seuerus slain in a Battle. ib. Seuerus left 32. legions to
defend his Empire. ib. The length of his reign. 368. 5. Sybilla Tiburtina
brought with great solemnity unto Rome. 7. 8. S. Simitrius a Priest Martyred.
220. 2. 229. 3. S. Simon Zelotes never preached in, or, near Britain. 42. 3.
S. Simon had Egypt, and Lybia in his division. 44. 2. S. Simon Mattyred in
Persia. 46. 4. S. Sircicius Pope a great aduauncer of that Religion which
Protestants call papistry. 576. 8. S. Sixtus the 1. succeeded Pope Alexander in
the Papal Dignity. 200. 1. The length of his Papacy. ib. S. Sixtus renowned
for sanctity, learning, and well governing of the Church. 201. 2. S. Sixtus
Decrees even according to Protestants. ib. S. Socrates probably Martyred in
Britain, and when. 180. 9. Soder, once Saract a City in the I Will of Man. 125.
2. Soder the first Bishops See in those parts. ib. S. Soter Pope. 234. 1. The
space of his Papacy. ib. S. Soter Martyred. 235. 1. 247. 1. S. Soters Doctrine,
an Religion. 235. 20. S. Soter sends diverse Bishops into Britain. 240. 6.
Stamford and University founded by King Bladud. 206. 8. Stamford furnished with
Philosophers from Athens. ib. Stamford continued a place of Learning until the
coming of saint Augustine. ib. Stamford interdicted by the Pope for Heresy.
ib. Saint Stephen Pope consecrated but three Bishops. 387. 2. or 397. 2. S.
Stephens Decrees about receiving penitent Heretics. 384. 12. or 395. 12. S.
Stephen apprehended at Mass. 379. 5. S. Stephen martyred. 379. 7. S. Stephen
the eight Archbishop of London. 391. 3. A Stone brought out of Egypt by Scota.
11. 51. The Scottish Kings accustomed to be Crowned on the same. ib. The same
stone brought into England by King Edward. ib. The same stone whersoeuer it be,
is a toaken that the Scots must reign there. ib. Subdeacons office. 228. 2.
Subdeacons can not entermedle in reconciling people to Christ, or in
administering Sacraments. ib. Subdeacons not to marry. 382. 11. or 392. 11.
Suetonius v. Publius. S. Syluester disputes with the Jews and confutes them.
480. 4. The time of his death. 537. 1. S. Sylnester of the present Roman
Religion. 538. 2.
T.
S. Tauriuus thought by some to be the first Archbishop of York. 178. 7. S.
Taurinus renowned for Miracles. ib. S. Taurinus did raise one from death and
who she was. 179. 7. S. Tephredaucus Disciple to S. Kebius. 567. 5. S.
Taphredaucus his Church in the I Will of Man. ib. S. Telesphorus succeeded S.
Sixtus in the Papacy. 208. 1. S. Telesphorus piety, and Religion. ib. S.
Telesphorus Martyred ib. The Temples of the Idols exceeding rich. 305. 1. S.
Thean the first Archbishop of London. 217. 7. 307. 3. S. Thean founded S.
Peter's Church in Corne-hill in London. 318. 3. S. Theodosius the first
Archbishop of York. 318. 3. Theodosius the Emperor commended. 575. 7.
Theodosius austere penance, and why. ib. Theodora Constantius his Concubine.
392. 2. A white Thorn called Holy thorn growing on a hilby Glastenbury. 127.
1. 136. 2. The same buddeth forth leaves, and flowers on Christmas day. 136.
2. etc. The branches thereof carried into foreign Countries. 137. 2. The
wounderfulnes of the Miracle. 137. 3. It has no cause in nature. 137. 4. Part
of the same Thorn florisheth cut of from the body. 138. 4. A Protestant
punished for endeavoring to cut it down. ib. The Thorns wherewith our Savior
was crowned flourished 500. years after. 420. 3. Thule the end of the once
commonly known world. 141. 3. Tiberianus Prefect of Palestina writes unto
Traian concerning Christians. 192. 1. Tiberianus an Heretic banished. 574. 5.
Tiberius informed of the preaching of Christ. 192. 1. Tiberius his opinion of
Christ's heavenly power. ib. Tiberius sent to Jerusalem for Christ to come to
Rome to cure him of his disease. ib. Tiberius cured of his disease by the
Handkerchife in the which our Savior left the print of his face. 13. 3.
Tiberius request the Senators that Christ might be accounted a God. 14. 3.
Tiberius threameth death to the Accusers of Christians. 15. 5. Tiberius seuerly
punishes the Senators, and why. 15. 5. Tiberius neither maintained Garrison,
or attempted alleration in Britain. 23. 7. S. Ticca Abbot. 333. 9. S. Ticca
Abbot at Galstenbury. ib. Tigris S. Patrikes Sister stolen by Pirates. 595. 5.
Timotheus an Heretic, a Britan. 606. 1. Timotheus his Heresies. ib. S. Timothy
S. Paul's Disciple, and Bishop of Ephesus never in Britain. 152. 7. S. Timothy
Martyred. 214. 2. S. Timothy son to our British Lady Claudia. 214. 3. S.
Timothy one of the Baptysers of S. Lucius. ib. S. Timothies last labors in
Britain. 231. 1. S. Timothy probably baptized by S. Paul. ib. S. Timothy
Martyred. 198. 4. 220. 2. 233. 3. S. Timothy leaves all his riches to
Ecclesiastical uses. 229. 3. S. Titus ordained Bishop by S. Paul in Crete.
143. 4. Titus the Emperor reigned 2. years, and a few months. 169. 2. Titus
his mercy toward those who conspired against him. ib. Traian succeeded Nerua
in the Empire. 171. 4. Traian kept the Empire almost 20. years. ib. Traian a
persecutor of Christians. ib. Traians Persecution cause of the nicrease of
British Christians. 181. 11. Traian leaves of all persecution, and why. 192.
1. Traian gave free leave for the Britans to be Christians. 193. 1. Traians
death. 195. 3. Transsubstantiation allowed by saint Cyprian. 380. 8. Trebellius
a Roman Lieutenant in Britain a Christian. 237. 3. The whole City of Treuers
Martyred. 497. 2. S. Trophimus sent to Arles by saint Peter. 67. 6.
V.
VAlens chosen for an assistant in the Empire. 571. 3. Valens leaued the war
for his Religion. ib. Valens fell afterward into Heresy. ib. Valentinian
declared Emperor. 571. 2. Valentinian a constant Catholic. ib. Valentinian
deprived of his honors by Julian the Apostata. ib. Valentinian reigned diverse
years in Britain. 571. 3. Valentinian the younger seduced by his Mother
Iustina. 573. 4. Valentinians Heretical proceedings against saint Ambrose. ib.
Valentinian overthrown by Maximus. ib. Valerian the Emperor at the first a
fauorer of Christians. 386. 1. Valerian turns a greuious persecutor. ib.
Valerian taken Prisoner by the Persians. ib. Valerians cruel death. ib. S.
Valerius sent into France by saint Peter. 172. 5. The time of his death. ib.
Vespasian a friend of Christians. 121. 8. 166. 2. Vespasians vow of Chastity.
124. 1. Vespasian made Emperor. 165. 1. Vespasian thought to have believed in
Christ. 166. 2. Vespasian sacked Jerusalem in the revenge of Christ's death.
ib. Vespasia^ procured those immunities which King Aruiragus granted to S.
Joseph. 166. 2. S. Victor Pope. 343. 1. S. Victor styles himself Archbishop
of the Roman, and universal Church. 344. 2. Saint Victor excommunicated the
Churches of Asia. ib. S. Victor excommucated Theodorus. ib. S. Victor
interdicted some, and why. ib. S. Victors Decrees. ib. S. Victor threatens to
excommunicate the Bishops, and Church of Africa. 345. 2. S. Victor sent
Preachers into Scotland. 345. 3. Virginity more excellent then marriage. 381.
9. Vitellius Emperor but 6. Months. 165. 1. Vitellius stabbed to death, and
cast into Tiber. ib. Unction with holy oil used in the Apostles time. 190. 5.
The holy Ghost given by the Bishops Unction with Chrisme. 382. 10. or 392. 10.
Our universities most infected with Idolatry. 269. 3. Universities privileged
by King Lucius. 308. 6. S. Vodinus Archbishop of London, Martyr. 95. 4.
Vortegerne makes Consta^ce a Monk King. 600. 3. Vows of Chastity, Obedience,
and Poverty necessary to a Monastical life. 327. 1. or 328. 1. S. Vrbanus
succeeded S. Calixtus in the Papacy. 377. 1. S. Vrbanus banished. ib. S.
Vrbanus secretly-recalled. ib. S. Vrbanus Decrees according to Protestants. ib.
S. Vrbanus Martyred. ib. 30. Usurpers of the Empire. 391. 1.
W.
A Wallnut Tree Miraculously buddeth forth at Glastenbury on saint Barnabas
day. 138. 4. Weary-all-hill why so called. 127. 1. The Town Wells once
Tiddinhton. 257. 6. Wells by whom made of any note. 257. 6. Wells took its
denomination from Wiclea a little River. 258. 6. Wes^^inster once called
Thorny-Iland. 101. 2. Of the original of S. Peter's Church there. ib. William
the first established the Laws of Edward the confessor. 303. 6. William
constituted a Jury of 12. sworn men. 288. 5. Winchester a Bishops seat. 288.
5. King Lucius builded there a Cathedral Church. ib. Winchester Monastery
erected by King Lucius. 309. 7. Wincester Monastery destroyed in the
persecution of Dioclesian. 309. 7. 468. 2. Winchester Church turned into the
Temple of Dagon. ib. Good works take away sin. 381. 9. or 391. 9.
Y.
York called Maxima from Maximinus. 188. 3. York builded by Ebrancus. 280. 2.
York called by Ebrancus Kairbranke. ib. York an Arch-flamens seat. ib. York
a Primats See. 178. 6. 187. 2.
Z.
SZepherine converted S. Amphibalus. 371. 3. S. Zepherine Martyred. ib. S.
Zepherines Decrees even according to Protestants. ib.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAc. 2. lin. 7. give. for, gave. l. 11. binghted. for, Knigted. l. 14.
Aruitragus. for, Aruiragus. l. 35. assentitus. for, assecutus. p. 5. l. 6.
promisit. for, permisit. p. 15. l. 17. diua. for, diuina. p. 23. l. 42. Romam.
for, Romani. p. 34. l. 12. stranger. for, stronger. p. 46. l. 8. Presidem. for,
Persidem. p. 54. l. 20. acibus. for, arcibus. l. 41. the of the head. for, the
head of the. p. 60. l. 46. faith. for, says. p. 64. l. 45. plantuere. for,
plantauere. p. 72. l. 18. Oceanum. for, Oceani. p. 75. l. 44. truth prove. for,
truth I will prove. p. 87. l. 13. nostra. for, nostro. p. 101. l. 2.
praedacentur. for, praedarentur. p. 104. l. 47. anditor. for, auditor. p. 114.
l. 22. hi. for, his. l. 23. his. for, hi. p. 141. l. 42. would. for, world. p.
142. l. 12. exem. for, axem. p. 146. l. 26. and. for, ad. p. 152. l. 27.
Confesser. for, Confessor. p. 180. l. 27. statis. for, status. p. 187. l. 47.
Eleutherius. for, Lucius. p. 200. l. 11. azinium. for, azimum. l. 21. plebenum.
for, plebeium. p. 206. l. 9. habitores. for, habitatores. p. 209. l. 4.
Metropolitanis. for, Metropolitanus. p. 211. l. 37. potestatem. for, potestate.
p. 215. or 216. l. 44. ammonens. for, admonens. p. 261. l. 49. tota. for, toto.
p. 305. l. 1. vere. for, verae. p. 344. l. 9. Alexandrae. for, Alexandriae. p.
357. l. 47. Vicinus. for, Vicinas. p. 373. l. 43. Inuenis, for, iuuenis. p.
378. l. 23. protertants. for, Protestants. l. 37. first. for, fifte. p. p. 379.
l. 13. consicere. for, conficere. l. 18. mandomus. for, mandamus. p. 397. l.
19. Britanniam. for, Britannam. p. 426. l. 10. Rge. for, rage. p. 441. l. 29.
columia. for, columna. p. 473. l. 13. exequia. for, exequi. p. 498. l. 7.
brechtus. for, Herebrechtus. p. 499. l. 4. findata. for, fundata. p. 527. l.
19. ocis. for, locis. p. 549. l. 45. mana. for, magna. p. 555. l. 49.
graudenti. for, gaudenti. p. 578. l. 28. eximae. for, eximiae. p. 589. l. 50.
Iberos. for, Iberi.

Many other Faults there are omitted by reason of the Printers not understanding
our English tongue, which for that they are easy for the Reader to correct in
the reading, I have hear omitted to set them down.


