The New Invention, INTITVLED, CALLIGRAPHIA: OR, THE ART OF FAIR WRITING:
Wherein is comprehended the whole necessary Rules thereof; by which any who
is capable and careful to learn, may without the help of any other Teacher,
under GOD, both be informed concerning the right writing of the most usual
Characters in the World; and perfectly instructed how to write one of the most
frequent in Europe, called the SECRETARY.

Brought to a Method, for the universal use both of the Youth, and of all who
have either wanted or neglected the occasion of Learning in their youth.

BY HIS Majesty's SCRIBE, Master David Brown.

SAINCT-ANDREWES, Printed by Edward Raban, Printer to the University. 1622.
With Privilege.

The sum of the Authors Privilege.
JAMES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
defender of the Faith; With special advise and consent of the Lords of Our
Secret Counsel: In consideration of the exquisite Travels, and great Charges,
made and sustained by our well-beloved Subject, M. David Brown, in Inventing
of this Work, Making of Types thereunto, and Printing of the same: and yet
some that slept, when he awoake in doing of the same, may frustrate and
prevent him in the expectation of his so tedious and sumptuous endevoures; and
that by divulgating of the said Invention in their own favors, if remedy be
not provided. Therefore, wit ye Us, with consent foresaid, To have given and
granted, and by Our Letters of gift, give and grant unto the said M. David
Brown, his Heirs and Assigneyes; The only License and Privilege to cause
Imprint this Book, as often ^^ need requires; and that for the space of Many
years: And to have prohibited, and by Our foresaides Letter^ prohibit, All
Our Subjects, that none presume to Print, or cause Imprint the same either in
English or Latin; nor yet bring home, buy or sell any extract thereof,
Without the special advise of the said Author, or his aforesaides: Under the
pain of 1000. Pounds Money, to be^ incurred by the Contraveners; whereof the
one half to redound to Our own use, and the other half to his, or his
foresaides use, with Confiscation of all and whatsoever Books shall happen to
be Imprinted, Bought, Sold, or brought home, wherever they can be apprehended.

TO THE MOST MIGHTY, AND RENOWNED MONARCH, JAMES, By the grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Increase of
prosperous Days here, and perpetuity of felicity hereafter.
IT is said, (dread Sovereign) by Solomon, that great King of Wisdom,
Virtue, and Peace, that a Kings favor, is like the dew upon the grass: as if
he should say, that the commendation, or loving countenance of a King to
Virtuous Works, both encourages the Workers, and makes the Works more and
more to flowrish within his Kingdom, according to that other Proverb, Virtus
laudata crescit. The efficacy and validity of either of these, I, (though a
very mean Instrument of a very mean Work, have found to be accomplished
by your Highness, (whom GOD has endued as another Solomon, with the like
Princely Prerogatives, whose Name therefore be praised) and that a^ diverse
times, but chiefelie at your Majesty's last being in your Highness Palace of
HOLY ROOD-HOVSE, after inspection of some of mine own Exercises of FAIR
WRITING, with certain rare practices of a nine-yeare-olde Disciple, which I
then taught, and at your Highness superscribing of my former Privilege. For
the which Royal Testimonies, and especially for the Privilege, (which I
esteem the Seal thereof) I most humbly render all hearty thanks unto GOD,
and to your Majesty through HIM, in whom I hope to prove your trusty
Servant to the death.

In memory, consideration, and boldness whereof, I have both with the better
courage, and greater expedition, enterprized and accomplished this difficill
Task, in finding out a way how Writing may be learned by Reading: and that
for the regard I owe to the glory of GOD, who is the Author of all sorts of
Virtue, of which the dexterity of Writing is one, your Highness pleasure, who
under HIM, is the maintainer of all Virtue, within your Royal Kingdoms, the
Commonwealth of them all, which springs from the Fountain of all Virtue,
and to mine own credit, which I owe both unto GOD, of whom I hold my mean
Talent, your Majesty's self, Prince CHARLES, your dear and only Son, to
all your Highness Loyal Subjectes of this your Majesty's famous Realm of
SCOTLAND, and especially the Secret Counsel, Nobility, College of Justice,
Universities, and chief Cities thereof: (where I was borne, brought up, and
do spend my days:) which (albeit not very worthy of it self, yet because
it justly belongs unto your most Sacred Majesty, being both bred in your
Highness own Realm, and the first fruits of this kind that ever did grow
therein) I therefore, according as appertains, more for mine own duty, than
its valor, with hearty affection, most humbly propine unto your Majesty's
most Royal Person, as Master of all the Ground, next unto JEHOVAH, (to remain
under the Saueguarde and protection of your Highness, and your happy
Successoures favorable Patronage, and Imperial authority, for a common use:)
and I recommende your Highness self, with all your most Princely Progeny,
to the blessed Tuition of the most mighty KING of Kings, during your Reign
in the Earth; and to HIS joyful Fruition, to reign everlastingly with HIM in
the Heavens: In whom I rest, while I breathe,

Your Majesty's Subject, and humble Servant, DAVID BROWN.

TO THE DILIGENT READER, AND PRACTIZER OF THIS BOOK.
AS no hight (good Friend) can be attained unto, but by the order of degrees,
beginning at the lowest, and by little and little aspiring unto the highest,
without omission of any; even so, no man can rightly conceive any Science,
Art, History, ^r Discourse, except he understand the beginning, midst, and
ending thereof, howbeit the usurping and covetous ^nclination of all men, (for
the most part) would be ^n an instant at the very hight of a thing, (as
oftentimes they imagine themselves so to be) before they pass the first six
steps thereof, when as it contains sixty: but in so doing, that their
impatiencie oftentimes throws the^ farther down, than their furious
imagination raised them up. For as rash Writing proves unprofitable for
learners to write; so hasty reading of the Art thereof, will avayle little
unto those who would practice the same, according to these Proverbes, which
have some affinity together, Legere, and non intelligere, negligere est: And
oftentimes, The more haste, the less speed. The practice of the one, a great
frie^^^ to Ignorance; and the other, a loving brother unto Y^^^nesse. And as
he is not the owner of the Fruit of ^^ Orchard, who leapeth in over the Dykes
thereof, and p^lleth the Fruits before they be ripe, not daring to enter at
the Yate of the same: even so he who turns over many Leaves in the midst of
a Book, without due consideration what is contained in each one particularly,
and orderly, (with the revolution thereof) as it stands, and enters not at
the beginning, may well get some tasting of green Fruit, to asswadge his
appetite a while, (though he spill his Teeth:) but the right use of all
indeed belongs unto him, who is the Master of the Keys and Entry, walks
through orderly as he^ lists, and but plucketh as be eats. We see they
are not the fattest Sheep which make most travel, and over-hale their meat,
when they have plenty; but th^se which make a slow pace, rest themselves
oftentimes, and ruminate, or revolue, that which they gather.

Therefore, since there is little pleasure, without sone industry, and that
few things can be blown up at once, like Glasses, neither by action, nor
consideration; have a little patience, (I pray thee, both for thine own
profit, and my credit) to read, consider, and practice this Work, even
forwards, as it is set down, without a^^^ omission at all, and as little
intermission as thou may, lest thou hardly escape the former inconvenients,
and by occasion thereof blame me innocentlie for thine own fault.

I confess, it is far yet from that sublimitie of style. whereat I hope it
will be: yet accept of it as it is. (as a Pledge of my Love) until it shall
please GOD that I amend it: for the Building can be but sober, which is
begun, accomplished, plenished, and garnished, all in such haste, without
both longer deliberation, and greater preparation.

If any part hereof may seem either obscure or doubtful, (as I trust there
be few) misconstrue not mine intention and meaning therein, because it
tends to ^hy weal, in so far as I am able: but I advise thee to seek
^esolution rather of those who be well experimented, ^han either to rest in
coffeehouse, or yet pronounce ^ash Sentence against a party unsummoned: for
some^imes a fault will appear to be, where it is not.

And if thou, through thy diligent searching, and se^ere examining, find some
indeed, (as at this time I cannot altogether cleanse it) judge very
charitab^ie: and ^he rather because it is far easier to find a fault in a
Work even well wrought by another, than to work the ^ike thy self without a
fault, found by some other who perhaps cannot do so well. I have seen a young
Mason, that could scarcely hew a Stone, epsy a defect in a fair Palace,
accidentlie in one day, which an hundredth, each one whereof more Skillful than
he, have been ^eaven years in building.

So, it is very easy unto thee, having as it were another man's Candle in
thine hand, to behold him, and his doings therewith* for thou holding it up
unto him while as he writes, and thou the mean time standing idle ^hy self,
thou may easily perceive when he writes wrong: because, though his face
be toward the Pap^^ as thine is, yet his mind is bended to many airthes at
once, and thine only to one: he has to consider, and to choose out of many
things what is best to be written, as also both what he has written, and
has to write, the Matter, Indictment, Method, Language, and Letters, but thou
have only to take notise what is done, and the manner of the doing: he has
not only thee to please in his doings, but another who perhaps has as
c^rious an head, and yet of a contrary mind: the third of another opinion:
and so forth. And therefore, though one man could do never so well, it is
very hard, yea, impossible for him to please multitudes, because of his one
opinion, device, plotte, and conceit, and of their plurality and diversity
of opinions, devices, plottes, and conceits.

In like manner, because it is far easier to find a fault, than mende a
fault, if in my time thou come speed by finding, I hope thou will play the
part of a discreet Premonitor, and either advertise me thereof mildly and
favourablie, that I may timouslie amend the same, i^ the next Impression, (GOD
willing) and I will gi^^ thee heartily thanks for thy good will: or if thou
will not, I beseech thee, to pass by the same with silence and modesty,
until it be repaired, either by me, or so^^ other. But if otherwise thou
make choice to declare the same to others, who perhaps will rather make it
ridiculous, by jesting; than blameless, by amending, thou manifestest as much
thine own folly, as my negligence* for none live without faults, and though
thou com^^^ not such, yet perhaps an hundredth worse daily: for in so doing,
thou both wishest, and seek, rather the infamy of one, wherewith to feed
thy solatious and phantasticke humor, than the common weal of all, whereat
thou art bound to rejoice.

Again, if indeed thou make choice to become a Challenger and detracter of
others, by thy scandalous or slanderous report, it is a sure token that thou
art destitute of wisdom and discretion thy self: yet if thou have any
courtesy, or gentilitie, though never so little, I am ^erswaded thou will
neither steal a dint of me behind ^y back, yea, scarcely before my face,
until thou first advertise me, that I may be as well guarded with
cor^espondent weapons to defend, as I have here armed ^hee wherewith to
pursue: I mean, thou will not fail first to choose some new Subject, which
has never been ^mplie written of before, (without any coloring of ^ther
men's Works) and write as largely thereon, as I, under GOD, have done of this;
that, if it be pos^ible, I may catch the like advantage thereby of thee, and
pay thee home again therein, by showing thee at ^he least a Moate in thine
Eye, when as I have remoo^ed the Beam out of mine own eye: or else if thou will not, but remain a Coward, or an empty Vessel, making a great noise, and
yet containing nothing but wind, it becomes thee to hold thy peace
altogether, and contain thy wind within thy self, rather as blast it forth
upon others.

So having no farther occasion in this place, to detain ^hee from this good
occasion it self, I remit thee thereunto: only entreating thee, whether thou
be a friend, or a foe, as thou take hold thereof, to give GOD the praise of
what pro^it thou reapest hereby: and as for (...), HIS frail Instrument in
this behalf, if I incu^^^ no disprayse, I shall rest fully and gladly
contented.

Thus, wishing the event of this thy business, t^ be according to mine
expectation, good will, and affecti^^* For, if thou be a Friend, Nature
teaches me to l^^^ thee: and if thou be a Foe, Grace teaches me to forgive
thee, yea, and to render unto thee good for evil: howsoever, therefore, thou
behavest thy self unto me, I freely forgive thee, and do recommende thee
now and ever, to the favor of the ALMIGHTY;

In whom I am bound To favor thee as my self. D. B.

TETRASTICHA.
SOLOMON, ECCLESIASTES IX. X.
that good work thou can devise, delay not to enterprise,
^hile as Breath, Skill, Strength, and Aid thou may have:
^r thou wilt want Invention, Wisdom, and Intention,
^ter Death, when thou art laid in the Grave.
PIBRAC, QVADR. 68. PAGE 719.
^ learn the most needful Art, bend thine affection,
^ther than seek all, and get nothing well:
^iue chiefelie in thine own, to attain Perfection:
^ it is no small honor to excel.
IBID. QVAD. 63. PAGE 718.
^w many might (in time) have wise been made;
^fore their time, had they not thought them so?
^at Artist e're was Master of his Trade,
^e he began his Prentiship to know?
CATO, Lib. 4. praecep. 29. But extended and applied unto Writing.
^ensoever to learn is no shame to any,
^ ignorance both shame and Skaith to many:
^d though in a year thou can little Latin attain,
^ in one day thou may learn to write thy Name.
ON THE BOOK.
WHerefore, O SCOTLAND, art thou called so (...)
Since in Thee such abundance of Virtues breed?
All sorts of Policy, rare and singular Men,
And having such plenty, wherewith thine own to (...)
Nations have at thine high Cedars admired;
Such as Wallace, Buchanan, and many one n^^:
Some for Valiantness* some for Learning revered,
And many other Gifts; which some have yet also,
With whom, why may not this worthy One be (...)
Whose charitable Travels here are worthy of praise?
For has be not all before him far surmounted*
In this most renowned, and profitable exercise?
By which he honoreth his Country, Friends, and N^^
Beside the winning to himself of endless Fa^e.
D. A.

IN THE PRAISE OF WRITING.
Rejoice all Writers, who live by the Pen*
For your Art with Royalty is clad:
The honor whereof lay hid amongst Men,
But now is universallie spread.
^ejoyce all Engravers, and Ye that Found
Types for Letters of Writ and Print,
^ince the Spring of your Cisterne does abound,
And now runs over the old extent.
Rejoice all PRINTERS, whose Calling depends
On Writing, that most ancient Art:
For it your chief from whence yours descendes,
Is promoted in every part.
Rejoice all Learners, who may, when ye list,
Learn all times, by this magnifique Work.
And All give GOD praise, who does so assist
This your Patron, that excellent Clerk.
I. S.

THE ARGUMENT, COMPREHENDING THE PREROGATIVES OF FAIR WRITING.
ALthough this Subject may seem base, not being great matters, but BARE
LETTERS, yet it is worthy of great promotion, both because it maintains al
other Subjects, as shall be declared (GOD willing) hereafter, and that the
right performance of the action thereof, called WRITING, is an Art as
Honorable, Needful, Profitable, Rare, Ancient, Nobly descended, and
consequently as Excellent as any other, which I prove by forcible Reasons.

It is Honorable, for two of the most chief, the one grounded upon the rare
practices of the most blessed, great, and rare PATRON, because it not only
pleased Him to honor it, in writing of the Tables of the Law with His own
Sacred Hand, (spoken so for our capacity:) But His Blessed Son, our only
Savior, bowed Himself in the Temple of Jerusalem, and wrote on the ground.
The other Reason, taken from the practices of Man: for is there any King or
Monarch in the World, who applies not himself to learn this Art, although
he should neglect and forgo all others?

Needful, for other two Reasons: the first, Tending to our Eternal
happiness: for it was inevitable and necessary that the Word of the LORD
should be written, that it might endure for ever: And though the use both of
Writing, and of all that is written will expire at the Day of Judgment, yet
the same very Word which now is written will endure eternally; because it is
eternal, as both He is Eternal from whom it proceeds as the Author, and
He who is not only the Subject thereof, but the very WORD it self: Who by
it will pronounce the Sentences both of Absolution and condemnation at that
Great Day: and rathere ere He suffer one jot or Letter thereof to be void or
remain unaccomplished, Heaven and Earth will pass away. And the second
reason, tending to the weal of our temporal estate, because without the use
of Writing, and Letters written, no Estate in the World could stand: seeing it
not only keeps constant memory of Promises, Rightes, and Duties, betwixt
man and man, from Generation to Generation; but likewise goes in Embassage
from Nation to Nation in all effaires, expressing men's Minds whose persons be
absent, as if they were present. Indeed, without the use of Printing, the
Estates of the World might stand, like as they did more than 5400. years, for
it is not above 200. years yet since it began to flowrish: and so there is not
so great necessity in the use of Printing, as of Writing; for Writing must
needs be, or else there could be little Civil order; but each one circumvene
and spoil his Neighbor without remedy of Justice.

Profitable, for two respects also: first, because universallie as many live
by the practice thereof, in good estate, as by the practice of any other Art:
and next, because Printing could scarcely ever have been, if Writing had not
been first: for Printing was not only first devised by the occasion of
sweirnesse in writing, and in-holding of maintenance to Writers; but likewise
the first pattern of printing Characters, was made conform to written
Letters: yea, Printing could scarcely yet continue, if it were not up-holden,
and maintained by Writing: for what Book was ever, or can be yet, so well and
easily printed, as that which was, and is first written; whereby it is
certain, that Printing is as inferior, as it is posterior unto Writing, and
that for three causes: first, because upon every occasion the minds of men
may be far better signified unto others in sheduls, and their promises
performed, or at least, urged to perform, in securities, by the mean of
Writing, than of Printing; seeing the one serves in doing, preserving, and
multiplying of any thing while it is in doing: and the other, but to preserve
and multiply extractes of a thing already done. Secondly, because Writing is
practiced by many, not only because it is necessary to all, but both
because it is easy of it self, and the means thereof easily carried;
whereas Printing is only practiced by few, since it is neither needful for
every one, easy to practice, nor the means wherewith easy to transporte,
yea, though even made in the most rare and compendious manner. And thirdly,
were not by occasion of the worthy exercise of VVriting, (as I have said)
how could there ever have been any such preservation of Learning by
Printing? any such manifestation thereof, by multiplying of Books printed?
and by consequent, ever any such immortality, and universalitie of fame
purchased either through Learning, or valiant deeds by mortal men, as now
there be, of some renowned, in all Ages past? for a mortal fame, that is, an
unwritten fame, may well surviue him unto whom it belongs, and continue the
next generation after, but is rarely found in the second, except of some rare
person: so then, if the famous reme^berance of renowned men had aye died when
themselves died, through defect of Writing, what could they have left of all
their endeavors behind them? for was not Wisdom, Honors, Learning, Riches,
and such others, in the World before them?

Rare, because by all appearance the secrecy and hid knowledge of all the
precepts thereof, has not been clearelie revealed to the Youth in former
Ages, yea, is scarcely yet, in any School whatsoever, except where this
Book is diligently taught. And surely I marvel that so many Volumes have
been written on all Subjectes, Sciences, and Arts, (except this Subject and
Art) in all Nations, in all Ages, and by all sorts of people, showing
perfectly how to attain to the right knowledge and practice thereof; as
also, that even so many sorts of Exemplare Books of fair writ, are printed,
and extant, and yet none have showed any perfect way how to follow them
without a guide, by writing the complete Art of Writing it self! It is true,
some Writers, of some Nations, have written some precepts, how to follow some
of the most usual forms of Writ amongst themselves; but never any SCOTTISH
Man has left any precepts behind him, how to write any form, either
usual in his own Country, or elsewhere.

Ancient, because certain it is, that Literature has been from the
beginning, and not only flowrished long before the Deludge or Inundation of
Waters, amongst the curious Inventors of Sciences and Arts, as appears by
the charitable regard either of SETH, or some other, who for the benefit and
weal of the posterity, caused write or grave the same on two pillars, the one
of Tyle, to abide fire, and the other of Stone, against water: but likewise,
not long after the Floode, amongst the Egyptians, as is evident, both by the
Skill of MOSES, who being trained up in Egypt, that read the Tables of the
Law, as soon as he saw them, and of the most part then of the Israelites,
who being participant of the same education, that doubtless could have done
the like action. And though sufficient warrant could not be produced, for
approbation of these Assertions, yet natural Reason cannot be prejudged, nor
frustrated of its own place: for what Librall Science or Art can be older
than Writing, since every Librall Science and Art behooved to be written,
both for helping the memory of the Author in inventing, and of the Students
in learning: (howbeit Socrates in his time, was of the contrary opinion) so it
has pleased GOD, by the mean of Writing not only to nourish and train up,
all Sciences and Arts in their infancy and minority, but principally to
defend them so in their full age and majoritie, against all assaults of the
ignorant, who ever have been, and yet are, professed enemies to Learning, that
aye when as they destroyed any worthy work in one Book, it was found again
in another: and hereby also, GOD be praised, was Antiochus disappointed of his
malicious and devilish attempt, who commanded to gather together all the
Transsumpts of the Sacred BIBLE, (as he supposed) and then caused burn them in
a terrible fire.

And Nobly descended, because no Art has an Author more noble nor excellent,
because the Author thereof is infinitely above all Nobility and Excellency:
for doubtless GOD Himself, who is the Author of all Goodness, first devised
and ordained it, as a thing good also of it self; and that either immediately
as he marked Kaine, with some hieroglyphicall or aenigmaticall letters, one or
more; by the Sententiall signification whereof, he was perfectly and
notoriously known to be a Murderer: or mediatelie by enduing others with
the rare gift of Invention, as he did many Artificers, either at the building
of the Arc, in the days of NOAH, or at the building of the Tabernacle, in the
days of MOSES and AARON, or else at that incomparable building of the Temple
of HIERVSALEM, in the days of King SOLOMON. Whereby it evidentlie appears,
that this Art has been invented by Divine inspiration; for doubtless as the
Heavenly Scriptures are concluded with this caveat, Let no man presume either
to add unto them, nor diminish from them, because they are so absolute,
complete, and perfect, that they contain all things necessary unto
salvation: so it lay never in any man's power in any Age, either to add or
diminish a jote, to or from the number of those Letters which it pleased GOD to
ordain, as so many strong Holds, Castles, and Iron Coffers, wherein to
preserve these our happy Evidences, and heavenly Rightes, from the violence
of all Tyrants, and enemies of the Truth whatsoever: and for as few in number
as these Letters be, they not only over-flowe all the Books in the World,
and contain the Languages of all Nations, (although indeed fewer of them do
contain some Languages, than others) but thereby any that are now living,
may know the mind, and disposition of a man, who died a thousand years ago,
and so in some sort have conference wirh him: which is no small Miracle, were
not custom thereof (as of many other things) breeds contempt, and
misregarde!

So if all these Reasons be rightly weighed and considered, who can justly
deny, but the ART OF FAIR WRITING ought to be as well ESTEEMED, because it
is as HONORABLE; as well MAINTAINED, because it is as NEEDFVLL; as well
EMBRACED, because it is as PROFITABLE; as great IN REQVEST, because it is as
RARE; as high IN PLACE, because it is as ANCIENT; and as well REGARDED,
because it is as NOBLY descended as any other Art? And thus much concerning
the Renown, Necessity, Utility, Raritie, Antiquity, Authority; or, to
reduce all in one, the EXCELLENCY of the ART OF FAIR WRITING.

For the which principal Causes then, (as well in the Epistle as here) and
diverse secundarie, which do follow, I have made choice to publish this Art.
FIrst, because of the measure of Skill I have from the ALMIGHTY, and
considering that I might justly be called an unjust Steward of such a Talent,
if I should choose rather to have it buried with me in the Grave, after I have
served mine own use therewith, than to publish and distribute the same to the
weal of others, both in mine own time, and after: which (I hope in GOD) will
do more good ^a any careful Scholar in one day, nor possibly any Master
Writer in three, without the help of this Book: because a view of the whole
Art may be better seen, yea, resumed and considered in one day, by private
and particular reading, than understoode in many days, by his common and
ordinary instructing: and though both were alike possible, yet it remains
impossible to any Instructor, howbeit never so cunning, either to do the same
in such short space, or, although he could, to endure with so great pains.
Whereby it cannot be valued, (GOD be praised) nor enough considered, what
great good the plurality, universalitie, and conformity of Books, multiplied
conform to this Book, will do abroad henceforth, (if it please Him to make
way thereunto) and that in many places at one time, and after one manner, to
infinite numbers, as well of Masters as Studentts, as far beyond and above
all their disconforme practices of Art, as Right and Uniformity can be
beyond Wrong, and Disconformitie.

Secondly, because not only Writing is a special mean whereby the Youth
do attain to other Learning, in all Seminaries thereof, as well Schools as
Universities, but in li^^ manner Letters written, are the strong foundations,
and fundamental stones, whereon that Great UNIVERSITY or ACADEMIE of all
LEARNING stands, the sure Boxes, wherein the rich Treasures of all Learning
are firmly enclosed, (which none can open but those unto whom it pleases
GOD to lend the Keys of Interpretation) and the costly Ringes, precious
pearls and jewels, whereout of the bright Diamonds of all Learning do shine:
Hence it comes, that a learned man, is called a Lettered man; and Letters
cannot justly be called Letters, at the least well known to be Letters,
except they be rightly framed, and lineallie set; neither yet can that be
done, without right information and instruction; nor yet right information and
instruction had, but by such as be experimented.

Thirdly, because there is not such uniformitie kept amongst Masters of Vulgar
Schools anent the grounding and trayning up of the Youth, in this virtuous and
necessary Exercise, as need does require; but each one teaches in some
pretended manner of his own, preferring the same to all others, though he
cannot defend, nor prove it to be right, by any relevant reason, warrant,
or perfect rule: whereupon it follows, and occurreth, that young writers,
unsurelie grounded, leaving one instru^tor, and going unto another, lose and
forget ^he most part of all that they first learned; which is no marvel,
because few of their forms of instructions do agree, as said is: while as in
Latin Schools, when a Student goes from one to another, he needs neither
ascend nor descend, but proceed from that self same Rule of Grammar, where
he left off; which is a thing very commendable: because every man is not
tied to remain constantly in one place, although he even have heritable
dwellinges; and therefore he finds it meetest, that his Children be
educated where he himself remains. The chief reason of this uniformitie
and universalitie of Latin, is, because there are constant, uniforme, and
absolute Rules universallie for the same, like as there be for all other
Learning, except only Writing: and the disconformitie thereof, and defect of
Rules for learning of the same, are the chief causes, not only that few
men's writ, (except those who write the universal ROMAN Character) prove any
more profitable for their use, than their native Language, when they resort to
any foreign Nation; but likewise of the scarcity of those who be both fine
Scholars, and fair Writers, and of the raritie of those gifted with Fair
Writing, in regard of the great plenty propined with Learning: For if in
times past, there had been as conformable and universal Rules for Writing, as
for other Le^ning, or yet now for it self; why might no^ Learned men have
attained thereunto by the^ own private Studies, as unto farther Learning?

Fourthlie, both because there be some o^ middle age, who regrate the want
thereof i^ their youth, and some that rue the neglect o^ the means; seeing
hardly can the one sort redeem the time, or the other reduce the occasion:
and for either of them this Book will (with the LORDS assistance) be a
sovereign remedy; seeing by perusing thereof a^ an ordinary mean, so many
of either sort as b^ capable, desirous to Learn, and intend not t^ go or
return to any School, may yet obtain their intent: and that by careful
Reading, and studying to perform that which they read; even as well as a
mean Scholar being diligent, may by his own private travels, attain to a
great part both of the knowledge and practice of any Science or Art, in
reading of Learned Men's Works, who have pathed the way, and made it straight
and plain before him.

Fiftlie, because there be sundry Students in Universities and Schools, who
wanting the occasion of Learning to write within them, resort in the midst of
their course daily to Vulgar Schools at certain hours to be taught: which,
as it is incommodious, both because of ^he liberty and distance of place; so
it is preju^iciall to the course of their studies, since there^y they protract
so much precious Time, that oftentimes their Skill proves and comes too
short for their place: for what they have Learned, is better than how far
they have Learned; I mean, how much they have profited, is better than how
far they have proceeded. Again, in observing of these dyets, they must not
only be absent when their Condisci^les are present, and oftentimes most
diligent, but will neglect the Latin language in familiar conference, and
louse the reigns of the maternall or Mother tongue; yea it may be added that
because they see greater ease in these Schools, than in others where they have
a greater Count daily to render, many of them do contract such a custom of
sweerenesse, that shortly they will be forced to renounce all Learning, save
only Writing, who perchance would both have been Cunning men, and sufficient
Writers, if the sight of the entysing objects at these occasions had not
interveaned. For remedy whereof henceforth, this present Work will be
sufficient; and the more, because I intend to have it published also in Latin,
whereby they may learn this Art in the Latin tongue, as easily as any
other, or yet in place of any other Author, and nevertheless proceed in
their course of other learning.

Sixtlie, and last, because there arise such contentions amongst Fair Writers,
through diversity of opinions of Writ; and some times one of common Skill,
esteeming most of his own Writ, at the least, conceiting altogether of some
other, which he thinks an A-per-se: and that none can be a Competent Judge,
in deciding of these Debates, for lack of a Grammar which should contain the
whole Rules of Art whereupon to ground his Sentence: which defect proceeds
of the great carelessenesse of all Fair Writers, in all former Ages: for it is
contrary to the practique of all such other incidentes and occurrences:
because in any question, or disputation, amongst Scholars, concerning any
Science or Art whatsoever, Judges may not only discearne betwixt Right and
Wrong, but even qualify their determination by lawful warrandes, and constant
Rules, except only in contentions for writing: and yet not that I love, or
admit contention, but do use all means to make peace: for instance, who can
justly say, that the Civil Laws were ordained to make discord, but rather
concord amongst all estates?

And thus I, (at the pleasure of GOD) being stirred up, by due consideration of
all the former motives, do my mean endeavor to supply all defects, and to
reform all absurdities, and that by downe-setting of an infallible pattern or
right Touchstone, of Fair and perfect VVriting, and of a sovereign Remedy,
or Recipie, for wrong and incorrect writing, both in one following hereafter:
whereby henceforth all right writing may not only be known, and
accordingly framed; all wrong writing viuelie discearned, and altogether
eschewed, and all erroures, which seem indifferent, exactlie corrected: but
likewise all contentions for whatsoever VVriting so decided, as that the
decision may, by Rule of right Reason, be warranted: and the work wherein any
fault shall happen to be, either perfectly renewed, or fully rejected.

THE ELEMENTS AND CONTEMPLATIONS OF FAIR VVRITING: Containing the Definitions,
Observations, Probations, and Divisions of the Art thereof: ^s also the Causes
and Occasions of the Practice of the same; and that in writing of the most
usual forms of Characters in the World.
DEFINITIONS.
CALLIGRAPHIA, Is the ART of Fair and Perfect VVriting.

VVRITING, Is a Literal Suppliment of the Voice, in exponing of the Mind.

OBSERVATIONS.
I Make choice of this Title, both for the raritie thereof, because (so far
as I perceive) none other Book of this Subject has it; and for the
propriety, since it is most proper thereunto, for it is framed of the
Etymology of the word, signifying as much as, Scribendi pingendive elegantia;
derived both from the Greek word (...), id est, qui eleganter scribit aut
pingit: and, (...), i. eleganter scribo aut pingo: and composed of (...), i.
pulchritudo vel elegantia, and (...), i. scribo.

Though the Definition of Writing, may agree also unto Printing, yet it does
hold well enough, since the superior word VVriting is general to both:
always Writing may have a more particular Definition than the former, and be
so proper unto it self, that it may exclude Printing, and this is it: VVriting
may not only be called a present framing and expressing of one Letter after
another, to signify the articulate voice of the Tongue, whereby the thoughts
of the mind are expressed to these who be present, and to interpret the
mind, (without use of the tongue) unto those who be absent: but likewise a
special mean, whereby the memory of things by passed is preserved, and the
foreknowledge of things to come revealed.

Now although Printing may say, Framing and Expressing, yet it may not say,
Present framing, and expressing: that is, both to frame and set down Letters,
and therewith to express words and sentences at every instant, without the
aid of other Artificers: for the word present is proper only to Writing,
because the action thereof is ready and easy, to be prosecuted at every
occasion, without the help of such secunda^ie means.

Again, Printing may well say, Framing and Expressing of Letters in the
plural number, but it may not say, of one Letter after another advisedlie in
the singular: because it consists in stamping, or imprinting, of many
Letters, (right or wrong) with one impression: for they may well be set in
order severallie, but the Impression must be together. But indeed, when they
are rightly set, Printing in that point, is (as it were) the very persection
of Writing, yea, and is so much more easy and commendable than Writing, by how
much more it abounds in multiplying of Extractes, all alike cleanly and
right: for thereby the Word of GOD is much more manifested, Bibles at a far
lower rate, and the Errors of Papistrie far better discovered, than of
before. For the which new Benefit also, we are bound to give the LORD ne^
thanks, Who stirs up worthy Instruments in ^^ Ages, for the weal of
Mankind.

As for the word articulate, I thereby distinguish Men's speeches, from other
Voices: because Voices confused, and inarticulate, such as the voices of
Beasts* Fowls, Fishes, and others, can no more be understood^ in the very
utterance, (except (as some allege) amongst themselves) than expressed by
letters: for letters are the articles or joyntes of syllables, syllables of
words, and words of sentences.

Though all manner of Subjec^tes whereon, Instruments wherewith, and Means
whereby we write, be included within the reaches of the former Definitions,
yet mine intention is to inform, and instruct the careful Scholar how to
write on Paper and Parchment, with Pen and Ink, in the most constant and
ordinary manner: and not to meddle with the rest, whether they be ordinary,
or extraordinary; or whether proceeding of necessity, or curiosity, farther
than mine information and instruction here a^ent, may agree unto them all, or
any of them, either in whole, or in part.

PROBATIONS.
I Call the right use or performance, of Fair and perfect Writing an Art,
because the D^f^nition of an Art, given by cunning Authors, does agree
thereunto: for whether we define an Art with Aristotle, the Prince of
Philosophers, to be an habit of doing, or working, according to the Rule of
right Reason: or with others, such as Lucian and Ramus, to be a collection of
good Precepts, tending to some profitable use of the life: who can lawfully
deny, but both these Definitions may in competent measure be attributed unto
it? And seeing few do perform, and practice the action of Writing alike, but
some one way, some another; and far more ^ ashlie the wrong way, than
advisedlie the right way; certain it is, there must be some secret causes
wherefore one sort do write ignorantly, and another Skilfullie: for which
contrarieties be more opposite, than Ignorance and Skill? And an Art could
not justly be called an Art, at the least were not worthy of the name, if
each one could attain thereunto without information and instruction, either
vocal or literal.

It is true, sundry oftentimes have taken up some pretended manuell practice
of Writing, at their own hand, and have known little or nothing of the Art:
yet because they could not be able to defend their doings, by any other
Rule of right Reason, than the bare word Custom, they might well serve their
own use therewith, but they could not be meet to instruct others, for lack
of sufficient qualification: as for exemple, Though a young Philosoph, ready
to be laureated, were never so perfect, if he cannot in some measure defend
and warrant his own Theses, by Metaphysicall, Logical, or Philosophical
Arguments and Syllogismes, he is thought the more unfit to receive the
Laurel: even so though any Master of the Art of Writing could do never so
well with his Hand, if he cannot defend the same with his Tongue also by
Rules of Art, he may well be meet to write concerning common effaires, but
to instruct others he cannot; because the most part of all instructions do
consist both as well and as much in Information as Demonstration, that is, in
speaking as in doing: and it may be seen afterward in this Book, that there
requires many other words to be spoken, than the former word Custom; and
though it should be reapeated a thousand times, it still remains but one
and the same; who then can learn or profit thereby? Indeed some other
Customs avail much, but this nothing.

Wherefore, such instructors are not unlike unto those who speak Latin, or
sing Music only by the Ear, (that is, by often hearing) and cannot defend
either of them to be right, though so they be; whereas the other, may be
compared to such as both do these things, and can defend them indeed, by
indoubted knowledge, proven by relevant reasons.

Likewise, they may be compared unto a sort of Friends (if any ways so I may
term them) which we call fair fasioned friends, who in their complementes
will promise to do all things which in them lie, that may either profit or
pleasure those unto whom they profess friendship; but when they are prooved or
charged with some one thing, they flatly refuse, and so transform an
affirmative into a negative, a general fair something, into a particular
fair nothing: even so if thou will now (I mean, at the first publication of
this Book) enter in conference with some who profess themselves to be the
most expert and fair Writers in the Kingdom, (yea, in the World, they will
readily allege, if they be not contradicted) they will discourse so
eloquently and Rhetorician-like, that thou would believe at the first, they
could do wonders, let be to know or do any thing whatsoever belonging to
the Art which they profess, and take upon them to teach: but if thou will
take any Line of their own writ, and ask wherefore such a Letter is
fashioned, measured, conjoined, etc, that way rather as another way (which if
thou can, thou may prove to be better) they will not only cease from their
discourse, but become so stupefact and dumme, that they cannot render one Rule
of right reason, nor answer a word to that Question; and if any dumme teacher
can be profitable in a Common Wealth, it is some good Book rather than a man.

Moreover, such who have only a common jade-trot of practice with the hand,
and know no Theoricke in the mind, to utter with the tongue, may be likened
unto such servantes as stand uncovered, holding or bearing a Pennar, Inkehorne,
and Candle, while their Masters indyte and write concerning any needful
purpose; and that because there is no good stuff nor gifts in them for that
or the like use, (but sufficiency for slavish service) in comparison of the
other sort, but as it were so many dried Bladders, having a fair show
without, and full of nothing within but wind; which, when they do crack,
burst forth all at once, and leave nothing till afterward: indeed I
acknowledge mine error here, for this comparison will not always hold,
because it is more pertinent sometimes to compare them unto Fishers Bottels,
which are so filled with strong Drink, that they froathe over, and cannot
contain that fuming rage which is within them.

Well then, it is hard to know, whether such Artistes, (if so they may be
called) who can scarcely define, let be to defend, the Art whereby they
live: be more ignorant, and intemperate, or they more blind, and negligent,
(in that point) who employ them, in trayning up of their Youth: for how can
any Instructor or Pedagogue, lead Children rightly in the way to Perfection,
either of Learning or Manners, who never walked through the bounds of right
Direction and Discipline himself? But as for the other sort, who are endued
with these Gifts, which they want, and yet deride, can cast up infallible
Rules, guarded with forcible Reasons, both of their Practices, and
Instructions, even as soon as a fine Grammarian can defend any Latin
phrase, by declaring and demonstrating the right Grammar Rule or authority of
any thing, which shall happen to be impugned therein, and will likewise have
some regard of Modesty, Temperancie, and good behavior. And howsoever
Writing may be done, without Rules of right Reason, yet fair and perfect
Writing, must be accomplished by these Rules: and since therefore, it has all
the properties due unto an Art, who can deny it to be justly entitled by
the name of an Art? yea, of a Science, (if I had choosed) rather than Printing.

DIVISIONS. Serving likewise as an Index, by declaring on what Page every
Division begins.
THis Art divides it self in two parts, one General, and another Special:
the one comprehe^deth all necessary Rules of Preparation whereby, beginning on
the 1. page: and diverse Rules of Information how to write the most usual
forms of Characters in the World, page 31. And the other contains the
remnant Rules of Information, 45. And all the Rules of Perfection, how to
attain to one of the most frequent sorts in EVROPE, called the SECRETARY,
144.

SVB-DIVISIONS.
THe General part is sub-divided into two Sections, the first treating of the
means whereby to write, page 1. And the second, of the manner how, 31.

The first Section, is severed also into two parts, the first concerning the
using of the disjunct means, or instruments from the Writer, such as the
Pen, Ink, Paper, and Penne-Knife, 1. And the other, concerning the using of
the conjunct means, or instruments to the Writer, as his Hand, Thombe, and
Fingers, 28. Also it treats both of the gesture of his Head and Eyes, and of
the position of his Body, while as he writeh. ibidem.

And the special part, is sub-divided into four Sections, each one whereof
contains one of the four Symboles, or Signs; signifying the articulate
voice of the Tongue, and cogirations of the Mind: and these be Letters, 57.
Syllables, 161. Words, 167. and Sentences, or Lines, 170.

The first Section is distributed into eight members: first is set down the
Preambles, and Introduction to Letters, 57.

Secondly, the Letters themselves, with their number, in form, and by order
of Alphabet: together, with the Variations, or Degressions, of all the
variable, or degredible sorts thereof, from their original proportion, 66.

Thirdly, the Divisions, or Denominations of Letters, declaring their several
sorts by their names, 79.

Fourthlie, the Comparations, or Descriptions, of Single and Double Letters
conjunctlie, demonstrating and making each one equal with another of its own
kind; and that by describing so many as have bodies, heads, and tails, and
how many want them, 83. And then, the double Letters severallie, showing
their combination; that is, how they are made double, and united, 91.

Fifthlie, thou will not only find the Entry which leads unto Perfection
in the Art of Fair Writing, made open, and the Keys thereof delivered, 93.
But likewise the Transition, or through-going, which leads unto Perfection it
self, made patent: which declares the gradation how, means whereby, and
space how soon it may be attained unto, 96.

Sixthlie, an Abridgement of the Art, containing ten compendious Precepts,
each one whereof having its own proper name, (for memories cause:) and these
be, Limitation of Capitals, Dimission of Square, Expedition, Proportion,
Quantity, Situation, Conjunction, Distance, Difference, and Comprehension,
109. Together with a brief Alphabet conform to the same precepts; after the
which does follow the Conjugations and Formations of all the Letters of that
Alphabet, both for themselves, and in place of all other Letters of this kind,
whether in the great Alphabet, or else where; showing so many as be both
conjoined and framed together of one fashion, though of diverse Names, and
begin proceed and conclude nearest after one manner: first ranked
conjunctlie or together, and then severallie, that is, each one with the own
Rule by it self, declaring the true progress and course of the Pen therein
121. Likewise two Verses or Lines of Writ conform to the said brief
Alphabet; 113, with a Prologue, 109, and Epilogue, 116. All of them for the use
of all Learners, but chiefelie of such as would feign learn the common form
of Writ suddenly; leaving all others unto those who may spare longer time, and
take greater pains.

Seaventhlie, an Narration, demonstrating ^owe many strikes may suffice, to
cast each Single and Double Letter, before the Pen be taken off the paper,
136.

And eighthly, many of the Rules of perfection in Fair Writing; (each one
whereof proved by ^n Exemple) which treat of the right pr^t ortioning,
measuring, and situating, of Sing^e, and inseparable Double Letters, and
conjoyning thereof within words, 144.

As for the three other Sections, they are indivisible, and do contain the
remnant Rules of perfection, which again do comprehend the Constructions of
Fair Writing, or the right contriving, setting, and ordering, of Letters
within Syllables; 161. Words, 167. and Sentences, or Lines, of Fair Writ,
170. and that even to the end.

Further, the Special part of this Book contains a General preface unto
all the four Sections thereof, and the forenamed Contents of the same, 45.

And last, the Conclusion; treating somewhat of punctes, and accentes: as also
Abreviations; and of the Effayres and Writs, wherein they be most used; and
that in the end, 176.

CAUSES.
THe causes of Writing (as of other things) be four, the Efficient, Material,
Formal, and Final; but more Metaphoricke than proper.

The Efficient causes are two-folde, Principal and isntrumental, or Immediate
and Mediate; the Principal Efficient is the Writer, because he (under GOD) is
the special agent or user of the means, as well in applying each one to its
own use, as by concurring and cooperating with them in doing of the action.

The Isntrumental Efficients are likewise two fold, living and dead, the
living Instruments, be Members of the Writer his Body, as the Hand, Thombe,
and Fingers; and the dead, (or rather; not living, because it may be alleged,
that any thing which never lived can be said to be dead) is the pen only. And
whereas I omit and exeeme the Arm, which has the Hand and Fingers depending
thereon etc, and Penknife, which is the Isntrumental Efficient of the Pen
etc; I do neither of them wrong: seeing it is but the nearest causes which
^ertaine most unto this purpose; for it were ^oth needless and impertinent to
extend the ^auses of Writing farther than need requires. And while as the
Hand, Thombe, and Fingers, are not always the Isntrumental Efficients, seeing
some will Write with their Feet and Toes, yea with their Teeth also; It is not
any such accidental and extraordinary practices that I promised to speak
of, because they are both tedious and needless, for if those persons were not
maimed, o^ else too curious, they would not exerce them: and whatsoever other
Members they employ thereanent, do but supply the place of the former, which
be the proper Isntrumental Efficients of the action.

The Material cause of Writing, or of Letters written materiallie, (that is,
without signification) is the Ink, for as the paper is the subject whereon, so
the Ink is the matter whereof: and so whether it be a common and cheap
Liquor (of whatsoever color) demonstrating the true lineaments and paths of
the pen, as it proceeds forth thereof in framing of Letters; or a rare and
sumptuous Liquor, as liquid Gold or Silver, all do consist alike of matter or
substance, though otherwise they be not equivalent, but discrepant in valor;
for all become dry alike soon, and none of them remains liquid more than
another: but indeed if thou will look to the inhesion or penetration of
Letters in the subject, the same is rather accidental than substantial.

The formal cause of Writing, is the external shape of the Letter, whether it
be perfectly or imperfectly proportioned; for albeit by the decent proportion
of every Letter appears the beauty of all the writ, yet sometimes by the
custom of right reading, the Sense of Words may be understood, though the
Letters be imperfectlie written: but we should no more presume hereby to do
any thing in a wrong manner that it may be right, than to do evil that good
may proceed thereof.

And the final cause of Writing, is the former signifying of articulate voice,
whereby the thoughts of the mind are interpreted, and the demonstrating of the
mind without the voice; for as Aristotle teaches, Writs or Letters are the
Symboles of Voices or Words, (howsoever it may be thought that the Voice
being invisible cannot be represented by any external Sign) the Voices
Symboles of the Conceptions of the Mind, and the Conceptions of the Mind,
Images of things which be outwith the Mind: and that both of Divine Writs
and Humane.

Of Divine Writs, it pleased the ALMIGHTY, by the mean and embassage of
VVriting, to manifest His blessed Will to the World in all Ages, (but
chiefelie, and in greatest measure, now in these last Ages) concerning His
own Glory, and Man's Salvation: which if thou would know, (as thou
ought indeed, because they are the two chief ends, wherefore it pleased
Him to give thee breath, and bring thee unto this World: for all other thine
Errandes, are but as so many parentizes, which will be very soon closed,
after thou thy self art closed in the Grave, whereas these will accompany,
thee, and go with thee to the Heavens,) thou must, with assistance of his
Holy Spirit, search the Holy Scriptures, and there the Writs, or Letters,
will be as Signs, leading thee to the gracious Words which did proceed
forth of His Sacred Mouth there anent, (to speak so) and the words will
lead thee to the conceptions, and notions, which were in His Blessed Mind,
and the conceptions, as Symboles, will viuelie represent unto thy mind, those
things which thou knew not of before.

And of Humane Writs, that is, betwixt man and man, when one is astricted to
perform any point of duty unto another, by Writ, (because words are no
sooner uttered, but they evanish in the Air, except either VVitnesses be
present, or the party all the more trusty) the Writs will signify the words
which he spoke, the words will interpret the conceptions of his mind,
(except dissimulation, which now abounds, has made discrepance) and the
conceptions of his mind, words of his mouth, and subscription of his hand,
will tie, and oblish him to perform those things which he promised, and
under-tooke to accomplish; and that either in whole or in part, according to
his power: otherwise, if there were no Writing now, I suspect there would be
little good order in any common wealth, or credit kept, either amongst
strangers, or neighbors, yea, scarcely amongst friends; in respect of the
infidelity, and incredulity, which daily increases so much the greater, by
how much the consummation of this great and universal Fabric approaches
^earer.

OCCASIONS.
LAst, the OCCASIONS of Writing are two-folde, The particular Effayres of the
Writer, and employments of others; The motives which move the Writer, be
likewise two-folde, External, and Internal: The one is, when he writes
concerning his own business immediately, for some public respects, as
when a Creditor persueth a Debtor before an ordinary Judge; The other is, when
he is moved by some motive as yet privy unto himself, as when it pleases
GOD to stir up any to be Author of some needful precepts, worthy to
be put in practice, and the same not as yet manifested: And the Employmentes
of others, whether they be the Writers Superiors, Inferioures, or equals, all
of them, (as his Clientes in a manner) do employ him to write concerning their
negotiations, mediatelie, and conditionally, either for favor, thanks, or
recompense.

Thus much concerning the ELEMENTS and CONTEMPLATIONS of FAIR WRITING; and
although some of them may seem coincident, and ambiguous, yet (if so be) I may
be the better excused, since a Sojournour has no great shame to go a little
astray in an unknown and unpathed way, wherein few before him have walked:
always, for method and orders cause, I could not well omit them;
notwithstanding mine intention be rather to insist in the external form, and
beauty of Letters for the eye, as most pertinent to the practice of the Art,
than to enter over deeply into any acurate description of their internal
properties for the mind, because that is more proper unto a Science.

Now for as much as I have not only declared what kind of Work this is, the
use thereof, the causes mooving me to build it, mesured and laid the
foundation thereof, and given a name thereunto; but have showed likewise the
causes whereof it proceeds, the occasions of the proceeding, considered of
the height, deepnesse, length, and breadth of the same before it was founded;
and not only prepared all necessary materials for uppe-going thereof, but
provided all necessary Furniture to be so affixed therein, as both building
and plenishing to remain one, and the same, It follows then in the next
rowme, that it be completed: which (GOD be praised) does arise to a great
height, in the General part of this Book, and (almost in substance, though
not in style) is covered with the Crown of Perfection in the Special: and
albeit some of the Rules of either part be affirmative, some negative, and
some partly both, (for explications cause) yet they must not be ra^ked
according to the method of the Rule it self, but rather keep such place, and
comely ordour, even as is requisite for the nature of the Subject.

And so immediately they begin.
THE GENERAL PART OF THIS BOOK.
Sect. I. Comprehending all the Rules of Preparation, concerning the means
whereby to write the most usual forms of Characters.
THE DISIVNCT MEANS FROM the Writer.
Concerning the Penknife.
LET the Penknife be of a span in length; two parts thereof being Haft, and
the third part Blade: the haft either square or round, and somewhat decreasing
small unto the end, for the slitting up of the clift of the Pen. And let the
Blade be made cleanly sharp, and so kept (by the means of whetting) always
for its own use.

The qualities and tokens of the best Pens.
CHoose Raven and Goose Pens for any writ upon Paper, and small writ upon
Parchment; and Swan or Briszell pens for great writ upon parchment. Take few
of either sort, but such as be somewhat straight of staulke, long and great of
pipe, round and hard through out, but chiefelie at the highest part thereof next
the staulke. And if the Goose pens have whole feathers on them, the pen
whereof the feather has a hollownesse on the right side of the staulke, (and
some time on the left) almost at the head or point of the feather, is only the
best, whether it be the second or third of the wing: as for the first and
fourth Quill, they are seldom found to prove good. But if thou find none of
the former two sorts when thou wo^ldest, or finding any Raven or Goose pens
whatsoever, not having the foresaid tokens or marks, refuse them altogether,
except only in great necessity. For what avails it to make evil pens,
though they may be made never so well, if when they are made they write not
well? Always, since pens cannot be aye had alike good, I will not
discourage any, but rather inform them in the subsequent Rule how to use the
nearest remedy: only here, in stead of these evil second and third pens,
I advise thee to make choice of the best sort of first pens, rather than the
fourth: that is, such as have maniest of the forenamed five qualities: for
albeit they have all commonly some that be bad, as crookedness, shortness,
and oftentimes smalnesse, yet naturally the most part of them have as many
also that be good, such as roundnesse, hardness, and sometimes greatness.

The manner how to form the Pen.
AFter the Quill is made hot amongst the ashes of the fire, and well rubbed
(being wet with thy mouth) first with the back of a Knife, and then with a
woollen cloth, let it be fashioned in this manner:

First, let the Knife slent down the fore part or face of the Quill, (being
holden upwardes) which if it be straight, is known only by the hollownesse
in the midst of that self same side of the stalk: or being crooked, is
perceived as well by the crookednes as hollownes. But beware ye cutany more than
half through, that is, the piece not quite taken off. Thereafter, turn the
Quill about, and cut the other half on the back, just forenent the other
half cut on the fore side: to wit, a shorter slent, which comes away (with
the former) from the Quill, whereby remains two sharp points at the end.

Secondly, holding the quill so still, begin the clift rightly in the midst
of the last half cut; and riue it quickly up, but not far; and that either
with the end of the penknife, or with that piece of the quill which ye cut
off, (it being holden on the point of the knife) as ye shall find most
convenient.

Thirdly, turn the quill justly about again, with the face upwards, as it was
first, and begin forenent the highest part of the clift, and cut it down
cleanly on either side, both either proceeding alike, or one after another, as
thou please, till it decrease to such a slenderness, or smalnesse; or
continue in such a fulness, or greatness, as thou would have thy letters or
writ to be.

Fourthlie, cut down the mouth evenly, the length whereof not to exceed twice
the length of the clift; and let it descend by such diminution or abatement,
as it may desist and leave off with some height upwardes from the clift,
equally on either side: the lowest part whereof being aye right forenent the
highest part of the clift; to the effect the point or neb of the pen may
remain strong, and so both serve its own use the better, and endure the
longer. And if it be not cleanly riven, then must thou either pare it lightly
on the back, essey to slit it somewhat farther up, or else lose it.

And fifthlie, coll or cut the point cleanly and evenlie at once, either on
the nail of thy thombe, or on the staulke of another pen, and that after
three manner of ways, because all pens may be considered in three sorts,
good, ill, and indifferent.

NOTA. By the way remember, while as thou c^llest the pen, to hold thine eyes
so close, that although the cutting spang upwardes, (as it usuallie does) it
get no entres into any of them, to impede or hinder thy sight.

ALIA. As for that old Rule, DEXTRA PARS PENNAE, LEVIOR BREVIOR DEBET ESSE; I
reverence the good intention of the Author thereof, in that behalf, but find
no necessity in the observation: because naturally while as the pen is
holden to write with, it lies somewhat over to the right side: by which means
that side wears both thin and short enough of it self, though it be not
so made nor mended: and therefore the foresaid precept can have no force,
because it has no repugnance.

A good Pen, I say, is hard or strong, which if thou would either make or
mende, let it aye have so long a clift or passage through the same as may
easily vent or deliver the Ink, and be made small on either side, to the
intent it may both write cleanly, and mend often, without further ryuing up,
because it is strong of it self: And, notwithstanding of the smalnesse
thereof; it will not only write great in respect of the long reach of the
clift (and so going further in breadth) by sad thrusting or laying to, but
likewise small through light thrusting or laying to: and therefore, and because
of the ready passage of Ink through a long clift, and so the pen enduring to
write the more cleanly, as likewise serving and suffering to be often mended
with little travel, and without further riving up, and consequently so much
the longer unspent, it is a good sort of Pen.

An evil pen, is that which is souple or weak, which when thou make, or
mendest, must have a short slit, and be suffered to remain great on both
sides, because it is weak; and in regard thereof has neither strength to
reach far in breadth, nor suffer to be sad laid to the paper: and
therefore, and because of the evil deliverie of the Ink from a short clift,
which can neither be mended, unless it be riven farther up, and by means
thereof so much the more of the pen wasted, nor yet endure to write cleanly,
it is an naughty sort of pen.

And as for the indifferent sort of pens, which are neither too hard, nor too
soft, but equal, let an indifferent mediocritie be kept betwixt the length and
shortness of their cliftes, as also betwixt the greatness and sinalnesse of
either side thereof, and that both when thou make and mendest them.

Or, in few words, lea^ne and observe this one lesson for all the three sorts
of pens: Try whether the pipe of whatsoever pen be hard, soft, or
indifferent; and then the neb thereof upon the nail of thy thombe, b^t
sparingly: if it be hard, and the slit not yielding so far as it ought,
then riue the same a little farther up, and make it somewhat longer, unless it
clieue foul* if it be soft, and have too long a clift, that is, not
correspondent to the strength thereof, but above the same, it requires to be
corrected, and made somewhat shorter: and if it be indifferent, let either the
clift thereof be kept, or made so equal, and with such discretion as thou (by
the exercise of thine hand) shall find most req^isite.

The manner how to hold the pen.
Hold the mouth of the pen inwardly, just forenent the palm of thine hand;
to the effect the broad side may come down in casting of all letters, and the
narrow side slent up, lest they be small where they should be great, and
great where they should be small. But if thou be inclined to suffer the pen
somewhat to decline, or lie aside, let the mouth thereof touch that joint of
the middle finger, wherewith it is holden, that the declination thereof may be
toward the left hand. As also, for the more comeliness of small and compassed
parts of letters, it is requisite oftentimes even to turn the left side, or
edge of the pen directly about, where the mouth was of before; but not to
turn the right side of the pen contrary wise about; that is, to hold the mouth
thereof directly forenent the left hand, and the back thereof to touch the
middle finger of the right hand, but remain always in its own station,
except in so far as it will turn it self by occasion and course of the
former turninges.

Let the pen be holden betwixt the utter point of thy thombe, high, and the
inner side of thy middle finger, (not above, nor yet touching the nail
thereof, but a little before the same) low, and he bound or holden close to
both, with the inner part of thy foremost finger in the midst: but let it not
be so short holden that either the nail of thy middle finger cover the mouth
thereof, or yet touch the paper.

Let the pen neither be over softly holden, nor too fast griped, but in a
reasonable measure betwixt both; because in so doing thine hand will be able
both to write best and most, or endure longest to write well without wearying.

How to govern or lead the pen.
SInce all letters, for the most part, ought to have a greatness, a smalnesse,
and a mixture; that is, partly great, and partly small; let the pen be
sadly laid to the paper as it comes down in all letters, that the stroke
which it makes may be great; and let it go lightly, or touch the paper
favourablie, as it slenteth up in all letters, that the stroke which it makes
may be small; (yet it may be tolerated when the descending part of any
letter slenteth to the left hand, not only to suffer the pen to go
lightly, that the stroke may be small, but likewise to make the nether
point of straight tailed letters small; both because they are most seemly so
to be, and naturally while as the pen is a lifting, or in taking up, at the
finishing of that part of such letters, it arrogateth some liberty so to do)
and keep such an indifferent mids, either of increasing, great, or
decreasing, small, as is requisite in the mixed part, which occurreth most
often in the compassing or turning parts of letters.

And howbeit neither all the downe-comminges of the pen can be altogether
great, all the up-goinges altogether small, (even besides these two sorts
excepted) nor all turninges altogether mixed, yet herein as thou strivest to
observe, thy writ will be so much the more comely, and legeable. But there
be some who delight to show their skill in the exquisite smalnesse of
downe-comming, and compassed parts of letters; which I think is neither
natural to do, nor yet pertinent to be done; because each one of these three
letters, (and) so casten, is not only uneasier to write than if it were all
great where it should be; but appears (a little distant from the eye) like
this consonant () in respect of the utter smalnesse thereof, where it ought not
to be. Indeed in beautifying, garnishing, or decoring of letters (besides
up-goinges and slent downe-comminges to the left hand) conditionally that the
proportion thereof be not the worse, but the better, I commend there, that
which I discommend here, as there be right reasons, times, and places of all
things.

What loss happens through want of Pens.
ALbeit a Pen be a small thing of it self, yet what thing is employed in
greater Effaires? and oftentimes the want thereof a needful times, either of
matters penning, or subscribing of matters penned, has caused many so to
regrate, that they would afterwarde^ gladly have given the price of a thousand
for the like precious time, but have been refused. Therefore since time
bypast no ways can be recalled, yea, very hardly redeemed, be careful to
use rightly the time present, by learning with thy writing to make, and to
prevent the time to come by foresight, in using always to keep: because both
the most part which can make, write aye best with their own form of pens;
and those who keep them, have them readiest. Otherwise, if thou will not thus
study to serve thine own use, thou will be forced to borrow, and often times
be disappointed, either altogether, at least of pens meet for thee, and so
then be constrained to write with any pen howsoever made or mended to thee
by another, or else, will thou, nill thou, to want often times, and that
perchance when thou have most ado.

Admonitions concerning the Pen.
AS often as thou art to write either with a new or old made pen which is
become dry, forget not to wette the point, and the most part of the mouth
thereof well within, before thou dippe it in the Ink, lest it hardly receive
the same: or if it receive, it vent not cleanly through, but fall out so in
blobbes at the point that it blotte thy writ. And as often as thou take Ink,
let the pen be dipped aye at the farthest side of the Inke-horne, to the
effect the Linne^ or Cotton within the same may come in, or be betwixt it and
the Horn, that the point thereof incur no danger. And immediately
thereafter not only shake the superplus of the Ink out of the pen, into
the Inke-horne again, rather than else where: but dight away the Hairs, and
thick Ink from the point thereof, (if any be) before thou write.

Again, when it shall happen thee to irke, rest, or do ought else which
hinders thee any ways in performance of the action, and as yet not minded
to desist, it is more seemly (for that short time) to place the pen on thy
right ear, than either to put it in thy mouth, or yet to suffer it to remain
in the Inke-horne, and that for preventing and intercepting of the occasions
following on these childish enormities: Because many children making their
countenance by the first thereof, take occasion with their teeth both to
enseeble and shorten the staulke of the pen, without the which the pipe
becomes unable to do its own part, since it can be no better holden any
way than with its own staulke. And by occasion of the second absurd^tie, the
pen becomes so weak and feeble, through long standing amongst the Ink,
that it will write no more good writ, till it dry again at length, and be
mended of new.

And last, when the action is concluded, remember to clean^e the Ink forth of
the pen, that it may write the more cleanly at the next occasion. (I add
here the word [remember] because commonly all means are more regarded in the
beginning of any action, than in the end, when the use of them is expired.)
Indeed after the pen is well dried, if thou use to mend it aye before thou
begin, it will be both harder, and rine so much the more cleanly, by how
little it has been dight.

The use of a Pen without Ink.
IF thou can not follow curious letters abruptly by rule of eye, or have not
a perfect hand draught, essey first with a dry pen, made without a clift, for
that effect, in stead (or for lack) of Char-coale, Blacke-lead, etc. and
thereafter go over the same again with a writing pen, having Ink therein:
and what errors of the first drawing thou leavest uncovered in the second,
fail not to deleate and rub away on both the sides of the paper, when as the
letters are dry, and that with a clean tooth, or piece of other bone, made
smooth for that or the like use.

How to make common black Ink.
TAKE, of Scottish measure, a choppin of Ale woort, being cold and well
settled, and a pynt of rain or standing water, and put in a leaden or earthen
vessel of correspondent quantity alike wide up and down, with half a pound
of fresh galls grossly brayed, and stir them about amongst the liquor, the
space of two days thrice each day, and one quarter hour each time; and that
with a small or thin piece timber, made broad at the nether end for that use.
Then strain the gall water through a draught cloth into such another vessel
covered above, together with ^. ounces of Coppresse or Roman Vitriole, one
ounce of clear Gum Arabicke, and half an ounce of Alme, if it shall happen
to sink: thereafter stir all about, the space of a quarter of an hour, and
then it will be sufficient.

Moreover, remember to fill up the first vessel again with half of the
former quantities or measures of galls, woort, and rain water; and stir the
same about thrice each week till the foresaid Ink be spent: like as thou
may supply aye the same with some augmentation so long as the color of the
gall water remains Brown. Whatsoever thing is written herewith, may be
dried with sand or gray paper, if the haste of thine affairs may not suffer it
to dry of the own accord.

How to make fine black Ink.
FOr writing any heretable right, or whatsoever thing either of great
importance, long endurance, or to men of great account, the most perfect
black, and lustring Ink, is most excellent and requisite; which if thou
would learn to make, either for thine own use, or to pleasure thy friend,
use and employ these means following:

Take Vessels of the former quantity and substance, and put the preceding
measures of materials and liquor therein; but either white wine or May dew in
stead of the rain water, and the gall water to stand the space of 20. days:
at the expiring whereof, thou must add to this composition these ingredients;
to wit, an ounce weight (at the least) of the fume of Rozet, otherwise called
Lamp black, half an ounce of the Pulver of an Hearts horn, being burnt and
beaten, or the like measure of the roots of white Lillies dried and in like
manner made in Pulver: all these requiring to be mixed with Gum Arabicke
water, before they be put amongst the rest. Likewise (if thou please) thou
may ad thus much further, an ounce of white Sugar candy, or common Sugar,
the white of two Eggs casten, and a Pomegranate or Sithron skin being dried
and beaten; and then let all stand the space of ten days before thou write
therewith, either in a shaddowie and cold place, or against the Sun as thou
think best: if thou make choice of the first, any of the former sort of
vessels will be sufficient, but if of the next, a Glass is most meet.

Remember to stir about this Ink, the said 10. days space, as often daily as
of before; and so often thereafter as thou take thereof: but before thou write
with the same, strain it through a linen cloth, being either knit about the
mouth of the vessel, or spredde above the mouth of the Inke-horne; and that
for retaining and holding back the grounds or thick Ink, because it is
profitable in the vessel amongst the rest, but both unprofitable and noisome
in the Inke-horne: in the one, because most substance remains in thick Ink,
and therefore it is the best mixture for thin Ink: and in the other, since it
is thick, it will not pass cleanly through the Pen; but both readily blot
whatsoever thing is written therewith, and hinder thee in finishing of the
action.

And if the same either grow whoare, or exhaust so through long standing, and
seldom troubling, that it cannot serve thy use; or yet when the thin Ink is
altogether spent, supply the remnant with a mutchken of vinegar, and rain
water, by equal proportions; half an ounce of bay salt, or either more or
less of these, as the quantity of thy composition requires: stirring all
about once each week at the least.

Finally, whatsoever thing is written herewith, may be dried either at the
fire a far off, with tighers of Brass, Copper, Tin, or white Iron, being
shorn very small, kept cleanly, and casten thereon; or else of the own
accord: (as thou please, or as time straiteth thee) for it being thus
composed, will be so clammie, that whatsoever thing cleaves thereunto when it
is wet, hardly ever severeth therefrom when it is dry.

And last, if thou would have any great letters or small writ written
heerewith to luster, or glister, in greater measure than the substance of the
Ink it self does affoorde, then take a pincell made of a Cons tail, and
dippe amongst gum Arabicke water, being dissolved thick, and lay over the same
therewith, after they are well dried of themselves.

The hinderance that proceeds of the want and scantnesse of Ink.
Whether thou be an ordinary writer that live thereby, or one that usest
it as a special help in thine effaires, have such plenty of Ink always
with thee as thine Inke-horne may easily contain: lest either when it is
scarce, thou ding back the point of the Pen, by thrusting it to the Horn,
Linen, or Cotton within the same; or else when it is deficient, thou ryue the
clift thereof farther up, by preassing to seek it where it is not to be had: and
so thou will be both hindered and angered when thou have most ado, as also
ashamed before whom thou so do; and that not only for lack of Ink, but in
like manner through often mending and changing of the pen in the midst of thy
writ.

Further, if thou neither be in haste, nor can have plenty of Ink at that
instant; take forth that which thou have rather with a worn pen, and lay upon
the side of the Inke-hornes mouth, that thou may take thereof as need
requires; than to spill or spoil the pen wherewith thou writest, through
default before said.

Concerning the Pennar and Inke-horne.
WHosoever thou be that art subject to write much and often, choose thy Pennar
and Ink-horne of such quantity, as that the one may contain plenty of
pens, and the other store of Ink: neither yet be ashamed to have them of
such a common and easy form, as they may be always separated, and yet kept
together with a durable string, wherewith they must be hung always at thy
Girdle (either before or behind as thou please) wheresoever thou resortest,
and not hid in thy Pocket. But there be some so inclined to civilitie, (or
rather to the love of their own reputation) that although they have purchased
large means by the mean of writing, and daily adds there unto, beside the
defraying of all charges otherwise; yet are ashamed in the very midst of
their profession to honor the Calling that far, (which has both honored
and preferred them so much) as to carry those necessaries in the most frequent
manner, without the which, or the like, they could not put it in practice, and
so want all which thereby they obtain: whereas many others which perhaps
deserve more, and receive less, may be easily known by these tokens of what
profession they be; which is a thing very seemly, yea, and agreeable to the
custom observed as well by sundry Artists, as Artificers of other Arts and
vocations, who think it no disparagement. Again, not only the Pennars, or
Penne-cases of the sorts that be carried in private manner, do hold few
pens, and those very short; but both the natural heat of the body makes
the color of the Ink, kept in these Ink-horns, soon to fade, after it is
dispersed in writ; and suddenly to exhaust, and be dried up in the
Inke-horne; or at least become so thick, that it will stop its own passage
through the clift of the Pen. As also aye before thou begin to write, they
require to be taken sundry, in so many pieces, that it is hard either to
keep them so long as thou writest; or after thou have written, to get them
conveaned, and set together again.

Have no Inke-horne, but that which may be closeli^ stopped as thou carriest
it; left the Ink overflow, and pollute thine Apparel, whereof if the color
differ from the color of the Ink, it will be hard to find remedy for
reparing of the fault, except the more timely regard be had thereunto, before
the penetration and drinking in thereof in that wrong subject. That sort of
Inke-horne, which (besides the stopper) is all of one piece, alike abroad,
both above, to receive the pen easily, without doing harm thereunto; and
under to stand on, is the best to be chosen: but none of those which are high
or long, whether consisting of one piece or more, because in taking Ink forth
thereof, the pen not only spilleth often times on their bottom, because
the deepenesse thereof is uncertain: but also even in the entry, since it is
too narrow. And that which is yet worse, a great part of the pipe thereof will
be so defiled with Ink, (by reason of the said deepnesse) that it will
reedilie blotte thy fingers, and so cause thy fingers to blotte the paper.
Last, while as thou perusest these necessaries, let them either hing still on
thy Belt, if then thou have not much to write, and that the Ink abound not: or
else stand on the writing table, beside thine hand which writes, because it is
nearest and readiest there: lest otherwise, if either at the left hand, or yet
directly before thee, some of the Ink fall out of the pen by the way, in
transporting thereof over thy writ, and so likewise disgrace it.

Concerning the Paper.
Have ever a sheet of clean Paper rightly folded in thy little Book, called
VADE MECVM, or more, as need requires, kept in better manner, that is, either
unfolded, or in fewer foldings: lest otherwise no less skaithe happen unto
thee, than by the want of pens in thine urgent business: (as is forewarned
in the own place) for although Ink may be hastily made, and after diverse
ways in time of need, yet pens are not always so to be had, (even where
they use sometime to be in greatest plenty) nor every where to make, though
thou could never so well: and paper farrelesse, which is not only more rare
to be had, but more difficill to make, albeit thou have abundance of the
matter whereof it is made.

When thou art to write on the paper which thou shall happen to have, let it
lie square on that part of the Table before thee, where thou sit or
stand, and be remooved at so many times, or by so many degrees,
forthwith from thee, as lines do increase in number in-with to thee.

Let both those who have made little progress in learning to write, and those
who have little leisure to learn, or both as one, make choice of the Page, or
Leaf, (of ordinary paper) in quarto, made in the long line volume: because
the one sort (if they would profit) must needs write slowly, till they amend
sufficiently: and so great Pages would both suddle in time of the writing, and
be tedious (for them) to write: and the other, may not write much at ones, for
lack of time, as said is. But accordingly as skill grows with the first,
opportunity with the last, and dexterity with both, it will be more fit
time to choose greater volumes.

And if thou would know particularly how to make that form of book, take
a Paste-boord equal in quantity with one of the sheets of Paper whereon thou
art to write, and fold it together justly in the midst fourefolde, pressing
down all upon each other; that the lirkes or folding parts thereof may appear
the more viuelie for the uses following: thereafter extend it again in length
and breadth, as before it was folded, the broad side lying always justly to
thee (that is, square on the Table before thee, as thou sit or stand)
then fold and few therein, eight sheets of cleanly and well bearing paper,
after this manner. First, fold 6. thereof in the long volume in quarto, for
thine own writing; and few them justly on the lirke going through the broad
side next unto thee, (as is immediately before specified) and next, fold the
remnante two in the short volume in quarto, for thy Exemplares; and few one
thereof upon the lirke toward or forenent the right hand, and the other upon
the lirke toward or forenent the left hand: and so the middle lirke (that is,
the lirke justly betwixt both) will be reserved; which require^h to be cut
forth, the breadth of an intch, from the one end to the other: and although
these two be thus divided, yet both being conjoined with the third, will
appear as it were three Books bound all in one. By virtue of which division,
and conjunction, all the Exemplares will both endure longer, and be kept
clean^r, than otherwise: and that not only by in-laying of one, or of all the
Exemplares of the one side, when thou writest by any of the other: but
likewise, when thou discoverest and perusest any of either side, all the rest,
both of that same side, and the other, may be obscured and reserved. Moreover,
cut the outmost Lease of the Paper whereon thou writest, half out on either
side; to the effect one of them may lie in-over, and cover the page of the one
side of all the Book, while as thou writest on any page of the other: whether
it be the page already written, or the page next following to write.

Touching the form of the Copies to be thus heereunto appended, employ any
cunning Master Writer to write four Examplares* either of Secretary or Roman
Hand, (as best agrees with thy business and inclination) and two Alphabets
conform thereunto, the equal half whereof on each side of the Book, filling
the uppermost side of every Leaf, both toward the right hand and the left,
saving the the uppermost Leaves: to wit, the utter Leaf of each side of the
Book, saving the uppermost pages of the two uppermost Leaves, (to wit, the
utter Leaf of each side of the Examplare part of the Book: which, if thou
please, may be reserved to contain thy name or subscription, and that in
Secretary Hand upon the one, and Roman on the other.

And last, let one of the four Examplares be great, another greater; one
small, another smaller: single and double Letters in one page together, and
Capitals in another page by themselves. And remember to cause all the Copies
upon the right side of the Book serve it self, through out all, to wit, the
first or left side of each Leaf, all the Examplares of the left side content
it self also with the Copies thereon, that is, to serve the last, or right
side of every Leaf: and seldom borrow one from another, because both have
alike: whereby they will lie directly forenent thy Face, on whatsoever side
thou writest.

When thou intendest to write any thing of great valor, and have large time
to do the same, let the paper be cleansed from all hairs and motes, that may
either hinder the course of the pen, stay it to write cleanly, or any ways
cause maculation; and that with Stanch grain: which if thou would learn to
make and use, I remitte thee to these few Rules that be made in English Verse,
at the forefront of that print Exemplar book set forth by Thomas Trippe, and
of other books, by other Writers.

Likewise there be ways how to take blottes of Ink forth of paper or
parchment; how to boil Ink, and make diverse kinds, and colors thereof; yea,
(which is more) to dissolve Gold, and Silver; and to do sundry other things
concerning curious and secret Writing, Geometry, Drawing, and Painting:
wherein I will not insist, because they are fully declared in diverse Authors;
whereof many be more obscure, and tedious to practice, than either needful,
or profitable being practiced.

But it is more expedient than needful that either Stanchgrain, or such others
as these before mentioned, be used in all writs concerning all matters, nor
yet are they needful for every Writer: for each Practisioner cannot, (nor
needs not) be a perfect Artist; neither is it requisite, that each one that
be perfect, take such pains in doing of every common thing, as at some
extraordinary and rare occasion, when he intends either to honor his
Country, those who employ him, or for some particular respects to demonstrate
his own cunning by the exquisitnesse and excellency of fair Writ.

Concerning the squaring of Paper.
LEt the Paper have dowble square, that is, two scores for every line of
letters or writ, the first 5. days when thou beginnest to learn; whether thou
be to build on an old foundation, or to cast down the same, and begin the
Alphabet of new. Which time being expired, let the square evanish by little and
little the space of 13. days, or yet some more or fewer as thou enrichest in
knowledge and practice: for this part of the rule cannot be strictly observed
by all alike, but must of necessity have some larger bounds for some than for
others; because all be not of one age to conceive, and those that be, cannot
conceive all alike soon; and though they could, they cannot with their heart
practice that conception alike well.

If thou can not draw the just meethe of writ lines abruptly with the point
of a Knife, take help of Square and Compass, and fill a sheet of Paper with
pefect black scores, all alike distant, of such number as may easily be
contained on the clean paper whereupon thou art to write* and each one of such
length as thou would have the lines, and of such breadth as thou would
have the bodies of letters to be: to the intent that the writing paper being
cleanly and thin, and the squared paper laid under the same, the scores may
appear therethorow, and so make the lines both to go directly forth to the
end, and be of equal distance. Or thou may either square the writing
paper softly, with the two points of the Compass, both the scores with one
travel, so narrow or wide as the proportion of the letters requires; or with
a knife, being thick edged at the point, or else with a small piece of black
lead, as thou shall think expedient. (As for a pen with a clift, because it
has no such strength as the Compass, it cannot be so meet for squaring: for
incontinent it will slitte further up in the self, and so make the scores to
be further and further distant.) If thou make choice of the last of these
means proponed, and would have the scores that be made therewith to
evanish, that both the writ may the more viuelie appear, and thine own
ignorance the less; then rub them softly with a piece of Wheat bread,
after that the writ is well dried of its own accord.

THE CONIVNCT MEANS TO THE WRITER.
Concerning the gesture or behavior of the head and eyes in the act of writing.
While as thou writest, let thine head bow down as little as is possible: and
if thine eyes have no infirmity, look directly to the pen as it is in the
action; lest, if thou do otherwise, thy lines or letters, either resemble
thine head, by declining; or thine eyes, by wavering.

Concerning the position of the body.
SEt thy body somewhat straight up, that it may lean the less to the Table
(except when either Sight or Light is deficient, or yet the Table too low) And
the midst of thy body (descearned by the Buttons standing endlonges or down
thy breast) justly forenent the border toward the left hand of the page, so
long as it is in quarto. But in greater volumes either of Paper or Parchment,
it will not be amiss, though thy body follow the lines so far as the
length of them requires, if thou usest not to draw the book nearer thee at
the writing of each one.

How to hold the arms.
Hold in thine arms so nigh thy body, as that thine elbowes may remain
within an handbredth to thy two sides, if the Table be not too high; lest
otherwise if thy right elbow ^y farther forth, thy lines ascend in the ending;
or if thy left elbow ly farther forth, they de^cend in the ending; or if they
both ly farther ^oorth, they be either elevated and borne up, or ^lse abandoned
and holden bowne in the midst, ^rregularlie.

Hold not thy right arm any farther forth ^ehinde, than it may ly in over
the Table before, by the length of a spanne; and that by removing thereof, and
thy writ, aye forwards a ^ittle, as lines do multiply on the volume; to ^he
effect thine hand may be the more steadfast both to write well and speedily.

How to hold the hands.
LEt thy right hand, which leads the pen, stand or depend on the end of thy
Ring and little fingers, rather than lean on the knockles thereof; lest the
pen lie aside in such sort, that it neither touch the paper with both sid^
aye at ones (as it ought) nor yet have sufficie^ passage for the Ink. And
though there be litt^ congruence or correspo^dence betwixt this ru^ and these
four patterns of an hand holding pen at the fore-ende of the said Thomas
Trip^ his Book, and others: yet who list to try, w^ find this no less
worthy of imitation a^ observation than any of them.

Let not the left hand follow the motion o^ the right hand, but remain still
on the margin^ right forenenst whatsoever line thou writest and hold therein a
Compass, made for that use of such length as the lines be, to the intent it
man reach to whatsoever part of the line where the pen goes, for keeping of
the paper straig^ down, that it molest thee not while as tho^ writest. And for
that effect, let the Compas^ be somewhat extended forth, the one poi^ thereof
set above that line which thou shall happen to be writing, and the other under
the same: but in great Volumes, where there belong lines, the left hand must
have liberty ^ follow the right, because the whole body will be either
constrained so to do, or else aye ^ the ending of one line, to begin another.

Further, let aye thine hands be clean, le^ not only they hinder the Ink
to go thorow^ the pen, but so pollute the paper, that though (with
difficulty) the same receive writ, it have manifold blemishes and defectes,
in stead of beauty and comeliness.

How to hold the thombe, and fingers.
LEt thy thombe and fingers which hold the pen, and chiefelie the foremost
finger, crook as little inwardly as possibly thou may; but rather be
stretched forthwith upon or about the pen, as it is in the motion; because
it is both the rightest and seemliest form of holding.

THE GENERAL RVLES OF INFORMATION.
SECT. II.
Comprehending so many Rules of Information as may be extended generally, how
to write the most usual Characters.

To follow an Exemplare.
Endeavor to resemble a most perfect Pattern of fair Writ, carefully and
attentively, till thou write either as well, or sufficiently; if neither thou
can surmatch it, nor that it cannot be surmatched.

The purity and exactness requisite in fair Writ.
LEt not letters of one sort of Character be mixed within words of another: but
each sort serve it self, with the Capital, Single, and Dowble Letters,
belonging to its own Alphabet. Yet there be some who intermingle Secretary
letters in words of Roman writ, and Roman letters in words of Secretary
writ: they may mix their Dishes together as they please, but I will hold mine
several.

How to place Capital letters in fair Writ.
BEstow such a fair rowme at the beginning of the first line of thy writ,
above, under, and within the squares of the same, upon beginning Capital
letters, as is expedient for the quantities thereof: as also the whole rowme
betwixt any line which thou shall happen to write, and the line above the same,
upon middle Capitals, as they occur and require to be written. But beware, thou
neither permit them to touch the written line above (I mean bodies or middle
parts of letters therein) nor yet come under the low score of whatsoever line
thou shall bappen to write, except those of them that have tails.

An admonition.
FOr thy better observing both of the former rule, and of all that follow; thou
must consider that every line has two draughts, either expressed or
understoode, leading it from the beginning to the end; one thereof high, and
another low: which sometimes I call Squares, and sometimes Scores; but I name
them never Lines, nor Rules: both because two of them serve only one line, and
that I have other matter to speak of Lines and Rules; which therefore I
distinguish by several names, for shunning all ambiguitie, and uncertainty.

How to write evenlie, without Square.
WHatsoever Proportion, Quantity, and Situation of Letters, great or small;
and by consequent, of Sillables, Words, Sentences or Lines, (I mean, not as
they are spoken, but written) thou learnest by Dowble Square, whether it be by
practice alone, practice grounded upon skill, or by consideration had by this
book of both; let the same Analogy be ay kept in all Set Writ, and best sorts
of Common Writ, as well by imagination without the help of Square, as by
imitation with it: and that not from the beginning to the ending of one line
absolutely; but eve^ constant. lie, continewing from the beginning of the
first Line of thy writ, to the ending of the last. And here follows a perfect
way, whereby thou may both rightly and easily observe the same.

When one or more letters having heads, or tails, or both, or the like, do
occur in words, measure not the letters wanting heads, or tails, or both, that
shall happen to ensue, by their heads or tails; but by their bodies, (at the
least, by so much as each one has of a body, whether whole or half) and
failing of all, by the last letters of that sort that preceeded, whether in the
same word, or in the word preceding the same, (meaning those letters which
want heads, or tails, or both, as they do) and that by making a meethe or
mark with the pen, known only to thy self, aiming lineallie and justly
endlongs the scores, from the one to the other: which thou may do, (both on
the high square and low, though no square be expressed) so long as thy skill
is weak; howbeit 3. or 4. letters having heads or tails, should interveane.

With what expedition to write.
SInce perfect and commendable writing can neither be learned by strength,
haste, nor speed; but by slight, patience, and diligence; wherefore, if ever
thou would aspire thereunto, reject those wrong means, and accept the right,
that is, write aye attentively, sparingly, and carefully, till thou either
hit, or shoot very near the mark thou aimest at: for 3. lines are better
thus written, than 30. otherwise. And how much less paper thou spendest by
this restraint, thou will learn in so much the greater haste; (and so this is
a rule of expedition always, though not in speed of doing, to do much; yet
in speed of learning, to do rightly.) But indeed afterward, thou may
endeavor by degrees to such speed, as not the less thy writ may be yet
correct. And further, let thy skill so appear even in the celeritie of things
quickly done, that there yet remains much more in thee, the doer; if greater
matters should occur, and more fit occasions offer, to essey.

Such Exemplares as be best, and meetest to resemble.
IF thou would reap any fruit by the seed of the travels, which thou
sowest in this arable field; let thy Exemplars be always so exactlie and
authenticklie written, by an expert Writer or Notar in thine own sight (thou
giving attendance at his left side, while as he writes them) that every
Letter, Word, and Phrase therein, may observe the whole Rules thereof, in so
far as it can extend thereunto. And while as thou resemblest the same, if
thou carefully perceive the true progress of the pen, in casting of letters;
and then follow the true paths and lineaments thereof, as it departs out of
one letter, and enters into another, but not with the words thereof gotten in
memory by often writing, thou will learn soonest with fewest Copies, but if
otherwise, with maniest; or rather with few, wherein the sentences be written
backwardes: because they will be so much harder, both to get and keep in
mind, and thou so much the more moved and constrained at the casting and
conjoining of every letter, to behold the Pattern: for the remembrance of the
sense, and forgetfulness of the letter, be two chief causes often times, not
only of the long time spent, and little profit obtained, by many that would
seem to be very instant and diligent in learning to write; but of the great
discredit and infamy it breeds to their instructors, who be innocent of
their negligence: for there be many Parents, who will not have their Children
chastised, but lovinglie admonished, although it should avail never so little.

The distance requisite in Fair Writing.
IN Set writ, and best sorts of Common writ, let all Single and Dowble Letters,
as also all Sillables, Words, and Sentences or Lines; be of equal distance,
each one of its own kind from another: that is to say, letter from letter
within syllable, when it contains diverse letters; syllable from syllable
within word, when it contains diverse sillables; word from word within line,
when it contains diverse words; and line from line within page, when it
contains diverse lines: except in a Poetical, and sometimes in a Prose
Abreviation within a syllable, and when a period occurreth within a line,
betwixt words; letters in the first, and words in the last, require to be
farther distant than otherwise. In like manner, not only when the whole first
line of thy writ is great, the second requires to be somewhat farther distant
therefrom, than any one of the rest from another; but when thou shall happen
to write any matter in Precept or Article manner, it is requisite that either
thou leave a line in the beginning, or midst, not out-red, and begin another as
nigh as any of the rest, (as occasion offers, or as the cause requires) and
that for distinguishing of the several heads of the subject: or else, if the
precept or article conclude equally with the line, thou must purposelie leave
the bounds of a line void, betwixt the ending of the one, and beginning of
the other, for that same effect. And in all those things, both commanded and
excepted, as thou carefully strivest to observe, the more decency and
seemlinesse thereby of thy writ, will conquest thee the greater commendation.

The good Order, or Neighborhood, requisite in fair writing.
IN the self same writs, let neither the head nor tail of any letter of one
line, do harm to the body, head, nor tail of any letter of another line;
nor yet within the bounds where they stand, in what soever line: but let each
one be conveyed, some other way, from another, and kept (so far as is
possible) within its own marches and bounds: which be known by the high
sort of heads, being measured enlongs above the high square; and low sort of
tails, alonges under the low square: which be the indifferent sort of both,
as, God willing, shall be declared particulardlie hereafter in the own place.

The nearest remedy how to bring irregulare Lines in order again.
IF thou chance either through ignorance, or negligence, to write out of
lineall order, (which thou will readily do, and much more, if thou be
inclined to any of the two) that is, to make lines up or down at the
beginnings, endings, or midst; take here the next remedy for each one of those
faults, being 6. in number: which if thou will use, (as thou may easily)
the overthrow of that thy labor, will be intercepted through timous care: and
that in the line immediately ensuing any wrong line; lest by delay, thou not
only anger thy self, and others, lose time and travel: but likewise bring thy
self in so evil a custom of irregulare writing, that thou will weary to
write any at all; if thou be such a one, as have others at command to supply
thy place.

First, if thy fault be in making any line too high in the beginning, then
begin the next line so much the lower, and proceed therein the more
carefully, both to the end, and in the end.

Secundarilie, if thy fault be in making any line over low in the beginning,
then begin the ensuing line so much the higher, and proceed therein the more
attentively.

Thirdly, if thy fault be in making any line to mount over high in the
ending, then let the line next following thereafter be begun so much the
lower: the amendment of the one, and enormitie of the other, beginning and
proceeding by equal proportions: and so forth, by contraries, using the like
remedies for the remnant of the former absurdities, and that not of lines
only, but of written words, syllables, and letters also.

Moreover, if diverse lines shall happen to go wrong, before thou perceive
thine own error therein, then presume not to amend the same altogether in
one line; lest thereby the blanke be so great, that it be more unseemelie
than the fault it self; and so the last error be worse than the first. But
if thou would extricate and unwind thy self out of that snare, that is, have
thy fault obscured, at least, not so readily perceived; then amend the same
by little and little, in such measure, and number of lines following after, as
the error contained which went before.

In what bounds to comprehend fair Writ.
LEt thy writ be seldom dispersed, but rather compact; which will better
consist in joining closely together of letters or syllables within words,
than either of words with words, or lines with lines: Except at sometimes,
when thou art driven to any extreamitie, through straitness, or lack of
rowme, it will be tolerable to use the last compendious means, as well as the
first: and that by studying seriously to contain thy matter in such little
bounds as thou have, (avoiding only confusion) than either to hazard the
valor thereof, or have thy labor lost: yea, or any ways disgraced.

Encouragement against weariness in writing.
IF thou can not follow the Pattern so near, nor be pleased with thy
writ, at all times, as thou would, notwithstanding thou have both convenient
occasions when, and necessaries wherewith; yet because even fair Writers are
not able to write always alike well; be not utterlie discouraged, nor desist
therefrom altogether, although at that time thou rest somewhat male-conted:
(for perchance thou have some other meditation in thy mind) but endeavor, with
resolute courage, to redeem the same at other occasions, when both thy mind
and hand are more bent to concur in that exercise: For daily experience
teaches, that many things will be refused at one time, and yet granted at
another.

How to extract any matter attentively.
When thou extractest any thing of great length, or valor, having long
lines, whether on Parchment, or yet Paper, lay a cleanly square, of
correspondent length, aye so justly upon the lines immediately under that
line, out of the which thou art copying, as that neither syllable nor letter
thereof appear, or be licentiate to show it self until the former line be
fully extracted: and thereafter, flit the square down nearer thee a piece,
and cover the line therewith that follows: to the effect, the line that was
first covered may kythe it self, and the matter thereof likewise be
abstracted: and so forth, of every line thoughout all the Volume before thee,
from the second, to the penult. But before thou write by any line, of the
matter before thee, remember to make a small secret tick or mark on the margin
thereof, just forenent the beginning of the last extracted line; and so do in
each line of the same to the end, for helping of thine own memory: because
such as be not daily acquainted with the matter, as well as the letter,
perceiving lightly any word insert in two lines together, may either perhaps
take the word written in the last line, in stead of the like word in the
first: or else, the word written in the first line, in place of the like word
in the last: and so thereby any of those lines, being either omitted, or
repeated, will, out of all question, make thy whole travel of little force or
effect.

NOTA.
Although the observation of this former Rule may seem su^e^^^^ous, because
the form of extracting therein contained is not so speedy as abrupt writing:
yet it may be answered, that that writer may have far sooner done who
spends a little more time, in performing of any thing well, than he that
writes rashly, or unadvisedlie, either by omitting or adding some things
which be ought not: and so, when all is done, is forced to write it over
again. Is not the Snaile both as goodlike, and comes as well to her purpose
at night, that perhaps has not crept a foot of ground all the day, as the
Swallow, which has flowne an hundredth miles out and in? And whether comes
he sooner, and in greater safety, unto his journeyes e^de, who goes
endlonges a Bridge, although the way thereunto be somewhat about: or he that
presumes to cross a dangerous Ferrie at the nearest, exposing himself to the
adventure of Boat, Tide, and Tempest: and yet being either greatly hindered
of his Voyage, endangered of his person, or disappointed of his purpose, will
afterward be forced to go about, when all other means have failed him? Is
he not then double farther out of the way, (besides the losing of much time,
and casting himself in the former dangers) than if he had gone somewhat about
willingly at the first?

ALIA.
When thou writest any thing, of great importance, it is requisite to lay a
sheet of clean paper under thine hand which writes, covering the whole paper
whereon thou writest: and another to cover all the writ it self (except aye
the three last written lines: that by the order, and compactnesse thereof, the
rest which follow may be measured) and that for preserving of both, from all
blottes of Ink, which may occur, and any such danger they may incur.

THE SPECIAL PART OF THIS BOOK: Containing the particular Rules of
Information, and all the Rules of Perfection, how to write the most usual
Characters; but chiefelie the SECRETARY, which is set down here, both for it
self, and in place of all the rest.
THE PREFACE.
THE Causes wherefore I insist not particularly, in any sort of Character,
but the SECRETARY, be three in number: First, because maniest like it best,
both for the excellency and celeritie thereof: and therefore is now used
through out the most part of EVROPE, but chiefelie in His Majesty's Dominions.
Secondly, for the Natural Affection I owe to His Highness, all His
Subjectes, (whereof I am one) and to all His Majesty's Realms, but chiefelie
SCOTLAND, my native Country. And thirdly, for shortness cause: for
doubtless if the whole sorts of Characters, which be comprehended under the
general Name, WRITING, and whereof this SECRETARY is one, were as largely
taught, by Rules of Art, as it is, and all the particular differences thereof
declared, I suspect that Work would be so tedious, and the Volume thereof so
great, that the space of a Man's Days would be over little to write it, and
not too much to read it.

Therefore I have made choice to give special Rules for one sort of Character,
and general Rules for all the rest: howbeit many of the Special Rules will
agree also unto sundry of the most usual Characters: (although not to them
all, nor yet strictly to every part of those, unto which they agree) and so,
both General and Special, in effect, serving as Rules, and the diverse sorts
of Writ comprehended under the Name, SECRETARY, as Examples: because in any
Grammar all the Language is not expressed: for then it would spender the whole
days of the Aged, let be of the Youth, to pass through: but compendiouslie
directed unto by Precepts, and briefly demonstrated by Examples: yea, often
times one thing expressed, representing an 100. things understood. And as
Grammars were made of certain Observations, partly heard by the Ear, and
partly collected forth of Ancient Authors of before: so is this Grammar made
to aggree with the most easy and common Practique, observed by all skillful
and fair Writers, which have been, and now are (as it pleases God.) And
whereas the Practice of fair Writing does preceede the Precepts thereof, so
many Latin Authors are anteriour to the Latin Grammar. And it is certain,
there has been as perfect Latin before there was a Grammar, as there was
fair Writing before this Book, which is the Grammar thereof. And if the
Latin Grammar be the Key of all Learning, this Grammar is the Key of that
Grammar: because it can hardly be learned without the use of Writing: Ergo,
the Grammar of fair Writing is the Key of all Learning: For, to have a Key
locked up, and want the Key of the Place where it lies, is (as it were) to
have a fine Bow, but it is in the Castle. And insomuch as some do allege,
that the Latin Grammar may be learned without the use of Writing, or the
Grammar thereof: the Answer is, So may Learning be as well had without the
use of the Latin Grammar: I mean, by exercising the Works of ancient Authors
for obtaining of the language, till they aspire thereby unto farther learning:
but none of them so soon, nor yet so well, as by these ordinary means. And
albeit I had given the Title [GRAMMAR] unto this Book, it had not been amiss;
because it would not have been repugnant to the nature thereof: for the
original word, (...), signifiing Litera, being generally applied, may be
as well, yea, (I may say) better, attributed unto letters, than unto languages.
And as touching the common use of a Grammar, such as Declining, Comparing,
Conjugating, Forming, and Constructing of Words; here the like of all these
things is done of letters; howbeit in another form, which is proper unto it
self: for, as a diclinable Word is declined through diverse Cases, from the
straight Nominative; so is a variable Letter bowed and chainged from the right
Proportion thereof, through diverse occasions of practice, and otherwise framed
in one written Word, than in another; as likewise it is compared or made
equal, with another of the own kind, conjugated or conjoined, formed or
fashioned, and constructed or set, at diverse occasions, in diverse written
Words, as the proprieties thereof do require. But yet since the Title
[GRAMMAR] is already chosen, and become common to diverse languages, I will
not insist to compare with them, nor strive for it: both because I have other
as good Titles at command; and they are more to be pitied nor envyed, which
have but one Title amongst them all: and what regard, if it were not borrowed
too?

And albeit strictly, (that is, in every jot) the Rules and Exemples of this
Book, do not agree to all the most usual sorts of Characters, but to the
most part; yet largely they may all be both better considered, and followed
thereby, than otherwise: and any diligent Practiser that is experimented, by
joining both the General and Special parts in practice together, may easily
remove any little difference betwixt whatsoever Rule thereof, and the like
place of whatsoever other Character, which it shall happen them to choose
rather than the Secretary. It is true, I can hinder none to prefer any
Character they please thereunto; but so far as I can perceive, the extent of
the Rules thereof reaches as far, as the bounds of any other: and
therefore, they may both easier be conferred therewith, to know the
difference, and applied thereunto, to learn the Skill and practice.

I acknowledge, it is now time that we come to the particular form how to
write: but first thou must know what to write, and I must propone unto thee
some things to be considered, for thy better enterprising of the action: for if
thou runnest rashly thereunto, without some farther consultation, it can no
ways be rightly accomplished.

Thou must consider, that all usual writing does consist in the right
composing of the before said Symboles, or Signs of the Voice, which be
Letters, Syllables, Words, and Sentences, or Lines; because in expressing of
them, all kind of Articulate Voice, may be understoode; and consequently,
all Thoughts of the M^nde uttered: for Syllables do consist of Letters,
Words of Syllables, and Sentences, or Lines, of Words.

They are justly called Symboles, or Signs of the Voice, as well for the
sound which they signify, being written, and is expressed, while as their
Names are uttered, being read; as either for the matter of their composition,
or manner of their proportion: as I shall do good will presently to make
plain in particular.

In a Letter are four things to be considered: to wit, the Form, the
Knowledge, the Name, and the Sound: each one of these proceeding of another,
being ranked according to their Age, or time of being, (to allude so) which Age
does proceed from the Form: because a Letter can have no age, till first it
be formed: and so the age begins immediately after the forming thereof. In
like manner, the Knowledge comes from the Form, (I mean only by his
knowledge who reads) the Name from the Knowledge, and the Sound from the
Name: and therefore, all these are internal, or rather significatiue, except
the Form, which is only external, or demonstratiue: because it points
forth, or signifies, all the rest. But if thou rank them conform to their
value, thou must turn them up-side-downe, making the Sound of a Letter to have
the first place, the Name the second, the Knowledge the third, (I mean only
the knowledge of a Letter) and the Form the fourth. For if the sound of a word
uttered could always continue, and not wear out, nor evanish in the Air,
as soon as it is spoken, there would be little or no use for Writing: And
therefore a Letter (I mean simply a Letter) is called a Letter, (that is, a
Blotte) rather because it is a Sign which represents some small part of the
Voice, being written, (for it becomes the same much it self when it is read)
than either for the external form thereof, or matter whereof it is formed:
because the sound which does proceed from the name, is the superior
quality, or use of the Letter: but the form or frame of the Letter, whereby
the name is known, is but a Sign, or Figure, representing that sound. And
although the sound be Symbolicke, yet it is to be understood, as if it were
real, (to speak so.) And as no musical or sounding Instrument can give
perfect sound, till the hand or mouth stir up the same: so these Signs or
Symboles cannot sound of their own accord, but remain and ly dead (as it
were) til the voice of the tongue reviue them, sound them, waken them up. A
written syllable, is rather called a syllable; because it signifies a great
part of the voice, (I mean, chiefly when it consists of diverse letters)
than for any respect either to the matter or form of the letters themselves
whereof it is composed. A written Word, is rather called a Word, because it
represents a greater part of the voice, which being uttered, beats the
Air; than for any regard either to the matter or form of the syllables, or
letters, which be included therein. And a written sentence, is named a
sentence, rather because it signifies the greatest or longest sound, or part
of the voice, (that is, the perfect meaning, and value of the words, one, or
more, which it does comprehend) than for the matter, or composition of the
words themselves, as they be written. And whereas in the singular number, a
simple letter, (that is, not an Hieroglyphik letter, signifying a syllable,
word, or sentence) be a dark and unperfect symbol of the voice; because it
signifies the least part thereof: yet letters in the plural number, are
bright, and perfect enough: because thereof do consist all the other three:
the first whereof is viue, the second viver, and the third most viue of all.
And so the Cogitations of the Mind, Speeches of the Tongue, and Writing with
the Hand; or rather the person gifted with these three, may be compared unto a
Clock, which strikes Hours, or measures Time: For the secret turninges,
motions, and passages thereof, (and chiefelie the restless Watch,) signifies
the Cogitations: the Bell that utters the particulars of time, (or becomes
Attorney in discharging the will of the Clock) signifies the speeches: and
the Dyall that declares both what is meant and spoken, signifies writing. And
whereas speaking and writing do often times prove contrariwise, it proceeds
of inconstancy, and dissimulation; even as false striking, and demonstrating
of wrong hours, do proceed of an ill tempered Clock.

And albeit Reading be often times used without uttering of the Voice, and
therefore may be thought to enervate, and cut away, the Pipes of the Sound,
signified by these Symbols, or, at the least, attributed unto them: yet it is
other ways: for such kind of Reading proceeds rather of some contracted
habit, or custom of the sound of Letters, learned of before through often
reading; than of the speculation, or inspection, of their Form, which then is
seen. Otherwise, we could no more read without uttering of the written
words which we see, than express them without a viue sight thereof; I mean
such as we have not recent in our memory. And so albeit the right fashioning
of Letters belongs to this Art, yet the meaning and sounding thereof
pertains to reading, (except only in verbal instructing of the Youth to
write, they must needs both be named and sounded, as well as fashioned and
known) but indeed the knowledge belongs equally to both: for as the
Skillful Writer knows, at the least imagines, the right fashion of Letters
in his mind, before his hand write them: even so the perfect Reader, when
either he sees, or finds them written, immediately knows their Names, by
their Fashion: and while as he reads, either by expressing, or suppressing
of the words, the one must be by sounding of their Names, (although not
fully, or at length, of every name particularly) and the other, by usual
remembrance of that sound: which is ingraffed in memory, through the often
seeing of their frame, that signifies the same.

And, if it shall happen to be demanded, wherefore I meddle with any thing here
in Writing, which belongs unto Reading: it may be answered, Even because
Writing and Reading are not only Brethren, (to allude so, excluding all
diversity of Gener) but unseparable Companions: in nature, though not in use:
and the younger of these depends on the elder: and it is certain, that any
thing which depends, of necessity must fall, if it want the Subject
whereunto it leans. For as Writing is the Subject of Reading, so it is the
Object also to the person that reads. Again, does not Natural Reason
prove, that Writing is older than Reading, how little soever it be? For no
Writ can be read, before it be written: (I mean not by the internal
consideration thereof, but by the external action) and it were needless, to
write any thing, but that which may be read, by some, either in private, or
public. Moreover, right Writing surmatcheth perfect Reading, as far as
Doing surmatcheth Saying: (I mean in Civil attemptes, and equality of
goodness) for it is far easier to speak a Word, than to do an Action: or
to expone what a thing means, being lately past, than to propone the
overture thereof before it was imagined. And so, though they be not different
in nature, yet there is no comparison betwixt them in excellency. For if it
be replied, that the Word of GOD may be read, and furnish comfort unto the
reader thereof; it may be answered, that it could not be read, were not
(praised be GOD) it is so graciously written.

It rests only in this place, that I should define the a^ore-named Symboles
of the Voice, before I proceed: but I think it more convenient, as each one
is set down severallie in its own place. It is true, they are defined
already in the Latin Grammar: yet because I am (with Gods grace) to insist in
them particularly, I cannot, without reprehension, speak largely of any
thing, except first I declare what it is: for perhaps many will peruse this
Book, who never learned Latin, nor knew the use of the Grammar thereof: and
so because it were a foolish illusion, to send such to seek an unknown
errand in an unknown part, (I mean unto them) the definitions of the former
signs cannot be pretermitted, nor passed by. And therefore, I begin, and
proceed, henceforth, as they give occasion of matter: but it behooves me to
speak most largely of Letters, being the chiefest sort; because all the
other three depend thereon: and then so much of the rest as makes for me, in
the illustration and manifestation of the deepnesse and secrecy of the matter.
And whereas the Section of Letters, is not only far greater than all the
other three, but almost fills up as much of this Volume, as all the remnant
Contents therein; it is not done without cause: for this whole Art consists
of Letters, because the Subject it self is Letters: and what is written beside
Letters, proceeds of Letters: at least, by occasion thereof, even as the
three ^ast parte^ of the Latin Grammar, proceed of the first: and therefore
is it not as large alone, as all the other three?

THE PARTICVLAR RVLES OF INFORMATION.
Sect. I. CONCERNING LETTERS.
The Preambles, and Introduction, to Letters.
A Letter is a simple voice, meet either to represent, or to be a part of the
literal signification of one or more written words.

The maine and principal scope of this Special part, is the aiming at the
Alphabet, like as it will show it self anon, containing all usual Single and
Double Letters, belonging unto the Secretary Character: but albeit thou have
once all enrolled together (for the Rules cause of Numeration and Division) yet
if thou intendest not to teach others, but learn for thine own use; I have
here also prepared for thee, an easier and brieffer Rue, comprehending the
most usual and necessary Letters thereof, and two Verses conform thereunto,
with ten compendious Precepts, directing how to follow the same: all
collected, and composed together, in form of Abridgement: which if thou
diligently haunt, and in any reasonable measure resemble, although thou
knew no more in writing, (save some of the most necessary Rules of
Preparation) it may suffice to further thee in thine Effaires.

But not to write at all, is both shame, and Skaithe: Shame for two causes:
first, because whosoever sees that thou can not write, knows thee to be
ignorant of all kind of Learning: and why? because Writing is the Key or
beginning of all Learning: and if thou want the Key or beginning of a thing,
how can thou have entrance thereunto, or begin the same? for God has put
far more differences (blessed be He) betwixt a Man and a Beast, than Reason
and Speech. And secondly, it is shame both to employ a Notar to subscribe for
thee, in any Security, and to want that good Token of Education, which
perhaps thine Inferior has: for wheresoever any Man of Honest Rank
resorteth who cannot write, (chiefelie where he is not known) he is
incontinent esteemed either to be base borne, or to have been basely brought
up, in a base or Moore-land Desert, that is, far from any City, where there
be Schools of Learning, Discipline, Policy, and Civilitie. And skaith, not
only in attending and paying a Notar for the former cause, and in neglecting
thy urgent business, through want thereof, chiefly which concerns Compts,
and Messives; but in discovering and revealing both of thy mind and estate,
unto these whom thou employest thereanent. And though at that time, they
conciliate friendship, and be sociall with thee; yet it is incident often
times, (as there is little soliditie here, in things beneath) that a friend to
night, will become an enemy to morrow, and so publish of thee what he
knows: and suppose constancy do even continue, thou will stand in awe both
to say and do before him as thou would; because a great part of thy
secrecy lies on the tongue of thy Secretary: and perhaps sleeps as
unsoundly there, as on the Topmast of a Ship, in a stormy night. Therefore,
if thou be such a one, whether the negligence has been in thy Parents,
Friends, or in thy self, strive thou yet to amend the same, if thine age be
within 40. years, whether thou can read or not; because the dint thereof
now strikes on thee: for, some above that age, have learned to write, that
never of before knew a Letter, (no, not of Print, let be of Writ,) but such
as they had lately learned of their own Domestickes, as it is both better,
and more commendable, to learn late, nor never; and of Inferiors, rather than
want the benefit thereof altogether: but immediately after they have learned
somewhat to read, they have begun also to write, and then in short time have
known how to read other Men's writ, by the like Letters in their own writ, and
so have proceeded, from one Degree to another, till they both could write and
read, Comptes and Messiues sufficiently: for oftentimes one that wants all,
neglects all; and those who have some beginning of a thing, seek to a
farther growth thereof: there would be no Harvest, if there were no
Seede-time: and if a Merchand would never use Merchandise henceforth until
he got a great Sum, whereof to make his Stock, there would be scarcely one
then, for ten now. So, how ignorant soever thou be, if thou can apprehende
thine own wantes, and have any disposition to learn, the reading of this
Book will (with the help of God) furnish thee Skill to write, and diligence
will soon bring forth habit thereof: for if it please God to bless but one
grain of Seed, it will increase an hundredth fold: then despise never a mean
beginning, if it be good, suppose it be hard.

But whether thou make choice of the great Alphabet, which comprehends the
small; or the small alone: presume never to learn any Capital Letters, till
thou (in some measure) be perfect of the Single and Double; both by writing of
them severallie in Alphabet, and joyntlie in writ: and that not only because
they are easier to learn; but because all writ stands more by them, than by
the Capitals, and so the more needful to be had: for in any matter, either
written or Printed, thou wilst find aye ten Single and Double Letters, (at the
least) for one Capital.

Here may arise a Question: How can the Capitals be learned by the ensuing
Alphabet, seeing it contains none but the sorts of A? To the which I
answer, They may be learned thereby for two causes: first, who will not
confess, but any judicious person (though he should never travel out of his
Native Country) may sufficienthe understand the Situation and forms of all the
Empires, and Kingdoms of the World, by diligent consideration, and often
perusing, of the Universal Card? and yet it contains not so much as one of
the least, but is contained it self, in little rowme. Then, why may not they
far better consider one thing suppressed, by another which is expressed.

Secondly, it is not mine intention either to set down Patterns of diverse
sorts of Characters here, (how beit I have many prepared) nor yet all the
Capitals of this same Character, but rather hold me by the Art it self, and
that for four respects:

First, because there be so many Printed Books, both already extant, and
daily setting forth, which do contain all sorts of Characters, Capitals,
and fair Writ; that it were little more needful, than to carry water to the
Sea, if Expenses should be bestowed on the Founding and Ingraving of Yrons for
them, or any others, but such as cannot be wanted, nor omitted: for the drift
of this Discourse requires only the exhibition and demonstration of some,
for the better consideration and practicing of all. And therefore, and for the
reasons immediately preceding, I speak in the Variations and Degressions of
Letters, and other places of this Book hereafter, as plainly of all Capitals
understoode, by the 4. only which be expressed; as if they were all expressed
together in one Catalogue.

Secondly, because this Book serves as a Grammar to all writing; and
consequently, to the right following of all the sorts of Exemplares which be
comprehended in such as the aforesaid Books: and so i^ of another nature than
they be: for it contains no more sorts of Letters, nor Exemplares than may
sufficiently explain and prove the Rules thereof: even as DISPVTERS Grammar,
being a perfect Abridgement of the whole Latin Language, (since thereby, as
one of the best, all Poesies, and other Works in Latin, be both conceived,
and followed) demonstrateth no more Exemples nor authorities, than may explicate
and interpret the Rules thereof: for if Grammars did comprehend all the
matter of things at length, whereof they briefly treat, they would cease to
be Grammars, (I mean concerning the use of them) and that for too great
prolixitie, in stead of compendiositie: because then each one of them would be
of so hudge a Volume, that the understanding of the whole Language, and
Treatises of the Books whereat they aim, would be as soon apprehended, by
the capacity of Students, as the Grammar it self; and so then both alike
tedious to learn and consider.

Thirdly, because any who intend not to instruct others, have store of
Exemples in this self same Book, containing also diverse Capitals; which
Exemples may serve for Exemplares both of Capitals and Writ: and therefore, if
they rightly peruse these Exemples, and the Abridgement of this Art following
hereafter, they will need no Exemplare-Booke at all. But as for those who
desire to be better grounded, they must proceed more formally in using of the
means: that is, first, strive to understand the former part of this Book,
before they come to these Exemples: next, endeavor to conceive them, and the
Rules whereof they arise, severallie, when they come thereunto: and in the
third rowme, employ some fair writer to extract all the Exemples of this Book
on a sheet of clean paper, and make one Exemplar of them al, to resemble: for
it has these rules which other Copies want. And though it be not all of one
Matter, because the sentences thereof are diverse; yet it is so much the
better, for resemblance of the Letters whereof it is composed; because it is so
much the worse both to be gotten, and kept in memory: for while as a student
learneth to write, it is the Letter, and not the Matter, to follow; but having
or being learned, it is the Matter, and not so much the Letter, whereunto he
must have regard.

And fourthlie, for shortness, and avoiding of prolixitie: for if all the
Capitals, which belong unto the Secretary, were insert here in such manner as
I first intended, it would make the Alphabet so great, and seem so difficult,
that it would affray (at the least hinder) many, at the first sight, from
esseying thereof, who had not some reasonable beginning before. He is not a
wise Instructor, or either has little to instruct, or desires few to profit
by that which he has, who shows forth the whole secrecy, and curiosity of
his Skill, unto his Disciples at the first, (thinking then to teach them the
same) but by little and little, as they are in any measure perfect in one
thing, to demonstrate and add thereunto another: and so forth, daily (as it
were to beguile them) by drawing and leading them aye farther and farther on)
till they either learn all, or the most necessary Documents and Experiments
which he has to teach. It is true, Capital Letters are more difficill to
imitate, than the Single and Double: but having first learned the Single and
Double, the Capitals then become easy to resemble. It would be very hard to
cause a Rudimenter make a Right Theme, or Latin Verse: but having learned the
Rudimentes, and proceeded orderly through all the Grammar, Theme, (yea,
Verse, if he have the Poetical Vein) will become as easy then to make, as
Litera was of before to decline. So there be many things which seem unto
Gazers very admirable, and wonderful, through appearance of curiosity, being
completed; which if they had seen either in the beginning, or in the midst of
the doing, or before the accomplishing; they would have been so far from
admiring the same, that they could have helped, and been partakers of the
action thereof themselves. And though there cannot (nor needs not) be such
Rules prescribed for Capital Letters, as for Single and Double; yet there be
sufficiency of Rules here concerning them: and what is pretermitted in the
one, is remitted to the other: and that not by direction of Precept, but by due
consideration, and diligent attention, of the peruser. Thus much concerning the
Preambles, and introduction to Letters, and the absence or retaining of
Capitals forth of thy sight, so long as thou art weak, until a more
convenient time, that thou be readier for them, as for stronger Food.

The number and form, of the most necessary and usual Letters, belonging to
the Secretary Character.
THE Letters of the Secretary Character here expressed, be 147. conform to
their variety of sorts; and but 23. conform to their diversity of Names:
counting five score to the hundredth, after the Arithmeticall Calculation: and
each sort of Aspiration, or h, as one amongst the rest, for the Rules cause:
and though h be not a Letter in Latin, yet it is one in writing: for if it
were not written, how could it be? Then they be all different in sorts, but
not in names; because there be aye diverse sorts under one name, as thou
may perceive by this their form of standing upon double square; which is
not made here, nor should be made else where, to keep Letters justly in
line, or lines evenlie in order: but for the better consideration of the
Proportion, Quantity, and Situation of the Letters themselves; being so
framed, measured, and bounded, as here may be seen, as well by the decent
Rank kept of their sorts, as Alphabeticall Order observed of their Names.

Which Character I divide three manner of ways: the first I call Variations,
or Degressions of Letters; declaring the several sorts of Secretarie-hand
writ: the second I call Divisions, or Denominations of Letters; declaring their
several sorts by their names: and the third I call Comparations, or
Descriptions of Letters, for understanding the differences thereof, by their
manner of proportion, of their proportion by their quantity, and of their
quantity by their situation, as they be bounded upon the two squares; that
is, betwixt, above, and under them: in so far as their limitation or
circumscription can be extended.

The Variations, or Degressions, of all the variable or degredibl^ Letters of
this Character, from their original proportion.
THis Character does comprehend two chief sorts of Secretarie-hand-writ,
Set and Common: Set writ is written two manner of ways, which differ more in
quantity and use, than in quality and substance: first, it is written with a
great pen, in great prop^rtion at the Head clauses, or Sentences, commonly
used in the beginninges, middles, or endinges of Books and Evidences: and with
a small pen, in small proportion, in the remnant of such Head-clauses or
Sentences; and that either when the matter is great, the person to whom it
belongs, or both.

Likewise, it is of two sorts; the first whereof is a more principal form of
its own nature than the second: because the one by principality is the Root,
and the other by descent the Branch: for the chiefer form must needs be aye
fayrer and better written than the secundarie, and so is more legeable: which
therefore challenges the first place throughout all the Alphabet: that is to
say, the first choice both of all sorts and names of Letters therein, whether
expressed or suppressed, belongs unto it, and to none other. But as it is a
degree better than the other, in respect of the exquisiteness, and exactness
thereof, being done; so it is a degree worse than the other, in respect of a
degree of longer time, which it consumes by slownesse in doing: yet
notwithstanding, Sat cito, si sat been, a thing well done, may very well be
esteemed as soon done, excluding any count of Time, unless it be all the
more pinched.

The second sort then, is a less principal form of its own nature than the
first, but not so slow; either whereof has a relevant reason for probation:
less principal, (I say) for although it have the first choice of all the
Letters to the great written words at the beginnings, or within the body of
it; yet it has not the first choice of all the Letters to the small writ
thereof, but of some: seeing the first choice of Capitals both expressed and
understoode, Minum Letters, and all others, except two, to wit, the first l and
t of the Alphabet, are proper only, and therefore reserved to the preceding
form: and herein stands the difference. Not so slow, (I said) because the
second choice of Capitals, expressed and understoode, Minum Letters, and such
others, that the former sort refuses, are not so slow, and may therefore be
written in shorter space than the first choice of these Letters: and since so
they be, they permit not this form, which consists of them, to be so slow
as the other: for all writ is mightily made up of Minum Letters.

Again, it is no indignity unto this sort of writ, to suffer these Letters
remain with the former, and that for three respects: first, because it is the
right owner of them, for the reason before mentioned. Secondly, because this
form vindicateth and obtains the use of many of the remnant Letters unto it
self, whereof the former sort is composed; and so these Letters are
constrained to yield subjection unto both the forms alike: for reiteration
and doing of them often over again, makes them so plentiful, and abundant,
that they are always equally present in either fort, as need requires: by
reason whereof there is some analogy and concordance betwixt these two forms.
And thirdly, as touching those Letters which it cannot obtain, (being so
preciselie kept by the right owner) it has both as great a commendation, and
is as well served without them, because it has speedier Letters for them, than
if it had them, because they are so slow.

Surely, because there is a right time of all things, I must (with license)
amplify this point, by declaring the decay of these two preceding forms of
fair Writ, immediately described, and what Skaithe fair Writers have
thereby, although I should seem somewhat to digress: ^ayre Writing was wont
to be no less needful than well maintained, and fair Writers had in due
regard and estimation: but now, partly in respect of the late invention of
PRINTING, and partly in respect of the desolation of sumptuous WRITING, the
most part choose rather to content themselves with the incongruitie, or
irregularitie of Common or Current writ, because it is both cheap and hastily
done; than to bestow a little more, and attend somewhat longer upon the
elegantnesse or singularity of SET WRIT. And so this is a Brazen Time for the
small n^mber of expert Writers, by whom it pleases GOD even to keep (as it
were) some spunke of life in fair Writing, that it extinguish not altogether:
and a Golden Time for those who have sure Offices, and Servants who have any
current form to write for them: for though they themselves do nothing but
subscriue, their Clients, with all employmentes, appertaining to such Places as
they possess, are so astricted, and thirled unto them, that they can neither
pass by, over, nor through, any other way. Wherefore, the ignorant, and
base-minded sort of these Writers, being so puffed up, with such Prerogatives
and Prefermentes, beyond their Brethren, deride and scorn any thing of the
sublimitie of the Art, howbeit they could no ways live so gorgeously, nor
maintain any such Trains as they do, without it: whereas, if a fair
Writer, who has no sure office, could do never so well himself, either in
writing, or employments thereunto belonging, if he will not lay aside all his
doing, and either teach Ch^ldren to do, or be a Slave unto such as these, his
Gift will avayle him little. And while as he imbraceth and makes choice of
the first, and employeth his Skill and diligence thereanent, if he will not
make each one as pe^fect as himself, at the least, the hardest of engine,
stiffest and heaviest handed, to conceive and profit as well as the most
pregnant witted, souplest and cleanliest handed; these who bestow least, as
these who be most thankful and liberal; and those who be urged to learned
with correction, as those who do willingly, with pleasure and delight: the
fault is altogether imputed unto him, and no ways unto them: and so he is
either reputed as infamous, or else not worthy of his Place.

In like manner, if they learn young, and not continue to be kept in right
use, where or with whom they learned, and so become worse, the fault is also
laid upon their Teacher, though against conscience they dissimulatelie speak
one thing, and think another whosoever so does: for they know well, that no
Man* and far less a Child, can keep any thing in memory, but that which
he uses: yea, (I say farther) though a Student even pass his Course in all
the Liberal Sciences, if afterward he exercise not his Studies, his Clergy
will evanish like the Snow before the Sun, and yet shall he, or any that
belong unto him, blame his Teachers, if so be that they did their duty unto
him, the time he was with them?

Moreover, many Parents so love their Children, (but with the wrong love
which Solomon often forbids) that they will not believe they have any
faults, except they be notorious: and incase they believe, they cannot suffer
to hear thereof: and if accidentlie they do hear, they so mislike their
Childrens Instructor, if he affirm the same, (as a lawful excuse perhaps of
their hard success) that do what he can, or use what Apology he please, it
will be hard for him ever to obtain their favor again: and it were little
matter, if they made not all their Friends and Associates of the same mind,
by their scandalous and sinistrous information. Wherefore, all that he has
taught to others, or can do himself, is set to little avail, because both
come within the compass of his estimation, and his estimation depends not so
much on his own doing neither, as on Childrens progress in learning, yea,
oftentimes on their bare testimony, without any warrant: and what is either
more inconstant or foolish, than a Childs report? But what regard if it were
not often times better believed than the very Sacred Scripture it self, and
their Childish desire not more yielded unto?

Common or facile Writ, has not only all the remnant unchosen Letters of the
Alphabet properly belonging unto it, but both borrows oftentimes, the first
choice of all Capitals, from the first sort of Set hand, and arrogateth the
second choice of Minum Letters from the second; and that by right of place, and
consequently by option of choosing: whereupon arises a controversy betwixt
the said second form of Set hand, and this present form, which anon it
behooveth me to discuss, because the decision thereof it submitted and
referred unto me, (in stead of a more competent Judge) and I have both accepted
the same, in and upon me, and under-taken to pronounce definitive sentence
therein, with all possible diligence: but first, (as it becomes all Earthly
Judges) I will hear both the Parties.

The principal sort, challenges and takes the second choice of Minum letters
unto it self; because it has ever been in use of them by indoubted right,
acclaimed by station of second place, and option of second choosing.

And the common sort, alleges, that albeit those letters would seem to
pertain unto the other sort, by the same pretended and dissembled right of
place and choosing; yet they ought not, because this sort has been clothed
with possession thereof these many years, past memory of man: and therefore
cannot of equity be frustrated now of that ancient right, except there had
been renunciation or disposition made thereof, and any of these Titles
produced for instructing.

Now for remooving of these Questions, and Debates, I repel and refute the
last alleadgeance, because the proponer thereof is not able to prove the
Antiquity of possession mentioned therein: and although it might be prooved,
it were no just cause to take away inheritable Right: and therefore I
descearne, that these debatable Letters belong to the principal sort; because
it has undoubted Right thereunto, by virtue of second place, and second
choosing: but because the Common sort becomes indigent, or destitute of Minum
letters, by occasion of this Decree, which I could not eschew, but behoved to
pronounce, according to Justice, I will not utterlie discourage nor damnifie
it, but have a charitable respect thereunto, and the rather, because it is more
prompt and needful in common business, than the principal sort it self,
(as all common means be, rather than special means.) Therefore, wite ye me
to have assigned, and disponed, and by these presents assign and dispone the
like sort of Minum letters, to the said desolate form, and that by doubling
of such Letters in the Alphabet, as have no constant difference from those
which were lately questionable. Likewise, with express advise, and consent of
either sort, I ordain, that they shall be both served alike, with all that
sort of Minum letters, as well debated, as added; and that there shall be
mutual and reciprocal proportion of borrowing and lending, affinity, peace,
and amity, betwixt these forms continually hereafter, so long as there
shall be any extract of this Book extant, wherein this their submission and
ordinance of peace is thus registrated.

And on the other side I ordain, that these sorts of Minum letters give
equal obedience to both the sorts of Writ, and serve them indifferently, and
that by reiterating of themselves so often as need shall require, or occasion
offer, though it were in one Page, yea, in one line, since they themselves were
doubled, or the number of them added for that effect: and none other sort
added with them, nor put for them.

Which Common Writ is also written two manner of ways, neither different in
substance, quantity, nor quality, but only in speediness. First, it
keeps an indifferent mids: that is, neither too speedy, nor to slow: which
is the best way, in respect of the legeablenesse of it self, being written:
but worst, in regard of its unreadinesse and slownesse to write.

Secondly, it is currentlie written, and therefore is somewhat worse, in
respect of the uncomlinesse, and raggedness, when it is done: seeing it is but
composed of all the abjectes, or derivatiue letters, of the Alphabet, which be
far descended, and derived, from their original proportion: (which original
is the whole Letters of the second sort of Set hand) but yet it is so much the
better, by how much it is more easy in doing: and therefore it is chosen, and
singled out, as a form most needful in hasty businesses.

And whereas it may be thought, that sundry of the Current letters belonging
hereunto, be too slowly, or well written: that is* not so Current-like as need
or haste does require, I do so of set purpose, because no Man needs to be
directed by Precepts, nor showed by Exemples, to write or form letters evil,
(that is, after a wrong manner) but rather both aye to be directed and showed
how to write well: howsoever the most part be desirous both to learn
themselves, and to be expeded in their effaires by others, with the easiest
and speediest sort of Writ. And therefore, though I present in the Alphabet
the Pattern of Current letters, somewhat nearer the right shape, than they
commonly use to be found in Current writ; yet either the inclination of the
doer, expedition of the adoes, or both, will pervert and corrupt them so, that
they will be both soon enough, and far enough, yea, too far different
therefrom uncommanded: because all commandementes be rather contrary than
agreeable unto Man's disposition: as it is far more difficile to roll a
Channon Bullet up to the top of a Mountain, than from thence unto the foot
thereof.

Last, Common writ is found likewise to be of two sorts: the one called Open
Minum, and the other Close: both written either indifferent, (that is, neither
too speedy, nor too slow) or Current, at the will and option of the Writer:
but the last thereof is best Current, because it is more speedy in urgent
effaires than the first. And though it be impossible to make the speedier
sorts either so legeable or comely as the rest, yet each one of them ought to
be respected for its peculiar property, to wit, celeritie; because neither
time nor place will serve aye to write alike well, nor yet would it be
necessary, though continual occasion might be had of both these
circumstances.

NOTA.
There is also another Minum Letter, contrary unto this, to wit, open above,
(like the third single u in the Alphabet) and close under: but it is neither so
seemlie nor speedy as the former.

The Divisions, or Denominations, of all the Letters of the Alphabet, declaring
the several sorts thereof by their names.
THe Letters of this Character are divided two manner of ways, some thereof
be Capitals, and some not: the Capital letters be of two sorts, the one
called Beginning Capitals, because they are commonly used at the beginning of
Books and Evidences, whereof in this Alphabet there is but one; to wit, the
first Capital A, placed here not for it self absolutely, but in name and
behalf of all beginning Capitals of the whole remnant Letters of the Alphabet:
as also in place of whatsoever plain or curious sort of beginning Capitals can
justly belong unto this Character.

And although I have spent (yea, rather misspent) much precious time, not only
upon old Capital letters, both curiously made, and filled up, with
Portraites, and all sorts of small Draughtes; but upon painting and inventing
of new Capital Letters, diverse forms of curious Writ and Comparthementes:
likewise, in writing of Testificates, with Gold, Silver, diverse colors of
Ink, and sorts of Writ; and both of Great Evidences and Small, belonging unto
Clerkeship and Notarie, with one fair and legeable Hand: as also in writing
oftentimes both of Compts of great Revenewes, and of extraordinary small and
compact writ, (to the great prejudice now of my sight, as in containing of the
LORDS PRAYER at length in less bounds than the scale of an Hairing) and
many other such needelesse curiosities: yet notwithstanding, (to my simple
judgment) plain Capitals swiftly done, and ordinary, or easy writing, and
drawing; be as much more commendable, as they are more ready than all these:
even as suits of gorgeous apparel, imbrodered, passemented, and decored, be
oftentimes so much uncomelier, than fine plain clothing, as they are
costlier. But indeed either in rare employments at ordinary times, or in
ordinary employments at extraordinary occasions, any that have inclination,
and correspondent gifts to exercise themselves thereanent, shall have my
consent; yet not absolutely, but conditionally, that they protract not so
much time as I have done in so doing, though they have never so much alloted
unto them for that effect; for I know (by doleful experience, I mean, by
neglecting of better exercises and other learning) that those conceates are
oftentimes more deceivable, than profitable: and doubtless the travels
thereof would be infinite, were not the doers are finite; and for a finite
person, to enterprise any infinite labor, except the praising of GOD, and
turmoyle himself therewith excessiuelie, and tediously, and then for little
use, is (as testifies the most wise, mighty, and experimented King that ever
was, except our gracious Savior) nothing else, but vanity, and vexation of
spirit.

The other sort of Capital letters, are called middle Capitals, because they
are frequentlie written within lines of writ already begun, and that at the
beginning of sentences and proper names; which be ofter different from the
former sort, in quantity and situation, than in quality and proportion:
whereof in this Alphabet there be 3. to wit, the remnant Capital sorts of A;
which be not placed here for themselves only, but both as so many
Attourneyes for the whole middle Capitals of all the remnant letters of the
Alphabet; and for all plain and curious sorts of middle Capitals, (of
whatsoever proportion) which can anywise pertain unto this Character.

These which be not Capitals, are called Single and Double letters, (which
stand in order immediately after the Capitals throughout all the Alphabet to
the end) being 143. who list to number them.

Of the which there be 121. Single letters, easy to be known: and 22.
Double, to wit, The 4. c in the Alphabet; (for henceforth I ^ust needs speak
of them all according to their names and order, and not any more, by
demonstration of their form, but directing by other letters to the Alphabet
where they are) 5. 6. 8. 9. e, 4. f, 4. 5. i, 4. l, 4. m, 4. n, 4. o, 4. p, 5.
s, 4. t, and all the 7. sorts of w.

As for the dividing of letters in vowels and consonants, and the subdividing
thereof, I insist not therein; because these divisions do belong more to the
nature of letters, than to their proportion: and therefore they are plainly
enough divided in the Latin Grammar. Only here, for knowing of them by their
proportion, I will distinguish the vowell sorts of i, and u, from the consonant
sorts thereof, in this manner; to wit, the 1, 2, and 5 sorts of i, be vowels:
the 3 sort of j, is a consonant: the 4 sort of ii, is a double vowel, or two
conjuct vowels: and the 5 ji, is both a consonant and a vowel, conjoined in
one. Likewise the 1, 2, 3, and 5 single sorts of u, be vowels: and the first
uu, is 2 vowels conjoined: and the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16
sorts of v, be consonantes; whereof 5 be single, and 6 double.

The which single and double sorts of letters, before specified, be first
compared, or described conjunctlie, (for the Rules cause) and then the double
sorts severallie: both following immediately in order.

The Comparations, or Descriptions, of Single and Double Letters conjunctlie,
demonstrating and making each one equal with another of the own kind: and
that by describing how many have bodies, heads, and tails; and how many want
them.
FIrst, of this Character there be 115 Letters, which have bodies, or just
middles, filling the rowme all completelie alike, up and down, betwixt the 2
scores: that is, neither going above, nor coming under them: and these be,
all the

4 sorts of -- a, and 4 -- g, 3 -- b, the 1, 2, 3, 4, -- h, 5 -- c, 1, 2, 4,
and 6 i, 4 -- d, all 5 -- k, 10 -- e, 5 -- m, 5 -- n, and 5 short - s, 5 -- o,
the 1, 2, 3, and 4 - t, 5 -- p, all 16 -- u, 5 -- que and 4 -- x, 10 -- r, the
2, 3, 4, and 5 y, and all the 4 sorts of z:

Except the body of the first k, which is irregulare, because it goes
somewhat above the high score.

And 28 want bodies, or just middles, whereby to know, and prove, the lineall
justness or equality of any of themselves, or other letters, both before and
behind them* as they occur in any word; to wit, all the 7 sorts of f, the
5, 6, 7, 8 h, 3 and 5 i, all 5 l, and 6 long s, the 5, 6 t, 6 and 7 y: because
they fill not up the rowme betwixt the 2 scores, for lack of Beginning and
Finishing parts, to come either justly alonges upon them, or crosse-wayes
betwixt them, or yet close inwardes on any of them: and that for
accomplishment of a body to e^erie one of themselves, as each one of the rest
has, (save such as be altogether bodies, that i^, wanting heads and tails:)
accomplishment (I say) because each one of them has some beginning of a body
already, howbeit but a plain stalk, as the second and last sorts of long s:
and much more are bodies begun in these which have uncompleted, or unclosed
works on one of the squares, joined sometimes to their fore-side and sometimes
to their backe-side: which I will endeavor to make clear, by distinguishing of
them particularly, and that after 4 manner of ways: first, some of them ^^ue
onel^e one part coming justly endlonges upon one of the scores, (meaning, so
far as the bounds of each one of them reaches, and these be 12, to wit,
the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 f: 2, 3, 4, l: 5, 6, t: 6 and 7 y. Secondly, ^o^e have
slenting parts, upon one of the sq^ares, and sometimes upon both: but not
closing, or concluding constantly, upon any of them, as these 9. the 6 f, 5,
6, 7, 8 h, 3 i, 1, 5 l, and 4 long s. Thirdly, some have no part at all upon
any of the squares, but beginning parts, or plain even-downe stalks,
coming crosse-wayes through them, as these 6, the 7 f, 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 long
s. And fourthlie, there is only one in question, which partly has, and
partly wants a body, which is the 5 ji: for when the latter part thereof
is severed from the former part, (as it uses often to be) the latter part
remains only a complete body; because it fills up the rowme j^st betwixt
the two scores, and goes not over: but the for^er part, neither when it is
conjoined with the latter part, nor separated therefrom, can be esteemed
either to be a body of it self, or to have one: for albeit it have the
beginning of a body on the high square, yet it has neither progress
endlonges, nor conclusion on the low square, but comes crosse-wayes under the
same. Likewise, by this narrow Calculation, these 4, the 1, 2, 3, 4, h, cannot
well be said to have complete bod^es, beca^se they have neither progress nor
conclusion on the low square: and therefore, it had not been amiss, but a
matter indifferent, though they had been counted amongst the number of these
which want bodies, as well as the 5 i.

Secondly, 49 have heads, or high parts, going above the high score, but not
all alike high, to wit, all the

3 sorts of -- b, the 1, 2, 3, and 4, h, 4 -- d, all 5 -- k, and 7 -- f, and 5
-- l, the 5 -- r, all 6 -- t, all 6 long - s, the 6, 7, 8, single u, the 5
short - s, 3, 4, 5, and 7 w,

And 94 want heads, which be, all the 4 sorts of - a, the 5, 6, 7, and 8 h, 5
-- c, all 6 -- i, 10 -- e, 5 -- m, and 4 -- g, 5 -- n, 5 -- o, 1, 2, 3, 4,
short s, 5 -- p, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, singl u, and 4 -- que 1, 2, and 6, double w,
the remnant 9 - r, all 4 -- x, 7 -- y, and 4 -- z,

But of these there be 16, whereof so much as is above the high square of each
one, is esteemed as a pendicle to the former sort, which have heads: because
it being so fashioned, and situated, the same is not unlike thereunto: and
these be, the 4 a: 3, 4, c: 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, e: 5, 6, 7, 8, b: 3, 4, q: 4, and
8, r: for there is somewhat of each one of them above the high square: and yet
the same cannot justly be called an head, nor any constant part or parcel
of a letter: but some of them be long and small downe-comminges, slenting
toward the left hand; which may be called Introductions to the beginninges,
or off-comminges, of these letters whereunto they appertain, or wherein they
be used; though done in the casting thereof, with one, and the same stroke: as
such parts of these 5 letters, the 4 a: 3, 4 c: 3 and 4 q. Some be short, and
must needs cloze narrowly in the casting: as such parts of these 6, the 7,
8, 9 e: 5, 7, and 8 b. And some be indifferent, and unconstant: indifferent,
either short or long, as thou please: and unconstant, either made or left
unmade, as thou think expedient: which may be named Conclusions, at the
finishing of these letters, wherein they be used; though done in the casting,
with one, and the same travel: as such parts of these 5, the 4, 10 e: 6 h: 4
and 8 r.

And thirdly, 48 have tails, feet, or low parts, coming beneath the low
square, although not all alike low: and these be, all the

7 sorts of -- f, 4 -- que and 4 -- g, 6 long -- s, the 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, h, 4 --
x, 3 and 5 -- i, 7 -- y, all 5 -- p, and 4 -- z,

And 95 want tails: and these be, all the

4 sorts of - a, and 10 -- e, 3 -- b, the 1, 2, 3, -- h, 5 -- c, 1, 2, 4, and
6 i, 4 -- d, all 5 -- k, 5 -- l, 10 -- r, 5 -- m, 5 short - s, 5 -- n, 6 -- t,
5 -- o, 9 single - u, and 7 -- w.

But of these there be 21, whereof so much as is under the low square of each
one, is esteomed as a pendicle to the former sort which have tails; because
that part of each one is not unlike thereunto, when the letter is so shapen and
bounded: and these letters be, the 3 b, 5 c, 4 d, 7, 8, 9, e, 1, 2, 3, h, 2 i,
4 k, 3, 5, l, 2, 3, m, 2 n, 2 r, 2, 8, single u, 4, and 7 dowble w: for there
be somewhat of each one of them under the low score, and yet the same cannot
justly be called a tail, nor any constant part of a letter; but some of them
are long and small upgoings, slenting to the right hand, which may be also
named Introductions to the off-co^ming, or casting of such letters; both when
they are casten of the like length as they be in the same letters severallie
in Alphabet, and at the beginninges of words, when these letters whereunto they
appertain occur before other letters: which are rather made accidentlie and
voluntarily, for garnishing or decoring of writ, than constantly or of
necessity to be portions of letters. (I mean so much thereof as be under the
low sco) I^ like manner, they serve as Bridges or passages of the Pen betwixt
letters, both for greater speediness in writing, and more seemly conjoyning
of letters written; and that when they are casten short, that is, limited
betwixt the 2 scores only: as within words, and chiefly in these 31, the 3
b, 5 c, 7 e, 2 i, 4 k, 5 l, 2 m, 2 n, 2 r, 8 single u. 4, and 7 dowble w. Some
be changeable conclusions of letters, since they are sometimes freely made, and
sometimes purposely left unmade, at the finishing of letters; and these be used
in two letters, the 4 d, and 3 l. Some be changeable, and subject to
vicissitude, in respect of their occurrance, and unchangeable in regard of
their fashion: by their occurrance, sometimes themselves, and sometimes other
Diphthongs for them, will happen to be written in such words as require them:
and by their fashion, when the Diphthongs wherein they be used are composed of
the 7 e, they keep this shape only; and these Diphthongs be two, the 8, and 9
e. And last, the like parts of these 4, the 1, 2, 3, h, and 3 m; of the which,
the 1, and 3, have small downe-commings slenting to the left hand, wherewith
they be concluded under the low square, for the viver perceiving and better
descearning of each one of them from any of the sorts of b: for otherwise
there would be little difference; how soever many, who hold themselves
Skillful Writers, use the same: which I think more pertinent in the Roman
sorts of such letters, than in these of this Character. To come to the second,
so much thereof as is under the low square, both slenteth down to the left
hand, and compasses up to the right hand. And the fourth, has a compassed
stroke, so much whereof as is under the low square, may either be made, or left
unmade, (at the beginning) as best pleases thee.

The Comparations, or Descriptions, of Double Letters severallie: showing how
they are made Double, and united.
SOme Double Letters of the former Alphabet be separable, and some
unseparable: the separable be 16 in number; to wit, the 4 c, 5, 6, 8, 9 e, 4
f, 4, 5 i, 4 l, 4 m, 4 n, 4 o, 4 p, 5 long s, 4 t, and the 1 double uu: and the
inseparable, be 6; to wit, the 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 double w. The separable are
likewise of 2 sorts: some whereof are natural, or plain; and other some
artificial, or curious: (artificial, I say, in respect of their names or
sound, as the same is pronounced in syllabication: for according to their
external fashion, they are more naturally, at the least more closely
doubled, and conjoined, than the other sort.) Natural, or pla^ne, because they
are doubled, and united, with letters of one name, in the most common and easy
manner: and artificial, or curious, since they are composed of letters having
2 names, after a rare, compact, and obscure manner; notwithstanding their
pronunciation be of one at length. These that be naturally double, are 13,
to wit, the 4 c, 4 f, 4, 5 i, 4 l, 4 m, 4 n, 4 o, 4 p, 5 s, 4 t, and the 1 uu.
And these which be artificially double be 4. the 5, 6, 8 and 9 e; the
composition whereof consiste^h most constantly of these 2 sorts of one
letter, the 2 and 7 e: the first whereof being composed with the 2 a (as ae,
according to the fashion of the 5 e in the Alphabet) has nothing changed in
the composition, but the two letters united, the last part of the first, and
the first part of the last, being set above others. Next, with the 2 o, as oe;
and that by joining of them likewise together. The last of the two sorts of e,
is also componed with the second a, and that two ways (as, behold the 8 and
9 e in the Alphabet) each one whereof, signifying no less in Current Writ,
than the former sort of Diphthong 5 e, does in Set and Common: yet the letter
a, is not expressed in any of them, but understood in both for speeds cause; and
these two sorts of conclusions, (l^ke tails) which they have, are put in place
of the a; for making some difference betwixt them, and the other sorts: to
wit, the remnant sorts of vowell e: for they being thus formed, are much
speedier to write; because each one of them is casten with one stroke, than
being composed at length with the a, since then there must needs be two.

And thus far concerning the Variations, or Degressions; Divisions, or
Denominations; and Comparations, or Descriptions, of all the Letters
comprehended in the former Alphabet: which serves both for a Table
Charactericall, by representing of the diversity of most usual Characters;
and Syllabicall, by sounding of the Syllables comprehended in the names, or
variety of Letters.

THE ENTRY WHICH LEADS TO PERFECTION, IN THE ART OF Fair VVriting Made
open; and the Keys thereof delivered.
THIS ART has many Keys to open the same, whereof this former Alphabet is
not one of the least; but if either thou want the Key of the Entry, within the
which the great Key is kept, (which Entry, and Key thereof, is this present
Art^cle, and the use of the same) or yet receive it, and not use the other Key,
I mean the chief Key, which thou will find there; but suffer it to roust, or
lose its clearness; wherein can it be steadable unto thee? For albeit thou
have never so great Sums of Money, costly Apparel, dainty Cheer, and
wholesome Medicine; yet if thou apply them not unto thy self, to serve thee
in thy necessities, each one for its own use: to wit, for paying of thy
Debtes, covering of thy Nakednesle, quenching of thine Hunger, and curing of
thy Disease; what can all these avayle thee? But albeit I fear the worst, yet
I hope the best: and upon which hope, to wit, that thou will endeavor for thine
own weal, to peruse this Work, I intend to convoy, at the least direct thee
through all the secret Cabinets thereof; and deliver to thee the Key of the
Entry thereunto, whereby (if thou will consider the form, and remember the
secret passages, and turninges of the Lock) thou may not only open them
all, and get entresse for thy self, aye when thou please; but cast up the
Yate so wide to the Walls, that even Children may easily follow thee in
thereat; and walk peaceably, in a patent Way, leading to the farthest or
highest part of the Art, without attending, paying, or praying any Ianitour
to receive thee, or Guide to conduct thee. Which Chief or Great Key, is the
reading of this Book, whereby (if thou be any ways capable, diligent, and
attentive) thou may know, in short space, how to write fair and perfectly:
even as well as any who has some reasonable beginning of learning, may
discover and open up any Art whatsoever, with the Key of Reading, perceive
what hidden Furniture is within that mystery, by diligent viewing, conceive
the secrecy thereof by due consideration, and then put all to its own right
use, by practicing thereof, both for the particular weal of himself, and the
common weal of others. Thus thou both having the Keys in thine own custody,
and the way made so patent, straight, and direct, to the airth and place where
thou would be, that if thou have any solid judgment, in-sight of
natural knowledge, or gift of learning, thou need not to go wrong: for
thou will not only see every chief meethe and token in its own place, as
was fore-tolde thee in the beginning of this thy Journey; but likewise such
particular refreshmentes, or variety of new sightes, in thy progress, as thou
go from one degree or perfection, to another; that if thou irke, or grow
weary in any part of the way, it will be as much in thine own default, as
mine.

THE TRANSITION, OR THROVGH-GOING, Which leads to Perfection, in the Art of
Fair Writing, made patent: Declaring the Gradation how, Means whereby, and
Space how soon it may be attaine^ unto.
PERFECTION IN FAIRE-WRITING, is neither so common nor easy, as each one
esteems it to be; but so high a thing as few can climb unto, without many
steps and degrees: and the way thereunto is so obscure, that as few knows
it well; because of the rareness of right Guiders: indeed some may well enter
on the most pathed parts thereof, sometimes by guess, through often resorting.
But now, I shall do good will (so far as it shall please GOD to assist me) to
strike out a fair entry in the midedst, and make it so patent and easy, that
any may go through at the nearest; and walk in all the paths thereof, who
have any errande, whether they have company, or not.

First, I (as it pleases GOD, insteade of a more skillful foundator) have
founded this work on such two strong Pillars, bound together with a Pende in
the midst; as I hope, shall stand firmlie and constantly up, against all
windy and stormy tempest of disputation whatsoever; and these be Knowledge
and Practice, joined together with forcibile Reason: which be the whole scope
and meaning of the premises; the first whereof is strong, the second stonger,
and the third, both strongest and best (of its own nature, though not for the
use) for the first and second would be soon overthrowen and demolished, were
not the third holds strongly out against the dint of the blast; and guardeth
them mightily with each kind of defense, against every sort of assault; that
is, by rendering a relevant reason, wherefore every letter, syllable, word,
line or ^^^icle of fair and perfect writing, is written that way, rather as
the contrary way. But many, yea even instructors, do content themsel^es with
practice alone, which is but the naked mids, because it wants the clothing of
understanding and reason on both the sides; for it will endure little storm,
when the Winter of trial shall come: and so, each one of those is not unliketo
a man beside himself, who walks naked, and is like to die of-colde; because
he is destitute of knowledge and reason, to use means for clothing and
defending of his body: to the which two therefore, as well as the third, I will
have a special regard; let others Practice by-guesse, or misregarde Knowledge
and Reason as they please.

And albeit this Art be not altogether Theroricall, or contemplative,
^^o^e^lie or of necessity; yet Theorie or contemplation, is very expedient
for the easier following, or better practicing thereof: as by exemple, though
Fair Writing, and Orna^e Latin, may be both taught and learned, the one,
without the speculatiue Knowledge and Practice of this Book, and the other
without the contemplative Knowledge and use of a Grammar; yet, it cannot be
denied, but the usage of both these means, is very requi^ite for both these
ends. Also, though a man may go a fair lourney by land on foot; yet we
will all confess, that an Horse is very expedient to refresh him, both when
he faints in the way, and to bring ^im ^he sooner to his Iourneyes end.

And next, there be two chief Steps, or Deprees, (though very wide) to
climb up to Perfection: with this Book, and without it; with it, there be
diverse inferior Degrees, and narrow Steps, which may all be comprised in
two: the one, by reading it, to get the former knowledge: and the other, by
practizing it, (and sometimes Exemplares written conform) to ge^ the former
Practice: and so consequently of both will proceed the former Reason, as a
most natural and kindly Birth. Which may be all accomplished by any betwixt
the age of 40 and 14, who be desirous and circumspect; and that in a month
space, they using diligence the most part of each day: yet I seclude none, of
whatsoever age or gifts, with longer space: for aye the longer the better, and
they so much the perfecter, except they be sloathfull in the midst. And
thereafter, without this Book two ways: with a Copy of unlegeable Writ, and
without it: with it, to extract rightly any matter whatsoever, or howsoever
written by another: but keeping preciselie thine own shape of Letter which thou
learnest hereby: that is, not to follow another any further than it agrees
with thine own, (though it should seem never so pleasant) if so be that
thine agree with thine own Exemplare. And without a Copy, to write any
needful thing thou please, from off thine own mind, neither matter nor
letter being before thee: and so forth, studying to wear, piece and piece,
from all these means, by order afore-saide, and by degrees heere-after
mentioned.

And although thou be perfect, having thus proceeded, yet cease not, but
exercise thy s^l^e sometimes, although it were only to keep thine hand in
right use of Practice: for thou havi^g once attained unto any measure of
Perfection, (in how short or long space soever) the ofter reading, and longer
practicing of this Book thereafter, will make thee to have both the more
delight, and the greater dexterity: for the first learning of any thing is
little in comparison of farther; because it but patheth the way a little to a
farther ingresse therein, that the steps may be the better known
thereafter. But ha^ing learned, wunne above all, and either beholding others,
or coming that way over again, at another time; then consideration will
engender conception, conception will bring forth knowledge, knowledge will
produce practice; and knowledge and practice tegether will beget reason, and
reason will bind and defend all these proceedinges. It is hard to cause a
Child, so long as he is learning the Latin Rudimentes, understand them
a^ight: h^e may well have some superficial scroofe of Skill or (...), (unless
he be all the more docile and tra^^able) but when he is past almost through
the Grammar, and hears any part of the Rudimentes taught over again, unto
other Children, then incontinent he begin^^^h ^o consider, conceive,
understand, practi^e, reason* and consequently, not only defend both his
own ^a^^nges and doings, by right Grammatical Rules; but likewise in his
Disputations to impugn and reform the (...) in others. So then, there is but
mean knoweled^e in the way of Learning, in comparison of that which is in the
end thereof: and commonly those who s^a^^, ^oone^^, and run fa^test, in the
beginning of that race, either becomes feeble before they come to the (...),
and so are forced to give over; or if they obtain the (...), they have little
more breath to do any more good: and so they are like hasty or untimelie
Fruit, soon ripe, soon rotten.

It has seldom been seen that the most pregnant Studente^ in the time of
their learning, have prooved best af^erwa^des; because commonly they both
conceit so much of their Skill, and lean so much thereunto, that few of them
can take pains, after they have passed their Course, which is the chiefest
time, for tha^ ^se: (for all is but Childrens-play before) but it has been
rather their Condisciples, whom often times they have both despised for
Poverty, and derided for Ignorance; who apprehending their own manifold
defecte, have applied themselves wholly to supply the same so much the more,
by their serious studies; and not only have risen up (as it were) from under
their feet, unto greater preferment than they themselves: but likewise, at
length, have prooved happier Instruments of GODS Glory, both in Church, and
Commonwealth.

And as each one that runs this first Race, must begin at the A B C, and
read all over again, before either he be perfect of that which he has
learned already, or yet meet to read farther: so if thou would be well
grounded in this Art, thou must begin this Book, not only at the
Alphabet, but before the same, and read, consider, and practice all of new
again, ofter than once: or else all thy Proceedinges will be fundied, that
is, defective, or not well founded: for though Fundying, and right ^ounding, be
not fa^re different in letters, yet they are far enough different in nature.
And as we see a Rower in a Boat have his Face one way, contrary to the part
where he would be, and the whole power of his Body striving against the
Stream or raging Flood another way: so though the Stream of thy Corruptions
carry thee somewhat downewardes the wrong way perforce: that is, make thee to
behold Ignorance and Sluggishnesse, as things very plausible to Nature, and
so choke the grouth of Virtue in thee: yet follow not thy Look, but turn
about thy Face the contrary way, and bend both thy Strength and Affections to
land at the part where th^ne Errande lies. And although perhaps thou be such
a one as has all Necessaries of this Life, furnished unto thee by thy Parents
or Friends, yet trust not too much to the continuance thereof: but so
carefully employ thy time, by Learning now, while as thou have these means,
as thou may live bonestlie afterward, when thou want them: for nothing
here is permanent, but subject to mutabilitie, and vicissitude: and Satan is
both a Thief and a Lier in many things, but especially concerning Time. And
suppose thou never want means during thy time, there is neither Travel nor
Time lost, but well bestowed, which is spent in doing of good: for every one
is ordained of GOD to use some lawful Calling, although he have even
reasonable Substance whereon to live: and that because the Mind is in a
continull Flux, aye mooving: not unlike unto a River which runs
uncessantlie, and therefore is set either upon good or evil: for we see
Rivers, when they run, prove both profitable and comfortable, sending forth
variety of Fishes for Man's sustenance: but when they are restrained, and stand
idle, they do nothing but corrupt and dry up themselus, and breed unclean
Beasts, both noisome and venomous: Even so, when a Man is well employed, in
any g^o^ use that he is meetest for, he prooveth a profitable M^^be^ ^n a
Commonwealth: but if otherwise, he be add^c^ed to idleness, he not only
misspendeth precious Time, corrupts and wastes himself, by unnecessarie
cogitations; but often times engendereth, and b^inge^h fo^rth, evil Actions,
to the great prejudice both of ^imselfe, and others. And so I am persuaded,
that that Man s^en^eth with better Conscience, who lawfully (...) that which
he spends, though it be never so little; than he that lives by I surie:
except in old Age, and scar^^^ie then: for, as Solomon says, Better i^ a
little (...) righteousness, than great Revenewes without equity. Therefore,
cast thine Eye^ aside, and behold the Creatures of GOD: do not the ve^ie
Birds hunger their young ones, not for hatred, but even to teach them for to
provide for themselves, as soon as they have any Feathers, wherewith they may
sl^^? So ought thy Provisers to teach thee or, if they either be deficient, or
negligent, thou ought to take hold on Wisdom thy self: at the least,
learn that easy lesson at these Creatures, which do want t^^ Reason, that
thou have: For, according to that Old ^rove^^e, It i^ easy swimming, so long
as the Head is borne above. And if other ways, thou have ^arentes, who would
feign help thee, and may not, thou ought not to despise them, but art bound
to love them, and to help them as thou best may: for Love (in this point)
is like unto water, which will either run downewardes, if it have any
descent, or else stand still, and putrify in it self, like unto Self-love:
for Love seldom ascends, (I mean from Children to Parents) except where
Grace makes it to mount above Nature: as Water by Conduites, or other Engines,
is sometimes forced to ascend upwardes, contrary its nature.

And sinallie, did thou ever see any Man, who neglected Learning when as he
might have had it, but rued the same, when be could not get it? And though
such a one have innumerable penitent Condisciples laureated with him in Class;
yet both his and their repentance (in that point) prooveth often times too
late: because when the Time is too far expired, it no ways can be redeemed.
O then! if Childhood be a pleasant Spring! and Youth-hood a brave Summer! and
yet many think Learning then as heavy a Cross, as occurreth unto them
either in the Harvest of their ripe Age, or in the Winter of their old Age. If
thou were to live another life, besides this, which is wearing to an end: and
die another death, besides that which thou must needs suffer here,
questionless thou would be very wise and wary the second time, and both
do many things which thou leftest undone, and leave many things undone,
which thou did the first time. But because thou have but one life to spend
here, and all things depending on thy diligence and behavior, in time of the
spending thereof, thou should take hold on the short time which thou have,
now while as thy Glass runs: and that by striving to learn, rather by
seeing, than by esseying: I mean, by exemple, like a wise Man, rather than by
Experience, like a Fool: For Experience is termed the Schoolmasters of
Fools.

And last, if thou be any ways capable and diligent, it has pleased GOD, by
the Mouth and Witinges of one, who was a learned Man, to give thee this
general comfort, in all Learning whatsoever,

Nil tam difficile est, quod non solertia vincat: That is, There is nothing so
difficile, but diligence may overcome the same: Yea, though it were to
transform Ignorance into Science, or banish Ignorance forth, and bring
Science in. Endeavor, therefore, to be diligent, and despare not of thy
gifts, though they be never so mean: for although the whole Corns in a
Country cannot be gotten shorn with Kempers; yet each one, according to his
ability, gets his own part well enough cutted down.

I return now to the chief degree of Perfection, because it is most
necessary and pertinent, and do remit the rest to thine own capacity and
diligence, as thou ascendest unto them: which being then in perusing of this
Book, after the two several ways before specified, is thus prescribed.

Before thou begin to practice, thou must for thine own weal, (though
perhaps thou apprehende it not at the first) even take some delight to read
and consider the same twice over, or either more or less, as thou find
thine Engine apt and prompt to receive the Instructions therein without
doubting: because that is the only way how to at^aine to the right
understanding of the Art: For, Exercise makes the Mind better to conceive
the same by reading; and then Practice makes the Hand readier to perform that
conception, by Writing. But if thou prefer, or give Practice the first place,
that is, suffer it to go before Knowledge, it will be so much labor in vain:
(I mean chiefelie in perusing of this Book) seeing no right Practice can be,
without good Knowledge; no good Knowledge, without right Instruction; no right
Instruction, but either from Above, or of such as GOD has gifted to inform
and instruct Below: for it is hard for any Man to teach another rightly to
do any rare work, which he himself cannot perfectly do first; or to tell
the right Tokens of an obscure Way, wherein he never walked: and so right
Instruction, makes good Knowledge; good Knowledge makes right Practice; and
good Knowledge, and right Practice together, including Reason, goes nearest to
Perfection of any thing: and the last of these cannot be rightly done
without the help of the first, no more than the Hand can rightly prosequute
any other Action, without the aid of the Mind: for as the Mind first
imagines any thing before the Hand execute the same; so the Hand cannot
rightly do, except the M^nde first direct. (The Eyes being set as
Spectators, obeying the one, and helping the other.) And when thou art thus
prepared for Practice, and art to begin the same, strive to follow the
several Directions contained in these eight diets following.

I. When either thou enterest to learn, or having somewhat learned before, let
the whole Single and Double Letters be casten with double square, both in
Alphabet, by the space of three days, and in lines of writ two days: which
must needs be justly drawn after this Pattern, of the like distance, or
either farther or nearer, as shall be requisite for the quantity of their
proportion.

II. Two days to want the half of the high square, after this manner, but
endeavoring to do as if thou had it.

III. Two days to want all the high square, except a little entresse thereof at
the beginning; and that for imprinting in thy memory which of two thou
want, as thus.

IV. Three days to want the high score altogether, and to write on the low
score: but still be mindful that it is the high square which is absent;
because many oftentimes mistake single square, and that sometimes by making
the bodies of letters, half above, half under the same, it being in the
midst; and sometimes under the low square, and so nothing above, save heads
of letters, as if it were the high square indeed, and not that which it is.

V. Other three days with half single square.

VI. Three days yet with a piece single square, both to show where lines
should begin, and how far distant to make them.

VII. Without squares altogether, the space of six days.

And VIII. Let thy writ grow to such a reasonable speed, the space of other
six days, being a Month (or thirty days) in the whole, as thou may
keep every letter thereof of such proportion, quantity, and situation, as
thou have learned the days preceding. Thus much of the Transition, leading
the nearest and directest way to Perfection.

THE ABRIDGEMENT OR BREVIARIE OF THE Art of Fair VVriting.
The Prologue.
IT is the precise and right Term now, whereat I should perform my Promise,
in drawing of this Work to a Brevitie; and that by making an Abridgement
thereof. Surely it does neither agree with my disposition nor intention, to
repeat any thing; yet if I apply not mine Instruction through out all the
Book, and especially in this place, as well to the capacity of those who can
write nothing at all, as of others, who esteem themselves perfect enough
already; they will comprize all the rest to little valor. For intercepting of
the which light esteemation, I will here (through GODS Grace) accomplish that
which I promised to do: that thereby the one sort may be sufficiently
informed, and instructed: and the other confirmed, and their Skill augmented.
For I am persuaded, that whosoever reads this Book, will not find it
altogether so barren of good matter, (though indeed the subject be so esteemed
by some) but it does contain many things which thou never read in any other
Book, nor never heard taught of any other man, and so scarcely ever knew of
before; or else it were but a sober invention. If I then (as Gods dispensator
in this behalf) have set on two Tables, such variety of Dishes that there
lacks nothing, but appetite to receive them; and these whom I have invited,
will neither take that which I car^e and offer unto them on the great Table in
the Hall, nor this little Table in the Chamber; nor yet choose and take unto
themselves such dainties off both as be meetest for them, it is no pity
though they want altogether.

So immediately is insinuated and set down, first, two lines of writ, and ten
compendious Precepts, collected forth of both the General and Special parts
of this Book, (for thy memories cause) directed thereupon: and next, a brief
Alphabet of Current single and double letters, extracted forth of the great
Alphabet: after the which follows the Conjugations and Formations of all the
letters thereof, showing so may as be both conjoined and framed together of one
fashion, though of diverse names, and begins and proceeds after one
manner: first ranked together, and then each one with its own rule by it
self, declaring the true progress of the pen therein; and that for the use
of all learners, but chiefly of those who would feign learn one form of writ
suddenly, leaving all others unto those who may spare longer time, and take
greater pains.

I know, some of those who can write somewhat already, will think it an
indignity to begin again at the casting of letters, (I mean severallie by
order of Alphabet) even as if the action or practice of all writ which ever
they have written, or will write, consisted not in the casting and framing of
letters: it is never shame to do well, (that is, any thing that may tend to
a good use) and (as I said once before) far better late nor never: for many
that can even cast Letters well, cannot cast them the right way, and each one
that can cast them the right way, cannot cast them after a comely manner, I
mean to begin, follow forth, and accomplish each one, both formallie and
decently, from the first part thereof to the midst, and from the midst to the
last: and if so be, far less are they able to observe and perform the
remnant injunctions, whereof this Art requires observance and performance.

And to shun and reject the burden of the which, it may be that some of them
allege there be more things prescribed than need requires, but (to my
judgment) there is not an idle Precept in all this Book: indeed, because
they cannot be all of a like weight, the greatest sort has the greatest
necessity in the observation: for when any Art is either taught or written,
it ought to be taught and written largely, and no necessary thing purposelie
omitted; because, in the learning and practicing thereof, there will be enough,
yea too much neglected, that ought to be respected. And so, when all is done
that can be done, there rests enough to do, though at the first, there be
no wilful negligence: let instructors therefore strive to know and practice
all which be any ways needful and expedient, and Students follow only so
maniethings as be most needful, and most expedient.

And albeit many letters, yea even of one sort, be oftentimes casten after
diverse ways, which does proceed of the disconformitie of instructing, which
has been in times past; yet all men (with unity of mind) will confess that
there is no way so good as the rightest way: and the way here taught and
demonstrated, I prove to be the rightest: (let others try or essey as they
please) because letters being made conform to it, not only gets the
rightest proportion, casts and joyneth best; but to cast and conjoyne are
speediest, and being casten and conjoined, are most comely and legeable: and
so consequently, the matter contained in them so much the more intelligible.

A PEDAGOGICALL ADMONITION, OF THAT WISE and learned Clerk, William Lillte,
unto his Disciples.
SCalpellum, Calami, Atramentum, Charta, Libelli, Sint semper Studiis Arma
parata tuis.

The use of this Copy.
IN the Letters only, and not in the matter, of these two lines of Writ, (as
in all others such like) are ten Observations to be marked: the Limiting of
Capitals, the Dimitting of Square, the Speediness requisite in Writing, the
Fashioning, Measuring, Bounding, and Conjoyning of Single and Double Letters,
the distance betwixt Letters, Words, and Lines, the difference of Letters, and
compactnesse requisite in all Writ.

TEN COMPENDIOUS PRECEPTS, Directing how to match the COPY afore-written.
LIMITATION OF CAPITALS.
PLace all Beginning Capitals within, above, and under the double square; and
all middle Capitals within, and above.

DIMISSION OF SQVARE.
Strive to frame and set all the Letters now, as justly without double square,
as when thou had it.

EXPEDITION.
Learn speedily, but write slowly, till thou can match the Copy.

PROPORTION.
Keep the same equal middles of Letters, in Writ, which thou learnest hereby
in Alphabet.

QVANTITIE.
MAke the Body, Head, and Tail of each Letter, equal with another of its
own sort; in length, breadth, and wideness.

SITVATION.
SET all the Bodies of Letters betwixt the scores, Heads above, and Tails
under.

CONIVNCTION.
Endeavor to conjoyne the most part of all Letters within Words, by seldom
lifting of the pen.

DISTANCE.
LEt almost all Letters within words, Words within lines, and Lines within
Pages, be equal distant, each one of its own kind from another.

DIFFERENCE.
Every Letter must differ somewhat from another in fashion, and have some
greatness and smalnesse: but compassed Letters indifferency.

COMPREHENSION.
Comprehend thy Writ in little bounds; and that rather of Letters within
words, than of Words with words, or Lines with lines, except of necessity.

The Epilogue, or Closing up of the Pattern, and Precepts.
IMADE Choice of the former two Verses, whereon these Precepts have resulted,
as a Pattern to follow, for the letters which it containe^h, and a Precept to
observe, for the matter comprehended therein; beca^se each one of them tends
to the well of the subject I have in hand: and that c^iefelie for the use of
those who would feign go the nearest way to learn. A Pattern to follow (I
say) for two causes: first, beca^se it makes mention of such comely Armor as
is requisite for Scholars always to ca^rie, when they march in that Conflict
betwixt Science and Ignorance, (which they think a Battle indeed, though it
be the most peaceable time that many of them will ever have in the world
again.) Next, because it serves in stead of an Exemplare of Practice, to be
resembled here; that while as they write thereby, it may keep them in memory
to prepare such things as without the which they can hardly resemble it, or
any other. And a Precept to observe, I said: for albeit it be commonly both
in every Students memory, and repeated by them; yet because sundry of them
are slack, and careless in preparing of those Necessaries, I ^ake occasion
here to reiterate the same: for nothing can be too often commanded, that is
not well obeyed.

AN ORATION, BEFORE THE BRIEF ALPHABET.
IF thou be one that would soon learn, it is for thy cause that this
Alphabet of Current Letters following, being 48 in number, as they be diverse
in sorts, are chosen and extracted forth of the great Alphabet, and casten by
degrees in this manner following: and that both for thy better consideration of
them all in general, and imitation of each one in particular. And if thou be
any ways tractable and careful to learn, thou may hereby understand them
as well, and follow them better, than if thou had seen them written by any
skillful Master Writer after the ordinary form: (that is, without more
instruction, than they commonly use to give) and whereas thou may perhaps
allege, he would both do and speak, that is, both write, and tell how to
write; write Exemplars, and declare how to to follow them: my answer is, thy
alledgeance may well hold against a bare Exemplar Book, but not against this;
for such a book may well show thee the end afar off, but it concealeth the
way that leads thereunto; and so will suffer thee to fall into an hundereth
ditches, if thou should walk therein without a guide: it shows thee a
little indeed, what to follow, but neither the means whereby, nor the manner
how to follow; and so is a most obscure teacher every way: yea, and so
senseles that it cannot do so much, as sign its own meaning: why then, is it
any marvel that these books be for the most part to all learners un-imitable,
and few the better thereof that buy them? It is not the beholding of a fair
complete Palace, that can teach a young Mason (newly passed Apprentize) to
build, or be Master of Work to the like; but he must needs either be
present at the founding of such a one, and still continue till it be
accomplished, or else have the knowledge of some secret precepts of that Art
or Craft, either left unto him by some near friend, who has been a cunning
Master Builder (he then being ingenious and careful to practice them) that
must first teach him. But this Book, as it pleases GOD does all these
things, which it cannot do; it not only shows the end, the means, and the
way how to win thereunto; but how to shun all dangers in the way, and come
safely to the end. And albeit it utters not by voice, yet it so expresses
its own meaning, both by literal instruction and demonstration, that any of
common judgment, who can read, may understand the same perfectly, without
any interpreter: for by the private means of reading, and ocular
demonstration figuratiuelie of things read, all careful Students in humane
Sciences, learneth and profits as much, yea, I may say far more, than by
public hearing. And when all is done, whether they learn by Word or Writ,
by these books, or this book, as I said of before in another place, that as
Practice availes little without knowledge; even so knowledge avails as little
without practice.

Further, if thou would know the viue proportion, quantity, and situation
of the bodies, heads, and tails of letters, either behold, or single them out
as they stand in the great Alphabet; and how each one is compared or described
in the Comparations or Descriptions thereof preceding this place: and if thou
would know how many strokes may serve to cast each one before the pen be
lifted, either behold them, or else abstract them forth of the Narration
following hereafter: by which means thou may have sufficient information
and instruction thereanent; and that by thine own diligence: for I think thou
art not so ignorant, but thou know unto whom thou workest, and whose errand
thou go.

This Summarie or Compende then, is not only coherent with the Comparations
and Transition going before; but is so knit, and linked with the Narration, and
Rules of Perfection following after, that it cannot be separated therefrom: at
the least, would not be much steadable, if so it were. And so, if the
Transition be the way which leads unto perfection, this Compende is the end
of the way, and the very Yate or Entry unto Perfection it self.

A BRIEF ALPHABET, OF CVRRENT Single and Double Letters.


THE CONIVGATIONS, AND FORMATIONS OF ALL THE Letters of this brief Alphabet:
Set down both for themselves, and for all other Letters of this kind, whether
in the great Alphabet, or else where;
Showing so many as be conjoined and fra med together of one fashion, though
of diverse names, and begins, proceeds, and concludes after one manner:
First ranked conjunctlie, or together, and then severallie, that is, each one
with the own Rule by it self, declaring the true progress of the Pen
therein.

1 begins upon the high Square, and comes somewhat back: 2, descends to
the low Square: 3, slenteth up again therefrom, unto the place where it began:
4, turns down again unto the low Square: and 5, concludes with a sharp
dash, by ascending a little within the last downe-comming. So it is almost
quadrant, and contains 5 parts, the 1 small, the 2 great; the 3 small, the 4
great, and the 5 small: howbeit they be all casten with one strike of the
pen, before it be taken up.

begins and proceeds betwixt the scores, as the same sort of a: but when
it slenteth up again, it must be brought from under the lowest Square, after
that it has come straight down.

1 begins, and proceeds betwixt the Squares, as the former sorts: 2,
comes straight down, under the low score, as the same sort of que but
concludes evenlie back to the left hand: and 3, comes either back again
within it self a little, for making of the last part great, or goes somewhat
downewardes, as thou please.

1 begins upon the high score: 2, compasses down under the low square: and
3, meets either preciselie where it began, or very near that part.

1 comes from above the high Square, slenting thereunto, or somewhat farther
down, as thou please: 2, slenteth contrariwise to the low score: and 3,
concludes with a stroke going endlonges the high score, preciselie from
betwixt the several slentes.

1 comes likewise from above the high Square, slenting both thereunto, and
down under, or over the same, to the low Square: 2, turns sharp, by going a
piece endlonges the sa^e: 3, slenteth up again, to the high Square: 4, down
again thereon, (that is, covering the most part of the up-going) to the low
Square yet: and 5, concludes, by ascending a little within that downe-comming.

1 begins, and proceeds betwixt the Scores, as the last sort of a; but
slenteth up again, from under the low Score, after that it has come straight
down: and 2, boweth a little to the right hand, in the last great part
thereof betwixt the Scores.

1 begins, and proceeds betwixt the Squares, as this last q: 2, slenteth
down to right hand, under the low Square: and 3, goes up, compassing
closely, and closing toward the same.

1 begins betwixt the two Scores: 2, slenteth upwardes, and compasses
narrowly somewhat above the high Square: 3, comes straight down, a little
under the low Score: 4, declineth back, somewhat toward the left hand: and
5, compasses wide, evenlie forth, or narrowly upwardes, as thou think
expedient.

1 begins and proceeds upon and above the Squares, as the other: 2,
slenteth or declineth to the right hand, in the downe-comming: 3, compasses to
the left hand: and 4, closes on the low Square.

1 arises from under the low Score, and slenteth up to the high Square: 2,
down again to the low Square: and 3, slenteth up again, somewhat within the
downe-comming.

1 arises as the i, and goes an hair breadth above the high Square: 2,
comes thence to the low Score: 3, ascends somewhat again: and 4,
concludes, with a strike going justly alonges the high Square.

1 arises also as the i: 2, comes evenlie down again to the low Score: 3,
goes narrowly up, a little above the high Square, and meets thereon: and 4,
closes, while as it goes through, endlonges the high Score.

and 1 begins, and proceeds, in like manner as the i: and 2, each one has
the same doubled, and conjoined together; excepting so far as one
Introduction, or tocomming, serves both the parts of each one of them. But
there is a mark set over the last, for the better descearning thereof from the
first, not unlike this Printed sort of v, which is chiefelie used when there
is more Minum Letters in that Syllable.

has the foresaid i tripled, and conjoined in the same manner.

1 begins either a little above the high Score, or under the low Score, and
goes up thereunto, as thou please: 2, compasses up, and comes straight
down to the low Score: and 3, concludes either in going endlonges the same a
little, or slenting somewhat up, as thou think hastiest, and best.

1 begins above the high Score, compasses up, and comes straight down to
the low Score, as the l; but whereas the one goes a little endlonges the same
there, or ascends somewhat from thence, the tail of the other comes as
far under the low Score, as the head thereof went above the high Score.

1 begins, and proceeds, in the same manner: and 2, concludes with a
strike through it, on, or endlonges the high Square.

1 begins, and proceeds, in the same manner, till it come to the low
Score: 2, it goes somewhat endlonges the same: 3, goes therefrom to the high
Score: and 4, closes in thereon, to the fore-side of the stalk.

1, begins, and proceeds, in the same manner yet, till it come to the low
square: 2, returns therefrom up within the stalk again to the high score:
and 3, makes half a compass, concluding under the low score.

1, begins and proceeds in the same form, till it come to the low square:
2, slenteth up therefrom to the high score: 3, compasses down narrowly to the
midst betwixt the squares: and 4, either closes in to the last part, or
comes through both the parts, before it conclude even forth.

^, begins and proceeds as the b, till it come to the closing on the high
score; then within the close part or body thereof, is only added a conclusion
not unlike unto the 2 r in the great Alphabet, or the 1 r in the small:
(secluding the tocomming or entrance thereof which comes from under the low
square) but the body of this letter must be somewhat wider or higher, than
the body of the b, that is, a little above the high square, for the better
receiving of this augmentation within the same without blotting; and that only
when it is hastily written: also, in casting thereof, thou must spend little
of the wideness in the first part of the turning within, and leave most to the
last, for fear of maculation.

^, begins and proceeds as the l, when the l concludes in ascending a
little; and then the remnant thereof proceeds and ends as the b: but both
the parts of the head thereof, to be somewhat lower than the heads of any of
these two Exemplar letters.

1, compasses from the high square to the low; and 2, compasses upwardes
again, and concludes where it began.

1, begins and proceeds betwixt the scores in the same manner, and 2,
concludes in slenting above the high square toward the left hand.

1, begins and proceeds in the same form also, both betwixt and above the
scores; but compasses or turns back again: and 2, concludes (on the high
square) where it began.

^, begins and proceeds in the same manner yet; but concludes with a
crooked dash under the low square toward the left hand.

1, begins on the high score, and slenteth toward the right hand to the low
score: and 2, compasses up again in closing or meeting where it began.

1, begins and proceeds in the like manner betwixt the squares; 2, comes
straight down under the low square: and 3, slenteth upwards again toward the
same.

^, begins and proceeds in the same form; but has a fair compass under
the low square, either evenlie forth, or upwards, as best pleases thee.

1, begins with the like slent from the high score to the low; and 2, goes
sometime up within the same, to the high score, and sometime it requires to
have the pen lifted, and set there again, that it may come thence to the low
score: and 3, compasses under the same like unto the tail of the last letter.

1, begins upon the high square: 2, sometimes comes straight down under
the low square: 3, goes endlongs through ^hereon in making of half a compass
closing on the high square: and 4, oftentimes the whole body is made betwixt
the Scores, before the stalk come under them. But the last way is not so sure
as the first: for the Letter being speedily so written, will appear both
like the first r, and second p, of this Alphabet, very often: and so make that
word to be doubtful, till the Sentence resolve the same.

1 arises from under the low Square: 2, flenteth up to the high Square: 3,
goes endlonges the same: 4, slenteth down a little to the left hand, more
than midway betwixt the Scores: 5, goes up a little within that downecomming,
and comes with a contrary slent, toward the right hand, to the low
Square: and 6, slenteth up within the same half way to the high Score. So it
is just quadrant, and consists of five parts, as the first a of this
Alphabet.

^, begins, and proceeds, under and betwixt the Squares in the same
manner; save only the one concludes by ascending a little from the high
Score, and the other, comes down under the same, and ends with an open
compass; either euenlie forth, or somewhat ascending, as thou please.

1, begins on the high Score, in going a little endlonges the same: 2,
descends thence to the low Score: 3, goes somewhat wide up again: and 4,
concludes by going a little endlonges the same.

1, begins, and proceeds, as the other, until it come to the low Score:
2. ascends within the downe-comming, and returns, and closes, in the
midst, betwixt the Squares: and thirdly, concludes, by going somewhat alonges
the low Square. The third of these parts may be the second, or the second
the third, which thou think best.

and 1, begin, proceed, and conclude, as the two former sorts of them, in
this Alphabet: but these here, are open compassed above the high Square,
whereas the other two are close compassed.

1, begins on the high Square, and compasses toward the left hand, to the
low Square: 2, goes through where it began, and slenteth toward the right
hand, somewhat above the high Square: and thirdly, concludes somewhat
toward the left hand, by setting of the Pen sadly down.

1, descends from above the high Square, to the low: and 2, has a strike
going through upon, or endlonges, the high Square.

1, descends, in the same manner: 2, comes under the low Square: 3, it has
a strike, joined unto that part thereof where i^ began, which boweth forth
wards a little.

1, begins, and proceeds, above, betwixt, and under the Scores, as the
other f: 2, is made somewhat higher, and comes down, compassing to the high
Square; and that inwardes, either to, or through, the stalk thereof, as thou
shall think most expedient: and 3, goes directly forth a little, and
concludes downewardes, either to, or somewhat under, the low Square.

1, beninneth and proceeds above, betwixt, and under the Squares, in the
preceding manner; but arises somewhat higher than at the beginning: 2,
comes even down narrowly to the high Score; 3, slenteth and grows to some
wideness under the same toward the right hand: and 4, concludes with a
slent contrary to the former, that is, toward the left hand.

1, arises from under the low Score, and mounteth above the high Score, to the
right hand; 2, slenteth down to the low Score, toward the same hand: and 3,
closes on, or betwixt the Scores, as the b.

1, arises and mounteth in that same form; 2, comes straight down to the
low Score: 3, goes up again justy as high as of before; 4, comes straight
down again: and 5, concludes as the former.

1, begins at the high Square; 2, goes a little endlongs thereon: 3,
slenteth toward the left hand, some farther down to the low Square: and 4,
compasses upwards under the same.

^, begins, proceeds, and concludes as the other; but co^passeth twice
under the low Square: the first whereof, as that part of the former letter, but
the last contrary thereunto.

Here ends the Abridgement.
AN NARRATION, Demonstrating so many strokes as may serve in the casting of
each Single and Double Letter of the great Alphabet, without taking up of the
Pen from the Paper, Except Ink fail therein, before the Letter be completed.
IN casting of each one of the Single and Double Letters, of the great
Alphabet, with so many strikes (one or more) as may suffice the same, without
lifting of the pen; thou must take heed to the right calculation thereof, and
reckon them in this manner: to wit, thou must count aye the first downsetting
of the pen, till it be once taken up, and the same up-taking, for the first
strike; the second setting, and second up-taking, for the second strike; and
the third setting, and third up-taking, for the third strike: and so they
divide themselves into three ranks, with an indifferent rank serving them
all. In like manner, there be 3 sorts of strokes, commonly used in casting
of all letters, to wit, Constant, Variable, and Deficient; all the fore said
three sorts of strokes are constant, the 4 variable; and as for the deficient,
or defective sort, it is oftest used in conjoining of letters within words,
with common or borrowed strokes; they not having any belonging properly unto
themselves.

FIrst, let 72 letters of the number in the great Alphabet, be written only
with one strike, or once setting down of the pen upon the paper, before it be
taken up agane, and these be, the

2, 3, 4, -- a, 5, 6, 7, 8, h, 2, 3, -- b, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, i, 3, 4, -- d, 4, 5,
-- k, 7, 8, 9, 10, e, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, -- l, 2, 3, 4, -- g, 2, 3, 4, -- m, 2, 3,
4, -- n, 2, 6, -- s, 3, 5, -- o, 4, 5, -- s, 5 -- p, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, -u, 2, 3,
4, -- que 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, w, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, r, 2, 3, 4, -- x, 6, 7, -- y,
and the 1, 2, 3, 4, -- z.

And because, the unskilful may perchance begin some of these letters at the
wrong side, though they have but one strike, I will therefore set down only
the beginning of each one of them, for removing of all doubts; so that they
cannot begin them wrong (for I hope they will not be so childish as to cast
them backwards) which is a lesson as imitable, as if thou saw them written by
any Master of this Art.

NOTA.
I omit the sorts of Capital A in these Rules; because, any of sober skill, by
considering of the single and double letters which be here specified, may not
only understande how these few; but all sorts of Capitals represented thereby,
and pertaining to the long Alphabet are casten, and how often the pen should
be lifted in doing thereof; even as easily as the whole single and double
letters of the same Alphabet, may be understoode to be casten by degrees, by
those few number contained in the Rules of the short Alphabet:

Secondly, let 45 letters be casten with two strikes, or twice setting down
and lifting up of the pen, these be, the 1, -- a, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, e, 1, -- b,
2, 5, 6, 7, f, 1, 2, 3, 5, c, 1, -- g, 1, -- d, 1, 2, -- h, 5, -- i, 1, -- que
1, 2, 3, -- k, 1, -- r, 1, -- n, 1, 3, 4, -- s, 1, 2, 4, -- o, 1, 2, 3, -- s,
1,2,3,5,6, -- t, 1,6,7, -- u, and the 3, -- w.

And since it is hard to descearne rightly the two several strikes of each
letter, and right way of the pen in casting thereof, when they are joined
together, as in the Alphabet; which comes by occasion of the lifting of the
pen once betwixt the doing of them; I have therefore thought good to mark
every one, whereby the doing of each strike may be distinctlie known: and
that by leaving a defect, or open part, betwixt the two strikes, where the
pen must be taken up; and the ticke or piece, taken, or rather withheld
forth thereof, put beside it, for the better knowing of the precise part
where they are conjoined; to wit, betwixt the ending of the first strike, and
beginning of the second: which defect, therefore, is not left here to be
resembled, but the several parts of Letters thereby the better perceived.

Thirdly, let ten Letters be casten with three strikes, or thrice
downe-setting of the pen, to wit, the 4, c: 1, 3, 4, f: 1, m: 1, 2, p: 5, ss:
4, t: and the 1, x: which be likewise set down in manner, and for the cause
immediately before exprimed; but with two wantes: because each one of them all
has three several strikes, except these two, which have four, to wit, the 4
cc, and ff.

Fourthlie, let these 14 Letters, the 2, d: 2, 3, g: 3, 4, h: 5, n: 9, 10, r:
4, u: and the 2, 3, 4, 5, y: be written indifferently, in respect of their
variableness, and inconstancy, to wit, with one stroke of the pen, as they
occur in any of the two sorts of Current Writ, as here thou may
perceive how they begin.

And with two strikes, in any of the two sorts of Common Writ, as here their
several strikes may be seen.

And last, these two, the 5, m: and 4, pp: the one with one stroke of the
pen in Current Writ, and three in Common Writ; and the other casten with two
strikes in Current, and four in Common.

Thus far tend the Rules of Information, concerning Single and Double
Letters: as for Capitals, which would seem more difficile, and therefore more
needful to have been thus severed by parts, for knowing thereby of their
several strokes; it is true, if they behooved to be first learned, thou
would find them harder to follow than these: but since thou art thus
trained up, with the knowledge and exercise of Single and Double Letters
(being the easiest sort) first, and not the less most needful; because all
Writing stands most by them, as said is, I think it not requisite to be so
tedious as to explain the Capitals: for by the sight of them in the great
Alphabet, and by the Rules of their Limitation, thou may both easily
consider their number of strokes, and suddenly resemble them. And although
they might be as easily declared in that manner, as the Single and Double
Letters, yet because they keep not such a constant fashion, being so often
altered, either by adding some more work unto them, or by substracting some
strokes from them, (at the option of the Writer, as he finds opportunity)
they cannot well be directed by Precepts, to keep any constant number of
strikes.

Therefore, I must needs apply mine Instruction in this behalf, somewhat to
the ordinary form of Masters to their Disciples; who in teaching of any
Science, teach much indeed, but remitte far more to their own private
Study: and besides both, they must even conceive many things, which are
understoode by one thing expressed: a fair Face absent, by the Picture thereof
present: but here the most part is expressed, and declared, and the least
understood, and remitted.

THE RVLES OF PERFECTION, IN Fair Writing: Concerning the right Proportioning,
Measuring, and situating, of Single and Inseparable Double Letters; as also the
conjoyning thereof within words, as they occur, which chiefelie consists
in seldom lifting of the Pen, while as they be written.
SInce thou have been taught that al single and dowble letters in the
Alphabet, have either bodies, heads, or tails, and some of them al three; let
the like equality of bodies, heads, and tails of letters, be kept in lines of
writ, as they have on double square in Alphabet, whether thou have double
square indeed, or but imagine thou have it: that is to say, the bodies of all
such letters as have them, must fill the rowme betwixt the two squares, the
heads go above the high square, and the tails come under the low square: and
as it is true by Doctrine of Precept, so is it true by Exemple of Practice;
behold the whole single and double letters in the great Alphabet, if they be
not so framed, measured and bounded: except only the fifth o, which requires
sometime to be written almost above the high square, (for speedes cause) when
it occurreth in Current Writ, after the 5 t, as is probable by that same letter
standing in these words,

Let so far of the down-comming strike requiring to be great, of all single
and double letters, as shall happen to fall in betwixt the scores, (or fill up
the breadth of the line) be made straight, and neither ly asquint to the right
hand, nor to the left, as these two, the 2 b, and 2 f: excepting first these 9,
the 4 a, 3, 4, c, 3, 4, que and the 1, 2, 3, 4, s; which require to decline to
the right hand, where the lines end. And next, the bodies of all letters in
the Alphabet, which have any form of compassing or roundnesse within.

And if thou be inclined to cause the most part of thy letters decline, or
lean to the right hand (as all men commonly are) the only remedy is, that
thou strive against that thy inclination, till thou subdue that wrong form of
declination; and that by causing them lean to the left hand, or margin, where
all lines begin (save the lines of the Hebrew Character, and some others) and
by so doing, thou may the more easily command thine hand, to keep an
indifferent mean betwixt both, that is, to make all the letters of this
Character to stand straight up and down, except these before excepted.

Let the heads of all single and double letters, which have them, be of a like
hight above the high square, whether they be compassed heads, crooked, or
slented; but the last sort, not to be altogether so high as the other two:
compassed, two manner of ways; close and open, close compassed heads,
ascending small, and descending great, as these two, the 2 b, and 5 f: and open
compassed, also ascending small, and descending great, as the 2 f, and 2 s:
crooked heads, going up small, and concluding great, as the 5 s; or coming
down great to the right hand, as the 5 w, or small to the left hand, as the 5,
t: and slented heads, ascending small, and descending great, as the 8, single
v: or concluding great, as the 2, d: or concluding small, as the 7, f: or yet
beginning small up, and growing great down, as the 1, or 2, t. But the heads
of these two, the 3, f, and s, require not only to be higher, or elevated,
and exalted, beyond other Letters, above the high Score; but likewise wider
compassed than any of those which fall under the Rule, and the heads of these
five, the 1, d: 6, t: 3, 4, and 6, w: to be shorter, or not so high, as any
of these which come within the compass thereof.

Let the tails of all the Single and Double Letters be alike low under the
low Square, whether they be casten straight down, remaining still; straight
down, returning up; or compassed about: yet the sharp points of the first
sort, makes the tails thereof to come somewhat lower than the other two:
which, therefore, shall not be counted in their length, so long as the
liberty thereof is not abused; that is, by making them so long out of measure,
that they do harm unto diverse Letters in the Lines following, after the
Lines wherein they stand, as the French sorts of these Letters commonly do.
The Letters which be straight down, remaining still, are, the 2, f, and s:
straight down, returning up, as the 5, p, and 3, q: and compassed about, as
the 4, h, and 2, y. But the tails of these four, the 3, g: 4, x: 5, y: and 4,
z, require not only to be lower, or farther under the low Score: but wider
compassed than any of these which observe the Rule: and the tails of these
five, the 4, g: 3, 4, p: 4, q: and 6, y, to be shorter, or not so low, as
any of those which come within the reach of the Rule.

Let none of the compassed tails of these seven letters, the 4, 5, h, 2 x, 2,
4, y, and 2, 3, z, be any farther forth under the low square, than the
foremost part of each one of them whch is betwixt the scores, to the effect,
the higher and lower part thereof being not only alike forth both up an
down, a small strike or lineament of the pen may go directly up (both for
the causes of greater speed, and better conjoyning) from the tail of any of
them, as they occur, and that to the next Letter following within that word,
(if there be any, and require such a to-comming) but likewise each one of
them may so hold it self within its own bounds, as that the quantity
thereof may do no harm to Lines following, if any shall happen to be, as in
these words:

Except in the last Line of thy Writ, although their tails be both farther
forth, and longer, yet small strokes (if so I may call them) may go
directly up from them, and yet do no harm, because no more Lines will
follow, as of this quantity, in the two Exemples following, (if thou
please) thou may make the two Letters which begin them, both when they
go up unto Letters which admit small strikes to come unto them, and when
Letters chance to ensue which admit none: so testimonies of both do appear
by these words:

Let the cross strikes of each one of these two Letters, f, and t, with the 4
g, go through them, justly and lightly on either side, endlonges the high
Square, likewise of these five, the 3, 4, 5, c: 3, and 7, e, whereof every one
has a strike proceeding from it, on the fore (or last) side only: and also
the cross strikes happening to these 36, the

1, 2, - b, 2, -- e, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, o, 1, 2, -- c, 1, 2, 3, - g, 1, 2, -- p, 1,
2, 3, 4, d, 1, 3, - h, 2, -- que 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, single v, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
double w, 1, x, 1, y, 1, z,

With these five, the 2, p: 5, m, n, and single u, when each one of them is
casten with diverse strokes, and the 4, or double pp, when it is casten with
maniest; none of them having any strike at all, seen or expressed, while each
one is set alone, as in the Alphabet; but altogether understoode: for although
none of themselves have either cross strikes going through them, or any other
strike at all proceeding from them, (except the last d and e here expressed)
because they are otherwise proportioned: yet, as each one of them happens to
be accompanied with another, or yet with other Letters in any word, it is
found to have a little small strike, going there from, unto any of the former
sorts, sometimes justly, endlonges the high Square, and sometimes to arise
from the last side of each one of them, the distance of an hair breadth, under
the same, as the entry to the Letter immediately following requires; which
does slent up through the high Square, to the beginning of that Letter, if it
admit such a beginning; or to any other, that has any entresse at all, to
the effect that it may lean closely to the first side thereof, except only
the sorts of long s, but chiefelie the 2, 3, and 6, thereof: and that both for
the greater speediness in writing, and more seemly conjoyning of all Letters
in thy Writ, as in these words:

Yet the strike going through the 2, or 5, f, in the Alphabet, is oftentimes
used to be on the low Square, when any of them chances to preceede the 3,
or 5, o, in any word, but chiefelie of Current Writ, as is evident by these:

Although thou have been taught to make all Letters within words alike near;
yet draw the cross strikes coming through Letters on either side, or from
them, on the fore-side only, (that is, the side toward the right hand)
somewhat farther forth, where, or when Letters wanting heads do follow,
which admit strikes from former Letters to begin them: and chiefelie the
strike going through the 2, t: for nevertheless that former Rule and this
agree; since in distance betwixt Letters standing within words, the first and
last parts, (that is, the nearest parts) of them, is as much reckoned as the
stalks thereof, where through these cross strikes come; and that whether
endlonges, or crosse-wayes the Squares, as in these words:

If thou intendest to be a speedy Writer, remember that thou lift not the
pen, (except to take Ink) to, nor within the casting, of any Single or
Double Letter, made with one strike, within a word; lest thereby, besides
slownesse in the action, thou make defectes in casting of these whole, or
uncutted Letters, (whole, I say, because albeit they may be casten and learned
by parts, or degrees, in manner before specified; yet they are never severed
by several strikes, as the remnant Single and Double) neither yet take the
pen up to the casting or beginning of any Letter of diverse strikes within
it self, nor after the casting of any single or double letter of this
Character, (as is usuallie done in learning to write them severallie by order
of Alphabet, where there is a good distance left betwixt every two) but let
the last or readiest part of the letter which thou have already written,
begin the first or nearest part of the letter, which next follows to be
written; and that by drawing a little whit or light touch from the one to the
other, as in the letters of these words,

And since there be diverse exceptions from this Rule, I divide them into four
ranks, both for the causes of better consideration, and remembrance thereof:
1, there be some letters which must needs have the pen taken up both to, and
after, the casting of each one of them; 2, some only to the casting; 3, some
after the casting (as for the up-taking in the casting of letters, I omit it,
because it must needs be dove; and therefore ought not to be restrained) and
4, there be some which have no constant or fast strokes going from them to
others, but a movable or variable of-set, arising from a clozed conclusion of
the one which preceedeth, and added to the nearest part of the other, that
follows, which serves as a Bridge for passage to the pen betwixt them, and
so it is doubtful unto which of the two it belongs.

The first sort, is two fold; first, the whole single letters which properly
belongs to the principal sorts of Set writ, being 23 in number, with the 2 w,
belonging also thereunto; are excepted from this Rule, and that as they are
written strictly, but not largely: Strictly, because it is a superior
form, and therefore, and in respect of the excellency and curiosity of all
the letters thereof, above any of the remnant forms of Secretary, it cannot
be so well directed to be fast written as any of them; for it is the
fountain, and they are but the conduites; and partly for that respect, and
partly, because it is slow of it self, and for the most part close every way,
that is, wanting passage from letter to letter; so^e liberty must needs be
granted unto the Exercers thereof, to lift the pen so much the ofter in writing
of the same. But if thou will consider them largely, albeit the most part of
the letters therein while as they are in writing, cannot so commodiouslie and
convenientlie arise each one forth of another, as the letters in the rest of
the forms; and therefore the pen must be so much the ofter taken up; yet,
being written, the most part of all the Letters in the same, are found little
worse conjoined, with strikes leaning thereunto, often times upon one of the
sides, and some times on both, as if the Pen did proceed orderly, out
through one, and in through another; as may be made clear by these words,
consisting of such letters:

And secondly, these three sorts of one Letter, the 2, 3, and 6, s, are
accepted for two causes: first, because the Pen must needs be twice taken
up, in casting of each one of them, (beside the up-taking thereof in the midst
of the middle-moste) to wit, to the casting, and after the casting, to begin
the Letter following; which I make plain, by the standing of such Letters, in
these words:

And next, because none of them can suffer any cross strikes, coming justly
endlonges the high Square; either through, or from, whatsoever Letters, to touch
them on any side, but especially the side toward the right hand, lest
thereby they have no difference from the 2, f; as does appear by the like
Letters, in these words:

And so thou must take heed, that thou draw no strikes unadvisedlie through
Letters: that is, thou should foresee whether or not the Letter resulting
requires such a strike to begin the same: for in so doing, without
deliberation, thou will not only do harm to the aforesaid three Letters;
but often times to some others also, such as the second n, and u, and thereby
cause each one of them appear like the 2, a: as in these words:

But both from the high heads of the first and last of the same three sorts of
s, when they are casten upwardes, and not downewrdes, and the higher head of
the middlemost, there may arise many Letters, as the matter requires; which
be of two sorts, having heads, and wanting heads: but all those which have
heads, save the four sorts of d, arise more comely and pertinentlie, than
any of the other sort, which want heads, unless it be a few, which
begin with sharp slenting strokes, above the high Square, and arises, or
comes off, no less comely than the other sort: the first arises both in
the second sort of Set hand, and any sort of Common, and these be 21, the
3 sorts of b: 2, 3, 4, d: 2, 5, f: 2, 3, 4, h: 2, 3, 4, 5, k: 1, 2, 5, l: and
1, 2, 5, t: with the same three sorts of s, themselves, as any of them
happens to be after another in any word whatsoever, by way of doubling: as
the like Letters in these words give sufficient probation:

And next, the second sort, arises only in the two sorts of Current Writ,
somewhat more superficially to keep the Pen unlifted, which be 47. in
number, to wit, the 2, 3, 4, -- a, 2, 3, 4, -- g, 2, 3, -- c, 5, 7, -- h, 3, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, - e, 2, 3, 4, 5, -- i, 2, 5, -- m, 3, 5, -- p, 2, 5, -- n, 2, 3, 4,
-- que 3, 4, 5, -- o, 2, 3, 6, 9, - r, 2, 3, 5, -- u, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, y, and the
2, 4, -- z.

As in these words:

In like manner, these two sorts of one Letter, the 6, 7, single v, which of
themselves have neither entresse for other Letters to come in to any of them,
or begin them, nor yet any constant off-set, proceeding from them unto
others, and therefore the Pen must needs both be taken up to the casting of
each one of them, and after: and so, when they are found to be joined with
other Letters, either before them, behind them, or both; these on-sets, and
off-sets, coming, or going, to them, or from them, do belong to those other
Letters, by right of proportion, rather as unto them: for a thing may ser^e often
times in common unto many, by courteous toleration of the owner, and yet be
proper but to one: and so when the Propriety fails, the Community wants:
the conjoyning, therefore, of the which Letters, may be perceived in these
words:

The second sort of the Letters excepted from the last Rule, be these ten,
the 4, a: 3, 4, c: 2, f: 3, 4, q: and 2, 3, 4, 5, t: because the Pen must be
contmuallie lifted, to the casting of each one of them, since they have no
entresse to receive any of themselves, as they meet again, or shall happen
to be doubled in a word, save this form of meeting, of these two, the 2, f,
and 2, t; and that two ways, the f, with f; and f, with t: first, when the f,
stands in a word, and the like happens to follow, it does become a double
ff: that is, when the even-downe stalk thereof is begun first, and not the
compassing of the head, and so then falls under the Rule, because the Pen
is neither lifted to the casting of the same, nor after. And next, the f, with
t: that is, when the t follows after the f, the Pen is neither lifted to
the casting thereof, nor yet after, and therefore it observes the Rule also:
as Exemples of both may be understoode, by such Letters, contained in these
words:

Neither yet has any of this preceding number entres (that is, access on
the left side) to receive any other Letter, which has a passage forth,
whereby they can be rightly begun, (the ^earest part of them may well be
touched, or leaned unto) except only the foresaid 2, 3, and 6, s, which
indeed may receive any of them; that is, arise there from, or join after the
same; save these two, the 4, cc, and tt: as I approve by such Letters, in
these words,

NOTA.
None of these seven Letters, the 2, 3, a: 2, 3, g: 2, 3, o: and 2, que can
neither arise well, from the tails of any of themselves, (occurring twice in
one word) nor any others.

The third sort of Letters excepted, be these three, the 7, h: 3, x: and 3,
y; because the Pen must be taken up, after the casting of each one of them,
to begin any Letter following, within a word, (howbeit they be most
proper in the end thereof) whether it require a stroke or not, to begin the
same, as in these words:

And the fourth, and last sort, be these eight Letters, the 2, 5, 6, c: 3, h:
2, o: 2, p: 9, r: and 3, w, are excepted: these three also, the 5, m, n, and u,
when each one of them is written with diverse strikes: and these two, the 2,
and 3, g, when each one of them is written with one strike, because the Pen
must be also lifted after the casting of each one of them, to the casting of
any Letter following, whether it requires a strike, or not. And albeeit
neither these 13 Letters in the whole before mentioned, nor these nine, the 3,
4, 5, o: 8, 9, single v: 4, 5, 6, and 7, w: nor yet the 3, p, when it is
written with two strokes, has any passage to other Letters, which can any
wise belong unto them, by the right of shape, as may be seen to enlacke in
each one of these sorts, as they stand here alone, and that because each one
of them ends with a closed conclusion, except the three Minum letters; yet,
as they occur in words, they find out, and have some passage, wherein the
Pen resorteth amongst themselves, as they meet again in words, though it
be somewhat lifted after the casting of the foresaid 8, but most after the h,
t, and sorts of g: and also it goes from any of them, to whatsoever others
which have an^e entres; and that either upon, or a little under the high
square; and no wise to be lifted after the casting of any of the remnant here
expressed; but to arise either from off the same square, or go endlongs
thereon, either to any of themselves as they obviat others again, or to
whatsoever others which require such a beginning; whether having heads, or
wanting them: for although all Letters join not together on both the sides,
yet usuallie, either the foremost side of every one of them is joined to the
hindermost side of the letter precceding the same, if it be not the first of a
word; or else the last side thereof to the letter following, if it be not the
last of a word. Or, to be short, each letter must be joined unto another,
either before, after, or both: and if any be exeemed, or excepted from this
Rule and Exception, (for in this point it is both) it must be chiefelie the
said 2, 3, and 6 s, before reserved, the 5, and 6 e, in the Alphabet, and the 2
o, here expressed: and for thy better consideration of the particulars of this
exception, thou have these Exemples, which do contain some of the letters
here specified, wherein the way of the pen may be easily perceived,

THE CONSTRVCTIONS Of Fair VVriting: Or right contriving, setting, and
ordering of Letters in Fair Writ: Beginning first here, at the placing of
Letters rightly in Syllables; and then proceeding from Syllables to Words,
and last, from Words to Sentences.
SECT. II. CONCERNING SYLLABLES.
A Syllable, is the pronouncing of one or more Letters joined with one breath.

Seeing Sillables are composed of Single or Double letters, the matter here to
be treated, is the right making up of Sillables with Letters, or right placing
of Letters in Sillables.

A Syllable, may admit any one or more of the Single and inseparable Double
Leters, or any one of the 5 separable double which follow to be spoken off, to
wit, the 5, 6 8, 9, e, being Diphthongs, and the 5 n, as the nature thereof
requires; and sometimes though two letters belong to a syllable, one is
expressed only, another understoode, and a little rowme left void for the
same, with a crooked dash made like a Comma, set over it; which is used in
Poesies for the Verse cause, as in the last Sillables of these words,

And so, if thou can spell, or syllabe well, and place the Letters rightly,
which follow hereafter, that is, as they are directed to be; thou needst
neither to make up Sillables of wrong Letters, by nature or sound; nor place
Letters wrong in Sillables, by a disagreeable proportion.

Let no Syllable accept of a Single v, in place of a Double w, as in these
words,

nor a Double w, in place of a Single, as in these words,

but place each one in its own rowme, both conform to the nature of the
word, wherein it stands, and to the sound of the Syllable, whereof it is a
part; which Syllable sometimes requires a whole or full voice, as in the first
Syllable of each one of the first words, when they are rightly set; as thus,

and sometimes a half, or at least, not altogether so full; as in the first
Syllable of each one of the last words, being also rightly Sillabed,

Let any beginning and middle Syllable of whatsoever English word, wherein
there is diverse Sillables, receive a vowell u, in the midst; as also in the
ending, except sometimes when any of these 3 other vowels, a, e, or o, does
preceede, then there requires a Double w; and any ending Syllable in the
midst only: (that is, any part within the border Letters thereof, and not aye
the precise middle letter of the same) but neither any ending Syllable of a
word in the beginning nor ending, nor yet any beginning nor middle Syllable
in the beginning, except some consonant either immediately follow, or that
there be no more letters in that Syllable; and so the beginning, midst, and
ensding thereof consisting all in one: the proof of sundry whereof, may be
perceived in some Sillables of these words,

A Syllable must neither receive a Single Consonant v, in the midst, nor
ending; but always in the beginning, as in the latter Sillables of these words,

Let any Syllable in the ending, which concludes with any of these two
Letters, m and n, have them rather written short than long, that is, rather
abreviated, leaving some letters to the consideration of the Reader, than at
length by expressing of them all; but chiefelie when that Syllable consists
of Minum Letters: because in this Character, these Letters will be so much the
more legeable in any word wherein they stand, as in these two,

But indeed two breviations are neither seemly nor legeable in Sillables of
one word: and although I have set a Double mm, in the Alphabet, yet it ought
rather to be written in Great and second sort of Set Writ, where abreviations
be seldom used, than in Small and Current Writ, where they oftentimes occur.

Let no beginning nor middle Syllable within a word where there is diverse
Sillables, rereiue a whole separable Double Letter, but be severed in twain,
for two Sillables together, that is, one Double making two Single in
sillabication; the one whereof, to be the last of the first Syllable, and the
other, to be the first of the last Syllable; and seldom any manner of way,
either before or after a conscnant: as may be easily noted by such letters in
any of these words,

the right practice of the writing of the which separable letters, is chiefelie
known at the end of a line, where if they be not separated, to wit, the one,
at the ending of one line, and the other, at the beginning of another line;
with some mark or touch of the pen left there, whereby whosoever that reads
the same, may know in reading of the same line, that the rest of that word
follows in the next line; thine ignorance or carelessness will appear, by
that thine own labor: but any Latin Syllable requisite, may receive any of
these six the 5, 6, 8, 9, e, and the 5, ji: as in these words:

Let any Syllable seldom receive any of these four Letters, the 4, a: 3, c:
3, and 4, que when those which have the high, or higher sort of heads
immediately result; but rather to preceede those which want heads, or have but
the shorter sort of them: lest if they which have heads be not attentively
convoyed another way from the slenting strikes of the forenamed forbidden
Letters, the most part of all which be above the high Square of the one sort
of Letter, will be stained, and defaced, by the other; and that because no
Letters wanting heads do interveane: as may be perceived by such Letters,
receiving the like damnage, in these words:

ANNOTATION.
The 3, or consonant j, has commomlie a tail, both when it occurreth in one
Syllable alone, and when it is conjoined unto a vowell i, that is, made
conform to the 5 ji, in thee Al^babet; or, as it is insert in the foresaid
word, adjicio, howbeit it was wont to be contrariwayes, to wit, the longest j,
put in the last place, for the more speedy writing, or hasty arysing thereof
from off the other: it is certain, that the way now used thereof, is the best
way, howsoever it be the long somest way; it may be, that a near by-rodde be
not ill, if the passage the^eof be anywayes good; but I think the hie way, is
both surer and better, suppo^e it be somewhat about: but when the aforesaid
Double Letter occurreth in two Sillables together, they require to be short
both alike and so become as the 4 ji, in the Alphabet, or as in the word, ^s.

SECT. III. Concerning Words.
A Word, is an absolute and perfect voice, whereby some thing is meant or
signified.

A Word, is sometimes composed of diverse Sillables, and sometimes of one
Syllable only; which oftentimes contains sundry Letters, and sometimes but
one.

And because the composing of Syllables in Words, belongs not to
Calligraphie or Fair Writing, but to Ortographie of right Sillabing; I will
not insist therein, but hold foorthwards the purpose I have in hand, that is,
to declare how to place Letters in Words: which I will endeavor to do, in the
self same manner observed in Syllables.

Let no Word receive any of these 18 Letters, the 3 a, 4 d, 4, 10, e, 6, 7,
f, 6 h, 3 l, 3 n, 4, 8, 10, r, the 5 sorts of short ^, and 3 t, in the
beginning, nor midst; but always in the ending, which therefore are called,
Final Letters: as in the end of every Word of this Sentence,

Let no Word admit any of these 5 sorts of one Letter, the 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6
long s, in the ending, (as Final Letters) but always in the beginning and
midst; as in these Words,

Let no Word receive the 7 w, in the midst, but always in the beginning and
ending; as in these,

because some of mean skill will readily suppone that it be rather the 5 l,
and 2 b, conveaned together, than that which it is; and so make the Word
wherein it is written, to be often mistaken (except in so far as the sense of
the matter will prove otherwise to them, if they have any reasonable
understanding) as it may indeed, in these words, (if the words which
otherwise they appear to be, were any language)

And howsoever it may be alleged, that none of those two Current sorts of w,
the 4, and 6, can be written with such speed as the other sort of w,
immediately exprimed; I answer, the first of the two may be as speedily
written indeed, as it: and although it were not, yet that word wherein it
shall happen to be found, (I mean in the midst) will be easier read, than
if the other letter were in place thereof, because it is so doubtful as said
is: and as to the last, I will not take upon me to defend the sufficiency
of it; but rather give mine Advise to discharge it, seeing it is more like unto
thse two Letters, the 2, l, and 3, o, in this manner, io, than that wherefore
it is put; and that because it has no kind of head to make any discrepance
from these Letters: except only that the first of them has a ticke set over
the same, which the w wants, and is oftentimes neglected in writing, above
the Letter, where it should be set: as also, neither is the single sort of
the said last w allowable, because it is like the Current, or 5, o; nor yet
the other w, because it is so uncertain.

No word in the midst, nor ending, must receive any of these 14 Letters, the
3, b: 5, c: 7, e: 2, i: 4, k: 5, l: 2, m, n, r, and vowell u: 4, consonant v:
4, and 7, double w; but always in the beginning: or else each of them must
renounce so much of the sharp stroke thereof as is under the low Square: and
likewise the 3, m, when it has the small compassed strike: the proof of this
Rule does appear by this Exemple,

Let any Latin Word requisite admit a Vowell u, as well in the ending, as
in the beginning, and midst, before a Consonant, as in these,

SECT. IV. Concerning Sentences, or Lines.
A SENTENCE, or LINE of WRIT, is an Oration, containing a general
pronunciation, which either exhorts, disswadeth, demonstrateth, or declares.

SENTENCES, or LINES, (being the fourth or last of the Signs which signify
the Voice) do consist in the composing of Words.

A Sentence, is some times comprehended in diver^e Lines, some times in one
Line, and some times in a Word; and which Word, being written in big
Letters, will some times exceed a line of great length.

And for as much a^ the composing or constructing of words (whereof Sentences
do consist) belongs unto the Latin Grammar, I will not digress, but
declare briefly what letters should begin Sentences, and lines, as well
according to their nature, as proportion; and both how and where to begin
them: and whereas they be often times begun otherwise, that is, with other
letters than b^e here allowed to begi^ne them; it is done ignorantly, or
negligently, in the first; and accidentlie, or occasionallie, in the last.

Begin no Sentence but with a Capital letter: if it be a beginning
Sentence, of a matter, or page, let it be a Beginning Capital: if it be a
middle Sentence, (that is, in the midst of a page, or matter, contained therein
already begun) let it be a middle Capital: likewise, a middle Capital
must ever immediately follow a complete period, at the concluding of the last
Sentence preceding the same; and either begin a proper name with it self,
or else make it to consist wholly of its own associates. The Exemple of this
Canon, may be seen in this sentence, at length:

When thou beginnest any line, save the first, either with letters wanting
heads, or having but the shorter sort of them, let them be begun so far
down, from the preceding line, as thou may have sufficient rowme above the
high Square of that line which thou shall happen to begin, for these which
have the high and higher sort of herds, and for middle Capitals, (I speak of
Square, as if it were always expressed: for I am persuaded, thou art not so
ignorant now, but thou know what is meaned by imaginary Square) except
these four, the 4, a: 3, c: 3, and 4, q: because they have small slenting
strikes above the high Score. And when thou beginnest any line with the
letters themselves which have high heads, or with middle capitals, let them be
so hie up as thou have rowme above the high Square, without doing harm to any
Letters in the last written line. But beware while thou so beginnest with any
letter of either sort, that thou take not thy measure by tails of letters
belonging to the line preceding; but by the lowest part of their bodies, on
the low Square. And for thy better attayning unto this Perfection, it will not
be amiss, though thou make 2 small tickes at the beginning of every line, to
represent the 2 Squares; to wit, one for the high Square, or high part of the
bodies of letters; and another for the low Square, or low part of the bodies
of them: to the intent, that the bodies, heads, and tails of letters, may be
the righter and comlier situated thereupon, in the b^ginning of the line, and
so proceeding justly, as on two Squares, unto the end of the line, and so
conseq^entlie, to the end of all which thou so writest; lest one line be too
far distant, and another over near, and so make thy Writ both unlegeable,
and unseemelie. The observation whereof, may be perceived in the Exemple, or
Exemplare, of the last Rule.

Let the first line of Matter, Page, or Article, have these two letters, the 3,
f, and s, properl^e to belong unto it; lest if their heads being made of such
quantity, (as in Alphabet,) in any other line, where there is no such void
bo^ndes above, they molest some letters in the line going before, as thou
may perceive in these Exemples of Caution, but not of Imitation,

Let only beginninges of lines have these four letters properly to belong
unto them, the 3, g: 5, w: 4, y: and 3, z: for if they be insert in any other
parts of lines, their heads and tails will also hurt other letters, and so
make confusion of thy Writ: the proof of which Rule does appear by these
four words, set at the beginning of these four lines following.

NOTA.
There is great need, in the Pronouncing and S^l^abing o^ English, of a sort
of a, to be pronounced like the Greek Letter n, and o^ an u, to be
pronounced like v: and if any Letter ^e superfluous in the English Alphabet, it
is likeliest to be z: not that it can be well spared neither, but because it
remains ydlest o^ any Letter.

As also these Syllables, ca, ce, co, cu, neither agree, nor go forwards
alike, with the Letter c, howbeit it be a thing usual: nor t-^, for ci: and
sundry other absurdities, which might be remedied, if regard were had
thereunto: but because they agree not well to my purpose, I remit them to
Writers of Ortographie.

THE CONCLUSION, Somevvhat concerning Puncts, and Accentes; as also
Abreviations, and of the Effayres, and Writs, wherein they are most used.
NOw in end, it rests only that I speak of Puncts, Accents, and
Abreviations, used in Writ: albeit the writing of Puncts and Accents, does
belong unto this Art, yet the nature and use of them pertains to the Hebrew,
Latin, and Greek Grammars, and other Authors; where they be largely taught:
wherefore I think it neither needful to declare how to write them, because
they are so plain and easy, nor yet to enter in discourse thereanent; but
remit thee unto these places, where if thou be learned, thou art already, if
not, thou may be sufficiently informed of their definitions and
observations; and if thou be not learned, thou have little use for Puncts, and
no use for Accents.

An Abreviation, is the contracting or signifying of some Sillables or Letters;
and that either by one or more Letters themselves, or some other significatiue
stroke or sign made with the pen, known sometimes by Proportion, sometimes
by Situation, and sometime by both.

When thou writest or extractest hastily any matter of little weight, it is the
right and convenient time, to write the most usual Abreviations either of
Words, Sillables, or Letters, as occurreth in the matter, and uses or
requires to be abreviated or written short: for many things must be written
even concerning weighty matters, such as Engrosments, Epistles, Compts,
Scroles, Minutes, and others of that nature, which need seldom to be written
long, (that is, with all the Letters at length) or yet in the best sorts of
writ. And while as they be sometimes otherwise found, it proceeds rather of
the will and disposition of the diligent Writer, by whom they are written, the
Person to whom, or both, than being aniwayes requisite of their own nature;
seeing they are neither heretable rights for long endurance, perfect Patterns
of learned Men's works for the Printing, nor Testificats to other Nations: but,
if it be thy will to prolong time in so doing, and declare thy cunning in
writing of employments better than they use to be, rather than in any worse
exercise; I for my part shall both think thy travel well bestowed, and
condescend thereunto with little solicitation.

Abreviations, or contractions therefore, being most frequent in such and the
like business, requires to be written in Current Writ; because there is
little disparitie betwixt the nature of these two: for as Current Writ is not
chosen in such effaires, for any goodness in it self, being the
off-scourings and worst of all writ, but only for the swiftness; even so
Abreviations are not used for any goodness in themselves, seeing they but
figure Letters, and Letters painte the Voice, or demonstrate the mind; and so
being a degree farther in place, are a degree worse in nature: which therefore,
must rather be considered Hierogly phicallie, and Mystically, by signification
of Sense, than Sillabically, by sound, or sillabication of Syllable; and that
because the Letters themselves are not all expressed, nor present, whereby to
make an harmony; but a great part thereof contracted, and absent; and so
therefore are but understoode to be, or imagined as if they were. Indeed some
of the most legeable Abreviations may agree to the two sorts of Common hand,
as well as the two sorts of Current hand, but seldom, or never, to the two
sorts of Set hand.

Which Abreviations, I think not expedient to collect, and insert here, nor
yet to be curious in describing of them; but rather to remit them unto thine
own experiment, and to the daily practique of the Country, as they occur
to thee in the Words and Sentences of the Writs and Securities wherein they
are most used; and that for two respects:

First, albeit the writing of them belongs to Chirographie, yet their
signification is not pertinent to be here; seeing the same pertains to
Ortographie: and is to be found (at the least, understoode by certain signs
expressed) in frequenting of the former Sentences of Writs; that is, by often
reading, extracting, or considering, of the same; either of purpose to learn
them, or for the better performance of thy necessary negotiations, and that in
the company of any cunning Clerk or Notare, (with whom thou may have
such farther knowledge and exercise, as may either bring thee to some good
Calling, or help thee to manage thine Estate, if thou be borne to Rentes) and
though I should bestow travel on the collecting, and charges of the making of
Types for Printing, exponing, and presenting of them unto thy sight in a
Tatalogue; yet all would be unprofitable, and needless, for want of their
significations, unto the which the bounds of this Discourse does not reach.

Next, because all the preceding Rules of this Book are so infallible, that
(to my simple judgment) they need not in substance to be altered: and so it
would be more ridiculous, than judicious, to add any thereunto which be
changeable now in the end of this last intch, more than in the whole spanne.

These Abreviations (I say) are Changeable for two Causes: first, because for
the most part every sort of Abreviation is found commonly to have two or
three significations almost as often as one; and so are rather understoode by
the Sentence wherein they are, than by the form or manner of their
contracting: in respect whereof, few or none of them can either be
commanded, or contramaunded by Rules, to keep any single signification, yea,
scarcely a double.

And last, because some of them are made freely, and some constraynedlie,
these that are said to be made freely, or resolutelie, are voluntarily made
at the particular will of the Writer: for every Mechanicke Man esteems much
of his own conceit: and it is hard to comprize the true valor thereof,
howsoever perhaps in his own imagination it be worth the half of his Rent.

And these Abreviations, which are said to be made constraynedlie, or
indeliberatelie, are abruptly made, by occasion of haste, and consequently of
fast Writing, yea, oftentimes for lack of convenient time and place: because
Necessity has no Law, and so is not capable of Reproof.

FINIS.
AN ABSTRACT OF THE OBJECTIONS AND EXCEPTIONS, WHICH WERE PROPONED BY CERTAIN
of the Learned, (to hinder the Accomplishment and Publication of this
preceding Work) ANSWERED BY THE AVTHOR.
I.
SOme do extenuate the Commendation of the Art of fair Writing, and say,
What needs it to be so highly extolled, and much set by, since it is
common? Unto whom I answer: It is so far from being common, that scarcely
one of an hundredth who have the Name of Fair Writers, knows the Theoricke
thereof perfectly, without the which (as a thing very expedient) they can
hardly be perfect: and far less the Common sort, who content themselves
with the common Practice, which is full of absurdnesse and incongruitie: as is
probable by either of their Works, who list to try them on the former
Touchstone, or confer them with the preceding Grammatical Precepts.

II.
Others, will not give over this Point altogether yet, but draw it to farther
length, saying, Though the Art of Fair VVriting be rare, yet VVriting it
self, (meaning the Tractise of the Art) is common enough, and therefore
needs not to be in so great account. To whom also I answer: The community
and participation of excellent gifts, derogateth not the renown and
estimation thereof, if they be rightly used: for what gifts in the wor^de
are more excellent, yea, more honorable than Wisdom and Learning? and yet
(praised be GOD) what less common are they than Fair VVriting? and so the
very practice thereof keeps the own Prerogatives for three causes: First,
since it is needful for every Estaie, from the highest, unto the lowest, and
by consequent so much the more in preferment; why ought it not then to be so
much the more regarded by all Estates, and made common amongst all Estates?
Secondly, It is not so common neither as need does require; for although it
be common amongst many, who be come to perfect age, yet it is not so amongst
all, but such as be somewhat learned otherwise: and though it were, yet it is
not a whit the more known by untaught Youth: yea, though they be even
procreated of Skillful Parents; and the reason thereof is this, It goes not
by succession, nor yet by election, but by GODS free dispensation, apprehended
by the ordinary mean of particular endeavor: wherefore the Children both of
Noble and Learned men, and no Attourneyes for them, must with as great
difficulty learn, before they can write, as i^ their Parents had never
learned nor written a Letter. And thirdly, although VVriting be common both
amongst many who be aged and learned, yet Fa^^e and Perfect VVriting is rare,
and in great request, amongst all of whatsoever age or gifts, (though not
altogether in such measure as in former Ages) for it is one thing to write, and
another to write well; and so the one as different from the other, as a
Disciple from a Master.

III.
It is alleged by some, That this Ar^e has been written in some part of
the World of before, although in another form; and the^ef^^e is not so rare
here as it would appear to be. V^hereunto I answer: It is rare
nevertheless; for, giving, and not granting, that it ha^h been written in
any part, or in any form, (as is not imposstble) it is ney^her so
universal, nor often written, by diverse VVriters, as other Arts bee^ and
verily for mine own part it was never exposed to my senses, neither was I
out of SCOTLAND to learn the same, nor yet taught within, except of the Great
TEACHER of all Teachers; but had the common Liberty, (I mean, either to
learn, or not to learn, as I pleased, after the awonted form of Grammar
Schools, wherein VVriting was not taught nor professed. And although I had
seen, heard, and been taught so to do, as also had traveled to Foreign
Nations, where such kind of Virtue is well maintained, and therefore
abounds, as the most provident Be works best in the richest Garden; it
would have been little prejudicial to the reputation of the Art here set
down: for as the foundation or invention of any Work, vindicateth the first
place; so the Work rightly built thereon, is worthy of the second: but
being utterlie demolished, and then re-edified both better, and in a better
form, it will at length obtain the first* at the least, be most in use, and
in greatest request: and so the best Work, whether it be the first or last,
will win the greatest commendation, how many soever be to presume for the
same: as the farthest caster of the double Cannon, has more popular praise, in
presence of many Contenders, and Spectators, than of few: for when one
essayeth his Strength and Skill, and neither having an equal to match him, nor
a token set up before him, demonstrating some far cast or throw of another;
the most he can do at that time, is either to surmatch himself, in striving
to cause every cast freethe another, or to set up some sign, far or near,
to essay at another time, without purchasing of any present applause.

Indeed, there are some common Precepts of this Art both universal and often
written, by diverse VVriters, which, so far as I have seen, and found right,
I re-iterate and confirm here, as few old buildinges, be altogether so
ruinous, but either some Stones or Timber thereof may serve to help the new:
and on the contrary, such Precepts as be otherwise, or agree not with this
Character, as it is now practiced, I reject altogether; as more unfit for any
use, than the very Red or off-scouringes of old Buildinges: for the one
cannot do so much as help to defend the Art whereof it would appear to be
a part, but the other, although it cannot be steadable to the walls of new
work, yet it may suffice to fill up a part of the Rampart thereof, and so
aid the same with some kind of Fence. So either these Precepts have been
wrong from the beginning, or else the use of them is changed, through long
continuance of time, (wherein every thing changes, except the Blessed Creator
of all things) as the most exquisite humane Invention of old, is mightily
both metamorphosed and augmented now, by some cunning Translator: not that the
Author thereof has been inferior to him in Skill, (as we must charitablie
judge) for the Author thereof had no Pattern at all to follow: and therefore
so long as his foundation stands, he is worthy to have place: at the least
his Work, if his Name be suppressed: whereas the Translator and augmenter
catches sometimes a three-folde advantage: first, by inspection of the
foundation laid by the foundator: next, by inspection of newer Editions made
thereof, at the least, of the practices of Generations or Times, betwixt the
Author and him: and thirdly, by the practice of the translator and augmenters
own time, and that perhapes in a far later age.

But these precepts immediately before mentioned are so few, unnecessarie,
difficill, and confused, that few can be able to practice them aright, without
the belpe of an instructor; and although each one easily might, they could
attain thereby to no perfection in Fair Writing, without much farther
instruction: and so, the most complete, necessary, plain, methodicall, and
consequently the best Work, out of all question will be thought the rarest
Work, and at the highest rate; what Work, or whose Work so ever it be, only
if GOD be the principal efficient, or true Author thereof.

IV.
It is objected by some, that this Art being published, will apparentlie make
such a conformity of Writ every where, that it will be hard to discearne one
Manu-script from another, and so make the Subscriptions of Evidences doubtful:
I answer, that is a very naked Assertion, for two causes; first, although it
could be possible, that all the Writers henceforth who are to be in the
World, might be taught in one School, by on^ Instructor, and with constant
Rules alike; yet such would be the natural disparitie of each ones particulare
form of doing from another, that as each one differs in Phisiognomie or
face, (which is not one of the least of GODS miraculous Works) so also in
Chirographie, or form of Letter; howsoever the contrary would appear at the
first view, as many people not well acquainted, have mistaken others
oftentimes at the first, through appearance or similitude of gesture; yet with
narrower marking, and viver attention, have so found it otherwise, that they
have excused themselves of that their error.

Indeed, there has been some evil inclined ones, who have studied to use,
(or rather abuse) their skill in affectating and counter fetting of some
particular man's form of Writ, and yet could not write well any pleasant
form, rather than to hold them with a general solid Character: but it is
far easier for a fair Scribener to follow one of the most curious universal
forms that is now used, than any particular man's ragged form, though they
were both alike lawful: whe^eby it is evident that the writing of diverse
general forms of writ is one thing, and the following of particular men's
writ, is another; and whosoever holds the contrary opinion, does greatly
err.

I confess, how many so ever (that be well minded) do write one matter,
with one form of Letter, may all agree in the substance thereof; though they
differ in the manner of the doing: even as a whole Class of Theologues
teaching one Text; or six several Authors writing one subject in far distant
places, at one time, may all agree in effect, though they differ in Method, and
yet not know one of another.

And last, it is not altogether the Subscription of Evidences that verifieth
the truth of the matter thereof, but in like manner the Seal of the
Subscriber, and Testification of the Witnesses, which were present at the
Subscribing: and so, though it were granted, that all men's Writ might be
conform, (as is unpossible, ever since the confusion of Languages, at the
desolation of the Tower of Babell) there be diverse Laws established, almost
universallie, (Glory be to GOD) not only to keep every man in his Right,
but likewise to punish condignlie those who do wrong.

V.
It is alleged by sundry, That it is impossible that the Art contained in
this Book can be so good as personal or ve^ball instruction forth of the
mouth of a Professor: and therefore the single or bare use of the the same
cannot be very profitable for the Youth, and such like alleadgeances. I
answer: If any thing that is thought impossible to be done, ever come to
pass, it is both the more regarded and admired when it comes: so, I hope,
contrary to their hope, that the like shall befall it: for an ordinary and
common thing, has but a light and bare applause, although the even^ even
prove good: Who thinks it any cunning to draw Water out of a Fountain
where it abounds? to work any common labor on dry land, or bear weighty
burdens, after the ordinary manner, by many and strong means? But there be
some few private men, who have found out ways to convoy Water to a dry City,
work under the Sea, transport great Stones and Timber by few and weak
means, but very rare, and do sundry charitable and common works in the
Country, that all the Generations before them did not so much as once dream
of: yea, this same Generation mocked them in the beginning, but yet as they saw
these Attempts accomplished, and the success prove contrary unto their
incredulous expectation, they were feign to hold their peace, (because of the
contrary sway the^ of the multitude) and admire the working of these works
which of before they thought impossible to work.

It has seldom been multitudes or communities sitting in their Gowns
together, that have devised the maniest and rarest good works, they might well
(after long solicitation of charitable minded men) establish and up-holde them
by authority and maintenance, when they were proponed, and found out to their
hand: but it has been private men, for the most part, of whom they have
often times esteemed least, who have been inventors of all Policy, and good
works, in a Commonwealth.

It is true, Men can do no Miracles, nor work Impossibilities now a days:
yet things which are impossible with Men, are possible with GOD: for he can
work his Works by contraries, as by making all things of nothing, by
bringing Light out of Darkness, Life out of Death, and by afflicting his
Saints, that he may glorify them: and even yet when he works by Men, be
chooses commonly the weakest Instruments for the greatest Works, that his
Glory may so much the more appear: yea, further, he suffers his best
Works oftentimes to have maniest difficulties, to the intent that when they
are done, and all impediments trodden under foot; his glory may yet be so
much the greater, by how much they have been impeded.

Indeed, it may be that this Book be not altogether meet for young
Scholars at Grammar Schools, yet I hope it will be profitable for the elder
sort of them, and for all Students in Universities, inrespect of their farther
years, knowledge, and learning: for if personal instruction consists in
audible information, and visible practice, so instruction by Book stands in
legeable information, and imitable practice. Read the secundarie cause of the
Argument, and the first part of the Narration, again.

VI.
It is excepted against this Book, That it will be a motive to abstract a
great number of the Youth from Writing or Vulgar Schools, and be so greatly
prejudicial to the estate of Vulgar Masters, (who must needs live by their
Calling) that it will both procure hatred unto it self, and the Author
thereof: and so forth. I answer: It will serve for very few of their number,
and so abstract them very little: for now, in this Age, where one remains in
the Schools until he be fourteen years old, ten leave them before that
time: and although it were otherwise, they would learn so much sooner, by
this Book, in the company, and by the advice of a Skillful Writer, than by
their own private pains, and so prejudge him nothing of his awonted Due; if
his Condition be, To teach them for so much, and not for such a space: and few
under that age, can be able to make much profit thereby, except under the
pedagogie of an Instructor.

Indeed, I think it better, that each one learn to write in some reasonable
measure perfectly, before he begin either Grammar, or Philosophy, for
helping him to effectate his purpose both the sooner and better, than after the
same, but never in the midst, except at some vacand hours by this Book, for
the reasons contained in the fifth secundarie cause of the Argument. Likewise,
such Masters of Grammar Schools, or their under Teachers, as do profess to
teach this Book at certain dyets to their Scholars, may instruct any Child
of reasonable age or knowledge, almost as soon by these means, to be both a
Scholar and a Writer, as when he is put to a Vulgar Master, only to learn to
Write: and therefore one transumpt hereof is not only requisite to be bound
in Volum with the Latin Grammar, for each one that learneth the same, that he
may learn to spell English by the one, as well as Latin by the other; but
likewise with any English Book for Lectors, that thereby they may learn to
read both. Print and Writ at once; beside the knowledge how to Write.

Moreover, this Book will not only ease all cunning Masters of Writing very
much of their travels, by making all their several instructions conformable
and agreeable, (how far soever they be distant in place) and so work the
more effect, as is declared in the third secundarie cause of the Argument; but
I hope one Extract thereof will inform a whole School how to follow their
Exemplars; and then far more when each one, at the least every two or three
have one, wherewith either to confer together, or to peruse day about: and
therefore the number of their Scholars will so much the more increase, by how
much more hereby their pains will be effectual: Consequently both this
Work, and the worker thereof, by the means will deserve love in stead of
hatred. But if any of them think otherwise, and would have their hearts
desire any ways satisfied, surely they shall have a very sufficient mends,
providing they will bestow the expenses; let them buy all the Extracts of this
Book, and either burn them all at once in a fair fire together, or else pine
them away one after another, in kindling of their Tobacco; and I shall never
quarrel them for their violence.

VII.
It is farther excepted against this Book, that not only there be diverse
Rules and Sentences therein, and chiefelie concerning the seldom uptaking of
the Pen, somewhat more prolixt and large than need requires, and therefore
the more tedious to read; but likewise some Sentences repeated, some parts
very barren and haske, too many similitudes applied, and that the Preambles
and Postscripts are little less, than all the rest of the Book: and so forth.
I answer to the first part, that I do so of purpose, because it behooveth t^
be, for these two reasons: First, although the aged may peruse it, and profit
thereby, yet it is chiefelie directed unto the Youth, as of weaker judgment,
at the least neither so careful in using of the means to conceive, nor yet in
practicing of any good conception: yea, to many, who perhaps have never been
in a Schoo^e to learn. And secondly, because it is the first Impression, and
therefore requires to be the more ample: for if it please GOD to spare me
till this Essay be censured abroad, corrected, and reformed, I intend to have
the Rules thereof made shorter, and published in Verse, (both for the better
getting, and keeping thereof in memory, and likewise the remnant in better
Prose, Language, and Method: for the which respect I have now made choice
rather to adventure it forth somewhat blockish, (that is, with the Paringes
thereon) than to presume at mine own hand to pare it too near at the first:
for that which appears to be good to one, will perhaps seem bad to another:
and none will deny, but it is as easy to substract and diminish, as to
multiply and augment. Always, though the body of the Work be somewhat
great, yet the Abridgement, and chiefelie the ten Precepts thereof, are as
short as possibly they might. And as concerning the amplenesse of those
places, concerning the uptaking of the Pen from the Paper, they could not be
so well nor plain otherwise; because, first I bring the most part of Letters
once under a Rule, and so many as be excepted, do come in by way of exception,
by so many ranks as the Pen requires to be lifted: for even ^s Latin
words (to wit, Similes Casus, and Modos,) standing in Sentences, are coupled
with Conjunctions, and, atque, etc. so must Letters be conjoined with others
of their own sort in written words, and that by a small joining strike of
the Pen going betwixt them.

To the second part I answer, that there is no repetition at all, but where
it must needs be: and when any is, it is rather by appearance, than in
effect: for if one part confirm another, it but linketh the whole Book
together, as it ought: and what one part wants, another has, without any
frivolous repetition. Does not the very Sacred Scripture it self agree in
passages and phrases, each part exponing another? and the Heavenly matter
thereof dispersed and sprinkled through out all: for one part has the
occasions, or time of the occurrence, or doing of a thing; another the place;
the third, the causes; the fourth, the effect: and so forth. Thus each one
being first conferred with another, and then joined together, do make up a
whole and complete sense: for though there be many Inhabitants in a
flourishing City, yet no man is any more ordained for himself only, than
he can live by himself alone, without the help of others: and so each one
ought to do good to another, by borrowing and lending, (giving and forgiving)
^^ Citizens all of one City.

To the third part I answer: That there is no Art nor History, but in some
parts thereof the contents and matter is more baske and barren, than in
another, if thou will enter into particular consideration thereof: yea, the very
Book of GOD it self would seem at the first so to be, and chiefelie some
parts of the Holy History of our Blessed Saviors Humiliation, and his
Sufferings; (but being generally considered, and every remarkable, worthy,
and fertile part, set forenent the base or barren part, as his Resurrection
forenent his Suffering; or his Exaltation forenent his Humiliation, then thou will both esteem the better, and reap the more profit of all. And yet if it
had pleased the Spirit of GOD, out of all doubt, he could have indicted the
same both in Method and Eloquence as far beyond all other Books, as it
surpasses them in Matter, Wisdom, and Valor: and it is indeed so far
beyond them, that it has surmounted the capacity of all the Philosophers that
ever was, notwithstanding of all their Wisdom, Learning, and Rhetoric)
Again, if thou will look to the forms observed in writing of Arts, behold
but the Latin or Greek Grammar, and thou will oftentimes find one place more
haske, and unpleasant than another; yea, it will seem altogether foolish,
idle, and without sense, to any man that never learned such things: and that
because, both the Matter and Language of Grammars, serve but for themselves,
and not for other purposes which occur in common effaires, wherein he is
best versed.

And as for the Similitudes, they are very needful, not only for present
understanding of the sense in time of reading; but in like manner thereafter,
the memory of the Similitude, will oftentimes demonstrate a new consideration
of the whole matter represented thereby, to men's rememberance again, who
perhaps without the same would either not have conceived it at all, or suffered
it to slip as soon out of their minds, as it entered in: and that which is
worse, never remembered thereon again afterward. And likewise the matter of
this Treatise seems so base, that if there were not some better things mixed
therewith than it self is, the most part would loathe it as much as they do
Water without Malt.

And to the fourth part I answer, That there is no strong City, but has
Walls to defend it self against the Assaults of all invading Enemies, and
sometimes Suburbs without, partly for more Strength, and partly for want of
rowme within: yea, and they sometimes little less than the City it self: I
liken this Work to a City having all these Saueguardes, yet I will counsel
no man to hinder his Journey through the same, in beholding of the utter parts
too much: but rather go forwards with such speed as his means may affoorde:
and while as he passes, if he be any wise attentive, and inquisitiue, he
will be informed concerning the esta^e of all things within, before he see
them, find all things according thereunto, when he sees them, and confirmed
thereof, after he has come forth, and seen them.

VIII.
It is objected, That it is rather the Practice, than the Theoricke of the
Art, which serves for Students: meaning, if they have some dexterity, any
Rudimentall knowledge of Writing will suffice them, etc. I answer: Any Mason
of course judgment, may undertake to build a roogh Stone Dyke, though he
know not the right use of Geometrical Rules: but if he were employed to be
Master builder of a stately Palace, whereof all the Conspicuous parts and
Corner Stones, behooved to be engraven and indinted; and every outmost Stone
artificially hewed; he would be constrained, if he had any time, either to
seek for more knowledge, (though too late) or else yield and give place unto
him that had it: even so, any Writer of sober skill, may take in hand to write
Epistles, Compts, Scroles, or such like; but if he presume to teach others, or
yet be employed to write concerning great Matters, and rare Employments, he
must needs either have sufficient skill, or else he will be forced (though to
his skaith) to renounce the Employment in favors of some other, who has that
which he wants.

IX.
It is alleged, that in the Comparations or Descriptions of Letters, and in
diverse places henceforth to the end, it had been more requisite to have set
down a particular presentation or demonstration of all the Writ Letters
themselves there, than to have remitted them, by order of Printed Letters and
Figures, to the Alphabet, as is done there at length: because, (to the
Ignorant) it appears both to be more obscure to understand, and tedious to
practice that way, than the other way: etc. I answer, the Remission is no
worse than the affectate presentation, for two causes: First, if the written
Letters themselves had aye been presented, and so often repeated, all those
Rules would have seemed, to any of weak judgment, so much the more
difficile, both to understand and put in practice, by how often the written
Letters, appearing of diverse kinds, would have been pointed forth in one
Page, and in diverse companies: wherefore, I have placed, and registrated them
all in one place, once together, for the better consideration, and easier
imitation thereof, by all imitators, but chiefelie these.

And secondly, if they had compeared themselves, and no Attourneyes, or
Procuratours in their names, representing them, I know not whether the buying
of so many several Types as they be in number, had been more sumptuous, or
the travel to make them more needless. And if they will have them presented
without reason, I may thus justly refuse them with reason: yet I will not
discourage them altogether thereanent, but for remooving of this their
Objection, and pretended excuse, in some measure, I have presented such a
number thereof in the Abridgement, as may serve for common Writing.

X.
It is alleged, and forewarned, both by Printers, and others having
experience, that the tedious pains in the downe-setting of this Book, great
charges in framing of Types thereunto, and often Printing the same, with
neglecting all other Effaires in attending thereupon, will apparentlie exceed
any benefit that ever will be obtained thereby; and therefore giving their
advise, To lose the travel which is past, hold in the expenses to come, and
let it desist altogether, or else it will not fail to over-throwe the estate
of the Agent, etc. I answer: It may be, these words be spoken in love, but I
intend not to follow them, for two respects, the one Divine, and the other
Humane: Divine, because the work tends to the Glory of GOD, (as all
Virtuous works do, whether Spiritual or Temporal, and few of the last sort
more than Writing, because it sets forth his Glory:) Humane two ways,
Civil and Natural: Civil, because it tends to the Commonwealth; for there
be few of that nature more necessary; yea, and to mine own weal also, (as
one of the smallest members thereof) whether I win or lose thereby: (I mean,
by my present use) if it please GOD I win, it will tend both to my weal
here, and hereafter; and if not, it will be hereafter, and not here; b^ c^se
it is my Talent, how mean soever it may be thought: and insomuch as I hide it
not, but do put it to the right use, I shall escape the punishment pronounced
in the Gospel for the contrary practice.

And Natural, because I am taught and persuaded by very natural instinction,
(though there were none other knowledge to be had) that it is much better to
leave the use thereof after me in the World, amongst men that can use it,
than to take it with me in a Propine or Entres-gift, to the crawling Worms in
the Grave, which cannot make so much use thereof, as a Swine of a Pearl.

Moreover, because our blessed Savior himself says, that no man having a
Candle, (how small soever it be) should set it under a Bushel, but on a
Candle stick, to the effect others may see therewith as well as himself.
Does not the fight of the Eyes serve as well for the Hands and Feet, and
remnant Members of the Body, as for themselves? Then it follows, that no
Member of the Body of a Commonwealth, was made for it self only, but for
the mutual aid and supply of all the rest also: and so I were unwoorthie of
such a Candle, or yet of the sight of the Eyes, (which GOD has so wisely
made, to look more foorthwardes to others, than inwardes to my self) if I
only show light therewith, looked, or had respect unto my self: that is, if
I only served mine own private use, with that which it has pleased GOD to
lend for a common benefit unto others, the more that He has made me the
keeper, or rather the distributer thereof. Is there any Steward of a Family,
but has a two-folde Charge imposed upon him, for which he must be comptable?
Or is he not addebted unto two Creditors? first, unto his Master, who both
hire^h him, and provideth the Furniture committed to his dispensation; and then
unto his Masters whole Family, unto whose use, and for whose entertainment the
same is allowed? Then, when his Master does straightly exact and require an
account of bis Stewardship, may he not expect and look for great punishment,
if he be either found a waster of his Masters Goods, an hungerer of his
Masters Family, or a feeder only of himself? So in this behalf I having
such an Office, have the like double charge, and therefore am debtor unto two
Creditors: first, unto GOD, of whom I hold the same, and who furnishes me
with gifts answerable, in some competent measure, for discharging a duty
the^ein: and next, unto the World, which is GODS Family in general, and to
mine own Country in special; May not I then look to be cited before his
Tribunal, and not know what to answer, if I detain that to my self, which
I received upon trust, and got commission to deliver unto others? And when I
have done all that I can, and suppose I could do all that I ought, it were but
my duty, and I still remain an unprofitable Servant.

Therefore, let none maintain the opinion, that I write this ^ooke upon
presumption, or desire of praise, (except in so far, as I will deliver it
again unto GOD, who is the right owner thereof) but upon necessity: for
sithence it has pleased Him of His goodness, to grant me some ability so
to do, (though not altogether in such measure as unto many others) that is,
by planting me, like as it were a Tree in His Garden, by furnishing me with
Root, Earth, Sap, Leaves, Growth, Bigness, and Hight, does he not expect
Fruits of me now, after so long watering, though he have many better Trees
growing beside? (And all this, besides many better Showers, whereunto my
purpose at this time does not reach.) Surely it is more than time now that I
bring forth some good Fruit, although it were never so little a tasting, till
it please the Almighty to bring greater abundance to maturitie; for
otherwise I might expect nothing else, but to be hewn down, and casten into
the Fire: Since then I could not be but culpable of infidelity and
negligence, and consequently capable of the punishment due thereunto, except
Repentance should interveane. Read the 5 objection again, (if thou list)
because this is somewhat relative to the assumption and answer thereof. Thus,
in the practicing of my Exoneration of the preceding Oneration to some, in my
special function, I do good will to extend the same to all, in my general
function.

For the which respects, I will pass stoutly through al these impediments
with this Book, till it be completely Printed, and refer the event thereof
unto GOD, who (as he has promised in his holy Word, and as my trust is in
him) will make all things work together for the best unto them that fear Him,
and to me amongst the rest.

XI.
One did propone this threefold exception, saying, this Book is 1, but a
Common and easy Work; 2, not mine own Invention neither; and 3. that many
have been, and yet are in this same Country, whose gift of learning
surpasses mine, that could have done the like, and better if they had pleased,
etc. To the first part thereof I answer, it is not common as yet, because it
is but beginning to grow common, and it may well be easy now to peruse, but I
have experience that it was not easy to devise.

To the second part I answer, it is indeed mine own Invention, with GODS
assistance; and if any be incredulous, let them prove the contrary, or else
give over the cause, and be silent; for of this Universal Challenge, they can
pretend no ignorance, since it is neither any private Register wherein it is
insert, nor yet will any boasteous Wind, or envious hand be able to take it
off, where it is affixed, (as I hope) for many Ages to come.

I confess, not long after it was begun, I accepted such advise as made for
me, and rejected the rest, as all Writers do when they intend to set forth
Works; for Solomon wills that every man (how wise soever he be) take
counsel when he interpryseth any matter of importance: because oftentimes
one will both know and see a thing, that another will neither understand nor
perceive, yea, though he have both as good judgment, and as sharp sight: but
indeed never man read it over thereafter, till it was all Printed except the
fore and latter parts, as is over probable by it self.

Likewise, when it was presented to the Press, I desired some learned men to
revise the same, who affirmed, that they had Skill in any Art or subject save
only in this: and therefore would not take upon them to mend or change any
thing therein, till after longer advisement, when the first essay should be
published: but indeed sundry impugned diverse things therein, and reasoned
against the same, when time of remedy was past; which reasoning, with some
farther of others before, are these Objections, Exceptions, and Answers, thus
here insert, enlarging the Volumme so far beyond mine expectation.

And I presuppone a good Work be devised, and found out by a number, yet it
will take the name from the first proponer thereof, if he be also the most
diligent and chief Agent in ^oing and accomplishing of the same: because
without his industry, moyen, and procurement, it had perhaps never been
enterprized, and far less completed, howsoever his Skill, ability, and
credit be not aye greatest: Who are the makers of Honey? Not the greatest
eaters of Honey, but the wise and diligent Bees, howbeeit they carefully
search and collect the matter thereof of diverse Herbs: for otherwise could
it ever come together, or become Honey of its own accord? (And yet I hope the
Matter, Juice, or Smell of few borrowed Herbs shall be felt, or perceived in
this Composition.) In like manner, the Work men that are hired to build an
House, are not so much said to be the Builder of the Work, as the owner
thereof, who d^viseth the Project, advaunceth the Expenses, for materials
thereunto, employeth them in the business, and pays them their Wages.

And to the third part of the Exception I answer: but I must subdivide it in
two, because I consider it in two Ranks: Touching the first, If it had pleased
any, (let be many) of this Country, (or any other, so far as I have yet
read, or heard of) to have prevented me, in manifesting either of the like, or
better, upon this Subject and Character completelie, at any time this 5000.
Years, and the same in rerum natura, or yet if I knew of another, either as
good or better, either in ^^adinesse, or making ready to be manifested; it
might ppeare to be some motive to cause me desist, and allege the same for
an excuse. But surely I would not, (so far as I might) because I am bound
as said is, and my ^and is as strictly made as any others that have written,
or might write, notwithstanding my gifts be far meaner: for the LORD, who is
only wise, disponeth these things, (as He does all others) most wisely to
every man according to His good pleasure, and will crave no farther account of
any man, than He gives him to distribute, and be countable of.

And as concerning the other part of the Subdivision, I honor them for their
gifts of Learning, and so far as I am able, I praise GOD for mine own: I
will compare with no man, but yield unto all men, (except in so far as I
will study to defend the sober gifts which I have, for His cause unto whom
they justly belong, that they never be dung down with boast of toome words,
but rather with actions, grounded upon right Knowledge and Reason: for in so
doing. I have already wunne a costly Pen, with Vanguarde and Commendation
of other things beside.)

There is yet one Comfort, which those of greater gifts want, that I have:
their Count will be great, and mine small; and if they will not make others
participant of what they have received, as much for that use, as for their
own, their Count will be yet so much the greater than mine, by how much less
they benefit others therewith: for what avayleth it, if a man could do never
so well, if he do it not?

XII.
Lastly, it is objected, that this Character of writ wherein I insist
particularly, does not agree in all things with the English and Irish
Secretary, which is somewhat righter than the Scottish, whereunto I most often
adhere, etc. I answer, that I could not omit mine own Country form of Writ,
both because it is my duty to give it the own place, and it is indeed not
very imperfect; neither yet to extol the English and Irish form of Character
(which is now most used) too much, and that by applying the whole drift of my
instructions thereunto, since it is not altogether perfect; but I join them so
together, that nevertheless they may be distinguished: and where there be any
differences, I both demonstrate them, and the way how they may be eschewed: and
so do study by all means, and specially by removing, and plucking up of all
differences by the roots, to bring them unto an absolute conformity; because
now all these three Kingdoms do so concord in one, (GOD be praised) that
they have but one Head, one Law, one Language, and one form of Character.

The end of the Objections.
ADMONITIONS, TO ALL PROFESSOVRS OF THE Art of Fair Writing.
LEt the total sum of all thy Writing, tend to the glory of GOD, the weal
of thy Country, and to thine own profit, credit, and pleasure.

II. Beware to write any thing which may either offend GOD or Man, directly
or indirectlie, or yet peril thy Soul, Body, Goods, or good name; though
Satan or his adherentes would not only promise to be thy warrant, but offer
thee a Kingdom for thy reward.

III. Be not rash even in Writing of the spediest form of writ, but let aye
mature deliberation of the matter preceede, and then the action of Writing
proceed; as also in weighty Matters, both form and reform.

IV. Although thou be taught by this preceding Art how to be an expert and
Fair Writer, yet notwithstanding be more careful to let thy Skill appear in
the brevitie and sufficiency of the Matter, than altogether to show thy Skill
in the painting, or needless curiosity of the Letter.

V. If thou who live by Writing* would GOD should bless thy Calling, be
neither covetous to extort the Rich who have much, nor sloathfull to help the
Poor who have little; but consider rightly thine own travels, their power,
and do something gratis; because thou have both thy life and thy gifts, to do
good unto others, as well as unto thy self.

VI. Whosoever thou be that writest, let never the Subject of thy Writing be
profaine; for W^iting is one of GODS gifts, and thou will prove both ingrate,
and guilty, if thou who art His reasonable creature, employ his own gift to
offend Himself; and specially if thou be an Instructor of the Youth: because
then under thine hands they are betwixt loosing and winning; for commonly such
education, such conversation, according to that old saying, Quo semel est
imbuta recens etc. But as thou give them good Exemples both of Matter and
Letter, so likewise give the best Exemples of all by thy wis^ Admonitions,
Indulgence, Temperancie, and good Behavior; for according to the common
Proverb, An ounce of Wisdom, is worth a pound of Learning: and it is to be
pitied and lamented, that the greatest part of Youth are apt and prone enough
naturally, though they have neither farther occasion nor provocation, not only
to learn the Custom of swearing, drinking, mispending, and all sorts of
riotous abuse, which alace, do abound too much in the aged, without any
civil punishment or remorse; but likewise to resemble and commit any
absurdity or enormitie, either done or tolerated by their Instructor, and
boldly in his absence to make him the Author thereof; whose bare report will
have more credit of many of t^eir Parents, than his sol^mne oathe of verity.

VII. If thou be appointed to instruct others in the Knowledge and Practice of
Fair Writing, fail not to attend preciselie upon thy Calling, and the place
thereof, so long as GOD calls thee unto no other Calling, nor better place:
but rather ere thou either tie thy self unto any place, (except where thou
have sufficient employment, and thankful Clients) he affrayde of ensuing
necessity; or yet engage thy self in churlish men's reverence too far,
seek, and change for once, to a place meeter for thee in time, though it were
meaner of it self: for it is better to be bare at liberty, than teathered in
poverty. Indeed a Grammarian may very well settle himself, because many
years will expire before any Class orderly pass through the Grammar: but
it is otherwise with thee, thy first years will commonly be thy best years,
(in computation) and that not only because Writing is soon learned, if it be
rightly taught, but likewise because the most part, as well of old as young,
are so inconstant, and inclined to novelties, and new faces, that though a man's
gift were never so great, they will readily loathe of him, and all his doings,
without any just cause; and yet when all is done, lay the fault only on him,
and style him with the Title of Inconstancy. Moreover, if thou be moved,
through men's unthankefulnesse, to require satisfaction of what is due unto
thee, as the Labourer is worthy of his Hire, many of them will pay thee with a
bare alleadgeance, in saying, that their Children have not so much profited by
thy travels as they expected: thou may the better trust me here anent, since
I have experience of such things my self, howbeit indeed I have taught many
of the greatest in this Land, who have proved far other ways, and thought it
well bestowed.

VIII. As thou who teach the Youth, (would have either favor or
recompense of GOD or Man, conceal nothing which is profitable for them to
know, nor yet the manner of practicing: but demonstrate every thing in the
own time and place, as Condition, Opportunity, and Necessity requires
Performance: for Children esteem their Masters Instruction as a Law, and if it
be according to their estimation, his practice, with their obedience, ought to
fulfill the same. Furthermore, leave nothing undone, within the bounds of thy
Calling, which lies in thy power to do: and what lacks, refer the
suppliment thereof unto the Almighty, together with the success of all thy
doings: so thou need not fear the Calumnies, nor detractions of any: for
such duty herein, as thou either studiest, or wishest to perform, thou will
be sure to receive the like degree of reward from GOD, (either here or
hereafter, if not both) howbeit man's good word, and far more his good deed,
be uncertain.

IX. When thou art required to subscribe as witness in any matter, be not
rash, but first read, and consider the sufficiency thereof: secondly, see
both the parties subscribe, at the least the party unto whom thou art called
to give testimony, and then subscribe thou: and thirdly, howbeit the matter
belongs not unto thee, yet in so much as thou art a witness to the equity
thereof, fail not immediately after thou have taken thy leave, to write some
brief memorial of the same in thy forenamed little Book, (which always
thou ought to carry) that thou afterward revising such an article insert
therein, thou may the more boldly and constantly abide thereat, in affirming
of the truth, if it shall happen thee to be cited, and required to depone
there anent before a Judge.

X. Since the All-seeing Eye of GOD sees all things, in all places, at all
times, write every thing, therefore, as well privately as publicly, in such
sort, as thou neither need to be ashamed to read, nor affrayde to hear
read in the days of trial: as also, be loath to write any thing in absence,
but that which thou would not stand in awe to utter by tongue in presence.

XI. Let never any thing of importance which thou writest, go forth of thy
custody, till thou also read it, because no man is so circumspect, but he
may in some points neglect himself: for if it either have or want but the
negative word not, where it ought not, it will be enough to turn all that
Sentence (wherein it is either omitted, or expressed) up side down, and so put
thee in danger of trouble, shame, and Skaithe, through that thy
carelessenesse, and negligence.

XII. And last of all, if it please GOD to make thee so fair a Writer, that
thou surpass or surmatch others, I beseech thee neither vaunt nor brag of
thine own Writ, and far less disdain any other men's Writ, whether it be
evil or good, except thou be chosen as Judge thereunto, then thou may
indeed give thine opinion freely, without either feade or favor: and
although thine own Writ merit Commendation, yet take none to thy self, but
persevere in well-doing, till others give thee the same, and when thou have
gotten it, accept not thereof as a thing belonging unto thy self, but unto
GOD, whose Instrument and Steward thou art in that Respect: for thou neither
have, nor can have any thing, but that which thou receivest, neither yet
when thou have received this amongst the rest, must thou keep it unto thy
self, but let the whole praise of the gift redound to the giver thereof: for
as standing water, which has no passage to the great Ocean, soon putrifieth,
and as men casten into the bottom of the sault Sea, and Fishes on the face of
the dry Land soon die, so does all praise due to the Creator, which is kept,
or stopped by any creature and why? it is no wonder indeed, because it is out
of its own right Element.

O LORD, since Thou, have thought it requisite,
This to complete, conjoyne Thy Blessing now,
And it avow, to come of Thy Spirit,
Being so meet, a Pattern to follow.
To Thee, O LORD,
For the which, and all Thy Mercies great,
With one accord,
Be rendered Praise of every estate.
FINIS
THE PRINTER TO THE READER, AND BVYER of this Book.
IT may be (Gentle Reader) that you think the Price of this Book too much
for so little a Volume; yet if you will consider the Causes wherefore it must
be so, you will allow thereof the better, which be four: First, because he
who sells it, intends, God willing, to be r^adie and present, or one in
his name, whenever it shall please you to inquire for the same: for it is
better to sell in such sort, as he who sells may live, and keep the Town,
nor at so low a rate, as he must leave the same, and disappoint you, when you
ask for such a one as is not to be found. Secondly, if you read this Book
orderly, and diligently, from the beginning, unto this place, I hope you will
not find it dear neither, but within the value. Thirdly, though it were
otherwise, it may not be sold any cheaper at this first Impression: because
there is but a few Printed, for an essay, upon an haste, and by guess, as it
were; partly since it is the Authors first Travels, and partly in respect of
the tedious writing of so many Characters, and much Writ, upon each Book,
after the Imprinting of the matter thereof. And fourthlie, because the Author
maintayneth two or three daily to fill up, and write in, all the foresaid
Exemplare Letters and Words, in every Extract, which it no small travel and
charges, in comparison of tbose Books which have nothing in them, but such as
is set down, and printed all at ones, with one travel. But indeed within few
years, God willing, when this Impression is sold, and new Types bought, to
supply the travels now made with the Pen, and the Book reformed, and
Printed the second^ time, then it may perhaps he sold at a far lower rate,
though much better of it self: to the which time, I entreat you to have
patience, and be content with it as it is, and not only dispense with any
apparent Dearth thereof now, but also excuse any fault you find either in the
Author in downe-setting, and correcting; or in Me, in the Imprinting: and th^n
I hope we shall please you better both in Travels and Price. Thus in the mean
time, and for ever, I wish you to farewell.

Imprinted at Sanct-Andrewes, By Edward Raban, Printer to the University
there: And are to be sold in EDINBVRGH, by John Burdon, at his Shop, beside
the Trone, on the South side of the Street, For six Shillinges Sterling the
piece.


