A REVELATION OF THE HOLY APOCALYPSE. BY HVGH BROVGHTON.

The ships also shall come from the Coasts of CITTIM, and afflict Assyr, and
shall afflict Heber: and also he shall come to destruction, Number. 24. 24. And
the Woman which thou saw, drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with
the blood of the Martyrs of JESUS, is the great City sitting on seven
mountains, which reigns over the Kings of the earth: called spiritually
Sodom and Egypt, where our LORD was crucified.

The sealed of God, the wise, will understand.

PRINTED 1610.

TO THE MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF GREAT BRITANNIE,
FRANCE, AND IERNE-LAND, DEFENDOR OF THE FAITH, etc.
MOSES Maymonides ( Gracious K.) a library of both former Talmudes, the
Ierusalemy and Babylonian, which from hard languages unknown to his nation he
made familiar Ebrew, so that they say from Moses to Moses the like to Moses
was not, his works are exceeding profitable to clear the New Testament. For as
S. Paul says, he differed not from the Jews common grant, but that they knew
not God to be in Christ reconciling the world unto himself: So Maymonides has
infinite much that clears the Apostles truth more fitly then Greek and Latin
Fathers do. And where the Apostles confute Pharisees: he records their
doctrine, that all may see the holy Apostles had just occasion. In this sort he
has two sorts which the New Testament battereth. Both he records in his
treatise of repentance. One is this, That Moses law shall stand for ever
unchanged, and Messiah shall come to Canaan to conquer all nations. The other
is this, That all his learned taught, all the good things spoken by the
Prophets for Israel in the days of Messiah, are but for the commodities of the
body. This is the common Jews religion, whose God is their belly. They which
worshipped stars, thinking they had souls and would enrich their worshippers
equally made their belly their God: they who brought the flood: and confusion
of tongues, unto the profane Caesar's that made themselves Gods, and the King
of Locusts which say they be Jews ( Romans 2. 28. 29.) but by a Synagogue of
Satan: and both are the great dragon, Apo. 12. The new Test. tells that the
old speaks of Eternal blessing in Christ his death ending Moses, Dan. 9.
And the Jews sin against the holy Ghost. For Aben Ezra could not deny this
upon Dan. 9. that the seaueny seauents are from Daniels prayer unto sealing
Messiah the holy of all holiness. He ends sacrifice and offering: and left
bread and wine, for the flesh and blood of beasts: and we all swear in the
Lords Supper, that sacrifices be ended by our Lords death: and by that Supper,
his flesh and blood is the food of our souls, and he would destroy Jerusalem,
that no place of sacrifice should be. That S. Stephen taught ( Act. 6. and 7.)
faithful unto death, and found the crown of life. When Jerusalem is
destroyed, as the Angelique-faced Stephen taught from the Angel Gabriel, Christ
sends his Angel to teach John of an heavenly Jerusalem: against which, Rome
shall fight to the end of the world: first by open tyranny, against martyrs:
and when the Empire is destroyed for that, Satan will turn himself into an
Angel of light: and set a Vicar of Christ with two horns of a Lamb, but with
the laws or mouth of the Dracon, to set up the former Empire and to be the
King of Locusts: all bent to the wealth and ease of this world. This John
teaches: whom Chapter by Chapter I expound, first briefly, by arguments upon
every Chapter then a scholion much larger: which I dedicate unto your Majesty,
for the increase of knowledge in your people, still to come out of BABYLON,
confusion, to JERUSALEM the sight of peace.

Your Majesty's most humble subject. Hugh Broughton.

THE AVTOVR TO THE READER.
IN all controversies men should know what both sides grant: and what they
hold differing. So where I turn all the Apocalypse against Rome: and did so
twelve years ago against the Popes champion, D. Johannes Pistorius, sent to
move wars in Zwitzerland: reason would for facility of ending controversy, I
show how much they granted me: and knew they must: that if any of mine own
nation, come short: and that with Satanean malice: they be dealt with, as
endeavoring to make our Church a synagogue of Satan. The matter shall be briefly
told.

Doctor John Pistorius holden a father of the Jesuits, dwelling in Friburge of
Briscouia, distant twenty English miles from Basil, was stird of the Pope to
challenge all our Cantons for disputation: that they ought to yield to the Pope,
as the seven did: And upon disputation refused, he would by war challenge his
supremacy. This then was thought no pley. Upon this Syllogism the mayn stood.

If the scripture be corrupted, another judge must be had: that is the Pope:
who only does challenge that. But the scripture is most corrupted: as Geneva
grants in Rob. St. praef. to the N. T. for Ebrew double readings (848. as
Elias reckons them) and Arias Montanus has written an whole work in
apparatu, of the old Testament, corrupted in Babylon, in 52. years, in so many
places: and Beza checketh and vnchecketh the new, that none knows what to
stand to: and the enemies grant, is still strong against himself. Therefore
the Pope will require by wars that ye make him judge.
A Rhoetian, brought up at Berne, named Caspar Clause-christi, at Leyden saw my
scripture Concent: where I defend the old Testament to be pure to every letter
by the Massorites, and say the Apocrypha be all lying works or Ironies:
mackages of fools. I taught him so much English: and expounded the matter at
large to him: and for reconciling the Creed with the Gospel. D. Fr. Iunius had
told him he was ever of my mind: and one M. Baudertius showed my Theseis to
the University, and the University allowed them. By this he saw the Pope was
berest of hope to give a charge to us, where he hoped of victory: or by
Gehennean torment: as Athean a dream as his that wrote, our Lord had gone into
the second death, when God raised him up, (...). Divinity may not be handled
with respect of persons: But if Quirites yield to me, so far I will defend Rome
and Mentz: and if Lacus Lemanus make the fish dead: and Wintonia have but a
sack full of wind, which Aeolus gave to Ulysses, when his fellows thought it
full of a great treasure, and forced him to open it, and so by tempest drowned
themselves: that chester will I leave to the wind, to be shut up in Ulysses
sack: and leave Lemanus to the snow water of the wild Alps.

The Rhoetian saw all the Popes hope gone, by the scripture proved true in
text: and the Apocrypha to be works of men that knew not Christ, and all in
sadness to be foolish, and the going of the soul to Paradise to be spoken in
the Creed, and he told me with great asseueration, that if I went to
Zwitzerland, I should remove war. I went presently to Basil: and Zurick and
Berne heard: and used me with all kindness. Mine host of Basil, a D. of Law, D.
Iacobus Henric-petri, had occasion to go to Friburge to D. Pistorius: and on a
thursday at Supper spoke much of me to him. Then D. Pistorius said: The
scholars of England be learned in the tongues: but it were better they knew the
Fathers better. On Friday my Doctor tells me what he said: On Saturday I gave
a Greek reply to the Post: as Pistorius triumphed in Greek: to this sum.

The Greek Fathers were in eloquence unmatchable: and in handling of the
Trinity, and Incarnation of Christ, and Justification by faith, and of holy
souls passage hence to heaven, and of wicked to Gehenna, they all agreed: and
none ever of 1400. years thought of Purgatory: as their oration in the Synod
of Basil showed: 160. years ago: which D. Iacobus Zwinger yet has. And so
much learning as their age could use against eloquent heathen, God gave them.
But they had no occasion to deal much for text of scripture with such: and
therefore less studied it: But for the Lords Supper, This was their common
opinion: that the Bread and Wine were Icones and Symbola, Images and Tokens of
the body and blood of Christ: As Origin spoke the consent of his age: and
Eusebius from his great Library, the recorder of common graunts: And eloquent
Nazianzen and others by Typi and Antitypa, and as the most sage Theodorite in
sad disputation to clear other matters, brings the same as a granted common
matter, to prove douted: so Macarius Monachus shows his days opinion,
calling the bread Symbolon of the body. And none wise could doubt: marking upon
what prophecy the Lords Supper stood. The Angel Gabriel told holy Daniel that
after 490. years, Christ the King by his death would end sacrifice and
offerings. And the Jews dated all days in common Epistles and conueyances, the
years since the return from Babel: as we the years of our Lord: in whose
last year, they, By Daniel, looked, the Kingdom of heaven should appear,
Luc. 19. though they knew not in what manner. Now when sacrifice was to end
at the Supper of the Lamb: our Lord, to seal the end of sacrificing, gave,
for beasts flesh and blood, which figured his body and blood, bread and wine,
to be in covenant speech his Body and Blood. All Graecians knew proper speech
and civil: that he should be bad, that knew not the place of both. In proper
speech a Father begets his Son: in civil speech Romulus was ancester to
Julian Apostata, Baasa to Achab, Iechonias Salomontiades to Salathiel
Nathanides. So the token of a Kings seal, is called his seal. This all the
Greek Fathers knew: and tottering Theophylact, your only, turns to this.
And the taking of the Lords Supper, is our oath that we believe he died in due
time, to bury Moses by his burial: and that by grace his spirit is with us to
sure salvation: as mighty as by his word it made the world. More is needless
and cannot be, but is wickedly forged. So far the Fathers were rare: not
always in commenting upon the Bible: But extremely deceived almost all in
honoring the Apocrypha: which Jews kept to play for Josephus against Appiones
that denied all the Jews story. Therefore not to plead with them from the Law
full of paradoxes, they object fails and humane works to busy them for all:
And they meant little further great matter in them. The Greek Fathers saw not
this much: though Eusebius told the true law had but 22. books. Nazianzen
agrees for the number: but misseth in regarding one Apocryphon, for holy:
Judith, as I remember: and Athanasius, casts out holy Hester. So we like of
the fathers for learning controverted in their age: not aey for comment. And
these grounds ye shall grant me or combat: The Hebrew text is kept by the
Massorites, so that nothing can be corrupted to alter one words signification.
The Jews knew their own tongue: and teach us the native of it. In honor of
the two tables of 613. letters, they bring all speches of laws bidding or
forbidding, into 613. And hold that all which faith or life may think of is in
them: And the New Testament never goes further: And no one syllable helps
Rome: but Italy is expressly cursed by your own translation as by all Jews
exposition, Numb. 24. upon which all the Apocalypse makes a revelation. This
England holds: and will not give place to Rome, but will dispute with D.
Pistorius Protonotary of the Pope at Basil, one day in Hebrew, an other in
Greek: with penners of every syllable of our speech. Protonotarius is stout in
these tongues: as he has written de art Cabalistica: though he has missed
altogether: and says all Rabbis say Melchisedek sacrificed bread and wine:
where none ever thought so: but all hold it offered to Abraham's soldiers to eat
and drink, as he was a King: and blessed Abraham as a sacrificer. And for Greek
Protonotarius and Pope are yet to learn how to defend the purity of the New
Testament, and to see Antique, Septuagint Thalmudique and Apostolic dialects.
And no Papist ever could speak or write Ebrew and Greek as country speech.
Thou know if thou dare dispute I may overthrow the Pope: Therefore tell
thine own heart, and write to him: that an English man wrote to thee, that the
chalenger will give over his challenge: or he be counted a shameless lier.

To this effect I wrote to him a Greek oration: and sent R. Rubens Chananean
epistle, which honored England above all nations: that he might see he had not
to deal with a Thraso. Three days after he wrote to Zurick great
comme^dations of my poor studies, specially of Greek eloquence, as native
Attique: And at three months end, after much combat in all Greek he writes
thus: I will not dispute nor have our old Religion to be called into question.
Then both sides Cantones showted, that the fear of war was gone, seeing the
Popes chalenger puts up this: that the Pope has not one syllable in the
Bible for his defense: But is vnvinciblie accused: and has none that dare
dispute in the holy tongues for his defense. Now he dares not for stark shame
require supremacy, being so broken.

After this what Basil spoke to English of me, how for one all England should
hear better while Basil stood, one Mr Brand of Londen and M. Ward of Cornwall
they told me, and belike at home: How they told Netherlanders that this combat
ended wars, and swear so: they will never deny it, and noble Danes know, and
doubtless told their K. how they staying for me at a ferry near Leopoldus
burial, which they had seen, and I would see, a Zurick hearing my name, said:
we were in great fear of war, till the Englander brake Pistorius: I would
gladly see his countenance: which argues the mind: that in quiet words calmed
boisterous preparation of wars: But my have cannot suffer stay.

And so said many strangers at Basil: and French were earnest to bring me to
their King. And what will to my rare honor, the state of Basil, Zurick, and
Berne meant, I will let them write.

Now for Jesuits humanity. D. Pistorius himself four years ago asked M.
Hakewill of Oxford, at Friburge of me, whether I was alive. He said, he left me
at Francfurt: then said he, I am heartily glad, and gave high good words. Now he
is dead, and I am sorry, for I hoped to turn him. Now two Cardinals of Rome,
Caesar Baronius, as the Jesuits of Mentz told me, and an other whose letters
were intercepted at Heidelberge (of him I heard no more) obtained of Pope
Clement a principal Cardinalship for me: and dealt with Mentz Jesuits to
persuade me: who when they could not, Archb. Ioh. Adami would have had me of
his court, and obtained that in Chapter: saying that he rejoiced more for my
honoring of him with dedication of my Greek translation of the Prophets,
then for his late election to be Prince of the Empire. And he should by order
have part of his court Protestants: and he spoke of me, as not misliking my
religion. But then Q. E. died, and I returned, and he died soon after. None
but shameless will deny this. Now this is past all denial, that Mentz gave
me leave to print in Greek my own Religion. That brake the neck of
Purgatory: besides other Papistique great poincts. Of this the best of Paris
wrote to Franckfurt to the Kings agent: that of nine hundred years so much was
never obtained of the Pope, as that book obtained: Rome must allow what Mentz
allows. And if Haides have but two places, as they grant, Heaven and hell,
Purgatory must give back all the land that it wan.

Furthermore when my book of Concent came in Latin, Pater Baltasar Ezelius in
the hearing of his fellows in their college at Mentz, spoke as by common
consent: We allow all that that book has: This I have printed in Latin, and I
am sure he will not deny it: and when we are both dead, none may: seeing in my
life time it is not denied. So this much is granted me of Rome: to assure the
simplest so far, how far the city is sunk: And badnes or madness geveth Nabal
for name, and Nabala for fame to him that will not see how upon this Rome
grant, the comment upon the Apocalypse is past reply.

I have turned the Apocalypse into Hebrew: and so I would expound it: if the
Turkey merchants would pay the charges. If they refuse, I will leave them to
try, whether strange shipwreck shall revenge them. Their agent L. Ed. Barton
gave the beginning: writing thus: If Mr. Br. may be brought to Constable. that may
turn to the common good of Christendom. This he sent to Mr. Stapers. Seeing
our age flees, we should sell all to buy the Pearl of heaven.

Let the just be just still.

The sum of the Apocalypse.
John's Apocalypse tells, that Christ showed the state to come, to the end of
the world; and a vision of himself: as unto Daniel, chap. 10. this does he,
chap. 1. And in singular sweetness to the seven stars, in the seven golden
Candlestickes, all these parts be applied with addition against all Arrianes,
that the Eternal, the son of God, the Creator of the world, is he, that
appeared unto Daniel. So, John expounds Daniel, into Salvation of all Jews
of grace. This goes through chap. 2. and 3. in easy facility.

Now for times to come, this appears, chap. 4. God on a throne fitteth a
judge, like Jasper, for Beniamins temple: and Sardius as Ruben: to fight for
the tribes. And Christians, in state Persons, are 24. Bishops, and besides
goodly, this in, chap. 4. Then the Lamb and Lion opens the Book of seven
seals, chap. 5. then he comes further against Caesares, on horse, white:
with plaguing riders, upon red, black, pale; For the martyrs, who crave to
destroy the Empire, but are bid to expect Diocletianes persecution. Then shall
their profane world be rolled up, chap. 6. After that, a general apostasy
comes, chap. 7. How that falls out, the seventh seal does show. Christ
stands at the golden Altar, to receive all prayers, and Rome bendes a policy
against all this. Thereupon Christ, as in Ezekiel, casts fire into the earth:
and Angels trompetters sound how hail and fire is mixed with blood: by that,
Popes be made a mountain: so a mountain of fire cast into the worlds sea, to
set all on fire: when the starre-Byshop falls from his heavens, to turn the
Law-waters, into wormwood and to darken the chief Sun, Moon, and Stars:
coming up by falling, and by turning the Scriptures into gall, soon darkening
the third part of the Church: that three woes are pronounced, chap. 8. By his
keys of the pit, whence he fetched the wormwood of his haeresies, he brings
locastes of Monks to devour all the West, and able to make wars, and
becomes King of Locusts: and makes wars: and so becomes a fiery
mountain, to make hail and fire mixed with blood. This was one woe. He weakened
the East Empire, to set up the Saracens: and is plagued from Euphrates: as his
Idolatry and treachery turned away the East, chap. 9. Christ reviveth the
Gospel, when men eat the little book, teaching again, how he is the Angel
of Covenant, and Mediator for the faithful, chap. 10. Martyrs bring policies
to see what the king of Locusts his City or policy is: and he falls, and
the Gospel is restored: and he falls with worlds end, chap. 11. The same
matter is repeated for Caesares and Pope in a dragon of Roman Arms. As it was
called Egypt, chap. 11. and Pharaoh, a Dragon, Esai. 27. The upper part of the
Dragon, is showed to be the Roman Empire: one, compiled of the four in
Daniel: and the tail is expounded to be the beast arising from the earth,
chap. 11. or King of Locusts, chap. 9. he reuiueth the former empire, so, that
none can live in it, without his mark, chap. 13. His mark is to force
Christians to Idolatry. For which vilanie, Roman Babylon is told of a fall,
chap. 14. By urging Idolatry, he drives from his Egypt, the Church through a
sea of fire and faggot, into the wilderness. Where the Tabernacle built has a
smoke of Gods anger, and Angels seven plague him, as he plagued all under the
seven Trompets: (Chapter 16.) For that our holy Martyrs calling for vengeance
from under the Altar rolled up also the Popes heaven as a book rolled. The
Beast revived has no difference from the former, but in bloody color, and the
daughter Rome riding upon it, all bloody, Chapter 17. Rome shall fall as
Babylon and Tyrus did, Chapter 18. It shall fall when all nationes sing
Halelu-Iah upon the destruction of the wicked, with understanding. Then the
WORD of GOD, will catch the Beast-false-prophet: the whole Dragon revived, and
cast him into a Lake burning with fire and brimstone: which is the second
death, Chapter 19. But the Roman Dragon shall be tied 1000. years before the
King of Locusts deceives generally. But then he makes a new Gog and Magog:
for the old Jerusalem: and thereupon shall be destroyed, as the old was, by the
first coming, so he by the second, of CHRIST, from a throne of judgment: as
the old Gog and Magog was, Chapter 20. As John in Patmos saw the heavenly
Jerusalem: so Patmos the Church, tossed with Aegean waves shall be in Gods fight
such, as Isaiah, Ezechiel, Aggei, and Zachary spoke of. CHRIST saluteth us
poor heathen, with his own most gracious voice.

To him that loved us, and has washed us from our sins by his blood, be all
honor and glory for ever, Amen.

Isaie 25. And he (the ETERNAL) will destroy in this mountain the covering,
that covers all people, and the veil, that is spread upon all nations. THE
ARGVMENTS OF THE REVELATION.
THe Apocalypse may be divided into speech unto the present age: and into
prophecies for time to come. Common to both are the nations, and places, and
the times.

The nations to whom the book is commended are cities of old Gyges kingdom
called the Land of Gog: where the Lagidae and Seleucidae had parted Asia the
lesser betwixt them. Ezechiel told, that when they were overthrowen for
scattering his people into all quarters, God would be glorified over them: and
in wrath remember mercy. As over Antiochos: in that the Land of Magog,
Antiochia first bare the name of Christians. Over both in these seven towns:
whereof Philadelphia bears plainly the name of Ptolomie Philadelphus. Sardis
was the Court of rich Craesus: whose wealth God gave to Cyrus the great: that
sent Israel home from 120. nations: and built the temple upon his own
charges. In it the old memory of Ggy or Gog is continued.

The nations called are from all people. The damned for deadly hinderance of
the Gospel is Rome, plainly described by full many arguments undeniable. The
whip of Romes Idolatry be the Saracenes.

The time in trope is taken from the time of Christ his persecutions: three
years and an half. But therein is meant the quality of state, not length of
years, that men should be afflicted the afflictions of Christ. So the Dragon
Caesar's afflict a year two years and half a year: and the Dragons tail the
Pope, and the old Roman Empire, months 42. and the Vicar of the Lambs
horns the king of Locustes, days 1260. They who think to get any certeyntie
hence, deceyve them selves, and the truth is not in them. The allusion is most
heavenly: calling Christ still into mind.

The thousand years come near propriety: telling when the Popes authority
should come to the highest.

These points may commonly be considered.

CHAP. I.
The present age is saluted, with narration of particular place, and day, and
vision of Christ: and in seven epistles the parts of it be applied unto
plain experience.

CHAP. II.
Ephesus learneth how remission of study loses the Church. Rome continually
practiced that: still shaking off Greek and Hebrew, and skill in Gods word.

Smyrna is told that Jews, not right Jews whose praise is of God, would seem
to be Jews: but should be found liars. So Rome would challenge the true Jew.
Rom 2. but they that seemed to stand, shall fall.

Pergamus hears of idolatry and fornication. Rome and Venice be deaf.

Thyatira has a new Iezabel, with witchcraft and whoredom and Baal: Papists
are full of charming: Nuns full wanton, and Gods of their own making.

CHAP. III.
Sardis the court shows, how the pomp of court, has hardly lively religion:
yet still some be there. So Rome the court town seemed under John alive: but
had forgotten S. Paul, Romans 11. and 13: and 2. These 2.

Philadelphia had true love, and tries who be the sound Jews: and shall be as
Salomons pillars in the heavenly Jerusalem. Such were full many Monasteries of
learned men: which knew well what S. P. Q. R. meant: when stultus populus
quaerit Romam.

Laodicea, follows the common manner, neither hot, nor cold: but holds on
what negligent custom has once brought in. So antiquity and universality
are the Papists answer: They never plead better skill in the Ebrew Law and
Greek Gospel: so thar Turks and Jews may see how they build not upon a rock
by sure grounds, but flee to custom: never allowed of God.

This from obscure Patmos on the Lords day, John teaches that the base
corners shall have truth: when they receive the holy, banished: and Rome the
banisher shall be left in Satan's throne, to pester the year with Popes holy
days: honoring creatures with religion of days, as Rome did to Julius and
Augustus, and as ill in March, May, January, and February, and in all Ovids
fastis.

The stories of times which God writes be more then yet men would ever learn.
The Lords resurrection day, is surely taught us, and that we should keep. But
his birth day, he would not have us to know: and when men would after three
hundred years seek it out, God gave them over into a deceived mind to miss
3. months: that of 1300. years that dotage was not espied, until this age
searched about, and found better matter. Yet Laodicea will follow custom, and
cared not for grace, from him who was, and is, and will be: and from the seven
spirits: the one, Eternal that gives seven lamps of oil to his servants:
and from Jesus Christ, that is above all the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89. Dan.
2. and 7. and Apoc. 6. and 19. whom Rome pierced with spear and nails: But
they shall feel whom they pierced, and whom they crucify again: to have him
counted a base and bare man, and not as on Tabor when the Godhead made the
humanity shinelike the Sun. Now for times to come.

CHAP. IIII.
When the voice of Christ like a trumpet, making them happy which know the
sound, Psalm. 89. behind us calls us from our own course, we shall see God in
the heaven of the Church, like Beniamins Jasper building his Church in Paul's
Shebet: An Ebrician must teach the word to the simple: the discourse would be
harsh.
and like Rubens red Sardius: fighting against Hagarenes for the Tribes: with
the Rainebow of the covenant: like Levies Smaragd teaching the brightness of the
Gospel.

Thus we shall see God sitting upon a throne, when Christ from obscure Patmos
shows that heaven is not best seen from great cities, which always overflow
in wickedness: but from place where fewest be to disturb.

So shall be seen 24. Bishops or Elders: that can apply the Patriarchs story
unto the Apostles Gospel, all these clothed with the justice of Christ: being
to the souls as white linen is to the body. Seven lamps of oil grace beaten
with much affliction as beaten olive: the seven graces of the spirit make this:
and the whole company be before the throne, a sea Ephesians. 5. 27.
clear, and blameles: justified freely by the grace of God.

And the Church shall not want rare wightes, full of eyes, whereof one shall
see more then millions of Papists, full of courage, and readiness to be
sacrificed, as Timotheus at Ephesus, and Polycarpus at Smyrna, and at Pergamus
Antipas: and full of wise pleading, as Paul to King Agrippa, and of high flight
into the heavens carrying souls thither, not as in Campus Martius, when for the
Caesar's funeral a summer house is made, and full of spice, and in a corner an
eagle is, and when it is set on fire, the eagle is let out: and fleed high: and
is said to carry the Caesar's soul to the Gods. Herodian. lib. 11. These have a
true hight, and have six wings: two to cover their face, from looking into Gods
counsel above reach: two to cover their feet, that their ways be not called
into sight: and two to flee in their course, as Vzielides expounds, Es. 6.
And the whole bent of these tends to honor God.

And by their examples the common congregation acknowledges the holy Trinity:
and the Creator, where the heathen have no lamp of grace, not the best learned
of them, not one spirit of seven. Their sage, as Pythagoras, in tongue
confessed God to be one: But they knew not the trinity, and that the Son
would be manifested in the flesh, to come a man looking through our walls, and
to come a Judge of all, nor that he framed the world for man, because he would
dwell in a tabernacle in us. In the heavenly policy of the Gospel, this must
be proper to true Christians: who finding a victory, cast down their crowns
when they come before God.

The Scribes confess all that we confess: The trinity of old confessed they:
as their works yet show, which might have broken the Arians necks, if Greek
pride had submitted them to learn Thalmudique studies. One error in the root
makes a million in the branches.

CHAP. V.
The counsel of God is hid: how he will use the profane Caesar's: and how man
of sin will afterward exalt himself in the Temple of God. Moses by Balaam
told but briefly, that Italy should afflict Heber, and be perishing unto the
end. Daniel speaks nothing of the Romans afflicting the faithful. But
showing that the Image, and four beasts being consumed by our Lords first
coming into the world, by implication he shows that Italy should kill
Christ, and destroy Jerusalem, and so breed a new Image of a beast. But his
pictures end in the Macedonians. Our Lord in Math. 24. only touches deceit and
vexation: and S. Paul 2 These. 2. shows that Emperor shall hold on till he
be taken away: and then shall man of sin show himself in the Temple as if he
were God Adoni kam, a Lord standing sure. But how the Emperor should be used,
and Pope come up and fall, that Daniel meddled not withal, who dealt most of
kingdoms. And proclamation that none in heaven nor on the earth could open the
book, tells that he meddled not with Antichrist, nor Caesar's punishment.

John's weping that none could open the book, tells that the matter is of
great use: that they shall have weeping, and gnashing of teeth, which contemn
the matter. Now one of the 24. Bishops hearing the person of a Doctor, said to
him, being in his traunse, now as a child, that the Lion of Judah spoken of
through the Prophets and specially Number. 24. how he should vnwall and subdue all the sons of Seth, and is the root of David his figure, who conquered all
resisters, and set up religion, he will tell what Esaias spoke of his conquests.
So Christ stands at the mids of Gods throne, in a plain description: a lamb,
John 1. as one that had been slain, Mat. 27. slain by Rome: upon whom the
revenge must go, having seven horns of power, to revenge Satan with his seve^
heads: and seven eyes, which be seven spirits of his providence, sending Angels
over the earth: as in building Jerusalem, Zach. 1. and 2. and 6. And he takes
the book from God, as Chap. 1. 1. as Mediator now: though he were in the glory
of GOD: and held it no robbery to be equal with God: and then the rare wightes
and 24. Doctors pray him to open the state to come, and all creatures show
that they shall serve Christ, when Idolaters be destroyed.

CHAP. VI.
The Lion hearted, the pacient ox, the wise man, the high fighted eagle, tell
how by his martyrs he builds the Church: and for their prayer the Caesar's
shall have war still: bloody war, great famine, that corn will be as dear as
spice: that a bath, choenix, a pottle, will be sold for the Roman Denarius,
about half a french crown, though GOD strike not vines and olives, but in wrath
remembers mercy. Such war, that blood, death, famine and pestilence, shall
make a riddance of the fourth part of men.

This comes in revenge of the martyrs. In Aboth Rab. Nathan, in Moses life,
all the just soulesly under the throne of glory: Here the term Altar teaches
that by Christ the Altar they have justice: Neither Scribes nor Apostles knew
purgatory. Covetousnes bred the teachers, sloth and contempt of truth the
believers. They are told that they must have patience a while till martyrs
blood be seed to make a Church of a sufficient number to have a Christian
empire.

Then the profane policies shall have an earthquake: their sun of stately
empire shall be turned to blacknes: their moon of Princes, into blood: their
stars shall fall as olives shaken: their heaven shall be lapped up as a roll:
al Islands and mountains shall be changed for them.

John from Esa. 2. and 14 and 34 and Ose. 10. sees a vision fitted to their
speches, that by considering Iudaes fall, the ten tribes fall, Assurs fall, and
Daniels Image, we may be sure of the Caesar's fall: and he expounds himself
and the Prophets: That Kings, great men, and rich, and Coronelles, and the
mighty shall hide themselves and wish as Samaria that mountains might hide
them from the anger of the Lamb. And so he teach Jews, that for contempt of
Christ, their destructions came.

The five seals are not distinguished in time, but in common place of victory,
war, famine, and both with plague, and martyrdom, all these in times come
sometimes at once. The sixth touches Constantines days.

Then an unspeakable riddance was made after Dioclesians persecution, that
twelve Augusti and Caesar's consume one another, till all came to the son of
our Helena: who in the ends of the earth, made the possession of Christ; comes
to York to Constantius his Father, that had Christians his chief men, and by
him is made his heyr of empire, and by them and our nation and the near in the
end is alone the Emperor of the world: and leaves the Rome that crucified,
(by the Gospel, and 2. These. 2.) where in 100. years, the slothful Popes
could not make Caesar good: but were caught in their lying that Peter should
long sit at Rome: who expressly writes that he kept about Babylon. Rome in
Italy is hated for Idolatry of Constantinus: and he removes the Empire to
Byzantium: calls it new Rome: and indueth it with the privilegies of old
Rome. Our West brought him to the East: and one of our Helena, despises old
Rome: and builds new Rome near Troy, where the wicked Helena wrought
destruction to the house of Assaracus, that after 300. years old Rome should
begin by blood and spoiling.

And this may be noted that Q. Elisabets agent did that in Constantinople that
none of other nations could: That the Turks Princes and Jews there desired to
have from England the Gospel preached there in Greek and Hebrew, and the Kings
royal mind is to be commended for his bent to allowance that way. L. Barton
wrote that if N. could be gotten thither, it were like to turn to the common
good of Christendom. So God offered our nation again glory in the stateliest
soil: But Satan hinders, by his servants that can turn themselves into
Angels of light. God will look to it.

One libeller would persuade, that the Jews letter coming in several copies
and translated there, and thence sent to Basil and printed there: was forged
there. A strange dealing, a strange impudency. None learned would think that
all Christendom, setting their wits together could forge such a letter. The
slaunderer could not read one line of it. And what a barbarous unthankful
wight is the Libeller of these words: Because your arms are the owls, you
think you must bring owls to Athens: and because the Jew saluteth you as you
feign: you think you are the only Rabbin of the world. If the base borne
wight had been of Constantinus kindred: he had been of an other spirit, but
now, he could not consider the height of that cause.

The like unto him is he that said these words, The knight which said the King
would give 500. lib. annuitie did but flatter: and I will stay the King that he
shall give no allowance to Jews matters. All the Orators that ever were, can
not sufficiently express the deadly hatred that these men have to the truth
of God.

There is no other way to make Christians ready in the Bible, but by handling
the Gospel by Thalmudiques: to whose tenor of study all the new Testaments
style is bent. The best learned Jesuits at Francfurt in the hearing of a
gentleman of England heartily requested this done, saying that by me, they ready
to clear the new Testament, could soon turn the Indians. The Jews over
Germany heartily desire this. Princes made great promises, but the old serpent
will be hindering, whom the great Angel can tie in chains that he deceive not,
and deal with his factours as they will be bound with chains of darkness. To
which matter I require the cups of the four wights and 24. Bishops full of
incense to be powered before the Lamb: that Iannes and Iambres may receive
according to their works: that no more regard whence the sixth seal brought on
a new world: nor how the fallen must be lifted up.

CHAP. VII.
Three hundred years were passed ere that men were sufficient in number to
have kingdoms of Christianity. Then Scholars began to remit zeal, and
Hebrew study: which had soon overthrowen Arians, showing GOD to be our
Creator, Eccles. 12. and Christ, Iehova our righteousness. Yea the Apocalypse
had most tamed Arians and Jews: and had been clear at the first by Thalmudique
vein of study. By 300. more, Bishops pride and sloth made but a gain and
ambition of the Gospel. Antioch would have chief Patriarkship, following
Antiochus old pride. Alexandria would, as Alexander would be a God: Old Rome
would, as it crucified Christ: New Rome would, for the Empires seat. None
considered that the Scholars of Patmos should be the sealed: and martyrs: when
neither North Wind rose, nor Southwinde blasted, in the garden: that the spices
might flow, and the beloved come into the Garden, and eat of his precious
fruits, Cant. 4.

But four Angels held the four winds. God favored Antioch, that where sin
abounded, mercy might more abound. That men should not therefore be high
minded, but fear: in the end Hagarenes take it. Cush or Abushini in Keturahs
house, had Abraham's family, and long held well: but in the end, held but the
Gospel and few Epistles, and the Psalms, for all the Bible: That which Colen
and Rome has printed. Moscovia from Constantinople, held little sound. Rome was
the cause of falling to all: still weakening the East Empire, that should have
holp the rest.

So God tells that a general fall shall come, that not the open be the true,
but the hid be the servantes of God: such as God sealed. As in Ieremies days
in Jerusalem the ill figs, the troops of Jerusalem were a Synagogue of Satan,
when all the Levites condemned him to die: and God in Ezekiel seals all his,
whom Israel condemned. So here an apostasy is told, which grows up; 300.
years: by many wicked steps. And then comes to the Popes supremacy, and soon
makes the open Church, a Synagogue of Satan. That only men unknown, few to
men's sight, but many to Gods ey, that sees all, be the Church. Here the
Papists might have their answer: when they ask where our Church was.

The tribes all have each one twelve thousand: Though Dan is not named he is
understood. But when Joseph's two sons and Levi be reckoned, one is left out,
as Symeon Deu. 33. So Dan here. They be shallow who hence guess that Antichrist
comes of Dan. S. Paul taught Chrysostom, 2. These. 2. that he should come
from Rome.

The latter half of the Chapter, sweetly expresses the poinctes whereupon all
stands, that salvation is from God and the Lamb. All more in religion is
from the serpent. All honor to Mary and Saints. Also Martyrs and their comfort
is sweetly expressed. This matter in time follows the eight and ninth.

CHAP. VIII.
Out of the seventh seal come matters more to be sounded, the^ six before had.
The Church had peace a small while, but angels seven are prepared to sound
wrath arising. Christ the Mediator, is ready to receyve prayer: he is
contemned, by Rome dallying with his mediation. Therefore he powers voices,
thundrings, lightnings and earthquake. Angels here tell it: Men in plain work.

The first common place: War.
Hayle and fire mixed with blood, In Julian the Apostata.
shows vexation with war: ever since Constantines house fell, the Popes
bestird them to stir wars to overthrow the East Empire, and to set the West
by the ears.

The second common place, The Popes supremacy.
The arising to be a great mountain: became a mountain of fire, when he cast
himself into the sea of nations: That a third part of men became dead in sin,
in profane trafique of life.

The third common place. Corruption of Scripture wrested to his policy.
A great star burning as a torch, fell from heaven, and fell into the rivers
and fountaynes of waters, and the name of the star is wormwood, etc. Angelus
ecclesiae, the Doctor is a star, Chapter 1. heaven is the Church: burning as a
lamp, is kindling of wrath: the waters be the Scriptures: falling into them,
is wresting of them to mainteyne his kingdom: so the sense is bitter, and the
D. is wormwood: that many find deadly haeresies by this wormwood.

The fourth trumpet, Great fall.
They which were principal, as the sun, moon and stars (Jacobs family, in
Joseph's dream) lose much light. Gagnaeus a Papist tells, this to touch,
Popes, Cardinals and Bishops.

A preparation to mark triple woe upon this.
An Angel flies in the open sky, and tells of three woes upon this.

CHAP. IX.
The V. common place.
The Angel or Doctor, falling from heaven (the Church,) has given to him not
S. Peter's keys of knowledge, but keys of a deep pit: to darken sun and air:
the office of Christ and law by which we see him. So infinite millions of
monks and friars come forth: locusts for devouring the earth, with scorpions
stings to torment hearts: when Christ is obscured and Scripture, that men find
no comfort: but be worse for their soul, then Job for his body, Job 3.

To make wars, their wealth will make many horses: and they have authority as
Kings with their crowns: though they pretend to be as private men. ( Dan. 7.
The Chaldean stripped of Kingdom is so termed: And Antiochus having no right to
the kingdom:) and they keep within doors, as of women's hair: but they have
Lions teeth, to hold fast all forged and wringed gifts: openly forged, as
Constantinus donation: and wringed of kingdoms, which they help up: and from
deceived by terror of purgatory. They have breast plates of iron, to defend
themselves: and the noise of their wings is like the noise of horses running to
wars: while still they set Kings by the ears: for the first common place:
that hail and fire be mixed with blood. And their scorpion stinges sting men
five months: till Princes compel them by a cold winter to hide themselves in
hedges, as Nahums Locustes of Ninivy, hide them by enemies.

An excellent name of the Pope: THE ANGEL OF THE PIT: KING OF LOCVSTS,
ABANDDON, APOLLYON.

Our common name which we give the Pope is Demon in Greek: for Popes be
Daemones in Eustathius: from the Commentaries of old Aristarchus and Didymus,
and others. His Commentaries are from ancient Heathen, not from himself: as
Erasmus well notes in his observations upon the Apocalypse. Whereas I cited
Homers Commentary followed by S. Peter, D. B. the learned, thought that a
foolish oversight: as though I must mean Eustathius: who was of late. And he
doubts whether S. Peter read Homer. I am out of doubt he never read him: But
the holy Ghost gave words of old for S. Peter's use afterward, by instinct, not
by reading. And so much a simple Doctor might have known.

B. L. showed himself, in his unlearned skophing most Athean. And as Iannes and
Iambres, Simon Magus and Elymas, and Alexander the Coppersmyth are for eternal
memory in the heart of the Bible, so deserve such for to be. Now as we
unawares and Papists call the Pope, Daemona, a Devil: unawares we call him so,
GOD ruling our tongues: that is specially worthy noting. When Julian the
Apostata was killed, and Libanius commended him, that he now was with the
Daemones, the Greek Doctors took him upon his word: and what an ass he was to
speak that which the enemy would wish. D. Johannes Pistorius the Popes
chalenger, wrote to me that JOHN CALVIN was Dactylodeictes of Antichrist: Who
showed by the finger who was Antichrist. I took his grant: that so the Pope
was. For Calvin's finger aimed at him. So the Popes chalenger overthrew the
Pope. The same wrote to me the Anathema. But God dealt with him as with Balaam
the son of Beor, in Italy pronuntiation, of Bosor, in Chaldean, where S. Peter
kept: where the Galilaean his voice told he wrote not from Rome. The Doctors
Anathema was this, to me, I Anathematize thee, as Paul did Barnabas. I take it,
said I. And so thou make me better then any Pope that ever was at Rome. Paul
thought him of the same faith, and happiness: But I anathematize D. John
Pistorius, as S. Paul did Anathematize Elymas Magus. Upon this he yielded, as
Helvetia knows. And to his dying day spoke most reverently, as some English
heard, of his checker.

So here we must mark not what men call the Pope, Holy father, and vicar of
Christ, and head of the Church, and King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: but what
GOD does call him: and God taught Adam to give fit names. Here the Popes names
be many. One is, the Angel of the pit: as the star falling had the keys of the
Pit, to bring forth his Locusts. And, the King of Locusts is the fittest name
for him. In Ebrew, he is called Abaddon, Number. 24. and Abdan in the Thalmud is
the worst name. Aruch will teach Beracoth Perek, evening prayer, fol. 28.
the place. Also he is called Abaddon chiefly for remembrance of Number. 24. where
Balaam ends his prophecy, in Italy going on to destruction: and John Chap.
17. 8. 11. translateth Balaam most properly: as D. Kimchi, in hard Grammar:
Adey obed goes on to destruction. In Greek he is another Apollo: a Devil of
Delphos, destroying such as seek to him: as Apollo destroyed rich Craesus:
deceiving him to war against Cyrus. He knew well enough that Cyrus should have
the victory: Esaias had told him so: and though Craesus gave to Apollos temple,
very great gifts: yet when he asked him, whether he should fight with Cyrus, he
answered: Craesus passing over Halys, shall overthrow a great King. So he did
in hope of good: But overthrew his own kingdom: and rich Craesus became poor
Irus. So the Pope makes but a mock of Kings. Thus one who of the sixth seal,
is fully described: what the Pope is, and what he means to do, as Chap. 11.
shall tell.

And this first of the three woes thus set forth, reaches from the Popes
supremacy, after the year of our Lord, 600. unto Ierusalems war ended at 1200.
For which 600. years, the Pope still made hail and fire to be mixed with
blood. Now the second woe is in his punishments, by the Turk: and by the
Gospel and Martyrs, teaching Princes to cast him off.

The sixth trumpet and common place. Of the Turks coming up and dealing.
Cedrenus and Volaterranus (in Arabia triplici) teach of the Turks and Saracens
conjunction: and sundry others, how they afflicted Spain and Italy. Their
history I have touched in my book of Scripture Concent: and I would any of
clean spirit that rages not against the Concent which GOD gave to Scripture,
and I do but show, to have my best help, thence. There is a full explication of
the second woe. Bibliander in Chronologia shows that after the Popes
supremacy granted by wicked miserable Phocas, to impudent Boniface the third,
Machumed began to be as gracious a Father as the Pope in Rome. Machmad is in
Cant. the title of Christ: Graces it self. And Chamudoth partaker of graces, to
rare Daniel Chap. 9. by the Angel Gabriel. Now this false Prophet forging
himself taught by the Angel Gabriel, takes Daniels term in the highest sense:
Machmad delight it self. Rashi tells, that because he humbled himself before
GOD in fasting and prayer, he was so called. But Turk and Pope will have the
holiness of Apollo: past repentance.

CHAP. X.
Now comes a most lively description of Christ, opening himself from Esa. 19.
and 54. and Genes. 9. and Apoc. 4. and Daniel 10. and Exodus 14. and Dan. 12.
and Es. 31. and Job, for the thunder of his power: which is past understanding,
and shall not be perceived of the Pope, till the next trumpetter, or common
place teacher sounds and ends the world.

Now the Angel bids John take from Christ the little book of the Gospel: and
to eat it: which was sweet in his mouth, in preaching: but bitter in
affliction, and to the enemy also: as Ezekiels book.

CHAP. XI.
John shows that the Church shall be built: as Jerusalem freed from Babel,
under Zorobabel and Jesus: when Zachary sees an Angel with a reed meating the
length and breadth. So John has a reed to meat the temple and altar: that is,
from the little book to show, the breadth and length and depth and height of the
love of God in Christ. Christ himself is the temple: Therefore to check
Thalmudiques, which to this day look for a third temple, as shows Rambam:
whom upon Koheleth (Solomon the orator) I have cited and translated, to check
them he shows court of sacrificing is geven to the heathen: and Ezekiels
goodly city, is a city of affliction: as Christ was afflicted 42. months:
Zacharies olive trees: Zorobabel with Israel, and JESUS with Levi: and
candelstick of Gods favor, Churches ( Chapter 1. revived.

Here is a new Elias: a new Moses: to call fire from heaven, and to stay all
dew of grace and success: and to turn their waters of armies into blood: and
to plague their enemies with all kind of plague. The experience follows.

The combat of the King of Locusts with the Martyrs.
When the Martyrs begin to revive the Gospel, the city which is called for
spiritual uncleanness of religion, spiritually Sodoma, for cruelty against
Israel, Egypt, sets fourth the King of Locustes: who comes with his
Locustes wings of chariots and war horses: and fights in all nations, with
these two captains of Martyrs: and kills them: and their case is plain, how
they are murdered: as if a Crowners quest went upon the policy that crucified
Christ: after his preaching 42. months: or days 1260. or years three and an
half. Now as Beda and Carthusianus well note (in three years and an half) all
time of preaching Christ, in memory of his preaching so long: so the time of
their noted death, while their ashes may be seen, and they are not put in
grave, is, in a proportion, called three days and an half.

Now that all may know that two year is not proper, twice one: but as all the
returned from Chaldea Babylon be two, Zach. Chapter 4. and 5. So the witnesses of
truth that leave spiritual Babel, all are in that sense called two: and the
city which kills them, in peoples, tribes, tongues, and nations, is not a
building of houses: but a building of policy. So the two be not two men, but
two companies: and the dwellers in earth would not rejoice and send gifts one
to another, as Jews against Haman in Ester for two, but for the companies of
two sorts: rare wightes full of eyes, and 24. Bishops: and the troops that
give glory to God and the Lamb, and pray only to the Lamb, the great God
and Savior: these in all nations where the king of Locustes tyranny reaches,
are the two Prophets who vex them, whose minds dwell on earth, and cannot see
the heavenly policy of Christ.

In that sense, after three days and an half, spirit of life from God entered
into them, and they stood up, and fear fell upon their enemies: and they heard
a great voice from heaven saying unto them, come up hither, and they ascended
unto heaven in a cloud, and their enemies saw it. John's vision went upon two:
and upon one city: and one beast. But Romes policy the king of pit keys, with
his Locustes: and the states that write and fight against them, must be meant:
of whom when one is dead, an other is alive, iump in the same vein: as though
it were the same man: and their enemies see, they go up to heaven: and the
beast which is ascended out of Abyssos, that is all his corporatio^, millions
of millions (these visions represent corporations, and under one, millions of
men be told) all Papists go from their Abyssos of black ignorance, unto
Abyssos, Luke 8. and Zohar upon Genes. 1. 2. whither the Devils shall come in
their time (but are yet in this world) to be tormented for ever and ever.

After this teaching and fighting a great earthquake shakes a tenth part of
the king of Locusts city: which crucified Christ, and prays to the virgin
Mary, to command her son, the Eternal God, by the right of a mother: as
though she were mother to the godhead, because she was mother to the Person
one of two natures. And they are very wise who think the mother of God, in
school phrase, can find no better speculation in heaven then to listen to the
City that crucified the Lord of glory. Iscariot the traitor confessed his
fault: yet Christ gave him over to hang him self. Rome that killed Christ, after
justifying him, sinning so against the holy Ghost, and sinning more then if
they had killed all the men in the world; yet is worse then Iscariot, and will not
confess sin, but claim right to rule the world: because once they durst
crucify the maker of the world: and pray to the Virgin Marie to forgive the
Popes holiness, the Vicar of Pilate.

In Elias 7000. bowed not the knee to Baal: and live. In this City 7000. that
bow the knee to Baal dye, are killed, in vision 7000. in story seaventie
millions of thousands, with this 120. years of the Gospel revived. And full
many give glory to God, and leave the virgin Mary alone, to be happy as other
faithful, Bathshebagh, Ruth, Thamar and Sarah, al her mothers: and who more in
sin yet stayed upon her son, who was then in their loins. Thus the second
woe is past.

The Popes fall: the seventh trumpet of common place.
Since Kingdoms match the Pope in strength, and have brought him that he dare
not queck but be content to hold his own: An open voice is in kingdoms, that
whereas the Pope has been once cast out, and now God reigns, we look for
no change till the resurrection, at 6000. by old guess. Hence at 463. For our
Lord was borne at 3927. add 1610. then now Adams soul and dust has 55, 37.
at 463. the guess will show it self. At 3000. the Arc was brought into
Salomons Temple. at 4000. exactly the Romans destroyed Zerobabels temple.

And as the Pope falls by steps as he came up, and not all at once, so 463.
years may Spain and Italy hold him up: while Archbishops and Bishops,
Pastors and Curates have too much stipend and authority: but little learning
in the holy book, for wisdom unto life. As Agamemnon said of Nestor, that
ten such would soon fell Priamus city: so ten Kings that would clear the
Revelation to Hebrews, Greeks, Latins, and all tongues might hasten the
Jews calling: but I am afraid none, saving our own, will perform any promise
that way: to agree with Jews that the Arc in the Temple is the holy man,
which is golden within and without, and has the tables of 613. letters, to
which answer 613. laws, into which all wisdom falls, and none fails,
written in his heart: and upon the mercy seat all of gold stay the Cherubims
look. When Christ is seen in his Temple of humanity, thus Papistry fails
and falls: and from the Church daily, till the end lightening and voices and
thundrings, and earthquake and great hayle, would make Egypt and Rome to
quayle.

But few desirous of divinity have maintenance, and ambitious in wealth spurn
at souls health: and kings see how much is spent in vain, and how scholars
bend to gain: and so courts fall at Sardis, Chapter 3. and the Pope may live yet
Hebers years, this present and 463. That this Trumpet may then speak to
Ezekiels dead bones, and make them arise, Chapter 37. as Apo. 20. all arise.

Thus in seals and Trumpets God has once showed all. By seavens: spirits,
horns, seals, and trumpets, to teach the profane world of resurrection. The
same shall be repeated in beasts seven headed, and seven Angels: unto a new
mention of the resurrection.

CHAP. XII.
A goodly sign appeared in the heaven. The faithful company is a Woman: their
abundance of grace of the gift of justice in Christ, and regeneration in
putting on Christ, is a garment of the sun: their contempt of all things under
the sun, is an having of the moon under her feet: their doctrine from the
twelve Apostles, is a crown of twelve stars. Their desire to teach Christ to
other souls, is a traveling of child. As the Sun is all bright, so is the
soul justified in Christ, bright as the sun, Cant. 6. though in it self it
is black, Cant. 1. and as the Moon, often not all lightened, but when it has
the Suns full light, it appears as the morning, as fair as any moon, Cant.
6. Our crown is the twelve Apostles doctrine: who were all of equal truth:
though S. Paul labored more then they all: and from Rome wrote enough to have
warned that city not to fight against Christ: and so much as might teach the
world that Peter was never near Rome: but kept where God scattered the twelve
tribes, as the 12. most labored to call the Jews, to teach the Gentiles. This
traveling of child teaches us what a care we should have to teach Christ:
and so, first to learn GODS book. God is our first Bishop: Ioh. 20. 29. in the
70. for El, the ebr. the Almighty.

Of men, the King should be best learned: as King Moses was: King Jesus, King
Samuel, King David, King Solomon, King Ezekias: the wealthier by wisdom, and
greater then many Kings, Daniel Belt, es-sar: that brake out a flame of sorrow
to the wicked Chaldean, who thought that Bell tas a far Bell held wealth. Kings
might soon be learned: who might learn the holy words of both testamentes in
two months, and the concent of scripture in an hour: and might command that
every sermon should either abridge the whole Bible, as S. Paul does to the
revoulting Ebrewes: or tell the afflictions of our Lords family, as Daniel does
seven times over: or weakness of Salomons Kings: or how Aharons twelve stones
tell the tribes story: or the golden chayn of Chronicle and Jubilees: or the
mysteries of Moses Ceremonies: or collations of prophecies with event: or like
revolutions to show Gods facility in teaching Christ: or some whole book: in
one sermon. So Kings without pain might pass all in learning.

And our Universities might be so ruled: but that the God of this world does
hinder, that our DD. should speak Ebrew and Greek better then English: and be
readier in the Bible then in any other book: or from their first preferment in
collegies, fast oftener then the Jesuits do for S. Laurence and all the
Saints in heaven, or live without college allowance. A Samuel would make a
Naioth. And an Archbishop worthy of his place, would make Daniel plain in one
hour, and the Apocalypse in an other. It is a wonderful sin to give men
honor without desert, and to be doltish scholars to unlearned teachers. We
travel, as Esaias speaks, but we bring forth only a wynd.

The God of this world being incarnate in the Romans, is busy in his
generation: Pharaoh, Esa 27. was not such a Dracon, nor the Persian God, Dan.
6. to whom only prayer must be: The Gods borne in Asia: as Aeschylus terms
them: The Dracon whom Babylon worship in the fable Apocryph. These were not
such Dragons as the Roman, Pompey, Crassus, Julius, Antonius, Brutus with
Cassius, Augustus with the whole Empire till it died: and the Empire revived by
Pope, these seven heads of the Devil teach us to know the Churches danger,
when their whole corporation makes a great Dracon, and their horns ten be not
as they in Daniel then Kings of ten men, but ten kingdoms. And the tail, the
Prophet that tells lies, Esa. 9. draws the third part of the stars to be
wandering stars, Iud. v. 13. and cast them into the earth, as Daniel 8.
Antiochus made Jews Pharisees and Sadducees.

When our tongues travel of Christ, the Devil would by Rome devour that: But he
is taken up into heaven, who will John follows the 70. most wisely hiding the
Eb. propriety from dull heathen.
bruise all nations with an iron rod: And the Church fled into the wilderness, as
Joseph and Mary with Christ into Egypt, and is nourished as Christ in his half
seven, Dan. 9. in his persecutions, days 1260.

Michael, who in the form of God, held it no robery to be equal with God:
Michael, who in Dan. 10. is the chief of the chief Princes the holy Angels, and
defends Judah against the enemies; Michael and his angels the marryrs
overcome Satan and the Caesar's, that the Church shuts the^ out of all account:
though Satan still accused them to the ten Persecuters.

So the Dragons tail is busy in the Popes: But the Church had as Israel, Exodus
19. two wings of an Egle to flee from Dracon Pharaoh into the wilderness: to be
again fed: after Christ's persecutions: a year, two years, and half a year:
from Pope serpent: that the Thebanes borne of this serpents teeth gnash: Where
was your Church before M. Luthers time, when the King of Locusts, A bad one,
Abaddon, a new Apollo, had from his keys of the pit brought a smoke, to darken
sun and air. And although the cloisters Idolatrous deserved as Israel in Amos
to be carried as with the river of Egypt: yet the Pope would so use the Church:
though heathen policy bridle him, yet Pope Dracon is fierce against remnants,
as in his Spanish Inquisitions.

CHAP. XIII.
Caesar's and Popes the Dracon and his tail are expressed past all denial who
are meant: The empire has arms from the four kindomes in Daniel. So God
forces us to be ready in Daniel, and to compare together the brase of the
Angelique men. Then Greek Leopard had four heads, that of 23. Captains al
made Kings, all came to four quickly, and every one dyed a violent death,
saving old Antipater, to have blood for blood, as the Romans here. The Bear
had but one head, the Lion one, and the fourth beast, the parted Macedonians
but one, that beast is not named, because it was the same nation with the
former, but is distinguished from the former by ten horns or Kings, five
Ptolemies and five Seleuci or Antiochi, that vexed Judah.

From these the Romans have their arms, beginning with a beast with ten
horns, with this difference: Ten Diademes betokening so many kingdoms. This
beast was colored like a Leopard, footed like a Bear: mouthed like a Lion. As
Nab. said, who can deliver you from my hand: and was a Lucifer, and would be
equal to God. So here it is said, who can war with the beast? Alexander
would be a God: So Divi Iulij and Divi Augusti, and so the Persians. And
Antiochus Epiphanes has a mouth speaking great things, so has this beast.
Now the sixth head being as dead, shows that the Empire should be dead and
revived: otherwise five heads were gone: and the seventh was not yet come. But
in a special sense one head seems as dead.

The time of Tyranny was 300. yet by Metonymia, meaning the argument of
persecution, from our Lords time, it is called three years and an half.
Antiochus Epiphanes raged against the temple properly three years and an
half: as Elias plagued Israel properly three years and an half. But the
matter shows Chapter XI. and twice in the XII. and here, that proper time cannot
be meant.

Again, I must advise the reader to learn Daniel before he learn this book.
Twenty years ago I made him plain enough, and plainer of late: though the
Dragon cast out of his mouth, a river of water. The whole Realm by this hour
might else have known Daniel clearly. The Tyranny and blasphemy of the
Caesar's and their destructions are known.

The Popes description.
A beast arising from the earth, that is, without war: having horns like a
Lamb, that is, Christ's Vicar: having the mouth of the Devil, for divelish
laws: restoring the Empire, and working Miracles of deceit: as though he were
Elias, a restorer of truth. The Jesuits report of their miracles, comment well
on this. And the Popes endeavor, (since great Constantine left hateful Rome) to
set it up, by revived Empire, and to destroy the East: this matter is famous in
continual stories. And Canon law tells that none may live under the Empire,
but by yielding unto the Popes laws in subscribing or oath, or some open token:
as a mark in the forehead. And where a number given to a man, as the sons of
Adonikam were 666. that being called the number of the beast, and to a sense of
wisdom, which is usual in notation, A God standing up, that is Adoni-kam:
this describes plainly the man that stands up in the temple of God, as if he
were God.

CHAP. XIIII.
The reviving of the Gospel, by worship of God only in Christ, as on mount
Sion of old: religion taught with as great concent of law and gospel, as any
harpes can make, by rare men of courage, patience, wisdom and high policy, by
virgin minds, unstained by Idolatry, renewed by Christ, and following him, is
taught, Chapter 14. as Chapter 7. and 11.

And the Pope is told of fall, and of eternal death to all of his bent: and
the Martyrs of present heavens joy, without purgatory. And Christ sitting on a
cloud at prayer of the Church, and an Angel coming out of the Church, bid by
an Angel Lord over fire and Gods heat, with sicles cut off Papists, that their
blood would reach to the horse bridles: over a Land as Canaan made to a square,
by the Thalmud, 1600. furlongs, 400. every way. The new Testament speaking to
Jews, is applied to their manner of speech, and plain to a Thalmudique, where
it is hardest to us.

The destruction which rebellion in Ireland wrought by the Pope in Desmonds
country, if all the blood of the dead were poured out, would a good way reach
to horse bridles: as that also of Ostend. And what would all that war, now 40.
years yield in blood of Papists: going withal to eternal destruction?
Happy are the soldiers, that dye with a good heart for the gospel, for they
rest from their labors.

CHAP. XV.
A new vision tells the gospels restoring, and the enemies punishment:
persecution borne sincerely, through fire and faggot, is a sea of glass mixed
with fire: and praise is against Romes Egypt and Dragon Pharaoh and Romes
Babylon; from Exodus 15. and Ier. 10.

And seven Angels, clothed with pure Justice, come out of the temple in
heaven. Angels represent what God by men will do upon earth: when sincere
hearted fight in his cause. These have golden girdles about their breasts, as
the Sacrificers were girded. Maymoni in the holy implements, sweateth to prove
from Jonathan upon Ezekiel, and Kabalah, that the Sacrificers were girded about
their breasts. John made no doubt of the matter: but as a Thalmudique taught
from God, tells resolutely the whole truth, Chap. 1. and here. Such poincts
showed would make Jews, all learned Jews, confess that God penned the New
Testament. All Christians be Kings and Sacrificers: and should consider that
they must wear crowns of gold, which no goldsmith but Christ makes: to rule
them selves in order: and to obey all in Gods law: and the girdle of truth to
bind their hearts in stedfastnes. Now where one of the four wightes gives the
Angels seven cups of Gods anger: the learned full of eyes teach the people
who are the temple to pray unto God for vengeance upon Christ's enemies: and
upon the peoples petition, the Angels have charge to serve them: as in Dan. 4
and Heb. 1. and men are fortifyed by them: as Darius Gabriel, Dan. 11. 1.

As the temple, Es. 6. was filled with a smoke of Christ his anger: and
Seraphim, the Angels which were instruments of fire did attend: so here the
smoke is in all the Church: that the enemies shall not perceive the truth till
they be consumed: having sinned against the holy Ghost: as the Jews, Esa. 6.
even by Rambam his grant, could not amend by ten chastisements: till the
temple was brent.

CHAP. XVI.
Under the seven trumpets, the earth, the sea, the fountaynes and rivers, the
sun, the King of Locustes, Euphrates, and earthquake, is celebrated. The seven
Angels in plagues keep that order.

The Popes earth or earthly hold of his possessions, is full of boyles: that
daily some loss he has: as he brought wars; to be hayle and fire mixed with
blood.

He became a mountain of fire cast into the sea, to make the third part of it
blood: so his nations be made all known dead in sin: and in seas of war fall
from him.

The star wormwood fell into the rivers and fountains of Scriptures, and
made them bitter. His rivers and fountains of forces are turned to drink blood.

He obscured the sun of justice: the sun of persecution parcheth his.

He got lands for Monasteries, that the Locusts might make him their King. But
now the throne of the beast is darkened by contempt and pillage of Land.

In the old time Virgil complained of Romes distress: that Hinc movet
Euphrates illinc Germania bellum: and at Euphrates, Chapter 9. Angels were tied,
but to be loosed by starts: now the river is dry, that Turks and Saracens come
even to Germany, and Germany also looks to freedom: that now the king of
Canaan, the servant of servantes, the false prophet sending from his mouth,
three (that is many) unclean spirits to cause kings to war, has no better
success, then Iabin by Sisera, at Mageddon: and here a fair warning is given
to watch, and integrity.

The air was darkened, and earthquake shook the city, that the tenth part of
the city fell, and Gods wrath ended all. So here a great earthquake, and hayle
greater then Iosuahs, falls upon the enemy, who can not repent, but holds
on to destruction.

Thus men, Gods messengers, shall give the Pope measure for measure, that he
can not repent: but blasphemy, not knowing how far Patmos passes Rome.

CHAP. XVII.
As Daniel at the last opens his Visions in proper speeches: so here, vision
and propriety come together: though some knots be knit: that the wise may
understand: and no wicked take the pains to search. One of the seven Angels
calls Rome an harlot, sitting upon many waters, that is, people and troops
and nations and tongues (as Daniel 3. speaks:) with which the Kings of the
earth committed spiritual fornication by accepting that filthy Idolatry, as
dronck with the wine of her Idolatry. This Angel does in vision that which a
Doctor would in reading.

And he carries John into a wilderness in vision: as men are best to judge when
the noise of city troubles not. Now he has another vision for the Empire
revived: a beast with heads and horns, as the former the old Empire: and
purple color, as more in persecution: and full of names of blasphemy, as
accepting the Popes Canons, and Mass, and Ceremonies: and a woman sits upon
this beast clothed in purple and scarlat, as drunk with the blood of the
Saints: and golden in Gold, as old Babylon, Esa. 14. and brave in pearls and
precious stones, as be the Popes in their Copes: and their Archbishops and
Cardinals, in cloth of Gold, and Aharons stones: mocking with God in apish
imitation: as they mock with the keys that God gave his Apostles: which Saint
Paul had as the best: if any could be better then other: and John specially:
author of Gospel, and Epistles, and Apocalypse: That Ruben might as well be
chief Patriark, as Peter chief Apostle. And this woman had in her hand a golden
cup, as old Babylon, full of her loathsome filthy fornication: though Rome set
soorth in gold and silver their crucifix and Virgin Marie and Saints: And in
the forehead, a mystery: Babylon the great: the mother of the fornications and
lothsomenes of the earth. Here we see plainnes: that none should think that
Babylon meant whence S. Peter wrote. Rome is Babylon in a mystery and trope:
S. Peter was to speak properly, as all men, when they tell whence they write.
But visions are in borrowed speeches. Now this is sure and plain, The woman is
the city which has kingdom over Kings of the earth.

Now of the beast his body this is told: that the beast, is, is not, and is. In
Caesar's it was in Rome: Dead by Constantinus house, and not being: and again
revived by the Popes.

The seven heads are seven hills whereupon Rome was built: famous for that:
and also seven Kings: whereof five ruled Judah, before our Lord came in the
flesh: Pompey, Crassus, Julius, Antony, Brutus with Cassius. John and all Jews
knew that well. Then comes the whole Empire the old, a sixth head, then
present: afterward the Empire to be revived, the seventh: and by the Pope, the
eight King: as he rules the Empire.

Now the ten horns, are Kingdoms, as they serve the revived beast not yet so
set up: but in the Popes time it shall be. Now these shall with one mind give
their power to the Pope, and persecute. But Christ and his Martyrs will
overcome: as in Chap. 7. and 10. and 11. and 12. and 14. and 15 and 16. And
when Martyrs teach the truth, countries will revolt from Rome, and make it
desolate: that the empire shall not be profane, nor favoring Rome: but as in
new Rome, before the Turk ruled.

CHAP. XVIII.
An Angel that lighteneth all the earth by his glory, proclaymeth that Rome is
fallen, known to be a dwelling of unclean spirits: in all places of the
policy: and the holy are commanded to come out of all that policy. Their
Canons and Prayers and apparel are al bent to a blind drift: and not fittest
to have been used in our tongue. The whole frame is out of order. The Lords
prayer is maimed: from their Latin, Mat. 6. leaving out a most noble sentence:
Their Creed is foolishly translated: that 20. several opinions are made of a
most clear phrase of 3000. years use: of going to God: their letany is
dangerous in phrase, praying to te Persons severally: and is applied unto their
doctrine of doubting of justification: and in Battologie is hateful to God:
and in trifling arguments, for saints days: and has lies, for the place of
Eves creation, and Archangels, and our Lords coming into the world at
midwinter. We should come out of all these follies: if our minds put on white
and clean linen: and we tie golden girdles about our breasts. Specially the
Divelish fable of Toby is intolerable, to be still kept. Bishops under Q. E.
gave leave in allowance of these things, to add in subscription this, (...)
things may be suffered.

Romes fall is told from Babels, Tyrus, and Ierusalems, Ierem. 51. Esa. 21. and
47. and Esa. 23. and Ezekiell 27. and Ier. 7. to show from stories past the
certainty of all this.

And these reasons are rendered: that the Roman policy killing men for the
Prophets, is guilty of their blood: as the Scribes for Abels, Math. 23. and
that the Kings, who should be Bishops next God, trafiqued with Pope for his
confirmation by the witchcraft of Papistry.

CHAP. XIX.
When people can sing Haleluja: that is, praise only God in whom we breath:
who drenched Pharoh, when Iah stopped his breath, Exo. 15. (there Iah is first
used:) when four times Aleluja is uttered from all sorts and continually: and
all the praise of Christ: and he is seen riding upon his white horse, and we
follow in white linen of justice: then Christ will make proclamation to all
kites, as in Ezekiel 39. concerning the Macedonians to devour the flesh of
Papists slain: and will cast the beast and false Prophet into a lake burning
with fire and brimstone.

CHAP. XX.
The time of the Popes absolut ripenes in Satan to deceive generally, shall
not be till a thousand years, when the smoke of his pit hides sun and air:
and his locusts have lions teeth, and iron brestplates, and wings of Chariots,
and war horses. Satan was tied among Papists and elder profane 1000. years:
that many reigned here with Christ for a thousand years: they of the first
resurrection, that is from sin in this world, upon them the second death
shall have no power: but they shall reign with Christ, and such will be for a
thousand years.

But after a thousand years the darkness of the pit will so extend it self:
that the old serpent shall trouble all the holy City, and besiege the
faithful every where: as though old Gog and Magog were alive, and the old
Jerusalem were a new to be defended. The Pope deceived all the Princes of West,
to send all their force for to recover Jerusalem, and Antioch: and 200. years
the greatest wars that ever were, were made there: That the old war of Gog
and Magog was nothing like this. And yet Christ had told that Jerusalem should
be desolate unto the worlds end, Mat. 24. as he caused Moses to tell, Deuteronomy. 28.
But the false Prophet to weaken Princes, who would be deceived, and not excel
in Gods word, as they most of all might do, he caused them to go for 200.
years from England; France, and all the West, men, women, and children, to
recover the cursed land.

And now God began new mercy: now first Rabbines made Grammers for Hebrew: and
Iarky the great D. commenteth upon the Bible at a thousand years: now 600.
ago: and Aben Ezra at 500. a very great Rabbin. Rabbi Sadaias was before him,
who turned Moses into Arabique, that Christians might follow the truth, and
not the 72. which hid their mind, for 1600. years change: as I have showed in
Conc. and Meschisedek. That hiding not spied has deceived all Arabia,
Abyssions, Graecia, Moscovia, England, unto 1603. to breach of all Moses
authority. Rabbi Sadaias did enough to have helped this. Another Rabbin put
forth a Greek translation in Ebrew letters. Ramban, who at the last became a
Christian, he wrote finely four hundredth years ago. Aruc a Dictionarie for
the Thalmud is 600, years old. Isaak Ben Arama, and Bechaiah, both overthrow
their own side, and help us to tie Satan again: and so does David Kimchi,
teach us from much Thalmudique, that the title of the 22 Psalm is the morning
star: a matter worth much gold, for Apoc. 2. and 22. Briefly from after 1000.
years God pitying us, stirred Jews to teach us Christ by their best
co^menting, though them selves could not see him. Al be godles that wish not
all help to turn them: and how has Satan bound them that labor to hinder
all the good of their commenting for Christians special use and hope for them.

Satan raged loose 500. years. But now we look for his fall: not fearing any
deceit with strength. Therefore the vision passes unto the resurrection.

CHAP. XXI.
Because the Church should be long in the wilderness, and seem black to men,
God shows the heavenly Jerusalem, how goodly it is, from Esaias 25. and 54. and
from sixty to the end: and Aggei 2. Exodus 28. Ezekiel 47. and all the
Prophets: and how great it is, 144000. furlongs square. As a thousand miles
high building: and so long and broad: that if all the elect since Adam, came as
beasts into Noah's Ark: a city of this largenes would but hold them. Here
Papists should see antiquity and universality.

CHAP. XXII.
The laws are golden, and streams of life in Christ, the morning star. But
this I have in Concent of Script. handled at large, and elsewhere. The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ open our eyes to see, that to morrow we shall die: that
to day we may hear his voice. Coloniae. Iu. 1610. (...)

Gentle Reader, where you see this title THE ARGVMENTS, printed above almost of
every page, there read, OF THE REVELATION. And where you see, OF THE
REVELATION, there read, THE ARGVMENTS.

Good Reader understand, that this larger Scholion following, in order of time,
was written before these Arguments: as thou may perceive in the reading.

AN EXPLICATION, OR REVELATION, OF THE HOLY APOCALYPSE.
AFTER that the Romans had killed Christ, and persequuted his servants,
stirred up by faithles Jews, whose rebellion overthrew their City and state:
Domitian raising a cruel persecution, and banishing John into Patmos, Our Lord
and Savior reueleth the state of the heavenly JERUSALEM: 2 Thessalonians. 2.
how it shall be afflicted by the Profane Caesares, till they be taken away:
and, when power of state returns to Rome, a policy all wicked should be set
up: to deceive if it were possible the very elect: so mighty shall it be to
deceive, because men would not receive the love of the truth. The style of the
book, is taken all from the old Testament, to be plain for learned
Christians: and dark to wicked that they should not see Gods counsels. In my
book of Scripture Concent, I opened the tropes: and in my Advertisement, I
applied the XII. precious stones to their tribes: whereof Jews called unto
Christ, in all Countries, taught us heathen the way of life. Now, my bent, is
to tell properly the sum of the book. And first, generally, who be the
persequutores. Here, as often as we read, that Christ was killed, as Chap. 1.
and 2. and 5. we must sagely consider, Pilate, and the Roman policy, where
Christ was crucified: That Rome, must be the state here damned: first for
Tyranny, when their Civil laws were good; that S. Paul by Lysias the humane
Chiliarch; and by Festus the Proconsul; and Julius the noble Captain, found
Neroes auctority long a defense. But, afterward, a state all sinful, should
come to Rome: and deceive and vex the Church unto the end. That Domitian, Chap.
1. Chap. 2. and 3.
banished John, Eusebius writes it. That Satan's throne by Rome tried in the
Churches, who would in Christ overcome; the seven Epistles teach. And where
God sits upon a throne of judgment to build his Temple by S. Paul of
Benjamin his Jasper: (in Benjamin the old Temple was buit) and to defend his
folk, like the ruddy Sardius of Reuben, Isai. 54. 9.
set a frontier against the Hagarenes; to teach by the rainebow of his
covenant, the sum of Leuies Smaragd, and Law. This description, Chap. 4.
is for terrible might against Rome, and their Idolatry. Chap. 5.
So the La^be as killed, to whom all creatures (whom Rome made Gods) promise
service for his Christians; He being the Lion of Judah, by that name, tells of
wars, greater then David made: From Psalm. 18. and 45. and 110. and Isai. 31.
That the Romans now, 2. Pet. 1.
be the enemies: they who pierced the hands, and the feet, of the morning
star: Ps 22. by Kimchies exposition, from all the Thalmud: and Apoc. 2. and
22. So the Prophecy there, for Creatures, to refuse worship, is bent against
Rome, which still would worship Creatures. None told so distinctly Romes case:
as now it is handled. Balaam, in Nu. 24. but generally: So S. Mat. 24. S. Paul
a little more at large, for the present possessor, Caesar: till he were gone:
and then for new Antiochi, from Daniel 11. to bring al to heathen folly. But
none told, that Christ would plague the Caesares infinitely more, the^ ever
governors were plagued: and that a King of Locusts, idle bellies devouring the
fruits of the earth, should come to revive the empire. These things were
sealed, for the LAMB himself to open: how he would use Hypocrites, Pilates,
Murderers; and yet washers of hands, as innocents in depth of mischief:
murderers of the king of glory: Chap. 6.
and yet confessors that Jesus of Nazaret, is King of the Jews. The revenge is
fitted to this cruelty and Hypocrisy: against Diuos Caesares, and a new Empire
of ho^inesse in title; and of boldness, to make Diuos, and Diuas. Christ by
his holy martyrs, shows white, might and speed: they are a white horse, he
gave them crowns, as he wan a crown; Psalm. 21. a crown through thorns, Psalm.
21.
and thorny in this world; but golden for the soul, in the world of souls.
And he has a Bow, Psalm. 45.
(with arrows sharp, in the heart of the kings enemies:) to make people fall
under him. That is one sealed common place. 1. Seal.
The revenge of the Diui Caesares is three fold: in speedy might, 2. Seal.
a red horse, and his rider has a great sword, and auctority to take away
peace, that men should kill one another. The Roman stories tell how miserable
the Emperors were, and often in hazard to overthrow the Empire, even at the
first persecutions. 3. Seal.
A step further, comes in the black horse, on who^ the rider bare a balance
in his hand, to sell corn as dear as spice: showing what famine should come:
greater then was in Claudius days. Aurelius Victor shows of 30. chosen
Emperors, at once: by their soldiers: who killed one another till all came to
one: and so in wars famine must be as Virgil says: Quippe vbi fas versum
atque nefas: tot bella per orbem.
Tam multae scelerum facies; non vllus aratro.
Dignus honos squalent abductis arua colonis.
Et curuae rigidum falces conflantur in ensem.
For where right's ouerturned, and wrong takes place
So many wars through the world, so many a face
Of wickedness (appears:) no due regard
Is then vouchsafed the plough: the fields are marred,
The Husbandmen dragged thence: now forged are
The crooked sithes, into stiff swords for war.


A vehementer degree of misery, follows in the fourth common place, 4. Seal.
or Seal: where the speedy and deadly vengeance of God, is a pale horse,
death sitting upon him: and the gulf of the grave, following of him, and he
had power to kill the fourth part of the earth, with sword, famine and
pestilence, and with the beasts of the earth: That, was the punishment of
Ieruschalami, under Tzedekiah, when the whole state perished. The cause of all
this vengeance is expounded in the fifth seal. 5. Seal. In Aboth R. Nathan.
The holy martyrs souls lay under the Altar Christ our Altar, calling for
vengeance. The Rabbis universal sway, places holy souls going hence,
immediately as Moses soul, under Gods throne: This speech under the Altar, is
in matter the same, but distinctly shows that by Christ our Altar, and
sacrificing of our selves, we have place of rest in Paradise. Purgatory, was
unknown to Jews and Grecians: that, was kept for the starr, that should turn
the waters of Scripture into wormwood.

This calling for vengeance against the beasts of the earth, Diuos Caesares;
has an answer, that they must be content a while, till moo martyrs blood
becomes the seed of the Church; till the greater part of the commune weal be
true Christians: an Emperor favorable, should be too much troubled with
Heretics; as Arrians proved that true. Under Martyrdom, the zeal was an
white horse: and the Church was holy and clear: and heretics, holden
heretics. But yet, now the martyrs prayer comes in short time to pass:
that the Emperors, and their great, and all idol policy, is shaken: their
suns, their moons, their stars, all their heaven, as of old, Isai 34. come
to nothing; That under the Gospel by Constantine, comes a new world; of al
Creatures joy, that they shall serve Christ: That stars, be no more Gods: Nor
Caesares, come of Venus, nor Air, be Juno, nor Aeolus, God of wind, nor
Neptune of Sea, nor Apollo of grass, nor Pan, of sheep, etc. But God shall be
One, in holy Trinity and Unity. This went current 300. years. But, that,
Satan blinded even the learned; not to see the Eternal son, Eternal God,
Creator of all things, to bein Adams seed, by David, Nathan, Zorobabel, Ely,
Mary, Redeemer of the world, Iscariotae in quietness, would be kicking against
our Great GOD, and Savior, CHRIST himself; therefore at the last he casts of
the outward power of the Church; and returns all to the badnesse of old Rome.
So the Israelites in Egypt were sealed. Exodus 12. 7. 13. 22. 13.
And shows that the true Church, shall be hid in Gods sealed; as in
Tzedekiahs days, Ezeck. 4. that the winds which in Cant. 4. 16. blew north
and south, upon the spices of the garden, should be stayed in all quarters,
that the church should be hid; in Gods sealed: in all quarters; but in men not
of sway in commonweals: obscure in the world: known to God, and brethren,
holy and few. This commune place reaching to the end of Popes glory, is
handled before the fall of the Church, yet in time it comes when the Pope is
full King of his Locusts: after Satan had been bound after a sort for general
deceit 1000. years. The commune place shall be handled in a several title.

The fall of the Church to be hid; is handled in Chapter VII.
Four messingers of Gods justice; Empires wicked, stay the spirits of grace,
from blowing upon men; to be trees which the hand of God planted. In the East,
Machmad; in North, Tartaria, in South, Abyssines revolted in the West, Italy
stays. The Jews of old, were scattered by the Macedonians, and Assyrians,
South, East, North; and planted there the Gospel; that the reuolters upon open
strength for the belly, should be cast off for ever, as the builders of Babel.
Daniels Image ruled in these parts; and felt the power of CHRIST; the Stone
that brake the image to dust: and seeing they would (to shake of West
government,) shake of the Gospel also; those Arabique contreies are shaken of
for ever, from open clear sway. But the West that last heard of GOD, shall
have under combat, fight by scripture, and in all quarters Jews and Gentiles
known to God, a company innumerable, shall be witness to the truth; martyrs in
hearts sadness, as if they had shead their blood: Why Dan, is omitted, is
showed in Scripture Concent: Thence, they that despise not the work, will fetch
a resolution.

How in the West, the Church falls.
Six seals, showed the Romans violence, against CHRIST and his servants;
plagued with wars, death, and pestilence, and overthrow of Empire. 7. Seal.
The seventh shows a sinful state in all Satan's might deceiving the West,
whereof 7. trumpets give warning, which the sealed before will take; others will
not.

CHAP. VIII.
AS Daniel Chap. 4. was amazed a while that Nebuchadnezar a star, should be
7. years a beast: so the Church, the Heaven on Earth, is amazed, as half an
hour: to what pass, badnesse of scholars in unlearned ambition, will come:
and 7. trumpeters standing before God, will sound that unto the world: that the
world shall have a warning, long before the matters come in practice.

The sum of the Gospel: contempt of which, causes God to cast off the open
Church.
CHRIST, Mat. 1. 11.
a sacrificer for ever, the Angel of the covenant, makes his humanity, the
golden Altar, upon which he lays the incense of our prayers, Psalm. 141. 2
received in a golden censor of his pure mercy, and they come before the Father
for the 144. thousand Jews, and innumerable heathen: whereof the trumpeters
for 7. commune places: compaines of holy Doctores be the principal. Now,
because Rome would teach with forcefull deceit, Romans 5.
not to receive the abundance of the grace, of the gift of justice of Christ,
that by faith we should be justified, to have peace with God, Ephesians. 2.
to reign with his Son: but must seek help from our selves, who be
children of wrath: Christ turns his mediation, Psalm. 22.
into wrath against the seed of the serpent; whose City pierced his hands, and
feet; and by their occasion made others fall. As the love of God in Christ,
Ephesians. 3.
for breadth, length, depth, and height, passes all knowledge; so the contempt
of the tree of life; and of the man a little inferior to Angels, Hebr. 2.
in death; but after ascension, crowned with glory: as to the rebellious Angels
disdayning man's glory it gave eternal woe, it gives to men that follow that
company called Satan, Exodus 20.
the old serpent. The anger of Christ is hear, voices, thunderings,
lightnings, earthquake in states; as at the Law-giuing; Because Christ the end
of the Law is contemned. This could never have fallen out, if the Ebrew Bible,
with the Massoreth orthographie dictionarie, for accents and vowels, had been
usual in churches over the earth; and the N. T. the marrow of all Greek, and
suns bringhtnesse to the old, had been schools study also in all nations.

But slothful contempt, to make translations from translations; bred
vncertainti; and it disdain; it blindness; it contempt of Christ; it
reiection. Machmad soon turned away all the East; whereof old, GOD was known;
and God has for that, cast them of for ever. The Grecians were so proud of
Greek bravery; that of Origens Octaplun: of Ebrew, in Ebrew letter, in Greek
letter, in the 70. in Aquilas, Symmachus, Theodotion, and other two uncertain
translations; they little cared for the Ebrew, but from Greek uncertain, they
marred their commenting, and gave Arrius great advantage. And, when Arabians,
Aethiopians, and Muscouites translated the 70. not the Ebrew: the difference of
1500. (and more) years excess, above truth by the 70. in Genes. 5. and 11.
caused Greece and the other, and much of Romish soyles, to blaspheme the Ebrew,
as corrupt: so disdayning bitter roots, they missed to gather fruit of
nourishment. This bred the thundering anger of the Eternal Word; which was
with God aey; and made all things: and gave words Ebrew and Greek, each as
pearl and shyning Jewels: Hence unlearned scholars, turn all to Ambition and
Heresy: politicians, to profaneness.

Of the VII. Trumpets.
As one trumpeter tells of a kings power in milliones, so here 7. represent
7000. as might fall out: still learned men gave warning: but when the root of
Iessai was contemned, the waters of grace, were not sent into unclean hearts.

The first Trumpet.
Buishopps, strove for superiority; Monachi, fall to idleness, and extolling
of Saints: Princes give wealth that way: painful scholars be hated and
persequuted: their voices make alowd trompet: Athanasius, Chrysostom, Basil,
Nazianzene, sound out matter against herefies, and forged Monastiques, and
contempt of scripture: and how the possessor of the West Empire should be taken
away: and a policy all sinful, should be erected in Rome. Andreas Caesariensis
does more plainly show that: being at the rising of it: about the 600. years,
of Redemption. Patriarchs affected supremacy; but the city that crucified
Christ; and now plagued Christians, was to afflict in the end, and to be a
trapp, for all coasts to fall. The contempt of learned warnings, and Romes
supremacy, made east, south, and north, fear least old tyranny from Rome
should be revived. So Machmad turned much of the world to fall away; that hail
of state, as in Esai, and fire, and blood, of wars come to the world: And most
of all Popes supremacy challenging Empire, raineth hail, fire, and blood to
this day: that men grounded as trees for the third part: and all the weak as
grass fell into Gods anger. So this is a commune place of the Popes supremacy.
The next trumpet sou^deth that poinct more fully: The scholars that inueighed
against Phocas the murderer, for erecting Boniface 3. supreme Papes or Father.

Of the names, Papas and Pope.
The name Papas, in the Greek fathers epistles, is from one to another, this
much: Right Reverend father. But when one would have all to himself; not by
learning in Ebrew or Greek for Gods word; but for strong hand in supremacy:
then the name rested in him, but turned into Pope; which in Homer, Iliad. 3.
as Eustachius well notes, is Damon, a Devil. The Providence of God, in men's
tongues for names, fitted unto matter, is to be regarded much: That Pope, and
Demon is all one.

Add unto this, that the Pope is called holiness: Mark for this, S. Paul; THE
SINFVL MAN; THE WHOLE ENEMY: HE THAT EXALTS HIMSELF ABOVE ALL, THAT IS
CALLED GOD; OR WORSHIPPED: A NEW ANTIOCHVS EPIMANES: SETTING FORTH HIMSELF IN
THE TEMPLE OF GOD, AS IF HE WERE GOD. THIS, AND POPE OR DEMON, GONCVRRE. The
second Angel, or Company of Scholars, shows how he comes up, for the
Emperor.

The second blast expounding the first.
A Mountain, an huge one burning with fire, is cast into the sea. Mountain
signifies an Empire; as Babylon is a mountain destroying: Burning with fire,
is, causing hoate wars; as in taking the Empires land, to become a Mountain:
and casting himself into the sea of kingdoms, to be to this day, a firebrand
of all our wars: The sea is politic states, for this sea of our troublesome
life; as Tully translateth Euripides: Si mihi nunc primum tristis illuxisset
dies, Nec tam arumnoso nauigassem salo: esset dolendi caussa, etc. That is, If
a heavy day had now first shined unto me, neither had sailed before so
troublesome seas, there would be just cause of sorrow, etc. So sea is, Dan. 7.
and Apo. 12. where Empires arise: so the men of the seas policy, called fish;
such as seemed alive Chap. 3. Forsook the waters, Esa. 55. and Eze. 48. which
give life to all where they come, turned here to haerefie, be turned to death:
and traffic of civil policy is turned to corruption.

The third blast, expounding the second.
The third explication of the learned great, tells that the Chap. 1. the 7.
stars be seven sergeants of the Church.
messinger of the holy Synagogue, or heaven, for the kingdom of heaven, shall
fall from his calling to be as Babilons king, Isai 14. A star setting Nemrod
his house on fire, will soon corrupt the third part of the Bible, called
waters, Isa. 55. and Ioh. 3. and 1. Ioh. 3. and infinitely in Rabbis, He
shall turn Justice of faith into Idolatry, as Ephraim in Amos. That many men
died the second death (called fish before) by Idols worship. So the Pope turning
the holy doctrine into idolous waters, is called wormwood.

Articles of the Popes corruption of Scriptures.
First, He holds not the Hebrew and Greek holy text in use: God own holy
words: penned by the Eternal Spirit: speaking all of life by the SON: in
daily esteem: for all in leisure of study to know: and which all of leisure
to study should know. But in steed of it brought in a Latin work; of which
tongue none is bound to have regard: and brought unto schools, Latin for
Greek and Ebrew.

II. The Apocrypha books were all made by Men of Judah: And speak not a
syllable of CHRIST: yet help Josephus for all Israel, against Appiones,
Instim, Diodorus Siculus, and Cornelius Tacitus in madd Antiochus: and so far
have their use. The fable of Tobi is made to busy heathen for Assurs
captivity: which heathen never mention: nor Iudahs deportation to Babel, or
return: For it Barucs forged Epistles; Susannaes allegory, for the whole
state, King Ioakims wife polluted by the Babilonian Judges; but revenged by
Daniel, is wittily fabled. The envious heathen, never mention the fire
quenched by Daniels most noble Cousins: Therefore a Rhetorical song, was
formed to show what in the fire, their cause might speak, to Idol-seruers.

But Daniel records nothing spoken: who knew all: and would omit nothing of
glory. So no heathen tell as Ieremi of Babell Bells servants, who thought Bell
gave them kindoms, that GOD by Cyrus would take out of Bells throat, all the
kingdoms which he had devoured: therefore the fable of Bell mocked heathens
blindness. No heathen tell of Daniel cast into the Lions den for not
worshipping the Persian Emperor, or Dragon: as Pharaoh is, Isa. 27. and moving
the K. to renounce that: the fable of the Dragon worshipped in Babel, and
destroyed, tells of their envy and folly. And upon Darius speech to Daniel,
that GOD in whom he believed, would save him: and Daniel said he was saved,
because justice to GOD and the K. were found in him: Abbakuks saying; the just
man shall live by faith: is enlarged by a fable: that Abakuk brought Daniel
pottage from Judea. The heathen knew not Gods counsel; that God by Jews would
teach in Babels fall, how he hated the pomp of this world; and has another
world for souls Rest, where wicked shall be plagued for ever, and tells that
true happiness stands in the knowledge of Christ: who gave Cyrus all Croesus
gold, to send Jews home from all quarters: to preach of their Eternal hope:
and to confute Greek sages. The 3. of Esdras, is much true, much in fable, to
smooch this in a greek style, familiar for heathen: and such fables be the
additions to Hester. The fourth of Esdras, was made to keep Esdras, (another
Moses) from contempt amongst heathen: who would think him base, that handles
but Jews genealogies, and the Temples building, without telling the reason:
and diuorcements: therefore they feign for him deep speculations: as the
greeks Clem. Strom. 1. feign all the Law was lost: and Esdras by revelation
restored all. The Persians for religion, were a new Nebuchadnezar, their
warriers, one Holophernes; Herodotus names one so. The Jews states, Judith.
Gods justice against Elam, Iudiths sword. And thus, heathen that would mock
truth, are mocked by fables.

Wicked Diodorus Sicul. and Tacitus, commend mad Antiochus, for his endeavor
to overthrow the Jews religion. Two works of several Jews, the later very
foolish and unlearned; yet good enough for profane heathen: were received to
stop such mouths. The whole nation is of wicked Tully termed barbarous, and
superstitious, to stop such a mouth; eloquent Syracides passing him in
sentences, and showing all the Laws glory; and eloquent Philo imitating
Salomons wisdom; for man's good end, were received: to check heathen; though
one knew not Christ. Of these the fable of Toby, is by the Pope made Gods word.
The Thal. Ieru. in Ros Hasana for Michael and Gabriel, make it a late fable and
wicked. For Manasses, carried to Babel by the King of Assure, some tryfling
declamer would show what one in his case might speak: as does Homer for
Agamemnon, Achilles, Calchas, Nestor and such: but it were a ridiculous
babishnes, to hold that trifling work better then Tobies fable; A plain fable
throughout, and no fitter to be read in sadness in the Church, then Lucians
dialogues. The Popes joining of these to the Bible, is wormwood.

III. Wormwood holds not these 3. principles true: which all should. 1. The
text of the old Testam. is kept in letter most sure, by the orthographie
dictionarie, or Massoreth: that no letter was more nor less, nor of other*
orme in Moses time, with vowels, and accents, and margin reading expounding
the text; then we have it at this day. 2. That the Rabbis expound all in
grammar sense, well for our use. 3. That all good for religion, and life is in
Moses; as the Prophets and Apostles draw him forth at large. IIII. The Pope in
Bellarmine and others, peruerteth or contemns every whit of the Bible. V. He
makes a whole policy, wicked: against all points of faith; and civil laws:
and would be as a God in the Church so set forth, 2. These. 2. Thus he is
wormwood it self. How he grows up to be a great mountain, to be able to
vex the world: that follows in the next Trumpet, and keys of the deep.

The fourth expounding the third.
The fourth Angel sounded, and the third part of the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
were stricken, for their third part; and day and night, Genesis 37. Jacob
expounds Sun, Moon, and Stars, for his Church: so it is here, day and
night are ruled by the stars; and mean the times more or less prosperous:
scholars and learned, falling away, corrupted scriptures, make an
ecclesiastical mountain; from a burning lamp, falling from God.

The occasions of the Churches fall from heaven.
The two Testaments, show that CHRIST is the Angel of the Covenant, standing
by his humanity, at the Altar of incense; and in his golden Mediation
receiving the prayers of the holy, that with his incense, they come before God:
so he sits a sacrificer for ever; figured in Sem described as God, without
father, without mother, without beginning of days, without end of life:
witnessed in Moses description, that he lives for ever; a King of Justice, and
a King of peace, so S. Paul to Scribes after their own manner, yet extant in
Zohar and Menachem and others describes his Vicar Sem, the great: as Rabbis
term him, to have figured the Redeemer to the world now, of Noah's house: The
SON thus known in our Son.

How the old Testament: came turned into wormwood.
Of the age before the flood, God said: I repent me, that I made man; therefore
water, took their bodies; prison aeternall, their spirits. The tower-masons
making Gods of stars, in contempt of SEM, the high sacrificer; and prating
daily against his faith, were cut off from Sems tongue, to let it alone; and
in Babels captivity ended it from commune use: and soon after Daniels age,
from speech of all, but schole learned; But Moses, by Sabbath reading was some
what known to the people. Besides God made Sems tongue so hard, that a man's
whole life will hardly catch it: and left no authors of it, but Sems prophets;
to make us search how rare words in them, open themselves, (and they used but
once) by the argument.

So Sems tongue is an hid pearl, of it Job cost me more pains alone, then all
Greeks, who now comes to open judgment. Churches had no Hebrew Rabbis for
gra^mer of yer. near 1000. nor gra^mars, or dictionaries; Origin did put forth
Ebrew, in Ebrew letters; and spelled in Greek, much cited in Epiphanius; with
six Greek translations. The 70. hid their mind much, specially in 3600. years
alteration of lives from Moses truth, as thus; Adam lived 230. years and
begat Seth. And afterward 700. for 130. in Moses, and 800. our notes say,
Moses omitted 100. y. before Seths birth; they may as well say he gave 100. too
many afterward: and so in 3600. years. Yet though Arabique were near Hebrew;
and Ethiopian: they translate the 70. And not the Ebrew: and Greeks with
Muscouia follow them. But if Princes had allowed in every land, so big as
Canaan, 42. great Cities, for Hebricians only; they had been Ezdrae, for
readiness in the Law: and had been Atlantes, to bear up heaven.

God saw that his justice could chose but few; and of eternity did set many to
anger, and therefore gave not Princes that judgment, nor to scholars, one of a
thousand millions, a mind to such hard pains, but to be such monachos, as
Nazianzenus taunteth, given all to feed them selves, and to envy all pains:
and Athanasius, Gregory, and his dear brother Basil, felt for the holy
Trinity. And West Monachos rested in Jerome for text, and in S. Augustine for
explication.

Of the New Testament.
The New Testament penned in Greek, by the H. Spirit, is to be esteemed in
Greek better then all the world can ever conceive.

Part I hope to utter: but conceive more. The preparation to bring Greek over
the world, must here be known. To Iapheths Iauan, God left it: and spread his
race from Cilicia over the West: that Bardi Caesar. Co^. in France, and our
Cambria kept Greek Philosophi. And when God meant in open action, to end by
Babel, Sems tongue; which he kept in Canaan 500. years that Babilons confusion
hurt not the Kings house: but the Chananean dialects twelve, came near his:
when God would end this tongue, in holy Daniels age when he had showed the
strict year and Pascha day, of Christ his Pascha, who being the first from the
dead, would show light unto the world. And Aggei, Zachary, and Esdras Malachi,
had commented upon holy Gabriels oration, when God would have no more Divinity
written, all being spoken that could be told: he shows a miraculous
providence to fi^t the Greek tongue to the Gospel, by Athenes and all Grecia,
Pisistratus, of holy Iosiahs time, brought noble Homers wit into more
reverence, then Monks the holy Gospel: that children should learn him every
whit without book, and parted him twice in Iliade and Odissea: into Alpha,
Beta, etc. (As the unknown God dealt, Psalm. 25. 34. 37. 111. 112. 119. 8
times: 145. and Pro. 31. Lamen. 6. times.) And Aristarchus made a comme^tarie
upon his hard words: so that S. Peter by Gods revelation uses his noble
phrase; and him, not Eustathius I cited, though Bil. and Bar. would win
spurs, to prick their own sides. Didimus elder then S. Peter kept
Aristarchus remnants, and from Didimos, not from Eustathius, I brought
Aristarchus and Homer, whom I am sure S. Peter never read, but the holy Ghost
read him, and led Peter. This honor to Homer, set on Solon to write sentences;
and Theognes, and Phocillides, and Minermus: that civil grounds were made
pleasant in brave Greek: to make all eloquent in speech; Then arise tragiques,
Aeschylus and an Heroique, equal to Homer, or old Corinnos of Troyes age: and
P Alamedes scholar, who in other wars, gave Homer his timber. Euripides, the
painter of man's lot, and Lyriques rare, and Commediques, as witty Aristophanes:
Physicians: Historiques, from Hesters age; Hellanicus and Herodotus, and Plato,
and Aristotle, and tenn Oratores, and Theopompus, and innumerable of all
sorts: while Judah was in Babylon, and under Persian, taught, ( Dan. 10.) that
soon they should be under Grecia, till Christ came in some part: and
therefore they taught their children Greek: that the 70. flaunted in store:
setting 80. several Greek sometime to one Hebrew tree; as to Shub. 70. 60. 50.
40. 30. 20. 10. and so to very many. Now Macedonians of Selleucus Nicatores
people being in 72. Kingdoms: East and North, were forced to know Greek: and
by the Ptolomies, South learned Greek; and the Jews scattred by them, brought
the 70. over all: and mention of Moses. So before our Lords redemption time,
all nations (as Tully, for Archi says) knew Greek, when Latin was kept in a
narrow compass. And thus a fundation was laid for elegant timber to the N.
Testament. The Jews note in Ierusalemi Megila, that Noah prophesied how Sems
house should bring Iapheth to faith in the tongue of Iauan, the Greek. And
Midras Rabba cites the same; and in Megilah theysay: that no tongue but
Greek, can give Hebrew fit terms. Christians should urge their own
testimony, that as a Tribe failed not from Judah till Messiah came, so all
nations then spoke Greek; Genes. 49.
but not many ages after that. And as Abben Ezra confesses upon Dan. 9. that
the 70. seauens are 490. years, from Daniels prayer, to sealing of Messiah, the
holy, of holy; wherein not one of a hundredth thousand millions, speaks so
truly for our victory, as the sharpest enemy does. So Ierusalemi should have
confessed, that the fishers of Gallile were to write in Greek from Jerusalem,
after 490. years. And before it should be destroyed, as we see Actor. 15.

Of the New Testaments elegancie.
The N. Testam. in Greek is so little that by one hour, in the morning and
evening; in one week; one may with ease, and great delight, read it over. Yet
this book has more several words by the fishers of Galile, and the
Physician of Antioch, and the tent-maker borne in Tarsus, to be the first
Apostle at Rome, then 100. great Greek books: above 4600. that all old Greeks
have some building in it: and all extant now, but for fragments kept, cannot
serve it. More, in men's names it learnedly opens Ebrew, to rare use: as Bosor
for (...) 2. Pet. 2. by Babels pronouncing, not Italy: that any maid of
Chaldea, might see by the speech, whence the Galilean wrote. So Talmud names
come, as Lazar, for Eleazar; whose nation is fit for any one that makes God
his strength: to feast in Abraham's Bosom, when the soul departs hence.
Moreover the Macedonians spoke Greek words, in east and south hardly found;
as, (...), and such: such from Thalmudiques of Babell, the N. T. had: and east
terms, for politic matters, from Seleucidae; as, Angareum, to postseruice.
It has above 50. of Syriaque, for rare use: And to show in what age, eue^
under the Romans empire beginning, and Greeks end, Jews have Greek names,
and some Latin: as Philip and Andrew and Marc Iustus, and such. This checketh
the Talmud, which from the depth of Satan persuadeth his sons, that Jesus our
Lord his days were long before, in the Maccabees government.

Four Dialests the Book has: Attique or commune Greek for matters known to
heathen: Act. 17. 18 Attique Greek.
as, Spermologos, to Paul at Athenes: the deadliest that Demosthenes there
above 300 years before bestowed upon Aeschynes. So from Diphilus, and Philemon,
and Sophocles, some for special use: and from Epimenides Aratus and Menander,
known testimonies: briefly from al eloquent some: as (...), and (...) (...)
for any passage, and Haides, to contain heaven and Hell Luc. 16. and 4. and in
Act. 10. times. Luke praeuented 15. foolish brawles by Greek: But men care not
kicking against the spur, Act. 9. and is often in Aeschylus and Euripides;
and names of manners from all: so that one cunning in the N. Testa. and Greeks
should from the one, still run to the other, in memory: and see better use
of both. And though one had so many eyes as Argus in Aeschylus 10000. all would
here be well occupied. Another Dialect is from the 70. when the speech is most
to Jews, The septua: greek.
as Iechonias begat Salathiel, so Zedekiahs the uncle 3. yer. elder, is son,
and Ioachaz first king, younger 2. years, Ioackim is eldest. So Vzziah is son
to Ioram his fathers great grandfather: So our Lord is son to Joseph (as men
thought) to Ely 'etc. to Adam, to God, as son of David. For some of these the
heathen have the like: so Julian calls Romulus his Ancestor, as S. Ma^h.
speaks of Iechonias and Salathiel: so for the word, until, for a matter
never done, Math. 1. and 5. and Homers Ili 5. in Agamemnon to Chryses: that he
should not have his daughter until she spent her age with him in Argos. So a
judge gives sentence for one that owes 10000. talents; and has not a penny to
pay, nor can get in prison, that he shall be in prison, till he pay the
uttermost farthing. The prisoner will not plead that in time he must come out.
Stars be darkened by ignorance of Greek, to put going to Hell for going to
Paradise, a breeding of Purgatory, which Grecia of 1200. years never held.
The 70. Greek is notable in this: whom God raised up, disannulling the
sorrows or hurtes of death. Act. 2. from Psalm. 18. he that would say Peter
spoke of the second death, or of hell Torment, deserves small thanks.
Briefly, many a thousand of words, have the Apostles from the 70. calling us
to remembrance of so many places in the old Testament: of them I have made an
Ebrew Greek dictionarie, and my friends have it in London, and they who will
give security for the copy, may write it out. The old Ierom, Erasmus, and Beza
missed much of lights, by not expounding 70. Greeks from their Ebrew, that
sun and air were much darkened. The Apostles Greek.
The 3. dialect is the Apostles own: often do they express Ebrew in a new
manner; and S. Paul the Orator of Tarsus, borne to be first Papas or father in
Praetorio at Rome; brought up at Gamaliels feet, to show in the Epist. to the
Heb. the best Thalmudique that ever the sun saw; the Ebrew of Ebrewes,
fathers side and mothers side: and rediest in genealogies, true and profitable
for his sisters son, and other cousins three, Romans 15. This Iaspar of
Benjamin the first foundation of the heavenly City shall be cited for clearing
Moses, Deuteronomy. 30. and the holy Gospel: by expressing Ebrew in new Greek; What
to go up to heaven, to bring Christ down, means; What to go down to the
deep, to bring Christ from the dead, means. Moses of Leui graven in the
Smaragd, and in his Law a sun; ( In solio Phoebus claris lucentis Smaragdis)
forbids Israel, to leave study of the Law, as though it were high, or far
fetched in speech: and thus tells what Smaragd-light it has, Deu. 30. 11.
This commandment which I command thee this day, is not a wonder for thee:
neither is it far off: it is not in heaven, to cause speech, who can go up
unto heaven, to take it, and preach it to us, that we may do it: neither is it
beyond the sea; to cause speech, who shall go for us beyond the sea, to take
it, for us, and preach it to us, that we may do it: But the word is very near
unto thee, for thy mouth and for thy heart to do it. Thus Moses shows that
the Smaragd of the Law shines in the Covenant of the Rainebow, Isai 54. for
the waters of Noah. That Christ in Genesis was known to the Patriarchs, and
all the Ceremonies went no further; and the Civil laws were most sensible,
and all might be acquainted with it: The Scribes do teach it sitting in Moses
chair; without their own works of traditions; and such as lived in travail
of hands might be able to judge. Now Saint Paul gives such testimony that
for the Law they were exact, as he yet was a Pharisee, but they not knowing
that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, 2. Cor. 5.
by the death of Christ: and resurrection, missed of the end of the Law; that
blind zeal to it made them fall from God. Now S. Paul imitateth Moses, whose
whole doctrine comes to this sum: Moses and Paul teach one thing.
do not say who can go up to heaven in high conceit, to bring Christ to dwell
in our Tabernacle below: or who can go in belief, Romans 10.
to the deep of the earth, to bring up Christ from the dead: But what says
he? The word is near thee, for thy mouth, and for thy heart; This is the word
of fath which we preach; for if thou confess with thy mouth, that JESUS is the
Eternal: and that God raised him from the dead, Psalm. 71. 20
thou shall be saved. Without marking imitation of Moses and 70. phrase, Psalm.
71. 20. Paul will not be understood here: And here he before had allowed the
Scribes for all other Divinity, while they sat in Moses chair, for holy
Trinity, and works, and law, and passage of all just hence to Paradise to
perfection of joy: Heb. 11.
to the City which they had desired; the heavenly City which God prepared for
them. Though they had not openly the Gospel: the perfection. But the Scribes
saw not that our Gospel was the perfection to the Law: And by that they
perish. I might bring a volume of examples: But my digression may not be too
long. The Thalmudgreek
The fourth is the Thalmudique kind when speech is to Jews. The old
Testament never named expressly and properly, place for souls: because infidels
would mock at that: But thus God says; Leuit. 26. If ye keep my
commandments, I will be your God, and walk amongst you; that is simply and
for ever: as God, is the good God to Abraham, Izhak and Jacob, not to dead but
to living. Now when the Prophets, had ended all that was to be spoken, to open
congregations: and the faithful were few under Macedonians: and Sadducees
denied souls immortality: and rejected Prophets comments upon Moses; The holy
learned enacted these terms: The Law, for all the old Testament. So is Psalm.
82. Ioh. 1. and 15. so Es. 8. Romans 9. Also, world to come; Paradise; Gehenna;
Day of Judgment; life eternal; second death, and many such: which all, the
precious Greek Testament has. And in all GOD applies it to man's capacity,
in infinite mercy: when the Redemption manifested, made the profanest leave
mocking. Examples of all four come, Apo. 21. in the 12. Jewels. Rubens
Sardius is Attique and 70. Simeons Topaz is attique, and 70. Leuies Smaragd is
attique and 70. But this by the way: Smaragd, Ex. 28. in Aharons shoulders
holding 6. tribes on the one, and so many on the other: is the Beryll of King
Joseph: as the K. is the stay of the Commune Weal: and the Emperor in
Constantinople: not S. Chrysostom, whom in Photio the Dialect deceived: not
decerning the 70. from Attique.

Iudahs Chalcedon in Thalmudique as in Thargum Ierusalemi upon Exodus 28. for
the Carbuncle: Isachars Saphir, is Attique and 70. Zabulons Sardonix is
Apostoliq. Dans Hyacinth, is Attique and 70. Neptalies Chrisophrase, is
Apostolic: Gads Amethyst is Attique and Apostoliq. Asers Chrisolite is
Attique and Apostoliq. Joseph's Beryll is Attique and Apostolic: Beniamins
Jasper, is Apostolic, fitted to the Ebrew: Isachar had it in 70. Exodus 28.
Judah in Isai. 54. and Apo. 21. in the first place: where the walls were like
Jasper Christalling. And thus glorious is the Greek Testament: which a
tetractys of most learned studies, makes a building all of Gold, in the
streets: and of pearl in the gates: and wainscotted with Carbuncles: for
Promises in the SON, the Sun of justice: and with other states for warriers:
for states men: and for navigations. I cited many Rabbis for this placing of
the stones to the tribes: then I had not Arias Montanus bible by me, nor
remembered him. Otherwise I had made reverend mention of his learned pains: as
I hold it a dogged atheism to rave against truth for humane respects.

How the Papes of Grecia used the Bible: And the Popes refused it.
The holy New Testament, the learned Papae, as Athanasius; great Cyril, and
elder Origin, and Basil, and his owne-soule- Gregory, celebrate with Attique
Greek, equal to Libanius and Porphyrie, and the best heathen, that ever
Athens bred; and all Monasteries were busied in copying it, with such care that
where paradoxa came, they left it vnchainged: and where they had no old
Testament but the 70. against enemies, which knew not Ebrew, they were most
ready in it: And had also Origens octaplun: whence men of leisure might be
reasonable in Ebrew: and the Christians Jews synagogue thus dealt. They read
Moses in Ebrew, and expounded him to their towns language: So Jews, in
Maymoni, did: and S. Paul described the like, and his discipline and theirs was
all one. The wealthy Jews that brought not up their sons in Moses, were
holden godless. And of multitudes learned, a sufficient number were chosen by
all, Elders; for all matters. They were Ecclesia: Zakenim: Episcopi, overseers.
And one, their best learned, to read the Law, with skill and choice of
conferences: with Prophets and Psalms fitted; he was chosen to be the
Messinger of the Congregation. He dealt for matters that touched all. In
expositions, the Archysynagogue requested the best in estieme to expound the
Law, by another text: or to some commune place. Where heathen Officers brideled
authority, they did excommunicate: and never the chief, but bade him keep
house and save his honor. And they made Rabbis, Maymo. Saned.
or Doctors; two or three, laying hands upon him, and saying: Learned Rabbi,
take thou authority to teach what is loose: and what is bound. And in the
Synagogues Leuy had no particular stroke, but went from their 48. towns to
Ierusalemi, at their courses: and the high sacrificer was not of the Sanhedrin,
but as they esteemed of his learning. And all the Synedrion might be of Israel,
or all of Levy: and many Synagogues had not a Leuite, but all Doctores were of
Israel. In Grecia the Greek Bishops carried them as servants: so Policarpus
martyr at Smyrna, and all, a long time. But let us mark The City that
crucified Christ: what corruption of Doctrine it had, with Egyptian tyranny.

First the Greek new Testament, the joy of man's mind, Of Kingdom power and
glory: howsoever loiterers will excuse this; the golden balance of justice
would bear reading of Latin to people of other speech, and the babbling and
Babels building in equal peise.

Secondly, Italy had Greek commune, when S. Paul Romans. The Papes
continuing Fathers, had brought up youth in Gods word, not in dross of man's
speech, to charm to men of other tongues; that must needs stop their ears
as deaf adders: though the charmers charmed never so wisely. But Popi Daemones
will answer to their name: and show what the only cursed City, 2. These. 2.
and Apo. 11. and 17. meant to do.

Thirdly, Because Clemens and Tertullian, were Eusebius Peter was at Rome,
though Luke Act. 23. and 28. and S. Paul speak in other tenor: and first Peter
tells, that he was at Babylon: and might not without infinite sin, use a
metaphore to deceive his reader: and when truth is a story, to Psalm. 87. that
Babel shall have Gods Church. Yet Popes begged great revenues for buildings and
scholars, by S. Peter's name. Paul's man of sin will do this.

Rock eternal, Deuteronomy. 32. (...) there, and Psalm. 18. and 2. Sam. 22. and often,
is GOD only. And in Deuteronomy. 32. a Prophecy is laid, of the Rock, a defender
against the four beasts that come out of the sea: upon which Rock the Church
stood, until the SON of Man like in body, Dan. 10. to Tharshish or sea-like
stone, took part of their afflictions. Now the WORD Eternal, that gave all
reason, the only teacher; in demanding, teaches to answer, saying: Whom do
men say, that I the Son of man (Dan 7. by Rabbis general) am? The fisher of
Galile, that heard Daniel often read, said from Dan. 9. Thou art CHRIST, and
holiness there of all holiness: and therefore (Psalm. 2.) The Son of the
living God. Then CHRIST calls him to Deuteronomy. 32. speaking Rock in Jobs Ebrew,
Upon this Rock will I build my Assembly, that no courts by terror of death
shall be stronger then it. Mat. 18. compared with Rom 8. 38. and. 2. Cor. 11. 23
24. etc. and Act. 26. 21* 22.
Christ is Ceph, and thou, as all that know him to be the Rock Cepha; and as
the Sanedrin makes Doctor, saying: Take thou authority for thy keys of
knowledge, to teach which is loose, and what is bound: whom thou teach that
God, was in the Rock, reconciling the world to him self, he has his sins
loosed, by thee on earth; by the Rock, in heaven: and who so believes not
that, thou bindest his sins, in earth and in heaven. This matter is the sum
of all: and Greeks in Photius, tell that Andrew was the Rock, before Symeon
was. And Cephas answered with all thought, as well as he: wherefore all had
equal comfort: and so all godly. And because this new sentence, has no new
Divinity, he leaves all after confession of the Rock, as knowing him self
and Theophilus, to have as good right to the name of Cephas. But he by
senioritie was to speak first for all, and so the name for all must be told
to him: that they who build their house upon the Rock, Mat. 7.
shall be shaken with no Winds, storms, waves. The Sun is not brighter then
this meaning, for these words. Let any who dare, try; by a conference of holy
Scriptures, as I do.

Now the Popos Demon, denying that Rome crucified CHRIST: as Saint Peter
denied that Christ ought to dye, and was termed Satan for that. He would have
this believed of all, that Peter had a praerogatiue above all the Apostles: and
was at Rome: and left to the City that crucified Christ, (for their good
service) a successor to pardon, or to tie sins.

Fiftlie, Hence Lands are given by Princes: and specially Buy-shop Gregory,
by Creontophonos Phocas, held Satan's throne, and became stronger then the
Emperor by this proceeding. The Bible must not be studied in Ebrew. The Jews
marred it; and in Greek haeretiques: As though there were not most learned
Christians, that could look to both. And this was pretense to pray still:
never to teach truth: and to give the people in Latin Niene commandments for
Ten; And the Creed with a translation, that white was black: that to go to
Paradise, in the Greek Creed, should be translated, to descend to hell; to
Gehenna; in old Chrysologus: and that the Fathers were there. So the Popes
Clyents, are the tail of the great Dragon. Moreover, the Lords prayer, for
many thousand pounds Lands, they might have, but maimed: to disgrace all
authority of the New Testament. But they never taught the meaning of the
Lords prayer, that when we pray, we pray unto the Father, which is in heaven.
That did Pope Demon disannul, sitting in the Temple of God, as if HE were God;
And he teaches to pray to all from whose name he could get any land: to
Marie, though Rome killed her son: to Peter, though Rome by authority made
him a martyr, far off to Apostles and other Martyrs, that Rome martyred: as
though Apoc. 6. under the fifth seal all these did not crave vengeance against
the beasts of the earth, that killed them. Moreover, to busy Princes, they
say; If Popingayes said over Pater noster, so often, they should have so many
years pardon, in a new invented fiery bath of Purgatory: stinging poor
souls like scorpions, five hundred years before their Devils doctrine was
espied. About the year 600. they tamed East proud Prelates; and go on thus.
From Leui they will make an order, and have an altar; and an Aharon, with a
cope, and holiness in the forehead: and Levites in Linen: and the name
Priest: and of bread, they can make flesh, and of wine, blood: and they break
Abben Ezraes rule praef. to Moses allowed of all; that nothing must be taken
properly, which goes against all sense. So they will not have the Lords death
to end all sacrifice, by the supper: But will make the supper a sacrifice:
against all wit and learning; And the Pope is an Aharon: and the Priests
lips will keep knowledge, Mal. 2. where he tells them they did not, but
should; therefore the Grecians would consume them as stubble: Also they are
flat Arrians praying to Michael, (who holds it not robbery to be equal with
God) as if he were a created Angel: and not the Eternal Son, the Angel
standing at the golden Altar of incense, his humanity, to receive in the
censor of grace, our prayers. These and such other treacheries against all the
Bible; first brought the third part of sun, moon and stars to be darkened
in the third part; but soon, Christ the true sun, and all air, for
brightness of Scripture. And by these degrees, Man of sin became able, as
now 600. years we find, to stir hail and fire mixed with blood, in the
earth: missing wholly of Religion: and not as Turks by ignorance, but by
covetous malice.

A cry expounding the first trumpets warning of fire and blood, by scholars
made a mountain of fire cast into the sea; by the star falling from his place:
a burning torch, falling into the waters of scipture: and making them bitter;
to darkening the third part of profession of Christianity. John saw an Angel
flying in the mids of the heaven, saying, woe, woe, woe, to them that dwell in
the earth, from the voices of the trumpet of the three Angels whose trumpet
shall be heard. In the open Church, companies of godly were martyred, for
resisting the Locusts, deceyuing of the world; now leaving the zeal that
Ephesus once had, and the first Doctores in Italy; and following Smirnean Jews
haeresie, in apish renewing Leuitiques, inflat Atheism of altar, cope, linen,
priest, sacrifice: reviving Pergamus Balamites, who for wealth and wantonness
bred Monasteries, joined to Nunries: when Thyatirean Iezabels, are with Baals
Priests, setting up a new Sardian dead wealth, in profane riches; and
contemning Philadelphias true love, to save souls: But reviving Laodiceas
falling to the manner of the world, neither hot in true zeal, nor cold, as
open contemners, but Chananean hypocrites. To this end the Popes clergy is
described in a plain painting forth of them: and of their wars for Jerusalem
at years 1100. Next are all the Turks wars handled alone: next reviving of
the Gospel against both; until the end of the world: before which time
neither Turk nor Pope shall fall. They flatter themselves that write
otherwise. But as the Antiochi who reigned about 300. yer. after 150. were so
weak, that they stood by the Romans courtesy: and so Lagidae in the tutelage
of Rome; till the set year of Christ his first coming; so though the Pope be
weakened in many places, Italy shall remain a continual plague: that shall
appear in the seventh Trumpet. But now let us consider the first Trumpet.

CHAP. IX.
The 5. Trumpet sounding out the Popes clearly.
The fifth Angel sounded the trumpet: and I saw a star fall from heaven, and
the key of the deep, of the Pit, was given him: and there came a smoke out of
the deep: and the sun and air were darkened by the smoke that came out of the
pit. THE haters of the Papes turned to Popes, from fathers to Devils; to be
the wicked (Isai 11.) Romylus, (in learned Jonathan from Cittim: Ieroms Italy,
Nu. 24. Onkelos and Iarchi, Romans.) They be for this commune place, the fifth
Trumpet in order of handling, but in an explication of the first in tenor of
matter. The star fallen from heaven was in the third trumpet: the messinger
of the congregation fallen from the kingdom of heaven; and Dan. 2. Mat. 3. in
Christ: and by Kimchi upon Hosea 4. Key is power of government (in souls
case) Isai. 22. Mat. 16. Apo. 2. The deep is darkness, Genesis 1. 2. in Zohar
co^paring visible with invisible, darkness bringing to Gehenna; 2. Cor. 4. 6.
even as the commanding of light to shine out of darkness, is compared with
showing Christ to our souls. As Rattes, suo indicio pereunt. Terent. so here
the Pope; and all that bear his keys. Keys here be damned; but not such
keys as have Gods warrant.

Whence the Pope chalengeth Keys.
Nothing is more commune, nor ever seen more impudent, the^ the Popes
chalinging of Keys; from Mat. 16. first saying that Peter is there the Rock.
1. All holy will hold him therein Abaddon, and Apollyon, author of destruction.
For the Son of man Dan. 7. Christ the holy of all holiness, Daniel 9. The son
of God Psalm. 2. calls himself the Rock from Deuteronomy. 32. translated in the 70.
God. six times in one chapter: and the Rock was Christ, 1. Cor. 10. and there
is no Rock but the Eternal, in Psalm. 18. and Rock is (...) Creator: and S.
Peter chap. 4. uses that term for God only, teaching Papes not to be babes,
nor Popes but to know how he understood the words of Christ. yet the Pope will
make Peter to take Gods name: and to be the chief of the Apostles; and to have
power in new sort, to bind and loose sins: as though all that truly teach
Christ, do not the same, though they know it not. But the first teachers of the
son, Ps. 2. were to have the first commencement of Doctorshipp, in Thalmud
known speech: Maymo. in Hagigah.
And all kings, who should read the Law and preach, as Solomon did all his
life, are the true Papae and Episcopi: One appointed man should be the sergea^t
of the Church: to look to business special: But all that governed should be
and are called Episcopi, 1. Tim. 3.
as well as he: and should be as well learned. God is Episcopus; Job. 20.
Pakid any of charge; as Eleazar, is Episcopus, communely in the 70. Judas
office was Episcope. Antigonus in Diodo. was like to be Episcopus of all Asia.
And when the Greek Papae would be Episcopi alone, they were never quiet. They
had been stronger, if all learned had been Episcopi with them; as at Zurick
now one rules none: but is chief sergeant for teaching and sacraments: but
accountable as any other, for carriage. But Pope Roman thus goes on, to teach:
that Peter came to Rome, that he left keys to one: and he to successores, that
they be the Rock, to sit in the Temple of God as God; to make men swear,
otherwise then any of Gods people ever heard: to allow Priests after our Lords
death: to reject the Ebrew and Greek Gods gift: and to accept a Latin deadly
falty translation, Exodus 12. Act. 7. and 13. to deny that the Bible which God
gave is exta^t, to use Latin in Lands of other Languages: to give the people
no use free in it: But 9. of 10. commun. And Pater noster as to parrats: and
with the last verse stolen away; the verse from Dan. 7. showing all Kingdom,
Power, and Glory, given to Christ. So the sum of faith they had, in Latin as
Parrats: and in the maine point; for the souls going up to the Father, a
going down to hell, with belief that the fathers till then were there. Before
I reckon more Popish, that is devilish, points: I will here show how Jews have
disgraced our Gospel by the wicked translation. Descended to Hell; by barbarous
wresting of Latin from the true use in Tullies days.

A digression to show a scandal laid to Jews.
Izhak Ben Arama says: Behold the string upon which the law of Christians
hangs; is this, the famously known; that for the sin of Adam, the first
death of the soul entered upon all ages: and they fell all, fathers and sons,
first and later, Prophets and holy into the sorrows of Gehenna, until Christ
went and redeemed them. These be strictly his words upon Leui. 26. where Moses
expressly tells, that the Godly should go hence to Gods Tabernacle: and Saint
Paul 2. Corint. 5. translateth him in a most heavenly and comfortable sort; and
telled expressly of Abraham and the commended, that they desired an heavenly
City* and God prepared it for them: although they were not perfected in this
world with manifestation of the Gospel. Some Greeks mistaking S. Paul, held
Limbum: and wrested Greek from old use to that: as Basil upon Psalm. 49. Yet
he spoke well upon Psalm. 15. As Maymoni, tract. poenite. That, all holy went
hence to Gods Tabernacle: and Chrysostom, though he said Christ opened
Paradise to the thief, says upon 2. Corint. Hom. 6. Thus Lazarus was poor:
and very poor, and he was rich that passed by him, lying in the gate: now
whether entered into the Kingdom; and ioyed in the bosom of Abraham? Herein
Chrisostom is very sound, and laid no trap for the Jews. Athanasius, Cyrill,
Theodorite, and others upon the Psalms, and many in Theophilact upon Luke. 23.
And he upon Johan in this; I go to the Father: and very many in Photius
library: and Hegessippus upon the Maccabees: yet Romes advancing Latin to
abolish knowledge of the Greek Testament, caused old Chrysologus to say: that
Abraham was in Gehenna; till Christ went thither, and the 3. day brought him
out. So the Jew had caught the Latin company, enemy to all the Bible for
happiness and Redemption: that Jews and Philosophers could speak of Emperors
causes better then they. Thus for 9. co^mun in stead of 10. for the Lords
prayer maimed, and turned to Battus infinite repetition, against the Law.
Eccles. 5. that our words before GOD should be few: and their belief stained
in the maine, shows how they of Rome taught the people, that would not
receive the love of the truth, but became a great deep sea of darkness: that
Sun and air; Christ the sun of righteousness, and the scripture by which
light comes to our eyes, were darkened: by a smok of haeresies, marring in
their Mass, al religion. The Jews though faithless, yet they do search most
narrowly, and profitable, the speech and story of the law: and show us Christ
in all whom they cannot see: But Romulus man of sin setting forth him self as
if he were God, in his Mass book, darkneth sun and air: in steed of
serving God alone, that is, praying to God alone; as our Lord (Mat. 6.)
repeated his Law: when ye pray, pray to your Father which is heaven. Maymony
shows, upon what Command* prayer depends, (otherwise prayer were sin) says
in his treatise for prayer; That all the Fathers expounded the Law for service,
to be prayer: And Menachem says, God forbid, that any should pray, but unto
God only: even as Psalm. 50. Pray unto me, in the day of trouble, and I will
hear thee, so thou shall honor me. No holy in all the Bible, the air to see
Christ, did ever pray to any Angel, but the Eternal Son, nor ever to any man
departed. Therefore Romylides liturgy in praying to infinite millions of
creatures, has infinite sins.

Of the Locustes, most lively describing the Popes subjects, to make him King
of Locustes: distinguished from all other policies that be, or ever were in the
world.
Locusts came out of the smoke: and the hot vapors of Lybia bred clouds of
Locustes: which by South winds flee to Sardinia, Silicie, Spain and Italy,
as others in Ioels days to Judea: that in one night the slow-bellies devour
whole valleies of tender Corn: where it would grow otherwise 100 fold. This a
Sardinian man told my self; and merchants many, as past doubt; that
exorcistes by Satan's help were invited to help the matter. Now the millions
of Monks and Friars, and such as devour other men's labors, void of all
actions for political use, are so fitly compared with these, that we may say,
God in the Creation made locuste to abound in Lybia: to show in time the
locusts bred by Rome, which would crucify the King of glory: and should
devour the fruits of such as had no love to the truth; 1. Cor. 2. 8.
but would Honor the City, that would kill the Lord of glory: that was a
greater sin then the devouring of all the fields in the world.

A distinction of these locusts from the proper locusts in Joel: that these be
as scorpions.
These had power as the scorpions in Italy, which sleep under every stone;
that no common weal could be healed of their sting, but such as make their
blood pay for it, and by them selves be healed.

A further illustration, of distinction from natural Locusts and Scorpions.
These locusts might not strike the blades of the earth, nor any green thing,
or coleworts, nor any plant, but only the men, that had not the seal of God
in the forehead, professing openly that Christ is the Angel of Covenant: and
his Humanity the golden Altar: and his Mediation the Censer, to receive the
prayer of them, who by the abundance of the grace of the gift of Justice,
look to reign by Christ Iesuus.

A further distinction how their sting is not of natural scorpions, but of
spiritual.
These kill not, but torment men five months: with a torment as it were of
scorpions: Hear the read must mark corporation speeches; that the whole
state is termed by one man. So does Moses speak to Israel, for many thousands
of years, in speech, as though all were to the present men: so Ezekiel
speaks of the King of Tyrus, then living: as he was (for a King) in Salomons
and Chyrams day: Solomon had Chyrams daughter, and he was a Proselite; and by
his charges, Chyram the workman, wrought Salomons brass works: and so the
king was of Eden garden: so, here, men of long descents be stonge; and not
only for a particular age. And as scorpions in locusts have no more time to
hurt: but hide themselves in winter: as Nahum tells: so these locusts hide
themselves: when sharp weather of policy comes. The Church spend near 1000.
years (good Abbates as Bernard and others full many in Flaccius Illyricus and
Antilogia Papae, and such) telling the Daemones or Popoi, of their dealings:
and Princes resonablie matched them so long: but Satan was let loose, after
1000. years. That Popes deceived Princes to spend their strength 200. years,
as Gods enemies, to bring the land cursed for ever, into glory; to make God a
liar: so Princes being weakened, Daemones Popoi, by strange forgerie of
Constantinus gift, became strong. Constantinus sons, knew no such matter, no
Julian that scoffed all that he could forge against his Uncle; nor Sozimus, as
bad as Julian: nor any Grecian. Yet the Popoi Daemones will have their own
testimony; for Empires given, without States consent. Thus the Papae or
reverend Father, that would be a king, by his locusts beggars the wealth of all
Countries.

Of the Scorpiones stinges.
taught to deny this: John. 3.
that so God loved the world, that he gave his only son, to the end, that
whosoever believe on him, should not perish, but have life ever lasting.

Eve, so the Pope having the throne of the serpent, deceived many minds from
that playnesse which is in Christ: and so stong their hearts, as they (Job.
3.) who desire the grave: and dig for it more then for treasures.



trust in wicked works, in giving Lands to Locustes, to avoid Purgatory,
unknown to Greeks: and to hate the Bible as auctor of haeresie: and to pray
to Creaturs: to be sure for that only, if no more sin were, to perish for
ever. And he teaches, that men should doubt of their salvation. So his
Locustes have the stinges of Scorpions.

Of the Locusts strength and authority.
When by their forged Purgatory, and much begging, the Locusts had gotten the
fatt of all Countries: the^ they were horses prepared to wars: that they
set Kings to war; as they would. And though they would seem to have no
secular Power: yet their dealinges showed they ware crowns like gold: being in
face as private men: So Babell: and Antio. Daniel 7.
of woman's hair, in keeping in Cloisters; yet have they teeth of Lions to
devour all: and habergions of iron to defend them selves: and the noise of
their wings, the proper noise of Chariots of horses, running to wars. Their
false teachers that speak lies, be the tails: Isai 9.
and they sting and kindle wars: and they torment five months, less then
half the time of the Gospells continuance.

Of the Locusts King.
A King is a chief person in a policy, bent all to the good of that state: so
the Buyshop of Rome got all bent to him. And challenges to be King of Kings:
and by his own mouth he is condemned His policy rules through all states:
Kings he will excommunicate. Thal. Ierusa. records that Kings should not be
excommunicated; But in Ieroboams cause. The Synedrion the Bishops of the state,
would in high offense, tell the King thus: keep your house: and salve your
honor. And the pelting preachers that will be teaching states, what they
should do, otherwise then for the sum of salvation, have a barbarous spice
of Pope pride: and ruynate states. Thirty yer* study should a messinger of the
assembly have, to read scriptures with due conference: and to be a learned
orator, to speak for common matters. Now an year or two in a common place
book, will make a bold Crier: the curse of the world: and an Archbuishop to
have the keys of deep darkness, if money can buy a shop. this has the depht
of papistri. Iethro Exodus 18. By civil wit tells Moses what Law GOD planted
in all men's hearts: that Bishops in all charges, must be of skill. If Bishops
of Kings armies must learn of Phormio, how to pitch a field: rivers will
soon flow with blood. As pope made hhaile and fire mixed with blood: daily
after a thousand years.

Of Oaths.
Kings try men by witnesses: and David forced none to swear against any: the
hid things were left to God. And by this law, upon 2. or 3. witnesses, every
matter shall stand: the Talmudiques as logical as others, condemned not men,
upon their own confession: as experience tells daily, that many forlorn,
take upon them matters of others: in Ireland, a poor man; in Walter Essex
days, for a swall supper, took upon him to be hanged, for other men's harm:
it was perceived: and his confession was not taken. And usually men once
condemned, take other men's guiltiness upon them. Man of sin, will charge the
Duke of Buckingham, to tell whether he ever affected the Kingdom; and then
tell it; and kill him: A policy patched from Popois Demonijs does this; against
the law of linseywolsey. They who follow him, are like unto him; and all who
Buy-shops to his Laws.

Of the Popes advancing learning.
Papists brag, how the pope brought Ebrew and Greek to us: and so deserves
thanks. This doing is a Kings work: and all kings are shameless, if this be
true: Grecia gave Greeks, written over the world; and Jews Talmudiques: and
Bomberbe a merchant undone by Popes envy; printed the best Ebrew: so this
speech is from Satan; as his kingdom.

Of Popes blindness, in Ebrew easiest matters.
Paul disputes in his whole epistle, to the Heb. for the Doctrine of Law and
Gospel: that perfection of doctrine was in the Gospel: and the Jews be
forelorne, which grant not that. The Popes in the depth of Satan's blindness,
would make Saint Paull an Atheist: against Leui. 26. and himself, 2. Cor. 5.
And for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who went hence to the heavenly City: and
they make him say, the fathers had not perfect joy: til Christ took them from
Limbo. Arias in Arcano sermon* in infernus, and Lacus: would make the holy
Apostle to cross Moses and the Gospel; and to set Isaac Ben Arama, as I
touched, upon the Popes treason, to disgrace the Gospel. I do marvel that he
wrote so: so learned a man: to miss so grossly. I think he was forced to
suffer it to pass under his name. This can a King of Locusts do. Some
Grecians stammered at S. Paul's words; as Basil upon Psalm. 49. But upon Psalm.
15. and 73. he called himself back: and so did Chrysostom, and the sway of
Greeks, agree with Moses. Leuit 6. and with the New. Test. and Talmudiques,
that the faithful went hence to perfect joy.

How blindlie the Papists wrest Ieroms words: that the Jews read not the 3.
first Chap. of Genesis; till they were 30. years old.
Ieromes Epistle to Paulinus, tells that the Hebrews read not the beginning
and ending of Ezekiel, and the beginning of Geneses till 30. years of age:
Maymonie in Morek Nebuchim, upon Ezekiel: says of him the same. But the term,
darash legere; is to read as Doctores, not as children read: Children read
Genesis from 7. year old: But under 30. hardly will any comment, well upon Genesis
1. 2. 3. Papists turn this to simple reading: He must be a blind king, that
would have the Bible to be so hated.

Of the Popes names.
He has a name in Ebrew ABADDON: from Number. 24. THE ROMAN SHALL AFFLICT ASSVR
AND EBER: AND HE TENDS TO DESTRVCTION. The whole bent of the Pope is to
destruction: his whole policy: and his Mass: his Idols; and his rules of
faith. Zurick takes a short course: to leave the Civil officer all
government: and to Scholar Bishopps only to look to learning. This much they
should add: for education of wealthy: that both Testam for Greek and Ebrew,
in Thalmudique civil law should be known perfectly before 30. By 15. it might
be reasonable: well by 20. exceeding well by 30. This I would show to a Prince
of zeal: that would urge study: But slow scholars, shall not be troubled with
advertisement. Plantines Bible, the Popes work, has offered much help: A
Kings bent; if some had not hindered, had done much in another sort: that in
one month, the New Testament might be learned, even by Talmudique manner:
calling all to Moses 613. laws; and they in few yer. and both tongues, by the
Apostles dictionary. No time will ever clear either, by our stale wandering
course: and unlearned flau^ting sermons: far from holy Ebrewers manner, as far
from all reason; that one scholar should teach all, matters of Experience, in
an hour or more. If they drew still all the Law to Christ; that by the Gospel,
we are perfected, it were learned. But the common sort, shall give an heavy
account for many idle words; speakers and allowers.

Of the Popes Greek name.
APOLLYON, that is, Destroyer: is the Popes Greek name: Because all his policy
tends to eternal destruction. The Bible till of late he little suffered in the
original: and yet, in the head of all; he fights against all for Hebrew: in
Genesis 3. 1. John. 3.
HE SHALL BRVSE THY HEAD all the millions of Hebrews, to each man say, HE. And
John expounds all of CHRIST: that HE should destroy the works of the Devil:
so says Onkelos, HE shall, etc. And so the Arabiq. Sadaias: And so the 70. and
all Greeks upon it: Yet the Popes translation has she; against thrice the
masculine gendre, in Ebrew: and all Ebrew kind, that ever were: to bring Mary
into Christ his honor, to destroy the Bible, and the world: So, whereas it is a
sin most high, to crucify Christ again: and to make him an open shame: the
Crucifix through all popery, shows here, that he is Apollyon. Pilate knew as
Mary that Christ was crucified; But that help nothing. But he could not
consider the L. of glory crucified. And the Crucifix cannot express that: but
leaves only a base object. Herein he is an Apollyon; and so in all Points.

A digression to our Prayer book, made from the Popes.
Our prayer book was made when Papists were the more in Parliament: and
allowed by our side for men's infirmity, as Luc. 3. allows Caina^ a son to
Arphaxad. And Acts. 7. souls 75. for 70. And as S. Paul allowed circumcision,
for Timothy: But Christ should profit the Galathia^s nothing, if they simply
did it allow. The whole book is bent to the Popes vein: and if there were
nothing false in words, the frame draws hate with it. For weakness in
other, I would allow it; until I could persuade to better: But seeing prayer
is our service to God: the Lords prayer, and his Psalms learnedly chosen, for
all occasions, should serve the turn. Tobie, is a fable and pe^ned full of
lies of purpose: that the reader should hold it no better. Yet because
Antiquity saw some use in the fable, ours suffered it, till better light came.
When simple put a Parliament in trust, the Parliaments ouersights should be no
plague to the simple. Al who fear God, will stick only to his word: and urge
no more. I have taught most unthankful Buyshopps, the Creedes article, that
souls go up, not down: and the holy, to heaven, not to hell. Archbi. Whitgift
yielded by Mr Geoffrey King: and knew that I cared not for voices of men, sure
to perish if they stood to their error. And thirteen year ago, I knew not of
an other living, of my mind; but I was sure I could make them worthy of
Ioakims burial: that durst burn my writing: and Anathema Maran Atha, while
they lived, and for ever. Spedily the best over Christendom flocked to my
mind; although some of Geneua, Marpurg, Hanaw, for rancour, deny all helps
for their own victory; and make them selves enemies to God, and al good men,
to make a Gehennean torment, of a going to the most happy dead, in Abraham's
bosom. The learned Fath. L. T. Winton has cleared this cause, and showed that
neither Westminster nor Rhodanus Alpin, through-flowen town, should bind men
to their wits. Our speech to God, is our only comfort in this world, and they
who will hinder us from the best in this kind, shall have their portion with
profane, in weeping and gnashing of teeth. Since the King came to England, the
Realm might have had the Bible well translated 5. years ago, with every man's
freedom to speak for the best: and a table for psalms; for all the ordinary
year; and all particular occasions: and for reading; Law, with Prophets,
Gospel, and Epistles: and both Universities, by this day ready in both
Testaments. But they had rather rent one another, the^ have the peace of God to
guard their tongues, in the eloquence of Gods word. But now let us return to
our Popes.

Of Antichrist, his Chaldy name.
Jonathan Ben Vziel, a rare Ebrew Doctor, elder then S. Paul's Gamaliel,
expounds Isaich. xi. When he says Christ shall consume the wicked with the
spirit of his mouth: He shows what wicked, even wicked RHOMILVS; he knew that
Balaam made but East, Assure: and West, Cittim Grecia, and Grecia Mayor Italy,
to afflict the holy, and therefore speaks upon a most sure ground, that that
wicked was Rhomilus. Arias Monta. knew that here, he brake the Popes neck; if
he came forth truly, under the Popes grant: and therefore leaves out the word
(...) Romylus. And what be our Papae of Croydon and other Parochies, that could
never spy this dealing. If the K. Roial vow, to the Bibles honor had not bin
hindered by Bishops, the Ebrew with Massorit, and the Caldy in true copy, had
been seen by this day in work. But when Buishopps crossing, hinders the
workman, what can the Kings money do; when the dogs neither eat hay, nor
suffer the ox: yet here the old Proverb takes place, Mendacem memorem esse
oportet. Boderianus, the fellow-laborer, in his Chaldie dictionarie, he not
privy to the guile cites the Chaldi perfect: But spelleth it subtly: not
Romylus, which Jonathan expressed most learnedly to any Rabbin, but he spelleth
it Armilus: to make nothing of it; but, Antichrist, or Antideus, or by some
Gog, or Magog. But Gamaliels scholar, who to the Hebrews, passes in
Talmudiques, all Ebrewes; that none but by Talmudikes help shall ever
understand him, specially in Melchitzedeke, living still as God, whom he
describes in office, even as they who in story knew to be SEM: this
Talmudique of Salem; Orator of Tarsus, borne to be Abba: Abba, Papa, for Rome;
as Peter, for Babell, Psalm. 87. He expounds Isai xi. and Jonathan most
soundly: 2. These. 2.
that when the present governor should be taken away ((...) is any governor,
that restrayneth others, (...)) then, man of sin should come. And although,
God still plagued Rome, by Alaricus, Gensericus, Thodoricus, and Totilas,
specially: yet the Papae still begged land; and took Imperial name, as
Pontifex in Sozimus: and by wealth ouermatched Constantinus Popes: that when no
punishment made Rome humble; but would have there, the Empire again set up;
and cared not for the truth: spirit of deceit should work, to their
destruction; that would not receive the love of the truth, to salvation. SO
THENCE, WAS THE REBELLION TO ARISE: MAN OF SIN; APOLLYON, SON OF PERDITION;
ENEMY; LAVLESSE; KING OF LOCVSTS; THE NEW ANTIOCHVS, EXALTING HIM SELF ABOVE
ALL THAT IS CALLED GOD: AND NOT SETTING THE IDOL OF IVPITER OLIMPIVS IN THE
TEMPLE: BUT VAVNTING HIMSELF, AS IF HE WERE GOD: to expound scriptures; to
loose or fasten sin: to set up or depose States. And to have a people of his
own frame: and to burn the true Temple of God.

The Epilogue, for the description of the Pope.
Five Trumpets described the Popes greatness, how it grew to be a kingdom of
Locusts; able to sting and to ouerrule in wars: his last mischiefs are told
first, how in his high power he brings hail of troubles, and fire mixed with
blood: when he is made a mountain of Empire cast into the sea: from a star
or Doctor of the Church, falling into Idols worship: and soon darkening a
third part of the chiefest; and in quick process, a smoke of blindness,
darkeneth Son, and Sun, and Scripture: that the Pope is to mighty to be
overthrown. As when he sent Princes to war for Jerusalem, and to spend all
their strength there: since now 600. years his might is high. Now follow three
poinctes: Machmads invasions: and martyrs fight; and lastly Christians
Policies, in war; his match.

Of Machumed or Machmad, or Moamed, in Piel, Hiphil and Hophall, the
participles three are used in Arabique and Rabbis.
The voice of Christ from his own mediatio^, bids the godly, as having
power, like the Angels, Dan. 4. over Nabuchadnezar, tell Machumedists, that
God will from the East send them great success, with the Popes supremacy,
Machmad began: and soon turned away all the Contreyes of Daniels Image, to
shake of the West yoke, hated of old under Greeks; and still resisting and
rebelling. Of their coming up, and spoiling of Spain and Italy: And joining
with Turks; I spoke in concent of Scripture. Euphrates was the old place of
fight for the Romans, as to M. Crassus army, and the Parthians. Old stories
give credit to prophecy: their armies are infinite; and horse many; with
success, and lions boldness: to threaten ruin to all that yield not: as they
have destroyed all ancient towns: Fire, blew smoke, and brimston; mean that:
Machmad his sonnets of victories, the false prophet makes a tail of Lions
boldness. Men in the East, worship the Devil: Idols, in the West; lived by
theft in Arabia; abounded in witches in Lybia, and in Europe. Hence, GOD set
up Machmad, to be a plague: yet men cannot repent.

CHAP. X.
How Christ helps his Church, by ruling war and guile: not to pass
bounds: which notably appeared in our Albion: for the Spannish navy 1588. And
in those homebred Devils, in the Gunpowder plott 1605. both stirred up, by the
Dragon, and false prophet.
Of Angel.
CHRIST is an Angel, the Glory of the Father, his Character, Exodus chap. 23.
Eb. chap. 1. so Chap. 8. MIGHTY, Isa. 9. and there in the 70. the Angel of
great Counsel.

Coming down from heaven, Esai 64.
Oh that thou would break the heavens: would come down that the
Mountains might melt at thy presence; as fire burns fuel, and makes
waters boil: the people would melt at thy praesence; when thou come down;
the Mountains would melt at thy praesence, Isai. 64. So here Christ coming
down: the Mountain of Rome and Turk melts.

Of the Cloud, Isai. 19.
Behold the Eternal, rides upon a swift cloud: and shall come into Egypt:
and the Idols of Egypt shall quake at his presence; and the heart of Egypt
shall melt within him; This Ancient speech, John expounds for spiritual
Egypt, chap. xi. and her Idols cap. 9. So when Israel comes from Egypt; God
one day, went before them in a Cloud, etc.

And the Rainebow was about his head.
The Rainebow is Genes. 9. 13. a token that the deluge shall not drown the
world again: and Isai 54. Thus GOD speaks: This is unto me as the waters of
Noah. For as I have sworn that the waters of Noe, should no more go over the
earth: So I have sworn, that I will not be angry with thee, nor rebuke thee;
the reason is in the verse. 5. For the Eternal would become a housband, to us
Gentiles: and he would defend, as verse. 17. In this place compared with Chap.
12. where the Dragon casts out waters, to sink the Church: this Rainebow
dries up those waters.

Of the face, like the Sun.
When Daniel was taught the fullness of Christ, by the Angel Gabriel, Dan. 9.
in Chap. 10. he sees his face as lightning: as the Doctrine was: so Saint
Steven handling the same matter, matter most clear; had his face like the face
of an Angel, Actor. 7. So Christ, Apoc. 1. had his face like the Sun in his
greatest brightness. That place tells who this Angel is.

Of the feet, like a pillar of fire.
When the Angel of the Lord went before Israel, he removed and stood behind
them: and so did the pillar of fire: which went before them; and removed and
stood behind them: and came between the Camp of the Egyptians, and the
camp of Israel. So here CHRIST, will stand betwixt Romes Egypt, and his
Church.

Of the little Book opened.
The sum of the Bible is short: How of Gods eternal counsel, the world was
made forman: Because the son of GOD by whom he made the world, would be a man
to give life to them that rested in this wisdom. And the story of 4000. yer.
to Ierusalems fall, by Rome has no more: and all should gladly hear of this,
all their life: and see CHRIST his bright face still to this sum. The book
is open, and easy to be understood: This sum I prefixed to Ecclesiastes: for
such as will not sit in the seat of the scornful. This Book is opposite to
Idols: that can teach nothing but baseness of the King of glory; and crucify
him again: and make him an open spectacle. The first crucifying of Christ,
cost Rome one utter destruction: that Rome stands not where it stood. And the
Crucifying of him again, has sent millions to eternal destruction. The little
book open in the hand of Christ, commanded no making of such crucifix: and it
commands to do no more, then is commanded: They wander wickedly, from the
mothers womb, that will adventure their eternal state, upon man's inventions,
which all know, may be spared.

Of the right foot, set upon the sea: and the left, upon the Land.
Waters, or sea signify war toils: Land, quieter profaneness: CHRIST, Dan.
12. stood over the waters of sharp swift Tygris, and lift up his right hand
and his left hand; and swear by him that lived for ever; what time should be
for Antiochus rage: so here he tells for Turk and Pope; that when the 7.
Trumpet has his blastes ended, the world shall end. Antiochi lost all, by the
first coming of CHRIST: and the Pope shall wast, until the second coming:
and till then keep some stroke.

Of the little Books eating.
The voice, like a trumpets, chap. 1. and 4. bids gracious John go, and
take the little book from the hand of CHRIST: so he asks Christ for it: and
he bids him take it, and eat it. And tells, that it will be sweet in the
mouth; for study: but bitter in the belly, for them that shall hear of it: as
the roll that Ezechiel aete, it told the Idolatrous Jerusalem of a fall, which
hastened upon them. So John by his book, sweet for Gods Counsel, is bitter
for them which shall digest it: when he preaches now to many people, nations,
and tongues, and Kings.

The roaring of the Lion, and seven thunders, shall be handled at the last woe.

CHAP. XI.
And a reed was given me, like unto a Rod, and the Angel stood by, saying;
Come, and measure the Temple of God; and the Altar; and them that worship in
it: But the Court which is within the Temple, cast out, and measure it not, for
it is given to the Heathen. THE eating of the book, and measuring of these
matters, Ephesians. 3. 16* 17. 18. 19.
be of one tenor: when the soul is full of the Gospel, it must show Christ to
be the Temple; and all height and depth; 1. Cor. 5.
length and breadth of wisdom to be therein contained: in that God would
dwell in CHRIST, to reconcile the world unto him self. And in his death upon
the Cross he is the Altar; and he sacrificed him self, being as Melchitzedek,
whom Saint Paul, as former Talmudiques in description makes a figure of the
eternal wight. He as Aharon, went through the veil of his flesh, into the
holy, from the Altar of the Cross, and performed all measures of justice. That
is here taught by measure (with a line) of Temple and Altar; Matters visible,
were to express the invisible. So Christ tells, John. 2.
that he is the Temple, saying: Destroy this Temple, and I will build it
again, in three days.

This Law; Ye shall reverence my Tabernacle, Leuit. chap. 19. 30. and 26. 2.
Commanded to reverence infinitely, Heb. 9. and. 10.
the Tabernacle of Christ. And Ben Arama, notes truly, upon Exodus Port. 52.
That God soon did cast off Moses Tabernacle, and Salomons Temple, to show that
he would rest in the Tabernacle or temple of Christ. Now the Jews, to make
Christ Aharon, and Melchitzedek, make this death, that Christ said; Destroy
this Temple, and in three days I will build it up again. The highest grace
for life, the slaves of Satan turn to death: whereupon, they were neither
forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come. Profane states be commonly
forgiven in this world; as the Epicure Luc. chap. 16. though in the world of
souls, they parch for ever: but the Jews sinning against the light of the
holy Spirit; and grace of salvation, perish openly in this world: surer of
eternal woe, in Haides, the world of souls; in which Abraham in Haides, in the
kingdom of heaven, will tell them: that they are not his sons. For he (in
Izhak received from death,) saw the resurrection of Christ, and rejoiced. But
the Jews gave money, to Soldiers, to have the resurrection of CHRIST denied.

Of measuring the faithful.
The Curtains in Moses Tabernacle, were made fit for the number: But when it
pleased the Lord to make the Gentiles his people, says Esai: Make larger
Curtains, Chap. 54. 2.
and the number of men aged twenty, and above, was thus: the sons of --

REVBEN. 1. 46500. 151450. SOVTH Summa totalis 603550. Simeon 2. 59300. Gad. 3.
45650. IEHVDAH 4. 74600. 186400. EAST Issachar. 5. 54400. Zabulon 6. 57400.
EPHRAIM 7. 40500. 108100. WEST Manasses. 8. 32200. Benjamin. 9. 35400. DAN 10.
62700. 157600. NORTH Aser. 11. 41500. Nephtaly. 12. 53400.

Thus God in Number. 1. and 2. twice reckoned his chosen; of the XII. tribes,
besides Leui. And the Curtains were fitted to such a number. So here John's
Doctrine shall teach a certain number: 1. Cor. 14. 22.
such as God has chosen; and no more: the other will follow the God of this
world. A man by man's wit, might marvel why Princes, would suffer such a
deceiuer as the Pope, to stand one year: his doctrine being altogether against
all light: and each Prince being able to cast him from his territories. But God
has chosen a few only, and none can come to Christ, unless the Father draw
him.

Of the Court within the Temple, to be cast out; in condemnation of Iudaisme.
Maymonides, in Bethabechica; or treatise of the Temple, about 430. year. ago,
wrote how the Jews yet look for return to Jerusalem: and to have a temple
like Ezekiels, or Salomons. For Ezekiels Saint Peter tells Chap. 1. 2. Epist.
That every Prophecy, is not to be expounded properly: because the holy men of
God spoke, as they were carried by the spirit of God. Now Dan. 9. tells, that
the Jews Temple should be utterly destroyed; and all sacrifice ended: Heb. 10.
5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
So by Daniell they should know, that the Messiah should be the building
wherein God would delight: as the very Jew Izhak Ben Arama noted above, in Port.
52. John preuenteth Iudaisme in showing that this Temple has no Levites court
to sacrifice; nor separation for Israel. But all be here kings and
sacrificers, and their Court reaches over all the City. And old Iudaisme is
now profaneness.

A digression, to compare the old Temple, or Tabernacle, with the spiritual.
The Temple of Solomon imitateth Moses Tabernacle: and all Jerusalem within the
walls; the space within Isreal's curtains: as the Thalmud notes, Christ is
the Temple, Ioh. 3. High sacrificer, Heb. 3. who went through the veil of his
flesh, by his own blood into the Holy. He is the Arc: golden within and
without: and containing the Law graven in him. And all grown into Christ,
should have the Law in their heart: and look for the crown of the Law.

In the outer Tabernacle or Temple, were the Candlestick of gold, lightened with
beaten pure oil, by the high sacrificer: and the table of xij. loves set
openly: and that had crown work: and the Altar of incense, covered with
gold. The Candlestick, the golden people: beaten pure oil; the spirit of
grace, that comes by afflictions; the kindler, CHRIST him self: Shem Tob;
the Jew comes in words thus far; though he knew not God to be in Christ. The
Table, 2. Cor. 5. 9
expresses the governor, who provides bread for the xij. Tribes, the xij.
months: And that pains finds a crown. So King Joseph feeding Israel,
held the xij. Tribes in his Beryll, on Aharons shoulders. King Moses, King
Jesus, King Samuel, King David, and King Solomon, ware the Crown for this
Table. The Altar of incense was proper to Aharons sons; high Sacrificers, and
lower; as Zachary of Abia, the eighth, of 24. courses. This work had his
crown. Now Christ is our Angel only, to stand at the golden Altar, that our
prayer as incense may come before God. In the court, an altar was of
sacrificing; where daily sacrifice, and the Pascha of flock beast, Kidd or
Lamb, a duty to all; and voluntary Pascha of Ox, and Ram voluntaire, and
of two days feast, Ioh. 18. were killed, and had their fatt brent on the
altar, and blood shed at the foot of the altar: where pypes conveyed it away.
Christ is our Lamb, Ox, and Altar: and when he ended sacrifice, he gave bread
and wine, which his Disciples did eat and drink (in taste like other bread and
wine) to be his body and blood, for our souls. Symbolon, Typus, Antitypus,
Icon, in Greeks: who durst not look for a knot in a bulrush.

Of the holy Synagogues.
The Synagogues saving in 48. Levites towns, usually were of Israel and no
Leuite: and they were Bishopps all the Ancient learned, and one, Sergeant of
the congregation, he read the Law: and the Archbishop requested the other in
estieme, to speak to the Law; how all tended to MESSIAH. So a sabbath days
journey, would draw all the Law unto Christ. And all were holden wicked who
being of wealth, brought not up their children from 7. year. in the law. Their
commentaries to this day in peecemeales, agree with the marrow of the New
Testam. Abben Ezra is wonderful, Dan. 9. speaking better for our maine battle,
the^ any of ours. Where he says, the 70. seauens, are from the beginning of
Daniels prayer, unto the sealing of Messiah, the holy of holy. Our Acadamiques
might be ashamed, that a Jew in Rhodes now 500. year. ago, spoke better the^
they for our Gospel. Zohar on Genesis 1. Elohim, in these words, Let us make man;
may be likened to a father, and a mother of the work. The father says, what
will thou make man? he will rebel: and an ill son will be the sorrow of his
mother: then the Mother says, his rebellion be upon me. This matter is deep
for a Jew to speak, The same says upon Genesis 49. IAH, is in Shiloh. And upon
Genesis 3. By the serpent, Christ shall be killed, and many of Israel with him. And
a rare saying, of God Rediemer in a Jubilee, I graued in a brassen abridgment
of the Bibles concent; from Zohar, upon Leu. 25. In the Jubilee year, God
dwelling in our tabernacle will be remission, Redemption, and ending of Sabbath
to Israel. fol. 53. Col. None of ours of old saw Iubilies, sitted to our Lords
death: the Jews knew it must be so. Ours scoff it being showed: and after
that be highly extolled. S. Paul describing Sem, in the person of
Melchitzedeck, to be as God, has Rabbis phrases: yet exta^t in Zohar, for his
warrant; that he held the man, and person as they did. And for all that
epistle, Rabbis speak the same that he does. And Rabbis have bin a bridle to
keep Daniel sound; that only holy Jews, be the afflicted in him; and when
the image afflicting holy Jews ended the^ Messiah should be borne in
Bethlechem. They might have taught us the right meaning of Daniel. So, for
ending the house of Solomon in Iechonias, lalkut brings Gods oath: and Maimoni
in poenit. Gods decree: and so Barbinel and Kimchi and Iarchi upon Ier. 22 and
universally they conclude, that the first Adam, the first day fell: So the
first day Christ is called heir of all In this sort the Bishopps of the
Synagogues, taught as learnedly as any of Levy.

Of the Synedrion.
Tha^. Ierusalemy in Sanedrin shows, that the Sanedrin of 70. might be all of
Israel, without any one of Leui. And that the high sacrificer was not of the
Sanedrin: but as another if he were rarely learned, and sage. And for all
faltes he was judged and punished as another: and that often they were so
simple, that the council taught them their duty on expiation day. The high
sacrificer might be excommunicated, but the King might not, but in Ieroboams
case. Where Mallachi tells, they should ask the Law at Leui, that is;
because they were always at the Temple: and bound to be learned. But Samuel of
Korah, and Daniel of Judah, were not inferior to any.

Of Athean imitation of Aharon.
It was death for any of Israel, to meddle with Aharons office. Samuel of
Korah, and Elias, whose tribe is uncertain, had Gods dispensation. Otherwise
they had never sacrificed. And nothing about the Temple might be in Isreal's
houses; no building like the Temple, arc, candlestick, table of bread,
Altars, or Levites attire: yet the father of Rome, will counterfaite: he will
have a Candlestick, Cope, Linen garments, precious stones, mitre, girdle
Priest, sacrifice, Altar: Satan taught him so, to dally with Gods Law. Greek
fathers began the name Priest and high Priest, to be fitted to their Doctores,
but in the end the gangrene crept to harm unspeakable: that Satan by Turk and
Pope ruled the world.

How Bishops were made in Israel.
Maymony, in Sanedrin shows how the Bishops of the Sanedrin made a D. to
teach the people: that they called him Muphla, wondrous learned, and held him
so, first: then some of the Sanedrin laid their hands upon him and said; Mat.
16.
Rabbi, take thou auctority to teach, Psalm. 109.
what is bound, and what is loose. Our Lord uses that speech in making his
Apostles Bishopps: Act. 1.
in giving them auctority to teach what is loose, and what is bound. But
Iscariot, let another take his Bishoprike, the rest were faithful Bishops.

Of excommunication.
In King Moses time, and other Kings, Civil punishments were used: but when
heathen ruled: then the congregation could do no more but remove the party
from the company: by open voice in their Civil court: Kehelah in Adams
tongue: Ecclesia in Iauans. Any of the seniors might excommunicate; but if the
excommunicated complained of injury; the Sanedrin examined the cause, and upon
injury they excommunicated the excommunicater.

A just; but strange doctrine.
Thal. Ierusal. in Illu Megallechim, writes of a Rabbin, who fell into an
haunt of Jew thieues. They took his money from him: he pronounced the Anathema
for them: they returned the curse upon himself; that amazed him: and coming
home, he asked Rabbis whether he were in danger of curse: doubtless, said
they: a money matter, where Laws be open, gives no Anathema: so the false
Anathema, returned sound upon thy self. On this he went to the thieues haunt:
and confessed sin, that for money he gave them to Satan: and requested
absolution, then said the thieues, absolve us and we will: they agreed to
both. There a woman comes by a scholmaister, beating a boy cruelly; and
says, thou art Anathema; the scholmaister asked a Rabbi, whether that could
bind him from the Synagogue the ordinary time; A mounth doubt less, said the
Rabbi: not the person, but the matter, gives the authority; go and confess
thy fault to the woman, and thou art free, and so he did. Thus reason, not
politic authority gives the force; and the Law, 1. Cor. 16. If any love not
the L. Jesus Christ, let him be anathema Maran atha The Pope the greatest
murderer and Idolater in the world, he will be excommunicating Princes. They
should return the curse upon his own head, and leave God judge: and others
may deal alike with all of the Pops keys: and God will make known who be his:
so Moses used Pharoh; so Elias used the soldiers; so Eliseus used the 42. of
Bethel; so Jeremy used Jerusalem; so S. Paul used Alexander, so the martyrs
here deal with the king of Locustes.

A digression to expound the term Bishop.
Much strife is for the Bishop of Rome, and for others. The manifold sense of
the term must be opened to end the strife. In Job, EL, the Almighty God, is
translated Episcopus. A looker to man's dealing. In the Law PAKID, a man of
charge, as Eleazar, or the bishop of the army, is translated Episcopus Judas
had Episcopon, as I mentioned before: therefore the Apostles were Episcopi: in
S. Paul, 1. Tim. the term Episcopus is translated in Arabique Zeken, a senior,
and that is the right meaning. Policarpus the messinger of the congregation of
Smyrna, is in Greeks Episcopus. And so the great teachers: so Calvin was, and
Beza in Geneua was Bishop: or yet Archbishop, though they took other names, as
high Pastor, is usually the civil Governor, and for Moses that is used, he was
Meparnes to Israel 40. year. that is Feeder. So Bishop is a term, for Lawful
calling, and comme^dable: if learning and tender care of people be to it:
Otherwise Ananias shall be excommunicated of S. Paul as a painted wall.

And they shall tread down the holy City, two and fouretie months. Here,
by City, is meant folk, as Ebr. 12. the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, so in this chap. where the tenth part of the City falls, people,
not wall is meant. So when the City is called spiritually Sodoma, and Egypt,
and where Christ was crucified: People of Religion most loathsome, to chaste
truth: and of tyranny murtherous, and the People by whom Christ was crucified;
as Tiberius the Emperor; Pilate, his Deputy, Ce^turion, and the soldiers. So
the holy City signifies here the heavenly Jerusalem. (...) people is once
translated by the 70. (...) City.

Of the xlij. Months.
Elias staid rain 42. months, when he was fretted by wicked Israel: and
Antiochus the wicked trod down Jerusalem 42. months; as I showed upon
Daniel. And our Lord preached 42. months: or 3. yer. and a half; or days
1260. or a time, two times and an half. Eusebius, and many after him, have
showed that: Old Beda, and Beroald and others. Here by time, the manners from
a like time is meant: the persequuting Pharisees manners; revived by the Pope.
And no certain time; for Chap. 12. all rage of the Serpent is but days 1260.
And again the profane Caesares rage, which endured 300. years is termed but
42. months.

And I will grant the two witnesses of mine that they shall prophecy days
1260. clothed in sackcloth: these be the two olives, and the 2. Candlesticks,
which stand before the Lord of the whole earth. The term two, means a
sufficient number, according to the Law phrase: In the mouth of two or three
witnesses, shall every matter stand. Zach. 4.
Nine and forty thousand and moo, who came from Babylon, are the two olives
that stood before the Lord of the whole earth: and the two witnesses here be
as much. Therefore by two, may whole states, and many millions be signified.

Of Prophesying.
Prophesying, is taken for expounding Moses by ages following, when the sum
of Religion is showed, how later ages would follow it, or leave it: all
falsehood falls. So when Cittim, Number. 24. is compared with Daniell xj. to
know the nation: and with Isai xj. and the Gospel for the crucifiers of
Christ: and 2 Thessalonians. 2 and withal the Apoc. this prophesying reuealeth the
beast, that comes out of the earth, the king of Locustes: how as the profane
Caesar's, had all their divinity from the unclean spirit; so has the Pope
all his: to mke a spiritual most unclean large commune weal: His Idolatry
matcheth the profane Caesar's: and he making Saints and Archangels, to pray to;
and a third world of Purgatory, and merittes, not to rest in CHRIST; and
forbidding study in the holy Bible, and mixing the Apocrypha, most foolish and
wicked fables, as Toby and the 2. Maca. with the most holy Ebrew Bible,
matcheth or ouermatcheth all the Caesar's profaneness. Therefore he cannot abide
expounding of Moses, when he cannot abide the reading of him.

Of the Decalogue.
The holy Jews honored the Decalogue, or Ten sayings, graven by God in two
great stones, with such high and heavenly reverence, that, because it contained
the sum of Divinity; they reduced all Moses unto it: and as the Decalogue
had letters 613. so they reduced all the Commandments, that could be gathered
out of Moses unto 613. And reduce to them all that can be spoken in Divinity.
And the Prophets, and our holy New Testament goes no further.

Of the Popes theft.
The Pope stole from the people this Law: Thou shall not make unto thy self
any graven Image, etc. A City in Israel that had scraped but one letter from
the tables number, had been destroyed. And of with infinite wickedness, then
must we hold the Popes and Popistes to be, that so dare contemn the graven
tables of all the frame of Moses Law, contrived into the two tables number of
lettes, for laws 613. which is by the Popes theft, brought out of frame. And
all must be holden wicked, that wish not his unclean spirited commune weal
destroyed.

Grounds which all should know, that soundly prophecy, or expound Scripture.
First, a Doctor should be a grammarian, for both Testaments; to know the text
sound: and the meaning plain.

2. The Massoreth defends every letter, in the Law or old Testament: that no
modest wit would wrangle.

3. A work called the Glory of Israel, speaks sagely; that the form of
letters which we have now, were not invented by Ezra, but were in the two
tables, and vowells and accents, as we have them now. The holy Ghost has given
a double reading, a text reading and a word in the margin, to expound the
text: which very often stands upon like letters, as (...) and (...) and (...)
and (...) and. Now they who feign letters, late invented by the form which we
have now, overthrow the authority of the double reading: and so of all.

4. Pisistratus, Tyrant of Athens, was elder then Ezra: he parted Homer into
Alpha, Beta, etc. the Illiad. into 24. letters names: and so Odyssea. Hence it
appears, that the Greek letters names be elder then Ezra. Moreover, they are
from the Hebrew: Aleph, Beth, etc. and so later then they. And the Ebrew names
be after the form, in (...). Therefore these forms were very ancient: and all
of Gods wisdom at the first. Moreover in Noe^s family, like letters (...).
gave double names: Dodamin and Rhodamin: Diphath and Riphath: and many such,
does David Kimchi note, upon the first of the Chronicles. And when the
septuagint translated by old dim copies, like letters; gave them often occasion
to leave the exact ebrew, and (...) turned to (...) Abbak 70. and Act. 13.
(...) turned to (...) Amos 5. Lxxij. and Act. 7. Aedom turned to Adam, Amos 9.
Act. 15. a Prophecier will trouble him self, if he know not these grounds.

5. The Alphabets order is celebrated of Gods wisdom, often; sometimes nearly
perfect, sometimes wholly perfect; sometimes with a verse more: sometime with
parenthesis in the mids, as Psalm. 37. 34. 25. 111. 112. 119. 145. Pro. 31.
Ier. 1. 2. 3. 4. This shows the order to be old. Besides, the order is
consonant to the form and lines, as they depend one upon another (...). so the
frame must be as old as the order.

Of Arias Montanus work; of diverse readings.
I noted 848. double readings: both holy. Kimchi, praef. to Ios. thought the
text corrupt, in Babell: and amended after the return in Ezraes days. Rob.
St. praef. to the new Testa. followed that: and Arias Montanus; at him I
marvel: and more at Kimchi, who in particulars gives sound reasons of the
double readings. And Pagninus abridgment, refuses Arias his mind: And Elias
Leui. praefa. to Massoreth; in Mos. soundly defends both readings: and still
the text is the subtiler; as of curiosity, and not of negligence; and the
margin, an help for the simple.

Of Lindanus, quareling with the text, and one Erostratus.
Lindanus labored to break the authority of Scripture; slandering the text,
as corrupted: and namely, Caari for Caaru, Psalm. 22. was brought of him. John
Izhak the Jew paid him. And Arias Montanus paid Erostratus. All Doctors should
be ready in that: to defend their ground; whereupon all their doctrine must
stand.

Of Law, vowelled and vnvowelled.
The Law Copies were some vowelled, and accented: the commune vnvowelled and
vnaccented: because the tongue may by use be read, reasonably without them;
but in doubts, to small certeintie. Rabbi Jacob, the bringer of the Massoreth
into a Dictionarie form, with notes, shows that Moses gave vowells: but the
people had few vowell'd copies: till Ezra made them commune: and Aben Ezra
says well. He that set the vowells and accentes, was a perfect wise man: for
He never missed of the best sense. But the 70. translated by vnvowelled; that
they might hide their mind: when dull heathen would quarrel with truth.

Of the 70. differing: thirty six hundred of years from the strickt Ebrew.
Many blaspheme Gods word by the 70. differing from it, Genesis 5. and 11. in
opusculis Patrum, one work blames the Ebrew: and all Grecia still followed
the 70. so Arabia, so Abyssini, so Muscouia. The text Genesis 5. faith; Adam lived
130. years, and begat Seth, and lived afterward 800. The Lxx. Adam lived 230.
years, and begat Seth, and lived after that but 700. Our notes not well set,
1603. have this note; Adam lived 230. years, and begat Seth, wherein Moses
omitted 100. yea. etc. This note dasheth all Moses authority, if he were not
true in his narration. S. Augustine could not tell the reason of the
difference, Ciuit. Dei. I have showed it in Concent. Scrip. and Melchitzedeke;
though my recompense has been, but ungrateful scophing of unclean spirits.
DD. that know not a letter, vowell, or accent, what authority they have from
God: such unclean spirits are good helps for the king of Locustes; when they
hinder the grounds of all prophesying.

Of Perfection in Scripture.
The text has perfect Divinity. The holy in all their ages knew the Trinity:
and that Christ would be made man, of a woman; according to our kind, as of
Mary, of Ely, of Adam. Here Anabaptists and Lutheranes, are in an heavy
case. All the holy knew that man's soul returns in death presently to God: to
receive the Abundance of grace of the gift of Justice in Christ, and joy under
Gods throne: or Anger for their sin, and contempt of Gods love in Christ,
before Gods angry face, Leuit. 26. Apoc. 14. The ancients lived by the law
graven in all hearts: some few they had, delivered, tokens of redemption. But
for all life, the heart laws served, Ier. 31. Romans 2. Job tells what store
of laws, hearts held. Moses for an whole great nation gave law written: but
the most bent to Leui: and imperfect without the Gospel. Job and the Apostles
have no Laws, but such as wise heathen, all would commend.

Authors for tongue.
Christians may pass in Ebrew, very rare Ebrewes: because the Apostles
translate much in special elegancie. Besides, they allow very much in the 70.
What they handle not, ancient Hebrews make plain. And they who will expound
Ebrew beyond this warrant, as some do, for Hell place, and Hell torment, in
life, do not well.

Prayer is our service of God. Maymoni in prayer from all Rab.
God forbid that any should pray but to God. Menachen upon Genesis and Deuteronomy. 6.
Mat. 4. and 6. never any holy prayed to a Created Angel, or man. Men the best,
had great faults; as Abraham long worshipped creatures; Philo and Maym. in
Idol Bechaia, shows exceeds sin of his, for Sarah, for which his
posterity smarted in Egypt.

Of the New Testament.
The soundness of text, and playnenesse in four Dialects, I handled in our
Lords family; against which book I hope none will rave, but for Ioakims
burial.

Conclusion.
Popery has no defense, by any sound grounds of study; not to any one
article.

Blasphemous grounds of Popistrie.
1. That they say, the Scripture is corrupt in text. The Massoreth, or
Dictionarie for every letter, prick and accent. checketh that for the old
Testament. And the new Testament can none blame, but to his shame; as I have
showed Princes in Latin.

2. That they say, the scripture is doubtful; no book was ever penned so
certain for Laws meaning: Visions, Allegories, bring no new rules; as Ezekiel
and Cantica. The New Testament has not one phrase, but the easiest to learned
Jews: not one from the beginning to the end.

3. That they say, the scripture is imperfect, they might as well say, God made
not the world perfect: But the Pope can make moo Creatures, and better: as
Archangelles, and Purgatories, and souls departed, to understand our hearts:
and bold to teach God whom he should pity: and to make Mary command Christ.
Satan in his own person, durst never be so bold.

4. They plead from the Law of Sanedrin; where a man must stand to their
judgment. That the Popes judgment must stand
The Sanedrin might be without any Leuit, as Ierusalemy notes: though the Law
speak of that, which most usually falls out: that Leui should be ready in
his own profession: But Esaias says to them, who was so blind? and Mallachi
speaks to the same effect: and the Levites whole condemnation of holy
Jeremy, where one of Israel cleared him. But the Pope his Cardinals, and
Archbuishops, have no more to do with Leui: then apes to stand for men.

5. The Pope makes a spirituality, Heb. 11. By faith these turned to flight,
the armies of the aliens
and a Clergy: to tie learning to them. David had his warriers, the best
learned in Moses: that by foresight of Christ thence; one frighted 1000. and
killed 800. And in Babel; Judah in Daniel, Ananias, Azarias, and Misael before
Ezechiel of Leui came thither, were the glory of men.

6. All wealthy should be brought up in the Bible, in frame of art, to know it
thoroughly: what laws it has; what disputations are upon those Laws; what
stories: and how the sentences of Job, David, and Solomon comment upon the
stories. All our nation might have seen this plain, if wicked had not
hindered: by their spiritual keys. And in Popes proceeding they make him
known to be wicked.

7. By Gods Law, Ecclesia, the Sanedrin court, should rule in all matters. And
old Wicklife, in Walsingham, did hit the nail upon the head, saying: That if
the Commune Laws of England might take place, the Pope should have no more to
do with us: then any other. Yet from Satan he will rule all: and make Ecclesia
to be not civil courts: but his courts. Our commune Laws praemune that
sagely* and the lawless resist God.

8. The Pope from Rome will rule; and the Rome-free-borne. Apostle; after he
taught the Thessalonians of Pope, from Rome: gives a charge to the Romans, to
keep every soul in obedience to the civil government: and by Civil
government, S. Paul escaped from death by Scribes traditions.

How young men learned in liberal arts, might be rarely exquisite, in the
greek new Testament.
GOD perfect in wisdom, knew that the Jews would marvel why the New
Testament should be all in Greek, and not any whitt in Ebrew. Therefore to
show it Gods work; against whom none may plead, he makes one little book
exceed for variety and elegancie of words: above 4600. chosen words. Thus
the book might be made easy.

1. The words should be all in a table: that all might read them quickly.

2. Appellatiues, and propre, should be set in their colors.

3. For Appellatiues, all Attique and eloquent Speeches of them; (as Romans 12.
3. Paul passes all Athenes) these should all come in their families.

4. Next, many thousand from the 70. with Ebrew to them: and in how many God
follows the 70. departing from the Ebrew. This would carry the Reader
through all the old Testament.

5. Thalmudique speeches be plenty, Mat. 12.
and easy to a Rabbin: as, Maymo. poenit.
Forgiveness neither in this world, nor in the world to come: and girded about
the breast: Apoc. 1.
second death: and such: these most trouble Greeks, Maymo.
and would be easiest handled, in their veins: and they be very many. Beidh.


6. Sometimes the Apostles mende the 70. or speak more eloquently: Apo. 20.
as in Iaspis Apoc. 21. verse. 19 it is Beniamins stone, Isai 22. Vzielides
after the Ebrew. Exodus 28. But verse. xj. the Carbuncle, Isai 54. So Sardonix
for Zabulon, and Chrysophrase for Nephtaly, are the Apostle John's, passing in
Greek skill. And (...), Eb. 1. 3. from Isai. 4. Tzemach Lecabod, and (...).
From Exodus 23. (...) these S. Paul brings. All this kind settled together;
would bring light and delight, to all godly learned.

Of propre names.
Many propre names be taken from the old Testament: wherein the 70. is
communely followed. Sarra, will try a scholar, and Phanuel: from the margin
reading: and Ionanan, Luc. 3. and the names from Israel in Egypt, being full
many: show they knew Ptolomies Egypt should fall: many co^teyne, Psalm. 89. as
Zorobabelidae, Mat. 1. many other special stories; chiefly Towns full many,
call to Seleucidae and Lagidae: as Antiochia, Seleucia, Philadelphia, and such.
Many are cleared by Thalm. Ierusalemy, as Lazar, for Eleazar: and Alphai for
Chalphai a. s. in the fathers stead: and such. The Greek and Latin in one
family; Alexander and Rufus, show that the Thalmud lies, bringing Jesus our
Lord his days to the Maccabees times. The name Marck and Paul, and all the
Latin terms show, that, under the Romans Christ was on earth.

Epilogue.
Thus when every word should be handled alone: and words tossed in disputation
handled alone: the whole book would be soon eaten: and millions would be able
to Prophecy: and to defend the faith, against the Beast that comes out of
the pit, of Satan's deepenesse: and to make Seniorie of true Bishopps: that
unlearned pseudo-piscopi, should no longer pine better learned in prison: sage
and learned be lawful Episcopi, bestowing revenues aright: but nobles ought,
and lower gentry to be the best learned, and to keep all in sage dealing. So
the King of Locustes would soon loose his crown. The 2. olive trees in
Zachary, which pour oil into the golden Candlestick, are they, who not by
might, but by Gods spirit, as they under Aggei and Zachary built the Temple.
The chief ruler was holden as anointed: so King Josias, though none but the
first of the house, as David, or in stir as Solomon for Adonias: and Ioash
for Athalia, and Ioachaz for elder Ioakim, were anointed. The high sacrificer
was of course: so both states were under the two olives: and when all be
sacrificers, Apo. 1. Then the governor that provides for bread, and they who
labor in word, are the two olives; that give matter of light, to the golden
Candlestick. Clothed in sackcloth: in sadness of their mind: considering how
the gold is darkened.

The restorers of the Gospel, be as Elias.
And if any man will hurt them, fire comes out of their mouths, and eats
up their enemies: yea, if any man will hurt them, so he must be killed. These
have power to shut up the heavens; that rain, rain not in the days of their
prophesying Here, the kingdom of the beast arising from the dark pit, is
closselie compared with Israel, in Achabs days: when Baal was worshipped by
so many false prophets. And Elias knew none but him self, left of true
religion in Israel: 1. King. 19. 10.
and the Altars, which GOD tolerated extraordinary, were all broken down. The
Papists damn themselves mightily, when they cast in our teeth: That our
company had not open policy still. Sigibertus complayneth, that at 1200.
England admitted not the Popes supremacy: So he answers Papists. And still
our commune Laws made it treason, to appeal unto the Pope: and holy Wickliffe
condemned him as freely as any in our times: Wickliffe, that set over the
Bible into English: Wickliffe, that taught how the common Laws would utterly
fall the Pope: Wickliffe, whose Bible many yet have: the Copiers of which show,
where the Church of God was. Such had the spirit of Elias, which called for
fire from heaven into Bohemia, and Prage, and Saxony, to burn much of Rome:
as Elias called fire from heaven to burn two Captains, and two fifties: so
Eliseus called fire from Hazael, that brent up Israel; And John Baptist,
called for fire from heaven, that brent up all Herodes house. And as Elias
staide rain three years and an half, so Eliseus spirit, brought famine to
Samaria: and the Christians in Claudius days: and the martyrs by the black
horse, bring corn to be weighed as spice, for dearth: so still God sends
famine for his martyrs.

The Martyrs be as Moses.
These have power to turn the waters into blood: and to strike the earth with
any plague, so often as they will.

This shows Rome to be a new Egypt: still rebelling against Moses, and
therefore has plagues to the same effect.

1. Egypt had waters turned to blood: so Rome, chap. 11. and 16.

2. Egypt swarmed with frogs: Rome has all the plagues of Egypt but two.
so Rome, chap. 16.

4. Egypt was plagued with serpents; and all savage: so the Locustes had tails
like scorpions: and their plaguers had horses with Lions mouths: and their
tails had heads like to serpents: and the Caesares people were spent by the
beasts of the earth.

5. A plague killed the beasts of Egypt: so the Caesares people, 6.

6. Boyles vexed Egypt: so the marked of the beast. Apo. 16

7. Hail Fire vexed Egypt: so, Rome hail and fire mixed with blood, chap. 6.
and chap. 16. great hail.

8. Locustes, ate the fruits of Egypt: Locustes, strangers swarm, Apo. 9.

9. Darkness, vexed Egypt: the throne of the beast is darkened. Thus God
compares propre Egypt: and the king of Locustes Egypt: how they that follow
Moses Law, and Prophecy: and bid the king of Locustes grant freedom to
Israel, still plague their Pharaoh.

And when they had ended their martyrdom, the beast which arises out of the
deep, shall make war with them: and shall kill them and their carcasses
shall lie in the large Common weal: which is called spiritually, Sodoma and
Egypt: where also the Lord was crucified. For doctrine of unclean spirits,
Note, how and why Rome is called Egypt and Sodom, and Babel, chapter 18. and
compare the old stories of the old Test. with Rome.
they are termed, as a City brent from heaven: for many plagues, by Egypt: for
good note, a broad City, as Romes policy was broad and large. And for a most
sure note, the City, policy and authority large: in which the Lord was
crucified. This name strikes the nail upon the head.

Of the City which crucified the LORD.
Thalmud Ierusalemy notes in Sanedrin, and Maymonie; that fouretie years
before the destruction of Jerusalem; causes of life and death were taken away
from Israel: so they teach, that Christ was not crucified in the policy of
Jerusalem, but under Pontius Pilate, in the Roman policy: as the four
Evangelistes record carefully. When the Sanedrin concluded to kill Christ,
they brought him to Pilate: he cleared him; yet whipped him, and delivered him
to be crucified. And the Roman soldiers showed all wickedness. 1. They
brought him into the Common hall. 2. They gathered the whole band against him.
3. They put off his own apparel, and put in mockage a scarlat robe upon him.
4. They platted a crown of thorns, and laid it upon his head. 5. They kneeled
in mockage, and said, All hail King of the Jews: and spate upon him; and with
a reed they stroke him on the head: and when they had ended mocking of him,
they put off the robe, and put his own clothes on him, and brought him to be
crucified: and pierced his hands and his feet: and pierced his side with a
spear, and cast lotts for his coat. These so great contempts from Romans the
vilest in the world, against the Lord Eternal, could never be put up. But that
Rome should be the misery in tyranny, while the world stood, Pilate killed
him self; and the Emperors for 300. years were miserable. And Rome, by many
spoiled: and since Popes supremacy a new Egypt; Now as the Jews, who betrayed
Christ, are slaves over the earth: so Rome that went further, was to be
revealed, to have all curses: the old serpents poison, chap. 12. Cains murder
of Abel, chap. 13. a Deluge, chap. 12. Biting of tongues, chap. 16. consumption
as the cursed brent Cities, cha. 11. Egypts misery told above: Iosuahs hail,
cha. 16. Siseraes fall at Mageddon, chap. 16. Iezabels misery from Elias,
chap. 11. Daniels beasts misery, chap. 13. and the Romans misery by Pompei
and Julius, Psalm. 97. handled in Appian fully: and as the Pope knew more then
the Caesares, so his sins were more strong against the holy Ghost: and he
should be openly Man of sin, to all sage in this world. The four
Eua^gelistes might teach the simplest this much. That seeing Rome grieved
Christ, as he complained (Isai 49. and Psalm. 22.) and felt too; most high
grief. Rome should be Satan's throne while this world stood: and all relics
of theirs a curse.

And people, tribes, tongues and nations, shall see their Carcases three days
and a half. So this City must mean a very large Common Weal, and Kingdom:
and the two in general may be full many thousands in particular. And as all
the time of persequution of the living, is three years and a half: the body
is here three days and a half.

And they shall not suffer their carcases to be put in grave. This plainly
shows the burning of Martyrs, whose bones and ashes may be seen three days
and a half; and are not put in grave. So good Bucers bones in this honor, were
taken out of the grave, not to rot there; but with pure fire, to have
consumption: as Elias in his fiery chariot, had his body consumed; and our
Father Henoch, that in his life matched the days of the sun 365. was without
pain dissolved: when God took his soul to heaven: and Moses had not man's
burial; God providing somewhat better for the ancient: that they with out us
were more perfect, and for rare honor to their persons, though by the doctrine
of the Gospel above the Law, we have the perfecter: but no whit to souls joy.
But as they with smaller helps passed us far, in following God: so their
mind here was infinitely fuller of graces, then ours: though the joy of
aeternall life is aequall to all. In not suffering the best men in the world to
be buried; the City that crucified Christ, is openly the throne of Satan.

And they that dwell on the earth, shall rejoice over them and be glad: and
send gifts one to another: because these two prophets tormented the dwellers
upon the earth. The dwellers on the earth are the Locustes, and their friends
earthly minded: and feared the companies of sound Christians; because they
taught Princes to hate the Popes religion, and Pride, and Wealth, and
Monasteries. The Hypocrites immitated the Jews; Hester. 9.
who upon the death of Amalekites kept in open Towns, the xiiij. of Adar, with
joy and banquet, and wake day, and sending of gifts one to another. These two
Doctores of Divinity (Prophet is here in that sense) were such a torment to
the Papists: as the first martyrs to the profane Caesares: who taught that
they were not Diui, and had no religion but from unclean spirits.

And after three days and an half, spirit of life from God entered into them:
and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon them that beheld
them. In his Vision of the Lords day, he has by light and darkness three
days and an half, resembled unto him: for viewing of the martyrs, from the
eyesight, to the mind: thus we must turn it. When men behold the bones and
ashes of the martyrs, they hold them not dead, but passed from death to life:
because they died for honor to Gods plain religion: teaching to honor GOD
only: and to receive aeternall life only by his mercy in CHRIST, the only
Rock: and to pray only to GOD: and to have a sure faith in him: and to loathe
all proceeding that is not agreeable to Gods holy word; and that it has a
plain and sure meaning.

The old Martyrs for these grounds were in honor with the Pope: these two
armies of Doctores died in the same cause, therefore their enemies hearts must
needs confess, that they are gone to heaven: even as if they had heard them
called up, and seen to ascend as follows.

And they heard a loud voice from heaven, saying unto them: Come up hither: and
they went up to heaven: and their enemies saw them. As the case of Elias was to
the body, so the Martyrs is to the soul: expressed bodily in this vision.

Of all souls passage at death.
It is appointed for all men once to die, and then comes judgment, Eb. 9. so
all souls must, when they leave the body, return to God that gave them: to
judgment for every hid thing, good or evil, Ecc. 12. 2. Cor. 5. so all
ascend, Ecc. 3. And only the souls of the beast descend.

The commune place is called in Greek Haides: and the happy part of it, is
heaven to Abraham, Eb. xi. Luc. 18. And a place of burning torment to the
wicked. The faithful went hence to Gods eternal tabernacle, Leuit. 26. 2.
Cor. 5. Mat. 8. Luc. 13. our Lord, Ioh. 15. and 16. Luc. 23. Eb. 9.

Of Purgatory.
The impudency of them which would establish Purgatory, is unspeakable.
Moses has not one syllable that way: therefore it can not be in religion.
They that wrote in Judah for the Maccabees story, make but two states: as
resurrection to honor, and shame from Dan. 12.

Saint Paul professing difference from Scribes, but in the incarnation and
resurrection of Christ: where they hold but Paradise and Gehenna: concludes,
that he held no more places for souls. 1. Cor. 3.
Where Saint Paul handles a commune place, of teachers; what doctrine will
abide sound: what fire of judgment will consume as stubble: they that hence
would have souls fire, out of this world, little regard Paul. He taught
nothing but what Moses and the Prophets taught. But no Thalmudiques, who best
knew their tongue, could find a purgatory in the^: therefore Saint Paul
taught it not.

Of the second of the Maccabees.
The second of the Maccabees, does the Pope must aestime, chap. 12. for
sacrifice for the dead, but little considers the vileness of that book.
Jews would tell him that it was Hagada; a fable made upon phrases: as where
they sacrifice, Ezr. 2. and no mention is of fire: he feigneth a most
ridiculous fable, of fire hid by the sacrificers, when they were carried to
Persia forsooth; not Babylon; and found by their posterity, turned into a
thick water; which when wood and sacrifice was brought: Nehemias bade them
anoint both with this water: and the Sun shone, and kindled a great fire.
Who would not judge this to be a most ridiculous fable. By what wit could the
sacrificers dream of such matter, that fire could be turned into water, or by
shun-shining kindled, please God. It must be kept unquenched. The whole consent
of Jews in the chain of their Cabala says, fire from heaven kindled the
sacrifice. A man would think the whole Nation in a sensible matter, should be
of more credit then obscure Jason of Cyren.

Moreover Zorobabel of Salathiel; not Nehemias of Chilkia, was governor at the
return. But iesters upon phrases, in Iarchi, make Cyrus and Artax all one;
because Cyrus end is not recorded. So in Iarchi they make Zorobabel and
Nehemias to be all one: for memory of phrase: that Zorobabels remoning is not
recorded. They that cannot judge betwixt a ridiculous fable, and a sad story,
are in great darkness. So the fable, of Ieremias, hiding the Tabernacle, and
the Arc and Altar of Incense in mount Choreb, Such, the Apost. only speaks
of, Tit. 1. 14. and many other places: and he writing by the spirit, could not
cross the spirit, Romans 15. 4.
is not heard of in the Thalmud; nor agreeable to reason. And the Law of the
eternal God, not to regard Jews fables, here takes place: and they be
lawless that break that Law. This much for the whole book, made one from
five of Jason of Cyren: that little knew Moses, or yet Ierusalems story.

Of Iudahs sacrifice.
In Iudahs sacrifice, the Writers speech doteth: Judah doubted not, but that
they slept in godliness, Chapter 12. 45. And what fool ever spoke so
senseless as this is; if he had not hoped for the resurrection, it had been
in vain to pray for the dead, verse. 44. Now, what sense can be in that
speech, that sacrifice should help the resurrection: The story durst not
touch any ease to the soul, for that had strouen with all Talmudiques. Maymony
shows, they offered for the dead; the heir did in Siphra Col. 31. But no
otherwise, then as paying a debt, which the predecessor should have paid
here: And that, when they doubted not of the others salvation; but honoring
him in paying that which the other should have paid. And Jason of Cyren harped
at such a string, but could not bring his mind about. Now the Popes Purgatory
is helped nothing hence: from a trifling book, and senseless speech: and
wrested beyond all religion of the Jews.

Epilogue.
As the two Prophets were seen called up into heaven in vision: so all
faithful souls by scripture truth, are to be seen called hence into the joy
of Christ.

What the Greek Fathers thought of Purgatory.
The Greek Fathers should be thought to understand the Greek Testament,
better then Latin: and none of them could find Purgatory there; but grant all
holy a passage hence to the Kingly Palaces: some staggered at the speech Ebr.
chap. xj. They without us were not perfected. Saint Paul in all that heavenly
Epistle, disputes of the Gospel, perfection to the Law; and of perfection of
Doctrine in this world: and he had showed in the same Chapter, That the Fathers
desired the heavenly City, and God prepared that for them: so they, who deny
the Fathers perfection, by S. Paul, mark him not well. Basil did once, upon
Psalm. 49. but called himself back, upon Psalm. 15. and often. And Chrysostom,
who seemed to stagger, placed Lazarus and Abraham in the kingdom of heaven, 2. Corinthians. homil. 6. Mat. 8. Luc. cap. 13. and the principal Divines, in
Theophyl. upon Luc. chap. 23. and upon the Psalms; and in Photius Library,
Philo in Greeks, and Josephus, I have cited, and Azarias, who turned into
Ebrew, Philoes words. And the Greeks be greatly iniuried, when Limbus
Patrum, is fastened upon them.

Hegesippus, and others that wrote the Maccabees martyrdom, doubted not but
that they went hence to salvation, Dan. 12. And it had been an infinite
disgrace to our Greek Doctores, if they could not see so much by the New
Testament. Now, let us return to the text.

And at that hour there was a great earth quake, and a tenth part of the City
fell: and there were killed by the earth quake 7000. persons of men, and the
rest were afraid: and gave glory to the God of heaven. When the Popes
persequution came to ripeness, then Princes by wars shake him off: as in
Germany, England, Zwitzerland and Netherland. And Christ here roareth like a
Lion: and the 7. thunders tell, the thunder of his power. In Venice, he is now
a mockage; and has but Spain to his strength: Queen Mary's persequutio^, is
now turned against the Pope: and his stirring Irish to rebel, undid Ireland;
And now his men the chiefest in learning, stick little to him: and speak to
his overthrow, not much less then we do. And now the Dukedom of Cleave, will
make him weak in Germany; If Geneueans would leave their Gehe^nean torment;
and our side prophecy sou^dly: we should weake^ him more by learning then by
strength of spear: seeing the best learned of his own side labor for us: as
Arias Montanus has done in much, about Plantines great Bible: and the best
learned Papists rejoice to see Daniel his 7. fold comfort of Nathans house:
and the certain year of the Lords supper, to have no more the body and blood of
a Lamb, his body and blood of Covenant: but Bread and Wine to show, that no
more flesh and blood may be in sacrifice. In Ebrew, Greek and Latin they saw
Jews request answered: and were very thankful in speech and letters: and show
that now they would soon cast off the king of locusts: if they might have good
maintenance to hold up better truth: and liberal arts that serve trueths
honor.

Of the third woe, and last Trumpet.
The second woe is past: behold, the third woe comes: And the seventh Angel
sounded the Trumpet: and there were great voices in the heaven, saying; the
Kingdoms of the world; are now of our God; and his Christ: And he shall reign
for ever and ever. Where the kingdom of the beast Abyssigena, bred from the
Pit, is gone: all the Church proclaim; that CHRIST will have no more
alterations; until he show heaven to all his. So the speech passes to the
worlds end. The Prophets communely pass over matters of common state: as
needless to be handled specially: and stepp from one thing of plague,
presently to Messiahs kingdom: as notably in Hosea, after mention of Isreal's
scattring, the kingdom of Messiah is joined. So wen Esaias had spoken of Babels
fall, after Sanecheribs; then he steppeth thence to CHRIST his preaching, By
the voice of a crier in the wilderness. So Daniel tells of his kingdoms,
their coming up: their urging of Idolatry: their chastisement: their
overthrow, omitting matters of ordinary course; where the present age would
look to it self. So Apoca. 6. handles the profane Caesares: and thence,
omitteth the Churches sliding away, till it come to an absolute fall. And then
tells of tyranny: and after tyrannies end; steppeth to the worlds end.

The third woe, is the plague of the enemies: by Kings of good religion:
continually unto the end.

The sum of the Bible.
Great voices, express the voice of whole nations: and the Kingdom of God and
Christ, the matter of all the Bible. Adam had that theme, to preach 930.
years. Sem the great, by S. Paul and Gamalies likened to the eternal author of
justice and peace, figured this matter: and confirmed Abraham in this, 75.
year. and rejoiced in Elam, trodden down by Abraham: And all the large writings
breathed by the holy Trinity, teach no other matter but this: and punishments
for contempt of this: and nothing should be suffered in the Church, but to this
sum. In the prayer which our Lord prescribed for a common form to the whole
Congregation; this conteyneth all: Thy Kingdom come: thy will be done on earth
as it is in heaven. So when John Baptist opened the kingdom of Christ: when
the Leuiticall policy was to cease: and all nations should serve God by Laws
written in the heart, Romans 2. Ier. 31. Then the kingdom of heaven is said to
come, when men humble themselves to receive the justice of Christ; and to be
clothed with the SUN. The fullness of kingdom comes when the holy soul
(...) leaves this world, and goes to God, and there reigns for ever: and
sees the Locusts pitt-bred, in Haides torment, fried in fire for ever and
ever. The pitt-bred beasts had sun and air much darkened: when they knew
not, whether man's soul ascends or descends: and whither the holy goes, to
heaven or to hell. This saying, Caterchesthaeis haidon, is neither more nor
less, then to go to God: when the godly, have a light place of joy: and the
godless, a dark place of torment. And this exposition cutteth off at the
least fifteen bad opinions, direct bad for this article: by consequents
fifteen score. The Kingdom here spoken off is termed Haides in the Creed:
and we may not put Hell for Heaven; nor descending, for going to God.
Purgatory falls when Haides has but two parts: Heaven and Hell; and with
it all Popery: Satan entered into many unthankful Caytifes: that could not
suffer the holy souls going into the kingdom, to be most eloquently spoken
in the Greek Creed: if they descend not to Hell as our Lord did in the
Creed; they shall ascend up, and before Gods throne have an hell for ever and
ever.

And the 24. Elders, which sat on their thrones before God, fell upon their
faces; and worshipped God, saying: We praise thee, O Eternal, who is, and who
was, and who will be; that thou take upon thee, thy great power, and do
reign. As the Nations have kept a stir, thine anger is come, and the time of
the dead to be judged; and to give rewards to thy servants the Prophets, and
to the holy, and to such as fear thy name. The Elders be the Governors of Gods
people in all offices: and specially in sage usage of Scripture, on assembly
days: all learned in the scriptures, and able to give faithful exhortation
out of it; and all borne in wealth, are brought up amiss, that are not
gronuded in young years, to read with delight in the holy Book. Albion sees,
who has opened that way: and faithless Jews confess: though Athea^ pa^ches
for envy burst. These have thrones before God: not Buyshops and Archbuyshops of
Papists; But chosen of the holy congregation: to teach what God tells: but as
Moses gave no commandment of his own head; nor Christ in the flesh, but as he
taught in Moses: so these speak all from scripture: few words by old plain
warrant: and yet in few lines shake of all popery and all errores. In number
they be 24. as knowing the XII. tribes story; how the tribe should not depart
from Judah, till his child came: and how the XII. Apostles gathered the XII.
tribes, to make them the foundation, of the heavenly Jerusalem. These are not
many: but 24. yet a reasonable good number. Many nobles in Albion and others,
that live by their own revenues, study the Bible, with as good dexterity, as
any feed-men: and know it better then some: after 42000. Brabant Gilders
charges, and again 40000 crowns charges: such be humble and know Jehovah, who
is, who was, who will be still, the same, to rule all ages to one sum of
salvation in Christ: how in him, GOD, was manifested in the flesh, and taken up
in glory, and the salvation of all ages. Enosh age, the flood, Babel, Jeroboam,
felt the price of despising this life. And after the great salvation begun by
the Lord himself to be spoken, and confirmed by his hearers, with all guiftes
of the spirit: for contempt, the world was soon given over: to Arius, Pope,
and Turk, yet God sealed a few, and at length places them in open kingdoms
to be seen: though still the greater part in open policy, cares but for this
life: as in Salomons days, all were of great show: but soon after his death,
Ephraim turned all but Judah; to worship calves, not God. So great Constantinus
help Christians, but few of his men cared for God. So here, Popes Idols, and
murder of the saints, cause God to shake him to dust: as he shoke the
Macedonians after Antiochus Epiphanes persequution: That the Jews received
their own kingdom, under the Maccabees: and that means the psalms, 97. and
99. and others about them; how the power of Christ breaks Idol kingdoms;
that God should take the protection of all into his own hands. So here
Elders show Popes strength cast of; that others be so strong as he: But as
under the Maccabees new corruption, left scant any in faith for Christ his
first coming: so it will be for the second: that scant faith will be found
in the earth: The true Elders complain not for men's negligence: but look for
Christ his second coming: upon the Popes full fall; as upon his first coming
the Macedonians had not a foot of ground.

Of the Worlds end.
No man can tell, when the world shall end, nor when the Pope shall be
utterly consumed by the spirit of Christ his mouth: But that many hundredth
years remain yet; we have many arguments of likelihood.

Of the Jews calling.
S. Paul shows that the Jews shall first be called, Romans 12. But Christians
in name, are miraculously bent against that: very near open Atheism: so their
calling cannot be yet: when Christian states swear to hinder that. Agent
Barton, moved a Jew, to request an explication of the new Testament; how it
is the perfection to the old. Two copies of one Epistle from a Rabbi, the best
learned in the East, came to England; in a strange Character: such as was never
seen in the West, and in style, unlike all Christians vein. And in date, and
particular circumstances; so, for the writers occasions, that all the wits in
the world, of the West, could not feign such a Character, style, and
particular matter. From England, after long viewing, these copies were sent to
Basil, to the party for whose work they were written. The Epistle is
printed: and the sum, (as request was made) comes forth in English. Now
mark the recompense, from a most thankful nation. Libellers the impudentest
that ever were in the world, that scoff a Conclusion of their own auctores
allowed sillogisme; a most learned work that brake Gehennean torment; (the
cause is well known) these rave against him, whom the Q. Agent made the Jew
believe to be the ablest of all Christians, to handle our Gospel in Hebrew
vein: And this scoff, from a most unlearned wight: is allowed by the Buyshops.

Because, your arms be the owls, you think you must bring owls to Athenes:
and because, the Rabbin saluteth you, as you feign, you think you are the
only Thalmudique of the world. The simple people were persuaded, that the
Epistle was forged: thinking, that, no slave of Satan, durst ever be so
impudent, as to borrow the princes authority, to a slander: and seeing two
impressions, of the Libel were soon sold under authority; they held not (as
they ought) the slanderers, to be Anathema Maran Atha: but supposed they spoke
true, and joined with them to serve Satan. Now Christians should have the first
benefit, in showing the Harmony of both Testaments: and where Christians
hinder their own good; GOD will give them no honor for Jews. The like prank,
one of Geneua played; being advertised of the Jews petition, and being
requested to lend Sadaias Arabique Moses, kept a coile as though the matter was
forged: that many marueiled, and gave information of him: and when the Senate
gave leave, to printe the Jews Epistle, and answer; he by one Grinetus forbad
to use the Senates leave: and bred much coile. Thereupon a Greek oration,
accusing him of machmadisme, is sent to the Senate. They call him to his
answer. Then he says, he thought the Jews Epistle was forged. The Libell
from England cited him, and hardened him in that. And others in Germany kept a
stir; (that, thereupon I called his divinity to account) and altered Princes
from great promises, toward Ebrew opening of the Bibles Harmony.

Of our Kings rare bent: to the honor of the Bible.
Our King vowed, to the Bibles honor (so that the party would, and might
conveniently, take the work in hand) 1596. a thousand pounds a year; after
that he reigned in England. Satan hindered the workman, by one that made
Gehennea torment, of going to Paradise, in the Creed: And blamed the workman,
as deceived: until he cleared himself; no modesty would request the Kings
pension; nor no wisdom grant it. The more religious promises be made; the
more circumspection is to be had, to the work of their ground, which failing
the Promise is no Promise. Also the BB. would take the Bibles clearing in
hand: for which work much of the old purpose began: so the workman was content
to be freed. After questions were cleared, a cold letter moves the king, with
mention of old bent. The King most redily tells by a Knight, of a royal
pension, to open the Bible against Jews: the offer is accepted: a book is
printed: chief objections are dissolved, and after nobles, an high preferred
Clerk, has a copy. He denies the Kings message: and said he would stay the
King from allowance to Ebrew clearing of the Bible: where the King was so
willing: and a Clerk so cross: A learned man wrote unto me, that God means
not yet, to call the Jews. But of duty, I have now 12. yer. celebrated the
Kings ready bent: and most constant faith. And I see that God stirs
unlearned scholars, to force a calling of them to account. Now by Ebrew, and
Greek, Jews must be taught: and Zwitzerland would persuade me, that they
knew none by story of my study that way: and I think some hundred of years
will pass, before another of like pains will arise to call them.

Of the Popes scholars.
The Popes scholars in Latin, Greek, and Ebrew; are terrible to ours: as D.
Pistorius, of Friburge was: and they so play upon our errores: that they have
turned millions so from us. Geneueans checking of the Greek Testament, makes
Jesuits use the Latin, and reject the Greek: many armies would not so much
help them: Besides rash terms: as Deus agit, excitat, impellit, mouet
peccatores. These give Jesuits victory. God, leads them into temptation, to
show his judgment: but in light of conscience warns against ill. But the
wicked rebel against light. Again these; asystate, stand not together. Deus
operatur omnia in ominibus; in good and bad: and Deus non agit in malis: Beza
has both: And this no better: Deus agit in impiis deserendo. This trifling of
unlearned disputing, increases papistry exceedingly. So; this cannot be
denied: God has set unto anger, all that he calls not to faith: But he
furthereth not by inward instinct, their destruction. He hardens by patience,
or too great affliction. This speech, he praedestineth men to destruction, is
not from God. For that term is used in furthering the means; as in the godly,
for salvation. So one rash term of a weak schole, will turn many away.

Of Daniel.
Long did Beza roar in french homilies against the Pope, from Daniel: Jesuits
reply, that no syllable there medleth with him: so all their powder without
pellet is lost: till Lemanus-lake-fishers emend their nets, they shall not
catch 153. great Fishes: and they must launch on the right side.

Of the poor Indians calling.
Of loctan, Genesis 10. come the East-Indians, their names famous in heathen; for
nationes, mountains and rivers, tell that; Their contempt of Godly teaching
Christ was great, Noe, Sem, Arphaxad, Selah, Eber, Phaleg, brother to Ioctan,
has cast the^ of hitherto. The West-Indians seem to come of the East: as both
speak some Ebrew. Now God drives us to both Indians, not for Pepper and
Tobacho: but in time, to show his name. And the Jesuits in teaching the holy
Trinity, Person, and Justice of Christ, may save many: and the Pope shall have
an outward reward of longer success, and some hundreths of years must be
spent this way.

Of the old opinion of 6000. years.
God has cast old ages into a pleasant frame of measures: of them for Jews,
and from Jews, I dedicated an Ebrew work to the Landtgraue of Hessia. Now
thousands I will touch. In 3000. exactly, the Temple was fully furnished: even
to the Arc. In 4000. exactly the Romans destroyed the second Temple: if
without it Messiah days have 2000. years from the year of Christ 1609. of
Adam 5536. One as Heber may come to the worlds end, by 464. yer. The truth God
only knows: reason tells affairs in work require such time: But no
particular person is sure of one day: but all should watch, when the Bridegroom
comes.

And to destroy them, that destroy the earth.
Although no Creature but Angels and men know God: yet the close bent of all
Creatures is framed to serve man for Christ: God bending them so. And in that
sense, every thing is weary of their toil, Eccl. 1. and groneth looking for
the Redemtion of the Children of God. Romans 8. and being turned to service of
Idols groan in Gods estieme, as corrupted: such was the old world in
corrupting their ways: such were Babel builders, till heathen came to God: and
almost all to this day. And Apoc. 5. All creatures give glory to the Lamb, in
service of Christians. But alas, men to this day would never search Gods word,
the wealthy, and principal of state, but remit that over unto others: as a
base work, for themselves to regard; whereby God cast off the world.

And the Temple of God was open in the heaven: and the Arc of his Covenant,
was seen in his Temple: and there were lightnings and voices and thunders, and
earthquake and great hail. After papistries overthrow, Christ who is the
Temple, and the Arc, who has the Law within him: and is the mercy seat, shall
be opened to the few saved: and God will pay Papists with wars, for the hail
and fire that they mixed with blood: troublesome meteores eloquently express
troubles of state: as before our Lords first coming, the Romans miseries,
destroying themselves, were a wonder to historiques: because Crassus robbed the
Temple: and Pompei before made Israel serve Rome; and Brutus with Cassius; and
Antonius with Cleopatra: and again Julius: so Rome that still will crucify
Christ, shall have as great stirrs to warn them of utter ruin. But by wars,
profanesse breeds; to all sides: that when the SON OF MAN comes, he shall
scant find faith upon the earth. The best way, to keep faith is to exercise
our universities in the Ebrew and Greek Testament: and to leave civil
government to sage courts fit for it: as Zuricke in Zuitzerland does; that,
Scholars tyranny make not new papistrie. And thus once, all is reueiled unto
the end. New visions tell the same matter: for better clearness.

CHAP. XII.
A description of the Church.
AND, a great sign was seen in the heaven: a woman clothed with the sun. With
the moon under her feet: and a crown of 12. stars upon her head: and being
with child, cried in travail; and peigned to bear child. THE woman is the
church, through the song of songs, New Visions opening the former.
and there pure as the sun, here, clothed with Christ the Sun of Justice:
And the state of the faithful, is called through this book, heaven; and they
are a great sign to the profane world, to wonder at. The Moon, and all under
the Sun, is contemned of the faithful: and the doctrine which the 12.
Apostles, equal in knowled and authority, delivered to the world, is the
Crown, and they be 12 stars: Judas Iscariot fell;a star from heaven; and
Matthias became a son of consolation in his stead; to keep still the number
of XII. for the XII tribes: and as S. Paul travailed of the Galathians, that
is; of Christ, to be formed in them; that they frustrate not the Gospel, by
holding circumcision, now abrogated: So the faithful travailed in soul, to
have Christ brought forth to heathens knowledge: that all might know, that all
this world was made obedient to a man, At the first, which man fell from God,
Genesis 3.
his first day, 1 John 1. 1. and 3. 8. and 5. 20.
and then God opened his Counsel, that the Son Eternal would be made man of
a woman, to destroy the works of the Angels that fell: who all are
collectiuely, satan, the enemy. Satan brought Adam to lose the life of his
soul: Ephesians. 2. 1.
and his body to death; and dust: and all this world to corruption; Christ
kindled light in Adams soul; and after 930. years heaviness, for sin took
it to his joy, and will raise up the body, and make a new world: Romans 5.
that all men who will receive the abundance of grace, of the gift of justice,
may reign by Christ: and all who will not regard this mercy, so clear as the
sun: they all by Adams fall dead in sin; shall be damned for ever with the
Diuils; This is the travail of the Christian mind. Speech of this is in all
books of the Old Testament, in Adams tongue; in all the new, in Greek; made
most common for this Gospel. And Law with Gospel, expounded by grounds of
art, which enemies grant; should be the travail of our mind. And if
Academies, had brought up their scholars in Ebrew and Greek exercises, for the
holy eternal Trinity in Unity: and for kissing the SON to happiness: Psalm.
2. By likelihood of man's reason, the world had benefull of true Christians,
where as now our Papes, Archbuyshopps, and Buyshopps; know not one letter,
prick, accent, of the Law; what authority it has from God. A pitiful matter;
that such blind, should be leaders. But the blind will no other leaders: So
God cannot pity them; who will make known them that be his: and despise them
that despise him: that they poor Caytifes shall perish for ever: and feel the
aeternall wrath of him, whose mercy they have despised: while they counted the
mercies offered in Christ, to be but folly.

Of the Profane Caesar: and Pope reviving of him, both comprised in the body,
and tail, of one Dragon.
Another sign was seen in the heaven. For behold, there was a great ruddie
Dragon; with 7. heads and ten horns: and upon his heads seven diademes. And
his tail draws a third part of the Stars of heaven, and cast them unto the
earth. John saw with his eyes in Vision; that which he and all the Apostles:
as S. Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2. saw in their mind. That from Rome, the Ruler, should
rule; till he were taken away: After, thence man of sin should arise. Both be
here in one dragon: which the profane Caesares and the Popes can not perceive.
They who be of the heavenly state, they all, do see, the Dragon is the Diuill,
or accusar of God: the great is the Devils power by Rome: the ruddy bloody
persecution. His seven heads, are seaue^ states of Rome, over THE FAITHFVL:
as the Jews knew their story full well: Pompei by Rome was an Emperor in the
East: The seaue^ heads afflicting the Church.
But perished near: in the land of Cham. So in Judah, M. Crassus was after
him, armed over Judah as a King, for Rome, who robbed the Temple of Salem, of
Abraham's house; but at Abraham's Charan, he and his army had a most famous
destruction. Julius Caesar made Cleopatra Lady of Judah, who perished in
Capitolio for that. Brutus and Cassius force, after was a King for Rome: They
by Antoni perish. Antoni has the East and marieth Cleopatra, and rules Judah,
and both perish. So five diademes of the Dragon perish. The 6. state is the
wholle power which crucified Christ; and his members: till our Helenaes son,
left Rome: Rome is condemned both in these, and the other; of Kings, Consuls,
Decemvires, Dictatores, Triumuires, etc.
and New Troy; to be a pillage to Alaricus, Giezerichus,, Theodoricus, and
Totilas for old persecuting of martyrs. The seventh is the Popes wealth,
getting lands by S. Peter's forged supremacy: and setting up the Empire in the
West. These be the seven diademes; spoken, to the Jews plain understanding.
Heathen stories may fit Romes 7. other states. The more fall out fit: (as
often many do to one speech) the more Rome (that crucified Christ) is
condemned: when GOD turns continual revolution to have Rome called into
mind. Moreover the allusion is to Daniels four beasts, which had 7. heads.
The Lion, one; the Bear, one; the Leopard four; the fourth beast, one. The
Roman state winning all those contreyes of the East, are fitly noted by their
arms: And specially by the then horns. The Seleucidae by five kings vexed
Judah by wars, against Lagidae: and Lagidae by so many again, wasted Judah:
So that Greek beast in one parted Kingdom, had 10. horns: From that beast,
the Roman beast has also, ten Kingdoms, at the least: and under Augustus, and
under the Pope, rekoned to that number, Strabo 17. Steuch. contra Vallum. Lib.
2. so, these matters be all, most plain.

Of the tail.
The profane Caesares persecution, moved few Christians, the stars of
heaven, to fall. But the tail of the Empire, the false prophet, that speaks
lies, he as Antiochus, Daniel 8. makes many fall from heaven: praetending
religion, with much praetense and no substance.

The combat of the Roman Empire, with the Church.
And the Dragon stood before the woman, being in travail; that when she bore
her child, he might devour it: And she bare a manly son, which will rule all
nations, with a scepter of iron. And the child was taken up to God: and to his
throne. The allusion is from the days of Christ, borne in Bethleem: when Satan
by Herodes swords, would have devoured him: but his mother fled with him to
Egypt: and after that Satan hoped to devour him in the grave, he was taken up
into heaven: so when Christians souls travailed to breed Christ: the Emperors
stormed; psalm. 2.
to devour that doctrine as David told, Ps. 2. But they brought forth into the
light of the world: the SON would bruise all nation-with an iron scepter; as he
did bruise the image in Daniel. And showed that his throne is in heaven, being
taken up, unto the aeternall King. And the Christians fled into the
wilderness; as CHRIST did in the time of his preaching, or half seven, Dan.
9. and often handled in the Gospel: in Eusebius handled: and of Beda, who
cited the Apoc. allusions. M. Scaliger and others that make mo years of our
Lords preaching, spent ill, good hours. All time of affliction, is sweetly
termed by our Lords affliction, to be as his, of days 1260. though it were of
300. yer. under Caesares resistance: and 600. under Popes: enemies to John's
Apocalypse. The speech is full of comfort: calling us unto the afflictions of
Christ himself; who reckoned all his own days: and will have all our tears
in his bottle: and pay all dogs and Doegs for Cerberean barking.

A Commentary upon the former vision.
And there was war in heaven: MICHAEL and his Angels made war with the
Dragon: and the Dragon and his Angels made war: but held not strength:
neither was there place found any more for them in the heaven. And the great
Dragon: the old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, who deceives the wholle
world, he was cast out: again I say, he was cast and his Angels were cast with
him, into the earth. The state of the faithful, here, is sweetly called
he^auen: to show our certeinty of hope, for the propre heaven: as the word of
Law and Gospel is as sure to us, as if we saw the third heaven; that, above
the air, and above the stars, as S. Paul did, at his first calling, to a
comfort against all his following afflictions: so the holy Daniel, that in one
image made abridge from the end of the old Testament, unto the beginning of the
new, called the state after abrogation of Moises, the Kingome of heaven. John
Baptist does begin with his tongue. The kinddome of heaven is come. And the
aeternall WORLD, the essential WORD, who spoke and all was made, he
confirms the same speech, to show that Daniels Image was ended: and the GOD
of heaven sets up a kingdom, that cannot be corrupted: The observation of
this speech, had kept Daniel in a clear meaning: and not brought the West
Empire of Christians, for East Greek, Seleuco-Lagides athean. Nor times after
Christ, for stories teaching when he would come. The terms of the Bible be
pearls; and still beat upon the open story, for noblest matters. So Saint
Paul Ebrew. XI. speaking of the Maccabees martyrs, famous in the Talmudiques,
and after his days, historied by Greek Jews, says from Daniels last
speeches, of double resurrection; That they would not be delivered because they
looked for the better resurrection. So he shows that Antiochus persequutions
were the last mentioned in Daniel. The Romans hindered not the Jews holy
religion, till by the Pharisees they vexed our Lord himself: when he opened
the kingdom of heaven, days 1260. They who without knowledge of Daniel, would
know the Gospel, are as men that would go from one Land to another parted by
great waters without a shipp. All that care for the kingdom of heaven, will
care for him: And my pains in a third commentary, an English, a Latin, a
shorter in English, came forth by my care and charges. By the third milliones
of our simple might have known, the Prophets whole heart. But that Bargulus
Illyricus, would cast him into the Lions den: If Lions rent not his bones; I
will commend him to the God of Daniel: and the fiery flames streaming from his
throne, for his fighting for the dragon against MICAEL and his Angels.

Of MICAEL.
Michael and Gabriel, are the only holy spirits, which have names in the Law.
And they only, in heavenly Daniel, called Son of man: as admitted unto Angels
company: so Ezekiel; and only they two. From Daniel chap. 8. and 9. Gabriel is
brought, to Luc. 1. For most rare use: The wise will understand it: but the
wicked will never understand: Dan. 12. Michael is used thrice in Daniel: twice,
chap. 10. and one chap. 12. Dan. 10. verse. 13. Behold MICHA-EL, the
principal, or only of the chief Princes, is come to aid me. Daniel saw a
glorious vision of Christ: before which he fell as dead: then an Angel in the
form of a man, that is, Gabriel speaks how Christ showed his assistance;
against Cambises inhibition of the Temples building: and gives him a notation:
He that is in the form of God: from Exodus 23. The Angel which has the name
of God in him: The character or form of Gods person. Ebr. 1. 3. That does
MICAEL signify. In our Lords words, Ioh. 10. from Dan. 12. The Father, and I,
am one. As I have showed upon Dan. 12. In Dan. 10. verse. last: the matter is
playner: in these words: there is none strong for you in these affairs: but
MICHA-EL, YOUR PRINCE. Daniel acknowledged; no creature of spirits, his
PRINCE: therefore Micha-el must be the Son of GOD. So he is called chap. 12.
in the same Angels speech: Michael the great Prince, that stands up for his
people. No created spirit dare challenge, a princehood over people: so here, in
the exposition of praise, MICHAEL is expounded Christ.

Of Tobies fable.
The Jews, as I have written; in Ierusalemi, upon Dan. 8. say* their Fathers
brought with them Angels names from Babylon, Michael, and Gabriel. Then if
Angels had no names before: Tobie, that brings Asmodaeus for a spirit, must
be a late fable. Neither Thalmud Ierusalemy, nor Babilonian has that name:
Only late Rabbines. Yet the fable of Tobie, cited by Clemens of Alexandria is
elder, then the compiled Talmudes. But they are made from Writers, all, Elder
then Tobies fable. Thargum, Eccl. is a late work: and eldest Jew for record of
Asmodai, the Prince of Devils: The Pharisees had, Beelzebub Prince of Devils:
And later Jews made Prince of Devils, Ben Tzirgha, son of Leprosy. To
disgrace our faith of the SON; Prince, among the holy Angels. The wicked
Rabbines, feign a Prince among wicked spirits. But we make no created,
Angel, Prince: the Eternal Son Creator of all, is the only Angel, Prince:
And he is the Arch-angell, that could not suffer Satan, to speak bad speech
of Moses, the first King in Israel. But Jehovah, before Jehovah: said, The
Eternal rebuke thee, Satan. The Jews in Midras Rabba. Deuteronomy. chap. 33. feign,
pleading from Satan, before God, for Moses: and in Abboth Rabbi Nathan. S. Jude
telling Rabbis that they would destroy the Nation by resisting rule: brings
their own commentary, how Michael the Archangel checked Satan, for contempt of
Moses King of Israel: and gives him the high check from Zach. chap. 3. The
Eternal rebuke thee Satan So the Eternal Son before the Father, spoke in
Zachary: what in Iudes Rabbis in a like cause Michael the Arch-angell
speaks: and Zohar, Genesis col. 46. says, Where Michael is head of the holy
Angels, there Gods majesty is meant. This has Zohar. And we should not favor
Arias more, then our enemies would. Tobies fable disturbing Scriptures glory,
where even Rabbis speak for it, should no more come among holy works: then a
work of Beelzebub, Asmodaus, or Ben Tzirgha: being a leprous wicked work;
from the principal mischief of the Devil.

Of Michaels Angels.
All the true Christians are called Michaels Angels, they fight by the two
edged sword of Gods word: which originally, in the Ebrew and Greek new
Testament; is pure in writ: clear in meaning: and perfect to discuss all sage
matters. Caesares Diui were soon confuted: because all knew their profanesse:
they were soon by all sides excluded, from all men's regard: for any hope of
happy state: But the great fight here is with the King of Locustes: and his
garrisons, Satan's Angels: that they may be known, not to be the People of
God. Here is a sore combat: that of the two Prophets, chapter XI.

Of the wicked spirits names.
Dragon, old Serpent, Devil, Satan, be the names of the wicked spirits
company. King Pharaoh, Esa. 27. is a Dragon, as old Pharaoh; who, for all
Moses Rod, would be but a Serpent: So the king of Madai and Paras worshipped
in Babel, that for a month none should pray but unto him, is in the Apocrypha
fable, a Dragon, worshipped in Babylon: So the Roman Diui Caesares, and the
Pope, showing himself, in the Temple of God, as if he were God, make a Dragon:
as the old enemy works in them.

Of old Serpent.
The old Rabbis as Zohar: and Aben Ezra, and many moo, confess, that the
Angels which fell, spoke in the old Serpent. And that company is called the
old Serpent or Tempter: as Adam gave the Serpent from his nature, the name,
Tempter: The Rabbis whom I have cited, (in an Hebrew treatise of fitting
Jubilees to the year of our Lords death;) so term the Tempter: and later
Aben Ezra; though late wicked Jews turn all to fables of a natural Serpent:
who may be musselled by their own ancient.

Of Devil.
Diabolos, in Greek is the commune name of any slanderer; but applied by Jobs
translater, chap. 1. to the Ebrew Satan, enemy; where our enemy the false
accuser, goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. There
Diabolos expresses enemy, by occasion taken from Satan slandering of Job.
Saint Pet. 1. 5. takes both names. The Zohar tells upon Genesis 3. how the
Devil accuses each one, from his coming into the world, all his life. So by
the Jews, he accused Christ as an enemy to Caesar; and made him pay for
robbery. Psalm. 69. though it was not robbery for him, to say, he was the Son
of GOD. Christ held it no robbery to be eaquall to God; but the Devil the
Slanderer made Caiphas urge this as a deadly matter: so the Christians, were
slandered to the Caesares, as athean; and the reformed now are haeretiques to
Papists; some trapps we lay in their way: whereby Gods justice does whipp us by
their tongues.

Of trapps laid by our selves.
Whereas, Catelthein eis haidon, in the godly: is all one as to remove hence to
the father: Geneua denying Christ a pass, Catelthein eis haidon: denies in
tongue, that he went to the Father: And so denies all religion. Likewise
Lutherans by Vbiquity, for the humanity of Christ, wound all the doctrine of
incarnation: wherein the humanity is according to our kind, sin only
excepted: Besides, we grant to the Papists, that text of both Testaments is
corrupt: and so we weaken the auctority of scripture; and make no end of
checking the holy Greek Testam. that the Jesuits bind not it, but Ieromes
Latin with Ebrew in octauo. Also where the Apostles speak plainly to all
learned Jews: we expound them as if they had coined Phrases, to new vexation
of our spirits: and make the word seem a nose of wax. Thus, we hinder our own
fight, but some still hold the truth, that the accusation cannot be general.
The rest should be wise with them.

The Devil and his Angels, The Angel of his praesence saved the^ Isai 63.
by MICAEL that stands up for his people, who be his Angels; are banished
from the Church: and known to be unclean spirits.

A second and playner exposition, of the Dragons war.
And I heard a great voice saying in the heaven, now is come the salvation, and
power, and Kingdom of our GOD, and the auctority of his CHRIST, because the
accusar of our brethren, who accuses them before GOD day and night, is cast
down; And they have overcome by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of his
Testimony; and despised their lives unto death. Therefore rejoice ye heavens,
and they who dwell in them: woe be unto them which dwell in the Land and the
Sea: because the Devil is come to you, having great wrath, knowing that he
has but a little while. Where a company by Martyrdom show that salvation
comes only by the death of CHRIST, and are constant in that Testimony: then
troops that make the heavens kingdom here, protest they know how salvation
comes: and know Gods power, that falls the mighty state of the Pope, and
know wherein the Kingdom of God stands: And the auctority of Christ: where
the Pope had a Kingdom of Satan in his policy, through all parts, of all
commonweals: even from ruling Emperors, to the poorest that had but a
chimney, to pay a Peter-peny. The holy Testament playnelie showing our
Creatores: And how the spirit of CHRIST flootereth upon all the waters of both
Testaments, and cleared the holy story: And clears our hearts, to call upon
GOD, with a good heart, this shows in this plain sum, what the Kingdom of
God and auctority of CHRIST is. Government stands upon plain rules. The
wealthy that know CHRIST, Kings, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Knights, will study to
excel in Divinity, to be true Bishopps and Elders, to eat up the Book of the
Gospel, and to see all miscariage sagely restreined: being those that Saint
Paul and the Talmudiques meant by Pastors. And will see how by Church lands an
infinite company may be made cunning in tongues, and sense of both Testaments.
That the Angelos Ecclesiae, and daily Seniores, may be so taught in Divinity,
as men are in liberal arts: to know the wholle faculty, and the propre use,
of every holy book. And what concent all the scripture has; and where one
error puts all out of tune, but may soon be removed: so a faithful mind,
will often in a day run over all the Bible: and see all ages faithful, as
trees planted by waters: and all wicked as dust scattred by the wind. And such
will be true Bishopps; as, Cucullus non facit monachum: so a courtiers favor,
and title; makes not a Bishopp for salvation, and power, and kingdom of God,
and authority of Christ. Buy-shopps mock with GOD: but all Mordecaies will use
them as Agagites: and as leprous to the Church. So when all Gouerners in state;
be learned Bishopps, joy will be in the Church; that the Devil must go to
Land, or quiet state of the Pope, or sea wars of Emperors bad: to seek whom
he can devour. The learned dealers for the Church, will find for it, means in
persequution to be protected: Yea and to make the Land or Papisticall state, as
King H. VIII. did, dry up the rivers of the Popes persequution. In the middle
of Papistry he overthrew the Pope by Papists. Who were content to buy the
Abbeies that fed Idolatrous Locusts, and could not for stark shame deny, a
common prayer book made from the mass book, turned to English: so, so much
was chosen from the mass book, to be in English, as seemed not directly to
fight with Gods truth, and subscription for allowance to that, was no further
meant, but that the Papists could find no fault with it: Under K. E. 6. and Q.
E. the best Bishopps allowed the communion book, no further; and gave others
leave to express that, how they bare with it, until fit time of amendment.

Of the Dragons short time.
This speech shows the time, near the seventh trumpet for the worlds end,
by the Dragons tail; the Pope here meant: in his persecution: that the Devil
is fierce, knowing that he shall not be long the God of this world. And the
Pope fears least his Kingdom shall soon fall. And our Buyshopps that urge
his canons damned by our common Laws, are now in rumores, that they incense
some to beg all Buyshopps lands. Leicester went far: to chaing 40000. lib.
for rack rent: but more harm is bred by Buyshopps tyranny now. Bishopps under
King Edw. have been such, as none (but of Satan's spirit) would deny them to
be lawful Bishops. And such as agreed well with Nobles, Gentry, and all. The
name troubles none but the Barbarous. They who hold the place without teaching
the people the truth; and with tyranny: break the common laws of the realm:
which stand with reason: that is, the Law of God: such should chainge their
mind: and obey the Gospel, lest their short time be for Sarans service and
for ever.

And when the Dragon saw that he was cast into the earth, he persequuted the
woman, which brought forth the male child. This common place touches all the
Popes persequutions, though it be uttered as at one time. The Pope had still
ready cruel torment: for all of his that descried wickedness, in his religion.

And to the woman were given two wings of an eagle, to flee into the
wilderness; into her own place: to be nourished there a time, and times, and
halue a time, from the praesense of the Serpent. The Pope drives the Church
into the Wilderness, as Pharaoh drove Israel: Saul, David: Antiochus, the holy
Jews: the Pharisees, he Lord of glory for a time, two times and half a time:
three years and an half: and, as I showed; all time of persecution, is called
in remembrance of our Lords: a persecution of days 1260. as chap. XI. or of a
time, two times, and half a time: As Beda, and Carthusianus, well noted. In
Exo. 19. God says, he brought Israel from Egypt, as with eagles wings: so
the persecutor here is a new Pharaoh: and Rome is Egypt spiritually, as in
chap. XI. And the Dragon Pharaoh; is here, a new Dragon. And the Pope; which
will be worshipped, for a God: is as Darius, Dan. 6. and in the fable upon
that: as the Dragon, which the Chaldeans worshipped. The Phrase of the fable,
followed a true story.

Of the time of these persequutions.
And the Dragon did cast after the woman out of his mouth, water, like a river:
to make her riuer-caried: But the earth help the woman; and the earth opened
her mouth, and drank up the river, which the Dracon cast out of his mouth. And
the Dracon was angry with the woman, and went to make war with the rest or
her seed: which keep the Commandment of God: and hold the testimony of
JESUS CHRIST. The Popes power (when Satan was let loose, to deceive; that
Kings gave their strength to Pseudo-Petre) drives the Church not to be seen:
for certain hundreths of years; before Martyr, Zuinglius at Zuricke, in the
Church which Charles the Great built, showed that he was the tail of the great
Dracon, which drew the stars of heaven from their place. And now they comment
best upon this place: asking where was our Church; before M. Lutheres time? I
will ask where was it not? Milliones in England opened themselves praesent:
when valiant K. Henry the VIII. shook off the Pope: and the best learned of
the Popes pay: were least enemies to us: as Cuthbert Tonstall; who at London
and Duresme, still bare with the Protestants works: and would swear by his
Fathers soul (therein faulty) that neither the accusares, nor he could amend
them: full many moo were of that vein: as they who gave harbor closely to the
teachers of the holy Gospel: and what learned have the papists bred; till our
side forced them to study. And at this hour their best grant, that we
ouer-reach them in the testaments tongues; and clearness; and defense of the
pureness of the text. Our greatest hinderance comes by our Buyshops, that
are void of loyalty, and full of cruelty: I speak not against Bishops, sage
and learned: but Buyshops savage and unlearned. Waters of trouble, they help
the Dragon to cast from the mouth of his canons: that no praemunire will serve
their turn: and if any would keep them from hell, will burn such papers. And
when common Laws of earth policy, drink up and dry the K. of Locusts
waters: yet if the rest of unadvised zeal give them advantage; Cerberus shall
bark so: that they may be forth coming, but not coming forth. The maine of
the Church in Albion, Almany, France, and Zuitzerland, the confederate
provinces, and Denmark, have made the earth to dry the Popes Rivers of
Belial, (as 2. Sam. 22. speaks.) But yet in Spain holy Martyrs daily find
the 42. month like affliction: to be conformed to the sufferings of Christ,
because they worship God only: That is, as all Jews expound the phrase, pray
only unto him: and rest in the abundance of grace of the gift of justice, to
reign by Christ. What authority on earth makes this Dragon; the chap. 13.
following will tell plainly: and the 14. how for Idolatry rejected, the tail
of the Dragon makes Martyrs.

CHAP. XIII.
And I stood upon the sand of the Sea; and I saw a beast coming out of the
Sea, having seven heads, and ten horns: and upon his horns ten crowns, and
upon his heads a name of Blasphemy. THIS holy Revelation, speaking of matters
to come, borrows speeches from matters past: which is the sure way to give a
sound Judgment. Daniel comfort the family of Nathan, by Gods vengeance upon
great Kings, arising great from seas of troublous wars. The first was not
Assure, but Babel: the Lion, with NABV. his mouth: who can deliver you from my
hands, chap. 3. The second was a Bear, from Madai and Paras; the East
devouring North, West, South, as having 3. ribs in the mouth. And by two
mighty kingdoms, Medes and Persans, set up one government: These two, had but
two heads, as all of the kind: the third, was a Leopard with four heads:
Alexander Macedon, and his four chief: which in 40. yer. brought all his
dominion parted into 23. Captains, and many Kings before, holding their own,
into the Power of four. The fourth was no new Beast: but the same nation of
the Greeks: in a parted kingdom: in Seluchus who gate seventy two kingdoms:
and Ptolomie Lagides in Egypt.

Of two special points to be noted here.
They who make the Romans one of Daniels Beasts, do pleasure the Jews highly:
concluding that Caesar and Rex Romanorum: and our Constantine and his
successores went to eternal flames. Eusebius began it, as Oecolampidius cites
his fragment: good Calvin followed that Atheism: and good Beza too: thence
thundering with powder without pellet against the Pope; and not marking how
seven times over, gracious Daniel, teaches that Greeks be the last that
afflict holy Jews in his pictures. And Jews upon Dan. 8. confess as Ralbag,
and Seror Hamor of Abr. Sebagh, that Greeks be Daniels last pictured. And our
error is duller then the Jews: they confess; for our Gospel, that Greeks be
the last afflicters: When the matter forces them to speak truth: we
relinquish their grant, to our Gospells strength: and follow them in a lie, to
our Gospells overthrow. Here we have no better to say; then, that Satan has
deceived us. Polichronius the learned Greek Father of old, saw the truth, and
wicked Porphyri confesses the same. And Sebastian Munster, at Basil revived a
touch of the truth: and Polyhistor Bodinus, Tremelius: and our learned
Whitaker; and D. John Reignold, in daily speech; and M. Rollock: and Geneua the
zealous town, in their last french, reject all notes damning Rome and the
Pope; The Jews over the world were broken, if all the Popes side, for their
own cause, would do the same: and the Jews broken, would break the Turks
Machumed.

The second Poincte.
The goodness of God was infinite, in breaking Salomons kingdom; and sending
Jews to Babell, to preach God, that made the world: and to show the
wickedness of the towers building, forworshipp of stars. So the power of the
great God, appeared in extolling base Babell, to fell Assure and all kingdoms,
and to fall in seauenty years: that Cyrus might say: The God of heaven gave
him all the Kingdoms of the world: and when Daniel had taught of the
redemption by Christ: after seven seuenties: and Jews went home from 120.
nations to Jerusalem in that hope: God made foolish the wisdom of Plato and
Aristotle, for their dreamed happiness. And this above all, is a miracle of
miracles, that the Greek tongue known in the West over, was conveyed by
Greek soldiers over North, East and South, by Seleucidae and Lagidae. So that,
in three hundred years, Greek was made common over all the world. And Homer,
was turned into the Greek tongue, as Fr. Portus, praef. in Hom. writes;
doubtless by some Macedonians, for increasing Greek in their Colonies. By
this means, the Greek tongue was made commune, over the world: that commune
salvation might be written in Greek. Also, the Macedonian Kings setted in
Egypt, and they of Syria: both clayming Judea, and still fighting for it, as
they became victores, scattered Jews into all parts: that they abide
scattered there yet: And Commentary or Register.
Itinerarium Rabbi Benjamin shows: even through the furthest India. So the
Apostles might speak in the Greek tongue to the old law. And thus the 4.
Kingdoms tyranny, help much to save others, by their own destruction.

How the Romans arms, are taken from the Kingdoms in Daniel.
The ten horns are from the Seleucolaegidae, in ten horns: five of each side
vexing Judah. But there were ten particular Kings; here Kingdoms: noted by
a crown upon every horn. Now exactly, five Seleucidae, are not notable: but
five Lagidae be. So for the strict number God would not have all the world
vexed: in men not worthy strict regard of story. But aboueX. Kings of old
Kingdoms now be noted. And Strabo lib. 17. notes, that Augustus divided all
Proconsulships into X. And Steuchus against Vallu. divides the Popes, in the
same sort. As I have in Con. Scr. showed. The color of Leopard, is from
Alexander: Bears foot, from Paras: Lions mouth, from Babell: Horns, color,
feet, mouth; mean all tyranny; demeanor, course, and laws alike. As Babel
deified the Image, Dan. 2. Paras, their King: Alexander, would be a God. And
Antiochus, would have Jupiter Olympius: So the Caesares, would still be Diui:
And termed the Christians Atheists: as when martyrs were moved to abjure
Christ; this was the recantation; (...). That is, away with the Atheists. As a
speech unto Caesar: to hold Christians Atheists: and to request their
destruction. Eus. Eccl. Histor. In this sort the Caesar has a name of
blasphemy, holding Gods servants, whose conversation is in heaven, to be not
Gods servants, but wicked men: as the text will show anon.

And the beast which I saw was like a Leopard: and his feet as a Bears: and
his mouth as the mouth of a Lion: and the Dragon gave him his own power: and
his own throne: and great authority. Here we see, why Satan bare arms, from
the Romans arms. Even because Satan's authority was executed by them. The god
of this world had such auctority given, to try the elect: that the Gospel
might be known, to be hid to none, but to whom the God of this world blinded
understanding. 2. Cor. 4. 3
This far reaches the profane Empire: which our great Constanstine made
dead: when he left old Rome, and made Bizantiu^ new Rome. By the death of one
head, the exposition following shows the whole beast once dead. Pompei with
Romes one head: and he perished in Egypt. M. Grassus with Romes army made
another head, and robbed the Temple of Abraham's sons; who came from Charran
or Carrae. The seaue^ heads afflicting.
At Carrae the Parthians overthrew his whole army: to the aeternall shame of
the Empire. Julius Caesar tamed Egypt: and disposed Cleopatraes Government;
third head: he was killed in the Senate house. Brutus and Cassius, the chiefest
of his murderers, their Roman host oppressed Judah; a fourth head. Antonius,
he with the Roman force being made a mighty King in the East, married
Cleopatra, and made Herod for Her, King of Judah: that Daniels Image might have
some remembrance till Christ came. Pompei perished in Egypt; a fifth head. Then
came the state of Rome to one Person: and so continued one head from Augustus,
unto great Constantine. And in that head when he left cursed Rome, the beast
there was dead. So the sixth head had been, and was not: and yet was restored;
to be a seventh head: an eight head, chap. 17. That is here once told.

And I saw one of his heads, as slain unto death: and his deadly stroke was
healed: that admiration was through the whole earth, after the beast: and they
worshipped the Dragon, which gave his power unto the beast: and they worshipped
the beast saying, who is like to the beast? Who can war with him? And a mouth
was given him speaking great things: and blasphemies: and auctority was given
him to be doing 42. months: and he opened his mouth to blasphemy against God:
to blaspheme his name: and his Tabernacle: and them whose Tabernacle is in
heaven: And it was given him to make wars with the saints, and to overcome
them. And power was given him over every tribe, tongue, and nation: That all
who dwell in the earth, should worship him, they whose names are not written in
the book of life of the Lamb, which was slain fromt the beginning of the
world. Here the tyranny of the profane Caesares, carried by the spirit of
Devil is fully described: well known by Diuus Nero, Diuus Domitian, and the
rest of Diui or Devils, unto Diocletian. That Christians reading this, might
look, for such troubles, as the holy in Daniel sustained. This needs no
exposition: but it self expounds, chap. 12. for the upper part of the
Dragon. And as Dan. 7. God sat upon a fiery throne; showing a reueng upon all
the afflicters of his people. So Apoc. 6. war, bloody, black, and pale, and a
gulf of a grave was opened: showing how the Caesares warred and perished
miserably 300. year. with their great armies. The Roman stories tell all, most
plentifully: and Rome, after their destruction felt it, by Alaricus, in
Zozimus, by Giezricke, in the Eccles. story: from Lybia a new Hanniball, by
Theodoricus, and Totilas: THAT AS STEVCHVS CONFESSES, ROME HAD BEEN MADE A
MOST FILTHY LODGE, OF OXEN AND HOGS, BUT FOR THE POPES. Now the Caesares
punishment follows, with a severe taunt of dullness, to them that will not
mark stately speeches: From Mat. 13. and Apoc. 2. and 3.

If any man have an ear, let him hear, He that carries captivity shall go
into captivity (Abb. 1. 2. for the Chaldean) if any kill with sword, he shall
be killed with sword, Genesis 9. When Antiochus the vile slew Jews faithful to
God, and had affinity with Egypt: God plagued both houses more notably then
any families that ever were before. Heathen did note it, though they knew not,
that they made a co^mentary to make Daniel, a most clear book: so Aurelus
Victor commonly read with Iustine in Grammar schools, shows how the Caesares
were plagued to the astonishment of the world: since Rome crucified the Lord of
Glory. And Herodian handles an Iliad of their plagues for 70. yer. how the
Emperores were so vile as dogs. Sozimus shows little better success. And
before our Lords days in the flesh, when their Empire made an head over
Judah; Pompei, Crassus, Julius, Brutus, Antonius, and their Civil wars, were
wonders of misery. And Plini records, what miseries made Augustus weary of
his life, full often. These rules should be a bridle for Buyshopps of Rome, and
all of their Caius.

Here is the faith and constancy of the holy.
Our gracious aeternall Spirit here meets with the weak: that they should
not judge of Gods favor, by prosperity in this world, From Cain, to Tuualcain,
(or heathen smith Vulcain) the wicked bare sway: Which Spirit went and
preached in the days of Noe, to them that are now Spirits in Prison. Nemrod
the Rebel had first dominion; and Nineveh and Babel at the last, Nemrods house:
and in Dan. 11. 35. and 12. 10. the faithful are told what God meant, to let
wicked Magog so afflict his: even to try them in the fire, to purify them,
and to whitten them. Twice the very same terms be told. Here, is the same
matter. That God would try the patience, as Dan. 12. of the holy: Holy Peter
writing from Babylon to the Jews scattred, tells them of their happiness,
in believing in Christ, whose kingdom tries his, 1. Pet. 1.
as gold is tried. The witty wicked Poet could tell so much: as Menander,
Epimenides, and Aratus other poinctes.

Scilicet vt fuluum spectatur in ignibus aurum,
Tempore sic duro est inspicienda fides.
That is, As yellow Gold in fire men do try,
So Faith is proved in misery.


Every truth has Gods warrant, whosoever does speak it. Now the Popes
religion stands in prosperiti; and no common weal has their wealth and
quietness. Therefore they are not of S. Peter's faith: who from Babylon wrote
to the near scattred Jews, of affliction. Although at the first some Doctores
of Rome were afflicted, and martyrs is too. But after quietness, they still
labored, to bring home from the East to old Rome; and pleaded from the Jews
manner of Fables, that the first called Apostle was in the Principal City: to
make him a most wicked man: that (foreseeing (as a Prophet) combatts where he
has been,) would not in his own time, make that matter past all doubt. As
Saint Paul Bishop of Rome: and Saint Luke of Antioh, makes it past all
doubt, that Peter was never near Rome: Clemens and Tertullian made Eusebius,
write that he was: And all who follow them have but rumores authority. And he
is cursed that makes man's authority his arm: and Melchior Canus a Rhomist,
makes a sound common place, that our Churches stories of men are weak
testimonies: In the 300. yer. persequution, it was not safe for any to write of
others: because enemies by such would search out more, how to persequute
Christians. Paul of Roman name, borne free in Rome, who would not build in
others fundations, who was careful for to strengthen the Romans, as not having
yet an Apostle, who first told the Synagogue, Acts 28. whereupon the Gospel
stood, shows that HE brought the name of Christ, to Caesares palace, Phil.
1. and was told Act. 23. that he should so do. And saluting 25. Romans 16.
never gives token of one word touching Peter: but clean otherwise, Gal. 2.
and Peter tells expressly that from Babylon he wrote his first Epistle, chap.
5. whereby all manner of speech, all men would require propriety: that the most
known Babylon should be there meant. Yet as Pindarus says that men believe
fables more then truth: so experience of sage men prove that true: men
otherwise sage, hold that true; that Peter was in Italy: as the Chaldi Job
says he was at Constantinople, and the forged Ben Vziel upon Number. 24. and
millions of milliones after them: whereas we despise Jews: Jews equally
despise Romists: where any could not miss to have known the truth: if Peter
had ever been at Rome. They who say by Babylon he meant Rome, would make him a
simple Fisher: that knew not where a trope would make a wickedlie: and afflict
all ages: where men never date common books for all Ages, from a misnamed
place; where the Reader would count the speaker a liar: so the 2. Epistle was
written from Chaldea where the letter (...) was an S. in Bosor. Beor in the 70.
and that, S. Peter would have followed living in Greek lands.

And I saw another Beast, coming up from the earth, which had two horns like
a lamb, and spoke as a Dragon: and practiced all auctority of the first beast;
before him: and causes the earth and them that dwell in it, to worship the
first beast: whose wound to his death, was healed, etc. to the end of the Chap.
A most plain description of the Pope. 1. by the beast arising from the earth.

First his state is a beast: as all arms of state are figured, by beasts and
such. So the King of Locusts, chapter 9. is a beast coming out of the earth, chapter
11. earth opposition to the sea, signifies a quiet state. So the Pope by
quietness gate lands, to be above all Emperors; yet Ceph, the Rock
aeternall, would be a servant. And Peter Cephas, a fisher: but the vnlikest
under their name, would be the vnlikest: next the Devil, the God of this
world: so his, a great state upon the earth; in the City which crucified Christ.

By the Lambs two horns.
The Lamb, signifies the S. of God; Johan. 1. and Apoc 5. Horns, power,
Psalm. 18. and Dan. 8. So he that chalengeth to be in stead of Christ, and to
have double power from him, Ecclesiastical and Temporal, in Ebrew, ADONIKAM.
My Lord is set up, he is here described. He so shows himself, in the Temple
of God: as if he were God: among many millions who knew him to be the wicked
man. But as in old Babel men were of Angels match, the three nobles that
quenched the fire* (and made Nemrods son confess their God.) and gracious
Daniel admitted to familiarity with Christ, and his Angels: and Ezechiel, and
Ezra, and men like Angels: so where the Devil had his Chapel, God had and
has his Church; to tell how Satan rules the Pope: and has strong work in
error.

OF ONE ERROR IN THE POPE: WHICH MAKES HIM NEXT THE DEVIL: WHERE THE DEVIL
WOULD TREMBLE; TO BE SO IMPVDENT OPENLY.
The ground of our salvation stands, in believing this, of the woman's seed,
a destroyer of Satan's works, Genesis 3. HE, shall bruise thy head: 1* Ioh. 3.
that is spoken twice, in Adams tongue, in the masculine gender. Some late
Popes I think, knew so much Ebrew: though of old few did: when they made
first the translation, called S. Ieromes, to be ignorant of this. So, not SHE
is meant, but HE. The aeternall God, as the Zoar, from Jews, there note: God
in Christ, and again, and again, thou Serpent, shall bruise HIS foote-stepp:
and not HER foote-stepp: yet the Popes translation corrupts that which they
call S. Ieromes: and say; she, shall bruise thy head.

1. So the Latin called S. Ieromes goes; though Arias Mo^tanus had a better
Conscience: and put forth the true Ebrew.

2. Of all Ebrew copies, that ever have been heard of: none herein was noted to
differ: as by them full many, (which we read) we may judge of the rest: who
would not pass over difference in Silence if any difference had been.

3. All Greeks universally, follow the Ebrew: yet against all, the Pope would
have: not HE: but SHE: Marie, in his translations: and in a treatise foisted
into Plantines great Bible.

4. Satan is broken thus: he brought Adams soul to death by sin: the
restorer must give it justice.

5. Satan brought man's body to corruption; that HE, must restore it in
resurrection.

6. Satan by Adams fall brought all this world to corruption* the restorer,
must be able to make a new world. But an HE, not a SHE, must do this:
wherefore, this error, conuicteth the Pope of wickedness, as high as the Devils
can go. Yet all, that go under Papists names, are not of this mind nor
Giltinesse: but all well charged with error here, are gilty without good change
of mind. While this stands, and honor to Mary above her place. The Popes
throne and Satan's be all one. For this maine poinct, would I gladly have, a
learned Papist to reply: that all might see, what can be spoken against the
truth.

Of the Dragons speech.
Laws be the speech of a Policy: and the Popes decretals ouerruling states,
are wicked, commonly; though all cannot be senseless: yet by unlawful men
urged they are all wicked. Seeing the Pope can have no more right; the^ a
Teacher, if he were learned: al from him is like an hand blackened with pitch.
And S. Paul taught the Romans; that every soul should submitt himself to the
higher power. Nero was then in place: and S. Paul appealed unto him. And Nero
the wicked man; in polity sensible, from native wit, was S. Paul's guard, and
the good of the world: against the Scribes Synedrion: to which all must stand,
Deuteronomy. 17. provided always, that they speak sensibly, from the Law: otherwise
all their right was lost: and when they persequuted Christ. He gave the Romans
their auctority for life and death: that Jews might not kill any 40. years
before Jerusalem fell. So the heathen Laws given for man's civil good, be the
earth that drinks up, the river cast out of the Dragons mouth, to drown the
Church.

Of the two horns, counterfaiting the Lambs.
The Pope praetendeth to follow Aharon, and the Levites: and thence comes his
spiritual sword: and he will without all color of warrant; be a King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords. His wickedness in the first being detected, should show
that the Dragon speaks in him. Aharon had no more to do with government
then any other man, nor any of his sons: and it was death for any to meddle
with his trade: that was not of his seed: that his house should be distinct,
till Christ of Judah sacrificed himself: and through the veil of his flesh
went not into the Limbum, as the deceived hold, but into the very heavens:
after this, Leuies office was wholly ended: though Mr. Eduward Lively be
commended, for his Persian Chronology: In Bar. his book, for D. Bil. syll.
Which makes sacrifices of Gods house hindered in Emporour Vespasians days:
that they could not be done, by whom they ought to be done, or not so
diligently, as they ought. He and his comme^ders missed strangely of
Christianity, unto the depth of Satan's badnesse: and next them the Pope.
Aharons sons for strange fire were presently killed; and were not forgiven in
this world, but were in the world to come: But the Pope blaspheming the Holy
Ghost, and the plain truth of Gods spirit, shall neither be forgiven in this
world, nor in the world to come: but as Iscariot in this world is given over
from sin to sin: that he cannot come to the justice of God: and is expressly
condemned to aeternall flames for the world to come: Chap. 19.

Of the Popes succession.
The Popes brag of succession, ever since S. Peter's days, in vain. S. Peter
was no Priest; nor of Leui: But an Elder: 1. Pet. 5. and having no more
honorable faith then those Elders. Elders never had particular succession:
though he Thalmud in Aboth to prove wicked traditions feign succession, how
one delivered over, Law by mouth. May. praef. Tom. 1. Gamaliel had S. Paul S.
Paul Timothy, and millions: who kept the Bible to this day. And Christian
Princes who truly knew God: left succession in some of their policy: and
still there were some Apostolie, or Angelie Ecclesiae: that sagely read the
Bible: and Baptized: and brake bread: the Communion of the body of Christ: and
gave the Cupp. his New Testa. blood. The high Council made Doctores: and they
were all either learned in Divinity; or, in great blame before God: and one
skillful might make thousands, in few year. that men should not brag of
succession, from one: to know both Testaments pure in write: sure for meaning;
by auctores of the tongue: where enemies and friends, use language alike: and
praeceptiue, for all that ought to be known: this duty, a Doctor should
perform: to show the face of Christ, to shine like the sun, through all the
Bible. But never Pope to this day, could do this much. Therefore, they should
not claim the spiritual horn. As holy Paul wished K. Agrippa, and all the
assembly, equal to himself, saving his bonds. And S. Luke ioyed, to pen S.
Paul's infinite wit, therein: and what an Ass he made of Tertullus: so, true
Papae, would have rejoiced to have made all Princes that gave them reverence,
perfect in the word of God. But they had not S. Ieromes spirit, to go by
might to learn of a Jew, the Ebrew tongue: and to write till, 91. to open
Gods word. He alone, did more then ever were in Rome Papae. Therefore he
deserved more reverence then they all: and the slow bellies should be ashamed,
to be such Kings of Locusts in the world: and all Cardinals and Buyshopps that
cross that cross the common Laws of nations: And People must needs be
wicked, that honor the prelate, in Judgment. Esai. 32. repeteth Moses law,
and says for the Gospel: that under it; Nabal, shall not be called Nadib. The
fool shall not be called most reverend, or right reverend; But he shall be such
whose study stands, in most reverend or right reverend matters. I now
translate Nadib, a general term of high title; Isai. 13. to particular
special use. every commandment of God has his Majesty, which created the
World: and they breed Monsters, that make cross laws.

Of the ancient facility, in teaching the Law.
The holy Jews did, as all men should; honor the finger of God in the two
tables: wherein all wisdom of faith and manners is contained. And a late
work, Tiphereth (glory) of Israel, tells that Ebrew letters, vowels*
pricks, accents, are at this day, as God set in the two tables. All Popes
Academies deny this, their own glory: and would make man's wit auctor of these
three; that all should be accursed, who make man their strength. So wise is
the Church that cannot err; as to deny the pillar of truth. But still God kept
in the company of some, that belonged to the Church, the ground of truth. This
being settled, we may go on; to show how the godly did honor the tables of God.
There they reckon letters 613. And because the ten Commandments, for faith and
works contain all Divinity; the holy Scribes; drew all Laws of Moses, into
the number of 613. They might have made them moo or fewer. But by Gods spirit
in honor of Gods writing, they bring them to his letter 613. to show Gods care
in the Law, that one Iod or prick should not perish: so we see that God
honoreth the Alphabet order: psalms 25. and 34. and 37. and 111. and 112. and
119. and 145. Prou. 31. Lam. 6. times: to stir all to spend their life, in
the word of life. That every thing here, might teach how God inviteth all to
salvation. And the very Geometrical form of Aleph, Beth, Gimel, Daleth, Heb,
Vau, Zain, etc. shows that when God, gave them, their order; he gave them
also the form, which we have now: and the Ebrewe name is from the form which
we now have: and the Ebrew named Alphabet is followed in the Greek Alphabet;
old in the days of Phisistratus when Aristarchus divided Homers Iliad and
Odyssea, by Alpha, Beta, Gamma, etc. Now this was old, before Ezra was borne:
and later then the Ebrew Alphabet: and that was later then the forms of Ebrew
letters, which we now have: therefore Ezra invented them not: as Popes would
persuade: but they are as God gave them in the Tables: and be 613. there:
whence the Laws 613. have their order. 248. bidding commandments, telling
what we should believe or do: 365. forbidding evil. The Jews say the bones in
a man well anatomed, be 248. which all should work what God co^ma^deth. That
rule is only given for memory: and has no further mystery: the 365. call
Henoch into mind, that as a son walked with God, and had his years, as the
days of the suns year. and so shall they that walk with God: as Messiah,
psalm. 72. To these co^mandeme^ts all disputations are called: and all the N. T.
The Law, thou shall make a King, that commandment, is for Messiah chiefly:
handled in Maymonie Tom. 4. Now the Scribes knew not, that Messiah was to be
God. Therefore this Law; JEHOVAH, our God, JEHOVAH, is One. is urged upon the
Pharisees: that Messiah must not only be David's son: but also his aeternall
Lord, from Psalm. 110. and so Mat. 1. shows a golden Candlestick of 42.
notes: and Emanuell and chap. 2. MESSIAH the holy of all holiness, is sought
for: the K. of the Jews. And all the 613. Laws are called into his life. The
N. Testa. being so handled, might be laid in one view, to make Princes admire
it at the first: when the years and promises of Christ: and punishments for
contempt: and Oeconomie of states, are laid in one light: and children when
they first read, were taught to read his family: and the end of Salomons
house: and are taught the afflictiones, of Sorobabilidae in Daniel, seven times
over. Thus an unspeakable love of the Gospel, would flame in Princes hearts;
when they should see every thing that can be disputed, brought to this Law.
And the Law for the King, that he must write a copy of Moses. And once a year
read it himself. So states could never be deceived: and millions might be
skillful in speeches of the holy Trinity: and in the story of them, from
whose feed CHRIST was made after the flesh; the blessed God in the Divine
spirit: and so great God and Savior. Moses made three crowns; one for the
arc; which kept the Law: which for knowledge, every man should wear in heart;
and the oratores of the Congregations, also in tongue: to bring all the Bible
to short speech; as Matthew. 1. Luc. 3. Act. 7. and the epistle to the Hebrews
does, to a ready mind.

The Table with shewbread; remembers the King of care, to feed all his xii.
tribes: so Moses was King, and still craving of God, what the people wanted; so
Iosuah: so David: so Daniel made rich by wisdom, chap. 2. praeferred his
zealous nobles, hoater for Gods glory then the fire: who kept their nation from
further danger of Idolatry. And by Daniels wealth, the returned, above 49000.
were enabled to restore their policy. And God gave Cyrus Croesus gold, to be
abler to send the Iwes home, to teach the hour of true happiness by our Lords
death: in Jubilee 28. such men wear the crown: no less learned then the
sacrificer: and these exalted the horn of Christ: as much as he that by the
Crown of the Altar of incense: morning and evening brent perfume.

The third Crown was on the Altar of incense; touched now: and honorable in
zeal and skill of praying to God: and Zachary father to John Baptist, 1.
Chronic. 24. 10
not high sacrificer, but of the eighth course of 24. had a Crown of praise
for his carriage in that office.

Now for these Crowns, every man should know the Arkes meaning, the mercy
seat; the Cherubim: and know who would bear this Law, in a mind golden within
and without. But skill of speaking, should be required only of the practiced
unto ripe years; not bearing of the Arc, be laid upon shoulders of Beasts.

To the maintenance of all by bread; belonged government: for all offenses:
That the court of all tribes used; when heathen took away capital causes;
then excommunication, was all that could be done. Otherwise he that kept his
Fathers wife, had felt death at once. Princes were never excommunicated.
Ierusal, Sane. The high sacrificer was whipped, and in all sorts judged as any
other man. ibid. Leuies tribe was bound to be ready to answer to all
demandes; for applying Ceremonies to their spiritual meaning: But they were
often worst, as in condemnation of Jeremy, and Elies Sons, and Iehosuahs in
Nehemiah, and Zachary and Malachie.

An application of the Popes calling to this.
It was death for any of Israel to meddle with Leuies propre duty, when his
office is quite extinguished, it is a most high contemt of God to revive it, by
imitation from man's brain; so all the Popes Priesthood and Mass is cursed. As
Archisynagogus was chosen for the best learned: so where many learned be, one
to be chief; reason and practice allway suffered this: but so that he should
not ouerrule: or do any thing of his own head. Revenues altered not the case:
which Laws and reason require to be spent for Christian good: and not for
purchase to idleness. Numius Ecclesiae, Sheliah Zibbur, The Talmud term, is
now the office of a Bishop, or Elder: and none can be fit that way, without
rare and chargeable education. And never yet any Pope was so learned, as with
skill of the holy speeches, to make a true narration, for the strength of the
Gospel. They make their Cathedrals, dens of thieues, when professing to
teach salvation; blind lead the blind into the ditch.

They who wrest S. Matt. 20. Marc. 10. Luc. 22. for condemning of Governors of
nations, deal most wickedly. Our Lord. Prou. 8. that he gives Princes
wisdom to govern: and stories, show that heathen governed for this life, and
civil commodity, as well as ever anyother. Neither any term used of the
three Eua^gelists means tyranny, but as in the 70 answers to ordinary
Ebrew. And Zebedes sons Mother requested not place of tyranny: but of civil
authority; as for to be great in Judah. And our Lord would never answer beside
the Qu. Their barbarous blindness is unspeakable, who wrest holy words, to
maintain Buyshopps savage, and more then hagarene tyranny: and how can such
escape the fire of Gehenna?

A doubt for the manner of policy now: what way is best to be taken.
Seeing the common sort of welthy are bent to this world, to be rich in kings
service; or Law; or merchandise: that many cannot be fit Teachers; but men
bent altogether that way: what is the soundest remedy, here? Seeing the world
will not admit great chaing: and great learning should be plentiful: before
great change would be to any good.

Answer.
The Universities should urge, great practice of the Hebrew Prophets and Greek
Apostles, using all helps of Thalmudiques and Heathen: by chosen guides: and
all of skillful acts, should have good recompense: And after certain years,
none should have any praeferment, but of special readiness in the truth of
holy story: where error troubles as haeresie: and the people should have a
most exact translation; to which all the Realm should have their consent: and
so Scholars all should have a voice in Bishopps proceedings: and revenues: and
be the only seniores in matters of learning: but for all Court matters, should
have common Lawyers: and other officers in Society with the^: and by learned
sermons should make al of good conceit; though not of learning to teach
others. But all that the scholar should do, is to be Angelus eccles. and to
keep him within that compass. Some as in Geneua, bare scholars would in
wickedness, ouerrule the Senate: more then any Pope was ever known to do.
Men that will teach and speak not precious matter, will be the destruction of
the Gospel. The zealous without knowledge, have in this kind done much harm;
and when an unlearned scholar is highly praeferred, and not brideled, he will
hardly be kept from doing unspeakable mischiefs: Civil auctority should make
a wall before such, that they should have no whit of Popes auctority: where the
Civil horn belongs to the King: and only the horn for the heart, to
Sheliach Zibbur, or orator of the congregation; So the Popes horns be broken,
as the Seleucians, and Ptolomeans when they tyrannized over the holy.

What may we think of Buyshopps, of which sort many Popes and Cardinales be.
The Talmud in Sanedrin concludes, that if any give money to be a Senior, they
should hold him, as an whipp for an ass. Maym. fol. the People, be the ass,
that suffer him; and he is a scourge from GOD, for some badnesse of theirs. And
This word signifies, an earnest pressing of men in suing for offices: and
bribing the^.
Ambitus in Tulli was hated: and, Lege Iulia. And from Act. 8. called, Simonia:
and one such man may cause God to be openly angry with many; that he will not
forgive them in this world; but send open punishment upon them; though civil
wicked have their open reward here: and the punishment reserved, to the world
to come: that is the meaning of the phrase: forgiveness in this world, and in
the world to come. Math. 12. and Maymoni. tome. 1. Poenit. Perek. I have known
mighty mightily plagued; for Buyshopps; some by their own strange death: some
by many Children: and Sanedrin says, others should not be quiet, till they
remove such from their society. And the words; thou shall not make thee
Elohim (Judges) of Silver or Gold: are of the Thalm. applied hither wittily.
And such Buyshopps in Divinity be most high contemners of God, and they cannot
speak from God but from the Dracon.

Of the Pope, King of Kings.
And the auctority of the first, he practices all before him. L. Inter Claras
C. de summa Trin. so all the Emperors now are confirmed of the Popes: which
right in old time, Emperores used over Popes, As reason would: though a D. of a
great town as Rome, had great revenues: to be hospital, and to breed many
learned, that was the intent of Princes in their great Liberality.

And he causes the earth, and such as dwell in it to worshipp the first beast:
whose wound unto death was healed. In his confirmation of Emperors, he gives
them S. Peter's blessing: and men worship them with title of Diui; when the
Empire was once dead in Rome: and translated to Bizantium, called new Rome: so
that old Rome had continued a most filthy habitation of hoggs and oxen, but for
the Popes supremacy: when he was worshipped, as the old Caesares. As Steuchus
confesses against Valla; lib. 2. BUT WHEN THE PONTIFICALITY WAS SET UP IN
ROME; THAT ALL NATIONS, FROM EAST TO WEST, DID WORSHIPP THE POPE, NO OTHERWISE
THEN OF OLD THE PROFANE CAESARES: He takes authority to confirm the Emperors;
and to make them of better estieme, with superstitious simple people. That is
here plainly foretold.

How long the Popes, the Stars falling; could not become mountains of fire,
to cast themselves into the sea of the Empire.
Before Christianity came in policy to Rome, the People, and Doctores chose
the Father, as the Jews did the Archisynagogue: as all should be and were
under heathen government. And they should be of the Dragons poison, that
would make any more ado for their authority. When Christians ^eld the Empire;
and Constantine lothing Rome that Crucified Christ, and the unlearned Popes,
that could not bring the Palace to Christianity in 300. years. When holy
Paul soon made Narcissus bad folk, the best; and Peter if ever he had come
there had done as much. So when Constantine removed to Bizantium; his house and
lieuetenant of Rauenna, confirmed the Popes, whose election should be
authentical: so when Charles the great after the overthrow of Desiderius, king
of the Lombardes; and of that kingdom, and came to Rome; Adrian the Father,
(when Charles the great confirmed with greater privileges, all that Pipinus had
given to Gregory the third) to requite the benefits of Charles, calling an
hundred and fifty Bishopps, makes a Perpetual decree. Nullum posthac fore,
Adri. 63. distinct.
neque aliorum Templorum Antistitem, nisi quem Carolus, successoresque eius
sciuerint and iusserint; Auentinus lib. 4.
refragantes huiusmodi patrum, decreto, diris deuoti, est nisi resipuerint
adiecta proscriptio.

That is:

That there should be no B. of Rome, nor of other Churches, except him whom
Charles and his Successores should know and command (to be so.) They that
withstand such a decree of the Fathers, are cursed; and unless they repent, a
proscription is added.

This constitution subtle Popes, in great dissentions of Princes, brake: yet
in the year 1314. Loduike Bauaras, restored the Empires right (much blotted)
unto his whiteness: Or Auentinus lib. 7. and seq. and Naud. and others.
against John 12. for when he was excommunicated of the Pope. for entering into
Italy with an army: and for setting Gouetners over Villages and Towns against
his will. And because he praesumed as soon as he was chosen, before he was
commanded of the Pope, to take upon him the name and right of the Empire; He
with the Counsel of his Nobles made one Petrum Corbariensen, a minorite, Pope:
using his ancestores authority and manner. And assembling men that knew divine
and humane Laws, shows that the Pope has no right above Caesare: But clean
contrary, the Pope with all spiritual high and low, should be subject to the
higher power. Thus dealt this good Emperor; mild enough; or rather, too mild.
And S. Paul borne to be a Bishop of Rome, in Tarsus, free in Rome, told the
same, Romans 13. as he told from, 2 These. 2. how thence man of sin would arise.
If 2 These. 2. had been read of all Children, since S. Paul wrote, aged, moo
then the Stars of Heaven, a million for a Star, had known what the Pope
is, and equal guilty, Cardinales; And our Archbuyshopps in his canones, damned
by common Laws, following the light of Gods engrauement in souls. All
Scholars that will be ouerruling Civil matters, unable to show skill in the
Law, of one Iod or Prick, as our Lords speech requires. Mat. 5. and will
Archbuishopps be, and urge athean oaths, and imprison better lettered by many
years study then themselves: and pine in Prison unto death, full many which
hold the truth of redemtion in trades life better then they; are, in the Popes
Giltinesse here: and speak from the Dragon: And are sure to go with both
into aeternall flames. The learned know that they to whom I now give the
Anathema Maran Atha, will sooner go to Bantam to fetch pepper, then reply.
And as Ovid. speaks, that while the Roman Empire stands, his fables should
stand: so while the world stands, our reuiuers of Dracons bloody laws, and
others to profane God; shall stand, in this my blame, in my defense for our
King and nations integrity.

Si quid habent very vatum praesagia. By what Iudaique cursedly revived
Ceremony, the chief divinity D. of Rome, bewitched Emperors: to give a spice
of countenance, that the Pope was above the Emperor.
In Judah; Kings were anointed with oil, praescribed by God, to Moses: and
it was death to imitate that oil. The Thal. has a full treatise of that.
Thence all of wit will fetch it: No King was ever anointed with this, but
Kings in hazard; King Moses was not, King Jesus was not, King Samuel was not,
Saul not accepted was, David not accepted was, Solomon in hazard by Adonijah
was, and Ioash for Athalias stir was. All this God allows. By the Peoples
authority wicked Ioachaz, two years younger then his brother, more wicked
Ioakim, was: all these, to avoid dissension. So annointment was still the
token, of a person doubted: whether the people should accept him, or not. Now
the Patriarch of Constantine: beginning annointement, of Emperors: as in
Iustinius, the uncle of Justinian, fame goes; challenged herein no
superiority, but would have the Emperores that requested the Churches favor,
If they were stained in open blame, to want that good will, till open
repentance came. This had zeal and man's wit: but God forbids to imitate
Aharons ceremonies: namely in oinctments. No chest, might be made like the
Arc: no candlestick; no Table; no curtain; no building, like the holy.
Touching our manner in England, think it began in token of freedom: as not
under the Emperor, but equal. But seeing Priests were the annointers, Locusts
NOW in flames aeternall: it should, with sacrifice, Aharons cope, Levites
linen, and name of Priest be left off: If my poor opinion were worthy of
account: if quietly they might: otherwise ceremonies of force were broken: as
in David's eating of the shewbread: and being deadly for use: as circumcision
for Galatians; yet in Timothy was repeted. So the wicked books of the
Apocrypha whereof none have one syllable of Christ: (though Galatinus would
bring Baruc to him: In, God will be seen upon earth) because the fables spoke
of Jews stories (whose truth heathen denied) were received for men's
weakness. But when Greeks would make iarring sayings, true divinity: Jews
told Hagarenes their judgment was weak: and so there the Gospel found
contemt: since the Pope anointed Emperores of weak authority: after he
deceived the Empire: For 200. yea. war that weakened West Kings, the
oinctment was pleaded for a token of superiority; that the beast coming out
the earth, might have two horns like Christ's.

And he does great signs, that he causes fire to come down from heaven, into
the earth, before men: and he deceives the dwellers on the earth before the
beast. When Isreal's state came far badd; holy Elias made fire come down from
heaven: In memory of that story; John saw in his vision fire come down from
heaven: betokening thereby any signs. Saint Paul told this in propriety, that
by false signs wicked Romylus, (Esai 11. in the Venice Chaldy) should deceive,
if possible, the very elect: because they would not receine the love of the
truth: as Solomon warns Ephraim, Prove. 3. the Emperors strife was with the
Popes for Auctority, little or nothing for Divinity, where they should have
been of best judgment: as Charles the great was of great judgment; that the
Popes for fear of fall, by resisting a learned Emperor, decreed for him and
his successors, (as I showed,) confirmation of Popes, that should serve in Rome.

Of Papists miracles.
Never any commented upon any text, Bible, or Law, as the Papists do upon
their Miracles. The Jesuits in the Indianes do such strange Miracles, that
Lucian de vera historia, would as well seem true: as noble learned Saddeel
nippeth Turrianus. And at dinners and suppers in stead of the Bible, they read
the stories of their own Miracles. So the Lady of Hales, made Iustus Lipsius,
of a quicker spirit to his style: as Bacchus made Ennius. And creeples come to
Hales: but go away leaping: So at Colen in a stage play, creeples came to S.
Laurence, and went a way leaping. So in Walsingam: The Host was carried in
Cambrige over the market place, in a coffer by two strong men: and praesently
became so heavy, that both they could not carry it alone. And when they put
drakes fresh blood to the wine: all (but Heretics) may see the very wine,
lively blood. That men swear by the blood of Hales: I heard a man, (in the
end; of true faith, and fatherly carriage Rich. Meneuensis) say: how his
conscience pricked him, when to Mass he used drakes blood. I know not but by
confession, whether this be true or not. At Mentz towns end Eastward, in the
brim of the fields, stands a low cross of stone: That way I walked with
two Jesuits, and a proselyte, whose commendation from the Pope to the Bishop;
and they then sitting with me on a green, desired to read from Latin to
Ebrew, for to plead for a principal Cardinalship. Of that stone cross, Pater
Nicolaus Serarius said, thus: Once a man drunk, armed with a sword stroke this
cross: and it poured out blood: and pursuit was made after the man: and he
was executed.

Then said I; let the Bishop, and all his Canons, that be not Lutherans (I know
they will not try) take swords and strike all the cross, and if it shed one
drop to my sight: I will accept the Cardinalship offered: and be of your faith:
as I am of Saint Peter's faith already: and believe no more then Epiphanius,
that he was ever at Rome: as he cared no more for Clemens Alexand. then did
Patriarch Photius: and less of Tertullian, hurt by Montanus. The only
auctores that Eusebius could bring for Peter to have been at Rome. And that
strength being broken, all further testimonies are but wind. The Thalmud in
San* requires in testimony eyesight. And for the new Moon (though they
knew the Mathematiques) they used two men's testimony that they saw the Moon
(unless clouds hindered) before they ordained the feasts celebration: so God
would have the People to hold their eyesight judge: as all simple must plead
sure faith. So, strike you this cross and make blood come forth to two
witnesses: which by Moses Law must be my warrant: and then I will be of S.
Peter's faith in your sense. Of the Catholic faith I am, and of the ancient
faith, which holy Paul of Tarsus, Gygs land; and holy Luke of Magogs land, in
Syria, taught and wrote from Moses and the Prophets. Ep. 2. 20. Make blood come
out of this stone, to my sight and I will be a Pseudo-Catholique as ye are:
upon this we turned to read the proselytes letters: For whose testimony that I
might have had a Cardinalship principal at Rome. One Mr. Murton of Yorkeshiere,
desired me to go to Mentz, with him to hear that asked: and took occasion in
speech of Cardinales, to ask what mine had been worth: then said he, about
18000. french Crowns. But I showed that Gods word was plain, to all of the
tongues study: and pure in all rules, to convert any well meaning heart: and
perfect to guide, through the whole course of life. I wish others to believe
their miracles as I do, who know that God made sense a divine testimony: that
a man convicted upon two witnesses, convicted to worship bread and wine, should
dye the death. The Gospel thrice, and S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. tell that JESUS gave
bread and wine, and that the Disciples drank what he gave. That no miracle
was here, but the native manner of a Covenant. And if the Apostles or Greek
Fathers had said; The Bread and Wine were altered, from their taste, or nature,
for so much: heathen would have sworn, the world never bare wickedder
Magicians: nor worthier of death by Moses Law: which Christ gave, as aeternall
God, and came as man, to be judged of man, how he did perform all: so that
the native power of reason which he planted in all souls, should judge of him;
that he performed all justice, to plain capacity of all nations: and required
none to believe further then logique common; to every man, would require
assent: or tell of open rebellion against the truth.

This also was a great miracle that Emperor Henry the VII. next Albertus; in
seditions, coming to Italy where 60. yer. Emperores absence, Naucler Gene. 44.
gave the Pope much authority, when the king of Sicilie, Robert; made stirs:
and the Pope Clement, V. favored him, as a vassal, of the Church; and then
kept at Auinion: he commanded both by the oath of fidelity, to keep the
peace. He answering that he would take no such oath: yet (by persuasion) would
take the crown of him, was soon after of Cardinales, by Dominican Bernehard
poisoning the Hostia, A Miracle of the Popes: transubstantiating the bread into
Poison.
or the Sacrament of the Altar, sent to Haides: because he would be bound to no
man. The beast with two horns, like a Lamb, in truth the Dragon let loose,
after 1000. yea. Apoc. 20. did this miracle: The like was done to our K. John,
who showed in the Abbot of Glassimbury, little good will, to make Popes too
fatt. And their daily miracle told before, of the Sacrament of the Altar, that
men must believe they have no sense; this Simon-Magus-bewitching of men; by
Moses Law should put them to death: how they would make their Images sweat;
by a fire and water, hid behind them, in the Vestrie, and tell how the
saints were angry, that men had no more zeal to offer to them; these were
commonly known to them, that lived in our Fathers days: before valiant King
Henry VIII. brake both the Popes horns, and ate the flesh of the beast. If
Erasmus Roterodamus, had lived to this hour, he could never have iested
enough, with the Popes false miracles: as Saint Paul terms them. Yet to this
day every where Papists brag of their religion, as proved by miracles: and so,
they prove their doctrine to be new. Miracles are to be wrought at the first
delivery of doctrine. When Adam first sacrificed, fire from heaven kindled it:
and Abels sacrifice respected of God, (are in Octaplo,) were fired by God. That
fire was kept until the flood. Then again, Noes sacrifice was kindled from
heaven: And that fire was kept by great SEM, or Melchitzedeke. Abraham
sacrificing, had fire first (in record) from heaven: and in Moses and Solomon,
that is expressly told, and thence gathered to the former: so when the Jews
came home from Babylon, they sacrificed: no mention is made of their fire.
Their private story, Salseleth, Hakabala says, they had fire form heaven. The
abridgement of the senseless writer Jason of Cyren, called the second of
Maccabees: tells an old wives tale, of fire, turned as unto salt, and set
against the sun, and so brought to inflame the sacrifice. These fables God
hated, and forbids. Tit. 1. 14. 1. Timoth. 1. 4. and 4. 7. and so his people
will.
Archimedes fire that set Roman ships on flame, at Syracusa, with a Crystal
Glass of narrow passage for the sun beams, should have been as holy a
fire, as that of Iasons fable: yet the Pope makes great account of this
invention: as being so true as his miracles: whereby he would prove new
sacrifice. Before the flood, Adam living long to teach the truth, and the
creation being all miraculous, we have no properly told miracle, but our father
Henochs assumption. Abraham reviving the world, did miracles: so Moses
beginning a new state: and JESUS in his noble conquest, in staying Sun and
Moon: and Samuel at Saul's installation. Ezekias in great fall of ten Tribes
captiued, had the sun turned back ten degrees. To Babell the fire was
quenched, Dan. 3. and the King made as a beast, chap. 4. Daniel stops Lions
mouths: and an handwriting damning the state, chap. 5. Thus to nations first
motion, or fall miracles are given: but to confirm no other religion, then
agrees with Adams. But the Pope will daily transubstantiate, and make a
Lynceus believe he cannot tell whether he see Bread and Wine: and so make a
sacrifice, as calling fire from heaven: which must kindle every sacrifice. And
whereas eyesight is Gods Testimony by Creation, law, and allowed ever, even in
the seal of the Covenant, which may contain no matter litigious; He breeds
wars, to make hail and fire mixed with blood. All this Doctrine is from the
mouth of the Dragon.

Saying to them that dwell in the earth to make an Image to the beast, which
has the stroke of the sword, and is revived. The earth, is the profane common
world, opposite to the Church: The Image respects, Dan. 2. as the beast
looked to Dan. 7. So the Pope shall challenge power to make Imperial state;
termed Image, Daniel. 2. Padeuicius lib. 3. Capter 10. In Lotharius saxo,
handled a plain story for this prophecy. Lotharius saxo, by persuasion, or
superstition, cast himself at the Popes feet, as he took the Crown. The
Romistes to make this a matter praeiudiciall to other Emperors, set up a
picture, when Lotharius was gone with this inscription. Rex venit ante fores,
iurans prius vrbis honores,
Post homo fit Papa: sumit quo dante Coronam.
That is, The King before the doors does come;
The Cities honors first he swears:
That done; the Popes man he is made,
Of whom he takes the Crown he wears.


Frederick the first was angry; saying, To be the Popes man, was all one, as
to be his servant, or subject: The Pope once took away the Picture: but soon
after fearing, lest the Emperors courage would wholly shake him off: thought to
bridle him at the first; and upon strife, by letters, he warned him, that he
should have before his eyes, how he had received the ensign of the Imperial
Crown from him. And a stir rising against this one of the Legates said;
Romanum imperium a Grecis translatum est ad Alamannos: vt Rex Teutonicorum, non
antequam, ab Apostolico coronaretur, Imperator vocaretur. Ante consecrationem,
Rex, post, Imperator. Vnde igitur habet imperium, nisi a Papa? Ex electione
suorum principum habet nomen regis: ex consecratione Papae habet nomen
Imperatoris, and Augusti, and Caesaeris. Ergo per Papam imperat: Recolite
antiqua. Zacharias promouit Carolum Magnum, fecit ei nomen grande, vt esset
Imperator. and vt posthac perpetuo rex Teutonicus esset Imperator, and
aduocatus sedis Apostaticae: vt Romano Episcopo Apulia, per eum pacata esset.
Subiecta, quae Papae, cum Vrbe Romanae est, non Imperatoris: Roma, Papae seeds
est. Imperatoris est Aquis in Arduenna, quae est sylua Galliae. Imperator quod
habet, totum habet a Papa: sicut Zacharias transtulit Imperium a Graecis ad
Teutonicos; Ita Papa potest iam transfer ab Alemannis, ad Grecos. Ecce in
potestate eius est, vt det illud cui vult, propterea constitutus a Deo, super
gentes and regna, vt aedificet and destruat, plantet and euellat. That is:

The Roman Empire was translated from the Greeks to the Almanies: that the
King of the Germans, should not be called the Emperor, before that he was
crowned by one Apostolic. Before the consecration he was King; after,
Emperor: whence then has he his Empire, but from the Pope? By the election of
his Princes, he has the name of King: by the consecration of the Pope, he has
the name of Emperor, and Augustus, and Caesar: Therefore by the Pope he rules:
search antiquities. Zachary promoted Charles the Great, he gave him the name of
Grande, that he might be Emperor: and that ever after, the German King should
be Emperor; and advocate of the Apostatique sea. That Apulia, brought to peace
by him, should be subject to the Roman Bishop, which is the Popes together
with the City of Rome, and not the Emperors. Rome is the Popes seat: The
Emperors seat is Aquis in Arduenna, which is a wood in France. That which the
Emperor has, he has wholly from the Pope: as Zachary translated the Empire
from the Greeks, to the Germans, so now the Pope can translate it from the
Almaines to the Greeks. Lo, it is in his power, that he may give it to whom
he will: and for that cause he is ordained by God above nations, and
Kingdoms, that he may build and pull down, plant and root out.

This Oration of the Popes Legate, makes a most lively commentary upon the
text following.

And it was given him to give spirit, to the Image of the Beast, that the
image of the Beast should speak: and cause that all who would not worship the
Image of the Beast, should be killed. He quickneth the Empire, to have power of
life and death against the reiecters of his allowed Emperor: till he depose
him, and set up others.

Of subjection in all matters to the Pope.
And he causes all both small and great, both rich and poor, both free and
servants, that he may give them a mark on their right hand, or their
forehead, and that no man may buy nor sell, but he that has the mark, or the
name of the beast; or the number of his name. Mark, in the hand; is oath of
fidelity, and subscribing to his Supremacy. Naucl. Genesis 44.
When Emperor Henry VII. refused to take oath of fidelity, to obey Clement VII.
he was soon after poisoned in the host, C. 1. de Iure, Iure. in Clem.
transsubstantiated from wholesome bread into poison. Because he called great
Assemblies and Scribes; and answered, that this was a new matter: and not seen
in his praedecessors age; That the Prince of princes, and Lord of the world,
should be bound by an oath of fidelity, to the servant of servants. The vicar,
of the Dragon who was a murderer from the beginning, showed all his
conscience; that pretending to give Christ our life, gave death. After Henry's
death, Clemens being terrible, that Emperors should be redier, to swear unto
fidelity to the Bridgemaker of Rome, puts forth the contents of that oath.

Vt Caesar Ecclesiam Romanam defendat, Haereticos exterminet, neque cum impijs
vllum commercium habeat, vt privilegia quondam Romanae Ecclesiae consessa
quocunque tempore conseruet: in primis, ea quae profecta sunt a Constantino,
Carolo Magno, Henrico, Othone IIII. Frederico secundo, Rodolpho, nequid Iuris
in illas Ecclesiae Romanae facultates, atque possessiones, quocunque titulo
sibi vendicot, vt reliquas etiam vbiuis, Eccesias earumque libertatem, ac Iura
protegat etc. in Clementius sub Tit. de Iure.

That is:

That Caesar defend the Roman Church, expel haeretiques, nor have any
commerce with ungodly men, that he should preserve the privileges once granted
to the Roman Church, at what time soever; and especially those, which
proceeded from Constantine, Charles the Great, Henri, Otho 4. Frederik the
secund, Rodolph: and that he challenge not any right or power, upon any title
over those privileges and possessions of the Church of Rome. That also he
defend the rest of the Churches whersoeuer, their liberties, their laws, etc.
In Clem. sub Tit. de iure.

Thus Emperors must defend all Popes Laws: by which all his foes and
haeretiques, cannot buy nor sell. And all must have auricular confession: and
all housekeepers must pay a ricks-penny for every chimney: and Priests be the
exchequer men: and Chauncelors for ecclesiastical praeferme^ts; Buyshoprickes,
Abbeies, etc. that Kings and Emperors should have but small force. And the
Locusts should have the Lions teeth, to hold fast all that they caught: and
should be like Horses praepared to wars: and should have Crowns upon their
head, thought their King called himself, the servant of servants: and bare the
face of a mild private man: the Locusts had wings of Camps, and the breast
plates of iron, to command war and peace as they would: that none should be
in the Commune Weal, but of their mark, by oath, and subscription, or whole
profession.

Of the mark in the forehead.
Aharon his garments contained the sum of religion: whereof one part, was a
plate of gold in his bonnet, thus engraven: HOLINESS FOR THE ETERNAL. That is
expounded, chap. 14. where the Christians hating Idolatry, have the name of God
written in their forehead. As God will make known who be his: and all who call
upon GOD must depart from wickedness. So here the having of his name in the
forehead, is the profession of his decrees. The saying of Aue Marie, went over
all, to the poor beggars: and reverence to the Cross: and coming to their
most wicked Mass: and refraining from reading Gods Book, but for licenced:
and auricular confession: briefly, all differing from their Dracoes laws, was
an heretic, and might neither buy nor sell.

Of the name of the beast, and the number of his name.
That is, his own name: So usual in states, the Antecedent is for the
relative; as Daniel chap. 9. The Governor shall destroy, the Governor own
people: for his own. Through the Bible, the names given by the holy, abridge
the sum of their life, God called the first man ADAM: which is also our
commune name, MAN: to tell us every moment, that dust we are: and to dust we
must return. Seth bare a warning, that only some of his should be settled,
when the flood made a mood of all the earth. Enosh tells of sorrow: (that
profaneness sprang instead of calling upon the name of God:) Cainan tells of
Lamentation due for that; Mahal-el, how the Almighty brings a mixture by
water, upon all. Iared how all goes down: He names his son Enoch
consecrated to God, to be an only man in the cursed world: and he told in his
sons name, when God would send the flood, Methu-Schelach; when he is deadp,
resently God sends it. Lamech, borne in time of all sorrows, in his days
the fathers died: and all to every soul that called upon God: and looked to
save their life by the Arc; else they had come to Noe: to have gone into the
Arc. Noe is conforter. All these be fathers to all in the world; and all
degenerate, who desire not to know the reasons of their names. So through the
old Testament the faithful printed faith and story in their childrens names.
And the Book of numbers, has under propre names moo sentences of faith then
would make a great volume. So that without Ebrew much of the Bible will be
unknown. So before the Captivity of Babell the Godly gave names to their
sonns, showing hope of their defense, and help by Elam, of whom came Cyrus:
one long before called his son, Elam, another also calls his son, Elam:
for instruction that Elam should send the Jews home. And God blesses these
two with most issue, Ezra. 2. Another calls his son Bagoas: by a famous
Persian name. Another calls his son Adonikam: God stands above all. Now
the sons of Adonikam were 666. God then meant to apply that to further
matter: as seauens in the Bible call into mind the first Sabbath, rested in
hope of Christ; so sixes, are commonly a memory of the sad fall, and used in
sorrow. Holy Lamech lived years 777. then he rested. In the six hundredth of
Noe, the flood came. Nabuchadnezar his cursed Image, was in height, 60.
cubits, In breadth 6. cubits. The gold brought from Ophir to Solomon, was
666. talents: as no long blessing, when after his death, Sysac King of Egypt,
has all of the Temple for a spoil. Now, Adonikam his sons, 666. might show
that God would use that text to some sad matter. Let us now examine the words
of the Text.

Here is wisdom. Let him that has wisdom, reckon the number of the Beast.
For it is a number attributed unto a man. And his number is, six hundred, sixty
six. Adams wisdom is showed equal to Angels, in giving names to beasts and
fowls, according to their nature: so that man's first wisdom appeared how his
soul bare the image of God, in fit names. His holy sons followed that: and
all of wisdom will examine what names they have given: and see which of all
them will fit the beast here: the man's name may soon be found by 666. for
only ADONIKAM of a man has that number. Now the wisdom stands in the
nation of Adonikam: how the beast that has horns like a Lamb is fitted to
that. Let us have our stories, to show how the Pope is fitted to this. Abbas
Vsp. Naucl. Gene. 44.
Innocentius the third bragged to Emperor Philip, that he would take from him
the Diadem of the King, or he should take from him, the Apostolical
(Apostaticall) ensign. Christ says; by him, Kings reign and Princes decree
justice. And he is truly ADONIKAM: Lord, standing up sure; for defense of his.
And Innocentius of Adam, the earthly, of Enosh the sorrowful: he will be
ADONIKAM: simply, a Lord standing sure: and have two horns of the Lamb,
though he speak like the Dragon. Mark another; when Albertus son to Rodulph,
following his fathers Example, sought by entreaters the confirmation of his
election of Boniface the eight, which bragged that he was Lord of the whole
world; Then Boniface coming forth girded with a sword, and wearing the
Imperial Crown, Cuspinianus in vitae Alberti. Naucl. Genet. 44.
cries with a tyrannical voice: EGO, SVM CAESAR ET PONTIFEX: and in a chafe
he rejects the election, which was made without his Authority, as of no
force, and frivolous, and refuses the confirmation: and called the Emperor a
murderer: so this Boniface had as brazen a face as Boniface the third, which
bought supremacy of the murderer Phocas: and vaunting that he is, TOTIVS
MVNDI DOMINVS, LORD OF THE WHOLE WORLD, the name of the MAN which has 666.
attributed, ADONIKAM, will be his name; with the two horns of the Lamb.

A repetition of the term Rock.
Specially, the term Rock, claymed of the Pope, to be his name, proves him
to have this name, or notation of ADONIKAM. In this Conceit thus he reasons.

Peter is the Rock, The Pope is as Peter. Therefore The Pope is the Rock.
So the Pope makes himself God, who only stands sure: ADONICAM.

A digression to a disputation at Mentz, in the Promotion of a graduat in their
commencement. 1601.

At Mentz in salvation year named, a commencer gave the question. I then
printing in their own Town, a Greek Oration of all my grounds in Religion,
was requested by Pater Nicol. Serarius their D. principal, to come to the
co^mencement. There they requested me most vehemently to dispute: that Rector
made short the first reply. And I took the second. This was the question.

Romana Ecclesia est vera Ecclesia
Reply. Quae facit hominem ex patris semine immediate
Petram dici, est hostis Dei.
At Roma facit hoc: ergo, est hostis Dei.
Promotus. I deny the assumption:

Reply. The term Rock is never used in commendation, of Holiness and
Constancy, but in God only: and is in the Law Deuteronomy. 32. six times translated
(...): But the Greek Lxx. durst not translate it so, lest the Heathen should
say: The Jews worship a Rock for God: as the Jews in Ierusalemy in
Abodazara, charge Heathen to make Godds of Rocks. So the Greek translation
deceived the Greeks: and they hold all faithful, Petres; and Andrew before
Peter, was Petra. In Photij Bibliotheca. But said I, Petra is God; Petros is
one, that is made (...) to Christ, that is, godly. But in all the scripture,
PETRA, is praise of holy Constancy, unspeakable, which is never bestowed upon
a Creature. For the ground of Israel as quarry whence they came, as cut out:
Abraham and Sarach is made the quarry: as of one quarry yielding many. This
tends only to multiplication: as of Deucalion, and Pyrrha, cast stones over
their head.

Vnde homines nati, duram genus.
Thence men sprung up, an hard (and stony) stock.
But touching Abraham, excepting faith, how much he missed in duty toward
God; Rabbi Bechaia, does so handle his weakness in leaving Sarah to shame,
that for that, all the harm of his seed leaving God, and afflicted in Egypt
did proceed. So no man may plead the term Rock, any commendation to them
two. Otherwise it is never spoken of any bare Creature.

Answer. It is.
Reply. The text will never be brought forth, while the sun shines, here he
was dumme: convicted upon, nihil dicit. Then he said, God communicates his
proprieties with us. As God is good, and men some.

Reply. Never is this in one, only. The Angels are called the sons of God:
But never one particular: so the faithful are the sons of God: Psalm. 2.
But no particular man, But, the son aeternall, in whom they that trust are
happy. So your condemnation is sure, that ye are Gods enemies: in making Peter
God, and your Pope. God being only MICHA-EL: and a man. Michael. as Michaelis,
belonging to God, Adonikam as in the possessiue: belonging to God which
stands sure: But seeing you have missed herein: I will try you in an other
argument.

If Rome crucified Christ: it is impossible for his unchangeable justice, not
to plague Rome, while the world stands: though Pilate washed his hands: in
the end he killed himself* and Pilates Vicars that wash themselves in titles
of holiness, they run to aeternall destruction. But Rome crucified Christ.
Therefore it is impossible for Christ, to bless Rome with any praerogatiue.
In wrath he remembers mercy in every place: but the main of justice still
abides. Ioctans sons yielded to Nemrod, to build Babel, for worshipp to
stars. When all these holy Fathers were alive to dissuade them, Noe, Sem,
Arphaxad, Selah, Heber: other faithless had not so many holy to dissuade;
Nemrod, had but Cham and Chush, both wicked So of Cham by the Mother, all
Israel and our Lord comes. And for the Centurion, Math. 27. that
acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God. And the Centurion, in Capernaum,
Luc. 7 who built the Jews a Synagogue, and loved the nation, and passed all
Israel in faith, Math. 8. And Cornelius, in Caesarea that feared God with all
his house, Act. 10. And for Sergius Paulus in Paphos, which sent for Barnabas
and Paul, and desired to hear the word of God, and believed. Acts 13. And for
Lysias in Jerusalem, Act. 23. And for Julius the Captain was so careful for
S. Paul, that for his sake, the life of the prisoners were spared. Act. 27. God
would not record this, but to save millions of millions of Romes Clients for S.
Paul: but for the unthankful to S. Paul, and forgets that Peter was at Rome,
(who never came near it) he still reserved Pilates holiness; that Popes
selfe-murther, should be the reward. To this effect I spoke.

Answer, I distinguish, as Rome is the seat of the Empire, it is cursed: But
as it is the seat of the Pope, it is Ecclesia.

Reply. Vbi Lex non distinguit, ibi neque tu debes distinguere; sed, quod das,
accipimus: quatenus est seeds imperij est maledicta: Atque Papa est Caesar and
Pontifex and mundi Dominus.

Ergo est maxim inuisus Deo, and vos omnes estis pares.

Et quicquid scelerum Apocalypsis praedicit: discriminati ab religione
Anglicana (multa vestra and nobis ingrata) vos causam sustinebitis, omnium: and
in nostro descess^ ab vobis, Geneuae c^ussam sustinebo: Geneuae senatus proba^t
mea. Deinceps ad theseis non ad Caluinum disputabitis.

That is: Where the LAW, distinguishes not, you ought not to distinguish: but
we take that, which you grant. As it is the fear of the Empire it is cursed.
But the Pope is Caesar, and chief Bishopp, and Lord of the world. Ergo, he is
most of all detested of God, and ye are all alike. And whatsoever wickednesses
the Apocal. does foretell; ye being separated from our English Religion, many
(of those wickednesses) are yours and unpleasing to us, ye shall maintain the
cause of all those. And in our departure from you, I will maintain the cause
of Geneua. The Senate of Geneua has approved my writings. Henceforward, ye
shall dispute to your positions, not to Calvin.

These arguments fitted to this question I had: which the Jesuits void of
envy, celebrated over Europe. But Midae Thersitae Satyroscoptae Ptoliporthi,
marred success, being amazed to hear that all Papists and Protestants who
granted not, that the Creed speaks of the holy souls passage to the holy:
be Atheists. The Jesuits gave me leave to print all my religion, and allowed
my Latin Concent: specially upon Daniel chapter 9. So for ADONICAM, they grant
all, or in reply must combat: which to do, D. Iahannes Pistorius refused
being a chalenger. So as none is the ROCK but Christ: and ADONICAM but Christ.
The Pope chalenging to be the Rock, and to stand up Lord of all; is in
wisdom guilty of chalenging, the name with the attribute 666. clayming the
horns of the LAMB: which is all one as to be ADONICAM. Thus John speaks
plainly, to the Jews nation: which in their names contained the sum of
their story.

These two Chapters well read, had made the Pope well known, to be Pilates
successor, not Paul's: Peter's he could not be; that never came near any part
of Greek land. How God hated Rome, it may appear: that S. Paul being willing
of a long time, to confirm the Christians there, having no Christian
Synagogue, and yet famous over the world. God would not, till the Jews came to
all extreamitie of shame, suffer Paul to go to Rome: and Paul's warning that he
should bring Christ's name before Caesar, and his desire to build where none
laid foundation, and to confirm them of Rome, and writing an Epistle to teach
the first Principles: and his mention of bringing Christ's name into the Palace,
as not known there before: and the ignorance of the Synagogue, Acts. 28. that
knew not what the Gospel meant, but that it was in every place gainesaid. This
shows that Peter was never at Rome. And Saint Paul's journey tells Rome that
God hated them. If he had not been sought to be killed, Lysias had not sent
him to Caesarea: and if the Jews had not again there sought to have killed
him, he had not appealed to Caesar. God would not that he should come to
Rome, but upon extreamities. So the journey thither (showed that Christ hated
the City that crucified him) was strange in calamities: and Paul was brought
thither as a prisoner, and kept in prison, though somewhat free.

CHAPTER XIIII.
And I saw, and behold a Lamb stood upon mount Syon, and an hundred forty
four thousand, were with him, having the name of their father written in their
forehead. THEY which were called before two Prophets, are now 144000. having the
name of God written in their forehead: the same number is said before to be
sealed: chapter 7. by a speech from Ezekiel, chapter 9. 4. There in the 70. (...), the
term of chap. 13. in Kimchy, a sign or writing. S. Paul expounds the
speech, that God will make them known who be his that they who profess the
name of God shall depart from wickedness. So they who have Gods name, are made
known who be his: and expound his word: and follow truth of worship due to
him: bearing a mark, in open profession, as sacrificers, such as Aharon had.
In this sort the holy Church still had some number, to profess the sum of
salvation; though on mount Sion a small hill, for the mountains of the world:
and not one to a million of ADONIKAM and his Children of three fold, as story
666. that number chap. 13. to bear the number of his name, was used for any
number of Apostatique profession. So here the 144000. twelve times twelve is
used for any Company that trusts in Christ, as the Patriarchs did.

And I heard a voice out of heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the
voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their
harpes, and they sing as it were a new song, before the throne, and before the
four lively wightes and the Elders. The heaven, commonly in this book, is the
Church; waters voice, is continual; so here continual singing is meant:
harpes signify, song with agreement: the new song is for man's praeseruation
every day. The four wightes are the rare, as Daniel, Ananias, Azarias and
Misael: and all the Evangelists and S. Paul: full of courage of Lions: so were
all the Apostles, of rare patience: ready to be sacrificed every day: and they
were the true Philosophers, thinking what should befall them after death; and
they were the Eagles of high flight and sight. The Elders are the Bishops, or
Teachers: the sage in government and skill in the holy Hebrew and Greek
Testaments. The song none could understand but the 144000. as no Papist soundly
thinks of all things, made for Gods glory in Christ, and how by him wholly
justice comes, and he only must be worshipped. When this is told them, they
are like unto men that dream, and know not who they are that are bought from
the earth: not what their religion means. Thereupon it is written.

And none could understand the song but the hundred forty and four thousand,
which were bought from the earth. What this song was.
Through the whole scripture this song is one and the same: that JEHOVAH, our
GOD, JEHOVAH is ONE: The FATHER, the SON, the Holy Spirit, be one, Coaeternall
and Coessentiall: the SON is called the WORD; by the WORD the Father made the
World, and by the Spirit beautified the heavens. And because the WORD would
become flesh, the World was made to serve once Adam the first. The Angels that
grudged at that, fell for ever: and deceived Adam: and made him dead in sin:
and brought him to be turning daily to dust until he dyed, and for him the
whole frame of the Creature, was pronunced corrupt. But he believed that
Christ, made of a woman, made under the Law, God being in him to reconcile the
World to himself: should give Adams soul justice by faith, should raise up
his Body, and make a new World: by his power, whereby he can subdue all
things to himself. This is the sum of the song; told through all Books of
the Bible.

A Digression to show the Concent of all the holy Books. The Concent of all
the holy Books, Geneses.

Geneses shows, how by the WORD of JEHOVAH, the heavens were made, and all
the settled army of them, by the Spirit of his mouth: 1. John. 1. 1. and 3. 8.
and when man fell; the WORD telling, that to destroy the works of Satan, he
would be made flesh, and have a Tabernacle in us. In which point, the Fathers
faith, unto the charge of Joseph's bones to be carried unto the Land, wherein
our Lords resurrection should be a Testimony of a new World: taught by Joseph
in his bones, long after his death. Heb. 11.
By faith, he taught by his dead bones, of the new world: and therein Geneses
end, has a new Geneses. All simple, should learn CHRIST from the Gospel of
Geneses: where his Godhead so familiarly, delited in the holy, Prove. 8. and
showed in appearances, that he would be man. All young men brought up to be
Bishops of the Kings armies, or Church: would rejoice to have learned Geneses
in Ebrew by heart. In old age they should gather the fruit.

Objection of them, that are not bought from the earth.
S. Jerome says: Jews read not the three first chapters of Geneses, till they
be 30. years old.

Answer. None should cite Jerome to make him a fool, or to win the Whetstone.
Maymony, in Morch Nebuchim has this sentence, that none, did Darash, read (as
a Doctor expounds) Genes. 1. and 2. and 3. and Ezech. 1. before he was aged
30. So S. Ierom meant. Jews all teach their Children, from seven to read all
Moses. It were better that Rome, were with Helice and Bura, then Popes should
be suffered, so to bring most wickedly the word of life into a deadly hatred.

Of Job.
Job, is a book for all holy to take notice of; for instructing their families
in the knowlede of Christ: which Abraham carefully did, as God testifies; the
comfort of it their posterity shall find: as the book sets forth the faith
and love (the effects of the Gospel. 1. These. 1.) of his posterity; even
before the Law was given; to show that the godly had always the Law written
in their hearts, 2. Cor. 3. Ier. 32. Romans 2. Job, is a patron to all the
faithful; in prosperity, for love, compassion, justice and equity, etc. in
his afflictions, his faith and hope in the Redeemer the seed promised, whom he
knew would take our nature upon him to die for him, and by his Godhead raise
himself from death, and that by his resurrection, he should be raised in the
last day, and be made like his glorious body; and that he ever lived to make
intercession for him: these things were his comfort in his greatest miseries:
and patience and constancy, the fruit of his hope, he showed Romans 5. and
commended to us Iam. 5. And in Job, God describes the state of the Church,
now flourishing, now wholly afflicted: yet by faith in the Redeemer find
recovery unto eternal life. Briefly, the whole book is a divine commentary on
Geneses, both for Creation and Redemption.

Of Exodus.
Exodus shows how God performed promise to Abraham of multiplying his seed:
Exodu^
of their affliction in Egypt: (for his heinous sin as Rabbi Bechai says, in
giving Sarah to Pharaoh) of revenging Egypt: of bringing Israel thence, by the
blood of the Lamb: and drowning Pharaoh, where they sang the song of the Lamb.
Exo. 15.
The Tables with letters 613. Vowels and Accents, as we have this day, in the
same form in the first Law, teach how we come from the Egypt of this World:
and the Tabernacle, how the WORD would have his Tabernacle in us.

Romes error against this song of the Lamb: barbarous.
Their Latin says The dwelling of the Children of Israel while they dwelt in
Egypt, was 430. year. yet Cohach came with Jacob, Genesis 46. and lived but 133.
year. Amram 137. Exodus 6. Moses 120. Deuteronomy. 33. all in extremity makes but 390.
year. So Moses must be buried 40. year. before he received the Law. So the Pope
makes all the Old Testam. nothing worth. Saint Paul makes it but 430. year.
from the Promise, Genesis 12. unto the Law, Gall. 3. 17. So the Pope would make
both Testaments, of small force: as his knights, in Genesis 3. say, she shall
bruise thy head, to be the ground of hope: that so, the Virgin Marie might
lawfully be worshipped.

Error Athean.
The heavy Commandment, Thou shall not make unto thy self any graven Image:
in the Popes decalogue is left out. The Chaldean who destroyed the Temple, that
all of Gold was carried to Babel: so the covering of the Arc, and the rest of
the Gold: that the timber, and Tables seem broken by the wicked: those wicked
are not more wicked then the other Babylon in a mystery, which to receive
Idolatry, would take away one commandment from the ten.

Of Leuiticus. Leuiticus.

When the Tabernacle was set up, the voice of Christ, which was terrible on
the mountain, speaks softly to Moses how Leui should co^triue all the Law by
sacrifice hither: that when the Jews had destroyed Christ his Tabernacle, Ioh.
2.
he would raise it again the third day: and end Leuies trade: and the Angel
commenting upon Leuit. 26. tells the very hour when Christ by death would
end sacrifice and offering.

How the Pope disannulleth all Leuiticus.
The Pope will have Priest, Altar, Cope, Leuitique linen, flesh of Bread and
Blood of Wine, to be for sacrifice; against all the light that Christ planted
in souls, for sense of eye sight, taste, feeling, smelling and hearing of
words: and common reason, when words of possessions must be expounded,
lawyerlike: not in natural sort. He that should urge natural propriety in
this. Iechonias begat Salathiel, should bring infinite absurdities upon the
genealogy. He is more senseless that knows not speeches of a covenant, how
the thing signifying, has the name of the signified. Typus, antitypus,
simbolon, Icones, old greeks Dionysius the forged, Origin, Eusebius,
Nazianzene, Theodoret. etc. could term the Bread and Wine, seals of ending
Moses Policy, which had the auctority of God, equal in wisdom to his
wisdom in the Creation of the World. Now where God ends all sacrifice, and
Moses policy, performing by our Lords death and testifying by S. Stephens
martyrdom. Thence the beast arising from the profane earth, would with the
mouth of the Dragon, erect a policy over the World; to make by Satan imitation
of Moses policy, to turn all Commonweals to apish mockage, of the sage
wisdom in Moses: unto the deceit of Satan, who transformeth him self into
an Angel of light. Thus the harpes on Mount Syon, will not agree with the
Popes Policy, by Leuiticus.

Of Numery. Numbers* Act. 26. 22. 23.

When Moses had showed in figures, that Christ was to suffer, and being the
first from the dead should show light unto the World: the people were to try,
whether by this faith, they would conquer Chanaan, and not by man's strength.
They are numbered in persons, a miraculous number; to proceed in 215. yer.
(whence only 70. male souls arose in 215. years) 603550. men of war
besides Women and Children. But they misbelieue and so come short.

The Like.
Popery teaches, that merits of saints, must be helps to conquer the Land
of Rest. And trust not to the Promise given to Abraham.

Of Deuteronomie.
Deuteronomie, Deutero.
repeateth to the sons the fathers religion: in an abridgement: showing that
all ages should do so: and gives an express Law, that fathers should teach
their Children the Law. And so, many psalms, and many places of the New
Testament, abridge the heavenly wisdom of God, for all former doctrine.

The Contrary.
No Cardinales of Rome, nor Princes that gave them honor, knew this much.
Therefore their gold is in high gilt.

Of Jesus.
The book of JESUS, Joshua.
shows how JESUS conquered the Land by a lesser number then the first, that
man should not have the praise, but only God. Psalm. 44. And their towns 324. as
some reckon them, in Chananean names, show all commodities of soil for a land.

The Contrary.
The Jews were told by David, Psalm. 95.
that JESUS settled not the people in the true rest: but bids them enter
into a Rest from man's Ceremonies: where Baptism for Circumcision, and Bread
with Wine, (tokens as strong as the worlds frame, upon Gods word, of life to
faithful receivers) are all that religious policy requires, that we have a
Rest from the infinite toil of Moses Policy. But the City that crucified
Christ, denies this Rest: and brings from man's wicked brain, wicked toys
innumerable, to be religiously observed: whereof the least were as bad as the
strange fire that Aharons sons did kindle.

Of the Book of the Judges.
Joseph in his Beryll, Judges.
bare the XI I. Patriarchs names: as a King and stay of the common Weal: when
the people fell away, other tribes: Judah, Benjamin, Isachar, Zabulon, Nepthaly
and Dan in part, and Leui to alteration, upon overthrow, in Elies sons. The
70. for a special reason, set in Greek for Joseph's Beryll, the Emerauld of
Leui, that heathen might not say: the God of Israel did not foresee what would
come to pass. Joseph bare the sway: and Ephraim of Joseph carried (except Judah)
all tribes landed away. Upon the Greek translation Chrysostom, sharper witted
then skillfull in the original, in Photius liberary, would make the high
sacrificer the stay of the state: where his office was for the World to come;
and upon this the Patriarchs would be checking not teaching the Emperor, till
both came to naught: as Elie his sons, overthrew all the glory of the states
under the Judges. The Pope passes all Greek Patriarchs over Kings; by whom
they stand, and by whose guiftes they had means to study the word of God, If
they had grace, and to help many lands so to do: that in the Pope (as in
Elies sons,) a fall extreme shall be.

Of Samuel, etc.
When God hastening to show CHRIST from Judah, Samuel.
gave Israel a mind to choose a King: he would give one of Benjamin, that
Rachel should be aequall to Leah: but soon remove him: Psalms.
then comes DAVID of Judah: David rare for faith and all humanity: whose
Psalms tell of Christ all that can be known: from Stories past, and in
Prophecies for the state following. That all men, high and low, rich and poor,
should still sing his psalms. And to him, is promised an aeternall throne in
Christ. Now to prove, that this throne is not for this World. Solomon has all
wisdom, prosperity, and pleasure, and writes a song of songs, that is all
in continued allegories of true souls following Christ: Canticles.
and Proverbs, to warn Ephraim from Idols: Proverbs Ecclesiaastes.
and Ecclesistes to tell that all under the sun was vanity. To the same
effect the history of poor Ruth, Ruth.
of Lot, leaving Country, kins folk and fathers house, contains a sage hope
in the song for the Lamb. And Salomons Temple is soon cast off, to be
despised, and the Kings of his seed; 1. and 2. Kings.
in 1. and 2. of the Kings; to show that a King of Nathan Salomons brother,
should be the true King; when Salomons Kings should cause captivity to Babel,
and overthrow of all. Chronicles.
The Books of Kings, and Chronicles, show that in event. Then Daniel, shows
7. times over, how under Kings Judah shall be in affliction, Daniel.
till the King of Kings comes. Hosea.
In Prophecy, Hosea tells of his salvation, how he shall be called from
Egypt, and destroy death, and arise the third day, Jonas.
which matter Jonas in figure experienced before. This salvation Osee teaches
and how Lo-Ammi, should be Ammi, and Lo-Ruchamah, Joel.
should be Ruchamach. Joel, shows Gods favor for the spirit upon all flesh,
to speak of the resurrection, chapter 2. and sharp judgment cited in this
Chapter. And Amos, Amos.
of erecting David's Tabernacle. Isaiah, is an Evangelist from chapter 40.
specially chapter 53. and where not: Isaiah.
and who is like to Michah, Michah.
telling Herod of Bethlechem, where the son of David should be borne. Nahum.
Nahum, comfort the true Jew with the fair feet of them that show peace:
and says: Aggie Aggeicha: festiue thy festiuities; though Nineveh scattred
Israel, yet Judah should be built. The name of Aggei the Prophet calls that
into mind. Habba.
Abbakuk, embraces the people with comfort against Babel, and leaves a mess
of potage for Daniel, and all good: that, the just shall live by faith. Jeremy.
Jeremy, 40. year. tells Judah their Ceremonies cannot turn their hearts
from strange Gods: But Babell shall be their dwelling to consume the wicked,
and to show Gods glory, where the Tower brought shame to all nations, built to
worship Creatures, and to forget the Creator. Tzephain, tells that (Tze-phan
Iah) the aeternall has sealed up judgment for despysing the Redeemer, (taught
by the Passover in Iosiahs days) therefore he will visit the Kings Children
for close Idolatry, the rulers for cruelty, the false Prophets for lying
vanities, overthrow the state and carry them to Babell, but after confession of
their sin, he will leave a poor and humble people, that shall trust in Messiah
the Lord. Obadiah, tells Edom, that for helping Babell to destroy Jerusalem;
by Babell they should be destroyed: yet in time Saviors (that is Apostles)
shall come from Syon to conquer and judge them (Luc. 22. 30.) that is, to bring
them to the faith, and that, of that Kingdom Christ shall be King. Ezechiel
shows the son of man glorious above the Cherub, Ezechiel.
Chap. 1. and from 40. a new Jerusalem: and chap. 38. shows to the eye the
resurrection: touching his Jerusalem: S. Peter tuneth the Harp on Mount Sion,
that: every prophecy of scripture is not to be expouded properly: because the
holy men of God spoke carried by the holy Ghost. Daniel.
Daniel, expounds him, that the death of Christ shall bring all nations to be
an heavenly Jerusalem: Of Daniel I have written more then any since Daniel
wrote, how his holy Gospel, shows Christ unto Children. The Copies of my
last edition he that uses, as the Persians the Prophet, shall be commended
of me to the God of Daniel, whom he knows not. For if he had known him, he
would not so have crucified again the Lord of glory. So described king of the
Jews, and first named CHRIST, mere properly in Daniel. Ages following shall
enquire how God will deal with the men. Aggei.
Aggei, answering in name (as was showed) to Nahums words, shows that of
Zorobabel, the SIGNET shall come: who shall shake the heaven of the Jews
policy; Zacharic.
and the profane earth. Zachary and Malachy, Malachie.
with him, show what Zachary and Malachy Luc. 1. should learn to begin the
New Testament, by the Angel Gabriel, Ezra.
on whom they comment: Ezra, and Nehemias, Nehemias.
also record his truth, and celebrate the names of the chief returned, and
the number of all. And Mordecai, in Esther, Esther.
tells how by faith in Christ they escaped the edge of the sword: Thus upon
Mount Sion of old, they tuned their harps, in the strange land of this world:
knowing that God would receive them hence into his Ourano polin: yet they were
not perfected in their music here, to see and feel as 1. Ioh. 1. the word
of life. S. Peter writing to poor Jews 2 Pet. 1. commends the reading of
the old harpes, as a light shining in a dark place, till the morning star
(Psalm. 22. Apo. 2. and 21. and David Kimchi upon Psalm. 22.) arise in our hearts.

The Popes contrariety.
S. Peter's most deadly enemy the Pope, which would make him the Rock, or God:
and will not learn how he expounds Rock: to be the Creator. 1. Pet. 4. from
2. Sam. 22. will not suffer the people to read the Law: a Pope or Demon,
openly bent against the goodness of God.

Of the New Testaments music. The Gospel.
The holy Publican makes in his first Chapter, Matthew.
a stately porch to the new Temple; showing from Abraham to David, that the
Fathers of Christ, were all afflicted in this world: and knew the holy
Trinity, and foresaw Christ, and his kingdom, which arises from David by
Nathan: not from Solomon: whose house would not be upright with God. 2. Sam.
23. All be faltie: but Ioakim so wicked: that because he overthrew the state;
the Jews enacted, not to name him, in their narrations: and so S. Matthew left
him out: Now when Nathans house comes in, for whom all Daniels Visions
speak, in them we see heaven opened: and how God sat upon a Throne, as if
he were like Jasper and Rubi, with the Rainebow like Moses Smaragd about the
Throne: and his harp has all tunes of Law, Mark.
till Christ be taken up. So Mark plays upon Gabriels harp, Luke.
Dan. 9. till CHRIST is King in heaven. Luke. plays first upon the last
string of Malachie: and the same tunes as the other two. The Son of thunder
begins from before the beginning, John.
showing that by the SON, God made the world: and harpeth most upon that
string: and teaches the Pope, that he, not Peter was the best beloved: and
needed not a threefold encouragement to feed the sheep. Thus the man Leui; the
Lion, Mark. The Ox, Luke; Eagle John, play all David's tunes: That mighty
Theophilus saw in every one, Man, Lion, Ox, Eagle; as Ezekiel chap. 1.

Of the Acts.
The Acts tells that S. Luke was full of eyes, Acts.
specially for depth of Ebrew skill. Act. 7. and 13. as in his Gospel chapter 4.
which poinctes I touch in a Latin Epistle to PP. of Germany, and to our K.
Majesty. The Antiochian shows how Antiochia first had Christian name: to
show that Christ would be great over Magog, Ezekiel. 39. and he alone was a
miracle of Gods mercy: But Nicolaus stood not sound: as Antioch by Pride had a
fall. Though Peter were there, and an heavenly company: of which if Rome might
have bragged, a 1000. Martin Luthers, and Zuinglians, and Martyrs and Bucers,
should not have shaken the Popes pride: who swells that Paul comfort the
small Company, who had no Apostles to strengthen, that yet their faith was
sounded over the world. And S. Luke ends in Paul's speech unto Jews, who
knew not what the Gospel meant, till he came thither: that the Pope might be
ashamed to say that S. Peter was there: whose writing is all in Jews vein;
and if he had been there, but one day, the Synagogue had heard what the
Gospel was. In that he tells how S. Paul was borne free in Rome, and thereby
found great protection, and freedom, and how Jesus our Savior told, that he
should be the Apostle to bring his name before Caesar, and of the famous
course, by appeal from Festus to Caesar, known to king Agrippa, by famous
navigations and miracles: these show the Popes badnesse, that would put all this
out of tune: to beg lands to match Emperors, by a lie that S. Peter should be
at Rome: whereof God has not given one syllable of found. The Testimony of
Origin, Clemens, Alexandrine, Tertullian, Eusebius, all unsound and nothing
worth, without testimony from them that should see him there. The Pope must
cut of all the stringes of S. Lukes harp, on mount Sion, and use Poliphemus
music to Galatea, from Aetna, if he will stand in his old forgery.
Epiphanius would not stay upon that fable: though Latin writers to glory of the
West, could foster the fable.

Of the Epistle to the Romans.
As the stringes of the Wolfes entralles, Romans.
will never have concordes with the sheep, the musical: so the fable from
the Pope that belieueth not that Christ, is the only Rock. Psalm. 18. will
never agree with the stringes of S. Paul's epistle. It Catechiseth men, as
needy of stay: and tells of a long desire that way: and gives express Law,
that every soul should obey Caesar, in matters of government: as to Jews not
taught in that. And Modestly shows his reasons of rules fit for simple:
though he was persuaded they could teach one another. He had not passed over S.
Peter if he had taught them. And he pleads for his Bishopric charge over
the Gentiles from Jerusalem to Illyrico, all ready gone over: and the Romans to
be of his Bishopric where the name of Christ had not been sounded by any
Apostle. And in salutations to five and twenty, not one syllable sounds
toward that S. Peter had been, or ever should be at Rome. If the Pope had
known IAH JEHOVAH, THE ROCK OF ALL AGES, this epistle had taught him the
Ebrews song: and to avoid them that should make sedition and scandala from
this doctrine.

Of the first to the Corinthians.
This teaches that the authority of Cephas, 1. Corint.
Paul, Apollos (the cunning lawyer,) might not be of auctority: But with
express doctrine of Ceph to Rock: whereupon they that build be Cephae set
upon the Rock. And for excommunication, he follows the Synagogues sage
manner: That the open Court, not Angelus Ecclesiae should practice it. Though
the Pope will be exco^municating kings: which thing Thal. Ieru. in Sanedrin,
holds never used nor lawful. Other Thalmudique questions he decideth, many:
and for the Lords supper, puts transsubstantiation out of tune: and shows
how all the Church should be as one body, full of charity and goodness, and
exhorts all to have skill in the Bible.

Of the second to the Corinth.
It continues in the same tenor: 2. Corint.
and that afflictions be the adiunctes, to teachers of salvation, not the Popes
ease and quietness: 2. Cor. 4.
and that the Gospel shines to all, whom the god of this World blinds not,
though ignorance be the mother of the Popes holy devotion.

Against Purgatory.
Where he says: we know that if this earthly house of tabernack has an end,
we have a building from GOD, an house not made with hands, everlasting in the
heavens: The Rock Leuit. 26. powers water of that Doctrine to Moses: So
Haides to all godly is heaven.

Of the Epist. to Gal.
Galatae barbarous Canniballs in Strabo, Galatians
are brought by S. Paul to the Rock of salvation: by faith without works of
the Law, and if they stick to any one of them as Circumcision, Christ profits
nothing. By this Epistle Martin Luther showed the Pope to be an enemy to
salvation. And where he says after many years he found Peter at Jerusalem,
and that Peter was the Jews Apostle, to save whom he could before the nation
should be scattred. And so he was for Greeks. This water from the Rock should
wash away the Popes lies. And the whole Epistle might tell him that he might as
well repete Circumcision as Priest, high Priest, Mitre, Cope, Linen, sacrifice.

Of the Epistle to the Ephesians.
The Epistle to the Ephesians contains a perfect doctrine of all faith: Ephesians.
penned easy for all to learn: and dashing all popery.

The Philippians.
Are taught to rejoice in afflictions: Philippi.
as the martyrs by Rome Apoc. chap. 1. and 7. and 11. and 12. and 14. and 15.
and 17. and Paul's afflictions brought the name of Christ into Caesar's palace.

Colossians.
Epaphras brought the Colossians to the Rock: Colossi.
the son of God of whose aeternity and dignity S. Paul speaks heavenly: and
to their building into all riches of full understanding in the mystery of
Christ: about deceit of Philosophy, and Jews Ceremonies for meat; the Pope
in both matters is busy: that his Wolfes stringes make no music, but where
Lupa gave milk to Rome builders.

Of the first to the These.
They in affliction be an example for the Martyrs in Spain haters of the Popes
idols. 1 Thessalonians.
The last glorious coming of Christ will be their comforts.

Second These.
They should not look that the last days were come to the World, 2 Thessalonians.
as to the Jews Common weal: in Prophets, Genes. chap. 49. Dan. 2. and Ebr.
chap. 1. Because not only open tyranny shall try Lions and Oxen: but also
mighty deceit (that they which receive not the love of truth, may be damned
for love to lies) shall try man, and eagle: and who be full of eyes. From this
place Greeks tell Antichrist should arise from Rome: see chapter 2. Th. 2. he
makes the matter plain. So at the first he showed his care for Rome. And as
Daniel chapter 2. calls the Counsel of God in the afflicters wicked, a
mystery: eloquent Paul takes his term thence, teaching that as those matters
had a most sure event, even to Antiochus figure of Antichrist, exalting
himself above all religion. So when the Emperor should fall: The Papae or
Divinity fathers of Rome should be (...), with all force of Satan. That text is
an abridgement of the Apocalypse.

First and 2. Timothy, and Titus.
Paul in Timothy tells all, 1. and 2. Timot.
what great learning they should have, which should govern others: every man
of charge is Pakid (...) in Adams tongue (...) in the LXX. Elders Acts. 2. and
Titus 3. In virtues of regeneration they should be rare: and by study they
should be learned. Exodus chap. 18. is the ground Sanedrin, Maymonie, an
explication. Of these the King chiefly was Doctor, Maymonie Hagigah. And
Archysynagogus and the rest chose one of their company, to be Sheliach Zibbur,
Orator of the congregation: he read the Law: and dealt in exhortation; and all
prophesied; and none should rule ouerthe people but in mildness, 1. Pet. 5.
Maymon in Sanedrin whose words for our Athean tyrany, in BB. forcing oaths,
etc. I wrote in my Book to I. C. of reverend, memory. Titus.
Titus is taught the same. Now an ape is liker a man, then the Pope Paul's
Bishop; in 2. These. 2. 1. Tim. 2. Tim. Tit. The opening of S. Paul by the
Talmudiques sitting in Moses chair, would clear him more then all others. He
in Greek abridgeth them writing to Timothy and Titus, who knew them at large.
Geneua does well this far: that all should be kept in order: in
excommunication far from S. Paul: and in letting the raines to Preachers to be
Rome Popes.

Of Philemon.
After he had described the gouerners, Philemon.
learned, and lovers of the people: he handles the cause of Servants: from
Exodus 21. and Israel servant in Egypt, Exodus cha. 20. whence in Talmudiques, a
long common place is of servants. The marrow of all which Gamaliels Scholar
contriueth to one short epistle. And here the gracious providence of Christ,
in the notation of Philemon and Onesimus conteyneth the duty of Master and
Servant: so wiseing al to learn Paul's tongue. Philemon is loving: so should
every Master be to his servant, Ephesians. 6. knowing that they have a Master in
Heaven. A famous Greek Poet, much cited for Haides, Heaven and Hell, from
Sophocles, Herodotus with Menander and Diphilus, was called Philemon. Onesimus
is by interpretation profitable: such should all servants be to their
masters. Not in ey-seruice as men pleasers but as serving the Lord. The poor
Daughter of Israel in Naamans house, caused him to seek Eliseus, and GOD: and
when he took peper in the nose, for Jordan: his servants ouerruled him, as
Onesimus to salvation. The name Onesimus is in Lysias the Attique: as usual in
Greeks, Onesiphorus S. Paul's great helper, is of the same notation.

How the Servant of Servants is Concordant.
The Servant of Servants is such an Onesimus, that he brings all to poverty
by his treachery: and by his Peter Pence for Chimineies, made millions of eyes
dim with smoke: and can forge Constantinus donation for the kingdoms of the
West. If Julian had heard any such matter: he had set that among the chief
schoffs for his Uncle: But neither he nor any Greeks could hear of such a
matter: which all the world had known in Constantines days, if it had been
true. The robber thus recompensed Constantine for bringing in Christian
polity: to destroy new Rome, and to root out from the East the holy Gospel.

Of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
From Rome S. Paul the most reverend Papas, Hebrews.
that ever was in Rome, (and S. Luke next him) the Ebrew of Ebrewes tells the
Ebrewes, that were upon revolt: that all Moses Policy ended in Christ: and
that no further sacrificer must be on the earth: and that faith gives true
commendation, from the Creation to the Maccabees days, who in Dan. 12. hoped
in the better resurrection. In this Epist. S. Paul abridgeth all the Bible.

The Popes Contrariety.
The Popes whole doctrine, as I showed, would make a new policy over the World
by imitation of Aharon: so that he comes to the height of sin: and denies
the whole doctrine of justification by faith: and that Abraham and the rest
went hence to heaven; against S. Paul's expressed words, praetending, chap. XI.
II. vlt. Where he speaks, as through the Epistle, of perfection in the
Doctrine: which the Gospel has above the Law, and not a word, he nor any of
reward in the World of souls. Also Augustinus Nabiensis writes wickedly, that
the Greek is a translation: and faulty, in, thou have made him a little
inferior to Angels. He would have it: A little inferior to God, yet Christ
could say how in humanity despised he was a worm; as infinitely inferior to
his Godhead, though both together make the Person great GOD.

Of the Epistle of James.
S. James frames his speech to Jews, James.
who knew that no Bishops of Elder, could be above another: and brings a Law
not to praeferre any before the rich in knowledge: and where Jews then and yet
hold that belief in the truth of the Law, and reverence to it, justifies:
as Abr. Sabung in Zeror, writes of some; and Moses de Kotzi, praef. in Talm.
He tells such a faith is a dead faith: regeneration must follow: as all
teach.

Of the first and 2. of Peter.
Both Peter's epistles, 1. and 2. Pet.
are written in Jews vein, that by affliction, (not by the Popes pomp) we
get heaven: and that Christ took that course being killed in the humanity,
and made alive by the spirit (the holy Spirit in the Ethiopian and Oecumenius)
in which he went (ten times is that speech of God in the Law) and preached to
them which are now spirits in prison: because they believed not when Christ
preached in the days of Noe. And, he bids us commend our souls to the
faitfull Rock, chap. 4. teaching the Pope how he understood the term Rock, to
be all one as Creator: where the Pope (as I often told) chalenging that name,
shows himself in the Temple of God, as if he were God. And chap 5. he
tells expressly that the chosen Church in Babylon saluted them and Mark. And
all speakers be wicked deceivers that use not propriety, where all minds
require propriety: and otherwise the whole world should be deceived. And in
the second, Bosor, with S. for Y, used only in Arabia, and Chaldea, tells
where he kept.

Of the 1. and 2. and 3. of John.
These be wholly for contempt of this world: 1. 2. and 3. John.
and clean contrary to the Popes doctrine: as his Apocalypse.

Of Jude.
He in teaching of Jews fall by the Rebels in the wilderness, Jude.
by the Angels that fell, and by the unclean Cities, brent from heaven:
warns not to bragg that the Church cannot err. And where Jews thought
government, a tyranny: he shows from Talmudique upon Moses Burial Midras
Rabba, Aboth Rabbi Nathan and others, that MICHAEL the Archangell, could not
suffer Satan to speak slander of king Moses: So he will not suffer Popes to
blaspheme Kings. But the Popes understand not so much as Iudes text: to know
MICHAEL to be IEHOVA: but make him a created Spirit: such blind batts they
be. And thus all the scripture agrees as harpes to follow the LAMB: whose
doctrine the Pope stayneth by idolatry: that none can understand the drift of
the Scripture, but the hundred forty and four thousand.

These be they which have not been defiled by women. For they be Virgins.
This speech is taken from the song of songs: which says, O that he would
kiss me with the kisses of his lips, for thy love is better then wine. Thy
name is oynctment poured out, therefore the Virgins love thee. Draw me, and
we will run after thee. None may think that marriage is a pollution. But
this speech is a trope for the virginity of the mind: free from Idolatry,
which is spiritual whoordome.

These follow the LAMB which way soever he goes, being the first fruit for
God and the Lamb: and there is no guile found in their mouth, for they are
sincere before God and the Lamb. They follow the warrant of Gods word for
every thing, and be bought from men, the first fruits for God and the Lamb,
which was a small part of the whole: and they hold no haeresie: but hold them
only happy whose sin is forgiven, and whose iniquity is covered: as Psalm.
32. and be just before God, in the justice of Christ.

The Combat of the 144000.
And I saw another Angel fleeing in the sky having the aeternall Gospel, to
preach to them that dwell upon the earth: and every nation, and tribe, and
tongue and people. Saying with a great voice. Fear God, and give him glory:
for the hour of his judgment is come* and worship him, which made the heaven
and the earth and the sea: Ier. 10.
and the fountains of water. In the seventh chap, Martyrdom was showed, but
without telling by whom. In chap. XI. the Persecuter was told, and the
persecuted were called two prophets: and chap. 12. the Persecuter is double,
the upper part of the Dragon, and the tail: and the persecuted is the woman,
clothed with the sun: but the cause of persecution is not told: chap. 13.
describes the Dragon by sure state, specially in the Empire revived by the
Pope: and how no man could live in the Empire, without his profession. Now that
it stands manifestly in Idolatry, that is here told: and persecution is for
preaching, that God only must be worshipped, and not the Empire, or Pope, and
Idols. For now God will defend his flock which of long time he suffered to be
deceived. Now he will judge and defend their cause. The Popes Idolatry is in
worship to Mary and creatures, called saints, and in prayer to them: due only
to God: creator of all things: of whose power, creatures put us in mind, and
he will not our invention. Now of Idolatry, the next Angel tells, how God
will revenge the City.

And another Angel followed, Isai. 21.
saying BABYLON the great City is fallen, Ier. 51.
is fallen: Because she has made all nations drink of the Wine of the anger
of her fornication. The old BABYLON now had no auctority to force Idolatry:
while it was under the Greek Empire, or Turk which hates Idols. But now
Rome bears sway; so shaken from tongue of scripture, as old Babylon from
Adams tongue: which remained in the house of Heber, and far passed the old
Babel in Idolatry. Therefore ruin is spoken, to be sure for it, as fell by
Isaiah 21. and Ierem. 51. upon the old Babel.

And a third Angel followed them, saying, with a great voice: if any worship
the beast and his Image, Psalm. 75
that is, takes a mark on his forehead, or hand, he also shall drink of the
Wine, Psalm. 21
of the anger of God; the Wine mixed in the cup of his anger, Esa. 34.
and shall be tormented in fire and brimston, before the holy Angels, and before
the Lamb: and the smoke of their torment ascends for ever and ever. And they
have no rest day nor night, if any worship the beast and his Image, that is, if
any take the mark of his name. Here is the patience of the saints tried:
here are they tried which keep the commandments of God, and the faith of
JESUS. Patience in this sort here, and faith of the saints was equally
spoken of in the profane Caesares days, here greater terror is set down: and
fit warning against the subtle work of Satan by man of sin, to deceive, if it
were possible, the elect. One poinct here is to be noted, that Gehenna is on
high, no less then Paradise, as in Leui. cha. 26. before the angry face of
God. So the Jews in Cether Malcuth folio 11. hold: that on high, place of
torment is, no less then place of joy: They who think that souls descend,
and that the holy were in Hell: and after warning hold this, should fear the
punishment here described. And the reformed Churches as Zurick, take the
wisest order, that destroy all the Popes marks: and most straightly look to
scholars carriage twice in the year, and refer all punishments to the Consul:
and Synedrion such was the Apostles doctrine, and the Synagogues of old. Great
revenues are now most needful: to breed learned to deal with Papist and
Jews. But Simon Magus Buyshopps, should have no place in the Church, following
the Buy-shopps of Rome, As Ananias the painted wall, and Eleazar his son (in
Raba) caused Jerusalem to be destroyed. So one like may bring an whole nation
under curse.

And I heard a voice from heaven, saying to me write: Blessed are the dead
that die in the Lord, from this praesent. Even so says the Spirit, to rest
from their labors: and their works follow with them. Because in time of
blindness, none could buy nor sell in Popes Kingdom, but of his profession;
other were killed: here is a sure comfort to strengthen the martyrs: God who
knows all, being the speaker from heaven: that praesentlie after death they
are fully happy, which die for Gods truth, or in faith: to rest from the labors
of this life: and their works follow with them: their open profession: that
God only is to be worshipped; and their careful life: teaching all, to
consider still: as all must die: so praesently follows judgment.

Comparisons of phrases, for holy souls departed.
When the fifth seal was opened, chapter 6. John saw the souls of them which
were killed for the Word of GOD, and for the testimony which they had, he saw
them under the Altar: who is Christ. The Thalmud of Rabbi Nathan, in Moses,
says, that his soul and all the just, are under the throne of God. So as
Saint Paul says, Romans chap. 10. The Apostles doctrine is confirmed by
Thalmudiques directly in all things, saving the Person and office of Messiah.

Chap. 7. The martyrs have white garments, and palms in their hands: they be
before the throne of God, etc.

Chap. 11. They are called up into heaven: and their enemies see them, going up
in a cloud. Hence purgatory is confuted: which has no ground from the old
Testament: as any Talmudique did ever expound it. For Leuit. 26. tells, that
hence men go to Gods tabernacle to joy, or before his throne to feel
aeternall anger.

Revenge: for Christ his Justice.
And I saw and behold a white Cloud: and one rode on the Cloud, like the SON OF
MAN, having on his head a Crown of gold: and in his hand a sharp sickle. The
cloud is Gods chariot, Isaiah 19. as I told chap. 1. and this place tells
what Person was there described. Here he has a crown of gold, as in Psalm.
20. a token of victory by death: so, chap. 6. In Maym. Poenit. the just have
Crowns in the World of souls. So to Talmudiques, the New Testam. would be
clear. Joel 3. 13.
The sharp sickle, in Joel, is Gods vengeance upon Iudahs enemies; Assure, the
Image, yea and the Image of the beast, here. For he speaks of all enemies.
The roaring like a Lion, and the 7. thunders tell the same thing: and chapter
X. and the earthquake: and destroying of them that destroyed the earth.

Revenge for the prayers of the Church.
Another Angel came forth from the Temple; crying with a great voice, to him
that road upon the Cloud: cast fourth thy sickle and reap, time is come to
reap: for the harvest of the earth is ripe. The Church be the faithful: the
Angel is the representer of their state. So Nebuchadnezar saw one watchful
and holy. Who tells that his punishment of 7. yer. beastliness, came by the
prayers of the just: Spain perceived in the Low Countries the force of this:
and is like to feel as good at home. What shall befall our Buuy-shop that
urges better learned to oath then himself, never heard of in Judah by either
Testament, Against the law of nature and against the law of England.
and imprisoneth better learned then himself, that will not profane the name
of God: and pineth unto death in cruel prison, them who deny him to be lawful
Buy-shop, and put by Teachers of salvation from their maintenance 400. What
shall become of this man: from whom the heart of a man has been taken 7. yer.
Nabuchad. dyed two years after he came to himself, so may this man. How
prayers of the just be heard, the next verse tells.

And he that road upon the cloud cast forth, his sickle into the earth: and
the earth was reaped. So the cry of the poor ascends into the ears of the
Lord of Hosts.

Revenge by the iniuried themselves.
And an other Angel came out of the Temple which is in heaven: having also a
sharp sickle. The faithful here have equal strength: and try combat with
Pope: as this year for Clieue: and Iuliaque: All the Protestants against the
Pope. Oh that our Albion would thrust in the sickle of good Laws against those
Popoi; lest they be still pricks in our eyes, and thorns in our sides; as
they have been.

And an other Angel came forth from the altar, having authority upon the
fire: and cried with a great voice to him that had the sharp sickle, saying:
Cast forth thy sickle, and cut the clusters of thr earth: for her grapes be
ripe. In Daniel, the Angel tells, chap XI. that in the first year of Darius
the Mede, chap. 5. he was a strength and might to him: Jacob had a camp of
Angels: which story David turns to all faithful. One paid Sanacharib: one
strengthens our Lord: One saved Peter, Act. 12. So here the lively speech of
the Angel, is an open token of assistance from the Angels of Christ: as they
be all ministering spirits sent forth to service, for them that shall inherit
salvation. Angels rule fire: as that which brent Sodom, Genesis 19. and Babel in
Xenophon compared with Dan. XI. And water in S. Paul's voyage. So all anger from
God is fire: and Angels, his servants.

The sure event.
So the Angel did cast his sharp sickle into the earth; and snapt off the
Vine of the earth, and cast it into the great winepresse of the anger of God,
and the wine press was trodden out of the City: and the blood came forth from
the wine press unto the horse bridles over stadia, (furlongs) a thousand six
hundred. The City is the assembly of the holy, the place out of it is the
dwelling of the faithless: The stadia or furlongs 1600. are taken from the
quantity of Chanaan: which Talmudiques calling to a square: make Ris, that is
Stadion; every way. The place I have cited in my Concent: where I abridge the
Apocalypse.

CHAP. XV.
A plain exposition of the Woman's fleeing into the wilderness.
And I saw, another great and marvelous sign; seven Angels having seven the
last plagues; for in them the wrath of God is finished. Chap. 6. expounds
this: and how when the Church has a seat in the wilderness, and their City
there: they make the wine press of Gods anger out of the City.

And I saw, as it were a sea of glass, mixed with fire, and them which
overcome, from the beast, and from his image, and from his mark, and the
number of his name, standing by the sea of glass, having the harpes of God,
and they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb,
saying: great and wonderful are thy works, O ETERNAL, the God of Hosts, just
and upright are thy wages: O King of saints: who would not fear thee, O Lord,
and give glory unto thy name, for thou only art gracious, for all nations,
shall come, and worship before thee, for thy judgments are manifested. Sea,
Rome compared to Egypt: the old Israel with the Spiritual.
signifies troubles, as Dan. 7. glass clearly considered of God: the
allusion, is to the Red sea: at which Israel was persequuted by Pharaoh: The
addition by fire is an open distinction, for the Popes sea of fire and faggott:
the song of Moses Exodus 15. is a thankesgiuening for deliverance from Pharaoh
by the blood of the Lamb: and the song of the Lamb conteyneth all the songs
in the Bible. This song is more fully described, chap. 19.
But most directly they of his incarnation, and souls passage from the body to
heaven, and resurrection, and sitting on the right hand of God. The works of
God be great and wonderful: that the wicked whom he has set unto wrath,
bear sway here for a time: but soon come to aeternall flames. And they who
in short affliction profess his name carry away an aeternall peise of glory: 2.
Cor. 4.
wicked Babel worshipping creatures had a great reign: that Gods servants
might teach there the truth of salvation. That which Ierem. speaks chap. X.
of our Gods praise against idols is here repeated. That Egypt and Babel teach
the Pope what to look for. Thus the holy protest their honor to God, and labor
to increase the Church, that all nations may come and worship him.

And afterward I saw, and behold the Temple of the Tabernacle of Covenant was
opened in the heaven: and the seven Angels came forth (having the seven
plagues) from the Temple: and they were clothed with clean and pure linen: and
girded about the breast with golden girdles. As Angels help Gods servants to
victories, so proper Angels considered with men, whom they strengthen may
here be meant. Their clothing signify sincere holiness: which men should
desire: and the golden girdle about the breast, signifies the binding of the
mind, in golden syncerity of heart. Maymo. in Beth Bechira handling Aharons
garment: cites traditions from them that saw the high sacrificers manner, that
Aharon was girded about the breast, that shows John to speak most learnedly,
chapter 1. and here, 15. and wiser then any, who would forge a book, could
do.

And one of the four liue-wights, gave to the seven Angels, seven golden
cupps, full of the anger of God, who lives for ever and ever. The lively wight
is here as orator of the whole Church: and after the acknowledging of Gods
goodness: by Gods charge the Angels take in hand to pour Gods wrath upon his
enemies: visibly, by men: but unseen: as the army that guarded Elisaeus. So,
as I told, the punishment of Nabuchadnezar, Daniel chap. 4. comes by the
decree of the watchful, and the petition of the holy. What the Angels desire
in revenge for the Church: God appoints them to help forward in assisting men
that be the fighters. So millions of millions wait upon Gods throne: to rule
the four beasts: that the house of Zorobabell afflicted should know, that the
heavens ruled: and tyrants should soon be tamed by them. The Pope should from
Dan. 7. learn this, and from Apo. chap. 6. where the profane Caesares be
destroyed: and know that after long angring of God, he must have full payment.
Mortal Princes soon fade as a flower. But God is everlasting (...) Daniel 7.
9. and living for ever, Dan, cha. 12. and Apoc. X. and XV. who because men did
not receive the love of the truth, to be saved, sends workfull error: that
they believe falsehood, that all may be condemned, which believe not the truth,
but delight in badnesse. This Book was penned in such a style, that it opens
not only it self, but also teaches how all the old Testament, belongs to
Christ.

And the Temple was filled with a smoke of the glory of God: and of his power:
and none could go into the Temple, till the seven plagues of the 7. Angels
were finished. When the Tabernacle of Moses, and the Temple of Solomon were
consecrated, then Moses and the Levites could not go in while the glory of
God filled them. Here a cloud of Gods anger filled with defense the Church in
the wilderness: that God will not give the wicked grace to join with them,
until they be consumed: the sturdy wicked who fight against open light, and be
of the 666. sons of Adoni-kam: which had rather have 666. talents of Cethem
from Ophir, then all the knowledge of John's Revelation: such that strive
against the light, shall neither be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to
come: but here have a conscience stinged as by scorpions, and in the world of
souls, death aeternall.

CHAPTER XVI.
As the Popes manner of rising plagued the World, in a like manner God
consumes him.
As the Popes arisinge, plagued the world, under Angels Trumpets: as 1. The
earth. 2. The Sea. 3. Fountains of waters. 4. The Sun. 5. By kingdom of
Locusts 6. By raising up the Turk 7. By earthquake.


So to him plagues come under the same terms: but in another signification, as
1. His earth has boyles. 2. Sea, blood. 3. Fountains blood. 4. Susnn parching
persecution. 5. By darkened throne, of spoil. 6. By Euphrates, by Turk. 7. By
whole, earthquake.


And I heard a great voice from the Temple, saying: go, and pour out the
cupps of the anger of God into the earth. In the heaven Christ is the Temple:
and the Church by him. By his commandment; and the Churches care, the Popes
world is plagued: spirits, being Gods messengers invisibly; men visiblie.

And the first went, and poured his cup into the earth, and there came boiles
sore and painful, upon such as has the mark of the beast, and worshipped
his image. The plague of Egypt under Iannes and Iambres resisting Moses, is
now upon the minds of Papists: which resist Law and Gospel: the discovery of
which Idolatry becomes a sound means for Kings, (that made the beast a King
of Locusts) to eat up the flesh of the beast. The West Kings made the Pope
mighty, to overthrow the East: weakened so, that Machmad and Turcke ouerhtrew
it. And ever since the Pope came to be mighty, he became auctor of hail and
troubles: and brought hail and fire of war to be mixed with blood. So now he
loses many Countreies, upon Martyrs, telling that he held Satan's throne: and
upon diligent schools detecting him in every part: and bringing the Apocalypse
to be daily read, and all the eloquent N. Testament in Greek founteine of
heavenly water, to baptize the mind by the spirit into the kingdom of heaven.

And the second Angel poured his cup on the sea: and it became blood, as of
the dead: and every living soul dyed in the sea. When the poor father of
Rome, forging. S. Peter's being there, became by Saint Peter's name, of low and
poor, an high mountain: he became fiery: and cast himself into the sea of
Empires: that by all his wars: a third part of the living in one age, were
killed and destroyed. Till a thousand years, he became not a full mountain;
till then Satan was tied: but in Ierusalems war, he was loose; that 200. y.
wars, turned the third part of political sea and ships into blood and
destruction: And what wars have been since in Europe, which the Pope has not
kindled? So he pays for it: so he loses whole countreies, as Netherland,
with the blood of 40. years wars: and wast of the Spanish nation. That scant
a third part escaped death: in them that could war: for his killing of K.
Philips son bent to heal the boyles of his religious. This did they, dead in
blindness: and known to be such.

And a third Angel poured his Cup into the rivers and fountains of waters:
and blood came of it. Here lesser waters, are less forces: that continually
he has bad success: and great loss. The year 1588. gave him an open token
of wrath in this sort: and Flanders 1600. And if he had gone forward; Venice
had taught the same: and Iuliaque will 1610. if he go forward: daily little
rivers of 700. 600. and 400. as they would meet are cut off. When he corrupted
the Rivers and Fountains of Scriptures, Ion. 3.
the waters from which he that is not borne, cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven: 1 Cor. 15. 29.
he made a third part dead in sin. Since the Gospel is preached to the dead,
Romans 6. 2.
they that know themselves dead in the flesh, but live to God in Spirit, pay
the worme-wood-starre, for bittering the waters of life: Coll. 3. 3.
and wresting all that is spoken of the true Church, into protection for his
Synagogue of Satan. And all together, be one Angel that pour their cupps
into the fountains to make them blood: and to show that they punish the dead
in sin.

And I heard the Angel of the waters say: lust art thou O Lord, who is, and
who was, and the gracious, in judging thus: because they shed the blood of the
holy and Prophets: and thou have given them blood to drink. For they are
worthy. The state that plagueth the Pope prosperously, acknowledges that the
success comes from God, the unchangeable; who is, as he was: and always
gracious. Pharaoh by waters destroyed Isreal's children: innocent blood. His
waters also God turned to blood: and again, to oppress his blood and his
armies. So because the Devilish (popish) Pope shed the blood of the holy and
Preachers: God gave the^ blood to drink. A miracle.
How died Popes? full many by poison: since the Monk poisoned the Emperor, by
transubstantiating bread into poison. Poison has been still practiced still in
Rome: Queen Mary, the bloody, sped ill. And the bloody French dyed in
bleeding: God as he was, so he is, and will be always just.

And I heard an other from the Altar, saying: even so, O Lord the God of
Hosts, upright and just are thy Judgments. For confirmation of this matter,
it is repeated, from the auctority of Christ the Altar, by words often used in
Scripture.

And the fourth Angel poured his Cup, on the Sun, and it was given him to
burn men in the fire. And men were brent with a great burning. When the fourth
Trumpet sounded, the third part of the Sun was darkened. There brightness of
knowledge in the Church was meaned. Here persecution, as Mat. 13. In England
this fell out. Queen Mary persecuted. Priest borne in the Realm find the
same, and Papists: measure for measure* and yet they being scholars, cannot see
the just judgment of God, as follows.

And they blasphemed the name of GOD, which had authority over these plagues,
and repented not to give him glory. The Law in England had perfect justice of
God. The Prince is supreme Bishop, and defendor of the Faith. He gives all
leave to read the holy Hebrew and Greek text, to expound the Hebrew by the
Apostles Greek, and the tongue of the New by Greeks, the Divinity by plain
reason. And all must confess that Gods work is perfect: and the man which
will add, shows himself in the Temple of God, as if he were God: extolling
himself above all Religion. Now the Priests preach the Pope King of England,
as Irus was King of Lydia. Irus had as good a right to Ithaca with Croesus
land, as the Pope to any Chimney-smoake in England for a Peter-penny. They
turn Subjects to refuse the Bible, the Church, obedience to the King: and
Papists have endeavored by Powder, to destroy the King, and his House, and the
Gentry of Parliament: a treason so barbarous, inhumane, devilish, Popish: this
shows that the Pope has the spirit of the former Beast: revived in all
cruelty, and deceit, and all this fight is openly against God, for Satan's
throne. Campian and other the Popes Martyrs, making the wicked Apocrypha part
of the holy Bible, and destroying faith and policy, should not have blasphemed
God, but have repented, and given God glory for justice. Bishop Tonstall under
Queen Mary, favored the Gospel in London and Duresme^: and although D.
Bancroft let Priest Watson print Popery in his house, and received four
Priests from Rome, yet he repented, and sent the Priest to Tiburne, and is
become a M. R. F. Better should all Papists come to God the shade.

And the fifth Angel poured his Cup on the throne of the Beast, and his
kingdom became darkened: and they did bite their tongues for pain, and they
blasphemed the God of Heaven for their panges, and boyles, but repented not of
their works. The fifth Angels Trumpet could not stay the Star of Rome from
seeking Supremacy and badnesse, but by increase of Locusts he would be a King,
or a Beast coming out of the Earth: and with his keys of the kingdom of
darkness he could bring a smoke of heresies, that darkened all Sun and
air. Machmad after, Lucian the dog say well for the whetstone, but both
those (...) are nothing to his spirits. As they have both their portion in the
lake, burning with fire and brimstone, and Lucian was not forgiven in this
world; so the Popes states shall have his throne darkened openly in this world,
by valiant and holy people: strengthened by Angels. Darkness, is usual for a
distressed state in Job, and David, and Isai. Albion with Denmark, is wholly
gone from him: half Zuitzerland, Netherland, Germany. And the poor schole of
Geneua said well to him: though it agrees with him, to slander the pure Text of
Scripture. Where Beza does say: Deus non agit in malis, he calls back those
errors of his and Calvines, whereby they seemed to make God auctor of sin. The
Senates religion, as they gave me leave to express it, I dare defend, against
Turk, and Jew, and Pope; while my hand can guide the warbling pen. And where
Bodinus says, that Calvin should say of the Apocalypse: Miror quid tam obscurus
scriptor velit; it is not credible: that one of his judgment, to shake off all
the Popes trash, would speak so, of a book penned by the Father of light. And
Bodinus himself, should have told the praise of God, for the light of
salvation, by this book. God told him, that they were happy that read and
mark the things written here, chap. 1. As Daniel calls to him all stories
heathen for 600. yer. so John for 1600. And as Daniel tells the same things
seven times over to infinite delight. So does John, repeat, and as pleasantly.
The Popes Divines seeing his throne fall, and decay, they chew their tongues,
in speech not fitted to matter. But snapping at syllables of the learned: and
aeschrologia godless from unclean spirits: and in all this they cannot repent
them of fighting against all plain truth. When fight is for popery by the
Gospel, the Gospel should be answered: and not discourses made to Zwinglius,
Luther, P. Martyr, Bucer, Calvin, Beza; Many others match the best of them: and
learning would try the Law by Ebrew, the Greek Testament by Greeks and Jews:
and so the waters would run clear: which now the starrworme-wood makes
bitter.

And the sixth Angel poured his cup upon the great river Euphrates: to praepare
a way for the Kings from the sun rising. The same matter of Machmad and Turk
arising from Euphrates and vexing the West, was under the sixth Angels Trompet.
Geball All Tarik is a memory, how Machmadistes, vexed thence Spain and
Italy. But rather for a scourge then to hold long possession; of old,
Euphrates stayed Parthians from the Empire. But for Popes Idolatry even
Germany is troubled by Hagarenes: that Virgill might well say of both, for
Rome:

Hinc mouet Euphrates illinc Germania bellum. On this side, Euphrates (begins
to jar)
On that side, Germany does menace war.
And for Civil wars, I may continue the verses following, in the Poet; for
the words following in John.

Vicinae ruptis inter se legibus vrbes,
Arma ferunt: saeuit toto Mars impius orb.
The neighbor Cities having broke their laws,
Each against other up in Arms arise:
And wicked Mars through all coasts of the world.
Acts (merciless, most cruel) Tragedies.
And I saw that from the mouth of the Dragon, and from the mouth of the beast,
and from the mouth of the false Prophet, three unclean spirits like unto
froggs (for they be spirits of Devils working signs) go forth un to the
Kings of the earth, to gather them into battle of the great day of the God of
hosts. Behold I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
garments, that he walk not naked, that men see not his shame. And he
gathered them into a place called in Ebrew Armageddon. The Dracon is the
company of the spirits that fell of old: the beast, the star that fell from
heaven, chap, 8. 9. and 11. 13. Prophecy is to teach the Gospel, chap. 11. So
false prophet is the troop of false teachers: three, is exceeding many: as
cha. xi. two make many thousands, for Zach. chap. 4. Their spirits be
unclean for doctrine of Devils, from the froggie puddles of slimie doctrine:
truth rests in this. HE shall bruise the old serpents head, Romans 16. God (...)
shall tread Satan under your feet: God in CHRIST destroys the works of the
Devil: and the very Zohar upon Genesis 3. says, HV. HE, is the holy and blessed
Eternal. But the old serpent deceives the Woman, that sits on Rome beast,
to say, that SHE shall bruise the head of the serpent: so their Latin goes, so
their translations, so their checking of the Hebrew text: Thrice having the
masculine gendre: so against all Hebrews and Greeks: so against all prophets
and Gospel: and Gods creation that the woman should do more then the man. So
to make this idle: that God should be in Christ, reconciling the World unto
himself: if a woman could do more then man, and God in man. Their writings
are so plentiful upon this poinct, that they can deny nothing: and so they
cross all the Bible, which is but a commentary upon this place: and all
popery is a fight with this place, and Satan conquering them for this maine
castle, has conquered them for all the Bible. That they have against all
religion Satan's spirit, Popes spirit: and his Academies, serving the Pope.
These be the three unclean spirits, going against all holiness of the Bible:
most evidently in deifying Creatures, and their made saints; and Bread with
Wine, which they would make better then all the world. A seal of most high
matters, is most highly to be estiemed: But none without athean madness will
say, the seal is the King: the Kings auctority it should have, to be as
himself: as Tully says to his brother. But none of wit would make it the
King him self.

All their doctrine is such, that their Temples, Mass, and daily profession in
all things is from the unclean spirit; so that no man conversant in the
Bible, can abide their Divinity.

For Liberal arts, Law and Phisique, they hold the principles of nations:
They should as well for the Bible: and the Thalmudiques agreed with Saint Paul,
but for the incarnation and resurrection. And in that the Pope grants the
story. But in all his proper differs from all men, therefore he must have a
spirit from the unclean Devils. The threatening of coming as a thief in the
night, is from Obadiah, telling of Idumeans destruction suddenly: who being of
Izhaks house, yet were close enemies to the truth. The commandment of watching
was used, Math. chap. 24. And the apparel of the mind teaches from care to
our body, what care we should have to apparel our soul: That faith
regenerating trim it. The allusion to Armageddon, where Barake of (...)
fought the combats of GOD, that Mageddon was a mountain of men cut in pieces:
that Iabin King of Chanaan was fully broken there; this shows extreme
breaking of the enemy. And when the world was not worthy of good Josias, GOD
would plague Judah at Mageddon.

So the name of it is fit to express a full overthrow, by God from heaven:
Barak and the People did little, but God from heaven: by the stars, Auctors of
weather fought from the storehouse of hail, and rain: that his mighty hand
was Auctor of victory. The next Cupp expounds that plainly, alluding
further to the victory of Iosuah: where hail slew more then the men did.

And the seventh Angel poured out his Cup on the air, and there came forth a
great voice from heaven, saying: it is done: and there came a great voice from
the Temple in heaven from the throne, saying, it is done; and there were
voices, and thunders, and lightnings, and a great earthquake: such as had not
been since men were upon the earth: so huge an earthquake, so great. Hail and
fire mixed with blood, were Pharaohs open punishments; and thunderings: and at
the Law giving, was thunder, lightnings; and heavy cloud. The Pope to come by
supremacy, weakening Greece by all means: and begging lands: and having
Princes help to further his forgery of Constantinus donation, made such wars
and troubles, that by Scripture phrase, hail and fire was mixed with blood.
Then Princes thought, the Turk, getting Grecia, should never plague them: But
now, that they see him the cause of the Turks greatness; and by Idolatry (as
Apoc. 9. told) the cause of that success, and whole hinderance to salvation:
they requit him with taking from him, what they gave him. He obscured sun and
air: all kind of learning: Ebrew, Greek, Latin, he abolished: histories he
obscured: that none of his applied well, Greeks to Daniel, the bridge to both
Testaments: Rhetorique tropes, which Sacraments require: he turns to
propriety: as in, This is my body: and, This is my blood: wherein all Covenants
the sign, has the name of the thing signified; Logique he turns to
sophistry: To patch an whole art and policy over mighty kingdoms by
sophistry, most ridiculously when it is examined. Not he, but martyrs made the
Gospel known: which stirs Princes against him: that as to ouertrow New
Rome or Constantina, they gave their authority to old Rome, and achieved
their counsel, but to their own great mischief: so Princes seeing that the
former age by the Pope, brought in the Turk to the hazard of the West: and see
that he knows not one letter, in the LAW: and is blind in every part of it:
and cannot make his own cause good, against the Turk or Jew; they forsake
him: the servant of servants: as God left the Chananites to be conquered of
David: So he is Chanaan: they be David: and in his war, he shall be Iabin:
and by Sisera, fall at Mageddon: and be no more able to resist.

And the great City became into three parts: and the Cities of the nations
fell: and Babylon the Great, was remembered before God, to give her the Cup of
the Wine of the heat of his anger: and every Island fled: and the mountains
were not found: and great hail, talent big, descended from heaven upon the
men: and men blasphemed God for the stroke of the hail, because the stroke of
it was exceeding great. By the City, mean the policy: and by three parts,
great division: that it has but a third part: because the policies of nations
fall from it: and God remembered his anger told, chap. 14. and as under the
Caesares: Islands and Mountains were moved from their place, that is, into
another policy: so here, alteration of policy is meant; hail of a talent, is
great overthrows, by Gods hand: the allusion being taken from plaguing the
Chanaanites, Ios. chapter 10. where hail killed more then sword: So the
Spanish fleet has often had great shipwrake, by the extraordinary hand of
GOD, specially 1588. And, what an infinite mass of money; and millions of men
has Netherland consumed to him? And lately, Venice showed his weakness, that
he durst not go forward to war, and specially Iuliaque: where Leopoldu^,
Emperor, Spanie, Pope, wish they had never begone. Touching the quantity of
hail, in countreies near the Alps, we see this speech to keep near
propriety: without a great hyperbole. At Zurick my learned friend M. Caspar
Wesserus, told me of hail lately there: that one stone was brought from a
field somewhat far off to the Consul, and must melt in carriage: yet being
weighed, it peised a wax pound.

Chanaan and Egypt have greater hail, that trees and beasts be stricken to
destruction by it. And in all this the Papists repent not: but think God to
favor the wicked side, and so blaspheme, and keep their old Idolatry, and
locusts of all professions, as before. It is hard for men to repent, which will
not learn from the word of God, how their case stands. Their false ground
that Peter was the chief Apostle, and at Rome, and the Rock, and that he had
authority, to bind and loose, more then others; and could leave that to
Doctores of the City, which crucified Christ, as though they best deserved
that; and the fables of their miracles, as though they were true; these harden
them, that they cannot come into the Church, till the anger of God consumes
the Pharaohs, as chap. 15. verse. vlt. told.

CHAPTER XVII.
John like Daniel.
And one of the seven Angels which had the seven Cupp^ came, This Chap. is a
plain speech opening all the former Visions.
and spoke with me, saying to me, come: I will show thee the Judgment of the
great Whore: which sits upon many waters, with whom the Kings of the earth
committed fornication: and they which dwelt in the earth, were drunk by the
Wine of her fornication. THe wise God makes the Cloud of his word light to
Israel, and dark to Pharaoh. That the wicked shall not be over busy with it:
he speaks to them in Visions, that they cannot see whither they tend: because
they know not the ground. Besides, commorations seem unto them new matter, and
not a commentary upon former. So to them that be out of the Church, all things
are in parables. But they that know the grounds shall see all easy. Jeremiah
taught Israel in the playnest propriety of words that might be. Ezekiel
sweetneth the same with allegories: when both are compared together, all is
plain. Daniel tells how Judah should be afflicted: by enemies likened to
the proportion of a man's body: fist so, generally: that heathen would not mark
the persecuted: But the Jews knew: And if at the first they had been told of
great affliction, they would have gone before captivity into Countries of
Grecia. But when they were in Babel, and near return: their enemies are
beasts coming out of the sea, and terrible: but yet revenged, as the image was
by strok from a stone; so they by fire. But the persecuters and persecuted,
neither be named: In a new vision they are expressly named, what the Ram and
Buck mean: and the persequutour, above all that should go before him, is
plainly described. And last of all, a proper speech, expounds the Image,
expounds the sea beasts, expounds the Land beast. That no book was ever
plainer then Daniel. John like Daniel.
John is like him: He tells, chapter 6. of great plagues to a state; but
tells not to what state. Then he tells of a falling away, but tells not
by whose occasion; Then he describes the occasioner, under seven trumpets;
but hides from the profane world, what policy he would have marked: After
this, he brings the old Caesares, and Pope with late into one serpent: After
this he divides the serpent into two beasts, with reasonable plain notes: and
shows that the former beast coming out of the sea should be revived, by that
which came up out of the Land: Now that revived beast, after his particular
doings and sufferings, is here to be seen, with the reuiuer. The Angel
teaches John in vision, the learned men be Angeli Ecclesiae.

The great whore, is the great Idolatrous City: the many waters, the harlot
sits on, be people troops, nations, and tongues: Kings society, in
Idolatry, is the fornication: the dwellers on the earth, Phll. 1. 27.
are the Idolous, whose (...) or carriage is not in heaven.

And he carried me into the wilderness in the spirit. As the Church was driven
into the wilderness: to have a policy unmixed with Rome: so John shows,
that they must not be of Romes part, that will condemn her: but absolute free
from her. In Egypt God could not give laws for Israel: but they must be
separated from other policies: so God brought them into the wilderness. And
when God would teach Judah, that Moses Ceremonies were but poor elements, and
to praepare them for the rest of Christ, he carries them into the wilderness
of the heathen: And when John Baptist praepared a way for the rest of Christ,
and calling of the heathen, who in the days of David and Solomon were not
circumcised, but baptized: Rambam Asure Bia. Per. 13. So we must go into a
wilderness, and simply judge by Gods word, not by rumors of antiquity and
universality, what is to be judged of Rome.

And I saw a woman sitting upon a scarlat beast full of names of blasphemy,
having 7. heads and 10. horns. So Satan, being incarnate in the Empire of
Rome, had seven heads and ten horns: and upon his head seven Crowns:
because so many states of Rome afflicted Gods people. In chap. 13. Ten
horns, had ten Crowns: to show that so many kingdoms, not several kings,
as in Daniel for Egypt and Syria belonged to the Empire.

And the woman was clothed in Purple and Scarlat, and golden in Gold, and
precious stones, and pearls: having a golden Cup in her hand: full of
abominations, and uncleanness of her fornication, and upon her forehead, a
name written, A MYSTERY: Babylon the great, the mother of fornications, and
the abominations of the earth. Red color, is usual for blood: and Lycurgus or
Dracoes laws: and most fit for Romulus town, where he embrued his hands in
the blood of his brother: but most of all for the Popes persequution. The gold
reuiueth Babel, and the very phrase is taken from it, Isai. 14. And the story
is in Dan. 3. where the King made an Image of gold; sixty cubits high, six
cubits broad. So they amazed, foolish, with the cost of the matter: but of
Christ we are to buy the true gold, Apo. 3. and 21. The golden rules of Faith
and Truth: and not to esteem of a crucifix of gold: to crucify Christ again
for the matter. So the picture of Mary, is in diverse places trimmed with
chains of gold, and precious stones: and their Copes wickedly following
Aharon, be of cloth of gold. So the 3. Kings of Colone, that returned from
Jerusalem to their country: and were but Persian sages, and no Kings, nor any
Persian that would be called Baltasar; they are said to be trimmed at solemn
times, with chains of great Jewels: I would not see it, because I would not
go bare-head into their Temple.

A golden Cup had Babel, to make nations drunk with Idols: making Gods of
their Stars: and was full of loathsome things, Rome passes all the enemies of
the Church in cruelty and Idolatry.
and unclean fornications: So is Rome manifestly; Colon, and Spain: as if
Babylon, a mystery; were written in the forehead. As the learning of Daniel
could do no good to Babel, but still it would keep the old Gods; till Cyrus
took their kingdom: so Rome is so deep in Idolatry, that no learning will
make men leave their places: Pharaoh. and Nebuchadnezar, were never so
hardened. And these pass all that ever were, So Antio. took away Moses Law.
for cruelty in persecution. The profane Caesares did not so strictly hinder
all use of religion. They hindered not the reading of Gods word, as the Pope
does, though they feared, lest the Kingdom of Christ should be a bridle to
them Romes cruelty told, chap. 11. and 12. and 13. and 14. and 15. is now
plainly handled.

And I saw the woman dronk with the blood of the saints: and with the blood of
the martyrs of JESUS. And when I saw her, I marueiled; with great marvel.
Here the blind may see, that since the Empire was revived in the West, the
persecutions of them, who say, Christ freely justifies, and only hears
prayer, and will have the Idol of him self (as Plato speaks of virtue) to
be fetched from his word, were bloody against the Saints and Martyrs of
Jesus. When the Pope contemns a thousand times better learned then himself:
how can he look to escape the wrath of God? John marueiled to see a woman
drunk with blood, therefore the Angel calls him to consider the chapters
before, as especially the thirteenth chapter.

And the Angel said to me: why do thou marvel? I will tell thee the
Mystery of the woman, and of the beast which bears her: which has seven
heads and ten horns. A more particular description follows then was cha.
13. But any may see this to be a commentary upon that place: as God is a
perfect expounder of his own word.

The beast which thou saw, was, and is not: and he shall ascend out of the
Pit. The Empire was, and again is made dead: by the removing to Bizantium, and
it shall ascend out of the Pit, chapt. 9. when the locust and their king come
out of the pit.

And shall go to destruction. This speech is part of Balaams for Italy, Number.
24. which should afflict Heber; that is, the faithful, and hold on to
destruction. The same he spoke of Amalek: that he should go on to destruction:
that was near a thousand years after Balaam spoke: that was Amalek was
destroyed by Israel. As a thousand years, are but as one day with God: so
Satan was tied 1000. yea. before the king of Locusts had the wings of horses
and chariots to vex the Church, the true Jerusalem; for the Low to the ruin
of the West.

And they who dwell on the earth will marvel, (whose names are not written in
the book of life, from the beginning of the world) when they behold the beast
that was, and is not, and yet is. Here is a meaning that has wisdom. The
natural man observes not that when countries fall, they rise no more;
Egypt, Aram, Assure, Paras, Graecia: that none would think Rome being once
destroyed, should raise again. But the taught of God, see a plain reason.
That the West in the end should afflict, first by strength; and next by
subtlety in religion: that Christ his servants should be tried, both for body
and mind: and he pay the City that crucified him: both with horse, as chap. 6.
and by the spirit of his mouth: and diligent searching of the Prophets. So for
easier memory of story, Christ would have Rome, that crucified the king of
glory, once to be plagued through their Emperors, and the Empire to be taken
away, and the City to be destroyed: as by Goths: and by Lybians, by
Giezerichus, a new Annibal. And then an enemy to God in all truth, to show
himself in the Temple of God, as if he were God: to be consumed by study about
the Bible: by the word and sword that comes from CHRIST his mouth: So the
beast was, and again is not, and yet is: God speaks in the praesent tempus
for things to come, because all things with him are praesent. This is a meaning
that has wisdom; as Jobs case, and Daniels Image. Therefore we should flee
to God to be the expounder: who opens what is in darkness: and with whom
light does dwell.

The seven heads are seven mountains, upon which the woman sits: also
they be seven Kings: five are fallen, and the principal is: the other is not
yet come: and when he is come, he must tarry but a little while. The Jews felt
Pompei heavy: that made Judah province to Rome. M. Crassus was heavy: that
spoiled the temple of much Julius Caesar was also heany, who strengthened
Cleopatra, Herod at the last. Brutus and Cassius were also heavy, with their
army. Antonius who Cleopatra, The seaue^ heads afflicting.
(and help in Capitolio, Herod to be King) was also heavy: all these came to
destruction: for meddling with Gods people: and all their state by Civil
wars: So five Kings are fallen: and the principal, is Augustus: and the that
if the commune laws of England might stand: the Pope should have no stroke in
England. Walsingham.
And good Lady Margareth, a pearl for a woman, the mother to K. Henry the
seventh, when she built Christ's College and S. John's, in both which I was
fellow: and owe them this duty: she in those days made laws to advance
knowledge: to ruinate the Pope. And the valiant Henry VIII. trust him out, from
being head or tail in our Church: so the Empire, ridden by the Pope, stood but
a little while, in sundry places. And all the while of the arising, the
Grecians; as, Chrysostom, Andreas, Oecumenius, taught that the Roman Empire
would be revived: though in Greek stories, Sysimus and the ecclesiastical,
Alaricus and Giezerichus wrought much harm: and there Antichrist should
reign: And if the Greek old Doctores had been well known: the Pope had never
gotten penny by his Mass. Areopagita takes the word in the Law sense, the
token of the body: so Eusebius, the Image and Symbolon: and so elder Origene;
and later Nazianzene: Antitypes and later Theodorit in a full disputation: and
Macarius the Greek Monk, calls it Symbolum: and full many moo. Then the
Pope had no authority for turning bread into the body of Christ: to make him
have 1000. bodies: and to make Religion a stage to Angels and men. This long
warning of the Popes arising was a warning to all ages: that they should not
suffer the starr falling to make bitter the waters of the Law; nor darken the
stars: and in all ages he had gainesayers. And both, Princes and People, who
contemned the warning of this book, were worthy to be given over to all force
of error.

And the Beast which was, and is not, the same is also the eight: and one of
the seventh. The Pope shall be the eight, and chaleng place above all, and
follow all heathen superstition in name, staff, apparel of Caesares: and
Temples: setting but a face of Christianity upon them.

A plain description of the Popes coming up.
And the ten horns which thou saw, are ten Kings which have not yet
received the kingdom: but receive authority as kings one hour, with the
beast. These have one mind, and shall part their power and authority, to the
Beast. These shall make war with the Lamb: and the Lamb shall overcome them
for he is Lord, of Lords, and King of Kings: and they which are with him, are
called, and chosen, and faithful. Steuchus against Valla reckoning the
Countries, which held of the Pope, brings them to ten. But we must know, that
ten, usually is a great number, about ten, fewer or moo: These kingdoms under
the first Caesares were not so parted: as when Julian the Apostata kept at
Paris: who never heard that his Fathers brother, the great Emperor Constantine,
gave the West to the Pope: and if any such matter had been, it could never be
hid from him. But when the Pope of Rome, by long begging for S. Peter: and so
for Monasteries in many Countreies, had gotten much wealth: and ready good
wills in Rome and the West, to set up again the Empire at Rome. He picketh
quarrels with the Patriarch of Constantinople: for procession of the holy
Ghost, and Pascha day, and supremacy: and still of old labored to extinguish
the Greek tongue: and purity of Latin: and weakneth the East Empire, that
barbarous Goths reigned: whom to overthrow, Princes gladly join with him: and
he with them still for great Countries: that in the end they swear to help
him to hold Constantinus donation: and to bring the East, the Greek, to agree
with Rome. And after 1000. yea. the king of Locustes has Satan's throne in such
power, that his wings be chariots and horses to cause kings to do what he
will. As, for Jerusalem wars; to overthrow all their kingdoms. And in these
times Satan bare sway, that scant any learned were in the West. But Monasteries
and Collegies were built to fortify haeresie: that Greek was unknown till
our age: and Ebrew to this hour, for skill in the tongue able to hold water:
and to make a translation of good warrant, to all learned judgments. In this
blindness, still some Abates and such fought well by pen: and at the last by
Martyrs: whom the Pope damned; and the secular power put to death. But in the
end, Christ by his martyrs roareth like a Lion; and seven thunders tell his
anger: and seven Angels pour it out: and men eat the little book of
Scripture: and preach to nations and kings, to bethink them, how they did set
up Rome.

And he says to me: The waters which thou saw, where the Where sits,
are people, and folk: and nations, and tongues. The phrase is from Babel,
Ierem. 51. O thou which sit upon many waters: Psalm. 19.
and from Dan. 3. These phrases teach the simple how plain Gods Law is,
lightning the eyes: to call old matters into mind: and to teach by old events,
how other matters will fall out. Moreover, this open speech of many waters,
to mean people and nations, would (making a commentary in the margin, upon
many places of the old Testament) inlighten much.

Of the Popes fall.
And the ten horns which thou saw upon the Beast, these shall hate the
Whore: and make her desolate and naked: and eat her flesh: and shall burn
her in the fire. The same kingdoms which cleaued to the Pope for profit or
deceit: when they see all profit gone: and how he by terror of forged
purgatory gate Princes great lands, will alter their mind to hate the Pope:
Many millions in England, hate his keys in Canterburies arms: as a mockage to
the true keys of knowledge: so they hate the title grace, in Scotland, as does
the learned M. Meluin; others, hate Leuies Linen, Cope, Priest; and Kneeling at
receiving bread, which should be received with most holy judgment, not in the
Popes gesture: others, hate the Leprosy of the Apocrypha books: the writers of
which show no more faith in Christ then did Flauius Josephus, nor so much.
Others, hate the Popes form of prayer: patched up for his use, to content the
people, not to spend that time in requiring of them opening of the Bible: And
many would have our Bishops caught in praemunire to loose all. Others, make
great suit to have their lands. Now if in England, most reverend and right
reverend fathers, so learned as they take upon them to be, be so hated, for
remnant of Papistrie; what hatred shall open Popery have, where the Pope dares
excommunicate kings? Thal. Ierusal. notes, that the King might not be
excommunicated, nor any chief Ruler. But be sagely warned, to keep his house
for a time, and to save his honor. But the high Sacrificer was whipped with as
many stripes as any other, for his faults, Ierus. in Sanedrin. But our Pope
will be excommunicating kings, without all color of warrant from God: and
show himself in the temple of God as if he were God: being in all policy
sinful, and blaspeming true teachers: so he must needs be hated of Princes,
that every one will draw from him all that they can: That is, to eat the flesh
of the Idolatrous town: and burning it in the fire.

For God has given it unto their hearts, to do his mind: and to do one
mind: and to give their kingdom to the beast, until the words of God be
brought about. Because they did not receive the love of the truth, unto right
happiness, to study the Laws of God day and night; God gave the^ over to a
foolish mind to pull down the East Empire, and to set up one in the West: and
to set the Synagogue of Rome, above all: to rule all Empire and Kingdoms. And
to this day, that cursed blindness abides in men, that they think it a shame
for a King to be learned: or for Noble men. True Kingdom, stands in
knowledge of the kingdom of heaven: and Princes of cunning education, might
know both Testaments in Greek and Hebrew; and vein of story, in young years:
that their hearts might a thousand times in a day run over the heavenly frame
of Gods book: and see their Ancestors, from Adam to Noe, the pillars of the
world. Then, the noble warrier Isa. 41. 2. 3
Abraham, King Moses, King Iosuah, King Samuel, King David, King Solomon: and
noble Daniel, the mightiest (subject) in the world, and greatest warrior; and
best learned. And his noble Cousins that quenched the fire, refusing Idols,
should have taught nobles, to have in equal sort hated Babelish idolatry of
cursed Rome, that crucified Christ, and by the serpents biting pierced his
footestepp and hands: Psalm. 22.
and would nail fast all feet and hands, from walking in Gods ways: and
working in his truth. What a shame is it for Kings, that they know not the
family of David, penned of purpose to make kings wise. David and Salomo^ both
wise began the glory: Ioakim and Ioachin, both unwise, ended the glory: all
betwixt are a glass for Kings to see their own case. Again the pomp of this
world is emine^t in Daniels Image: afflicting the holy house of Natha^, but
beaten to powder for their pains: and that madness of Counsel is expressed
in Nebuchadnezars open madness. His open madness of seven years, was not so
madd as the Persians, or Alexander that made themselves Gods: and the parted
Macedonians are a patron of slavery to Satan. Here in one Image all Greek and
Latin to Liuie is contained: and Kings might make their teachers, to bring such
stately matter into commune knowledge, to make a Bridge from the fall of
Salomons house, unto the setting up of Nathans. Nabuchadnezar honored Daniel to
Iudahs good; For chief heads of this matter: Kings further called, should
further delight in this kind. So, for the Image of the beast, Apoc. 13. if
Kings had been happy, they had learned from story what John foretold: but
because they despised Gods exhortation to read the Book: God gave it into
their hearts to give their kingdom to the beast: if they would make their
people learned in this Book: the flesh of the harlot should soon be eaten.
All true soldiers, should be Doctores of Divinity: such all will conquer with
small loss, as Israel under Joshua, which studied Moses 40. yer. And David's
Capteins by knowlede of Moses, were mighty in battle. Doctors in bare title;
the Popes, and ours, deserve so much reverence, as so many apes, and all that
put any trust in them, are like unto them.

Now comes a plain condemnation of Rome.
The woman which thou saw is the great City, which has the Kingdom, over
the Kings of the earth. All be past shame, that see not Rome here damned unto
the end of wrath.

CHAPTER XVIII.
The King is Angelus to cause the word to be sounded.
After this I saw an Angel, coming down from heaven: having great auctority:
and the earth was lightened by his glory: and he cried mightily with a great
voice, saying: BABYLON the great City is fallen, is fallen, and is become a
dwelling of Devils, and a prison of every unclean spirit, and a prison of
every unclean and hateful bird, because she has caused all nations to drink
of the wine of the anger of her fornication, and the Kings of the earth
committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth became rich by
the might of her wealth, etc. THE like speech is in Ezekiel, chap. 47. where
the glory of the Gospel shines from Christ, and waters of doctrine flow with
life: And the Angels glory lightened the whole earth, cha. 10. taught this same
matter: where John eats the little book. And Christ is the Angel, he comes
down, when he sets up the light of his word, by which he shines over the
earth. Though in vision sundry Angels express him. And when Jerusalem is
builded, Babylon must needs fall: and where the mighty Gospel is taught of
millions, there Christ speaks with a great voice. Anabaptists, be the chief
help that the Papists have to dispute, that it is dangerous for the common
people to meddle with Gods word. But a learned officer, would with sagenesse
soon teach them how they miss burning in fire the obstinat in haeresie.
Maymo. in the treatise, Chagigah. Perek III. shows how the King should read
the Law, before the people in the feast of Tabernacles: and in what sage
reverence. A pulpit of wood was made for him, in the court where all might
come, men and women, and the synagogue keeper, brought forth the book of the
Law, and gave it to the Archisynagogue: and he to Sagan of the Temple:
Strategos, Act. chap. 4. 1. Chancellor, we may term him: he to the high
sacrificer: and he to the King, and he read Deuteronomie, and of the King he
says: (...) That is: The King is Angelus to cause the word of GOD to be
sounded.

If the Jew, could thus honor the Law: and show the Kings duty; which Jew saw
not the true glory of it by the SON of GOD: how much more should we bring up
our Kings to honor the holy Gospel: to read special places: as the first of
Saint Matthew of 1800. yer. story: and 3. Luke of 3957. or Act. 7. or 2 Thessalonians.
2. or some special place: to stir nobles, a learned reading would be as good
as a commentary. And chapters expounding one another: and Psalms might so be
chosen, that by bare reading great light would come. So millions would say that
Babylon the great is fallen: and (...) and Daemones be all one, and Rome is a
dwelling of Devils: and Cardinals be unclean spirits and Archbuy-shopps be
unclean and hateful birds, and their keys be keys of the pit: and their
Idolatry making Peter the Rock against this, 2. Sam* 22.
THERE IS NO ROCK BUT THE ETERNAL, had made the Kings of the earth mad in
Idols: from one error; that the gates of death, shall not praeuaile against
Rome: where the speech meant, that terror of Romes persecution, should not stay
the building upon Christ the Rock.

Buy-shopps should be known how wickedly the merchants become wealthy, blind
leaders of the blind, unto eternal destruction. Unclean spirits, and
hateful birds: if Esaias 13. 14. 21. 23. 47. and Ier. 51. and Ezekiel. 27. and
again Ier. 7. should be read, comparing old traffic with the Popes riches
and ruin; this chapter would have great light: which of it self needs not
further exposition: For the next cha. tells how Rome falls, The Gospel is
the joy of the godly.
by the joy of the godly, which in order of time handles matter, whence the
ruin of Rome comes. The term witchcraft, bestowed upon the Popes doctrine,
is to be noted: They who say, bread after words spoken, is no longer bread,
would have men bewitched, and so for the wine. Sense is a divine testimony, and
if two men should witness, that others did worship bread or wine: no
hypocrisy should save them. Christ gave the Law in Moses, and will not the
tokens to be worshipped: that must be kept for God only. Where Rome killed
men for the Prophets doctrine, and holy Apostles: they are as gilty, as if they
had killed them: and all holy in the same faith. All the holy spoke of Christ,
and Rome by Pilate killing him, was worthy to have for Popes, neither
forgiveness in this world, nor in the world to come: but here, to be openly
cursed as Iscariot, and in the world to come, eternal flames. This kind of
speech troubled great Doctors: I will therefore digress a little; to this
phrase: Maymoni, in treatise of repentance, says: there is a sin, whereof
sentence passes; that he shall be punished in the world to come, and no harm
passes over him in this world, and there is a sin: which is punished in this
world, and in the world to come: as be the Jews that betrayed Christ, and the
Romans that crucified him. The Jews are plagued with blindness and slavery,
and Rome with horrible Idolatries, and tyrannies, and wars, and blood.

CHAPTER XVIIII. As old Isratel praised the Eternal IAH for their deliverance
from Egypt Canaars; Babel, Antiochus and all their enemies; so here the holy
do, for deliverance from Rome, which is called and compared with Egypt, etc.
because that the cruelty and Idolatr of all the enemies the the Gospel since
the beginning was in Rome.

I say Jeremy and Ezekiell compared with this chapter bring great light.
And after this I heard a great voice of much people in heaven; saying,
Allelu-iah, salvation, and glory, and honor, and power, belongs to the Lord
our God: for his judgments are right and just: because he has judged the
great whore, which corrupted the earth by her fornication, and revenged the
blood of his servants out of her hand: And again they said Allelu-iah: And her
smoke ascended for ever and ever, etc. WHEN the Angel filled the earth with
his glory, then much people prayseth GOD, for revenge against Rome, and the
24. Bishopps, sage learned, and the special rare, the four wightes full of
eyes, and tell of the Lambs supper, and his marriage with the Church: which
matter, Psalm. 45. and Cantic. directly handles, and all the scripture runs
upon that. Now for the term, Hallelu-iah. It is used first in Psalm. 104.
where the verse before, wishes the wicked to be destroyed out of the earth.
And the old Hebrews turn that speech of the Psalm, to have been the
preaching in the days of Noe; when the flood came: and Midras Tillin notes,
that Allelu-iah was never used till Psalm. 104. after prayer that the wicked
should be taken away, out of the earth. The authority of the book is little,
but the peise of the argument is much. So in the New Test. Aleluiah, is never
used, till speech comes of the Popes destruction. The sinful, to have Pyrrha
the wife of Deucalion. The fable which made Noe Deucalion, (...) and his wife
(...) contained a fable which Ovid has.

Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur affore tempus
Quo mare, quo tellus, immensaque regia coeli
Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa labores.
That is, Jupiter bethought him, how time should come,
When Sea and Land and great Heavens palace
Should burn, and the worlds workmanship decay.


As once, the world perished by water: so it should by fire. Sem and Iaphet
taught that, in sadness. But their sons turned it into a fable: yet S. Pet.
2 Epi. 3. restores the matter unto old truth: And as the Midras turns in
fable Halelu-iah, to be used at holy preaching, in Zohar upon Genesis 6. by the
argument: and first, Psalm. 104. upon the destruction of the wicked: so here,
first upon the destruction of the man of sin, the word is used: And that,
four times.

Of the Hebrew term.
God, only wise, contrived the world unto Macedonian victories, and reign of
300. yea. from West, unto all parts: that Greek was made common over all the
world, by the time that the Apostles were to write the Gospel: that in the
Greek tongue, and only in the Greek tongue, they might write it for all
nations. Yet God would have the tongue, which Adam spoke and Heber kept: and
that in which the Law was penned, to be still studied. Therefore, the N. Test.
has many, yea full many words, that require Ebers help: and in expressed
letters about 50. And whereas, Esai. 19. tells, that in Egypt they shall
speak the tongue of Chanaan: he means, that with the Gospel, they shall
have the Hebrew tongue: and Origens Octaplun, eightfold work, in Epiphanius
Ancorato, had Hebrew in Hebrew letters, and the same spelled in Greek: and six
Greek translations: so here, the study of the Hebrew Prophets, to open the
Gospel, does fell the Pope: and the Pope is closely touched by the word,
Allelu-iah; Psalm. 135.
Praise God, in whom we breath: and not Idols which have no breath in their
nostrills.

Of the best way to overthrow the Pope.
The Turks Princes moved Q. Elizabeth's agent, L. Barton, of godly memory, to
the known way, by common wit, to open the truth; in causing a Rabbin to
demand a proof of the New. Test. by Ebrewes. The Apostles proved all by
Ebrews: and so should all expounders of them: And the Pope unable therein
falls, and all his Cardinales, and Archbuyshops. And our King took once a
noble course that way: the hinderer, shall abide judgment: and that a most
heavy: and shall not have his shame forgiven in this world, nor in the world to
come. An Ebrew explication of the N. Test. by sayings granted of Jews, would
move Jews and Gentiles to hold one truth. My Hebrew explication of Nathans
house, Mat. 1. and Luc. 3. from Dan. 7. fold shield, and the Hebrew chayning of
the Chronicle, has moved Salem and Rome: though Nazaret would bring the auctor
to the top of a Rock. This matter is worthy of record: that Gods vengeance may
be marked while the world stands, how he will deal with so grateful babes.
But now let us abridge the text: People, Bishops, rare godly praise God, for
calling to the Marriage: that the Church is married to Christ: and clothed in
white justice: and Christ warreth, to overthrow Rome.

Amen, Aleluiah: And a voice came from the throne, saying: praise our God all
his servants, and they that fear him both small and great. This short sum of
Divinity, distinguishes us from Papists, who make Gods of Creatures: and give
praise to them where God only will be feared.

And I heard the voice of a great multitude: and as the voice of many waters,
and as the voice of strong thunders, saying, Halelu-iah: for the Lord God of
hosts does reign: let us rejoice and be glad: and let us give him glory. For
the marriage of the Lamb is come: and the wife has praepared her self: and it
was given her to put on white linen, pure and shining. For the linen is the
justice of the saints. When whole kingdoms call upon God: and fight for the
Gospel with success, it is fitted to continual noise of waters: as Ezekiel 1.
24. the kingdoms that made Gods judgments known: Psalm. 136. 9. 15. 24.
are likened to much water: and the thunder of Gods power, is well expressed,
by thunder of the air, Psalm. 29. All tends to Aleluiah; Psalm. 78.
Praise God in whom we breath, for rescuing us from Satan, with manifestation
of his kingdom: And let not England forget the goodness of the Lord: but acy
remember it: and not hide it from their children: but to the generation to come
to show the praises of the Eternal, his power also, and his wonderful works
that he has done. The light of the Gospel now these hundred yea. has been
exceeding great, and to greater knowledge, then ever since the Apostles times
the Church had. And all reformed Countreies flow with learned men. And sage
carriage is here laid out to the eye; in white linen. This short rule must
always hold: 2 Timothy 2.
God will make known who be his: and all must depart from sin that call upon
the name of God.

And he says unto me, write: Blessed are they that are called to the supper
of the marriage of the Lamb. This should be written in all hearts: that they
only be happy, which in the Lords Supper, protest the abundance of grace of
the gift of justice. The bread bare, and wine bare, taken in the sage use: that
our souls feed upon his incarnation and redemption; is as strong, as the frame
of the world, to stay us in Christ. The auctority of the speaker, who made the
world by his word, must be looked unto: and as our eyes, judge of the frame of
the world; and our mind, to what invisible use all was made subject to a man:
so our eyes, must judge of bread and wine, and our minds, that Christ suffering
for us, ended sacrifice and offering. By seal of things without life: by bread
and blood of the grape: by the term supper: the whole tenor of Christianity is
meant: but the acceptance of the seal is an open action, to distinguish us
from others. The Pope corrupted, from the playnesse that is in Christ: and
making Priest and sacrifice: has missed wholly of the truth in Christ: as
Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses.

Papists would make fools believe, that Calvin bread this; symbolum corporis:
and in other matters, if Calvin has (...). a rash word: they urge that upon
whole Churches. Their eyes might tell, that the ancient Grecians never made
question here: neither had combat with haeretiques here: Eusebius after
Origin, recorder of the whole Churches opinion, in praep. calls Bread and
Wine, Icones, and symbola. Neither did any after him, strive against that: but
full many followed him. God is light: and all the Bible is so plain, to a
sound student, that none can move doubt, but to his plague. The Papists carry in
a silver chest, a wafer of meal, as the body of Christ: making themselves a
scoff to God and his Angels: and the barbarous think by unlearned prating, to
make their cause good. They come 40. yer. short of learning, to defend the
common grounds, against a subtle Jew, or Turk, as to this syllogism of
Machmad.

If the scripture be corrupted, another judge must be had (The Pope not only
grants, but urges also this: and this.)

But the scripture is corrupted.

Therefore another judge must be had.

I will join with Turk, Jew and Pope, to grant the Preposition. But against
Turk, Jew and Pope, and our side; I deny the assumption: and hold the text
pure. This no Romist yet ever saw. Therefore their studies must be holden
unfit to rule in Divinity.

And he says to me: these words of God be true. By reason that the carnal
man cannot see the glory of the wisdom, which is in the covenant of CHRIST,
in plain simplicity full of heavenly truth: The Angel stays upon this
doctrine, as opposite to Rome: and working Romes fall: handled chap. 18.

And I fell down at his feet, to have worshipped him: and he says to me, do
not. For I am fellow servant to thee, and to thy brethren which have the
testimony of JESUS: Worship God: for the spirit of prophecy is the
testimony of JESUS. Here, John shows man's weakness to Idol-seruice, in his
transe, ready to worship the Angel. And tells, that, Angels be ministering
spirits for our salvation: God only must be worshipped. The spirits that
teach, teach of Christ: that he only must be worshipped: In the old Testament,
Christ is called an Angel: and is worshipped; but no created Angel is
worshipped.

The wars of Christ and Christians: against the Empire and Pope.
And I saw the heaven opened: and behold a white horse, and he that sat upon
him, was called faithful and true: and in Justice does he judge and war. And
his eyes were like a flame of fire: and he had upon his head many Diademes:
having a name written, which none knew but himself: and clothed in a garment
dipped in blood: and his name is called the WORD OF GOD. The heaven opened,
shows what shall be opened in the Church: the white horse, is sincere might:
the Ryder is called faithful and true, to assure us of victory against mighty
states: and he judges and warreth in righteousness, unable to abide sin,
still to reign: his eyes be a flame of fire, searching in justice to the
bottom: This is made famous in 1588. and 1605. for our Albion.
as Daniel 10. for the overthrow of Xerxes army: and Apo. 1. and 2. And his
many Diademes, shows that he will rule Kings in many Countries. And the
name written which none knows but himself, signifies the Godhead, dwelling
in light that none can come to.

His garment dipped in blood, is expounded Esai. 63. showing, that the enemies
blood shall make him known, as under old Assure and Cittim. And his name is the
WORD OF GOD: as in John the first: and infinitely in Onkelos. Jehovah, is the
WORD of JEHOVAH. These mighty titles comfort the Church: that they shall be
sure of a victory. Reign still, O King MESSIAH, for we rest on thee: reign
still, O King of Saints, and we will follow after thee.

And the armies, in the heaven follow him, upon white horses, clothed in linen,
white and clean. The valiant Christians with speed and courage follow Christ:
and in synceritie of truth: though Lutherans Vbiquitie, and others journey to
hell, be great spotts: yet many are free from these: and mo will be in time.

And out of his mouth comes a sharp sword: to strike the nationes with it:
and he shall bruise them with an iron Scepter. The sword of his word, has in
all ages told; that, every trespass should receive just recompense: and by
stories past we should assure us, of them that be to come: and the iron
Scepter, Psalm. 2.
taught by David, how Christ his enemies should fall. And the Image beaten to
dust, Dan. 2. and the Roman civil wars taught them, what it was to meddle
with the Jews: and with Tully to say: Barbara Iudaeorum superstitio: Gens nata
seruituti. So Diui Caesares for 300. years were bruised: and now the Pope for
400. to come, may still look to be plagued, that by 6000. years of the world
he shall be as the Macedonians at our Lords birth, void of all authority.

This short vision may endure a long time, as that in Ezekiel, of Gog and
Magog, 38. and 39. contained matter of 300. years.

And he treads the press of the wine of the anger and indignation of God of
hosts, and he has upon his garment and upon his thigh a name written, KING
OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. Esaias 63. telling of the winepresse, teaches now
by story, of old events: and the other Attributes, Nabuchad. Dan. 2. gives to
Daniels God: and the stories show the works. And students of judgment, would
be ready in heathen which open the holy Books, from the first Greek stories
to the last. By garment, and thigh written upon: open dealings of Christ, teach
men to contemn his mediation: and to feel that he rules all.

An open proclamation of the Popes destruction.
And I saw an Angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a great voice:
saying to all the birds that flee in the air: come and assemble unto the
supper of the great God: to eat the flesh of Kings: and the flesh of Coronels:
and the flesh of the Mighty and the flesh of horses, and of their Riders, and
the flesh of all free and bound. This speech Ezekiel used, chapter 38. speaking of
Macedonians, that should afflict Judah: specially, under Antiochus Epiphanes,
after whom, that Kingdom fell daily, more and more, with horrible destruction.
And as the speech in Ezekiel is carried hither, so the names of Gog and Magog,
be in the next Chapter: where the Popes chief ripeness comes to let Satan
loose.

And I saw the beast and the Kings of the earth, and their armies to make
war, with him that sat upon the horse, and with his army. This short
prophecy tells, that the Pope and Empire shall fight against the Restorers
of the Gospel: and still have the worse. Albion and Ierne have shaked him off:
and much of Germany: and Netherland: and half Zwitzerland: and all Denmark:
and his murdering of the French King, will have revenge. In Ireland his
stirring of Papists, under Desmond, to rebel, made greater death, then kites,
wolves and dogs could devour, or men bury: or rivers wash without poisoning
their fish. And Brabant, now 40. yer. has seen great slaughters, and the
Kings putting of his own son to death, was more loss to his house, then many
millions: And his own death, was of a strange sickness: So many French that
persecuted the Gospel, had strange death. And one after another, while they
fight against Christ, shall have strange success: as the Popes have strange
deaths, and boyles at home.

An abridgement of all Gods judgments in one.
And the beast was caught, and with him the false prophet: which works signs
before him, by which he deceives them that receive the mark of the beast, and
worshippeth his image: Both were cast alive into the lake, burning with fire
and brimstone. Andreas, upon chap. 13. teaches plainly, that Antichrist
setting up the Empire, is there meant: So Pope and Emperor, must needs be
meant here, to as evident destruction, as if they were cast alive into
eternal flames: this should be a fair warning, for men to come out of Babel,
to use no garments, no prayers, no laws, of the Popes making.

And the rest were killed with the sword of him which sat upon the horse,
which went out of his mouth, and all the fowls were filled with their flesh.
The principal had open terrible misery: the others, in vision, had but death.
So, in Daniel chap. 7. the fourth beast, was cast into the fire: and the common
sort in Ezekiel. are eat of fowls.

CHAPTER XX.
The Devils are not simply bound.
And I saw an Angel coming down from heaven having the key of the Pit, and a
great chain in his hand, and he laid hold upon the Dracon, the old Serpent,
which is the Devil and Satan, and he bound him a thousand years, and cast him
into the Pit, and shut him up, and sealed upon him, that he should not deceive
the nations any more until the thousand years were ended: Afterward he must
be loosed a little while. THAT the Devils are not simply bound, one hour, Job.
1. and 1. Pet. 5. teach us: when they fell the sixth day: misliking the charge
of care over man: the dark air wherein we breath, a black Tartarus, without
starre-light, is their lodging: in chains of Gods providence, as if they were
in prison. So, we may not think that the Devils were ever simply bound: but
they were in the Pit, whence at the last the locusts came forth: among the
company of the profance: that they deceived not the great number sealed, chap.
7. and former martyrs, chapter 6. But for a thousand years, some reigned in all
ages with Christ, and many were martyred, and moo vndeceiued, to worship the
beast and his Image, and to take the mark in the forehead or hand. They lived
the true life by the Gospel: where all faithless alive, 1. Tim. 5. 6.
be dead (in sin) as S. Peter says: and Zeror Hamor, infinitely. The
Apostles in their ages lived and reigned with Christ, and Iustine Martyr and
Athenagoras, and such in their ages: Athanasius and many of his time, and so
others in their ages: lived here the Christian life, and reigned as Kings;
sacrificing their own affections, chap. 1. Some in all parts of the thousand
years, not altogether a thousand years. The rest of the dead, did not revive,
until the thousand years were ended: as the profane Caesares, and Idolatrous
Locusts: who had great occasion offered to the first resurrection, with Christ,
Romans 6. Ephesians. 2. But they being dead in sin, despised the truth, and revived
not. The first resurrection is by faith, to be risen with Christ. He is happy
and holy that has his portion in the first resurrection. The second death
shall have no power over them: but they shall be sacrificers of God, and of
Christ, and there shall be such, to reign with him for a thousand years.

From Adam, of 1000. yer. Satan deceived not generally while the Fathers lived:
that the flood was denounced, in the old world, and in the world now of 900.
Chanaans sin was growing to ripenes: Amalek of 1000. came not to Amans pride:
as Israel bred not Sadducees of 1000. yer. nor Rome gate rule to deceive whole
states, of a thousand years. Now the text will be clear.

The Pope deceived not generally till, 1000. yerees.
And I saw thrones, on which men sat: and judgment was given to them, and the
souls of them that were beheaded for the testimony of JESUS, and for the word
of God, and which worshipped not the beast, nor his Image: nor took the mark
in their forehead, or upon their hand: but they lived and reigned with CHRIST,
the 1000. year. The rest of the dead did not revive of the 1000. year. This is
the first resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
resurrection. The second death has no power over them: but they shall be
sacrificers of GOD and CHRIST: and reign with him a 1000. year. Here then, be
martyrs, and holy for 1000. year. But the starre-worme-wood, and the darkened
stars, and the locusts they continued, in profane heathen lot: and the Devils
were in their pit, helping them to set him loose: to vex the holy Church: for
the old Jerusalem: which Christ pronunced, that it should be Iebus, or trodden
down for ever.

And when the thousand years are finished, Satan shall be let loose out of the
Prison: and shall go forth to deceive the nations, over the four corners of
the earth: Gog and Magog, togather them unto wars: whose number is as the
sand of the sea. The Pope to weaken Princes did set them on, to recover the
holy land, which God would have to abide cursed: that Jews might see their
sin; killing Christ: this would the Pope have recovered: and Rome in a
thousand years, could not learn this one chapter, nor remember old Gog and
Magog: how the Pope now reuiueth that war, in my Concent, I have showed the
terms meaning. Thence the Reader may fetch it. The Jews Jerusalem was holy:
but now the Christian Church is the beloved City, and the tents of the holy,
which, to besiege and weaken, he stirred this wars for desolate Jerusalem.

The Pope weakened the West in superstition, provoking to war, for (as he
termed it) the holy Land.
And they ascended over the breadth of the earth: and compassed the Tent of the
holy, and the beloved City. All the strength of the West was deceived by
superstition, to go fight in the East for Antioch: in the land of Magog: and
other soiles near Jerusalem: and all the force of Machmad, from the East
assembled: and 200. yea. the poor Church was afflicted: that afterward Popes
might set Kings up and down, as they would. And Machmad still since has vexed
the West: and the king of Locusts now has 300. years, being a new Gog and
Magog, vexed the Church.

And a fire came down from heaven, and ate them up. As Satan dealth with Jobs
sheep, he dealth with the Popes sheep, to eat them up with fire. Even thence
to the worlds end, chap. 19. which matter is here briefly repeated: and in
that which follows.

The Pope is a Beast of Empire by his might.
And the Devil which deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone: where the Beast, and false prophet, and they, shall be tormented day
and night for ever and ever. The Pope is a Beast of Empire by his might, and so
the eight is also the seventh: and he with his Clergy is also the false
prophet. Here Papists may see what shall become of them.

A lively description of the latter Judgment.
And I saw a great white throne, and one sitting upon it: from whose presence
the Earth and the Heaven fled, and no place was found for them: and I saw the
dead, small and great standing before God, and books were opened. All men's
doings are in record before God, as written in books, the like speech is in
Daniel, chap. 7.

And another Book was opened, which is of life: and the dead were judged by
the things written in the books, according to their works. All that put not
on Christ, are condemned for their works.

Now the sea had given up her dead: and death and the grave had given up her
dead. And they were judged every one according to his works: and death and
Haides (...) were cast into the lake of fire: this is the second death. Death
and Haides, are expounded in Arethas, sensible: Men which commit matter worthy
of death and destruction.

And if any were not found written in the book of life: he was cast into the
lake of fire. This shows that only the chosen in Christ have life
everlasting: and what there company is: even the heavenly Jerusalem in this
world; the chapters following do show.

And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first
earth passed: and the sea is no more. This speech may well be referred to the
new world: which for us to search of what sort it shall be: the Law, Deuteronomy. 29.
(to leave hid things to the Lord our God) forbids us to search curiously. Of
the heavenly Jerusalem, I have made a treatise in Greek alone: at large, which
I made turn to other tongues.

This work is made to convict Rome to be damned through all: and I hastened in
the beginning to that: and I would not draw the Readers mind from that. The
last end may be handled best severally. So this pains shall here have an
end.
AN EXPLICATION OF THE HEAVENLY JERUSALEM, SHOWED APOCAL. CHAPTER 21. AND 22.
BEING of larger discourse then the former Commentary made by the same auctor,
to show Romes condemnation: and with small strife against Rome: and such as
Rome will not refuse to read.
By H. Br.
After the destruction of Babylon:
Let us behold the salvation of Sion.

A Commentary upon the Apocalypse, Chapter 21. and 22.
CHAPTER XXI.
The second discourse of 21. and 22. Chapters.
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first
earth passed away: and the sea was no more. ISAIAH, chap. 66. compares the
Gospel having the rest of Christ for the Jews Ceremonies: unto a new heaven:
and the earthly heathen state called to the church, a new earth: as God will
make indeed a new world. And joins the doctrine of both, together: So here,
after mention of heaven and earth passed: the words import the new world: and
praesentlie turn to the Gospel: in saying, the sea shall be no more: that is,
a troubled state shall be no more. For, the peace of God which passes all
understanding, guardeth our hearts in the love of Christ, that no sufferings
for him is a grief or trouble: and we read, chap. 16. that his Angels have
seven cups of wrath, to pour upon the helhounds that bite his servants: they
shall not care for the sea, whence the Roman beast arises.

And I John, saw the holy City Jerusalem, new; coming down from God: from
heaven: as a bride praepared; for her husband trimmed. John began the New
Testament: John ends it. The term sounds grace or mercy: fit for the
argument: So in Zachary, at the building of the Temple, acclamation should be;
Grace, Grace, be to it. And none, but a John in heart, one that is made
gracious, Ephesians. 1. (the Hebrew to that, is Iehonan, and John and Iochanan) can
see the holy Jerusalem. The worldly do look to worldly pomp: as the Pope to
rule princes: in deed every teacher should rule Princes, by sage advise, not by
auctority.

Of John.
Iehoiadah, the stately high sacrificer, is called also John: and sundry
others, and that name is in the 70. Ionan, and one of our Lords fathers is
called by that name, and others too: Ianna, and Ioanna be of the same
notation: Grace: given by fathers that still looked to the grace of God, in
Christ, and all should in heart be. So every one should be in heart Petros
building upon Petra, the Rock: Eli Tzur and Tzuri-shadday, Number. 1. 5. 6. teach
that. My God is the Rock: My Rock is God. One word of Hebrew, had broken the
Popes keys: as the Pharisees keys of the Kindome of heaven, and all take a
foolish course for Divinity, which seek it from Latins rather then from Ebrew.

Of Jerusalem.
Of Jerusalem, I wrote at large in my treatise of Melchitzedek, where also I
showed, why the 70. altered the Hebrew, 36. hundred of years, adding to the
Patriarchs at fatherhood, to many, 100. As Adam at 230. begat Seth, where
Moses proper truth wrote 130. Our note 1603. has flat atheism, saying, that
Moses omitted 100. yer. so the note might have said for Seth, Enosh, Caynan,
Mahalaleel, Enoch, Arphaxad, and all to Nachor, and that he gave many hundreds
too much, to their ends. It is trange, that most reuerened FF. and right
reverend FF. after plain demonstration of truth will be such fools as to
utter such athean lies to the people: and, it is more strange, that the people
give them any regard, after their utterance of such blindness. These teachers
are not for Jerusalem, the sight of peace; but for Abyssus, whence the king of
Locusts and his swarms came. Salem, was the towns name in Sems days: and the
place where Izhak was offered, was called by Abraham lireh* and of that famous
action the town enlarged, was called JERUSALEM: the sight of peace.

Maymony writes in Bethbechira, the chosen house, or place where the Temple
was built: as, by history Isaac was offered there: so, by tradition, Adam and
Habell offered there, and Noe coming out of the Arc, and that may well be: for
God troubles not his people with many places: but contriueth all points for
help of memory: and for like matter for our dullness. As for Rome that
crucified Christ, God would not plague another City: but would have Rome once
destroyed: to show his anger upon it: and revived to be a throne of Satan, to
plague them that cared not for his warning: but would have all to depend upon
it.

Of Melchi-Tzedek and Izhak: causing glory to Ieruschalaim.
Sem, the great, in the title of just King, and King of peace, described as
God: (as the very Rabbines note) and Saint Paul upon their grant, draws all
unto Christ, in his humanity: how the sacrificer is taken from men: and so
resembles not Jehovah, Michael, in heaven barely; but as he should come to his
office on the earth: being the SEM, the great: Sem here conteyneth all; with
Isaac received from death, and their story cries out unto all Jews, that
they should know; that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself:
and that Christ was to suffer: and being the first from the dead, should show
light unto the world. S. Paul most eloquently draws Moses speech hither, Romans
10.
Deuteronomy. 29. Say not in thine heart, who can go up into heaven, for to bring
Christ down: or, who can go to the deep to bring Christ from the dead? but
if thou confess with thy mouth, Paul taught nothing but Moses and the
Prophets, Act. 26.
that JESUS is the ETERNAL: and believe in thy heart that God has raised him
from death, thou shall be saved. So Melchi-Tzedek and Izhack, in their story
teach all, that God gives the sight of peace: to make the City of God upon the
earth; For heathen, in Abraham our father: as he and we believe that God
raises Christ from death: Romans 4. 22. 23. 24*
and that matter is sweetly told in calling Christian Policy, Jerusalem. So
Zachary, says, Jerusalem shall be built in Ieruschalaim; The sight of peace,
shall be taught in the soil where SEM dwelt, and Isaac was received as by a
resurrection. The low Jerusalem, is called holy, when our Lord was baptized and
tempted: and when after his resurrection, many Izhaks arose: and were seen of
many. But after our Lord his ascension, the term is not bestowed upon it:
though in Pentecost, the spirit came plentiful, to teach Jews and Proselytes
of all nations: the resurrection.

Of S. Paul's heavenly Jerusalem.
S. Paul in his Epistle to Jerusalem, tells them that the earth which
breeds briers and brambles: shall come to be brent up: that so, the Low
Jerusalem should have an end: And, that, we are come to the heavenly Jerusalem,
etc. Heb. 12.
In that term, he expounds the Prophet Isay for his Jerusalem.

Of the Jews error to this day.
Maymony, and all the unbelieving Jews, to this day, expect a return to Mount
Sion, to restore a City there. Maymonie, may be read in Ebrew and English upon
Ecclesiastes: and in my disputations from Isaiah with them, they said, he
speaks for the world to come; in higher matter: then that which touched
building of stone. And they be guilty of S. Steuens blood to this day, holding
it blasphemy to say: that, Jesus of Nazaret should end Moses Law, and
sacrifice. Maymony, in the fundations of the Law, writes the Jews common
error, thus: it is a matter plain and expounded in the Law: that it is a
commandment: which stands for ever, yea for ever and ever. To teach them
better understanding of Moses, God brought them to Babel, with loss of all
Ceremonies, saving circumcision: and before he brought them home, he told them
to the last year, when God would end their Ceremonies, which made the heathen
to hate them: and told that their City should be destroyed. This matter S.
Paul urges through all the Epistle to Jerusalem. And I should have had
occasion, to have examined all Talmudiques upon Moses 613. Laws: and to show
how all the Ceremonies God has abolished: and given in the New Test. Laws,
written in all hearts: moo then 613. That we need not come to Talmudique. This
argument, would require all opened, in the New Testament, to which of Moses
613. each thing belonged: and would show all wherein Talmudiques yield to the
Apostles: and teach Jews and Greeks, how all the New Test translateth
Hebrews. He that threatened to stay the king from alowance this way, shall in
fame be buried with the burial of an Ass. There is no study so good as
this: nor so much desired of all sorts. He knew neither the Low nor High
Jerusalem, that would threaten to hinder this study: and is worthy to be
recorded forever: for an example to others. The treatise of David's family, and
Nathans comforted through all Daniel: and of the Rome-Beast, one made of four;
savage unto Constantinus the great: This showed more the^ any Academique in
Ebrew and Greek, or either ever, the way to the heavenly Jerusalem. The right
honorable Sr. John Fortescue, reading the works, told the bearer, thus: Tell
the auctor I will obtain of the King, a very great stipend for him. The
honorable Gentleman knew what a privy Counselor should do: death praeuented
him: yet, as it seems from his motion, the Kings kingly promise came: and
for Jerusalem, his memory shall not die.

Dressed as a Bride, trimmed for her husband. The City for a ruler is trimmed,
as a Woman (to be married) for her husband. Esai. 52. Rules of salvation are a
greater trimming for the mind, then any outward trimming can be for the body.
The holy Prophets words have all trimnesse that speech can conteyne in
language: The promises of Christ all trimnesse of sharp wisdom: the stories
of contemners endless to destruction; and of Embracers, few to salvation, all
trimnesse of story: and so the New Test. for the age here meant, all
trimnesse of wisdom, and learning, and carriage: rules of faith have wisdom
passing all heathen: and Christian true policy is more civil then all
heathens. So the City is trimmed for a City, as a bride for the bridegrom.

And I heard a great voice from the heaven, saying: Behold, the tabernacle of
God is with men: and he shall dwell with them: and they shall be his people:
and God himself will be with them their God: and God will wipe all tears
from their eyes: and death shall be no more, nor mourning, nor cry, nor pain
shall be any more: for the first things are past. In Leuiticus 26. God
tells, that if they keep his Laws, God will have his Tabernacle with them:
and they shall be his people, and he shall be their God. So before the
captivity of Babel, they that conquered the land, with Iosuah, and the
Judges, and under David and his house many were: and Ier. 10. 11.
And Ezekiel tells that after they have been in Babylon, to teach the
Creation of the world: and return from Babel in the hope of Messiah, they
should be the people of God: and the same is here spoken for us heathen,
coming unto CHRIST. And now, that men be taught of Christ plainly: no
affliction will make them weep: as in Babylon they wept, at the River sides,
Psalm. 137. not knowing clearly Gods counsel: how the Lord sent them thither, to
teach by Babels punishment, that ONE, the God of heaven ruled all: and when men
see the death of Christ, to give life: that they who believe in him die not,
but pass from death to life: then death, mourning, cry and pain, will be
nothing: as the first case is altered. Andrew was Petros before Symeon, in
Photius: because he first acknowledged Petram: and all who do so, are sure;
that the courts (to kill Christians) the gates of Haides shall not prevail
against them. When they knew that in Haides, God has Paradise for the Godly.
So Athanasius tells that the Martyrs feared not (...). The going to (...).

And he that sat upon the throne, said: Behold, I make all things new, Isai
43. and 2. Cor. 5. Turn this to a new life here: and in that sense Christ
about fourteen years after Ierusalems fall, spoke to John in this vision:
that although the Church in the sight of the world, should be base: it should
be a new heaven. The Jews see a new light in Moses: and the new Testament
calls us from the toil of Moses, to the rest in Christ: that Daniel, chap.
9. 24. shines as Saint Stephens face, as the face of an Angel: and the mind
which by the new Testament does see the old, sees a new world: above that
which was seen in Popery: Where Bellarmine and his, labor to disgrace the
scripture: Ioh. 3.
the waters from which they that be not baptized by the spirit, shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven.

And he says unto me, write: for these words be true and sure. When the
Apostles were all dead, The of God is not bound: consider the A post. speech, ^
Ro^. 15. 19. and the^ Lord gave great victory.
but John: and the Disciples were in great affliction, and the God of this
world was mighty in persequution, the natural man would think it hard, to
look that the Bible, should bring a new world: Therefore the WORD, who made
this world: and will make a new world: would have this written, that in this
world first he will make a new world.

And he says unto me, it is done: I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end. The learned note; Ebrewes, as Kimchi, and Greeks, as Eusebius, that the
Prophets spoke in the praeterperfect temps, for things to come, because with
God, all is praesent: and as sure as things past. So, should men have regarded
this book, that all in it (though strange) should come to pass. That the
Roman Emperors should be plagued to overthrow: that a new Rome should be
built for Empire, near old Troy: that a beggarly scholar by lies and false
miracles should set up an Empire; making himself as if he were God: and
deceive the world: men feared not this. But Christ what he spoke in the
beginning brings it to pass in the end.

Of ALPHA and OMEGA.
In that Christ names himsefe by the Greek letters, the first, and the last,
he gives great honor to the Greek tongue, that they who seek not from his
words, but from barbarous Latin his wisdom, should be guilty. Many Latin
terms have greatly deceived: as, sacramentum, for mysterion: dispensator, for
Oeconomus; Descendere ad inferos, for Cateltheim eis Haidon; and such: hence
come seven sacraments: dispensing with Gods word: and going down to Hell.
Briefly, the smoke from the Pit, is bred by wrested Latin: as that an Image may
be worshipped, not an Idol. When Papae, Cardinales, Arch-buyshopps and
Buyshopps, rule the sheep, ignorant of Gods words, they become wolfes: and the
most deadly enemies to the truth. The Pope has an auctor, in opusculis
patrum, which by the LXXII. rejects the Ebrew truth, adding an hundred of
years, more then Moses gave at Seths birth: and he allowed this blasphemy:
That Moses omitted an hundred of years. His notes for souls 75. Act. 7.
teach by Gregory Martyn, that either the old Testament, or New fails, and
his translation not the Septuagint, taught; that the dwelling of Israel which
they dwelt in Egypt, was 430. year. And their translation checking S. Paul's
Greek, for 450. after a sort, made Beza and our BB. after Bibliander and
others hold the text corrupt, and their rude translation made Achaziah two
years elder then his father, and 20. year. elder then himself. And their
barbarousnesse not knowing Pascha Bouis and Arietis, as a peace offering, to
endure for eating for the night of the Lamb, (a day and a night further,) bred
the wicked note: against expressed words of Saint Mark: that the Lord
praeuented the Jews in the day of the Passover, where so his Passover could
not be killed in the Temple: where not to kill it on the due day, it was
death: and their translation taught these lies, Act. chap. 7. Jacob died in
Egypt and the Patriarchs, and they were carried to Sychem. And they were put in
the grave, which Abraham bought for money of the sons of Emor the Sychemite.
Where Jacob was not buried in Sychem, but in Hebron: And Abraham bought nothing
in Sychem: neither was the purchase there for money but for Lambs. Thus with a
false translation, they brake the peoples heart: that they were discouraged
from the Bible. Also they blasphemed the Hebrew, as Steuchus does: and
praeferre their barbarous Latin to it.

Of ignorance in Alpha, how it bred deadly errors.
They hold from a father, well known: that Ezra invented the Law Characters,
which now we have. Alpha Beta, etc. be Greek names from the Chaldy: and old in
Greece, as referred to old Cadmus: which from Sidon built Thebes in Grecia,
Pisistratus was elder then Ezra: He by Aristarchus divided Homers Iliad and
Odyssea into Alpha, Beta, etc. named from the Chaldy, expressing the Hebrew
form: therefore the letters were an old invention; Diphath and Riphath:
Dodanim and Rodanim, Genes. 10. and 1. Chro. 1. are acknowledged of grammarians
to come several names for one Person, in Noes time, by the similitude of the
Letters, which we now have.

Therefore, their antiquity is from the beginning. Now the order of letters is
settled by God, Psalm. 25. 34. 37. 111. 112. 119. 145. Prove. 31. in Lament.
Chap. 1. once: the 2. once: the third, thrice: the 4. once. And the speech
shows, that God has a sure order in his ways: as in the letters, whereby
he does teach us of his ways. Moreover, the Geometry of the Characters, is
agreeable to their situation: as all that mark them, may know. So the Popes
ignorance, greatly disgraceth Gods word: by not knowing one letter in the
Greekor Hebrew. Also their exposition for (...), Tau, in Ezekiel to make it a
Cross from T. in Greek, that is senseless. Tau, there is, (...) in the 70. a
mark: as the Pope in his wickedness has to his. Tau or (...). The Hebrew
last letter is, Thaiu in grammarians, with distinction from Tau, the Mark.

OF VOWELS.
The Papists be more hurtful in teaching that Ebrew vowells, were not from
the beginning. Here some Jews help them, and our side, and so they infer,
that the text is uncertain. Their conclusion is Athean, and the help to their
assumption godles. Very many words in Ebrew, differ from ordinary grammar,
without difference in sense, and none but the first writers would have laid
them so. Accentes be of the same tenor of antiquity.

Of Tiphereth Israel.
A most learned grammatical work, called, Tiphereth Israel: the glory of
Israel; affirms that letters, vowells and accents were written by God in the
tables as now we have the^. And that is most sensible. For, Gods work must
needs be perfect: and who can add to that which he has done? And Abben Ezra
speaks most sensibly, that none ever was so wise as the auctor of the
accents: for he never misseth to direct to the best sense. Now the Popes
ignorance, in A and (...), Alpha and Omega; shows that he is ignorant of the
whole glory of the Bible.

Of Cethib and Kery.
Times 848. God teaches us elegancie of the tongue, or sense of the text, by
setting a word in the margin, to adorn the text, and this passes the wit of
man, and must needs be known, to be the work of God: and commonly for like
Characters, (...) and (...): (...) and (...): (...) and (...): (...) and (...):
(...) and (...) Iod: and some time to note the conjugation and mode, for the
common Bibles vnvowelled: and to (...) the margin has a term of art, to
note Hophal: (...) make thou straight my ways. Psalm. 5. 9. lest David seem to
say: My way is straight. So in substantive the text, (...) in Ios. 18. 24.
might be read Ammoni, but to show Patach under Iod, the margin has Ammonah
(...). Sometimes, uncivil words as Rabsaketh, Isay. 36. are read in the margin
by cleaner: Now Aria^ Montanus has made a whole work of this, in apparatus:
showing the text to be corrupted in Babel: whereas copies would endure 1000.
yer. And Daniel rich, holy, wise, would keep his pure. And some double
readings be after the Captivity, as in Daniel, and Daniels former had been
that is, perfected.
amended by himself. This opinion of Arias, Kimchibred: Praef. ad Ios. and
Elias praef. ad Mass. Bibl. and Barbiner ad Ezekiel. confuteth him mightily.

Now Plantines great Bible is printed without the margin reading: and a Cipher
is over the text word, noting it to be corrupt. So that work would teach that
the Bible is most corrupt. It is strange, that the Papists should be so blind,
as not to see this: or so bad, as to persuade it.

Of their inter linearia.
Their interlinearia, sometimes puts the text in the margin; and the
margin in the text, to breed confusion.

Of a most wicked slander.
One writes to the interlineall, a poison full treatise to Genes. 3. That for,
HE SHALL BRVISE: the Hebrew should be, SHE shall bruise: that the Virgin Mary,
not Christ, should destroy the works of Satan. And the text thrice, has the
masculine gender: and no Ebrew is evident, or mentioned, to have taken it
otherwise: and the Zohar says, upon HV: This is the blessed God. So for Alpha
and Omega they would make the late daughter of Eli the auctor of all. Here,
their Latin and their tra^slations out of it place SHE for HE: and at Colon
on D. Sauerrinus meeting with me, fell into sudden talk, would know my
religion, by assent or dissent herein: and I made my mind plain: and that
all Ebrewes, Greeks and divinity rejected SHE.

Of Cetib and not Kery: and Cery: and not Cerib.
When two Prophets have the like phrase, saving one word, as Esai. 16. and Ier.
51. the word which abounds, is left vnvowelled: so Idroc, is twice, in Ier.
51. once, in Esai 16. in memory of that, left vnvowelled. Sanctus Pagninus,
knew not the reason of this: therefore he left the word untranslated. But Alpha
will not like of this doctrine. So, when a story is repeated, as the speech of
Rabsaketh: if a word be more in the one; the other has the vowells of that in
memory of the difference: that the Reader may read it. Thus Alpha, is as
curious in his word, as in the frame of the world: and requires due reverence
to it: and they are in great danger, whose profession of life should be
skillful in it: and will deal with it, with unwashed hands.

Of Iod not contemned.
The Jews, to show Gods care over every letter in the Bible, bring in the Law
co^playning, of loosing Iod, with humble cry, before God: thus: O Lord of the
world: this is thy rule: that a Testament which fails in a letter, fails in
all. Now in Sarai I had (...) Iod, when she is Sarah, (...) Iod is gone, and
the auctority of the Law is lost. God answers, thou have no loss: Iod was in
the end of a foeminine, and I set it in the beginning of a masculine, when
Hoshea was called Iehoschuah (...)

Thus they mark narrowly, that which our Lord tells: one (...) Iod of the
Law shall not perish: he that is Aleph and Tau: will keep all the letters from
Aleph to Thau: More of this, is in Thal. Ierusalemie, in San fol. 20.

Of OMEGA.
He, that names himself (...) mega, will require that his new Testament
shall be regarded in due kind; to defend truth of Copy, and elegancy of
speech. I defended truth of Copy, against Rhemistes translating, Act. chap.
13. from the Latin, in years, not about, but after a sort, 450. yet a
thankful Pseudographus, wrote that I defended the 70. and became a scorn:
none of 1200. yer held the 72. pure: Satan was strong in him, that would
believe a disputation for sincerity of their copy: and if ever any should be
thought to know the 72. he that translated the Prophets a new into Greek,
should be thought to use all the 72. copies easy to be had. But (...) in all
unthankfulness would be still cursed in lies. The first aduiser of him sped
ill.

Of Greek style.
Because none before me, have noted Gods counsel in making Greek common: I
will often handle that, to have it better understood: when God first destroyed
Iudahs kingdom, and speech: he stirred Greeks, first to set up theirs. Then
Pisistratus set Homer in honor: that children learned him by heart. Plato in
Timao mentions one such. Thence of 200. yea. all kinds study, to make brave
Greek: that it came to perfection. Then God sends Greeks to rule Gog or
Gyges land, and Magog with all Assiria, and 72. kingdoms in the East, and
North, and South, to fill all. 300. ye. with Greek Armies and Colonies: That
Tully noted in his days, the Greek to be common over all the world. Now the
Bible, was by Jews translated into Greek, and so read in all nations. And the
Jews being carried by the Macedonians into all quarters, when the Apostles
came to teach, granted all: saving, God in Christ gave life to all souls, that
did eat his flesh and drink his blood: feeding continually in soul upon
this: and were baptized with the water of the Law. So the Greek tongue by O
MEGA, the ETERNAL, taught Iapheth, to dwell in the house of Sem. Ierusal. in
Megilah and Midr Rabba' Genesis 9. And the Jews confess in Megilah, that no
tongue but the Greek, has words to expound the Hebrew. So he, that terms
himself by the Greek, and Hebrew Alphabet, is much despised, when Babell
banisheth both tongues, to a pedlers Latin, in so much, that the true Latin
auctores, were out of request.

Of 4. Dialects in the holy Greek.
Of necessity, the Apostles were to speak to heathen, in Heathen or Attique
Greek: as all, that will move others, speak to their capacity: and they be
ridiculous and citizens of Babel, not of the heavenly Jerusalem, that will this
deny. When the Apostles tell stories of Jerusalem, to the Church, they were to
speak in the 72. language: And all, of wit and conscience, would so expound
their words. When disputations are had with Jews, the Talmudiques specially;
the Jews schole-phrase, does our Lord use and his disciples: and when none of
these three answer the Hebrew fitly, then the WORD takes heathen general
terms, to apply unto special Hebrew. Reason, forced these four Dialects: and
they who confound these four are fitter for Babel, then for Jerusalem: for
confusion; then sight of peace.

Of the Attique Greek.
Haides, in S. Luke 16. conteyneth the lodge of Abraham in heaven, and the
lodge of the rich Epicure in Gehenna. Saint Luke an Heathen, wrote to Prince
Theophilus an Heathen. And Heathen would judge whether the Physician of
Antioch, of Magog, knew Greek in fit sense to teach Gog, in Ephesus or Gyges
Country, and Magog in Siria, that Christ in their own language now does
conquer them, so far, as to have the first Christians named of Antiochia, and
S. Luke to be the glory aeternall thence: though God had no other occasion to
honor his enemies town, but to show that where sin abounded, there grace
should once, more abound: But not often: Nicolas the proselyte falling away,
taught, that the town, deserved as much supremacy, as Rome, that crucified
Christ: or Alexandria, for that Alexander would be made a God. So Haides,
containing heaven and hell, and nothing else in propriety; Old Chrysologus, who
placed Abraham in Gehenna, and is tossed of Isaac Ben Arama, fol. 205. and
Purgatory, and many opinions moo are confuted. If Haides, have but Heaven and
Hell, Purgatory is gone: which makes a third place: so the first Dialect, in
one word, tells the Pope, (...). Let Greeks seek to Eustathius, what meaning
is plain for these words. (...), 2 Peter. 2. is of heathen Greek, in Homers
commentary: Iliad. Of this I spoke in Catechizing the modest Archbi. Whitg.
which yielded and sent Mr. Geoffrey King over sea, to confess his error: I
spoke generally of Homers commenter: and should mean, the principal,
Aristarchus, from whom old Didymos made his commentary: and Eustathius from
both, and many moo ancient: and though he were late: his commentaries are made
from these two and old heathen. Two Petifoggers in Greek, would scoph, as
though I cited Eustathius to be followed of Peter, far elder. Such Midae be
fitter for Babel, then Jerusalem: Their further equalling of error to Lybian
sands: show an ill bent.

Of the Lxxij.
The Greek of the 72. comes often: notably; Act. 2. in this; whom God raised
up, (...) disannulling all pains that death brought. The matter is taken from
Psalm. 18. And thence, would the Sadducees expound S. Peter's word: to prove him
a wicked Sophister: if he had meant more. They who prove the second death
hence, know not O Mega: the auctor of speech.

Of the Thalmudizinge.
These be Talmudique speeches. The dead, for the profane, often in Zeror, once
in S. Peter, 1 Epi. chap. 4. In S. Paul the dead in sin, Ephesians. 2. such is,
Gehenna: and the second death. Chrysologus missed grossly, for Gehenna, that
Abraham should be there: whom expressly S. Paul, Ebr. XI. after the Gospel
Mat. 8. and Luc. 13. and all Talmudiques, from Leui. 26. places in heaven. N.
N. and his commenders missed most atheanly, more then anyeuer, since the Devil
deceived Adam, to say, that our Lord was in the second death. The Devils
trembled till their time, to speak so blasphemously: he may brag, he at the
last has made them next himself, and more open.

Of forgiveness in this world: what Talmudiques mean.
Maymonides, cited by me, in poenit. Perek. 6. says, there be sins, whereof
judgment determines, that punishment shall be taken for a man in this world,
in his body, or in his wealth, or in his young children, which are his
possession: and there is a sin whereof punishment is taken, in the world to
come: And there is a sin which is punished in this world, and in the world to
come. This was an old Ebrew speech: and to the Scribes our Lord speaks, in
their own phrase, that they sinning against the Holy Ghost, should not be
forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come. Old and late who hence, breed
Purgatory, show that from Babel, not from Salem they speak. The same sin is
said, in sinning wilfully, (...): as Core, Dathan, and Abiram did: whom the
earth swalowed: and heat of fire consumed their remnant. That punishment have
the Jews to this day, for sinning against the holy Ghost; in betraying of
Christ: and now a days many resist the truth: as Iannes and lambres resisted
Moses. Such never knew him who is O MEGA, bringer of all things to pass.

Of the Apostles pecular Greek.
The Apostles peculiar Greek, is wonderful: as in the Lords prayer, Give us
this day (...), bread, neither in superfluity, nor wanting. The term was made
by the holy Ghost by the frame of Greeks, to Pro. 30. in Agur the son of
Iakeh. Give me (...) bread fitly measured for me.

Of Saint Paulls most eloquent expressing of Moses: to show a short way, to
expound the new Test.
S. Paul says, that he differs in nothing from the Jews generally, but, in
not doubting of the incarnation and resurrection. In his speech he follows,
Deuteronomy. 30. and doubts not, what mind can go to heaven, to bring Christ
down: or what mind can descend to the deep (of the earth, Psalm 71) to bring
Christ from the dead. But he confessed with his tongue, that Jesus was the
Eternal, and believed in his heart that God raised him from death: and assured
him self and others of a sound way, to truth by this.

Of Thalmudiques agreement, with the new Testament.
Neither the holy Gospel, nor holy Epistles, teach any thing for
Ecclesiastical government, but as the holy Synagogues did: many superfluities
of ambition, the Scribes and Pharisees had: as they had in right sort, all that
the Apostles held, taught of old, by them, and godlier, sitting in Moses
chair. So that, by old grantes, all Divinity questions might be soon
ended. And this does Paul (in his imitation of Ebrew) speak: Gamaliels scholar
at Jerusalem: and the Greek orator bred in Tarsus, free in Rome: that none
other Apostle should be Papas of Rome but he, so called rarely of God; and
tendered by Coronel Julius, Sergius Paulus, and the Proconsull of Melita: and
the barbarians for a prosperous journey to Rome, to which, and of which, he
wrote more from God, then any, saving Saint Luke, Act. 23. and 28. And if
Saint Peter had been there, he knowing the state to come, would have left
momuments of his being there: and would have co^mented upon S. Paul, 2. These.
2. as he co^mented upon all his Epist. 2. Pet. 3.

And thus, Christ by taking the name from Alpha, and O Mega, requires
knowledge in the tongues wherein he speaks. The direct and proper use,
calls us to an higher matter. The beginning, and the end. He created all
things: and they were very good. And created Angels, that when man should be
created, they should take care of him: misliked man's superiority: and were
condemned to Tartarus, and are kept in chains in the black air, unto the
judgment of the great day: he has an end for them: that although they sinned
of infinite pride and unthankfulness, and every whit from their own motion,
yet they over raught not the decree of Christ; who told the day of their fall,
Heb. 2. 89.
and Adams fall, that in humanity he would be a little inferior to Angels, 1
Cor. 15. 27.
by suffering of death: but would have all things subdued unto him. In Adams
fall, all were to be borne dead in sin: that all should for ever perish; Act.
14. and 17.
but for further mercy. All, he inuiteth to seek unto God, that they might
feel him: but al being dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.
only they whom he quickneth believe in him: he still inuiteth the wicked to
goodness, but they rebel against his spirit:; 1 Cor. 1.
thinking his wisdom foolishness: yet he rules them, that their sin shall
not have the rain to open mischief, but as he will. And one open judgment he
showed in Noes days: an other he will show in fire, Apoca. 20. And all whom he
has not chosen of eternity, 2 Pet. 3.
and called in due time, and quickened from dead, and sanctified by his spirit,
he condemns for their wicked works: and this helps them nothing, that they
do his decree: they did not that which he tells plainly by doing, they
should live: and their own conscience damneth them, Romans 2.
that they justly perish for ever. And in their stubburnesse, after long
patience, he shows his power. Romans 11.
And these his ways be unsearchable. But as the letters from Aleph to Tau,
have all their form and sound in special use, order: and not two the same.
So, from the beginning to the end, he rules the world in a most wise course:
to show his judgment and mercy; wherein, this last book calling old speeches
to new matter; goes through the Alphabet of all ages: and shows how Iapheth
has fellowship with Sems house, Genesis 9.
and Cittim or Italy, shall be perishing when they afflict Heber, that he may
be seen to join first and last in wise order. The Concent which is in Moses
and the Prophets, and New Test. is wonderful in places, times, and families: I
wish all Preachers to follow the holy men's vein: but the tongues and stories
require much time: that for Divinity, the most use commoration of plain
Ethiques known naturally: and little study how the Prophets comment upon
Moses: S. Paul upon the Gospel: and how all four have their harmony. And if
Daniel and John's Apoc. should be made plain over a kingdom: that pains
would kill millions of papists. The one, I have made plain, in my last
edition: by which, since it was printed: many might have seen light: But, the
God of this world darkened some minds, to hinder that; not regarding the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone.

To him that is a thirsty, I will give of the fountain of the water of life
freely. Here all excuse is cut off from the wicked: that they are called to
the waters of life, but refuse: Rome begging lands, thirsted not to have the
waters of the Law to refresh the soul; but made them bitter: Therefore their
condemnation is just. And for these waters be our fightes: from Tiberius, to
this day: since Jerusalem came from heaven.

He that overcomes, shall possess all things: and I will be his God: and he
shall be my son. Here is a valiant combat. The waters of life of the Hebrew
and Greek Testament, are drawn from a deep well: many fadom of years deep:
and policies still will have will have their own devices: and bestow death on
such as offer men life: Here the faithful unto death, shall have a kingdom;
as the Sons of God.

But the cowards, and the faithless, and the loathsome, and murderers, and
fornicators, and witches; and Idolaters, and all the false: shall have their
portion in the lake burning with fire and brimstone. They who take not up their
cross, and fellow Christ, are not worthy of him: they who believe not the
Gospel are not worthy of him: certain beasts, fowls, fish, forbid to Jews,
to distinguish them in diet, from heathen are called unclean, or loathsome, so
be all without the Gospel, in their high learning: as Socrates, Plato, Cicero,
Varro, Plutarch, and the ciuilest: Murderers of the Martyrs, specially:
wherein the Spanish Inquisition is the deepest. Fornicators, in Rome, Venice,
and all Italy, have open freedom: and of old Horace age and all epicures
still, 1 Pet. 4. 3.
as Turks wallow in that: and therefore S. Peter to the Jews of Arabia gives
sharp warning against that: and witches in all commonweals are hated: and the
subtilest witchcraft is that, of the Popes TRANS-SVB-STAN-TIA-TION: a monstrous
term, for a monstrous matter: besides all other their coniurations.

Of Idolaters.
Idolaters be the Papists, the grossest that ever were: and where Christ had
infinite grief to be seen on the Cross: though in glory he darkened the
Sun, and shook the earth, and rent the stones: yet Papists think, that gold,
as in Nebuchadnezar his Image; Daniel chap. 2. or silver, or Alablaster, or
stone, or wood, is a goodly worship: Christ (in whom is hid all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge) could have commanded that, if he had liked of it: and
we should not be better learned then Alpha and Omega.

The Popes brabarous Answer.
An Idol is heathenish; and unlawful: an Image is lawful: as no man says,
the Idol of God, but may say, the Image of God.

Answer.
Neither Attique Greek, translated by Tulli; nor 70. Greek: nor the Apostles
Greek, nor any Talmudique will suffer this distinction, therefore it is for
Witches, not for Doctores. (...) in Aratus, is Cor^i, Imago, (...) in Plato is
forma and species, in Tulli offi. 1. Idolum Dei, is in Apian: Imago,
simulachrum, (...) Chal. Imago, figura, corporea vel incorporea, and Targ.
idem, and (...) is in Number. 33. 52. and the same is in Genesis 1. 26. 2 Kin. 11.
18. 2 Chronicles. 23. 17. Dan. 3. 2. Isai. 40. be all unlawful. They who would have
People, to adventure their aeernall state upon such quirks: against all
teachers of speech, are pestilent witches, and most impudent teachers. He that
cannot remember Christ by all things made ours, for Christ, is no Christian:
The stars serve Man, for CHRIST: the Air, Land, Sea, Plants, Beasts,
Foul, Fish, and what need we an Image? which can represent but a base man,
in base sort. No Jew, for Ebrewe; no Attique, for Greek, will clear the
Pope: therefore he is Popes, and teaches doctrine of Devils, and Rome is a
mere Babel: confusion to holy speech. And all liars have their portion in the
lake: all who miss of Gods truth, are liars, and perish. The Thalmudiques who
agreed with Paul, for all justice of the Law, Romans 10. yet missing of Christ,
lost all. Now the Papists be most impudent in lying: as when they teach to use
Latin, for Hebrew, in the Law, and for the Greek in the Gospel: their lies be
of infinite number: in their Purgatory, and where Haides has but heaven and
hell: in the bread and wine, against eisight, the witnesses of God, and their
whole policy is a lie: therefore, chap. 19. the beast and false prophet was
cast into the fire.

The second death.
The phrase second death, is a Talmudique, used in Onkelos, upon Deuteronomy. 33. and
Jonathan upon Isai 22. and in Zohar and later, infinitely. And no soul goes
to it, but perishes for ever. Of this, I wrote upon great occasion in an
Epistle to Doct. Whitg. to which he gave great testimony: though one unlearned
brent the Copies, after his death: which flame may bring him and is very like,
to the fiery water, Dan. 7. and here.

And there came to me one of the seven Angels, which had the seven Cups
full of the seven last plagues: and he spoke with me, saying: Come, I will
show thee the Bride of the Lamb. The same art it is, to plague Rome; and to
build Jerusalem: and in vision an Angel does this: visibly, learned truth:
wherein John him self is the principal Angel. The Church has here a goodly
name: warning to be careful of a wise and holy soul: the Bride of the Lamb:
All the song of songs goes upon this and the end of Isai. Such Concent of
Scripture, Bellarmine and all that Brackmunim that would not have all to know,
may look for fire and brimstone, to be their portion. All be bound to praise
God: and to do that skilfully. And his word teaches, that the Pope and each
such, is a Buy-shop from Satan, Col. 3. 1
not a Bishop from God, which would not have the word of God to dwell richly in
us.

And he carried me in the spirit into a mountain, great and high: and he
showed me the City, the great: the holy Jerusalem descending from heaven from
God, and having the glory of God. This expresses that, which Ezekiel wrote of
old, concerning the building of the Church, under Christ. The Jews to this
day, look for a building in Chanaan. Against that, Saint Peter gives this
rule: That every Prophecy of Scripture is not to be expounded properly:
because the holy men of God spoke, as they were carried by the spirit of God.
This place strengthens Saint Peter: and so expounds Ezekiel, that all Jews
^ight see, Christ spoke by the fisher of Galilee the dear to Christ: Ezekiel
was brought to an high mountain: so John: and our Lord, Math. 17. when he
would show his glory, took Peter, James and John, and carried them into an high
mountain, alone. Visions must agree with spiritual matter. Buildings of
Princes, be upon mountains, stately to behold: and hard to be come to, by
enemies to vex: And wicked Rome braggeth twice in Virgill.

Septem quae vna sibi muro circumdedit arces. This Rome alone (which among the
Cities all)
Has seven hills encompassed with a wall. Virg.
Georg.
Lib. 2.

And Ovid is playner.

Quae de septem totum circumspicit orbem:
Collibus, Imperij Roma Deumque locus.
Of Empire, and of godds, Rome is the place:
Which from seau'n hills all the world does outface.
Propertius, and Galen in Aphoris. Hipp. and they who name the mountains, may
be spared; All serve Apo. 17. Now God that is One, he from one mountain will
fight against seven Psalm. 68. will tell what Mount Zion is. The church has
high matter: unto whose height of study the profane cannot climme. Alexander
could match Porus, upon his high rock: But he durst not meddle with mount Tzion.
So Philosophers can speak much, to the height of heaven: but unto Paradise
above the heavens, no thought of theirs could ever come. And as heathen were
amazed at stars, and worshipped them: so Papists are amazed at Martyrs, and
worship them. The Pope should study the Bible, and cause all scholars to do
the same; in Ebrew, Greek, and conference of stories, to pass all Martyrs
saving the Apostles age taught from God, without study: and should confirm in
open study the doctrine which Christ sealed by his blood. So he had made an
holy City. But Rome begun with bloodshed of brother, when Romulus killed
Rhemus, (not as Salem with Sem and Izhak in peace and redemtion) would end
with bloodshed of brethren: and to go to heaven as Romulus, and Julian the
Apostata: in somnio Scipionis, and in Sozimus, and Apolline Delphico. And as
Libanius said, that Julian was with the Daemones: and the Greek Doctores
granted that, with heart and good will: So we will grant with heart and good
will, that the Pope, and his Martyrs shall be together.

Of the great City Jerusalem.
Though Nympha, the Church in song of SS. hide it self as a dove in cliffes of
rocks, as few: yet when all of all ages are put together, they make a great
City. And this City should have holy Laws, to worship God in spirit and
truth: all sent from heaven, and having the glory of God.

And the light of it was like a most precious stone: as the Carbuncle stone
glittering. The 70. in Isai, chap. 54. 12. for (...) Codcod. (...), and in
Thargum Ierusalemy, Nophec the stone of Judah is (...) and for (...)
Christallos. Thence Saint John has his matter: and he that marketh not that,
teach, that John brings matter without warrant: which he never does thorough
his book: but still confirms his matters from old speeches. So the stone of
Judah makes the windows that the sun of justice may shine in: and the gates
shall be of flaming stones; clear Doctrine, that may call all unto Christ: And
all thy borders, shall be pleasant stones: for thy children shall be taught
of the Eternal: so the taught of God, be the precious stones: such was Moses,
and Joshua: such were Isai, Jeremy, Ezekiel, Daniel: such were Paul, and all the
holy Apostles: and all that sincerely know and cleave to their Doctrine: But no
Bellarmine that would disgrace the wit and writ of the scriptures. No such,
shall be any stones here: but be as common sands: parching in heat, and
dangerous in wind: and still fruitless.

And it had a wall great and high: having xij gates: and upon the gates xij.
Angels, and names written, which are of the 12. tribes of the sons of Israel.
The wall is the defense by Christ, as follows, anon: that the inner building
of the wall was (...), This is the ancient faith: this is that which the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 2. 20.
Carbuncle. The gates have Angels to conduct them that shall be saved: and the
true story of the XII. tribes, taught here by their names, teach others a
passage into the city. This matter expresses Ezekiel 47. where the names of
the tribes of Israel be upon the gates: and the gates 3. to each of the four
corners of the world.

From the East three gates; from the North 3. gates; from the South 3. gates;
from the West 3. gates. Ezekiel being in Babel, North from the East of
Israel, began that men should come to the holy City from the North; where
Israel was scattred. But for us in the West where the Church is best, in our
ends of the earth the possession of Christ: Jerusalem being East was first to
be named: and next the North for holy Daniels sake, the light of the world,
whom moo in Albion understand, then in the world besides; and I hope moo shall
by my enlargement now coming forth: teaching how the new Testament commenteth
upon him.

Then the ordinary course, the coast joined to the East, the South where the
Jews were scattred by the Ptolomies: and a long time Alexandria bare
Patriarchs: Athanasius a wonder for holy Divinity, and Greek eloquence: and
great Cyrill, great, though not equal to Athanasius: whose long commentary
upon Isai in Greek, I have and wish it printed: Thence, D. B. may see upon Isai
38. what he meant by, (...) to strengthen his own most learned Syllogism:
which breaks the neck of Purgatory: when Haides is known to have but Heaven
and Hell. Alexandria in the South had glory: as Antioch North. That, wheresin
abounded, grace should more abound: Antiochi deserved no such favor, the head
of Magog in Siria. But God promissed, Eze. 39. to glorify his name about
Magog. And therefore would have Christians to bear the name first from the
place most hateful, and next Alexandria, the next hateful, to be high: and
Rome that crucified Christ, yet for some help they had showed the Maccabees,
and certain good captains, Math. 8. and 27. and Act. 10. and 23. and 27. God
would pity that cursed town: Though Constantinus new Rome bare sway a great
while: but the Buy-shop of Rome still worked to overthrow Bizantium: that he
might have the throne of Satan in higher measure. And Bizantium had not meddled
with Gods people, and long had no occasion of high throne for God to show later
anger: But had far more learned then Rome ever: and scant ever acknowledged
Romes purgatory: And to the West from Chanaan; in the Land Gyges or Gog: as
Croesus wealth enabled Cyrus, when he took Sardis, to send Israel home from
120. nations; So, God by John gave Sardis his Apocalypse: that it kept religion
far longer then Rome. Now, as God placed the tribes about the Arc, three
nobles of Leah Eastward; the blemished to parching sun: and the basest
Northward; and the last borne and dearest toward Sunset: to show that his
mercy reaches most to the furthest off: Of these the Psalm. 80. speaks:
before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasses: stir up thy strength, and come and
help us. That is, as (Shem Tob well notes) at the Sunset of our state, and
our last birth, as Joseph and Benjamin were most tendered; show O Lord now, the
fathers favor to the children.

Paul, the Hebrew of Hebrews, of Benjamin, he chalengeth for him self and his
kinsmen, Romans 15. and his company, al Grecia and the West: and names
expreslie Spain. And besides Joseph of Arimathea, Paul's scholar might teach
our West, the ends of the earth, to be the possession of Christ, That Albion,
France, and martyrs of Spain, have now 3. gates in extreme West: that the
Ebrew and Greek Testaments were never so much studied, as in Albion, and
France and Germany. Cambridge, Duresme, York, London, will bear one record,
that thirty years he cleared the Revelation, that Papists made great means
to be further taught: By the Mayor of Duresme, and by others at London: offering
as good as a Bishoprike, if without danger in further matter they might. And I
know there had been but few Papists in England, if a few had opened the old
Testament by the new: as the Apostles vein required. And if the new Testament
were translated into such Hebrew as the Apostles made Greek: and the Old into
perfect sense in Greek, all nations would swear, that our ends of the earth
are the possession of Christ.

And the walls of the City had twelve foundations: and in them the names of
the Lambs twelve Apostles. These foundations, are the 12. precious stones
which follow* in which, Exodus 28, the xij. Tribes are named: So the very stones
engraven infer the Tribes, from Exodus 28. And here the Apostles names show
that they taught no new doctrine, but the same which the Tribes had of old.

And he that spoke with me had a golden reed to measure the City, and the
gates of it: and the wall of it: and the City stands square: and the length
of it is so much as the breath: and he measured the City with the reed in
furlonges twelve thousand: and the length, and breadth, and height of it, be
equal. When the Jews came home from Babylon, the like restoring of the City,
Zach. 2. is expressed by an Angel having a reed. So, the restoring of the high
Jerusalem, after the City which crucified Christ, had made it low: is
expressed by an Angel having a reed. Now twelve thousand furlongs, make (as we
may suppose) 1500. English miles. A City so high, so long, and so broad, would
hold an infinite company of men: and since Satan was bound from supreme rage.
The first 300. year. by martyrs, bred an infinite company of millions, and in
quiet long after, moo: and when Angels held the four winds 144000. of
Israel, and so many heathen, as none could number: and now after restoring,
when mo in number profess salvation in Christ (by breaking bread: and pray
only to Christ for justice by his gift) then papists be in number; it must be
a great City that shall hold all: If all old holy be taken in also. And if
some by envy had not hindered opening of both Testaments in Ebrew and Greek,
in the Talmudique vein, which others might translate into many tongues, many
poor Jews and Turks had seen the xij. tribes over our gates; and the Apost.
doctrine to be fastened in Aharons Jewels, and had taken Chambers, in the large
building of our square Jerusalem, 1500. miles high: and so square. When Christ
taught Noe to make the Arc, of 300. cubits length; and 50. cubits breadth,
the sixth of the length: and thirty high, the tenth to the length: he showed
Noe, he had all beasts and fowls and their fodder in measure. So he, that
weighs all the dust of the earth: knows how many souls he has chosen:
and how large his heavenly City shall be, and how many he was to reject,
that their carcases should be fuel for Gehenna.

The City was square.
This, alludeth unto the Tabernacle and Temple: where Dabir the Arkes place was
square: and now we all have the Law in the Tables of our hearts: and see the
Cherub, as having seven cups of wrath fighting for us: and know Christ to
be the mercy-seate: and golden Altar: and we are all sacrificers to make our
own prayer of incense: and the lifting up of our hands to be the evening
offering: and we our selves to be the golden Candlestick: and our hope is the
anchor of the soul sure and fast, Heb. 6.
going within the veil: whither JESUS our forerunner is gone: being a
sacrificer for ever, after the order of Melchitzedek: So we leave imitation of
Aharon, in Linen, Cope, Mitre, Altar, Flesh and Blood substantiated, Priest
and Sacrifice, to them that will toy with imitation of Aharon, and remember not
the fire that brent Nadab and Abihu for strange fire. The Popes fire is a
thousand times stranger. Therefore an whole lake of fire and brimstone,
remains for him.

Of Arias Montanus, placing in Altar of Incense in the most holy.
Arias Montanus knew well enough, that the Altar of incense was set in the
outer holy: yet in Apparatu, he does place it in the holy. It is marvel why
he durst spare a truth: This I guess; that the simple papists, should not see
the birth of Christ cast out of course. This I will but touch. I told Jews,
that his conception and his birth is all one for treueth of salvation. And
Christ would have neithe exactly known: because it would trouble the
Mathematicians of the world too much. As of late double rekonnings made. Turk
and Jew think we have no truth of story. Seeing, annus salutis, comes as
well from Conception in December, as from birth in September: the old account
may be well kept. But we should have no lies in our heavenly Jerusalem,
though men estieme more of custom, then of him, whose eyes are a flame of
fire: Eighteen weighty arguments one learned man, a Ciuilian has brought, to
settle the time better. Because Jews should not gather absurdities, from our
Gospel: that a wise favorable Prince (taking order, that all men's wealth
should be rated: that Soldiers pill'd not any, but rested in set portion:)
should cause every one to repair to his native town at midwinter; in my book
to the Landt-Graue, I place the conception in December. That as their Midras
Rabba, in Deuter, tells the MESSIAH should come in Tisri: and redeem, on
friday. by Bechai, fol. 12. so he did: and then John's trumpet proclaimed him:
and at Pascha, became our Pascha: and at Pentecost, gave a fiery law. The old
testam. is so strong for Christ: that the very Jews speak thence the same
that the new Testament does.

And he measured the wall of it: an hundred forty four cubits: the measure
of a man's, which the Angels was. And the inner building of the wall was
Carbuncle. A wall, is a defense: and so thick a wall must needs be a strong
defense: and being of shining Carbuncle; it shows the City to be of glory
and truth invincible. Such is Divinity: being skilfully handled.

Of Prayer.
The Place. whither the people met to prayer in Salomons Temple, is called in
Ebrew, Azara, Strength: and in Greek (...) the mercy-place, Now, seeing Prayer
and Gods mercy be our wall: this should be made of the Carbuncle of his: that
the Psalms and holy scriptures should be our prayers. Athanasius shows use
in them for all life: and to every part of holy story, certain Psalms might
fitly be quoted. The prayers which we have from the Pope, were penned for his
drifte in Divinity: and offer great hold of blame in every point: and no wight
full of eyes will be taught but by God, to what prayer he shall say, Amen. The
Prayer which the Lord gave is commended to be the common prayer of the Church
assembled. But without Battalogie or often repetitions. And for it, Math. chap.
6. the Pope corrupts the Greek text: filching away, the sentence of greatest
light: Thine is the Kingdom, Power and Glory, for ever and ever: which
calls, Daniel chap. 7. and all Daniel thither: To be a Carbuncle-wall to the
Sermon. If the Bishopps translate the Bible well: and add tables, for skillful
reading, of Conference in Places. This will best build walls of Carbuncle: when
all pray as their heart and God best likes.

And the City was of pure gold, like to pure glass. By the City, is meant,
the whole laws of policy: which should be as pure as gold: and as clear as
glass. Tyrannical and superstitious, anger God: and where the policy is
disputable, it is foolish.

And the foundations of the wall, were trimmed with every precious stone.
Before, I showed upon chapter 7. how the Tribes were fitted to their stones; and
more largely in my advertisement of errors, in our handling of religion. How
the warriers, the frontiers, were two noble of Lea; but of some blemish, Reuben
and Simeon; and of each handmaid, Dan and Gad: had stones of color for a
warriers coat. The water men, likewise fit colored stones, and fit notationed,
Isachar, Zabulon, Aser, Nephtaly. and the noble statesmen, also fit Leuy, Judah,
Joseph, Benjamin. So that the dum stones assuring Israel of the Land; when they
misbelieued; argued them to be but common sand.

The order of the Tribes, Apoc. 21.
Sundry orders (very many) be of the tribes, in the old Testament; to show that
one is not better then another: but that in some points, the mean is as the
best. Here, they are placed in special regard of story.

Benjamin, not Reuben, nor yet Joseph first.

Issachar, not Simeon second.

Because Leui, and Judah, held themselves all ways better.

Then Judah, third, not Leui.

Then Leui, in Iudahs old place.

Then Zabulon, fifth: as next to Isachar.

Then Reuben, sixth: to come before the handmaides S.

Then Aser, Luc 2. 49.
the handmaides son: Ancestor to Anna: the Dau. of Phanuel.

Then Joseph, the eighth.

Then Simeon, to come before the rest baser borne.

Then Nephtali: of the first bearing handmaid, before Dan his elder brother.

Then Dan before the later bearing handmaides S.

And Gad, in the place left.

This situation, comes not from John's wit: as he names the tribes, chapter
7. but from eyesight of a building, set by God.

Reason of their order.
Reuben, lost his glory: first falling from the land: Then, by Civil right,
Joseph should have had it. For in Jacobs purpose he was eldest: and had the
birthright. But Jeroboam after seven defenders, falling and felling ten
tribes, cast him to the eight place. For that cause: his Beryll in Aharons
shoulders, holding six Tribes on the one, and six on the other: is translated
of the 70. Smaragdus: because heathen could not see, why God should plague
proud Ephraim, Joseph, bearing up all in Egypt and in Iosuah. So the Sardius
of Reuben, is not in the first place: not the Beryll of Joseph: But the Jasper,
of Benjamin: Ioseps brother: by civil right. As the Temple was built in the
tribe of Benjamin, whereby half Benjamin claue to Judah: and Benjamin, by
Ester Atossa, and Mordecai, repressed the decree of destruction, from Aman of
Amaleke: and Esther became the mother of great Darius Artaxerxes, brings the
Persian King, that built the Temple, to be of Benjamin; and all his seed: and
caused favor to the Jews under Persia: Whereby doubtless many of Benjamin,
before S. Paul and his sisters sons, and the named, Romans 15. were great
pillars of the Church. And S. Paul alone, building three gates of Jerusalem,
Westward, is enough to make Beniamins Iaspar, the first foundation: seeing he
filled all from Jerusalem to Illyrico with the Gospel of Christ: and after to
Rome, where he first taught the Synagogue; what the Gospel was, Act. 28. and
Caesar's Palace, Phil. 1. and taught two years, without let: and went to
Spain: for he spoke from God that he would so do: and from wicked Rome that
crucified Christ, he built many Churches by others: sending Crescens into
France, and Titus into Dalmatia: and calling Mark from the East, who had been
with Peter at Babylon: and keeping dear Luke the Physician with him, to make
many Princes, Theophilos. And in his beginning of Epistles, he warned, 2 Thessalonians. 2. that cursed policy of the world should come: and Romans 13. warned
them, not to take superiority over the Civil Officer: and recording matters
small, and many persons; never has one syllable that Peter should ever be at
Rome. But being a Prophet, as Saint Luke has arguments innumerable, and
invincible that he never was there: What a company does he reckon in the
Epistle to the Romans, without any mention that Peter had been there: but of
his own desire, to build where others had not laid a foundation. And from Rome
to the Galathians, he tells expressly, that Peter's charge was for the Jews
scattred by captivity: to whom the twelve Apostles were charged chiefly to
go: and to judge the 12. Tribes. To the Ephesians he mentions Tychicos, whom
he sent to them: but nothing of Peter. And to the Philippians, he mentions,
that the Gospel by his bonds was manifested in Caesar's palace. It had been a
stale news, if another had done that before: and if Peter, had turned any of
Caesar's house, which to record, it touches the glory of Christ, he had as well
mentioned that. And S. Luke, who envied not S. Peter, (in the Acts) but told
high glory, had not hid his praise in Rome, if desert had been. And he tells
the Collossians, that Luke was with him, without mention of more: or token that
Peter ever had been there. And in the second to Timothy, he names many,
Demas leaving of him: Crescens and Titus, as I told: and Lucas only to be with
him: and that Mark who was in Chaldea, 1. Pet. 5. should be brought to him.
Also he mentions Eubulus, Pudens and Linus: and where he left Trophimus
sick: and how Alexander the Copper-smith hindered him: and if saint Peter had
laid any fundation in Rome to his help, he had never hid that: And when
Timothy came to Rome: and was sent from him, he tells the Hebrews of him:
but because they knew how Paul many years after his calling, agreed with
Peter, to bishop the East: he mentions nothing of him. That by Beniamins
Jasper, S. Paul should be the fundation of the heathen, borne among heathen:
and borne Citizen, of the chief West town: and a persecutor, to comfort the
City that crucified Christ: that as he found mercy: so they might suffering as
he did. And this much, for the Jasper, the stone. But for the Greek term I
must speak more.

Of the term Jasper in the third place. Apoc. 21.
Four Dialects, the holy Apostles have: which matter, tells a sound reader
to distinguish: and a D. ignorant heerin, will work much disturbance. To
Attique or common Greek they were to stand, when they wrote to heathen: and
were not forced to peculiar ( Greek) Dialect. So to Theophilus the heathen,
(...), Luc. 16. is used, for heaven and hell: as having both places and no moo:
and Catelthein, for passage, as the journey stands, without regard of up or
down. Luc. 4. and ten times, in the Acts, as I mentioned: So 70. Greek: so
Talmudiques and Apostles proper. Colyrion, in Ioh. chapter 3. is Talmudique: and
that the Sacrificer was girded about his breast, as Christ, Apoc. 1. Maymony
proves from Vzielides and common tradition, in treatise of holy apparel,
Perek. 10. John's own use of Greek is in Chalcolibanus, Apoc. 1. to Dan. 10.
and in white stone, to Deuteronomy. 27. and in Iaspis cha. 4. for Iaspeh the Hebrew;
and here: In the 70. Exo. 28 Sabulon is graven in it: for which John first
applies Sardonix, and as I told twice before, in this chap. Iaspis must be
referred to the Ebrew Carbuncle; Codcedona, in the Thargum Ierusal* as Kimchi,
upon Isai. 54. well noted. But here Law will tell: the Hebrew Iaspeh calls
the Greek unto it. He that marketh not this, shall confound all this matter.
And this much for the first foundation: wherein Paul not Peter is surely meant.

Of the second foundation.
Simesn, in Aharons chosen HAMISPAT, or virtue of Judgment, was graven in the
second stone: by birthright: but he as Reuben by carriage, not with right of
judgment, lost native dignity. Sichem, and Joseph, and Madianique, Number. 24.
brake his dignity: that gave him no defender, judge: only against Arabians in
Ezekias days, he gate ground: and held it a while. But for his own people,
he did nothing extraordinary. Therefore, because Jacob blessed all his sons,
some Darshan descanter, framed Iudiths fable for Simeons help: if that had
been a true story, the builder of Jerusalem had left Symeon his Topaz in the
second place. For Issachar in Thola, was not such a conqueror, as Judith: if it
were not a fable. God has plagued Grecia, for Judith, that would give an whole
book to the glory of Symeon: where God gives scant a line; he ca^ plague us
as well, and we be as well advised.

Of the Carbunck.
Leui in Aharon, third in birth, had the third place; and the Smaragd to be for
Moses: as the sung Ovid Metamor.

In solio Meyses claris lucente Smaragdis. That stone tells, that they be
blind, that think the Law dark: all Moses describes Christ of Judah, to
be the true sacrificer: who abolishing Leuies Office, takes Leuies place. And
as in Jacobs sons, not the first was best, nor the second, but the third
better, and Judah the fourth best: so, Peter most missed, and needed most
comfort: and Andrew found the Rock before him: and James sacrificed him self
(not at Compostella, but) under Herod: and John passes all they both of Judah:
and Christ now changes places, as ending sacrifice: that Leui shall teach of an
eternal sacrificer. So, the Carbuncle is in the third Place.

The Smaragde.
The Rainebow of Covenant, Isa. 54. and Genesis 9. Like the Smaragde, is about
Gods throne: to speak of the Covenant and Kingdom: therefore it is next
Christ.

Of the Sardonix.
Sabalon should be next, by order of matter: and Sardonix his Iahalom, Exodus
28. a term so applied by S. John. In Plato Phoed. Sardius, and laspis, and
Sardonix, are used to represent high joy, for the just in Haides: therefore
Sardonix is of high price. Elon was a Judge of Zabulon: and in the land of
Zabulon the calling of Disciples began. And as Zebed in Leahs tongue, for
society, to be from her husband sure: so Zebedaeus, had the term in his name:
the father of James and John.

Of the Sardius.
Ruben deserved much pity. For he would have saved Joseph's life: and he was a
frontier against the enemies: and therefore his Sardius, a war color, was in
Gods glory defending his Church: chapter 4. and has his place before any of the
handmaides S.

Of the Chrisolite.
Lea, pronounced her self happy, when her maid bare Aser. and God gave him an
happy soil, to have the sea, and other tribes, as bars and locks to him:
and continual strength, and olive woods: and much good, Deuteronomy. 33. And when
Ezekiel tells the King of Tyrus, by terms from the tribes stones, what
dignity he had in old society, with David and Solomon in Israel: he
reckons all Leahs six, and Rachels two: But none of the handmaids, saving
Aser, bordered next him: and fellow to the sea with him. He had no judge all
his days: but gracious Anna, Luc. 2. 37
that kept her a widow about 84. years: praying and fasting at the Temple, and
prophesying of Christ: and teaching from Dan. 9. 457. years after the return:
that, that year Christ must be borne: and, seeing God face to face. The
daughter of Phannel, seeing God face to face, being of the happy Tribe of Aser,
shows the Son of God, to all that looked for Redemption in Israel.
Therefore, though of the last borne of the handmaides sons, for this
Godliness has the seventh Place.

Of the Beryll.
Joseph that bare all, is now bare of glory. His Beryll bare all the
Patriarchs: aequall in Letters, as Gods providence did cast them, 25. in one
Beryll, and 25. in another. Thus Maymoni does cast them, in Celi Mikdas Perek 9.

(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)

Thus Gods care, does teach what a precious thing, belief in Christ is: that,
for Abraham's faith he should so play with Jacob, for his marriages: for the
wives aemulation for Children: for wisdom to give names to them: as their lot
should fall out, and time of their birth: that Jacob should bless them
according lie. Now Joseph bare sway about 600. years: But too long dignity,
bred pride to contemn all hope in Christ: that Joseph bare not up, but bare
away the Tribes. The wisdom of God, who knows how the Angels despised his
counsel, and Christ, and perished for ever: does show matter, (small to a
carnal mind) wisdom to astonish Angel: that every word of this book,
should have a mystery. These defendours of the people, came of Joseph: King
Iosuah, Deborah, Gedeon, Abimelech, Ieptha, Abdon, half the tribe of Manasseh
in Iair, with Reuben, and Gad in Saul's days. But Jeroboam the eight, did mar
all. So manifold, and unsearchable is the wisdom of God. The Jews, seeing
Joseph gone for Jeroboam: might fear, lest Judah should fall more for killing
of Christ: that now, only Saint Paul's Bishopric of the West is best, in
Christianity: and he foretold how Rome would deceive, and bad them not to be
proud, but fear: and not ouerrule the civil officer; but be subject: all this
is vain; to many. Joseph's Beryll, the glory of Paradise is now abject.

Of the Topaz.
Simeon has the ninth place, to be very base, yet before many of the
handmaides children.

Of the Chrysophrase.
The Chrysophrase is a white Achate, with a golden lace, and part green.
Achate simply is in Exodus 28. for Nephtaly: John gives the trimmest of
Achates, as God showed him: And Nephtali, is set before Dan: because Dan first
fell away.

Of the Hyacinth.
Leshem, was Dan his stone: and in notation it is, Follow God: and in the
partition of the land: Leshem, the Town was given to Dan, as prophesied in
the name of his stone. though it were far from the other soil of his, where
Samson dwelt. Iarchi upon Iud. 18. from the Thal.
Semel is an idol. Alpha and (...)mega, gave him warning that he turned not
the Letters. But none can stand longer than God stayed him. Jonathan the some
of Manasses of Gerson, of Moses (who would think it) he and his house were
Priests to the idol, till the removing of the glory from Ephraim: and
Jeroboam (regarding not that) set up a Calfe in Dan. The Antichrist, by
imitation of idols, is Dans child. Barbarous Rome cannot avoid that, but by a
ridiculous distinction, of Idol and Image.

Of Gads Amethyst.
God, of ordinary course, should follow Dan, and Aser, the younger, being set
before him; for Anna the daughter of Phanuel.

Thus, John comfort the 12. tribes in their own vein of speech, calling
all their stories of 1700. years, often reuolued in the same desert, to show
the Constancy of God: to encourage the 12. tribes, not to be amazed, that Rome
has crucified Christ, and destroyed the low Jerusalem: but to know, that it
also shall be destroyed: after unwilling furthering of the Gospel by
martyring: and when ease and wealth brings blindness, and error: it shall
under praetense of holiness, and by persequution cause more study of Law, then
all former ages had. The Jews soon would climme into the mountain of Tab^r
in mind: to acknowledge this description, to be all from the Prophets: and
most easy to understand. And, this, cutteth off all Iudaisme, which the
Rabbis have to this hour: who from Ezekiel, 40. look still for a return to
Canaan. But against that, S. Peter told them, that every Prophecy of
Scripture, is not to be expounded properly.

And the twelve gates were twelve pearls: every one several gate was of a
pearl. The words of the holy Apostles, open the way into the City, and the
spirit of God spoke in them, and no one could be above the other, but every one
stood a foundation upon the Rock. By them which have written, we know that the
others had words also as pearls. When the Pope buried the style of the
Apostles, and brought in Romes tongue: and neither that pure: then the pearls
lost their gayness.

And the street of the City was pure gold, as clear glass. The open laws
are agreeable to the souls frame in judgment, from God: and rules of faith be
clear. Rome has scant one rule of either. But their laws cross commune
reason: and their speeches of faith be either false, or litigious.

And a Temple I saw not in it: for the Lord God of hosts is the Temple and the
Lamb. Earthly buildings profit not: as all S. Stephens oration tells: and
the faithless Jew Izhak Ben. Arama, Port. 52. showing, how the Tabernacle
thrice described, and set up; did little help, they presently misbelieuing. And
Salomons Temple after his death, was robbed by Shisak King of Egypt: and
rejected of the ten Tribes. And this (as the Jew confesses) to show, that
God rested in CHRIST, a goodlier Temple, the heaven and the earth: whose
temple, when it should be once pulled down, he would raise it up the third
day. Moses Law; ye shall stand in reverence of my Tabernacle: took effect for
punishment in Ephraim, for Elies sons defiling of women, waiting there; that
God foresooke his Tabernacle in Shiloh: and Ephraim fell in the day of battle,
34000. 1. Sam. chap. 4. and Psalm. 78. Nabuchadnezar that destroyed the Temple:
was so many years like a beast, as the Temple was in building. And his Babell,
for the holy Temple, was destroyed. The carnal Jews, urged Moses Law,
against Christ, as to death: That he said, destroy this Temple: and I will
build it again in three days. He spoke of his own Temple. For which, the Law
of Moses was made: and the Tabernacle, and the frame of the world: and because
they stood not in reverence of his Temple, he destroyed them. By the former
Law, as they martyred S. Stephen: for saying, Jesus of Nazareth would destroy
the Temple. And they meant as much, for S. Paul, for speaking and teaching
against the Temple: and they thought he had brought Trophimus a grecian of
Ephesus into the Temple: and so polluted it. But the true Temple they saw not:
till theirs was destroyed. And here John expounds Moses: That God, the Lord
of hosts, (the Angels, and goodly frame of the world) That CHRIST in whom all
fulness it self dwells, is the Temple. And they that crucify a picture,
as his, making him vile: or worship a piece of bread, as his body, being a
mockage to Angels and men, shall find no place in Jerusalem. The Temple of
the Lamb must be used as he teaches. It sits in shining light in heaven,
and may not be made base in this dark air, by our foolish inventions: his
own commanded works, as Salomons Temple, cannot contain God. 1. King. 8. and
Act. 7. and Esai. 66. This one rule; overthrows all Talmudiques by the
Prophets: whose words they reverence.

A plain conclusion, from Esai. 60. and 51. and Ezeck 47. of the Gentiles
Jerusalem.
And the City shall have no need of the sun, to give light in it: for the
glory of God lightneth it: and the Candle of it is the LAMB. Isai. 60. Arise
be lightened, for thy light is come, and the light of the ETERNAL rises over
thee. Ephesians. 4. He says, arise thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead,
and Christ shall shine to thee. Many Rabbines, as S. Paul, draw Esaies words to
Christ: and when John wrote, 144000. Jews faithful would so take it. Isai.
60. The Sun shall be no more thy light on the day, and the brightness of the
Moon, shall not give light unto thee: But the ETERNAL shall be thy continual
light: and thy GOD shall be thy honor. Thy Sun shall no more set: and thy
moon shall not be hid: for the Eternal will be thy continual light: and the
days of thy mourning shall be gone: worldly joy shall not be thy comfort, but
the joy of God. As John, banished into Patmos, has in one day, the Lords day,
more joy then all the world is worth: when darkness covered Caesares, and
obscurity, nations: But God shined over him, and the glory of Christ was seen
to him, to show him in wilderness the state of the Church. If he had not been
banished from Ephesus, he should not have had these visiones. But now his
comfort is the greater. As one, far from his Country, may study more in six
years, then in 12. among much acquaintance at home, and be less grieved from
quarrelling of the wicked.

Now John applying Esai unto the LAMB, shows that all his comfortes carry
unto Christ. Act. 2 20
And all the Prophets do the same: so this book teaches all the Myriades of
Jews that believed, to expound all the Bible. So do S. Paul's Epistles,
expounding all the Law and Prophets how they speak of Christ. Isai. 61. 1.
And the chap. 61. ver. 1. is plainly by our L. Luc. 4. of him self.

And the nations, the saved shall walk in her light: and Kings shall bring
their glory and honor into her. Isai 60. And nations shall walk in thy light:
and Kings in thy brightness, that arises to thee (And her gates shall not be
shut in the day, for night is not there) that they may bring the glory and
honor of nations unto her. And they shall open thy gates continually, day and
night: they shall not be shut, that men may bring unto thee the wealth of
nations: also their Kings shall be brought. Thus God comfort the xij.
Tribes, from their known prophecies, to go forward to win at the last so
many as would furnish a City: Fifteen hundred miles square, in two thousand
year. Though the ten Tribes were scattred, yet Hosea tells them that as HE
raises up the dead, so he can call them back: and Cyrus called them from 120.
nations upon his own charges: and some of all Israel, returned to have hope in
Christ: at 490. years, by holy Daniel. And from all nations, some were at
Jerusalem the last year: and men, 120. received spirit to be sufficient to
teach all nations, and many thousands were turned: and of them every one would
turn many thousand. And John stirs up their hope.

And there enters not into it, any common: and practicing lothsomenesse, and
lies: But the written in the book of life of the Lamb. Profane infidels,
unclean in soul: and lying in judgments, as all Papists be; and old
heathen, estranged from Christ, are not of this: but they whom Christ has
chosen, called, and sanctified. This matter is eloquently expressed, by
Manasses-saw-martyr, chap 52. Arise, arise, put on thy glory, put on thy
trim apparel, Jerusalem the holy City; for no uncircumcised and unclean,
shall come any more unto thee.

This shows, that they who be truly of the Church, have their mind bravely
clothed: and will have none profane of their company, nor auctores of
untruth; unfit for the Carbuncle walls of Jerusalem: as the Apocrypha lies
are with the Bible: a mere leprous sort, whereby Papists term all the Bible
lies: yet they that can not read one word of the Law, as a professor should;
will fight to keep those wicked books with the holy: and fight to hinder
explaning of both Testaments, in Saint John's Carbuncle vein: and in Paul's
Iaspers. As none can be saved, unless he be borne again of water, John. 3
Isai, chapter 55. so puddles of filthy pooles, will mar those waters. It is
marvel, that any dare chirpe, to hinder the light of Gods word: seeing God
is able and ready to revenge. The Pope puts the wicked fable of Tobie, in
the heart of the holy Bible. But it had been better, a millstone had been
hanged about his neck: and that he had been cast into the main Sea. It is
better to be a dore-keeper in the holy Jerusalem, then in Emperors Palaces in
such mixture, to the pure waters of Gods word. John and Ezechiel shall be judge.

CHAPTER XXII.
And he showed me a pure River of water of life: so clear as Crystal:
issuing from the throne of God and of the LAMB. IN the song of songs, lively
waters of CHRIST flow from Libanus: they be waters of life, Ioh. 7. to teach
others life: and the true MESSIAH comes by waters, blood, and spirit. 1 John
4. Water of clear doctrine: blood of suffering: and miracles of spirit. And if
a man be not regenerated of this Water and Spirit: he shall not see life. And
thus speaks Ezekiel.

And he brought me unto the brim of a river: Ezekiel. 47.
and at the brim of the River, was much store of trees, on both sides: and he
said unto me: these waters go forth into Galile, the first: and descend to
the plain: (to sea of Tiberias) then unto another sea: (Lacus Asphaltites) to
the Ocean: and those waters are made wholesome: And surely, every living soul,
which can creep into any place, where these Rivers come, shall be lively: and
the fish shall be great. Thus Ezekiel tells whence Christ shall begin to
teach, in Galilee. And the Zohar upon Geneses, does note that. And John saw the
event of this: for at the sea of Galilee, was he, and James, and Peter, and
Andrew, called to be fishers of men. And after the resurrection, Ioh. chap.
21. at the sea of Tiberias Christ appeared to many of his Disciples, fishing;
and all night they had taken nothing. And in the morning the Lord comes to
the water side, unknown, and asks whether they had any thing to eat: they
said, No. Because they had taken nothing all night. Then he made them cast
into the right parts: and they make a draught of 153. great fishes, 2. Chron.
2. 17.
whose spaume, might match the 353000. Proselites in Chanaan. Old and late,
Prophecy and story, are thus contrived, to make easy and sure the doctrine
of life. And God must needs hate the Pope, that bent not all his wealth, to
have so many as he could, ready in the Law: as were the Fishers of Galilee. The
Disciple whom JESUS loved, has now, Apoc. 21. a third sight of Ezekiels
prophecy. In John, from the throne of God and the Lamb, comes the water: In
Ezekiel, from the Temple: so, the Lord of Hosts, and the Lamb, be the Temple.

In the middle of the street of it, and of the River, was a Tree of life,
bearing twelve fruits, bearing his fruit every month, and the leaves of the
tree, did heal the nations. Ezekiel chap. 47. And by the River came forth, at
his brim, on either side, all kind of trees for meat: the leaf of none
faded: nor the fruit failed: every month they brought forth new. For the
waters came forth from the Temple: and the fruit was for meat: and the leaf
to heal. The first psalm, expounds this: that the study of the Law finds
Christ: the tree of life: and makes others fruitful trees to feed and heal.

An exposition follows here, Chap. 22.
And no Catanathema (given over as cursed) shall be any more: But the throne
of God; and the Lamb shall be in it: and his servants shall serve him: and
shall see his face, and his Name shall be in their forehead. They that were
cursed, are healed by the waters of repentance, and by the leaves of the tree
of life: and their service to God only, and sight of his favor, is meat and
drink to them: and they have Gods mark in forehead: as Papists have theirs:
They Gods word, and Baptism, and breaking of bread: Papist prayers to saints
and images: and profaner theirs.

And night shall be, not there: neither shall they need candle, nor light of
the Sun: for the Lord God lightneth them: and they shall reign for ever and
ever. They who know God in Christ, shall not be to fearch Philosophi, for
better happiness, in native study: nor Jews, Talmudique study, wherein they
adventure their soul. But seeing Christ, they see all: and reign with Christ,
first here, and shall reign for ever.

The Epilogue.
The Angels speech.
And he says unto me: These words be faithful and true: The Lord God of the
holy Prophets, has sent his Angel, to show what is to come quickly. Because
this book applies all the Prophets unto Christ, and takes away all covering
from their meaning: he calls the Lord, the God of the holy Prophets. This
conuicteth all to be godless, who contemn to know the Prophets: and to make
them plain by John.

How the Revelation would force any Jew or Gentile of learning, without rancor,
to yield unto faith.
First the learned style of John should be showed: and infinite fullness of
eyes: how every phrase from first to last, is couched with circumspection
admirable: for common Greek: for readiness in expressing the 70. for
ouermatching Talmudiques in their kind: and proving the Gospel by their grant:
and visions passing man's wit: expressing plain matter, from 2. These. 2. by all
plainness and majesty, that heaven can afford. This being granted the sequel
follows.

The sequel, by any Jews grant.
When the visions are seen to pass the wit of men: as Esai. chap. 60. as
Ezekiels, as Daniels, and Zacharies, and all drawn to Christ, with a commentary
from God: John being a simple fisher, and in transe: no Jew nor Gentile could
deny, but that this book has Gods authority: and expounds it self: and
shows how all the old Test. speaks of Christ.

A Digression to Jews desire, to know the proof of the New Test. by the Law.
Twenty years ago, I disputed in Francfurt Synagogue, with a Rabbin, the
Jews chosen for skill: with this promise, that I would make him confess that
Moses draws unto Christ, or speak against his conscience: and we both
agreed: to call God to strike him presently, that spoke untruly: I requiring
nothing of him, but that which I well knew he perceived: and might judge all
past denial. He was content and never crossed me: But desired a large
treatise: And ten yer. ago at Basil, requested a full treatise: and all the
New Test. translated in such Hebrew as I spoke to him: and the Apocalypse,
applied in order of books to all the old Test. Also he moved the Jews of
Germany, to request the same: who have made him their Orator (they of Hanau)
that if he yield, they all will. And the Jews of Worms, and Mentz: being
commanded by the Bishops to read my Books, said that they could deny nothing:
But requested Moses and the Prophets, opened at large: to full measure of
their 613. Laws, showing which stand still for all nations and ages: and which
were given as unto children, to be removed in riper knowledge. The Rabbi, my
friend, chief requester of Catechese, and their Orator is called Rabbi Eliah.
Why now I accomplish not request, I will tell: omitting their particular
injuries: because when all this age is dead: this description of Jerusalem may
stand.

The greatness of the Jews request, in due articles.
1. The translating of the New Testament into Ebrewe, should have with it a
Dictionary of four Dialectes: and I should have many Scribes learned, who by
direction, may help me much to speed.

2. Fair Copiers of my translation, and learned Printers will require States
help.

3. A treatise of MESSIAH, from Genesis 3. to the end of Malachi from all Rabbis,
of whom often I need but line out, what I would have copied: that would
require much money for learned Scribes.

4. The comparison of all Moses 613. making a commentary from the New Testament
upon them: and a table from them to the New Test. this will be of greater
pains, then my goodly recompense can heartely take in hand.

5. Jews request me to require our own side, first to yield to me: which I
could make them do: or refuse with shame enough. But that I cannot force
superiors to justice.

6. To these positions, I must require consent: that the text of both Test, is
pure: that of the tongue, the enemies may best be made judges; to their
overthrow, and our victory. For all speeches hard in the New Test. to us, are
easy to them. That for government of the Church (to make many learned in the
Law) they and the Apostle have yet to eyesight the same rules.

7. As the Jews grant all that I have yet printed in Ebrew; I would request
Princes to force their Scholars: to yield from their crossing of their own
Gospel: or to combat with me briefly.

8. Because unlearned wightes, shall not prate against any thing; but that many
nations may judge: I would have ability for helpers, to turn all that I do,
into other tongues many.

Princes helping in this, I would hasten the works, and till then, I leave all
hinderers, as murderers of souls, out of Jerusalem the holy City.

The speech of Christ.
Behold I come quickly, etc. unto, etc. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all, Amen. Chap. 1. 23. needed no comment: nor the chap. 18. nor this
Epilogue. Therefore I may not with idle words weary the Reader.

Tlo.
A BRIEF TABLE FOR THE MORE READY FINDING of the Chapters in their pages, and
some principal matters in the same Chapters handled.
THE 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Chapters are handled in the 53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58.
pages. The 8. Chap. begins to be handled in the 59. page containing these
things principal as follows. The sum of the Bible: contempt of which, caused
God to cast off the open Church 59. Of the 7. Trumpets generally 60. The first
Trumpet there handled ibidem. Of the names, Papas and Pope: handled 61 The
second trumpet, expounding the first 62 The third trumpet, expounding the
second ibid. Articles of the Popes corruption of scriptures. 63 The 4. trumpet
expounding the third page 66. The occasions of the Churches fall from heaven.
ibid. How the old Testament, came turned into wormwood 67 Of the new Testam.
68 Of the new Testam* elegancie. 70 How the Papes of Graecia, used the Bible:
and the Popes refused it page 76 A Cry expounding the first trumpets warning of
fire and blood, by scholars made a mountain of fire, cast into the sea, by the
starr fallen from his place, etc. 81
The 9. Chap. page 82.
THe fifth Trumpet sounding out the Popes clearly. ibid. Whence the Pope
chalengeth keys. page 83. A digression, to show a scandal laid to Jews 84 Of
the Locusts: most lively describing the Popes subjects, to make him King of
Locusts: distinguished from all other policies, that be, etc. page 86 A
distinction of those Loc. from the proper Locusts in Joel, that these be as
scorpions 87 A further illustration, of distinction, from natural Locusts: and
scorpions ibidem A further distinction, how their sting is not of natural
scorpions, but of spiritual ibidem. Of the scorpions stings 88 Of the Locusts
strength and auctority 89 Of the Loc. King. 90 Of Oaths ibidem Of the Popes
advancing learning page 91 Of Popes blindness in Ebrew, easiest matters
ibidem How blindely the Papists, wrest Ieroms words: that etc. 92 Of the Popes
names ibidem Of the Popes Greek name 93 A digression to our prayer book, made
from the Popes 94 Of Antic. his Chaldy name 95 The Epilogue, for the
description of the Pope 97 Of Machumed, or Machmad, or Moamed: in Piel, Hiphil,
and Hophal: the participles three are used in Arabique and Rabbis. 98
Chapter 10. ibid.
HOw Christ helps his Church by ruling war and guile: not to pass bounds,
etc. ibid. Of Angel, Christ ibidem Coming down from heaven 99 Of the cloud
ibidem Of the rainebow, about his head ibid. Of the face of Christ like the
sun: page 100 Of his feet like a pillar of fire ibid. Of the little book
opened ibid. Of the right foot set upon the sea, and the left upon the Land
101 Of the little books eating. ibidem.
The XI. Chap. page 102.
THe measuring of the Temple page 102 Of measuring the faithful 103 Of the
Court within the Temple, to be cast out, in condemnation of Iudaisme 104 A
digression, to compare the old Temple or Tabernacle, with the spiritual 105 Of
the holy Synagogues 106 Of the Synedrion 107 Of Athean imitation of Aaron 108
How BB. were made in Israel ibid. Of Excommunication 109 A just, but strange
doctrine. ibidem A digression to expound the term Bishop 110 Of the 42. moan.
111 Of Prophesying 112 Of the Decalogoue ibid. Of the Popes theft 113 Grounds
which all should know that soundly prophecy, or expound scripture ibid. Of
Arias Montanus works, of diverse readings 115 Of Lindanus quarreling with the
text and one Erostratus ibid. Of Law vowelled, and vnvowelled ibid. Of the
Lxxij. differing 3600. years from the strict Ebrew 116 Of Perfection of
script. ibid. Autores for the tongue 117 Prayer is our service of God ibidem Of
the New Testam. 118 Conclusion ibid. Blasphemous grounds of Popery page ibid.
How young men learned in liberal arts, might be rarely exquisite in the Greek
N. Testam. 120 Of Poper names 121 The Epilogue ibidem The restorers of the
Gospel, be as Elias 122 The Martyrs be as Moses 123 Of the City which
crucified our Lord 124 Of all souls passage at death 128 Of Purgatory ibid. Of
the 2. Macca. 129 Of Iudahs sacrifice 130 The Conclusion 131 What the Greek
Fathers thought of Purgatory ibidem Of the third woe, and last trumpet page 133
The sum of the Bible 134 Of the worlds end 137 Of the Jews calling ibid. Of
our Kings rare bent to the honor of the Bible 139 Of the Popes scholars 140 Of
Daniel 141 Of the poor Indians calling ibid. Of the old Opinion of 6000.
years page ibidem.
Chap. xij. page 143.
A Description of the Church ibid. Of the profane Caesar, and Pope reviving of
him both comprised in the body and tail of one Dracon. page 145 Of the tail
147 The combat of the Roman Empire with the Church ibid. A Commentary of the
former vision of MICA-EL, defending the Church 148 Of MICA-EL. 150. Of Tobies
fable. 151 Of Michaels Angels 152 Of wicked spirits names ibid. Of old Serpent
153 Of Devil ibid. Of trapps laid by our selves. 154 The Devil and his Angels,
by Michael are banished from the Church. page ibidem. A plainer exposition of
the Dragons war. ibid. Of the Dragons short time 157 Of the time of the
persecutions, by the Dragon. 158
Chap. 13. page 160.
OF two special points to be noted. 161 The second point. 162 How the Romans
arms are taken from the Kingdoms in Daniel page 163 A most plain description
of the Pope: by the beast arising from the earth page 169 Of the Lambs two
horns. ibid. Of one error in the Pope, which makes him next the Devil, where
the Devil would tremble to be so impudent openly. 170 Of the Dragons speech.
171 Of the two horns, counterfaiting the Lamb 172 Of the Popes succession.
173 Of the Ancient facility in teaching the Law 174 An application of the Popes
calling to that 178 A doubt for the manner of policy, now what way is best to
be taken 179 The answer ibidem. What may we think of BB. of which sort many
Popes, and Cardinales be 180 Of the Pope King of Kings 181 How long the Popes,
the stars falling, could not become mountains of fire, to cast themselves
into the sea of Empire 182 By what Iudaique cursedly revived Ceremony, the
chief Divinity D. of Rome, bewitched Emperors 184 Of Papists Miracles 186 An
oration of the Popes Legate, very remarkable 194 Of subjection in all matters
to the Pope ibidem. Of the mark in the forehead 196 Of the name of the beast
and Number of his name ibidem. A repetition of the term Rock 199 A Digression
to a disputation at Mentz. 200.
Chap. 14. page 205.
THe heaven, commonly in the Aposignifieth the Chruch 206 What the song of the
rediemed was 207 A Digression to show the Concent of all the holy books, and
first of Geneses 208 Objections of them, that are not rediemed from the earth,
against that ibid. Of Job 209 Of Exodus ibid. Romes error against the song of
the Lamb barbarous 210 Error Athean ibid. Of Leuiticus ibid. How the Pope
disannulleth all Leuiticus 211 Of Numeri ibid. The Contradiction of the Pope
against that book 212 Of Deutero. ibidem The Contrary also ibid. Of Jesus (son
of Number.) ibid. The Popes contrary 213 Of the book of Judges ibid. Of Samuel,
etc. 214 The Popes Contrariety 217 Of the N. Testaments music: the Gospel
ibid. Of the Acts 218 Of the Ep. Romans 219 Of the 1. Corint. 220 Of the 2.
ibid. Against Purgatoris ibid. Of the Epist. to the Galat. 221 To the Ephesians
ibidem To the Philippians ibidem To the Colloss. ibidem To the These. 1. and 2.
Epist. 222 To Timothy 1. and 2. Epist. 213 To Philemon ibidem How the servant
of servants is concordant to Onesimus 224 Of the Epistle to the Hebrews 225 The
Popes contrariety ibidem Of the Epist-Iames ibidem Of 1. and 2. Pet. 226 Of 1.
2. and 3. of John ibidem Of Jude 227 Of the Combat of 144000. 228 Comparisons
of Phrases for holy souls departed 231 Revenge for Christ his justice 232
Revenge for the prayers of the Church ibid. Revenge by the iniuried themselves
233 The sure event of Gods judgments. 234
The 15. Chap. page 235.
A Plain exposition of the woman, fleeing in the wilderness ibid.
The Chap. 16. page 238.
AS the Popes manner of rising plagued the world: in a like manner God
consumes him ibid.
Chap. 17. page 251.
John like Daniel ibidem A plain description of the Popes coming up 259 Of
the Popes fall 261 A plain condemnation of Rome page 263
Chap. 18. page 264
THE King is Angelus to cause the word to be sounded page ibid.
Chap. 19. page 267.
ISai, Jeremy, and Ezekiel compared with this chap. bring great light ibid. Of
the Hebrew term of HalleluIah 268 Of the best way to overthrow the Pope 269
The wars of Christ and Christians against the Empire and Pope 273 An open
proclamation of the Popes destruction 275 An abridgement of all Gods judgments
in one 276
Chap. 20. page 277.
THE Devils are not simply bound ibid. The Pope deceived not generally till,
1000. years. 279 The Pope weakened the West, in superstition provoking to
war, for the holy Land. 280 The Pope is a Beast of Empire by his might 281 A
lively description of the latter Judgment ibid.
Chap. 21. page 284.
THE second discourse upon the 21. and 22. Chapters, of the Apocalypse ibid.
John began the N. Testam. and he likewise ended it ibid. Of John 285 Of
Jerusalem ibidem Of Melchitzedeke and Isaac causing glory to Jerusalem. 286 Of
Saint Paul's heavenly Jerusalem 287 Of the Jews error to this day ibid. Of
Alpha and Omega 292 Of ignorance in Alpha how it bred daily error 293 Of
Vowells 294 Of Tiphereth Israel ibid. Of Cethib and Kery 295 Of the Papists
interlinear. Bible 296 Of a most wicked slander ibid. Of Cetib, and not Kery
and Cery and not Cetib ibid. Of Iod not condemned. 297 Of Omega ibid. Of Greek
style 298 Of 4. Dialects in the Greek 299 Of Attique Greek ibidem Of the 72.
Greek 301 Of the Thalmu. Greek ibidem Of forgiveness in this world: what
Talmudiques mean ibid. Of the Apostles peculiar Greek page 302 Of S. Paul's
most eloquent expressing Moses ibid. Of the Talmudique agreement with the N.
Testam. 303 Of Idolaters 306 Of the Popes barbarous Answer page 307 An answer
to his ibidem Concerning the second death 308 Of the great City Jerusalem 311
Of Arias Montanus placing the Altar of incense, in the most holy 317 Of Prayer
318 The order of the Tribes 319 Reason of their order 320 Of the term Jasper
in the third place 323 Of the second fundation ibidem Of the Carbuncle 324 Of
the Smaragde ibidem Of Sardomix 325 Of Sardius ibidem Of Chrisolite ibidem Of
Beryll 326 Of Topax 327 Of Chrysophrase ibidem Of Hyacinth ibidem Of Amethyst
328 A plain conclusion from Esai 6. and 51. and Ezeck. 47. of the Gentiles
Jerusalem 331
Chap. 22. page 334.
THE Epilogue, the Angels speech 336 How the Apoc. would force any Jew, etc.
to yield, etc. 337 A sequel by any Jews grant ibid. A digression to Jews
desire ibidem The greatness of the Jews request page 338 The speech of
Christ: To whom be Kingdom, power, and glory, for ever and ever, Amen. 339.
FINIS.

