TWO EPISTLES UNTO GREAT MEN OF BRITANIE, IN THE YEAR 1599. Requesting them
to put their necks unto the work of their Lord: To break the bread of the
soul unto the hungry Jews, by their writings, or by their charges, through
such as be ready to declare all that their necessity does require.

Printed now the second time, in the year since the creation of the world 5532.

Or year of the LORD 1606.

Translated by the Auctour for the use of such as would and should know what in
this cause ought to be performed.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE TEMPORAL LORDS OF the Q. of Englandes most
excellent privey Counsel.
It is high time (right honorable) that some order were taken for that matter
which the Q. Ambassador of Byza^ttium judged likely to turn to the good of
Criste^dome by right usage. An entrance into which business stands in
answering D. Abraham Ruben the Ebrew his Epistle. which to pas over in silence
any indifferent will judge it great profaneness. He speaks glorious things of
Gods goodness upon us. unto which if we give no acclamation, we may justly be
counted godles. The Q. also is highly extolled by him for extraordinary
breading of rare knowledge. Where, as it is profitable for the realm that she
should be counted in truth no less then in title defendour of the faith,
(which defense stands chiefly in breeding rare skill for the truth and
clearnes of the holy Scripture) so it is needful to confirm the Jews praising
in that her Divines show in worck all which his words tell: whereby the
Ambassador be not counted a Thraso for his nation, but honorable in sage
spech. Moreover the Jew made a petition honorable for the Q. to perform: and
such as she may not deny without open contempt of Christianity: That one might
be sent to Consta^tina able to direct the Jews willing to learn Christianity.
It is reported in Germany that this Doctor has turned full many to our faith:
who if they be not well directed will turn to many by ways. And the nation
that setleth them should find Eternal blessing of God, and honor among men.
An other petition also he has as profitable for our nation: as nedeful for
Jews: and pleasant for a man of Learning to undertake. He requesteth a full
treatise for the Scripture and against the Law of traditions or Talmud. Here
great matter of infinite use might be handled, for both testaments, their
tongues and copy, (how they show Gods wisdom and quick eye) and their story
pithily compact, with Christianity breathing through all. So for Jews
traditions, the Ierusalemy Talmud might be printed, with approbation for their
examininge of much text, but in such points as Rabbines wrest, to defeat S.
Stephen, Acts. 7. who truly says that after Idolathrous Terahs death Abraham
was called from Charan: and to disgrace S. Paul geving Saul and Samuel 40.
years they most impudently give Samuel but 11. and Saul bare two: against
their own grant upon Midras tillin Psalm. 24. So to defeat the Jubilees that
they fall not upon our Lords death, which one poinct falling out from the
partition of the Land by fifties unto redemption makes all past gainsaying,
here to work disturbance they confound all. So where Gabriel tells an end of
Circumcision, sacrifice, and all Moses and the Gentiles calling into equal
covenant: there of malice they wander exceedingly. And for the family of
David to disgrace S. Luke and S. Matthew, they forge vanity. For all such they
should be confuted. And generally for all their traditiones: whereof they that
once were lawful, had express limitation when they should end. And all their
own additions were foolish or nedeles. For these every Massecheth or treatise
might be confuted. This far reaches the Jews Epistle, that which I have
seen. His desire of awnswer appears in that he wrote a second: which the Post
of Strasburge has lost. The iourneys of it are so far examined. Your honors
must show what you mean to do in this case. Religion with policy, as I trow,
forbid you to neglect it. If your honors think otherwise; that I may
discharge my self, and make away for other states to thinck upon this same
cause, I trust your Lordships will not be offended that I print this Letter in
sundry languages. Thus I commend your HH. to God, as you regard his H. and
Christianity commended unto you. BASIL, 29. Iulij, 1599.

Your Lordships to command, HVGH BROVGHTON.

TO THE METROPOLITAN, THE NEXT in England to the Queen* exalted may be her
Majesty.
YOur soul knows full well how often you have beheld my Letters for the
affairs of a man of esteem Rabbi Abraham Ruben an Ebrew, a special Lawier in
Jews Lerning: whom we must regard, as he loves our nation, and affords
honorable speches of our Queen, more then any one of milions: and also seeks
the honor of our nation, and estimation for the lerning of our people in
singular hartiness. Notwithstanding until this very day I heard no word from
you, but that which others spoke upon heresay: whereon no hold is to be taken,
that you would give me allowance sufficient to awnsweare the Jew. And now
because I have been long a pilgrome without awnsweare now these two years
days: and could have made a great volume before this, and left mine own
business to be employed for the use of the Church, I thought good to demand of
you before the Eyes of this soonne what you purpose for awnswear to the people
of the King of Thogarma^ And I will stay yet a little tine while, watching what
you will speak in the end. Although he wrote unto my baseness, I am not of
authority to answer, because his writing went upon matters of your trade. And
all the while you hold your peace, none may meddle with this business. Therefore
I am in great expectation that you will not hold your peace: but take the
matter in hand: or will say, that you find none in the Kingdom which be men of
understanding, and of settled affection for this work: and will search for
them from some other place where they may be found. For he is not a speaker of
light matter: and his spech is not of e^mpty and vain sound: but he minds
things of chief regard: his heart utters good matter: he desires in his
works the kingdom of heaven: and his pen is the tongue of an amiable writer.

Your eyes have been the beholders of sundry former letters, and you have marked
them. Yet you may here also consider the effect of his words: that you may
perceive whether great blame were in ye for delay hitherto as though ye had
be^ weak of judgment, and you will weigh my words whether they give
advertisement of right. In the beginning he speaks highly of God his blessing
upon us, in the corners of the earth: how he creates the fruct of lips to
heavens peace, a far off: and from the corners of the earth he has heard of
songs of honor in true justice. Should not we all for this join to him with
as good spech in the prophets allegories and say of God. He has geven in the
wilderness Ceder, The Tabernacles Sittah tree, and myrtle, and oil wood, and
set in the desert, the Pitys and the Box also: that we may see and understand,
and mark, and perceave that the hand of the Eternal has done this for us. It
was our duty to have uttered with sage carriage: that the mercies of God upon us
pass all spech: and it has not been done under the heaven as Gods co^passiones
were showed upon the people of Britanie: if God had geve^ us an heart to
consider his doings. The Rock of my heart knows that since I received the
little book of the humane Rabbin I have been ready to take the matter in hand:
as in hand it must needs be taken. And if I went to the couch of my bed, if I
geve sleep to my eyes, or slumbering to my liddes without thinking upon an
awnswear unto the Jew for the praises of our God, let my hand forget to rule a
pen, and let my toungue cleave to the ruff. But it was not for me to speak, as
with the realms consent, much or little, without public auctority: nor to
preve^t you in your own office. Furthermore, the party has writ ten most
honorable praises concerning the Prince among nations, our sovereign Lady:
and he would make her the glory of all the earth. There has been none, there is
none, there will be none hereafter, a prayser of her highness, such as he showed
himself. And although my pen found her all this praise, with the children of
the East, yet I am not fit to awnswer for the majesty of the Q. because I am
of no place among you, notwithstanding the many and great preferments the
Queen had to give: and sent me word from the LL. by S. Iul. C. that I should
chose honorable preferments. Notwithstanding if it be the Queens pleasure to
appoint me for this charge: then will I go about heartily, to set forth the
honor of her highness, as the golden head of her kingdom: and I will not suffer
the sons of the East to be amazed: that there is no Patron to this cause
among all sturdy hearts of Britanie.

A digression to awnswere a libeller, that the Jews Epistle should be forged.
I will here digress from translating: to meet with some readers opinion. For,
some say: Many in London are persuaded that the Jews Epistle was forged. For
Wolf the Printer printed so much: and many countenanced the auctour of that
fame: as D. Cosen, named in it, and M. Kuph, and Barker, that from the stage
came to Paul's cross, and N. Scrivener, and stationer Ox. and M. Lively, and
stationer Iacson, and A. w. and S. w. and He that durst write so against a true
Epistle sent in Ebrew, to disgrace him that should defend the general cause
should be as great a slave as ever Satan captived: A Purgopolyneicen Menechmus,
Knaviter impudent, a brainsick woodcok, and a lunatique fool, a new Julian
Apostata, as allowing sacrifice to be lawful in Vespasianes wars, and toying
with the name CHRIST, as not our Lords name, but common politic: Dan. 9. and
denying that Prophecy had prefixed time for our Lords birth, baptism, or
death, or for ending of Ceremonies. No better could he be that should write
untruly that the Jews Epistle was forged: and the believers of such should
deserve to be blowe^ up with powder: But some Barrabas recorded thus: The Jews
Epistle saluteth you as you feygne. Till this be proved a slander, none should
think upon awnswear. And Vladislaus could not give Turks more offense, and
victory, then the forger or slaunderer here. Thus reasonable men have thought.
My awnswer is: that the Turkey Merchantes know, that the Jew does acknowledge the
Epistles to be his: and Greeks told them that the Rabbin highly commends so
much awnswer as he had: and a Middelburgean went from me, and much for my sake
to him: to whom he acknowledged the Epistle: and told him that the second which
he sent and came to England, was the very same in a new copy: least the first
had perished. Now a rude Jew, by I. C. setting him on, translated that: so,
either men be extremly void of lerning, or full of impudency: and should abide
Vladislaus punishment, for them selves and for such as fight for them, as many
have been noted quickly gone. Besides the libeller forged an whole letter, to
play the villain: and skopheth Arc. wh. yelding that to descend to Hell in the
Creed, is by co^sequent to ascend unto Paradise: and rayleth upon D. B. his
defenders, saying, that none by Scripture may deny that our L. went hence to
Paradise: and he libelled, when he hoped for great ruin, matter for bad men:
of whom some openly break out, in hope of his libelled assistance. All this may
convict the party to be in all badnes and madness: till he bring a bar.

Lo, This answer is plain. Now I will return to translate: how in the former
the Jew talks of our happiness through the blessings of the al sufficient: and
of the high and great dignity of our Q. (...) (by him) as the sun* and as
terrible as a camp. After this the Jew makes a petition for a matter grateful
to him, thankful among us: a matter honorable, and nothing onerable. His soul
desired to obtain from England some teachers of justice: which might guide al
Ebrewes who delight in the shelter by Christ. and flee to repose al their hope
under the wings of the Eternal majesty. For it is to be feared lest their
way-pathes turn to be crooked, for want of a guide and directer: and come to be
of no worth, and decline in their voyage with tottering feet, and seek not the
Eternal by the right path. Oh that his petition befell him, and Oh that the
Mighty would give him his desire. Truly gref parcheth me that the Brestcare of
judgment is gone from us, that we keep back spech of holy truth, and contemn
his petition, and restrain the request of his tongue: and withold the Ma^na
from his meaning. Oh that my ways were fit for a journey as this my soul
brayeth after the streams of water, for the honor of our nation, and for the
divine glory of our ends of the earth, the possession of the Sone in who^ so
many as trust are sure of happiness. How honorable is the name of Constantine
for his diligence and care and busi thoughts to call nationes unto the
mountain of the Lord, the celestial Sio^, and unto the Jerusalem which comes
down from an high: our histories show how he wrote and sent to Spain and
India, careful for East and Weast. If we come of his mothers kindred, flesh of
his flesh, and bone of his bone, shall not we go after his steps in the
steps of Christ? Is not our soverai^ Lady our motherlik Sarah, and a new
Helena? There must be sent a messinger to the Virgin sea of Elisa that shall be a
builder of the holy city. My hope is the L. will not despise, nor your Grace.
she will not disdain to send unto the city of Co^sta^tin an Orator that can
handle the Law, aD. of divinity and an Eva^gelist. For the mighty Emperor the
king of Thogarmah desired to know the force of our religion and to see how the
high Jerusalem is built among us, which is paved with all preciousnes: her
stones make a foundation of Saphires: The windows are of the Chaldy Chalcedon
or Carbuncle: and the gates of Crystal stones: and pleasant stones are in all
her borders. When he sees how beautiful our city is, he will have a desire
to dwell with us in peace. Your wisdom knows well what the words of the
Ambassador closly touched concerning an hope exceeding great. We might bring
all to pass by the help of God, and our purpose should not be hindered. And if
we could turn him to our side, what goodly dwellinges had we recovered, what
pleasant soyles had come again to us: as streams spread abroad: as a garden
upon a river. As the Santall which God planted: as the Cedres by the waterside.
We feel that he is a mighty King: and has the strength of the Rhinoceros.
The mountains of the East obey him and principal nations have been tamed of
him. And who would linger, or faint, or be weary in affairs for so great a
personage. If we set one, the Almighty will furnish with strength: and will
increase might, where little at the first was. And if our success be good, we
should ridd our side of much harm: and his strength would turn to be our
perpetual mighty strength. And touching this Jew, news upon news ru^ne and
tidinges upon tidinges, showed by letters that this Rabbin has drawn many
with him to hear the whistling of the flocks of Christ. If that be true, our
duty requires we settle them: and to confirm them, lest their feet stumble,
and their steps slide, and some of them turn unto heresies. Moreover I think
that the second Epistle which perished at Strawesburge, declared more
oboundantly the counsel of the heart of the Rabbin, and cried out to find some
coning doctor, to teach readily the frame of all the bible. And it were an easy
matter to teach them all this: and it should be a glory for our Queen, and as
long as the Moon primeth for ever and ever. And this much for the journey unto
the City of Constantina.

At the last the Ebrewes desire was to find so much favor as that he might
have from us a treatise of the written word: what consent and perfection the
Bible had. The handling of this requires also a confuting of the Thalmud
geven, as Jews say, by word of mouth from man to man. Here he made an high
petition, and requested very deep matter And he knew well enough what costly
studies must be joined together for this compass of lerning. At the first all
the Scripture must be abridged, and the accidents: the incorruption of the
text: what tongues the Bible has: what ground we have for understanding the
tongue of the Law: and the joining of all books into one body: and how the
glory of Christ and his salvation does breath through every several parcel.
After this must come the Thalmudiques, Jews works: upon the Law, Prophets,
and Hagiographa. So the ground of translation soundly should be manifested. It
is known and famous how the congregation of Romistes fights to overthrow the
pureness of the Text: also they deny the Ebrew characters form now, to be
Mosaicall, and deny the vowels to be Mosaicall, and say, the eight hundredth
forty eigh margent readinges, check the text as corrupt And thus before the
simple folk, the Pope has fell, cast down, and overthrowe^ the glory of the
Prophets. Against such dealinges we should set forth the honor of the volumes
written, by the Messingers of God, our doctor, and our teacher of justice: and
to combat with them which say there is corruption or alteration in the Prophets
Text. And their spech does spare a truth. For the congregation of the learned
Jews returned from Babel, men of light, pure, abundant, mighty, have set up
marks and a wall about the Law to keep it sincere and sound. The Jew knows
this full well. Yet to show our consent with him, this matter must be handled.
So we shall besene not to have any mind of agreement and fellowship with them
which say, the Original, (Ebrew or Greek) is corrupted. Moreover touching the
New Testament we must needs declare wherefore it was written in the tongue of
the sons of Iaphet: and how God acquainted the Jews by little and little to
take the tongue of their neighbors. So Ezra records certain Epistles in the
tongue of Aram Genesis 10. used in Chaldea and Persia. So Daniel wrote half his
book in Arams tongue. And afterward the Septuaginta did set over the holy
volume into the tongue of Iavan. notwithstanding all this the Jews do greatly
marveile even unto this day why the New Testament was not written in the Jews
language: (or tongue of Chanaan. Es. 19.) and thy have forgotten what their old
Doctors say: in the Thalmud Ierusalemy, in Megilah fol. 71. They shall in time
speak in the tongue of Iapheth in the house of Sem. This thing is a great
matter: and goodly to be showed how it is come to pass. So, to show directly
all the drift of the Scripture, this labor will require travel. For the Jews
in this argument rely upon the Misnayoth or Thalmudiques. But you and your
fellows upon our S S. Doctoures. And if you so deal with the Jew, he and his
people would despise us all. Here I will show my poor opinion, what should be
done for declaration of the wisdom of our faith, according to the expectation
of the King of Turkey handled in the Jews Epistle. For I have reason to think
that by the Kings commandment, and not of him self, he would write as he did.
Thus the case stands. When we expound the Law, we must search carefully, the
propre force of every word so well as we can: and so we must bring the best
sense that we can. For every commandment little or great, must be weighed with
the balance of the heart. For the heart has common judgment planted from the
wisdom of the Eternal God. Now if common judgment cannot bear the speech: or
if it go against common sense, then must we seek a trope from some other place
of the Law or holy scripture. For the common judgment graven in the mind, that
is the ground of all expositiones. And all nations agree in that. For the Angel
betwixt man and God is the light wherewith he was lightened at his coming into
the world. And upon this ground all our religion is settled. And we must needs
handle this fully for the Eastern nations. And this much for the Scriptures,
how the meaning should be opened. There remains a labor of long wings,
for joining of all the books: from their beginning with the creation of the
world, unto the end of the last book: which is called the Revelation of S.
John, which seals up all. The joining of the curtines in the Tabernacle was
not better fastened with stringes or clasping together, then all the books one
enter into the other. And three books specially are full of the brightness of
Christ, and beams of his glory: the book of Daniel, The foreworke Gospel, and
the vision of S. John. How denty unto the palate be their words? how sweet
unto the soul be their speches? They are more worth then Gold, and much Fess
Ore, and sweter then honey and the dropping of the comb. For Daniel showed how
Michael stood for his people under Babel, Madaj, Macedon and the Kings of the
North, with the Kings of Egypt. how they walked in an image; became as chaff:
were eaten up of fire. But the people of Christ was still saved, and they who
feared God were more honored in Babel then ever any should have been under the
Kings of Judah. Also they were taught of the very day when Christ who was holy
above the sons of David, should consecrate himself for us. Yea all nationes
knew, when the King of glory should come into the worle. Also, Flavius
Josephus, beside his testimony that Christ arose again the third day, he
confesses that in his days expectation was of a King who should reign over
all the world. Also Romans wrote in the same sort. And all this bred from the
book of Gracious Daniel, whose vesiones are sweteness it self, and his
expositiones are as clear as crystal, concerning what should befall the
Jews, until the Redeemer came into the world. Also the Greeks record all
that Daniell prophesied, to have fallen out. And as he himself showed in work
the force of his name, when he transposed one Letter to make Balat Esh, tzar,
he has broken out a fire to the foe, and showed that there none Bell, Tash,
Azzar, Bell a storer of wealth: but Bell he is a fire of sorrow to his worshippers
and the God of Heaven is Tash Atzar, the storer of wealth: as he calls his
name and the Chaldea^s King his name how they agree with Gods present judgeme^t
then: that the very letters placing should be regarded: so Heathen stories
record, that his prophecies be true, and the matters which he wrote of be
famously known among them: as the fall of Babel, of Paras, of Alexanders
house, and all the wars of the Kings of the North, and the Kings of Egypt:
and all their marriages how they were mingled in the seed of man, and cleaves
not together till the Romans bestript them of their Kingdoms by the year that
Christ came into the world, and was borne in Bethlechem Iehuda, in the reign
of Augustus. Any simple man might see the wisdom of our faith, if a ready
Doctor should teach him the Prophecy of Belat Esh Tzar. Daniel Tash Aozar, had
laid up store full great: and he is, as it were a bridge from the end of the
captivity unto the days of Christ. And thence springes the Gospel of the
four Evangelistes, Matthew, Marc, Luke, John. They are as the four beasts, in
the head of whose books is the similitude of the Throne, of the Kingdom of
David: and on the similitude of the Throne, the similitude of a man in deed. He
is Christ. They have declared in few words the perfect knowledge of God with
the Spirit of fire and judgeme^ts and a fiery Law was with their disciples.
How goodly are the steps of Christ in their story, how precious are his
works and wonders: his right hand wroght valiantly to subdue the old enemy,
that he should not deceave the sons of Adam. They have gathered all the
sweetenes of all the Prophets to honor the honorable in strength, since the
coming of the son of man with the clouds of heaven: and after his
resurrection, he went unto the ancient of days, and was brought before him,
and to him was geven power and honor and kingdom, and all people nations and
tongues worshipped him. Those things have they written, and their true words
be as light spread upon the mountains. Also John in the Revelation builds the
high Jerusalem: after that Christ had destroyed the lower. And he testifies
that the covenant for all nationes made them the servantes of God in every
country under Heaven. Only as in Daniel the saints of the most high Trinity,
were always in affliction, so while the world endures, all that desire life of
the world to come, the world of recompense, shall be whittened and purified,
through distress and anguish. Moreover he comprehends the four beasts of
Daniel a new by like dealinges in one beast compou^ded of the four first: and
the dealinges of this beast will be stirring until light and darkness have their
end. These things gracious John sets forth. Your high honor shall
wonderfully advaunce the glory of the Gospel if you afford a declaration of
these three works in particular concerning the brightness of the light of
Christ: whose glory covers the heavens, and his praise fills the Earth. And
furthermore of Christ you have an heavenly matter of spech. His bars reach
through all the curtines of the holy Scriptures: Into which, breath of life is
inspired, unto salvation: as he has been the hope of the ancient Fathers
since Adam was set upon the earth: a bruser of the old serpents head. Also he
is properly Melchisedek, King of Justice and King of peace: in whom all the
families of the Earth should be blessed. And he is the unblemished Lamb, and by
his blood we are redeemed: and God gave him for our sins: but he shall sit
upon the Throne of David for ever: and he at the time prefixed was killed to make
reconciliation for sin: and he confirmed the covenant for the many, that is,
for all nationes, and he arise and destroyed city and temple, to make an
heave^ly city that Jerusalem which comes down from heaven. Great grace may be
showed in a true narration for all these poinctes. The joy of heart in all the
readers will be pleasant and permanent, when they go throw Law, Prophet, and
Hagiographa. No old gold can match the price; no silver can be wayed to the
value, it cannot be peised with Ophirs Cethem, with the precious Beryll or
(Isachars) Saphir. Doubtless a learned man, and eloquent Orator, one of a
thousand, which could expound from the Apostles according to the brightenes of
their words, how all depends upon the salvation of Christ: and how there is
no other name under heaven for which God gave charge to give honor for the
world to come, by one book of direction here, should be of high price, and
delightful full of comfort and esteem. The joys and price would match all
Jewels: and vessels of Fess Gold would be geven for it. The gold and Crystal
would not match it: the Ramoth and Gabish stones should not be regarded as it.
And all this does the learned Rabbin comprehend: who listened what will be
awnsweared from England, and geveth all heed of attention. The last petitiones
contained closly the Thalmudiques. For them a learned book should be made, to
allow the right, and to damn the wrong: while the Apostles manner is showed:
how they handle Moses 613 Laws: and all their speches are called to those
common places: so to show all their words, rule upon rule, rule upon rule: line
upon line, line upon line, how they rule the Thalmudiques. A lively man of good
valor would perform all this. The King of Togarmah or Turkey, wished, desires,
and would have the knowledge of our faith: the Queen's Ambassador is the
reporter: a Jew wrote it again and again: we hahe the praises of our God and of
our Queen: he calls for a guide: he has geven us the honor asking
instruction of us.

And now the eyes of all look upon you, low and high mark you, what you will
awnswear for the glory of our God and Kingdom, and wisdom of our nation. All
Kings in the world will mark, how you will carry this matter: whether to glory
and honor for ever, or to eternal shame and reproach.

To the christian Reader.
FOr better understanding of this Turkey cause, a narratio^ of the whole matter
may be added. There was one M. Ed. Barton made the Queen's Agent at Constantina,
called Byzantium* before Constantin our glory, hating the Idols of old Rome,
removed the Empire seat thither, and called it Constantines city, and new Rome.
This Agent there being a special wise man grew in great favor with the great
Turk: whose mother, as report is, was a Jew. Also he fell into acquaintance
with the chief Rabine* of the Jews Synagoge: to whom he had expounded the book
of Scripture consent: as the Jew himself in effect records: and greatly moved
him to affect Christianes. Now L. Barton, the Rabbin, and the Iewess Queen
mother, all three dealt with the Turk to consider that all Turks perish for
ever: and how unnatural a thing it was for a Father to have his Funeral
celebrated with the death of an exceeding great troop of Sons: and told how
Christianity were better: and by peace with the Emperor and change of
countries, his sons might be among Christianes, and their Princes sons
would gladly dwell in his territories. The Turk began to consult how his own
side could be brought to that. Then L. Barton gave him this intelligence: that
there was one in England: who from a child had night and day studied the Ebrew
Bible with all Iudaique Hebrews: and the Grek holy Testament Equally,
expounding the tongue and matter of the old Testament, with all kinds of Greek
auctours: which in the university he professed, after one years abode there.
For he was of his acquaintance, and knew all his affairs. Then he bad ^^nd for
him: and he should teach in Ebrew or Greek, in what Church ^e would in Byzantio:
with safe guard, and all countenance: that by Jews and Greeks assent, the
Genisares might come to their Parents faith, and be glad to live for a better
hope. All Germany knew, that in the Turks court strange alteration was: and
he suffered Buda ^nvictualed three days: that it might have been taken: but that
our General stayed to have the Duk Mathias to come thither to have that glory:
But before his coming it was victualled. This and L. Bar^ons auctority as
Mardochais Germany knew. Now to allure the Christian thither the learned Jew
is set on. He shows him self ^o be as learned a Rabbin as any in the world.
Co^stantinopole Jews ^ccused by Chrysostom very wisely from Dan. 12. by
sundry very learned narrations, that therein God reckoning the very days of
An^iochus rage, as for the 400. years affliction Genesis 15. and for the 70. in
Babylon Jeremy 25. would not suffer them void of time limited in ^urther
affliction from God, those Byzantian Jews still provided for the chief city, a
chief Rabbin: as for Jerusalem and Nehardeah, in Mesopotamia upon Euphrates.
Th^se three places have the chief Rabbines in the world. And he of
Constantinopole shevved him ^elf such. He writes an Epistle full of Rabbish
elegancy. And with more reverence then any Jew might give a Christian, that
forsook ^ot his own side. For they have a Canon, that, none seek Physik of
(...) Christian for body or soul, in Maymony. The sum of his letter was, that
the party would come to Byzantian Rome, to bestovv his Ebrevv ^tudies among
Ebrevves: and not live where none knevv their use. He should be a Ietro to the
Jews, in their wilderness. And he should ^ule all Divinity schools there. It
had been death to him to have writ^en so unless the Turk bade him: and the
Jews in all places had sone ^en his accusers. This Epistle was sent to
England, as a little book: to ^ALD. STAPERS, by L. Barton, writing that if the
party came to Constantinopolin it might turn to the good of Christendom.
These fevv words might tell all not Athea^ by envy, what the matter was. The
LL. savv it: and none of their scholars could read it, as it has strange
writing, and a style most strange. Archb. wh. bade that it should be sent to
me. I was then at Basil. I left England, being persecuted for sayng, that
Barovv and Greenvvood were pardon for all, as they were, but for denying that
our L. went to Hell. And the very Jesuits of Mentz in a Grek letter to my self
say: the Church never believed that our L. went to worse lodge then the Fathes
had. All living are superi, all dead inferi: and against Epicures we confess
our L. went to inferos, the souls departed. Before execution of Barovv and
greenvvood two days B. Elmer requested a chaplein of N. N. to request me from
him, to talk with the two bent to die: saying, as sure as I live, if he talk
with them, he will save their life. The Chaplein promised to move me, but did
not. Otherwise he had requested me by an other. But the Chaplein had rather
two should dye: then N. should be detected, what imprisonment and coile his
Gehe^na kindled: as his slime still rages in the same badnes and madness,
vvishing as Nero that all might be killed at a blovv that is not of their
heresy. To be revenged of him, requesting leave of my L. keeper, I went over
sea, and at Midelburg I printed of the Kings Right: and of the Grek Credes
phrase: that by Heathen, 70. Apostles, or Thalmudizing Greek, it never meant
more or less in writers of esteem, then to go hence to God. And that in the
Godly it was all one with this: to ascend into Paradise. From Middelburg I went
to Helvetia for this cause. An Helvetian told me there, that the Pope had sent
one D. Pistorius to dispute, that the Scripture was corrupt: and therefore the
Church must judge: and if our half would not yield to that: he would fortify his
side to fell ours. The Helvetian told me, that foyling him I should hinder
wars. I went thither: he provoked me, upon occasion of spech, being at
Fribourge, when I was in Basil 20. miles off. I wrote to him in Grek wherein he
gloried: how he was led amiss. He three days after commended my poor studies
most highly to our Tigurines: who sent me his letter: but in the end, he wrote
in Greek, he would not dispute. That was showed to the Popes Captains: then
they said: so our co^missio^ for war cesseth: seeing the Popes D. is broken. A
learned man Lodovicus Lucius will testify and swear this: and the LL. of
Berne, Zurick, and Basil offered all sufficient: hut I told I was bent to an
other. This was my basil voyage where I printed the two Eb. Epistles.

Finis.

