A SERMON PREACHED AT THE ASSIZES, HOLDEN AT WINCHESTER the 24. day of
February last, before Sir LAVRENCE TANFEILD Knight, Lord Chief Barron of the
Exchequer, and Sir RICHARD HVTTON Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas.

By ABRAHAM BROWN Prebend: of the Cathedral Church of WINTON.

NOLI ALTVM SAPERE printer's device of Edward Allde

LONDON: Printed by Edw. All-de. 1623.

TO SIR LAVRENCE TANFEILD KNIGHT, LORD Chief Barron of the Exchequer; and Sir
RICHARD HVTTON Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas.
Beloved in the Lord:
I Was requested very earnestly by a right Worshipful person, that he might
have a Copy of my Sermon, Preached at the Assizes at Winchester: another put
me in mind of publishing it, and a Dedicatorie Epistle required. To answer
all these; if I publish it, I shall satisfy in exhibiting the Copy requested:
And albeit I am not over earnest to have it published, yet I may suppose, that
that part of the Sermon which is against the Mass (the thing most of all
respected in the speech) may serve among other Writings for the confutation of
that pretended sacrifice. But for Dedicatory Epistle, to whom more properly and
of right does it appertain then to your Honors? (if it may please you to
accept of it) your selves being the most principal persons in the Auditorie,
most judicious to discern all things then spoken: and being acquainted with
pleadings in Law, may judge what validity our reasonings have in matters of
Religion. The pleadings in Law are ingenious, and ought to be very
demonstratiue, strong in proof, that things may be evidently cleared before
they come to sentence: yet this difference, that in Law-pleadings one pleads
against another; In our matters one speaks, and no man in the place must
contradict: yet we must not be in that respect more bold, but more
circumspect; for God hears, and many witnesses. What I have said against the
Mass, I have read, and resolutely approve to be the truth: and if shortness
have made obscurity or weakness of proof, or insufficiency in a matter of
so great importance; when it shall be replied, by Gods grace I will strengthen
the Arguments, and give more abundance of testimony accordingly, as things are
by me alleged. In pleading against the Mass, above all other controversies in
Religion, your Honors are very competent and convenient Judges. For with you
are handled cases of restitution, if any thing be taken away: matters of trust
to be performed: alienations of things in that respect, and alterations not to
be admitted, voluntas testatoris, the testators will especially to be regarded,
the ends proposed in grants to be observed: that if the Mass Priest, were put
to his trial at your judgment seat, he should receive the very same judgment
I have set upon him. He must restore the Table he has taken away, place it
again in the midst of the Church as our common Prayer book allows, that
it may be farther from an Altar, or (if not) to have such a judgment as to be
a Table and not an Altar; he must restore the great Loaf he has taken away,
having put in steed of it a thin Wafer Cake, the knife must be brought again,
alienation must be recalled: that the Priests only must not participate,
alteration forbidden, and to minister under both kinds, the end prescribed by
our testator to be kept, even by eating the Bread, and drinking the Cup, to 1.
Cor. 11. 2.
show forth the Lords death until he come. For the Mass is a new invented
Religion, and as it is said in Schools, Vno absurdo dato mill sequuntur, Grant
one absurdity and a thousand will follow: so is it with the Mass Priest, one
absurdity has bred many absurdities; he has invented a mystery, and yet his
mystery keeps not the rule of such mysteries as are in the old Testament,
which should be the pattern for all mysteries. And again, as his mystery
agrees not with the Scriptures, so the Mass Priests intention agrees not
with his Mass book: that as it is said, he that is out of the way the faster
he runs the farther he is out; so is it with the Mass Priest, once out,
never in. The Mass Priests dealing (in respect of God and in respect of the
people) is like a tenure in England which I have heard of, where the Tenant
makes proffer of a Present to his Landlord, but delivers it not, that the
chief Lord may say unto him, I thank you for nothing. For concerning God, the
foolish Mass Priest understands not, that that which is the Priests portion,
and that which the Priest eats, (as it is in the Leuiticall Offerings) is not
the Sacrifice, but that which is burnt is Gods offering, and the blood
sprinkled at the mercy seat, is the atonement: but he eats all his
offerings, drinks up all in his Chalice, and rinceth his Chalice, that he may
be known to drink all, that God may say to him I thank you for nothing: But
as for the people, they may all the year long (excepting once a year when he
receives but half) say to him we thank you for nothing. And for the Mass
Priests intention not to agree with his Mass book it is as evident. For his
prayers are in the plural number: and he intends himself only. Again, he
prays to God, only that the oblation which the whole family had offered
(meaning the Bread and Wine which the brethren had offered, part whereof was to
serve for the Communion) might be made the Body and Blood of his most beloved
Son Jesus Christ. And upon it brings in the Institution, which is for taking
and eating: but he intends not, but offering of Christ himself for a
propitiatory sacrifice; not marking that a body broken and bloodshed is already
sacrificed; and what is once sacrificed cannot be sacrificed again. Therefore
our Savior sitting in person at the supper, delivered his Body broken as
already sacrificed, and his Blood shed, to prevent a Mass Priest for to offer
him: For his sacrifice as a Doctor of the Church Gregorius Nazianzenus.
says, is, insacrificabile sacrificium, a sacrifice that cannot be sacrificed
again. Besides these absurdities, this is also not to be ouer-skipped, that
when he says Ite missa est, Go your ways, it is dismissing time; the speaker
means that some should depart, and those that remained should communicate:
for all might have adored, if that only were intended, but all could not
communicate: but he intends no such thing as a Communion, that they that
remain must adore only, and receive nothing, that still the people may say, We
thank you for nothing: The truth is, the old prayers which are in the Mass book
are mistaken: for in the prayers, what is for offering, is to be referred to
those offerings which the disciples had offered for the maintenance of the
Church, but the mysteries of the Body and Blood of Christ, were to be received
according to our Saviors Institution: in so much that we living now by Tithes,
those prayers are out of use. More might be said, but a Dedicatorie Epistle
must not be ouerlong. The Text of my Sermon is a mattor of great observation;
short in words, but large in meditation. Let us look to the ordering of our
ways, and not so much with them to attend an unnecessary adorning of Temples
made with stone, and a false advancing of Sacraments: so shall we have better
showed us the salvation of God; and we true worshippers in spirit and truth.
The people of the land have accepted this Religion, as to pray in their mother
tongue, to offer praises in singing of Psalms, with the Preaching of the Word
if they may have it. Lamenting much when their lot is to dwell there where they
may not have it: I write what I know. The sum is, if we offer praise, and
order our ways, we shall in greater confidence look for the coming of him
which is to come, even our Lord Jesus Christ, judge to be of the quick and the
dead, unto whose grace I commend your Honors in all your judgments.

Your Honors in the Lord, ABRAHAM BROWN.

A SERMON PREACHED at the Assizes holden at Winchester.
PSALM. 50. v. 23. He that offers praise, glorifieth me, And to him that
disposes his ways aright, Will I show the salvation of God.
I Have chosen this Text in three respects; First in respect of my self being
aged, and about finishing my course, after a long service in the ministry of
the Word, that I might have such a Text, as would sum up, if not all, yet
most of my Sermons. Secondly, this being the time of the Assizes, it would be
very fitting to speak of that which will be handled at the general Assise,
which is the day of Judgment. Lastly, withal to exhibit unto you the Religion
of our Savior Jesus Christ, complete, even perfectly set out; for as much as
without which we cannot be saved.

To perform these things, I have divided my Text into three parts. The first
will concern praising of God; The second to be the ordering of ways; The
third, a showing of the salvation of God. The first of praising God, I will
make instance thereof in the Church service, that the religion of Christ in the
new Testament, may be fully discerned: And where it is said, he that offers
praise (without any exception of person) albeit the word (offers) be the act
of a Priest, yet I had rather say, that all are Priests, then to exempt any
from offering of praises, even in the Church. It is said in the Revelations of
Christ, that he has made us Chap. 1. 6.
Kings, and Priests, unto God, and his Father. And Saint Peter says, Ye as
lively stones, are built up a spiritual 1 Pet. 2. 5.
house unto God, to offer up spiritual sacrifices unto God, acceptable
thorough Jesus Christ: for albeit the burnt offerings of the old Testament are
ceased, yet we cannot be a peculiar people unto God without sacrifices: It is a
thing duly to be marked, that that part of the Temple which was called but the
Porch thereof, was twice severely reformed by our Savior, and titled by the
name of the house of God: our Savior applying that unto it, in the Prophet
Esaias, Mine Math. 21. 12. John 2. 1^.
house is the house of Prayer, and you have made it a den of thieves. And so it
follows in the mystery of the Temple, that the upper part thereof being
fulfilled by Christ, and in him personally finished in the heavens, where he is
now, and appears in the sight of God for us: Now nothing remains for us,
but only that part wherein was Prayer, and Preaching: And so that place
honored with the title of the house of God. To this, that answers that our
Savior after he was ascended, gave gifts unto men, Saint Paul naming by them,
Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 9.
no Priests; and I will say no Priests sacrificing, because all Priests.
Again, the Apostles designing out their office, go no farther then to give
themselves continually to Act. 6. 4.
prayer, and the ministry of the Word. And if their prayer be the prayer of
the Church, the unlearned must confirm it by saying Amen unto it. And they
shall be but president Priests among the Priests, offering alike praises unto
God. All the congregation offers, and they no Priests, nor good Disciples
that offer not. All our Church Service conformably for offering is, Prayers,
Confessions, and praises: for Prayer the house is named by it, and for
confessions and praises the Hebrew word in my Text is indifferent to them both:
If any man object and say, that there are more things in the Church service
then prayers, confessions, and praises, as reading of Scripture, the Pulpit
Sermons, the Lords supper also, and Baptism: To this I answer, that in all
these, God offers somewhat unto us, and not we to him: in the reading
Statutes and ordinances, with admonitious, exhortations, and threatenings, the
Pulpit secondeth these things; at the Lords Supper Christ gives and we
receive: Baptism offers the forgiveness of our sins: so nothing will be
ours but offering of Praises in the house of Prayer: unto which, God adds
this approbation, He that offers Praises glorifieth me. This assertion,
howsoever it mislike Trent Can. 3. Sess. 6.
others, it has one most vehement adversary, as decreeing in a Counsel: that
whosoever shall say that the Lords Supper is a Sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, a bare remembrance of the Sacrifice done upon the Cross, and
not propitiatory, or only to profit the receauer, neither ought to be offered
for the living, and for the dead for sins, punishments, satisfactions, and
other necessities, let Rhemes upon Heb. 7. 1^.
him be Anathama. Others say, that there is no lawful Commonwealth in the
world, that is not made a peculiar people unto God by a Priesthood,
distinguished from them that worship false Gods, or no Gods at all. This must
be answered, or we have a great defect in our Church, and my self reproved,
that take hold of these words, as if God were now content, only with a
spiritual sacrifice, saying, He that offers praises glorifieth me. And to
make answer; this Psalm containing such matter as shall be accomptable at
that day, when God will call all the world from the rising of the Sun, to the
going down of the same, unto judgment. First of all it is said, I will not
reprove Verse. 8.
thee for burnt offerings, So that we are discharged from the Leueticall
sacrifice: And then comes in these words, Offer unto God Praise, and pay thy
vows to the most Verse. 14.
high. And both these things are contained in my Text, and no more Sacrifices
then these contained in the Psalm. That which the Papists strive for, is
called by the name of the Mass: which thing bears the burden of the Church
service with them. The thing therefore offering opposition to mine assertion, I
could not but look more narrowly into the matter, and I find that this Real
sacrifice of the Mass, is not only of those things which are not named in the
Scripture, of which it is also said, Negat Scriptura quod tacet: The Scripture
denies that it speaks not of: but it is in the Scripture by strong reasons,
and arguments contradicted. And as for the Doctors of the Church, there are the
names of Priest, Sacrifice, Altar; but the thing not so: Thirdly, the practice
of the Apostolic, and Catholic Church will not bear such a thing as the
Mass is: that is by the Scripture, it is contradicted; in the Doctors a
verbal matter, a thing of words; in the practice of the Church, a nullitie, a
thing of nothing.

To make these things appear, I must first set out the Scriptures
contradicting it, even in his Mass priest, and in his sacrifice. In this
respect I will set out seven faults in the Mass, two against Christ his
Priesthood according to the order of Melchisedech, and five against his
Sacrifice on the Cross; The two faults against the Priesthood are these.

First, that the Mass Priest will presumptuously thrust himself into such a
priesthood, as is proper to an everlasting Person: and the Priesthood therefore
continued in him, not passing it over to any other, for so is the Prophecy;
Thou art a Priest for ever, according to the order of Melchisedech. And
accordingly the Prophecy is so applied, as this man because he endures for
ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood. This word unchangeable, is otherwise
translated; a continual Priesthood, or a Priesthood that passes not from one
to another; but Athanasius, a Doctor Sermon. cont. Arianos.
of the Church says: it is Sine transitione, sine successore: without passing
it over to any other, without a successor.

The second fault is, that the Mass Priest will be so bold as to be of that
order, that was made with an oath after this manner: (I have sworn and will
not repent:) for this (will not repent) will not agree with a sinner that
needs repentance, therefore said; That the Law makes Priests that have Heb.
7. 28.
infirmities, but the word of the Oath which is since the Law, makes the Son
who was perfected for evermore: such a son, as of whom the Father will say,
this is my well-beloved Math. 3. 17.
Son in whom I am well pleased, To discourse of these two points, would
require longer time then is allotted. I will pass therefore to the second
kind of faults against his sacrifice, in number five: The first thing is, that
in sacrificing he will imitate Christ sacrificing himself upon the Cross,
which thing must not be imitated in any wise. This thing may be observed that
our Savior Instituting his Supper as a remembrance of him until he come
again, gave himself as already sacrificed: that is, his body broken and his
blood shed; for the Son of God, may do as God his Father does, which calls
things that are not, as if they Romans 4. 17. Heb. 10. 14.
were: for concerning sacrificing, it is as it is said, with one oblation, he
has for ever perfected those, that are to be s^nctified. As Ambrose a Doctor
of the Church says upon that place, Si. Medicamentum forte, etc. if the
Medicine be strong once applied, it will cure all together: if with one
oblation he has perfected those that are to be sanctified, he that will be
sanctified by the repetition of the Sacrifice, says the medicine is not
strong. The second fault is, that the Mass Priest not marking the order of the
atonement in the old Testament, takes in hand a work which he cannot
possibly finish: for the atonement was not finished when the Priest in the
lower part of the Temple had offered his Sacrifice: but for to make up the
atonement, He must go up into the holy place, and sprinckle the blood Leuit.
16. 14.
upon the mercy seat: So did our Savior the Priest according to the order of
Melchisedech, when he had offered himself upon the Cross, he entered into
heaven it self, now to appear before the presence of God for us: and stands
Heb. 9. 24. Revel. 5. 6.
in the midst of the throne, as a Lamb stain: This second point of entering
into the Holy place, is far from a Mass Priest, that if he should boast
that he began, say he cannot, that according to the Leuiticalls, he has
finished an atonement. The third fault is, that to make Christ a Sacrifice, he
consecrateth an Altar, by which means he will make the better the worse, and
the greater the lesser. For in the mystery of Sacrificing, the Altar is
greater then the Sacrifice, as our Savior calls the Scribes and Pharisees
fools, and blind, saying whether is greater the gift, or the Math. 23. 19.
Altar that sanctifies the gift? True it is, the Doctors of the Church have
used this word Altar, without weighing of it; it was not seven times purified
in the fire: it may be found in them that Christ offered himself upon the
altar of the Cross: but if things must be tried by the touchstone of the
Scripture, the Cross brought nothing but curse and shame to Christ crucified.
But for sanctifying, our Savior Gal. 3. 13. Heb. 12. 2. John 17. 9. Heb 9. 14.
faith plainly, I sanctify my self, and offered himself through an
eternal, or some read it, holy Spirit, without spot, and purges our
conscience from dead works to serve the living God. The fourth fault, is
against the laytie only; unto whom he delivers Christ sacrificed when he
has not sacrificed him at all: for without bloodshedding no sacrifice, and
which is more, no forgiveness of sins. It is but a mockery to say a body
cannot be without blood: for a sacrifice cannot be without bloodshedding where
death ensues, Christ shed his blood when he was circumcised, and some
otherwise, but the Sacrifice was not finished before death was testified, even
when out of his blessed s^de issued water and blood, the vitalls of the heart:
In the John 19. 34.
primitive Church therefore, the knife that cut the bread was called Sacra
Lancea, the holy spear, as making a supposed issue of blood for the Chalice.
If God therefore should deal with the popish Laytie according to the mystery
of Sacrificing, none of them have forgiveness of their sins: And by this
means all Pardons from the Pope are frustrated, because they never are
partakers of the remitting blood of Christ: for out of the sacrifice (Blood)
not any capablenesse of pardon. The fifth fault is, that when he has made an
end of his own sacrificing, and eating of the Body and drinking of the Blood
of Christ: he puts a consecrated Cake into a Pixe at the uppermost end of
the Church close to the wall, which is not agreeable to the mystery of the old
Temple: for our Savior in the mystery of our Redemption, bearing the person of
the Mediator, represented in the incence Altar, for intercessions and prayers:
that Altar stood below and right before the Mercy seat, so 1 Kings 6. 22.
that by this means in their Church God is excluded, and if that they will say
that he is in heaven, why then is not the Mediator in Heaven, that their Church
order may be according to the truth of things? For Christ is in heaven, to make
Intercession for us. But this consecrated Cake is affirmatively made, the god
of the Christians, who in the mystery of our Christian religion is the
Mediator as Saint Paul says, one God and one Mediator: in so much that a
Counsel decreed, that the Church prayers should Con. Carthag. 3. Can. 13.
be made unto God in the name of the Mediator Jesus Christ: for albeit any
person of the Trinity, may be called upon, yet ordinarily God is to be prayed
unto, and Christ the Mediator, which in our Church book, is most commonly
observed.

But here is the scandal to Infidels of all sorts, that this is the God we
make show of, carrying him by processions in the streets, and every where
worshipped: yet the Cake has no prerogative as other things have had; as Manna
appointed by Gods ordinance to be reserved, Exodus 16. 24.
was free from corruption; that it may seem to be a strong argument that this
Cake made God, is not his ordinance being subject to mouldinesse, and the
eating of Myce: and I have read that being carried in the wind, and often
blown out of the Pixe, was clipped and made less: O indignity! that I will
say of this last point according to a phrase in the Proverbs: Six things I
hate, but the seventh (in thus abusing of our Savior) I detest and abhor, and
so end Scripture reason, and pass to the testimony of the Doctors of the
Church.

To repeat the Doctors of the Church in the multitude of their testimonies,
would be too much for a whole Sermon, much more for a piece of a Sermon: But to
prove that which I have affirmed, that the Mass is but a verbal thing in the
Doctors; and as they sport in Schools, Verum est in vocibus non in rebus, true
in words but not so in deeds: I will set out unto the Doctors an objection to
answer, and a place of Scripture to expound. The objection made against the
Christian religion was, that they had neither Temples, nor Altars, nor Images.
This objection has answer from the Doctors: the first that answers shall be
Origin, who lived 200. years after Tract. in Leuit.
Christ: and he for Altars names the heart, and our Hom. 9.
prayers for the sacrifice: Clemens Alexandrinus, an other Hom. 7.
Doctor of the Church, being about Origin his time, says non sacrificamus sed
glorificamus: we sacrifice not but glorify. In saying we sacrifice not, he
cannot forget spiritual sacrifices: therefore means such a real sacrifice
as the Mass is; and the Doctor forgets not spiritual sacrifices, when he
says we glorify, for that answers to my Text. An other Doctor of the Church
Arnobious, ^^b. 2.
living 300. years after Christ, says to the Heathens; Putatis nos occultare
quod colimus, si delubra and aras non habemus. You think that we hide that we
worship, because we have neither Temples, nor Altars. If the Christians God was
hidden, it was no where to be seen, neither in the Church, nor out of the
Church; If no Altars, no Sacrifice real, no Mass.

Cirillus an Archbishop much to be regarded in this matter, he lived about
400. years after Christ; the objection he receaueth from Julian the Apostata:
who if any real sacrifice as the Mass had been but intimated in the Church,
he would have discerned it, being once a Reader by Office in the Christian
Church: but the answer is Lata via euntes, mentalem cultum perficientes. Lib.
9. con: Julianus.
Going the broad way, we make a mental or minde-worship.

And now if you expect more testimonies: mine answer is the objection ceased
not long after him, and Christian religion was better understood with the
reasons thereof, that Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome for ought I have
read, make not the like mention thereof: And as for Justin the Martyr an
inhabitant of the City of Rome, and a Doctor of the Church most ancient, about
160. years after Christ, his Church-seruice is so like ours, that from him we
have testimony for ours.

Concerning Dionisius that ancient Doctor, as is supposed, he makes a great
show at the first of ceremonial matter, but it ends with this, the Bishop
communicates, the rest he exhorts to communicate, and concludes with
thanksgiving, and thus much for the objection.

The place of Scripture which is to be expounded by the Doctors is that in the
Prophet Malachie, where it is thus written: From the rising of the Sun, to
the going Chapter 1. 11.
down of the same, my name is great among the Gentiles, and in every place,
Incence shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering; for my name is
great among the Heathen says the Lord of hosts. This place says the Papist,
so euidenly proves the Mass, that it cannot be denied: but then I must make
the Doctors of the Church, if they so expound it not, unskillful in the
interpretation of the Scripture, preferring modern and new Writers before
them. The force of their assertion stands upon these words (pure offering)
which can agree to none but unto Christ offering: which I easily agree unto,
for our offerings if they be pure, they are but pure by a favorable grace,
being as Saint Peter says acceptable through Jesus 1. Pet. 2. 5.
Christ. But to come to the Doctors, the first that I will bring in is
Irinaeus, of whose writing they presume most: Lib. 4, cap. 32.
his words are, that our Savior gave counsel to his Disciples to offer unto
God out of his creatures, first fruits (not as if he needed them,) but that
they should not be unfruitful, or unthankful. That which is bred of his
creatures, he took it, and gave thanks saying, This is my Body, and the Cup
likewise, that which is of that creature, and is with us confessed to be his
Blood, and taught the new oblation of the new Testament, which the Church
taking from the Apostles in the whole world, offers unto God.

These words to him that is affected to the Mass, may seem to sound some such
thing, but he is deceived: for albeit the words of the Lords Supper be brought
in, as that he said of the Bread* that it was his Body, and confessed the Wine,
to be his Bl^od, yet the body of Christ, and his Blood, are not the offerings;
which a Priest must only offer; but the Bread only and the Wine are the
offerings, which not Priest but Disciples offer.

In the primitive Church therefore the Disciples offered at the Table, new
Corn, Grapes, Oil, and Frankincense; and these decreed by a Bishop of Rome to
have the V^b^^^us.
name of oblations: that now I will conclude against the Mass, that so learned
a Doctor coming so near the Lords Supper, as bringing out the words of the
Institution, and handling so curiously withal, the place of the Prophet
Malachy, yet not hit upon the Mass sacrifice: surely it may be well supposed
the Mass was not in his days. To proceed to the rest, for of these Offerings
the Bread and Wine are not the Body, and Blood of Christ, but the materials of
the things, as the Doctor says, which God has no need of, we have, I mean
Christ himself: So the oil was for Lamps, may be as the Frankensence for
odours; That at the first had so the name of Offerings, that the Mass Priest
may mistake them in the Canon of his Mass, to be the things he strives for.
Tertullian is Aduersus Iudae^s.
the next Doctor, he says, that the pure sacrifice is a spiritual sacrifice,
and a pure conscience: Chrysostom says, it is the mystical Table, and the
reverent sacrifice upon it. In Psalm. 95.
This is it you will say, but the Doctor says, it is done without an Altar,
then not sacrificed by us, but offered as already sacrificed by Christ: for if
no Altar then no Mass. Hierome that Doctor says, it is the prayers of the
Saints. Eusebius says, it is religious Hymns, and holy Prayers: De d^menstr.
L. 1. c. 10. Contra Iuli. l. 9. De ciuit. l. 20. c. 25. In Heb. chapter 8. In Malac.
Cyrillus says, it is meant of Christians worshipping God every where.
Augustine that Doctor interprets it of Saints offering themselves: Ambrose
says, our heavenly Altar is our faith, in which we offer our daily Prayers:
Theodoret does expound the place of spiritual sacrifices: These Doctors being
the most famous Doctors of the Church, and all in their Expositions, not
hitting upon the Mass, how can it then be true, that this place cannot be
otherwise expounded, then of the Mass? But I suppose S. Paul, the Doctor of us
Gentiles, does expound the place, where he says, I will therefore that men
pray exery 1. Tim. 2. 8.
where, lifting up holy hands, and as it is translated) pure hands without
wrath, or doubting. And thus for the Doctors of the Church, and to the Papists,
I say, they are rather in this matter, Sophisticae verborum quam Discipuli
veritatis: Sophisters of words, not Disciples of the truth: As one said to a
Jesuit in the Council of Trent, that he had taught them to use Sophistry in
the simplicity of Christ's Religion.

But to avoid all Sophistry, I make a third trial, which is the practice of
the Church: where I say the Mass is a nullity, even a nothing; and here I make
use of the Plea at Common Law: where when an ancient Grant is in question,
they enquire after the Vsier of it, as they term it: how that was continued
from the first time of the Grant: The like will I do in my Plea against the
Mass: And I will ask the Mass Priest, where his Altar stood in old times?
and I will answer him my self, for it stood in the middle of the Church: What
else? it had railes about it, and those called the Chauncell. What was upon it?
I answer a great Cake, or Loaf. What besides? a knife, called sacra lancea,
the holy Spear, besides also other Chrysostom. Liturgy.
dishes. What was done there? I answer the Bread and Wine was delivered to
them that reached out their hands to receive it. In what garments did he stand?
I answer, the Apostles and their successors (as it is confessed by Eus^b.
lib. 7. 18. Rosar. B. Mariae.
themselves, celebrated in quotidianis vestibus, in the garments they ware
every day. This being the Vsier in ancient times: Now I will ask a Mass
Priest whether this be his Mass or not? and withal, I will bid him come down
from his Altar, and stand at a Table, in the midst of the Church, with a
great Cake, or Loaf upon it, his knife by it, and then say (if he can say so)
we are of a new Religion. And now I will answer when the old Religion went
out, even when the Table that stood in the middle of the Church, even a board
Table, was turned into a stone Altar, placed at the upper end of the Church,
the loaf of Bread turned into a little round thin Wafer-Cake, and the knife
out of use: and holy vestments devised for the Priest; confessed therefore it
must be, that the Mass is a latter, and a new invention, not the Institution
of Christ: And if you ask when this was done? let the Mass Priest tell it:
for a man will come by his goods, though he cannot tell when, and at what time
the Thief stole it. But he may answer, it is the Church that has done it:
that is, I say men devised it, for in Scripture speech, when God has set down
what he will have done, the after doings, are called the inventions of men, as
when our Savior alleges out of the Prophet, That the fear of God was taught
Math. 15. 9.
by the precepts of men; those men were the Elders of the Church, the
Governors of the Church, that is, the Church: But as David says, I hate
inventions, but thy law Psalm. 119. 113,
do I love: And now I will apply those words of the Prophet Jeremy, as stand
in the ways, and look, and ask after Ierem. 6. 16.
the old way, and walk^ therein, and you shall find rest for your souls. And
if you will have proof of these things: first for the board Table. St.
Augustine tells of the Donatists, Ep. ad Bonifa, Durandus,
that in their anger brake the boords of the Altar. And let not the word Altar
trouble you, for it is but a borrowed word from the old Testament; for it was
a board Table: and as for the Loaf, a Writer of theirs says, that in old
time, it was a great Loaf, sufficient for all the Communicants: and why is it
not, that which St. Paul says, as that we are all partakers of one Bread?
which thing is so 1. Cor. 10. 17.
observed, that Chrysostom that Doctor of the Church says upon that place in
this manner; Not of another body this man, of another body that man, but all of
one body are fed and nourished. S. Augustine also says, Knows he not that
even Ep. 86.
now he is to eat part of the body of that immaculate Lamb? Strange kinds of
speeches of two such famous Doctors, and contrary to the Council of Trent;
That decrees that De Sacri. Euch. can. 3.
Christ must be taken to be whole, in Divinity soul and body, and in every
parcel of the bread, for every man by himself to participate: But these
Doctors, bewray another matter, as that the Lords Supper is to be eaten in an
understanding so: not so indeed. In an understanding, all the household of Gods
Elect have eaten, do, and shall eat, of that only Body, which was broken at
the Cross. And eating it in such an understanding, we shall then eat it
spiritually, in the deed it self. No feeding to the spiritual feeding: so
true a feeding, and so substantial, that to it only agrees all that our
Savior speaks, in the sixth of John, of eating of his Flesh, and drinking of
his Blood: As to this thing also we are directed by our Savior his own speech,
saying: It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, the words
that I speak, are spirit, and life. And the conclusion of this note is, that
these two famous Doctors by their speeches, have overthrown both
transubstantiation, and the Mass.

But to proceed in the matter in hand: that the place for the Table, was the
middle of the Church, one only proof will serve, which is Constantine the
great, in his glorious Eusebius li. 10. c. 4. Gerson.
Church, made for Christian Religion, so placed it. And it is reported by a
Writer of theirs, that when the Pope commanded that the Tables should be made
of stone, (may be for the iogling of it) he would have for himself, a Table
of boords. And now I have ended my speech concerning Scripture, Doctors, and
the Vsier of the Church; none of them testifying the Mass: It may be it will
be said, if the Mass be taken out of the Church, a thing so comely, and
glorious in his ceremonies, the Religion of Christ will be but a bare Religion.
To this I answer, that if it be bare, it will fit well enough to that worship
which must be, in spirit, and in truth, according to our Ioh. 4. 23.
Savior his own saying, only decency and order must not be neglected. And
when the Religion of Christ shall be thus stripped of this outwardly glorious
Priest, it will receive the better judgment from the wise. A grave
Philosopher, or a severe censuring Poet, will give a truer judgment then those
Governors of the people, that to please the vulgar sort of men, holding them
to some Religion; devise for them such glorious shows, not caring whether the
thing be true, or false, or agreeable to Gods word, or not agreeable. A wise
Philosopher will not except against inhabitation of virtue in a thread bare
cloak. They were wise men, which adored Christ lying in a Manger: But such
baseness needs not, as pomp also needs not, in medio virtus, virtue may
be neither. A Philosopher reading of the Gospels, and marking our Savior his
speeches said, he was the wisest man that ever spoke: He looked not for any
authority of the world in our Savior, but considered his speeches: And
concerning glorious Churches, a Poet will say, In templis quid fuit aurum: What
does gold in the Temples, if it be (says he) the Gods will not thank you; if
not, they will not blame you. What says Cato? Si Deus est animus, etc. If God
be a spirit, he is to be worshipped with a pure mind. Numa had three sayings,
as that the Gods cared not for bloody Sacrifices: Again, better things were
not to be presented by worse things: such as the Images be made of (no not of
gold, for it is but thick clay.)

The third thing was, that the whole life of man, was to be spent in Religion.
If a Papist should bring an Heathen Philosopher into his Church, and show the
goodly Imagerie, and painting therein, he would ask him what else? for these
Images have mouths, and cannot speak, as when they brought him a child, to
behold the beauty of him, he said to the child: Loquere my pner vt te videam:
Speak child that I may see thee: he respected inward virtue, not outward
shows. S. Augustine says, In humilitate hnius sacrificij, non est tiphus, nec
cothurnus, In the humility of this Sacrifice, there is neither pride, nor
masking, like Players. The sum is the Religion, is not discerned by gewe-gawe
foolish men, but by them that are grave and sober.

The Papist when he would gain a Disciple, he obiecteth against us, that our
Religion is to easy; no austerity of life, for want of fasting: again, bare
of all comely ceremonies: Both these objections are not otherwise to be
answered then by the wisdom that is in Christ's Religion, As for fasting, to
answer in wisdom two ways, showing that we eat not flesh to pamper our
flesh: but as S. Paul says to Timothy, Drink a little wine for thy stomach
1. Tim. 5. 23.
sake, and for thy often diseases: The like to be in eating of flesh, and this
being true without dissimulation, then it will be seconded; that such liberty
is in Christ's Religion, that nothing is to be excepted against, which is
received 1. Tim. 4. 4.
with thanksgiving unto God: A good Disciple that believes it; A faithful
deuider of the Word that preaches it. But for comely ceremonies, as far as
decency goes, we must go along with them: a fault to have our houses swept,
and foul Churches; fair benches at home, and ragged Pewes. Our Savior being
to answer the objection of fasting, made his answer three ways; first, that
new wine was not to be put in old bottels: Math. 9. 14.
Secondly, that nothing would gain them to the truth; for John Baptist came
fasting, and they said he had a devil: he came eating, and they said he was a
glutton: The third answer, which must stand for all, is, that wisdom is
justified of her own children: These rules observed, they must have an answer
picked out of them: But if we fasted with them, their fasting a matter of no
such hardness; should we gain them? that the answer will be the last (which
is) that wisdom is justified of her children. And our Savior will say for
all judgments, If I say the truth, John 8. 46. 47
why do ye not believe me? he that is of God hears Gods word. As the
wisdom of Christ in his Religion, framed according to spirit and truth,
seems foolishness to the wise men of this wo^ld: so let the wisdom of the
wise men of this world, be foolishnes to us, that are Christ's Disciples.

I will divide our Church actions into three sorts. The first is our
Confessions and Praises, in the house of Prayer: He that offers praises
glorifieth me, where the word Glorifieth will answer to the objection of
wanting glorious setting forth of Church service, even that he that offers
praises, glorifieth him. The second sort of things are Baptism, 1. Cor. 11. 2^.
then their devised sacrifice of the Mass; yet for this also I answer with
that Prophecy: Thou do prepare a Table before me in the sight of mine
adversaries. I am the bolder Psalm. 23.
so to say, because two Doctors of the Church Origin and Eusebius make use
thereof: as seeking proof for a Table: whereby they show, that albeit the name
of Altar be used, yet a Table must be proved; for that the Churches act was at
a Table, not at an Altar: And so it serves for an Argument against the Mass.
The Act of the Pulpit is he taught daily in the Temple, and then Luke 19. 46.
this Act may not want his Prophecy. I will allude at the least to that place
of a Psalm, where it is said: An handful Psalm. 72. 16.
of Corn shall be in the earth, even in the top ^f the mountains, and the
fruit thereof shall shake like the trees of Libanus, and the children shall
flourish out of the City like grass. What is this handful of Come, which
shall be in the days of Christ? for the words of that Psalm concern him, and
his days, and said to be in the top of the mountain: let that Sermon in the
mountain be it; yet what is the mountain of the Church, if not the Pulpit,
the highest place of the Church? and what more answers to an handful of
Corn, then the Preachers Text: for the seed the Sower sowed, was the word of
God. And when this handful which Luke 8. 11.
is the Text, is enlarged by Expositions, and Applications, how well may be
said, that the fruit thereof shakes, like the trees of Libanus. And how fitly
shall the Auditorie be those children, that flourish out of the City, and
stand before the Preacher as thick as grass? And I will say, that I may
better take up this Prophecy; for the Seed of the word sowed in the Pulpit,
then the Mass Priest can take it up: for his baked Cake, upon the top of his
shaven crown. For he is bold, so to apply it: though he shake no fruit,
except he shake his locks in that his dumme show when he acts his Mass.

The Kingdom of Christ is knowledge and abundance of knowledge, as it is said
by the Prophet, that in the days Isay.
of Christ, knowledge shall abound, even as waters upon the sea: And who is he
that is a man of gravity, and wisdom, but that he will say it is a glorious
sight, and a glorious Church built of lively stones, to see men and women of
all degrees; and youths of all ages, come into the Church with their Bibles,
and Psalme-bookes, to hear the Word, and to sing Psalms, and praises to the
glory of our God? These acts would become the greatest Emperor in the world.

It is said of Charles the great, that he sung in the Church: But what need I
speak of an Emperor? Christ our Math. 26. 30.
Savior the pattern of Majesty and gravity did sing. The Prophet Hosee
wills the Israelites to offer the Calves Hose. 14. 3.
of their lips: but to offer prayers by telling of prayers which they
understand not, be they not lips of Calves and not of men? It is said of a
Philosopher, that he never laughed but once, and that was when he saw an Ass
so gingerly to eat a thistle: I suppose he would have laughed once more to see
a man like a great boy, to stand with a pair of Beads at his girdle, and to
take them with great devotion to tell prayers in a tongue he understands not.

But I will follow these matters of the Church no farther, but will come to the
second part of my Text, which is in these words, And to him that orders his
ways aright, But to bring in this second part, I must set down a common
Church for us Christians like the Temple of the Jews whereunto all resorted,
of all Sects and of all manners; Pharisees, with their Leven, Saduces denying
the Resurrection: with sinners of all sorts, none accepted but the
uncircumcised: upon this confuse mixture in the worshippers in one house
comes in that question. Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? who shall
rest in thy Psalm. 15. 1.
holy hill? The like is here, though not proposed in a question but
affirmatively set down, as to him that orders his ways aright, I will show
the salvation of God. God is glorified in his house, when in it common praises
be offered unto him, but the salvation of God shall not be showed but unto him
that orders his ways aright. I must devise such a Church that all must come
into, And what need I say devise a Church, I know where I stand, and before
whom I speak at the Assifes: But my devised Church is none other then the
Church of England as now it is, which has in it four principal notes,
Authentical and Catholic to the designing of such a Church, And they
irresistable truths, as these.

There shall be no Images in the Church to be worshipped; This is agreeable to
the second Commandment, so evidently practiced by the Jews, that you need not
inquire whether they worshipped any: for in their Sinagogues, as in their
Temple they had no Images to be worshipped: that their Prophets may freely
speak against Images as it appears in the Prophesies committed unto them by
a certain relation from the holy Ghost. This continued to this day: They
cannot without great offense given of Christians, to see that second
Commandment put out of their Catechism, and the worship of Images grossly
practiced every where.

The second thing is, that the whole Church-Seruice shall be in their mother
Tongue as we say, that is known unto them: For Saint Paul as in a matter of
great absurdity, asks the question when on blesses in the Spirit, how shall
he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say, Amen. at the giving of
thanks? seeing he knows 1 Cor. 14. 28.
not what thou say.

The third is concerning the Lords supper: that it be given and received under
both the kinds: even of Bread and also of Wine alike consecrated: For who can
deny that our Savior did not so institute it, and said, Do this 1 Cor. 11. 25.
as often as you do it in remembrance of me: and so delivered it unto Saint
Paul, that it might in that manner be administered in the Church. This to be
observed is necessary to be required, that in a matter of so great importance
there may be no defect in the Church.

The fourth is, that there be proposed but one true and living God to receive
the prayer, and for Mediator none but our Savior the Son of God; as Saint
Paul even in that place where he appoints for the Church supplications and
prayers to be made in it, and says, There is but one God and one Mediator
between God and man, the 2 Timothy 2. 5.
man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom for us. No person of the blessed
Trinity, but may have invocation even in the Church: but Saints (whosoever) are
no mediators for that place: For I will say as Saint Paul says in a smaller
matter, They were neither crucified for us, nor 1 Cor. 1. 13.
we baptized in their name. This is the Church, and so devised, that to
contradict this Church, if Governors of people shall persecute their Subjects,
if they will not worship Imager, nor have their Church Service in an unknown
tongue, not receive in one kind, nor admit more Mediators then Christ, they
are execated and indurated, blinded in their understanding, and hardened in
their hearts: On the contrary side, if Governors shall not tolerate any to
say, we will worship Images, have our Service in the Latin tongue, though not
understood of us, and will but under one kind receive at the Communion, and
will have more Mediators then one: If by the severity of their powers they
compel them to come into this undoubted Catholic Church, they shall do it
clearly with a good conscience.

There was one named Apelles as it appears in the Ecclesiastical Histories,
who was of this opinion, That Eusebius. l. 5. c. 12.
Doctrines were not to be inquired after, but every one to abide as he has
believed, and every man to be saved that believes in Christ Crucified, so that
he be found in good Works. This opinion was holden for erroneous, and so it
is. For albeit Pharisees and Saduces came into the Church or Temple altogether,
yet our Savior spoke vehemently against the Pharesie, denouncing a Woe unto
them: and Math. 23. Math. 22. 29.
also confuted the Saducie: And excommunications ever have been executed,
though making differences in the executions.

There are two sorts of men, which profess Recusancie against this Church,
which in respect of these four points, I dare affirm to be Apostolic, and a
true Catholic Church: the one bears the name of a Recusant: the other is
called a Separatist. I make to my self some difference between them, as the
other an Adversary in doctrines of Faith; this agreeing in doctrine, but
discontented with the Ceremonies of our Church. But notwithstanding the other
dislike of doctrines, and this man distaste our Ceremonies: why shall not both
of them, come to a common Church where there will be common Prayers,
Supplications, Thanksgiving for the King and for the Kingdom, with other
necessities, for the affairs of men, in occupying on the Seas and on the
Eearth? The God is common to both, the Mediator common to both, yea the Lords
Supper as common to both, as Baptism is common: The Recusant Papist being with
us a professed Christian, differs not from us in ciuility of life, virtues
and good works: The maine point of these separations is only Scriptures, and
only Christ, two matters of great importance: let them grant that the
Scriptures are only the trial for matter of Salvation tending to eternal
life, which thing the Jews sought in them as our Savior affirms, and
withal make Christ the only Mediator; John 5. 39.
the reconciliation will be at hand. As for the Seperatist we agreeing in
doctrines, our Ceremonies of greatest note in offending being but three in
number, as the Surplis, kneeling at the receiving of those blessed Signs given
by Christ, as children kneel when they receive their fathers blessing: the
third crossing in Baptism: For the fewness of them like a thin cloud,
which will nothing hinder the glorious shining of the Gospel through them;
nothing burdenous, and which will much clear the English Church from any great
offense: he that is in the Pulpit with his handful of Corn sowing the word of
God, his judgment by them is not any whit Captiuated, and brought into
subjection, but may freely say when he has crossed a child in Baptism, that
the Baptism was perfected before the Cross came. O what golden days have
been lost by this separation? And now I have made this Preface to my second
part: I will frame a question like that, as Who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle,
and who shall rest in thy holy hill? Whereunto answer is made, He that walks
uprightly and works righteousness, so I will make the like question: to whom
will he show the salvation of God? And answer shall be to him that orders
his ways aright. In the Hebrew it is, to him that shall put his ways. And I
will make to be, putting his way into a vow; And so it shall answer to that
which succeeds the burnt offerings, and said, Offer unto Verse 14.
God praise and pay thy vows unto the most High. For there is no way better
then to put our ways into a vow: into which order of proceeding, the English
Church falls aright: For the child at the baptism puts his ways into a
vow: and when he commath to be Catechized he is asked of it, and he answers,
that they did promise and vow three things in my name, meaning Godfathers and
Godmothers, whom otherwise we call Witnesses. And now our ways are put into
vows, they are debts, and answer to that in the Lords prayer, where we are
willed to crave that our heavenly Father would forgive us our debts, for what
foolishness were it to understand our vows to be other, then those that are
specified in our baptism, which are diligently to be marked, as to forsake the
Devil and all his works, the pompes also and vanities of this wicked world,
and the sinful lusts of the flesh, to believe the articles of the faith, and
generally to keep Gods commandments. Who but a Papist would expound in
triuiall matters? And to draw to the application of the matter, John Baptist
was the first that began the Ministry of our new Testament, and applied unto
himself, out of the Prophet Esaias his office to be a Crier in the Wilderness;
saying, Prepare ye the ways of the Luke 3. 4. 5.
Lord, make his paths straight, every valley shall be filled, and every
mountain shall be brought low, and the crooked shall be made straight, and
the rough ways shall be made smoothe. How manifestly does this of the Psalm
of ordering of ways proceed, so confirmed by a Prophet, and executed by John
Baptist more then a Prophet. And that we may think that these, were not words
without deeds and a practice accordingly, it may well appear by the success
that John Baptist his preaching had: for it fell right into the ordering of
ways in such sort, that particular persons one by one enquired of him how to
order their ways? The people (and they no doubt the common people) came unto
him, and asked of him what shall we do Luke 3. 10.
then? and he answers unto them and says, he that has two coats let him
impart to him that has none, and he that has meat let him do likewise. Then
came also the Publicans to be Baptized and said unto him, Master what shall we
do? And he said unto them, ask no more then that which is appointed you. And
the soldiers likewise demanded of him saying, and what shall we do? and he
said unto them do violence to no man, neither accuse any man falsely, and be
content with your wages. And by these we may make a rule for others, as no
doubt he did: Who did the like to Herod, rebuking him for keeping his brothers
Luke 3. 19.
wife. And at one word, this is the truth of which our Savior spoke of to the
woman of Samaria, when he said, the true worshippers must worship the Father in
spirit and in John 4. 23. Romans 12. 1.
truth, in offering up our bodies in a true rep^ntance, and holy sacrifice unto
God.

If the Apostles had meddled with laws of carnal commandments, they had
transgressed the rule: therefore they meddle not with any thing, but with
matters of truth, in squaring out duties for subjects to their Magistrates and
high powers with reciprocal duties between husband and wife, father, child,
Master, servant: And generally this to be Gods Commandment, to believe in 1.
John 3. ^3.
the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and to love one another as he has
commanded. If this method had heene continued between Pastor and Flock: the
new Testament had been always seen in his true colors: which afterward by
the Church of Rome was bedawbed with golden, but unkind and unnatural
ceremonies. Notwithstanding the Primitive Church kept his matter of ordering of
ways a long time: And to give you a view thereof I will be so bold, as to
divide this Auditorie into these particular estates; As here are honorable
Judges, Justices of peace, Counselors at law, Gentlemen, Soldiers, Merchants,
Handycrafts-men, and Husbandmen: For the Judges (such honorable and wise
persons) I will say no more then God bless them, and of the rest I cannot in
so short a time speak particularly; But that generally somewhat may be said of
Ways, I will take out two, which in the primitive Church were in some question
concerning their ways: those are the Merchant, and the Soldiour. The Merchant
was called into question as not having the right course of a trade, because he
is nothing laborious as others are, but easy, selling whole sale, of no
action, neither in hand or in speech: for properly that is a trade, which
gets gain by his labor, and after gayning, returns still to his labor:
as the Handycraftsman makes his work, gayneth, and returns to his work
again; so the Plowman sows and reapeth and returns to the Plow again: so
vocations of words; have their gains, and their returns to labor again. For
it was said to Adam, in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou
return to the earth, for out of it wast thou Genesis 3. 19.
taken, because thou art dust, and to dust thou shall return. Notwithstanding
this question of the Merchant was not alike defined, but men of good judgment
dissented: and I suppose that John Baptist would not have made any exception
against him who excluded not the Publican, neither is the Merchant an idle man,
but much occupied, and looks up unto the heavens to have success and
blessing from God. You may say that rather they might have made exception
against him whom I named a Gentleman: unto that I answer, that our kind of
Gentlemen, were not extant in their days: But I will help to admonish them to
take heed, that that which is in the book of Wisdom be far from them, as to
say of the pleasures and Wisdom.
pastimes of this life, this is our portion, this is our lot: Remember what
Abraham said to his son being in hell torments, Thou in thy life time
receiuedst thy good things. As for the Soldiour, the exception against him was,
not to be received into the ministry of the Word.

But there are more kinds of trades, and one there is not so easy to be
condemned: because the Law is to be the ground of his action; but he is so
often in law, that he is less in charity, and fills whole parishes with
uncharitableness. To discribe him, I must borrow a term from the common Law,
which may be, comprehends not so generally these kind of trades: But the
term is a Common Barretor: With these kind of men no trespasses must be
taken up by neighbors and brethren, in one faith and one Church: but all must
be tried by law: that the offender if he refuse that trial, must redeem his
peace with a great price. This trade is so violent, so hurtful, and such a
cunning extortion, that our Savior both remembers it, and gives counsel to
his Disciples, saying, If any man will sue thee at the law, and take away Math.
5. 40.
thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. If therefore Christ's Disciple must
deliver coat and cloak, whose Disciple is he that takes them?

There is an other Tradesman, if we may call him a tradesman; I mean the
Usurer, tolerated in Commonwealths, Psalm. 15. 5.
and condemned in the word of God: None of the Disciples of Christ, in whom
there must be nothing but that which is perfect, that we may be like to our
Master, who was perfect. His Disciples therefore must not lend, looking for
something again; but lend, looking for nothing again. And in the new
Testament, how can it be, that to him shall be showed the salvation of God,
when in the old Testament He shall not dwell in the holy hill. In this thing
they are both a censured evil, by the word of God, and an evil end will be
the increase of riches in their great abundance to them that use it. The
abundance of riches so blinds his judgment, that he sees no evil, but
thinks that he has God by the finger, when he has the devil by the fist. In
the old Law one might not lend in Usury to his brother according to the
flesh, and may he now lend to his brother according to the spirit? Let the
Preachers of the Word, and deuiders of the Word take heed least while they
teach some vsuries small, that they may be done: they by so teaching and so
doing, become least in the Kingdom of heaven: Let the Disciple hearken unto
his Master, and hear Christ saying; If ye love me keep my commandments. A
Lawyer being asked concerning Arrests, Ioh. 14. 15.
upon the Sabbath day, answered, that the Arrests were good in Law: but the
parties that executed the Arrests punishable; shall we so answer for the
Usurer, that his usury is good in law, but the Usurer culpable? so that he
shall not dwell in the holy hill. And to speak somewhat of Arresting on the
Sabbath day: whereby I say, our ways are not ordered aright: how can that be
good in the law of any Commonweal, that breaks any one of the ten
Commandments? the ten Commandments, are not very subtle, hard to be
discerned, but gross, even the law of nature. Let us put a God, (and what
Nation does not put it) no less can be then to have one set day to worship in.
Break that day so commanded, and where then is our Religion? To put out his
day, and to set out another, would require good warrant: Put, break this, and
to put in no other will be irreligion. The Sabbath day to be kept holy, should
be accounted, though not so expressed in statute, yet necessary in his
understanding; but he usurps another Phrase as Arrests to be good, any
commandment from God notwithstanding: and so a private man will make
judgment, for the whole Kingdom. Is it not breaking of an holy Sabbath day,
to do occupations of the world on the Sabbath day, as to Cart and Plow? and is
it nothing to use violence, and to draw to prison, the Iaylor to attend,
Scriuener to be called for, Obligations to be made, money to be paid? Judge
righteous judgment, show not Art of Law in the laws of men against the law of
God.

There is a Prophecy in the Scripture concerning the Church of Christ, as that
the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall be with the Kid,
and the Calfe, and the Lion, and the fat beasts together, and a little Child
shall lead them: What are these beasts, but men of diverse natures which have
subscribed to the faith and Religion of Christ? some proud and haughty in
mind, strong, and by nature ravenous, fat some in the pleasures of this life,
and in the abundance of wealth; others meek, gentle, poor and miserable: and
who is this Child that does lead them up and down to their pastures and
feeding in the word, but that Minister and Preacher of the Word? in respect of
such a great work, as a Child weak and simple, yet orders their ways: And
when the common Barretor and his neighbor, the Usurer and his Captive shall
sit before the Child, in one Church, if not in one Pew, the common Barretor
shall learn a lesson of peace, charity, and the Usurer taught mercy: and his
Debtor learn to borrow and pay again. Shall the borrower be as an
excommunicate person, for a misery that may be could not be avoided? and shall
God leese his right, because man will have his? destruction and ruin is
prophesied, to that place where man is preferred before God. If it be said that
if we love not our brother whom we see* how will we love God whom we see not?
Let these cruel men have their brethren brought into a place, that they may
see them to make experience if love of brother be in them, if not, how then the
love of God? The conclusion of these shall be, take heed of this general
Assise Psalm; saying, What have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, that
thou should take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be
reformed, and have cast my words behind thee? Our Savior says, Light is come
into the world: but men love darkness more then light. For every one that does
evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, least his deeds Ioh. 3.
19,
should be reproved. But he that does the truth, comes, to the light, that
his deeds may be manifest, that they are wrought in God.

It is no small inducement for men, to run to the Popish Religion, because
there is to be had, this ordering of ways very particularly, like as it was
done by John Baptist, when they came to be baptized of him, confessing their
sins: even at an auricular confession to do it, a grace if it be a grace,
not to be had with us will be a defect: I cannot deny, but that it is an
ordering, but not an ordering aright of the ways of Christians. For that
ordering is cursorie after this manner; A deputed Priest for that purpose, a
most particular enumeration and telling of sins, penance proportionably
enjoined, and absolution administered.

To examine these in order as they are set down, The first a Priest Deputed
for Confessions: And where in the new Testament is this Deputed Priest? Is it
every Priest? St. James albeit he had said, If any man be sick, let him call
the Presbiters, Elders or Priests, as they will have it: to Chap. 5. 14.
pray over the sick person, and to anoint him: yet in the very next verse,
speaking of Confessions of sins or faults, says: Confess one to another
sins or faults, neither does he will the Priest to enjoin it, but bids
the Christians one to another to confess sins: And if it be but to pray one
for another, that Act is not only for Priests, but common with every
Christian: and it is not absolve one another, but pray one for another, that
they may be healed: And the prayer is of a just man, but only Priests are not
just.

And for the second point, which is so particular an enumeration and telling of
sins, this I will say, that the devising of questions about the breaking of
the ten Commandments, by the Confessor, is worthy the reading, that we may see
the multitudes of trespasses and offenses for our instruction: And farther, to
help even for the amendment of things in our soul much amiss: but the
confession of a crime and heinous fault, how can it be repeated? I have read it
in a printed confession book after this manner. That since I was at
Confession, or as the words are, first I acknowledge my self guilty unto
Almighty God, unto our Lady St. Marie, and to all the Company of heaven, and to
you my ghostly father, that since the time of my last Confession I have offended
my Lord God grievously, and specially in the seven deadly sins: and coming
to the ten Commandments, he says: I have sinned fleshly with person that
been wedded, and other more, and more would, if I might have had time and
place. Such a Confession had need to be auricular, told in the Priests ears,
and kept close. But what penance shall be set out for such a man? The saying
is, He that will not pay it in his body, must pay it in his purse. And will
that be an ordering of ways? And shall he be thus absolved from time to time?
then will it not be washing a Sow that walloweth in the mire. You Papists say,
that our Religion is an easy Religion, you mean because you fast often in
abstaining from eating of flesh (for that is all) you task your selves with
Prayers, and undergo penancies: but if this ordering of ways be your
Religion, your Religion will be the easier Religion; for it is easier to
mortify the flesh, then to mortify the deeds of the flesh: you call it the
Sacrament of penance; if penance be the Sacrament, you will deceive the more
persons laden with sin: and to think themselves lighted of the burden of
sin, when sin still from time to time ladeth them. Speak plainly, and say
it is repentance, and forgiveness is the Sacrament, as our Savior says to us
Preachers, setting down our Commission. Thus it is written, and thus it
behooued Luke 24. 46.
Christ to suffer, and to rise again the third day, and that repentance and
forgiveness of sins should be preached in his name among all Nations,
beginning at Jerusalem. But you translate the word repentance by the word
penance: saying, Christ said, that penance should be preached. And from whence
have you this word penance? is it from thence that your Latin Translation
says, Agite paenitentiam? but how dissolutely do you abuse the gravity of the
Translator? For when he meant to speak home, as we say, and to the purpose,
translateth do repentance, answerable to our conuertion, and ordering our
ways aright, according to the Hebrew and Greek: you Translate him in your
English by your Confessors terms as do penance: But to return from
speaking any more to them; the truth is, the ordering of ways must be done by
an effectual repentance, even a turning from our evil ways, that we may be
found always in sins great and less, well told even by a Confessors book,
to be upon the mending hand. This is published in our Common prayer, where
repentance and forgiveness are joined in our absolution: the application of
which absolution we leave to the conscience of all hearers as they repent: and
not to be a Sacramental donation or grant to any that repents not. And this
is the ordering of ways in our Church, where truths should be, not
deceptions and falsehoods. Repentance must bring in the absolution, not any
Sacrament, no not those two noble Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper,
will with us absolve an unrepentant sinner: unless you apply them to Infants,
unto whom knowledge of repentance is not yet come. And now we may see why the
Church is rid from the law of carnal commandments, which were to some but
clokes for their hypocrisy, to all, burdens hard to bear: for all
commaund^ments of God must be kept; albeit they be carnal rights, and therefore
the not sleeping sin and transgression worthy of an expiation and an
atonement: and now in the new Testament the Church service easy, as he that
offers praises glorifieth God: so God himself saying. But when we come to
this second point, which is ordering of ways: then we are come to that
straight gate, that leads to eternal life: into which few enter, and thereby
true that many are called but few chosen. St. James says, In many things we
offend all of us. And St. John will not Iam. 3. 2.
deny but that we may sin, though he say afterward, he that is borne of
God sins not: meaning by continuance in any sin never so little. It is
said of the Husbandman, that he is not out of work all the year long, for he
is changing of ground, breaking up of grounds, fallowing, plowing, weeding,
reaping: no more is the Saint of God out of work all his life time: and
repentance will find work, for the Pastor and Teacher, for the Flock and the
Disciple: And when we are thus laboring in repentance, let us hearken to him
that says, Come to me all ye that are we arie, and laden, and I will ease
you, take my yoke on you, Math. 11. 28.
and learn of me that I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest
for your souls, for mine yoke is easy, and my burden is light. These words
no doubt are spoken unto them that labor in converting and turning still from
this, and that evil way even as men wearied: finding the burden still heavy.
And this my Text will have a good correspondencie, and will answer well to
that our Savior his voice; and that it is said in my Text, that we must order
our ways aright: and it comes in after this manner: And unto him that
orders his ways aright, I will show the salvation of God. This showing of
Gods salvation, is the third part of my Sermon, and makes my work a perfect
work, that I shall by Gods grace fulfill my promise, which was to exhibit the
Religion of Christ perfectly, for as much as without which we cannot be saved.
For unless when I will speak of offering praises, and so glorifying God, I
bring not in every one of those three persons of the blessed Trinity; God will
be imperfectly glorified. And this thing is ready to be performed in these
words, which are, I will show the salvation of God. I say, the three persons
are here ready to be showed us. For who is he that can show the salvation of
God, unless it be the holy Ghost? and what other salvation under heaven
besides Jesus? as for God, he is named: And concerning the holy Ghost, that he
must show the salvation, it is easily to be proved, because the salvation is
such a thing as eye never saw, ear never heard of, and never entered into the
heart of man, even Jesus Christ crucified: to the Jews a stumbling 1 Cor. 1.
23. 1 Cor. 19. 20.
stone, to the Grecians foolishness. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe?
where is the Disputer of this world? by Christ crucified, God has destroyed
the wisdom of the wise, and has brought to nothing the understanding of the
prudent, Verse 19.
and the Princes of this world, if they had known it, would 1 Cor. 2. 8.
they have crucified the Lord of glory? We are said to be Ministers of the
Spirit, but I suppose that none of us will say, that we do minister the
Spirit but by the holy Ghost, none can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
holy Ghost: 1. Cor. 12. 3.
neither Disciple nor yet the Teacher. If the Wise, the Scribe, the Disputer
could not find it out, we are not wiser of our selves then they: What is it to
show a thing to a man, set you it never so near him (albeit he can see) except
the air be lightened, by which they may see? The holy Ghost has lightened the
understanding of man, and withal will convince the world of sin, because
they believe not in Christ. When the day is broken and the Sun up, he that
cannot see then is blind indeed: so now that the holy Ghost is come and
lightneth the world (which thing how far it reaches who can tell) whosoever
sees nor Christ crucified, to be the salvation of God, is blind, and to be
holden for blind. And as there are degrees in seeing, some seeing better, some
worse; so Christ crucified, to be The salvation of God, is better seen of some
then of others. It is an easy matt^^ for us to show to a man that Christ Jesus
is the salvation of GOD, if showing be to say so, and to preach so, but to
bring it aright into the heart, and to believe with my understanding that Jesus
dyed for our sins, will require an influence of the holy Ghost.

There is great difference in showing of a star, if it were to be showed
between an Astrologer, and a Countriman, even about the Creation of the world,
as if the Countryman were asked whether might be better spared, his Apple Tree
in his Orchard, or one of the little Stars in the Sky? It may be it would
not be rightly answered, we are so earthly; and therefore dull because we are
earthly: but an Astrologer if he wete to show the Stars, he will not only show
it according to his situation, bigness, motion, but according to an influence
it has to usward. The holy Ghost if he show the salvation of God in Christ
Jesus, he will show it by an influence in us, which the Astrologer cannot do,
and by that influence show an influence in Christ Jesus to usward, both for
Justification by faith, and Sanctification by a new birth: and then with joy
we shall say the holy Ghost has showed us the salvation of God. And for the
salvation of God to be the second Person in the Trinity as no Christian will
deny, so he the less a Christian that makes not the second Person in the
Trinity all the salvation of God. As here he is named, because a time
appointed would come, when we should readily name him, as Saint Peter says,
Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other name under
heaven given among men, whereby we Act. 4. 1^.
must be saved. In the old Testament it is said, Hearken O Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
Israel thy God is one God. To us also in the new Testament Christ says, Go
ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
the Son, and Math. 28. 1^.
the holy Ghost. And Saint John says, There are three that 1. John 5. 7.
bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these
three are one: So to conclude, I will say that by this blessed Trinity, our
Religion is not only styled, but confyned: beyond these three Persons we must
not go.

Angels must not be worshipped, neither yet any Saint: yet there is one Saint
which approaches near to the blessed Trinity, even the Mother of Christ in a
right as it were, that she was his Mother, though he never called her Mother,
but Woman. She has matched him if not gone beyond him in Psalms, Hymns, and
prayers: This injury has been too long in practice, but now I suppose it is
come to the highest: For the Jesuits to accomplish the injury done unto Christ,
first names himself by the name of Jesus: yet as if Jesus were but a Son:
though I dare say, they think not that Jesus had mo brethren: they commend
their society, not to Jesus but to the Mother, as their Patroness and
Protectrix. A brainesicke society, who will not say? (As lamentable it is)
that Bellarmine that great Champion concludes his work with, praise be to God
and to the blessed Virgin the Mother? leaving out the Son and the holy Ghost;
and so the Papists in their salutations and farewells, as Midwiues in
childe-birth say devoutly, not knowing how blasphemously, God and our Lady
help you. For who that fears God dare join a creature with God the Father,
or the Son of the Father? But it is enough, to point at these things for this
time. My speech is to better Christians; let us offer praise, that God may be
glorified: And notice must be taken of that which follows: even that To him
that orders his way aright, shall be showed the salvation of God: And to
that blessed Trinity, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, be all honor, praise
and glory, now and evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

