THE SHEPHERDS PIPE.

(...)

LONDON Printed by N. O. for George Norton, and are to be sold at his Shop
without Temple-barre. 1614.

Of his Friend Master William Brown.
A Poets borne, not made: No wonder then
Though Spencer, Sidney: (miracles of men,
Sole English Makers; whose cu^n names so bie
Express by implication Poesy)
Were long unparalleled: For nature bold
In their creation, spent that precious mould,
That Nobly better earth, that purer spirit
Which Poets, as their Birth ^ights, claim ^inherite:
And in their great production, Prodigal;
Careless of futures well-nye spent her-all
Veiwing her work: conscious sh'had suffered wrack
Has caused our Countrymen ere since to lack
That better earth, and form: Long thrifty grown
Who truly might hear Poets, brought forth none:
Till now of late, seeing her stocks new-full
(By Time, and Thrift) of matter beautiful,
And quint-essence of forms; what several
Our elder Poets graces had, those all
She now determined to unite in one;
So to surpass her self; and called him Brown.
'That beggard by his birth, she is now so poor
That of true Makers she can make no more.
Hereof accused; answered, she meant that ^ee
A species should, no indiuiduum be.
That (Phoenix-like) He in himself should find
Of Poesy contained each several kind.
And from this Phoenix's vrne, thought she could take
Whereof all following-Poetswell to make.
For of some form, she had, now made known
They were her errors whilst ^'intented Brown.
In libellum, inscriptionemque.
Not Aeglogues your, but Eclogues: To compare:
Virgil's selected, yours elected are.
He Imitates, you Make: and this your creature
Expresses well your Name, and theirs, their Nature.
E. JOHNSON Int. Temp.

To the truly Virtuous, and worthy of all Honor, the Right Honorable
EDWARD, Lord ZOVCH, Saint MAVRE and CANTELVPE, and one of his Mties. most
Honorable Privy Council.
BE pleased (great Lord) when underneath the shades
Of your delightful Brams-hill, (where the spring
Her flowers for gentle blasts with Zephire trades)
Once more to hear a filly Shepherd sing.
Yours be the pleasure, mine the Sonneting;
Even that has his delight; nor shall I need
To seek applause amongst the common store
^t is enough if this mine-oaten Reed
Please but the ear it should; I ask no more.
Nor shall those rural notes which heretofore
Your true attention graced and winged for fame
^mperfect lie; Oblivion shall not gain
Ought on your worth, but sung shall be your name
^o long as England yields or song or Swain.
Free are my lines, though dressed in lowly state,
And scorn to flatter but the men I hate.
Your Honors. W. BROWN.
THE SHEPHERDS PIPE. The first Eglogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Roget and Willy both ymet,
Upon a greeny Ley,
With Rondelayes and Tales are set.
To spend the length of day.
WILLIE. ROGET.
Willie. ROGET, droope not, see the spring
Is the earth enamelling,
And the birds on every Tree
Greet this morn with melody:
Hark, how yonder Thrustle chants it,
And her mate as proudly vants it;
See how every stream is dressed
By her Margin, with the best
Of Flora's gifts, she seems glad
For such Brooks such flowers she had.
All the trees are quaintly tired
With green buds, of all desired;
And the Hauthorne every day,
Spreads some little show of May:
See the Prim-rose sweetly set
By the much-lou'd Violet
All the Banks do sweetly cover,
As they would inuit a Lover
With his Less, to see their dressing
And to grace them by their pressing?
Yet in all this merry tide
When all cares are laid aside,
Roget sits as if his blood
Had not felt the quickening good
Of the Sun, nor cares to play,
Or with songs to pass the day
As he wont: Fie, Roget fly,
Raise thy head, and merrily
Tune us somewhat to thy reed:
See our Flocks do freely feed,
Here we may together sit,
And for Music very fit
Is this place; from yonder wood
Comes an Echo shrill and good,
Twice full perfectly it will
Answer to thine Oaten quill.
^oget, droope not then, but sing
Some kind welcome to the Spring.

Roget. AH Willie, Willy, why should I,
Sound my notes of iollity?
Since no sooner can I play
Any pleasing Roundelay,
But some one or other still
'Gins to descant on my Quill;
And will say, by this, he me
Means in his Minstralsie.
If I chance to name an Ass
In my song, it comes to pass,
One or other sure will take it
As his proper name, and make it
Fit to tell his nature too.
Thus what e're I chance to do
Happens to my loss, and brings
To my name the venomed stings
Of ill report: How should I
Sound then notes of iollity?

Willie. It Is true indeed, we say all
Rub a gal'd horse on the gall,
Kick he will, storm and bite,
But the horse of sounder plight
Gently feels his Masters hand.
In the water thrust a brand
Kindled in the fire, 'twill hiss,
When a stick that taken is
From the Hedge, in water thrust,
Never rokes as would the first,
But endures the waters touch:
Roget, so it fares with such
Whose own guilt has them enflamed,
Rage when e're their vice is blamed.
But who in himself is free
From all spots, as Lillies be,
Never stirs, do what thou can.
If thou slander such a man
Yet he is quiet, for he knows
With him no such vices close.
Only he that is indeed
Spotted with the leprous seed
Of corrupted thoughts, and has
An vlcerous soul in the path
Of reproof, he straight will brall
If you rub him on the gall.
But in vain then shall I keep
These my harmless flock of sheep.
And though all the day I tend them,
And from Wolves and Foxes shend them.
Wicked Swains that bear me spite,
In the gloomy veil of night,
Of my fold will draw the pegges,
Or else break my Lambkins legs:
Or vnhang my Weathers bell,
Or bring briars from the dell,
And them in my fold by pieces
Cast, to tangle all their fleeces.
Welladay! such churlish Swaynes
Now and then lurk on our plains:
That I fear, a time, ere long
Shall not hear a Sheepheards song.
Nor a Swayne shall take in task
Any wrong, nor once unmask
Such as do with vices rife
Soil the Sheepheards happy life:
Except he means his Sheep shall be
A prey to all their injury.
This causes me I do no more
Chant so as I wont of yore:
Since in vain then should I keep
These my harmless flock of Sheope.

Willie. YEt if such thou will not sing,
Make the Woods and Valleys ring
With some other kind of lore,
Roget has enough in store,
Sing of love, or tell some tale,
Praise the flowers, the Hills, the Vale:
Let us not here idle be;
Next day I will sing to thee.
Hark on knap of yonder Hill
Some sweet Sheepheards tune his quill;
And the Maidens in a round
Sit (to hear him) on the ground.
And if thou begin, shall we
Graced be with like company.
And to gird thy Temples bring
Garlands for such fingering.
Then raise thee Roget.

Roget. Gentle Swain
Whom I honor for thy strain,
Though it would beseem me more
To attend thee and thy lore:
Yet least thou might find in me
(...) neglect of courtesy,
(...) will sing what I did leere
Long agon in Ianiueere
Of a skillful aged Site,
As we tosted by the fire.

Willy. SIng it out, it needs must be
Very good what comes from thee.

Roget. Whllome an Emperor prudent and wise,
Reigned in Rome, and had sons three
Which he had in great chiertee and great prise,
And when it shop so, that th'infirmitee
Of death, which no wight may eschew or flee
Him threw down in his bed, he let do call
His sons, and before him they came all.
And to the first he said in this maneere,
All th'eritage which at the dying
Of my fadir, he me left, all in feere
Leave I thee: And all that of my buying
Was with my penny, all my purchasing,
My second son bequeath I to thee,
And to the third son thus said he:
Immovable good, right none withouten oath
Thee give I may; but I to thee devise
Jewels three, a Ring, Brooch and a Cloth:
With which, and thou be guied as the wise,
Thou may get all that ought thee suffi^;
Who so that the Ring uses still to wear
Of all folks the love he shall conquer.
And who so the Broch bears on his breast,
It is eke of such virtue and such kind,
That think upon what thing him likes best,
And he as bliue shall it have and find.
My words son imprint well in mind:
The Cloth eke has a marvelous nature,
Which that shall be committed to thy cure.
Who so sit on it, if he wish where
In all the world to been, he suddenly
Without more labor shall be there.
Son those three Jewels bequeath I
To thee, unto this effect certainly
That to study of the Vniuersiree
Thou go, and that I bid and charge thee.
When he had thus said the vexation
Of death so hasted him, that his spirit
Anon forsook his habitation
In his body, death would no respyte
Him give at all, he was of his life quitte.
And buried was with such solemnity,
As fell to his Imperial dignity.
Of the youngest son I tell shall,
And speak no more of his brethren two,
For with them have I not to do at all.
Thus spoke the mother Ionathas unto:
Sin God has his will of thy father do:
To thy fathers Will, would I me conform,
And truly all his Testament perform.
He three Jewels, as thou know well
A Ring, a Brooch, and a Cloth thee bequeath,
Whose virtues, he thee told every deal,
Or that he past hence and yalde up the breath:
O good God, his departing, his death
Full grievously sticks unto mine heart,
But suffered mot been all how sore it smart.
In that case women have such heaviness,
That it not lies in my cunning aright
You tell, of so great sorrow the excess,
But wise women can take it light,
And in short while put unto the flight
All sorrow and woe, and catch again comfort,
Now to my tale make I my resort.
Thy fathers will, my son, as I said ere,
Will I perform, have here the ring and go
To study anon, and when that thou art there,
As thy father thee bade, do even so,
And as thou will my blessing have also:
She unto him as swy the took the Ring
And bad him keep it well, for any thing.
He went unto the study general
Where he gat love enough, and acquaintance
Right good and friendly, the ring causing all,
And on a day to him befell this chance,
With a woman, a morsel of pleasance
By the streets of the University,
As he was in his walking, met he.
And right as bliue he had with her a tale,
and therewithal sore in her love he brent,
^ay, fresh and piked was she to the sale,
^or to that end, and to that intent
^he thither came, and both forth they went:
And he a pistle rowned in her ear,
Not wot I what, for I ne came not there.
^he was his Paramour shortly to sey,
This man to folks all was so leefe,
That they him gave abundance of money,
He feasted folk, and stood at high boucheefe,
Of the lack of good, he felt no grief,
All whiles the ring he with him had,
But failing it, his friendship began sad.
His Paramour which that'y called was
^ellicula, maruailed right greatly
Of the dispences of this Ionathas,
^in she no penny at all with him sy,
And on a night as there she lay him by
In the bed, thus she to him spoke, and said,
And this petition assoile him praid.
O reverent sir, unto whom quoth she,
Obey I would ay with hearts humbleness,
^ince that ye han had my virginity,
^u I beseech of your high gentleness,
Tellith me whence comth the good and richesse
That ye with feasten folk, and han no store,
By ought I see can, ne gold, ne tresore.
If I tell it, quoth he, par adventure
Thou will discover it, and out it publish,
Such is woman's inconstant nature,
They cannot keep Council worth a rish:
Better is my tongue keep, than to wish
That I had kept close that is gone at large,
And repentance is thing that I more charge.
Nay good sir, quoth she, holds me not suspect
Doubts nothing, I can be right secree,
Well worthy were it me to been abject
From all good company, if I quoth she
Unto you should so mistake me.
Be not adread your council me to show.
Well, said he, thus it is at words few.
My father the ring which that thou may see
On my finger, me at his dying day
Bequeathed, which this virtue and propertee
Has, that the love of men he shall have aye
That wears it, and there shall be no nay
Of what thing that him likes ask and crave
But with good will, he shall as bliue it have.
Through the rings virtuous excellence
Thus am I rich, and have ever ynow.
Now Sir, yet a word by your license
Suffers me to say, and to speak now:
Is it wisdom, as that it seems you,
Wear it on your finger continually?
What woldst thou mean, quoth he, thereby?
What peril thereof might there befall?
Right great, quoth she, as ye in company
Walk often, fro your finger might it fall,
Or plucked off been in a ragery
And so be lost, and that were folly:
Take it me, let me been of it wardeine,
For as my life keep it would I certain.
This Ionathas, this innocent young man,
Giving unto her words full credence,
As youth not auised best be can:
The Ring her took of his insipience.
When this was done, the heat and the feruence
Of love which he beforne had purchased,
Was quenched, and loves knot was unlaced.
Men of their gifts to stint began.
Ah thought he, for the ring I not ne bear,
Fails my love; fetch me woman
(Said he) my Ring, anon I will it wear.
She rose, and into chamber dresseth her,
And when she therein had been a while,
Alas (quoth she) out on falsehood and gyle.
The chest is broken, and the Ring take out,
And when he heard her complaint and cry,
He was astonished sore, and made a shout,
And said, Cursed be the day that I
Thee met first, or with mine eyne sy.
She wept and showed outward cheer of woe,
But in her heart was it nothing so.
The ring was safe enough, and in her Chest
It was, all that she said was leasing,
As some woman other while at best
Can lie and weep when is her liking.
This man saw her we, and said Dearling
Weep no more, Gods help is nigh,
To him vnwiste how false she was and slye.
He twyned thence, and home to his country
Unto his mother the straight way he went,
And when she saw thither comen was he,
My son, quoth she, what was thine intent
Thee, fro the school, now to absent?
What caused thee fro school hither to hye?
Mother, right this, said he, not would I lie.
Forsooth mother, my ring is a go,
My Paramour to keep I betook it,
And it is lost, for which I am full woe,
Sorrowfully unto mine heart it sit.
Son, often have I warned thee, and yet
For thy profit I warn thee my son,
Dishonest women thou hereafter shun.
Thy brooch anon right woll I to thee fet,
She brought it him, and charged him full deep
When he it took, and on his breast it set,
Bet than his ring he should it keep,
Lest he the loss bewail should and weep.
To the university shortly to seyne
In what he could, he hasted him ageine.
And when he comen was, his Paramour
Him met anon, and unto her him took
As that he did erst, this young reuelour,
Her company he not a deal forsook,
Though he cause had, but as with the hook
Of her slight, he beforne was caught and hent,
Right so he was deceived often and blent.
And as through virtue of the Ring before
Of good he had abundance and plentee
While it was with him, or he had it love:
Right so through virtue of the brooch had he
What good him list; she thought, how may this be,
Some privy thing now causes this richesse:
As did the Ring herebefore I guess.
Wondering hereon she praid him, and besought
Besily night and day, that tell he would
The cause of this; but he another thought,
He meant it close for him it kept be should,
And a long time it was or he it told.
She wept aye too and too, and said alas,
The time and hour that ever I borne was!
Trust ye not on me Sir? she seid,
Lever me were be slain in this place,
By that good Lord that for us all deid,
Then purpose again you any fallace;
Unto you would I be my lives space
As true, as any woman in earth is
Unto a man doubts nothing of this.
Small may she do, that cannot well by heet,
Though not performed be such a promise.
This Ionathas thought her words so sweet,
That he was drunk of the pleasant sweetness
Of them, and of his foolish tenderness.
Thus unto her he spoke, and said tho,
Be of good comfort, why weepest thou so?
And she thereto answered thus, sobbing,
Sir quoth she, my heaviness and dreed
Is this; I am adread of the leesing
Of your brooch, as Almighty God forbeed
It happen so: Now what so God thee speed,
Said he, would thou in this case counsel,
Quoth she, that I keep it might sans fail.
He said, I have a fear and dread algate,
If I so did thou would it leese
As thou lostest my ring, now gone but late,
First God pray I quoth she, that I not cheese,
But that my heart as the cold frost may freeze:
Or else be it brent with wild fire:
Nay, surely it to keep is my desire.
To her words credence he gave pleneere,
And the brooch took her, and after anon,
Whereas he was beforne full leefe and cheer
To folk, and had good, all was gone,
Good and friendship him lacked, there was none.
Woman, me fetch the brooch quoth he, swythee
Into thy chamber for it go; hye thee.
She into chamber went, as then he bad,
^ut she not brought that he sent her fore,
^he meant it not, but as she had be mad
Her clothes has she all to rent and tore,
And cried alas, the brooch away is bore.
For which I wole anon right with my knife
My self slay, I am weary of my life.
This noice he heard, and bliue he to her ran,
^eening she would han done as she spoke,
And the knife in all haste that he can
From her took, and threw it behind his back,
And said, ne for the loss, ne for the lack
Of the brooch, sorrow not, I forgive all,
I trust in God, that yet us help he shall.
To th'Emperesse his mother this yongman
Again him dresseth, he went her unto,
And when she saw him, she to wonder began,
The thought now somewhat there is misdoe,
And said, I dread thy Jewels two
Been lost now, percase the brooch with the ring.
Mother he said, yea, by heaven King.
^onne, thou wotst well no jewel is left
unto thee now, but the cloth precious
Which I thee take shall, thee charging eft
The company of women riotous
^hou flee, least it be to thee so gricuous
That thou it not sustain shall ne bear
Such company on my blessing forbear.
The cloth she felt, and it has him take,
And of his Lady his mother, his leave
He took, but first this forward began he make*
Mother said he, trusts this weel and leeue,
That I shall seyn, for sooth ye shall it preeue,
If I leese this cloth, never I your face,
Henceforth see wole, ne you pray of grace;
With Gods help I shall do well ynow,
Her blessing he took, and to study is go,
And as beforne told have I unto you,
His Paramour his privy mortal foe
Was wont to meet him, right even so
She did than, and made him pleasant cheer:
They clip and kiss and walk homeward in feere.
When they were entered in the house, he sprad
This cloth upon the ground, and thereon sit,
And bad his Paramour, this woman bad,
To sit also by him adowne on it.
She does as he commands, and bit,
Had she this thought and virtue of the cloth
Wist, to han set on it, had she been loath.
She for a while was full sore affesed.
This Ionathas wish in his heart began:
Would God that I might thus been eased,
That as on this cloth I and this woman
Sit hear, as far were, as that never man
Or this came, and uneath had he so thought,
But they with the cloth thither weren brought.
Right to the worlds end, as that it were.
When apparceiued had she this, she cried
As though she through girt had be with a spear.
Harrow! alas that ever shope this tide!
How came we hither? Nay, he said, abide,
Worse is coming here sole wole I thee leave
Wild beasts shallen thee devour or cave.
For thou my Ring and Brooch have fro me holden.
O reverent Sir! have upon me pittee,
Quoth she, if ye this grace do me wolden,
As bring me home again to the Cittee
Where as I this day was, but if that ye
Them have again, of foul death do me dye
Your bountee on me kythe, I mercy cry,
This Ionathas could nothing beware,
Ne take ensample of the deceites tweine
That she did him beforne, but feith him bare,
And her he commanded on deaths peine
Fro such offenses thenceforth her restreine:
She swore, and made thereto foreward,
But herkneth how she bore her afterward.
When she saw and knew that the wrath and ire
That he to her had borne, was gone and past,
And all was well: she thought him eft to fire,
In her malice aye stood she steadfast,
And to enquire of him was not aghast
In so short time how that it might be
That they came thither out of her contree.
Such virtue has this cloth on which we sit,
Said he, that where in this world us be list
Sodeinly with the thought shallen thither flit,
And how thither come unto us vnwist:
As thing fro far, unknown in the mist.
And therewith, to this woman fraudulent
To sleep he said, have I good talent.
Let see, quoth he, stretch out anon thy lap,
In which wole I my head down lay and rest,
So was it done, and he anon began nap,
Nap? nay, he slept right well, at best,
What does this woman, one the sicklest
Of women all, but that cloth that lay
Under him, she drew lyte and lyte away
When she it had all: would God, quoth she,
I were as I was this day morning!
And therewith this root of iniquitee
Had her wish, and sole left him there sleeping.
O Ionathas! like to thy perishing
Art thou, thy paramour made has thy berd,
When thou wakest, cause have thou to be ferd
But thou shall do full well, thou shall obteene
Victory on her, thou have done some deed
Pleasant to thy mother, well can I ween,
For which our Lord quite shall thy meed,
And thee deliver out of thy woeful dreed.
The child whom that the mother uses bless
Full often sithe is eased in distress.
When he awoke, and neither he ne fond
Woman ne Cloth, he wept bitterly,
And said, Alas! now is there in no land
Man worse I know begone then am I
On every side his look he cast, and sy
Nothing but birds in the air flying,
And wild beasts about him renning.
Of whose sight he full sore was agrysed,
He thought all this well deserved I have,
What ayled me to be so evil auised,
That my counsel could I not keep and save?
Who can fool play? who can mad and rave?
But he that to a woman his secree
Discovers, the smart cleaves now on me;
He thus departs as God would harmless;
And forth of adventure his way is went,
But whitherward he draw, he conceitlesse
Was, he not knew to what place he was bent.
He past a water which was so fervent
That flesh upon his feet left it him none;
All clean was departed from the bone.
It shope so that he had a little glass,
Which with that water anon filled he
And when he further in his way gone was,
Before him he beheld and saw a tree
That fair fruit bore, and in great plentee:
He eat thereof, the taste him liked well,
But he there-through became a foul mesel.
For which unto the ground for sorrow and woe
He fell, and said, cursed be that day
That'I was borne, and time and hour also
That my mother conceived me, for ay
Now am I lost; alas and well away!
And when some deel slaked his heaviness,
He rose, and on his way he began him dress,
Another water before him he sye,
Which (sore) to comen in he was adrad:
But nathelesse, since thereby, other way
Ne about it there could none be had,
He thought so streitly am I bestad,
That though it sore me affese or gast,
Assoile it wole I, and through it he past.
And right as the first water his flesh
Departed from his feet, so the secownd
Restored it, and made all whole and fresh:
And glad was he, and joyful that stownd
When he felt his feet whole were and sound:
A violl of the water of that brook
He filled, and fruit of the tree with him took.
Forth his journey this Ionathas held,
And as he his look about him cast,
Another tree from a far he beheld,
To which he hasted, and him hied fast,
Hungry he was, and of the fruit he thrast
Into his mouth, and eat of it sadly,
And of the lepry he purged was thereby.
Of that fruit more he raught, and thence is gone
And a fair Castle from a far, saw he
In compass of which, heads many one
Of men there hung, as he might well see,
But not for that he shun would, or flee,
He thither him dresseth the straight way
In that ever that he can or may.
Walking so, two men came him ageine,
And saiden thus: dear friend we you pray
What man be ye? Sirs, quoth he, certain
A leech I am, and though my self it say,
Can for the health of sick folks well pu^uay.
They said him, of yonder castle the King
A leper is, and can whole be for nothing.
With him there has bin many a sundry leech
That undertook him well to cure and heal
On pain of their heads, but all to seech
Their Art was, 'ware that thou not with him deal,
But if thou can the charter of health enseale;
Least that thou leese thy head, as didden they,
But thou be wise thou find it shall no pley.
Sirs, said he, you thank I of your reed,
For gently ye han you to me quit:
But I not dread to loose mine heed,
By Gods help full safe keep I will it,
God of his grace such cunning and wit
Has lent me, that I hope I shall him cure,
Full well dare I me put in adventure.
They to the kings presence han him lad,
And him of the fruit of the second tree
He gave to eat, and bad him to be glad,
And said, anon your health han shall ye;
Eke of the second water him gave he
To drink, and when he those two had received
His Lepry from him voided was and weiued.
The King (as unto his high dignity
Convenient was) gave him largely,
And to him said, If that it like thee
Abiden here, I more habundantly
Thee give wole. My Lord sickerly,
Quoth he, feign would I your pleasure fulfill.
And in your high presence abide still.
But I no while may with you abide
So mochill have I to done elsewhere.
Ionathas every day to the sea side
Which was nigh, went, to look and enquere
If any ship drawing thither were
Which him home to his country lead might,
And on a day of ships had he sight.
Well a thirty, toward the Castle draw,
And at time of Euensong, they all
Arriueden, of which he was full faw,
And to the shipmen cry he began and call,
And said, if it so hap might and fall,
That some of you me home to my country
Me bring would, well quit should he be.
And told them whither that they shoulden go.
One of the shipmen forth start at last,
And to him said, my ship and no more
Of them that here been, does shope and cast
Thither to wend; let see, tell on fast,
Quoth the shipman, that thou for my travail
Me give wilt, if that I thither sail.
They were accorded, Ionathas forth goes
Unto the King to ask him license
To twine thence, to which the king was loath,
And nathlesse with his benevolence,
This Ionathas from his magnificence
Departed is, and forth to the shipman
His way he takes, as swyth as he can.
Into the ship he enters, and as bliue
As wind and wether good shope to be,
Thither as he purposed him arrive
They sailed forth, and came to the Cittee
In which this Serpentine woman was, she
That had him terned with false deceitis,
But where no remedy follows, streit is.
Turns been quit, all be they good or bad
Sometime; though they put been in delay.
But to my purpose, she deemed he had
Been devoured with beasts many a day
Gone, she thought he delivered was for ay.
Folk of the City knew not Ionathas,
So many a year was past, that he there was.
Misliking and thought changed eke his face,
Abouten he go'th, and for his dwelling
In the City, he hired him a place,
And therein exercised his cunning
Of Physic, to whom weren repairing
Many a sick wight, and all were healed,
Well was the sick man that with him dealed.
Now shape it thus that this Fellicula,
(The well of deceiuable doubleness,
Follower of the steps of Dallida)
Was than exalted unto high richesse,
But she was fallen into great sickness
And heard seine, for not might it been hid
How masterfull a leech he had him kid.
Messages solemn to him she sent,
Praying him to do so mochill labor
As come and see her; and he thither went:
When he her saw, that she his Paramour
Had been, he well knew, and for that dettour
To her he was, her he thought to quite
Or he went, and no longer it respite.
But what that he was, she ne wist not
He saw her urine, and eke felt her pous,
And said, the sooth is this plain and flat,
A sickness han ye strange and marvelous,
Which to avoid is wonder dangerous:
To heal you there is no way but one,
Leech in this world other can find none.
Auiseth you whether you list it take
Or not, for I told have you my wit.
Ah sir, said she, for Gods sake,
That way me show, and I shall follow it
What ever it be: for this sickness sit
So nigh mine heart, that I wot not how,
Me to demene, tell on I pray you.
Lady ye must openly you confess,
And if against good conscience and right,
Any good han ye take more or less,
Beforne this hour, of any manner wight,
Yield it anon; else not in the might
Of man is it, to give a medicine
That you may heal of your sickness and pine.
If any such thing be, tell out it reed,
And ye shall been all whole I you beheet;
Else mine Art is naught withouten dreed.
O Lord she thought health is a thing full sweet
Therewith desire I souerainly to meet:
Since I it by confession may recover,
A fool am I but I my guilt discover.
How falsely to the son of The Emperor
Ionathas, had she done, before them all
As ye han heard above, all that error
By knew she, o Fellicula thee call
Well may I so, for of the bitter gall
Thou take the beginning of thy name,
Thou root of malice and mirror of shame.
Than said Ionathas, where are those three
Jewels, that thee fro the Clerk withdrew?
Sit in a Coffer at my beds feet, ye
Shall find them; open it, and so pray I you.
He thought not to make it queint and tow
And say nay, and streine courtesy,
But with right good will thither he began hye.
The Coffer he opened, and them there fond,
Who was a glad man but Ionathas? who
The ring upon a finger of his hond
He put, and the brooch on his breast also,
The cloth eke under his arm held he tho;
And to her him dresseth to done his cure.
Cure mortal, way to her sepulture.
He thought rue she should, and fore-thinke
That she her had unto him mis bore.
And of that water her he gave to drink,
Which that his flesh from his bones before
Had twined, where through he was almost lore
And he relieved been, as ye above
Han heard, and this he did eke for her love.
Of the fruit of the tree he gave her ete,
Which that him made into the Leper stert,
And as bliue in her womb began they fret
And gnaw so, that change began her heart,
Now harkneth how it her made smert.
Her womb opened, and out fell each intraile
That in her was, thus it is said sans fail.
Thus wretchedly, (lo) this guile-man did,
And Ionathas with jewels three
No lenget there thought to abide,
But home to the Empress his mother hastes he,
Whereas in joy, and in prosperitee
His life led he to his dying day,
And so God us grant that we do may.

Willy. By my hook this is a Tale
Would befit our Whitson-ale:
Better cannot be I wist,
Descant on it he that list.
And full gladly give I would
The best Cosset in my fold,
And a Mazor for a fee,
If this song thou wilt teachen me.
It Is so quaint and fine a lay,
That upon our revel day
If I sung it, I might chance
(For my pains) be took to dance
With our Lady of the May.

Roget. Roget will not say thee nay,
If thou deem'st it worth thy pains.
It Is a song, not many Swains
Singen can, and though it be
Not so decked with nycetee
Of sweet words full neatly chused
As are now by Shepherds used:
Yet if well you sound the sense,
And the Morals excellence,
You shall find it quit the while,
And excuse the homely style.
Well I wot, the man that first
Sung this Lay, did quench his thirst,
Deeply as did ever one
In the Muses Helicon.
Many times he has been seen
With the Farries on the green,
And to them his Pipe did sound,
Whilst they danced in a round.
Mickle solace would they make him,
And at midnight often wake him,
And convey him from his room
To a field of yellow broo ne;
Or into the Meadows, where
Mints perfume the gentle Air,
And where Flora spends her treasure:
There they would begin their measure.
If it chanced nights sable shrowds
Muffled Cinthia up in clouds;
Safely home, they then would see him,
And from brakes and quagmires free him.
There are few such swains as he
Now adays for harmony.

Willie. What was he thou praisest thus?

Roget. Scholar unto Tityrus.
Tityrus the brauest Swain
Ever lived on the plain,
Taught him how to feed his Lambs,
How to cure them, and their Dams:
How to pitch the fold, and then,
How he should remove again:
Taught him when the Corn was ripe,
How to make an Oaten Pipe,
How to join them, how to cut them,
When to open, when to shut them,
And with all the skill he had
Did instruct this willing lad.

Willie. Happy surely was that Swain!
And he was not taught in vain:
Many a one that prouder is,
Han not such a song as this;
And have garlands for their meed,
That but jar as Skeltons reed.

Roget. It Is too true: But see the Sun
Has his journey fully run;
And his horses all in sweat,
In the Ocean cool their heat;
Sever we our sheep and fold them,
It Will be night ere we have told them.

THOMAS OCCLEEVE, one of the privy Seal, composed first this tale, and was
never till now imprinted. As this shall please, I may be drawn to publish the
rest of his works, being all perfect in my hands. He wrote in CHAVCER Stime.

THE SHEPHERDS PIPE. The second Eglogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Two Shepherds here complain the wrong
Done by a swinish Lout,
That brings his Hogs their Sheep among,
And spoils the Plain throughout.
WILLIE. IOCKIE.
Willie. IOCKIE, say: what might he be
That sits on yonder hill?
And tooteth out his notes of glee
So uncouth and so shril?

Iockie. Notes of glee? bad ones I trow,
I have not heard beforne
One so mistook as Willie now,
It Is some Sow-gelders horn.
And well thou asken might if I
Do know him, or from whence
He comes, that to his Minstralsie
Requires such patience.
He is a Swinward, but I think
No Swinward of the best.
For much he reketh of his swinke,
And carketh for his rest.

Willie. Harm take the Swine! What makes he here?
What lucklesse planets frowns
Have drawn him and his Hogs in feere
To root our daisied downs.
^ll more he thrive! and may his Hogs
And all that ere they breed
Be ever worried by our Dogs,
For so presumptuous deed.
Why kept he not among the Fennes?
Or in the Copses by,
Or in the Woods, and braky glennes,
Where Hawes and Acornes lie?
About the Ditches of the Town,
Or Hedge-rowes he might bring them.

Iockie. But then some pence 'twould cost the Clown
To yoke and eke to ring them.
And well I ween he loves no cost
But what is for his back:
To go full gay him pleases most,
And lets his belly lack*
Two suits he has, the one of blew,
The other homespun gray:
And yet he means to make a new
Against next revel day;
And though our May-lord at the feast
Seemed very trimly clad,
In cloth by his own mother dressed,
Yet comes not near this lad.
His bonnet neatly on his head,
With button on the top,
His shoes with strings of leather red,
And stocking to his slop.
And yet for all it comes to pass,
He not our gybing scapes:
Some like him to a trimmed Ass,
And some to lacke-an-Apes.

Willie. It seems then by what is said,
That Iockie knows the Boore;
I would my scrip and hook have laid
Thou knewst him not before.

Iockie. Sike lothed chance by fortune fell,
(If fortune ought can do)
Not kend him? Yes. I ken him well
And sometime paid for it too.

Willie. Would Iockie ever stoop so low,
As conissance to take
Of sike a Churl? Full well I know
No Nymph of spring or lake,
No Heardesse, nor no shepherds gerle
But feign would sit by thee,
And Sea-nymphs offer shells of perle
For thy sweet melody.
The Satyrs bring thee from the woods
The Straw-berrie for hire,
And all the first fruits of the budds
To woo thee to their quire.
^iluanus songsters learn thy strain,
For by a neighbor spring
The Nightingale records again
What thou do primely sing.
Nor can thou tune a Madrigall,
Or any drery moan,
But Nymphs, or Swains, or Birds, or all
Permit thee not alone.
And yet (as though deuoid of these)
Can thou so low decline,
As leave the lovely Naides
For one that keeps Swine?
But how befell it?

Iockie. The Other day
As to the field I set me,
Near to the May Pole on the way
This sluggish Swinward met me.
And seeing Weptol with him there,
Our fellow-swaine and friend,
bad, good day, so on did fare
To my preposed end.
But as back from my wintring ground
I came the way before,
This rude groom all alone I found
Stand by the Alehouse door.
There was no nay but I must in
And taste a cup of Ale;
Where on his pot he did begin
To stammer out a tale.
He told me how he much desired
Th'acquaintance of us Swains,
And from the forest was retired
To graze upon our plains:
But for what cause I cannot tell,
He can nor pipe nor sing,
Nor knows he how to dig a well,
Nor neatly dress a spring:
Nor knows a trappe nor snare to till,
He sits as in a dream;
Nor scarce has so much whistling skill
Will hearten-on a teame.
Well, we so long together were,
I began to haste a way,
He licensed me to leave him there,
And gave me leave to pay.

Willie. Done like a Swinward; may you all
That close with such as he,
Be used so! that gladly fall
Into like company.
But if I fail not in mine Art,
I Will send him to his yerd,
And make him from our plains depart
With all his durty herd.
I wonder he has suffered been
Upon our Common here,
His Hogs do root our younger treen
And spoil the smelling breere.
Our purest wells they wallow in,
All ouer-spred with dirt,
Nor will they from our Arbours lin,
But all our pleasures hurt.
Our curious benches that we build
Beneath a shady tree,
Shall be orethrowne, or so defilde
As we would loath to see.
Then join we Iockie; for the rest
Of all our fellow Swains,
I am assured will do their best
To rid him fro our plains.

Iockie. What is in me shall never fail
To forward such a deed.
And sure I think we might prevail
By some Satyricke reed.

Willie, ^f that will do, I know a lad
Can hit the maister-vaine.
But let us home, the skies are sad,
And clouds distill in rain.

THE SHEPHERDS PIPE. THE THIRD EGLOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
Old NEDDY'S poverty they moan.
Who whilome was a Swain
That had more Sheep himself alone,
Then ten upon the plain.
PIERS. THOMALIN.
Thomalin. Where is every piping lad
That the fields are not yclad
With their milk-white she
Tell me: Is it Holy Day,
Or if in the Month of May
Use they long to sleep?

Piers. Thomalin it is not too late,
For the Turtle and her mate
Sitten yet in nest:
And the Thrustle has not been
Gathering worms yet on the green
But attends her rest.
Not a bird has taught her young,
Nor her mornings lesson sung
In the shady grove:
But the Nightingale in dark
Singing, woke the mounting Lark
She records her love.
Not the Sun has with his beams
Gilded yet our crystal streams
Rising from the Sea,
Mists do crown the mountains tops,
And each pretty myrtle drops,
It Is but newly day.
Yet see yonder (though vnwist)
^ome man comes in the mist;
Have thou him be held?
^ee he crosses over the land
With a dog and staff in hand,
Limping for his eld.

Thomalin. ^es, I see him, and do? know him,
and we all do reu'rence owe him,
It Is the aged Sire
^EDDY, that was wont to make
^ch great feasting at the wake,
And the The Midsummer fires are termed so in the West parts of England.
blessing-fire.
Good old man! see how he walks
Painful and among the balkes
Picking locks of wull:
I have known the day when he
Had as much as any three,
When their lofts were full.
Underneath yond hanging rocks
All the valley with his Flocks
Was whilome ouer-spread:
He had milch-goates without peers,
Well-hung kine, and fatned steeres
Many hundred head.
WILKINS core his Dairy was,
For a dwelling it may pass
With the best in town.
Curds and Cream with other cheer,
Have I had there in the year
For a greeny gown.
Lasses kept it, as again
Were not fitted on the plain
For a lusty dance:
And at parting, home would take us,
Flawnes or Sillibubs to make us
For our iouisance.
And though some in spite would tell,
Yet old NEDDY took it well;
Bidding us again
Never at his Cote be strange:
Unto him that wrought this change,
Mickle be the pain!

Piers. What disaster THOMALIN
This mischance has clothed him in,
Quickly tellen me;
Rue I do his state the more,
That he clipped heretofore
Some felicity.
Han by night accursed thieves
Slain his Lambs, or stoine his Beeues?
Or consuming fire
Brent his shearing-house, or stall;
Or a deluge drowned all?
Tell me it entire.
Have the Winters been so set
To rain and snow, they have wet
All his driest Laire:
By which means his sheep have got
Such a deadly curelesse rot,
That none living are?

Thomal^n. Neither waves, nor thieves, nor fire,
Nor have rots impoor'd this Sire,
Suretiship, nor yet
Was the usurer helping on
With his damned extortion,
Nor the chains of debt.
But deceit that ever lies
Strongest armed for treacheries
In a bosomed friend:
That (and only that) has brought it.
Cursed be the head that wrought it!
And the basest end.
Grooms he had, and he did send them
With his herds a field, to tend them,
Had they further been;
Sluggish, lazy, thriftlesse elues,
Sheep had better kept themselves
From the Foxes teen.
Some would kill their sheep, and then
Bring their master home again
Nothing but the skin;
Telling him, how in the morn
In the fold they found them torn,
And nere lying lin.
If they went unto the fair
With a score of farned ware,
And did chance to sell,
If old NEDDY had again
Half his own; I dare well saine,
That but seldom fell.
They at their return would say,
Such a man, or such would pay,
Well known of your Hyne.
Alas poor man! that subtle knave
Undid him, and vaun^ i^ brave
Though his Master pine.
Of his master he would beg
Such a lamb that broke his leg,
And if there were none:
To the fold by night he would hye,
And them hurt full rufully
Or with staff or stone.
He would have petitions new,
And for desperate debts would sue
NEDDY had forgot:
He would grant: the other then
Tares from poor and aged men:
Or in Iayles they rot.
NEDDY lately rich in store,
Giving much, deceived more,
On a sudden fell:
Then the Steward lent him gold,
Yet no more then might be told
Worth his masters Cell.
That is gone, and all beside,
(Well-a-day, alack the tide)
In a hollow den,
Underneath yond gloo my wood
Wons he now, and wails the brood
Of ungrateful men.

Piers. But alas! now he is old,
Bit with hunger, nipt with cold,
What is left him?
Or to succor, or relieve him,
Or from wants often to repreeue him

Thomalin. All Is bereft him,
Save he has a little crowd,
(He in youth was of it proud)
And a dog to dance:
With them, he on holy days
In the Farmers houses plays
For his sustenance.

Piers. See; he is near, let us rise and meet him,
And with dues to old age, greet him,
It is fitting so.

Thomalin. It Is a motion good and sage,
Honor still is due to age:
Up, and let us go.

THE SHEPHERDS PIPE. THE FOVRTH EGLOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
In this the Author bewailes the death of one whom he shadoweth under the name
of Philarete, compounded of the Greek words (...) and (...), a lover of
virtue, a name well be fitting him to whose memory these lines are consecrated,
being sometime his truly loved (...) now as much lamented) friend Mr THOMAS
MANVVOOD. son to the worthy Sir PETER MANVVOOD Knight.

UNDER an aged Oak was WILLY laid,
Willy, the lad who whilome made the rocks
To ring with joy, whilst on his pipe he played,
And from their masters wood the neighbring flocks.
But now o're-come with dolors deep
That nigh his heart strings rent,
Ne cared he for his silly sheep,
Ne cared for merriment.
But changed his wonted walks
For uncouth paths unknown,
Where none but trees might hear his plaints,
And echo rue his moan.
Autumn it was, when droop't the sweetest flowers,
And Rivers (swollen with pride) orelook'd the banks,
Poor grew the day of Summers golden hours,
And void of sapp stood Ida's Cedar-rankes,
The pleasant meadows sadly lay
In chill and cooling swears
By rising fountains, or as they
Feared Winters wastfull threats.
Against the broad-spred Oak,
Each wind in fury bears;
Yet fell their leaves not half so fast
As did the Shepherds tears.
As was his seat, so was his gentle heart,
Meek and dejected, but his thoughts as hye
As those aye-wandring lights, who both impart
Their beams on us, and heaven still beautify.
Sad was his look, (o heavy Fate!
That Swain should be so sad
Whose merry notes the forlorn mate
With greatest pleasure clad.)
Broke was his tunefull pipe
That charmed the Crystal Floods,
And thus his grief took airie wings
And flew about the woods.
Day, thou art too officious in thy place,
And night too sparing of a wished stay,
Ye wandering lamps: o be ye fixed a space!
Some other Hemisphere grace with your ray.
Great Phoebus! Daphne is not heree,
Nor Hyacinthus fair;
Phoebe! Endimion and thy dear
Has long since clef^ the air.
But ye have surely seen
(Whom we in sorrow miss)
A Swain whom Phoebe thought her love,
And Titan deemed his.
But he is gone; then inwards turn your light,
Behold him there; here never shall you more;
O're-hang this sad plain with eternal night!
Or change the gaudy green she whilome wore
To fenny black. HYPERION great
To ashy palenesse turn her!
Green well befits a lovers heat
But black beseernes a mourner.
Yet neither this thou can,
Nor see his second birth,
His brightness blindes thine eye more now,
Then thine did his on earth.
Let not a shepherd on our hapless plains,
Tune notes of glee, as used were of yore!
For PHILARET is dead, let mirthfull strains
With PHILARETE cease for evermore!
And if a fellow swain do live
A niggard of his tears;
The Shepheardesses all will give
To store him, part of theirs.
Or I would lend him some,
But that the store I have
Will all be spent before I pay
The debt I owe his grave.
O what is left can make me leave to moan?
Or what remains but does increase it more!
Look on his sheep: alas! their masters gone.
Look on the place where we two heretofore
With locked arms have vowed our love,
(Our love which time shall see
In shepherds songs for ever move,
And grace their harmony)
It solitary seems.
Behold our flowrie beds;
Their beauties fade, and Violets
For sorrow hang their heads.
It Is not a Cypress bough, a countenance sad,
A mourning garment, wailing Elegy,
A standing hearse in sable vesture clad,
A Toombe built to his names eternity,
Although the shepherds all should strive
By yearly obsequies,
And vow to keep thy fame alive
In spite of destinies
That can suppress my grief:
All these and more may be,
Yet all in vain to recompense
My greatest loss of thee
Cypress may fade, the countenance be changed,
A garment rot, an Elegy forgotten,
A herse'mongst irreligious rites be ranged,
A toombe plucked down, or else through age be rotten:
All things th'vnpartiall hand of Fate
Can raze out with a thought,
These have a seu'rall fixed date,
Which ended, turn to naught,
Yet shall my truest cause
Of sorrow firmly stay,
When these effects the wings of Time
Shall fan and sweep away.
Look as a sweet Rose fairly budding forth
Bewrayes her beauties to th'enamour'd morn,
Until some keeneblast from the envious North,
Killes the sweet budd that was but newly borne,
Or else her rarest smells delighting
Make her, her self betray
Some white and eurious hand inuiting
To pluck her thence away.
So stands my mournful case,
For had he been less good,
He yet (vncropt) had kept the stock
Whereon he fairly stood.
Yet though so long he lived not as he might,
He had the time appointed to him given.
Who lives but the space of one poor night,
His birth, his youth, his age is in that Eeuen.
Who ever does the period see
Of days by heaven forth plotted,
Dies full of age, as well as he
That had more years allotted.
In sad Tones then my verse
Shall with incessant tears
Bemoane my hapless loss of him
And not his want of years.
In deepest passions of my griefe-swolne breast
(Sweet soul!) t^is only comfort seizes me,
That so few years should make thee so much blessed,
And gave such wings to reach ETERNITY.
Is this to dye? No: as a ship
Well built, with easy wind
A lazy hulke does far out-strippe,
And soonest harbor find:
So PHILARETE fled,
Quick was his passage given,
When others must have longer time
To make them fit for heaven.
Then not for thee these briny tears are spent,
But as the Nightingale against the breere
It Is for my self I moan, and do lament
Not that thou left'st the world, but left'st me here.
Here, where without thee all delights
Fail of their pleasing power,
All glorious days seem ugly nights,
Me thinks no April shower
Embroder should the earth,
But briny reares distill,
Since FLORA'S beauties shall no more
Be honored by thy quill.
And ye his sheep (in token of his lack)
Whilome the fairest flock on all the plain:
Yeane never Lamb, but be it clothed in black.
Ye shady Sicamours! when any Swain,
To carue his name upon your rind
Does come, where his does stand,
Shed drops, if he be so unkind
To raze it with his hand.
And thou my loved Muse
No more should numbers move,
But that his name should ever live,
And after death my love.
This said, he sighed, and with o're-drowned eyes
Gazed on the heavens for what he mist on earth;
Then from the earth, full sadly began arise
As far from future hope as present mirth,
Unto his Cote with heavy pace
As ever sorrow trod
He went, with mind no more to trace
Where mirthfull Swains abode,
And as he spent the day,
The night he past alone,
Was never Shepherd loved more dear,
Nor made a truer moan.
TO THE VIRTUOUS and much lamenting Sisters of my ever admired friend, Mr
THOMAS MANVVOOD.
To me more known then you, is your sad chance,
Oh! had I still enjoyed such ignorance;
Then, I by these spent tear not bin known,
Nor left another grief to sing mine own.
Yet since his fate has wrought these throes
Permit a Partner in your woes
The cause does yield, and still may do
Enough for YOU, and others to^
But if such plaints for YOU are kep.
Yet may I grieve since you have wept.
For he more perfect grows to be^
That feels another MISERY
And though these drops which mourning run
From several Fountains first begun
And some far off, some nearer sleete
They will (at last) in one stream meet
Mine shall with yours, yours mix with mine
And make one Offering at his Shrine:
For whose ETERNITY on earth, my Muse
To build this ALTAR, did her best skill use;
And that you, I, and all that held him dear,
Our tears and sighs might freely offer here.
THE SHEPHERDS PIPE. THE FIFTH EGLOGVE. To his ingenious friend Mr.
CHRISTOPHER BROOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
WILLY incites his friend to write
Things of a higher fame
Then silly Shephards use endite
Valid in a Shepherds name.
WILLY and CVTTY. Morn had got the start of night,
Laboring men were ready dight
With their shouels and their spades
For the field, and (as their trades)
Or at hedging wrought, or ditching
For their food more then enritching.
When the shepherds from the fold
All their bleating charges told,
And (full careful) searched if one
Of all their flock were hurt or gone,
Or (if in the nightime cul'd)
Any had their fleeces pulled:
Amongst the rest (not least in care)
CVTTY to his fold began fare,
And young WILLY (that had given
To his flock the latest even
Neighborhood with CVTTY's sheep)
Shaking off refreshing sleep,
Hy'd him to his charge that blet;
Where he (busied) CVTTY met.
Both their sheep told, and none mist
Of their number; then they blist
PAN, and all the Gods of plains
For respecting of their trains
Of silly sheep; and in a song
Praise gave to that holy throng.
Thus they drove their flocks to graze,
Whose white fleeces did amaze
All the Lillies, as they pass
Where their usual feeding was.
Lillies angry that a creature
Of no more eye-pleasing feature
Then a sheep, by natures duty
should be crowned with far more beauty
Then a Lilly; and the power
Of white in sheep, ourgoe a flower:
From the middle of their sprout
(Like a Furies sting) thrust out
Dart-like forks in death to steep them,
But great PAN did safely keep them;
And affoorded kind repair
To their dry and wonted laire,
Where their masters (that did eye them)
Underneath a Haw-thorne by them,
On their pipes thus began to play,
And with rimes wear out the day.

Willie. CEase CVTTY: cease, to feed these simple Flocks,
And for a Trumpet change thine Oaten-reeds;
O're-looke the valleys as aspiring rocks,
And rather march in steel, then shepherds weeds.
Believe me CVTTY! for heroicke deeds
Thy verse is fit; not for the lives of Swains,
(Though both thou can do well) and none proceeds
To leave high pitches for the lowly plains:
Take thou a Harp in hand, strive with APOLLO;
Thy Muse was made to lead, then scorn to follow.

Cuttie. WILLY: to follow sheep I never shall scorn;
Much less to follow any Deity;
Who'gainst the Sun (though weakened by the morn)
Would vie with looks, needs an Eagles eye,
(...) dare not search the hidden mystery
Of tragic Scenes; nor in a buskined style
Through death and horror march, nor their height fly
Whose pens were fed with blood of this fair I Will.
It shall content me, on these happy downs
To sing the strife for garlands, not for crowns.

Willie. O who would not aspire, and by his wing
Keep stroke with fame, and of an earthly jar
Another lesson teach the Spheres to sing?
Who would a shepherd that might be a star?
See learned Cutty, on yond mountains are
Clear springs arising, and the climbing goat
That can get up, has water cleerer far
Then when the streams do in the valleys float.
What madman would a race by torch-light run
That might his steps have vsher'd by the Sun?
We Shepherds tune out lays of Shepherds loves,
Or in the praise of shady groves, or springs;
We seldom hear of CITHEREA's Doves,
Except when some more learned Shepherd sings;
And equal meed have to our sonetings:
A Belt, a sheep-hooke, or a wreath of flowers,
Is all we seek; and all our versing brings,
And more deserts then these are seldom ours.
But thou whose muse a falcons pitch can sore
May share the bays even with a Conqueror.

Cuttie. Why does not WILLY then produce such lines
Of men and arms as might accord with these?

Willie. Cause Cutties spirit not in Willy shines,
Pan cannot weild the Club of Hercules,
Nor dare a Merlin on a Heron seize.
Scarce know I how to fit a shepherds ear;
Far more unable shall I be to please
In ought, which none but semi-gods must hear;
When by thy verse (more able) time shall see
Thou can give more to kings then kings to thee.

Cuttie. But (wel-a-day) who loves the muses now?
Or helps the climber of the sacred hill?
None lean to them: but strive to disalow
All heavenly dewes the goddesses distill.

Willie. Let earthly minds base mucke for ever fill,
Whose music only is the chime of gold,
Deaf be their ears to each harmonious quil!
As they of learning think, so of them hold.
And if there is none deserves what thon can do,
Be then the Poet and the Patron too.
I tell thee Cuttie, had I all the sheep
With thrice as many more, as on these plains
Or shepherd or fair maiden sits to keep,
I would them all forgo, so I thy strains
Could equalize: O how our nearest swains
Do trim themselves, when on a holy day
They have to hear thee sing, knowing the trains
Of fairest Nymphs will come to learn thy lay.
Well may they run and wish a parting never, (uer,
So thy sweet tongue might charm their ears for e^

Cuttie. These attributes (my lad) are not for me,
Bestow them where true merit has assigned;

Willie. And do I not? bestowing them on thee:
Believe me Cuttie, I do bear this mind,
That whereso'ere we true deserving find,
To give a silent praise is to detract;
Obscure thy verses (more then most refined)
From any one, of dullness so compact.
And rather sing to trees then to such men,
Who know not how to crown a Poets pen.

Cuttie. WILLY, by thy incitement I Will assay
To raise my subject higher then tofore,
And sing it to our Swains next holy day,
Which (as approved) shall fill them with the store
Of such rare accents; if disliked, no more
Will I a higher strain then shepherds use,
But sing of Woods and Rivers as before.

Willie. Thou will be ever happy in thy Muse.
But see, the radiant Sun is gotten hye,
Let Us seek for shadow in the grove hereby.

THE SHEPHERDS PIPE. THE SIXTH EGLOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
PHILOS of his Dog does brag
For having many feats;
The while the Curre undoes his bag,
And all his dinner eats.
WILLY. IOCKIE. PHILOS.
WILLY. STay IOCKIE, let us rest here by this spring,
And PHILOS too, since we so well are met;
This spreading Oak will yield us shadowing
Till Phoebus steeds be in the Ocean wet.

Iockie. Gladly (kind swain) I yield, so thou will play
And make us merry with a Roundelay.

Philos. No Iockie, rather wend we to the wood,
The time is fit, and Filberds waxen ripe,
Let Us go and fray the Squirrell from his food;
We will another time hear Willie pipe.

Willie. But who shall keep our flocks when we are gone?
I dare not go and let them feed alone.

Iockie. Nor I: since but the other day it fell,
Leaving my sheep to graze on yonder plain,
I went to fill my bottle at the well,
And ere I could return two lambs were slain.

Philos. Then was thy dog iil taught, or else a sleep;
Such Curres as those shall never watch my sheep.

Willie. Yet Philos has a dog not of the best;
He seems too lazy, and will take no pains,
More fit to lie at home and take his rest
Then catch a wandering sheep upon the plains.

Iockie. It Is true indeed: and Philos wot ye what?
I think he plays the Fox he grows so fat.

Philos. Yet has not Iockie nor yet Willie seen
A dog more nimble then is this of mine,
Nor any of the Fox more heedfull been
When in the shade I slept, or list to dine.
And though I say it, has better tricks in store
Then both of yours, or twenty couple more.
How often have the maidens strove to take him,
When he has crossed the plain to bark at Crows?
How many Lasses have I known to make him
Garlands to gird his neck, with which he goes
Vaunting along the lands so wondrous trim,
That not a dog of yours durst bark at him.
And when I list (as oftentimes I use)
To tune a Horne-pipe, or a Morris-dance,
The dog (as he by nature could not choose)
Seeming asleep before, will leap and dance.

Willie. Belike your dog came of a Pedlers brood,
Or Philos music is exceeding good.

Philos. I boast not of his kin, nor of my Reed,
(Though of my reed and him I well may boast)
Yet if you will adventure that some meed
Shall be to him that is in action most,
As for a Collar of shrill sounding bells
My dog shall strive with yours, or any's else.

Iockie. PHILOS in truth I must confess your Wagge
(For so you call him) has of tricks good store,
To steal the vittailes from his masters bag,
More cunningly, I nere saw dog before.
See WILLY, see! I prithee PHILOS note
How fast thy bread and cheese goes down his throat.

Willie. Now PHILOS see how mannerly your Curre,
Your well-taught dog, that has so many tricks,
Deuoures your Dinner.

Philos. I wish 'twere a burre
To choke the Mungtell!

Iockie. See how clean he lickes
Your Butter-boxe; by Pan, I do not meanly
Love Philos dog that loves to be so cleanly.

Philos. Well flouted IOCKIE.

Willie. PHILOS! run amain,
For in your scrip he now has thrust his head
So far, he cannot get it forth again;
See how he blindfold strags along the mead;
And at your scrip your bottle hangs, I think.
He loves your meat, but cares not for your drink.

Iockie. I, so it seems: and PHILOS now may go
Unto the wood, or home for other cheer.

Philos. Twere better he had never served me so,
Sweet meat, sour sauce, he shall abye it dear.
What must he be aforehand with his master?

Willie. Only in kindness he would be your taster.

Philos. Well Willy you may laugh, and urge my spleen;
But by my hook I swear he shall it rue,
And had fared better had he fasting been.
But I must home for my allowance new.
So farewell lads. Look to my fleeced ^raine
Till my return.

Iockie. We will.

Willie. Make haste again.

THE SHEPHERDS PIPE. THE SEVENTH EGLOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
PALINODE intreates his friend
To leave a wanton Less;
Yet he pursue her to his end
And (...) all Council pass.
PALINODE. and HOBBINOL. WHither wends Hobbinoll so early day?
What be thy Lamkins broken from the fold,
And on the plains all night have run ast ray?
Or are thy sheep and sheep-walkes both ysold?
What mister-chance has brought thee to the field
Without thy sheep? thou were not wont to yield
To idle sport,
But did resort
As early to thy charge from drowzy bed
As any shepherd that his flock has fed
Upon these downs.

Hobbinoll. Such heavy frowns
Fortune for others keeps; but bends on me
Smiles would be fit the seat of majesty.
Has Palinode
Made his abode
Upon our plains, or in some uncouth Cell?
That hears not what to Hobbinoll befell;
Phillis the fair, and fairer is there none,
To morrow must be linkt in marriage bands,
It Is I that must undo her virgin Zone.
Behold the man, behold the happy hands.

Palinode. Behold the man? Nay then the woman too,
Though both of them are very small beholding
To any power that set them on to woo;
Ah Hobbinoll! it is not worth unfolding
What shepherds say of her; thou can not choose
But hear what language all of Phillis use;
Yet, then such tongues,
To her belongs
More men to sat her lust; unhappy elfe!
That wilt be bound to her to loose thy self.
Forsake her first.

Hobinoll. Thou most accursed!
Durst thou to slander thus the innocent,
The graces pattern, Virtues president?
She, in whose eye
Shines modesty,
Upon whose brow lust never looks with hope,
Venus ruled not in Phillis Horoscope;
It Is not the vapor of a Hemblocke stem
Can spoil the perfume of sweet Cynnamon;
Nor vile aspersions, or by thee or them
Cast on her name, can stay my going on.

Palinode. On may thou go, but not with such a one,
Whom (I dare swear) thou know is not a maid:
Remember when I met her last alone
As we to yonder Grove for filberds straid,
Like to a new-strook Do from out the bushes,
Lacing herself, and red with gamesome blushes
Made toward the green,
Loath to be seen:
And after in the grove the goatheard met:
What said thou then? If this prevail not, yet
I Will tell thee more.
Not long ago
Too long I loved her, and as thou do now
Would swear Diana was less chaste then she,
That Jupiter would court her, knew he how
To find a shape might tempt such chastity:
And that her thoughts were pure, as new-falne snow
Or silver swans that trace the banks of Poe,
And free within
From spot of sin:
Yet like the flinte her lust-swolne breast concealed
A hidden fire; and thus it was revealed:
Cladon, the Lad
Who whilome had
The Garland given for throwing best the bar,
I know not by what chance or lucky star
Was chosen late
To be the mate
Unto our Lady of the gleesome May
And was the first that danced each holyday,
None would he take but Phillis forth to dance,
Nor any could with Phillis dance but he,
On Palinode she then ceforth not a glance
Bestows, but hates him and his poverty,
Cladon had sheep and lims for stronger lode
Then ere she saw in simple Palinode,
He was the man
Must clip her than,
For him she wreathes of flowers, and chaplets made
To strawberries inuites him in the shade,
In sheering time
And in the prime
Would help to clip his sheep, and guard his lambs,
And at a need lend him her choicest rams,
And on each stock
Work such a clock
With twisted colored thread; as not a Swain
On all these downs could show the like again.
But as it seems, the Well grew dry at last,
Her fire vnquench'd; and she has Cladon left,
Nor was I sorry; nor do wish to taste
The flesh whereto so many flies have cleft.
Oh Hobbinoll! Can thou imagine she
That has so often been tryde so often misdone,
Can from all other men be true to thee?
Thou know with me, with Cladon, she has gone
Beyond the limits that a maiden may,
And can the name of wife those rouings stay?
She has not ought
That Is hid, unsought,
These eyes, these hands, so much know of that woman
As more thou can not; can that please that is common?
No: should I wed,
My marriage bed
And all that it contains, should as my heart
Be known but to my self; if we impart
What golden rings
The Fairie brings,
We loose the Iem nor will they give us more,
Wives loose their value if once known before
Behold this Violet that cropped lies,
I know not by what hand first from the stem,
With what I pluck my self shall I it prise?
I scorn the offals of a Diadem.
A Virgins bed has millions of delights
If then good parents please she know no more:
Nor has her servants nor her favorites
That wait her husbands issuing at door:
She that is free both from the act and eye
Only deserves the due of Chastity.
But Phillis is
As far from this,
As are the Poles in distance from each other
She well beseemes the daughter of her mother.
Is there a brake
By Hill or Lake
In all our plains that has not guilty been
In keeping close her stealths; the Paphian Queen
Never used her skill
To win her will
Of young Adonis, with more heart then she
Has her allurements spent to work on more.
Leave, leave her Hobinol; she is so ill
That any one is good that is naught of her,
Though she be fair, the ground which often we till
Grows with his burden old and barrenner.

Hobbinoll. With much ado, and with no little pain
Have I out-heard thy railing against my love:
But it is common, what we cannot gain
We often disualew; sooner shall thou move
Yond lofty Mountain from the place it stands,
Or count the Meadows flowers, or Isis sands
Then stir one thought
In me, that ought
Can be in Phillis which Diana fair
And all the Goddesses would not wish their.
Fond man then cease
To cross that peace
Which Phillis virtue and this heart of mine
Have well begun; and for those words of thine
I do forgive
If thou will live
Hereafter free from such reproaches more,
^ince goodness never was without her foe.

Palinode. ^eleeue me Hobinoll what I have said
^as more in love to thee then hate to her:
Think on thy liberty; let that be weighed;
Great good may often betide if we defer
And use some short delays ere marriage rites
Wedlock has days of toil as ioysome nights.
Can thou be free
From iealousy?
Oh no: that plague will so infect thy brain
That only death must work thy peace again.
Thou can not dwell
One minute well
From whence thou leau'st her; lock on her thy gate
Yet will her mind be still adulterate.
Not Argos eyes
Nor ten such spies
Can make her only thine; for she will do
With those, that, shall make thee mistrust them to^.

Hobbinoll. Will thou not leave to taint a virgins name^

Palinode. A virgine' yes: as sure as is her mother.
Do thou not hear her good report by fame?

Hobbinoll. Fame is a liar and was never other.

Palinode. Nay, if she ever spoke true; now she did:
And thou will once confess what I foretold
The fire will be discos'd that now lies hid,
Nor will thy thought of her thus long time hold.
Yet may she (if that possible can fall)
Be true to thee that has been false to all.

Hobbinoll. So pierce the rocks
A Red-breasts knockes
As the belief of ought thou tell me now.
Yet be my guest to morrow.

Pallinode. Speed your plough.
I fear ere long
You Will sing a song
Like that was sung hereby not long ago.
Where there is carrion never wants a crow.

Hobinoll. Ill tuto^'d Swain,
If one the plain
Thy sheep hence-forward come where mine do feed,
They shall be sure to smart for thy misdeed.

Palinode. Such are the thanks a friends fore-warning brings.
Now by the love I ever bore thee, stay!
Meet not mishaps! themselves have speedy wings.

Hobbinoll. It is in vain. Farewell. I must away.

FINIS.
W. B.
OTHER EGLOGVES: BY Mr. BROOK, Mr. WITHER, and Mr. DAVI^S.

LONDON Printed by N. O. for G. Norton. 1614.

To his much loved friend Mr W. Brown of the Inner Temple. D. D.
Cuttie. WIlly well met, now whiles thy flocks do feed
So dangerlesse, and free from any fear;
Lay by thy Hook, and take thy pleasant Reed,
And with thy melody reblesse mine ear,
Which (upon Lammas last) and on this plain,
Thou plaidst so sweetly to thy skipping Train.

Willy. I Cutty, then I played unto my sheep
Notes apt for them, but far unfit for thee;
How should my lays (alas) true measure keep
With thy choice ears, or make thee melody:
For in thy strain thou do so far exceed,
Thou can not relish such my homely Reed.

Cuttie. Thy niceness shows thy cunning, nothing more,
Yet since thou seem so lowly in thy thought;
(Who in thy Pastoral vein, and learned lore
Art so much praised; so far and near art sought.)
Lend me thine ears, and thou shall hear me sing
In praise of Shepherds, and of thee their King.
MY loved WILLY, if there be a Man
That never heard of a brown colored Swan;
Whose tender Pinions scarcely fledged in show
Could make his way with whitest Swans in Poe;
Or if there be among the Spawne of earth,
That thinks so vilely of a shepherds birth,
That though he tune his Reed in meanest key,
Yet in his brain holds not heaven, earth, and sea:
Then let him know, thou art that young brown Swan,
That through the winding streams of Albion
Taking thy course do seem to make thy pace
With flocks full plumed equal in love and grace;
And thou art he (that though thy humble strains
Do move delight to those that love the plains:)
Yet to thy self (as to thy sort) is given
A JACOBS staff, to take the height of Heaven;
And with a natural Cosmography,
To comprehend the earths rotunditie:
Besides the working plummet of thy brain,
Can sound the deepes, and secrets of the maine:
For if the Shepherd a true figure be
Of Contemplation (as the learned agree)
Which in his seeming rest, does (restless) move
About the Center, and to Heaven above;
And in his thought is only bounded there,
See's Natures chain fastened to JOVE'S high Chair,
Then thou (that art of PAN the sweetest Swain
And far transcending all his lowly train)
In thy discoursiue thought, do range as far
Nor can thou err; led by thine own fair star.
Thought has no prison and the mind is free
Under the greatest King and tyranny.
Though low thou seem thy Genius mounts the Hill
Where heavenly Nectar does from Jove distill;
Where Bays still grows (by thunder not struck down)
The Victors-Garland; and the Poets-Crowne,
And underneath the Horse-foote-foun^ does flow,
Which gives Wit verdure, and makes learning grow.
To this fair Hill (from storms and tempests free.)
Thou often repair'st for Truths discovery,
A prospect upon all times wandering mazes
Displaying vanity; disclosing graces,
Nay in some cliffe it leads the eye beyond
The times horizon stripping sea and land.
And farther (not obscurely) does divine
All future times: Here do the Muses shine,
Here dignity with safety do combine,
Pleasure with merit make a lovely twine.
Vitam vitalem they shall ever lead
That mount this hill and Learning's path do tread:
Here admiration without enui's won,
All in the light, but in the heat sit none.
And to this Mount thou do translate thine Essence
Although the plains contain thy corporal presence,
Where though poor peoples misery thou show
That under g^iping Lords they undergo,
And what content they (that do lowest lie)
Receive from Good-men; that do sit on hye.
And in each witty Ditty (that surpasses)
Do (for thy love) make strife'mongst Country lasses
Yet in thy humble strain; Fame makes thee rise
And strikes thy mounting forehead'^ainst the skies
Renowned friend; what Trophe may I raise
To memorize thy name; would I could praise
(In any mean) thy worth; strike envy dumb,
But I dye here; thou live in time to come;
States have their Period statues lost with rust:
Souls to Elysium, Nature yields to dust,
All monuments of Arms and Power decay,
But that which lives to an Eternal day,
Letters preserve; Nay Gods, with mortal men
Do simpathize by virtue of the pen.
And so shall thou: sweet Willy then proceed
And in eternal merit fame thy Reed.
PAN to thy fleeced numbers give increase
And Pales to thy loue-thoughts give true peace
Let fair Feronia (Goddess of the woods)
Preserve thy young Plants multiply thy buds.
And whiles thy Rams do Tup, thy Ewes do twyn
Do thou in peaceful shade (from men's rude din)
Add Pinyons to thy Fame: whose active wit
With Hermes winged cap does suite most fit.

Christopher Brook.
THIRSIS AND ALEXIS.
Thirsis. ALEXIS if thy worth do not disdain
The humble friendship of a meaner Swain;
Or some more needful business of the day
Urge thee to be too hasty on thy way;
Come (gentle shepherd) rest thee here by me
Under the shadow of this broad-leau'd tree:
For though I seem a stranger, yet mine eye
Observes in thee the marks of courtesy:
And if my judgment err not, noted too
More then in those that more would seem to do:
Such virtues thy rude modesty does hide
Which by thy proper luster I espied;
And though long mask't in silence they have been,
I have a wisdom through that silence seen:
Yea I have learned knowledge from thy tongue,
And heard when thou have in concealment sung:
Which me the bolder and more willing made
Thus to inuit thee to this homely shade.
And though (it may be) thou could never spy
Such worth in me to make me known thereby,
In thee I do; for here my neigbouring sheep
Upon the border of these downs I keep:
Where often thou at Pastorals and plays
Have graced our Wakes on Summer Holy Days:
And many a time with thee at this cold spring
Met I, to hear your learned shepherrds sing,
Saw them disporting in the shady groves,
And in chaste Sonnets woo their chaster loves:
When I endued with the meanest skill,
Among others have been urged to tune my quill,
Where (cause but little cunning I had got)
Perhaps thou saw me, though thou knew'st me (...)

Alexis. Yes Thirsis I do know thee and thy name,
Nor is my knowledge grounded all on fame,
Art not thou he, that but this other year,
Scard'st all the Wolves and Foxes in the sheere?
And in a match at Football lately tried
(Having scarce twenty Satyrs on thy side)
Held'st play: and though assailed, kept'st thy stand
Against all the best-try'd Ruffians in the land:
Did thou not then in doleful Sonnets ^one,
When the beloved of great Pan was gone;
And at the wedding of fair THEM and RHYNE,
Sing of their glories to thy Valentine?
I know it, and I must confess that long
In one thing I did do thy nature wrong:
For till I marked the aim thy Satyrs had,
I thought them ouerbold and Thirsis mad,
But since I did more nearly on thee look
(...) soon perceived that I had all mistook;
(...) saw that of a Cynicke thou madst show
^here since I find that thou were nothing so,
And thatof many thou much blame had go^
When as thy Innocence deserved it not.
But this too good opinion thou have seemed
To have of me (not so to be esteemed)
Preuailes not ought to stay him who does fear
He rather should reproves then praises hear
It Is true I found thee plain and honest too
Which made me like then love, as now I do
And Thirsis though a stranger this I say
Where I do love I am not coy to stay.

Thirsis. Thanks gentle Swayne that do so soon unfold
What I to thee as gladly would have told
And thus thy wonted courtesy expressed
^n kindly entertaining this request:
Sure I should injury my own content
Or wrong thy love to stand on complement,
Who have acquaintance in one word begun
As well as I could in an age have done:
Or by an over weaning slownesse mar
What thy more wisdom has brought on so far;
Then sit thou down and I Will my mind declare
As freely, as if we familiars were:
And if thou will but daigne to give me ear
Something thou may for thy more profit hear.

Alexis. Willingly Thirsis I thy wish obey.

Thirsis. Then know Alexis from that very day
When as I saw thee at that Shepherds Coare
Where each I think of other took first noate,
I mean that Pastor who by Tauies springs
Chaste Shepherds loves in sweetest numbers sings,
And with his Music (to his greater fame)
Has are made proud the fairest Nymphs of Tham
E'ne then me thought I did espy in thee
Some vnperceiu'd and hidden worth to be
Which in thy more apparent vertnes shined
And among many I in thought deuin'd,
By something my conceit had understood
That thou were marked one of the Muses brood
That made me love thee: And that love I bear
Begat a Pity, and that Pity Care:
Pity I had to see good parts concealed,
Care I had how to have that good revealed,
Since it is a fault admits no excuse
To possess much and yet put naught in use:
Heereon I vowed (if we two ever met)
The first request that I would strive to get
Should be but this that thou would show thy skill,
How thou could tune thy verses to thy quill:
And teach thy Muse in some well framed song,
To show the Art thou have suppressed so long:
Which if my new acquaintance may obtain
Thirsis will ever honor this days gain.

Alexis. Alas! my small experience scarce can tell
So much as where those Nymphs the Muses dw^ly
Nor (though my slow conceit still travels on)
Shall I ere reach to drink of Hellicon;
Or if I might so favored be to taste
What those sweet streams but ouer-flow in waste,
And touch Parnassus where it low'st does lie,
I fear my skill would hardly flagge so hye.

Thirsis. Despair not Man the Gods have prized naught
So dear that may not be with labor bought,
Nor need thy pain be great since Fate and Heaven
They (as a blessing) at thy birth have given.

Alexis. Why say they had.

Th. Then use their gifts thou must,
Or be ungrateful, and so be unjust:
For if it cannot truly be denied,
Ingratitude men's benefits do hide,
Then more ungrateful must he be by odds
Who does conceal the bounty of the Gods.

Alexis. That Is true indeed, but Envy hates those
Who seeeking fame their hidden skill disclose:
Where else they might (obscured) from her espying
Escape the blasts and danger of envying:
Critickes will censure our best strains of Wit,
And purblinde Ignorance misconster it.
All which is bad: yet worse then this does follow,
Most hate the Muses, and contemn APOLLO.

Thirsis. So let them; why should we their hate esteem*
Is It not enough we of our selves can deem?
It Is more to their disgrace that we scorn them
Then unto us that they our Art contemn;
Can we have better pastime then to see
Our gross heads may so much deceived be,
As to allow those doings best, where wholly
We scoff them to their face, and flout their folly;
Or to behold black Envy in her prime
Die selfe-consum'd whilst we vie lives with time:
And in despite of her, more fame attain
Then all her malice can wipe out again,

Alexis. Yea but if I applied me to those strains,
Who should drive forth my flocks unto the plains,
Which whilst the Muses rest, and leisure crave,
Must watering, folding and attendance have.
For if I leave with wonted care to cherish
Those tender herds: both I and they should perish.

Thirsis. Alexis now I see thou do mistake,
There is no meaning thou thy charge forsake,
Nor would I wish thee so thy self abuse
As to neglect thy calling for thy Muse:
But let these two so of each other borrow,
That they may season mirth, and lessen sorrow,
Thy flock will help thy charges to defray,
Thy Muse to pass the long and tedious day.
Or whilst thou tun'st sweet measures to thy Reed
Thy sheep to listen will more near thee feed,
The wolves will shun them, birds above thee sing,
And Lambkins dance about thee in a Ring;
Nay which is more: in this thy low estate
Thou in contentment shall with Monarkes mate:
For mighty Pan, and Ceres to us grants
Our fields and ^lockes shall help our outward wants*
The Muses teach us songs to put off cares,
Graced with as rare and sweet conceits as theirs:
And we can think our lasses on the greenes
As fair, or fairer then the fairest Queens;
^r what is more then most of them shall do,
We Will make their iuster fames last longer too,
^auing our Lines by greatest Princes graced
When both their name and memory's desac'd.
Therefore Alexis though that some disdain
The heavenly music of the Rural plain,
What is it to us, if they (or eseent) contemn
^he dainties which were nere ordained for them?
And though that there be other some envy
The praises due to sacred Poesy,
Let them disdain and frer till they are weary,
^e in our selves have that shall make us merry:
Which he that wants, and had the power to know it,
Would give his life that he might dye a Poet.

Alexis. Thou have so well (young Thirsis) played thy part
I am almost in love with that sweet Art:
And if some power will but inspire my song,
Alexis will not be obscured long.

Thirsis. Enough kind Pastor: But oh! yonder see
Two Shepherds, walking on the lay-banke be,
Cuttie and Willie, that so dearly love,
Who are repairing unto yonder grove:
Let Us follow them: for never brauer Swains
Made music to their flocks upon these plains.
They are more worthy, and can better tell
What rare contents do with a Poet dwell.
Then whiles our sheep the short sweet grass do shere
And till the long shade of the hills appear,
We Will hear them sing: for though the one be young,
Never was any that more sweetly sung.

Geo. Wither.

An Eclogue between young Willy the singer of his native Pastorals, and old
WERNOCKE his friend.
Wernocke. WILLY, why lig'st thou (man) so w^-be-gon?
What? been thy rather Lamkins ill-apaid?
Or, has some drerie chance thy Pipe misdone?
Or, have thou any sheep-cure mis-assaid?
Or, is some conteck 'twixt thy love and thee?
Or, else some loue-warke arsie-varsie taken?
Or, fates less frolic than they wont to be?
What gars my WILLY that he so does wane?
If it be for thou have mis-said, or done,
Take keep of thine own council; and, thou art
As shoene and clear fro both-twaine as the Sun:
For, all Swains laud thine hauiour, and thine Art.
Ma hap thine heart (that uneath brook neglect,
And jealous of thy fresh fame) liggs upon
Thy rural songs, which rarest Clerks affect,
Dreading the descant that mote fall thereon.
Droope not for that (man) but vnpleate thy brows,
And blithly, so, fold enuies up in pleats:
For, fro thy Makings milk, and mellie flows
To feed the Songster-swaines with Arts soot-meats.

Willie. Now, sil^er (Wernocke) thou have split the mark
Albe that I ne wot I han mis song:
But, for I am so young, I dread my warke
Woll be misualued b^th of old and young.

Wern^cke. Is thilke the cause that thou been ligge so laid,
Who whilom no encheson could fore-haile;
And caitiue-courage nere made misapaid,
But with chief yongsters songsters bar'st thy sail?
As swoot as Swans thy strains make Thames to ring
Fro Coiswould where her sourse her course does take,
To her wide mouth which vents thy carolling
Beyond the hither and the further lake.
Than up (sad swain) pull fro thy veiled cheek
Hur prop, thy palm: and let thy Virilaies,
Kill envious cunning swains (whom all do seek)
With envy, at thine earned gaudy praise.
Up lither lad, thou reck'st much of thy swinke,
When swinke ne swat thou should ne reck for fame;
At Aganip than, lay thee down to drink
Until thy stomach swell, to raise thy name.
What though time yet han not bedowld thy Chin?
Thy Dams dear womb was Helicon to thee;
Where (like a Loach) thou drew'st thilke liquor in,
Which on thy heart strings ran with musickes glee.
Than up betimes, and make the sullen swains
With thy shrill Reed such iolly-iovisance
That they (entranced) ma wonder at thy strains;
So, leave of thee never ending souenance.

Willie. Ah Wernocke, Wernocke, so my spirits been steept
In dullness, through these duller times missawes
Of sik-like music (riming rudely cleept.)
That yer I pipe well, must be better cause.
Ah, who (with lavish draughts of Aganip)
Can swill their soul to frolic; so, their Muse,
When Courts and Camps, that erst the muse did clip,
Do now forlore her; nay, her most abuse?
Now, with their witless, causeless surquedry
They been transposed fro what of yore they were,
That Swains, who but to looser luxury
Can show the way, are now most cherisht there.
These times been crimefull (ah) and being so,
Bold Swains (deft Songsters) sing them criminal;
So, make themselves often gleefull in their woe:
For thy tho Songsters are misween'd of all.
Mecaen^ wont in blonket liueries
Yelad sike chanters; but these miser times
Uncase hem quite, that all may hem despise,
As they don all their best embellisht Rimes.
And Haruest-queenes, of yore, would Chaplets make
To crown their scalpes that couth most swootly sing,
And give hem many a gaude at Ale or Wake,
But now ne recke they of soot carrolling.
Enaunter they should be as seem they would,
Or songen lowdly for so dear desert;
Or else be peregall to Nymphs of old,
From which their beastl^hed now freely start.
Than must they latch the blows of Fates too fell
With their too feeble clowches as they con:
For, none regards or guards hem for their spell,
Tho they, on point-deuice, empt Helicon!
There nis thilke chiuisance they whilome had
For piping swoote; since, with an Heydeguies,
Pipt by Tom-piper, or a Lorrel-lad,
(So be he claws hem) they idolatrize. (sale,
And those that should press proper songs for
Been, in their doomes, so dull; in skill, so crude;
That they had leauer printen Jack a vale,
Or Cl^m o Clough (alack) they been so rude!
And since so few feate Songsters in an age
Been founden; for do weigh hem as they been,
For, Swains, that con no skill of holy-rage,
Been foe-men to fair skils enlawrel'd Queen.
Enough is me, for thy, that I ma vent
My wits spells to my self, or unto thee
(Deer Wernock) which do feel like miscontent
Since thou, and all vnheeded, singt with me.

Wernock. Vartue it is sed (and is an old said-saw)
Is for hur self, to be for sought alone: (draw,
Then eftsoons fro their case thy shrill pipes
And make the welkin ringen with their tone.
Of world, ne worly men take thou no keep,
What the one does, or what the other say;
For should I so, I so, should Eyne out-weepe:
Than, with me; Willy, ay sing care-away.
It Is wood to be fore-pinde with wastefull carke
In many a noyfull stout of willing bale
For vading toys: But trim wits poorest wark
The upper heaven han hent fro nether Dale.
Thilks all our share of all the quelling heap
Of this worlds good: enough is us to tell
How rude the rest been, caduke, and how cheap;
But, laud for well-done warks, don all excel!
For thy we shoulden take keep of our Race
That here we reunen, and what here we done
That when we wenden till an other place,
Our souenance may here, ay-gayly won.
For, time will vnderfong us; and our voice
Woll woxen weak; and, our devising lame;
For, life is brief; and skils been long, and choice:
Than, spend we Time, that Time may spare our Fame,
Look how breme Winter chamfers Earths blecke face;
So, corbed Eld accoyes youths surquedry;
And, in the front, deep furrows done enchase,
Inueloped with falling snow a hy.
Then naught can be atchieu'd with witty shows,
Since grief of ^lde accloyen wimble wit;
Than, us behonen, yer Elde sick accrewes,
Time to forelay, with spells retarding it.
I not what bliss is whelmed with heavens coape
So b^e the pleasance of the Muse be none:
For, when thilk gleesome joys han hallowed scope
They been as those that heau'ns-folke warble on.
I con my good; for, n^w my scalpe is frost
Yielding to snow; the crow-feete near mine Eyne
Been marks of mickle preefe I have, that most
Of all glees else allow, han sudden fine.
O how it garres old Wernock swynck with glee
In that emprise that chiuen fear fame,
It heats my heart above ability
To leave parduring souenance of my name.
And when mine Engine han heau'd hy my thought,
An that on point-deuice eftsooones y fell,
O! how my heart's ioy-rapt, as I had cought,
A Princedome to my share, of thilk Newell.
They been of pleasances the alderbest:
Than, God to forne; I wol no mo but tho:
Tho been the sum of all I louen best:
And for hem love I life; else nold I so.
Drive on thy flock than, to the motley plains
Where by some prill, that among the Pibbles plods,
Thou, with thine Oaten reed, and queintest strains,
May rapt the senior Swains, and minor Gods:
That as on Ida that mych-famed Mount,
A Shepherd Swain; that sung less soote than tho^,
By light loves Goddess, had the grace to mount
To owe the sheenest Queen that Earth did owe:
So, thou may, with thy past'rall Minstralsy
Beating the air, atweene resounding Hills,
Draw to thee Bonibels as smirke, as hy,
And wrap hem in thy love begrey their wills:
For (ah) had Phoebus Clerks the means of some
Worse Clerks (paravnter) so to sing at ease;
They soon would make high long-wing'd haggards
And veil unto their Lures: so, on hem seize. (come;
For, bright Nymphs bu xume Breasts do easily open
To let in thirling notes of noted lays:
For, deftly song they han a charming scope;
So, Nymphs themselves adore Brows girt with Bays.
Than, Willy (ah for pity of thine heart
That drouping yearnes, at misses of these times)
Take thou thy Pipe, and of glee take thy part;
Or cheer thy self with cordials of thy Rimes.
Before the worlds stern face, the world backe-bite
So flyly that her parts ne'it perceive:
Moral thy matter so, that, tho thou smite,
Thou may with tickling her dull sense; deceive.
Than hy thee, Willy, to the neighbor wastes
Where thou (as in another world alone)
May (while thy flock do feed) blow bitter blast^
On thy loudst Pipe, to make il's pertly known.
For, since the rude-crude world done us misplease
That well deseruen, tell we hur hur own;
And let her ken our cunning can, with ease,
Aye shend, or lend hur sempiterne renown.

Willy. Ah Wernocke, so thy sawes mine heart down thril
With love of Muses skill in special,
That I ne wot, on mould what feater skill
Can be yhugg'd in Lordings pectorall.
Ne would I it let-bee for all the store
In th'vncoth scope of both-twain hemispheres;
Enough is me, perdy, nor strive for more
But to be rich in hery for my leeres.
Ne would I sharen that soule-gladding glee
In th'euer gaudy Gardens of the blessed
Not there to han the Muses companee,
Which, God to-fore, is of the best, the best.
Now, Wernock, shall thou see (so more I thee)
That I nill vsen any skill so mytch
(Fair fall my swinck) as this so nice, and free,
In case I may my name to Heaven stitch.
For why; I am by kind so inly pulde
To these delices; that when I betake
My self to other lore I more am dul'd;
And therefro, keenely set, I fall to make.
But, well-away, thy nis the way to thriuen;
And, my near kith, for that wol sore me shend:
Who little reck how I by kind am given;
But hur would force to swinck for thriftier end.
Hence forward then I must assay, and con
My leere in leefull lore, to pleasen them
That, sib to me, would my promotion,
And carke for that to prancke our common Stem:
For, now (as wends the world) no skill to that
(Or rather but that) thriues; since Swains are now
So full of contecke, that they wot ne what
They would; so, if they could; they all would owe.
So fares it in calm seasons with cursed men;
If frennes forbear, at home, hem to invade,
They wry their peace to noy each other then
By plees, till they decease, or fall, or fade.
So times been keener now with common Swaynes
Than when as foreign foe-men with hem fought:
For, now they swyncke, but for fly Law-mens gains
Or seld they should possessen what they ought.
But, what for this? to me it little longs
To gab of sikliche notes of misery;
Enough is me to chaunten swoote my songs,
And blend hem with my rural mynstrelsy.
But, o (my Wernock) how am I to thee
Obligen, for thy keen reencouragements
To skill so mickle loved and sought of me
As this of making with Arts Elements?
I not how I shall thrive therein; ne how
I shall be dempt of in these nicer times:
But how soere so thou my works allow,
I nill be ill-apaidon with my Rimes.

Wernock. Thou nedst not, Willy; wretch were I to laud
Thee in thy misses: for, I so should be
To th'adultries of thy wits-scapes, but a Baude
Ne, as a friend, in sentence, should be free.
Than, wend thou fairly on, with thine emprise;
Sing clearly, Will, on mine encouragement,
And other Swains, more able to devise;
And, fix thee for it, in the firmament.
Enough is me so I may bear a part
Aye in the Muses Quire with those and thee;
I Will sing (at ease) aloud, with cheerful heart,
No base ne mean but Tenor of best glee.

Willy. And I, with thee, woll chaunt each counter-verse
So shrilly that we will make thilk Quire to ring
As ever do the Angels; who rehearse
The loudest lauds of heau'ns-Lord when they sing.
So, farewell, Wernock, mickle thanks to thee
For thy freedom, that can so well devise:
Phoebus now goes to glade; than now go we,
Unto our sheddes to rest us till he rise.

Wernock. Agreed dear, Willy, gent and debonaire,
We Will hence: for, rhumaticke now fares the Air.

Io. Dauies.

FINIS.
To his better beloved, then known friend, Mr. BROWN.
SVch is the fate of some (write) now a days
Thinking to win and wear, they break the Bays,
As a slow Foote-man striving near to come
A swifter that before him far does run,
Puffed with the hope of Honors gole to win
Runs out of Breath yet furthest of from him.
So do our most of Poets whose Muse flies
About for honor: catch poor Butterflies.
But thou fair friend not rankt shall be amongst those
That makes a Mountain where a Mole-bill grows;
Thou whose sweet singing Pen such lays has writ
That in an old way: teaches us new wit:
Thou that were borne and bred to be the man
To turn Apollo's glory into Pan,
And when thou lists of Shepherds leave to write,
To great Apollo add again his light
For never yet, like Shepherds forth have come
Whose Pipes so sweetly play as thine have done.
Fair Muse of Brown, whose beauty is as pure
As women Brown that fair and long'st endure
Still may thou as thou do a lover move,
And as thou do each mouer may thee love,
Whilst I my self, in love with thee must fall,
Brownes Muse the fair Brown woman still will call.
JOHN ONLET. Int. Temp.

AN OTHER ECLOGVE: BY Mr. George Wither. Dedicated to his truly loving and
worthy friend, Mr W. BROWN.

LONDON, Printed for George Norton. 1614.

TO HIS TRVLY BELOVED loving friend Mr WILLIAM BROWN of the Inner Temple.
Roget. and Willie. Prithee Willy tell me this,
What new thing late happened is,
Thou (that were the blythest lad)
Art become so wondrous sad?
And so careless of thy quill,
As if thou had had no skill.
Thou were wont to charm thy Flocks,
And among these rudest rocks
Have so cheered me with thy Song,
That I have forgot my wrong.
Something has thee surely crossed,
That thy old wont thou have lost,
But what is it? Have I ought said
That has made thee misapaid?
Has some Churl done thee a spite?
Do thou miss a Lamb to night?
Frowns thy fairest Shepherds Less?
Or how comes this ill to pass?
Is there any discontent
Worse then this my banishment?

Willie. Why, does that so evil seem,
That thou nothing worse do deem?
Shepherd, there full many be,
That would change Contents with thee.
Those that choose their walks at will,
On the valley or the Hill.
Or those pleasures boast of can
Groves or fields may yield to man:
Never come to know the rest
Wherewithal thy mind is blessed.
Many a one that often resorts
To make up the troop at sports,
And in company some while
Happens to strain forth a smile:
Feels more want, more outward smart
And more inward grief of heart,
Then this place can bring to thee,
While thy mind remains free.
Thou condemn'st my want of mirth,
But what find'st thou in this earth,
Wherein ought may be believed,
Worth to make me joyed, or grieved?
And yet feel I (naithelesse)
Part of both I must confess.
Sel'd, yet for such causes small:
But I grieve not not now at all.

Roget. Why has WILLY then so long,
Now forborne his wonted song?
Wherefore do^ he now let fall,
His well-tuned Pastoral?
And my ears that Music bar,
Which I more long after far
Then the liberty I want.

Willie. That were very much to grant,
But does this hold always lad,
Those that sing not must be sad?
Did thou ever that bird hear
Sing well, that sings all the year?
Tom the Piper does not play
Till he wears his Pipe away:
There Is a time to slack the string,
And a time to leave to sing.

Roget. Yea, but no man now is still,
That can sing, or tune a quill.
Now to chant it, were but reason,
Song and Music are in season.
Now in this sweet jolly tide,
Is the earth in all her pride.
The fair Lady of the May
Trimmed up in her best array
Has invited all the Swains,
With the Lasses of the Plains,
To attend upon her sport
At the places of resort.
Corridon (with his bold Rout)
Has already been about
For the elder Shepherds dole:
And fetched in the Summer-Pole;
Whilst the rest have built a Bower,
To defend them from a shower,
Seil'd so close with boughs all green,
Tytan cannot pry between.
Now the Dayrie Wenches dream
Of their Strawberries and Cream:
And each does her self advance
To be taken in, to dance.
Every one that knows to sing,
Fits him now for Carrolling:
So do those that hope for meede,
Either by the Pipe or Reed,
And though I am kept away,
I do hear (this very day)
Many learned Grooms do wend,
For the Garlands to contend
Which a Nymph that hight Desert,
(Long a stranger in this part)
With her own fair hands has wrought
A rare work (they say) past thought,
As appears by the name,
For she calls them Wreathes of Fame.
She has set in their due place
Every flower that may grace,
And among a thousand more,
(Whereof some butse ne for show)
She has woue in Daphnes tree,
That they may not blasted be.
Which with Time she edged about,
That it might not shatter out.
And that they might wither never,
Intermixed it with Liue-euer.
These are to be shared among
Those that do excel for song:
Or their passions can rehearse
In the smooth'st and sweetest verse.
Then for those amid the rest,
That can play and pipe the best,
There Is a Kidling with the Damme,
A fat Weather, and a Lamb.
And for those that leapen far,
Wrestle, Run, and throw the Bar,
There Is appointed guerdons too:
He that best the first can do
Shall for his reward be paid,
With a Sheepe-hooke, fai^e in-laid
With fine bone, of a strange beast,
That men bring from out the west.
For the next, a Scrip of red,
Tassel'd with fine colored thread.
Then for him that is quick'st of foot,
A Cup of a Maple-roote:
Whereupon the skillful man
Has ingrau'd the Loves of Pan.
And the last has for his due,
A fine Napkin wrought with blew.
Then my Willy what moves thee,
Thus forgetful now to be?
What make thou here with a wight
That is shut up from delight:
In a solitary den
As not fit to live with men.
Go my Willy, get thee gone,
Leave me in exile alone.
Hye thee to that merry throng,
And amaze them with thy Song.
Thou art young, yet such a Lay
Never graced the month of May,
As (if they provoke thy skill)
Thou can fit unto thy Quill.
I with wonder heard thee sing,
At our last years Reuelling.
Then I with the rest was free,
When unknown I noted thee:
And perceived the ruder Swains,
Envy thy far sweeter strains.
Yea I saw the Lasses cling
Round about thee in a Ring:
As if each one jealous were,
Any but herself should hear.
And I know they yet do long
For the res'due of thy song.
Haste thee then to sing it forth,
Take the benefit of worth.
And Desert will sure bequeath
Fames fair garland for thy wreath.
Hye thee Willy, hye away.

Willie. Roget rather let me stay,
And be desolare with thee,
Then at those their Revels be.
Naught such is my skill I wis,
As indeed thou deem'st it is.
But what ere it be, I must
Be content, and shall I trust.
For a song I do not pass,
Mong'st my friends, but what (alas)
Should I have to do with them
That my Music do contemn?
Some there are, as well I wot,
That the same yet favor not:
Yet I cannot well avow,
They my Carrols disallow.
But such malice I have spid,
It Is as bad as if they did.

Roget. Willy, what may those men be,
Are so ill to malice thee,

Willie. Some are worthy-well esteemed
Some without worth are so deemed.
Others of so base a spirit,
They have nor esteem, nor merit.

Roget. What Is the wrong?

Willie. A slight offense,
Wherewithal I can dispense;
But hereafter for their sake,
To my self I Will music make.

Roget. What, because some Clown offends,
Will thou punish all thy friends?

Willy. Honest Roget understand me,
Those that love me may command me,
But thou know I am but young,
And the Pastoral I sung,
Is by some supposed to be
(By a strain) too high for me:
So they kindly let me gain,
Not my labor, for my pain.
Trust me, I do wonder why
They should me my own deny.
Though I Am young, I scorn to flit
On the wings of borrowed wit.
I Will make my own feathers rear me,
Whither others cannot bear me.
Yet I Will keep my skill in store,
Till I Have seen some Winters more.

Roget. But in earnest mean thou so?
Then thou art not wise, I trow.
Better shall advise thee Pan,
For thou do not rightly than:
That Is the ready way to blot
All the credit thou have got.
Rather in thy Ages prime,
Get another start of Time:
And make those that so fond be,
(Spite of their own dullness) see
That the sacred Muses can
Make a child in years, a man.
It is known what thou can do,
For it is not long ago,
When that CVDDY, Thou, and I
Each the others skill to try,
At Saint Dunstanes charmed Well,
(As some present there can tell)
Sang upon a sudden Th^ame,
Sitting by the Crimson stream.
Where, if thou did well or no,
Yet remains the song to show.
Much experience more I Have had,
Of thy skill (thou happy Lad)
And would make the world to know it,
But that time will further show it.
Envy makes their tongues now run,
More then doubt of what is done.
For that needs must be thy own,
Or to be some others known:
But how then wilt suit unto
What thou shall hereafter do?
Or I wonder where is he,
Would with that song part to thee:
Nay, were there so mad a swain,
Could such glory sell for gain;
Phoebus would not have combined
That gift with so base a mind.
Never did the Nine impart
The sweet secrets of their Art
Un to any that did scorn
To have their fair Badge seen worn.
Therefore unto those that say,
Were they pleased to sing a Lay,
They could do it, and will not tho;
This I speak, for this I know:
None ere drunk the Thespian Spring,
And knew how, but he did sing.
For that one infused in man,
Makes him shew't, do what he can,
Nay those that do only sip
Or but even their fingers dip
In that sacred Fount (poor Elues)
Of that brood will show themselves;
Yea, in hope to get them fame,
They will speak though to their shame
Let those then at thee repine,
That by their wits measure thine.
Needs those Songs must be thy own,
And that one day will be known,
The same imputation to,
I my self do undergo:
But it will be known ere long,
I Am abused, and thou have wrong,
Who at twice ten have song more
Then some will do at fourscore.
Cheer thee (honest Willy) then,
And begin thy song again.

Willy. Feign I would, but I do fear
When again my Lines they hear,
If they yield they are my Rimes,
They will find some other Crimes.
And it is no safe ventring by,
Where we see Detraction lie.
For do what I can, I doubt,
She will pick some quarrel out,
And I often have heard defended,
Little said, and soon amended.

Roget. See thou not in cleerest days
Often thick fogges cloud Heavens rays?
And the vapors that do breath
From the earths gross womb beneath,
Seem they not with their black steatne^,
To polute the Suns bright beams,
And yet vanish into air,
Leaving them (unblemished) fair?
So (my Willy) shall it be
With Detractions breath and thee.
It shall never rise so hye,
As to stain thy Poesy.
Like the Sun she often exhales
Vapors from the rot'nest vales;
But so much her power can do,
That she may dissolve them too.
If thy verse do bravely tower,
As she makes wing, she gets power.
But the higher she does sore,
She Is affronted still the more:
Till she to the highest has past,
Then she rests with fame at last.
Let naught therefore thee affright,
But make forward in thy flight:
For if I could match thy Rhyme,
To the very stars I Would clime.
There begin again and fly
Till I reached Aeternity.
But (alas) my Muse is slow:
For thy pace she flagges too low.
Yea, the more'^ her hapless fate,
Her long wings were clipped of late.
And poor I, her fortune ruing,
Am my self put up a muing.
But if I my Cage can rid,
I Will fly where I never did.
And though for her sake l'me crossed,
Though my best hopes I have lost,
And knew she would make my trouble,
Ten times more then ten times double,
I would love and keep her toe,
Spite of all the world could do.
For though banished from my flocks,
And confined within these rocks,
Here I waste away the light,
And consume the sullen Night,
She does for my comfort stay,
And keeps many cares away.
Though I miss the flowery Fields,
With those sweetes the Springtide yields,
Though I may not see those Groves,
Where the shepherds chaunt their Loves,
And the Lasses more excel,
Then the sweet-voyc'd Philomel.
Though of all those pleasures past,
Nothing now remains at last,
But Remembrance (poor relief)
That more makes, then mends my grief.
She Is my smind^ companion still,
Maugre Enuies evil will.
Whence she should be driven to,
Wert't in mortals power to do.
She does tell me where to borrow
Comfort in the midst of sorrow;
Makes the desolatest place
To her presence be a grace;
And the blackest discontents
Be her fairest ornaments.
In my former days of bliss,
Her divine thoughts taught me this,
That from every thing I saw,
I could some invention draw:
And raise pleasure to her hight,
Through the meanest objects sight,
By the murmur of a spring,
Or the least leaves rustling.
By a Dazie whose leaves spread
Shut when Tytan goes to bed,
Or a shady bush or tree,
She could more infuse in me,
Then all Natures beauties can,
In some other wiser man.
By her help I also now,
Make this churlish place allow
Somthings, that may sweeten gladness
In the very gall of sadness.
The dull loanesse, the black shade,
That these hanging vaults have made,
The strange Music of the waves,
Beating on these hollow Caves.
This grim den which Rocks embosse,
Ouer-growne with eldest moss.
The rude portals that give light,
More to Terror then Delight.
This my Chamber of Neglect,
Wal'd about with Disrespect,
From all these, and this dull air,
A fit object for Despair,
She has taught me by her might
To draw comfort and delight.
Therefore thou best earthly bliss
I will cherish thee for this.
Poesy; thou sweet'st content
That ere Heaven to mortals lent.
Though they as a trifle leave thee
Whose dull thoughts can not conceive thee
Though thou be to them a scorn
That to naught but earth are borne:
Let my life no longer be,
Then I am in love with thee.
Though our wise ones call it madness
Let me never taste of gladness
If I love not thy made fits
Above all their greatest wits.
And though some too seeming holy
Do account thy raptures folly:
Thou do teach me to contemn
What makes Knaves and Fools of them.
O high power that often does carry
Men above

Willy. Good Roget tarry
(...) do fear thou will begone
Quite above my reachanon,
The kind flames of Poesy
Have now borne thy thoughts so high,
That they up in Heauenbee
And have quite forgotten me,
Call thy self to mind again
Are these Raptures for a Swain,
That attends on lowly sheep
And with simple herds does keep?

Roget. Thanks my Willy, I had run
Till that Time had lodged the Sun,
If thou had not made me stay;
But thy pardon hear I pray.
Loved Apollo's sacred fire
Had raised up my spirits higher
Through the love of Poesy
Then indeed they use to fly.
But as I said, I say still,
If that I had Willi's skill
Envy nor Detractions ^ongue,
Should ere make me leave my song;
But I'd^ sing it every day
Till they pined themselves away.
Be^ thou then advised in this
Which both just and ^itting is,
Finish what thou have begun
Or at least still forward run,
Hail and Thunder ill he will bear
That a blast of wind does fear:
And if words will thus afray thee?
Prithee how will deeds dismay thee
Do not think so rathe a song
Can pass through the vulgar throng
And escape without a touch,
Or that they can hurt it much:
Frosts we see do nip that thing
Which is forwardst in the Spring:
Yet at last for all such lets
Some what of the rest it gets:
And I Am sure that so may thou;
Therefore my kind Willy now,
Since thy folding time draws on
And I see thou must be gone,
I no more of this will say
Till we meet next holiday.

Geor. Wither.

Imitatus est Moschi (...) Idyll. (...) and Meleagri Epigram. Antholog. lib. 7.
I. S. olim inter Otia Rustica.
To his Melisa.
LOVD did Cytherea cry,
If you straggling Cupid spy,
And but bring the news to me,
Your reward a Kiss shall be:
You shall (if you him restore)
With a Kiss, have something More.
Marks enough the Boy's known by,
Ti'ry Color, Flamy Eye;
Subtle Heart; and sweetened Mouth,
Faining still, but Failing Truth;
Daring Visage, Arms but small;
Yet can Strike us Gods and all.
Body Naked, Crafty Mind;
Winged as a Bird and blind;
Little Bow, but wounding hearts;
Golden both, and Leaden darts.
Burning Taper; if you find him,
Without pity, look you Bind him.
Pity not his Tears or Smiles:
Both are false, both forged guile^.
Fly it, if a Kiss He profer;
Lips enchanting he will offer,
And his Quiver, Bow, and Candle,
But none of them see you handle.
Poisoned they are, and such,
As my self I dare not touch:
Hurt no sight, yet pierce the Eye,
Thence unto the Heart they fly.
Warned thus, Pray, take some pain,
Thelp me to my Boy again.
Thus while Cytherea cried him,
Sweet, within Thine Eyes I spied him.
Thence he s^ly shot at Mine,
(...) My Heart and crept to Thine.
Pay you, Sweet, the promi'st Fee,
Him, I Will swear, I did not see.
FINIS.

