THE SECOND PART OF THE PROTESTANTS PLEA, AND PETITION FOR PRIESTS AND Papists.
Being an history of the holy preisthood, and sacrifice of the true Church of
Christ.

Inuincibly proving them to be, the present sacrificing preisthood: proving
also the sacrifice of the Mass, used in the Catholic Roman church: and that
these were promised, and foretold by the Prophets, instituted by Christ, and
exercised by all his Apostles.

Moreover that they have ever from the first plantinge of Christianity in this
our Britanye, in the days of the Apostles, in every age, and hundred of
years, been continued and preserved here.

All for the most part, warranted by the writings, and testimonies of the best
learned Protestant Doctors, and antiquaries of England, and others.

The preisthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of
the law.

Hebr. cap. 7. ver. 12. WITH LICENSE. Anno 1625.

AN ADMONITION OF THE Author, to all Readers of this his history:
comprehending the Argument and contents thereof.
KNowinge well by long and daiely purchased experience, the great and grievous
persecutions, which formerly have been raised, and persecuted in England
against consecrated Priests of the Roman Church, and professors of that
Religion; and for nothing more, then holy priesthood, and the sacred sunctions
thereof. And yet often hearing all sorts of people, even persecutors
themselves, contestinge and cryinge out, they would willingly stand to the
Judgment of, and be arbitrated by divine Authority, and reverend antiquity:
I an unworthy member of that holy order, a long student in divinity, to
which these are either parts, or have a subordination, for my discharge of
duty to God, and his holy Church, comfort and strengtheninge those that be in
truth, and satisfying, or confounding such, as be in error, have taken in hand
to write a brief history of this subject, beginning at the first original of
Christianity, especially in this Kingdom of great Britain, to which only
after my more general Introduction, and preface ended, to prevent (...) both
in writer, and Readers, I will confine my self.

And to win the love and likinge of all, and avoid the dislike of any, I
mean to follow that most friendly, and to all protestants, favorable manner,
and method in writing, insinuated in the Title of this work, always, or
most commonly to carry with me, the allowance, and warrant of the best
learned Doctors, and Antiquaries of their Religion. And yet for Catholics, I
trust none of them shall find the least occasion of fear, that though I shall
walk upon so vnl^uell ground, I will betray their most just, and holy cause:
but rather add a greater luster, and splendour of glory, then bring any the
least diminution of honor unto it. And make this matter so palpably manifest,
by all Authorities, divine, and humane, the scriptures both of the old and new
testament, and all kind of expositors of them, friends or ennemies, that they
which shall not acknowledge the undoubted, and only truth of the doctrine of
the holy Catholic Church in these mysteries, must needs be said wilfully
with malice to close their eyes against it.

And though the law of Moises wherein the Prophets lived, and God spoke by
them, was but a figure of things to come, and gave but a dark shadow, or
glimeringe of the gracious brightness, and shininge, which our blessed Savior,
the true light of the world, revealed unto it, in the law of the gospel: yet
I shall in the very beginning as a preface to this holy history, so inuincibly
prove, by the scripture (...) old testament, by all original texts, hebrew or
greek, all Authors, the Rabines before Christ, the best learned Doctors of the
primative Church of Christ, and protestants themselves, that the Messiah
promised and foretold by the Prophets, was to ordeine a new sacrificing
priesthood, and that blessed sacrifice of his body, and blood which we
commonly name the sacrifice of the Mass and this was one of the most apparent
distinctiue signs to know him by; so that whosoever denies this, consequently
denies Christ to be the true Messiah.

And the more plainly to demonstrate this, when I come to the first plantinge
of the faith of Christ, in this kingdom in the Apostles time, I will make
manifest, by all testimonies, and antiquities, that Christ our blessed Savior
and Messiah accordingly to the prophesies of him did institute this sacrificing
priesthood, and both celebrated, and ordained the sacrifice of Mass for his
Church for ever. That all his Apostles were sacrificing massing priests, and
offered that blessed sacrifice And that in this kingdom of Britanie in
particular, as in the whole Christian world besides, in every age, and hundred
of years, from the first preachinge, and receiving of Christian Religion here,
in the Apostles time, in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, and six
hundred years, of Christ, and so long as the best learned protestants
affirm, that holy primative Church remained unspotted, in the first received
truth, and integrity thereof.

The same holy sacrificing priesthood, a continual succession of sacrificinge
massinge priests, and Bishops, and sacrifice of Mass ever continued here, in
the same manner as they are now used and observed in the present Roman Church,
without any the least essential change, or difference. By reason whereof many
chief Articles in Religion now questioned, as the supernatural change or
transubstantiation of bread and wine into the blessed body, and blood of
Christ, there offered a propitiatory sacrifice for sin; prayer to the
blessed Virgin, S. Mary, and other Saints, and Angels, prayer for the faithful
departed, merit of sacrifice, and good works, with insufficiency of sole
faith, and other principal things which protestants commonly disallow in
Catholic Religion, will be thus proved, and deduced in every age, in this
our Britanie, even with the allowance of our best learned protestants, and such
antiquities, as they approve, and cannot disallow. One most material point of
the Popes power and spiritual prerogative in this nation, from the first
embracinge of Christian Religion in all ages, which I promised in my first
part, I understand to be effectually performed already. Therefore I shall
sparingly make mention thereof, in this history, except in some things, and
places, where it shall be needful for the more perfect handlinge of the
present subject of this work.

And hereby it will sufficiently appear, unto all protestants, and persecutors
of the holy Catholic Roman Church, that seeing the controversy is, whether
the Catholic, or protestant church is the true church of Christ, that by no
possibility the protestant congregation can be this true and holy church.
For by their own Articles of their Religion, to which all protestant Bishops
and ministers have sworn and subscribed. (Articl. of Engl. protest. Relig.
articul. 19.) The visible Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men,
in which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly
ministered, according to Christ's ordinance, in all those things that are
requisite to the same. Which be the very words of their own subscribed, and
sworn Article of Religion.

Therefore when they require three things to the true Church, true and
lawfully consecrated priests, and preachers, the pure word of God preached,
and Sacraments duly ministered, and all these shall be found in the Roman
Church in all ages from the first preaching of Christ, and not any one of them
in the protestant parlamentary Church of England, or any such other, but a
manifest opposition and persecution of those sacred preachers of the word, and
ministers of the Sacraments, as of the word, and Sacraments themselves, so
preached, and ministered, none of these can possibly be the true Church of
Christ, but a company of professed adversaries and enemies unto it: and that
the only true Church which they have so unchristianly persecuted the Catholic
Roman church is that true and most holy church of Christ.

THE PREFACE PROVING THE CONTENTS OVT OF THE Prophets.
Wherein sacrificing and Massinge Preisthood, Priests, and the sacrifice of
Mass, are proved by learned Protestants, and other testimonies, from the
history of Melchisedech. Genesis 14. THE I. CHAPTER.
SO undoubted a verity, and necessary a thing it was, for our blessed Savior
cominge into the world, to perfect the Law of Moses, and euacuate the
external, imperfect preisthood, sacrifices, and ceremonials thereof, and to
institute and ordeine a sacrifice, and preisthood more perfect and independent,
to continue for ever, as his law and Religion is to do, and to give a most
sure, and timely warning and notice of this to the world, that when God had
made the first promise of the Messiah unto Abraham, in the 12. and 13. chapter
of Genesis, in the very next the 14. chapter following, he revealed by the
preisthood and sacrifice of Melchisedech long before either the law,
preisthood, or the sacrifices thereof were delivered to Moises, what the
euerduringe preisthood, and sacrifice of the Messiah, and his law should be.
For so both the Prophet David, S. Paul to the Hebrews, S. Peter in the canon
of the holy Mass, being Author thereof, as shall be proved hereafter, the
ancient Rabines before Christ, as protestants them selves acknowledge, so
likewise by their warrant, the most ancient and holy Fathers of the Church of
Christ, do prove their preisthood, and sacrifice of Christ, and his
sacrificinge priests, in the law of the Gospel, from the words of Moises:
these be our english protestants translation.

2. Melchisedech King of Salem, brought forth bread and wine: and he was the
priest of the most high God. The greek readinge, is: For he was the priest of
the most high God: signifying thereby, that he did the preistly sacrificall
office, with that bread and wine: and although in the hebrew the verb Hotzi,
which our protestants translate, brought forth, ordinarily where it is not
otherwise limited and restricted, has that signification, yet being confined
as here it is, to the office of a sacrificing priest, such as Melchisedech was,
it must be appropriated to his office of sacrificinge, otherwise the reason
which the scripture makes. because he was a priest, is superfluous. And the
rather in this case, because in the hebrew text, this bringinge forth of bread
and wine by this extraordinary priest, has relation unto God; and so must
needs be a sacrificall action: for the bringinge forth of bread and wine, or
matter of any sacrifice to God, by a priest that is a sacrificer, must needs
be a sacrifice. The hebrew is thus: Melchisedech King of Salem brought forth
bread and wine, he being a priest, to God the most high. The name God here
in Hebrew Leeb, being the dative case, and answeringe the production of the
bread and wine, and not the word priest, for otherwise it would not be true
constructio^ in that language, the particle le there seruinge to the dative,
and not genitive case. And therefore, as Franciscus Stancarus that great
protestant professor of hebrew, and others tell us, Rabbi Samuel upon this
place of Genesis, does thus expound it: actus Sacerdotij tradidit: erat enim
ipse sacrificans panem and vinum Deo sancto and benedicto. He delivered the
acts of preisthood, for he was sacrificing bread and wine to God holy and
blessed. Where he plainly expounds it, as I did before, referring the
bringing forth of the bread and wine by Melchisedech the priest, to God holy
and blessed. Which is more plain by the words immediately following in the
hebrew: veicbarechehu and he blessed him: That is to say, he blessed or
praised God, of whom the immediate last speech was. Rabb. Samul. in cap. 14.
Geness. Francisc. Stancar. in l. 10. de art. fid. Petr. Galat. ibid. c. 6. and
alij.

3. So that a priest that used to sacrifice, being proved by the original text
of scripture to have offered or brought forth bread and wine to God the most
high and blessed, and praised him, must needs be said as the Rabbine
expounds it, to have sacrificed bread and wine unto him. So do the holy
fathers: panem and vinum obtulit: Melchisedech offered bread and wine: says S.
Cyprian, the old Roman Mass and S. Ambrose: Quod tibi obtulit summus Sacerdos
Melchisedech: The high priest Melchisedech offered sacrifice to God. S. Hierome
says: In Typo Christi panem and vinum obtulit, and mysterium Christianum in
Saluatoris corpore and sanguine dedicauit. In figure of Christ, he offered
bread and wine, and dedicated the Christian mystery, in the body and blood of
our Savior. So S. Augustine, S. Leo, Arnobius, Eucherius, Primasius, Eusebius
Caesariensis, Theodoretus and others of the primative church, both greek and
latin. Cyprian. epist. 63. Miss. Rom in can. Ambros. l. 4. de Sacram. c. 6. l.
5. c. 1. ad cap. 5. ad Hebr. Hierom. epistol. 17. ad Marcell. c. 2. in quaest.
in Genesis in psalm. 75 109. ad cap 26. Math. August. in psalm. 33. de cia^tat Dei.
l. 6. c. 22. epist. 95. Arnob. Romans in psalm. 109 Leo sermon. 2. anni verse.
Assumpt Eucherius Lugd. homil. 5. de Pasch. Primas. in c. 5. ad Hebr.
Theodoret. quaest. 63. in Genes. and ad psalm. 109. Protest. Articl. of Relig.
articul. 7. scriptures.

4. And except we will say there was a tradition of so great a mystery and
necessary to salvation (which the Religion of our english protestants denies)
or that the Prophet David had some new particular revelation of this thing,
which though it should be gratis spoken by protestants, does inuinciblie
confirm what has been said of this matter; we must needs grant that this
holy prophet, did expound and understand that action of Melchisedech, as so
many authorities remembered did, for he makes it a thing so certain, that
he brings in God him self testifyinge by oath, that it was so: Thus by
protestants translation he speaks of Christ's preisthood and consequently
sacrifice, from this place: The Lord has sworn and will not repent, thou art
a priest for ever: after the order of Melchisedech. (psalm. 109. or 110. verse.
4.) For we do not read in any other passage of scripture, before David's time
but in that place of Genesis, what the order, preisthood, or sacrifice of
Melchisedech was. The same is testified by S. Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews.
( Hebr. 5.6. and 7.17.) And all learned texts Hebrew, Chaldy, Greek and Latin
agree; only the Hebrew makes it plain, that God had made such a promise to
Melchisedech, that Christ should be a priest after his order for ever.

5. For where our English protestants taking upon them to translate and
follow the Hebrew, and as before translate: Thou art a priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedech: The Hebrew is: Our Lord has sworn, and will
according to my word, or, as I promised to Melchisedech. Hal dibrati
Malchisedech. Where we cannot without corrupting the Hebrew dibrati, taking
the last letter away read otherwise. Therefore seeing S. Paul plainly says,
that Christ was a priest after the order or manner of Melchisedech: (...)
repeating it in diverse places: And the Prophet David says, that God swore it,
and so promised to Melchisedech: we must needs believe that Christ's
preisthood and sacrifice, after this order to continue for ever is undeniably
testified and expressed in that place of Genesis, and act of Melchisedech.
Which, to leave S. Paul until I come to the new testament, is proved by the
greatest protestants that ever were.

6. Luther upon that place alleged by David. ( in psalm. 110. Tom. 8.) says:
Melchisedech Rex erat, and Sacerdos, obtulit panem and vinum, pro Patriarcha
Abraham and eius familia. Quid est vero oblatio panis and vini pro Abrahamo?
Hoc exprimit Sacerdotium Christi ab hoc tempore vsque ad finem mundi, quo
mysterium altaris Sacramentum pretiosi corporis and sanguinis sui offert
Ecclesia. Melchisedech was a King and Priest, he offered bread and wine for
Abraham, and his family. What does the offeringe of bread and wine for Abraham
mean? This does express the preisthood of Christ from this time to the end of
the world, in which the church does offer the mistical Sacrament of his
precious body and blood. Philip Melancthon in council. Theolog. part. 2. page
373. says: Excipit Melchisedech redeuntem ex praelio Abraham, and eum ad
sacrificium admittit, eique benedicit. Melchisedech receaueth Abraham
returninge from battle, and admits him to sacrifice, and blesses him.
Calvin diverse times confesses. in c. 7. ad Hebr. verse. 9. page 924. That this
was the opinion of the old Fathers, and he plainly says. Veteres Ecclesiae
Doctores in hac opinione fuerent, vt in oblationem panis and vini insisterunt,
sic autem loquuntur. Christus Sacerdos est secundum ordinem Melchisedech, atqui
panem and vinum Melchisedech obtulit, ergo panis and vini sacrificium
Sacerdotio Christi conuenit. The ancient Fathers were in this opinion, that
they insisted in the oblation of bread and wine, for so they speak, Christ is
a priest after the order of Melchisedech, but Melchisedech did offer bread and
wine, therefore the sacrifice of bread and wine agrees to the preisthood of
Christ.

7. The godly and learned man, as Master Doctor Sutcliffe calls Andreas
Crastouius the Caluinist. ( l. 5. de Miss. papist. c. 26. Andr. Crasteuius l.
de opific. miss. 1. sect. 66.) says: we may not reject the consent and
harmony of the ancient Fathers, both for their nearenes to the Apostles age,
and the singular agreement of them al together: yet he adds: hic omnium
veluti conspiratione oblatio Melchisedechi sacra proponitur, vt non tantum
Abrahae militibusque, sed etia^ Deo incruentum sacrificium simboli^e oblatum
videatur. Here as it were with consent of all, the holy oblation of
Melchisedech is proposed; that it was not only to Abraham and his soldiers,
but that it seems to have been an unbloody sacrifice simbolically offered
also to God. Theodor Biblia^der a learned protestant. ( l. 2. de Trinit. page
89.) writes: erat apud veteres Hebraeos dogma receptissimum, in aduentu
Missiae benedicti cessatura esse omnia legalia sacrificia, tantumque
celebrandum sacrificium Thoda gratiarum actionis, laudis and confessionis: and
illud peragendum pane and vino, sicut Melchisedech Rex Salem and Sacerdos Dei
altissimi, temporibus Abrahami panem and vinum protulit. It was among the old
Hebrews a most received Maxim, that at the coming of the blessed Messiah, all
legal sacrifices should cease, and only the sacrifice Thoda of thanks
giving, praise and confession, should be celebrated, and that to be done with
bread and wine, as Melchisedech King of Salem and priest of God most high in
the time of Abraham brought forth bread and wine. Thus this learned protestant.

8. But where he says, only that the Rabbines wrote thus; Melchisedech did
bring forth bread and wine, that is his gloss; for Fra^ciscus Stancarus (
Apud Petr. Gallat. l. 10. de arcan) The best learned protestant of his time in
the Hebrew antiquities, does assure us from the most ancient Rabbines (of
which I have cited Rabbi Samuel before) the like, or more plain, for the
sacrificing of Melchisedechs bread and wine; and that only never to cease, but
to continue in the time of the Messiah So have R. Moses Hadarsan, R. Pinhas,
and R. Ioai, as the same protestant with others testifies. So that we
plainly see, by all authority, the holy scriptures, the ancient Rabbines,
and the general consent of the holy primative Fathers of Christ's church, as
they are warranted by the best learned protestants of foreign nations whether
Lutherans, or Caluinists, that both Melchisedech (the plain figure of Christ
in this) did offer sacrifice in bread and wine: and this kind of sacrifice
though after a more excellent manner, as the law of the Messiah so requires,
was to be offered by him, and his holy priests in that law. Now let us come
to our English protestants: to make all sure from any contradiction, and learn
of them that the best learned of the^ do so write, and all of them ought so
to acknowledge by their own Religion.

9. For evidence whereof, it is a common maxim and ground of Religion among
them, that the scriptures especially as they translate them, and logically
deduced conclusions from them, are the word of God. ( Field. page 226. wotton
def. of Parkins page 467.) To speak in their words: all matters concluded
logically out of the scriptures ar the word of God, as well as if they were
expressly set down in it word by word. And so of necessity must they all
say, if they will maintain any external show of Religion, for rejecting
traditions, and the authority of the church, as they do, and claiminge only
by scriptures in all matters of faith, they must needs allow so ample
authority to deductions from scriptures: for evident it is, and they willingly
confess, that all things which they hold even as matters of faith, are not
expressly set down in scriptures. And this is an express article of faith
with them, set down in the 6. article of their Religion, confirmed by
parlaments, and subscribed and sworn unto, by all protestant Bishops, and
ministers of England. The words of this their sworn and subscribed unto
Religion in this point are these. Articles of Engl. protest. Religion ratified
by the parlaments and canons of Q. Eliz. and King James articul. 6.

10. Holy scripture conteyneth all things necessary for salvation: so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an article of the faith.
Therefore things so read in scripture and thereby proved, must needs be
articles of faith, otherwise Religion should be without articles of faith,
which is impossible, for by this protestant Religion, there is no other means
to make or prove them such. Being thus directed by these protestants and by
their direction, I make this Argument and proof from scriptures as they
translate the^: Every high priest is ordained to offer sacrifice for sins. (
Hebr. 5.1.8.3.) But Melchisedech was an high priest: Therefore ordained to
offer sacrifice for sins. The first or mayor proposition, is the very words
of S. Paul, as our protestants translate him. The minor or second proposition,
is their translation of the Prophet Moises: Melchisedech was the priest of the
most high God. (Genesis 14.18.) Where he is called, the priest, by excellency and
blessing Abraham, and called by S Paul, better or greater then Abraham. (
Hebr. 7.6.7.9.) Who also was a great priest and patriarch, and as a superior
receiving tithes of him: and so eminent and chief, that the order of which he
was, is not only called the order of Melchisedech, but Christ himself often
termed high priest after the order of Melchisedech: and as our protestants also
translate, after the similitude of Melchisedech, as both the Greek and Latin
texts also are: Therefore Melchisedech of necessity was an high priest.
Therefore again the conclusion, which in a true Argument and Sillogisme, as
this is, cannot be denied, that Melchisedech offered sacrifice, being thereto
ordained, is most certain and an article of faith by these protestants
Religion before.

11. And because by the rule of their Religion, we may not seek but in
scripture to know what sacrifice it was, which he offered, it must needs be
that sacrifice of bread and wine, which the scripture Rabbis, Fathers, and
foreign protestants have told us of before: for we do not find any other
sacrifice, or matter like a sacrifice in scripture attributed to Melchisedech.
If any man shall say, that S. Paul speaking of all high priests offering
sacrifice, means sacrifice improperly, as prayers and such devotions: I
answer this is not only improperly, but by true consequence blasphemously
spoken, utterly denyinge that either the priests of the Law of Nature, or
Moises, or Christ did offer any sacrifice, and so no sacrifice for sin
beeinge offered by Christ, man's redemption was not wrought by Christ, but man
is vnredeemed, and Christ was not the Savior of the world; for in that place
as S. Paul speaks of every high priest and preistly orders, he also speaks
of the external sacrifices of of them, in their order and time. And so does
the protestant public gloss upon those words of S. Paul: Every high
priest is ordained to offer sacrifice: expound them in these terms: He
brings a reason, why it must needs be, that Christ should have a body that
he might have what to offer, for otherwise he could not be an high priest.
(Protest. Annotat. in cap. 8. Hebr. v. 3) Therefore by these protestants S. Paul
speaks of an external and properly named sacrifice, and that therefore
Melchisedech, as well as other high priests, did offer an external sacrifice,
otherwise by their own reason the same which S. Paul alleges, he could not
be an high priest, as the holy scripture proves he was, not offering any
external sacrifice, which both by S. Paul so many testimonies before, and the
public and authoritatiue exposition of English Protestants, is essentially
and unseparably belonging to al true priests and preisthood.

12. The Protestant Bishop D. Morton. ( Appeal l. 3. c. 13. page 394.)
plainly grants that Melchisedech offered an external sacrifice, wherein
there was really bread and wine. He further proves from the Rabbis and
Bibliander. ( supr. cent. 1.) That at the cominge of the Messiah, all legal
sacrifices should ceise, and a sacrifice in bread and wine should only still
continue. And constantly avouches for the common doctrine of English
Protestants in these words: The protestants acknowledge in the Eucharist a
sacrifice Euc^aristicall. (Mort. sup. l. 3. c. 13) The present protestant
Archbishop of Canterbury director of Master Mason, and he directed by him
directly grant, that the words of Christ concerning his body and blood to be
given, argue a sacrifice to God. (Franc. Mason lib. 5. page 233.) And cite and
grant further in this manner. ( page 243.) Christ having offered himself for
a sovereign sacrifice unto his Father, ordained that we should offer a
remembrance thereof, unto God, instead of a sacrifice. An other says ( Middle.
papistom. page 92.113.) The sacrifice of the Altar, and vnbloodye sacrifice,
were used in the primative church: and the ancient Fathers called the
sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, a sacrifice. And again. ( page
49.137.138.47.45.) The primative church did offer sacrifice at the Altar, for
the dead. Sacrifice for the dead, was a tradition of the Apostles, and the
ancient Fathers. And Isaac Casaubon the known french stipendary champion for
the Protestants of England, writes thus of our King in this matter. (
Respons. ad Card. Peron. page 51.) The King is neither ignorant of, nor
denies, that the Fathers of the primative church did acknowledge one sacrifice
in Christian Religion, that succeeded in place of all the sacrifices in the
law of Moses. And least any man should doubt, what sacrifice he meant, by so
speaking, he tells us, it is. The body of Christ in the Eucharist, as
Catholics hold: and adds there: Haec est fides Regis, haec est fides
Ecclesiae Anglicanae. This is the faiih of the King, this is the faith of the
English church. And writes to Cardinal Perron in these words: The King said
in the hearing of manic, and wished him so to signify to Cardinal Perron, that
he agreed with the Cardinal in his opinion, de duplici sacrificio, expiationis
nempe, and commemorationis, sieve Religionis. Concerning two kinds of sacrifice,
the one of expiation for the world, the other commemoratiue, or of Religion.
Which last Cardinal Perron with all Catholics take to be the sacrifice of
Mass: Therefore if the English Protestant church and his majesty, agree so
far with Catholics, the atonement will sooner be made in this matter.

13. Neither did Casaubon here assume for his majesty, and English
Protestants, any new thing, but the same, which they had professed and
granted in their most solemn and public decrees and proceedings, from the
first beginning of their parlamentary Religion in the time of Queen Elizabeth,
or sooner. For we are taught by these protestants, that in the first parlame^t
of that Queen, when Catholic Religion was suppressed, yet both she, her
nobles, new Bishops, and the rest continued in this opinion, that there was an
external sacrifice in the church, and the Mass was this external sacrifice:
for appointing a kind of disputation in questions they most disliked in
Catholic Religion, or wherein they thought themselves to have most advantage,
they set down but three conclusions: The first of a strange tongue, in common
prayer: the second concerning ceremonies: And the third and last is thus: It
cannot be proved by the word of God, that there is in the Mass offered up a
sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead. ^h. Stow and Howes histor.
an. 1. Elizab. Theater of Brit. an. 1. Eliz.) Where they do not deny an
external sacrifice, in the church of Christ, ^hether that the Maste is this
external sacrifice, but so far agree with Catholics; but they only deny,
that by scripture, which they only understand by the word of God, the
sacrifice of Mass can be proved a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and
dead. Never denying it to be a commemoratiue and Eucharistical sacrifice, or
of Religion as his majesty before calls it, by the mouth of Casaubon. Neither
do they absolutely deny it to be a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and
dead, but that it cannot be so proved by scripture: never denying but by
tradition it may so be proved, as some protestants have confessed before, and
shall manifestly be proved hereafter by all testimonies.

14. And to make evident demonstration by these protestants of England, that
they all do, or should, both allow an external sacrifice, and sacrificing
priests, and preisthood, which they have so long and grievously persecuted,
there was yet never any protestant Prince, King, or Queen in England, but by
public authority and law of Parliament allowed, and received the holy
sacrifice of Mass, and consequently sacrificinge and massinge priests and
preisthood, being as al learning teaches, indivisible and inseperable
correlatiues, maturally and mutually dependinge one of the other. It is evident
that King Henry 8. ( Stat. Hen. 8. testament. vlt.) Both by Parliament, and his
last will allowed Mass both for the quick and dead. King Edward the sixth. (
Theat. of great Brit. in Henr. 8. Statut. an. 1. Edward. 6. cap. 1.) Enacted a
a particular statute thereof confirming the doctrine of real presence, and it
was in force, al his life: and was repealed by Queen Mary in respect it did
allow to communicants to receive in both kinds. ( Stat. an. 1. Mar. parlam. 1.
sess. 2. cap. 2.) Queen Elizabeth in her first parliament, revived this statute
again and it continued in force all her life. Parlam. an. 1. Elizab. And his
majesty that now is, in his first parliament received and confirmed this very
statute of the holy sacrifice of Mass, and the real presence, and is still in
force never by him repealed. Parliament an. 1. Iacobi cap. 5. The statute it
self is so clear in this point, as it cannot be contradicted. And besides
this, the injunctions of King Edward the sixth, the best interpretors of his
law do so assure us, where in the 3.21.22. Iniunction of his time we find
then by his Regal Authority Mass, high Mass, altar, high altar, lights
upon the altar before the Sacrament, Christ's real presence therein, and
transubstantiation, used commonly in England after this statute was enacted. (
Iniunct. of King Edw. 6. iniunct. 1.21.22.) And both for the time of Queen
Elizabeth, as also his majesty that now is receauinge that statute.

15. The public collection of our statutes. ( Collectio^ of Engl statutes an.
D. 1611. Titul. service and Sacraments cap. 1.) Printed cum priuilegio, by his
majesty's allowance and commonly used by our protestant lawyers and others,
has this note and these words upon this statute: Anno 1. Eduardi sexti cap.
1. This act was repealed by 1. Mar. parl. 1. sess. 2. cap. 2. and is revived by
1. Iacobi cap. 25. But note the time of the first making of this statute, which
was before that the Mass was taken away, when the opinion of the real
presence was not removed from us. Whereby it is manifest, that both Queen
Elizabeth, and King James reviving and giving full life, and validity to this
statute, of the doctrine of Mass, and real presence, must needs give the
same allowance to those holy doctrines confirmed by that statute, and so ought
all English Protestants co^forming themselves in matters of Religion, to the
laws and parlaments of Protestant Princes, the chiefest rules and squares by
them in such proceedings. And so neither any Catholic or Protestant of
England, except they will be singular against the law of their own Religion,
can or may take exception against that is said before, or profess himself an
adversary or persecutor of holy consecrated sacrificinge Catholic priests, or
sacrifice of holy Mass, but rather reverence and embrace them And thus much
from the book of Genesis, that the true Messiah was to be a sacrificinge
priest, according unto the order of Melchisedech, to institute a new
sacrificinge preisthood, and the external holy sacrifice of Mass, to be
continued in his church for ever.

The same proved with like allowance, and approbation of Protestants, out of
the book of Exodus. THE II. CHAPTER.
NOw let us come to Exodus the next book of Moses. Where the protestants
shall inform us, that both the ancient Rabbines before Christ, the Fathers of
the primative church, and the scripture it self expounded by the grounds of
protestant Religion do warrant us, not only that there was an external
sacrifice to be continued in the time, and Religion of Christ, but that this
sacrifice in particular was the blessed body and blood of Christ, under the
forms of bread and wine, as it is offered in the holy Mass, by massinge and
sacrificinge Catholic priests; we are told assuredly not only from
Catholics some of them living and writing before these controversies began,
and which had been eye witnesses of their relation, but from protestants
also, and those Sacramentary Caluinists, the greatest enemies to the holy
sacrifice of Mass, and transsubstantiation, that upon these words of Exodus
in the 25. chapter where the vulgar latin reads: Et pones super mensam
panes propositionis in conspectu m^o s^mper: and our English Protestants
translate: and thou shall set upon the table show bread before me always.
Petr. Gallatin. de Arcan Cathol. veritat. l. 10. cap. 6 Ioh. Vitus epist.
Wintonicus. l. dure osiomart. rion. Franciscus Sta^car. in correct. Petri
Gallatini l. 10. c. 6. Praefat Protestant. ad lectorem ante Petr. Gallatin.
edit. Francofurti an. 1612.

2. That the ancient Rabbines long before Christ, expounded this place of the
holy sacrifice of Christians, inferinge also from thence, as the text will give
warrant unto (as I shall prove hereafter by protestant Religion) that this
bread did signify the sacrifice of the Messiah, and that in his time, and in
this sacrifice bread should be miraculously changed into his body: Stancarus
the great Sacramentary linguist, cites and approves Rabbi Judas, living as
he says many years before Christ, to write in these words: Erit hic panis
duaerum facierum, de quo scriptum est Exodi 25. capite. Lehem Phanim Aephanai
tamid. panis facierum coram me semper. Quare autem dicatur panis facierum,
ratio est, quia ait R. Judas, transmutabitur ex substantia panis, cum
sacrificabitur, in substantiam corporis Messiae, qui descendet de caelis. Et
ipse idem erit sacrificium. Eritque inuisibilis atque impalpabilis, cuius rei
fidem facit seeds Eliae. Et Magistri aiunt, eam ob rem dictum esse panem
facierum, quia in ipso sacrificio erunt duae substantiae, diuinitas and
humanitas. This bread shall be of two faces, of which it is written in the 25.
chapter of Exodus. Bread of faces before me continually. And why it is called
bread of faces, the reason is as Rabbi Judas says, because it shall be
changed when it is sacrificed out of the substance of bread into the substance
of the body of the Messiah which shall come from heaven, and he himself shall
be the sacrifice, and shall be inuisibly and vnpalpable. To which the state of
Elias gives credit, and the Masters say, that for that cause, it is called
bread of faces, because in that sacrifice, there shall be two substances,
divinity and humanity.

3. Neither do the ancient Fathers of the Law of Christ expound it otherwise,
but not finding how the things there spoken can be rightly applied to the
figurative sacrifices of the Law of Moises, do gloss it, as the old Rabbis
did, expounding it, of the holy sacrifice of Mass, in the Law of Christ: among
whom, Theodoret that ancient learned greek Father, ( Quaest. in Exodus
quaest. 60.) expoundinge that scipture, and not finding how it could be meant
or intended for the things of that Law of Moses, says in respect of that:
perspicuum est ista fuisse super ^ua, Deoque minime grata. Nos autem
sacrificium interiora penetrans celebramus, offerentes Deo incensum cum lumine
lucernarum, and mystica sacrae mensae consecratione. It is evident that these
things were superfluous and not acceptable to God. But we (Christians) do
celebrate the sacrifice that penetrateth the internal things, offering unto
God incense with light of candels, and the mystical consecration of the holy
table. Which in other places. ( In Philotheo c. 20. Dialog. 2. and ad cap. 6.
epistol. ad Hebr.) He calls, mysticum diuinum and salutare sacrificium,
corpus and sanguinem Christi: The mystical, divine, and saving sacrifice, the
body, and blood of Christ. Which he commannded the priests of the new law to
offer when he said to his Apostles, do this in my commemoration.

4. Neither can this place of scripture, if we will be directed by
protestants, carry any other so proper interpretation: for first by their rule
of the original Hebrew tongue, in this place to be followed, it is as I have
showed before Lehem, Phanim, bread of faces, Aquila reads as the Hebrew,
(...). The common Greek, (...) bread before God, as Sebastian Castalio, panis
appositiuus, bread set before God, and our protestants seem to mean no other,
when they translate it, show bread: for by their own translation God thus
commands: Thou shall set upon the table show bread before mec always. (Exodus
25. v. 30.) The table on which this bread was thus to be placed, was of
Shittim incorruptible wood, the table to be covered with pure gold, with a
crown of gold round about it. And four rings of gold, and staves of Shittim
incorruptible wood covered with gold to bear it by. All the vessels belonginge
to this holy table were of pure gold, and seven golden lamps of gold besides
ca^dlesticks of gold to burn before this holy sacrifice, and a table
continually, and all this in the most holy place the propitiatory, where God
spoke unto that people: which being so strictly commanded by God, of this,
and noe other sacrifice, argues, that which was figured herin should be the
most honorable, and continuinge sacrifice, not to end with the propitiatory,
and Gods appearing there, but to continue in the holy Religion of the Messiah,
therein prefigured. Which must needs be of that excellency there described
with so great glory, to be ever in the sight of God.

5. What superstition and idolatry by Protestant Religion allowing (no such
Reverence but to Christ himself) was this, except some great supernatural
mystery and worthy that reverence, had been figured therein? and nothing there
is by their Religion, that can have so much, but the blessed body of Christ.
Therefore they must needs grant this most holy, continual, and most
pleasing sacrifice to God, to be there prefigured. And if we follow their
rule of concordance of places, they parallel with this, the 24. chapter of
Leuiticus, where this sacrifice is made of pure flower, baked into cakes, set
upon the pure table before the Lord, it is a memorial, an offeringe made to
the Lord, an everlasting covenant, to be eaten in the holy place, most holy of
all offerings, by a perpetual statute. Thus our protestants. Which as it
cannot be verified of any sacrifice of Moises Law, imperfect, figurative, and
ended by Christ so long since, never to be revived again, never holy in
themselves, and protestants pretend no such sacrifice for them, being in all
things most evidently consonant, and agreeinge with that, which Catholics
maintain, and prove of the most blessed sacrifice, of Christ's most sacred
body, and blood, offered upon an ever duringe altar, and most acceptable in the
sight of God, it must needs be understood of this, and nothing else.

6. Also in the same Book of Exodus written by Moses, the sacrifice of the
Paschall Lamb (a figure of this most holy sacrifice) was instituted: for
although this may be said to forshew the death of Christ, yet it cannot be
denied denied, but it also and properly represented this our holy commemoratiue
sacrifice, and that this Paschal lamb was also a sacrifice, for so the
scriptures witness. ( Exodus c. 12. v. 6.) Ve shahatu otho: and they shall
sacrifice him: Thus the Hebrew, so the Greek, so the Latin, immolabitque eum:
and our protestants translatinge: shall kill it: make it a new text, the
scripture being otherwise, and so they themselves translate in the same
chapter. ( Exodus c. 12. v. 27.) It is the sacrifice of the Lords passover, as
the Hebrew, Sebac, Greek Cobia, Latin victima is. And in the book of members.
( c. 9. v. 13.) Our protestants translate it, offerringe equivalent with
sacrifice, so it is in the new testament in diverse places, ( Marc. cap. 14.
Luc. c. 22. v 7.) And that it more properly signifies Christ's holy oblation
in the Eucharist, then upon the Cross, the reasons ar many and manifest. His
oblation upon the Cross did not fall upon the fourteenth day, neither at
eueninge, as the commandment of this was. ( Exodus 12. Number. 9.) but upon the
fifteenth day at none time and not the eueninge. Neither was Christ crucified
in memory of any passover or delivery, neither crucified so to be eaten,
neither did or might any eat or drink his body or blood so sacrificed.
Neither was he so sacrificed in any house as the commandment was, or in
Jerusalem, but without the town in the open field. And not only the baptized
and clean, but all others ought to eat and receive by faith Christ sacrificed
upon the Cross: which was forbidden in the Paschall Lamb and that which was
figured in it as an everlasting memorial. ( Exodus 12. v. 14. Leuit. 23. Number.
28. Exodus c. 12. v. 45.46.47.48. Number. c. 9.22.)

7. And this sacrifice of the Lamb was instituted before Aarons preisthood, as
that of Melchisedech was, and so as Philo writes. ( l. 1. de vita Moisis.) The
old custom therein continued, that the chief of families should exercise the
preistly function, and so that sacrifice of the Lamb as well as that of
Melchisedech, figures of our most holy sacrifice and Sacrament, were eaten and
received by all: whereas the sacrifices of Moises Law offered by the preistes
of Aarons order, were only received by the priests, and those of the tribe of
Leui. (1. Corinthians. 9.13. Deuter. 18.1. Number. 10.9. and 18.20.) And of all men
our protestants that would have the Eucharist celebrated only with a communion
for others besides the priest to receive, and communicate should be of this
opinion, if they would speak consequently, as learned and truly religious men
must do: and except they can prove a bit of Bakers bread to be a more
excellent and honorable sign, and more perfectly to figure and represent the
oblation and death of Christ, then an Innocent Lamb so ceremoniously, and
religiously sacrificed and received as that was, and say with the blasphemous
Jews, that the law of Christ is not more perfect then the law of Moises, and
still offer up a Paschall Lamb, they must needs acknowledge, that we
Christians have a far more excellent sacrifice, figured by that Lamb, then
Caluins communion is.

And this is plainly proved by our blessed Savior himself, who so soon as
he had celebrated the sacrifice of the Paschall Lamb, and imposed an end unto
those sacrifices of the law, there presently at the same time, and in the same
sacrificing words wherewith be ended that which was to cease, he founded and
instituted the most holy sacrifice of the law of the gospel to continue for
ever, and never to be altered or taken away. ( Matthew. c. 26. v. 18. Luc. c.
22. v. 19.) And the Hebrew word, Gasha, in which language Christ spoke at that
time, is an usual sacrificinge word, in holy scriptures, and must needs be
the same, wherewith he spoke in S. Luke, and S. Paul thus repeateth. Do this
in my commemoration. (1. Corinthians. cap. 11. v. 25.) For although we have not
any Hebrew text of those places, yet that sacrificinge Hebrew word, being the
Hebrew to that Greek and Latin which we have, seeing Christ spoke in Hebrew,
we must needs affirm, they were both alike, and is a sacrificinge word, so
used seven or eight times, in one (the 29.) chapter of Exodus, and so many
other scriptures, as I have here quoted: as likewise the greek which we have,
and protestants should as they protest to do, follow in the new testament.
Leuit. c. 16. v. 9. Exodus c. 10. v. 25. Numer. c. 6. v. 10.11. Leuit. c. 9. v.
7. c. 16.22. Leuit. 14. v. 18.19.29.30.31. cap. 15. v. 14.15.29.30. c. 16. v.
9.24. c. 17.9. c. 22. v. 23.24. c. 23. v. 11.12.18.19. Numer. c. 6. v.
10.11.16.17. c. 8. v. 12. cap. 9. v. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.10.11.12.13.14. cap. 15. v.
3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.15.24. cap. 15. v. 29.30. Fr. Mas. l. 5. cap. 6.
page 235.243.

9. And our protestants of England freely acknowledge, that both the primative
Fathers and councels do so testify: The present protestant Archbishop of
Canterbury, director to Master Mason, together with his directed scribe
confess: This is the judgment of the Fathers: Irenaeus says, that Christ did
then teach, the oblation of the new testament, which the church throughout all
the world does use. Chrisostom says, the words of the Lord, give strength to
the sacrifice until the end of the world. So they and others write of S.
Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Cyrill, S. Leo Fulgentius, and others. (
Park. problom. page 153.154. Morton. appeall. 2. cap. 6. Mason. l. 5. page
243.) And for councels say: The Nicen (first) council in that Canon which
Calvin and all others receive, says plainly, that the Lamb of God offered
vnbloodely, is laid upon the holy table. And for their own opinion are
forced to confess, that Christ did in that place offer his body and blood in
sacrifice: for beeinge urged with this Argument. Christ said: This is my body
which is given for you, or as it is in S. Paul, which is broken for you: and
again. This is my blood of the new testament, which is shedd for you, is
shedd, is broken, is given not to you, but to God for you, do not these words
argue a real, actual and proper sacrifice? They answer and grant in these
words: They argue a sacrifice to God. (Prot. Archb. Abb. and Franc. Mason supr.
l. 5. page 233.) Therefore of necessity must also grant, that it is the most
holy sacrifice of Christ's body, and blood figured in that Paschall Lamb, as so
many authorities have told us: and except the sacrifice of Christ's body and
blood be not a propitiatory sacrifice for sins (which they may not say) they
must needs confess, that in holy Mass priests do offer, not only a
commemoratiue, but a propitiatory sacrifice.

The same proved with allowance and consent of Protestants out of the book of
Leuiticus. THE III. CHAPTER.
THe Protestant correctors of Petrus Gallatinus do assure us. ( Franciscus
Stancar. in l. 10. c. 7. Petr. Gallatin. de Arcan. Leuit. cap. 21. v. 8.) That
where our English Protestants translate in the 21 chapter of Leuiticus: Thou
shall sanctify him therefore, for he offers the bread of thy God: They should
read: and sanctificabis cum, quia carnem Dei tui ipse est, vel erit
sacrificans. Thou shall sanctify him (the priest) because he is, or shall be
sacrificinge the flesh of thy God. There teaching, that the priests of the new
law are understood, as also their holy sacrifice of Mass, wherein they offer
the blessed body and blood of Christ our God: and therefore great
sanctification and sanctity is required to their calling. And they prove by
the Jews themselves. ( Leuit. c 21. v. 6.8.17.21.) That the word Lehem, which
our English Protestants translate bread, does in that place signify flesh and
not bread, as it often does, and except those protestants deceive us, it so
signifies four times in that chapter. According to that saying of Christ by
English Protestants: My flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in
deed. (Ioh. cap. 6. v. 55.) And their fre^d Frosterus with other Hebritians
acknowledges, that it is taken for flesh even in sacrifices, and cites: Genesis
3. Exodus 18.1. Samuel. 14.2. Samuel. 9. psalm. 136. Proverb. 30. and concludes
with Malachias c. 1. v. 6. In which places the word is Lehem, the same which in
this place of Leuiticus. And the cited protestants correctors of Gallatinus
bring Rabbi David Kimhi. ( in Serassim apud protest. sup.) alleging for this
reading of Lehem, not only this place of Leuiticus) but cap. 8. Deuter. Numer.
28. Ioh. cap. 6. Where they prove this to be sense of that place, and of the
Hebrew word, signifying there the most holy sacrifice of Catholic Christians.

2. They further prove it, by the ancient Rabbis R. Simeon and others. (
Francisc. Stanc. sup. l. 10. c. 7. in Gallatin.) That when this sacrifice
should be offered, all others were to cease, and this to be celebrated, in
bread and wine, and by the great power of words from the mouth of the priest,
this sacrifice on every altar shall be changed into the body of the Messiah*
Virtute ingenti verborum Sanctorum quae ab ore Sacerdotum manabit, illud omne
sacrificium quoad in vnaquaque ara celebrabitur, in corpus Messiae conuertetur.
And this is no more then our English Protestants do by public allowance
publish and print, both of the doctrine of the primative church of Christ, and
themselves also in this: some of them assure us the holy Fathers taught, that
bread is made the body of Christ. It is changed, not in shape but nature.
Christ's body is made of bread, and his blood of wine. The priest by secret
power does change the visible creatures into the substance of Christ's body and
blood. The bread does pass into the nature of our Lords body. The primative
church thought the sanctified and consecrated elements, to be the body of
Christ. (Mason. page 243. Parkins: page 153.154. Morton. appeal l. 2. c. 6.
Sutcliff. Subuers. page 32. Field. page 150.

3. And to show that diverse of the best learned of them for themselves are
wholly of this opinion, besides diverse cited in other places, one of their most
judicious writers writes with public privilege. ( Couel. def. of Hooker page
116.117.276.) The omnipotency of God makes it his body. And again: To these
persons (priests) God imparteth power over his mistical body, which is the
society of souls, and over that natural, which is himself, a work which
antiquity calls the making of Christ's body. And confesses it for a
reasonable satisfaction, to say, it is done by transubstantiation. And in an
other work speakinge of this preistlye power, he adds. ( Couel. examine.
page 105) By blessing visible elements, it makes them invisible grace, it has
to dispose of that flesh, which was given for the life of the world, and that
blood which was powered out, to redeem souls. And yet if we neither had the
ancient Rabbis, nor Fathers thus allowed unto us by protestants, neither the
consent of foreign and domestical protestants in this matter, but stand only
upon the text of holy scripture it self in that one chapter of Leuiticus, and
let it be granted that the word Lehem, may signify in that place Bread, as
probably as flesh, or more probably, if any man would so desire; yet seeing we
find it so often as four times in one chapter. ( Leuit. cap. 21. per totum.)
The bread of God, with an excellency above other bread, and offered in
sacrifice to God by priests, that are appointed and commanded to be so
extraordinarily holy by anointing with oil blessings and sanctifications, and
to be so chaste, continent, and holy as is there commanded, and knowing it was
there but a figurative sacrifice, a figure of a more excellent to come, and
preisthood also, when we see no such thing either for preistly dignity, or
holy sacrifice in the Sacramentary Religion, but all reallie and truly
verified in the Catholic Roman Church, we must needs interpret it of the
holy preisthood and sacrifice thereof.

4. We read in the same book of Leuiticus often mention of the sacrifice
Thodah: in one (the seventh) chapter: ( v. 11.12.13.14. Leuitic. cap. 22. v.
28.) there is diverse times set down this Sebac Thodah, sacrifice Thodah. And
it is described to be Caloth Matzoth. Our protestants translate it: Sacrifice
of thanks giving, unleavened cakes, and, Caloth Beluloth, unleavened wafers, by
our protestants translation. Who there can it also. ( v. 13.15.) Sacrifice of
thanksgiving, of peace offerings. And again: Sacrifice of peace offerings, for
thanksgiving: Such was the dignity of this sacrifice, at least in that which
it prefigured, for of it self but mean as we see, that as many learned
protestants Theodor Biblia^der, Franciscus Stancarus, the English Protestant
Bishop D. Morton, and others assure us: erat apud veteres Hebraeos dogma
receptissimum: It was a most commonly received opinion among the old
Hebrews, that at the cominge of the blessed Messiah, all other legal
sacrifices should cease, and only the sacrifice Thodah, of thanksgiving praise
and confession, should be celebrated: and that to be celebrated with bread
and wine. Theod. Biblia^d. 2. de Trinit. page 89. Francis. Stancar: in eme^d.
lib. Petr. Gallatin. l. 10. Morton appeal Hieronym. a Sancta fide l. 1. contr.
Iud. cap. 9. Talmuld. apud. eund. 16. Froster. Lexic. v. Thoda.

5. And to make all sure from exception, the Prophet David testifies as much.
( psalm. 50. v. 7.8.9.10.11.12.13.) For making relation in the 49. (by the
Hebrews 50.) psalm, how God would reject the sacrifice of the Jews, and have
a new more pleasinge sacrifice offered unto him: when he had rejected the
former, he adds for the new that was to continue: Sebac Leholim Thodah.
Sacrifice to God Thodah. Where both by the sacrificing Verb Sebac, and Thodah
to be offered in sacrifice unto him, he adds of them that shall offer it:
and thou shall glorify me: as our protestants translate it. And whereas in
Leuiticus is only mention made of cakes or wafers in this sacrifice, the same
Prophet David in the 116. psalm as the Rabbines before, makes also mention of
the cup or challice in this sacrifice. For saying there. ( psalm. 116. v. 17.) I
will sacrifice the sacrifice Thodah Sebac Thodah: he says also, as our
Protestants translate. ( v. 12.13.) What shall I render unto the Lord for all
his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon
the name of the Lord. Where the Hebrew reads: I will lift up or offer, Ese
the cup of salvation: for that which in the Greek Latin and Protestant
English is: I will take the cup or chalice, calicem salutaris accipiam, of
salvation. So that if we will justify both readings, it is evident that an
holy chalice, was both to be offered and received in this: and to take which
text we will (as one we must) because things offered in sacrifices were
received, and things also in them received, were before offered, it is
manifest by the Prophet, that the holy consecrated challice, was to be offered
and received in this sacrifice Thodah, as it is with Catholics at this time.

6. And this was so known a verity among the Jews, that as Hieronymus, a
sancta fide, proves against the Jews. ( l. 1. contr. Iudaeos cap. 9.) he
himself a Jew, it is often reiterated in their Thalmud it self, est quaedam
locutio saepe in Thalmud reiterata, quae dicit sic: in tempore futuro vniuersa
sacrificia, excepto sacrificio confessionis annihilata erunt. And we do not
find in any Religion Christians or others, any cup or chalice, which truly or
putatiuely, is termed the cup or chalice of salvation, but that which is
consecrated and offered in holy Mass: of which Christ said as our protestants
translate it. ( Luc. cap. 22. v. 20. 1. Corinthians. cap. 11. v. 24.) This cup is
the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you. Marc. 14.24. This is my
blood of the new testament, which is shed for many. Matthew. 26.28. This is my
blood of the new testament which is shed for many, for the remission of sins.
So that except we will be Antichristians, and deny the truth of the words of
Christ, that which he then gave and offered, and is lawfully consecrated,
priests do still offer in holy Mass, was and is this cup or chalice of
salvation, fortold by the Prophet David in this place.

7. And howesoeuer we will interpret this word Thoda with protestant
Hebritians, to signify gloria gloriatio, laus laudatio, celebratio confessio,
glory, glorification praise, commendation, celebration, confession. ( Froster.
in Lexic. in v. Thoda page 355.) it cannot possibly be better expressed and
verified in any thing then the holy sacrifice of the blessed body and blood of
Christ, which therefore the old canon of the Mass calls sacrificium laudis,
sacrifice of praise. For as S. Augustine says. ( l. 1. contr. aduersar. leg.
and Prophetar. cap. 18.) Quid est sacratius laudis sacrificium, quam in action
gratiarum? Et vnde maiores agendae sunt Deo gratiae, quam pro ipsius gratia per
Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum? quod totum fideles in Ecclesiae sacrificio
sciunt, cuius vmbrae fuerunt omnia priorum generum sacrificia. What sacrifice
of praise is more holy, then in thanksgiving? and wherefore are more or greater
thanks to be given to God, then for his grace by Jesus Christ our Lord? All
which the faithful do know in the sacrifice of the church, of which all
sacrifices of the former kinds were shadows. And our protestants of England
have granted as much before, acknowledginge the Eucharist to be a sacrifice of
Religion, a sacrifice of thanksgiving, a commemoratiue sacrifice, and a
remembrance and memorial of Christ offered and sacrificed for the sins of
the world, and man's redemption: which deserve and bind all Christians to give
the greatest glory, praise, commendation, thanks and confession to God for so
an inestimable grace and benefit they possibly are able.

7. Therefore most truly and properly this holy sacrifice of Mass, which
Catholics use, was by the holy Scriptures, Rabines, Fathers, Catholics and
protestants before termed Thoda. For besides all those Etimologies, and
significations thereof, before alleged from protestant Hebritia^s, they
further add. ( Ioh. Froster. Lexic. Hebraic. in Thoda page 355.) Vocat
scriptura hoc nomine speciem sacrificij, quo offerentes confitebantur accepisse
se beneficium a Deo, celebrantque and praedicabant gloriam clementiae, and
benignitatis, de graeci transtulerunt (...) sacrificium laudis, Germani
Liboffer. (Leuit. cap 7. verse. 11.) Acconstabat vt eius descriptione Leuitici
7. habetur, ex placenta Azimae, offerebanturque ab illis, qui cum a periculo
aliquo liberati, gratos se Deo declarare voleba^t. The scripture calls by
this name Thoda the kind of sacrifice, by which they that offered it, did
confess, that they had received benefits from God, and they celebrated, and
declared the glory of the mercy, and bountifulnes of God, the Greeks translated
it, sacrifice of praise, the Germans Libopffer, and it consisted, as appears
by the description of it, in the 7. chapter of Leuiticus, of an unleavened Cake,
and it was offered of them, that being delivered from any danger would show
themselves thankful to God. All which properties in a most excellent manner,
are found and proved to belong to the holy sacrifice of Mass, for more then
any other rite or ceremony used by any Christians.

THE IIII. CHAPTER. Proving the same, by the same warrant from the Prophet
David.
NOw let us come to the Prophet David: who in the 21.22. psalm by the Hebrews
speaking of the conversion of the gentiles and all nations to Christ, and
setting down many particulars of his holy life and passion, among the rest,
when by protestants translation he had said: all the ends of the world shall
remember and turn to the Lord: and all the kindreds of the nations shall
worship before thee. For the kingdom is the Lords, and he is the governor
among the nations, which we see performed by Christ, he immediately adds:
all they that be fat upon the earth (the potent and mighty) shall eat and
worship. The Hebrew which our protestants should follow there, is Istachahu
have bowed down themselves in worship. So is the Greek (...) So the vulgar
Latin: manducauerunt and adorauerunt, so Sebastian Castalio the protestant,
comedent and adorabunt: so reads S. Augustine, ( Augustine. in psalm. 21.)
Manducauerunt and adorabunt omnes diuites terrae. Even all the rich upon earth
have eaten, and shall worship. And examining what holy food this should be,
which even the ritchest and most potent should worship, when they did eat it,
not findinge any other food, worthy such worship, he concludes:
manducauerunt corpus humilitatis Domini sui etiam diuites terrae. Even the
rich of the earth have eaten the body of the humility of their Lord.
Whereupon a very learned writer and linguist before these times of
controversies. ( Jacob. Perez de Valentia quaest. 5. contra Iudaeos.) Writing
against the Jews says: although this Sacrament was figured by many signs and
figures in the Law, yet David in manifest words has expressed it in the 21.
psalm. And citing the words before alleged, thus he writes: vbi manifest
ostenditur, quod fideles debebant ma^ducare and adorare Deum suum. Where it is
manifestly showed, that the faithful ought to eat and adore their God.

2. And whereas the same holy Prophet in his 98. psalm says: adorate
scabellum pedum eius, quoniam sanctum est. Adore the footestoole of his feet,
because it is holy: The same S Augustine having related those words of God in
the Prophet Isay, as our protestants translate them. ( Isay cap. 66. v. 1.) The
heaven is my Throne, and the earth my footestoole: thus speaks: Fluctuans
convert me ad Christum, quia ipsum quaro hic, and inuenio quomodo sine
impietate adoretur terra. Sine impietate adoretur scabellum pedum eius.
Suscepit enim de terra terram, quia caro de terra est, and de carne Mariae
carnem accepit, and quia in ipsa carne hic ambulauit, and ipsam carnem nobis
manducandam ad salutem dedit: nemo autem illam carnem manducat, nisi prius
adorauerit: Inuentum est quemadmodum adoretur tale scabellum pedum Domini, and
non solum non peccemus adorando, sed peccemus non adorando. Doubtful I convert
me to Christ, because I seek him here, and I find, how without impiety earth
may be adored. For from earth he received earth, because flesh is from the
earth, and from the flesh of Mary he received flesh, and because he walked here
in the same flesh, and gave the same flesh to be eaten of us, to salvation:
and no man eats that flesh, but first he adoreth it: we have found how such a
footestoole of the feet of our Lord may be adored, and we do not only not
sin in adoringe it, but we should sin, if we did not adore it. Thus this
holy and learned Doctor.

3. And of all men our English Protestants, which utterly deny all worship or
adoration to relics, and holy material things, and singularly at their
communion, differently from all other protestants by strict and very penal
commandment use the ordinary act and gesture of adoration, kneeling to their
communion, must needs be of this opinion: for in their Religion there is
nothing under God but the blessed body, blood and humanity of Christ which
may have that external religious and adoring gesture used unto it. The words
of their article Religion to which they are all bound. ( Articul. 22.) are
these: worshipping and adoration as well of Images as of relics, and also
invocation of Saints is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no
warrant of scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God. Where we see
all other things prohibited to have any worship or adoration, or acts thereof
done unto them. And the Prophet here is plain even in the original tongue,
Hebrew, which these men apprise so much, that it is Gods commandment, that
we should worship this body of Christ, Gods footestoole, incuruate vos
scabello, Laharum, pedum eius sanctum ipsum, Chadosh hu. It is holy. And our
protestants professinge to allow and follow the Hebrew do falsely translate:
worship at his footestoole, for he is holy. For the Hebrew is plain: worship
or adore his footestoole. And so the protestant Sebastian Castalio translateth,
eius pedum subsellium veneramini: worship the footeestoole of his feet. So the
Greek (...) (...). Adore his footestoole. And our protestants cannot excuse
themselves, because it is in the Hebrew La harom, to the footestoole, and the
particle la, is an adiect to Harom, but by this more condemns them, for the
word Hastitachu, incuruate vos, bow down your selves in worship, to the
footestoole, or his footestoole, does demonstrate the worship was done to the
footestoole. And these men condemn themselves in this matter: for in the 20.
chapter of Exodus. (v. 5.) Where they would have adoration to creatures
forbidden, they translate the very same word: Thou shall not bow down thy
self to them: La hem: and yet here the express commandment is: bow down
yourselues to his footestoole.

4. Again, where the Prophet David speaks as our protestants translate him.
( psalm. 39 alias 40. ver. 7.) Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire etc.
speaking of the old sacrifices to cease, and the law of Christ to be
received: S. Paul. ( Hebr. 10.5.6.7. thus expounds it of Christ: when he
comes into the world he says, sacrifice and offeringe thou would not, but
a body thou have prepared me in burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin thou
have had no pleasure, then said I, ^oe I come to do thy will o God etc. And in
that place of the psalm the Greek reading is as S. Paul reads, a body thou
have prepared me: (...). So reads S. Augustine, S. Basile, and others. And
S. Augustine thus concludes from that place. ( Augustine. in psalm. 39. l. 17.
ciuitat. cap. 20. Basil. in psalm. 72.) vocem illam in psalm. 39. Mediatoris per
prophetiam loquentis agnoscimus: sacrificium and oblationem noluisti, corpus
autem perfecisti mihi. We acknowledge that voice of the Mediator speaking by
prophesy in the 39. psalm: Thou would not have sacrifice and oblation, but
thou have perfected a body for me. And then thus he declares how this the
body of Christ our Mediator was made our sacrifice, in place of those that were
abrogated. ( Augustine l. 17. ciuitat. cap. 20.) Quia pro illis omnibus
sacrificijs and oblationibus corpus eius offertur, and participantibus
ministratur. Because for all those sacrifices and oblations his body is
offered, and ministered to the participants.

5. And upon those words of that psalm thus he writes. ( Augustine. in psalm.
39. v. 7.) Sacrificia ergo illa, tanquam verba promissiua, oblata sunt. Quid
est, quod datum est completiuum? corpus quod nostis. Videte quando dictum est,
Christus enim ille est Dominus noster, modo loquens ex persona sua, sacrificium
inquit. and oblationem noluisti. Quid ergo? Nos iam hoc tempore sine sacrificio
dimissi sumus? absit, corpus autem perfecisti mihi: Ideo illa noluisti, vt hoc
perficeres: illa voluisti antequam hoc perficeres, perfectio abstulit verba
promittentia. Nam si adhuc sunt promittentia, nondum impletum est, quod
promissum est. Hoc promittebatur quibusdam signis, ablata sunt promittentia,
quia exhibita est veritas promissa. Therefore those sacrifices, being as
promising words, are taken away, what is that which is given fulfilling them?
The body which you know consider when it was spoken, for that Christ is our
Lord now speaking in his own parson, sacrifice says he, and oblation thou
would not have. What therefore? are we in this time left without a sacrifice?
God forbid. But thou have perfected a body to me: Therefore thou would not
have those sacrifices, that thou might perfect this; Thou would have them
before thou did perfect this. Perfection took away the promising words,
for if still they are promisinge, that is not yet fulfilled, which was
promised. This was promised by certain signs, the promising signs are taken
away, because the truth which was promised, is given.

6. Neither may this place be otherwise expounded of any, seeing S. Paul
himself. ( Hebr. 10. v. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.) does so expound it, being best
acquainted with the meaning of the holy Ghost: and therefore at large proves
from hence, the ceasing of the sacrifices of the Law of Moises, for their
imperfectness, and a new and perfect sacrifice of Christ's body to succeed in
place of them: and thus concludes by our protestants translation: he takes
away the first, that he may establish the second. So it is in Greek: so in
the Latin readinge. (...). Aufert primum, vt sequens statuat. Therefore our
protestants making this concordance of these scriptures, and granting before
an external sacrifice of Religion among Christians, cannot possibly make other
construction of this place of the Prophet, then S. Paul, and S. Augustine
after him has done before, and to endeavor the contrary, would be to recall the
sacrifices of the Jews to be still in force, and euacuate the Law of Christ.
S. Chrysostom writing upon the 95. psalm says plainly, that the Prophet
there plainly interprets the mystical table, the vnbloody-sacrifice, the
heavenly and exceeding venerable sacrifice of Christians, Luculenter, and
dilucide mysticam interpretatus est mensam, quae est incruenta hostia, caeleste
sum que venerandum sacrificium. And in the 72. psalm by the Hebrews speaking
at large of the cominge of Christ, our Messiah, as our protestants. ( protest.
argum. in psalm. 72.) and all agree, about many mysteries of him, and many
excellencies which he should have, as that he should rule from sea to sea, all
Kings should fall down before him. He shall be a deliverer, shall redeem
souls, he shall daily be praised. (Psalm. 72. v. 11.10.12.13.14.15.) and the
like.

7 It immediately in the next verse follows of him in the Hebrew readinge,
which by protestants we must follow, without any interruption, or
interposition of any one word: Iehi Pissath Barbaaretz be Roh Harim. He shall
be a little cake of bread, placentula panis, as Iacobus de Valentia before
these controuerses, reads* in psalm. 72. as an handful of meal, fietque vt
farris pugilli: by the protestant Sebastian Castalio. Sebast. Castal ibid. a
cake of wheat, placenta frumenti, a sacrifice of bread. Francisc. Stancar. in
l. 10. Petr. Gallatin. sacrificium panis: as an other protestant linguist
reads, a little cake of bread, a sacrifice of bread: placentula panis and
sacrificium panis, as Hieronimus a S fide a Jew reads, from the ancient
Hebrews and Chaldeans in the same manner. Hieronymus a S. fide l. 1. contra Iud.
cap. 9* both Jews, Catholics, and protestants as Sebastian Munster,
Franciscus Stancarus, and others assure us, that Rabbi Solomon reading upon
this place, Iehi Pisath B^r, erit placenta frumenti: a cake of wheat:
confesses further: Magistri nostri exposuerunt hoc esse genus placentarum in
diebus Messiae, and totum psalmu^ de Rege Messia explanauerunt. Our Masters or
Rabbines expounded this to be a kind of cakes in the days of the Messiah,
and interpreted the whole psalm of the King Messiah. The same authors prove
unto us, that the Chaldy Paraphrases read on: erit substantificus panis: The
Messiah shall be substantificall bread. R. Salmon in psalm. 72. Petr. Gal. l.
10. Petr. Burg. apud Genebr. in psalm. 72. Genebr. ib. Sebast. Monster.
incensura errorum Iudaeor. page 56. Francisc. Stancar. in l. 10. Gallat.
Hieronymus a sancta fide l. 1. contra Iudaeos.

8. The other Rabbi Ionatha^ Ben Vziel, which wrote before the coming of Christ
as the Jews themselves, besides both Catholic and Protestant witnesses,
approve, and cite him in their book, Besepher Bibakim, of collections: here
reads: erit sacrificium panis in terra in capite montium Ecclesiae: he, the
Messiah shall be a sacrifice of bread on the head of the mountains of the
church. Let him consider that has eyes, that as it is said, he is the Messiah
of whom the whole psalm speaks, therefore when he says, and he shall be
a cake of wheat on earth, on the head of mountains, he means, and would
say, that a cake of bread shall be the sacrifice over the heads of priests
which are in the church. And Iacobus de Valentia. (in psalm. 72.) long before
these times, proves against the Jews, that their Targum reads: erit
placeutula tritici super capita Sacerdotum. He shall be a little cake of
wheat above the heads of priests. Neither does either the Greek, or any
Latin readinge contradict these most ancient and approved readings: the
Greek sterigma signifies, fulcimentum flabilimentum or firmamentum, that
which susteineth, bears up or strengthens some other: so is the Latin,
what exemplar soever we follow, or readinge, frumentum or firmamentum, or as
Iacobus de Valentia writes. ( vt supra) S. Jerome readinge, memorabile
triticum, memorable wheat. For all these significations and properties, in an
excellent manner are verified of Christ, and the holy sacrifice of his body. And
the Copula, or verb in all learned languages, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Iehi,
estai, erit, must needs have relation, and connection with the Messiah, only
there spoken of both immediately before, and after: the next verse being, by
our protestants translation, the Hebrew Greek and Latin agreeing. ( psalm.
72. Hebr. verse. 17.) his name shall endure for ever: his name shall be
continued as long as the sun: and men shall be blessed in him, all nations
shall call him blessed. And so to the end of the psalm: so the whole psalm
before the 16. verse.

9. Therefore strange it should be, that in a whole psalm, both by Jews,
Catholics, and protestants, entreating only of the Messiah, there should be
one only verse, relatinge a matter quite extrauagant by protestants
translation, being thus: There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon
the top of the mountains: the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon, and
they of the city shall flourish like grass of the earth. And then immediately
follows, of the Messiah by these protestants translation: His name shall
endure for ever. Which has no connection with the former, if we expound it of
material corn, and for the prophet to say only, there shall be an handful of
corn in the earth upon the top of mountains, never was, or can be in that
material sense, any sign or distinction to know the Messiah by, which is the
scope of that psalm. And yet in their psalms in meeter printed. ( an. 1614.
cum priuilegio Regis regali, conferred with the Hebrew, as these men write)
they make the matter worse: thus it is: The mighty mountains of the land
of corn shall bring such thronge,
That it like Cedar trees shall stand
in Libanus all alonge.
Their cities eke full well shall speed,
the fruits thereof shall pass:
In plenty it shall far exceed,
and spring as green as grass.
This is the Rithme, the reason I leave to others to find, it passes my
skill* But this I am certain of, that never any such thing chanced in the
time of Christ, since, or before to my readinge: and for any protestant, or
other, to say, that come as high as Cedar trees, with the rest described in
their Rithme, shall be at the cominge of the Messiah, is to deny Christ, and
with the Jews to expect an other, yet to come, when such things may be
performed.

10. Therefore to let others pass, I will conclude this matter with Iacobus de
Valentia, that learned Bishop of Cristopolis. ( in psalm. 71. and Hieronymus a
S. fide a Jew.) both long before this time of controversies: The first says:
per hoc quod additur, in summis montium: by that which is added in the tops of
mountains, is expressed that this abundance is not to be understood of
wheat, or material corn, as the blind Jews do say, that in the cominge of
the Messiah there shall be great abundance of corn, and wine, and oil.
Therefore here is recompted, and foretold, the sacrifice of the Eucharist, in
which Christ is daily offered in the form of bread, for Christ is daily
lifted up over the heads of priests, as it is figured in the 29. chapter of
Exodus, where God commanded a piece of bread to be lifted up, over the heads
of the priests before the people. The same figure was of the bread of
proposition in the 25. chapter of Exodus, and 24. of Leuiticus. Therefore in an
other translation which is called Targum, it is: erit placentula tritici super
capita Sacerdotum. He shall be a little cake of wheat above the heads of
priests. Therefore David says so: This King the Messiah shall be firmament,
or corn, or memorable wheat in earth upon the tops of mountains, that is, he
shall be lifted up over the heads of priests in the form of bread, for
priests are often in scriptures understood by mountains, for their eminency of
dignity, as is said before. And again: after the Prophet had foretold, that
the Messiah should be God and man, and worshipped of all nations, and Kings of
the world, after he adds, that this King Messiah shall be corn and
wheat, and a piece of of bread on the tops of mountains, and over the heads
of priests, as has been declared there by many translations. And so it is
manifest, how this Sacrament is not only possible, but also many ways
figured, and foretold in the law, and Prophets. And so it plainly appears,
that Christians do not adore bread, as the blind Jews do lie, but we adore
Christ consecrated under those accidents.

11. The learned Jew. Hieronym. a S. fide l. 1. contr. Iudaeos. having disputed
in the like manner, thus concludes: we learn that the Jews affirm that
psalm, Deus iudicium tuum Regi da: speaks all things of the Messiah: now
therefore where it says: he shall be firmament on earth on the tops of
mountains, and the Caldy translation says, that he (the Messiah) shall be a
sacrifice of bread on earth on the head of the mountains of the Sinagogue: The
mountains of the Sinagogue are the priests of the church, which de facto every
day do eleuate or lift up the Messiah over their heads: and this is so
manifest, that it cannot be denied but by them, to whom the malediction of
Esaias the Prophet is come, that they should be made blind in eyes and heart.
Is. 42. And to this case and condition are all they brought, by these holy and
learned authorities, which deny the truth of this holy sacrifice: for it is
evident that in the sense of protestant Sacramentaries, this prophecy to be
fulfilled at the cominge of the Messiah, was never performed: when in this
Catholic constructio^ it is justified and effected in the whole world: And if
we should come to Libanus it self, though now many hundred years under the
Mahumetans, yet we are assured even by protestants themselves, that Christ in
the form of bread is there most religiously and above other places, elevated
daily by priests over their heads in the holy sacrifice of Mass; there be
Catholic Christians in great number, with Patriarch, Archbishop, Bishops and
religious men obedient to the Pope of Rome in all the dominions of the grand
Segnior of the Turk, there be so many Christians frequenting Mass, that a
protestant tells us: They make above two third parts of his Empire. Cytraeus
lib. de statu. Ecclesiae page 20.21. Munster. in Cosmograph. Ed. Grimstom.
book of estates page 1053. and 1064. of that, which the Prophet speaks of
Christ's being a priest after the order of Melchisedech, I have spoken before:
only I add here from the learned Father ( Anastasius Abb. l. contra Iudaeos)
disputing against the Jews, who having proved from the history of Genesis, and
S. Paul, the dignity of the preisthood of Christians, above that of the old
testament, and that of Melchisedech greater also then that was, inferred, that
the sacrifice of Christians must needs be much more excellent: Si Typus ille
excelle^tior erat Iudaico Sacerdotum, profecto multo magis erit ipsa veritas.
If that Type or figure was more excellent then the Jewish preisthood, surely
the truth it self must needs be much more excellent: which is no other by
any Christians, but Christ's most holy body and blood in the sacrifice of Mass.

THE V. CHAPTER. Wherein the same holy doctrines are so also proved out of the
Proverbs of Solomon. cap. 9.
S. Ciprian. ep. 63. ad Cecil. having cited the history of Melchisedech and how
Christ institutinge the most holy sacrifice of his body and blood, to be
offered by his priests, in holy Mass, therein fulfilled that figure of
Melchisedech, he adds: Sed and pe^ Salomonem Spiritus Sanctus typum Dominici
sacrificij ante praemonstrat, immolatae hostiae and panis and vini, sed and
altaris and Apostolorum faciens mentionem. Saptentia, inquit, aedificabit sibi
domum, and subdidit columnas septem. Mactauit suas hostias, miscuit in cratera
vinum suum, and parauit mensam suam and misit seruos suos, conuocans cum
excelsa praedicatione ad crateram dicens: Quis est insipiens declinet ad me:
and egentibus sensu dixit: venite, edite de meis panibus, and bibite vinum quod
miscui vobis. But by Solomon also the holy Ghost does show before the figure of
our Lords sacrifice, making mention of an offered host, and bread and wine, as
also of an altar, and the Apostles Wisdom, says he, did build for himself
an house, and put under it seven p^lers, killed his hosts, mingled his wine in
a boule, and prepared his table, and sent his servants calling with a loud
preachinge to his cup, saying: who is unwise, let him decline to me: and to
needy in sense he said: come you, eat you of my breads, and drink the wine
which I have mingled for you. This exposition of S. Cyprian is approved by the
church of Christ. Breuiar. Roman. in fest. corpor. Christ. and S. Augustine in
his 4. book of Christian doctrine. cap. 21. and l. 17. ciuitat. cap. 20. And
in his books, de ciuitate De^, he likewise so expounds it: and calls the
sacrifice there figured, corpus, and sanguinem Christi, the body, and blood of
Christ, succeedinge the old sacrifices, id enim inquit sacrificium successit
omnibus illis sacrificijs veteris testamenti, quae immolabantur in vmbra
futuri. For that sacrifice, says he, has succeeded all those sacrifices of
the old testament, which were offered in shadow of that was to come.

2. And Rabbi Samuel in his book of the cominge of the Messiah, which he sent
to Rabbi Isaac Master of the Sinagogue, writes thus, upon that place, and of
this holy sacrifice: Rabbi Samuel l. de aduentu Messiae cap. 20. hoc
sacrificium pulcherrime and apt describit Solomon Propheta. Solomon the
Prophet does most excellently and aptly describe this sacrifice ( of
Christians) in the 9. chapter of his book of Proverbs: when he says, most
high wisdom has communicated his sacrifice, mingled his wine, and prepared
his table, then he sent his servants, saying, who is a little one, let him
come to me, and the unwise shall eat my bread, and drink my wine tempered
with water, o my Master what is this prepared table of the most high wisdom
but the altar, o my Master? what is the bread and wine mingled, but the
sacrifice of bread and wine, and of water which is offered on the altar? who
are the unwise called by the servants of wisdom, but the gentiles, or nations
which knew not God, called by the Apostles? and it is to be noted, he says,
his bread and his wine, for by that he does insinuate, that this sacrifice is
acceptable to God, and that to this banquet so high, and so spiritual, he did
not call our Fathers which were wise in the law, who were occupied in the
sacrifice of the law, which carnal sacrifice he has not left unto us.
Whereupon it comes, that we (the Jews) detest in the gentiles the sacrifice
of bread and wine which God has appointed, and in no respect rejects, as he
does reject sacrifices of flesh.

3. And Hieronymus a S. fide. l. 1. contra Iudaeos cap. 1. by whose book
diverse thousands of Jews (he being also a Jew) were converted, proves
against them, that a principal reason why they did not receive Christ, was
because he taught a new law* preisthood, and sacrifice, which cannot consist
together with the law, preisthood and sacrifices of Moses. If we resort to
the original text of Hebrew, as our protestants would seem best to allow,
we have a greater allowance there for these mysteries; for whereas S. Cyprian
with the vulgar latin reads, wisdom builded to herself an house,
sapientia aedificauit sibi domum: the Hebrew is Banetha Beithah, builded his
house: Christ the wisdom of his father builded his house, his church, as it
is commonly expounded: And where S. Cyprian reads, mactauit suas hostias,
killed his sacrifices, in the plural number, as the latin vulgar, immolauit
victimas suas, sacrificed his victims, the Hebrew in the singular number, to
design one singular sacrifice, is, Tabechah Tibchah, offered up his sacrifice;
and therefore our English Protestants in their late privileged translation
readinge quite otherwise: she has killed her beasts: have profaned that
holy text in this point, so the Hebrew reads of Christ in this place: his
table: his bread: his wine which he mingled. And this is so evident and
manifest, that Sebastian Castalio the protestant linguist translated: victimam
suam immolauit, vinum libauit: he offered his sacrifice he sacrificed his
wine: Castal. in hunc loc. Prou. 9. So that the sacrifice here mentioned, must
needs be that, which Christ's eternal wisdom, offered, and therefore the altar
whereon it is offered is called, his table, and when it is called bread, or
food, or flesh, the Hebrew Lehem signifying them all, or wine, it is not
absolutely so called, but his bread, or his food, or his flesh, and his wine,
which he mingled, or sacrificed, as this protestant before has taught us.
Therefore we must needs conclude from hence, that the preisthood of
Christians, is a true sacrificinge preisthood, and neither protestant or other,
finding other sacrifice then holy Mass, it must needs be this.

Wherein the same mysteries are proved by the same manner out of the Prophet
Esaias, and others. THE VI. CHAPTER.
Our Protestants of England in the Titles of the 56.60. and 61. chapters of
Esaias the Prophet interpret them of Christ, and his holy Religion: so do many
scriptures, all readers may see cited and alleged in the Margins there by
them: and yet in these places the holy Prophet does testify, that there shall
be a sacrificing preisthood an external sacrifice, and altar whereupon it
shall be offered in this law of Christ, In the first place which Christ him
self expounds of himself and his law, the Prophet speaking of the
conversion of the gentiles to Christ, writes thus by protestants translation:
Even them will I bring to my holy mountain (his church) and make them joyful
in my house of prayer: their burnt offerings and sacrifices, shall be
acceptable upon my altar: for my house shall be called an house of prayer for
all people. The Hebrew, Greek, and Latin readings do all manifestly express
sacrifice and altar, whereon it was to be offered, and that sacrifice to be
acceptable to God: therefore seeing an altar, whereon sacrifice is offered, a
sacrifice thereon offered, and a priest sacrificinge or offeringe such
sacrifice, are in all learning mutual correllatiues, and cannot possibly be
separated, these must needs be found among Christians by this place of the
Prophet.

2. And in the 60. chapter v. 7. speaking also of the conversion of the
Gentiles, there foretells, how the preistes, which he should choose in
them, whom he understands by the Rams of the flock, these being chief
of natural sheep, as priests be in the spiritual fold and sheep of Christ,
shall offer acceptable sacrifice upon the altar of God in the church of the
Gentiles converted. The Hebrew Greek and Latin texts all agree proposing unto
us, a sacrifice offered on the altar in the law of the Messiah: and can have
no other construction, except we will return to Iudaisme: for as a learned
Father proves. ( Anastasius Abb. l. contra Iudaeos.) significat gentes
sacrificaturos esse Deo sacrificijs acceptis, quare non de sacrificijs legis
intelligi potest, neque de altari t^rrestris Jerusalem, ergo spiritualis. The
Prophet signifies, that the Gentiles shall sacrifice to God with acceptable
sacrifices, wherefore he cannot be understood of the sacrifices of the law,
nor of the altar of the material Jerusalem (being euacuated. Is. c. 61. v. 5)
therefore of the sacrifice and altar of the spiritual Jerusalem, the church of
Christ: as the whole chap. shows of the glory of the house of God, among the
gent^es, wanting among protestants. And in the next chapter, where our
protestants read: strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and the
sons of the Aliens, shall be your plow-men, and your vine dressers: The same
Father together with S. Cyrill glosseth: clare hic vt annotauit Cyrillus,
significat futuram esse translationem legis, and Sacerdotij: non enim amplius
ex tribu Leui erant futuri Pastores and Sacerdotes. Quod si alia erit lex, and
aliud Sacerdotium, ergo and alia hostia, and aliud Templum. The Prophet does
here clearly signify as S. Cyrill has noted, that there should be a
translation or change of the law and preisthood: for pastors and priests were
not to be any more of the tribe of Leui: But if there should be an other law,
and preisthood, therefore also an other sacrifice and Temple must needs be.
So other holy and learned Fathers, all of them vnitinge to every true law, and
Religion, a sacrificinge preisthood and sacrifice: among whom Theodoret upon
those words of S. Paul, by protestants translation, says: For the preisthood
being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the law: lex
coniuncta est Sacerdotio, necesse est enim, vt cessante Sacerdotio, idipsum
legi quoque accidat. The law is joined to preisthood, for of necessity it is,
that the preisthood ceasing, the same must also chance to the law. Hebr. cap.
7. v. 12. Theodor. in hunc locum. This our protestants have yielded unto
before: Therefore, if now contrary to themselves, and so great reason, and
authority, they would take a sacrificinge preisthood and sacrifice from the
law of Christ, they must also take away the law of Christ, and Christ
himself, except they will leave him without a law.

3. Again in his 66. and last chapter, the same Prophet speakinge of the
gentiles to be converted to Christ, and his church of them, as our protestants
expound him by public warrant. Protest. title of the 66. chapter of Isay.
speaks thus in the parson of God: I will also take of them (the gentiles) for
priests and for Levites, says the Lord. The learned tongues, Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin read, Lachonim, eis Iiereis, in Sacerdotes, for priests,
sacrificing priests, as they name the preistes of the law of Moses. Therefore
except we should deny (which we may not do) there was no sacrificing
preisthood, or sacrifice in that law, we must allow the like, though in a
more excellent manner to the law of Christ. This may suffice for this holy
Prophet.

4. S. Augustine proves the sacrificinge preisthood of Christians, and their
most holy sacrifice out of the books of the Kings of rejecting the sons of
Hely and the old preisthood, and to institute the new. Augustine. l. 17.
ciuitat. cap. 5.1. Reg. 2. Quod addit manducare panem: that which he adds to
eat bread, does elegantly express that kind of sacrifice, of which our
priest himself (Christ) says. Ioh. 6. the bread which I shall give is my flesh
for the life of the world: that is the sacrifice, not after the order of Aaron,
but after the order of Melchisedech. Anastasius proves the like out of Aggeus
the Prophet, of the external glory of the churches of sacrificinge Christians
there foretold. Others prove the same from other places of the law, and
Prophets. Anastas. l. cont. Iud. Agg. 2. S. Augustine expounding the 33. psalm
and there speakinge much of the holy sacrifice, which Christ instituted of his
blessed body, and blood, under the forms of bread, and wine, and Gods
rejecting the sacrifices of the law of Moses, writes how this was figured by
King David, dissemblinge and concealing himself, before King Achis, in the
first book of the Kings cap. 21. a figure how Christ did shadow his
divinity, thereby the better to alter and change the law, preisthood and
sacrifices of Moises, and institute the new.

5. This was there forewarned, says this holy Father, especially by two
things, in that history. First that the scripture says of King David, he
changed his countenance before them: immutauit os suum coram eis. S. Augustine
reads, vultum suum. The second is as S. Augustine reads: ferebatur manibus
suis. He was borne in his own hands. And so the Greek in all copies, plainly
is: (...). ( v. 10.) as in the former, (...). ( v. 9.) He changed his face or
parson. Upon the first he says: Mutauit vultum suum, quia erat ibi
sacrificium secundum ordinem Aaron, et postea ipse de corpore and sanguine suo
instituit sacrificium secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Mutauit ergo vultum suum
in Sacerdotio, and dimisit gentem Iudaeorum, and venit ad gentes. He changed
his countenance, because there was sacrifice according to the order of Aaron.
And after he instituted a sacrifice of his body, and blood, after the order of
Melchisedech. Therefore he changed his countenance in the preisthood, and
forsook the people of the Jews, and came to the gentiles.

6. And again speakinge how the deniers of this holy sacrifice and Christ's
real presence there as he promised in the 6 chapter of S. John were like to
King Achis, condemning this for folly in Christ, as Achis censured King David
for his gestures in concealinge himself. He adds, ( conc. 1.) Erat in illis
regnum ignorantiae, quasi Rex Achis. Id est regnum erroris eis dominabatur.
Ille autem dicebat: nisi quis manducauerit carnem meam, and biberit sanguinem
meum: quia mutauerat vultum suum: quasi furor iste and insania videbatur, dare
carnem suam manducandam hominibus, and bibendum sanguinem. Ideo quasi insanus
putatus est David, quando dixit ipse Achis arreptitium hunc mihi adduxistis.
Nonne videtur insania, manducate carnem meam and bibite sanguinem meum, and
quicunque non manducauerit carnem meam, and biberit sanguinem meum, non habebit
in se vitam? quasi insanire videbatur, sed Regi Achis insanire videbatur, id
est stultis and ignorantibus. There was in them the kingdom of ignorance, as
King Achis, that is the kingdom of error ruled in them. For he said, except
a man eat my flesh and drink my blood: because he had changed his
countenance, as fury and madness it was thought to give his flesh to be eaten,
and his blood to be drunken of men. Therefore David was reputed as a madd man,
when Achis himself did say, you have brought this madd man unto me, is it not
thought madness to say, eat my flesh, and drink my blood, and whosoever does
not eat my flesh and drink my blood, shall not have life in him? he did
seem to be as madd, but he did seem to be madd to King Achis, that is to
say, unto fools, and ignorant men.

7. The second which this holy learned Father, expounds to be prophetical
of this mystery, in that place is that which I noted: he was borne in his own
hands: of this says S. Augustine, and ferebatur in manibus suis. Hoc vero
fratres quomodo posset fieri in homine, quis intelligat? Quis enim portatur in
manibus suis? in manibus aliorum potest portari quis, manibus suis nemo
portatur. Quomodo intelligatur in David secundum litteram, non inuenimus, in
Christo autem inuenimus. Ferebatur enim Christus in manibus suis, quando
commendans ipsum corpus suum, ait. Hoc est corpus meum. Matthew. 26. Ferebat enim
illud corpus in manibus suis. Ipsa est humilitas Domini nostri Jesus Christi,
ipsa multum commendatur hominibus. And he was borne in his own hands: o my
brethren who can understand, how this can be done in a man. For who is
carried in his own hands? some man may be carried in other men's hands, but
no man is carried in his own hands. How it can be literally understood in
David, we do not find. But we find it in Christ. For Christ was carried in
his own hands, when speaking of his own body, he says. This is my body. For
he carried that body in his own hands. That is the humility of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that is much commended unto men. And in his next sermon upon that
psalm, expounding all the gestures of King David, before King Achis, to be
figures of, and fulfilled in Christ, he writes again in this manner of the
same matter. Augustine. conc. 2. supr. in psalm. 33.

8. Et ferebatur in manibus suis. Quomodo ferebatur in manibus suis? Quia cum
commendaret ipsum corpus suum, and sanguinem suum, accepit in manus suas, quod
norunt fideles: and ipse se portabat quodamodo cum diccret: Hoc est corpus
meum: And he was carried in his own hands. How was he carried in his own
hands? Because when he recommended his own body and blood, he took that
which the faithful know, into his own hands: and he after a certain manner
carried himself, when he said, this is my body. And speakinge plainly, that
Christ was figured, and represented in that history of King David, he says:
Quis est? notus est Dominus noster Jesus Christus. In corpore and sanguine suo
voluit esse salutem nostram. Vnde autem commendauit corpus and sanguinem suum?
de humilitate sua. Nisi enim esset humilis, nec manducaretur, nec libaretur.
Who is it that was signified by David, it is our known Lord Jesus Christ. He
would have our salvation to be in his body and blood. From whence did he
recommend his body and his blood? from his humility. For if he had not been
humble, he would neither have been eaten, or been our drink. Many such
testimonies more may be brought from the law and Prophets, and ar so used of
the best learned holy Saints that lived in the primative church, which I must
and wittingly do pass over to avoid tediousnes, not so well suteinge with a
preface or introduction: therefore I will now lastely come to the last Prophet
Malachias, and his prophecy of this holy mystery.

THE VII. CHAPTER. Wherein the same is proved at large by all expositions and
testimonies, even by our protestants themselves, out of the Prophet Malachy.
MAny of the holy learned Fathers of the primative church, demonstrate against
the Jews, Christ to be the true Messiah by this holy sacrifice of Mass, the^
offered by the converted gentiles, in all the world: for citinge the prophecy
of Malachias, of Gods reiectinge the sacrifices of the law of Moses, and his
acceptinge of the pure sacrifice of the gentiles, they prove thereby, that
whosoever denies that prophecy to be fulfilled and verified, in the holy
sacrifice of Mass, consequently denies Christ Jesus to be the true Messiah,
and must, as yet the misbeleeuinge Jews do, expect an other. S. Augustine
says: Hoc sacrificium per Sacerdotem Christi secundum ordinem Melchisedech,
cum in omni loco a solis ortu vsque ad occasum, Deo iam videamus offerri,
sacrificiuum autem Iudaeorum quibus dictum est, non est mihi voluntas in vobis,
nec accipiam de manibus vestris munus, cessasse, negare non possunt, quid adhuc
expectant alium Christum, cum hoc quod Prophetatum legunt, and impletum vident,
impleri non potuerit nisi per ipsum. When we see this sacrifice to be offered
to God by the preisthood of Christ according to the order of Melchisedech, in
every place from the rising of the sun, even to the setting thereof, and they
cannot deny, but the sacrifice of the Jews to whom it was said, I have no will
in you, neither will I receive gift from your handas, to have ceased, why do
they yet expect an other Christ, when this which they read to have been
prophesied, and see to be fulfilled, could not be fulfilled but by him.
Augustine. l. 18. ciuitat. cap. 35. Malach. cap. 1. Augustine. l. 1. cont.
aduersar. leg. and Prophet. c. 20. orat. contr. Iudaeos c. 9.

2. The very same argument, and exposition of that prophecy, use these holy
Fathers following (to omit others too many to be cited) within the first 400.
years: S. Clement, S. Iustine, S. Irenaeus, S. Martial, Tertullian, S.
Cyprian, Eusebius, S. Chrysostom, Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, and others, all
against the Jews, thereby inuincibly proving against them, that the sacrifices
of that people had then ceased, and their Religion euacuated, and the Religion
of Christ only true, because according to that most undoubted true prophecy,
the sacrifice of Christians, the holy Mass was then in their times offered in
all the world. And this is so evident in all antiquity, that both the
Magdeburgian protestants, Calvin, and others confess, that S. Irenaeus, S.
Ciprian, S. Athanasius, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine and Arnobius do so expound
it. And our protestants of England in their newly authorized bible, by his
majesty, do prove as much: for thus they translate that passage, of the
Prophet Malachias: I have no pleasure in you (the Jews) says the Lord of
hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand (from your hand) the
Hebrew, as they note in the margin, for from the rising of the sun, even
unto the goinge down of the same, my name shall be great among the heathens,
says the Lord God of hosts. Clem. l. 7. Constable. Apostolic. cap. 31. Justin.
dial. cum Tryphon. Irenaeus l. 4. c. 32. Martial. epistol. ad Burdegal. c. 3.
Tertul. l. 3. cont. Marcion. c. 22. Ciprian. l. 1. cont. Iud. c. 16. Eusch.
Caesar. l. 1. demonstr. euangelic. cap. 10. Chrysostom. ad psalm. 95. Aurel.
Carthag. epist. ad Marcellinum. Magdeburg. cent. 2. col. 63. cent. 3. col. 83.
Calv. l. de ver. eccles. reform. Protest. Bible Malach. 1. v. 10.11.

3. Where the Prophet expressly makes this greatness of the name of God among
the gentiles and the pure sacrificing which with incense should by them be
offered unto God in all places, to be a notion, and distinctiue sign to be
assured by, that the sacrifices of the Jews were to cease, and determine, and
to demonstrate, that as the law of Christ is more excellent then the law of
Moises, so the sacrifice of the same, and the priests which offered the same,
taking their dignity from the worthiness of the sacrifice which they should
offer, should be more worthy, then those of the Jews, which he did reject.
For so it is in all languadges, Mincha tehora, a pure oblation in Hebrew: (...)
a pure sacrifice in Greek: in omni loco sacrificatur, and offertur nomini meo
oblatio munda. In every place a clean oblation is sacrificed and offered to my
name: in Latin. Fertum purum: a pure sacrifice: as the protestant Sebastian
Castalio reads: a pure offeringe: as our English Protestants translate. And
it is ridiculous, for any man to expound it of prayer, without sacrifice
external, for the Prophet there plainly opposes this the external sacrifice
of Christians, which was to be received, to the others of the Jews which were
then to cease, and the chief protestants have so expounded and translated it
before: and here he speaks of both prayer expressed in the word thymiama in
Greek, Muctar in Hebrew, as the English Protestants, together with S.
Augustine, S. Hierome, Eusebius and others expound it: and external sacrifice
in the other as is before recited. protest. of Engl. and Fr. Mason. of
consecrat. of Bish. page 219.220. Augustine. Hierom. and Eusebius. apud Mason. supr.

4. Which being joined with the known sacrificing verb or verbal Maggash,
cannot possibly have any other interpretation, but as plainly and literally
expresses the public sacrifice of the Mass, used by Christians, as any
missale, or Catholic writer does, or can do in general terms, not
descendinge to the particular expressing of the blessed body and blood of the
Messiah there offered, which belonged only to the time of the law of Christ,
and not those figurative days: yet by many attributes and properties so
describes it, that it cannot be applied to any other. For it terms this
sacrifice, a pure offering, the pure sacrifice, the sacrifice wherein only God
would be pleased, the sacrifice that should succeed the sacrifices of the
law, and euacuate them, a sacrifice to be offered in all places, as Christ
was to be honored in all, and to continue for ever. Never to be abrogated by
any other; all which are before remembered by the Prophet, and cannot by any
possibility be truly spoken of any other sacrifice, then this of the most
blessed body and blood of Christ, offered by his holy preistes in that
sacrifice, which from the Hebrews we call Mass in our language.

5. Neither can any thing be so briefly spoken by God, to confute the
frivolous and vain objections, of some protestants, almost now quite exploded
out of the world, by Catholic arguments, about dimensions, and pluralities of
places and locations of this most blessed Sacrament, and sacrifice; for God
here by the mouth of his holy Prophet, assuringe us that this sacrifice shall
be but one, and no more, as it is before expressed in all holy languages,
Hebrew Greek and Latin, yet so miraculous and extraordinary it shall be that.
Be call Machom, (...), in omni loco, in every place, by protestant translation
out of Hebrew, Greek and Latin iustifyinge it, this only pure sacrifice
shall be offered to God: That if these men will either believe natural or
supernatural reason, and authority, God or man, they may see the vanity of
their contradiction. For whereas they would persuade their adhere^ts and
others, that one and the same sacrifice cannot be offered in many places, God
himself testifies the quite contrary, that this shall be offered in all
places, and yet be but one pure sacrifice, as is before declared, by all
translations, and the original text it self, from the word of God by his
holy Prophet.

6. And it is as evident, from this only clause: in every place: that this
could be no other sacrifice, then the sacrifice of Mass, used in the
Catholic church of Christ, now dilated into all nations, and in every place:
for there be now in the world but four great professions of Religion,
Christians, Jews, Mahumetans, and Pagans. No Christian will or may say, that
prophecy of the true worshippers of God, and pure sacrifice to be offered
unto him, is, or can be understood of any of them; for first the pagans
sacrifices were not offered to God, but to Idols: they were not pure and holy,
but most wicked and abominable: they had not any one sacrifice, that was
generally offered in all places. Eusebius. Tertul. cont. Iud. Justin. cont. gent.
Aristid. Plutarch. in vit. etc. The Mahumetans have no external sacrifice at
all to offer in any place. Mahum. in Alcor. histor. Turric. and their whole
Religion, by all Christians is damnable, and their sect could never yet be
called universal, in all places. And to speak with protestants, as before, in
those contries, which the Turk possesses: The Christians make above two third
parts of his Emipre. Edw. Grymst. page 1064. Auth. of the book of the estates
in the great Turk in Asia. Therefore there is nothing in that Religion that can
be called this pure sacrifice, offered to God in every place.

7. The sacrifices of the Jews were many, and not one by one, and all of them
rejected by God in this place of the Prophet, as our protestants thus
translate. ( Malach. cap. 1.10.) I have no pleasure in you, says the Lord of
hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand. And then immediately the
conversion of the Gentiles, and their pure sacrifice to be offered to God. (
verse. 11.) in every place, is set down. So that not any one sacrifice of the
Jews, could after this time be acceptable to God, none could be this pure
sacrifice, in any place, much less in every place, when the Jews Religion was
never so extended. And as the holy scriptures and Hieronymus, a Sancta fide a
Jew. ( l. 1. contr. Iudaeos cap. 9.) proves, the Jews might never offer
sacrifice out of Jerusalem, and so this could not possibly be meant of them:
ostendit nobis in hoc quod dicit: In omni loco: quod haec oblatio munda, fienda
erat per vniuersum mundum, vbicumque per modum esset assignatum: per contrarium
sacrificiorum antiquorum, de quibus erat prohibitum ne alibi quam in Temple
Ierosolymitano fierent. The Prophet shows unto us, by that he says: in
every place: that this pure oblation, was to be made in all the world,
wheresoever it was assigned in the world: by the contrary of the old sacrifices
of which it was forbidden, that they should not be offered in any other place,
then in the Temple of Jerusalem. And proves there out of the Jews Thalmud,
often repeating, that their sacrifices were to cease: quaedam locutio saepe in
Talmud reiterata quae dicit sic: in tempore futuro, vniuersa sacrificia,
excepto sacrificio confessionis annihilata erunt. All sacrifices should be
annihilated but the sacrifice of confession, called Thoda in bread and wine:
meaning the sacrifice of Christians, as I have proved in due place.

8. And Rabbi Samuel. (Marrochian. l. de aduent. Messiae cap. 20.) writing to
Rabbi Isaac Master of the Sinagogue, upon this prophecy of Malachie says.
Timeo Domine mi, quod Deus eiecit nos a se, and sacrificium nostrum, and
acceptauit sacrificium gentium, sicut dicit per os Malachiae: o my Master, I
fear, that God has cast us away from him, and our sacrifice also, and has
accepted the sacrifice of the gentiles, as he speaks by the mouth of
Malachy. And immediately citing the words of that Prophet, as before,
concludes thus for the sacrifice of Mass used by Christians: sacrificium
gentium, est mundus quam sacrificium nostrum. The sacrifice of the gentiles (so
he called Christians converted of the gentiles) is more pure then our sacrifice.

9. Thus commonly also the holy Christian Fathers, among whom S. Augustine
citinge that prophecy of Malachie, thus speaks to the Jews. ( Augustine.
orat contra Iudaeos cap. 9.) Quid ad haec respondetis? aperite oculos tandem
aliquando and videte, ab orient sole vsque ad occidentem, non in vno sicut
vobis fuerat constitutum, sed in omni loco sacrificium Christianorum offerri,
non cuilibet Deo, sed ei, qui ista praedixit, Deo Israel. What do you answer
to these things? open your eyes sometime at the last, and see, that the
sacrifice of Christians is offered from East to West, not in one place as it
was appointed unto you, but in every place, not to every one that is called
God, but to him, the God of Israel, that foretold th^se things. Therefore
seeing the word of God proposed by his holy Prophet cannot be untrue, but must
needs be verified in some sacrifice, offered thus unto him by some professors
of Religion, and all others besides Christians are thus clearly excluded, and
Christians have only one external sacrifice of the Mass, containing the
oblation of Christ's most blessed body and blood, the only most pure sacrifice
and acceptable unto God, and offered in every place in the whole world, it must
needs be this pure and general sacrifice.

10. To which our protestants themselves (to make all sure) do thus give
testimony. First his Majesty, as Casaubon has published by warrant. (
Casaub. Resp. ad Card. Per. page 51.52.) neither is the King Ignorant, nor
denies, that the Fathers of the primative church did acknowledge one sacrifice
in Christian Religion, that succeeded in the place of the sacrifice of Moises
law. And both from our King, and D. Andrews, the Protestant Bishop now of
Winchester, affirms of this sacrifice. ( page 50.51. sup.) It is Christ's
body, the same object and thing which the Roman church believes. An other
diuidinge Christians into the Latin and Greek church, as the common division
is, and telling us, as all acknowledge, that in all contries of the Latin
church, remaining still in obedience to the sea of Rome, the sacrifice of the
Mass is publicly in all places offered, and in the contries that have
revolted lately from it, the same sacrifice is privately with many still
celebrated, thus he writes of the Greek church. ( Edwine Sands relation of
Religion cap. 53. or 54.) with Rome they concur in the opinion of
transsubstantiation, and generally in the service and whole body of the Mass,
in praying to Saints, in auricular confession, in offeringe of sacrifice and
prayer for the dead. They hold purgatory also, and worshipping of pictures.
Their Liturgies be the same, that in the old time, namlie S. Basils, S.
Chrisostoms, and S. Gregory's (that which the Roman church now uses)
translated without any bendinge them, to that change of language, which their
tongue has suffered.

11. Chytraeus a German protestant, writing de statu Ecclesiae, of the state
of the church. (page 7.8.11.13.15.18.20.21.) says: Among all the nations of
Greece, Asia, Africa, Ethiopia, Armenia etc. all places are full of Masses, the
sacrifice of the Mass is offered for the living and the dead. The Georgians
inhabiting old Iberia, and Albania. The Syrians name S. Basile author of their
Mass. The Armenians inhabitinge most large spaces of the earth from the bounds
of Cappadocia and Cilicia unto Iberta the Caspian sea, Media and Assiria, are
most like the papists in Religion and ceremonies, in their Mass they remember
invocation, and intercession of Saints, offering up of the Sacrament. Also
every where in Persia, and all the east, the Christians do the same. The
Maronites at mount Libanus, are conformable to the Latin church in all
things. The Jacob is in Asia and Afric, are more by much propagated and have
their Masses.

12. Our English Protestant translator of the author of the book, of the
estates, Empires, and principalities of the world. (Edw. Grymston. pref. to the
Reader.) although as he confesses he alters and adds at his pleasure,
cannot find out any one province, or contry of note in all the whole world,
where he dares to affirm, and can prove that this holy sacrifice of Mass is
not there offered unto God. The same proves. ( page 102. to page 283. in the
estate of the K. of Spain.) that the King Catholic of Spain, by land and
Sea in all parts of the world Europe, Asia, Afric, and America, is the
greatest Emperor and King that now presently is, or ever heretofore has
been in the world, possessinge more territories, and dominions, then all
Turks, Tartars, Pagans, and enemies of Christianity, that be, and yet in all
these dominions this most holy sacrifice of Mass is publicly offered and
celebrated with great honor, and glory. So that if it were receued no where
else, but in his territories, the prophesy of Malachias is fulfilled in his
dominions, as well appears by this, and all Cosmographers of these days,
that truly set down the estates of great Princes. There is no maine part, ab
ortu solis vsque ad occasum, from the risinge of the sun unto the setting
thereof, nor from the settinge to the rising again, but he has some dominion
there: as a late verse is of the Enfante Mary of Spain her Father, and her
brother is in the same condition: Unto her greatness witness gives the sun,
tasked no hour, to shine at any hand,
As he his course about the globe does run,
but on some part of her late Fathers land.
An homage which he never did before,
to any Prince, nor like to do no more.


13. And yet besides these so many and vaste countries, our protestants have
told us before, that all the other three parts of the world, Asia, Afric, and
Europe, are full of Masses, and sacrificinge Christian priests. Which this
protestant also confirms. ( Grymston. supr. in these kingdoms page 700. etc.)
teaching that not only in the territories, but in Tartaria, China, Iapan, Peru,
Magor, Calicut, Narsing, Persia, all the Turks estates in Europe, Africa and
Asia, Monomotapa, Congo, Moraco, and from the rising to the setting of the
sun, the prophecy of Malachie is justified and performed, for in all these
places, Mincha tehora, thusia Cathara, the pure sacrifice, he speaks of, the
holy sacrifice of Mass, is offered to the name of God, and his name is great
among the Gentiles.

14. This is the state of things at this time. Thus it was from the first
planting of christianity in the whole known world, by the holy Fathers before:
and appears in the most ancient Mass of S. Mark, the Evangelist, used
among the first Christians of this nation, as I shall show hereafter, in which
thus we find. Per quem (Christum) offerimns rationabilem and incruentam
oblationem hanc, quam offerunt tibi Domine omnes gentes, ab ortu solis vsque ad
occasum, a Septentrione ad meridiem: Quia magnum nomen tuum in omnibus
gentibus, and in omni loco ince^sum offertur nomini tuo Sancto, and sacrificium
and oblatio. By whom (Christ) we offer this reasonable and unbloody oblation,
which o Lord all nations do offer unto thee, from the rising of the sun, to
the setting thereof, from North to South, because thy name is great in all
nations, and in every place incense, and sacrifice and oblation, is offered to
thy holy name. Liturgia. eccl. Alexandr. and S. Marci Euang. M. S. per antiq.
tempore Britan.

AN HISTORY OF THE HOLY PREISTHOOD, AND sacrifice, of the true church. The
first age.
THE VIII. CHAPTER. Wherein is proved by all kinds of testimonies, Catholics,
Protestants, and whatsoever, that Christ the true Messiah as his calling and
dignity required, in abrogatinge the preisthood and sacrifices of Moses law,
instituted an other more perfect sacrificinge preisthood, and sacrifice of his
sacred body, and blood in Mass.
Having declared and proved at large out of the holy Prophets and law of
Moses, by all learned languages, and translations, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin,
by all learned interpreters of scriptures, as well before, as after Christ, the
ancient Rabbines, and primative Fathers of the church of Christ, as they are
allowed and received both by Catholic and Protestant writers, and their
consent herein. That our blessed Savior Christ our Redeemer, and high priest,
after a more excellent manner according to the order of Melchisedech, was to
euacuate the legal preisthood, and sacrifices of the law of Moses, as in
themselves figurative, and vmbraticall, being to cease and determine at the
coming of the Messiah, and to found and institute a preisthood and sacrifice
more perfect, effectual, and as S. Paul styles it. Hebr. cap. 7. v. 24. and
our protestants translate it, (...), an unchangeable preisthood, and
consequently a sacrifice and law unchangeable, for so these men translate the
same holy Apostle: every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices
for sins, and: for the preisthood being changed, there is made of
necessity a change also of the law. (protest. transl. Hebr. cap. 5. v. 1.
Hebr. cap. 7. v. 12.

2. Therefore the time of this most happy change and alteration beeinge now
come, at his last passover, or eating of the Paschall lamb, a figure (as I
have by greatest allowance, and warrant formerly declared) of this most holy
christian sacrifice, although our Savior had often celebrated that legal
feast before, or none or small memory thereof left in scripture, yet when in
this last he was to end the old, and ordeine the new, he sent his two great
Apostles and most beloved, S Peter and Saint John, to provide the first
Christian church as some not vnworthly call it. ( Proclus apud Flor. Rem. l. 8
Luc. cap. 22. v. 12.) to institute this most sacred preisthood and sacrifice
in, (...), a large upper Room furnished (as our English protestants translate)
but as the Greek word is, and french Hugonots also do read, a great Room
strewed with carpets. (Hugon. gallic. apud Florim. Raemund. supr. de origin.
haeres. l. 8. cap. 12) into which our high priest and Savior did enter, vt
Rabbinorum nonnulli affirmant, vest sacra, quam ipsi appellant Taleth indutus,
as some of the Rabbines affirm, having on a sacred or sacrificinge vestement,
which they call Taleth. And there after he had ended the ceremony of the law
about the Paschall Lamb, he instituted this new sacrifice of Christians, and
gave power and commandment to his Apostles present, to do the same; Hoc
facite, do this, which I have done, in this mystery.

3. We have heard already, and it is infidelity to deny it, that he was a
priest, according to the order of Melchisedech, that he must needs by that
title offer a sacrifice with some resemblance to that of Melchisedech, in bread
and wine, that he was to change the law, preisthood, and sacrifice: he had
not done any of these offices of the Messiah, and high priest before, only he
had in the sixth chapter of S. John, given his faithful promise (which he could
not violate) that he would perform it: this was the last day, time, and
opportunity wherein he could possibly effect it, with his holy Apostles, to
whom this charge before al others was first and chiefly to be recommended, he
being that very night to be betrayed, violently taken, and separated from them,
and never to communicate with them again in the short time of his life;
Therefore now or never he was of necessity to make performance of this most
holy duty; and if not now, the law, preisthood, and sacrifices of the law,
had not been abrogated and changed, but Iudaisme had been still in force,
and Christ could not truly and lawfully have enjoyed the title of the true
Messiah, if so excellent, and evident sign, and property, of the holy
Redeemer, had been wantinge and defective in him.

4. Therefore all kind of witnesses that be or then were in the world, friends
or enemies, whether Jews Gentiles or Mahumetans, whether Christians,
Catholics, either the ancient Fathers or later writers, and the best learned
protestants themselves give evidence, that Christ at that time instituted a new
sacrifice, and sacrificinge preisthood. The ancient Rabbines before Christ, so
expounded the scriptures, of the old testament, as I have showed before, and
both Catholics, and protestants so assure us. ( Francisc. Stancar. and Petr.
Gallat. l. 10. cap. 4.5.6.7.) The Jews that lived in the time of Christ, soon
after, and at this day acknowledge it, having proved by their lamentable
experience, that after the institution of the new sacrifice, and preisthood by
Christ, as he forewarned them of the ceasing of their sacrifices, and
desolation of the Temple of Jerusalem, where only by their law they might be
offered, they lie in that forsaken state which all the world observes, and the
Prophet thus by protestants translation foretold of them. ( Osee c. 3. v. 4.)
The children of Israel shall abide many years without a King, and without a
Prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an Image, and without an Ephod,
and without Seraphim, preistly and sacrificing vestures. Iudic. cap. 17. v. 5.

5. And all that write against the Jews, as the holy Archbishop S. Gregentius,
Iulianus Pomerius Archbishop of Toletum, Rabbi Samuel, Hieronymus a S. fide,
Paulus Burgensis, Petrus Gallatinus, Franciscus Stancarus a protestant, and
others and their own Thalmud is witness, that the hate of the Jews against
Christ and Christians, is not so great for any thing, as that Christ at that
time ordained a new sacrifice and sacrificinge preisthood, and rejected those
of the law of Moses. The gentiles soon after converted did confess it in
all places, and in this kingdom of Britanie as I shall inuincibly demonstrate
herafter. The Mahumetans in their Alcaron and other authors give testimony to
this. So do the most holy and best learned Fathers of the primative church
Greek and Latin, S. Denis the Areopagite converted by S. Paul, S. Irenaeus,
S. Basil, S. John Chrysostom, Theodoret, S. Martial scholar to S. Peter the
Apostle, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, Primasius, and long before these S.
Clement, Ignatius, Anacletus, with Pope Alexander, living in the first hundred
years, and others after, without number, plainly some of them saying that
Christ then taught the new sacrifice of the new testament, which the church
receiving from the Apostles, does offer to God in the whole world. And that it
is so certain and undoubted a truth, that Christ did then make his Apostles
sacrificing priests, that in their judgment, no man had called it into
question. Quod Dominus potestatem celebrandi, and conficiendi noui testamenti
mysteria, Apostolis per haec verba contulerit, hoc nemo opinor in dubiu^ vocat.
Gregent. Archiep. Tephren. disput. cum Herban. Iudeo. Julian. Pomer. l. 1. and
2. contr. Iudaeos. Rabbi Samuel Marrochian. l. de Aduent. Messiae cap.
19.20.21.22.23.24.25.26.27. Hieronym. a S. fide l. 1. and 2. contr. Iud. Paul.
Burg. cont. Iud. Petr. Gallat. and Francisc. Stancar. l. 10.11. Thalm. and
Abraham. Mahum. Rabb. Sam. supr. cap. 27. Dionis. Areopag. Eccles. Hierar.
part. 3. c. 3. Irenaeus l. 4. c. 32. cont. haer. Victor Antiochen. in c. 14.
Marci. Basil. de sacrificijs ritu and Mis. celebr. forma. Chrisost. de
sacrificijs, and Homil. 8. and ad cap. 26. Matthew. and alibi saepe. Theodoret.
in c. 8. ep. ad Hebr. Martial. epist. ad Burdegal. cap. 3. Ambros. l. praep. ad
miss. ad cap. 11. epist. 1. ad Cor. and alibi. August. l. 17. ciuitat. c. 20.
and quaest. 43. l. 1. quaest. in Euang. Primas. in epist. 1. Corinthians. c. 11.
can. 3. Apost. Alexand. 1. epist. ad Orthodox.

6. And this sacrifice was, and is his sacred body, and blood, under the forms
of bread and wine, so miraculously effected both then, and still by the
ministry of consecrated priests by his omnipotent power, annexed by promise to
this sacred and consecrating words, this is my body: this is my blood: and that
his holy Apostles were then made such sacrificinge priests, and supernaturally
enabled to that highest and holiest function. Neither can any protestant of
England be of other opinion: for except contrary to the judgment and
testimony of all people, Jews, Mahumetans, Pagans, and Christians, which
acknowledge Jesus Christ to have been, and ordained a new sacrifice, and
preisthood, they will cast off all nature and name of Christianity, and go
further then any infidel yet has done, most foolishlie and blasphemously to
say, there was never any such as is called Jesus Christ: they must confess
with the rest, that he ordained these things, they must say, either with
Turks and Pagans his institution was not holy herin, or with the Jews, that
this sacrifice is, panis polutus, poluted bread, and not his body. ( Hieronym.
a S. fiae l. contr. Iud. 2. Iud. in Thalm. and alibi.) and his holy priests,
be, tonsi, shauelings, as some of them profanely do: or acknowledge with true
Catholic Christians in all ages, times, and places, that the sacrifice and
preisthood he then ordained, are the most perfect, absolute, and permanent for
ever. For so all testimonies and evidences upon which Christian Religion
builds, the word of God delivered in holy scriptures, or tradition with the
warrant and practice of all the holy Apostles, and church of Christ, have
already, or will in this ensuing treatise assure us.

7. Therefore many of our best learned protestants, and with public warrant,
and privilege have granted before. ( pref. cap. 1.) that Christ did not only
institute and offer this most holy sacrifice, but did give power unto his
Apostles, and commandment also, to do the same. That it succeeded to the
sacrifices of Moises law, that is was from the beginning the sacrifice of the
altar, and unbloody sacrifice, sacrifice offered for the living and the dead
(Morton appeal l. 3. c. 13. Franc. Mason l. 5. page 233 243. Middlet. Papistom.
page 92 113.49.137.138.47.45.) And among others to make al sure, his majesty
is avouched to be of the same mind. ( Isaac Casaub. resp. ad Card. Peron. page
51.) that from that time of Christ's institution, there is in his Church, and
has ever been an external sacrifice, wherein is contained the body and blood
of Christ. And a protestant Bishop among them speakinge in all their names. (
Morton appeal l. 3. cap. 13.) says: The protestants acknowledge in the
Eucharist, a sacrifice Eucharisticall. Which, and more, they are all bound to
do, by an express statute of parliament received and confirmed by three
protestant Princes, King Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and our present
sovereign King James, wherein is expressly thus enacted. ( Statut. an. 1.
Edu. 6. cap. 1. an. 1 Elizabeth cap. 2. an. 1. Iacobi cap. 25.) The most
comfortable Sacrament of the body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ,
commonly called of the altar, instituted of no less author then our Savior,
both God and man. The institution of which Sacrament being ordained by Christ,
as is aforesaid, and the words, this is my body which is broken for you; This
is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for you, and for many, for the
remission of sins, spoken of it, being of eternal infallible and undoubted
truth, the most blessed Sacrament etc. These be the words of the statute
established by his present majesty in parliament, with public assent of all
English Protestants, ministers or others: in which statute penalties be
decreed against al gainesayers of this holy sacrifice, and provide an especial
writ against such transgressors. statut. supr.

8. And to make all matters unquestionable in this point, this statute was
enacted when there were none but sacrificing preistes in England, diverse years
before the book of making ministers was invented. Which the words of the
abridgement of our statuts approved by his majesty (to reiterate them) thus do
testify. ( Abridgm. of stat. an. Dom. 1611. Titul. service and Sacraments cap.
1) the first making of this statute was before the Mass was taken away, when
the opinion of the real presence, was not removed from us. Therefore this
statute wholly and without any other exception, limitation, or restriction
being publicly made, approved, revived and confirmed by three several
public parlaments, of three Protestant Princes, cannot be contradicted by any
English Protestant: and except contradictions can both be true, which is
impossible, it is not possible but the contents of this statute of Christ's
institutinge the holy sacrificinge preisthood, and sacrifice of Mass at his
last supper, must needs be an article of faith, and infallible truth, in the
Religion and judgment of English Protestants. Therefore some of their best
learned. ( Field l. 3 cap. 29. page 138. Couell examine. page 114.) have with
public applause, and warrant written, that it is heresy, to be of other
opinion. For so they should deny and gainsay the universally received, and
practiced opinion, of the primative church. Whose custom universal and from
the beginning was, to offer the sacrifice of Mass, both for the living and
the dead. Which all men know, cannot be performed, but by massing and
sacrificing priests, Mass and massinge priests, sacrifice and sacrificing
priests, being inseparable correlatiues, in all eue^ humane knowledge, and
learning, both of Catholics, and Protestants, Christians, Jews, Mahumetans,
Pagans, or whatsoever infidels, professinge learning, or followinge the light
and warrant of nature.

9. And for the very usual name it self of this most holy sacrifice, called
generally in the latin church, Missa, or sacrificium Missae, Mass, or the
sacrifice of Mass, seeing it was to be the only external sacrifice of the whole
church of Christ, it could not possibly be named by any denomination more
aptly, then the word Missa, Mass, being by diverse learned in the holy tongs,
a name both in Greek Hebrew and latin fittly signifyinge sacrifice, or
equivalent thereof: of the Greek there is most difficulty, and yet some
learned gretians, as Albericus ( dictione Missa.) testify, that Missa is a
Greek word, signifyinge interpellation, or intercession, such as sacrifice to
God ^s. That it is an Hebrew word, and aptly taken for sacrifice, we have the
consent almost of all Hebritians, both Catholics, and protestants, as of the
first Alc^atus, Hector Pintus, Claudius Sanctus, Pamelius, Demochares,
Casalius, Capino, Cauus, Couarrunias, Pauinus, Heruetus, and others. Alciatus
l. 7. parerg. cap. 10, Hect. Pint. in cap. 3. Dan. Claud. Saint. praef. ad
Liturg. Pamel. in Tertull. l. de orat. and praef. in Liturg. Graecor. Demochar.
tract. 2. de Miss. c. 1. Casalius l. 1. sacrif. Miss. Io. Capr. Can. l. 12. de
loc. c. 13. Couarr. l. 4. Var. resol. c. 22. Pagn. v. Mitza.

10. And among Protestants, Sebastian Munster, Philip Melancthon, and John
Froster Professors of Hebrew ar of the same opinion, and to justify our
English name of that holy sacrifice, to be taken also from the Hebrew, where
we call it Mass, or Mas, the word or radix Mas in Hebrew, signifies tribute
or due paiement, such as we owe in this sacrifice being commanded to do it,
hoc facite, and the unleavened bread that was eaten with the Paschall Lamb,
and consecrated by Christ is Massah, in Hebrew. Monster. in gramatica and
lexic, Hebraic. Philip. Mel. Apolog. confess. Augustan. John. Froster. in
Lexic. Hebraic. edit. Basil. an. 1557. Petr. Veg. in psalm. 101. And to come to
the Latin word, Missa, Mass, S. Albinus our learned countryman, expoundinge
those last words in Mass, ite missa est, says: id est directa, sieve missa
est, id est perfecta est pro nobis oblatio and oration. That is, sacrifice or
oblation and prayer for us is directed, or sent, or perfected. S. Albin. l. de
divine. officijs. so does Remigius Antisiodorensis, saying. Missa dicitur, quasi
transmissa, vel quasi transmissio. Remig. Antisiodoren. expositio. de celebrat.
missae. And Petrus Lombardus. Missa dicitur quia missa est hostia, cuius
commemoratio fit in illo officio: vnde dicitur: Ite missa est. Petr. Lumbard.
l. 4. sent. Where we see that it is called Missa, because it is a sacrifice
sent, or offered unto God, and not of dismissinge the people. Which is evident
by the practice of the church in all places, which at the end of all Masses
dismisseth the people: but as our protestants themselves confess ( Fox tom,
2. in Queen Mary.) says not always, ita missa est, but sometimes,
benedicamus Domino, soometimes, requiescant in pace, and in the old Muzaraban
Mass, in solemn feasts, where we say in the end of Mass, ite missa est,
they said, solemnia completa sunt, the solemn sacrifice is ended, and in other
feasts: missa acta est: mass or the sacrifice, is ended. (missa Muzarab.
antiq. in council. 4 Toletan. and alibi.) And in this sense it was always
accepted, in all ages, from the Apostles, as our protestants themselves shall
evidently confess hereafter, in this history.

THE IX. CHAPTER. Shewinge how the Apostles in general being by Christ
ordained sacrificinge priests, did according to that power and commandment
given unto them, offer the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood in Mass, and
ordered other priests to that end.
ANd by this it is also manifest, that the Apostles were sacrificinge and
massinge priests, and did, as that preistly dignity confered upon them,
required, offer this holy sacrifice, according to the warrant and
commandment of Christ unto them, to do, that which he did in that behalf.
So that if we had no further authority, for their sacrificinge preisthood, and
duty to offer this blessed sacrifice, but that they were, as before is showed,
made sacrificing priests by Christ, seeing that preisthood and sacrifice was
never to cease, but to be continued in the church of the Messiah, unto the end
of the world, and these men were the chiefest instruments, and rulers, which
our Savior instituted, to convert the nations, and communicate this sacred
preisthood and power, to offer this sacrifice, unto others, still to be
continued, without interruption, we must enforcedlie yield, that they left
such a sacrificinge power, and some manner and order how this sacrifice was to
be solemnized, to succeedinge generations. Which I shall prove of every one of
the Apostles in particular, in the next chapters, only here of them all in
general, that this doctrine of consecration, preisthood and sacrifice of Mass,
they taught and delivered to the churches where they lived and preached, we
have many and worthy arguments and witnesses.

2. S. Chrysostom tells us plainly, how the Apostles practisinge and
delivering the order of this sacrifice, decreed that the faithful departed
should be remembered then, and prayed for. Ab Apostolis sancitum est, vt in
celebratione venerandorum mysteriorum, memoria fiat eorum qui hinc decesserunt.
Nouerunt illis multum hinc emolumenti fieri, multum vtilitatis, stante siquidem
vniuerso populo, manus in caelos extendente, caetu etiam sacerdotali,
venerandoque posito sacrificio: quomodo Deum non placaremas pro istis orantes?
(Chrisostom. Homil. 3 in cap. 1. epist. ad Philipp.) It was decreed by the
Apostles, that in the celebration of the venerable mysteries, a memory should
be made of them that were departed this life. They knew much gain, much
profit did thereby come to them, for all the people standinge holdinge up their
hands to heaven, the preistlie company, and the venerable sacrifice offered:
how could it be that we should not appease God, prayinge for them? The very
like he writes in an other place. ( Chrisost. Homil. 69. ad popul.
Antiochen.) And S. Basile setting down many things delivered by the tradition
of the Apostles, says. ( S. Basil. l. 5. de universal. eccl.) this tradition
did commend the words of long prayer, and consecration over the bread and
chalice, set down in order: multifariam digesta super panem and calicem
prolixae orationis and consecrationis verba commendauit? Irenaeus says the
church received this order of sacrifice, from the Apostles, and in his time
offered it to God in all the world. Oblationem noui testamenti Ecclesia ab
Apostolis accipiens in vniuerso mundo offert Deo. Irenaeus l. 4. cap. 32.
contr. haeres. The ancient learned Bishop Stephanus Eduensis writtinge of this
holy sacrifice, sets down the manner how the Apostles practiced and preached
it. ( Stephan. Eduen. Episc. l. de Sacramento Altaris cap. 20.) Sicut Magister
docuerat Apostoli se and alios communicando consecrationem corporis and
sanguinis Domini facere caeperunt, and fieri per vniuersas Ecclesias
instituerunt. Primo sine aliquo ornatu fiebat canonis mysterium, postea cum
canone legebatur epistola, and Euangelium. Deinde a Romany Pontificibus,
quibusdam additis ad ornatum and decoratum; Ecclesiae celebranda aliqua
susceperunt. As Christ their Master had taught them, the Apostles
communicating themselves, and other began to make the consecration of the body
and blood of our Lord, and preachinge instituted it to be done throughout all
churches. First without any ornament the mystery of the canon of Mass was
practiced, afterward with the canon were read the epistle, and Ghospel. After
this somethings for ornament, were thereto added by the Popes of Rome, the
churches received the rest to be celebrated.

3. Where we see the whole body and substance of the Mass, consistinge in the
holy canon perfected, practiced, and delivered by the Apostles. And what was
after added by the Popes of Rome, were only ceremonial for honor and ornament
sake and not necessity, as he there expresses, and I will demonstrate
herafter by our protestants themselves, and for this place their prime man and
first protestantlye made Archbishop, testifies as much as this holy Bishop
has done before. For he says plainly. ( Matthew. Parker. l. de Britan. antiq.
cap. 17. page 47.) that the order and form of Mass, which the Apostles used,
and delivered to the church, duce^tis a^plius a^nis in prima Ecclesia durauit,
continued above two hundred years in the primative church without alteration.
And then being somewhat altered, by Pope S. Zepherine, the change which was
made, was to a more excellent form and matter. Ad pulchriorem materiam
formamque. S. Proclus Patriarch of Constantinople and successor to S.
Chrysostom there testifies, that Saint Clement received the form of Mass
from the Apostles, and published it to the world. ( Proclus tractat. de
traditione divine. Liturgiae. infra. cap.) Quia Sacrosancta illa mysteria a
Sanctis Apostolis sibi reuelata in lucem edidit. And how daily after Christ's
Ascension they assembled and found great comfort in this holy sacrifice of
Christ's body and blood, said Mass with long prayers. Cum multam consolationem
in mistico illo Dominici corporis sacrificio positam inuenissent, fusissime and
longa oratione Liturgiam decantabant; and more plainly, as hereafter,
preferringe it before all other holy duties and exercises. And Amalarius
Fortunatus makes this reason, why the form and order of this sacrifice, was
by our Savior recommended to the care of the Apostles ( Amalar. Fortunat. l.
3. de Eccles. offic. cap.) Saluator quo vehementius commendaret mysterij illius
altitudinem vltimum hoc voluit infigere cordibus and memoriae discipulorum, a
quibus ad passionem digressurus erat, and ideo non praecipit, quo deinceps
ordine sumeretur, vt Apostolis per quos Ecclesias dispositurus erat, seruaret
hunc locum. Our Savior that he might more vehemently commend the worthiness of
that mystery, would have it the last thing he was to fasten into the hearts and
memory of his disciples, from whom he was to depart to his passion, and
therefore did not command in what order it should afterward be received,
that he might reserve that duty to the Apostles, by whom he was to dispose
the churches.

4. To this all the holy Fathers before, that testify Christ ordained this
holy sacrifice, and recommended it to his Apostles, bear witness; for none but
Antichristians will say, that the Apostles taught or practiced, otherwise then
Christ instituted and commanded. And they were so zealous in this holy
doctrine, that as both Catholics and Protestants have proved before, they were
wicked Heretics by S. Ignatius testimony that then denied this B. sacrifice to
be the body and blood of Christ, which were given and shed for the sins of
the world. ( Ignat. apud Theodoret. Bezam. Whitaker. and al. supr.) And
Leontius Bizantinus writing against the Heretics Nestorius and Eutiches
charging them first with denyinge the Nicen creed, and producinge a
pseudosimbolum of their own invention, taxes the Heretic with an other
profane impiety not inferior to the other, to deny the holy order of the
sacrifice of Mass, ordained and instituted by the Apostles, received by the
Fathers, and that of S. Basil penned by the same holy spirit; and invented an
other Mass of his own to sustain his heresy full of blasphemies. Audet and
aliud malum non secundum ad superiora, aliam enim Missam effutiuit praetor
illam qua a patribus tradita est Ecclesijs, neque reueritis illam Apostolorum,
nec illam magni Basilij in eodem spiritu conscriptum, in qua Missa blasphemijs
non precationibus mysterium Eucharistiae oppleuit. And this wickedness was so
great by this renowned author, that he calls it Antichristianitie and the
denier of the Apostles Mass, Antichrist. An vt alius Antichristus adhuc
expectetur par est, qui sic Christum oderit, and quae Christi sunt mutare
nitatur? And our English Protestants themselves both say that the sacrifice of
Mass for the living and the dead, was a tradition of the Apostles, and Aerius
was justly condemned of heresy by the primative church, for denyinge sacrifice
for the dead. And this is publicly and authoritatiuely approved by the
remembered statute of Queen Elizabeth, King Eduard the 6. and King James our
present sovereign, assuringe us, that this holy sacrifice of the altar, was
instituted by Christ at his last supper with his Apostles, delivered to the^,
and by them to the church and succeeding Christian priests to the end, and
conteyneth the oblation of the most sacred body and blood of Christ. Middleton.
Papistom. page 49.137.138.47.48. Field. l. 3. cap. 29. page 138. statut. an. 1.
Edu. 6. an 1. Elizab. and an. 1. Jacob. Reg.

THE X. CHAPTER. Wherein is particularly proved of all the holy Apostles and
Evangelists, that they were sacrificinge massinge priests, and did both
practice and teach the same doctrines. And first the 4. Evangelists and S.
Paul, who have remembered these mysteries in holy scriptures.
THis being thus inuincibly proved, and acknowledged, both by Catholic and
Protestant authority, that both Christ our Savior instituted this holy
sacrifice, and sacrificinge preisthood; and his Apostles receauinge them from
him, did all in general both exercise and deliver the same unto the churches,
there can be no Christian desirous to retain that name, that may oppose
against the same; yet for a further manifestation of these truths, unto all,
that will not desperately dwell in error, I will now prove in particular, how
every one of the Apostles, and Evangelists, both believed, practiced, and
taught these mysteries. And first to begin with the four Evangelists, and S.
Paul, who have committed these Christian holy secrets, to holy writing; I
will show how both in these their sacred scriptures, they teach and allow the
sacrifice of Mass, and a sacrificinge or massinge preisthood, by order and
sacred office to offer that sacrifice. And to put us out of all doubt or
question that this is and was their meaning in those holy scriptures, I will
prove, that every one of them was a true massinge priest, and actually did
offer, and celebrate the most honorable sacrifice of Mass, in essential
things, as the holy Catholic massing priests of the church of Rome now do,
and have ever most religiously done, in all ages. The same I will likewise
prove, of all the other Apostles, in their order, only I will crave leave of
S. Peter, the first, and chiefest, to remember him last in this matter; for as
I have proved at large in other places, as among the Apostles he was the
first, and allmoste only Apostle, which planted the faith of Christ in these
parts of the world: So we in Britanie did first receive from him, our holy
massinge and sacrificinge priests, and preisthood, never hitherto altogether
discontinued, or interrupted, but by him and his successors in the Apostolic
sea of Rome first founded, and ever after successively in all ages preserved in
this kingdom, as will appear hereafter.

2. Therefore to begin with the Evangelists and S. Paul, which speak of these
mysteries in scripture, S. Matthew the Apostle (and first in order among the
Evangelists) writes of Christ's delivery of this sacrifice in these words, as
our English Protestants by his majesty's privilege translate them. ( Matthew.
cap. 26. v. 26.27.28.) Jesus took bread and blessed it, and brake it, and
gave it to his disciples, and said, take eat, this is my body. And he took
the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them savinge, drink ye al of it for
this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many, for the
remission of sins. The Greek text, which these men say must be here
preferred, is word by word as they translate, speakinge of Christ's body, that
it was at that present given there, and his blood in the present tence shed for
remission of sins (...). Therefore if Christ's oblation, and giving his body,
and blood, upon the Cross was a sacrifice, as all agree, seeing it was so in
respect it was there given and offered for remission of sins, here being the
very same body and blood, and given for remission of sins, it must needs be
also a sacrifice, and not only eucharisticall or of thanks giving, but
satisfactory: for whatsoever tal^eth away sins, by its own virtue, as the
Evangelist here speaks of this, must needs be such, and Christ's body and
blood being of infinite value in themselves and of their own nature, can not
but be satisfactorie for sins, whenever, howsoever, and by whomsoever they
are offered, or given for remission of sins, though the limited power of
priests may bring some limitation to their satisfaction, the ordinance and
institution of Christ, so disposing in this sacrifice, as it is now daily
offered by consecrated priests, as the common opinion is, otherwise a thing of
illimited worth, should be of like deserving, and satisfaction.

3. And this is so evident, that not only all learned Fathers, and antiquity
do from hence teach, that Christ in this place instituted the sacrifice of the
new testament, as I have cited diverse before, but our greatest enemies and
persecutors, as namly the present Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury the
director of Master Mason, and he also with others. ( Mason. praefat. and lib.
5. cap. 6. page 235. Abb. ibidem. Magdeburgent. in S. Iren.) acknowledge,
particularly naminge S. Irenaeus, S. Chrysostom, and S. Gregory, from them
concluding in these words: That Christ did then teach the oblation of the new
testament, which the church throughout all the world does, when she says,
this is my body. And they plainly say. ( Mason and D. Georg. Abbots supr. page
233.) that these words of Christ recited before by S. Matthew, this is my body
which is given for you, and this is my blood of the new testament which is shed
for you, do argue a sacrifice to God. And if this was not a sacrifice, then by
protestant Religion, admittinge nothing but scriptures in matters of faith,
Christ Jesus was not the priest after the order of Melchisedech, which was
promised; for exceptinge this, the whole new testament is silent of any
preistly act, of that order, which he performed in all his life, and so that
being a distinctiue sign, of the true Messiah, they would deprive all mankind
of Redemption, and our most blessed Savior of the title, and honor of
redeeminge us. Therefore thus they grant. ( Abbots and Mason supr. page 243.)
Christ having offered himself, for a sovereign sacrifice, unto his Father,
ordained, that we should offer a remembrance thereof, unto God, in stead of
a sacrifice. Which they must needs understand of Christ's oblation in this
place, before his passion, for they make this before his commandment, and
power given to his Apostles, of celebrating this mystery, by these words as
these men translate. ( Luc. cap. 22. ver. 19.) do this in remembrance of me.
So that Christ ordeyninge, that we should do what he did, as the words be
manifest, and Christ as they confess there, offered himself for a sovereign
sacrifice unto his Father, we must offer Christ in the same manner, for a
sovereign sacrifice unto God.

4. And for a clear demonstration, that together with the commandment a
preistlie sacrificinge power was given by those words, to his holy Apostles,
and they by them made massing, and sacrificing priests, to sacrifice, as Christ
by these protestants, and the scripture before, did at that time his blessed
body, and body, it is not lawful, or validate in either Religion of
Catholics, or Protestants, for any Christian man, or woman to intermeddle to
offer, or minister in these things, whatsoever we shall name them, or judge
them to be, but a Catholickly consecrated priest, by the one, or protestant
minister by the other, therefore those sacred words, do this ( Matthew. cap. 26.
v. 20. Marc. cap. 14. v. 17. Luc. c. 22. v. 14.) gave preistly and sacrificing
power to his Apostles, only present, by the Evangelists: for if they had been
generally spoken unto all Christians, all Christians should both have power,
and were bound under damnation to take upon them to minister in such things;
for the words, do this, to whomsoever they were spoken, conteyne an express
commandment, to be performed.

5. And to make this matter more evident, it is manifest by the protestant
parliament statute of King Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and King James. (
Statut. 1. Edw. 6.1. Eliz. and 1. Jacob. supr.) That the Protestants of England
neither do, nor by their Religion may, make it a matter of commandment and
necessity, for lay parsons to communicate under both kinds, but do freely
acknowledge, that in the first five hundred years of Christ, the Sacrament was
ministered unto, and received of the laity sometimes in one, sometimes in both
kinds, and yet the practice of the church was holy in those days; therefore
there never was a general commandment to al Christians to receive in both
kinds: yet S. Paul settinge down Christ's ordinance, and institution of this
holy sacrifice, he said both concerning his body and blood, he gave this
express commandment: do this in remembrance of me. (1. Corinthians. cap. 11.
ver. 24.25.) And therefore Tatianus Alexandrinus disciple to S. Iustine the
martyr, in his harmony of the ghospels, does set down those words of Christ
to his Apostles. Do this in commemoration of me, both after the delivery of
his body and blood unto them. ( Tatianus Alexand. Harmon. Euang. cap. 155.)
Therefore all they being priests, and only present then, must needs be made
priests and sacrificinge priests, by those consecratory words of Christ, then
only spoken unto them.

6. Which is made most evident in the case of S. Thomas the Apostle, who by
opinions Catholic and Protestant was a priest, and as hereafter a
sacrificinge massinge priest, yet he was not present when Christ said to the
other Apostles in the 20. chapter of S. John's gospel; receue ye the holy
Ghost, whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them: and whose
soever sins ye retain, they are retained. And as protestants affirm made
them priests; and they themselves in their book of pretended consecration,
only use these in making ministers; for the scripture says plainly, and
immediately in the next words: But Thomas one of the twelve, called Didimus, was
not with them when Jesus came. (ver. 24.) neither when he said these words
unto them; but when the rest of the Apostles told him they had seen Christ, it
follows in the same place by English Protestants reading: The other disciples
therefore said unto him, we have seen the Lord. (ver. 25.) But he said unto
them, except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my
finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will
not believe. (v. 26.) These be the very next words of the Evangelist, unto the
former; and then immediately follows, how eight days after, Christ appeared
again, S. Thomas being present, and cured his incredulity.

7. So that it is most plain, and evident, that S. Thomas received the chief
preistlie power in the last supper of Christ, and by those his powerful
words, when having celebrated the high preistly function of sacrificinge after
the order of Melchisedech, in consecrating and offeringe for our sacrifice, his
most blessed body and blood under the forms of bread and wine, and beeinge to
leave this preistly sacrificinge power in his church, he did first communicate
and give it to his Apostles, saying unto them as our protestants translate.
This do in remembrance of me. (Luc. cap. 22. ver. 19.1. Cor. 11. ver. 24.25.)
where we may boldly read, sacrifice this in remembrance of me, or in
commemoration of me. For so both the Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin also will
give allowance, as I have proved before. Yet if we should take them only, for
the common action of doing, se^ing in the very common sense of doing, it
conteyneth both a power and commandment, to do that, which Christ there did,
which by all testimonies before, and allowance of protestants themselves, was
his most holy offeringe, and sacrificinge his sacred body, and for sins; It
must needs give both power, and precept to his Apostles to do the same, do
this, or, this do: otherwise neither the Apostles, nor priests truly
consecrated after them, had done that, which Christ did, and which he gave
power and command unto them to do; but some other thing, not commanded, and
which they had no authority, or warrant to do; which is the transgressing,
vnco^maunded, and unwarranted lamentable condition of all those, that deny this
holy sacrifice, and presume to practice any other thing in place thereof.

8. Therefore seeinge no man does, or can pretend, but there was only one true
consecrator, time, place, manner, and order of consecratinge, both S. Thomas,
and the other Apostles, for holy priests, it evidently follows, they were
all consecrated by Christ in the action, time, place, and order as is before
remembered; and that they were so consecrated sacrificinge massinge priests.
Which our learned Protestants of England plainly teach us to be so. The great
Archbishop, champion for the English Protestants, when he so professed him
self, writing with their greatest applause, and privilege, speakinge of the
time, place, and manner, when, where, and how the Apostles were made priests,
and of their two spiritual powers, jurisdiction, and order, he says of
this. ( Marcus Ante. Reipub. Ecclesiast. l. 2. cap. 1. number. 3.) Ordinis ego
potestatem intelligo nunc ad conficiendam Eucharistiam, and sacrificij in cruce
per Iesum Christum peracti memoriam celebrandam: ad quod Sacerdotium quoddam
est necessarium. Ad hoc Sacerdotium promoti sunt Apostoli a Christo Domino, in
vltima caena, quando eis dixit: hoc facite in meam commemorationem. (Luc. 22.
and 1. Cor. 11.) By power of order, I now understand power to consecrate the
Eucharist, and celebrate the memory of the sacrifice, which Christ perfected
upon the Cross, to which a certain preisthood is necessary: to this
preisthood the Apostles were promoted in the last supper, when he said unto
them, do this in my commemoration.

9. And again. ( Marcus Anto. supr. l. 2. cap. 4. page 19.) Quando
Eucharistiae conficiendae ipsis dabat potestatem, dixit eis: hec facite in meam
commemorationem: nimirum id quod me videtis nunc facere, and vos facite: hoc
est sumite panem, benedicite, frangite, and porrigite: similiter and vinum. Et
conseqnenter Apostoli ex ipso facto Christi instructi, certe diuina Christi
institutione dabant Eucharistiam. When Christ gave unto his Apostles power to
consecrate the Eucharist, he said unto them: do this in my commemoration: That
is, what you see me now to do, do you the same; that is take bread, bless
it, break, reach: likewise also wine. And consequently the Apostles armed by
that fact of Christ, certainly by the divine institution of Christ, did give
the Eucharist. And in an other place. ( Marc. Anton. l. 2. cap. 4. page 118.)
de Sacrosancta Eucharistia: Ipsius necessitatem toties inculcauit: nisi
manducaueritis carnem filij hominis, and biberetis eius sanguinem, non
habebitis vitam in vobis. ^anis quem ego dabo caro mea est, pro mundi vita.
(Ioh. 6. Luc. 22.) postea in vltima caena: accepto pane gratias egit, and
fregit, and dedit eis, dicens, hoc est corpus meum, quod pro vobis datur: hoc
facite in meam commemorationem. Panis consecrationem in corpus Christi, and
vini in sanguinem, ipse coram Apostolis fecit: eandem ipsi quoque vt facerent,
frangerent, and darent, express mandauit. Concerning the holy Eucharist,
Christ did very often inculcate the necessity of it: except you shall eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in
you. The food which I will give, is my flesh for the life of the world. After
in his last supper, when he had taken bread, he gave thanks, brake, and gave
to them saying, this is my body which is given for you: do this in my
commemoration. He made the consecration of bread into the body of Christ, and
of wine into his blood, before the Apostles, and expressly commanded, that
they also should do the same consecration of bread and wine into Christ's body
and blood.

10. And in an other place he teaches, with S. Chrysostom, whom he follows
therein, and other holy ancient Fathers. ( Marc. Anto. l. 1. cap. 1. page 9.
Chrisostom. hom. 17. in epist. ad Hebr.) That the sacrifice which the Apostles
were here commanded to offer by Christ's words, do this, and which by that
power they did offer, and which all truly consecrated priests did after offer,
was the same body and blood of Christ, which he himself offered, the same,
and no other sacrifice. Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Quid ergo nos? ait
Chrisostomus, nonne per singulos dies offerrimus? offerrimus quidem. Et vna est
hostia, and non multae. Quomodo vna est, non multae? quia semel oblata est in
Sancto Sanctorum: hoc autem sacrificium exemplar est illius: idipsum semper
offerrimus. Pontifex noster ille, qui hostiam mundantem nos obtulit: ipsam
offerrimus and nunc, quae tunc oblata quidem consumi non potest. And much more
to as great effect, or greater, and yet at his pleasure he does maine, and
make lame the sentences of that holy Author. And to avoid the frivolous cavil
of some about the words, in my remembrance, or, commemoration of me, whereby
they would have it gathered, that this is only a commemoratiue sacrifice, or
commemoration of that sacrifice, this man with all other Protestants. ( Marc.
Ant. l. 1. cap. 12. pag^ 146 147. Mumer. 26.27.) and the express scriptures
are witness, that the priests and sacrifice of the law of nature and Moises, of
Adam, Seth, Enoch, Noe, Sem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and his twelve sons, Job,
Melchisedech, Aaron and all in the law were true priests, and sacrificers; yet
they were in all Christian learning, but figures of the truth in the time of
the Messiah.

11. Therefore if this were only a commemoration, it should at least by as
great reason and authority, be also a sacrifice, and the parson that
celebrateth it, a sacrificinge priest, both being far more excellent then
those priests, and sacrifices. And the words, in remembrance, or commemoration,
are so far from hindering the truth, of these priests and sacrifice, that they
rather give a second power, and virtue unto them, even by these protestants
themselves; for they have told us before, that by these words, do this,
Christ gave power to consecrate the bread and wine into his body and blood, and
do what he did in that sacrifice, then addinge after the words, in
remembrance, or commemoration, he gave them a second power, and commandment
different from the other, yet both of them preistly and sacrificall: otherwise
Christ himself should be said (which cannot be) that he did consecrate and
offer this remembrance of himself, and his own action: Therefore the words
must needs contain a double virtuall power and command to the Apostles, the
one part and principal being, to do that Christ did, expressed plainly in
the powerful words, do this, the other in remembrance or commemoration,
contained in the same terms. Which was by a (then) public protestant
preachinge minister both preached publicly, and with public allowance after
printed in this manner. Edw. May sermon. of the communion of Saints, printed by
John Dauson an. 1621. page 6.

12. God has given to priests a power over his own natural body, which is
himself: for to them only was it said: do this in remembrance of me: by
which words they have commission to dispose of that very body, which was given
for the life of the world, and of that inualuable blood, which was shed to
redeem sinful souls: for which cause the Bishops and presbyters have, as
antiquity can tell, been honored with an honor, which no King, no Angel had
ever given him. They are the makers of Christ's body, they do a work which
none but the holy Ghost besides them ever did. And in the margin he thus
cites Isodor Pelusota, l. 2. epist. 5. (...). such a power the Kings of the
earth have not. An other speakinge of the consecratory preistly power, by those
words of Christ, spoken in his parson: This is my body: This is my blood,
concludes. ( Couel def. of Hooker page 116.117.276.) The omnipotency of God
makes it his body. And of priests: To these parsons God imparteth power over
that natural body, which is himself, a work which antiquity calls the
making of Christ's body. And of preistly power: By blessing visible elements it
makes them invisible grace, it has to dispose of that flesh which was given
for the life of the world, and that blood which was powered out to redeem
souls. Others say: The sacrifice of the altar, and unbloody sacrifice, were
used in the primative church. The primative church did offer sacrifice at the
altar for the dead, sacrifice for the dead was a tradition of the Apostles
and ancient Fathers. Aerius was justly condemned of heresy by the primative
church, for denying sacrifice for the dead. Middlet. Papistom page
51.91.113.49.137.139.47.48. F^ild. l. 3. cap. 29. page 138.

13. And to put us out of doubt, that this is, or should be the common
doctrine and Religion of all English Protestants, their chosen champion, with
greatest allowance among them, as he affirms, writes plainly. Haec est
fides Regis, haec est fides Ecclesiae Anglicanae: this is the faith of the
King, this is the faith of the church of England. ( Io. Casaub. resp. ad Card.
Peron. page 51.52.) And their public statute of all the Protestant Princes of
England says so, and so decrees to be observed of all, authentically prouinge
in protestants Religion, that this most holy sacrifice of the altar, was
instituted by Christ, that it is his body and blood, broken and shed for
remission of sins, and by the omnipotent words of Christ, This is my body
this is my blood, being of eternal infallible and undoubted truth, so
consecrated by truly and duly ordained priests unto the end of the world.
Therefore most evident it is, by all kind of Arguments and testimonies, that
the holy Apostle and Evangelist S. Matthew, as the rest also, did, and of duty
was bound to offer the most holy sacrifice of Mass. And that he thus did, as
the rest of the Apostles also did, it is manifest by diverse antiquities, which
we have of this holy Apostle.

14. First it is commonly agreed upon, both by Catholic and Protestant
writers, that he preached, and suffered Martyrdom in Ethiopia, having first
converted the King and many others, and that of all nations the Christians of
Ethiopia were ever most devout to the holy sacrifice of Mass, the protestants
themselves ar witnesses, and as they have had that holy sacrifice from their
first receauinge the faith of Christ, which in all things as
transsubstantiation of bread and wine into the body and bloody of Christ,
according to the doctrine of S Matthew, before and offeringe of the said
blessed body, and blood, with invocation of Saints, and prayer for the dead,
so their tradition ascribes it, to S. Matthew the Apostle, as ordinarily it is
referred unto him. And not only S. Abdias which lived in that time, by his
works usually received, Julius Africanus, and others be witnesses, that he
said Mass, and was martyred at the holy altar by King Hirtacus, but that
undoubted history of his life and death, which the universal church of Christ
follows, approves and proposes unto us, so testifies: Origin, in Genes.
Eusebius. histor. lib. 3. cap. 1. Socrat. lib. 1. c. 15. Doroth. in Synops.
Magdeburg. cent. 1. l. 2. col. 777.776. Edw. Grimston. in Presbyter. John Page
1088.1089. Missa Aethiopum sieve S. Matthaei Apostoli Biblioth. SS. Patr. Tom.
6. Iudoc. Cocc. Tom. 2. Sebastian. Munster. Cosmograph. l. 6. cap 57. Abdias
and Iul, Afr. c. l. de vita Apost. in S. Math. Metaphrast. in S. Matthew. Anton.
part. 1. Petr. anot. l. 8. cap. 100.

15. Rege mortuo, Hirtacus eius successor Ephigeniam Regiam filiam, vellet sibi
dari in matrimonium: Matthaeum, cuius opera illa virginitatem Deo vouerat, and
in Sancto proposito perseuerabat, ad altar mysterium celebrantem, iussit
occidi vndecimo calendas Octobris. Vita S. Matthew. Apostoli in Breuiario die 21.
Septembr. King Aeglippus whom S. Matthew had converted to the faith being
dead, Hirtacus his successor desiringe to Mary his daughter Ephigenia, she^ by
the help of S. Matthew, having vowed virginity to God, and perseueringe in
her holy purpose, he commanded S. Matthew to be killed, as he was
celebrating Mass at the altar, on the eleventh of the calends of October.
Which history and relation, must needs be approved by the Protestant church of
England, keeping his festiuitie with the former histories, the church of Rome,
the ancient Martyrolodges of Rome, S. Bid, Vsuardus, and others upon the same
day. ( Engl. Protest. Comm: Book in fest. S. Matthew. Apostol. and calend. 21.
Septembr. 11. call. Octobr. Martyr. Romans Bed. and Vsuard. eod. die and Ado
Treuer. 16.) To which the ancient Manuscript of an author Anonimus, published
in print, all most an hundred years since by Fredericus Nausea Bishop of
Vienna, writtin as he says, characteribus plusquam vetustis, in exceedinge
old characters, in a most ancient library, gives this ample testimony,
having before related the history of S. Matthewes preachinge there: Cumque
omnes respondissent Amen, and mysteria Domini celebrata fuissent, and Missam
suscepisset omnis Ecclesia, retinuit se Sanctus Matthaeus iuxta altar, vbi
corpus ab eo fuerat Christi confectum, vt illic Martyrium expectauit: nam
expansis manibus orantem, spiculator missus ab Hyrtaco, a tergo puncti ictu
feriens, Apostolum Dei, Christi Martyrem fecit. And when all had answered Amen,
and the mysteries of our Lord were celebrated, and all the Christian assembly
had heard Mass, S. Matthew kept himself still by the altar, where the body
of Christ was consecrated by him, and expected Martyrdom. For as he was
praying with his hands stretched forth, the executioner being sent from King
Hyrtacus cominge behind him, thrust the Apostle of God through, and made him
a Martyr of Christ. Anonymm antiq. l. in vitas, miracula and passionis
Apostolorum. in pas. S. Matthew. Apost. cap. 6.

16. And this may fully satisfy for S. Matthew the Apostle, that he was a
sacrificinge and massinge priest, and did both say Mass, and ordeyne other
holy massing and sacrificinge priests, and delivered a form of that holy
sacrifice to the Christians of Ethiopia. I have been more large in him, because
he was the first among the Apostles which in his gospel wrote of these
sacred mysteries, and beeinge an Apostle, and confirmed in grace, neither did,
nor could in this, or any article of Christian Religion, believe, or practice
otherwise, then Christ commanded, and instituted, and the rest of the Apostles
and Evangelists did also believe, teach, and exercise, as I have taught in
general of them all. Now in particular of every of them with so much brevity
as I may, the difficulty beeinge already cleared, until I come to S. Peter,
in whom beeinge besides his primacy among the Apostles, and in the whole
church of Christ, our protoparent Pastor and Father in Christ, I must spend
some longer time, in that respect to deduce our holy sacrificinge, and massing
preisthood from him.

17. The next of the Evangelists, and scripture writers, which entreats of
this blessed mystery, is S. Mark, whose words in his gospel as our
protestants translate them, concerning Christ's institution of this sacrifice,
are these: Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake it, and gave to them and
said, take, eat: This is my body, and he took the cup, and when he had given
thanks, he gave it to them: and they all drank of it, and he said unto them,
this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many. (Marc. cap. 14
ver. 22.23.) Where we see, as in S. Matthew before, so hear S. Mark does
assure us, that the mysteries there celebrated, were Christ's body and blood,
shedd for many; and so according to that which is already proved in this
matter, must needs be an holy sacrifice in the judgment of this Evangelist:
and that by his own continual use and practice of saying Mass, and
deliueringe a perfect form and order thereof, unto the churches where he
preached and lived, we have many testimonies.

18. First the very Mass it self which he delivered to the church of
Alexandria, and others which he founded, is yet used in those parts, and
known to all antiquaries. (Missa S. Marci, seu Ecclesiae Alexandrinae. in
Biblioth. patrum.) and it does agree in all matters of substance, with the
Mass of the Latin church. And he himself had so reverent opinion of this
most holy sacrifice, that he thought himself unworthy to offer it; and
therefore as S. Hierome writes, cut off his Thombe, but it was miraculously
restored, and he usually offered that holy sacrifice, as we have testimonies
even of this our own nation, far beyond exception: to omit others S. Bid S.
Marianus and Florentius Wigorniensis, al which affirm in these same words:
Marcus discipulus and interpres Apostoli Petri, mittente Petro porrexit in
Aegiptum, and primus Alexandriae Christum annuntians, constituit Ecclesiam, and
postquam constitutis and confirmatis Ecclesijs per Lybiam, Marmoricam,
Ammonicam, Pentapolim, Alexandriam atque Aegiptum vniuersam, ad vltimum tentus
est a Paganis qui remanserant Alexandriae, qui videntes eum die sancto Paschae
Missas facientem, miserunt funem in collo eius. Mark the disciple, and
Interpreter of Peter, being sent by Peter, went into Egypt, and was the first
that preached Christ at Alexandria, and founded that church, and after founding
and confirming the churches through Lybia, Marmorica, Ammonica, Pentapolis,
Alexandria and all Egypt, at the last was apprehended by the Pagans, which
remained at Alexandria, who seeinge him saying Mass, on the holy feast of
Easter, cast a rope, about his neck, and so put him to death. Beda in
Martyrolog. 7. call. Maij. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. page 233. in Nerone.
Florent. Wigorn.

19. Thus these three ancient and learned English writers, with others. And
this form of Mass which he used and delivered to these churches, seems by
Antonius Sabellicus, to have been written by him at Aquileia in Italy, whether
he was first sent by S. Peter before he went to Alexandria: for he tellinge
with the common opinion how he wrote his gospel at Rome, by the warrant and
approbation of S. Peter, and his coming to Aquileia, says he wrote there also
somethinges, hic quoque aliqua scripsisse creditur, and most likely his Mass
because we find no mention of any other his works, but his ghospel written at
Rome, and that.

20. And to make all sure by our English Protestant antiquaries, and other
writers, who ascribe the greatest credit in these matters to the british
Authors, their Religion and practice, before the uniting themselves with the
successors of S. Augustine, and the Roman church, there is yet extant a very
old manuscript, written by a British Christian, before that union almost a
thousand years since, which our protestants entitle, prima institutio
ecclesiastici seruitij, the first institution of the ecclesiastical service.
(M. S. Britan. antiq. pr. Stores in exordio, prima institutio ecclesiastici
seruitij.) in which manifestly mention is made that S. Mark the Evangelist did
write a form thereof, and that very form of Mass used and penned by S. Mark,
was practiced here in Britanie, when it was first converted, in or nere the
Apostles time: of this I shall speak more at large when I come to S. Peter.
And this will suffice for S. Mark.

21. S. Luke the next of this holy company, is most plain of them all for
holy sacrifice, for first he does plainly distinguish the consecrated cup,
from the other which he calls by protestants translation, the fruit of the
vine. ( Luc. cap. 22. ver. 18.) an exception with unlearned protestants. And
then by their own translation, he thus writes of Christ's action herin. (ver.
19.) And he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them,
saying, this is my body which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me.
(ver. 20.) likewise also the cup after supper, saying, this is the new
testament in my blood, which is shed for you. Where as I have proved before,
both by protestants and all witnesses, our holy sacrifice of Mass is plainly
instituted, which our protestants prove by one of the most ancient antiquities
of our Christian Britans, a sermon as Master Fox says. ( Act. and monum. page
1142. sermon. translat. by Aelfricus.) so ancient and of so great authority
in this kingdom, that it was usually read in the church here in the year of
Christ 366. above two hundred years before S. Augustines cominge hither, and
translated into the Saxon language out of Latin by King Aelfricus in the
year 996. Which speaks of Christ in these words: He blessed bread before
his suffering and divided it to his disciples thus saying: eat of this, it is
my body, and do this in my remembrance. Also he blessed wine, in one cup, and
said: drink ye all of this, this is my blood that is shed for many in
forgiveness of sins. The Apostles did as Christ commanded, that is, they they
blessed bread and wine to howsell again afterward in his remembrance: even so
also their successors and all preistes by Christ's commandment do bless
bread and wine, to howsell in his name with the Apostolic blessinge.

22. And again: In the old law faithful men offered to God diverse sacrifices
that had foresignification of Christ's body, which for our sins he himself to
his heavenly Father has since offered to sacrifice, certainly this howsell
which we do now hallow at Gods altar, is a remembrance of Christ's body which
he offered for us: and of his blood which he shed for us: So he himself
commanded, do this in my remembrance. And shewinge how Christ is wholly and
truly present in every parcel of this blessed sacrifice of Mass, it adds:
That innocent Lamb which the old Israelites did then kill, had signification
after ghostlye understanding of Christ's sufferinge, who vnguiltie, shed his
holy blood for our redemption. Hereof singe Gods servants at every Mass, Agnus
Dei qui tollis peccata mundi miserere nobis: That is in our speech: Thou Lamb
of God that take away the sins of the world have mercy upon us.

25. Where is plainly proved by these protestants antiquity, that Christ did
in those words of S. Luke, both institute the most holy sacrifice of Mass,
for that Evangelist, and all priests to offer, and that the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world (only Christ Jesus) is present there, and
was publicly prayed unto as present, in our first Britane primative church in
this kingdom. Therefore no Christian of Britanie can make it a question, but
S. Luke an holy Evangelist, did in this holy mystery, as Christ had instituted,
by his own gospel, and the other Evangelists and Apostles, did preach and
practice: Which is farther confirmed out of the history of his life, wherein we
find that he erected altars, and consecrated sacrificing and massing priests,
no others known to Christians in that time. This will more appear when I come
to S. Paul whose both companion, and scribe and secretary in some sort he was,
and so could not be of an other opinion, or practice in this point, then that
great Apostle. Metaphrast. in vit. S. Luc. Gul. Eisengren. cent. 1. part. 5.
did. 7. Hieron. l. de vir. illustris. in S. Luca.

24. The holy Apostle and Evangelist S. John brings Christ speakinge in these
words, as our protestants translate them, ( Ioh. cap. 6, v. 51.) I am the
living bread which came down from heaven. If any man eat of this bread,
he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give, is my flesh which I
will give for the life of the world. The Jews therefore strove among
themselves, saying how can this man give us his flesh to eat? Then Jesus said
unto them, verelye I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the son of
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Who so eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up, at the last
day. For my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed. He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. As the
living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eats me,
even he shall live by me. This is the bread which came down from heaven:
not as your Fathers did eat Manna and are dead: he that eats of this
bread, shall live for ever.

25. These words be so evident, for the real presence of Christ in the
sacrifice of Mass, by all testimonies of antiquity, that as I have showed
before, none but incredulous people, and like King Achis will deny it. And
for Britanie the lately cited antiquity that was publicly read, in our
churches here so long before S. Augustines cominge hither, does with the whole
consent of our church, in or before the year of Christ 366. so approve it,
citing all these words of S. John which I have related, to that purpose. ( the
old Britt. sermon. supr. apud Fox pag^ 1142. and alios.) and no man can better
expound S. John, then S. John himself, who as we are assured both by
Catholic and Protestant antiquaries, and authorities, did both say Mass, and
consecrated sacrificinge and massinge priests, to do the same. So we are
taught by Eusebius Emissenus, or Faustus Reginensis, S. Bid, Haymo, the author
of the scholasticall history, Smaragdus, Durantes, Honorius, Vincentius,
Nicolaus Methonensis, and others. Eusebius. Emis. seu Faust. Regin. hom. in fest.
S. Joan. Bed. homil. in id. dixit Jesus Petro sequere me. Haymo Homil. 2. in
festo S. Joan and Homil. 1. histor. scholastic. cap. 106. Smarag. Abb. in
collect. in Euangel. in fest. S. Joan. Duran. l. 7. c. 42. de diu. offic.
Honor. sermon. in fest. S. Joan. Vincent. l. 11. c. 44. Nichol. Methon. l. de
corp. Christi. And we have both Catholic and Protestant testimony for this, of
our own nation, a priest of Eaton in his holy travails above 200. years
since, and a protestant minister thus approuinge and relatinge from them: Ad
occidentalem partem Ecclesiae, quae est in monte Sion, est lapis rubens prae
altari, qui quidem lapis portatus erat de monte Sinay per manus Angelorum ad
preces S. Thomae reuertentis ab India: super quem celebrabat sanctus Ioannes
Euangelista coram beatissima virgin Maria Missam, per multos annos, post
Ascensionem Domini. At the West end of the church which is in mount Sion,
there is a redd stone standing in stead of an altar, the which stone was
transported thither from the mount Sinay by the hands of Angels, at the prayers
of S. Thomas, when he returned from India: upon this stone S. John the
Evangelist did celebrate and say Mass, before the blessed virgin Mary, many
years after the Ascension of our Lord. Gulielm. Way Etonensis presbyter. l.
Itinerar^ cap. loca sancta montis Sinay. an. D. 1420. Hackluyts. book of
travails in Gul. Way cap. mount Sinay. And he was so daily devoted to this
holy sacrifice, that as the ancient Anonymus writer of his and the other
Apostles lives does witness, he celebrated it, the very day he died, and was
buried by the altar. Anonimus antiq. in vit. miracula and pass. Apostolorum in
Ioanne cap. 10.

26. S. Paul the last of our holy writers of these mysteries, says plainly
by our protestants translation. (1. Corinthians. cap. 11.23.24.25.) I have received
of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same
night in which he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks,
he brake it, and said; Take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you:
This do in remembrance of me, and after the same manner also he take the cup,
when he had supped, saying; This cup is the new testament in my blood: this
do ye as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. Where we see a
double power and commandment also of Christ unto his Apostles, both to
consecrate and communicate, both his body and blood: And yet there is no
commandment in any Religion Catholic or Protestant, for any but priests to
do all these things, and to them only when they offer the holy sacrifice of
Christ's body and blood in Mass, for if at any other time in sickness or
otherwise they communicate, they do it only as other Catholic lay parsons
do; And many cases there be in the Religion of Protestants, in which
communicants are not bound to receive in both kinds: and it is approved and
enacted by the public statute of all our Protestant Princes that ever were in
England, King Edward the sixth, Queen Elisabeth, and our present sovereign
King James, that even in the first primative and unspotted times of
Christianity the Christians did very often communicate in one only kind. (
Statut. parliament. 1. an. 1. Eduard. 6.1. Elisabeth. and an. 1. Iacob^) which
could not be tolerable, if the commandment of Christ had been general unto
all to communicate in both, as it was to his Apostles, and all massinge or
sacrificinge priests in them.

27. And to make it most evident in all proceedings, that the powers and
commandments were communicated and given to priests only, no parsons
whatsoever King or Caesar but priests only, and with protestants their
ministers which in their Religion cipher the places of priests, do or may
intermeddle with any of those powers or commands of Christ, do this, either
in respect of his blessed body or blood, or howsoever we will term those
mysteries, and yet to them to whom they were committed, they are plain
commandments imparatiue in all la^guages Greek, Latin, English, (...),
facite, do this, in the imparatiue and commaundinge mood, and manner of
speech: and so all men of whatsoever Religion do understand them, and cannot
possibly truly use them in any other meaning. And after prouinge how the
mysteries there delivered, are the very body and blood of Christ, (1. Corinthians.
cap. 11. ver. 27.28.29.30.31.) although he had said before, that he had
delivered unto them, that which he received of Christ, and entreats of the
same, diverse verses before, and in 11. or 12. after even to the end of that
chapter, yet not having therein set down the form and order fully, how this
sacrifice was to be celebrated, he concludes thus in that chapter: The rest I
will set in order when I come. (1. Corinthians. c. 11. v.vlt 34.) reserving it to
tradition, being to long a work to be comprised in an epistle.

28. Whereupon S. Augustine expoundinge those very words: caetera cum venero
ordinabo. The other things I will order when I come, as he reads, writes
in these words. ( Augustine. epistol. 118. ad I anuarium cap. 6. Tom. 2. operum
eius.) vnde intelligi datur, quia multum erat, vt in epistola totum illum
agendi ordinem insinuaret, quem vniuersa per orbem seruat Ecclesia, ab ipso
ordinatum esse, quod nulla morum diuersitate variatur. Whence we are given to
understand, that it was to much for him to insinuate in an epistle, all that
whole order of celebration, which the universal church observes in all the
world, to be there ordered of him, which is not varied with any diversity.
Where we see plainly, that by the testimony of S. Paul himself warranted
with this great authority, he delivered a form of Mass unto the church, and
the church in S. Augustines time still continued it without any diversity or
difference to be excepted against.

29. And where S. Paul writes to S. Timothy according, to our protestants
translation: I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giuinge of thanks be made for all men: for Kings and all
that be in authority. (1. Timoth. cap. 2. v. 1.2.) it is the common
interpretation of the holy Fathers, and expositors of scriptures, that he
there alludeth to the order used in the holy sacrifice of Mass, where these
things were observed, as appears in the most ancient Masses we have
extant. So S. Remigius, S. Augustine, S. Bid, S. Bruno, S. Anselme, Haymo,
Petrus Lombardus and diverse others writing upon that place, expound them of
the holy Mass. S. Remigius says: Apostolus dirigens haec verba Timotheo, and
in illo tradidit omnibus Episcopis and presbyteris omnique Ecclesiae, quando
deberent Missarum solemnia celebrare, and pro omnibus orare. The Apostle
directinge these words to Timothy, and in him delivered to all Bishops and
priests, and to the whole church, when they should celebrate the solemnities
of Mass, and pray for all. Remigius in 1. Timoth. cap. 2. Augustine. epistol.
59. quaest. 5. Beda in 1. Timoth. cap. 2. Bruno, Haimo, Petr. Lombard. and alij
in eund. loc.

30. And a little after: Quam formam vel exemplum, omnes Ecclesiae modo
retinent: nam obsecrationes sunt quicquid praecedit in Missarum solemnijs, vbi
incipit Sacerdos consecrare mysteria corporis and sanguinis Domini. Which form
or example all churches do still retain: for obsecrations are all whatsoever
it said in the solemnities of the Mass, until that place where the priest
begins to consecrate the mysteries of the body, and blood of Christ,
saying: Te igitur clementissime Pater. (Which be the first words of the
canon.) Orations or prayers are those which the priest utters in the
consecration of the Eucharist, even to the fractio^ of the body of our Lord:
that is, when the priest puts one part of the host into the chalice.
Postulations are the blessiings, which the Bishop says over the people
inuocating upon them, the name of God. The giving of thanks are prayers which
the priest, after the people have received, does render unto God the Father,
who has offered unto them, the mystery of the body and blood of his son for
their salvation. Which all most word by word and in the same sense is
delivered by S. Augustine in his 59. epistle. quaestione 5. Tom. 5. where he
sets down the whole order, and manner of the sacrifice of Mass, as we now
use it, and expounds S. Paul's words to that purpose, as the other holy and
learned recited Father likewise does.

31. And to make all sure by our protestants themselves, they assure us that S.
Trophimus mentioned by S. Paul, was his disciple, and left by him at Arles in
France, when he passed from Rome to Spain, although Eisengrenius proves
from the french Annals and diverse antiquities, that he was disciple both of S.
Peter and S. Paul, B. Petri and Pauli discipulus. ( Guliel. Eiseng. centen. 1.
part. 1. did. 3. fol. 53.) And was of such fame and renown as Pope Zosimus
1200. years since the Roman Martyrologe. ( Zosimus To. 1. council. Martyrol.
Roman. in S. Trophimo die 29. Decembris, the Magdeburgian Protestants with
others testify:) ex eius praedicationis font, tota Gallia fidei Rinulos
accepit: out of the fountain of his preaching all France receiving the
channels of faith. (Magd. centur. 1. l. 1. in Trophimo.) yet the ancient
British antiquity suppressed by our protestants (of which before, and more
herafter) is a sufficient warrant and witness, that he delivered and observed
in France, a certain form and order of the holy sacrifice of Mass, and the
same was used and practiced, also both at Rome and here in Britanie likewise at
that time. M. S. Britan. antiq. pr. Stores in exordium.

32. And the same is as evidently proved, from his renowned scholar S. Denis
the Areopagite; Who in his book of the ecclesiastical Hierarchy. ( cap. 5.7.
and epist. ad Demophil.) sets down the whole order of the sacrifice of
Mass, and how the priest behaved himself at the holy altar, both before and
after consecration, how the catechumens, energumens, and public penitents,
were not permitted to be present, but only to the prayers which were before
the oblation of the sacrifice: He sets down how bread and wine was proposed
on the altar, how blessed, consecrated into the body and blood of Christ, and
offered in sacrifice. How great reverence and prayer was also used unto Christ
under the external species. O tu diuinum sacratissimumque Sacramentum, obducta
tibi per signa obscuritatum, quasi vela and integumenta, patefacta perspicue
nobis ostende, mentisque nostrae oculos singulari, and quae obtegi non potest,
luce comple. He shows how a memory of Saints is there made, mystica
Sanctorum recitatio fit. He teaches how the priest or Bishop, prayed for the
dead, for remission of their sins, and to come to glory. Precatur oration illa
diuinam clementiam, vt cuncta dimittat per infirmitatem humanam admissa peccata
defuncto, eumque inluce statuat, and regione viuoru^. Which is as much as the
Roman church now uses, in that holy sacrifice of Mass. And he remembers how
in the end the priest acknowledges the dignity of that holy sacrifice, to
be so great, that he was unworthy to offer it, but that Christ did both give
power and command to do it, when he said to his Apostles, do this in
commemoration of me. Religiose simul, and vt Pontificem decet, post sacras
diuinorum operum lauds de sacrificio, quod ipsius dignitatem superat, se
purgat, dum primo ad cum clamat, tu dixisti, hoc facite in meam commemorationem.

33. And how careful, and diligent an obseruer, and practiser of this massing
doctrine he was, in act and deed, daily in his whole life, we may be assured
by the worthy writers of his life and death, Hilduinus Abbot of S. Denis in
France where he was buried, about 800. years since, Roswita or Roswida, not
long after and others, who confidently and from public testimony, write, that
neither his strict imprisonment in a dungeon could hinder him from performing
this holy duty, but there both persuadinge the people present, and writing
unto others absent, to confirm them more, said Mass in that unfit place: and
to prove how acceptable it was, Christ Jesus with a multitude of Angels
appeared unto them all, with such a light from heaven, as had been seen, at
the very time when they were to communicate, and comforted his holy Martyr. Sed
nec carcereis praesul praeclarus in antris desinit obsequium Domino persoluere
dignum: sed docuit plebem studiose conuenientem, ac celebrat sacrae solito
solemnia Missae: Est vbi caelestem debebat frangere panem, lux noua tristifico
subito fulgebat in antro, in qua sidereae regnator splendidus aulae scilicet
angelica pariter comitante caterua apparens, charum consolabatur amicum.
Trithem. l. de scriptorib. in Hildonio. and Roswida. Hilduinus Abb. in vita S.
Dionisij Areopag. cap. 29. Roswita l. de vit. S. Dionis. Areopag. and alijs.

THE X. CHAPTER. How all the rest of the, Apostles in particular S. Andrew,
James the great, Thomas, James the less, Philip, Bartholomew, Simon,
Thaddaeus, and Matthias, were sacrificinge Priests, and Apostles, and usually
offered the sacrifice of Mass.
NOw let us come to the rest of the holy Apostles which have not in scriptures
written of these mysteries, and prove of them all, and in order (except S.
Peter the first, whom I have promised to put in the last place) that in their
sacred functions, they offered the most holy sacrifice of Mass. And first to
begin with S. Andrew. It is a received opinion. Iodoc. Cocc. Tom. 2. l. 7.
artic. 5. de purgator. that this holy Apostle did first deliver that form of
Mass, which was auntiently and from the beginning used in the church of
Constantinople, and after called the Mass of S. John Chrysostom, the great
and learned Patriarch of that place, because it was enlarged by him, and is
still, as our protestants acknowledge, used to this day in the churches of
Greece. Edwin. Sands relation of Religion. cap. 53. or 54. And that he
himself did usually and daily offer this most sacred oblation of Christ's body
and blood, we have most ancient and undeniable testimonies, whether we will
profess our selves Catholics or protestants in Religion; for both these agree
in this, that S. Andrew was martyred by Aegeus Proco^sull of Achaia in the
city Patras: and they celebrate his day of festiuitie, upon the last of
November. And they do, or ought if they make not fictions of their own,
deduce the history of his passion from the ancient penners and relators
thereof, which be the priests and deacons of Achaia, which were eye witnesses
and present at the same. S. Cyprian, or whosoever was the ancient Author of
the book among his works, de duplici Martyrio. The old Anonimus who wrote
the book of the Apostles lives, published by the learned Bishop of Vienna
Fredericus Nausea, S. Simeon Metaphrastes himself, a learned grecian and
ancient of those parts, S. Iuo, S. Bernard, Algerus, the ancient writer of
the lives of Saints, the whole latin church in the public service of the
feast of S. Andrew the Apostle, the ancient Breuiary of the church of
Salisbury in England, and others are witnesses, that S. Andrew beeinge
persuaded and threatened by Aegeus the Proconsull, to sacrifice to the Pagan
Gods, answered publicly unto him in these words: Ego omnipotenti Deo, qui
vnus and verus est, immolo quotidie, non taurorum carnes, nec hircorum
sanguinem, sed immaculatum Agnum in altari: cuius carnem posteaque omnis
multitudo credentium manducauerit, Agnus qui sacrificatus est, integer
perseuerat and viuus. I do daily sacricrifice to God almighty, the only true
God, not the flesh of bulls, nor blood of goats, but the immaculate Lamb
upon the altar, whose flesh after all the multitude of believers have eaten,
the Lamb that is sacrificed, remains whole and living. Breuiar. and Missale
Romans Martyrolog. Romans Bed. and Vsuard. vlt. Nou. Protestant comm: Book in
calendar. Nouem. and infest. vlt. Nouem. Cooper v. Andreas Godw. conuers.
Magdeb. cent. 1. in Andr. Apostolo. Act. S. Andrea per Presb. and Diacon.
Achaiae. Ciprian. l. de duplic. Mart. Anonim. in mirac. vit. and Pass. Apost.
in S. Andrea. Sim. Metaphr. in S. Andr. S. Iuo Carnoten. Episc. sermon. de
Sacram. dedicat. ser. 4. Algerus contra Berengar. S. Bernard. apud Francisc.
Feuarden. annotat. in Frenaeum l. 4. contra haer. cap. 32. page 361. Jacob.
Genuen. Epis in vit S. Andrea vlt. Nouem. Breu. Ecclesiae Salisbur. ibidem.

2. Thus it is evident that S. Andrewe the Apostle did offer this holy
sacrifice of Mass, and every day: and that the sacrifice was Christ himself
the true Lamb of God that takes away sins Among the holy ancient and
renowned witnesses, S. Iuo supr. ser. 4. speakinge of this holy sacrifice of
Mass thus wtiteth: In memoriam veniunt verba beati Andreae Apostoli, quibus
asserit and in caelis esse corpus Domini, and de altari posse sumi corpus
Domini. Cuius inquit carnes cum sint comestae in terris a populo, ipse tamen in
caelestibus ad dexteram Patris integer perseuerat and viuus. The words of S.
Andrew the Apostle do come to memory, in which he affirms, that the body of
our Lord is in heaven, and yet may his body be receued from the altar. Whose
flesh says he, when it is eaten of the people on earth, yet he perseuereth
whole and alive in heaven, at the right hand of his Father. And this gives
full satisfaction for S. Andrew, that he was a sacrificinge and massinge
priest.

3. The next in order is S. James the brother of S. John the Apostle, and
Evangelist, martired by King Herod as we read in the 12. chapter of the Acts
of the Apostles, where our protestants thus read: About that time, Herod the
King stretched forth his hand to vex certain of the church. And he killed
James the brother of John with the sword. (Actor. cap. 12. ver. 1.2.) Which his
timely death has taken from him such ample memory as is delivered of some
other Apostles that lived longer, in histories. But being assured before by
all kind of testimonies, that he was one of them to whom our blessed Savior
gave power, and commandment to offer the holy sacrifice of his body and
blood, that he there being consecrated a priest, and one of the three Apostles
which our Savior most loved, and he him, it would be more then impiety to
think, he either neglected the power, or brake the commandment of his
Master, whom he so much loved, and loved him again; for so he should not have
been so principal a friend and lover of Christ, but his professed enemy, in
continually violatinge his law, and commandment. And being both brother to
S. John, and consecrated and ordained priest at the same time, in the same
manner, and order as he was, how could S. John be a massinge and sacrificinge
priest, so undeniably as is proved of him, except S. James were also in the
same degree?

4. Further it is proved that S. James lived sometime before his death and was
martired in Jerusalem, where the public sacrifice of the Christian church at
that time was the holy Mass: for as Hieremias Patriarch of Constantinople
proves against the Protestants in his censure, and others. The holy Mass is a
sacrifice instituted of Christ. (Hierem. in censura. Council. 6. Constantinop.)
in memory and commendation of all his mercy and humility sustained for our
souls. Saint James the Apostle, called our Lords brother, first reduced into
order that liturgy, and sacrifice, beeinge so instructed of Christ to do it,
in all parts of that holy sacrifice, nothing else is handled, but an universal
order of things, which our Savior undertook for our redemption. Then this S.
James also a chief Apostle of the same Christ, consecrated with the same
solemnity the other was, and living and dyinge in the same place, a great
Saint and Martyr as the oother was, could not possibly differ from him in this
point: nor from the rest of the Apostles, all of them by all consent before,
agreeinge in these mysteries. And it is an historical approved verity, by all
antiquities, that these few disciples which this S. James converted in Spain,
and brought with him to Jerusalem, were directed and sent thither again by S.
Peter the Apostle, that great massinge priest (as hereafter) and they were such
as he that sent them in that respect.

5. S. Thomas follows next in Apostolic order, how he was a sacrificinge
and massinge priest I have showed before in S. John. And this holy Apostle
preachinge in India, altares and diverse other pregnant arguments of his saying
Mass in those parts are found among them there. Christiani qui Indias
frequentarunt, quas olim diui Thomae praedicatio peragrauit, altaria Christiana
cum reliquijs quibusdam Imaginis Virginis in speluncis inuenerunt. Florimund.
Raem. de origin Haer. l. 8. cap. 12. And Franciscus Aluares. ( de reb. Ind.)
that lived long in those parts, writes, that their Annals testify, they had
a church built in their contry within ten years of Christ's Ascension, which
church there still remains, and bears the name, as ever it did, the church
of our Lady of Mount Sion, and the reason why it is so called, is because the
stone where of the altar was builded, was brought thither from Mount Sion. The
same is proved by others, and protestants themselves, further declaringe the
manner of their saying Mass, still continued with great reverence, and
devotion; teachinge how they never say Mass without incense, and three
clergy men, a priest, deacon, and subdeacon, and they derive their Religion
from S. Thomas the Apostle. An other, an English Protestant minister from
experienced trauailers, and antiquity writes: est Capella Indorum: there is a
Chapel of these Indians converted by S. Thomas in Mount Caluary at
Jerusalem, where only the pilgrims of India, by their priests singe Mass,
after their order consecrating and making, conficientes, the Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ, of bread and wine. They behave themselves with
greatest attention, reverence, humility, and devotion. Therefore we cannot
doubt but S. Thomas taught, and practiced these mysteries, both there, and
wheresoever he lived and preached. Edw. Grim. book of estates page
1088.1089.201.203. Sebast. Munster. l. 6. cap. 57. vide multos apud Gul.
Eisengr. centen. 1. fol. 168. Rich. Hackluits book of travails in mount
Sinay. Sir John Mandeuil page 36. cap. 14.

6. Concerning S. James commonly called S. James the less, and brother of our
Lord, whose place is ordinarily numbered next, I have spoken before, how, and by
Christ's appointment, as the greek writers say, he composed a form of Mass,
and delivered it to the churches, where he lived, and so must needs be a
professor and practiser of that, which he taught to others; and consequently
consecrated massing and sacrificinge priests, to perform the same. His Mass
approved of in the sixth general council held at Constantinople, as our
protestants allow, is still extant, and known to all learned men, in all things
of substance agreeing with the usual present missale of the Roman church.
Censura Oriental. Hieremias Patriarch Constantinapol. ib. cap. 10. Proclus S.
Nichol. Methon. and Bessarion apud Gul. Eisengr. cent. 1. fol. 186. Council.
general. 6. can. 52. can. Apost. 3. Missa 5. Iacobi in Biblioth. Patr. and al.
Morton apol. part. 2. page 8.

7. Now follows S. Philip, which followed the same opinion, and practice of
the holy sacrifice of Mass: for we do not only often read in general,
that he founded churches, and consecrated Bishops, priests, deacons and other
inferior clergy men, which none but they which hold a sacrificinge
preisthood, and sacrifice of Christ's body and blood in holy Mass, allow: But
S. Simeon Metaphrastes living where S. Philip preached, with others testifies
in particular: Sacerdotes and altaria vbique in illis locis statuit and
construxit, pro sacrificijs illis quae fiebant in daemonum altaribus,
sacrosancti fecit in eis peragi sacram misterij celebrationem. He appointed
preistes and builded altars, every where in those places, and for those
sacrifices which were used to be offered upon the altars of devils, he
caused the holy celebration of the sacred mystery to be perfected. Anonimus.
supr. l. in Pass. Apostol. in S. Philippo Gul. Eisengr. centur. 1. fol.
157.158. and alibi. Simeon Metaph. in S. Philippo Apostolo Sur. die 1. Maij.
And the protestant Sebastian Munster with others teaches, how the Abissines
testify from their Apostolic antiquities, and constitutions of the Apostles
themselves, preserved by continual tradition with them, that among other
mysteries of Christian Religion delivered by them, this of the holy sacrifice
of Mass, and Christ's sacred body and blood offered therein, was one, and that
S. Philip the Apostle was principally their Apostle, and preached these things
to them. Asserunt imprimis Philippum Apostolum apud eos praedicasse Euangelium.
Sebastian. Munst. Cosmograph. l. 6. cap. 56.

8. Touching S. Bartholomew, we read that he preached in India, where that
known massinge Apostle taught, and left that holy sacrifice, so that two
Apostles if they had not been confirmed in grace, and free from error (as all
agree they were) no Christian will think they could preach and practice
contrary doctrines, in so great mysteries, to, and in one people, place, and
time, and we further read, that S. Bartholomew consecrated many priests,
which (as before) must needs be sacrificing massing priests. And he made King
Polimius a massinge Bishop, and maker of massinge priests, continuinge so 20.
years, besides others. Breuiar. Romans in fest. S. Bartholom. Abd. cert.
Apostol. l. 8. Antonin. part. 1. titul. 6. Petr. de natal. l. 7. cap. 103.
Martyr^log. Romans die 24. Aug. Dion. Areopag. l. mistic. Theolog. Eusebius. l. 5.
hist. c. 10. Origin. in Genesis Hieron. l. de script: in pauten.

9. S. Simon and Jude could not be of any other profession opinion or practice
in this point, being both with the rest of the Apostles consecrated
sacrificinge priests, and S. Simon so zealous a lover of Christ, as our
protestants write, that he thereby was named Zelotes, by a kind of
excellency, and S, Jude as he himself is witness, in his epistle, was frater
Iacobi, brother to S. James, that notorious massinge priest, and Apostle as is
before declared: and S. Simon is generally taught, to have conuersed most in
those contries, where S. Mark that massinge Evangelist practiced, and planted
that doctrine. And S. Jude first preached in Jury diverse years, where his
massing Brother S. James was so renowned for writing the form of this holy
sacrifice, and both practicing it himself, and deliueringe it to others. And
they consecrated Abdias Bishop of Babylon, who by his own, and all
testimonies, was a massinge and sacrificinge priest, and Bishop, who could make
and consecrate no others but such as he was, and had authority to do.
Socrat. l. 1. cap. 15. Niceph. hist. l. 4. c. 32. Fortunat. Godwin. Conuers. of
Britanie. Iud. Episc. c. 1. v. 1. Martyrolog. Romans die 28. October. Bed. and
Vsuard. ib. Stowe histor. Godwin. Conu. of Brit. Nicephor. l. 2. cap. 4. Ado
Treuer. and Bed. 5. call. Nouemb. Nicephor. lib. 2. cap. 40. Guliel. Eisengr.
centen. 1. part. 5. did. 7. fol. 168. Abd. certam. Apost. l. 4. Antonin. part.
1. Petr. de natal. l. 9. cap. 115. Abdias l. de certam. Apost. l. 6. Iul.
African, praefat. histor. Apostol. Anonym. in S. Bartholom.

10. S. Matthias being chosen into the place of Judas the traitor, by the
other Apostles, could be of no other judgment, and Religion herein, then they
were. And the places he preached in, give testimony unto this: for whether we
will say with Sophronius, Dorothus, and Nicephorus, that he preached in
Aethiopia, we have heard that massinge Apostles and priests preached there: or
with our ancient Martyrologes, that he was martired in Jury, S. James and the
other Apostles before have proved he must needs he a massinge and
sacrificinge priest, and execute that holy function, living and dying there.
Sophron. apud Hier. l. de scrip. Eccles. Doroth. in Synops. Nicephor. l. 2. c.
40. Martyrolog. Romans 24. Febr. Bed. Ado. and Vsuard. ib. Isidor. l. de vit. and
obit. Sanct. cap. 81.

11. To conclude with S. Barnabas, extraordinarily called to be an Apostle, as
S. Paul, he is commonly taken to be the first composer of the Mass of
Milane, in Italy, named S. Ambrose his Mass, in respect of certain additions
of his unto it, and used with great privilege in that church, to this day, not
differinge in any material point from the present order of saying Mass used
in the rest of the Roman Latin, or Greek church at this time, or whersoeuer.
Traditio Eccl. Mediolanen. in Ital. Iodoc. Cocc. l. 6. To. 2. articul. 9. lib.
7. artic. 5. And this Mass was, as our protestants themselves acknowledge, in
such use and credit in the Latin church, that it was more usual then that
called S. Gregory's Mass, until the time of Pope Adrian the first about the
year of Christ 780. Their words be these. ( Io. Balaeus in act. Roman. Pont.
lib. 3 in Hadrian. 1.) Missarum ritus a magno Gregorio editus, occidentalibus
Ecclesijs imperauit. Pope Adrian commanded the order of the Mass published by
Gregory the great, to be used of the west churches, till which time S.
Barnabas and S. Ambrose Mass still used at Millane were more usual, as an
other thus writes. ( Fox Tom. 1. act. and Monum. page 130) Pope Adrian the
first ratified and confirmed the order of Saint Gregory's Mass, above the
order of S. Ambrose Mass, for unto this time, which was about the year of our
Lord 780. the Liturgy of S. Ambrose was more used in the Italian churches.
Therefore there is no difficulty but S. Barnabas as the rest of the Apostles,
was also a sacrificinge massinge priest.

THE XI. CHAPTER. How S. Peter the chief Apostle, and first founder of the
church of Christ in this our kingedome, was a sacrificinge, massinge priest,
delivered a form of Mass to the church, consecrated many massinge priests in
this part of the world nere unto us, and some of this kingdom.
NOw lastely to come to S. Peter, the prime and chief of the Apostles, he
could not be at difference with the rest in this, but must needs be a
massinge priest as they were, and so for this purpose is it little, material
whether this contry received the faith from him, or any other of the Apostles.
But because both Catholics, and protestants agree. ( Gul. Cambden in Britan.
Theatr. of great Brit. l. 6. controuers. histor. To. 1. in S. Petro.) that both
Greek and Latin antiquities give that unto him, as is lately proved at large,
he must also be the first institutor of our ecclesiastical Hierarchy, in
consecratinge unto us, diverse holy Bishops, and priests, which that is
delivered already, proves to have been massing Bishops, and priests, and by
those sacrificinge Bishops, and his sacrificinge successors, our priests and
Bishops were ever sacred massinge Bishops, and priests unto these days, of
innovation, as will manifestly appear in all ages, herafter by this treatise.
For, besides that, which is said before, how all the Apostles were massing and
sacrificing priests, and all the other Apostles and Evangelists besides S.
Peter, we have of him in particular, more and most credible witnesses, then
are needful to be alleged. S. Isidor says. Ordo Missae vel orationum,
quibus oblata Deo sacrificia consecrantur, primum a S. Petro est institutus,
cuius celebrationem vno eodemque modo vniuersus peragit orbis. The order of
Mass; or of the prayers by which the sacrifices offered unto God are
consecrated, was first instituted by S. Peter, whose celebration the whole
world observes in one, and the same manner. Isodor. l. 1. de officijs cap. 15.
de Missa and orationibus.

2. Our holy ancient learned contriman, S. Albinus, or Alcuinus by others,
purposely entreatinge of this most blessed sacrifice, and the ceremonies
thereof, thus writes: Celebratio Missae in commemorationem Passionis Christi
peragitur, sic enim ipse praecepit Apostolis, tradens eis corpus and sanguinem
suum, dicens hoc facite in meam commemorationem, hoc est in memorian Passiones
mea. Tanquam diceret, quod pro vestro salute passus sum, ad memoriam reuocate.
Hanc Petrus Apostolus primus omnium Antiochiae dicitur celebrasse. The
celebration of Mass is done in commemoration of the Passion of Christ, for so
he gave commandment unto his Apostles, when he delivered unto them his body
and blood, saying do this in commemoration, which is in memory of my passion:
as though he had said, recall unto memory that I suffered for your salvation.
This Mass S. Peter the Apostle is said first to have celebrated at Antioche.
Albinus alij Alcuinus l. divine. offic. cap. de celebrat. Missae.

3. Egbertus writing how the court of the King, Regalis aula, at Antioch was
in the time of S. Peter's beeinge there made a Christian church, among other
holy functions S. Peter exercised in it, he says he ordinarily said Mass,
in qua communiter populum docuit, and Missas celebrauit. (Egbert. Abb. sermon. de
incremento and manifestat. Cathol. fide.) And again. ( sermon. 10.) Sacerdotalem
ordinem nos accepimus a Romana Ecclesia, Romana autem Ecclesia, ab Apostolo
Petro, Petrus a Christo, Christus a Deo Patre, qui vnxit eum oleo laetitiae,
hoc est Spiritu Sancto prae participibus suii, and iurauit dicens ad cum, tu es
Sacerdos in aeternum, secundum ordinem Melchisedeih. Verus Sacerdos erat
Dominus noster Jesus Christus. Ipse inuisibiliter dedit corpus and sanguinem
suum, quando coram discipulis panem and vinum in cana benedixit benedictione
calesti; and fecit sua admirabili potestate vt sub specie eiusdem panis, and
vini sumerent de manibus ipsius corpus and sanguinem eius. Ipse quoque sicut
pollicitus est, cum Ecclesia sua est, vsque ad consummationem saeculi, and
quotidie inuisibiliter offers per manus Ecclesiae Deo Patri pro salute mundi,
corpus and sanguinem suum sub specie panis and vini. Propterea dictus est
Sacerdos secundum ordinem Melchisedech, qui erat Rex Salem, and Sacerdos Dei
summi, and oblationem fecit Deo ex pane and vino. Dominus Jesus Christus
discipulos suos fecit veros Sacerdotes. Dedit eis potestatem conficiendi corpus
and sanguinem suum sub specie panis and vini, quando dixit ad eos. (Luc. 22.)
hoc est corpus meum quod pro vobis tradetur; Hoc facite in meam
commemorationem. Omnem denique potestatem quae ad Sacerdotij officium, and ad
episcopalem dignitatem spectat, ab illo acceperunt. Eandem autem potestatem
singuli successoribus relinquerunt, in illis terris, and in illis Ecclesijs,
quas eis Dominus conuertendas, and gubernandas delegauit. Et vt nunc de
reliquis taceam, Beatus Petrus princeps Apostolorum in Romana vrbe,
presbyteros, and Episcopos ordinauit, and omnem potestatem quae ad officia
eorum pertinebat, eis dedit, sicut ipse a Domino Jesus Christo acceperat.

4. We have receued preistly order from the church of Rome, and the church of
Rome received it from the Apostle Peter, Peter received it from Christ, Christ
received it from God his Father, who anointed him with oil of gladness, that is
with the holy ghost above his partakers, and swore, saying unto him. ( psalm.
10.) thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech. Our Lord
Jesus Christ was a true priest. He did inuisibly give his body and blood, when
before his disciples at his supper he blessed bread and wine, and made by his
admirable power that under the species of the same bread and wine, they should
receive from his hands, his body and blood. He also, as he has promised, is
with his church unto the end of the world, and does daily inuisibly offer by
the hands of the church, to Go^ ^he Father for the salvation of the world, his
body and blood under the form of bread and wine. Therefore he is called a
priest after the order of Melchisedech, who was King of Salem, and priest of
the high God, and made offeringe unto God of bread and wine. Our Lord Jesus
Christ made his disciples preistes. He gave them power to make his body and
blood under the form of bread, and wine, when he said unto them. ( Luc. 22.)
this is my body, which shall be given for you: do this in my commemoration.
Finally they received from him all power, which belongs to the office of
preisthood, and episcopal dignity. And every one of them, left the same power
to their successors, in those contries, and in those churches, which our Lord
commended to them to convert and govern. And at this time to be silent of the
rest, S. Peter chief of the Apostles in the city of Rome ordained priests, and
deacons, and gave them all power which apperteined to their offices, as he
himself had received from our Lord Jesus Christ.

5. And thus from S. Peter deduceth a continual succession of sacrificinge
massinge priests, and Bishops in all this West part of the world; And among
others teaches how particularly this our kingdom of England had our massinge
priests, and Bishops by that deduction from S. Peter, and his successors in the
Apostolic see of Rome. Stephanus Eduerists. ( l. de Sacramento Altaris.) a
learned Bishop many hundred years since, says: sicut Magister docuerat,
Apostoli se and alios communicando consecrationem corporis and sanguinis Domini
facere caeperunt, and fieri per vniuersas Ecclesias praedicando instituerunt.
As Christ their master had taught, so the Apostles communicatinge themselves,
and others, began to make the consecration of the body and blood of Christ, and
by preachinge instituted it to be done through all churches: and shows how
the canon of the Mass was used by S. Peter, and the rest from the beginning.
Primo ficbat canonis mysterium. Before any thing was added by the Popes of
Rome. And Paschasius Rathertus plainly says, it was the common opinion in his
time, that S. Peter was the Author of the canon of Mass: respice in
Sacramentorum celebratione, instituente beato Petro, vt credimus, quid orat
Sacerdos in canone. And then he adds particularly, that by S. Peter's
institution, the priest prays, v^ fiat corpus and sanguis dilectissimi filij
tui Domini nostri Jesus Christi: That it may be made the body, and blood of thy
most beloved son, our Lord Jesus Christ. Paschasius Ratbert. l. de corpore
and sanguine Christi.

6. I read in an ancient Anonymus Manuscript history of this kingdom. ( M.
S. hist. incipit in principio creauit Deus. cap nomina summorum Pontificum.)
post Passionem Christi anno sequenti beatus Petrus Apostolus tenuit cathedram
sacerdotalem in partibus orientis annis quatuor, vbi primam Missam celebrauit.
Deinde venit Antiochiam, vbi cathedram adeptus, sedit annis septem, inde venit
Roneam. The next year after the Passion of Christ, S. Peter the Apostle held
his preistly chair in the parts of the east four years, where he first
celebrated Mass. From thence he came to Antioch, where obteyning the chair,
he sat seven years, from thence he came to Rome. The ancient English
history, commonly called Caxtons history, because printed by him, thus
testifies: Peter the first Pope was ablessed man, and glorious Apostle of
Christ, he was head of the church (after S. Hierome) 37. years, and he held
his Bishopric in the east five years, and he said Mass. he made our Lords
body, then after he came to Antioch. old English histor. published by Caxton.
part. 4. an. D. 34.

7. Martianus Polonus has the same words, with our Manuscript history before
cited. Walfridus Strabo 800. years since writes, how the Romans received the
use and observations of their Mass (common to the western world) from S. Peter
the chiefest of the Apostles. Martin. Polon. in supputat. tempor. col. 27. in
S. Petro. Walafrid. Strab. l. de obseruat. cap. 22. The like has S Clement
scholar and successor to S. Peter, Comestor, Ioannes Belethus, Pope
Innocentius the third, Polychronicon, Ioannes Cantabrigiensis, Petrus de
natalibus, Hesichius, Nicholaus Cabasilla, Germanus S. Beda, S. Hierome,
Theonas, Cassianus. S. Anacletus, who was made priest by S. Peter, as he
himself witnesses, S. Epiphanius, Jonas Aureliensis, our learned co^tryman,
with diverse others, cited by Eisengrenius and others. And to take the warrant
of Protestants with us, for this verity: first we have the testimony of the
Magdeburgians from Martinus Polonus, and others, in quibusdam chronicis vt
Martini and aliorum, not only that S. Peter said Mass, but in some sort the
order thereof. Our first English Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury expressly
acknowledges, that S. Peter said Mass both in the east, Missam dicta^ a
Petro in orientalibus regionibus, and after he came into the west also, and
that, illius traditio a Christi primo instituto ducentis amplius annis in prima
Ecclesia durauit. The order of Mass which S. Peter used and taught, continued
in the primative church above 200. years from the institution of Christ until
the time of Pope Zepherine. Clem. Romans l. 10. Recognit. histor. scholast. cap.
7. in act. Apostol. Io. Belethus l. de offic. divine. cap. 124. Innocent. 3.
Praefat. l. 1. Polychronic. l. 4. cap. 6. Ioannis Cantabrigien. in pupil.
oculi. c. 8. Petrus de natalib. l. 4. cap. 108. Hesichius Hierosol. in act.
cap. 20. and cap. 23. Leuit. l. 6. Nichol. Cabass. c. 28. de Miss. Germ.
Constantinp. in can. Miss. Anaclet. epist. 2. and al. apud Eisengren. centen.
1. fol. 116.117. Magdeburg. ^ent. 1. l. 2. cap. 6. col. 500. Math. Parker.
antiquit. Britannie. page 47. cap. 17.

8. And this Pope by this great protestants confession, was so far from
chaunginge any essential thing therein, to make it worse, that to insist in
his words: donec eam Zepherinus 16. Romanus Pontifex quorundam suasionibus ad
pulchriorem materiam formamque mutare voluit: until Zepherine the sixteenth
Pope of Rome by the persuasions of some would change that Mass to a more
excellent matter and form. And to put us out of doubt that Pope and S.
Zepherine did make no change or alteration of this S. Peter's Mass, now after
two hundred years, in protestants judgment, but that which rather honored,
then in any respect disgraced this holy sacrifice, all the change which this
Protestant Archbishop finds made herin by this holy Pope, is this, by his
own testimony, that where before wodde^ challices were used in some places, in
those times of persecution and necessity, this Pope (to use this protestants
words the 16. Pope of Rome) constituted that Masses should be celebrated with
patens of glass. Zepherinus 16. Romanus Episcopus, patents vitreis Missas
celebrari constituit. (Matthew. Parker supr. cap. 18. page 47.) Which an other
English Protestant purposely entreating of such things, thus expresses:
sanguinis Christi consecrationem in vit^eo calice, non ligneo, vt antea, fieri
debere statuit. Pope Zepherine constituted, that the consecration of the blood
of Christ should be made in a chalice of glass, and not of wood, as before
was used. Robertus Barns in vita Pontific. Roman. in Sever. alij Zepherin. And
further: Cum Episcopus celebraret Missae sacra, iussit omnes presbyteros
adesse. He commanded that all the priests should be present, when the Bishop
celebrated the sacrifice of Mass.

9. This is all S. Zepherine altered in this Mass of S. Peter, by these
protestants own grant: Therefore it is sufficiently agreed upon both by
Catholics and the best learned protestants, that according to the common
opinion in that respect, S. Peter did not only and usually say Mass, beeinge
a massing and sacrificing priest, by his preistlie consecration, but as the
great Apostle of Christ composed an order, or form of saying Mass, and
delivered it to the church to practice, and it was so accordingly received, and
practiced with the best learned and most holy men, the glorious lights of Gods
house, in that primative and freely confessed unspotted days of Christianity.
What this holy order was, and how it did not differ in any substantial or
essential matter from that Mass which the present Roman church now uses, I
shall sufficiently prove, with the good leave, and likinge, both of Catholic,
and learned protestant authors, hereafter.

10. In the mean time, to make that which is already said unquestionable, S.
Peter ever left in the renowned places where he lived, this holy doctrine, and
practice of saying Mass. And whether soever he sent any Apostolic men to
preach the gospel, this was a principal charge, and power bequeathed unto
them. For Jerusalem where S. Peter first preached I have spoken sufficiently
in S. James before, so for S. Mark at Alexandria, and the African parts. For
Antioch also I have written what might suffice, yet will I add somewhat of the
glorious successor of S. Peter there, S. Ignatius, whom S. Chrysostom the
great ornament of that very church S. Felix, and Theodoret do allow me to
call, the immediate substitute or successor of S. Peter there, and that by S.
Peter he was consecrated Bishop, dextera beati Petri fuisse ordinatum
Episcopum Ecclesiae Antiochenae, and, per magni Petri dexteram Pontificatum
suscepit. Though I do not deny, but as S. Clement did to S. Linus, and Cletus
at Rome, so S. Ignatius might and did give place to Saint Euodius at Antioche.
Whom great Authors therefore name S. Peter's first successor there. ( S. Io.
Chrisostom. orat. de translat. corp. S. Ignatij Antioch. Felix. Romans Pont.
epist. ad Zenon. Imper. in S. Synod. Constable. act. 1. Theodoret. dialog. 1.
Immutab. Eusebius. chr. and hist. l. 3. c. 16. Hieron. l. de scriptor. in Ignat.
Ignat. epist. ad Antioch.

11. This holy Saint and learned Father consecrated by S. Peter, was so far a
massing priest, and earnest practiser and patron of this holy sacrifice of
Mass, wherein Christ's sacred body and blood ar offered, that as not only
Theodoret and al Catholics with him teach, but as the grand protestants Beza,
Peter Martyr, Scultetus, Whitaker, and others as enforced do grant, that S.
Ignatius did condemn Simon and Menander for heretics, because according to
their known heresy against Christ's true humanity, they did reject the
sacrifice of his body and blood in the sacrifice of Mass: ( Theodoret. Dial.
3. Beza Dial. Cyclops. Peter Mart. loc. 12. Missae. Scutlet. part. 1. Medull.
patr, l. 1. Whitaker contra Camp. and al.) They do not receive (says S.
Ignatius) Eucharist and sacrifice, because they do not confess the Eucharist
to be the body of our Savior Jesus Christ, which suffered for our sins,
which his Father by his bounty raised again. (apud Theoderet. supr.) (...)
(...),

12. The protestants of Magdeburg. ( cent. 2. col. 113. cap. 6.) acknowledge
(which no man can deny) in epistolis Ignatij vt hodie extant vtrimque legitur
and sacrificium immolare, and Missas facere. We read both to offer sacrifice,
and say Masses in the epistles of Ignatius, as they are extant at this day. And
our English Protestants confess in these terms. ( Sutclisse subu. page 32.)
We read in Ignatius this phrase, offerre, and, sacrificium (...), to offer,
and, immolate sacrifice. And not to insist upon the words of S. Ignatius (
Ignatius epistol. ad Smirnens.) (...) which the old translation turns, ^ssam
facere, to say Mass, the other Greek words of this holy Saint which the
Magdeburgian protestants do allow for his ( Magdeburg supr.) (...), and (...)
do in all lexicons and Greek Authors, properly signify sacrificinge, or
offering sacrifice; and yet as that holy Father witnesses, this was in his
time the act and office of Christian priests. And says: this preisthood, is
the top or chief of all good things among men, and he that rages against
it, does not reproach man, but God and Christ his only begotten Son, who by
nature is the highest priest of God his Father, and he teaches how an
external sacrifice offered upon an external material altar, is a proper act
of this holy preisthood. ( Ignat. epistol. ad Hieron. epistol. ad Ephesians.) And
that this sacrifice in particular is, a medicine of immortality, a preservative
against death, and procuringe life in God. The bread of God, heavenly food,
which is the flesh of Christ, and blood of Christ. Ignat. epist. ad Trallian.
ad Ephesians. and ad Roman.

13. And if we attend S. Peter in his journey from the east to these western
parts, as Rome, and from thence to this kingdom of Britanie, we shall still
find antiquities, and monuments, though so many ar lost, that he still
continued his holy function in saying Mass, and neither there, nor here did
or could consecrate any but sacrificinge massinge priests. This holy Apostle
cominge in his journey to Rome to Pisa a famous city of Hetruria in Italy,
upon the Sea coaste, with his disciples, we find ancient evidence, that he
there said Mass, and in honor and memory of him a church was there builded,
and after his death dedicated unto him, yearly frequented with great resort
of pilgrims. ( Martin. Peers l. de diuinis and Apost. traditionib. part. 3.
fol. 70.) and part of the very altar whereon he said Mass is there still kept
in the sacrarie of that church, with an antiquity in authentical old
characters, testifying the truth hereof. Certa part altaris vbi celebrauit in
sacrario templi maioris venerabiliter recondita, vna cum testimonio literis
valde authenticis and vetustis, hinc rei fidem minime suspectam facientibus.
Also there is at Naples, as both Catholics and protestants witness, an old
church, where S. Peter said Mass, and the church thereuppon called: Ad diui
Petri aram: At the altar of S. Peter. ( Benedict. Fulco l. de locis antiq.
Neopolitan. Lindan. Apolog. Jacob. Gualter. tabula chronographic. secult. 1.
page 44.) at the entrance of the door whereof, this inscription still remains
to keep it in remembrance.

Siste fidelis.
Et priusquam templum ingrediaris,
Petrum sacrificantem venerare,
O faithful man stay, and before thou enter into the church, worship Peter
sacrificinge.
14. For Rome we have still the portable and remoueable altar whereon S.
Peter and many of his successors there in persecution said Mass. ( Antiquitat.
Eccl. Lateran. Romae. Breuiar. Romans die 9. Nouembr. in dedica. Basilic.
Saluatoris.) we have all his successors holy Saints and Martyrs almost 300.
years by protestants confession, all of them sacrificinge, and massing
preistes, as shall be manifest in their times and places, and the four first
of them S. Linus Cletus, Clement, and Anacletus, consecrated and ordered
massing and sacrificing priests, by their holy Master and predecessor S. Peter
himself, as both they themselves and other ancient authors testify. We are
warranted by our protestants with others before, that the form and order of
the sacrifice of Mass which S. Peter composed, used, and delivered to the
church, was without any change or alteration, continued in that church of Rome
and these western nations above 200. years: from whence it appears
consequently and plainly by these protestante writers, that this kingdom of
Britanie receiving the faith from Rome in the Apostles times, and generally in
the times of Pope Eleuthenus and Victor, who both were before S. Zepherine, in
whose days they suppose some addition to have been used in that Mass,
inuincibly prou^th, that this kingdom with others did not only admit Mass,
and massinge priests in the first conversion thereof, but the very unchanged
and unaltered Mass of S. Peter himself. We have the Catalogues and histories
of the successions of Bishops in all renowned churches in this part of the
world, which received their first Apostles and Bishops from S. Peter, that are
preserved, testifyinge that these their first Apostles, Priests, and Bishops
sent unto them from S Peter, were massinge and sacrificinge priests, and
Bishops. If I could exemply but in half the number of them which were so
ordered, and sent by S. Peter into Italy, Spain, Germany, and France, I
should make to long a digression from the question of Britanie, which I
chiefly handle, write a foreign history, and entertain my reader over much
in such affairs: therefore I will only insist in some few of the chiefest,
those that came nearest unto us, and with whom our Britans in all probable
judgment had most intercourse, commerce, or acquaintance.

15. I begin with S. Maximinus, and S. Lazarus whom Christ raised to life,
seeing to the first one of the 72. disciples of Christ S. Peter commended S.
Mary Magdalen, because some protestants think S. Joseph of Aramathia that
buried Christ, and lived, died, and was buried with us in Britanie, came into
France with them. ( Guliel. Eisengren. centenar. 1. part. 5. did. 3. fol.
148. Theater. of great Britanie l. 6. That the first said Mass we are taught,
because we read, that he did minister the holy Eucharist, to S. Mary Magdale^
after Mass was ended. Quod morienti S. Magdalenae post Missarum solemnia
Sacrosanctam Eucharistiam administrasse legimus. Anton. Democh. l. 2. de Mass.
contra Calvin. Petrus de natal. l. 5. Antonin. part. 1. Volater. l. 7. Guliel.
Eisengr. cent. 1. fol. 148. page 2. This for Aqueus where he was Bishop. For S.
Lazarus his being a massinge priest, and his saying of Mass, at Marssiles in
France, where he was Bishop, the holy vestiments in which he said Mass
being to this day preserved and to be seen in the cathedral church there, ar
sufficient witness. In Cathedrali Ecclesia, vestes in quibus Missam celebrabat,
adhuc hodie conscruantur and monstrantur. Demochar. l. 2. contr. Calvin. c. 32.
Petr. de natal. l. 1. c. 72. Antonin. part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 19. Guliel. Eiseng.
centen. 1. fol. 149.

16. How famous S. Martial disciple of S. Peter, and sent into France by him,
was in many parts of that nation so well known to our British Druides in those
days, it is not unknown to any antiquarie of these contries: And as little
ignorance can any man pretend, that he was a massinge sacrificinge priest, for
so renowned he was for this, that the infidels themselves then knew it, among
whom the chief idolatrous priest or Druid of Limogen, as the french Annals
tell us, forsook the town by reason of an Hebrew called Martial, who being
come into Gaul, uses not wine, nor flesh, but when he offers sacrifice to
God: si non que au sacrifice de Dieu. Who buildinge a chapel there, celebrated
Mass in it. Celebre le Saint sacrifice de la Mess. S. Aurelian. in vet. S.
Martialis. Doctor. Puel. D. Tigeon. Cl. March. To. Seigneur de Faux Augenin
histor. Gallic. in S. Martial. Vincent. in specul. hist. cap. 41. Io. Gualt.
Chronolog. ecclesiasticopol. an. Do. 56. And in that city still remains the
holy altar, on which he used to say Mass whereof he himself makes mention
in his epistle, ad Burde galenses, and for that cause so honored, that it is by
public edict of parliament examining and approving the truth of that history,
from ancient time, decreed, that seven candels should continually be kept
burninge before it, the body of that their Apostle being buried near unto it.
Florimund. Remund. de Origin. haeres. l. 8. cap. 12. edict. inter log. parlam.
Galliae de hac re. Annon videtis S. Martialem ad Burdegalenses nostros
scripsisse, se aram Deo Israelis and martyri ipsius Stephano dedicasse? ea ara
in ciuitate Lemogicum, vbi Apostolus ipse Aquitaniae quiescit, conspicitur,
aedificata a Principe Stephano, quem ad Christianismum ipse conuerteret: ante
eam noctes diesque ardent septem candelae, iuxta antiquam istam fundationem, in
parlamento nostro, and disceptatam, and confirmatam.

17. And this holy Saint, and Apostle of Aquitaine, himself teaches, what
great honor and reverence is due to Christian sacrificing priests, and what an
excellent sacrifice they offer of Christ's sacred body and blood in holy Mass:
thus he writes to his late converted Christians. ( S. Martial. Episc. ad
Burdegales. cap. 3.) honorabatis Sacerdotes qui decipiebant vos sacrificijs
suis, qui mutis and surdis statuis offerebant, qui nec se nec vos iuuare
poterant: nunc autem multo magis Sacerdotes Die omnipotentis, qui vitam vobis
tribuunt, in calice and pane vino, honorare debetis. Before you were converted
to Christ, you did honor your priests, which deceived you with their
sacrifices, which did sacrifice to dumb and deaf statues, who could neither
help themselves, nor you. But now much more you ought to honor the priests of
God almighty, which give unto you life in the chalice, and lively bread. And
a little after, speaking more plainly of this holy sacrifice, offered unto
God, upon the altar, he says: Sacrificium Deo Creatori offertur, in ara
Christi corpus and singuinem in vitam aeternam offerrimus. Quod Iudaei per
inuidiam immolauerunt, putantes so nomen cius a terra abolere: nos causa
salutis nostrae, in ara sanctificata proponimus, scientes hoc solo remedio
nobis vitam praestandam, and mortem effugandam: hoc enim Dominus noster misit
nos agere in sui commemorationem. Sacrifice is offered to God, our Creator,
upon the altar. We offer the body and blood of Christ for everlasting life.
That which the Jews did offer through envy, thinking to abolish his name from
the earth; we offer this upon an hallowed altar, knowinge that by this only
remedy, life is to be given unto us, and death to be avoided. For this our
Lord Jesus commanded us to do in his commemoration.

18. Thus this holy Saint, that stilleth himself. The Apostle of Jesus Christ,
who as he says was present with Christ in his life, when he was buried, and
see him after his resurrection. ( Martial. epist. ad Burdegal. epestol. ad
Tholosanos.) was one of his 72. disciples, and was by special command of
Christ unto S. Peter, whose disciple he after was, sent by him to be the
happy Apostle of that contrie. And I have rather among many others in the like
condition, cited this history of S. Martial, because morally to speak, the
best learned Druids and others of this our Britanie, where the chiefest and
commanders in that sect remained, could not be ignorant of these things; for
both S. Aurelianus successor immediate to S. Martial at Limogen, and S. Martial
also himself are most worthy witnesses, that Sigebertus the summus Sacerdos,
high priest, Arch-flamen, and chiefest of the Druids sect, in those parts, was
by S. Martial converted, to this his holy, sacrificinge and massing Christian
Religion. ( S. Aurelian. in vit. S. Martial. and Martial. epistol. ad Burdegal.
cap 3.) And S. Aurelianus does make this his holy conversion so famous, that it
could not be concealed, from the rulers of the Druids Religion in Britanie,
whom it so much concerned. ( Aurelian. supr. and annotat. in S. Martial.) for
presently after, Benedicta, wife of the Prince of that Province, was converted
by S. Martial, this high preiste of the Druids: Sigebert being also converted,
did break in pieces all their Idols, destroyed their Temples, except the
Temple dedicated to the unknown God, and shiuered the altars of the diuils
into dust. Ipsemet Sigebertus Pontifex Idola omnia confregit minutim, and
Templa euertit, excepto Templo ignoti Dei, and altaria daemonum in puluerem.
Which S. Martial himself does sufficiently insinuate, when he says: dum
altaria daemonum, in puluerem redigerentur, aram ignoti Dei ad consecrationem
reseruari iussimus. Quia dedicata in nomine Dei Israel, and testis ipsius
Stephani, qui pro eo a Iudaeis passus est. (S. Martial sup. cap. 3) when the
altars of the devils were beaten into dust, we commanded the altar of the
unknown God to be reserved for consecration. Which was dedicated in the name
of the God of Israel, and Martyr Stephen, who suffered for him by the Jews.

19. And if we come to the nearer parts of France, Paris, Rouen, Britany,
Normandy, Picardy, and all the sea coaste, we shall evidently see, that no
other doctrine or practice of this holy sacrifice of Mass, could possibly have
entrance into this kingdom: for in those parts we find S. Denis the
Areopagite, that glorious massinge, and Mass teachinge Father, S. Paul's
scholar, sent thither by the massinge Pope, S. Clement, with his massinge
companions, S. Rusticus, and Eleutherius, and S. Nicasius sent a massinge
priest, and Bishop, by the same massinge Pope. ( Gregor. Turonen. l. 1. hist.
Sur. in vit. Genouefuae. Metaphr. 3. October. Bed. and Vsuard. 7. id. October.
Volater. l. 15. Breu. Romans in S. Dionis. Arnold. Merman. l. Britones,
Normandos, Rothomagenses, Picardos, omnemque maris Oceani tractum instruxit,
formauitque fide S. Nicasius a S. Clemente illue Apostolus delegatus imperante
Nerone. Conuers. gent. tabul. Eccles. Rothomagen. And some think he preached
and practiced this doctrine also, in this our Britanie. Harris. Theatr. l. 1.

20. If we circuit further, and come to Gallia, Belgica, Collen, Mentz,
Treuers, Lothoringia, Alsasia, Heluetia and those parts, we shall find in
these days of the Apostles sent thither by S. Peter, S. Clement uncle to S.
Clement the Pope, his glorious companions S. Mansuetus our contriman,
Celestius, Felix, and Patiens: we see sent thither also by the same Apostle
and his authority, S. Maternus, one of the 72. disciples of Christ, with S.
Eucharius, Valerius, our noble Britan, S. Beatus, and others. Arnold. Mohu.
supr. Io. Scomer. Gul. Eisengren. cent. 1. Antonin. part. 1. Petr. de natal. l.
10. cap. 113. Ant. Democh. lib. 2. de Miss. Sebast. Munster. in Cosmograph.
Bed. 18. call. Octobr. Wolfg. Bawr. in vit. praesul. Memetocern. Annal.
Colonien. and Treueren. And that these were massinge, and sacrificinge priests,
we have many authorities: only I will exemplify in the two chiefest, to which
the others were subordinate in such affairs, and taught and practiced as those
two their superiors, S. Clement and S. Maternus did.

21, Of these it is evident, not only because they were both consecrated
priests, and directed by that great massinge priest, and Apostle S. Peter,
whose command and order, and their own institution beeing^ holy Saints they
neither did nor could violate, but also that they usually said Mass, as first
of S. Clement it is testified, of his public, and solemn saying of Mass,
Missarum solemnijs celebratis, wherewith he armed himself before he wrought
that great miracle, in destroyinge the horrible dragon which had killed at
Metz, so many men, and other creatures; by which public miraculous deed many
were converted to the faith of Christ. Antonin. part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 26.
Anton. Demochar. l. 2. de Missa. c. 42. Gulielm. Eisengren. centen. 1. fol.
147.) And to perform this holy solemnity and sacrifice of Mass, he ordered
clergy men, in diverse degrees, and orders, in diuersis gradibus, which no
Christians but such as allow the sacrifice of Mass, admit, and builded
churches there. ( Antonin. supr. Petr. de natal. l. 10. c. 113. Vincent. l. 9.
cap. 42.) S. Maternus also the disciple of the same massing Apostle, S. Peter,
and sent into Germany by him, who preached in many provinces thereof, buildinge
diverse churches to holy Saints, as S. John Baptist, his Master, S. Peter, and
others, was so renowned a massing priest, that among other his wonderful
miracles. ( Petrus Merssaeus Cratepol. Catalog. de Archiepiscop. Treuern.) it
is commonly delivered, and written of him, that he said three Masses in one
day, in far distant places. Diuersis ac long distantibus locis. So renowned
were these men for that most holy function, and office, so zealous and devout
in the performance thereof, and God so well pleased, and served in that so
sacred an exercise, that he did so miraculously concur unto it.

THE XII. CHAPTER. Wherein is proved even by protestants, that whatsoever
Apostle or other, first preached Christ in Britanie, brought sacrificinge
preisthood hither: and S. Peter first founded here our ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, of sacrificinge massinge priests and Bishops.
NOw we may hope that no man being by name a Christian, will be so opposite an
Antichristian, to think, that Christ which could not teach errors, or
contrary doctrines, and delivered but one, and the same true, and infallible
Religion to the whole world, for all places, people, and ages, had one Religion
for the rest of the world, in Europe, Asia, and Afric, all of them as before,
embracing in the Apostles time the holy sacrifice of Mass, and sacrificinge
preisthood: and an other for Britanie, quite different, and never heard of in
any antiquity, never practiced in any other form, or order, never registered
in any monument. And seeing all the Evangelists, and Apostles of Christ,
together with their disciples, were massinge and sacrificinge priests, and
there were no other to preach, and propagate true Religion, in this, or any
other nation, under heaven, but they, how could any Caluinistical communion, or
other new devise be imagined to have had beeinge here? For whosoever it was,
which any protestant does, or will affirm, to have been the first preacher of
Christianity in this kingdom, S. Peter, S. Paul, or S. Simon Zelotes, who
only among the Apostles are reported in histories to have been in this
kingdom, as our best learned protestant antiquaries with others truly
acknowledge, or S. Joseph of Aramathia, for which many contend, or whosoever,
if they were priests (as priests they must needs be in all opinion Catholic
or Protestant, that should found our church) they must needs also be massing
and sacrificing priests, no other Christian priests beeinge in the whole world
at that time, as before is evident. Theater of great Britanie lib. 6. Camb. in
Britan. Godw. conuers. of Brit. Stowe hist. Holinsh. hist. of Engl.

2. And for those three Apostles, I have particularly proved in every of them,
that they all, as also all the rest of that holy order of the Apostles which
divided the world among them to convert it to Christ, were without any
exception, massing preistes. And if any man will persist in S. Joseph and his
holy company, seeing none of these were Apostles, but directed by them, as all
other disciples either of the 72. or others were at those days, whosoever
among them were priests, must needs also be massing and sacrificing priests, no
others being either to consecrate, or direct them in their holy labors, but
those which are manifestly proved such. And seeing we do not find in any
antiquary Catholic or Protestant, but S. Joseph's both conversation and
direction was either with, or by S. Peter, S. John, S. James, or S. Philip,
Apostles, all these being acknowledged to be massinge priests, whosoever in
S. Joseph's company were consecrated, or directed by any of them, could not
receive any other consecration, or direction.

3. But to do some honor unto this kingdom, of great Britanie more expressly
in this kind, though the generally complained of, and lamented among
antiquaries loss of our ancient records, and histories of these matters, will
forbid me to write so fully as I could wish, of this subject, I will set
down some of the chiefest, and first massinge and sacrificinge priests, and
Bishops in this nation, and show plainly, how we had and ever continued, an
holy and hierarchicall succession of such sacred parsons from S. Peter, that
greatest Apostle of Christ in all ages, offeringe the blessed body, and blood
of Christ in the sacrifice of Mass, unto these times. So that it shall
evidently appear, although this kingedome has for situation been called an
other world, yet it did never from the beginning of Christianity here, differ
from the known Catholic Christian world, in these holy mysteries, until these
times.

4. For the truth and verity of this first plantinge the sacrificinge
Christian preisthood, and sacrifice of Mass in this kingdom, it is little or
nothing material whether it was S. Peter, S. Paul, or S. Simon Zelotes, or S.
Joseph of Aramathia, or any others, disciples to any of those, or any others of
the Apostles, because as before is proved, they all agreed in these holy
things; yet to know who was our first founder and Father in Christ, to whom
we owe for that the greatest reverence, dutiful children should, and ought to
perform, to derive from him, our happy Hierarchicall succession in holy
things, and to know the truth which some have veiled and obscured to much, it
is a thing most worthy our knowledge, and our shame if we should dwell in
ignorance thereof. Therefore to be breife, because it is lately and largely
proved, that S. Peter was this our first parent in Christ, by all testimonies,
for this place it will suffice, to show how the best learned English Protestant
antiquaries most backward in this business, by certain Maxims or undoubted
grounds in antiquity, do consequently and by an evident necessity, bind
themselves and al others to be of this opinion. Stowe and Howes histor.

5. First they say the twelve Apostles divided the world amongst them, to
convert it. Secondly, which follows from the former, that this kingdom fell
in division to one of these Apostles^ Thirdly, that there is a silence in
histories, that any Apostle, but S. Peter, S. Paul (this none of the twelve)
and S. Simon Zelotes were here. Fourthly, that this kingdom received the faith
(if not sooner) in the beginning of the Empire of Claudius. Fifthly, that in
his time many Christians came hither from Rome, and diverse here were in that
time converted to the faith of Christ. Sixthly, that S. Paul came not to Rome,
nor any of these western parts, while long after the death of Claudius, in the
days of Nero, as the scripture it self with all histories is witness thereof.
Seventhly, none of them does affirm, that S. Simon Zelotes was here at all,
but if he were here, they incline to think he came not hither until the
cominge of S. Joseph of Aramathia, in the 63. year of Christ, when in all
opinions diverse of this kingedome were Christians almost 20. years, and some
priests of this nation very long before that time.

6. From hence an half blind man must needs make this undoubted, and
infallible conclusion, that S. Peter was our first Apostle and Father in
Christ. These protestant antiquaries of England give us further warrant both
from themselves and antiquity, that S. Peter did in every Province appoint one
Archbishop, whom all other Bishops of the same Province should obey. Peter
preached in no place, but he there ordained Bishops and teachers, and founded
churches. And that it is confirmed almost 800. years since by Simeon
Metaphrastes (a learned Saint of the Greek church) out of the Greek
Antiquities, and diverse others that S. Peter preachinge the word of life in
this Island, he here founded churches and ordained preistes and deacons. And
except S. Peter himself, S. John, S. James, S. Mark and S. Timothy with whom
they Parallel S. Aristobulus our first Archbishop, were not Archbishops, this
great Saint was by their allowance our Archbishop in Britanie, and as before
so constituted by S. Peter, no other being then to ordeine him to that dignity
in this nation, all which our protestants thus write with public warrant and
privilege. John Whitguift answer to the admonition page 65. sect. 1. and def
of the answ. page 318. Clem. Romans apud eund. and Polydor. Virg. l. 4. de
invent. c. 12.13. Sutcliff. Subuers. page 3. Theater of great Britanie l. 6.
cap. 9. Sim. Metaphrast. die 29. Ian. Eisengren. centen. 1. Thom. Rogers in
artic. Relig. of Engl. articul. 36.

7. Therefore except this great massing priest and Apostle S. Peter should be
of an other opinion and practice in these things in this our Britanie, then
he and all the other Apostles had been in all other times and places before
(which no Christian can once imagine) he also consecrated massing and
sacrificing priests, and Bishops in, and for this kingdom. And although our
losses of such sacred monuments have been great, yet we have not altogether
lost the memory of al their names: one and the first which I find in
histories, was S. Mansuetus natione Scotus, borne in this kingdom of great
Britanie, and by the antiquities of the church of Toul in Lorraine claimed to
be the first Bishop of that city, so likewise of the church of Treuers,
except the identitie of the name deceaueth me, to be afterward living very
long Archbishop there, because he made much stay or residence in those
places, yet both our learned contriman S. Marianus, and Methodus, nere the
Apostles times affirm, that he as others which they there name, S. Clement,
Felix, Rusticus, Moses, Martinus etc. preached both, in propria prouincia and
exterius, both in their own and other nations. Annal. Tollens. Arnold. Mirman.
in Theatr. conuers. gent. Belliforest Cosmograph. Petr. Merssaeus Catalog.
Archiep. Treuerens. in S. Mansueto. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. col. 254.
Method. apud eundem supr.

8. This holy contriman of ours beeinge consecrated priest by S. Peter, that
great massinge priest, and Apostle, must needs himself also by that, if we
had no other argument, be a massinge priest. But we are not so straightened of
proofs in this matter, for we have warrant by the French and German
histories, that he was one of the companions of S. Clement uncle to S. Clement
the Pope, that great massinge Archbishop of Metz, sent thither as Arnoldus
Mirmannius thinks in the time of Caius Caligula: so ancient a massinge
priest he makes this our glorious contrima^. Arnold Mirm. supr. Annal. Tullen.
Bellifor. supr. Gul. Eisengren. centur. 1. Petr. de natal. l. 11. Demochar. l.
2. de Miss. contra Calvin. Caio Caligula Imperante, Tullenses habuere
Apostolum, suaeque in Christum fidei primum Antistitem S. Petri Apostoli
discipulum S. Clementis Collegam origin Scotum. The inhabitants of Toul had
for their Apostle and first Bishop of their faith in Christ, S. Mansuetus
disciple of S. Peter the Apostle, companion of S. Clement, he beeinge a Scot
by nativity. Eisengrenius, and the Authors he follows, has the same, only
saying he was made Bishop of Toul Anno Christi 49. in the 49. year of Christ
in the Empire of Claudius. Guliel. Eisengr. centur. 1. fol. 56. cit. Petr. de
natal. l. 11. and Demochar. l. 2.) so that if this Britanie had a massinge
priest made by S. Peter, whose disciple he was, in the 40. year of Christ, and
the same a massinge Bishop within 9. years after, the sacrifice of Mass,
being of continuance here above 1580 years, it makes a sufficient time of
prescription to claim title of continuance. And he was one of the oldest
massing priests and Bishops, that I find of this nation, only S. Kentigern
equal perhaps unto him therein, for the annals of Treuers say that this S.
Mansuetus (I find no other in that time) was successor to the great massinge
Archbishop of that city S. Maternus, of whom I have spoken before, Anno Domini
160. in the 160. year of Christ: at which time by many authors King Lucius
and this kingdom was converted; and besides many such priests had 28. massing
Bishops, as I shall demonstrate in the next age. Petrus Mersseus Catalog.
Archiep. Treuer. an. 160.

9. And very probable it is, even by our English Protestants. The Protestant
Theater of great Britanie l. 6. teaching that about this time between the 40.
and 50. year of Christ, many in Britany became Christians, as namely Pomponia
Graecina, the wife of the Romans Lieutenant, Aulus Plautius, and about the same
time S. Beatus, and his holy companion Anonymus, but that a German writer
calls him Achates, made massing priests by S. Peter, and directed by him,
this holy massinge priest S. Mansuetus had some cooperatio^ in that happy
business. And that these our two renowned contrimen S. Beatus and his companion,
were sacrificing massing priests, it is evident: first because they were here
first instructed in the faith of Christ by the^, which of necessity (no others
being here, or else where at that time) were massinge priests: secondly because
as these protestants both Germa^ and English tell us they were further
instructed and directed by S. Peter a massing priest and Apostle, and if
perhaps (which these men do not insinuate, S. Peter was martired before they
were consecrated priests, yet being consecrated at Rome, without all question,
where none but massinge Bishops and consecrators were, S. Linus, Cletus or
Clemens, they must needs be consecrated massinge priests, which is further
proved by the places of their most aboade after, S. Beatus living in and
beeinge the Apostle of Heluetia, where abouts many massinge priests before
remembered consecrated by S. Peter, as S. Eucharius, Valerius, Clemens,
Mansuetus, his contryman, with others were. The other came into his own contry
of Britanie here, where (as before) as he could find none but massinge
priests, so he left behind him no others, as I shall prove herafter.

10. And manifest it is, that our Christian Britans which were conuersinge at
Rome, when and where they were consecrated, and with whom they also at their
being there conuersed, were for their qualities, sayers, or hearers of Mass.
Which is clearly proved by the Christian family of our noble contriwoman
Claudia, or Sabinella, wife to Aulus Pude^s; whose house by the Roman
antiquities, as it was the first lodginge of S. Peter the Apostle, that great
massinge priest, so it was their chiefest place of saying, and hearing Mass:
Maiorum traditione praescriptum est, domum Pudentis Romae fuisse primum
hospitium Sancti Petri, illicque primum Christianos conuenisse ad Synaxim
coactam Ecclesiam. Martyrolog. Romans in S. Pudente, Praxede, Pudentiana, Donato
and Timotheo. Baron. ib. annotat. die 19. Maij. Where we see, it the first and
principal massinge church in Rome, both for the Britans and Romans also, that
were Christians, and the best residency S. Peter or his successors which were
the consecrators of priests there had at that time. And he had such care of
this house and family, that not only the parents, Pudens, and Claudia, but all
their children S. Nouatus, S. Timotheus, Pudentiana, and Praxedes were by him
instructed in the faith, and S. Timothy was made massinge priest, as the
ancient Roman Martyrologe and others witness. Romae depositio S. Nouati, filij
beati Pudentis Senatoris, and fratris S. Timothei presbyteri, and sanctarum
Christi virginum Pudentianae, and Praxedis, qui ab Apostolis eruditi sunt in
fide. Martyrolog. Romans die 20. Iunij. Vsuard. eod. die. Baron. annotat. in 20.
diem Iun. act. S. Nouati and S. Iustine. Therefore this S. Timotheus our holy
co^triman by his blessed Mother S. Claudia, beeinge instructed by S. Peter a
massinge priest, and consecrated by a massinge priest and Pope, and resigninge
his house to be a massinge church, as will euidentlye appear in the beginning
of the next age, when I come to that notorious massinge priest and Pope S. Pius
by our protestants confessions, who dedicated that house for a massing church,
must himself also by these protestants be a massing priest, and his holy
parents brother and and sisters sacred Virgins, with the rest of our Christian
contrimen there, be reuerencers and frequenters of holy Mass.

11. The like I might without reprofe write of others, whose names I have else
where remembered, that probably they preached in Britanie, in this age, and out
of question were massinge priests, but having so many certain and evident
examples without exception, I need not the assistance of probabilities, only
because we are assured by great English Protestants Bishops and others, that
as the truth is, there is a mutual relation and dependence, between an altar
and sacrifice, and that an altar does as naturally, and as necessarily infer a
sacrifice, as a shrine does a Saint, a Father a son. (Morton. Apolog. part.
2. page 82. Morton appeal l. 2. sect. 1. page 162.) these protestants confess
unto us again, which they cannot deny, that long before they imagine any
alteration of Religion in the church of Rome, this kingdom had Christian
altars, ( Theater of great Britanie l. 6. Gildas l. de excid.) and among
others they justify unto us the antiquities of Glastenbury, which assure us,
there was an altar in the old church there builded by S. Joseph of Aramathia,
and his holy company; and this altar and holy place was of such reverence, that
the holy Saint Patrick with others, desired to be buried by that holy altar,
and an Angel from heaven did assign him that place of burial. Sepulturam
Angelo monstrante, flamamque ingente de eodem loco cunctis videntibus erumpente
in vetusta Ecclesia in dextera part altaris promeruit. Where we see an Angel
from heaven, and with a great sign, and miracle, openly before all people
present, cunctis vide^tibus, to give testimony to the worthiness of the holy
altar, and place in respect thereof. Io. Leland in assert. Arthur. Math. Park.
antiquit. Britan. Stow hist. Godw. conuers. of Brit. antiquit. Glasto^ apud
Capgrau. in S. Patric. Gul. Malm. l. antiq. caenob. Glast.

12. And not without just cause and deserving by these our protestants who in
Gildas as they allow him, and who wrote as they commonly teach, when the
Britans still held the Religion delivered unto them in the Apostles time,
without alteration, do testify, that the altars here from the beginning were,
sacra altaria, Sacrosancta altaria, sacrificij caelestis seeds, holy altars,
sacred altars, the seat of the celestial sacrifice, altars at which priests
did sacrifice and say Mass, Sacerdotes sacrificantes inter altaria stantes.
Altars sanctuaries and privileges, refuge for such as fled unto them,
testified by our protestants themselves. Gildas epistol. de excid. and
conquest. Britan. edit. per protestant. who further witnessing that the first
general council of Nice was received here in Britanie in the da i^ of
Constantine, and now by our protestant statute is of high authority, and
undeniable in England, witness also: The Ni^en council in that canon which
Calvin and all other receive, says plainly, that the Lamb of God offered
vnbloodely, is laid upon the holy table. Stowe and howes histor. an. 542.
theater of great Britanie l. 6. statut. an. 1. Eliz. Regin. and 1. Jacob.
Regis. Fraunc. Mas^n with direct of the protest. Archb. Abbots book of
consecrat. page 243. and the sacrifice of Christians being as is inuincibly
proved, the most holy body and blood of Christ, and the altar the place
whereon it is offered, by that connection in Greek, (...), mutual
correlatiues, and inseparable, and nomine and re, it cannot possibly be
otherwise. So that if any testimony of heaven or earth, men or Angels,
Catholics or Protestants will satisfy in this matter, it is manifestly
convinced, that S. Peter preached and established a sacrificing preisthood, and
the doctrine and practice of holy Mass in this our nation.

13. And yet if any man is desirous to hear S. Peter himself confirm that
from heaven, which he so approved on earth, we may add such his testimony
also to the holy Angels before, and bring other Apostles from heaven also,
that were massinge priests when they lived here, to iustifye the same, in, and
to this kingedome. We read in the aunciently written life of S. Sampson
Archbishop of york, when our protestants say the Britans still kept their
Apostolic first received Religion, a man so holy and miraculous that S.
Iltutus prophesied of him being but a boy of seven years old, that he should
be a light to this nation, the chief of all, and Archbishop very profitable to
the church of God. Cum septem esset annorum ad S. Iltutum Abbat em discendi
gratia adducitur: qui videns puerum osculatus est eum, dicens: gratias Deo
agimus qui lumen hoc nobis indignae de gente nostra accendere dignatus est in
terra. En caput omnium nostrum: en Pontifex summus multam Ecclesiae Dei
profuturus. Manuscript. antiq. and Capgrau. in Catalog. in vita S. Sampsonis
Ep. and Confess. he was made a deacon, and after a massing priest by the great
massing priest and Bishop S. Dubritius the Popes Legate, consecrated by the
massinge Bishop S. Germanus, who was sent hither from S. and Pope Celestine, to
settle the church of Britanie; both when he was made deacon and priest, a dove
descended upon him and stayed immouably until the office was ended. Being
made a priest, he was so glorious and renowned a massinge priest, that always
in his life he had Angels assisting and ministering unto him whenever he said
Mass. Omni tempore vitae suae Angelos dum celebraret, sibi assistere and in
sacrificio ministrare videre meruit. Yet this man above all of this nation, was
in such favor with God, S. Peter, S. James called the brother of our Lord, S.
John the Evangelist and the court of heaven, that these three great Apostles,
with a great company of celestial citizens, densissimis candidatorum turmis,
appeared unto him, and S. Peter told him, that our Lord Jesus Christ had chosen
him to be a Bishop: and soon after an Angel appeared to S. Dubritius, and
commanded him to consecrate S. Sampson a Bishop: in whose consecration they,
that were present did see a Dove sent from heaven to stand immouably upon him.
Nec multo post Angelus Domini beato Dubritio apparens, Sampsonem ordinari
Episcopum praecepit, in cuius consecratione qui aderant columbam caelitus
emissam immobiliter super eum stare videbant.

14. And in the time of S. Mansuetus, the first Bishop of London in the Saxons
time, when S. Peter did miraculously appear about the dedicatinge of the
church of westminster, as many both holy and ancient Catholic writers, and
protestants antiquaries assure us, and the circumstances of the history
demonstrate it to be true, he sent this charge and command to S. Mellitus
Bishop of London, who had determined to dedicate it the next day followinge: I
have dedicated the church, and by authority of my sanctification prevented the
episcopal benediction. Therefore tell the Bishop what thou have heard and
seen, and the signs remayninge will justify thy words to be true. Therefore
let him abstain from dedication, and supply that which wants, to offer there
the holy sacrifice of our Lords body and blood. Ego sum Petrus qui cum meis
ciuibus constructam in meo nomine basilicam dedicaui, episcopalemque
benedictionem meae sanctificationis authoritate praeueni. Dic ergo Pontifici
quae vidisti and audisti, tuoque sermoni signa parietibus impressa testimonium
perhibebunt. Supersedeat igitur dedicatione, suppleat quod omisimus Dominici
corporis and sanguinis Sacrosancta mysteria. S. Alured. Rival. M. S. in vita
S. Eduardi Regis and confess. Jacob. Genesis Episc. in eius vit. and M. S. antiq.
Sur. in vit. eius and Capgrau. in eius vit. Franc. Mason l. of consecrat. here
we see, that S. Peter now in glory, both allowed and commanded the sacrifice
of Mass, which when he lived and conuersed on earth, he had practiced,
frequented, and instituted with so great diligence and devotion.

15. So likewise when in the time of the Danish fury here, he appeared to
comfort this afflicted contry, where he had preached and taught this holy
doctrine, he did not choose any man to reveal his glad tidings unto, and the
delivery of this kingdom, but S. Brithwold, that great and famous massinge
priest, and Bishop of Winchester, or Wilton, and in the most known massinge
place of England, the Abbey of Glastenbury, and did fortell, how S. Edward
King and confessor, that most great reuerencer of holy Mass, perhaps yet
unborn, and borne in exile in Normandy, should be King in England, and
deliver it from those floods of miseries, wherewith it was then surrounded, and
long time had been. And to assure us this was a true vision, and prophecy of
S. Peter, and he an approuer of all lovers of holy Mass, as God also is, this
he adds: Erit cum dormieris cum patribus tuis, visitabit Dominus populum
suum, and faciet Dominus redemptionem plebis suae. Eliget enim sibi virum
secundum cor suum qui faciat omnes voluntates suas, qui me opitulante regnum
adeptus Anglorum Danico furori finem imponet. Erit enim acceptus Deo, gratus
hominibus, terribilis hostibus, amabilis ciuibus, vtilis Ecclesiae,
laudabilemque vitam sancto fine concludet. It shall come to pass, when thou
shall sleep with thy Fathers, our Lord will visit his people, and our Lord
will cause a redemption of his people. For he will choose unto himself a man,
according to his own heart, which shall do all his desires, who by my help
obteyninge the crown of England, shall make an end of the Danish fury. For he
shall be acceptable to God, grateful to men, terrible to his enemies, amiable
to his citisens, profitable to the church, and he shall conclude his laudable
life, with an holy end. And the holy and learned writers of his life thus
immediately add: all which things the event of the thing proved to be
fulfilled in S. Edward. Quae omnia in beato Eduardo completa rei exitus
comprobauit. Therefore this must needs be a true vision, and prophecy of S.
Peter. Alured Rival. l. de vit. S. Eduardi Jacob. Episc. Genesis in vit. eius M.
S. antiq. ibid. Capgrau. in Catal. in S. Eduardo Rege and Confessore Sur. in
vit eius and Lippom. Godwin Catal. of Bishops in B. Brithwild.

16. This is that holy King that left the hereditary miraculous power of
curing the disease called the Kings evil obtained by his piety, to his
successors. This is that great reuerencer of massinge priests, this is he who
at the time of elevation at holy Mass in England, upon Whitsunday did see by
revelation the King of Denmark drowned in the sea by the coaste of Denmark,
as he was taking ship to come to invade England, and his navy dispersed,
which, peractis Missarum solemnijs, as soon as Mass was ended, he
confidently related. This holy King, to speak in protestants and their
authors words. ( Stowe histor. in Edward Co^fessor.) before the day of his
nativity was elected of God, who perseuering in chastity, ledd all his life
dedicated to God in true marriage, wherefore as we have known proved by good
and sufficient men being witnesses, God greatly glorified him in his life with
wonderful signs. Therefore it is evident that S. Peter, and God himself, with
the whole court of heaven, did, and do allow of massinge priests, and the
holy sacrifice of Mass, not only as it was celebrated in the beginning, but
after all additions which protestants write, or imagine, were put unto it; for
after all these added and long after, as we see, both S. Peter and God
himself did thus approve, and honor the both reverent sayers, and hearers of
that blessed sacrifice.

THE XIII. CHAPTER. Wherein is proved, how after the death of S. Peter, in the
time followinge commonly ascribed to S. Linus and Cletus in the sea of Rome,
and to Marius King in Britanie, the Britans both at home and abroad used the
sacrificing preisthood, priests and Mass.
HItherto we have spoken of S. Peter, who being martired by Nero the Emperor,
it is a question whether S. Linus, whom (and S. Cletus) he had consecrated
Bishops at his beeinge at Rome before he^ came into these West parts, or S.
Clement did immediately succed him; S. Leo the second with our renowned
contrimen, S. Marianus, Florentus Wigorniensis, and to speak in Martinus
Polonus words. ( Leo Papa 2. epistol. decretal. Marian. Scot. lib. 2. aetat.
6. in Nerone. Florent. Wigorn. an 50. al. 72. Martin. Pol. supputat. col. 33.
in Lino.) They which searched more diligently concerning the chair of the
Roman church, do say, that Linus and Cletus did not sit as Popes, but as
coadiutors of the Pope, to whom S. Peter in his life only committed the
dispensation of ecclesiastical things: for which being endowed with so great
authority, they deserved to be placed in the catalogue of the Popes, but S.
Peter appointed S. Clement his successor. Dicunt qui de cathedra Romanae
Ecclesiae diligentius perserutati sunt, quod Linus and Cletus non sederunt vt
Pontifices, sed vt summi Pontificis coadiutores, quibus in vita sua beatus
Petrus vnam tradidit ecclesiasticarum rerum dispensationem: propter quod tanta
authoritate dotati, meruerunt in catalogo Pontificum poni. Clementem vero ipse
beatus Petrus successorem constituit. Which S. Clement himself as he is
commonly received, does also likewise affirm of himself, and S. Leo says:
Linum and Cletum nihil vnquam legibus suis ex pontificali ministerio,
potestatiue egisse, sed quantum eis abeato Petro praecipiebatur, tantum
solumodo agebant. Linus and Cletus did nothing at any time by their laws by
papal ministry or power, but how much was commanded them by S. Peter, so
much only they did. Clem. Roman. epistol. 1. Leo Papa 2. epist. decretali
supr. apud Marian. Wigorn. and alios. which we find in their lives that the
first, ex praecepto Petri Apostoli constituit, vt mulier in Ecclesiam velato
capite intret: constituted by the commandment of S. Peter, that a woman
should have her head covered, when she entered the church. The other by the
precept of S. Peter ordained 21. priests in the city of Rome. Cletus, hic ex
praecepto Petri, viginti and vnum presbyteros ordinauit in vrbe Roma. Martin.
Polon. supputat. in Lino and Cleto and alij.

2. But because many others, and great authors incline to think they were
Popes, I meddle not to discuss this matter, little pertinent to my present
purpose, because very little is written of them: But this most certain it is,
that whether they were Popes, or no, being consecrated by S. Peter that known
massing priest, and Pope, and having S. Clement their successor, that known,
massinge Pope, they must needs be also massinge priests, and Popes, if they
were Popes. And for S. Linus who as both Catholics and Protestants testify,
did write the acts of S. Peter in the same sort as they are published, gives
plain testimony, to the daily saying of Mass, and offering therein the blessed
body and blood of Christ, and shows how the sign of the Cross was used in
the celebration thereof every day: o crux quae quotidie car^s immaculati Agni
fidelibus diuid^ populis. Linus in histor. pass. S. Petri. And it is proved not
only by histories, but S. Paul himself does sufficiently incline us to know,
that his chief lodginge was in the then chief massinge house of our Christian
Britans, at Rome, and not only of him, and other the Popes, but such holy
disciples as came to Rome unto them: for writing unto S. Timothy. 2. Timoth.
4.) he remembreh only to salute him, but four parsons, Eubulus, Linus,
Pudens, and Claudia, which seem to have had all, or the most of their
permanency in that house, where S, Timothy also had been entertained when he
was at Rome: and therefore they alone salute him, being as S. Chrysostom and
Theodoret well note upon this place, the most eminent Christians then in Rome.
S. Chrisostom. and Theodoret. in 2. Tim. 4. for S. Linus was a Bishop there
ordained by S. Peter, and the other three renowned for their harboring of the
Christians, there at that time, as most certain it is of Pudens and Claudia,
and not improbable as I have showed in other places that Eubulus was our noble
contriman and Father to Claudia, and so for his hospitality to the Saints of
God, first remembered in this salutation, all histories beeinge silent of him
and no other nation claiming him to be from them.

3. Therefore this being then so renowned a receptacle, and massinge house,
although S. Linus did not intermeddle in sendinge priests, or preachers into
this, or any other country, yet the Christian Britans which lived at home,
could not be ignorant what was done in such things, in this holy house of our
so eminent Christians at Rome, seeing there was continual traffic and
intercourse between Rome and Britanie at that time, and so much even in
spiritual things by our best protestant antiquaries of this kingdom. ( Theater
of great Brit. l. 6. Matthew. Parker. antiquitat. Britan. page 2.3. Godwin.
conuers. of Britanie page 17.18. Cambd. in Britan. Stowe histor.) that they
asscribe a great part of the labors and means of plantinge the faith of
Christ in Britanie, to our holy British Lady Claudia, and those of that house
in Rome. All of them being Christians, as both Catholics and Protestants
write, totamque suam familiam Christi fidem amplexos, and that number so
great, that there were in it in the beginning of the next age an hundred men,
wantinge four, nonaginta sex homines, that were Christians, and not fewer in
this time by probable opinion, the owners of the house being both so honorable
and religious, all of them hearers at the least, and frequenters of this most
holy sacrifice. vit. S. Pudentianae in Breuiar. Romans die 19. Maij.

4. And to speak in a Protestant Archbishops, and great a^tiquaries words: (
Matthew. Parker. antiquitat. Britan. page 3.) Nec verisimil. solum sed verum
iudicandum est, in tam nobil^ familia faisse cum Claudia gentiles suos ^tannos
qui vna baptisati fuerunt, a quibus Euangelij ignicula per totam gentem
Britannicam dispersa, viritim ad multos peruenerunt. Neither is it only to be
judged likely, but true, that in so noble a family with Claudia, there were
Britans her countrymen, which were baptized with her, by whom the small fires
of the gospel dispersed throughout the whole nation of Britanie from man to
man, did come to many. And not only those reuerencers of holy Mass which were
of the family of Lady Claudia, but many others in Rome, at that time, both
Roman and British Christians, in their own parsons cominge from thence into
Britanie, parsonally performed these holy offices, as our Theater protestants,
thus assure us. Theater of great Britanie l. 6. cap. 9. it has also passed
with allowance among the learned Senate of our antiquaries, that when Nero
began (a little before this time) to banish and persecute the Christians in
Rome, many Romans and Britans being converted to the faith, fled thence into
these remote parts of the earth, where they might, and did more freely enjoy
the liberty of their professions. Which an other Protestant Bishop and
antiquary speakinge of these days of Claudia, thus confirms. ( Godwin
conuers. of Britanie page 18. cap. 3.) Of these times we speak of, I doubt
not we may use the words of Cassiodorus, it was not counted unlawful for those
to be Christians, that dwelt beyond Italy and France, as in Britanie. Whereby
undoubtedly it came to pass, that many professing Christ, not daringe to abide
nere unto the heart of the Empire, made choice of our Britanie, where to lead
their lives in such sort, as they might enjoy liberty of conscience. And he
notes in the mergine: Britanie a refuge for Christians.

5. Therefore although we should follow their opinion, that say S. Linus and
Cletus executed the papal function, excluding S. Clement until after their
death, though we find no priests purposely, sent by them unto this kingdom,
or other nation, yet the protestants themselves do freely grant. The English
Protestant Margin. annot. in Matthew. Westminster. an. 59. Robert. Barnes in vit.
Pontif. in Lino Damas. seu Anastas. in S. Lino and Cleto. Breu. Romans die. 26.
April. and 23. September. Martin. Pol. in S. Lino and Cleto. that they were both
made priests by the great massinge priest and Apostle S. Peter, Petrus
Apostolus Linum and Cletum presbyteros ordinauit, and both of them did also
make priests, S Linus 18. as both Catholics and protestants teach, and diverse
Bishops: and S. Cletus by S Peter's command consecrated in the city of Rome
25. priests, which being commanded by a massinge Apostle, and performed by a
massinge Bishop, must needs be massinge priests, and all those so many
Christians of these times by our protestants before either Britans or Romans,
which either by their concurre^ce at Rome still staying there, or by personal
presence being come, and stayinge here, gave assistance and help toward the
instruction and conversion of this our Britanie, must needs be either sayers,
or hearers of Mass, and practisers and approuers of that holy sacrifice, and
so joined themselves with those massinge priests, and Bishops in this kingdom,
which I named before and lived long after this time, as I shall show
hereafter. Or if we will rather incline to them that say, these two were only
coadiutors and not Popes, but give the papacy in this time to S. Clement as
some Protestants with many Catholics before, and others hold, to speak in a
protestants words ( Robert. Barnes l. de vit. Pontif. Romanor. in Petro. Petrus
ordinauit Clementem, sui officij vices ei committens:) Peter ordained Clement,
committinge the place of his office unto him: It must needs even by that title
be, that as he was sacred and received this charge and power from that great
massing priest, and Bishop S. Peter, so he also received from him that holy
sacrificinge preisthood, and power, and succeeded him in that, as other sacred
papal functions, of whom I am to speak in the chapter followinge.

THE XIV. CHAPTER. How duringe the time of S. Clement his papacy, and all this
first hundred years of Christ, our Christian Britans, together with all others
continued these holy doctrines and offices of sacrificing preisthood, preistes,
and the sacrifice of the blessed body and blood of Christ in Mass.
THis holy and learned Pope, and successor to S. Peter, S. Clement, whether he
presently executed that highest pastoral function, or of humility gave place
to S. Linus, and Cletus more aunciently consecrated Bishops, at and for Rome by
S. Peter, being himself consecrated as before a massinge priest, and most
devoutly and religiously as I shall demonstrate, continually executinge that
holy massinge and sacrificinge preistly power, and duty, did not only in
general impart it to this nation, as he had care and charge of the whole
church committed unto him, nor in particular because he had residence and much
continuance with our Christian Britans at Rome as S. Cletus, Linus and Peter
before had, but because in all probable judgment, he was long time here in
Britanie with S. Peter, and after by the same great Apostle charged in one of
his last admonitions unto him, to have an especial care of this kingdom of
Britanie in particular, both which are easily proved by the words of S. Peter
unto S. Clement, as he himself thus relates them, and produces them, as one
among other reasons, why above all others so many worthy men, he made
choice of S. Clement to be his successor. Clemens Romans epistol. 1. ex verb. S.
Petri. mihi ab initio vsque ad finem comes itineris and actuum fueris, quaeque
per singulas civitates, me disputante solicitus Auditor exceperis. Thou have
been a companion of my travails, and deeds from the beginning unto the end.
Thou as a careful Auditor have observed what I have preached in every city.

2. And to him again: If I had any other better then thou, or any had been so
diligent helper of me, or any had so fully received my doctrine, and learned
my ecclesiastical dispositions, if I had any such other, I would not compel
the unwilling to undertake this good work. Si esset alius melior, si quis
mihi alius adiutor tam sedulus adstitisset, si quis tam plene doctrinae meae
rationem caepisset, sed and ecclesiasticas dispositiones a me tam plene
didicisset, habens alium talem, non te cogerem opus bonum suscipere nolentem.
And to the Christians at Rome in this manner. When he was to die. Audite me
fratres and conserui mei, quoniam vt edoctus sum ab eo qui me misit, Domino and
Magistro meo Jesus Christo, dies mortis meae instat, Clementem hunc Episcopum
vobis ordino, cui soli meae praedicationis and doctrinae cathedram trado: Qui
mihi ab initio vsque in finem comes in omnibus fuit, and per hoc veritatem
totius meae praedicationis agnouit: Qui in omnibus tentationibus meis socius
extitit, fideliter perseuerans. Hear me o my brethren and fellow servants,
because as I am taught by him that sent me, my Lord and Master Jesus Christ,
the day of my death is at hand, I ordeine this Clement to be your Bishop, to
whom alone I commit the chair of my preachinge and doctrine, who has been a
companion unto me in all things, or places from the beginning to the end, and
thereby knows the truth of all my preachinge. Who has been my fellow in all
my tentations, faithfully perseueringe. Clem. supr. epist. 1. Marian. Scot. in
S. Petro. Flor. Wigorn. in chron. in S. Petro. Leo Pap. 2. epistol. decretal.
Alexander 1. epist. 1. ad omnes orthodox. To. 1. Council.

3. Therefore seeing S. Peter was in Britanie as I have showed before, and our
protestant antiquaries allow of those ancient records, which almost 800.
years since were alleged for reverend antiquities, and say, that S. Peter
stayed long time in this our Britanie, converted many, founded churches, and
ordained Bishops, priests, and deacons; quo in loco cum longo tempore fuisset
moratus, and verbo gratiae multos illuminasset, and Ecclesias constituisset,
Episcoposque, and presbyteros, and diaconos ordinasset. Protestant Theater of
great Brit. lib. 6. cap. 9 antiquitat. graec. apud Sim. Metaphrasten die 29.
Iunij. Laurent. Sur. 29. Iunij: and was such a massinge priest and Apostle, as
I have showed before, S. Clement this his inseperable companion, in all times,
and places, from the beginning to the end, and the best learner, follower, and
obseruer of his doctrine, and practice in holy Religion, must needs be here in
Britanie, with him staying here long time, longo tempore, and be as his
Master S. Peter was, a massing priest. And S. Peter having consecrated for the
Romans two Bishops, S. Linus, and Cletus before, S. Clement could not be only
for that place. And the commissionall words of S. Peter to S. Clement, are
general for all Christians, without limitation of place, or parsons, to supply
the place, and parson of S. Peter, who was chief of all. So this must needs
include our Britans, being so many of them then Christians at Rome, and his
brethren and fellow servants in Christ, as the words be, equally as the
Romans, or any others were: and our noble contriwoman S. Claudia her house
having many more Christians in it, then any other in Rome, and the principal
place of S. Peter's residence, when he conuersed there, it cannot seem
improbable, that this great charge was committed to S. Clement by S. Peter in
that house, where the ordinary assemblies of Christians were kept. And so of
all nations, this our Britanie could not be left out, in that charge, and
commission: which S. Clement himself does sufficiently prove, in that epistle,
wherewith others thus he writes of S. Peter's charge unto him. S. Clem. Romans
epist. 1. Leo 2. epistol. decretal. Marian. Scot. in S. Clemente. Florent.
Wigorn. in eod.

4. Episcopos per singulas civitates, quibus ille non miserat, perdoctos and
prudentes, sicut serpents, simplicesque sicut columbas, iuxta Domini
praeceptionem, nobis mittere praecepit. Quod etiam facere inchoauimus, and
Domino opem ferente, facturi sumus, vos autem per vestras dioceses Episcopos
sacrate and mittite, quia nos ad altas parts, quod idem iusset, agere
curabimus. Aliquos vero ad Gallias, Hispaniasque mittemus, and quosdam ad
Germaniam, and Italiam, atque ad reliquas gentes dirigere cupimus. Vbi autem
ferociores and rebelliores gentes esse cognouerimus, illic dirigere
sapientiores, and austeriores necesse habemus. S. Peter commanded us, to send
Bishops very learned, and wise as serpents, and simple as doves according unto
the commandment of our Lord, to all cities, to which he had not sent. Which
we have begun to do, and by the help of our Lord will do hereafter and
consecrate you (writing to the Bishop of Jerusalem) and send Bishops,
throughout your diocesses, because we will have care to do it to other parts,
as he commanded. We will send some to France, and Spain, and some to
Germany, and Italy, as we desire to the other nations: and where the people ar
more feirce and rebellious, thither we have need to send more wise and austere
men.

5. Where we evidently see, by S. Clements own testimony, and consent of
many ancient learned men embracinge it, that he was charged by S. Peter to
send Bishops, not only into Italy, Spain, France, and Germany, but into all
these other nations, atque ad reliquas gentes, in which Britanie must needs be
comprehended: and consideringe in what state of barbarousnes this kingdom was
in respect of Italy, Spain, France, and Germany also, before it became more
civil by the Romans rulinge and abidinge here, and receiving the faith of
Christ, there was no nation in this part of the world, known then to the
Romans, that might be so truly termed, ferociores and rebelliores gentes,
more feirce and rebellious nations, then these of Britanie, as not only the
Roman historians of those times but S. Gildas himself, a Britan, most
lamentably bewaylinge it, their own British history, and others ar sufficient
witnesses. Iul. Caesar. l. de bell. Gallic. Cornel. Tacit. Sueton. Diod. Sicul.
Gild. l. de excid. and conquest. Britan. Galfrid. Monum. l. 3.4. and yet S.
Clement plainly says, that he then already had, or would by the grace of
God, send Bishops into al those contries, and that it was S. Peter's command
unto him to send to all cities, where he himself had not ordained Bishops.
Therefore we cannot doubt, but S. Clement did perform this commandment of
S. Peter, and his own promise in sending some learned Bishops, and priests
into this kingdom. S. Antoninus, Philippus Bergomensis, diverse in the opinion
of Harrison a protestant, and Master Harris a late Catholic writer think he
sent S. Taurinus hither. S. Antomn. Florent. Archiep. histor. part. 1. Philipp.
Bergom. histor. in S. Taurino. Will. Harrison descrip. of Britanie, Harris
theatr. l. 1. and this last affirms the same of S. Nicasius citing also
Arnoldus Mirmannius, who plainly, says that among other people, S. Nicasius
instructed the Britans in the faith, beeinge sent thither Apostle by S.
Clement: Britones, formauit fide S. Nicasius a S. Clemente illuc Apostolus
delegauit. Arnold. Mirmann. theatr. conuers. gent. at which time there were no
Britans, but of this Britanie.

6. The same I may and not improbably say, of S. Martine, to whom a church was
dedicated at Canterbury in the time of King Lucius, and S. Marcellus, or by
some Marcellinus, a British Bishop of this Land, or the nere ensuinge time.
And if any man obiecteth, three of these S. Taurinus, Nicasius and Martine by
diverse writers preached in France, this hinders nothing, but rather
proves, seeing others affirm it, that they preached here also, S. Marcellus,
or Marcellinus which was certainly a Britan, both preached, and was Bishop in a
foreign contry, so was S. Mansuetus, and S. Beatus in the same case before,
and it is evident by Methodius, and Marianus already cited, that this was
usual in those days, for the same men to preach not only in their own but
foreign and strange contries. And our English Protestant publishers of
Matthew of Westminster, incline to think so of diverse sent into France by S.
Clement. ( Matthew. Westminster an. 94.) among whom there are numbered S. Nicasius,
and Taurinus; for where the Monk of Westminster says, they were sent by S.
Clement, ad locandum in Gallijs nouae fidei fundamentum, to place the
foundation of the faith in Gallia: these protestants give a larger circuit,
and say plainly, doctores mittuntur versus occidentem, that S. Clement sent
those doctors, S. Denis, Nicasius, Taurinus, Trophinus, Paulus, Saturninus,
Astremonius, Martialis, Gratianus, Iulianus, Lucianus, Firminus, Photinus into
the West, where Britanie is. Protestant Marg. annotat. in Matthew. Westminster. supr.
an. 94. and very straung it should be if S. Clement as before having so great
charge given unto him by S. Peter as well of Britanie, as Gallia, and by his
own words and promise was to send Bishops into this our Britanie, should be
so mindful of France so nere unto us, to send so many as we see, thither, and
forget S. Peter, himself, and Britanie so much, as to send none unto it at all.

7. That S. Clement, and consequently those holy priests and Bishops which were
consecrated, and sent by him into these parts, were sacrificinge and massinge
preistes, is manifest before, and his own works ar so evident in this behalf,
that if S. Clement was not a massing priest, and Bishop, and consecrated such,
there neither is, or ever was any massinge priest in the world. For he sets
down at large the whole order of that holy sacrifice, as it is now offered,
and celebrated by Roman Catholics, prouinge that unbloody sacrifice to be the
most holy body, and blood of Christ, so naming it, as also holy Oblation,
Mass, and other such titles as the present Roman church does. ( Clem. l. 6.
constitut. cap. 23. l. 2. cap. 6.20. epistol. 2. l. 7. constitut. Apostol. cap.
43. l. 8. cap. 35. l. 10. Recognit. epist. 2. can. Apost. 3.4.5.72.) he
remembers also the consecrated Altars, whereon it was offered, altar
clothes, and veales, for the altar, lights thereuppon, church vessels of
gold, and silver chalices, cruets, pales, incensinge, holy vestures by the
Bishops, and priests at that time, the signinge with the Cross, naminge of
holy martyrs, and their memories, the preface to the Mass, and canon thereof,
wherein was offered the same sacrifice, Christ himself instituted. Prayers and
sacrifice for the dead, the gospel and epistle read at Mass, the pax or
holy salutation, and with other ceremonies the priests benediction at the end
of the holy sacrifice, how the Catech^ens not baptized were not permitted to be
present at the sacrifice, but dismissed before, and in no material thing
differs from the present missale used in the church of Rome. epist. 2. l. 8.
constit. cap. 16.17. l. 2. constit. cap. 23.61.63. l. 8. cap. 17. l. 6. cap.
30. l. 8. cap. 18.47.48. l. 2. cap. 63. l. 8. cap. 15. l. 2. cap. 61.62.

8. And it would be a very unlearned objection, in this case for any man to
say, that S. Clements works have been corrupted: for evident it is before,
that all his predecessors in the sea of Rome, all the Apostles, Evangelists,
and their disciples in all places, taught, and practiced this holy doctrine,
and sacrifice of Mass, so that except S. Clement should be singular against
them all, in this point, which is manifestly untrue before, his books could
not be corrupted, or corrected in this respect; and if they had been altered
therein, they had been corrected to the common received truth, and not
corrupted with errors. Secondly no man that says S. Clements works to have
been corrupted, as Ruffinus and others, do say they were corrupted in any
such matter, but by the Eunomian heretics, thrustinge in some things,
sauouringe of their heresy, into his books. ( Ruffin. Apolog. pro Origene.)
and Ruffinus and all those men were teachers, practisers and defenders of holy
Mass. ( Ruffin. histor. eccl. l. 1. cap. 22.) Thirdly our protestants which
grant the church to have been free from error long after the first 400.
years of Christ, before which Ruffinus lived, and these books were corrupted
as he with others testifies, may not be allowed by their own Religion, to
say these sacrificinge and massinge doctrines were errors, but truths of those
unspotted times. And so it is not possible that exceptinge some thing tendings
to the Eunomians heresy foisted into his works by them, any thing else about
these matters should be thrust in; for Ruffinus who, as before was a patron,
and practiser of Mass, and so teaches it to have been the universal
doctrine, and practice of the church of God, witnesses, that whatsoever was
corrupted in S. Clements works, he himself being, Apostolicus vir, immo pene
Apostolus, an Apostolic man, and almost an Apostle. Were such things as the
ecclesiastical rule does not receive; quae ecclesiastica regula omnino non
recipit. Ruffin. Apolog. supr. therefore the holy sacrifice of Mass, and
massinge preisthood, being so authentically allowed by the ecclesiastical
rule, both then, before, and after, could be none of those things, which were
corrupted, or inserted into S. Clements works.

9. And to make this matter more sure, we have many and renowned Authors of
that, and following times, saying clearly, that S. Clement did compose, and
publish to the world, a form of Mass, which continued in succeedinge ages,
and such without any material change, or difference, as the whole church of
Christ now uses. Among these is S. Proclus Patriarch of Constantinople,
successor to S. Chrisostom that great massing prelate, who in his book of the
sacred Mass, de traditione diuinae Liturgiae, writes in this manner. ( Proclus
Patriarch. Constantinopol. tract. de traditione diuinae Liturgiae.) multi
diuini Pastores, qui Apostolis successerunt, ac Ecclesiae Doctores, sacrorum
diuinae Liturgiae mysteriorum rationem explicantes, scriptis mandatam Ecclesiae
tradiderunt, in quibus primi and clarissimi sunt S. Clemens, summi illius
Apostolorum discipulus and successor, qui sacrosancta illa mysteria, a Sanctis
Apostolis sibi reuelata, in lucem edidit. Many divine Pastors, which succeeded
the Apostles, and Doctors of the church, expoundinge the order of the holy
mysteries, of the divine Liturgy Mass, committed it to writing, and delivered
it to the church, among whom the principal and most renowned were S. Clement,
the disciple and successor of that chiefest of the Apostles, which did publish
to light, those holy mysteries revealed unto him by the Apostles. Where we
see, that S. Clement did not only write the order of Mass, but is recompted
in the first place, as one of the chiefest, that performed this holy work.

10. The others which he there names ar S. James the Apostle, first Bishop of
Jerusalem, S. Basile the great, and S. John Chrysostom, this man's spiritual
Father, Pater noster Ioannes, cui aure a lingua cognomen dedit. Who as he
says did shorten the Apostles Mass, taking some things from it, because for
the length it did not so well please some men, declined from that great zeal
of the Apostles, and their time: for as he writes in the same place, the holy
Apostles were exceedingly devoted to this most holy sacrifice, as a thing most
necessary, and principal in their function: postquam Seruator noster in caelum
assumptus est, Apostoli priusquam per omnem terram dispergerentur,
conspirantibus animis cum multam consolationem in mystico illo Dominici
corporis sacrificio positam inuenissent, fusissme, and longa oratione Liturgiam
decantabant. Haec enim diuina sacra vna cum dicendi ratione coniuncta, caeteris
rebus anteponenda censebant, atque maiori and alacriori rerum diuinarum, and
sacrificij sacrosancti studio and desiderio flagrabant, and illud obnixe
amplectebantur. After our Savior was assumpted unto heaven, the Apostles
before they were dispersed through all the earth, assemblinge together, with
agreeinge minds, applied themselves to pray all the day: and when they had
found much consolation placed in that mystical sacrifice of our Lords body,
they did singe Liturgy (Mass most largely with long prayer. For they did
think these divine sacrifices joined with preachinge to be preferred before
all other things, and were incensed with a greater and more cheerful
affection and desire of divine things, and the holy sacrifice, and did embrace
it, with all their power. Hitherto this ancient Saint, and Patriarch.

11. Of Ruffinus I have spoken before, only I add here, that he being
commonly taken to be the interpreter of many these works of S. Clement, where
the holy sacrifice of Mass, and massinge preisthood ar so evidently approved,
and acknowledging S. Clements works had been in some things corrupted, ever
takes these for the true writings, and doctrine of S. Clement, and far from
being corruptions, or insertions by others. The holy learned and ancient
Bishop Nicholaus Methonensis. Episc. l. de vero Christi corpore in Eucharistia.
having showed, how S. James said Mass at Jerusalem, S. Peter and S. Paul at
Antioch, S. Mark at Alexandria, S. John and S Andrew in Asia, and Europe,
concludes with an eminency for S. Clements Mass. Omnesque vniuersae Ecclesiae
vbicumque sint, per eam quam Sanctus Clemens conscripsit Liturgia^ tradiderunt.
And all the Bishops have delivered to the whole church, whersoeuer dispersed,
the Liturgy or Mass according to that order which S. Clement wrote. And to
put us out of al doubt, he means this of the holy sacrifice of Christ's body
and blood in the Mass, that that his book is instituted, de vero Christi
corpore in Eucharistia, of the true body of Christ in the Eucharist, Marcus
Ephesius and Bessarion write the very same, of S. Clements Mass, citinge
diverse testimonies, from thence for the real presence, of Christ in that most
holy sacrifice, and diverse others deliver the like. Marcus Ephesians. l. de corpore
and sanguine Christi Bessarion l. de Sacramento Eucharist. M. S. Gallic. antiq.
pr. or que nous sommes. an Dom. 81. in S. Clement.

12. Whereby is evidently proved that S. Clement did not only write a form of
the Mass, and practice, as a sacrificing priest that holy sacrifice but this
was so renowned, that it was published by the Bishops, and received in all
churches. And among these in this our Britanie, except the British
a^tiquities themselves written before the union of the Christian Britans with
the disciples of S. Gregory, and the converted Saxons in this contrie do
deceive us, which our English Protestants generally extolling the credit of
those monuments, and the Christian Britans Religion, may not affirm. This
antiquity so ancient as I have related, and purposely entreatinge of the
first order of saying Mass, especially in France, and this kingdom of
Britanie, comprehending England and Scotland, is in that respect though with a
later hand writing thus entitled: prima institutio and varietas ecclesiastici
seruity, praecipue in Britannia and Gallia: The first institution and variety
of the ecclesiastical service especially in Britanie and France. And it
terms it, cursum, the course or order of the public Liturgy, or Mass
thereby expressed. Bed. in Martyrolog. 4. call. Ianuar. Beatus Trophinus
Episcopus Arelatensis, and Sanctus Phetinus Martyr, and Episcopus Lugdunensis,
discipulus Sancti Petri Apostoli, cursum Romanum in Gallijs tradiderunt. Inde
postea relatione beati Photini Martyris cum quadraginta and octo Martyribus
retrusi in ergastalum, ad beatum Clementem quartum loci successorem beati Petri
Apostoli deportauerunt. Trophinus Bishop of Arles, and S. Photin Martyr and
Bishop of Lions, disciple of S. Peter Apostle, delivered the Roman order in
France. Then afterward the relation of S. Photin Martyr imprisoned together
with 48. Martyrs, it was carried to S. Clement, the fourth in succession to S.
Peter, the Apostle. Where we plainly see, that the church of Rome had then a
public order and form of Mass and this was published throughout France by S.
Trophinus, from whose fountain as I have showed before, both from Catholics,
and Protestants, all the churches of France did receive instruction. Zosimus
Pap. epist. To. 1. Council. Petr. Cluniacens. Magdeb. centur. 2. page 2. col. 6.
Martyrolog. Romans die 29. December.

13. And this Mass after the death of S. Peter, Linus, and Cletus, was
approved by S. Clement, and as it seems by an ancient Manuscript french
history, he added the epistle and gospel which all were not written in S.
Peter's time. For thus it testifies with others. S. Clement Pope ordeyneth that
in the solemnity of the Mass, the epistle and gospel should be read. (M.
S. French history an. Do. 81. cap. 2.) and immediately adds, how then he
sent many preachers and holy Bishops into France, and these parts, which could
bring with them no other Liturgy, or Mass, then that which their Master S.
Clement had so published, and approved, both by his authority, and practice
before. And if the Mass of S. Mark was not the same with Saint Peter's, as
some think, yet sure we are, seeing he was an Evangelist, S. Peter's scholar
and wrote his gospel, ex ore Petri, from S. Peter's mouth, as S. Hierome
witnesses, and by his approbation. ( Hieron. in Catal. script. in S. Marco.)
that his Mass could not be different from his Masters, in any material
thing, and seeinge S. Peter approved his gospel, he did not, and would not
disprove or disallowe his Mass: And yet this old British antiquity is
witness, that the Mass which the old Christian Scots, did use in his time, and
was accounted very holy, was practiced by S. Mark, and from him continued to
the time of this Author, by continual tradition, from one to an other.

14. Ipsum cursum qui dicitur presenti tempore Scottorum, Beatus Marcus
decantauit and post ipsum Gregorius Nazianzenus, quem Hieronymus suum Magistrum
esse affirmat, and beatus Basilius frater ipsius S. Gregorij, Antonius, Paulus,
Macharius vel Ioannes, and Malchus secundum ordinem Patrum decantauerunt. Inde
postea beatissimus Cassianus, and post ipsum beatus Honoratus, and Sanctus
Caesarius Episcopus qui fuit in Arelata, and beatus Porcarius Abbas qui in ipso
monasterio fuit, ipsum cursum decantauerunt, qui beatum Lupum, and beatum
Germanum Monachos in eorum monasterio habuerunt, and ipsi sub norma regulae
ipsum cursum ibidem decantauerunt. Et postea Episcopatus cathedram adepti in
Britannijs and Scottijs praedicauerunt. Quae vita beati Germani Episcopi
Antisiodorensis, and vita beat Lupi affirmat. Qui beatum Patricium literas
sacras docuerunt, atque enutrierunt. Et ipsum Episcopum in Scottijs ac
Britannijs posuerunt, qui vixit annos centum quinquaginta and tres, and ipsum
cursum ibidem decantauit: and post ipsum beatus Vuandilocus senex, and beatus
Gomogillus, qui habuerunt in eorum monasterio Monachos circiter tria millia.
Inde beatus Vuandilocus in predicationis ministerium a beato Gomogillo missus
est, and beatus Columbanus partibus Galliarum, and ibidem ipsum cursum
decantauerunt. That order which at this time is called the order of Scots, S.
Mark did singe, and after him Gregory Nazianzen, whom Hierome affirms to
have been his Master, and S Basil brother of the said S Gregory, Antonius,
Paulus, Macharius or John, and Malchus, according to the order of the Fathers
did singe it. And after that most blessed Cassian, and after him S. Honoratus,
and S. Caesarius Bishop, that was in Arles, and S. Porcarius Abbot, which was
in the same monastery, did singe that order, who had monks in their monastery
S. Lupus and S Germanus, and they three under rule did singe the same order:
and after made Bishops preached in Britanie, and Scotland, which things the
life of S. German Bishop of Antisiodor, and the life of S. Lupus does affirm,
who taught S. Patricke holy learning, and brought him up, and placed him Bishop
in Scotland, and Britanie, who lived an hundred fifty and three years, and
song there the same order. And after him Vuandilocus an old man, and S.
Gomogillus, who had in their monastery about three thousand monks. After S.
Vuandilocus was sent to preach by S. Gomogillus, as also S. Columbanus to the
parts of France, and there they did singe the same order.

15. Hitherto the words of this so ancient, and approved Manuscript British
antiquity. So that whether soever, or to whomsoever we turn our selves to
enquire of these things, whether Hebrews, Grecians, or Latins, Apostles,
Evangelists, or their Disciples, and with us at home, Britons, or Saxons,
Catholics or Protestants, it is clearly and plainly confessed, that
generally in this first Apostolic age, and hundred years of Christ, which
must needs be allowed for a rule, square, and direction to all succeedinge
times, and posterities. The holy sacrificing preisthood of the present Greek
and Latin church, and all Christian nations, whether these late novelties,
have not entered, sacrificinge massinge priests, and the most holy sacrifice
of Mass, were our Savior Christ Jesus his sacred ordinances and institutions,
and so used, practiced, and with all honor performed by the whole number of the
Apostles, without exception, their disciples, and successors in all places, and
among the rest, to the great glory thereof, in this our nation of great
Britanie. And all this without any material change, or alteration in that
sacrifice, the principal act, and office of truly consecrated priests, and
preisthood, as is before related, and our chief protestants have before
confessed of the most contradicted and questionable things, a sacrifice
instituted by Christ himself, containing an oblation of his most blessed
body, and blood, both for the living and faithful departed, propitiatory for
sins, with a memory of the holy Saints in heaven, of which lesser instance
has been given, because few Saints of the new testament were then at the first
deceased this life, and entered into glory, yet the churches then dedicated to
diverse of them, and invocation and prayer then made unto them, as before
appears, makes it an undoubted truth.

16. To which I only add for this kingdom of our Britanie from those
antiquities, both printed, and Manuscripts, which our protestants most allow,
and approve, that S. Joseph of Aramathia, and his holy company, besides their
buildinge a church, in honor of the blessed Virgin Mary, did expressly serve
her, and pray unto her: duod cim praedicti in eodem loco, Deo and beatae
Virgini deuota exhibentes obsequia, vigilijs, ieiunijs, and orationibus
vacantes, eiusdem Virginis Dei, genitricis auxilio in necessitatibus suis
refocillobantur. The twelve holy men spoken of before, S. Joseph and his
companions, yeeldinge devout services to God, and the blessed Virgin,
attendinge to watchings, fastings, and prayers, were in their necessities
releiued by the help of the same Virgin, Mother of God. ( Antiquitat. Glast.
apud Capgrau. in Catalog. in S. Joseph ab Aramath. and S. Patricio. antiq. M.
S. tabulis affixae in ead Eccles. Glaston. and others.) So that whomsoever S.
Peter, S. Paul, S. Joseph, or any other man will truly and seriously allow,
or in his own singular conceit or fantasy imagine, to have been the first
preacher, and teacher of the Christian faith, and Religion, in Britanie, or
what or whose order and form of Mass, and Liturgy, they will say was then
here used and practiced, they must needs by all authorities, and warranted
judgments acknowledge, that the holy priests here in that time were
sacrificinge massinge priests, their external Liturgy and sacrifice, the
sacrifice of Mass, wherein Christ's holy body and blood were consecrated, and
offered both for the living, and faithful departed, the Saints were
remembered, and prayed unto, and no material difference between that, and the
present Mass, of either the Greek or Latin church. And so I end this first
age and hundred years of Christ.

THE SECOND AGE OR HUNDRED YEARS OF CHRIST.
THE XV. CHAPTER. Wherein demonstration is made, both by protestants and other
antiquaries, that sacrificinge massinge priests, and Bishops, and sacrifice of
Mass, continued and were honored in this kingdom of Britanie from the
beginning of this hundred years, until King Lucius time, when it was wholly
converted to that faith.
WE are now come to the beginning of the second age, or century of years of
Christ, when by all accounts in history, King Coillus, that was bred up at
Rome, was King in Britanie, and S. Anacletus Pope of Rome. When many of our
before remembered massinge and sacrificinge British priests, as namely S.
Mansuetus, S. Beatus, his holy companion before by some named Achates, and S.
Timotheus were living. And though I do not find any particularly named, whom
S. Anacletus sent hither, of the holy preistly massinge order, yet to follow
even the opinion, and direction of English Protestant antiquaries, in this
business, we must needs grant, that he had a care of this contry as well as
others in this kind, for they testify of this Pope; Ab ^pso Domino primatum
Romanae Ecclesiae super omnes Ecclesias, vniuersumque Christiani nomine populum
concessum esse asseruit. (Robert. Barns l. de vit. Pontific. Roman. in Anaclet.
Ormerod. pict. Pap. page 78.) Pope Anacletus affirmed, that supremacy was
granted from our Lord himself, to the church of Rome, over all churches, and
all Christian people. Because, says he, Christ said to S. Peter, who lived
and died at Rome, thou art Peter, or a rock, and upon this rock I will
build my church. Quia, inquit, Petro agenti and morienti Romae dixit, tu es
Petrus and super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. By which reason among
others, diverse other learned English Protestant writers, with public
privilege and allowance, do prove unto us first confessinge with this holy
Pope, that Christ made S. Peter the supreme and chief governor of his
church: secondly that this supreamacy was necessary and to continue forever in
his church: and thirdly because S. Peter dyinge Bishop of Rome, and at Rome,
and there only possibly to have his last and immediate successor, and so
constituted by himself as is evident in S. Clement before, it evidently
follows by the reason of this holy Pope, and protestants, that even by Christ
himself this supreamacy over all churches and Christians, was granted to the
church of Rome. Whereupon these protestants testify in his life, that he
ordained diverse laws bindinge the whole church, and still observed. Rob.
Barnes in Anacleto.

2. And if we may believe the first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, and in
the whole world also, Matthew Parker, he tells us how in particular his
jurisdiction extended into this kingdom of Britanie, and that the division and
constitution of Archbishops sees with us, was by Pope Anacletus his ordination:
Ex Anacle to huius insulae diuisionem. (Matthew. Parker antiquitat. Brit. page
24.) And that he was a sacrificinge massinge priest, it must needs be granted,
both by his own, and our protestant testimonies also of him; for he himself
is witness, that he was made priest by the great sacrificinge and massinge
Apostle S. Peter: a Sancto Petro Apostolorum Principe, presbyter ordinatus.
(Anacletus epist. 3. To. 1. council.) and our protestants do plainly confess
of this holy Pope: Sacerdotem sacrificaturum, ministros vestibus sacris
indutos, seu testes and custodes sibi adhibere ordinauit. Episcopos vero, and
plures ministros sibi in sacris faciendis adiungat: and quod Sacerdote mayor ac
dignior sit. (Robert. Barnes l. de vit. Pontif Roman in Anacleto.) Pope
Anacletus ordained, that when a priest was to offer sacrifice, he should take
unto him as witnesses and keepers, ministers in holy vestiments. And that a
Bishop should join unto him more ministers, when he said Mass: And that he
is greater, and more worthy then a priest. The authority from whence they
cite this, is much more plain, where the very order we still use in solemn
Masses is expressed. But the protestant words manifestly prove that the
sacrifice of Mass and sacrificinge vestures, were used from the days of the
Apostles. Therefore this holy Pope exercising supreamacy, and enactinge laws
for the whole church in Britanie or wheresoever, as these protestants there do
testify, it must needs be confessed, that the priests which in his time
either for Britanie, or any other nation, were consecrated immediately by
himself, or mediatly by his authority, were as himself was, sacrificinge
massinge preistes, and the deacons also for which he made decrees, by the
testimony of these men. ( Robert. Barnes Sup. in Anaclet. Matthew. Parker.
antiquitat. Britan. page 24.) were also as they teach, such as served at the
altar and sacrifice of Mass, as Master Fox speakinge of the very deacons
ordained by Pope Anacletus proves in these terms. therefore served the office
of the deacons, as we read, to lay the offerings of the people upon the
altar, to be hallowed, and when the mysteries, be consecrated, to distribute
the cupp of the sacred blood of the Lord, to the faithful people. (Fox Tom.
2. in Q. Mary. Ambros. l. de omnib. divine. offic.)

3. And much part of the aboade and residency of this holy Pope, as also of his
predecessors and successors as appears before, and will be more manifest
hereafter, was in that known massinge and sacrificinge house, of our noble
contriwoman S. Claudia, or her children. And the order of Mass which he used,
was the same which was practiced by S. Peter the Apostle, and by him delivered
to the church, as these protestants have before with other Authors confessed. (
Matthew. Parker antiquitat. Brit. page 47. cap. 17.) and such was the condition
of his next successor S. Euaristus, using the same order of saying Mass, with
S. Peter, and both claiminge, and exercisinge supreamacie over all churches, as
these protestants assure us. ( Parker supr. Barn. in vit. Pontif. in Euaristo.
Io. Funoc. commentar. l. 5. an. 105. Ed. Grimston.) and Nennius the ancient
British writer, who as these protestants say, wrote a thousand years since,
does expressly affirm, in his Manuscript history, that he dealt with the
King himself of this our Britanie about the conversion thereof, probably
before King Lucius was borne: Missa legatione a Papa Romano Euaristo. And many
were converted by this h^s means. ( book of estates page 435. Bal. l. de
scriptor. cent. 1. in Nennio Banchor. Nennius histor. M.S.) therefore this Pope
being known to be a massinge Pope, the priests which were (by Ne^nius) sent
hither by him, must needs be massing priests, as all others here, at, and
before that mission were.

4. Next is Pope Alexander, a man, by our protestants allowance, studio
euangelizandi and miraculis celebris, interfectus martyr obijt: renowned for
his zeal in preachinge the gospel, and miracle, and dyinge a martyr. (
Whitguist. answ. to the admonit. page 97.98. Rob. Barnes l. de vit. Pontific.
Romans in Alexandro 1. Bal. act. Romans Pontific. in eodem.) this Pope as Albertus
Krantzius writes, sent preachers, and priests into this our Britanie. (
Albert. Krantz. Metropol. l. 1. cap. 6.) therefore to know of our protestants
whether they were massing preistes, we must enquire, and learn of them, what
he was in this respect that sent them, because he would not, not could send
others then he himself was, for such a business. That he was a sacrificinge
massinge priest, and Pope these protestants thus assure us, by the laws and
decrees which as they thus testify, he made and published for the church. (
Robert. Barn. in vit. Pont. in Aleaandro 1. Io. Funccius l. 5. commentar. in
Alexand. 1. an. 111.) In Eucharistiae sacrificio aquam vino admisceri voluit.
Ad Eucharistiae oblationem azimum panem non fermentatum, sumendum esse
praecepit. Vno die vnam tantum Missam a singulis sacrificijs fieri debere,
decreto sanciuit. Peccata sacrificio (de Eucharistia loquens) deleri ait: Ideo
passionem in Missa recitandam instituit. Rationem effectus huius sacrificij,
hoc est, quod peccata expiet, adiecit, dicens: Quia corpore and sanguine
Christi in sacrificijs nihil maius est. He took order that in the sacrifice
of Eucharist, water should be mingled with wine. He commanded, that
unleavened and not leuened bread should be used for the sacrifice of the
Eucharist. He made a decree, that no sacrificing priest should say more then
one Mass in one day. Speakinge of the Eucharist he says, that sins ar
blotted out with sacrifice: therefore he ordained that the passion should be
recited at Mass. He added the reason of this effect of this sacrifice to
purge sins, saying: because in sacrifice nothing is greater, then the body
and blood of Christ.

5 These protestants add further of this massinge Pope, in this business ( Rob.
Barns supr. in Alex. 1.) In Massa pridie quam pateretur, vsque ad haec verba.
Hoc est corpus meum addidit, ad memoriam passionis Christi in^ul^andam He added
in the Mass, the day before he suffered, unto these words, this is my body,
to impresse in our memories the passion of Christ. Where we see it evidently
confessed by these protestants themselves, that this primative holy Pope
Alexander that lived (to speak in a Protestant Archbishops words, anno 111. in
the year of Christ one hundred and eleven) and was a godly Bishop. (Ioh.
Whitguift answ. to the admonit. sect. 1.2. page 97.98. and dif. of the answ page
594.) and by the German historian before sent priests into this kingdom, was
as far engaged in the mysteries of holy Mass, as any Roman massinge priest
is at this present, acknowledging it to be the greatest of al sacrifices, the
body and blood of Christ, a sacrifice expiatinge and propitiatory for sins.
And what matter was to be used and consecrated, and how priests were to behave
themselves in this most holy sacrifice. And it appears even by these men's
testimonies, that the priests of that time are so far from not saying Mass,
that they did not only daily offer this most holy sacrifice of Christ's body
and blood for sins, but they said Mass more often then once a day, diverse
Masses in one day, until it was forbidden as before by this holy Pope, That
one priest, should say but one Mass a day. Vno die vnam tantam Missam a
singulis sacrificijs fieri debere, decreto sanciuit.

6. This Pope was as all Christians then, far from being a parlamentary
protestant of England to punish saying or hearing of Mass daily with a
yearly penalty of four and twenty thousands, three hundreds and twenty
pounds and twenty marks, an hundred marks for every Mass, or make holy
sacrificing massinge priests to be traitors, and their entertayners fellons,
when by these protestants ( Rob. Barnes sup. in Alexandro 1.) this holy Pope
excommunicated those that resisted the Popes Legates, and forbad priests and
clergy men to be conuented before a lay tribunal. Legatis Apostolicis
obsistentes, decreto excommunicauit. Clericum ad plebeium tribunal pertrah^re
prohibuit. And yet he was so holy and renowned a man, as besides that which
protestants have testified of him before, an other writes. ( Edw. Grimston. in
the estate of the church of Rome. page 435. in Alex. 1.) Alexander a Roman, a
man of so holy a life, as many Roman Senators received the Christian Religion
by reason of his great piety. So we may be assured that all Christians the^
were of his opinion in these things, as they before him were: for none of these
things which these protestants here say, he decreed, were new, or invented or
added by him, but confirmed in their first institution and integrity, as I
have proved from these protestants and others before, that the mixture of water
with wine was an apostolical tradition. Couel against Burg. page 122.) which
S. Alexander himself confirms, when he says of it. ( Cyprian. epistol. 63.
Alexand. 1. epistol. 1.) a patribus accepimus, and ipsa ratio docet. We have so
received it from our predecessors, and reason it self so teaches, and
therefore commands, vt pauis tantum, and vinum aqua permixtum in sacrificio
offerantur, that only bread and wine mixed with water, be offered in the
sacrifice, and S. Cyprian plainly says it was, Dominica traditio, a tradition
of Christ himself, by his own order and example. And he with others so
expounds Solomon in the Proverbs to prophecy thereof, as I have declared at
large before. Proverb. c. 9. Ciprian. epist. 63. ad Cecilium.

7. The eminency of this sacrifice, above all others, how it conteyneth the
body and blood of Christ, and is satisfactory for sins, as S. Alexander by
these protestants teaches, they have often told us before, that it was so
esteemed from the first institution thereof by Christ. That which he says,
how it ought to be solemnized with unleavened bread, was also, as the
protestants, besides the general practice of the Latin church, assure us, the
ordinance of Christ himself, and the law it self, as a Protestant Archbishop
with others thus expounds this confirmatory decree of this holy Pope. ( Ioh.
Whitguife answ. to the admonit. sect. 1.2. page 98. and def. of the answ. page
594.) Alexander was a good and godly Bishop, it is reported in some writers,
that he appointed unleavened bread to be used in the Eucharist, because that
Christ himself used the same according to the law written Exodus 12.
Deuteron. 16. The words: pridie quam pateretur, the day before Christ
suffered, unto the words, hoc est corpus meum, this is my body; were not newly
added by Pope Alexander, but declared by him to be the institution of Christ
himself, and so of necessity to be used. For these he testifies thereof. (
Alexand. 1. epist. 1. ad omnes Orthodox. Tom. 2. council. de conse. did. 2.
nihil in Sac.) Ipsa veritas nos instruxit etc. Christ Jesus truth it self has
instructed us to offer the chalice and bread in the Sacrament, when he says:
Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and gave to his disciples, saying: Take
and eat for this is my body, which shall be given for you, likewise after he
had supped, he took the chalice, and gave to his disciples, saying: Take and
drink you all of it, for this is the chalice of my blood, which shall be shed
for you, for remission of sins. For offenses and sins are blotted out with
these sacrifices offered unto our Lord. And therefore his passion is to be
remembered in these, by the which we are redeemed, and often to be recited,
and these to be offered unto our Lord. With such sacrifices our Lord will be
delighted and pacified, and forgive great sins. For in sacrifices nothing
can be greater then the body, and blood of Christ. Nor any oblation better
then this, but this excels all. Which is to be offered to our Lord with a
pure conscience, and to be received with a pure mind, and to be reverenced
of all men. And as it is better then all others, so it ought more to be
worshipped and reverenced. Quae pura conscientia Domino offerenda est, and Pura
mente sumenda, atque ab omnibus veneranda. Et sicut potior est cateris, ita
potius excoli and venerari debet.

8. This was the opinion of this holy Pope, and all good Christians under his
charge, in that prime age of Christianity, and hereby we perfectly know,
that S. Alexander did not add any new thing to the holy sacrifice of Mass,
but only proposed the ordinance and institution of Christ himself, to be
followed and observed, as is evident in that I have cited from him, whereby it
appears, that what he wrote in that matter, ipsa veritas nos instruxit, that
Christ the infallible truth, did teach and so instruct and institute as
evidently is proved by comparinge those words, which these protestants say S.
Alexander added in the Mass, to the institution of Christ, as it is delivered
in holy scriptures by the Evangelists and S. Paul. The words supposed to be
added be these: Qui pridie quam pateretur: who (Christ) the day before his
passion took bread into his holy and venerable hands, and lifting up his eyes
toward heaven to thee, God his Father omnipotent, giuinge thanks unto thee,
blessed it, brake and gave to his disciples, saying, take and eat you all of
this. For this is my body. All unto the last words, for this is my body. They
say were S. Alexanders addition. But S. Paul, as he is translated by our
protestants, has the same from Christ's institution, in this manner. (1. Corinthians. cap. 11. verse. 23.24.25.26.) I have received of the Lord that which
also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was
betrayed took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said,
take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for you: do this in remembrance
of me. After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped,
saying, this cup is the new testament in my blood, this do ye as often as ye
drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come. Wherefore
whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord vnvvorthily,
shall be guilty of the body, and blood of the Lord. The like have the
Evangelists, S. Matthew, Mark, and Luke from the words and institution of
Christ himself. Matthew. cap. 26. Marc. cap. 14. Luc. cap. 22.

9. And it plainly appears by that is said, that without these words, or
their equivalent, it is impossible to observe the institution and commandment
of Christ in this behalf. And therefore our most learned, holy, and ancient
contriman S. Albinus, or Alcuinus, Remigius Antisiodorensis, and others after
them, confidently and truly say. ( Albin. Flac. Alcuin. l. de divine. officijs
cap. de celebratione Missa. Remigius Antissiodor. in exposit. Missae. Hoc quod
sequitur, qui pridie quam pateretur, vsque in memoriam facietis: Apostoli etc.
This which follows, who the day before he suffered, unto those words, you
shall do it in my commemoration, the Apostles had in use after the ascension
of our Lord. Therefore, that the church might celebrate a continual memory of
her redeemer, our Lord delivered it to his Apostles, and the Apostles generally
to the whole church in these words, without which, no tongue, no Region, no
city, that is, no part of the church can consecrate this Sacrament. Which the
Apostle does make manifest, saying: for I have received of our Lord, which I
have also delivered unto you, that our Lord Jesus the night when he was
betrayed, took bread, and the rest. Therefore by the power and words of
Christ, this bread and this chalice was consecrated from the beginning, is
ever consecrated and shall be consecrated. For he speakinge his words by his
priests, does by his heavenly blessing make his holy body and blood.

10. S. Ambrose relates this in the same manner in these words. Ambros. l. 4.
de Sacramentis cap. 5. vis scire quia verbis caelestibus consecratur etc. Will thou know that consecration is done by heavenly words? receive what the
words be. The priest does say: make unto us, says he, this oblation
ratified, reasonable, acceptable: which is the figure of the body, and blood,
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who the day before he suffered did take bread in
his holy hands, and looked to heaven, to thee o holy Father, omnipotent
everlasting God giving thanks: blessed it, brake it, and beeinge broken gave
to his disciples, saying, take and eat you all of this: for this is my body,
which shall be broken for many. Likewise also he took the cup after he had
supped, the day before he suffered, looked to heaven to thee o holy Father
eternal God, giuinge thanks: blessed it, gave it to his Apostles, and
disciples, saying take you, and drink you all of it: for this is my blood.
Behold all those words are the Evangelists, until those, take and drink,
either body or blood. After they be the words of Christ: take drink you all
of it: For this is my blood. Consider every thing, who the day before says he
that he suffered, he took bread in his holy hands, before it is consecrated
it is bread, but after the words of Christ come unto it, it is the body of
Christ.

11. The like he has in other places, so have other ancient and holy
Fathers, and so plainly that our protestants themselves do freely grant (
Fox Tom 2. act. and Monum. in Queen Mary.) that it was so practiced, and
delivered by the Apostles themselves, and that it was further the express
commandment of Christ to use those or their equiualents words: verba
institutionis caenae r^citata omnino videntur. Nam Paulus ea non frustra 1.
Cor. 11. repetit. and quidem annexum mandatum hoc facite in mei
commemorationem, postulat vt historia illa de institutione and passione Christi
recolatur, vt Paulus 1. Cor. 10. The words of the institution of the supper
doubtless, were recited in the Apostles time, for Paul does not in vain repeat
them, in his first Epistle, and eleventh chapter, to the Corinthiens, and
certes the commandment of Christ, do this in commemoration of me, does
require, that the history of the institution, and passion of Christ, be
related, as Paul witnesses 1. Cor. 10. ( Magdeburgen. centur. 1. l. 2. cap. 6.
col. 500. c. Ritus circa caenam Domini.) Therefore by all consents, this holy
Pope exercisinge supreme spiritual jurisdiction in all places, and beeinge so
famous a massinge Pope, and still retayninge the Mass of the Apostles, and by
some (as before) sendinge priests into this our Britanie, neither these which
he is supposed to have sent hither, or those others which still after this
suruiued of this nation, were or could be any others then sacrificinge
massinge priests: neither our Christian Brittans at Rome so near unto him, be
others then hearers or sayers of holy Mass.

12. Successor to S. Alexander was S. Sixtus the first of that name, who as
these protestants tell us, was Pope ten years, three months and 21. days,
succeedinge his blessed predecessor as well in this opinion, and practice of
sacrificinge preisthood, and holy Mass, as in the papal dignity, for as
these men say. ( Robert, Barnes in vit. Pontific. Romans in Sixton. Io. Func. l.
5. commentar. in Sixto 1. an 121.) sacra vasa ne quis praeter sacros ministros
attingerent, praecepit. Quod corporale appellant, ex lineo panno fieri iussit.
Missam non nisi in altari celebrandam esse, constituit. He commanded that
none but sacred ministers should handle the sacred vessels, that which they
call the corporal he commanded to be made of linen cloth. He ordained that
Mass should not be celebrated, but upon an altar. And so we are assured by
these enemies to holy Mass, and sacrificinge preisthood, that he in all places
maintained both, for he was so absolute for the Popes supreamacy even by these
witnesses, that, he gave power to all ecclesiastical ministers to appeal
from their Bishop to the Pope of Rome. Ab Episcopo ad Romanum Pontificem
appellandi ius dedit ecclesiasticis ministris.

13. Successor to S. Sixtus was Telesphorus, both in dignity and doctrine also
by the warrant of these protestants, for by them he was so devoted a defendor,
and teacher of sacrificinge preisthood, and holy Mass that, he decreed every
priest should say three Masses upon Christ-Masse day, and an other days they
should not say Mass before the third hour of the day. He commanded that
the song of the Angels glory to God on high, should be sunge at Mass. Yet
say two Protestant Bishops, and one their primate: there is nothing contained
in gloria in excelsis, but the same is taken out of the scriptures, and to be
used of all true Christians. Telesphorus who added it, was a good Bishop, a man
notable for learning, and piety; eruditione ac pietate vir insigius, and the
church of Rome as yet pure in doctrine. Rob. Barn. supr. in Telesphor. Func. l.
5. comment. an. 129. Stowe and Howes histor. in Helius Adrian. Cartwright adm.
Whitguift answ. to. admonit. page 101. and def. page 602. Bal. l. 1. de act.
Pontif. Romans in Telesphor.

14. S. Higinius succeedinge, succeeded also by these protestants, as well in
exercising spiritual supreamacy over all Bishops, decreeinge, that no
Metropolitan should condemn any Bishop of his Province, without the advice
of the other Bishops. And for sacrificinge preisthood, and Mass, he honored
them so much, that living in the time of the Emperor Antonius Pius, a favorer
of Christians, he decreed that Christian churches should be dedicated, with
solemn rite of sacrifice of Mass. Cum solemni ceremoniarum and sacrificiorum
ritu dedicanda esse. (Io. Funcc. l. 5. commentar. an. 141. Rob. Barn. in Higin.
supr.) and by an other protestant: Templa dedicare cum solemni ceremonia and
sacrificio iussit. In this Popes time, as many of our protestant antiquaries
with others from antiquities tell us, we had many godly Christian preachers,
and priests in Britanie, which by so many testimonies before without any
exception must needs be sacrificing massing priests, and by many authorities
converted many to that holy faith, and sacrificinge massinge Religion of Christ
in this kingdom, ( Annal. Burton. an. 140. or 141. Harrison descript. of
Britanie Io. Caius l. 1. antiq. Cantabrig. Theater of great Britanie l. 6.
Harris Theat. Tom. 2.) and no marvel when so many Authors write, that in one
town of Cambridge there were the^ nine such learned Christians of that only
place; a schole of learning, at, and diverse hundreds of years before that
time, as the antiquities and antiquaries of that university inform us. And no
man can doubt of many such priests being here then, if he duly consider the
difficulties of a general conversion of so large, and Idolatrous savage
nation, as this at that time was, and how all agree, it was wholly converted
long before the death of King Lucius, who by Matthew of Westminster, commended
by our protestants for an exact calculator of times, and others, beeinge borne
in the 115. year of Christ, was at the death of this Pope, holdinge the
papacy but 4. years, 3. months, and a very few days, 35. years of age,
and had been King 25. years, his Father Coillus dying, when he was but 10.
years old, and yet by all antiquities, in all his life even before his own
conversion, a great friend and favorer of Christians, and this his kingedome a
refuge, and receptacle of them, that were in those times persecuted for
Christian Religion. Matthew of West. Anno gratiae 115. Ioh. Bal. l. de script.
in Matthew. Westminster. Rob. Bar. sup. in Higinio. Matthew. Westminster. an. 150. Matthew.
Westminster. an. gratiae 124.

15. And to omit foreign examples beyond number in this case, when the Saxons
of this nation, were converted by the disciples of Gregory, though S. Augustine
was a very miraculous man, and his companions many and holy learned men, and
industrious in that sacred work, and found many worthy and renowned Bishops
here with their cleargies that assisted them with all their power in the
conversion of this nation, as those glorious Bishops S. Molocus that joined
with, S. Bonifacius, sent from Italy with many good me^, cum piorum caetu, S.
Iue, S. Kentegern, S. Asaph, S. Lethardus styled the precursor, and way maker
to S. Augustine, praecursor and ianitor venturi Augustini, with others, and had
all the furtherance the holy Queen S. Bertha, and her husband King Ethelbert
the most potent in this Island reigninge from the uttermost coasts of kent unto
Humber, and by the virtues of S. Bertha and S. Lethardus by many arguments, a
Christian in judgment and affection before S. Augustines cominge hither. Hect.
Boeth. hist. l. 9. fol. 178. Holish. hist. of Engl. l. 5. c. 29. page 112.
Capgrau. in S. Iuone M. S. in vit. eius and in S. Asaph. and Kentegern.
Godvvin. Catal. Bal. centur. 1. de script. Capgrau. in S. Lethard. Matthew.
Parker. antiq. in S. Augustine Stowe histor. in King Ethelb Holinsh. histor. of
Engl. Theater of great Brit. in K. Ethelbert. Bed. l. 1. histor. and l 2.

16. Yett S. Augustine and fine other Archbishops of Canterbury after him S.
Laurence, S. Mellitus, S, Iustus, S. Honorius, and S. Adeodatus, were dead,
and above four score years passed, after the cominge of S. Augustine into
England, before this kingdom wholly submitted it self to the true discipline
of holy church, in the time, and by the labors of that our most learned
Archbishop, S. Theodor. Godvvin. Catal. in Theodor. Matthew. Parker in eodem
Capgrau. and M. S. in vit. S. Theodori. Therefore seeing we have so ample
warrant in antiquities, as the old chronicle of Landaffe, ascribed to S.
Telian, S. Bid, the old English Chronicle, named Beatus, Cocelin, and others
that the faith of Christ was preached in Britanie in the time of King Lucius
in the 156. year of Christ, and very many converted by priests sent from the
Pope of Rome, which was not above three years after the death of this Pope S.
Higinius, and in the papacy of Pope Pius the first, we may not with judgment
think, but these priests or diverse of them that had won so many to Christ in
that time, were sent in the days of this massing Pope S. Higinius, and his
sacrificinge predecessors which besides that is already said in this matter,
will more appear in the next Pope S. Pius the first. Chronicon Landaf. apud
Io. Caium l. 1. antiq. Cantabrig. page 107. Beda l. 1. histor. cap. 4.
Chronicle Brutus an. 156. Gocelin. in vita S. Augustini cap. 31. Stovve histor.
in King Lucius Io. Caius supr.

17. This holy Pope by all accounts governed the church of Christ at Rome, when
by so many ancient authorities the priests sent from thence, had so increased
and propagated the Christian faith in this kingedome, who the better to be
mindful of this nation, as his predecessors, by that among other motives,
were, lived and conuersed most, and more then with any of any other contrie,
or nation, with our Christian Britans, that were then at Rome, in so much that
we have allowance both from Catholics and Protestants, that a great part of
their chief residency was in the house of S. Claudia, our noble Christian
contriwoman, and with such freedom and liberty to command therein, that
diverse protestants, besides all Catholic antiquities assure us, this holy
Pope by the grant and donation of her holy children did consecrate it for the
first Christian church in Rome. ( Robert. Barnes in vita Pontif. Romans in Pio
1.) Thermas nonati templo dedicauit, Pope Pius the first dedicated the house of
Nouatus (son of S. Claudia) for a church. An other thus writes of him, in
this matter. He consecrated the first temple of Rome, which was dedicated to
5. Pudentiana, the Temples of Christians having been in former times in hidden
and obscure caves. Edw. Grimston book of est. in the church of Rome. page
436.) the Catholic antiquities that testify this, are to many too be cited.
( Act. and vit. S. Pudentianae and Breu. Romans die 19. Maij. Martyrol. Romans 19.
Maij. Baron. annot. in eod. Romans Martyrol. die 20. Iunij.) but they all agree,
that the Popes of Rome were ordinarily intertayned in this house of our
Christian Britans, and especially this holy Pope Pius said Mass there, and
was there releiued by S. Pudentiana, daughter to our British Lady Claudia,
and the Christians came thither usually to hear Mass, when Antoninus the
Emperor had forbidden Christians to have Mass publicly. Quod ab Antonino
Imperatore sancitum erat, ne Christiani public sacrificia facerent: Pius
Pontifex in adibus Pudentianae cum Christianis sacra celebrabat.

18. And to manifest farther unto us, what a massinge Pope this S. Pius was,
and how in all probable judgment, that holy doctrine among others, was
propagated here in Britanie, these antiquities tell us, there was in that
British house, ninty six Christian men, nonagiata sex homines Christiani. (
Pius Pap. 1. epist.) and the like he writes of the house of Euprepia, where
he also lived, and said Mass, vbi nunc cum pauperibus commorantes, Miss is
agimus. And he was so zealous herein, and to have Mass said with all
attention, and devotion, that he decreed as these protestants testify, to
write in their own words: Sacerdotibus negligentius Missae sacra facientibus
paenas statuit. ( Robert. Barnes in vit. Pontific. Romans in Pio 1. Grimston in
Pius 1. Io. Func. commentar. in Chronolog. l. 5. in Pio 1. an. 145.) He
ordained punishments for priests that said Mass negligently. That if any by
imprudency should shedd any of the blood of Christ, upon the ground, he
should do penance forty days. If upon the altar, 3. days. That if upon
the linen cloth under the chalice 4. days. If upon the other linen cloathe 9.
days. That he should lick up the blood of Christ, that was shedd, or if that
could not be, either pare it, or wash it away, and so pared or washed, either
to be burnt, or kept reserved in the sacrarie. Vt si quis per imprudentiam de
sanguine Christi effunderet in terram, paenitentiam ageret dies 40. Si super
altar, dies 3. Si super linteum substratum calici, 4. dies. Si super aliud
linteum, dies 9. Sanguinem Christi effusum lambere, vel si id fieri non possit,
aut radere, aut eluere: and rasum aut lotum, vel comburi, vel in sacrarium
repositum seruari.

19. Therefore this Pope beeinge in all men's judgments, Catholics and
Protestants. ( Ioh. Bal. l. 1. act. Pontif. Romans in Pio 1.) an holy Saint, and
martyr, and to use a Protestant Bishops words, one that did many works of true
piety in the field of the Christian church, multa verae pietatis opera, in
agro Christianae Ecclesiae fecisse perhibetur, was so well acquainted with our
Christian Britans, and both claymed and exercised supreme spiritual
jurisdiction over all places, and parsons in matters of Religion by these
protestants. ( Robert. Barnes in vit. Pij 1.) Quae ad Religionem spectant, a
suae dioceseos synodis audtenda esse statuit: salua tamen Pontificia
authoritate, of all natious this our Britanie must needs then be an honorer of
sacrificinge priests, and holy Mass, in this time, and ever after, unto the
general conversion of it in the time of S. Eleutherius, between whom and
this Saint Pius there were but two Popes, S. Anicetus and S. Sother, both which
were not Popes many years by these protestants, not 18. years by any of their
accounts. Robert. Barn. in Pio 1. Anicet. and Sother. Io. Balaeus in act.
Pontif. in eisdem Edw. Grimst. in the same Popes. Fox Tom. 1.

20. And these Popes were so far from crossinge with this, and others their
predecessors in these points of supreamacy, sacrificinge priests, and sacrifice
of Mass, that by the confession of these protestants, they made decrees, which
confirmed them all, making laws bindinge all Archbishops, Primates, and
Metropolitans, and showing they were subject to the Pope of Rome, and
prescribed rules for all priests saying Mass, and shauing their crowns, as
they now use in the Roman church, at this day, Archiepiscopum a suo Episcopo,
aut coram primate, aut Romano Pontifice accusandum esse. Archiepiscopos non
Primates, sed Metropolitanos appellandos esse dixit, nisi ista praerogatiua a
Romano Pontifice concederetur. Capitis verticem spherulae instar radendum
Sacerdotibus, praecopit. Ne Sacerdos celebraret, nisi vt minimum duo adessent,
ordinauit, ne Monacha pallam contrectaret, neue thus in aceram poneret,
statuit. So we are sure, these two holy Popes, Saints and Martyrs, were also
sacrificinge Popes, and all priests at that time under them, whether in
Britanie or else where, beeinge subject and obedient unto them, were massinge
priests. And so we are now come with a continual deduction of these sacred
doctrines and practices, both in the church of this our Britanie, and others
until the time of Pope and Saint Eleutherius, when and by whose happy means
historians commonly tell us, this kingedome was generally converted to the
faith of Christ.

THE XVI. CHAPTER. Wherein is proved by testimonies of protestants, and others,
that this kingdom in the time of King Lucius, was converted by massing
Priests, and Bishops, and the holy sacrifice of Mass, and such massinge
priests and Bishops, continued here in honor, all this age.
IN this happy general conversion of this kingdom, no man of what Religion
soever, can without profane and irreligious boldness, and impudentnes affirm
in judgment, that so wise and virtuous a King, his Nobles, so many learned
Druides, and others, especially moved to Christian Religion by the pa^ence,
piety, and virtue of the glorious Martyrs, and Saints of those days by all
antiquities, Mass saying or Mass hearing Christians, would write such
suppliant letters, and send Ambassadors so long a journey, as from hence to
Rome, to be converted to any other Religion of Christ, but that sacrificinge
and massinge profession, by the miracles and sanctity of whose professors, they
were so moved and convinced in judgment, it was the only truth. Neither would
or could Pope Eleutherius an holy and learned Saint, and successor only to
sacrificinge massing Popes, and priests, recommend unto King Lucius, and this
kingdom, any other then massinge priests, and Religion, or the learned
messengers of King Lucius, as our protestants style them. ( Io. Bal. centur.
1. de scriptor. in Eluan. and Meduuin. Math. Parker. antiq. Brit. Godwin.
Conuers. of Britanie.) consent to any other, or so many renowned both priests
and Bishops, as were still remayninge in, or of this nation known massinge
priests, and bishops, join with the Legates of Pope Eleutherius, in teaching
and preachinge any other doctrine, or Religion.

2. Such were our renowned contrimen S. Mansuetus, yet living except the
Annals of Treuers, or the same name deceive us, consecrated priest by S. Peter,
and now removed from Toul to Treuers, for the ecclesiastical Annals of that
archiepiscopall sea tell us. ( Petr. Merssaeus Annal. Archiep. Treueren. 7.)
that S. Mansuetus (I read of no other of that name but our holy coutryman in
that time) was Archbishop of Treuers in the year of Christ 160. Mansuetus, qui
huic nomini and vocationi suae vita proba, anno Domini 160. optime respondit.
And S. Marcellus or Marcellinus our glorious contryman, who before his
departure out of Britanie had moved King Lucius to the faith of Christ, and
after of the Tungers, and Archbishop also of Treuers returninge hither with the
Popes Legates, was so renowned an instrument in the conversion of this kingdom,
that the Annals of the place where he was Archbishop say, that by the
preachinge of this Saint, the third Bishop of Tungers King Lucius was
baptized. (Annal-Treuer. in S. Marcello.) S. Marcellus, alijs Marcellinus fuit
Tungorum tertius Episcopus, and huius praedicatione Rex Angliae, id est Lucius,
baptizatus est. The catalogue of the Bishops of Tunger gives him greater
honor, tellinge us, that by his preaching he converted Lucius Prince of
Britanie with the whole nation to the faith of Christ. Lucium Britanniae
Principem cum tota gente, sua praedicatione ad Christum conuertit (Catalog.
Episcop. Tungrens. in S. Marcello.) And yet I have showed before, that these
were massinge priests and Bishops, as their predecessors in those places, S
Valerius, Eucharius, Maternus and others were.

3. The same I say of S. Tymotheus, our holy contryman, by his Mother S.
Claudia beeinge a known massinge priest, and one of the owners of that his,
and his brother Nouatus and Sisters house in Rome, so notoriously dedicated to
be the first public massinge church there: for this holy massinge priest came
hither in this time, and was so great a worker in the conversion of this his
contrie, that the histories of Treuers themselves, which give such honor as
before to their Archbishop S. Marcellus in this business, yet freely also
acknowledge that King Lucius, was brought to the Religion of Christ by S.
Timothy, whom they call S. Paul's disciple, perhaps because S. Paul makes so
honorable a memory of his parents, S. Pudens, and Claudia (2. Timoth. 4.) and
likely did baptize this S. Timothy, and thereby called his disciple though a
very child, when S^ Paul was martyred. ( Martyrolog. Romans die 20. Iunij Baron.
annot. ib. Sur. Tom. 3. die 12. Iunij.) and the other S. Timothy his scholar
dead long before. S. Lucius Britanniae Rex S. Timothei Apostoli Pauli
discipuli cruditione ad Religionem Christi inductus est. (Petr. Merssaeus and
Annal. Archiep. and eccl. Treuer. in S. Marcello.) If we reflect upon the
Saints that were sent chief Legates hither, from Rome, S. Fugatius, and
Damianus, the principal of them in all antiquities, as we must needs to give
them their due, that be chosen and selected me^, they must needs be learned
virtuous, and of mature age, and judgment to be employed in so weighty a
business, and as all histories testify they were, and so must needs be
consecrated massinge priests, being sacred by those remembered sacrificinge
Popes, which neither did, nor could consecrate any other, nor they bring any
other doctrine in this or any other points of Religion, but what they had
received from those holy Popes.

4. And to this, besides so many general Arguments, S. Gildas the most
ancient and renowned British Author is a particular witness, if it could
please our protestants to publish it to the world, except that renowned Abbot
Doctor Fecknham did abuse his auditory in the first parliament of Queen
Elizabeth in his public oration, which no indifferent man will think, he
did or durst to do, for fear of open shame and confusion, if he should have
aduouched an untruth in that assembly. And yet speaking principally of the
sacrifice of Mass, then to be condemned by that parliament, cites Gildas in
the proeme of his history, testifyinge that the same Religion, and church
service, the sacrifice of Mass which was then to be abrogated was brought
hither, and settled here in the Latin tongue by the Legates of Pope Eleutherius.
(Abbot Fecknham orat. in parlam. 2. of Queen Elizabeth.) and all our chief
protestant antiquaries and historians of England, as their Bishops, Parker,
Bale, Godwine, with others Gosteline, Powell, Fox, Fulke, Middleton, Stowe,
Holinshed and others confidently affirming, that the Christian Brittans never
changed in any material thing, that holy Religion which they received in the
time of the Apostles, but constantly continued in the same, until the cominge
of S. Augustine hither, from S. Gregory the great Pope of Rome, and after.
Parker antiquitat. Britan. page 6.45.46. Balaeus l. 2. de act. Pontif. Romans in
Gregor. 1. l. de scriptor. cent. 1. in August. Dronotho. Godwin. conuers. of
Brit. Powel. annot. in l. 2. Giraldi Camb. de Itiner. Cambr. cap. 1. Fox act.
page 463. edit. an. 1576. Fulke answ. to a count Cath. page 40. Middelt.
papistom. page 202 Stow histor. in S. Augustine and King Ethelbert. Holinsh.
histor. of Engl. cap. 21. page 102.

5. But as I have proved before by these protestants and otherwise, the Britans
by that Apostolic man received the doctrine, profession, and practice of
sacrificinge preisthood, priests, and sacrifice of Mass, and continued them
unto this time; so I will demonstrate by them and all antiquities hereafter,
in every age, that they kept and observed the same inuiolablie to those days,
and after without interruption. And yet this is but a needles probation; for
being so inuincibly proved before, that they received these holy doctrines and
professions from the Apostles, and from them to these days, if they had
departed from them now, or after, they should be apparently guilty of error
in departinge from those truths, which the Apostles, and all from them to
these days continued. And if we look into the catalogues of holy writers, in
this time, whose works be preserved to posterity, we shall see, that the
holy sacrifice of Mass, and massinge priests, were generally in all places in
as great use and honor as at this day. The most renowned writers of this time
whose books be extant now, were S. Iustine, S. Irenaeus, and Tertullian, all
they do plainly testify, that the sacrifice of Mass, offeringe up the
sacred body, and blood of Christ, was the generally used, and known sacrifice
of the Christians in this time, in omni loco, in every place, says S.
Iustine. ( Justin. Dialog. cum Tryhone.) Ecclesia in vniuerso mundo offert Deo.
The church does offer it in all the world, says S. Irenaeus. ( Irenaeus
aduers. Haeres. lib. 4. cap. 32.) therefore the church of Britanie must needs
offer it; and I have proved by our British antiquities before, that Rome,
France, and Britanie in these days of Eleutherius, and Irenaeus which went to
Rome in the papacy of S. Eleutherius, used one and the same order of Mass. And
Tertullian that notorious massing Author, declaring how Christian Religion was
then dilated in the world, and the sacrifice of Mass was the common sacrifice
thereof, expressly names this our Britanie to have received the Christian
faith, and to agree with other Christian nations therein. ( Tertullian. de cultu
Faeminar. cap. 11. l. ad Scapul. cap. 2. l. de orat. cap 14. l. de vel. Virg.
cap. 9. l. contra Iudaeos.) and S. John Chrysostom speaking of this conversion
of our Britans, witnesses manifestly, and our protestants acknowledge it for
truth, that the British churches then founded, which were many had altars, for
their priests, erected in them. ( Chrisostom. serm^ de Pentecost. protest.
Theater of great Britanie l. 6.. 12.) which as is confessed before by these
protestants, neither were, nor could in Christian Religion be ordained but for
massinge priests, and the sacrifice of Mass, as we find in the most
ancient churches of this nation; as S. Joseph's dedicated to our Lady at
Glaste^burie. ( Antiquit Glaston. Capgrau. in S. Patricio M. S. antiq. in
Lucio.) S. Martins at Canterbury, and the old church at Winchester, where as
we read there were Christian altares, so also that the sacrifice of Mass was
from their first foundation offered on them. ( Bed. hist. l. 1. cap. 27. Galfr.
Monum. l. 11. histor. cap. 4. Stowe histor. in Constantine son of Cador.
etc.) so of S. Peter's church in Cornhill in London and others. And S. Damianus
and Phaganus the chief Legates of S. Eleutherius, bearing so great devotion to
the massing church builded by S. Joseph at Glastenbury, that they themselves
continued, and dwelled there some time, and settled twelve of their company to
continue there duringe their lives, must needs be massinge priests, as all had
here ever been from the Apostles time: in which faith and Religion this holy
Pope, as our protestants with all antiquities assure us, confirmed the kingdom
of Britanie: Eleutherius vt bonus paterfamilias effecit, vt confirmatis and
consolidatis Britannis in suscepta prius ab Apostolis doctrina, totum illud
regnum, in eius fidei verba iuraret. Ioh. Bal. l. 1. de act. Pontif. Romans in
Eleutherio.

6. So that by this Protestant Bishop, and his and other authorities, those
doctrines of sacrificinge priests and Mass which from the Apostles days, as I
have abundantly proved, had without discontinuance ever continued here in
diverse particular places and parsons, were now generally by this holy Pope, and
his massinge Legates, established and confirmed in this kingedome: confirmatis,
and consolidatis, and this Pope highly commended for that his general
confirmation, vt bonus paterfamilias. And by their first Archbishop with others
before, and as I have proved by continual deduction, the order and form of
Mass which S. Peter delivered to the church, was still continued after this
time, without any material change, alteration, addition, or diminution.
Neither does any Protestant Author challenge S. Eleutherius, of any innovation
in Religion, but the contrary: how he condemned all innouators therein as
Tatianus and the Seuerians, making a decree against them, and the known
Religion of Christ, his sacrificinge Religion, as before is proved was much
increased by him. Sub hoc Pontifice caepit Ecclesia esse securior, ob id
Christianorum Religio plurimum aucta est. And yet no change at all therein. (
Bal. and Robert. Barnes in vita Eleutherij. Eleutherius epist. decretal. ad
prouincias Gall. To. 1. conc. Io. Bal. act. Pont. Romans l. 1. in Eleutherio.
Rob. Barn in vit. Pontif. Romans in eodem.) therefore all those Bishops, and
priests which by all writers he consecrated, must needs be massinge Bishops,
and priests, as all those three Archbishops, and 28. Bishops, which he
consecrated, or confirmed for this kingdom renowned in histories, and all the
priests of this our Britanie under them, must needs be massing Archbishops,
Bishops, and priests. Whose succession here continued unto the conversion of
the Saxons, and after by all histories, and until both those peoples united
themselves, as well in this massinge and sacrificinge doctrine, which both the
Britans, and Saxons had ever observed from their first conuersions, as in all
other points of Christian Religion. The names of many of them I have remembered
in other places.

7. And concerning the supreme spiritual power, which this holy Pope both
claimed, and exercised, both in this kingedome, to settle these sacred points
of Religion here, and in other nations, these protestants assure us, it was as
great and ample, as ever any his successors did, or now do challenge in such
affairs. These men tell us. ( Rob^ Barnes in vit. Eleutherij. protest. annot.
Mag. in Matthew. Westminster. an. 188.) he condemned heretics, and made decrees
against them; he made laws binding all clergy men, and in the cases of
Bishops, reserved judgment to the sea of Rome, vt nihil nisi apud Pontificem
definiretur. In his epistle to King Lucius, so recommended by our protestants,
he prescribes what laws he was to use. He appoints the limits and bounds
of Britanie, as these men witness in the laws of King Edward the Confessor.
His Legates disposed of all spiritual things here, in that time, and he by his
papal authority confirmed them. And so they continued until heresy and
infidelity in the Pagan Saxons time did overthrow them, as all histories and
antiquities, British, or Saxon, Catholics or protestants, as their Bishops,
Parker, Bale and Godwine, with Cambden, Powell, Holinshed, Stowe, and others
cited in other places are witnesses. Therefore it will be but a superogated
work, to proceed further to followinge ages, yet for a general and complete
content to all, I will though with more brevity, speak also of them, and here
end this second age, or hundred of years, Pope Eleutherius dyinge in the later
end thereof, and King Lucius not long after in the beginning of the next
age, and Pope and S. Victor, the immediate successor of S. Eleutherius both
endinge this, and giving entrance to the next ensuinge age, and centenary of
the years of Christ by his papal regiment.

THE THIRD AGE, OR HUNDRED YEARS OF CHRIST.
THE XVII. CHAPTER. How notwithstanding the manifold tumults, and persecution
of Christian Religion, in this kingdom of Britanie, in this third hundred
years, yet the holy sacrifice of Mass, sacrificinge and massinge priests, and
Bishops still here continued, without any total discontinuance.
King Lucius dyinge, as Matthew of Westminister with others writes, in the
year of Christ 201. the first of this third hundred year, without heir; This
our kingdom by that means in the beginning of this age was pitifully vexed
with wars, and tumults; and toward the later end thereof lamentably tormented,
and afflicted (as the whole Christian world almost then was) with the most
cruel and barbarous persecution of Diocletian, in which among other miseries,
all monuments of Christian Religion, so near as he could, were ruined and
destroyed; whereby it came to pass, that little memory of ecclesiastical
things then, in this nation is left to posterity, yet sufficient is to be
found, that together with the Popes supreamacy in such affairs, the holy
sacrificinge preisthood, the sacrifice of Mass, and diverse renowned
sacrificinge Bishops and priests, here still continued without discontinuance,
in all this age, notwithstanding so huge an army of most savage, and cruel
enemies still fightinge against them. Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 201. Bed. l. 1.
histor. c. 4.6. Parker. antiquit. Britan. Godwin. conuers. of Britanie. Stowe
histor. in K. Lucius. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. Fox Tom. 1. Holinsh.
histor. of Engl. Galfr. Monum. hist. Britan. l. 5. cap. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7. Ponticus
Viran. Brit. histor. l. 5. Gildas l. de excid. and conquest. Britan. cap. 7.8.

2. For First our chief protestants have told us before, that S. Peter's Maste
continued in use in the church without any change, unto the time of Pope and
S. Zepherine, which was next successor to S. Victor, therefore by their
allowance, we have the sacrifice of Mass, a massinge preisthood, and priests
to offer that holy sacrifice all his time. Therefore when we find by many
antiquities and historians, as well Catholics as Protestants, that he sent
many learned priests and preachers into this kingedome, especially the more
northren parts thereof, which we now call Scotland, we must needs if we had
noe other argument, conclude, that they were sacrificinge, and massinge
priests, because they received both their consecration, and jurisdiction from
so known a massinge priest, and Pope his authority. Yet to make this matter
more evident, and show the supreme spiritual power which he used even in
this, besides that which he both claimed and exercised in excommunicatinge the
church of Asia for their not due observation of Easter, he confirmed the order
and institution of his predecessor S. Eleutherius, in subiectinge all the
churches, and Christians of that part of Britany now termed Scotland, to the
Archbishop of York, a massing priest and Prelate, as I have showed before,
these parts and countries then being temporally ruled by diverse temporal
Kings, or Princes, and at difference or enmity at that time one with an other.
And to make this Religion more permanent with that rude nation, the Scots
themselves then began to study divinity. (Hector Boeth. Scot. histor. l. 6.
fol. 89. page 2.) being therein instructed by those priests which Pope Victor
sent thither even to the uttermost part thereof to propagate Christian Religion.
Incepere and nostri tum primum, sacras colere literas, Sacerdotibus
praeceptoribus, quos Victor Pontifex Maximus, ad Christi dogma propalandum in
extremam miserat Albionem. Which was in the year of Christ 203. Humanae
salutis tertius supra ducentessimum. And ever continued in the same as their
historians contend, unto these days of heresy, nostri qua fide and pietate
instituti semel fuerunt hactenus erroribus aspernatis, perseuerant. Which was
written in the year of Christ 1526. Anno salutis Christianae sexto and
vigesimo supra, millesimum quingentesimum.

3. So long and longer these massinge priests and sacrifice of Mass continued
there with honor, by their writers, and our English Protestants affirm as much
in these terms. ( Edw. Grimston. in the est. of the K. of great Britanie page
20. cap. 17.) Scotland received the Christian faith in the time of Pope Victor
the first, in the year 203. and idolatry did quite cease, under King
Craknite, who died in the year 313. Celestine the first sent Palladius thither
to root out the Pelagian heresy, which began to increase there under Eugenius
the second, who died in the year 460. since this time the realm continued
long in the profession of the Romish church, until these later days, the
days of King James, our present sovereign, as he there expresses.
Therefore seeing the profession of the Roman church, which from the beginning
by these authorities, and testimonies, both Catholic and Protestant ever
continued there, was the profession of the sacrifice of Mass, and massinge
priests, such was the profession ever until now in those parts. Again this
part of this Island was subjected both by Pope Eleutherius, and Victor, to the
Archbishop of York a massing Prelate, either S. Theodosius or S. Sampson,
therefore the preistes subject to that see, must needs be massinge priests. (
Harrison description of Britanie in K. Lucius. Godwin Catalog. in York page
555. edit. an. 1515.) and both S. Gildas, S. Bid and all antiquities assure
us, that this Religion was preserved in peace, and quiet here, unto the
persecution of Diocletian. Gild. l. de excid. Britan. cap. 7. Bed. histor.
eccl. l. 1. cap. 4. antiq. Winton. apud Godw. Catal. in Winchester. 1.) and the
Annals of Scotland tell us expresselie, of the altars chalices, patens, and all
vessels, instruments, and ornaments used in the holy sacrifice of Mass, to
have been in honorable, and public use in this time in that contry. ( Hector
Boeth. Scot. histor. l. 6. fol. 102.

4. And if we leave Britanie and return again to Rome, and the Pope there, S.
Zepherine, these protestants assure us, he was, rei diuinae magis quam humanae
inte^tus, a man more given to divine then human affairs, a Protestant
Bishops words: and yet they absolutely teach, he claimed and exercised
supreme spiritual jurisdiction, and made decrees, concerning the holy
sacrifice of Mass, of what matter, the chalice and paten, in, and on which the
body and blood of Christ should be consecrated, in that sacrifice, were to be
made, and how priests ought to be present when the Bishop celebrated the
sacrifice of Mass, cum Episcopus celebraret Missae sacra iussit omnes
presbyteros adesse. (Bal. in act. Pontif. Romans l. 1. in Zepherino. Edw.
Grimston page 436. in Zepherin. Rob. Barnes in vit. Pontif. Romans in Zepherin.
alij. Sacer) and by the sentence of their first Protestant Archbishop, he was
so far from doing any dishonor to this holy sacrifice of Mass, that, ad
pulchriorem materiam formamque mutare voluit. The change he made, was for the
more honor thereof. Math. Parker antiquitat. Britan. page 47. Magdeb. cent. 1.
cap. 5 col. 146.) being nothing but that I cited before of causing the
sacrificing instruments to be made of a better matter, making no other change
at al therein. And within few years after, the next Pope but one, Vrbanus the
first, as these protestants assure us made a law, that eue^ in the poorer
churches the sacrificinge vessels should either be of gold, silver, or tin.
Ne vasa sacra vitrea, sed aut aurea, aut argen^ea, aut stannea in inopioribus
Ecclesijs essent, legem tulit. (Rob. Barnes in Urban. 1. Edw. Grimston. estate
of the church of Rome in Urban. 1. page 436. Magdeb. cent. 1. cap. 6. col.
146.) and that Pope Fabian an holy Saint, and miraculously chosen to the papal
dignity, made a decree about the sacrifice of Mass, what priests were to be
allowed to say Mass. And they put it out of all question, that the most
renowned other Fathers of this age, as Tertullian S. Ciprian, with others
taught and maintained this doctrine of the sacrifice of Mass. Magdeburg. cent.
1. cap. 4. col. 83. titul. de Eucharist. and sacrificio. so they write of Pope
Stephen, Faelix and Sixtus in this age, whom they acknowledge for holy Saints,
and open maintayners and practisers of this blessed sacrifice, shewinge how in
their time, the whole canon was secretly read, as is now observed. Sixtus, dum
Sacerdos canonem ante celebrationem sub silentio legeret, vt in populo Sanctus
triplicatum caneretur, instituit. And neither bring any Pope, or Father to the
contrary, or any Pope altered any thing in this holy sacrifice, which they do
or can dislike.

5. And concerning communion it self in one only kind, by the laity, and
such as said not Mass, now used in the Latin church, with much dislike of
many protestants, these protestants themselves confess unto us. ( Magdeburgen^
cent. 3. cap. 6. de ritib. circa caenam col. 149) that it was the custom of
the church of Rome, of Italy, and with other Bishops for the communicants, to
receive only under the form of bread. And some of our English Protestants as
Master Parkins. ( Parkinsus l. demonstr. problem. page 155.) gives many
instances and examples of such communicating. And among others brings S.
Ciprian to be a witness hereof, writing in this time, as also the Protestants
of Germany do, teachinge this custom in those churches of Rome, Italy, and
others to have been more ancient then this time: and most certain it is,
that both S. Ciprian, and Tertullian before him, testify it was also so used
in Afrike to communicate only under the form of blood. ( Ciprian. l. de laps.
and l. de spectacul. Tertullia. l. 2. ad Vxorem. cap. 5.) S. Irenaeus proves
the same of the age before; and both S. Chrysostom, or whosoever author of the
opus imperfectu^ super Matthaeum, S. Augustine, Isichius, S. Bid, Theophilact,
and others do so expound, that act and example of Christ at Emaus, in S. Lukes
Gospel, after his resurrection, thus by our protestants translation: he
took bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them. (Homil. 16. operis
imperfect. supr. Matthew. August. consens. Euang. l. 3. c. 25. Isych. l. 2. in
Leuit. c. 9. Bed. and Theop. in c. 24. Luc. cap. 24. v. 30.) the same
exposition is made of breakinge of bread, in the 2. and 20. chapter of the
acts of the Apostles, by the ancient author, of that imperfect work, and our
learned coutrimen, Jonas Aurelianensis, and S. Bid, and the Syriake text
reads, in fractione Eucharistiae, in breakinge the Eucharist. And John
Calvin himself does so plainly expound the later place of the 20. chapter.
Actor. cap. 2. v. 42. cap. 20. v. 7. Homil. 17. operis imperfecti. Beda ad cap.
20. act. Jonas Aurelianen. l. 3. de Imaginib. text. Syriac^ Calvin. in act. 20.

6. And to make all sure, the parliament statute of three Protestant Princes,
King Edward 6. Queen Elizabeth, and King James. ( Statut. parlam^ an. 1.
Edw. 6. an. 1. Elizab, and an. 1. Iacobi Abridg. of stat. titul. service and
Sacram.) does warrant us, that in the primative church, communion was often
used in one only kind. And the three first Evangelists S. Matthew, Mark and
Luke ar ample witnesses, that the words of Christ, drink you all of this (the
ground of protestants in this contention) were only present with him, and by
him at that time made priests by all antiquities. ( Matthew. cap. 26. v. 20.
Marc. cap. 14. ver. 17.18. Luc. c. 22. v. 14.) and so the words and
commandment could not possibly be general, for that cause, and if they had
been general, all the whole Christian world, in all ages Catholics from the
beginning, and protestants since their new cominge, had been, and ar guilty
of transgressinge that institution and commandment. Therefore seeing we
cannot find any innovation in these mysteries, in this time, let us seek out
some more massing priests of this nation, in this tempestuous season. For such
we find particularly at Rome S. Mellanius as the Roman Martyrologe with
others names him, but by the ancient Manuscript history of his life and
Capgraue, S. Mellon. He being a noble Britane, and going hence to Rome to pay
the tribute of his contry and serve the Emperor, was converted to the faith of
Christ, by the massing Pope S. Stephen, and by him taking first all inferior
orders, was made a massinge priest. Quem praefatus Papa sibi adhaerentem per
omnes Ecclesiae gradus vsque ad Sacerdotium promouit. (Martyrolog. Romans die 22.
October. Baron. ib. Vincent. l. 11. c. 74. Petr. de natal. l. 9. c. 93. Demochar.
contr. Calvin. M. S. antiq. de vita S. Mellonis. Ioh. Capgrau. in catal. in S.
Mellone Episcopo.) and was so devout a sayer of Mass, that among other times,
as he was saying Mass, an Angel openly appeared both to the holy Pope, and
him, at the right hand of the altar, and Mass being ended designed him to
go to Rouen in Normandy, where he was the second Bishop, next to S. Nicasius,
as the Annals of that church are witness, and continued there a massinge
priest, and Bishop sent from that massinge Pope, until about the year of
Christ 280. which being before the beginning of the persecution of Diocletian,
we had then here in Britanie great numbers of massinge priests, and Bishops,
as I have proved before by our best antiquities.

7. And though for that time we are in a great defect and want of monuments,
yet we have warrant enough, that both in, and after that persecution, we had
both massinge priests and Bishops to continue our hierarchicall succession for
the present time of the persecution in this part of Britanie, where the Romans
ruled, and the persecution by that opportunity and power raged, we must not
look into our churches and altars destroyed for public use of these holy
points of Religion; for as our best and most ancient author, S. Gildas
writes, the Christians that remained, did hide themselves, in woods, and
deserts and hidden caves. Qui superfuerant siluis ac desertis abditisque
speluncis se occultauere. (Gildas l. de excid. and conq. Biitan. cap, 8.) S.
Bid and others after both Catholics and protestants have the like. ( Bed.
histor. Eccl. Angl. l. 1. cap. 8. Matthew. Westminster. in Dioclet. Theater of Brit.
16. Stowe Holinsh. histor. of Eng.) but if we go into the Northern parts,
beyond the Romans walland bounds, where the Christian Britans and Scots under
King Crathlint that renowned glory of that nation then reigned, we shall find
both Mass, and massinge priests of this our part of Britanie flying thither in
honor, and offeringe publicly the most holy sacrifice of Mass, with great
reverence and solemnity: such were the holy massinge priest and Bishop S.
Amphibalus, Modocus, Priscus, Calanus, Ferranus, Ambianus, and very many
others, alijque permulti, preachinge the doctrine of Christ in all the Scottish
contries, Christi seruatoris doctrinam omnes per Scotorum regiones concionando
multis pijsque sudoribus seminantes. Hector. Boeth. Scot. histor. l. 6. fol.
102. Veremund. apud eund. ib. Holinsh. histor. of Scotland in K. Crathlint.

8. And among these holy doctrines, that of holy Mass, sacrificing priests,
and preisthood were so honorable, and renowned, that this religious King
Crathlint did build a cathedral church, for that our persecuted massinge
Bishop, and priests, endowinge it with great gifts, and al things necessary
for the honorable and reverent saying of Mass, as chalices, patens,
Candlesticks, and other such things, requisite for the use of sacrifice, made
of silver and gold, and an altar enclosed with copper and brass. Sed and
Crathlintus Rex, sacra Antistitis aedem muneribus ornauit amplissimis,
calicibus, patenis, candelabris, alijsque similibus, ad sacrorum vsum commodis,
ex argento auroque fabrefactis, altarique cupro, and aere clauso. And that
these and many others flyinge thither, in this time were of this part of
Britanie, where the English inhabit, it is plain by these histories: so that
it is most manifest, that all this third age or hundred years of Christ, the
holy sacrifice of Mass, massing priests, and preisthood, still continued in all
this kingdom of great Britanie, although not in such splendour, and glory, by
reason of the great afflictions, and miseries of those days: as in better
times, I will make mention of diverse our massinge priests, and Bishops, that
escaped death, and suruiued after this persecution, in the next age, and so end
with this.

THE FOVRTH AGE, OR HUNDRED YEARS OF CHRIST.
THE XVIII. CHAPTER. How the holy sacrifice of Mass, sacrificing and massinge
preisthood, priests and Bishops continued in this kingdom of great Britanie in all this age, without any interruption or discontinuance.
IN the beginning of this age, and fourth hundred year, the state of the
church of Christ was little different, either in Britanie, or any other nation,
from that wherein it was in the later end of the former, for as our histories
tell us, the persecution begun by Diocletian did not cease, although not in
such extremity of rigor, until Constantine the great our contriman had been
Emperor some years, in the seventh year of his Empire by Matthew of
Westminster, Florentius Wigorniensis, and others: caepta semel persecutio,
vsque ad septimu^ annum Constantini feruere non cessauit. (Matthew. Westminster. an.
gratiae 304. Florent. Wigorn. an. 299. al. 321.) neither do our Scottish
writers, Veremundus, Hector Boethius, and others differ herein, for they are
witnesses, that many holy Christians of this southern part of Britanie, in the
time of Constantius, fledd to the Picts, and Scots, for succor, and were there
religiously entertained by King Crathlint. ( Veremund. apud Hect. Boeth. l. 6.
Scotor. histor. fol. 102. page 1.) Constantius Diocletiani more in Britannia
Christianae Religioni fuerit insidiatus. Vnde magnus piorum numerus
perseque^tium saeuitiam declinare cupiens, ad Scotos and Pictos co^cessit. Hos
Crathlintos Rex, ad se confugientes beneuolo affectu suscepit. And the Roman
histories agree with this, teachinge, that in the beginning of the Empire of
Constantine, and until he had the vision of the Cross, and was admonished to
seek and send for S. Siluester, then Pope, to baptize him, the persecution
still continued, and S. Siluester hid himself in the mountain Soracte, which
an English Protestant Bishop with the Italian writers thus relates. ( Io. Bal.
l. 1. de act. Romans Pont. in Siluestro.) At postquam soboles Helenae
sanctissima, Caesar Constantinus, apud diuos hominesque fauorem nactus, in
excelso vidit crucis aere formam. Tunc redijt tandem Romam, Soracte relicto,
atque sub Augusto magnos sortitus honores.

2. Yet notwithstanding this secret profession and practice of Christian
Religion, in this time we have certain testimonies of the continuance of
these holy doctrines of the sacrifice of Mass, sacrificing priests, and
preisthood, in this our Britanie in those days. For our Scottish historians
before alleged, give evidence, that those massinge priests which I have named
before, did I live a while after this time, and that in the isle Mona, there
was a sacrificinge Bishop, and priests that said Mass, with such ritche
ornaments and instruments for that time as I have described, and that this
massinge Bishops name was Amphibalus Bishop of Soder, being a Britane, lived,
and died there an old man, long after the death of S. Amphibalus our martyr.
Amphibalus Brito vir insigni pietate, primus Antistes ibi creatus, Christi
dogma per Scotorum Pictorumque Regiones propalando, multa contra Gentilium
Religionem dicendo, scribendoque gloriosum and Christiano viro plane dignum,
multa senectute viuendo fessus, faelicemque sortitus est finem. (Boeth. and
Veremund. sup. l. 6. histor. Scot.) where besides the time not agreeing, and
the old age wherein this S. Amphibalus lived and died a glorious confessor, but
no Martyr, the contry whence he was a Britan, Amphibalus Brito, prove it was
an other different Saint, from the Martyr Amphibalus, of whom we do not read
that he was a Bishop, nor a Britan, but coming hither from other places of
persecution, as the writers of his life are witnesses. Vir quidam meritis and
doctrina clarus nomine Amphibalus, transiens in Britanniam verolamina Domino
ducente perue^it. (M. S. antiq and Author vitae S. Albani antiquus in vit. S.
Albani Ioh. Capgrauius and alij in vit S. Albani.) which he also himself does
witness in this words to S. Alban My Lord Jesus Christ the son of the living
God, has preserved me from dangers, and for the salvation of many, sent me
into this nation. Dominus meus Jesus Christus filius Dei viui securum inter
discrimina me custodiuit: and pro multorum salute ad istam me misit prouinciam.

3. And we had at this time here in Britanie, living after the persecution of
Diocletian, many others both Bishops, and priests, that exercised and offered
the sacrifice of Mass, among which S. Taurinus was Archbishop of York, ex^
(...) protestant antiquaries, and others ar deceived: not that Taurinus which
was in, or before the days of King Lucius, but another more late, and living
in this time, placed Archbishop there in the time of Constantius Chlorus, who
came hither as Matthew of Westminster writes, in the year of Christ 302. (
Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 302.) and by the consent of the same Constantius, or
more, as a Protestant Bishop and antiquary from antiquities thus delivers. (
Godwin. Catal. of Bishops in York 1. page 555.) it is reported that
Constantius Chlorus appointed Taurinus Bishop of Eureux to be Archbishop
there, at York. Which is almost or fully 200. years after the other Taurinus
was sent into France by S. Clement, both by Catholics and Protestants. And by
all writers S. Restitutus was at this time or soon after Archbishop of London:
for in the year of Christ 326. he was of such renown and honor, that he was
chosen the only Bishop of this Britanie, to be present at the great council
of Bishops, at Arles in France, to which he thus subscribed for this our
Britanie: Ex Prouincia Britanniae ciuitate Londinensi Restitus Episcopus.
Martyrol. Romans die 11. Augusti Vsuard. eod. die. Vincent. in spec. l. 11. c. 78
79. Petr. in catal. l. 4. cap. 50. Matthew. Westminster. an. 94. protest. annot. marg.
in eund. Tom. 1. council. in Arelat. conc. Io. Bal. l. de scrip. cent. 1. in
Restit. Godwin Catal. in London in Restitutus Matthew. Parker antiq. Brit.

4. And a frivolous exception it is, for Stowe with all others so to confess,
and after to add: He writes not himself Archbishop, and therefore makes
that matter of Archbishops doubtful, or rather overthrows that opinion. (
Stowe histor. in King Lucius.) For it is evident by the subscriptions of that
council, that many of the greatest Archbishops in this part of the world were
present, and subscribed there: yet not any one of the^ subscribed by the name
of Archbishop, so it was in other councels. And as a Protestant Bishop and
antiquary assures us, in these words. ( Godwin supr.) he subscribed to the
decrees of the same counsel, which he brought over with him. In which it is
decreed, that none but sacrificinge consecrated preistes, might offer the
sacrifice of Mass. ( Council. Arelat. can. 15.) And among so many Bishops, and
priests, as were present there, Claudianus and Auitus the Legates of that
renowned massinge priest and Pope S. Siluester by protestants confession, were
present and subscribed to this council. Therefore this our Archbishop, then
the primate of all Britanie, must needs be a massinge priest, as also all
priests and Bishops under him. Of our third Archiepiscopall see at Caerlegion I
do not find the name of any Archbishop, before Tremounus vrbis legionum
Archiepiscopus, Archbishop there in the time of Aurelius Ambrosius. ( Galfrid.
Monum. histor. l. 8. cap. 10.) though we know, that many were there before
this time. And yet the memories of all our Bishops that escaped alive from this
persecution, are not perished. For besides those I have recompted, we are
assured both by Catholic and Protestant antiquaries, that the Bishop of
Winchester called Constance, was now living, and dedicated there a church
newly reedified to the honor of S. Amphibalus the Martyr, in the year of
Christ 310. within 21. years after it was destroyed in the persecution.
Because it is a memorable history, and not only warranted by an old
Manuscript, but published and approved by a new Protestant Bishop, I will
relate it in these his own words. Manuscript. antiq. Godwin. Catal. of Bish.
in Winch. page 207.

This church as the same Author, old Manuscript, says, was hallowed and
dedicated unto the honor of our Savior, October 29.189. by Faganus and
Damianus Bishops, about the space of 100. year the church of Christ had then
peace in this land, viz. until the reign of Dioclesian, who endeauouringe to
root out Christian Religion, not only killed the professors of the same, but
pulled down all churches and Temples, any where consecrated unto the exercise
thereof. Amongst the rest this of Winchester at that time went to wrack, the
buildings thereof beeinge ruinated, and made even with the ground, and the
Monks and all the officers belonginge unto it, either slain or enforced to
fly for the present time, and yet afterward to deny Christ. This happened
anno 289. not long after the death of this cruel Tyrant, to wit, the year
309. The church aforesaid was again reedified, and that with such wonderful
forwardnes, and zeal, as within one year and thirty days, both it and all
the edifices belonginge unto it, as chambers and other buildings for the
Monks, were quite finished in very seemly and convenient manner. The 15. day
of March following, it was again hallowed and dedicated unto the honor, and
memory of Amphibalus, that had suffered death for Christ, in the late
persecution, by Constance Bishop, as my author says, of Winchester, at the
request of Deodatus, Abbot of this new erected monastery. The like or greater
expedition was used in buildinge, and dedicatinge a church to S. Alban of great
cost and sumptuousnes, where he suffered Martyrdom, and yet as Matthew of
Westminster writes, it was finished or builded within ten years of his death
and martyrdom. Fabricata december scilicet annis post passionem eius elapsis. S.
Bid says as soon as the persecution ceased, a church of wonderful work was
builded there unto his honor. Vbi postea redeu^te temporum Christianorum
serenitate Ecclesia est miri operis, atque eius Martyrio condigna extructa. So
our histories testify of S. Julius and Aaron in particular. Bed. histor. Eccl.
l. 1. cap. 7. Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 313. Io. Capgrau. in S. Albano.

6. And to make it manifest unto us, that there were many Bishops left here
after this persecution, to consecrate and dedicate so many new builded, founded
and consecrated churches, as were presently (after the persecution ended)
erected in this kingedome, and to execute other episcopal functions, the best
and most ancient histories we have, as S. Gildas, S. Bid with others
testify, that, bilustro necdum ad integrum expleto, before ten years of
persecution were ended (S. G^ldas words) the Christians eueryvvhere renew
their churches pulled down to the ground, found, build and finish churches of
their holy Martyrs, and celebrate their festiuities. Bilustro supradicti
turbinis necdum ad integrum expleto, emercescentibusque nece suorum Authorum
nefarijs decretis, laetis luminibus omnes Christi Tyrones renouant Ecclesias,
ad solum vsque destructas, basilicas Sanctorum Martyrum fundant, construunt,
perficiunt, ac velut victricia signa passim propalant, dies festos celebrant.
And that we may be assured, that among these holy Christian exercises, the
holy sacrifice of Mass was offered, by their sacrificinge and massinge
priests, it immediately follows in these renowned antiquities: sacra mundo
cord oreque confi^iunt. They celebrate their sacrifice with a pure heart and
mouth. And our antiquaries both Catholics and Protestants assure us, there
were altars for sacrifice in these churches. S. Gildas calls the altars,
altaria sacrosancta, sacred altars, whereon the heavenly sacrifice is offered
and laid. Sacrifieij caelestis sedem. And that all the preistes, of these
British churches, were sacrificing or massing preistes at the altars:
Sacerdotes sacrificantes inter altaria stantes. Gild. l. de excid. Stow
histor. in Constantine 2. Galf. Mon. histor. Brit. l. 11. cap. 4. Matthew. Westminster.
an. gratiae 543.

7. And if we will appeal to other churches and judges in this time, whether to
our King and Emperor now a Christian, or to the Popes of Rome, yet Saints and
holy men by the license of our protestants, or to general councels the first
being celebrated in this time, or to the renowned Fathers that lived and wrote
in this age, we shall find these holy doctrines and exercises of the
sacrifice of Mass, sacrificinge, and massinge priests, and preistho^^ (...)
have been in greatest honor, as well in all other Christian nations, as in
this kingdom. For Constantine our King, Emperor, and contryman, we cannot
better learn what mind, and Religion he was of, in these matters, then from
S. Siluester then Pope, and his Master and Father in Christian Religion, who
instructed him therein: and from the first general council of Nice, wherein,
and whereto he was present and consented. And to make all sure, and walk with
the pass of protestants in this travail, we are told by these men, that this
massinge Pope, declared and decreed, in what sacred attire, both the priests
which offered, and the deacons which served, and ministered in the sacrifice of
Mass, should be invested. ( Rob. Barnes l. de vit. Pontif. Roman. in
Siluestro.) and to speak in a protestant Bishops words: Huius Siluestri
permulta feruntur instituta, de chrismate consecrando, pueris confirmandis,
temptis ornandis, altaribus tegendis, missatoribus constituendis, vngendis,
vestiendis, hostijs adorandis, seruandis, sacrificijs, ceremonijs alijsque
ritibus. Very many institutions are ascribed to this Siluester, of
consecratinge chrisme, confirminge children, adorninge churches, coueringe
altars, making massinge priests, anointinge and vestinge them, adoringe and
reserving the consecrated hosts, of sacrifices, ceremonies, and other rites.
By which no man can doubt, but S. Siluester was a massing priest, and Pope, and
this renowned Emperor converted by him, a reuerencer of holy Mass and
sacrificinge preisthood.

8. which truth and doctrine for this age is more confirmed, by the great
general council of Nice, where Constantine present assented, and S. Siluester
also present by his Legates, Victor and Vincentius subscribinge, approved: in
which it is plainly declared, that none but consecrated massinge priests have
power to offer that holy sacrifice. ( Council. Nicen. 1. can. 14. and per al.
translat. can. 18.) and to carry our protestants consents with us herein, the
present protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, director of Master Frauncis Mason,
together with this his directed secretary, warrant us herin sufficiently in
these words. The Nicen council in that canon which Calvin and all other
receive, says plainly, that the Lamb of God offered vnbloodily, is laid
upon the holy table. Fran. Mason in pref. of his book of consecrat. and page
243.) therefore this holy council being by all judgments general, having
besides the consent of the Pope, and Emperor, the allowance and subscription of
318. Bishops, and immediately in those days, as our protestants. ( Theater of
great Britanie l. 6.) with others assure us, received here in Britanie, and at
this present by our protestant parlaments of highest authority, and to be
embraced of all. ( Statut. in parl. an. 1. Elizab. and an. 1. Jacob.) we must
needs say, that the sacrifice of Mass and massinge preisthood then was, and
now ought by all men to be honored, and approved in this kingdom. And if we
will enquire of the other holy and learned Fathers which lived in this age, and
were not of that number 318. present in the Nicen council, we shall find they
were al without any exception, both of the Greek, and Latin church,
sacrificinge, and massinge priests, their number is too great to be related,
therefore I will exemplify only in those, which all account renowned, as S.
Basile, S. Epiphanius, and S. Chrysostom in the greek church, all which as
our protestants confess, were not only massinge priests, but did write and
set forth a public form of Mass; which are yet extant, and in noe material
thing different from that of the present Latin church, and by the confession
of these protestants. ( Edw. Sands Relat. of Relig. cap. 53. or 54. Middleton.
Papistom. page 51. Morton Apol. part. 2. page 81.) still used in the churches
of Greece, which also use the present Roman Mass of S. Gregory translated
into Greek, as they testify of the Greek church in these terms. Their
liturgies be the same that in the old time, namely S. Basils, S. Chrisostomes
and S. Gregory's translated without any be^ding them to that change of
language, which their tongue has suffered, Edwine Sands sup.

9. And if we come nearer, unto the Roman and Latin church, we shall find
S. Ambrose in Italy, so renowned for this, that to speak in protestants
words. ( Fox act. and Mon. Tom. 1. and Tom. 2. page 131.) until about the
year of our Lord 780. the Liturgy of S. Ambrose was more used in the Italian
churches then S. Gregory's. Pope Adrian the first was he, whom we declared
in the former part of this treatise, to ratify and confirm the order of S.
Gregory's Mass, above the order of S. Ambrose Mass. Where we see this twice
approved by one great protestant; which an other, a Bishop among them, thus
confirms. ( Ioannes Bal. act. Pont. Romans l. 3. in Hadriano 1.) Hadrianus
primas missarum ritus a magno Gregorio editos, occidentalibus Ecclesiis
imperauit. Pope Hadrian the first, commanded that order of Mass which was
published by Pope Gregory the great, to be used by the western churches. Yet,
to use the words of an other protestant Author. ( Edw. Grimston. in Pope
Adrian 1.) this Pope Hadrian was one of the most famous of all his
predecessors, in bounty, learning, and sanctity of life. And he could not
be the worse, for so recommending the Mass of S. Gregory. ( Bal. act. Pont.
Romans l. 2. in Gregor. Magno.) the most excellent of all the Roman Popes, both
for learning, and life. Gregorius Magnus omnium Pontificum Romanorum doctrina
and vita praestantissimus. As the last cited, protestant Bishop. ( Bal. supr.
in Greg. Magno. writes, and styles him justly with the title of honor
therefore commonly and duly given unto him, Gregory the great. That the Mass
usually called the Mass of S. Gregory, because he was the last Pope that
added to the old Mass, yet not four lines, and not essential in any thing,
nor does not in any least point, now questioned, differ from the old Mass,
continued since the Apostles time, as these our protestants shall sufficiently
testify in due place, and order hereafter.

10. Or if we will come nearer home, into France, we shall find there by the
evidence of the british old Manuscript I have cited before, that S. Caesarius
Archbishop of Arles, the greatest in that kingedome then in preeminence, and
power, and S. Porcarius Abbot there, by whom S. German, and S. Lupus which
were sent Legates into Britanie to settle the state of our then disturbed
church, by S. Caelestine Pope, were brought up, and instructed, did use S.
Marks Mass. ( M. S. antiq. Britan. in S. Caesario Arl. and Porcar.) at which
time also S. Kebius our noble contryman of Cornwall, was many years scholar to
S. Hilary, that renowned sacrificinge priest, and Bishop of Poictiers in
France, which was so far engaged for the honor of this holy sacrifice of
Mass, and sacrificing preisthood, that he boldly and roundly wrote to
Constantius the Arrian Emperor, that his soldiers and himself in offering
violence unto these, had sinned as greatly as the Jews did in puttinge Zachary
to death. Mediolanensem pijssima^ plebem tu furore terroris tui turbasti,
Tribuni tui adierunt Sancta Sanctorum, viam sibt omni per populum crudelitate
pandentes, protraxerunt de altario Sacerdotes. Leuius te putas, sceleste,
Iudaeorum impietate poccasse? effuderunt quidem illi Zacharia sanguinem, sed
quantum in te, concorporatus Christo, a Christo disceaisti. ( Hilar. l. 3. ad
Constantium Imperatorem.) and yet that our worthy contriman lived 50. years
with this massinge Bishop. ( M. S. antiq. in vit. S. Keb. Io. Capgrau. in eod.)
and by him made a massinge priest, and Bishop, returned into, and lived so and
died a miraculous Saint in his own contry in this kingdom. Apud
Hillar-pictane^sem Episcopum per quinquaginta annos manens Sanctus Kebius,
caecos illuminauit, leprosos mundauit, Paraliticos, mutos, and daemoniachos
sanauit, and gradu Episcopali ab Hillario accepto, admonitus est ab Angelo in
suam patriam remeare.

11. And that all the Bishops of Britanie, being many at that time, together
with their priests, under jurisdictions, were massinge and sacrificinge
priests, and in this holy sacrifice as well as other matters in Religion
co^senting with the Popes of Rome, the Fathers of the council of Nice, and
Sardice, where we had diverse british Bishops present, and with the
sacrificing Catholic Bishops and priests of France, namely S. Hilary the
great glory of that nation, and S. Athanasius that most renowned massing
Prelate, who as Zonoras writes, was here in Britanie, we have a world of
witnesses: and great S. Chrysostom, S. Hilary, S. Athanasius, Constantine our
King, and Emperor, S. Hierome, Theodoret, Socrates, Sulpitius Seuerus, Glycas,
Zonoras, as appears in my marginall citation of them, and other later
writers, not only Catholics, but Protestants also in their great Theater of
Britanie, Stowe, Howes, Hollinshed with others. Chrisost. in Homil. quod
Christ. sit Deus. Hilar. l. de Sinod. Athanas. epist. ad Constant. 2. Hieron.
epist. ad Euagr. Theodoret. l. 4. hist. cap. 3. Socrat. l. 2. c. 16. Sulpit.
Sever. l. 2. sacra histor. Glyc. part. 4. Annal. Zonor. To. 3. c. 2. Theater of
great Britanie. l. 6. Stowe and Howes histor. in Lucius. Holinsh. hist. of
Engl. Godw. Conuers. of Brit.

12. And such plenty, and great numbers of these massinge priests, and Bishops
we had here in this our Britanie, at that time, that as I am warranted both by
foreign and domestical writers, leauinge our Archbishops, and Bishops sees
furnished, we had diverse british Bishops, besides, with their priests and
clergy, sent from hence for Armorica, or little Britanie in France, as the
holy massinge Bishops, and Martyrs, sent and martyred with S. Vrsula, and the
other 11000. Virgins, and Martyrs of Britanie, S. Michael, Iacobus, Columbanus,
Iwanus, Elutherius, Lothorius and Mauritius. Episcop. Genesis in vit. S. Vrsul.
Matthew. Westminster. an. 391. Io. Capgrau. Catal. in S. Vrsula. M. S. antiq. ibid.
Harris in Theatr. To. 4. in S. Vrsula. antiquitat. Ecclesia Coloticen. and al.
al which with all other Bishops and priests of this kingdom consented with the
whole Christian world, as is showed before in the doctrine of holy Mass,
sacrificinge priests, and preisthood, which our protestants will more
demonstrate unto us, by the publicly taught and received Religion of Britanie
in this time: for they produce unto us, an old ancient sermon, written in the
latin tongue, and translated into the saxon language by Aelfricus in the year
996. and to write in protestants words, this sermon was usual to be read in
the church here in England in the year 366. (John Fox Act^ Monum. page 1142.)
which must needs be a most excellent testimony for this age and time. And
yet among many other things tendinge to the same purpose, thus we find by
our protestants translation thereof. In the old law faithful men offered to
God diverse sacrifices, that had fore signification of Christ's body, which for
our sins he himself to his heavenly Father has since offered to sacrifice.
Certainly this housell which we do now halow at Gods altar, is a
remembrance of Christ's body, which he offered for us, and of his blood, which
he shed for us: So he himself commanded, do this in my remembrance. Once
suffered Christ by himself, but yet nevertheless his sufferinge is daily
renewed at this supper, through mystery of the holy housel. And again: In
that holy housel, there is one thing in it seen, and an other understood.
That which is there seen has bodily shape: and that we do there
understand, has ghostly might. The housell is dealed into sundry parts,
chevved betvveene teeth, and sent into the belly: howbeit nevertheless after
ghostly might, it is all in every part. Many receive that holy body, and yet
notwithstanding, it is so all in every part, after ghostly mystery.

13. And showing how the Paschal Lamb was a figure of this holy sacrifice of
Christ, the Lamb of Innocence, and God, which takes away the sins of the
world, as in holy Mass we so pray unto Christ there present, under that
denomination, they teach it was the use and custom of our Christians in
Britanie in that time, to do the same, the very words of that old british
public homely by our protestants translation be thus: That innocent Lamb
which the old Israelites did then kill, had signification after ghostly
understanding, of Christ's sufferinge, who vnguiltie shedd his blood for our
redemption. Hereof singe Gods servants at every Mass, Agnus Dei qui tollis
peccata mundi, miserere nobis: That is in our speech: Thou Lamb of God, that
take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us. Where we see
plainly acknowledged, by this so ancient antiquity, in this fourth hundred
year, and the protestants themselves, so translatinge and proposinge it, that
generally in that time, the holy sacrifice of Mass was offered by the Bishops,
and priests of Britanie in all places, and all the servants of God did then
acknowledge, and profess, that Christ the true Lamb of God that takes away
the sins of the world was therein offered, and there present, prayed unto by
all Gods servants. Which is as much as any massing priest, Bishop, or Pope
holds, teaches, or practices at this time concerning these things.

14. And because in this age this our kingedome had by agreement both of
ancient and late writers, and by protestants themselves. ( Bal. l. de
scriptor. in Palladio and Niniano.) a great dependence of Rome, both in
temporal and spiritual affairs, and many of our chiefest clergy men, as S.
Teruanus, and S. Ninianus those two glorious Northre^ Bishops, had both their
education, instruction, ordination, and jurisdiction from thence, as many
others had at this time, and the Bishops of Rome are so much charged by our
protestant writers for adding unto the holy sacrifice of Mass, I will only use
these men's authority, which say they will set down what every Pope did add,
Quid alij Pontifices addiderint, suo loco in Pontificijs actis dicetur. And
they are so far from not performinge their promise in this, that they rather
relate more then less added by these holy Popes, as will be made evident by
their own testimonies hereafter. Yet for more ample satisfaction let us
follow them in this point. Of S. Siluester I have spoken before, next to him
succeeded S. Mark, who as these men say, was Pope in the time of Constantine
the great, Constantino Imperante in Pontificatu sedit, which time was an holy
time in Religion, by our Kings judgment, and so this Pope not likely to make
any public law unholy. Therefore these protestants only say of him, that
he ordained the creed of the Nicen council to be said or sunge at Mass. (
Rob. Barnes in act. Pont. Romans in Marc. 1. Io. Bal. in vit Pont. in eod. Edw.
Grimston. in Marc.) but this Nicen creed is holy in all judgments, and was
received, and used in Britanie here, in that time, as I have proved, and it is
received by the protestant parliament of England, subscribed and sworn unto by
all the protestant Bishops and ministers of England, allowed in the articles of
their Religion, and practiced in their churches. ( Parlam. an. 1. Eliz. K.
James can. articles of Relig. articl. Creed. commun. book etc.) and therefore
does a protestant antiquarie justly say of that holy creed, and time, in the
year of Christ, 330. At this time the Nicen creed was commanded to be sunge
or said, in all Christian churches. (Stowe hist. Romans ad an. 330.) therefore
none but Arrian Heretics ever did, or will impugn it.

15. The next Pope which these me^ find, to have added any thing to this holy
sacrifice, was holy Damasus, an acknowledged good Bishop, and as they teach,
he only added the Confiteor, Confession, used in the beginning of Mass, in
which there is nothing, which protestants disallowe, but confession and prayer
to Saints there remembered. ( Io. Whitguift. ansvv. to the admonit. page 78. and
def. of ansvv. page 489. Bal. in vit. in Damaso. Barnes in eodem. Grimston. in
Damasus.) which as I have proved before was used in the church of God, and in
this Realm of Britanie in the Apostles days. And to pass over so many
examples, and testimonies, of other Christian people, and places, in the second
age our Apostles S. Damianus and Fugatius prayed to S. Michaell the Archangell,
and other Angels, and dedicated a church or chapel to them, the ruins yet
standinge near Glastenburie. ( antiquit. Glaston M. S. Gapgrau. in Catal. and
alij.) diverse churches besides with their allowance were founded and dedicated
to S. Peter, S. Martin, and other Saints. In the third age S. Amphibalus at his
Martyrdom publicly prayed to S. Alban Martyred a little before, so did other
holy British Christians to him and other Martyrs and Saints of Britanie at
that time. ( tabul. M. S. in Eccles. S. Petri in Cornhill. Stowe histor. in K.
Lucius Caius antiq. Cantabrig. Harris l. 2. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. M. S.
antiq. in Lucio M. S. antiq. in S. Amphibal. Capgrau. in eod. and S. Alban.
legend. antiq. and alij.) in the beginning of this fourth age, I have showed
before, what general buildinge, and dedicatinge of churches there was, to our
Martyrs, that had suffered a little before, and solemnizinge their festiuities,
and consequently prayer and invocation unto them. And all this long before S.
Damasus was Pope, being scarcely borne at that time. Therefore many our
protestants of England confess, that prayer and invocation of Saints and
Angels, was publicly used in the primative church, even in the sacrifice of
Mass. And some of them make it an article of our creed: for to speak in their
words. If we deny it, we shall peradventure deprive ourselves of a great
part of their Angels ministry, and dissolve that communion of Saints, which
we profess to believe as an article of Gods truth. Couel examine. page
295.178. Parkins problem. page 89.93. Ormerod. Pict. Pap. page 26.27. Middlet.
papistom. page 129. Morton. Apolog. part. 1. page 227.228. Couel ag. Burges
page 89.90.

16. Wherefore I may boldly conclude of this holy Pope, in this matter, in
these words of a Protestant Archbishop: Damasus was a good Bishop, and
therefore no good thing by him appointed, to be disallovved. (Io. Whitg.
ansvv. to the admonit. page 78. sect. 2.3. and def. of ansvv. page 489. of Pope
Siricius they say, he commanded that Masses should be said in places
consecrated by the Bishops: Missas in loco ab Episcopo sacrato celebrandas
esse. (Rob. Barnes l. de vit. Pont. Romans in Ciricio.) but this was only a
ceremonial decree, and to Gods more honor, as I have showed in our old Britans
by their dedication of churches, and our protestants in England after their
ceremonies observe it to this day. What a protestant Bishop means, when he
writes of this Pope, Missae memorias adiunxit. He adjoined memories to the
Mass. ( Io. Bal. l. 1. de act. Pontif. Romans in Siricio.) I know not, if he
means memories of Saints, to pray unto them, or memories of other faithful
departed, to pray for them (as one of them he must needs understand) I have
proved before, they were both used from the Apostles time, and so cannot be
said to be any addition of Pope Siricius in this time. These protestants do
not mention any other Pope in this age, to have added, or altered any thing,
in this holy sacrifice: Therefore by their good leave I do here end this
fourth hundred of years.

THE FIFTHE AGE, OR HUNDRED YEARS OF CHRIST.
THE XIX. CHAPTER. Wherein is manifestly proved, that all this fifth age, the
sacrifice of Mass, massing priests and Bishops did continue in honor in this
our Britanie.
THe first Pope which offers himself in this next and fifth hundred of
years, to speak as a late protestant writer does, was Innocent of Albania, or
Scotland. (Edw. Grimst. est. of the church of Rome Pope 41. page 44. an. D.
402.) and commonly it is written of him, both by protestants and others. ( Rob.
Barnes in vit. Innocentij and Io. Bal. in eodem.) that by contrie he was
Albanus, or of Albania, the old common and received known name of Scotland.
And if he was of this our Albania, it might be occasion that the Scots and
Britans of this kingdom did more frequent Rome at this, then other times. But
whether he was of Northren Albania, that is in the east, or of Alba in Italy,
or whencesoeuer, sure we are, that many of this nation which proved holy
priests, and Bishops also, had their education, and instruction in Religion, at
Rome in these days, by the massing and sacrificinge priests, and Popes in that
place. Such were S. Teruanus made Archbishop of the Picts, by S. Paladius the
Popes Legate in Scotland, about the year of Christ 432. as our Scottish
writers testify. And that he was instructed in the faith at Rome, I gather
from the same Authors, affirming that S. Paladius baptized him, being an
Infant. Teruanum Infantem lustrico lauerat font Paldius. (Hector Boeth. l. 7.
histor. foli 133. Posseuin. in appar. To. 2. page 452.) which must needs be at
Rome from whence S. Palladius was sent into this kingdom, in or about the
year of Christ 431. and died soon after his cominge hither. And so having
for his Master and Tutor in Religion, that massinge priest, and Bishop, and the
Pope also then being the like, this man could not be instructed there in any
other Religion, different from that. And in the same age, before this, S.
Ninian who was also brought up, and instructed by the massinge Popes, and their
disciples at Rome, was sent from thence, to teach the same and other holy
doctrines of Christian faith to the same people, and was their Bishop, as all
antiquaries Catholic and Protestant testify. ( Bed. hist. Angl. l. 3. c. 4.
Bal. l. de scriptor. cent. 1. in Ninian. Capgrau. in eod. Theat. of great Brit.
l. 6.) whose successor S. Teruanus was, and about the same time as our Scottish
and other histories tell us, S. Seruanus was made Bishop of the Orchades being
instructed and consecrated by the massinge Bishop Paladius, which that famous
massinge Pope S. Celestine sent his Legate into this nation, of whom herafter.
Hector Boeth. Scotor. histor. l. 7. fol. 133.

2. Besides these extraordinary, the ordinary Archbishops, and Bishops with
their whole clergy perseuered in these holy doctrines, none to contradict
them herin but in other questions moved by Pelagian heretics. And that S.
Innocentius the first Pope in this age under whom our remembered Bishops had
their education and instruction, was a massinge Pope, our protestants assure
us, testifyinge that he confirmed the ceremony of giuinge the Pax in Mass.
Vt pax in Missa daretur ordinauit. The like they testify of Pope Sozimus, and
Bonifacius, which were between S. Innocentius, and S. Celestine, that sent so
many Bishops into this kingdom, affirming how they both maintained
sacrificinge preisthood, and holy Mass, with the ceremonies thereof, and the
supreamacy of the sea of Rome. ( Io. Bal. l. 2. de act. Pont. Romans in Innocent.
in Sozimo and Bonifacio. Robert. Barn in vit. Pontif. in eisdem.) And for the
sacrifice of Mass, that it was, Missa papistica, the papisticall, or, papists
Mass, such as Catholics of this time (whom they call papists, and their
Mass priests and Religion papisticall) do use. ( Bal. supr. lib. 2. in
Caelestino.) before the days of Saint and Pope Celestine, who as they say
added some things to the papisticall Mass, used before his papacy.
Papisticae Missae inseruit. And yet this sacrificinge massinge and papisticall
Pope was he, by all antiquities, on whom Britanie in those days did chiefly
depend for direction, and instruction in matters of Religion.

3. Therefore to make all peace, and atonement, we may by the proceedings and
institutions of this holy Pope, and our Master and Pedagogue in Christ, let us
learn of our protestants themselves, what were the things he added to the
sacrifice of Mass, whether any matter essential, or that may be excepted
against. They have told us, that before his additions, the Mass was
papisticall, and concerning his additions, In initio sacrificij, vt psalmus,
Iudica me Deus, and discern causam me am etc. a sacrificaturo diceretur
ordinauit: graduale in Missa ordinauit. He ordained that the psalm, Judge me
o God and discern my cause, should be said in the beginning of the sacrifice,
by the priest that offers the sacrifice: and he ordained the graduale should
be said in Mass. ( Rob. Barn. l. de vit. Pontif. Romans in Caelest. Magdeb.
cent. 5. in Caelest.) so write others of these protestants, among whom one a
Bishop says: Caelestinus introitum, graduale, responsorium, tractum, and
offertorium, vt propria inuenta, papisticae Missae inseruit. Pope Celestine did
put into the papisticall Mass, as inventions of his own, the introite,
graduale, responsorie, tract and offertory. ( John Fox Tom. 2. in Q. Mary.
Cartwright admon. Whitg. answ. to the admonit. page 94. sect. 1.2. Io. Bal. l.
2. act. Pontif. Roman. in Caelestino.) which words of his, vt propria inuenta,
as his own inventions, are the evident forgery and invention of this
protestant, for all these things are plain words of holy scriptures in all
places, and so the inventions of God himself, and not Pope Celestines; And if
he means that the placing them in the Mass was his invention, which he
does not insinuate, why was it not lawful for him to use the scriptures in
Mass? otherwise no prayer or part of Mass, or whatsoever liturgy or public
office of any church could be lawful, nothing could be lawful, for nothing
is more lawful or warranted then the word of God and scripture. Yet it was not
S. Celestines invention, to place any one of these in the Mass, but they were
all used therein, before his time, even by the confession of these protestants
themselves. For first concerning the introite, it is one of the psalms of
David the 42. by the Latin account, and by the Hebrew 43. and such kind of
introite to the holy Mass, was in use long before this Popes time, as our
protestants acknowledge, whereof one thus confesses.. ( Io. Fox To. 2. Act.
and Monum. Q. Mary page 1401.) Chrysostom in the eleventh homely upon the
Gospel of S. Matthew, says, that in his time, and before his time, the use
was to singe whole psalms till they were entered and assembled together: And
so belike Caelestinus borrowed this custom of of the Greeks, and brought it
into the Latin church. Therefore by these men S. Caelestine was not the Author
of this custom: yet if he had been, no protestant or Christian will say, that
saying or singinge holy psalms, so warranted in scripture, is an unlawful,
but a lawful and godly exercise.

4. The same protestant Author makes the graduale, response, and tract of as
ancient standinge, when he thus speaks of the graduale and consequently of
the others belonging unto it. (Fox supr.) the graduale the people were went to
singe when the Bishop was about to go up to the pulpit, or some higher
standinge, where the word of God might be better and more sensibly heard at
his mouth, readinge the epistle and the gospel. Which custom he makes as
ancient, or more ancient, then the time of Pope Alexander, in the Empire of
Traian. Touching the last which is the offertorie, it is evident by these
protestants, and al testimonies before, that it was, and of necessity must
needs be used from the begininge, for where there is Mass sacrifice, and
oblation offered, there must needs be an offeringe or offertorie thereof,
otherwise it could not be offered. Fox supr. Therefore this protestant
acknowledges it to have been used before the time of S. Irenaeus so near the
Apostles, and that he thus does remember it. Iren. l. 4. cap. 18. pro diuersis
sacrificiorum ritibus simplex oblatio panis and vini fidelibus sufficiat. In
stedd of diverse rites of sacrifices in the old law, one oblation of bread
and wine serves. Therefore I will conclude with these words, of a protestant
Archbishop. Celestinus was a godly Bishop, and the church of Rome at that time
had the substance of the Sacraments, according to Gods word, neither was there
any superstition mixed with them. John Whitg. def. of the answ. to the admonit.
page 588.

5. And in this opinion are, and ought to be, all our English Protestant
antiquaries, and divines, which generally hold, and teach, that the Britans of
this kingedome, inuiolablie kept the true faith and Religion of Christ, in all
things, until the cominge of S. Augustine, and his companions from S. Gregory
the great Pope of Rome, in the later end of the sixth hundred years: for most
certain and undoubted it is, by all antiquities, that this nation at this time
of S. Celestine, being infected with the Pelagian Heretics, learned and
subtle in disputation, this holy Pope sent many holy Bishops hither to confute
that heresy, instruct the ignorant, repair the decayed discipline of our
church, and reform many abuses grown by reason of that heresy, and the Saxon
Pagans, which then were entered into this Island. Which Legates of this holy
Pope, must needs be adjudged to be of the same faith, and Religion with him,
that sent them, by his authority and direction to effect those holy labors.
He sent the two holy Bishops S. Germanus, and Lupus into this part of
Britanie, S. Palladius into Scotland, S. Patricke and Segetius into Ireland. I
have spoken of S. Palladius before, how by his power from the sea of Rome, he
placed sacrificing and massinge priests and Bishops among the Scots, and
Picts, in the north parts of this kingdom, of united great Britanie. Prosper.
in Chronic. ad An. 432. Rob. Barnes l. de vit. Pontif. Romans in Caelestino. Io.
Bal. l. 2. Act. Pontif. Romans in eod. Bal. l. de scriptor. Brit. cent. 1. in
Leporio Agricola.

6. Also I have showed out of our ancient British Manuscript and otherwise
before, how both S. German and Lupus were massinge priests, and Bishops, and
observed the ancient form of Mass composed by S. Mark, therefore being
sent by authority from that massinge Pope, S. Celestine, they neither did, nor
might vary and differ from the opinion, and practice of him, that sent him, as
S. Prosper who lived at that time, and others write, to supply his own place
and parson in ordering and reforminge the church of Britanie. Papa Celestinus
Germanum Antisiodorensem Episcopum voce sua mittit, vt deturbatis haereticis
Britannos ad Catholicam fidem dirigat. He consecrated many massinge priests,
and Bishops in this kingdom, among whom the chiefest was, that massing Saint
Dubritius Archbishop, the chief Doctor, Primate and the Popes Legate. (
Prosper. in Chronic. An. D. 432. Io. Capgrau. in S. Dubritio. Matthew. Westminster.
Galfrid. Monument. hist. Brit. l. 9. cap. 12. Rob. Caenal. l. 2. M. S. Gallic.
antiq. M. S. antiq. and Io. Capgrau. in vita S. Dubritij.) Episcopos in
pluribus locis Britanniae consecrarunt: and dextralis partis Britanniae beatum
Dubritium summum Doctorem and Archiepiscopum statuerunt: a protestant Bishop
writes: Dubritius was made Archbishop by Germanus and Lupus, and they
appointed his see to be at Landaffe. ( Godwin. Catalog. in S. Dauide.) this
holy Archbishop by the heavenly direction, did consecrate that notorious
massinge priest S. Sampson Archbishop of York, in whose consecration a
miraculous vision appeared to confirm his calling and Religion, and both S.
Dubritius and others did see a pillar of fire miraculously proceeding from his
mouth as he celebrated the holy Mass, and he himself all his life had
Angels ministering unto him in that blessed sacrifice. Angelus Domini beato
Dubritio apparens, Sampsonem ordinari Episcopum praecepit. In cuius
consecratione qui aderant, columbam celitus emissam immobiliter super eum stare
videbant. Eodem die Sampsone celebrante, Dubritius cum Monachis duobus,
columnam ignis de ore eius procedentem rutilare perspexit. Ille vero omni
tempore vitae suae Angelos dum celebraret, sibi assistere, and in sacrificio
ministrare meruit. (M. S. antiquit. and Capgrau. in S. Sampsone Episcopo.) what
massinge preistes and Archbishops the immediate successors of these two
renowned Archbishops were, I shall lay down herafter more at large.

7. And such as these were, such also was the Archbishop of London S. Vodinus,
and all Bishops and priests under him, and so consequently in all Britanie at
that time: which as well appears, by their own historian, S. Gildas, venerable
S. Bid, as also Matthew of Westminster with others, who speaking of the
miserable and general persecution of the christian Britans, in all places
quasque Prouincias, among other cruelties they tell us, these infidels martyred
the British priests, as they were standing at the altars where they said
Mass. Sacerdotes iuxta altaria trucidaba^t. (Gild. de excid. and conquest.
Brit. Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 462. Bed. l. 1. histor. Eccles. cap. 15.)
therefore the preistes generally then, were altar, sacrificinge and massinge
priests, otherwise they could not have been thus cruelly put to death, at the
altars, and places of saying Mass, in all all parts of this nation at that
time. Neither could there possibly, at that time be any other priests, but
massinge priests, except they would turn heretics (which we do not read)
and leave the doctrine and Religion of their both Archbishops, Bishops, and
Masters in divinity, which in this time were by all testimony both of
Catholics, and Protestants, either the only or principal, S. Dubritius of
whom I have spoken before, S. Iltutus, and S. Gildas, all most holy and
miraculous men, and known massinge priests. For concerning S. Iltutus he was
(as a Protestant Bishop with Vicentius, and Antoninus confesses) scholar to
the renowned Popes Legate and massinge Bishop S. German, spoken of before, Io.
Bal. l. de script. Britan. cent. 1. in Ilchtuto alias Iltuto. And to prove him
a massinge priest, and all his scholars after him, that were priests, to have
been massinge priests, Nennius our most ancient (exceptinge Gildas) writer
which we have left, testifies in his Manuscript history, that there was in a
church which this massinge Saint Iltutus builded, a miraculous Altar, sustained
only without any propp, or foundation by the power of God, altar quod nutu Dei
fulcitur. (Nennius histor. M. S. in fine post nomina ciuitatum Britanniae.) and
this miraculous altar so inuisibly sustained, did remain in Nennius time, and
manet vsque in hodiernam diem altar potestate Dei fulcitum.

8. To prove S. Gildas to have been of this opinion, and practice, his
history, de excidio Britanniae, often cited in this treatise, is full of
altars, massinge and sacrificinge priests, and makes their irreuent saying of
Mass, and often neglect of celebrating that holy sacrifice, to have been one
of the chief causes of Gods indignation against them, and depriuinge them of
this kingedome, and giuinge it to the Saxons their professed enemies. And he
was one of the renowned scholars of his massing Master, S. Iltutus, as S.
Sampson the great massing Archbishop of York, of whom I have spoken before,
and S. David, that most holy sacrificinge and miraculous Archbishop of
Caerlegion, of whom hereafter, and S. Paulinus were: as both Catholics and
Protestants are witnesses. ( M. S. antiq. de vit S. Iltuti. Ioh. Capgrau. in
Iltuto. Ioh. Bal. centur. 1. de scriptor. Brit. in eod.) what this Paulinus
was, and whether he that was sent hither with S. Augustine I dare not affirm,
yet considering the long time S. Iltutus lived, as many then did, and he
being living as diverse write. ( Bal. supr.) in the year of Christ 520. he
might have in his old age a scholar, that might live longer then S. Paulinus
death, that came with S. Augustine, and was Archbishop of York: for many our
holy Bishops as S. Kentegern, and S. David lived longer, and we find no other
renowned Paulinus here in those times. And Nennius who says expressly, that
he omitteth of purpose to speak of those that came with S. Augustine, and
were not of this nation, yet makes a most honorable memory of that Paulinus
Archbishop of York, saying that he baptized 12000. at one time, and ceased
not baptisinge forty days together. Nennius in histor. M. S. prope finem.

9. So that it is not improbable but this holy man S. Paulinus, was the scholar
of S. Iltutus, and leauinge his contry (as many did in that rage of the
Saxons) went to Rome and lived to come hither again to accomplish so holy
labors, as he did with those other massinge preistes sent hither at that
time. Which he might well perform, if we allow him, to be 20. years old,
at the death of his Master S. Iltutus, as before in the year 520. and as an
other Protestant Bishop writes. ( Godwin Catalog. York 1. page 558.) to have
died in the year 644. which account makes him but 124. years old, two years
younger then his fellow scholar S. David by all antiquities making him 146.
years of age at his death. Post 146. aetatis annum, vt omnes eius fatentur
historiae, mortuus. In the year of his age, 147. anno aetatis suae centesimo
quadragesimo septimo. And twenty one years younger then S. Kentegern by all
histories, dyinge when he was one hundred eighty and five years old, cum
esset centum octaginta quinque annorum. Ioh. Bal. centur. 1. de scriptorib.
Britan* in David Menenien. Ioh. Capgrau^ Catal. in S. David. M. S. antiq. in
eod. S. Asaph. in vita S. Kentegern. Capg. in eod. Io. Bal. centur. 1. de
script. Brit. in Kentegern. Elgnen. Godwin Catalog. in S. Asaph. and Probus the
ancient writer of S. Patricks life, dedicateth it to Paulinus, about that time
S. Paulinus was Archbishop here, which argues that Paulinus had some
acquaintance with, or reference to S. Patricke, otherwise an Irish Author would
not have dedicated his work to one in England.Those schools were here of high
authority approved both by the Popes and Kings of Britanie, as Cambridg
teaches. Prebus in vita S. Patricij inter opera S. Bedae. Io. Caius l.
antiquitat. Camtab. page 147.148.

10. Now let us come to S. Patricke, who although he was chiefly sent by S.
Celestine to the inhabitants of Ireland and Scotland, yet he was a Britane
borne, and by many antiquities preached much, and by some many years together
before his death living in this nation, died here. Therefore we may boldly
apply him as a Master and witness in this business. This man being sent by the
massinge Pope S. Celestine, was so far also a massinge priest, and Bishop,
that as the ancient writer of his life, not S. Bid but Probus an Irish man
more ancient then S. Bedes time, witnesses. (l. 2. de vita S. Patricij in
fine.) the inchaunters and magiciens of that contry, especially three which he
called Locri, Egled, and Mel, did tell to the King and nobles of that contry
being idolaters, diverse years before the cominge of S. Patricke thither, that
a certain Prophet should come thither with a new Religion, that though it was
hard and austere, yet it should quite destroy their ancient worship, and
there continue for ever. And to speak in this ancient Authors words of S.
Patricks saying Mass in particular: praecinebant quasi in modum cantici
lirico modo compositi ante aduentum Sancti viri duobus aut tribus annis
decantantes de eo. Haec sunt autem verba cantici secundum linguae illius Idioma
in latinum conuersa, non tamen manifesta. Adueniet artis caput, cum suo ligno
praecuruo capite: ex eo omnis domus erit capite perforata: incantabit nephas ex
sua mensa ex anteriore part domus suae, respondebit ei sua familia tota, fiat,
fiat. Quod nostris verbis potest manifestius exprimi. Adueniet totius artis
Magister cum signo crucis, and quod omne cor hominum compungitur, and de altari
Sacramentorum conuertet animas ad Christum, and omnis populus Christianorum
respo^debit Amen. Qua^do erunt haec omnia regnum nostrum gentile non stabit.
Quod sic totum completum est. They did singe before the cominge of the holy man
S. Patricke a song made lyrickwise of him two or three years. And these are
the words of the song according to that language turned into latin, but not
manifest. The head of art will come, with his staff with a crooked head, with
that all the house shall be bored in the head: he shall singe wickedness from
his table from the former part of his house, all his householde shall answer,
so be it, so be it. Which in our words may be more manifestly expressed. The
Master of all art shall come with the sign of the cross, and all the hearts of
men shall have compunction, and from the altar of Sacraments he shall convert
souls to Christ, and all Christian people shall answer Amen. When all these
things shall be, then our heathen kingedome shall not stand. All which was so
fulfilled. Io. Capgrau. in Catalog. in S. Patricio.

11. John Capgraue and others in S. Patricks life thus set down this
prediction of S. Patricke, adueniet homo cum suo ligno cuius mensa erit in
orient domus suae, and populus eius retrorsum, and ex sua mensa cantabit, and
familia respondebit ei Amen. Hic cum aduenerit, Deos nostros destruet templa
subuertet, and doctrina eius regnabit in seculu^ seculi. A man shall come with
his staff, whose table shall be in the east part of his house, and the people
behind him, and he shall singe from his table, and the company shall answer
unto him Amen. He when he comes shall destroy our Gods, overthrow our
temples, and his doctrine shall reign for ever. Where we see an evident
prediction, and foretelling, how this great Apostle should be a sacrificinge
massinge priest, his altar should be in the east part of the church, as altars
usually are, and the people should answer Amen. How devout a sacrificinge
massinge man he was, the history of his life is witness, and of many miracles
to prove the sanctity and holiness, both of that sacrifice, and the sacrificer;
Among which a sorcerer ouerthrowinge his chalice when he said mass, the
earth opened and swallowed him up. Factum est alto die cum Patricius Missam
celebraret quidam magus effudit calicem suam, and statim terra aperie^s os suum
deuorauit eum. (M. S. antiq. in vit. S. Patric. Capgrau. in eod.) and the
altar on which he usually said Mass, healed diseases and wrought other
miracles. And this most holy Saint by all testimonies both of Catholics, and
Protestants. ( Bal. l. de scriptor. Britan. in Patric. Prob. in vita eius.
Capgrau. and al in eod.) was so great a promoter of the blessed sacrifice of
Mass, and sacrificinge massinge priests, and Bishops, that for the honor and
propagation of them, to insist in the words of Nennius. ( Nenmus M. S. hist. in
S. Patricie.) he founded 345. churches to that use. He consecrated so many or
more Bishops, endued with the spirit, of God, and ordered 3000. massinge
priests. Ecclesias numero fundauit 345. ordinauit Episcopos trecentos
quadraginta quinque aut amplius, in quibus spiritus Domini crat. Presbyteros
autem vsque ad tria millia ordinauit.

12. Therefore this massing Archbishop living and rulinge in Ireland and
Britanie until the year of Christ 491. by a Protestant Bishop making his age
122. years, and longer by Capgraue, and others, saying he was, annis centum
triginta, an hundred and thirty years old, and by Probus an hundred thirty
two, and more, when he died. ( Bal centur. 1. de scriptor. Britan. in
Patricio. Capgrau. Catal. in eod. M. S. in vita S. Patric. Prebus in vit.
eiusd.) this kingdom of Britanie could not be without Mass, and many
massinge priests, and Bishops in this age. And as the great recited number of
massinge priests and Bishops, especially Bishops, above 340. could not be
wholly employed in these kingdoms, which never had so many in so short a time,
we may be bold to extend his mission of such massinge men, to a larger
circuit, and say he sent diverse of these his massinge disciples, even into
Armerica it self: for we find in the aunciently written life of S. Brendan
1100. years since. ( M. S. antiq. and Io. Capgrau. in vit. S. Brendani.) of
whom one of the Islands of America still bears name, that in his long and
tedious travails, he found in those parts, diverse massinge preistes, that
did usually say Mass, and had most sumptuous Altars of Crystal, who affirmed
they were disciples to S. Patricke, and by him directed thither. And were most
holy and miraculous men, and among other things then prophesied to S.
Brendan, how that contrie should be descryed, and visited again by
Christians, to their great good and comfort after many ages, as happily we
find it was: Post multa annorum curricula declarabitur ista terra vestris
Successoribus, quando Christianorum superuenerit persecutio. Written in many
Manuscripts many hundreds of years before the late discovery of America, and
by Capgraue and others published long before that time.

THE XX. CHAPTER. Wherein is proved by protestants and others, that the church
of Britanie and Rome, accorded in this age in these mysteries: and how all the
Popes being massinge priests and Popes, yet no one of them made any material
alteration in this sacrifice.
THus having showed both by Catholic, and Protestant authorities, that the
holy sacrifice of Mass, massing priests, and preisthood generally, and
inuiolablie continued in Britanie all this age and hundred of years, because
it is confessed this nation was still hitherto directed in Religion, by the sea
Apostolic of Rome, and there want not protestant adversaries, which say the
Popes there in this time also added, and altered diverse things, to, and in the
sacrifice of Mass, we will now prove by these protestants them selves, that
not any one Pope altered, or added any one material, or least essential
thing therein in this age. The first Pope after S. Celestine which these men
accuse for addinge, or alteringe in this matter, is that most learned and
renowned Pope, S. Leo, against whom a Protestant Bishop thus exclaimeth. ( Bal.
l. 2. de Act. Pontif. Romans in Leone 1. Robert. Barns in vit. Pont. in cod.) Leo
primus Thuscus, in canone Missae, hoc sanctum sacrificium, immaculatam hostiam,
and hanc igitur oblationem, non sine magna Dei blasphemia addidit. Pope Leo the
first, a Tuschan by birth, did add in the canon of the Mass, not without great
blasphemy of God, this holy sacrifice immaculate offeringe, and therefore this
oblation. To this I answer, and first to the pretended addition of the prayer.
Hanc igitur oblationem: That as our renowned contryman S. Albinus with others,
proves. ( Albin. Alcuin. l. de divine offic. cap. de celebrat. Missae.) this
prayer, especially the first part which he taxes, is as ancient in the
Mass, as the Apostles time, and was used both by S. Peter and others of that
sacred order: Missam Petrus Antiochiae dicitur celebrasse, in qua tres tantum
orationes in initio fidei proferebantur, incipientes ab eo loco, vbi dicitur;
Hanc igitur oblationem. Therefore S. Leo added nothing in this prayer, being
for the first part used by the Apostles, and others in their days, which is
that, this Protestant Bishop excepteth against: and for the later end thereof,
which he taxes not, was by this man himself, and others, both Catholics,
and Protestants, added long time after, and then, first by S. Gregory the
great and first Pope of that name. Baleas l. 2. de Act^ Pontfic. Romans in
Gregorio 1. Rob. Barnes in vit. Pontif. Romans in eodem. and alij communiter.

2. So that it is evident S. Leo neither did, nor could add any part of this
prayer, to the sacrifice of Mass as his own addition or invention, all that
he did, or possibly could do therein, was to take order that the decree or
custom of the Apostles should be observed, which cannot be either great or
little blasphemy of God, as this barbarous mouth affirmed, but honor unto God
in that behalf. To make all sure, I will cite the whole prayer then used thus
in English: Therefore o Lord we beseech thee, that thou will be pleased to
accept this oblation of our service, and all thy family through Christ our
Lord. The rest being added by S. Gregory, is thus: and dispose our days in
peace, and command we may be delivered from everlasting damnation, and
numbered in the flock of thy elected servants. In which addition of S Gregory
there is not any one word, of matter now in controversy, but al holy and
allowable, by Protestant Religion. And in that part, which I say with S. Albin
or Alcuine, was used by the Apostles, there is not one word, except, oblation,
which is, or can by protestants be called into controversy, by them or any
Christian; Therefore to answer that and hoc sacrificium, immaculatam hostiam,
together; If S. Leo added these words, to the canon of the Mass, then the
canon of the Mass was before S. Leo his pretended additions: and in other
places of this canon of which no protestant does, or will produce any Author,
being as is proved before apostolical, this Liturgy of Mass is called. (in
can. Missae antiq.) donum, munus, sanctum sacrificium illibatum, oblatio
benedicta, adscripta, rata, rationabilis, sacrificium, hostia pura, hostia
sancta, hostia immaculata. A present, a gift, holy sacrifice unspotted, an
oblation blessed, adscribed, ratified, reasonable, a sacrifice, a pure host,
an holy host, an immaculate host.

3. And this Protestant Bishop himself has testified also, that the
offertorie was used in S. Celestines time before: which is this in English: O
holy Father omnipotent eternal God, receue this immaculate sacrifice, or
oblation, which I thy unworthy servant do offer unto thee, my living and
true God, for my innumerable sins, and offenses, and negligences, and for all
here present, as also for all faithful Christians both living and dead, that
it may be to me and them for salvation to eternal life. Suscipe sancte Pater
omnipotens aeterne Deus, ha^c immaculatam hostiam, quam ego indignus famulus
tuus offero tibi Deo meo, viuo, and vero, pro innumerabilibus peccatis, and
offensionibus, and negligentijs meis, and pro omnibus circumstantibus, sed and
pro omnibus fidelibus Christianis, viuis atque defunctis: vt mihi and illis
proficiat ad salutem, in vitam aeternam Ame^. So likewise it was for the
chalice: offerimus tibi Domine calicem salutaris: o Lord we offer unto thee
the chalice of salvation: And I have proved in all ages before, from Christ,
even with the allowance of our protestants, that Mass was an holy sacrifice,
and all truly consecrated preistes, did ever in all times and places still
offer that most holy sacrifice, both for the living and faithful departed,
and that this was so an undoubted and generally receued custom, and truth in
the whole church, that by our protestants grant, it was justly condemned to
be heresy, to deny it, and this long time before S. Leo was borne: Therefore
none of those names could be by any possibility his invention in this kind.
Which this protestant accusing Bishop him self to confound and contradict
himself, teaches in the same place, when he says of S. Leo, Missae
sacrificium approbanit. He did approve the sacrifice of Mass: therefore Mass
was termed and known to be so accepted a sacrifice, before his time, and
approbation. For a thing approved, or to be approved, unseparably carries
with it a precedence to the approbation, that which is, not cannot possibly be
approved, as a thing past or present, and every such allowance or approbation
necessarily supposes the thing to be so allowed or approved. And this will
suffice for S. Leo.

4. After whom in this age the only Pope which is produced by these men to
have added, or altered in the Mass, is Gelasius: of this Pope a protestant
thus writes. (Robert. Barnes in vit. Pontif. in Gelasio.) praefationem Missae,
vere dignu^ and iustum est, instituit. But this is evidently untrue, as I have
proved before, for S. Ciprian, and before him Tertullian inform us, it was in
use in the church before their times; and S. Ciprian alleges it is an
apostolical, common, and known custom of the church. ( Ciprian. l. de orat.
Dominic.) and Fox the protestant proves. ( Io. Fox Tom. 2. in Q. Mary.) that
this could not be any invention of Gelasius, for that both the ancient Greek
church before that time, and both S. Ciprian, and S. Augustine so agree it was
in use before. Ciprian. sup. Aug. de vera Religione cap. 3) therefore follows
therein the opinion of Thomas Waldensis, that it could not be the invention of
Pope Gelasius. And Pope Vigilius which lived not long after Gelasius, who
writing to the Bishops of Germany and France, desirous to know the order
which the church of Rome observed in the prefaces of Mass, answers in this
manner. ( Vigilius epistola ad Episcopos Germaniae and Galliae.) Inuenimus has
nouem praefationes in sacro catalogo tantumodo recipiendas, quas long a retro
veritas in Romana Ecclesia hactenus seruauit. We find that these 9. prefaces
are to be receued in the holy catalogue, which truth has long time from
former ages hitherto observed in the Roman church. And thus he reco^pteth
them: one of Easter, another of the Ascension of our Lord, the third of
Pentecoste, the fourth of the nativity of our Lord, the fifth of the apparition
of our Lord, the sixth of the Apostles, the seventh of the holy Trinity, the
eight of the Cross, the ninth in Lent. And thus concludes: has praefationes
tenet and custodit sancta Romana Ecclesia, has tenendas vobis mandamus. These
prefaces the holy Roman church observes, these we command to be kept by
you. And Houeden as our protestants have published him, recites all these, out
of the same authority to have been receued in England in a council of our
Bishops many hundred years since, setting down the begininge of every one of
them, and adds the tenth of the blessed Virgin, decimam de beata Virgin.
Roger. Houeden in annal. part. posterior. in Henr. 2.

5. And our English Protestants themselves by their highest parlamentary
authority in such things with them, use the same prefaces, except that of the
Apostles and blessed Virgin, in their public church service, their communion
book. ( Protest. communion book titul. communion.) and yet in that of the
blessed Virgin which seems to have been added after the days of Pope
Vigilius, there is no invocation of her, nor any matter now questioned by
protestants found in it. And concerning that of the Apostles of matters
questioned there is only this clause, or petition unto God, for preserving his
church: vt gregem tuum Pastor aeterne non deseras: sed per beatos Apostolos
tuos continua protectione custodias, vt ijsdem Rectortbus gubernetur, quos
operis tui Vicarios eidem contulisti praesse Pastores. That God the eternal
Pastor will not forsake his flock, but keep by his blessed Apostles, with
continual protection, that it may be governed by the same Rulers, whom
Vicars of his work, he has appointed Pastors to rule it. Which is not a
prayer immediately to the Apostles, but to God for the protection of his
Apostles, and such as our protestants themselves in their public service, on
S. Michael his day, do use for the protection of Angels, as is manifest in
their collect or prayer of that feast, being the old Catholic prayer word by
word translated into English. And yet if there were any immediate prayer unto
the Apostles, or any other Saints or Angels, in any o^f these prefaces, I have
proved before, that it was the received doctrine of Christ's church, from the
beginning.

6. And if we should allow unto protestants, that Pope Gelasius did add in the
prefaces, all that clause, vere dignum and iustum est: unto, per Christum
Dominum nostrum. What is there in it, but holy, and allowable, and still
practiced by themselves in their church service. This it is: vere dignum and
iustum est aequum and salutare nos tibi semper and vbique gratias agere Domine
sancte Pater omnipotens aterne Deus, per Christum Dominum nostrum, o Lord holy
Father omnipotent eternal God, verily it is a thing worthy and just, right
and belonginge to salvation, that we always and in all places give thanks to
thee by Christ our Lord. Are not all Christians in all judgments bound to be
of this mind, and this being a duty so bindinge and belonginge unto all that
believe in Christ, is it not the better, the oftener, and more publicly it be
acknowledged? o^ if it be good by protestants, and in their public practice,
how can it be ill in Catholics, or could be so in Pope Gelasius? And if he
had added, Te igitur clementissime Pater per Iesum Christu^ filium tuum Dominum
nostrum supplices rogamus ac petimus: Therefore o most merciful Father, we
ask and beseech thee, by Jesus Christ, thy son our Lord. It is the same
reason, as before, this being a very Christian, and holy prayer, by Protestant
Religion, to ask all things of God in the name of Christ as he himself said:
whatsoever you shall ask in my name, that will I do. (Io. c. 14. v. 13.) and
whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name he may give it you. Io. c.
15. v. 26.

7. Whereby these men may see, that neither the primative church which used
invocation of Saints, nor the present church of Rome insistinge therein, did,
or do diminish any honor, or duty to Christ, by honoringe them, which honor
him, and are honored by him. Yet S. Remigius witnesses, this prayer, Te
igitur clementissime Pater, to have been used from the Apostles. ( Remig. in
epist. 1. ad Timoth. cap. 2.) Whereas some protestants write of Pope Gelasius. (
Balaeus l. 2. de actis Pontif. Romans in Gelasio.) Gelasius hymnos, prefationes,
gradualia, collectas and orationes praescripsit: Pope Gelasius did prescribe
hymns, prefaces, graduals, collects, and prayers: I have proved by these
protestants, that all these were used in the church, and laudably long before:
and by the word praescripsit, he did prescribe, what hymns, prefaces,
graduals, and collects, or prayers were to be used, it is evident, these were
before, and he being Pope, and chief, prescribed the order how they should be
used: which proves, he rather took some away, then added any, for among them
were before, praescripsit, he prescribed, which, and no others should be used.
And whereas there is a controversy, by some, whether this prescription and
orderinge these things was by Pope Gelasius, or one called Scholasticus; Master
Fox the Protestant historian decideth this question. ( Io. Fox in Q. Mary
page 1403.) teaching out of, vetusto quodam libro de officio Missa, an old
book of the office of Mass, that these were both one, and Gelasius, being
Scholasticus before, was made Pope: Gelasius Papa ex Scholastico effectus in
ordine 48) And thus much of Gelasius.

8. After whom, for an intermedler in these affairs, our protestants propose
Pope Symmachus. ( Barnes in vit. Pontif. Romans in Symmacho. Bal. l. 2. in eod.)
who commanded, gloria in excelsis Deo, to be sunge upon sondayes, and feasts
of Saints. In Dominico die and Sanctorum natalitijs, gloria in excelsis
canendum esse dixit; or by an other, praecepit. But if they mean the first
part, of this holy hymn, it was the song of the Angels, at the birthe of
Christ, and recommended unto us in scripture, and by one of these protestants,
used at Mass by the commandment of Saint, and Pope Telesphorus, who lived in
the Apostles time: gloria in excelsis Deo etc. in Missa canendum praecepit.
(Rob. Barnes in vit. Pontif. Romans in Telesphoro. and S. Petro) and if they
mean the whole canticle, as it is now used, their brother John Fox, with
others, thus testifies. ( John. Fox supr. in Q. Mary.) The hymn, gloria in
excelsis, which was sunge of the Angels at the birth of our Savior, was
augmented by Hilarious Pictauiensis, with those words, that follow, singing it
first in his own church, which was an. 340. and afterward brought into other
churches by Pope Symmachus. And our histories testify it was used here in
Britanie by S. German in his time. And our English Protestants use it, in their
public church service, at this day, by public authority. Engl. Protestant
communion book morninge prayer.

9. That which a Protestant Bishop writes of this Pope, that he reduced the
Mass to form, Missam in formam redegit. (Bal. l. 2. Act. Pontif. Romans in
Symmacho.) is his formal forgery, or foolery, confounded by many undeniable
instances granted by protestants before, as the form of Mass of S. Peter, S
James, S. Matthew, S Mark, S. Clement, S. Basile, S. Chrysostom, and Popes of
Rome long before this time, as among other witnesses this Protestant Bishop
himself testifies of S. Innocentius, Syricius, S. Celestine, S. Leo and
Gelasius. ( Bal. in Act. Pontif. Romans in Innocent. Syric. Calestino Leon.
Gelas.) therefore without evident contradiction, and wilful error, he cannot
intend, or affirm, that Pope Symmachus did first bring the Mass into order.
Therefore of necessity to keep himself from these absurdities, he must
understand, that Pope Symmachus confirmed, or allowed of the form of Mass,
formerlie used in the church, which all Popes and good Christians ever did, and
ought to do.

10. And here ends the fifth hundred year, at which time, and long after, as
with others, our protestants assure us, that S. Dubritius that great massinge
Prelate, and Archbishop primate here, and the Popes Legate, and great Master of
divinity, together with S. Iltutus privileged in the same faculty by papal
authority, and S. Gildas by whom all Britanie and other contries received
instruction were living, and consequently agreeing in all things with the
church of Rome. ( Bal. cent. 1. in Dubritie Iltuto Gylda Albanio. Godwin.
Catal. in S. David's. Capgrau. Catal. in Dubrit. Iltut. Gild.) About which time
also among diverse others those three great lights of our British church
known massinge priests, and Bishops S. David that succeeded S. Dubritius in
his archiepiscopall dignity, S. Thelians and S. Pattern, began to flourish, and
went that great Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. ( M. S. antiq. Capgrau. Catal. in S.
David. S. Thelian. and S. Paterno and alij. M. S. S. Theliai apud Godwin.
Catal. in Landaff. 2.) and both in going and returninge through Italy and those
places, and ordinarily saying Mass, must needs use that order and form
thereof, they found to be used at Rome, and all places receauinge direction
from thence in such affairs, and so here I end this age, and centenary of
years.

THE SIXTH AGE, OR HUNDRED YEARS OF CHRIST.
THE XXI. CHAPTER. Wherein being confessed by our protestant writers, that all
the Popes of Rome unto S. Gregory were massinge priests, and Popes, yet not any
one of the^ by these protestants confession, made any the least material
change, or alteration in these mysteries.
NOw we are come to the sixth age, or hundred of years, of Christ, wherein
lived S. Gregory the great, Pope of Rome, that sent S. Augustine and diverse
other holy clergy men hither, which converted a greater part of this nation,
and kingdom, called England; Wherefore seeing by confession of our best
learned protestants, the Christian Britans of this Island, had from their first
conversion unto Christ, and did at the coming of S. Augustine from Rome,
continue in the same holy faith, and Religion, which they had learned, and
receued in the Apostles time, and hitherto we have not found any material
difference in any age between them, and the church of Rome in these chief
questions I have in hand; now to make evident demonstration by these
adversaries to the holy Roman Religion, that this church never altered any
substantial matter, by their own judgment, at, before, or after, the cominge
of S. Augustine hither, I will first set down all the pretended chaunges
additio^s or alteratio^s, which these protestants charge that holy church
withal, in these affairs, prouinge them to be of no moment, or essential;
And after show how the Christian Britans in this age also, as in all the
former, still agreed in these questions with the church of Rome. And whereas
there was then some difference between the disciples of S. Gregory and the
Brita^s here about the observation of Easter, and some other questions, rather
ceremonial, then substantial in Religion, that the church even by the
testimony of our protestants, did hold the truth in these matters, and such
Britans and Scots as held the contrary, were in confessed, and inexcusable
error.

2. The first alleged chaunger or additioner of any thing in the holy
sacrifice of Mass, which our protestants object among the Popes of Rome, in
this age, is Horsmida, who as these men write: commanded that altars should
not be erected, without the assent of the Bishop. Ne altaria sine Episcopi
assensu erigerentur iussit. (Rob. Barnes in vit. Pontif. Romans in Horsmida. Bal.
in Act. Pont. in eod.) but this was according to holy scriptures, to have
Superiors and commanders to be obeyed: remember them which have the rule over
you. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselues. (Hebr. cap.
13. v. 7.17. and S. Ignatius living in the first hundred years, proves noe
such thing ought to be done without the Bishops assent. ( Ignat. epist. ad
Smyrnenses.) and the puritan presbytery, and among our English parliament
Protestants no such matter in their Religion may be done, without the
allowance of their Protestant Bishops. And these protestant obiectors
themselves before confess, that Pope Syricius took order, that Mass should
not be said but in places consecrated by the Bishop. Missas in loco ab
Episcopo sacrato celebrandas esse. (Rob. Barnes in vit. Syricij Papae.) which
was soon after the ceasinge of persecution by the Emperors, that places might
be freely dedicated to God, and hallowinge of altars belo^ged properly ever to
the episcopal dignity. And our protestants ar witnesses, that this was then
practiced and observed in Britanie by S. David, S. Dubritius and others, too
many to be recited. And in King Lucius his time, when so many churches with
their altars were dedicated by our holy Bishops to God, S. Peter, and other
Saints. Godwin conuers. cap. 2. page 11. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. Theat. of
great Britanie. Capgrau. in S. Patricio and alij.

3. From Horsmida, they lepp over Ioannes 1. Faelix 4. Bonifacius 2. Ionnes 2.
Agapetus 1. Syluerius 1. until they come to Pope Vigilius, who as these men
say, decreed, that Mass should be said toward the cast: Instituit vt Missa
celebretur versus orientem. (Io. Bal. l. 2. de Act. Pontif. Romans in Vigilio.)
or as an other protestant interprets it: Vigilius instituted that priests
being to say Mass, should turn their face toward the east. (Barnes in vit.
Vigilij) Vigilius instituit, vt Missam celebraturi, faciem ad orientem
verterent. But this is only a ceremony if he had first invented it: but S.
Basile tells us it was an apostolical tradition, so to pray toward the
east. ( Basil. l. de Spiritu Sancto cap. 27.) for speaking of such traditions
from the Apostles, not contained in scripture he says: vt ad orientem versus
precemur, quae decuit scriptura? to pray with our faces toward the east is a
tradition, and not taught in scripture. And this tradition and custom of the
primative Christians to pray, and say Mass turning their faces toward the
east, was so common, public, and well known long before this time ( Proclus
supra in vita S. Patricij. Holinsh. histor. of Ireland in S. Patrick) that as I
have declared before, both Catholic and Protestant antiquaries so assuring us,
it was given for a distinctiue sign, by the devils and magiciens of Ireland,
to the then Pagan inhabitants thereof, before the cominge of S. Patrick thither,
to know him and his Christian disciples by, that they should set their Altar,
say Mass, and pray toward the east, as we generally see chauncels and high
altars of Christian churches are framed. Therefore we may be secure, that
hitherto the church of Rome and Britanie agreed in these mysteries, nothing
added yet by any Pope, which the Britans did not embrace. For better testimony
whereof we are told by the antiquaries of Cambridge, that King Arthur in his
charter of privilege, to that schole, or university, bearinge date at London,
in the year of Christ 531. does therein express, that he gives that
confirmation with the counsel and assent of all and every Bishops, and nobles
of his kingdom, and license of the sea Apostilick of Rome. Consilio and
consensu omnium and singulorum Pontificum and Principum istius regni, and
licentia sedis Apostolicae. (Io. Caius l. 1. antiquit. page 69. Diploma Regis
Arthuri 7. die Aprilis an. 531. Londini apud Caium supr. page 68.69.70.)
therefore if the then Kings of Britanie, and all the Bishops, and Noble men
thereof, by which the rest were governed, did then so firmly adhere to the Pope
of Rome in matters of Religion, that they would not join in such an Act,
without his license, no man will think, there was or then could be any
difference in Religion between them. And to confirm us the more in this great
union, and amity of Rome and Britanie, in such affairs, at this time of Pope
Vigilius, and King Arthur, our protestants Matthew of Westminster tells us.
( Matthew. Westminster. an. 533. that this Religious King committed Walwan son to
Loath his sisters son, Who should have inherited the kingedome of Norwey to
Pope Vigilius to be brought up, when he was but 12. years of age, and that
he was knighted by him. Erat autem Walwanus filius praedicti Loath, duodecim
annorum iuuenis, Vigilio Papae traditus ad nutriendum, a quo etiam and militiae
cingulum accepit. How far this Pope intermeddled in ordering the prefaces in
Mass, I have said before, and these protestants being silent therein, thereby
rest contented in that point.

4. The next additioner with these protestants, is the next Pope, Pelagius the
first: who as these men say, gave allowance that in time of Lent priests might
say Mass at the ninth hour of the day, which is three of the clock in the
afternoon by our account. In quadrage sima presbytero licere sacra facere hora
nona pronuntiauit. (Rob. Barnes in Pelag. 1.) an other says: vt quadrag
esimali tempore hora nona sacrificulis missare liceret. (Bal. in Pelag. 1.) but
this was but a ceremony, and argued, how reverent and devout priests were, in
that time, to this holy sacrifice, that they did, and would fast so long to
say Mass, so nere the time it was instituted by Christ, and Christ was offered
upon the Cross, this proves, they were not protestants in that time, which
neither reverence Mass, nor fast so long, or at all in Lent. But they add of
this Pope: mortuorum memorias approbauit, ac lucri gratia missis adiecit. He
approved the memories of the dead, and for gain added them to Masses. ( Bal.
in Pelag. 1.) but this Protestant Bishop is either very forgetful, or makes
no scruple to contradict himself, for he tells us before in the life of
Saint and Pope Siricius long before S. Celestine sent S. German and the rest
into these parts, that this S. Syricius adjoined memories unto Masses, and yet
died a confessor in the year of our Lord 399. Syricius Missae memorias
adiunxit, and anno Domini 399. confessor occubuit. (Balaeus. l. 2. de Act.
Pontif. Romans in Syricio.) and Tertullian in his time sets it down for an
Apostolical tradition, to say Mass for the dead, and keep their anniuersary
days, oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitijs annua die faecimus. (Tertul. l.
de coron. milit. cap. 3.) S. Ciprian S. Chrysostom and others have the like.
And our protestants have confessed before, that it was an Apostolical
tradition to say Mass for the dead, and that Aerius was justly condemned of
heresy, and for an heretic for his denial thereof. And we had here in
Britanie many foundations to say Mass, and pray for Christian souls, and
friends deceased, as we find in the charter of King Arthur before recited,
wherein among other motives of that his confirmatorie privilege to the
university of Cambridge, he says expressly, that he does it, with the
consent of all his Bishops, for the help of the souls of his antecessors
Kings of Britanie. Pro amore caelestis patriae, remedioque animarum
Antecessorum meorum Brita^niae Regum. Charta Regis Arthuri apud Caium supr.
antiq. Cantabr. l. 1. page 69.

5. After this Pope, until they come to S. Gregory, these protestants
complain of no additions, but only in Pope Pelagius the second, which was the
immediate predecessor to S. Gregory, and sent him, yet a private priest, his
legate to Constantinople: of this Pope they write: nouem praefationes ante
canonem in Missa canendas de dit. He gave nine prefaces to be sunge before
the canon in Mass. ( Bal. in Pelag. 2. l. 2. in Act. Pontif. an other thus
more particularly expresses it: Pelagtus nouem praefationes Ecclesiae de dit
ante canonem, in Missa canendas: in Natali, in Epiphania, in Quadragesima, de
Cruce, de Resurrectione, de Ascensione, in Pe^tecoste, de Trinitate, de
Apostolis^ (Barnes in Pelag. 2. in vit. Pont.) Pelagius gave nine prefaces to
the church, to be sunge before the canon in Mass, one in the nativity of
Christ, an other in the Epiphanie, in Lent, of the Cross, of the Resurrection,
of the Ascension, at Whitsontyde, of the Trinity, of the Apostles. I have
answered this before, in Pope Gelasius, to whom these protestants before
contradictinge them selves ascribe the preface, how vain this quarrel is I
have there declared, and only add here from their protestant like published
Matthew of Westminster: Anno gratiae 581. Papa Pelagius decreuit nouem
praefationes ta^tum ad Missas debere cantari, cassatis quotidianis quae dici
solebant. In the year of grace 581. Pope Pelagius decreed that only nine
prefaces should be sunge at Mass omitting the daily prefaces which were wont
to be said. Where we see that this Pope did not add any thing in this
business, but rather deducted some prefaces, though they had been used to be
said before, for so the words, dici solebant, manifestly prove, as I wrote of
Pope Vigilius before. All which do evidently testify, that the ancient
receued custom of the church of Christ was long before these days, to use
these prefaces.

THE XXII. CHAPTER. Wherein evident demonstration is made, even by these
protestants themselves, that neither S. Gregory the great, which sent S.
Augustine, with many other holy learned men into England, did make any
material addition, or alteration in these mysteries. But the Religion which
those his disciples preached here, was in all points by all testimonies both of
God and man, Britans them selves, and Saxons, Catholics and Protestants,
ancient and late writers, the true Religion of Christ, and in all things
wherein they differed from the Britans, more pure then that which they then
professed.
NOw we are come to the happy days of S. Gregory the great, that sent so many
holy men, to preach Christian Religion to this English nation, and so called
our Apostle, in which it will be more manifest, even by these protestant
accusers themselves, that whatsoever difference there was, between the holy
disciples which he sent hither, and some Britans, the error in every point was
in those that opposed against the Roman mission. And for S. Gregory himself,
one of the four holy Doctors of the church of Christ, he was by all testimonies
a great learned man, and holy Saint, and so honored both in the Greek and
Latin church, and the Mass he used as our protestants have told us. ( Edw.
Sands relation of Relig. supr.) both was, and is receued and publicly used
even in the Greek church, being translated into Greek: he is styled by all
writers protestants and Catholics, Gregory the great, and commonly named the
Apostle of the English nation, in all public protestant Kalenders placed
among the holy Saints, and by a Protestant Bishop his greatest accuser,
dignified, with these honorable terms. ( Bal. l. 2. de Act. Pontific. Romans in
Gregorio Magno.) Gregorius Magnus omnium Pontificum seu vt dictum est
Patriarcharum Romanorum, doctrina, and vita praestantissimus: inuitus ac demu^
coactus Pelagio praedicto successit, vir doctus and bonus. Gregory the great
the most excellent both for learning and life, of all the Roman Popes or
Patriarchs, did against his will, and at last thereto compelled, succeed
Pelagius the second, he was a learned and good man. Therefore it cannot be
either probable, or possible, that a man so learned, virtuous, and holy, that
he is thus dignified by so great enemies, both for learning and piety above
all the Popes that ever were so learned, and known holy Saints, and so
unwilling to take that greatest honor, and charge upon him, would or could
contrary both to so great learning, and piety, which could not consist with
any the least error in Religion in essential things, make any erroneous
public decree in such affairs. For in so doing he should have been so far
from that eminent learning, and piety, and being a glorious Saint in heaven,
which both by protestants and Catholics are generally held and written of him,
that quite contrary he should have been an unlearned, wicked, and damned man.
Which no tongue or mouth that has learned to confess Christ, dares to affirm
or utter.

2. But to give all contentment, I will examine all whatsoever in particular,
they say this so holy learned Pope added, or altered in these mysteries, as
they pretend. This Protestant Bishop says of him ( Bal. l. 2. supr. in Gregor.
Mag.) introitum in Missa ex aliquo psalmo cancre iussit. He commanded the
introite in the Mass to be sunge out of some psalm. They have told us before
of more ancient times wherein the introite was used, before S. German, Lupus,
Palladius and Patricius were sent into these parts. But if S. Gregory did any
such thing, seeing it was ex aliquo psalmo, out of the holy scripture, neither
these men, nor any which will not disallow of holy scripture, may reprehend it.
And where this protestant accuser further says: Nonies in Missa, Kyrie eleyson
canere iussit. S. Gregory commanded that Lord have mercy upon us, should be
sunge 9. times in Mass. He is deceued, for that is song but 6. times, and
Christ have mercy upon us, thrice: And his friend Master Fox. ( Io. Fox in Q.
Mary page 1401.) will tell him, that this was the ancient custom of the
Greek church long before, from which is was taken by S. Gregory, only that S.
Gregory added, Christ have mercy upon us. But howsoever is it not a most holy
and warranted custom, so to pray? our protestants themselves observe it in
their public church service. ( Com. book tit. Litan. and alibi.) and
commonly prefer them before all other prayers, both in their private, and
public writings.

3. Of S. Gregory's addinge, diesque nostros in tua pace disponas, and dispose
our days in peace, and grant we be delivered from eternal damnation, and
numbered in the flock of thy elect. I have spoken before, and here only I add,
that S. Bid, whom this Protestant Bishop. ( Io. Bal. l. de scriptor. Britan.
centur. 1. in Beda Girwino.) does equal or rather prefer before S. Gregory,
S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and S. Chrysostom, those great lights of Christ's
church, does say, that these words which S. Gregory added in the holy Mass,
are words full of greatest perfection: Beatus Papa Gregorius in ipsa Missarum
celebratione, tria verba maximae perfectionis plena superadiecit, diesque
nostros in tua pace disponas, atque ab aeterna damnatione nos cripi, and in
electorum tuorum iubeas grege numerari. (Beda Eccles. histor. l. 2. cap. 1.) in
which place he also commends him, for causinge in the churches of S. Peter
and S. Paul at Rome, Masses to be said over their bodies. Fecit inter alia
beatus Papa Gregorius, vt in Ecclesijs beatorum Apostolorum Petri and Pauli
super corpora eoru^ Missae celebrarentur. Which sacred bodies of those two
glorious Apostles, this lewd protestant superintendent, and therein as his
phrase teaches, a V^gilantian heretic, calls the dead ^arcasses of the
Apostles, so as we term the dead bodies of beasts, and therefore disliketh
S. Gregory for that institution: super Apostolorum mortua cadauera Missas
celebrari mandauit. (Bal. l. 2. de Act. Pontif. Romans in Gregor. Magno.) but
though it does not belong to this place, and my promise, yet to free S.
Gregory from all pretended error in any matter, I will show in the next chapter,
when I come to speak of the british priests, and Bishops of this age, that
they were as far engaged in this doctrine of reverence to holy relics, as
either S. Gregory, or his disciples he sent hither were, or the Catholics of
the present Roman church be at this time. The same I will demonstrate
concerning the doctrine of Indulgences, an other pretended blott, which they
would gladly find out, to stain, and blemish the glory of that great Doctor,
Pope, and Saint.

4. And whereas this protestant Bishop says of this holy Pope: He admitted
Masses for the dead, Missas pro mortuis admisit, I have often showed by these
protestants, that this was used from the beginning. And whereas he obiecteth.
( Bal. supr. in Greg. Magno.) that S. Gregory first instituted Candelmasse day,
and palm sunday, with solemnity of procession, though these be but
ceremonial, yet he contradicts himself, knowinge and acknowledginge, that
processions were long before in use, and that Candelmasse day was kept with
candels in the time of Pope Vigilius, and by his approbation: candelaru^ festum
instituit. (Bal. in Vigilio l. 2. Act. Pontific. Rom.) whereas this man says
in S. Augustine, S Gregory's disciple, that he brought hither altars,
vestiments, holy vessels, relics, and books of ceremonies, introduxit
altaria, vestimenta, vasa sacra, reliquias, and ceremoniarum codices. (Bal. l.
de scriptor. Britan. l. 1. in Augustino. Monocho.) I have showed already, that
all these were in use with the Christian Britans long before, and this
protestant obiector among others, so acknowledges in diverse, both Scots, and
Britans, in this Island, and in the life of S. Patrick he receueth as S.
Patricks, the epistle written in his name: Patricius scripsit ad Aualonios
Inculas epistolam. (Bal. centur. 1. Gild. l. de excid. Bed. l. v. histor.
Eccles. Bal. centur. 1. in Brigida Lagin. Kentegern. Patric. Iona. Monacho and
alijs.) in which he proves both S. Patricke, S. Pope Celestine, S. Pope
Eleutherius, and his Legates S. Damianus, and Fugatianus in King Lucius time,
and all the Britans in those times, to have been as great Patrons, and
practisers of these doctrines and customs, which he disliketh in S. Gregory
and his disciples, as any of them the^ was, or any learned Catholic at this
present is. Thus f^rr these protestants exceptions against the doctrine of S.
Gregory, and his disciples, all turning to their glory, and confusion of the
protestant accusers by their own sentence.

5. To which I will add one thing more from our holy contrima^ S. Aldelmus
scholar to S. Gregory as his words import, who thus relates an addition of S.
Gregory to the canon of the Mass, which our protestants do not remember in
their oblations. ( S. Adelmus l. de laudib. Virginitat. cap. 22.) mihi operae
pretium videtur, vt Sanctae Agathae rumores castissimae Virginis Luciae
praeconia subsequantur: Quas Praeceptor and pedagogus noster Gregorius, in
canone quotidiano, quando Missarum solemnia celebrantur copulasse cognoscitur,
hoc modo in Catalogo Martyrum ponens: Faelicitate, Anastasia, Agatha, Lucia. It
is a thing worth labor, that after speech of S. Agatha (he speaks of the
praise of virginity) the praises of the most chaste Virgin Lucia, should
follow, which our Master and Instructor Gregory, is known to have coupled in
the daily canon, when the solemnities of Mass are celebrated, placing them
thus in the Catalogue of Martyrs: Faelicitas, Anastasia, Agatha, Luciae. But
this rather makes against protestant quarrels, in this kind, for they
contendinge against the doctrine of prayer to Saints, are taught here, that it
was the ancient custom of Gods church to pray unto them, even in their
public Masses. ( can. Miss.. nobis quoque peccatoribus.) for S. Gregory did
here only add S. Agatha, and S. Lucia, unto the others, which were in the
canon before, copulasse cognoscitur, and be very many in particular, as
appears in that place, besides all the Apostles and holy Martyrs in general,
cum tuis Sanctis Apostolis, and Martyribus: and the words, in canone
quotidiano, in the daily canon of Mass, are an evident conviction, that the
daily canon of Mass was used, and this honor of Saints also therein before this
time: as we see in all old Masses, Greek, Latin, or Syriake. And I have
before proved, that this holy doctrine was ever from the beginning of
Christianity in this kingdom reverently observed. Of the truth and excellency
of S. Gregory's and S. Augustines Religion planted among the Saxons, I have
spoken sufficiently in all things in my ecclesiastical history at large.

6. To prove it briefly in this place more sound and perfect then the Religion
of the Christian Britans, so dignified by our protestant writers, I first use
them for witnesses thereof. And first the present Protestant Archbishop of
Canterbury D. George Abbots, the director of Master Frauncis Mason, and this
his directed scribe thus write, producinge the British Bishops themselves at
that time so acknowledginge. ( George Abbot and Franc. Mason l. 2. of
consecrat. of Bish. cap 4. page 59.) The british Bishops confessed, that they
understood that to be the true way of righteousness, which Augustine had
preached. Yea the faith which S. Augustine brought, and that which the Britans
had before, must needs be one and the same in all material and substantial
points. Wherefore we cannot excuse the Britans, for refusing to join with him
in the conversion of the Saxons. The like have, Stowe, Howes, Hollinshed and
other protestants. ( Stowe and Howes histor. in K. Ethelbert. Holinsh. hist. of
Engl. l. 5. cap. 15. page 96. page 97. an. 581.) shewinge directly, that the
Christian Britans at the coming of S. Augustine, and his companions, were far
inferior unto them, both in holiness of life, and purity of doctrine. Which is
testified with great lame^tation by S. Gildas a Britane, S. Bid writer of the
british history. ( Gildas l. de excid. and conquest. Brit. Bed. histor. Eccl.
l. 1. Galfrid. Monument. hist. Reg. Brit. l. 10. and 11.

7. And if we descend unto the particular differences, which then were
between S. Augustine, and the Britans, there is not any one to be found in
any antiquity, that concerned the questions I have in hand, but in them there
was an uniform consent by all writers, only I find that they differed in
some ceremonies about the consecration of Bishops, but in no material thing.
( S. Asaph. in vit. S. Kentegerni. M. S. in vit. eius and Capgrau. in Catal. in
Kenteg.) and our protestants differ from them both therein. For the Britans did
then consecrate Bishops with anointing their heads with holy Chrisme,
Invocation of the holy Ghost, Benediction, and Imposition of hands: Mos in
Britannia inoleuerat in consecratione Pontificum tantummodo capita eorum sacri
Chrismatis infusione perungere, cum inuocatione Sancti Spiritus, and
Benedictione, and manus Impositione. And the Romans besides these necessary
things, in that consecration, kept and observed the decrees of the holy Canons,
in this business; Which the Britans did not omit for any dislike they had of
those sacred ceremonies, but by distance of place, and infested with Pagans
invasions, were ignorant of the canons, as our Authors say: Insulam enim quasi
extra orbem positi, emergentibus Paganorum infestationibus, canonum erant
ignari^ (M. S. de vita S. Kenteger^ antiq. and Capgrau supr. in eod.) and yet
our protestants both knowinge the canonical institutions, and what both the
Romans and Britans, with all the Christian world at that time, thought to be
essential, and necessary in this holy Sacrament, neither follow the one, or
other, and so by all judgment, have deprived them selves of lawful and true
Bishops, and consequently of all true clergy men, which cannot be without
true and lawful Bishops, such as they want, to consecrate them.

8. The other differences between S. Augustine, and the Britans, may appear
out of the words of S. Augustine unto them, related by S. Bid, and others, and
thus set down by our protestant historians. Augustines oration briefly was
thus. (Bed. histor. Eccles. l. 2. cap. 2. Stowe and Howes histor. in Kentish.
Saxons. K. Ethelbert.) although dear brethren, in many other points ye do
contrary to our custom, or rather contrary to the custom of the universal
church of Christ: yet notwithstanding if ye will in these three things
consent unto me, that is, to celebrate the easter in due time, to accomplish
the ministry of Baptism according to the Roman, and Apostolic church, and
last of all to preach with us to this English nation, the word of our Lord,
all your other ceremonies, rites, and customs, though they be contrary to
ours, yet we will willingly suffer, and be content to bear with them.
But they ansvvered they vvoulde do none of these things requested. Where we
see, that S. Augustine and the Britans did differ principally, in these three
things, and by our protestants themselves, S. Augustine held the truth in them,
and the Britans were in error. And so likewise in all other ceremonies rites
and customs then co^trouersed: for S. Augustine justifies that the Britans in
them all were, contrary to the custom of the universal church of Christ. In
multis quidem nostrae consuetudini, immo vniuersalis Ecclesiae contraria
geritis. And their learned contriman Gyraldus Cambrensis diverse hundreds of
years since, being as a protestant, Bishop styles him, vetustae cognitionis
vere helluo, an insatiable seeker forth of antiquities, with protestants
allowance thus sets down the ceremonies of the Britans, wherein they
differed from all other churches, in this order. Bal. l. de scriptor. Britan.
in Gyrald. Cambren. cent. 2. Gyrald. Cambren. descript. Cambr. cap. 18. David
Powell ib.

9. De quolibet pane apposito primum fractionis angulum pauperibus donant. Of
every loaf of bread set before them, they give the first corner they break
to the poor. They sit three and three together, at dinner in memory of the
Trinity. They cast away their armor, and bare headed ask the benediction of
every Monk or priest, or any wearinge the habit of Religion: The people does
greatly, and more then other nations, desire confirmation by a Bishop, and
Inunction of Chrisme, by which the grace of the holy Ghost is given. They give
tithes of all things they possess, cattle, sheep sometimes when either they
marry wives, or go on pilgrimage, or correct their life by the counsel of the
church. Above all foreign labor, most willingly going on pilgrimage to Rome,
they more readily with devout minds adore the Tombs of the Apostles. We see
they yield devout reverence to churches and ecclesiastical men, and relics of
Saints, and portable bells, woven books, and the cross, and give far more
honor to all these then any other nation. The immunities of their churches,
far exceeds the Indulgence of the canons. You shall not see any where the
Eremites and Anachorites of greater abstinence, or more spiritual. And
speakinge of the Britans in the time of S. Germanus, and Lupus, when they were
troubled with Pelagianisme, and first irruptions of the Pagan Saxons, these
Authors say. These customs and ceremonies of the Britans continued from them,
to the time of Gyraldus Cambrensis, that died in the year of Christ 1190. ab
eorundem doctrina haec, vt fertur, vsqe in hodiernum documenta tenuerunt.

10. Thus we have learned all the differences, that were between S.
Augustine, and the Britans: and find, that S. Augustine was the innocent
party in them all. For among all these last recited, where any thing is
remembered as singular, and differing from other churches, it is the case of the
Britans, and the Romans agreed with the common and receued customs of the
church of Christ: And concerning those doctrines and customs which our
protestants do most dislike in S. Gregory, and S. Augustine, with his
associates, and the now present Roman church, which are pilgrimages, and
especially to Rome, with the honor of that holy Apostolic see, reverence of
holy relics, Indulgences, honor to sacrificinge massinge priests, and
Religious men, and more Sacraments then protestants admit, as namely the
Sacrament of confirmation, giuinge of the grace of the holy Ghost, by
anointinge with sacred Chrisme, reuerencing of the cross, and holy images,
we see by the testimony both of the Britans, and protestants themselves, that
these were more zelously observed of the Christian Britans at that time, whose
faith and Religion is so much commended by our protestant writers, then they
were by S. Gregory, or S. Augustine then, or be at this time by the present
church of Rome, and the members thereof.

11. Therefore it being the common and generally receued opinion, both of our
English Protestant Bishops, as Parker, Bale, Godwin, with others, and their
Doctors and antiquaries as Powel, Fox, Fulke, Middleton, Gosceline, Stowe,
Howes, Holinshed, and too many to be recited, that at the cominge of S.
Augustine hither, the faith and Religion of the Christian Britans here, was in
all material points sound, and perfect, and the same which they receued in
the time of the Apostles, much more and rather must they needs yield, and
allow that honor, to the Religion and doctrine of S. Augustine, and the other
disciples of S. Gregory, which they preached and planted here, being by so many
and all humane testimonies before acknowledged in all matters controuersed
between them, to be the undoubted true, and perfect Religion of Christ.
Parker. antiquit^ Britan. page 6.45.46. Balaus l. 2. de Act. Pontific. in
Gregorio Magno and l. de scriptor. Brit. centur. 1. in Augustine. Dionotho.
Godvvin. conuers. of Brit. Povvell annotat. in l. 2. Giraldi Cambr. de
Itinerar. Cambr. cap. 1. Fox Act. and Mon. page 463. edit. an. 1576. Fulke
ansvv. to counterf. Cathol. page 40. Middlet. Papistom. page 202.) Io. Goscelin.
hist. Eccl. de vit. Arch. Cantuar. Stovve and Howes hist. in K. Ethelbert.
Holinsh, histor. of Engl. cap. 21. page 102.

12. And to make all sure, and unquestionable, except with athests, and
infidels, enemies to Christ himself, we have both the present and
prophetical witness of God himself, that by no possibility can deceive un
in this case, and this confessed, and receued even by our protestant writers,
who first assure us, that in the controversy between the Britans and S.
Augustine, God gave so miraculous testimony, for S. Augustine and his Roman
companions to teach the truth in all things controuersed then between them
and the Britans, that the Britans were thereby so extraordinarily convicted, and
confounded (to speak in protestant words) that they confessed in deed, that
to be the true way of righteousness which Augustine had preached, and showed
them. (Stowe and Howes histor. in K. Ethelbert.) and God could not possibly
give other testimony by these protestants, and all learning, except he would
or could (blasphemy to affirm) contradict himself, for by all professors of
Christian Religion he had promised, that Catholic church universal should
never err, and yet protestants with others thus confess: all other churches
throughout the world agreed with Augustine in Christ. Of Gods prophetical
testimony hereof we have many witnesses, Catholics and Protestants, S. Asaph
in the life of S. Kentegern, many Manuscripts, the British history, Matthew of
Westminster, with others for Catholics; and among protestants, their first
Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, their protestant Bishop Bale, with others.
( S. Asaph. in vit. S. Kentegern. M. S. antiq. in eod. Galfr. Monum. l. 7. cap.
3. Matthew. Westminster. an. 465. Matthew. Parker. antiquit. Britan. page 49. Io. Bal. l.
de script. Britan. cent. 1. in Kentegern.) this last speakinge of the Pagan
Saxons inuadinge this kingdom, and ouerthrowinge Christian Religion, brings
S. Kentegern thus to prophecy long before, how S. Augustine and his associats
should restore it again, not only unto the ancient state of Religion, but a
better then it enjoyed in the time of the Britans. Christianae legis Religio
vsque ad praefinitum tempus dissipabitur. Sed in pristinum statim immo meliorem
miserante Deo in fine reparabitur.

13. The ancient Manuscript history of S. Kentegerns life, S. Asaph, Capgraue
and others say, S. Kentegern prophesied this, and publicly told it, to his
disciples at the time of the death of S. David, which as our protestants write,
was above 50. years before the cominge of S. Augustine hither. ( M. S. antiq.
de vita S. Kentegerni. Io. Copgrau. in S. Kentegerno Episcopo and Confessore.)
who being at that time as often, very earnest at his prayers, and much
lamentinge, after being demanded by his disciples the cause of his great
sorrow, after a short silence, thus answered: Know you my dearest children
that S. David the ornament of Britanie, Father of his contry, is even now
loosed from the prison of his flesh, and gone to the heavenly kingdom.
Understand you that Britanie deprived of so great a light, shall lament the
absence of so great a patron, who opposed him self against the sword of God,
half drawn against it, for the wickedness of the inhabitants thereof, that it
should not be fully drawn and bring it to destruction. Our Lord will give
Britanie over to foreign nations, that know him not. And the Isle shall be
emptied of the inhabitants, by Pagans. The Religion of the law of Christ shall
be destroyed, until a certain time in it. But by the mercy of God, it shall
be again repaired unto the former, and unto a better state then it was before.
Seruo Dei quodam die prolixius orationi intento, facies eius quasi ignea
apparens stupore and extasi circumstantes repleuit. Intucbantur enim faciem
eius tanquam vultum Angeli stantis inter illos. Completa oratione, grauissimis
lamentis se dedit. Et cum discipuli causam tristitiae humiliter ab eo peterent,
paulisper in silentio residens, tandem ait. Noueritis filij charissimi, Sanctum
David decus Britanniae, patrem patriae, carnis carcerem modo egressum, regna
caelestia penetrasse. Credit mihi, quod non solum Angelorum multitudo in
gaudium Domini sui illum introduxit, sed and Dominus noster Jesus Christus ei
obuiam procedens, ad portas paradisi gloria and honor coronauit eum, me
vidente. Scitote etiam quod Britannia tanto lumine orbata, tanti patroni
lugebit absentiam: qui gladio Domini propter malitiam inhabitantium semi
euaginato super illam, ne penitus ad internitionem extractus percuteret
semetipsun opponebat. Tradens tradet Dominus, Britanniam exteris nationibus
Deum ignorantibus: sed and a Paganis ab indigenis euacuabitur insula,
Christianae legis Religio vsque ad praefinitum tempus dissipabitur in ea: sed
in pristinum stati^, immo meliorem miserante Deo iterum reparabitur.

14. Our protestant historians do likewise relate the actual change of
Religion here then for the better, and for better preachers in these words, (
Edw. Hovves and Stovve histor. in K. Ethelbert. Gild. l. de excid.) Among
many the Britans doings which their own historiographer Gildas does
lamentably set forth in writing, he says of them thus, that they never
took care to preach the gospel of Christ unto the Angles, and Saxons, which
inhabited the land among them. But yet the goodness of God provided for the
said nation of the said Angles, much more vvorthie preachers by whom they
might be brought to the faith. And then immediately they set down S. Augustine,
Mellitus, Iustus, and John, with others sent hither by S. Gregory, to be these
much more vvorthie preachers, by whom this nation was brought to the faith.
And this might suffice in this matter, but for the full clearing of al doubts, I
will further and fully prove, how al priests and Bishops in Britanie in this
age, were sacrificing massing priests: and the best learned and most holy
among them, did in all things join with the Popes, and church of Rome; and
they which opposed most against S. Augustine, and his associates sent from
thence in some ceremonial customs, did in these points and all others which
protestants most dislike in Catholic Roman Religion, utterly disagree from
these protestants, and hold the same doctrine and practice generally, as S.
Augustine did, and the members of the present Roman Apostolic church do at
this day.

THE XXIII. CHAPTER. Wherein demonstration is made both by protestants, and
other testimonies, that during all this age and hundred of years until and
after the coming of S. Augustine, this kingdom had many holy massinge priests
and Bishops, agreeinge in these, and all other articles of Religion with the
church of Rome.
IN the later end of the fifth hundred of years, of Christ, I made relation,
how among many others, those two renowned massinge priests, S. Dubritius the
great Archbishop of Caerlegion, and the Popes Legate, made Bishop by the
massing Bishop and Legate of the sea Apostolic, and S. Iltutus disciple of
the same massing Bishop and Legate S. Germanus were Tutors, and Masters in
Religion and divinity, not only to the clergy of this Island but many others,
and neither did, nor could teach them any other doctrine in these points, then
they had receued from others, and practiced by themselves, about holy
preisthood, and sacrifice of Mass; And as both protestants and other
antiquaries tell us, both these lived 20. years at the least, in the
beginning of this sixth age, S. Iltutus being alive and florishinge in the
year 520. claruit anno a Christi natiuitate 520. and S. Dubritius living two
years after, obijt anno gratiae 522. ( Bal. l. de scriptor. Britan. cent. 1.
in Ilchtuto. and in Dubritio. Godw. Catal. in S. David's. in Dubritius.)
therefore we may boldly say, that among so great numbers of their massing
scholars, many of them lived a great part, if not all this age. The ancient
Manuscript of the Saints of Wales, the Apologist of the antiquity of
Cambridge, and others thus testify of S. Dubritius. ( M. S. antiq. de vit.
Sanctorum Wall. in S. Dubritio. Io. Caius l. 1. de antiquit. Cantabr. Academ.
page 145.146.) Creuit illius fama cum vtriusque legis, nouae and veteris
peritia per tota^ Britanniam, ita quod ex omni part totius Britanniae
scholares veniebant, non tantum rudes, sed etiam viri sapientes and Doctores ad
eum studendi causa confluebant. Imprimis Sanctus Helianus, Sampson discipulus
suus, Vbelnius, Merchiguinus, Elguoredus, Gunuinus, Longual, Artbodu, Longur,
Arguistil, Iunabin, Conbram, Goruan, Guernabin, Iouan, Elheharn, Iudnon,
Curdocui, Aidan, Cinuarch, and cum his mill clericos per septem annos continuo
in podo seu pago Hentlan super ripam Guy, in studio literarum diuinae
sapientiae and humanae retinuit. Where we see he had a thousand scholars at
one time, and place, seven years together that were clergy men students in
divinity, and in an other place, called in the British languadge Mocros,
miraculously assigned unto him, he had as these antiquities say, innumerable
scholars many years together, cum suis innumerabilibus discipulis mansit per
plures annos regendo studium. l. de vit. Sanct. Wall. Caius sup. page 147.148.
M. S. antiq. and Capgrau. in S. Iltuto and Tatheo.

2. The like they write of the schools of S. Iltutus, and S. Tatheus, or as
some call him Thatheus. The antiquaries of Cambridge allege for the immunities
and privileges of their university, the ancient Charter dated at London in
the year of Christ 531 of King Arthur, that known reuerencer of sacrificing
priests, and Mass. Charta priuileg. Arthuri an. 531. apud Caium antiq.
Cantabrig. l. 1.) and both Catholics and protestants testify, that the
ancient university of Standford continued in this time, and until S. Gregory
interdicted it for heresies that fell among the Saxons and Britans together
mixed. (Harding histor. in King Ethelbert. Stowe and Howes history in Bladud.)
therefore we may assure our selves, that notwithstanding so many troubles,
and alterations, as chanced here in those days, they continued the holy
doctrine and custom of Mass, and sacrificinge priests; For S. Gregory so
known and confessed a Patron and practiser of these things, neither would,
nor could have interdicted that university, for any thing which he himself
so embraced and honored. So that it is evident, that the whole kingdom of
Britanie in this time followinge the doctrine which their schools and
universities taught them, must needs then allow these holy mysteries of which
I write. The same is evident, both by the Kings which then reigned here, as
also by the Archbishops who ruled in Religious affairs. The Kings in the
beginning of this age were Other pendragon, who died about the year of Christ
515. beeinge for Religion of the same with the massinge Archbishops S.
Dubritius and S. Sampson, with the sacrificinge Bishops, and priests, by whose
general consent he was crowned King. Other conuocato regni clero, caepit
diadema Insula: annue^tibusque cunctis sublimatus est in Regem. (Galfr. Mon. l.
8. cap. 17. Math. Westminster. ad an. 498) and when his death was known they as
solemly assembled to give him Princely Christian burial. Cum obitus Regis
diuulgatus fuisset aduenerunt Pontifices cum clero regni: tuleruntque corpus
eius ad caenobium Ambrij, and iuxta Aurelium Ambrosium more regio humauerunt.

2. Next was King Arthur, how he was engaged in this holy doctrines it is
sufficient Argument, that being but 15. years of age, and his birth by many
not without exception, he was with the general applause both of the
sacrificinge clergy, and their ghostly children, crowned King by S.
Dubritius the Popes Legate, and renowned massinge Archbishop, and primate of
Britanie with the other massing Bishops thereof. Defuncto Vtherpendragon
conuenerunt ex diuersis Prouincijs proceres Britonum, Dubritio Vrbis Legionum
suggerentes, vt Arthurum filium Regis in Regem consecraret. Dubritius
associatis sibi Episcopis Arthurum regni diademate insignuit. (Galfrid. Mon l.
9. cap. 1. Matthew. Westminster. ad an. gratiae 516. Stowe histor. Britans and Saxons
in Arthur. Io. Bal. l. de script. Brit. cent. 1. in Dubritio. Godwin Catalog.
in S. David's.) to this his whole life in fighting against the enemies of that
holy Religion, the sacred churches, and altars which he reedified for that
heavenly sacrifice, and charters of immunities which he granted to the most
known massing places of Britanie, as Glastenbury and others, and the great
reverence he used to all massinge priests and Prelates, are sufficient
testimony of this, and to be seen almost in all histories, Manuscripts and
others of that time, and he lived unto the year of Christ 542. Now if we
come to the Archbishops and Bishops under them, Matthew of Westminster and
others tell us, that for York, that renowned massinge man S. Sampson was
Archbishop there, 7. years after the beginning of this age, anno gratiae 507.
Floruerunt in Brita^nia Sanctus Sampson Eboracensis Archiepiscopus, and S.
Dubritius Vrbis Regionum Archiepiscopus. (Matthew. Westminster. an. 542. and alij.
Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 507.) what a miraculous massing priest, and Prelate
he was, I have spoken in the former age.

3. That S. Dubritius ruled all in the Archiepiscopal see of Caerlegion, where
most both Bishops and priests were in these days, at the least until the 16.
year of this age I have showed before, when S. Dubritius with the rest of the
Bishops of Britanie crowned King Arthur in that year. Who was Archbishop of
London at this time, it is not so certainly remembered in particular. But the
Author of the British history translated by Galfridus assures us, that there
was an Archbishop of London at this time, and that he together with S.
Dubritius Archbishop of Caerlegion, and the Archbishop of York did crown
King Arthur. Trium Metropolitanarum sedium Archi Praesules, Londoniensis
videlicet, Eboracensis, nec non ex vrbe Legionum Dubritius hic Britanniae
primas, and Apostolicae sedis Legatus. (Galfr. Mon. histor. Reg. Brit. l. 9.
cap. 12.13.) and by the circumstances of the history, these three Archbishops
performed that great solemn coronation at the sole^nitie of Mass, at which
both the King, these three Archbishops with the other Bishops of their
divisions, and the nobility of Britanie were present. And this coronation is
cheifely attributed to S. Dubritius, because it was in his diocese. Dubritius
quoniam in sua diocesi caria tenebatur, paratus ad celebrandum obsequium, huius
rei curam suscepit, and he was the Popes Legate. And all histories agree, that
when the Bishops, and clergy, either of London, or York division, were
persecuted by the Pagans, they fledd for succor, to the known massinge
preistes, and Prelates of Caerlegion diocese, communicatinge with them in
Religion.

4. S. Dubritius waxinge old, and desirous to live a solitary and contemplative
life, the holy Saint David was miraculouslie chosen to succeed him. ( Capgrau.
in S. David. Gyrald. Cambr. Itiner. Cambr. l. 2. cap. 1. Godwin in S. David's.)
I have showed before, that he was the scholar of the massing priest, S.
Iltutus, scholar of the massinge Prelate and Popes Legate S. Germanus. This
holy Archbishop was so renowned a massinge priest, and Prelate, that as we
read both in ancient Manuscripts, and other histories, he brought with from
Jerusalem, beeinge a pilgrim there, an holy and miracalous Altar, given him
by the Patriake there, on which he consecrated the body of our Lord. In quo
Dominicum consecrabat corpus. ( M. S. antiq. de vit. S. Dauidis. Capgrau. in
Catalog. in eod.) and to make evident unto all, that S. David did say
ordinarily Mass in Britanie, as well as at Jerusalem, and likewise so did all
the Bishops here of Britanie then, and with great solemnity, to omit many
other memorable testimonies hereof, we read in the antiquities of Glastenbury,
Capgrauius, and others, and a Protestant Bishop writes, that the history is
still preserved engraued in Brass at Wells in Sommersetshire, though he
somewhat minceth it, how S. David and seven other Bishops goinge to Glastenbury
to dedicate the holy church there, Christ appeared unto him the night before
the intended dedication, and bid him abstain from dedicatinge it, for it had
been dedicated before to the blessed Virgin Mary his Mother. ( M. S. antiq.
and Io. Capgrau. Catalog. in S. Patricio. antiq. Glaston. Godwin conuers. of
Brit. page 11.) and to testify the truth of this vision, and testimony, left a
miraculous wound in the right hand of S. David, tellinge him how it should be
as miraculously healed as it was hurt, in this manner: crastina die cum
Pontificalibus inductus, cum per ipsum, and cum ipso, and in ipso, in Missa
pronuntias, ipso qui tecum loquitur operante, per ipsum quem sacro conficies
ore, vulnus quod nunc abhorres; nusquam esse videbis. Et cum sanctus iussa
complesset, sicut praedixit Dominus, efficitur sanus. To morrow when thou art
adorned with thy pontifical vestiments, and shall pronounce in Mass the words
by him, and with him, and in him, he that speaks with thee workinge by him
whom thou shall make with thy sacred mouth, thou shall see nowhere the
wound, which thou now abhorrest. And when the Saint had done as he was
commanded, as our Lord foretold, he was made found. And it follows in the
same a^tiquitie, preserved in Brass by Thomas Highes of Wells esquier, as that
protestant Bishop writes heretofore, fixed upon a pillar of S. Joseph's
chapel, which he himself had read. Godwin supr. cap. 2. page 11.

5. Postea idem Episcopus Domino reuelante quendam cancellum in orientali part
haic Ecclesiae adiecit, and in honor beatae Virginis consecrauit, cuius altar
inestimabili sapphiro in perpetuam huius rei memoriam insigniuit. Afterward the
same Bishop (S. David) by the revelation of our Lord, did add a certain
chauncell to this church, in the east part, and consecrated it in the honor of
the blessed Virgin, whose Altar for perpetual memory of this thing he did
adorn, with a sapphire of an inestimable price. Where we evidently see, the
doctrine and practice, both of the Archbishop, and Bishops of Britanie, seven
of them being then present, to go on pilgrimage, to holy places, and relics,
that they were sacrificing priests, said Mass, and with great reverence, and
solemnity, and in that holy sacrifice consecrated by consecratinge words of
their mouths, and offered the blessed body and blood of Christ, used the same
canon we now do, as the words, per ipsum, and cum ipso, and in ipso, with
the other circumstances tell us, and so honored the holy Altars, whereon this
heavenly sacrifice was offered, that they there offered inestimable gifts, and
ornaments to honor them withal, which is as much as any priest of the present
Roman church teaches, or conte^deth at this time, or Catholic Religion
allows them to do.

6. This renowned Archbishop so miraculous for his birth prophetically
foretold, his life, and death and so holy and pleasing unto God, that as I have
showed in him already, God spared to take vengeance on the sins of the
Britans, for his sake, during his life, died in the year of Christ 546. but
50. years before S. Augustines coming hither, as our protestants themselves
with others witness. ( Bal. l. de scriptor. Britan. cent. 1. in David
Meneuiensi.) and by an other protestant which faith, he sat long to wit,
65. years. (Godwin Catal. in S. David's 1. S. David.) he lived within 16.
years or nearer to S. Augustins arrival in this kingedome, an 596. for as I
proved before, his predecessor S. Dubritius was Archbishop there, in the year
516. and after, and died not until the year 522. though in his old age he had
a little before resigned his charge to S. David. ( Godwin sup. in S. David's. in
S. Dubritius. Bal. cent. 1. in eod. Galfr. Mon. l. 11. hist. Britan. cap. 3.)
there is some question in histories whether, as Giraldus Cambronsis and some
others say, Cenauc was immediate successor to S. David, or S. Theliaus,
Telianus, Eliud, all one man, by others. ( Girald. Cambr. Itiner. Cambr. l. 2.
c. 1. Godw. M. S. David's antiquitat. Eccles. S. Dauidis apud Godwin Catal.
Epis. pag^ 506. in S. David's.) but for this matter it mattereth nothing: for
this Cenauc was scholar, and successor to S. Pattern, that great known
massinge priest and Prelate, companion to S. David, in his holy pilgrimage: And
so could not differ from these holy Saints, in so great questions in Religion.
And for the other S. Telian or Eliud, there is no doubt, for he was scholar
to the renowned massinge Prelate S. Dubritius, and by him so thoroughly
instructed in divinity, that being endued with the holy Ghost, he could
perfectly expound all difficulties of holy scriptures. A sancto Dubritio
Episcopo in scripturis sanctis eruditus fuit, donec explicaret. (M. S. de vita
S. Theliai and Capgr^ Catalog. in eod.) and was so undivided a companion of S.
David, his predecessor, not only under their Master Paulinus (not improbably
he that lived to be Archbishop of York that great massing Prelate in S.
Augustines time) but in his pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and so by Rome from which
he could not differ in Religion: and so intrely and nearely conjoined in
Religion, and affection, that as we read in his life, they were both of one
mind, perfectly in all things; Sanctum David perfectae hominem vitae sibi
associauit: quos tanta coniunxit dilectio and sancti spiritus gratia, quod idem
velle, and nolle ambobus esset. Therefore he could not possibly, nor the
Bishops and priests under him, differ from S. David, in so great matters, but
were wholly of the same mind, and practice with him in those things. And the
church of Rome in all Catalogues receueth and acknowledges him for an holy
Saint, which it never did, will, or can do, to any an enemy and apposite unto
it, in those mysteries. And this sacrificinge massinge Prelate, probably was
Archbishop of Caerlegion among the Britans, at the cominge of S. Augustine
hither, living long after that time, and as a late writer holds. ( Engl.
Martyrolog. die 25. Nouembr.) until the year of Christ 626. living before
diverse years among the massing priests and Bishops of France, and not
improbably was there when S. Augustine first landed here, and neither present
at, or consenting unto that opposition, to S. Augustine.

7. And concerning the two other Archiepiscopall sees, London, and York,
although there is little memory left of Ecclesiastical affairs in them,
being both with their whole diocesses in those times most grievously
afflicted, and almost wholly eaten and devoured up, by the Pagan persecutors
in Religious things; yet for these doctrines we have in hand, there is
sufficient testimony left in antiquities, that so long as the state of
Christian Religion had public and open profession, there was also there the
like public use, and exercise, of these points of Catholic Religion; And
after the external face of Christianity was overthrown, yet at the least in
many places, of those Provinces, a private use and exercise was still continued
of these articles, even to the coming of S. Augustine and after, until the
general conversion of the Saxons themselves. And for York we have the known
massing Prelate Pyramus chapeline to King Arthur, that great Patron of
sacrificinge priests and holy Mass, which as his place required, was deputed
to say Mass, and ordinarily so did before that Religious King. ( Galfrid.
Monum. l. 9. histor. Reg. Briton. cap. 8. Matthew. Westminster. an gratiae 522.) and as
Thadiocus succeeded him in place and dignity so likewise he was his successor
in opinion, and practice in those questions, as will evidently appear, if we
only consider that they were both ordained by the authority and Legantine
power, either of S. Dubritius or S. David those famous massinge priests,
Prelates, primats and Saints. But we have the general warrants of the renowned
S Gyldas Badonicus, which now lived and until within 16. veares of S.
Augustins cominge hither, florishinge in the year of Christ 580. as a
protestant Bishop and antiquary with others writes. ( Bal. l. de scriptor.
Britan. cent. 1. in Gilda Badonico.) and proves that in this time all the
priests of Britanie were, sacrificantes sacrificinge massinge priests, inter
altaria, at the holy altars, the seats of the celestial sacrifice, seeds
caelestis sacrifi^ij, and Probus that wrote the life of S. Patricke, in this
age testifyinge as much. Gildas l. de excid. and conquest. Britan. Probus in
vita S. Patricij inter opera S. Bedae.

8 And if we turn our eyes to look into the further, and more northien parts
of the diocese of this Archiepiscopall see in Golloway, and Albania, we shall
find many particular testimonies of this verity. There we shall find S.
Kentegern; that most miraculous holy Saint, so far a massing priest, and
Prelate, and after the Roman order, that he had in his schole or monastery
under him in the north of Britany, besides 600. that were not learned, 260
learned divines, trained up to p^eac^ and offer the holy sacrifice of Mass. (
M. S antiq. de vit. S. Kentegerni. Io Capgrau. Catal. in eod. Io. Bal. l.
script. Britan. cent. 1^ in Kentern. Godwin Catal. in Asaph. Hector Bo^ Scotor.
histor. l. 9.) and he had an other as great a school and compan^e of massinge
men in Britany, which he left to S. Asaph, and sent of these into all parts
both of this our Britanie, and into other nations, as Norwey, and Island,
being warranted in all these things by the Popes of Rome, where he was seven
times on pilgrimage, Romam septies adijt; and in all things conformed himself
to that holy Apostolic church, and at his death, gave strict ommaund to all
under his charge, to be in all things obedient to the church of Rome: de
Sanctorum Patrum decretis, sanctaeque Roman^ Ecclesiae institutis firmiter
custodiendis, fortia dedit, ac dereliquit praecepta. And that he lived either
after, or unto the cominge of S. Augustine I will demonstrate herafter.

9. And to come to London diocese, now afflicted with Pagan persecutors, yet
we find Theonus a massinge priest and Prelate familiarly acquainted with S.
David, that massing Archbishop, having been Bishop of Gloucester before, to
have been Archbishop there in these times. A Protestant Bishop writes:
Theonus being first Bishop of Gloucester, forsook it, and took the charge of
London upon him the year 553. ( Godwin Catalog. in London. in Theonus.) but
the British historye, proves him to have been Archbishop of London, before
the death of S. David: Theonus Glouecestrensis Episcopus, in Archiepiscopatum
Londoniarum eligitur. Tu^c obijt sanctissimus Vrbis Legionum Archiepiscopus
David in Mineuia ciuitate. (Galfrid. Monum. histor. Reg. Brit. lib. 11. cap.
3.) and so he must needs he ordained Archbishop, by the consent, and
allowance of that massinge high Prelate, S. David. And he continued Archbishop
there, until the year of Christ 586 when together with Thadiocus, Archbishop
of York, and very many of their clergy they fled into Walls and other
places. ( Matthew. Westminster. an. 586. Stowe histor. Galfrid. Monum. hist. l. 11.
cap. 10.) And to prove all then were sacrificinge massinge priests here, S.
Gildas then living at that time has so before affirmed; the sacrificinge
massinge which protestants and others confess, to have been then in London,
and other places of that diocese, confirm it; their flying for succor only
to the places, where Mass and massinge preistes continued, as in Wales,
Cornewayle, and little Britanie, manifestly convince it to be so. Stowe histor.
in Constantine 2. Galfr. Monum. l. 11. histor. cap. 4.

10. This is proved by those holy churches, and massinge altars, which the
Pagans did reserve, and not destroy, by converting to them to the Idolatrous
worship, and sacrifices of their Pagan Gods. Si qua Ecclesia illoesa
seruabitur, hec magis ad confusionem nominis Christiani quam gloriam faciebant.
Nempe ex cis deorum suorum templa facientes, prophanis suis sacrificijs, sancta
Dei altaria polluerunt. (Matthew. Westminster. ad an. gratiae 58^.) And when above al
other things questioned, our protestants most disallowe the reverence of holy
relics, and not contendinge that there was any Christian Religion in these
Archbishops and their clergy, but either the massinge Religion, or their
protestant profession, do plainly confess, that these were massinge
preistes, and not Protestant Ministers, for they with other a^tiquities
acknowledge, that the greatest care which these two Archbishops, their Bishops,
and priests had, in those tempestuous times, was how to keep with reverence,
and from irreuerence, the holy relics of their Saints, and so notwithstanding
so many dangers, and difficulties, carried most of them unto these places of
their rest, and refuge, so far off, Walls, Cornwaile, and Britanie in
France. ( Holinsh. histor. of Engl. Galfrid. Monument. histor. Reg. Brittan.
l. 11. cap. 10. Matthew. Westminster. an. gratiae 586.) Tunc Archipraesulis Theonus
Londoniensis and Thadiocus Eborascensis, cum omnes Ecclesias sibi subditas solo
tenus destructas vidissent, cum pluribus ordinatis, cum reliquijs Sanctorum in
Cambriam diffugerunt, timentes ne Barbarorum irruptione, tot and tantorum sacra
ossa veterum, a memorijs hominum delerentur, si qua imminenti periculo minime
subtraxissent. Plures etiam Armoricanam Britanniam petentes. Therefore no
protestant can, will, or by the grounds of their Religion may say, that these
were Protestants, but undoubtedly Catholic Papists, reuerencers of holy
Mass, relics of Saints, and such doctrines, as protestancy does not allow,
and thereuppon they plainly call them, sacrificulos, massinge priests. H.
Matius Germanorum lib. 5. page 39.

11. Neither did these doctrines and the profession of them cease here with us,
between this public desolation in the 586. of Christ, and the year 596. when
S. Augustine came hither, even in those parts which the Saxons posessed, but
there were diverse Bishops, and sacrificinge massinge priests still continuinge
in them, and the holy sacrifice of Mass was still, though not so generally and
publicly as before, continued also in this time, and many of the Saxons
themselves, even from the days of King Arthur, when many of them received the
Christian faith, still continued therein, and this testified by protestant
writers. ( Holinshed histor. of Engl. page 122.123. l. 5.) teachinge how upon
a great victory of that renowned King against them, he pardoned all that would
and did receue the Christian faith, which were many. And Hardinge with others
testifies, that Stanford at this time was a Christian university, though with
some errors. ( Harding histor.) and yet a great part of them must needs be
Saxons. And in those very places themselves where the Pagan Saxons most and
principally ruled, and reigned, the Christian massing sacrificing Religion was
there permitted, and tolerated even by the Kings allowance, as a protestant
historian proves in these words. ( Holinsh. histor. of Engl. l. 5. page 107.)
At the same time that Constantine (the next King to Arthur) was driven into
Wales, there reigned among the English men, one Iourmericke the fifth, as Bede
says, from Hengist. The same Iourmerick though he were not christened
himself, yet he permitted the Christian faith to be preached amongst his
people, and concludinge a league with the Scottish men and Picts, kept the same
inuiolate duringe his life time. So likewise it was in the kingdom of the
Kentish Kings, extendinge to Humber, for King Ethelbert had married a
Christian, and gave peace to Christians in his dominions, as we may also
gather the like of the kingdom of the east Angles, whose King Scebert, was a
baptized Christian, except a protestant historian is deceued, in the year of
Christ 569. or before, then beginning his Reign, and being christened in
France in the Regiment of his Brother and predecessor King Carpewalde. (
Stowe histor. in east Angles in K. Scebert anno. 569.) and in many other places
of Loegria, this England, the like instances may be given: for the enimitie
between the Saxons and Britans was not principally for Religion, but who should
rule here, and possess this kingdom: aspernebantur vt plurimum Saxones
Britonum Sacerdotum tum Gualiam incole^tium doctrinam: tametsi veram
profiterentur, inuisae gentis magis quam disciplinae, de qua multa atque
praeclara frequentius audiuerant, odio permoti. (Hect. Boeth. l. 9. Scot.
histor. fol. 177.) and they had peaceable commerce, amity, and correspondence
with all other Christians, round about them, French, Scots, and Picts, as is
declared before.

12. And to putt all out of doubt in this matter, we are taught by many
credible, and uncontrollable antiquities, that even at the coming of S.
Augustine hither, there were diverse renowned massing, sacrificing Bishops, here
with their massinge priests, that preached even to the Saxons, and converted
many, and that these holy Bishops, and priests did in all things agree, with
the Apostolic Roman church, and receued mission, power, and jurisdiction
from thence. Among these was S. Kentegern for the Northren and other parts of
this kingdom, who preached to the Saxons and proved their Pagan Gods (namly
woden) whom principally they worshipped as chief God, to have been only a
man, a King among them, and a damned creature. (S. Asaph. in vita S.
Kentegerni. M. S. antiquit. in vita eius and Capgrau. in eodem.) Quem
principalem Deum crediderunt, and praecipue Angli, de quo originem duxerant,
cui and qua^tam feriam consecrauerant, hominem fuisse mortalem asseruit, and
Regem Saxonum, a quo plures nationes genus duxerant, huius inquit corpore in
puluerem resoluto, anima in inferno sepulta aeternum sustinet ignem. And that
this holy Bishop lived unto this time of S. Gregory, joined in Religion with
him, and by him was warranted to preach to the Saxons, as to other nations, we
have the greatest warrant, we can desire in such things, both Catholic and
Protestant antiquaries, ioyninge in this, that he was a Bishop 260. years. (
M. S. antiq. and Capgrau. supr. Bal. l. de script. Britan. cent. 1. in
Kenterno. Godwin Catalog of Bishops in Asaph.) whereby it evidently follows,
that being made Bishop after the being of S German, and Lupus here, as
appears before, he must needs be living at this time, and it is
particularly testified by the ancient writers of his life, S Asaph his holy
scholar and successor, John Capgraue, and many ancient Manuscripts, that
having been seven times at Rome, he was there in the time of S. Gregory, who
approuinge his sacred calling sent him with his Apostolic warrant into these
parts. Vir Deisepties Romam adiens Sancto Gregorio speciali Anglorum Apostolo
totam vitam suam, electionem, and consecrationem, and omnes casus qui et
acciderunt, seriatim enodauit. Sanctus vero Papa illum virum Dei and Spiritus
Sancti gratia plenum intelligens, in opus ministerij a Spiritu Sancto illi
iniuncti destinauit.

13. In the western parts we had then besides the Bishops which opposed
themselves to S. Augustine, commonly recompted seven in number, yet agreeing
with him in these mysteries, the renowned holy Bishop S. Asaph, disciple, and
successor to S. Kentegern, in that see, when he forsook it; This holy
massinge Bishop ruler of the college of so many massinge priests, as I have
before related, did in all things join himself with the disciples of S.
Gregory the Pope, in so much as a Protestant Bishop writes of him: A Gregorij
Pontificis Romani discipulis Angliam aduentantibus, authoritatem accepit. (Io.
Bal. l. de script. Britan. cent. 1. in Asapho.) he receued authority from the
disciples of Gregory Pope of Rome, which came into England. And this is he,
who as the same Protestant Bishop writes, wrote the life of S. Kentegern his
Master. Therefore this holy Prelate must needs be a massinge priest, as all the
other under him were at that time. If we go further to other parts of this
nation, we shall find in the kingdom of the Mercians, or by some the east
Angles, the renowned and miraculous Archbishop S. Iue, a noble Persian by
birth, who being sent thither by the Pope of Rome S. Gregory or Pelagius the
second his predecessor both massinge priests and Popes, was also a massing
priest and Prelate, and dying at the town, now of his name called S. Iues, in
Hontington shire, gave that name unto it. ( Annal. Monaster. Ramseiae. M. S.
antiq. de vita S. Iuonis. Io. Capgrau. in Catalog. in S. Iuone Episcop.
Florent. Wigorn. in Chronic. ad an. 600.) And to testify that he exercised
both his massing preistly, and episcopal function there in preachinge to the
Saxons, his body was found, buried in episcopal manner, sepulchro aperto
Episcopum Pontificalibus indutum co^spiciunt. This Apostolic doctor of this
nation as Florentius Wigorniensis, Capgraue, and the old Manuscripts of his
life ^ll him, Doctor Apostolicus and vere caeli nuntius Ino, dyed here as
Wigorniensis writes in the year 600. four years after the cominge of S.
Augustine hither: and hither also came with him, and preached here, sent from
Rome, besides others not named, S. Sithius, and S. Inthius his associats,
massinge priests. Qui cum Romam peruenisse^t consilio Papae dispositione Dei,
Sanctus Iuo cum Sithio nepote, and Inthio cognato suo alijsque quibusdam, in
Britanniam intrauit. And to show that he was a true Apostle of this nation,
sent by the sea Apostolic of Rome, coming through France hither, beeinge
honorably entertained by the King and people of France, to stay there, would
by no entreaty consent, but came as he was, a Domino destinatus, ordained for
us by God, into England Cum Galliam cum suis intrasset, a Rege and populo
honorifice susceptus, nec vlla gratia terrena quamuis assiduis precibus
rogatus, ab ipsis retineri poterat, sed Britanniam ingrediens.

14. And to pass into the kingedome of Kent it self, where S. Augustine
landed, and settled himself, his successors, and see at Canterbury, there, we
had at his cominge, and twenty years before, and before the time, that Theonus
Archbishop of London, and Thadiocus Archbishop of York with their massinge
priests, forsook their sees, in that kingedome and city itself of
Canterbury, a renowned massing Bishop, S. Luithardus, and his massing priests,
usually saying Mass, the Queen S. Bertha being present in their the^
cathedral church, dedicated to S. Martine, as all antiquaries agree, and as I
find in an old Manuscript history, builded in the time of King Lucius. ( Bed.
hist. gent. Angl. l. 1. cap. 27. Io. Capgrau. in Catalog. in S. Lethardo
Episcopo and Confessore. M. S. antiq. in eod.) And by the persuasion of this
holy massinge Bishop S. Luithard, the King and Saint afterward Ethelbert,
entertained S. Augustine with all humanity, and was by him after actuallie
converted to the faith of Christ, in so much that this holy Bishop is called,
Ianitor venturi Augustini, opener of the door to S. Augustine. (Capgrau. supr.
in S. Lethard. Gulielm. Malm. l. 1. de gest. Reg. Anglorum.) And was before S.
Augustines cominge when he still lived a Pagan, favorable and gentle unto
Christians: Benignus erga Christianos in natiua gentilitate fuit. By occasion
whereof, his kingdom extending to Humber, and his sister being married to
Slede King of the east Angles, and her son Sebert, or as Henry of Huntington
calls him Sibrictus, or Siberctus, being a Christian King, so great parts
of this nation were free from persecution, and some of the Saxons, that were
converted, became massing priests, long before S. Augustine came hither. (
Henric. Hunting. histor. l. 2.) For such is numbered Godelbertus as a Protestant
Bishop writes, ex quorundam coniecturis genere Anglosaxo, above an hundred
years before this time an. 498. ( Pitseus historic. Rel. Tom. 1. aetate 5.
Bal. l. de script. Britan. cent. 1. in Godelberto Presbytero.) And as Sebastia^
Munster and the first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury witness, S. Offo an
English Kings son in this our England, went hence and preached in Germany in
the year 601. ( Munster. in Cosmograph. in German. Matthew. Parker antiq. Brit.
page 8.) not without other associats of this nation, except we will make, his
case singular from all other Apostolic men, and conuerters of contries. And
except we will make a very bold exposition of the English Author of the book,
de Virginitate, or laud Virginum, of the praise of Virgins, commonly ascribed
to our holy learned Bishop, S. Aldelmus, calling, S. Gregory the Pope his
Master, and Tutor, Praeceptor and Pedagogus noster Gregorius. (l. de laud
Virginum. Bal. cent. 1. in Adel. Pitseus To. 1. in eod.) we must needs as the
rule of correlatiues. Master and scholar requires, make him scholar to S.
Gregory the great, which lived but few years after S. Augustines cominge
hither, and being Pope then, likely he was Tutor and Master to this au^cie^t
English writer, before the time of his papacy, as he was to many others, and
not after.

15. So I might instance of others, but these abundantly suffice, to prove,
that after the first plantinge of the faith of Christ in this our Britanie,
there never wanted in it, either in the time of the Britans, Saxons or whom else
soever, Mass, massing priests, and Bishops. For even those British priests
and Bishops, which most opposed against S. Augustine in some other things,
were as far engaged in these articles, to be sound and Orthodoxe as S.
Augustine was, and so both practiced here in Britanie, as I have related
before, and their most learned S. Kelian, Columban, and Gallus, with others
going hence into other nations did wholly submit themselves to the Popes of
Rome; and their chiefest S. Kelia^ was made Bishop of Mitzburgh by the Pope,
receuinge power from him to preach. Romam profectus est, and officio
praedicandi a Papa receptus Episcopus, orditus. (Manuscript antiq. de vita S.
Keliani. Io. Capgrau. Catalog. in eodem. Sur. die 8. Iulij.) And that S.
Columbanus the man whose authority was most objected against S. Augustine,
about the diverse keeping of Easter, was a notorious massinge priest, as also S.
Gallus in as high degree, as any Catholic now is, it is testified in their
lives, where we find, S. Columban did dedicat a church, and altar, with the
relics of S. Aurelia, and adorninge the altar said Mass upon it. Beatus
Columbanus iussit aquam afferri, and benedicens illam, adspersit ea templum:
and dum circuirent psallentes, dedicauit Ecclesiam, deinde inuocato nomine
Domini, vnxit altar, and beatae Aureliae reliquias in eo collocauit,
vestitoque altari, missas legittime compleuerunt And in the same Authors we
read, that S. Gallus did ordinarily use, Missam celebrare, to say Mass, and
being urged both by the Prince, Bishops, and Clergy, to accept of the
Bishopric of Constance, he refused it and preferred John his deacon, whom S.
Gallus had converted unto the faith of Christ. Who in his consecration was ledd
by the Bishops to the Altar, and solemnly consecrated, and said Mass: in
which after the gospel, as the manner was, S. Gallus preached. Episcopi
duxerunt eum ad altar, and solemni benedictionts officio ordinauerunt
Antistitem, consumatoque sacrae promotionis ministerio, rogauerunt cum
sacrificij salutaris celebrare mysteria. Praemissis ergo ex more diuinae
oblationis initijs, post lectionem Euangelij rogauerunt venerabilem Gallum, vt
multitudini quae aderat, verbi officio sacrae instructionis pabulum
ministraret. Where we see as much devotion, and reverence, used by the
greatests opposites to S. Augustine, to the holy sacrifice of Mass,
sacrificinge preisthood, holy water, holy oil, to consecrate altares,
dedication of churches, and such like matters most disliked by protestants, as
S. Augustine used, or any learned Catholic now professes or defends.

16. And to remember Masses of requiem for the dead, so soon as S. Gallus
heard of the death of Saint Columban, this S. Gallus so renowned a man, called
his brethren together, and they prayed and said Masses for his soul. Audiens
mortem S. Columbani collegit fratres., causas meroris aperuit. Deinde tanti
patris memoriam precibus sacris, and sacrificijs salutaribus frequentarunt.
What form of Mass both these, and they which then continued in Britanie,
used, I have proved before, from the British antiquities, as also how al which
here were contrary to S. Augustine in some ceremonials, I have demo^strated by
all kind of testimonies, that in these and al other essential and
fundamental things, and not ceremonial, or alterable in Religion, they wholly
agreed, and without the least difference, consented with S. Augustine, and the
church of Rome, and differed in all now controuersed questions, from the
present protestants of this nation, and all others. And so Catholic Roman,
or (as protestants call it) the papists church, as it has ever since to these
days of innovation from then, been the only known and visible church, as
these men freely confess, and acknowledge, all antiquities, writers, and
monuments so testifying; so it was in the same manner the only true, visible
church, in every age, or hundred years from Christ, and his Apostles unto that
time, no other in any thing rese^bling the present protestants congregation,
beeinge known, or heard of, at home, or abroad, by their own confessions, and
all Arguments, in any one of those ages, of the primative church of Christ. And
so I end this history.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
THE I. CHAPTER.
WHEREIN sacrificinge and Massinge Preisthood, Priests, and the sacrifice of
Mass, are proved by learned Protestants, and other testimonies, from the
history of Melchisedech. Genesis 14. page 8. Chap. 2. The same proved with like
allowance and approbation of Protestants, out of the book of Exodus. page 30.
Chap. 3. The same proved with allowance and consent of Protestants out of the
book of Leuiticus. page 43. Chap. 5. Wherein the same holy doctrines are so
also proved out of the Proverbs of Solomon. cap. 9. page 72. Chap. 6. Wherein
the same mysteries are proved by the same manner out of the Prophet Esaias, and
others. page 78. Chap. 7. Wherein the same is proved at large by all expositions
and testimonies, even by our Protestants themselves, out of the Prophet
Malachy. page 89. Chap. 8. Wherein is proved by all kinds of testimonies,
Catholics, Protestants, and whatsoever, that Christ the true Messiah, as his
calling and dignity required, in abrogatinge the preisthood and sacrifices of
Moses law, instituted an other more perfect sacrificinge preisthood, and
sacrifice of his sacred body, and blood in Mass. page 106. Chap. 9. Shewinge
how the Apostles in general, being by Christ ordained sacrificinge priests,
did according to that power and commandment given unto them, offer the
sacrifice of Christ's body and blood in Mass, and ordered other priests to that
end. page 121. Chap. 10. Wherein is particularly proved of all the holy Apostles
and Evangelists, that they were sacrificinge massinge priests, and did both
practice and teach the same doctrines. And first the 4. Evangelists and S.
Paul, who have remembered these mysteries in holy scriptures. page 130. Chap.
10. How all the rest of the, Apostles in particular S. Andrew, James the great,
Thomas, James the less, Philip, Bartholomew, Simon, Thaddaeus, and Matthias,
were sacrificinge Priests, and Apostles, and usually offered the sacrifice of
Mass. page 174. Chap 11. How S. Peter the chief Apostle, and first founder of
the church of Christ in this our kingedome, was a sacrificinge massinge priest,
delivered a form of Mass to the church, consecrated many massing priests in
this part of the world nere unto us, and some of this kingdom. page 189.
Chap. 12. Wherein is proved even by protestants, that whatsoever Apostle, or
other, first preached Christ in Britanie, brought sacrificinge preisthood
hither: and S. Peter first founded here our ecclesiastical Hierarchy, of
sacrificinge massinge priests and Bishops. page 219. Chap. 13. Wherein is
proved, how after the death of S^ Peter, in the time following commonly
ascribed to S^ Linus and Cletus in the sea of Rome, and to Marius King in
Britanie, the Britans both at home and abroad used the sacrificing preisthood,
preistes and Mass. page 242. Chap. 14. How duringe the time of S. Clement his
papacy, and all this first hundred years of Christ, our Christian Britans,
together with all other, continued these holy doctrines and offices of
sacrificinge preisthood, priests, and the sacrifice of the blessed body and
blood of Christ in Mass. page 252. Chap. 15. Wherein demonstration is made,
both by protestants and other antiquaries, that sacrificinge massinge priests,
and Bishops, and sacrifice of Mass, continued and were honored in this
kingdom of Britanie from the beginning of this hundred years, until King
Lucius time, when it was wholly converted to that faith. page 278. Chap. 16.
Wherein is proved by testimonies of protestants, and others that this kingdom
in the time of King Lucius, was converted by massing Priests, and Bishops, and
the holy sacrifice of Mass, and such massinge priests and Bishops, continued
here in honor all this age. page 310. Chap. 17. How notwithstanding the
manifold tumults, and persecution of Christian Religion, in this kingdom of
Britanie, in this third hundred years, yet the holy sacrifice of Mass,
sacrificinge and massinge priests and Bishops, still here continued, without
any total discontinuance. page 323. Chap. 18. How the holy sacrifice of Mass,
sacrificing and massing preisthood, priests and Bishops continued in this
kingdom of great Britanie in all this age, without any interruption or
discontinuance. page 338. Chap. 19. Wherein is manifestly proved, that all this
fifth age, the sacrifice of Mass, massinge priests and Bishops, did continue in
honor in this our Britanie. page 366. Chap. 20. Wherein is proved by
protestants and others, that the church of Britanie and Rome, accorded in this
age in these mysteries: and how all the Popes being massinge priests and Popes,
yet no one of them made any material alteration in this sacrifice. page 388.
Chap. 21. Wherein being confessed by our protestant writers, that all the Popes
of Rome unto S. Gregory were massing preistes, and Popes, yet not any one of
them by these protestants confession, made any the least material change, or
alteration in these mysteries. page 403. Chap. 22. Wherein evident
demonstration is made, even by these protestants them selves, that neither S.
Gregory the great, which sent S. Augustine, with many other holy learned men
into England, did make any material addition, or alteration in these
mysteries. But the Religion which those his disciples preached here, was in all
points by all testimonies both of God and man, Britans themselves, and Saxons,
Catholics and Protestants, ancient and late writers, the true Religion of
Christ, and in all things wherein they differed from the Britans, more pure
then that which they then professed. page 414. Chap. 23. Wherein demonstration
is made both by protestants, and other testimonies, that duringe all this age
and hundred of years, until and after the cominge of S. Augustine, this
kingdom had many holy massing priests and Bishops, agreeing in these, and all
other articles of Religion with the church of Rome. page 437.
The Errata.
Page 38. line 1. members, Numbers. Page 197. line 23. Martianus, Martinus.
There are two ciphers X. (Page 130. and 174.) in the chapters, in steed of X.
and XI. and so consequenter, which should have made the 23. chapters, to have
been 24.

AN ECCLESIASTICAL PROTESTANT HISTORY, OF THE HIGH PASTORAL AND FATHERLY
CHARGE and care of the Popes f Rome, over the church of Britanie.

From the first plantinge of the Christian faith there, by S. Peter the
Apostle, and his Disciples: continued in every age, and hundred of years, by
holy Bishops, and clergy men, sent hither and consecrated by them, his
Successors in the Sea Apostolic.

Evidently deduced and proved by historical narration, from the published and
privileged writings (to appease all protestants) of the most learned and
allowed English protestant pretended Bishops, Doctors, Antiquaries, and others
of that Religion.

Mementote praepositorum vestrorum, qui vobis locati sunt verbum Dei. Obedite
praepositis vestris, and subiac^te eis, ipsi enim peruigilant, quasi rationem
pro animabus vestris reddituri. Hebr. 13.

With license, 16^5.

THE GENERAL ARGVMENTS OF THE ENSVINGE HISTORY: SERVINGE ALSO FOR A PREFACE,
to the Reader, to declare the scope of the Author, and contents of the work.
THE Catholic Author well acquainted with the proceedings of Protestants, in
these times, and the controversies of them, to accept and allow of nothing,
but what is liked and allowed by them selves; and yet to make the world
believe, they are Reuerencers of antiquity, and would willingly embrace, and
follow that, which was our first faith in any question delivered by the
Apostles, and thence continued from them: the greatest of all being that who
planted here first the holy faith, and since had chiefest commanding power in
such things: He sets historically down from the best Antiquaries, and
learned protestant writers of this contry, and other antiquities approved by
them, the means and manner of our first conversion unto Christ, and by what
spiritual chief ruling authority this nation has ever been governed in such
things, since then, until the conuersions of the Saxons by S. Augustine, and
his associats sent hither by Saint, and pope Gregory, the first, after which
time now above 1000. years, our protestants put it out of Question, and agree,
that the power of the popes of Rome absolutely ruled here in such matters.

Therefore this history of the first six hundred years, is divided into six
Centuries or ages, every one conteyninge one hundred years. In the first, he
shows from those protestant Authors, and Antiquaries, how S. Peter that
great Apostle of Christ, both immediately by himself, and mediately by his
holy disciples, first preached here, founded our church, consecrated for us
Bishops, priests, and other clergy men, and ordained all things thereto
belonging: and how from this first institution by him, we ever had a continued
succession of such consecrated parsons, unto the more general conversion by
pope Eleutherius in the days of king Lucius after which time there can be no
question of such a succession of Bishops here. And how after the death of S.
Peter unto the end of the first hundred years, spiritual matters were ordered
here by authority and direction from the sea of Rome, and successors of S.
Peter there.

In the second hundred of years, is proved by the same protestant authors, and
their antiquities, how from the beginning of that age, to the end thereof, all
spiritual things were likewise managed here, by that see Apostolic, more or
less, as the times then permitted. And in the general conversion of king
Lucius, and his kingdom, all ecclesiastical businesses were done, and settled
by jurisdiction of the popes of Rome, and their legates, directed hither by
their authority, exercising here as ample jurisdiction spiritual, to the
great honor of this kingdom, as any pope of Rome may claim.

Such was the estate of spiritual power, and proceedings here in the third,
fourth, fifth, and sixte age, or hundred of years also: in the later end
whereof, S. Augustine was sent hither to convert our ancestors the Saxons. In
all which ages, and Centenaries of years, both the Kings, Archbishops,
Bishops, and others, both Rulers, and Ruled in this kingdom, gave as much
privilege, and prerogative to the popes of Rome, as Catholics now may do, by
their catholic Roman Religion.

In which time also, among all those christians which then lived here, those
Bishops of Scotland, and Walls, who, as our protestants tell us, and commend
them for it, did only or most oppose against the pope, his legates, and
authority here, were those also, by the same protestants, which did much more
intermeddle in princes affairs, then any popes, their legates, or such as were
most obedient unto, or Ruled by them. Which proceedings the Author does in all
places leave to protestants relation, and medleth not with them otherwise at
all. But so much as with probability in history, he may, mitigateth such
matters, as some protestants, even with public allowance of the protestant
state of England, have boldly published to the world in that kind: freely and
before God protesting, as he never hitherto had any intermedlinge with the
temporal affairs of Princes, but ever to his uttermost, did yield and render
all duty unto them, praying for the safety, honor and preservation of his
Sovereign, and this kingdom, so he will ever continue the same most humble
and dutiful affection.

Other particular Questions in Religion depend upon this. Because whosoever in
any Religion has the chief chardge and cure, the particulars depend upon his
proceedings, whether it be Pope, Prince, Superintendents, Presbyteries, or
whatsoever, and so being proved that from the beginning of christianity in
this kingdom, the Pope of Rome ever had chief command and direction in
Religious things. It must needs follow, that which protestants name papistrie,
ever reigned here. But I understand there is a general controuersiall history
to be shortly published, of all such things in particular, from the first
preaching of the Gospel in this kingdom, which will give, full a^ ample
satisfaction, in all such Questions.

THE FIRST CENTVRIE OR HUNDRED OF YEARS.
THE I. CHAPTER. Wherein is briefly made demonstration by the best learned
protestant Antiquaries, and others of England, that Saint Peter the Apostle
first preached the faith, and founded the Church of Christ in this our Britanie.
TO bring us unto a more certain, and undoubted knowledge, of the first
preachers of christian Religion, in this kingdom, the best learned protestant
Antiquaries we have, prescribe certain Rules, and squares, to be directed by
to come unto them, in their judgment. Matthew. Parker. antiq. Britan. page 1.
Godw. Conuers. of Brit. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. Mason. l. 2^ c. 2. page 51.
Theater of great Brit. l. 6. cap. 9. first they affirm, that the Britans
received the faith, soon after the Ascension of our blessed Savior, in the
time of Tiberius, Caius Caligula, or Claudius Emperor: and they build this
their assertion cheifely upon the words of S. Gildas. l. de Excid. and conq.
Britan. c^ 5.6. Who speaking of things done here in Britanie, either in the
time of Caius, or Claudius, adds: Interea glaciali frigore rigent Insulae,
indulget sua praecepta Christus. In the mean time while these things were
doing, Christ does afford his precepts to this frozen Island. In which place,
he rather means the time of Claudius, then any other, as may easily appear,
to all judicial and equal readers of that ancient Author in the place
alleged, needles to be insisted upon, if we will be guided by our
protestant directors, because in their next Rules they shall make it evident.

It must needs in their opinion be so understood. For they deliver for a
second Maxim, that this nation embraced, and was taught the Religion of
Christ, by some one of the Apostles. So say their Archbishop Parker. in antiq.
Britan. Bal. in act. Pontif. Romans in Gregor. 1. Cambd. in Brit. Fulke Answ. to
a Romish. cath. page 40. Powel. annot. in l. 2. Giral. Cambr. Itiner. Cambr. c.
1. Holinsh. histor. of Eng. c. 21. page 102. Stowe histor. in Agricola. Stow.
supr. Godwyn supr. their Bishops Bale, Godwyn, their doctors and Antiquaries,
Cambden, Fulke, Powel, Holinshed. Stowe, the Theater writers and others,
inclining to this opinion, and some of them plainly teaching, with diverse of
the ancient fathers, that the 12. Apostles divided the world amongst them, to
preach the gospel in, assure us, that to speak in their words, The holy
Apostles being dispersed throughout the whole earth, did divide the provinces
amongst them, to preach the gospel in; and it is delivered plainly by sundry
ancient writers, that Britanie fell in division, amongst the Apostles.

The third and last general Rule which these men assign unto us, is, that
mention is not made of any Apostle in any antiquity to have preached here, but
only of S. Peter S. Paul, and S. Simon Zelotes, none of all these alleged
protestants or any other, I read does speak of any other, and among these
one a protestant Bishop and Antiquarie writes in these terms. Godwyn Conuers.
of Britanie. cap. 1. page 2. I find mention of three only of the Apostles to
have been in our Britanie, to wit, Peter and Paul, and Simon Chananaeus,
called also Zelotes. For although some have written that S. James preached in
Ireland, and S. Philip in this next adioyninge Gallia France (which I have at
lardge refuted in other places) yett noe one historian to my remembrance, and
reading, does teach, that either of those twoe, or any of the rest, except
those three before set down, were at any time in this Island.

These Rules of Protestants thus supposed, and allowed, it will with a small
labor, evidently appear unto us, by these men, and all antiquities, that the
most glorious Apostle Saint Peter was our first father, and teacher in Christ.
For first concerning S. Paul, he himself, and other scriptures, and these
protestants also confess, he was none of the 12. Apostles, by who^ the world
was so divided, and though miraculously called by god before, yett not
properly an Apostle until in the 13. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, v.
2. he was so ordained: as our english protestants by their conference of the
first chapter and verse of S. Paul's Epistle to the Romans. Romans cap. 1. v. 1.
are Interpretors hereof, when the other Apostles had preached long before, and
otherwise also executed their Apostolic function.

Secondly it is evident by the same holy scriptures. Romans 1. c. 1. act. cap.
27.28. many Antiquities, and these protestants themselves, so clearly
co^fessinge ( Theater of great Brit. lib. 6. Godw. Conuers. Parker. antiq.
Britan.) that S. Paul came not to Rome, nor any part near Britanie, or these
western nations, until many years after S. Peter was both come to Rome, and
this kingdom of Britanie had received the faith of Christ, at the latest in
the time of Claudius according to these protestants by some Apostle as before,
the first coming of S. Paul to any of these western Regions, being long
after in the time of Nero, to whom he appealed from the Jews, and Festus,
and so was brought prisoner to Rome and so continued two years, not going
from thence to any other place. Actor. c. 25. v. 10.11.12. cap. 27. and 28. v.
30.

That S. Simon Zelotes should be the first Apostle that preached here, or was
here at all, it is as improbable, or rather impossible by these protestants:
for first diverse of them disable him ever to have been here, Stowe and Howes
histor. in Agricola Holinsh. hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 5. rather thinkinge, the
place Brita^nia, where some have thought he preached to be mistaken, and not
to be understood of this nation, or that Simon which is supposed to have been
here, was not S. Simo^ the Apostle, but some other of that name, as S. Simon
Leprosus, or Nathaniel, also by some named Simon, which preached in these
western parts, namely in France, and not improbably here.

Secondly these protestants which would have us think S. Simon the Apostle
preached here ( Menologie. Graec. in Nathan. Bar. in martyrol. Romans 28. october.
Guliel. Eisengr. centurie^ 1. and alij.) refer his being here until the coming
of S. Joseph of Aramathia, coniecturinge that he came with him, who came not
hither until the year of Christ 63. when they grant that Britanie had
received the gospel by an Apostle so long before, as is already declared
from them. Parker Antiquit. page 3. Godwyn. Conuers. of Britanie page 10.
Thirdly (to make all sure) Such as have taught that one S. Simon did preach in
a place called Britannia; Doroth. in Synops. Maenolog. Graec. 6. Id. Maij. do
also affirm, that the same S. Simon suffered martyrdom, and was crucified in
the same place, and they keep the feast of his martyrdom upon the tenth day
of May. When concerning S. Simon Zelo^tes the Apostle, not only the whole
latin church, and all catholics in the world, but Protestants also, both of
England, and all other nations, in their most public service books, and
kalenders of their churches, received and allowed by their parlaments, and
highest Rules in their Religion, which all of them ar bownde to obey, and
follow, do celebrate the festiuitie of S. Simon Zelotes the Apostle, upon the
28. day of October, above five months after, and all jointly agree, in the
history of his life, and death, teaching he never preached in any part of
Europe, or near our Britanye, and was martyred in Persia, diverse thousands of
miles from hence. Martyrolog. Romans die 28. Octobr. Breuiar. and Miss. Romans eod.
die. Bed. in Martyr. eod. die. Vsuard. and Ado eod. die. Protestant com. Book
and all their kalenders with their Bibles 28. of October.

Now there is noe other left to be our first Apostle and Father in Christ but
S. Peter, except some ignorant or wilful man, will allege S. Joseph of
Aramathia, who though he was noe Apostle, yett as some say, he was sent
hither out of France, by S. Philip one of the Apostles, and so mediately the
same S. Philip. though never here in parson, might be our Apostle. I answer
as before, that we contend for the first Apostle, that either immediately by
himself, or mediatly by his disciples, preached here, and founded our church,
and not to exclude all Apostles in after times, from this kingdom, for I will
at least probably show, that S. Paul was here, a little before his death in an
other place; and there also give his due to S. Joseph, and his holy company,
in a far more honorable degree, then any protestant, or other one writer yet to
my reading has performed toward them; But S. Joseph from whomsoever he was
sent, cominge hither but in the 63. of Christ, almost twenty years (as before)
after this kingdom had received the faith of Christ, neither S. Joseph, nor
any of that holy fraternity could be the first preacher here.

And so far improbable or impossible it is, that by the Judgment of our
English protestants, or others, S. Philip the Apostle should be then in
France to send S. Joseph hither, that he was many yares before crucified, and
so dead by martyrdom in Phrygia at Hierapolis there, in Asia, as the common
consent of antiquities, the whole-church of God, and the protestants of
England, in the Rituall of their Religion, generally used and allowed by them,
and all other protestants do witness, and therefore keep his festiuitie
accordingly upon the first day of May, in or about the 54. or 55. year of
Christ, long before S. Joseph's cominge into this part of the world. Bre. Romans
1. Maij. Martyrolog. Romans Bed. Vsuara. Ado 1. Maij. Chrysostom. hom. de 12.
Apost. Abd. lib. 10. Metaphrastes 14. Nou. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 24. Niceph. lib. 1.
ca. 39. Pet. de Natal. l. 4. c. 107. Anto^. part. 1. tit. 6. ca. 11. Eisengr.
contra. 1. Prot. Com. Book and kalend. 1. Maij. Therefore of necessity, both
Catholics and protestants must needs acknowledge, that S. Peter the most
worthy and blessed Apostle, was our first most happy father and master in
Christ, which I have made lardge demonstration of in other places, and will for
particulars be more evident in the next chapter, and this whole history: an
historical truth so testified by many authors, that Sir William Cambden,
whom others therein follow, the best antiquary of this nation, writes in
many editions, Quid ni crederemus? why should we not believe them. Cambden in
Britania in diverse editionis Andree Chesnee l 3. hist. d' Angleterre. Budley
page 171. Making S. Peter's preachinge and foundinge the church of Christ here
in Britanie a thing so certain, that he meruayleth any man of Judgment can
make doubt thereof. Therefore I may boldly use these words (and affirm them
true) of a protestant Bishop in the name of the rest: We should account it a
great glory to derive the pedigree of our spiritual lineage, from so noble,
and excellent a father as Saint Peter. Godwyn Conuers. of Britanie page 6.

THE II. CHAPTER. Where both the former is more manifestly declared, and in
particular farther proved by these protestants, and antiquities by them
allowed, what highest spiritual offices the same glorious Apostle, and his
disciples performed here.
TO prove more amply what has been said of S. Peter's being and preachinge
here, and to show what he did for the first foundinge of our church: A
protestant Archbishop from diverse authorities writes: Whit gifts Answ. to the
Admonition page 65. sect. 1. and def. of the Answ. page 318. The Apostle Peter
did in every province appoint one Archbishop, whom all other Bishops of the
same province should obey. An other with great privilege says ( Sutcliffe
Subuers. page 3.) Peter preached in ^e place, but he there ordained Bishops
and teachers and founded churches. And to show that all these and such benefits
came to us first from S. Peter and his holy see of Rome, among other Marcus
Antonius de Dominis, now by the great mercy of God a penitent in the
catholic church, when he was in profession a protestant in England ( Marcus
Anton, de Domin. de Repub. christian. l. 4. cap. 10. with public priuiledg in
England) and a chosen champion for that Religion against the Pope by chiefest
protestant authority in England, then testifies: Est caput Roma quatenus ab
ea diffusum est euangelium in reliquas totius occidentis ecclesias, and in
multas orientis, atque in barbaras etiam extra Romanum Imperium nationes. Rome
is the head of the church, in so much as from it the gospel was diffused into
the other churches of all the West, and into many of the East, and into
barbarous nations also without the Roman Empire. And our. Sovereign kings
speech in parlam. 1. publicly protested of this church of Rome: It is our
mother church: and consequently that it first brought us forth in spiritual
christian birth, as mothers do their natural children to the world and that
we, except we will turn bastardly unnatural and disobedient children, do
owe and must perform all duty and obedience unto it, our most holy mother in
Christ. And to further this our bounden duty, the protestants of England in
their Theater. of the Emp. of great Britante page 203 l. 6. c. 9. number. 5. will
help us foreward who write in this manner: That S. Peter the Apostle preached
the word of life, in this Island, as to other gentiles he did, for whom God
had chosen him, that from his mouth they might hear the gospel, as himself
alleges, and that he here founded churches, and ordained priests and
deacons, which is reported by Simon Metaphrastes out of the greek Antiquities,
and Gulielmus Eisingrenius in the first of his Centuries. Therefore this being
written by so learned and holy a man as S. Simon Metaphrastes was, and so
ancient above 700. years since, and out of such monuments and Authorities of
the Gretians, as in his time were honored with the Title of Antiquities, this
alone might content us in this matter, as it has already the best learned
protestant Antiquaries of this nation.

But because allowance is given to the authority which cannot be denied,
because it is the manner of Protestants to mynce authorities, I will cite that
holy ancient Father and Saint. S. Sim. Metaphr. 29. die Iunij. in his own
words which be these. Roman redijt, ex qua venit Mediolanum, and Photicen
quae sunt civitates in Continente. In quibus cum constituisset Episcopos and
Presbyteros, venit in Britanniam. Quo in loco cum longo tempore fuisset
moratus, and multas gentes non nominatas attraxisset ad fidem Christi,
angelicam aspexit visionem, quae dicebat: Petre, instat tempus tua
resolutionts, and oportet te ire Romam: in qua cum mortem per crucem
sustinueris, recipies mercedem Iustitiae. Cum ergo propterea Deum
glorificasset, and egisset gratias, and apud Britannos mansisset dies aliquot,
and verbo gratiae multos illuminasset, and ecclesias constituisset,
episcoposque and presbyteros and diaconos ordinasset, duodecimo anno Caesaris
Neronis rursus Romam reuertitur. S. Peter by revelation came to Jerusalem, at
the death of the mother of God, then returning into Egypt, by Africa came
again to Rome. From whence he came to Milane and Photice, which be cities in
the contine^t: in which when he had constituted Bishops, and priests, he came
into Britanie, where when he had stayed a long time, and drawn many nations
not named, to the faith of Christ, he had an Angelical vision, which said: o
Peter, the time of thy Resolution is at hand, and thou must go to Rome, in
which when thou have suffered death by the cross, thou shall receive the
reward of lustice. Therefore when he had glorified God and given thanks for
it, and remained some days with the Britans and illuminated many with the
word of grace, and founded churches, and ordained both Bishops, priests, and
deacons, he returned again to Rome in the twelueth years of the Emperor Nero.

Hitherto the very words of this learned Saint, so precisely and particularly
describeing the time and coming of that glorious Apostle into this Island, and
staying here, with his return to Rome again, that as noe man except an
infidel will or can deny it, no Author of antiquity or credit auouching half
so much for either S Paul or any other Apostle to have been here at all: so
except we of England will show our selves the most ungrateful, and disobedient
to that our first, and most glorious Pastor, and parent, of all nations in the
world except Jerusalem, Antioch and Rome, we ar most engaged to honor and
reverence this most glorious Apostle and his Successors in his holy Sec: for
neither Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, or Bythinia, which he himself
particularly remembers, 1. Pet. 1. v. 1. nor any other kingdom or nation
mentioned in any Author of credit and Antiquity, and to be paralelled with
him whom I have cited, approved even in this point with all Catholics, and the
most judicious indifferently minded and best learned protestants, can
constantly affirm and prove, that they had received such benefits and
blessings from S. Peter, as this our Britanie, which to visitt he went so
far, stayed therein so long, and enritched as with so many and
vnansweareable graces and favors: continuinge them so long, until he was
admonished from heaven to return from hence to Rome, as before his cominge
thither, he also was as Metaphrastes, die 29. Iunij. S. Leo sermon. de Apostol.
with others write, directed to come help us in the west. And if we will
follow the Roman tradition. ( Baron. annotat. in 9. Maij in Pudente. that)
Domus Pudentis erat primum hospitium S. Petri Romae, the house of Pudens was
the first lodging of S. Peter of Rome, we are more strictly bound to Rome and
Rome to us, that beeinge the house of our renowned christian contrywoman Lady
Claudia, as our protestant writers tell us. Matthew. Parker antiq. Britan. page
2.3. Godwyn Conuers. of Britanie. Cambd. in Britan. Theater of Brit. l. 6. Now
let us enquire and set down in particular, so near as such a desolation
and loss of Antiquities as England has often suffered, will give us leave, of
this Archbishop and Bishops in particular, which S. Peter consecrated for us,
to found and begin the first hierarchicall order and Succession in our
primative church of Britanie.

Many Authors both ancient and later writers and of these late times, both
catholics and protestants, ar witnesses that S. Aristobulus, one of the
seauentie and two disciples of Christ our Lord, was Bishop of this our kingdom
of Britanie. Dorothaeus Bishop of Tyrus. ( Dorothaeus lib. de septuaginta
duobus discipulis in Aristobulo.) And the Maenologe of the Greeks are plainly
of this mind. The first in his book entitled de septuaginta duobus
discipulis, of the seauentie two disciples, writes: Aristobulus ab Apostolo ad
Romanos commemoratos Episcopus Britannia factus est: Aristobulus one of the
seauentie two disciples, of whom S Paul speaks in his epistle to the Romans,
was made Bishop of Britanie. And to putt us out of doubt that he did not
mistake, naminge Britania for Bythinia, as a protestant writer would seem to
expound him, when he writes: Dorotheus says, Aristobulus, whom the Apostle
to the Romans remembers, was made Bishop in Britanie, or Bithania. Stowe
histor. titul. the Romans. in Agricola. I think this man will hardly find any
Bythania in the world: we read of Bethania often in the Gospels, and S. John
says. cap. 11. v. 18. Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem about fifteen farlongs
off, as our protestants translate and their note there upon is: that is about
towe miles. protest. annot. marginal. in c. 11.11. Io. v. 18. Which was too
near to Jerusalem, to be a Bishops see, and the old provincial makes
mention of noe such. And if by Bythania, he meant the country Bythinia the
Region of lesser Asia, against Thracia, and next Troas, which was also sometime
called Bebrycia, after Mygdonia, and by S. Peter Bythinia in the Apostles time,
and after, it is evident that Dorothaeus meant it not, for in the next name
which is S. Tyticus, he says, that he was made. Bishop of Chalcedonia of
Bith^nia. Tyticus meminit and huius Paulus, primus Episcopus Chalcedoniae fuit,
quae in Bithynia est. Doroth. supra in Tyticho. Therefore of necessity by this
Author and the rest foe affirming it, without doubt, or any exception, S.
Aristobulus needs must be Bishop of this our kingdom of Britanie, noe other
place then of that name fit for a Bishop in the known world to apply it unto.

And thus testifies the ancient Maenologe of the greeks, with others, both
catholics and protestants of whom I have here noted some. Maenolog. Graecor.
die 15. martij: Baron. annot. in martyrol. Romans eod. die. Arnold. Mirman in
Theatr. Conuers. gent. Auth. of the Exam. of the Calend. praefat. and in the 3.
Conuers. Sir. Ed. Hoby counterf. page 48. Thom. Rogers upon the Articles of
Relig. articul. 36. page 197. Protest. Theater of Brit. l. 6. Cambden Belg.
That this holy Bishop was either consecrated here, or sent hither by S. Peter,
we may not question, being so generally confessed by protestants before,
that noe other Apostle did, or then could perform that office. And if the
Identitie of the name deceaueth us not, this our holy Bishop or Archbishop, was
Father in law to S. Peter, his wives Father, and Brother to S Barnabas the
Apostle, sent into these west parts by S. Peter: for as Simon Metaphrastes
writes. ( S. Simon Metaphr. die 26. Iunij.) Accepit Petrus filiam Aristobuli
fratris Barnabae Apostoli, ex ea genuit filium vnum and vnam filiam. Peter
married the daughter of Aristobulus Brother of Barnabas the Apostle, and had by
her one son, and one daughter. Martyrolog. Romans 15. Martij. Godw. And being
called in the Roman Martyrologe as a protestant Bishop truly tells.
Apostolorum discipulus the disciple of the Apostles. Conuers. of Brit. It wholly
disableth him from being disciple to S. Paul, who alone of the Apostles
besides S. Peter was in this kingdom, for the scriptures themselves are
wittnes. Actor. cap. 13. v. 2.3.4. that S. Paul was not an Apostle, until in
the 13. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, before which time by the
protestants before, Britanie had received the faith, and probably S.
Aristobulus was then a Bishop, as many others of the 27. Disciples were. And
many ar called the disciples of the Apostles which were peculiarly the
disciples of S. Peter, the chief Apostle, as appears in diverse places of the
same Authority. S. Aristo. Arch. of this our Britanie.

And that this holy disciple of S. Peter, was not only our Bishop, but
Archbishop also in Britanie, I have warrant both of Catholics and protestants
to auouche it; First if we examine either by Dorotheus or any whomsoever
writing of the reside^cies of the 72. disciples of Christ, we shall hardly
find any among them, which had not the dignity of that high calling, yea he
relates S. Aristobulus as a chief amongst the^, and then being sent to this
kingdom of Britanie so great and ample. And where as in other such kingdoms
our protestants before assure us, S. Peter ordained an Archbishop, we cannot
doubt but in particular it was this his most worthy disciple, as also the
disciple of Christ, which first exercised by S. Peter's assignement that Archie,
and chief pontifical order in this Island.

Secondly, because we read it confide^tly written, and from more ancient
authority, that this holy disciple of S. Peter was not only our first Apostle,
but here began and first founded the hierarchical order, of our British
church, a thing proper to that highest spiritual calling. Arnold. mirac.
Theatro conuers. gentium in Britan. and Aristobulo. Brita^nia Straboni a
Britone Rege nuncupata, primum Aristobulum, sieve illu^ cuius meminit S. Paulus,
quod Dorothaeo probatur, sieve aliu^ vnu^ certe ex 72. discipulorum class
Apostolu^ est nata. Deinde Fugariu^ and Damianu^, qui ordinem Hierarchice
Ecclesiae istic fundatae ab illo inchoatum constituerunt sanxeruntque more
nimirum Apostolico. Britania so named by Strabo of King Brito or Brutus, had
for the first Apostle thereof Aristobulus, either him, whom S. Paul
reme^breth, which Dorotheus approves, or an other, surely one of the order of
the 72. disciples, after that Fugarius (Fugatius by others) and Damianus, who
constituted and confirmed by Apostolic manner the Hierarchical order begun by
him of the church founded there. Where we see S. Aristobulus, the first
founder of the Hierarchicall order in this church of Britanie: a thing which
as al protestants against the puritans, makes the peculiar office of an
Archbish. Whitgift answ. to the admonit. Bridges eccles. govern. Bilson against
the purit. Couel, Downam, Barlowe etc.

Thirdly, These protestants of England, especially the university of Cambridge
by their chosen champion Mr. Thomas Rogers for defense of their Articles of
Religion of Protestants, writing (to use his words) by the lawful authority
of the church of England, allowed to be public. Thom. Rogers book of the
faith of England page 1. do plainly say, that S. Aristobulus, was Archbishop
in this our Britanie. Thus he writes in the name of English protestants and
by their warrant. Rogers supra artic. 36. page Albeit the Terms and Titles of
Archbishops we find not, yet the superiority which they enjoy, and
authority which Bishops and Archbishops do exercise, in orderinge and
consecratinge of Bishops, and ecclesiastical ministers, is grounded upon the
word of God: for we find, that in the Apostles days, how themselves both
were in dignity above the Evangelists, and the 70. disciples, and for
authority both in and over the church, as twelve patriarchs, says Beza, and
also established an ecclesiastical heerarchie. Hence came it, that bishop was
of Jerusalem James; of Antioch Peter; of the Asian churches, John; of
Alexandria mark; of Ephesus and all Asia, Timothy: of all Creete, Titus; of
Philippos Epaphraditus; of Corinth and Achaia, Apollos; of Athe^s Dionisius: of
France Crescens; of Britanie Aristobulus. Beza in act. Apost. 1.2. D.
Chrisosto. in Act. Homil. 33.2. Hieron. in Gal. Eusebius. D. Hieron. ad Euagr. D.
Hier. in 2. Tim. 1. Theod. arg. in epist. ad Tit. Theod. in epist. ad Phil.
Eusebius. lib. 2. Dorotheus in Apostol. Synops. Where we see S. Aristobulus not
only joined in rank, and dignity of spiritual preeminence, with the
Evangelists, and Apostles themselves, but with the general authority of the
protestant church of England, plainly declared to be the first founder of
ecclesiastical hierarchy, and Archbishop of this our Britanie. And to give
evident testimony, that in their judgment this nation of the west, both
derived the succession of the Bishops thereof from S. Peter and Aristobulus,
and never wanted by such until these days, they thus conclude in this matter,
supra page 197.198. Finally from the Apostles days hitherto never wanted a
succession of Bishops neither in the East, nor Weste churches, so prouide^t
has the almighty been for the augmentation of his glory, and people, by
this kind, and calling of men. And thus much for the first Archbishop of
Britany ordained by Saint Peter.

Now to come to speak of the Bishops he consecrated and ordained for us,
although it is precisely proved before, that such there were: Episcopos
ordinauit. S. Peter ordained Bishops here in Britanie for us, and every
Archbishop which is chief of Bishops, such as S. Aristobulus was unto us, does
necessarily infer, and prove some Bishops subordinate, and under, else he
could not be the chief, and principal; for every Archbishop infers
necessarily some Bishops or Bishop under him their chief in that calling.
Diverse Antiquities of Glastenbury, apud Capgrau. in S. Joseph, affirm, that
one of the holy company of Saint Joseph of Aramathia, namly his son Iosephe
was a Bishop, which if so it was, he must needs be subordinate to S.
Aristobulus. And yett if I would set down uncertain things, I might place
our holy Bishop and marty S. Angulus, in or near this time, with much more
probability then some without any authority I can find, referr him to the
days of Diocletian his persecution: or say that S. Martine, to whom the
christian Romans, builded and dedicated the church at Canterbury, was a British
Bishop, and in this time; for that such a S. Martyne a Bishop there was about
those days, there be many testimonies, and that he was consecrated by Roman
authority; and so aunciently to prove it probable, he was a Britanie, that
the ancient Manuscript of Radulphus de Diceto deane of London, or whosoever
Author of Abbreuiatio chronicorum, says, that it was builded in the time of
king Lucius, for speaking of the time of that our first christian king, he
affirms. ( Abbreuiatio chronicorum in Lucio. M. S) Tunc constructa est extra
Cantuariam ecclesia Sancti Martini: then the church without Canterbury
dedicated to S. Martyne, was builded. As diverse also were to S. Peter, our
most glorious Apostle. One I find consecrated by S. Peter or his successor at
Rome, which was both a Britanne, and lived and died a Bishop here in the time
of S. Aristobulus, a Germane writer calls him Achates, but I take not that to
be his name, he was one of the happy companions of S. Beatus our noble
contryman consecrated at Rome, of whom I will speak more when I come to that
glorious man, when I have first entreated of the consecration of S. Mansuetus a
renowned Bishop, borne in this Island, consecrated by S. Peter himself.

This man, as many antiquities say, was natione Scotus, by contry a Scot, of
the north part of this kingedome, made Bishop by S. Peter, whose disciple he
was before, and sent into these parts, or consecrated by him here, and made
Bishop of Tullu^ in Lorrayne. Tullenses habuere Apostolu^, suaeque in Christum
fidei primu^ Antistitem S. Mansuetum S. Petri Apostoli discipulum, S. Clementis
Collega^ origin Scotu^, (Arnold. Merman. in Theatro Conuers. gentiu^ in
Metensib.) The inhabitants of Tullum (says Arnoldus Mermannius) bad for their
Apostle and first Bishopp of their faith in Christ, S. Mansuetus a disciple of
S. Peter the Apostle, the fellow of S. Clement, a Scot by birth. An other
citinge also for Authors Antonius Democarez, and Petrus de Natalibus, says.
(Guliel. Eiseng. centenar. 1. part. 1. did. 3. page 56. Petrus de Natal. l.
11. c. vlt. Anton. Monchiacen. Democh. l. 2. de Miss. contr. Calvin. c. 33.) S.
Mansuetus, natione Scotus, ex nobili prognatus familia Simonis Barion^
Apostolorum Coryphaei discipulus, socius B. Clementis Episcopi Mettensis, a
Petro Leucorum in vrbe Tullensi primus Antistes consecratus est anno Christi
49. Tiberio Claudio Caesare Augusto. In the 49. year of Christ in the Empire
of Claudius S. Mansuetus a Scot by contry, borne of a noble family, disciple of
S Peter chief of the Apostles, companion of S. Clement Bishop of Metz, was By
Peter consecrated the first Bishop in the city of Tullum.

Mermennius, before cited says, ( in Theatro conuers. gentium.) that Saint
Clement whose companion this our contrye man Saint Mansuetus was, was Bishop of
Metz in, or about the 40. year of Christ, in the ^yme of Caius Caligula
Emperor: Metensibus fidei Religionisque Antistes fuit S. Clemens Romanus, anno
and quod excurrit 40. Caio Galigula Imperatore, S. Petro pontifice maximo. But
to admit, that S. Mansuetus was not made Bishop by S. Peter until the 49.
year of Christ, and was noe Bishop, but an assistant of S. Clement, at his
first sendeing by S. Peter of him to Metz, yett to have a Bishop of our nation,
and consecrated and sent to forreyne parts by the chief Apostle, is an
invincible argument, that both S. Peter was the first founder and father of the
Brittans birth and life in Christ, disposed of all spiritual affairs here,
long before the cominge of any other Apostle, either into this kingedome or
part of the world to convert it, and left at that time diverse Bishops in this
contrie, or fit for that most holy order: otherwise he would not have sent
S. Mansuetus of this contrie forth of Britanie, to execute that high dignity
in a strange nation, such as Lorrayne, where Tullum is, then was, and still
is, to this Island. And this I may more boldly write, by a consequent and
concluded leave, and warrant from our Protestant Bishops, and other such
Antiquaries, who in their great Theater of Britanie give us diverse graunts,
and Rules to lead us, both to so tymely a being of Saint Peter in this
kingedome, and his disciples preaching here, and both claiming and exercising
such powerable jurisdiction and authority here, as I have related from others.
First they write in these words. ( Theater of great Britanie lib. 6. cap. 9..
5)

If Peter were here at all (which they granted and is demonstrated by them
before) it was before ever he went to Rome, and the gospel was preached here,
before it was in Rome, if Peter were the first, as some hold, that preached
there, both which may be more probable. Again thus they write ( 7.) It has
passed with allowance among the learned Senate of our Antiquaries, that when
Claudius began to bannish and persecute the Christians in Rome (which they
think to be before this time of S. Mansuetus being Bishop of Tullum) many
Romans and Britans being converted to the faith, fled thence into these remote
parts of the earth where they might and did, more freely enjoy the liberty of
their professions. And from this Sanctuary of salvation, the sad lamenting
Lady Pomponia Graecina, the wife of Aulus Plantius, the first Lord lieutenant
of Britanie brought that Religion, whereof she was accused and stood indicted
upon life and death, which was noe other then the Christian profession. And
to interpret themselves more clearlye where (as they hold) this great Lady
the Lord Lieutenants wife was converted, thus they set down their marginall
direction concerning this matter. Aulus Plantius his wife became a christian in
Britanie.

Now to assure us how soon it was, that S. Peter and his disciples had made
so happy an entrance, and wrought so glorious effects in this our kingdom,
these very Protestants tell us. That Aulus Plantius was sent hither out of
germany, with an army the second year of Claudius, which was (as some
Protestants write) in the 44. year of Christ, by others the 45. and stayed
here but a short time, returninge to Rome and triumphing there, for his
victories over the Britans, in the year of Christ 49. and then in the year
50. Publius Ostorius Scapula was Propraetor here. (Theater supr. lib. 6. c. 6.
page 193. Protestants in Festis Regum an. Dom. 44. Claudij 3. Stowe and Howes
histor. an. D. 45) By which account of these Protestants themselves, this
lamentinge Lady Pomponia Graemia, by them here converted to the faith of
Christ, and all her christian company, as chances in such cases at so great
parsonadges conversion, and many other christians of the Britans, which they
say were then converted by those disciples of S. Peter, or by himself, (noe
others then being here) must needs be converted before, or in the 49 year
of the Incarnation of our Savior, in which as I proved before, our contryman
S. Mansuetus, was ordained Bishop of Tullum by S. Peter, which was 14. years
before the cominge of S Joseph of Aramathia hither, by all antiquities, and
diverse by the scriptures themselves, before S. Paul came to Rome or any
western nation.

And if we may believe the Protestant writers of the Theater, they make the
coming of S. Paul to Rome, long after, writing in these words. ( Theater of
great Britanie supr. l. 6.. 7.) Paul came not to Rome till the tenth of Nero.
When both by them and the scriptures, he was a prisoner two years, and could
not depart from Rome. Which makes these Protestants reckoning 16. or 17.
years after the conversion of so many in Britanie, and consecration of S.
Mansuetus that holy Bishop by S. Peter. And to prove further unto us, not only
that these first christians of Britany were converted by S. Peter, but that
others of this our nation, were even at this time, consecrated priests, and
Bishops also by S. Peter, these Protestant Bishops and others, having
immediately spoken before of the conversion of Lady Pomponia Graecina herein
Britany in or before the 49. year of Christ, they proceed in these words. (
Theater of the Empire of great Britanie l. 6.8.9. B. Rhenan. in history of
Germany. Pantaleon.) And much about these times, as B. Rhenanus in his history
of Germany, Pantaleon, and others do report, one Suetonius a noble man's son
in Britanie, converted to the faith by the first planters of the gospel in
this Island, and after his Baptism called Beatus, was sent by the brethren
from hence, unto Rome to be better instructed, and further directed by Saint
Peter himself. And returninge through Suitcerland, found such willingness and
flockinge of the people to hear, and receive the doctrine of Christ, that he
there stayed, and built an oratory not far from the bake Thun, and near the
Town called Vnderfewen, where in preachinge and prayers, he employed his time
to the day of his death, which happened in the year of grace 110.

Hitherto the words of our english Protestants, of this glorious and renowned
man, far exceeding that which they give him here: for as their Author Henricus
Pantaleon. ( de viris Illustr. Germaniae part. 1 p. 114 a German Protestant
writes plainly of him, that he was, the Apostle of Heluetians. S. Beatus
Heluetiorum Apostolus. Which Title and name none but puritans of any Religion
will give to any but Bishops, and none but such which only have power to
consecrate priests, (without which a true church cannot be) can either be, or
truly called their Apostle. And that this holy Bishop of Britanie though he
stayed most in Heluetia, yet that he was principally sent to be a Bishopp in
Britanie by Saint Peter, it is evident by these Protestants before, testifyinge
that he was returning into Britanie, and so cheifely directed by Saint Peter:
( Pantal. supra Stamph. lib. 7. de Sanct.) Which Pantaleon with Stamphius and
others do more plainly witness, saying. S. Beatus ille nobilibus parentibus
natus ex Britannia, in patriam rediens etc. S. Beatus borne of noble parents in
Britanie, returninge into his contry: and adding of him, omnia bona pauperibus
distribuit: he distributed all his goods to the pore: must needs be in
Britanie, where of these his goods he was to make distributor of them. And
these Germa^ historians tell us, that he had an other companion sent and
directed with him, from Rome by S. Peter or his authority there, and beeinge
also a Britain returned hither, being consecrated Priest or Bishop by the
same authority, and at the same time.

So that we see by these Protestants themselves, that so long as S. Peter
lived, the Bishops and Priests of Britanie were consecrated by him in this
contry, and in his absence hence went unto Rome for their consecration, and to
be directed by him. This other companion of S. Beatus, borne in this kingdom,
and consecrated at Rome by S. Peter, and returninge hither, where for any
thing we read otherwise in histories, he continued in preaching all his
life, and died here, some Germane writers have named Achates. (Anonymus apud
Beat. Rhenan. de Reb. German. l. 3. page 172. Rhen. supr.) Whether that was his
true name or not, it is not material to my purpose to question here: the
history it self in germany being so certainly and generally received, that
it is, and aunciently was published, printed, and painted in their churches
there. Hac historia non solum picta est in templis ac scripta, sed etiam typis
expressa: of this history mention is made, especially of S. Beatus in the
Roman Martyrologe, S. Beda, Vsuardus, Molanus, Gulielmus Eisengrenius, the
Antiquities of Heluetia, and expressly in the ancient monuments of the church
of Constance, and others. ( Martyrolog. Romans 9. die Maij. Beda Vsuard. and Mol.
ab. Guliel. Eis. centur. 2. part. 5. Annal. Helu Momment. Eccle-Constant. Baron
annot. in Mart. Romans 9. Maij.) neither can we think that these two holy
Bishops or priests of this kingedome of our Britanie were singular in this, but
that we had more so consecrated, and directed from Rome besides them, and
needed not Bishops and pastors here, otherwise S. Beatus would not have stayed
most of his time in Heluetia, forth of his contry, nor S. Peter his
consercator and director, and our Apostle by these Protestants before, given
allowa^ce unto it.

Neither had S. Beatus been sent (the words of our Protestants and Pantaleon
also) by the brethren from hence unto Rome to be better instructed and
further directed by S. Peter himself. (Theater, and Pantal. supr.) But that
the Brethren and Christians here depended of Saint Peter, and accounted it both
their duty, and honor to this nation, to have their spiritual Guides,
Bishops, and Priests consecrated and directed by him, and his Apostolicque
supreme power and command, in Religious things.

Now let us return to S. Peter's beeinge here in Britanie; whereof I have
spoken before, how to supply all spiritual wants of this kingedome, and found
our church, in Britannia long tempore fuit moratus, he stayed in Britanie a
long time, as the greek antiquities remembered unto us by our Protestants have
told us: and to express his great love, and care, to this and other western
nations, more particularly commended to his chardge, this long time was so
long, and his love to us so great, that as both S. Simo^ Metaphrastes, and
Eusebius Pamphili in some book not now, but in the time of Metaphrastes
exta^t, and by him constantly cited, say: S. Peter stayed at Rome, and in
Britanie, and the cities of the west, three and twenty years. Eusebius
Pamphili dicit Petrum viginti tres annos tra^seg^sse Romae, and in Britannia,
and in ciuitatibus quae sunt in occidente. (Simon Metaphrastes die 29. Iunij.
Eusebius Pamph. apud eund. supr. Surius 29. Iunij.) allotinge only as it
seems the rest of the 25. years which is commonly said, the time of his
being at Rome and these parts, to his Journey in the east, at the time of the
migration of the B. Virgin our Lady forth of this world. Which is confirmed by
some of our Protestant antiquaries of England in these words. This year 70.
being the fourteenth year of Nero Bassus and Tuscus, being then Roman
Consuls, the holy Apostle S. Peter having accomplished his preachinge, in the
west parts, returned to Rome, where he preached again, as he did before.
(Ioh. Stow and Ed. Howes histor. titul. Romans in Julius Agricola.)

And before his departure hence, as I have already remembered, besides S.
Mansuetus, S. Beatus and such as he consecrated Bishops of our nation in
forreyn places, or for them out of Britanie, he ordained here, and for this
kingedome Bishops, Priests and Deacons. Apud Britannos Episcopos, presbyteros
and diaconos ordinauit. Who these Bishops in particular were, I read noe man
precisely to set them down, yett if we will follow the antiquities of
Glastenbury saying that S. Iosophe the son of S. Joseph of Aramathia was a
Bishop, as both Catholics and Protestants allow them in other things: I crave
pardon probably to write, that he was one of them which S. Peter consecrated
here.

First, because as is granted, before S. Aristobulus our Archbishop, unto whom
S. Joseph, whether Bishop or not, was subject, was ordained by S. Peter.
Secondly because S. Joseph is named a Bishop, and yet in probable judgment none
when he came hither, with his Father S. Joseph, for by the same and all other
antiquities and histories of that matter, S. Joseph his Father noe Bishop, was
the Abbot or Superior of all that company, yet neither Catholic nor Protestant
will easily instance that Bishops, by order and Sacrament Superiors, were or
might be Inferiors or subjects to any of Inferior degree.

Secondly there is noe possibility by any authority, that I find at all, to
surmise that S. Joseph was a Bishop before his cominge hither, but the words
of the antiquity which say of him: that Jesus consecrated him Bishop before in
the city Sarath: Quem Dominus Jesus prius in ciuitate Sarath, in Episcopum
consecrauit. (Antiquit. Glast. apud Capgrau. in S. Joseph ab Aramathia.) Which
noe Protestant will or may by their Religion say, was a true and real
consecration, but rather prophetical, what should be done, by orderly
consecration after. For this vision was long after Christ's Ascension into
heaven, where all Protestants of England ever since, imprison him to keep him
from being present in the B. Sacrament of the altar.

Thirdly they and all others generally deny such extraordinary proceedings,
where an ordinary and universal order, as in this case is appointed by Christ
himself. Wherefore S. Paul himself that vessel of Election, and extraordinary
Apostle, though miraculously converted, chosen, and called, yett be neither
was actually a christian without external baptism, nor a Bishop but by
Imposition of hands, and ordinary consecration. And we read of S. Sampson,
our holy Archbishop of york, that before he was a Bishop, S. Peter, S. James,
and S. John appeared unto him saying: (Io. Capgrau. in S. Sampsone Episc. and
Confessore.) Our Lord Jesus Christ has chosen thee for a Bishop, and sent us
to consecrate thee: whom when they had consecrated with benediction, they
disappeared out of his sight. Nocte quadam vidit se densissimis candidatorum
turmis circundari: and tres Episcopos vestibus aureis ornatos, cum illo
ecclesiam ingredientes orare, cuius vnus illorum ab ipso inquisitus, qui esset,
ait. Ego sum Petrus Christi Apostolus, and hic frater Domini Iacobus, and
Euangelista Ioannes. Dominus Jesus Christus te sibi in praesulem elegit, and te
consecrare nos misit. Que^ cum benedictione consecrassent, ab eius oculis
elapsisunt. And yett neither S. Sampson nor any other took this for a real
consecration, but only figurative of that which was after to be done by the
holy external rite of the church of Christ; until as we read in the same
history, our holy Archbishop S. Dubricius upon the apparition and message of an
Angel did truly and really, externally consecrate him a Bishop: nec multo
post Angelus Domini beato Dubricio apparens, Sampsonem ordinari Episcopum
praecepit. (Capgr. supr.) So I might exemplify in many such cases, only
prophetical and figurative, what should afterward be done, and not what was
then effected.

Therefore if S. Joseph was a Bishop as that antiquity persuadeth, by that
figurative vision, and not consecrated before he came into Britanie, as is
showed before, and we read of no other which at that time made, and
consecrated Bishops but S Peter, I may probably at the least affirm, that S.
Iosephe was one of them which S. Peter at his departure hence, (S. Iosephe
being certainly here at that time) was consecrated Bishop by Saint Peter here
in Britanie. And when I find both Catholics and Protestants affirm, (
Martyrol. Angl. 7. die Februarij. Drekin Almin. an. 1620. 7. Feb. with others.)
that S. Angulus was our Bishop of London and martyr, and yet noe historia^,
Catholic or Protestant, puts him in the number of them which were Bishops
there after the time of K. Lucius, but quite leave him out of that catalogue,
as appears by our Protestants Harrison, Godwyne, Stowe and others which with all diligence they could, have collected the ancient Bishops of London, I must
needs draw him to an higher time then that of king Lucius was, before which
noe consecration of Bishops in Britany was, or is so memorable as this by S.
Peter the Apostle ( Harris. de script. of Brit Godw. Catalog. of Bishop in
London 1. Stowe and How. l. hist. Lucius Iocelin of Furnes l. de Episc. Brit.

And to end here the Relation of S. Peter's proceedings in Britanie, we have
clearly, deduced, with the allowance of our best English Protestant
Antiquaries, and other Authors by them approved; That S. Peter Prince of the
Apostles, was our first Father in Christ, and renowned Apostle, both
immediately by himself, and his holy disciples; That he performed here all
chief and eminent pastoral duties and offices, when our Emperors with our
Lieutenants here, as also all our Kings were pagan Infidels; That he ordained
and consecrated for us Bishops, priests, and other clergy men, and founded
churches to the honor and Religion of Christ, and the honor of his blessed
Mother S. Mary the Virgin, (few other christian Saints then deceased) as that
of Glastenbury not so dedicated without his approbation, being chief in such
affairs. He consecrated other Britans out of this nation, exemptinge them
from the pagan service of those such remembered princes, he sent them by
authority to preach the gospel, in other contries, he or his disciples
converted Pomponia Graecina the Lord Lieutenants wife of Britanie, as these
Protestants have proved, and many in the like case, their husbands continuing
in their infidelity, and contradiction, and many husbands and children, the
wives and parents not allowinge, as servants in respect of their Lords and
masters, and Subjects in regard of sovereigns.

I, a Catholic Priest, now demand of the best learned Protestants Bishops of
England, whether these proceedings and prerogatives in that most glorious
Apostle, and his worthy disciples, our first Masters in Christ, were not as
great and ample, as the renowned Priests and Catholics of this kingedome now
attribute, and give to the Popes of Rome his Apostolic Successors? We who
have read most, and suffered much for this cause, cannot see the difference,
or find instance of disparitie, except in number of parsons, less or greater
quantities of grounds, and some improportions in such things, which make noe
essential diversity, for otherwise we have been told by the best learned
Protestants with others, that S. Peter and his disciples did manifestly and
directly transfer and change those parsons, places, and property of things
of this our Britanie from a temporal, to al spiritual use, from the command
(except in temporal duty) of the present Emperors, Lieutenants, Kings and
Sovereigns alienated from Christian Religion, to the co^mande of Christ, his
Religion, our most holy Apostle and his disciples, by his authority so
directinge.

THE III. CHAPTER. How in the rest of this first Hundred years of Christ after
Saint Peter, The Apostolic See of Rome, still continued and exercised this
supreme spiritual power in Britanie.
IT is a question, not only among Catholics (but some Protestants also)
whether S. Linus and Cletus were Popes after S. Peter, or only Suffragan
Bishops, as so ordained by him at the first. And Pope Leo the second an holy
Saint, with there nowned of our Historians to omit others, S. Marianus and
Florentius Wigorniensis, say plainly: Si Petrus Apostolorum princeps adiutoris
sibi asciuit Linum and Cletum, non tamen pontificij potestatem cis tradidit,
sed Clementi successori suo. If Peter Prince of the Apostles, did take Linus
and Cletus to be his Adiutors, yett he gave not them the Papal power, but to
Clement his successor. And Linus and Cletus did nothing by their own Laws
and power as popes, but only so much as was commanded them by S. Peter. ( S.
Leo 2. in epist. decretal. Marian. Scot. lib. 2. aetat. 6. Florent. Wigor. in
Siluan. and Otho Consul. Robert. Barns in vit. Port. Romans in Linum.) Therefore
to omit doubtful and uncertain things, and to come next to S. Clement who
most certainly by all Cathololicks and Protestants was Pope of Rome nominated
by S. Peter: (though Baronius and others whom he alleges are of opinion that
S. Clement yielded his right, and did not exercise the office of supreme
pastor til after Linus and Cletus, yet who in S. Peter's life him were his
Coadiutors and after his death his successors before S. Clement, (to 1. Annal.
p. 742.743.744.745.) before any other: by this Pope, Doctors were sent into the
west (as our Protestants tell us ( Margin. annot. upon Matthew. Westin. an. 94.
Matthew. Westminster supr.) in great numbers, as S. Denis, Nicasius, Taurinus,
Trophimus, Paulus Narbonensis, Saturninus, Martialis, Gratianus, Iulianus,
Lucianus, Firminus, Photinus all Bishops, and they add S. Regulus. Whom
although they setle the^ with their Bishoprics in France, yett it proves the
power and spiritual command of that holy pope, to have extended it self
as well to this kingdom, one and the same reason being for, and against them
both.

But we find diverse Authorities both late and ancient to induce us, to
consent that some of these named holy Bishops, sent at this time, by S.
Clement, were sent by him into this kingdom of Britanie, namely S. Taurinus
and S. Nicasius: and that S. Taurinus was Archbishop or Bishop of york. Among
others, William Harrison a Protestant historian. ( In descript. of Britanie.
page 23. Chronolog. ibid. an. 141.) produces an Antiquity that so affirms:
whereupon he writes in this manner: Whether Taurinus Bishop over the
congregation at york, were one of the nine scholars of Grantha Cambridge
spoken of in the chronicles of Burton, I do not certainly find. But certain
it is, that Walterus Rollewink in his history fasciculus temporum. (an. 94.)
says. S. Taurinus was Episcopus Eboracensis, Bishop of york, which is here in
Britanie: and so not Ebroicensis in France, where the same or an other of
that name was Bishop about the same time And an other late writer. ( Harris
Theatrum. l. 1.) in his manuscript history, alleging both S. Antoninus and
diverse others, says: diverse have written that both S. Nicasius and Taurinus
were here in Britanie, and for S. Taurinus, S. Antoninus says, that S.
Taurinus: filiam Lucij Regis Britanniae a morte suscitauit. S. Taurinus did
raise from death the daughter of Lucius, King of Britanie. (S. Antonin. hist.
part. 1. titul. 6. cap.) Which directly proves, that S. Taurinus was here in
out Britanie, and this King Lucius for certain, was either he that lived to
receive the faith of Christ publicly in the time of Pope Eleutherius,
beginning his reign in the year of Christ 124 ( Matt. Westminster. an. 124.) or
Lucius Antenous the Roman prefect in Britanie called there upon. Rex
Britanniae, King of Britanie, as well he might, prescribinge laws unto us in
Britanie as Hector Boethius. ( Scetor. hist. l. 5. fol. 76.77.78.) with others
witness: and was resident at york in the time of the Emperor Adrian, when
and where S. Taurinus is supposed to have been Bishop and wrought this
miracle. For S. Anacasius being sent hither by S. Clement, they which teach
so. ( Harris supr.) produce the french histories that he preached to the
Britans, which in that time were only those of this kingdom, the little
Britanie in France then and long after named Armorica, and not Britannia.

And yett to omit others, Arnoldus Mermannus in his Theater of the conversion
of nations, (. Britones.) says, that among other people, S. Anacasius being
delegated thither an Apostle by S. Clement, did instruct and inform in the
faith the Britans, and all the waste of the Ocean Sea. Britones, Normandos,
Rhotomagenses, Picardos, omnemque Maris Oceani tractum instruxit, formauitque
fide S. Nicasius a S. Clemente illuc Apostolus delegatus. And to putt us out of
doubt, that S. Clement did take upon him the spiritual chardge of this our
Britanie, as well as of France and other places, the same Author from others
testifies, that our Archbishop S Aristobulus who as Eisingrenius says, had
been a Bishop from anno Christi the 39 the 39 year of Christ, was yett our
Apostle in Britanie alive in the year of Christ 99. S. Clement then Pope. Et
quod excurrit 99. Clemente Pontifice Maximo, Domitiano Imperatore. (Guliel.
Eis^ng. centen. 1. part. 1. did. 7. fol. 67. Arnold. Mermman. Theater conuers.
gent. in Albione) And we have vett in England an old manuscript, a short
historical relation. ( M. S. antiq. pr. Stores in Exordium) Of the public
Mass, and church service, of the Britans, and French men, from the Apostles
time, written before the union of the Britans with S. Augustines mission, by S.
Gregory, and written by a British Author, testifying that the public church
service and Mass, both of the french and Brittans was carried up to Rome to S.
Clement, to be examined and approved by him then Pope, which he accordingly
performed by his papal power, and this Mass was ever after used both in
France, and this our kingedome of Britanie.

So that most evident it is, by those few Antiquities left unto us, that in
the time of S. Clement who was Pope in the later end of the first, and
beginning of the second hundred year of Christ, this our church of Britanie
was wholly in spiritual things, dependant and subordinate to the church and
Popes of Rome: and thus much of the first age and hundred year, from the birth
of Christ. When here and of this nation there were yett living many Bishops
consecrated by S. Peter, and the Roman Papal authority: S. Aristobulus,
Mansuetus, Beatus, and probably S. Iosephe, Taurinus, Nicasius, Angulus, and
others: for to add to the former, S. Anacletus says in his Epistle, approved
by our Protestants of England, our contryman S. Marianus and others. ( Rob.
Barns in vita pont. Romans in Anacl. Mar. Scot. l. 2. de aetat. 6. col. 250.
Florent. Wigorn. in Domit.) that the provinces where Archbishops were, were
divided by the Apostles and S. Clement his predecessor, ab Apostolis and Beato
Clemente praecessore nostro, ipsa Prouincia diuisio renouata est. (Some do make
Clitus and Anaclitus alone, and make him praedecessour to S. Clement see. Baro.
to. 1.) Therefore most evident it is that S. Clement took upon him and
exercised, this supreme Papal and spiritual power in this kingedome.

THE SECOND CENTVRIE OR HUNDRED YEAR.
THE IV. CHAPTER. Showing by these Protestants, how the popes of Rome in this
second Century of years claymed, had, and exercised supreme spiritual
Jurisdiction and power in Britanie.
TO begin with the second age, and hundred year, Saint and Pope Anacletus
offers him self first, being the next and immediate Successor to S.
Clement, and as he himself wittnesseth. ( Epist. decretal. Marian. Scot. l.
2. aetat. 6. col. 250. Florentius Wigorn. in Domitiano. Matthew. Westin. an.
102.) Both instructed, and taught and made priest by S. Peter chief of the
Apostles: vt a beato Petro principe sumus instructi, a quo and presbyter sum
ordinatus. This holy Pope S. Peter's disciple beginning his papacy in the 102.
year of Christ as our Protestants of England inform us. ( Rob. Barns. in vit.
pontif. Romans in Anacleto. Ormerod. pict. of Pap. page 78.) Thought that the
primacy over all churches was granted to the church of Rome by our Lord
himself, and over all Christian people. Ab ipso Domino primatum Romanae
Ecclesiae super omnes Ecclesias, vniuersumque Christiani nomine populum
concessum esse asseruit. And they tell us further, how according to this
supreamacie granted by Christ to the Sea of Rome, over all churches and
Christian people, he executed the same in making his general decrees,
bindinge all Bishops, Priests and others, both concerning the most blessed
sacrifice of the Mass, and Jurisdiction.

Among other things, to speak in Protestant words. (Rob. Barns supra.)
Episcopos officio pares, ordine duplici distinxit: eos primates, sieve
patriarchas appellari voluit, qui in illis ciuitatibus praeessent, in quibus
olim primarij Flamines sederunt: in alijs metropolitanis vrbibus, Episcopos
Metropolitanos vel Archiepiscopos nominandos esse censuit. He distinguished
Bishops equal in order, into two degrees: causinge them to be named Primates,
or Patriarchs, which ruled in those cities, in which of old the Archflamens
did sit: in other Metropolitan cities, he would have them named
Metropolitans or Archbishops, and he calls this not his own decree, but the
decree of S. Clement his predecessor, and Saint Peter also. ( Anacl. supr. and
apud Mar. Scot. and Flor. Wigorn. supr.) And sets down in a certain Tome,
what cytes were to have primates, both according to his own, S. Clements, and
the Apostles order.

And this decree of Saint Anacletus, in this highest question of Jurisdiction,
was so universal and general in it self, so embraced of all, and
includinge, that as not only Giraldus Cambrensis, and ancient authorities of
this nation, ( Lib. 2. de Iure Metropol. eccles. Meneuen. ad Innocent. 3.) but
the chief Protestant Antiquaries themselves, as Matthew Parker the first
Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, ( Lib. antiquit. Britannic. page 24.) and
Sir John Prise, ( Io. Pris. defens. histor. Britan. page 73.) do plainly
acknowledge, that by that Tome of Saint Anacletus Pope, it was contained and
decreed, how many and which were the places throughout all this Island even as
it contained England, Scotland, and Wales. And thereupon this Protestant
Archbishopp, does in express terms call the division of Britanie in that
respect: Ex Anacleto huius Insulae diuisionem. The division of this Island
according to the decree of Pope Anacletus: And though this division was not
actually made at that time for setting Archbishops in those provinces at that
time, but was deferred until in after when the faith was recreaued here in
more public manner, when persecution ceased, or was mitigated; yett by these
authorities there is noe doubt, but this holy Pope both claymed, and exercised
the same highest spiritual Jurisdiction, as well in this, as all other
nations, that decree being general, and without limitation for all nations,
as it is allowed by these Protestants, and making all provinces in the known
world, substitute and subordinate to the church of Rome in such affairs, and
none exempted.

And as this decree alone will witness, he sent as opportunity and the cause
required, Bishops and priests into other contries, so he did the like to this,
to increase and continue that happy buildinge, which his predecessors had
founded here before. So we must say of his immediate Successor Saint
Euaristus, except we will reject the authority of one, of our most ancient
and approved historians, Nennius, who in his manuscript ancient history,
written if we may believe the Protestant Bishop Bale. ( l. de scriptor. cent.
1. in Nennio.) A thousand years since, confidently affirms that, Britannicus
Rex, A king of Britanie received an ambassadge from Euaristus Pope of Rome, to
receive the faith of Christ, missa legatione a Papae Romano Euaristo; (Mennius
hist. M. S.) who yett says with others, that the general conversion of this
land, was not until the year of Christ 167. others making it later.

This holy Pope began his papacy in the year 111. and lived therein until
120. before which time our king Coillus, brought up at Rome, was so well
disposed to Christian Religion, that as our Protestants and the antiquities of
Glastenbury tell us, he confirmed the twelve hides of land to the religious
Eremitage of Glastenbury. ( Antiquitat. glast. apud Capgrau. in S. Joseph and
others.) And therefore cominge from Rome into Britanie to be king (his Father
king Marius beeinge dead) we cannot think but as many of our contrimen his
subjects then at Rome, were Christians, and in so great number, that in one
British house there, the house of S. Claudia our British Lady, and children
after her, there were at, or soon after this time, in the time of Pope Pius
the first, 96. christians: ( Act. 5 Pudentianae Breuiar. Romans in vit. eius 19.
Maij.) So many of them, and of other nations also, and clergy men, were sent
hither by the Pope of Rome at that time, which many of our Protestant
historians will confirm, assuringe, that both now and at all times until the
conversion of king Lucius, there were many christians which came from Rome,
living in this kingdom. ( Godwyn Conuers. of Britanie page Caius l. 1. antiq.
Cantabrig. Will. Harrison. descript. of Brit. Holinsh. hist. of Engl.) So do
diverse ancient antiquities of the Annals of Burton, and others of foreign
nations.

And touching the time of Pope Alexander the first, next successor to S.
Euaristus, he being made Pope in the year 120. and continuinge Bishop of
Rome by common opinion 8. years, and five months, in the fourth year of the
papacy of this blessed Saint, as both Matthew of Westminster. ( Annal. Burton.
an. 141. Catal. Episcop. Tungr.) and the autient Table hanging in the church of
S. Peter in Cornehil, in London, then builded in the time of king Lucius,
witness, beeinge the 124. year of Christ. The year of our Lord God 124.
Lucius was crowned king: so the one, and the other says: anno gratiae 124.
Coillo Britonum Rege defuncto, Lucius filius eius regni diademate insignitus
est. In the year of grace 124. Coillus king of the Britans being dead,
Lucius his son was crowned king. Math^ Westin. an. 124.

This king Lucius, although neither he nor the kingdom were yett so
generally converted, yet well knowinge that many preachers had been sent
hither from Rome, and diverse Brittans here were desirous to embrace the faith
of Christ, did not only give way unto it, in this beginning of his Reign, but
except Albertus Krantzius a man well acquainted with our British antiquities
(as a Protestant antiquary witnesses) does deceive us. ( Io. Caius antiq.
Cantabrig. l. 1. Albert. Krantzius Metropol. l. 1. cap. 6.) Did write unto S.
Alexander the first, Pope of Rome to have christian Religion preached in this
kingedome. Religionem Christi Lucius quondam Britanniae Rex, ab Alexandro primo
eius nominis summo pontifice, impetrauit in Insula predicari. Lucius King of
Britanie did obtain of Pope Alexander the first, to here Christian Religion
preached in that Island. Which is confirmed by many Authorities, prouening unto
us, that this Island at, and immediately after that time, had diverse preachers
of the faith of Christ, and among them some Bishops, besides those I named
before, to prove that we had a continual succession of holy Bishops from
Rome, as these also were, from our first christianity.

And that we had many preachers, and many by them converted, may appear by
that is acknowledged before from these Protestants: to which many of them add,
and from antiquities, that many Scholars and Doctors of our Universities then
were converted in the year 141. nine in one place of Cambridge. In peruetustis
Annalibus Burtonensibus sic lego. Anno Domini 141. hic baptizati sunt nouem ex
Doctoribus and Scholaribus Cantabrigiae. I do read (says one) in very old
Annals of Burto^ thus. In the year of our Lord 141. here were baptized nine of
the Doctors and Scholars of Cambridge. ( Caius lib. 1. de antiq. Cantab. page
95. Theater of great Brit. lib. 6. Harris. descript. of Brit.) Like to this
have many other Protestants: who assure us, this succession could not come from
S. Joseph of Aramathia and his company, for a Protestant Bishop, according to
the truth of histories writes: (Godwyn. conuers. of Brit. page 16. c. 3.) It
seems that Joseph and his fellows prevailed little by their preaching, and
therefore gave themselves at last unto a monastical and solitary life in the
Island of Aualon.) And even their memory was so much forgotten when king
Lucius was converted, that as our best antiquities we have of that matter, tell
us, those which S. Eleutherius sent from Rome, found the best information of
them at Rome, and their ancient house or church was foe desolat, that it was
become, Latibulu^ Ferarum, a den for wyld beasts at their cominge hither. (
Antiquit. Glaston. apud Capgrau. in S. Joseph Aramath. in S Patr.)

I find in histories no others, from whom we have the least probability to
claim a continuance in Religion, therefore it must needs be from Rome, from
whence also we had among these holy men, some Bishops to continue a
succession from thence. For although S. Beatus was but lately dead living unto
this year 110. it is not unlikely but his companion was still living, and
except there were twoe of that name, and in those times and the same contrie,
which no history does remember, S. Mansuetus was yet a live, and long after
until we had many other Bishops sent from Rome, or consecrated here by the
Roman authority, in the time of this King Lucius. For we read in the
Annals and Catalogue of the Archbishops of Treuers, near unto Tullum, that in
the year 160. S. Mansuetus was Bishop there: Mansuetus qui huic nomini and
vocationi suae vita proba, anno Domini 160. optime respondit. The seventh
Archbishop of Treuers was Mansuetus, who by his godly life did excellently
answer this his name to be meek, and his vocation in the year of Christ
160. ( Annals Arch. Treuer. Petrus Merssaeus Catal. Arch. Treuer.) Which by
noe historye I can find, was or could be any other, but Saint Mansuetus our
contryman spoken of before, both the name, time, and place so near unto
Tullum, where he was first Bishopp alloweinge it, and nothing impugninge it.

And among those Bishops here in Britanie, and of our own nation, I find two
named being both consecrated and sent hither by the Authority of the Sea of
Rome: one of them S. Tymotheus son to our holy contryman, Saint Marcellus, or
by some Marcellinus a Britanne borne, and a Bishop here, and after Bishop of
the Tungers, and lastely, Archbishop of Treuers, both which preached here in
the time of King Lucius long before his conversion, and at or before this
time, and were instruments of his happy conversion, actually and parsonallye
concurringe thereto by mission and Authority from the Popes of Rome: of which I
have made more lardge and ample relation in other places: for this purpose so
many Authors here cited will suffice, both Catholics and Protestants
consentinge that S. Tymothie and S. Marcellus or Marcellinus, preached here in
the time of king Lucius and before his conversion. ( Petrus de Natalib. lib.
1. cap. 24. Harris Tom. 2. Magdeb. centur 2. Annal. Eccles. Cur. Io Stumph. in
Rhetia. Petrus Merssaeus in catalog. Archiep^ Treuer. in Archiep. 20. Anton.
Democh. l. 2. de Miss. cont. Calvin. Gulielus. Eisengren. centen. 2. part. 4.
distinct. 7. Petr. Merss. in Archiep. Treuer.)

And that this S. Tymothie could not be Saint Tymothie Bishop of Ephesus S.
Paul's Scholar, to whom he wrote the Epistles, who was martyred many years
before King Lucius was borne, and S. Onesimus was his Successor in S. Ignatius
time as he himself is witness: ( Epist. ad Ephesians.) But only S. Tymothie our
blessed contryman by his mother S. Claudia, ( Martyrol. Romans die 20. Iunij) and
a child baptized by the Apostles, and thereupon called their disciple, who was
owner of the house in Rome, where S. Peter by the Roman tradition first
entertained there, and of S. Tymothie the Lord thereof in his time named
Thermae Timothinae, the Bathes of Tymotheus, (Act. 5. Iustini Philosoph. Baron.
annot. in 20. Iunij in S. Nouato.) which he forsook for the love of God, and
this his nation, so soon, that by Pope Pius the first, martyred in the year
154. his said house was consecrated a church, he himself being then in all
probability preaching in this Island, as so many Authorities cited do warrant.

The history of S. Marcellus or Marcellinus, both to have been a Britane, a
Bishop, and to have preached here long before S. Linus was converted, that he
persuaded him to be a Christian, and after went into Germany, and returned
from thence into Britanie again, sent with others from Pope Eleutherius to
convert king Lucius and this kingdom as they did, is an undoubted verity,
acknowledged by all that write of that matter. And therefore our Protestants of
England freely grant us in these words. Even from the days of those godly
men, who first taught the Britans the gospel, there remained among the same
Britans, some Christians which ceased not to teach and preach the word of God,
most sincerely unto them: But yett noe king amongst the^ openly professed that
Religion, till at length this Lucius perceauinge not only some of the Roman
Lieutenants in Britanie, as Trebellius and Pertinax with others, to have
submitted themselves to that profession, but also the Emperor himself to
begin to be favorable to them that professed it. And then he sets down
how king Lucius sent to Pope Eleutherius to be instructed in, and receive the
faith of Christ: and in like manner is the Relation of other Protestants. (
Holinsh. histor. of England lib. 4. cap. 19. Math. Park, Antiquit Britan. page
4.5. Ioh. Goscelius in histor. Manuscript. Bal. l. 2. de actibus Pontif. in
Gregor. 1. and l. de Scriptor. cent. 1. in August Dirnoth. Godwyn Conuers.
Powel annot. in l. 2. Girald. Cambr. c. 1. Fox to 2. Act. page 463. Fulke Ans.
to count Cath. page 40. Middlet. papist am page 202. Stowe. Holinsh. etc.

Then if by these men there still continued a succession of true preachers in
Britanie from the Apostles time. ( Protestant Articl. of Religion. Bills.
Whitgift, Barlow, Bridges, Downam, Hookeer, Couel and others against puritans.)
Which the puclick Protestant Religion denies to be without true Bishops to
consecrate such priests and preachers: and the Roman Luietenants themselves
and christians, and so consequently as the greatness of their state and
necessity of the church here required had Bishops, and rather from Rome,
being themselves Romans; And I have exemplified in so many Bishops
consecrated and sent hither by S. Peter and his holy successors Popes of Rome,
and not any one Instance can be given of any one Bishop or priest in all this
time, sent or consecrated by any others, we must needs leave that prerogative
to Rome, and honor to Britanie, to have had the holy Bishops and pastors of
this church from thence: And that Apostolic See to have ruled here in
spiritual things, as these Protestants have freely acknowledged in the holy
Popes S. Anacletus, Euaristus and S. Alexander already. ( Rob. Barns in vit.
Pontific. in nominibus citat. Downam lib. 1. of Antichrist. cap. 3. page 35.

And so they teach, that all the following Popes unto S. Eleutherius, to wit
S. Sixtus the first, Telesphorus, Higinius, Pius and Anicetus the immediate
predecessor to Eleutherius, took upon them generally the supreamacy and
highest commanding power in all spiritual things, and all places without
exception or limitation. S. Sixtus gave authority to appeal to the Popes of
Rome from all Bishops. Ab Episcopo ad Romanum Pontificem appellandi Ius dedit
ecclesiasticis ministris. (Barnes supra in Sixto.) Saint. Telesphorus
prescribed generally the fast of Lent. ( in Telesphoro.) Published the manner or
order of Mass, and made a decree as supreme Judge, how all suites and
controversies should be tried, and decided. Saint Higinius made a law byndinge
all Bishops and Metrapolitans, and the whole clergy, ( in Higinio) S. Pius
dedicated the howl of our renowned contry woman S. Pudentiana in Rome, to be
a church, ( in Pio) made general decrees for the holy sacrifice of the Mass,
binding all Priests and Bishops. Declared it to be sacrilege in all people
whomsoever, which converted lands or goods dedicated to Religion, to profane
uses Appointed the age of virgins to be consecrated. He decreed that matters
apperteyning to Religion should, be heard in provincial counsels of Bishops,
reseruinge the authority of the Pope of Rome and appeals to him. Quae ad
Religionem spectant a suae Synodis audienda esse statuit, salua tamen
pontificiae authoritate. (Idem in vit. Pont. in Aniceto.) S. Anicetus the next
before S. Eleutherius, made or renewed the decree, how both Bishops and
Metropolitans were to be ordained. That an Archbishop was to be accused
before the Pope of Rome. That noe Archbishops should be called primates,
except that prerogative of name were granted him from the Pope of Rome.
Archiepiscopos non primates appellandos, nisi ista praerogatiua nomenclaturae
ei a Ro^ano Pontifice come deretur.

Wherefore these Popes being by all Protestants holy Saints, and Martyrs, and
the church of Rome then by his majesty and al other learned men of the
Protestant profession, our mother church, the true church, commandinge church,
most high Apostolicque church, and these their decrees universal and general
comprehending all, and excluding none, either in Britanie, or any other nation,
except we will be wilfully headstronge in disobedience, we must needs
acknowledge, that this kingdom from S. Peter's first preachinge here, unto the
general conversion thereof in the time of Pope Eleutherius (of which
sufficiently in the next chapter) ever was, and did acknowledge it self
subject in spiritual things to the holy Apostolic See of Rome. And this in
particular also proved by so many ancient, and approved Authors, historians
and others that entreat of this subject, shewinge how often the Popes of Rome
in these remembered days sent preachers hither, and the Britans likewise
acknowledginge ever, that See for the chiefest and supreme, sent thither
though so far distant hence, to have preachers and Instructors to be sent
hither by the highest papal power there.

I will insist in Protestants relation for this business: They tell us that S.
Bid, the old chronicle of La^daffe, Goceline in the life of S. Augustine cap.
31. historiae maioris, the old chronicle called Brutus, Ioannes Nauclerus, an
old manuscript history which the Protestant Bishop Godwyn says he had in
latin, say that many preachers were sent hither from the Pope of Rome in the
year of Christ 156. when S. Pius was Pope: and I have read a very old
manuscript, testifyinge that king Lucius did in that year, send legates to the
Pope of Rome to that purpose. An epistle written from the Pope of Rome to the
king of Britanie, dated in the year 159. found among the old constitutions
of this land, and in the old chronicle called Brutus, which the Protestant
Bishop Bridges, says he had seen, says there was the like sendinge, in, or
about that time. Mennius, as these men tell us, affirms as much of the year
164. so does an other ancient chronicle, which Godwin cites. William of
Malmesbury has the same, of the next year 165. S. Edwards laws say so, of
the year 167. Henry of Hardford has the life of the year 169. Marianus
Scotus published by our Protestants, so writes of the year 177. The
Protestant Bishopp Bale has so of the year 179. Polydor Vergil the history of
Rochester, Matthew of Westminster, and Martinus Polonus by Protestants, so say
of the year 188. Therefore to save the creditt of these, and many others so
ancient, and allowed by Protestants, we must needs by their leave and
allowance say also, that this our kingedome in those days depended upon the Sea of Rome in Religious affairs. And thus much of this matter before our
general conversion in the time of King Lucius. ( Io. Caius antiq. Cantabrig.
lib. 1. page 109.110.111. Godwin. conuers. of Britannie. p. 21.22. Holinsh.
hist. of King. Lucius Theater of Brit. lib. 6. M. S. pr. gloriosi, ac Deo
dilecti. in S. Dubritio. Matthew. Westminster. an. 154. Godwyn. Conuers. pa. 29.30.
Stow hist. in Lucius. Caius supr. page 100. Godw. Conuers. page 29.20.22. Mason
book of consecrat. in Lucius. Will. Lambard. lib. de leg. Reg. fol. 130. page
2. Godwyn. Conuers. page 22.

THE V. CHAPTER. How in the general Conversion of this kingedome in the time
of King Lucius, all spiritual things were ordered, settled, and confirmed
here, by the Popes Authority.
AT the time when our King Lucius, and this kingedome was generally converted,
there were, as these Protestants have proved, or granted before, diverse
Bishops and Priests in England, we had many universities, as Cambrige,
Stamford, Greekelade, Bellisium, Oxford, and others, as our Protestants
contend, and diverse learned men in them, our next and neighbouringe contries,
France, the hither parts of Germany, Lorraine, Heluetia, and all Italy, even
unto Rome it self, situated in the further part thereof were full of Bishops,
priests, and learned clergy. ( Ioh. Lidgate in Cant. Caius antiq. cont.
Brian. Twin. antiquit. Oxon. Harrison descript. of Brit. Cambd. in Britan.
Harding. histor. l. 1. c. 15. Ioh. Bal. in praefat. ad l. de scriptor. etc.)

And yett King Lucius and his nobles, now resolved to receive the faith of
Christ, could find noe center, to rest their holy desires of so happy a
change, until they arrived at the Apostolic See, from whence this nation
from the first original, of christianity here, ever received instructors, and
instruction. And to obtain this his so heavenly purpose, this Renowned king
with applause of his nobility, did not send one only Messadge, Ambassadge or
epistle, and at one time to that end, but as our best antiquities say:
Epistolas suas Eleutherio Papae direxit: (Epist. Eleuther. ad Luc. and leg. S.
Eduardi apud Lumb. Calfrid. Monum. l. 5. cap. 19. Pont. Virun. l. 4. Matthew.
Westminster. an. 185.186.) he directed his epistles to Pope Eleutherius: diverse
Epistles, and consequently diverse Ambassadges, so read the old British
history, Ponticus Virunnius, Matthew Westminster, as they are published and
allowed by our Protestants, and others.

And these so diverse epistles, were only to become a Christian, and to have
his kingdom instructed in the faith of Christ, and all things thereto
belonginge ordered by his highest papal authority, petens ab eo, vt
christianus efficeretur. And none of these epistles was that which our
Protestants tell us he wrote unto that holy Pope, for laws to govern his
kingdom by, which were distinct from this, of which I shall speak hereafter:
Whereby it is evident that this blessed king and his wisest council at that
time, by so often writing both to this holy Pope Eleutherius, and some others
of his predecessors before, as appears by that I have written already, did
fully and constantly inform themselves, that the highest directing power in
things religious, was only residing in the Popes of Rome, otherwise they were
all strangers unto him, far distant, and above all Bishops of the world more
persecuted, all of them before this time and long after, sufferinge cruel
deaths and Martyrdom for Christ. Therefore it was for the due honor, and
right belonginge to that holy See, and not temporal glory or countenance, as
a Protestant Bishop would gloss the matter. ( Godwyn Conuers. of Britanie c.
3. page 36.) but the supreamacy of the Roman Bishops, which these Protestants
have given to all the Popes before.

And because, to speak in the words of the first Protestant Archbishop in
England: The renown of the popes of Rome at that time, was most famous in all
the world, for their often martyrdom, and constancy and sincere discipline of
faith: quorum tunc fama crebro martyrio and constantia, ac sincera fidei
disciplina, per totum Christianum orbem celeberrima fuit. (Matthew. Parker,
antiquit. Brit. page 5.) This was that, which moved king Lucius, to give this
due honor to the Sea of Rome, and appeal unto it for instruction: for he saw
that by that holy See the faith of Christ, was dilated into all these nations,
as the recited Protestant Archbishop thus witnesses. ( Parker. supr. page 4.)
Cognouit complures nobiles Romanos candem fidem a pontifice Romano accepisse,
eorumque exemplo Christianum nomen in singulas prouincias sparsum and
disseminatum fuisse, statuit in eadem fide sub Eleutherio tunc Romano pontifice
inaugurari. When King Lucius knew, that very many noble Romans, had received
the faith of Christ from the Pope of Rome, and by their example, the Christian
name was dispersed and sown abroad into all provinces, he did resolve to
receive the same faith, from Eleutherius the Pope of Rome Where it is evidently
confessed, that if king Lucius had not acknowledged this highest spiritual
dignity in the Sea of Rome, and have sued to have the Christian Religion
settled here by that authority, he should have been singular in that kind,
as our Protestants now are, all other provinces giving then that honor to Rome,
and having their faith in Christ established from thence.

And this is evidently declared, by the manner of the sending, and writting of
this king, to that Pope S. Eleutherius, S. Bid says: hist. eccl. l. 1. c. 4.
that K. Lucius did humbly beseech Pope Eleutherius by his letters, that by his
commandment he might be made a Christian. Obsecrans vt per eius mandatum
Christianus efficeretur. The Roman Tradition says: In the beginning of the
papacy of Eleutherius, there came humble letters unto him from Lucius King of
the Britans, to receive him and his subjects into the number of Christians.
Huic initio pontificatus supplices literae venerunt a Lucio Britannorum Rege,
vt se ac suos in Christianorum numerum reciperet. (Breu. Romans in S. Eleuther.
26. Maij. Baron. hist. Eccl. tom. 2.) A Protestant Bishop reads: praying that
by his direction, and appointment, he might be made a Christian. (Godwyn.
conuers. p. 20.) An other Protestant antiquary says: Desiring Eleutherius
Bishop of Rome, to send some devout and learned men, by whose instruction he
and his people might be taught the faith, and Religion of Christ. The old
chronicle of La^daffe is: implorans vt iuxta eius ammonitionem christianus
fiat. Humbly entreatinge, that by his appointment he might be made a
christian. ( Annal. Landaf. apud com. antiq. Cantab. l. 1. page 98. thus our
Protestants allege that Antiquity. Others of them say. Lucius sent an
Ambassadge to Eleutherius, Bishop of Rome by Eluanus, and Meduinus Britans,
entreating Eleutherius by them, that he would open a passadge by himself and
his ministers, for the fosteringe and cherishinge of christian Religion in
Britanie. Frauncis Mason. l. 2. p. 52. ca. 3.

Like is the testimony of other historians, both Catholics and Protestants,
that king Lucius proceeded in this humble, and submissiue manner in his
writings, and Ambassadges to the Pope of Rome at that time, and in these
affairs. The which highest authority spiritual in the Pope of Rome, these
our Protestants further confirm, in that they teach generally, that these two
Ambassadors of King Lucius, Eluanus and Meduinus, received all the authority
they had, to preach here in Britanie, from Pope Eleutherius, who consecrated
the one Eluanus a Bishop, and made the other a Doctor to preach the gospel.
(Theater of great. Brit. l. 6. Stow. hist. in Lucius, Godwyn conuers. of Brit.
Mason l. 2. c. 3. Bal. cent. 1. in Eluan.) And the present Protestant
Archbishop of Canterbury, Doctor George Abbot, director of Master Mason as he
protests, and his directed Scribe ar of this opinion, that all the Bishops of
Britanie after this, derived consecration and succession episcopal, from this
one only Bishop Eluanus, consecrated and authorized by Pope Eleutherius.
(Frauncis Mason consecrat. of Bish. l. 2. c. 3. p. 55.56.) Which, and more, is
approved by an other a Protestant Bishop, by whom Pope Eleutherius even in
this great business is termed. Paterfamilias, the Master of this spiritual
house and family of Britanie. (Bal. l. de Act. Pont. Romans l. 1. in Eleuther.)
and this kingedome was consequently of his family, and under his rule and
command, and thereupon as a good Master and Governor of this family, did
confirm and solidate the Brittans, and the whole kingedome in the faith
received by the Apostles. Eleutherius, vt bonus paterfamilias de thesauro suo
noua cum veteribus proferens, effecit, vt confirmatis and consolidatis
Britannis, in suscepta prius ab Apostolis doctrina, totum illud regnum in eius
fidei verba iuraret.

And to make most evident demonstration further, even by these Protestants,
as well as by all other Antiquities, that the supreme power spiritual in all
proceedinges in this kingedome at that time was wholly, and undeniably in Pope
Eleutherius, and those his twoe Legates, which he sent hither, Damianus and
Fugatianus, as they are commonly called. The Protestant Archbishop and his
Mason tell us, in these words. ( Mason l. 2. e. 3. p. 55 56.) From Rome there
came two, Fugatius and Damianus, but we cannot learn that either of them was
a Bishop. This is the constant writing of these Protestants: yett to deal
plainly, these men knew not all things, or else they might easelye have
known, that both the British history, Ponticus Virunnius, and Matthew of
Westminster, as they are published by Protestants, call them Antistites,
Bishops: and a Protestant Bishop produces an old Manuscript Author, testifying
that the first church of Wincester was hallowed and dedicated to the honor of
our Savior, October 29. 189. by Fuganus and Damianus Bishops. (Galfrid. monum.
l. 4. hist. c. 20. Pontic. Virun. lib. 4. in fine, Godwyn. Catal. in Winchest.
Matthew. Westminster. an. 186.)

And if they were noe Bishops, it so much more aduaunceth the Popes power, in
this kingedome, for these Protestants with others shall testify, that by their
legatine power from Pope Eleutherius, they exercised more and greater
Jurisdiction spiritual here, then any Bishop, or Archbishop of that time. And
if they were Bishops, as those Authors affirm, yett I find none to write that
either of them was an Archbishop: yett as before, and shall immediately be
proved, they by their delegate power from Pope Eleutherius, executed here
greater Jurisdiction spiritual and more ample, then any Bishop, Archbishop,
prince, king or whosoever, the Pope himself excepted, could lawfully do
Which these Protestants and other undeniable antiquities do, thus demonstrate
unto us.

The first Protestant Archbishop of Canterburye ( Parker. antiquit. Britan.
page 5.) writes from diverse witnesses, that these two Religious men were,
assigned by Pope Eleutherius as chief work men, tanto operi praeficiundo, in
gouerninge so great a work, and establishinge the discipline of christian
Religion. In sancienda christianae religionis disciplina, and (...) cooperarij
adhibiti in administranda ecclesia periti. Joined by Pope Eleutherius with the
Bishops in gouerninge the church, beeings killfull therein. Which must needs
be, by their legatine power from Pope Eleutherius. Martianus Polonius. ( In
Eleutherio Papa col. 49.) published by Protestants, and dedicated by them to
Queen Elizabeth, says: Papa Eleutherius misit duos Religiosos viros Fuganum
and Damianum qui Regem praedictum and populum baptizarent, erant tunc in
Britannia viginti octo Pontifices Idolorum, quos Flamines vocabant: Inter quos
tres Archiflamines erant, sed praedicti Sancti, de mandato Apostolico, vbi
erant Flamines, instituerunt Episcopos, vbi Archiflamines, Archiepiscopos. Pope
Eleutherius sent two Religious men Fuganus and Damianus, who baptized the said
King Lucius and his people. There were then in Britanie 28. high priests of
the Idols, whom they called Flamins, among which there were three
Archflamins, but the said holy men by the commandment of the Pope, did
institute Bishops, where there were Flamins, and Archbishops where there were
Archflamins.

This is confirmed, not only by all Antiquities of these things, but the
chief Protestant writers, among which the Protestant Archbishop Whitgift, and
his friend Fox write in this manner. ( Whitg. defense of the Answ. page 323.
Fox tom. 1. fol. 146.) Eleutherius the good Bishop, hearing the request of
the king, and glad to see the godly towardnes, of his well disposed mind,
sends him certain teachers and preachers, called Fugatius, or by some
Fuganus, and Damianus, or Dimianus, which converted first the king and people
of Britanie, and baptized them. The temples of Idolatry and other monuments of
gentility they subverted, conuertinge the people from their diverse and many
gods, to serve one living God. Thus true Religion with sincere faith
increasing, superstition decayed with all rites of Idolatry. There were then
in Britanie 28. Head priests, which they called Flamins, and three Archpreists
among them, which were called Achiflamins, having the oversight of their
manners, as Judges over the rest. These 28. Flamines they turned to 28. Bishops,
and the three Archiflamines to three Archbishops, having their seats in the
three principal cities of the Realm: That is, in London, in York, and in
Glamorgantia, videlicet in vrbe Legionum, by Wales.

Thus far these Protestants, and one of them named the Archbishop tells us,
that the constitutinge of Archbishops, in the places of the gentiles
Archflamines, by these Legates of Pope Eleutherius, was to follow the example,
and order of S. Peter himself, who did so, as S. Paul likewise, and ^eth
this reason. ( Whitgift def of the An^w. page 320.321. Which might be done in
respect of the city and place, and not in respect of the Idolatrous priests;
for Archiflamines were in great cities, which being converted unto Christ,
might have in the place of their Archiflamines, godly and learned Archbishops,
to ouersee and direst the rest of the Bishops and preachers, that unity and
order might be observed. Thus Paul did at Ephesus and Creta. And why might not
Peter do it in other places likewise? Master John Seldom, a great Protestant
antiquary, and lawier, writing of these two holy Legates, speaks thus. ( Io.
Seldom Analect. c. 6.) Beat^ doctores cum per totam fere Jerusalem paganitatem
deleuissent, Templa quae in honor plurimorum deorum fundata fuerant, vni Deo
eiusque Sanctis dea^cauerunt, diuersisque ordinatorum coetibus repleuerunt.
When the blessed Doctors had blotted out paganism almost throughout the
Island, the temples which were founded in honor of many gods, they dedicated to
one God, and his Saints, and replenished them with diverse companies of clergy
men. The very same be the words of Matthew of Westminster, as he is published
by E^sh Protestants. Matthew. Westminster. an. Dom. 18^

And this present Protestant, Antiquarie refutinge the ridiculous and ignorant,
or very wilful singularity of Godwyn the Protestant Bishop, singularly and
only as he himself writes. ( Godw. conuers. of Britanie p. 26.) excepting
Sutcliffe, denying Archflamines in this Island, citing for authors Pomponius
Laetus, and Fenestella, thus adds. ( Pompn laet. de Sacerdot. Romans ca. 7.
Fenestell. de Sacerd. Romans c. 5.) Quemadmodum autem Episcopis apud nos
Archiepiscopi, sic Flaminibus Archiflamines praeponebatur. Horum potestati
caeteri Iudices in Insula subijciebantur. Hos autom ex praecepto Apostoli
Idolatriae eripuerunt, and vbi erant Flamines Episcopos, vbi erant
Archiflamines Archiepiscopos posuerunt. Seeds autem Archiflaminum in tribus
nobilioribus ciuitatibus suerunt, Londonijs videlicet, Eboraco, and in vrbe
legionum. His tribus euacuata superstitione, octo and viginti Episcopi
subduntur, diuisisque parochijs, subiacuit Metropolitano Eboracensi Deira and
Albania, quas magnum flumen Humbri a Loegria secernit. Eboracensis autem
Archicpiscopis in omnes Scotiae praesules, ac Antistites iure primatis olim
fungebatur. Quod and resaucitum erat sub Henrico secundo and Hugone Legato
Pontificio celebrato concilio. As Archbishops with us Christians, are in power
over Bishops, so were Archflamines over Flamines. In this Island the other
Judges were subject to their power, these by the the commandment of the
Apostle (and Pope) they delivered from Idolatry, and where there were Flamines
they placed Bishops, and Archbishops where there were Archflamines. And the
Seats of the Archflamines, were in the three more noble cities, in London to
wit, in York, and the city of the Legions. To these three, superstition
being taken away, eight and twenty Bishops are subjected, and the parishes or
diocesses beeinge divided, Yorkshire and Scotland (which the great river of
Humber does divide from Loegria England) was made subject to the Metropolitan
of york. And the Archbishop of York, did of old time enjoy the Right of
Primate over all the prelates, and Bishops of Scotland. Which was again
decreed in a cowncell held under king Henry the second, and Hughe the Popes
Legate.

The like to this have all our Antiquaries, Catholics or Protestants writing
of this matter. The Author of the old British history, the book of Landaffe,
the Antiquities of Glastenbury, S. Bid, Ponticus Virunnius, Radulphus de
Diceto, Asserus, Capgraue, Will: of Malmesbury with other ancients, and our
present Protestant Antiquaries consentinge, as Cambden, Ho^linshed, Harrison,
Stowe, Howes, the Theater writers and others two many to be recited, and
needles, their works commonly extant and to be seen of all, only I will
allege Bicetes, because his manuscript is rare, and he much commended, both
for Antiquity and Authority by the Protestant Authors of the great Theater,
Thus he writes: Eleuther Papa ad quem Lucius Rex Britanniae missa epistola se
fieri Christianum impetrat. Eleuther ergo misit Faganum and Dinuanum, qui Regem
Lucium baptizauerunt. Templa etiam quae in honor plurimorum deorum fundata
erant, vni Deo dedicauerunt. Erant tunc in Britannia 28. Flamines, and tres
Archiflammines, and vbi erant Flamines, Episcopos, vbi autem Archistamines,
Archiepiscopos posuerunt. Londonensi subiacuit Loegria and Cornubia. Eboracensi
Diera and Albania, vrbi autem legionum Kambria. Eleuther Pope of whom Lucius
king of Britanie obtained by an epistle he sent unto him, to be made a
Christian, sent Faganus and Dimianus, which baptized King Lucius. The Temples
which were founded in honor of many gods, they dedicated to one God. There
were then in Britanie 28. Flamines, and three Archiflamines, and where there
were Flamines they placed Bishops, and where there were Archflamines they
placed Archbishops. To the Archbishop of London, England and Cornwall were
subject. To the Archbishopp of York, were subject Diera, the North of England
and Scotland, and Wales to the Archbishop of Caerlegion. ( Galfrid. Monum. l.
4. c. 19.20. Chronic. eccl. Land. apud Came. l. 1. antiq. cantabrig. Antiq.
Glast. apud Capgra. in S. Patric. Bed. l. 1. hist. c 4. Pontic. Virun. l. 4.
Radulph. de Dicet. hist. in Lucio. Guliel. Malmes. de antiq. caenob. Glast.
Camb. in Brig. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. in Lucius. Harris. descript. of Brit.
Stow and Howes in Lucius. Theat. of great Brit. lib. 6. Hector Boeth. l. 5.
fol 86.85. with others.

Thus we see by all historians, old and late, Catholics, and Protestants,
that in this general plantinge of the faith in this nation, all Religious
matters were wholly ordered by these Legates of the Pope, and his supreme
direction, all Jurisdiction spiritual of Archbishops and Bishops, with their
peculiar diocesses and gouernements, assigned and distinguished by this highest
papal authority of the Pope of Rome by his legates here. And to assure us,
that nothing was then thought by the king himself, or any christians here, to
be firm and validate in this kind, without the confirmation of the Pope
himself, when these Archbishops, and Bishops with their Jurisdictions were
settled, many churches dedicated to God, and his holy Saints, universities or
colleges for christian learning and education assigned, all orders of
clergy men instituted, with all other necessary things in such a cause
remembered in our histories, which I have at lardge related in an other place,
these holy Legates returned to Rome again, to obtain the Popes confirmation
of all these their holy ordinances, and constitutions, which was orderly
performed, as both Catholic antiquities, and Protestant historians do thus
undoubtedly assure us herein.

First Ponticus Virunnius in his British history, l. 4. as it is warranred by
Protestants, says of these Legates, sent by Pope Eleutherius: Romam redierunt,
and cuncta quae fecerant, a Pontifice confirmari impetrarunt: confirmatione
facta, cum pluribus alijs redierunt in Britanniam. They returned to Rome, and
obtained to have all things they had done, to be confirmed by the Pope, and
the confirmation being made, they returned into Britanie with other. The
Author of the old Birttish history, published with the self same Protestant
approbation. ( Galfrid. Monument. l. 4. histor. Britan. cap. 20.) says.
Denique restauratis omnibus, redierunt Antistites Romam: and que fecerunt a
beatissimo Papa confirmari impetrauerunt, confirmatione vero facta, reuersi
sunt in Britanniam compluribus alijs comitati. At last when the Bishops (so
Virunnius also terms those Legates) had restored all things they returned to
Rome, and obtained to have those things they had done to be confirmed by the
most blessed Pope, and the confirmation being made, they returned again into
Britanie, accompanied with many others. Like be the words of Matthew of
Westminster, warranted by these Protestants in this manner. ( Matthew. Westminster. an.
186.) Anno gratiae 186. beati Antistites Faganus and Deruuianus Romam reuersi,
quae fecera^t impetrauerunt a Papa beatissimo confirmari. In the year of grace
186. The blessed Bishops Fuganus and Deruuianus returned to Rome, and obtained
those things, which they had done to be confirmed by the most blessed Pope.
Which being finished, the said doctors with many others, returned into
Britanie.

And our English Protestants in their Annotation upon this place thus, approve
it. ( Protest. annot. Merginal. in Matthew. West. supr. ad an. 186. ( Fides
Christi in Britannia confirmatur. The faith of Christ is confirmed in Britanie.
All things of this nature were here confirmed by the Popes Authority. De
mandato Apostolico, by the Popes commandment, as Martinus Polonus turned
Protetestant, by these men in their publishinge of him. De mandato Apostolico,
ex praecepto Apostoli, by the commandment of the Apostle or Pope, as reads
the Protestant Antiquarie Master Seldom. ( Martin. Pol. in Eleutherio col. 49.
Seldom supr. in Anaclet. c. 6.) And so all Protestants do, or ought to
confess, approuinge those Authors I have cited before, and fetchinge the
greatest evidence they have of these things and times, from them, so
particularly as before, registringe both the necessity of the Popes
approbation and confirmation to be such, that the Legates themselves were
enforced to go from hence to Rome to procure it, and returned not hither for a
final settlinge of all things, until the Pope had confirmed and approved them
at Rome.

And ^his illimitated and supereminent Power, both claimed and exercised by
this holy Pope, was not confined in and with his proceedinges with this
kingedome, so happily converted to the faith by him, but to show himself by
these Protestants, as his his holy predecessors before have been proved by the
same allowance, to be the supreme and highest commander, and governor of the
church of Christ in all places on earth, he generally proceeded accordingly,
making and ordeyninge decrees, for all parsons and places, and times, as these
Protestants thus assure us. (Robert Barnes in vit. Pontif. Romans in Eleutherio.)
Hoc tempore Lucius Britanniae Rex, Christiano caetui cum suis subditis adiungi,
a Po^fice petijt per literas. In this time of Pope Eleutherius, Lucius King of
Britanie desired of the Pope by his letters, that he and his subjects, might
be joined to the Christian company: as though S. Eleutherius then Pope, by
power of that nam and place had such power over the whole company of
Christians, that none that is a king or great prince, on whose public
conversion together with his people, so many matters requiring the consent and
confirmation of the highest Pastor, and supreme Jurisdiction depended, might
be admitted to be a Christian, without the Popes Approbation.

And to confirm this highest power spiritual in him, as in his predecessors
before, they further tell us. ( Rob. Barns. supr.) That generally in the cases
of Bishops, which is the greatest, he decreed that nothing should be defined
in their cases, but by the Pope himself. Accusationem contra Episcopos
intentatam, Episcopos audire permisit: sed vt nihil, nisi apud Pontificem
definiretur, cauet. And again that any priest might appeal from his Bishop to
the Pope of Rome, if the sincerity of the other judge his Bishops was
suspected. Vt nemo Clericum accusatores, pertraheret ad alterius dioecesis
Episcopum, sed accusaret eu^ apud suum Episcopum: Sivero Iudex Glerico
suspectus esset, appellandi facultatem dedit Reo. Where he evidently by these
Protestants makes himself and his Successors in the Sea Apostolic of Rome,
supreme Judge in spiritual things, and reserueth appeals to them in such
affairs from all other Judges.

THE VI. CHAPTER. How this most renowned Pope Eleutherius, did by these
Protestants, and antiquities allowed by them, claim, exercise, and settle
here, for him, and his Successors, as ample prerogative, and Jurisdiction, as
Catholic Schools do, and Catholicques may give to Popes.
ANd because there is great difference between Catholics and Protestants,
concerning some privileges which the former commonly yield, and the second as
usually in England deny unto him, and either of them would be thought to
reverence and embrace the opinion, and practice of that blessed Pope
Eleutherius, and those unspotted times, especially as they are interpreted by
themselves, let us now take counsel and advise of these Protestants their
persecutors in this kind, whether this most blessed Pope Eleutherius, who
so converted this nation, and was so blessed, and worthy a Saint with these
men, was not by their Judgments, and testimonies, as far engaged in this
matter, as Pope Gregory, the fifteenth of that name, now is; or King Lucius
that holy king and Saint, the holy Bishops, and clergy, and all the
Christians of this land, at that time did not give to the Popes of Rome then,
as much in this kind, as any English priest, or Catholic now does, and by
the present Roman Religion may give, and allow to this present Pope, or any
other.

This is evidently proved, and inuincibly made manifest unto us before, not
only by so many our best Antiquities, but generally by the best learned
English Protestant historians, jointly and with an uniform consent, agreeing
in this, that at the settlinge of many Archbishops, and Bishops in this Island,
by the highest Papal power of Saint Eleutherius, by the same also the whole
kingedome of Scotland, with the Northern Islands, were made subject to the
Archbishopp of York, in spiritual things, as I have proved before by the
best historians, Catholics and Protestants which have written of this matter.
Which also agree, that these kingedomes were at that time, long before, and
until the union of them by our present Sovereign king James, not only
distinct, and diverse kingedomes, under diverse kings, laws, and governments,
but ordinarily, as then they were, at open wars, and hostility in civil and
temporal respects; Therefore it was neither King Lucius, who to use the words
of Hector Boethius. ( Scator. histor. l. 5 fol. 83. Godwyn conuers. of Britanie
page 22.23) aggreing with our English Protestants, and others in this, was but
a king by courtesy of the Roman Emperors and their Authority. Lucius
Britonibus Caesaris beneuolentia and authoritate imperitabat. Therefore he
neither had, nor possibly could have his power, and principality extended
further, then that of the Romans was, which went noe further then the wall of
Adrian, which divided the kingedomes, making Scotland a distinct kingedome,
and never subject to the Roman Emperors. Which could not allow to king Lucius
more, then they were Lords and Masters of themselves, for according to that
law maxim, used by many Protestants, and a grownde in the law, and light of
nature it self; Nemo potest plus Iuris in alium transfer, quam ipse habet:
Noe man can give more power to another, then he himself has. For so he
should give that which he has noe right or power to give, beeinge a thing
impossible.

Therefore king Lucius, nor the Roman Emperors, having any power, or right at
all spiritual, or temporal, over the Scots or Britans, or any people then
dwellinge beyond that Wall, in the kingedome now called Scotland, they could
not by any possibility give such spiritual power, to the Archbishop of York
to command in that contrie, nor command the inhabitants of Scotland, in noe
respect subject unto them, to be subject to the Bishop of York, their subject
in temporal respects. Neither did, would or could the kings of Scotland, then
pagans subject, and submitt their people and contry to the Archbishop of york
of an other kingdom, now enemy to them, both in spiritual and temporal
respects. And it is directly against all Protestants professions, confessions,
or churches, that any Protestant Prince or other whosoever clayminge or
pretending supreme spiritual Jurisdiction among them, should challendge or
presume to extend it further, then their temporal ditions and Governments, as
is evident in all places where the new Religion is admitted, as England, the
Low contries, the cantons of Switserland and the rest, where the spiritual
Jurisdiction which they claim, is limited and confined within the circuites of
their temporal Dominions, without any further progress. Parlam. 1. Elizab. 1.
Jacob. Scotic. Confessiones Heluet. Gallic. Saxonia. Belgic.

Therefore this highest supreme directing spiritual power (which established
at that time, and long after, the subordination and subjection of Scotland and
the Islands to the Archbishop of York) must needs by these Protestants, and all
Antiquities, be only peculiar to the Pope of Rome, who and that alone
effected these things: as so many Protestants and others have proved before,
and others from our best antiquities affirm, that all ecclesiastical things
were ordered here, according to the commaundment of Pope Eleutherius that
blessed man. Secundum iussum beati Eleutherij Papae. (Annal. Landaf. apud Io.
Caium l. 1. de antiquit. Cantabrig. p. 90.) Which is an evident demonstration,
that this holy Pope had this supreme spiritual power over all this Island at
that time; for without such a power, these things could not have been
performed. And demonstrateth also, that noe other power on earth, could have
duly performed it, especially any temporal King, Prince, Emperor or
Lieutenant whatsoever, for so, contrary to the names, offices, and powers of
such Rulers, they should be Emperors, Kings, Rulers, Regents and the like
where they have noe Empire, Kingedome, Rule, Regiment, sovereignty or any
subjects, a thing in the light of nature of it self, imployinge
contradiction, and impossible.

And let noe man say, that according unto some, as namely Giraldus
Cambrensis, this Island was divided into five provinces, Britannia prima,
Britannia secunda, Flauia, Maxima, and Valentia, which now is Scotland, and
that there was an Archbishop there. ( Girald. Cambr. l. de Iure Metropol. eccl.
Meneu. apud Park. antiq. Britan. page 24. and Io. Pris. def. hist. Brit.) For I
answer, this division was made long after this, as the twoe last provinces
Maximia and Valentia prove in their own names. For the same Author says, that
Maximia was so named, of Maximus the Emperor, Maximia. Ab Imperatore Maximo
vocata, and Valentia now Scotland, was so called of Valens the Emperor.
Valentia a Valente Imperacore sic dicta est. (Girald. Cambr. Parker. and Pris.
sup.) Both which Emperors Maximus and Valens, were long after this time, and
Scotland not under the Romans, to be made a province by them, and besides so
many Protestant Authors and Antiquities before, that there were but only three
Archbishops here at this time, nor after diverse hundreds of years, the
Scottish histories, and all Protestants agree, that Scotland had neither
Archbishops nor Bishops, perhaps long after this time.

The testimonies of these things ar to many to be produced, therefore I will
only instance in the present Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury and his
deputy, in writing the book, Entitled of the Consecration of the Bishops of
the church of England, who speak in this manner: ( Fra^c. Mason epist. dedicat.
and l. 2. c. 3. page 54.) The Romans before this time of King Lucius his
receauinge the faith, had divided Britanie into three Provinces, one of them
was called Maxima Caesariensis, the Metropolis whereof was York. An other,
Britannia prima, the Metropolis whereof was London: the third Britannia
secunda, the Metropolis whereof was Caerlegion. And prouinge, besides so many
other Authorities before cited; both by Asseruius Meneuensis schole-master to
King Alfred, Ptolomeus Lucensis in the life of Eleutherius, William Read, (De
vit. Pont. in Eleuther. page 3.) and John Leland, (M. S. Leland. in assert.
Arthur. fol. 36.) that the Archbishops of this Island, were only seated in
those three Metropolitan cities, of London, York, called also Maximia or that
province, whereof it was Metropolis, and Caerlegion. To answer fully this
objection thus they add: Georg. Abb. and Fraunc. Mason supr. page 54.

Although Britanie was after the Nicen. council divided into five Provinces,
Valentia and Flauia Caesariensis beeinge added to the former: yett there were
noe new Archbishopricks erected. The reason whereof was, because those two new
Provinces. ( Notitia Prouinc. Occid. page 117.) were taken out of the former;
and consequently could not have Bishoprics, without the diminishinge of the
authority of the former, in whose Jurisdiction originally they were, which was
not sufferable, because it was against the canon of the Nicen council ( Can.
6.) decreeinge, that in Antioche and in other Provinces, the dignities,
prerogatives, and authorities of churches should be maintained. And for S.
Andrews in Scotland to have been always subject to York, or when York had
noe Archbishop, as at the cominge of the pagan Saxons hither, and driuinge the
Archbishop from thence, to the Pope himself, immediately these Protestants
prove unto us, by the ancient Antiquity called Notitia Prouinciarum, which
they cited before: for in that thus we read: S. Andrea Episcopatus est Domini
papae. The Bishopric of S. Andrews belongs to the pope of Rome, where the
Annotation is: olim in Scotia nullas erat Archiepiscopatus, adeoque Episcopatus
Scotiae Domino Papae in spiritualibus immediate suberant, vt in manuscriptis
exemplaribus nostris notatur. In ancient time there was noe Archbishopps See
in Scotland, but the Bishops of Scotland in spiritual things, were
immediately subject to our Master the Pope, as is noted in our manuscript
copies. Notat. Episcopat. in Scotia edit. per Aubert. Miraeum. Aubert. Miraus
in annot. in illum locum.

Which first immediate subjection to the Pope, and not the Archbishop of York,
did begin but in the time of King William of Scotland, as Roger Houeden and
others prove, setting down the Popes decretall letters thereof at lardge, but
had continued under the Jurisdiction of York, by the first institution of Pope
Eleutherius a thousand years, and besides the testimonies of many Authors both
late and ancient, Catholics and Protestants, settinge down the whole
proceedinges at lardge, how Pope Clement did only exempt it from the Sea of
York, and subjected it immediately to the Sea of Rome, because of the
continual, all most, wars between these twoe nations. This matter is
publicly confessed and acknowledged by King William of Scotland, and David
his Brother, Richard Bishop of S. Andrews, with others in their public
Charter, in public council in the church of S. Peter at York, as Houeden and
others set down at lardge. Epistol. Clementis Papae ad Guliel Scotorum Regem
apud Roger. Houed. part. histor. in Henric. 2. and epist Papae Caelestini apud
eundin Richard. 1. and Thom. Walsing. in Eduard. 1. Polydor. Vergil. Angl.
histor. l. 13. l. 9. l. 24. Guliel. Malmesb. l. 3. de Regib. Godwyn Catalog. in
York in George Neuill. Roger Houede^ Annal. part. postr. in Henric. 2.

And when Scotland after a thousand years subjection unto the Archbishop of
York by the Popes ordinance, neither was nor could, notwithstanding so many
dissentions between these kings, and nations, be exempted from that
obedience, but by the Pope himself, and yet with this reservation, to be
immediately subject to the Pope of Rome, as the words of the Popes decree thus
testify. (Epistol. Clement. Papae apud Rog. Houed. supr.) Clemens Episcopus
seruus seruoru^ Dei, Charissimo in Christo filio Willielmo illustri Scotorum
Regi praesentis scriptis pagina duximus stastuendum, vt Scotticana ecclesia
Apostolicae sedi, nullo mediante debeat subiacere. Clement to his most beloved
son in Christ William the Renowned king of Scots. We have thought good to
decree by this our present writing, that the church of Scotland, shall be
immediately subject to the Sea Apostolic. So that it is most evident by all
testimonies, that this kingedome of Britanie, was from the first conversion
thereof to Christ, ever subject to the Sea of Rome in spiritual things, as
far as the Pope of Rome now requires, or Catholics attribute unto him.

Which these our Protestants of England, and from Authentical Antiquities, as
they say, will more Amply prove unto us, and in the highest degree of papal
privileges. For they tell us, that king Lucius did not only receive the
Christian faith, Iuridicall direction, and settling of all spiritual and
meerlie Religious affairs, by the authority of the Pope of Rome, but the same
holy Pope, not only with the good likinge and consent of King Lucius, but by
his suite and petition interposed himself, in the ordeyninge alteringe, or
correctinge and settlinge, the very temporal laws themselves in this
kingedome, to govern Rule and direct it, even in civil and merely humane
things, as is manifest in a certain Epistle which these Protestants, with
general consent asscribe to S. Eleutherius himself, written to king Lucius,
as responsory, and satisfactory to some letters, which this king had written
unto him to such purpose, to have temporal laws from him to govern this
kingdom by: Petistis a nobis leges Romanos, and Caesaris vobis transmitti. You
require of us (writes this holy Pope to king Lucius) the Roman Laws, and the
Emperors, to be sent over unto you, which you would practice, and put in
ure, within your Realm: the Roman Laws and the Emperors, we may ever
reprove, but the Law of God we may not; you have received of late through
gods mercy, in the kingedome of Britanie, the Law and faith of Christ. You
have with you within the Realm, both parts of the scriptures, out of them by
gods grace with the council of your Realm, take you a Law, and by that
Law by gods sufferance, rule your kingedome of Britanie, for you be gods
vicar in your kingedome. Epist. Eleutherij Papae ad Lucium Reg. Britan. apud
Fox to. 1. Iuel contra Hard. Franc. Mason l. 2. Godwyn. Conuers. of Brit. page
38. Lambert. in leg. S. Vsuardi. Stow in Lucio.

Thus these Protestants translate that part of that Popes Epistle. Whereby
first it is manifest, That King Lucius now a Christian did not, and in
conscience could not, write for, or absolutely desire the Imperial Laws, the
Emperors then being pagans, and their Laws accordingely mayntaining the
Idolatries of the gentiles, but as they should be moderated and corrected by
the Laws of Christ, which noe man could with more authority and better
perform, then the holy Pope, having then the supreme place in the church of
God. For otherwise he should have been an enemy to Christ, and his law which
he now professed: and being in so high grace, and favor with the Emperor,
and Roman Senate, as these Protestants and other antiquities tell us, he might
and should with far more honor, love and likeinge, have received these Laws
from the Emperor himself, the Senate of Rome, or many Romans here in
Britanie, who then lived according to those Roman and Imperial Laws, then
from Pope Eleutherius, who lived not as those Laws commanded, but so far
otherwise, that he and all the Popes of Rome before, and many after him, were
both persecuted, and putt to death for christian Religion by those laws.

Therefore king Lucius requestinge such Laws from Pope Eleutherius, must
needs hereby acknowledge, that as by sendinge so far unto him, to be
instructed in the faith of Christ, and all such matters spiritual to be
settled and ordered here by his highest power: so in his temporal proceedings
which to be just, and holy must needs have a subordination unto spiritual,
and the judgment over Laws. Whether they are holy just and such as Christians
in conscience and Religion ought to use, and be directed by, is to be made by
them chiefly, who have the greatest knowledged, and command in such cases,
and judgments, which be the governors and Bishops of the church of God, he
thought noe Laws to be vncontrolably warrantable, but such as the chief
pastor of the church of Christ, the Pope of Rome should give validity unto, by
his confirmation and allowance. For among so many Laws, as so ample, and
great a kingedome was to be ruled and governed by, there must needs be many,
which of necessity were thus to be examined by the Law of God, and chiefest
interpreters thereof. Which Saint Eleutherius warned King Lucius of, when he
prescribed unto him, to have his Laws warranted by the scriptures, and taken
forth of them by the council of the Realm, and by that Law to Rule the
kingedome: where it is evident, that he appoints the Law of Britanie to be
conformable to the Law of God, and to be secure it should be such, it to be
enacted and concluded by the best council of his Realm in such things, which
were the Bishops, clergy and learned divines, cheifely which S. Eleutherius
had settled here, for they were the only or principal Interpreters of holy
scriptures here at that time: and others in a manner, concerning such things,
Catechumenes, to be instructed themselves, and not to draw Laws out of
scriptures, to instruct, and direct others. And so a Protestant Bishop with
such public warrant expounds it in these words: By the advice of the
clergy of their dominion. Bridges def. l. 16. page 1355.

And S. Eleutherius taking upon himself, as Pope of Rome, the supreamacy
over the whole church, as these Protestants have told us, cannot by any but
careless or ignorant of truth be interpreted, to give any such preeminence to
a newly become Christian temporal prince, but calls him only the Vicar, or
Vicegerent of God, as all princes Christians and others ar, or should be to
see justice performed to all within their dominions, which is sufficiently
expressed in this very epistle it self, where that holy Pope tells King
Lucius, what is the duty and office of a king, the words by Protestant
translation ar: The people and nations of the kingedome of Britanie is yours,
such as ar divided, you should gather them together to the Law of Christ, his
holy church to peace and concord: and cherish, maintain protect, govern and
defend them from the injurious malicious, and their enemies. A king has his
name of gouerninge, and not of his kingedome, so long you shall be a king,
as you rule well, otherwise you shall not be so named, and loose that name
which God forbid. God grant that you may so rule your Realm of Britanie,
that you may Reign with him euerlastingely, whose Vicar you ar in the said
kingedome. Epistol. Eleuther. apud Godwyn. Conuers. page 23. Fox tom. 1. Stowe
and Hovves histor. in Lucius. Bridge. def. p. 1355. Ieuel. ag. Hard. Lambard. de
legib. Theater of Brit. and others.

Where we see, in what sense this holy Pope called King Lucius the Vicar, or
Vicegerent in his kingdom, to see justice ministered, the church of Christ to
be defended from wrong, and the privileges thereof to be kept inviolable.
Which this holy king most christianly performed, for when all ecclesiastical
matters were settled here by the Popes authority, and these Laws here
appointed for this kingedome, first here concluded, and then with the rest
confirmed by the Pope: cuncta quae fecerant a Pontifice confirmari
impetrauerunt: Then this king according to the direction and instructions of
the holy Pope to speak in Protestants own, words: endowed the churches of
Britanie with liberties, Lucius Rex, ecclesias Britanniae libertatibus muniuit.
Which are to many to be related, and ar set down in the British history,
Matthew of Westminster and others. ( Pontic. Virun. lib. 4. in fine. Galf. Mon.
lib. 4. histor. Reg. Britan. cap. 20. Matthew. Westminster. an. 186. Protest. Annot.
upon Matthew. West. an. 187. Galfrid. Monum. sup. l. 4. Matthew. West. an. 187.)
And in this sense our best British and christian Saxon kings, who were most
obedient ever to the church of Rome, were from that time, and by virtue of that
donation, of Pope Eleutherius, giuinge Lucius the Title of the vicar or
vicegerent of God in his kingdom, so called and enjoyed that Title as a
Protestant Lawier, and Antiquarie thus deduceth. ( Seldom Analect. l. 1. page
4^) Ex quo non solum Britannorum, sed etiam Anglorum subsequentes Reges, hoc
nomine vicarij Dei sunt potiti. From which time, or the grant of Pope
Eleutherius, the kings that followed, not only of the Britans, but English
also obtained this name of the vicars of God: and cites the ancient Lawyer
Henry Bracton, for the same. But we need not demurre upon the authorities of
private Lawyers, or Antiquaries for this matter. For we have Laws themselves
of good king Edward, which William the Bastard afterward confirmed (a
Protestant Lawyers or rather the words of the Law, to confirm and warrant
this: Where the very words of the Law thus ancient and confirmed, are these.
Leges S. Eduardi apud Gul. Lamb. fol. 126. page 2. leg. 1. cap. 17. and leg. 77.

Rex autem quia Vicarius summi Regis est, ad hoc est constitutus, vt regnum
terrenum and populum Domini, and super omnia sanctum veneretur Ecclesiam eius,
and regat and ab iniuriosis defendat, and maleficos ab ea euellat, and destruat
and penitus disperdat. Quod nisi fecerit, nec nomen Regis in eo constabit,
verum testante Papa Iohanne nomen Regis perdit. The king because he is the
Vicar of the highest king, is constituted for this to rule the terrene
kingedome and people of God, and above all things he ought to reverence his
holy church, and defend it from injurious people, and to pull from it, and
destroy and wholly overthrow evil doers. Which except he performs, the
name of a King shall not be appearinge in him, but as Pope John does wittnes,
he loses the name of a king, or Ruler. Where we see by the public Laws
themselves, that the King is not called the Vicar or Vicegerent of God in
respect of spiritual but temporal affairs, to reverence and defend it, and
suffer noe wrong to be done unto it, or privileges taken from it; which is
more plainly expressed in the same Law in this manner: ( leg. S. Vsuardi
supr.) Debet Sanctam Ecclesia^ regni sui cum omni integritate, and liberate
iuxta constitutiones patrum and praedecessorem seruare, fouere, manutenere, a
king ought to keep, foster, and maintain the holy church of his kingedome,
with all integrity, and liberty, according to the constitutions of the
Fathers, and predecessors. Which a king ought to swear in proper parson upon
the ghospels and relics of Saints before the laietie, priests, and clergy,
before he is crowned by the Archbishops and Bishops of the kingdom: hither to
this holy law of our auntie^t kings.

I have insisted upon this Epistle of Pope Eleutherius the longer, because with
Protestants it is in so high esteem, so ancient and certain, that a
Protestant Bishop writes: We have seen the Bishop of Romes own letter to
king Lucius, that is reputed to be the first christian king of Britanie.
(John Bridges def. of the gouernm. in the church of Engl. l. 16. page 1355.)
The Theater writers say, it is in the custody of Sir Robert Cotton Baronet of
Conington in Huntington shire, ( Theater of great, Brit. l. 6. c. 19.) Others
say it is likewise found, in the old history called Brutus. (Caius antiquit.
Cantab. l. 1.) Stowe writes: I find the same entered in a book entitled,
Constitutions, pertayninge to the Guilde hall of London. (Stovve histor. in
King Lucius.) And it is found also among the old Laws of Saint Edward our
king and others before him, and placed and received as a part of our Law,
both by our Saxon kings, and Norman also, as namely king William the first,
as the Protestant publisher of them himself, a lawyer and antiquarie is
witness, with all most all writers, plaerique scriptores omnes, as he
testifies: ( Williel. Lambard. lib. de Priscis Anglorum legib. fol. 1. ante
praef. fol. 126.131.) Therefore I may boldly term Pope Eleutherius the first
Christian Law maker, and first director, and confirmer of Laws in this
kingedome. Which how it can stand to be justly done, as all these our kings,
their nobles, clergies, lawyers and these Protestants auouche, without as
great a preeminent power as the Popes of these times do claim, or commonly
Catholics ascribe unto them, I leave to the quickest sighted Protestants to
distinguish.

And yet this schole of Protestant antiquaries, do read a lesson unto us, to
clymbe a stepp higher in such affairs. For they assure, from the same public
laws of our ancient Saxon and other kings, and from the same Pope
Eleutherius his own donation, that he declared to be annexed to the crown of
this kingedome, all the Islands between us and Norway, and that our kings
should have care thereupon, to enjoy them. The words of that ancient Law by
Protestant publishing, and allowance public ar these: ( Leges Ed^wardi Regis
c. 17. apud Lumbard. supr. fol. 130 page 2.) Debet de iure Rex omnes terras and
honores, omnes dignitates and iura and libertates coronae regni huius in
integrum cum omni integritate, and sine diminutione obseruare, and defendere,
dispersa and dilapidata, and amissa regni iura in pristinum statum, and debitum
viribus omnibus reuocare. Vniuersa vero terra and tota, and Insulae omnes vsque
Norwegiam and vsque Dariam pertinent ad coronam regni eius, and sunt de
appendicijs, and dignitatibus Regis, and vna est Monarchia, and vnum est
regnum, and vocabatur quondam Regnum Britanniae, modo autem vocatur Regnum
Anglorum, tales enim metas and fines, and praedictae sunt, constituit and
imposuit coronae Regni Dominus Eleutherius Papa sententia sua, qui primo
destinauit coronam benedictam Britanniae, and christianitatem Deo inspirante
Lucio Regi Britonum. The king of right ought with all integrity and without
diminution observe, and defend all lands, and honors, all dignities, and
Rights, and liberties of the crown of this kingedome, wholly, and call back
again all the Rights of the kingdom that be dispersed, dilapidated, and
lost, with all his power unto their ancient and due state. And the whole and
all the Land, and the Islands even to Norway, and Denmark do belong to the
crown of his kingdom, and at of the Appendicies, and dignities of the king,
and it is one monarchy and one kingedome, and it was anciently called the
kingedome of Britanie, and now is called the kingedome of the English men, for
our Lord the Pope Eleutherius did by his sentence co^stitute, and appointe such
limits, and bounds to the crown of the kingedome, first sending by the
inspiration of God, a hallowed crown and Christianity to Britanie to King
Lucius. Hitherto this so ancient and public authority and antiquity, now,
seeing all writers, Catholics and Protestants agree, that both S. Eleutherius,
which made this declaration and confirmation of so many Islands and Rights,
and King Lucius which accepted it, was in the like degree, and all our kings
so many hundred years after, many of them holy Saints, which by this
declaration esteemed these territories to be their own, to keep them all, or
any of them, declarer or receauers from horrible and damnable usurpation, as of
necessity by these Protestants we must do, what way is there to end this
difficulty, except we allow, of the Popes Authority in such a declaration.

But to yield a greater, and more ancient honor, and privilege, to this
kingedome, and the kings thereof, then many Protestants, enemies to our
British Antiquities, will allow unto it, not only to comprehend al these
Northren Islands unto Norway, under the name of, Insulae Britannicae, the
British or Britons Island. But that the kingedome of Denmark was subject and
tributary to Britanie, diverse hundreds of years before Christ, and so
consequently the adjacent Islands, which by Ius gentium, belonged to the
Continent, next adioyninge, we shall by this exempt this kingdom from
receiving any thing by a free donation from Pope Eleutherius in this kind,
claiminge by this, that he only adjudged the old Right and Title of Britanie
to be true and lawful in this case, not giving any new prerogative by that
confirmation. Yett this will not exempt either king Lucius from embracinge, or
Pope Eleutherius from assigning and confirminge that division, and preferringe
the Title of king Lucius before the Scots and others, which by their histories
had then enjoyed long time diverse of those Islands, and so we must still
acknowledge that both Eleutherius the Pope, and king Lucius, then thought, the
decision of such things, did in some respect in conscience belong to that See
Apostolic, otherwise neither would the one have made it, or the other sought
for, or accepted it, in that manner, both of them being worthy and renowned
Saints in the church of Christ. M. S. pr. Regnum Britanniae in Gurguntio. Ioh.
Romans apud Stowe in cod. Stowe and Howes histor. in Gurg. an. ante Christ. 375.
Ioh. Lydgate in Cantab. Ioh. Harding Chron. c. 34. fol. 29.30. Caius antiq.
Cantab. l. 1. Matthew. Westminster. aetat. 5. c. 5. Hect. Boeth. hist. Scot. Giral.
Ca^b. ap. Stow. supr. And into the same laborinth we fall, by these men denying
power in the Pope of Rome, to give pardons, or Indulgences to mitigate, or
release the punishments of sins, if we should harken unto them; for they
greatly commend unto us the Epistle ascribed to S. Patrick the Irish Apostle
in the antiquities of Gastenbury, to be of great authority, and yett in this
we read. Quod sanctus Phaganus and Deruuianus ab Eleutherio Papa qui cos
miserat, dece^ annos Indulgentiae impetrarunt. That S. Phaganus and Deruuianus,
obtained of Pope Eleutherius that sent them, ten years of Indulgence for the
pilgryms visiting that holy place, a greater power in the Pope then the other,
by these Protestants. And thus much of this hundred years. Theater of great
Britanie lib. 6. Godwyn. Conuers. of Britanie cap. 2. page 10. Ioh. Leland. in
Assert. Arthur. Antiquitat. Glaston in tabula lignea. Capgrau. in Catal. in S.
Patricio. and M.S. Antiq. in eodem.

THE THIRD CENTVRIE OR HUNDRED YEAR.
THE VII. CHAPTER. How the Popes of Rome in this third Centurie, or hundred of
years also, by our Protestants and others, ruled and governed here in Britante
in spiritual things, by their supreme power therein.
NOw having ended this second hundred year, when there was so general an
acceptance of this highest papal Authority in Britanie by the king, his
Nobles, three Archbishops, so many other Bishops, and the noble clergy and
others here, we may be more breife in ages followinge: for it is a common
consent of the Protestant writers of England, that the same faith and Religion
in all material points (such as this is) continued firm and inviolable here
at the least until the cominge of S. Augustine hither in the later end of the
sixth hundred year. And it is a verity granted by all, followinge S. Bid,
susceptam fidem Britanni vsque in tempora Diocletiani Principis inuiolatum
integrumque quieta in pace seruabant. The Britans kept the faith which they
received in the time, of king Lucius, inviolable and whole in quiet peace
until the times of Diocletian. ( Bed. hist. eccles. l. 1. c. 4.) Who did not
begin his Empire, until the year 285. and his persecution long time after
about the year 296. And no man can think, but among so many Archbishops,
Bishops, and clergy men, which together, with the whole christian Religion,
embraced the papal power, lived, and governed the church of Britanie here many
years in this age, in the same manner and order, as it was commended unto them
by the Roman supreme spiritual Authority, of S. Eleutherius and his
Apostolic Legates.

Therefore to be breife, the next Pope which was in the beginning of this
hundred year, Scotland (as hereafter) a great portion of this Island, and then
a distinct great and invincible kingedome, unto the most powerable Roman
Emperors, was converted to the faith of Christ. The very name of this holy Pope
and Martyr carries spiritual supreamacy with it, in all the Christian world,
Asia, Africa, and Europe, by the mouths and pens of all Protestants and
others. A Protestant Bishop for all shall answer in these words. Pope Victor
excommunicated all churches both greek and latin, which differed from his
church, in the observation of Easter. (Morton. appeal l. 1. cap. 9.) Which noe
man can question, but it was the highest act, to have and exercise such power
over all churches, and yett most justly and lawfully, and he a blessed man,
which both a Protestant Archbishopp and his majesty king James shall testify
for all. The church of Rome was then a Rule to all, says our King. ( King
James in parlam.) The other says: Victor was a godly Bishop, and a martyr, and
the church at that time was in great purity, not beeinge long after the
Apostles times. (Whitgift Answ. to the admonition p. 80. sect. 4.) Wherefore
King Donalde of Scotland now moved by the example of King Lucius, his
neighboring Sociate in terrene principality, and his whole kingedome, and
being assured by this supreme power spiritual exercised by S. Victor over
all churches, that it was his right, and the surest way in time of
controversies (as that was in the observation of Easter) to adhere unto the
chief and commandinge church of Rome, he sent to this holy Pope, to be
instructed in the faith of Christ, a long, paineful and troublesome journey and
labor on both sides, so many Bishops now being in Britanie, France, and in
all places between Scotland and Rome, if kings and kingedomes could have
been converted to the faith of Christ, and matters of the church with them
ordered, without his direction or confirmation. For as truly write the
Scottish historians. Pope Victor sent priests, in extremam Albionem, to the
vttermoste part of Albion, or the vttermoste Albion, to preach the doctrine of
Christ. (Hector Boeth. l. 5. Scot. histor. fol. 89. p. 2. Boeth. supr. p. 1.
Buchan. Rer. Scotic l. 4. Reg. 27. Holinsh. histor. of Scotl. in Donald. Ed.
Grymst. p. 20. in Scotl.. 17.) the narration whereof is this.

Talem dederat Donaldo Regi animum, pacis Princeps and author Christus Dominus
quod verae pietati, aspernato malorum demonum cultu, sese paulo ante addixerat.
Nam Seuero Imperante Romany, apud Victorem Pontificem maximum qui
quintusdecimus post Petrum Ecclesiae praefuit, per legatos obtinuit, vt viri,
doctrina and Religione insignes, in Scotiam ab eo missi, se cum liberis and
coniuge Christi nomen profitentes, baptismate insignirent. Regis exempla
Scotica nobilitas sequuta, auersata impietatem, Christique Religionem complexa,
sacro font est abluta. Fuit annus ille quo Scoti ad lumen verae pietatis, Dei
Optimi Maximi benignitate vocati sunt, and recepti; ab eo qui primus fuit
humanae salutis tertius supra duce^te simum: a Scotorum Regni institutione
quingentesimus tricesimus tertius. Christ our Lord prince, and Author of peace,
gave such mind to king Donald, that castinge aside the worship of wicked
devils, he had a little before addicted himself to true piety. For when
Seuerus was the Roman Emperor, he obtained of Pope Victor the fifteenth after
S. Peter, that ruled the church, that men renowned for learning and Religion,
sent from him into Scotland, might baptize him, with his wife and children,
professinge Christ. The Scottish nobility followeinge the example of the
king, forsakinge impiety, and embracing the Religion of Christ, was baptized.
This was in the year of the Incarnation of Christ, two hundred and three, and
from the beginning of the kingdom of the Scots, five hundred thirty and
three.

And a little after speakinge of the renowned leardned Christians, of that
time, he adds. Incipere and nostri tum primum, sacras colere literas,
Sacerdotibus praeceptoribus, quos Victor Pontifex Maximus ad Christi dogma
propalandum, in extremam miserat Albionem. At that time our Scottish men first
began to study divinity, having for their Tutors, those priests which Pope
Victor sent to teach the Religion of Christ in Albion, the uttermost country in
this part of the world. And again: nostri qua fide and pietate instituti semel
fuerunt, hactenus erroribus aspernatis, perseuerant. Our contrimen (of
Scotland) persevere at this day (it was written in the year 1526.) in the faith
and piety wherein they were then instructed. ( Hector Boeth. in fine praefat.
Bal. centur 5. in Hector Boeth.) And a Protestant of England in the year 1615.
writteh: Scotland received the faith in the time of Pope Victor the first, in
the year 203. Celestin the first sent Palladius thither, to root out the
Pelagian heresy, which began to increase there, under Eugenius the second,
who died in the year 460. since this time the Realm continued long in the
profession of the Romish church, until these later days. (Edward. Grimston.
Book of Estates page 20. cap. 17.) He means the days of this our
Sovereign king James the first of England, and sixth of that kingedome.
Therefore it is a thing without question, that this holy Pope, so earnest for
the spiritual supreamacie of his Apostolic See, settled it with other
doctrines in this Island, where with the rest it still continued until these
times, as these Protestants have declared. Which is evident by all histories,
not any one affirminge, but rather denyinge, that he altered any thing of
that constitution of Pope Eleutherius, submittinge the whole nation of
Scotland, to the Archbishopp of York in spiritual affairs. And if king
Donald and the nobility of Scotland then had not been assured, that this
supreme spiritual power, in disposinge and orderinge church matters, in such
cases, had belonged only to the Popes of Rome, of all people and places in the
world, they would not have appealed to Rome, for those things at that time in
the Empire of Seuerus, when above all others, there was the greatest enmytie
and wars between the Romans and Scots, that ever were testified by all their
histories. Bed l. 1. histor. c. 5. Hect. Boeth. lib. 5. Scot. hist. Bucan. Rer.
Scotic. l 4. Holinsh. hist. of Scotl. in Seuerus.

In an other point also we are assured, that S. Victor who had by his
highest authority excommunicated so many churches, both greek and latin, as
these Protestants have told us before, for their wrong keepinge of Easter,
settled the right observation thereof in Scotland at this time. For to speak
in Protestants words of this Pope: He confirmed the ordinance of Pius,
touching the celebration of Easter upon the Sunday. So did Pope Eleutherius
before him, and so consequently also among other Christian doctrines, by his
legates taught and delivered it here in Britanie. And we are taught by these
learned Protestants, that in the first general council of Nice: De
obseruatione Paschae antiquus canon sancitus est, ne porro in hac re Ecclesiae
variarent: The old canon of the observation of Easter was decreed, least the
churches should afterward differ, about it. (Ed. Grymstonp^ 436. in Victor.
Rob. Barnes in vit. Pont. Romans in Victor. Bal. lib. 1. de act. prat. in eod.
Magdeburg. centur. 3. and in Eleuther. Damas. in Eleuther. Barns iu Siluestro.
Magdeburg. cent. 4.) And that we had British Bishops there, which consented
to this decree, and received it for Britany, they testify in these terms. (
Theater of great Britanie l 6. cap. 9 page 206 n. 19.) The Britannes continued
constant in christianity, and the censures of their Bishops, for the great
estimation of their constancy, piety and learning, were required, and
approved in great points of doctrine, among the assemblies, of some general
counsels, as that of Sardis (where appeals to the Pope were decreed) and
Nyce, in the time of great Constantine, we had our Bishops present. And all
men of readinge are assured of this, both Constantine the Emperor in his
epistle to the churches, and S. Athanasius in his Apology write plainly, that
this our Britanie received the council of Nice. Epist. Constant. apud
Theodoret. Athanas Apolog.

Therefore it is a very idle and ignorant conjecture, or rather malicious error
of some Protestants, to seem to write as though Britany had received the faith
from some of the Asiatical churches, because some of the later Scots and
Britans die err in that observation, but this error of the Britans as diverse
have proved already was quite different from that of some part of Asia and
greek. And the first gretian that came hither, except some sent by Roman
Authority, that I find was S. Regulus Albutus borne in Achaia, who came into
Scotland, when Augustinus was king, almost two hundred years after this, and
long after the controversy of keepinge Easter was ended, and brought thither
holy relics of S. Andrew the Apostle, who coming into Pictland, and the fame
of this known, very many came to reverence the holy relicques of the Apostle,
and made offerings there, and the king of the picts Hirgustus received by him
with procession and lyinge upon the ground, with much reverence, kissed the
holy relicques, and after mass ended he bequeathed his palace to Saint
Andrew, and to Regulus and the Priests to serve God in. Huius rei fama per
Pictorum regiones delata permultorum animos ad visendas venerandasque sacras
Apostoli reliquias attendit. Confluxerunt ergo illuc vndique donaria Christi
Apostolo pretiosa afferentes. Affuit and Heirgastus Rex eorum, quae fama ad eum
detulerat, visendi cupidas. Venientem ad se Regulus cum sociijs pio apparatu
cum Sacerdotum ac Monachorum religiosa deductione in hymnis and canticis
excepit. Rex humi procumbens, sacras reliquias multa veneratione osculatus, vbi
sacra Christiano more, cuius ipse Heirgustus erat obseruantissimus, erant
peracta, regium palatium amplis structuris ornatum diuo Andreae, Regulo, ac
Sacerdotibus ibidem deinceps Optimo Maximo Deo famulaturis, libere erogauit,
struxit and haud procul a palatio, sacram aedem diuo Apostolo dicatam: and
builded an other church not far from the palace, dedicated to the holy Apostle.
And thus much of S. Victor.

Next to him succeeded Pope and S. Zepherinus, who to prove he still
maintained this Roman supreamacie, as his predecessors before, over all
Bishopes, Primates, Patriarckes, and whomsoever, or wheresoever of the
clergy, or others, did generally decree as these Protestants tell us. ( Rob.
Barns in vit. Pontif. Romans in Zepherin. he calls him Seuerus.) Sine Romani
Pontificis authoritate accusatum Episcopum, nec a Primate, nec a Patriarcha,
nec a Metropolitano, in Iudicio condemnandum esse. That a Bishop accused,
should not be condemned, neither by the Primate, nor Patriarcke, nor
Metropolitan, without the authority of the Pope of Rome. By which is evident,
that even the Archbishops themselves of Britanie, to whom all others were
subordinate in things spiritual, were subject to the Pope of Rome at this
time.

Pope Calixtus succeeded next, and to speak in a Protestant Doctors words: (
Powel l. 1. of Antichrist. page 130.131.) Calixtus Pope defined, that all
Bishops though gathered in a general council, shall fulfill the will of the
church of Rome. They which do not this are pronounced to keep a conciliable,
and not a council. And to be short in this matter, the Protestants of England
prove unto us, that this business of the spiritual power of that See over all
other churches, is the chief scope of many of their Epistles decretall. ( Rob.
Barns in vit. Vrbani, Antheri. and Dovvnam. lib. 1. Antichristi. cap. 3. page
35.) And to give some particular instances hereof more in Britanie, in this
age: we find in histories. ( Matthew. West. an. 257.258.) that Pope Stephen
about the year of Christ 257.258. or 259. When S. Mellon, then noe Christian,
was sent from hence by public authority to Rome, about the temporal affairs
of this kingedome, converted him to the faith of Christ, made him priest, and
soon after Bishop, exempting him from his civil employments of this his
country, and by his Apostolic power sent him Archbishop to Rhoan in
Normandy. (Petr. de Not. de vit. 51. Vincent. in. Specul. l. 11. c. 74.
Martyrol. Romans 22. October. Ioh. Capgr. in 5. Mel. M. S. antiq. in eod. and
Catal. Episcop. Rothmag. Matt. West.) And among others our glorious men and
martyrs here in this age, it is the common opinion, that S. Amphibalus who
converted S. Alban. ( Matthew. Paris p. 178.179. Lidg. in vit. cius. Engl.
Martyrol. 25. Iun.) both was a Britan borne, and consecrated at Rome, some say
by Pope and Saint Zepherinus, what and how glorious his history is, for his
preaching and martyrdom with us, all histories of that time are full: and how
renowned he and others of his holy company, sent by that Apostolic See were
at the same time in Scotland, namely Modocus, Priscus, Calanus, Ferranus,
Ambianus, and Carnonus, both Scottish and English histories will witness. Where
S. Amphibalus was the first Bishop they had, and in Mona the Island: Amphibalus
Brito vir insigni pietate primus Antistes ibi creatus. Hector Boethius Scotor.
histor. lib. 6. fol. 102. Bal. centur. 1. in Amphib. Holinsh. hist. of Scotland
in Chrakint. Veremund. apud Boeth. supr.

And so honored was he of that most worthy King of Scotland Chrathlintus,
that to show the honor he yielded to this holy Legate, and his companions,
and somewhat to behold the Religion of that time, the Scottish history thus
speaks unto us. (Hector Boeth. supr Holinsh. hist. of Scotland in Chrah.)
Chrathlintus Rex sacram Antistitis aedem muneribus ornauit amplissimis,
calicihus, patenis candelabris, alijsque similibus ad sacrorum vsum commodis,
ex argento, auroque fabrefactis, altarique cupro and are clauso: prouentus ad
ea ex agris in sacrae aedis vicini constituit. Fuit id templum omnium primum,
Christiano ritu, vbi Pontifex sacerque magistratus sedem haberet primariam,
inter Scotos, cuius nostri meminere scriptores dedicatum. King Chrathlint did
adorn the Holy House, of the Bishop Amphibalus, with most honorable gifts,
chalices, patens, candlesticks, and others seruinge for the use of Mass made
of silver, and gold, and an Altar, enclosed with copper and brass, and
appointed revenues for them out of the country adioyninge. That was the first
Christian church where a Bishop and holy magistrate had his chief See, among
the Scots, that is remembered by our writers. Thus were the Bishops and priests
consecrated at, and sent from Rome, honored in this nation at that time. When
we read further the Sea of Rome to have been here in such high honor, that
the British writer, and witness of S. Albans life, living then, writes. (
Compilator vitae S. Albani apud Capgrau. and M.S. antiq. in vit. eiusd.) Romam
proficiscor, vt illic veniam merear delictorum, libellum quoque istum offeram
Examini Romanorum: vt si quid in eo secus quam debuit forte prolatum fuerit,
hoc per eos dignetur in melius commutare. I go to Rome, that there I may
deserve forgiveness of my sins: and I will offer this book to the Examination
of the Romans, that if any thing be uttered therein otherwise then it should,
it may be amended.

And that all spiritual power and jurisdiction then in Britanie, was
subordinate unto, and dependinge of the Popes of Rome, in that time, the
Antiquities and Antiquaries, Protestants and others, both of Cambridge and
other places do plainly testify, who among other evidences for this
matter, produce unto us the ancient Bull of Pope Honorius, dated at Rome the
20. day of Februarij in the year 624. ( Bulla Honorij 1. Papae an. 624.20.
Februar. apud Caium l. 1. de antiquit. Cantabrig. Accad. p. 75.76.77.) Wherein
he affirms that he follows the example of Pope Eleutherius, of whom I
have spoken before: Pope Fabian who lived in this age, and others who beeinge
likewise holy Popes, had done the like which he did toward the university
or school of Cambridge, and concerning his power spiritual over all parsons
in this nation, thus it is.

Honorius Episcopus seruus seruorum Dei, dilectis filijs doctoribus and
scholaribus in vniuersitate Cantabrigiae studentibus Apostolicam benedictionem.
Dilectissimi in Christo filij, no^ absque labor, and plurima perturbatione
didicimus, quomodo nonnulli propriae salutis immemores luporum faucibus, and
vulpina facie, libertates and priuilegia, quae vobis and praedecessoribus in
eadem vniuersitate studentibus gratiose indulsit seeds Apostolica, moliuntur
^neruare: Ita quod plures ecclesiarum praepositi absque rationis. Iure minus
inste in vos iurisdictionem indebitam, and insolitam vsurpantes, quamque non
consueuerunt hactenus, ad vntuersitatem vestram accedunt, materiam
perturbationis, and discordiae seminantes, correctionis, emendationis aut
reformationis ibidem officia exercentes, contra inhibitionem sedis Apostolicae.
Volentes igitur, vt tenemur iustitia suadente, paci and tranquillitati
vniuersitatis vestrae paterna sollicitudine salubriter prouidere.
Praedecessorum nostrorum Romanae Ecclesiae Pontificum, Eleutherij, Fabiani,
Leonis, Simplicij, Felicis and Bonifacij vestigijs debite inhaerentes,
authoritate omnipotentis Dei districtius inhibemus, sub poena
excommunicationis, quam veniens in contrarium ipso facto incurrat, ne quis
Archiepiscopus, aut eorum officiales, seu visitatores generales aut speciales a
Sede Apostolica deputati, audent in aliquem vestrum suspensionis vel
excommunicationis, scu interdicti sententias infer, aut vos familiares
vestros molestare praesumat.

Honorius Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his beloved sons the
doctors and scholars of the university of Cambridge sends Apostolical
benediction. We have learned not without labor and much sorrow, most
beloved sons in Christ, how some unmindful of their own salvation, like
greedy wolves, and craftly foxes go about to weaken or euacuate the liberties
and privileges which the Sea Apostolic has granted graciously to you, and
your predecessors students in the same university. So that many Rulers of
churches without right of reason, usurping, unjustly over you undue
jurisdiction, and unaccustomed, and which hitherto they have not used, come to
your university, sowing matter of trouble, and discord, exercising there the
offices of correction, emendation, or reformation, against the inhibition of
the Sea Apostolic. We therefore willing, as we are bound by justice
persuadinge it, with a fatherly care safely to provide for the peace, and
quietness of your university, duly followinge the steps of our predecessors,
Popes of Rome, Eleutherius, Fabianus, Leo, Simplicius, Felix and Bonifacius, by
the authority of almighty God, do strictly forbid under pain of
excommunication ipso facto to be incurred by the contrary doer, that noe
Archbishop, or their Officials, nor the visitors general or special deputed
from the Sea Apostolic, shall dare to inflict the sentences of suspension or
excommunication, or interdiction, against any of you, or presume to molest you,
or your servants.

By which it is evident, that in this age the Popes of Rome, exercised the
highest spiritual jurisdiction in this kingdom, limited (as they thought good)
the power of Bishops, and Archbishops, subiecting them to their ce^sures, and
made exemptions from them, and all others, except the Sea of Rome it self, and
had their visitors here to such purposes, except these Protestants do deceive
us. Which further testify, that this Pope Fabian, in that time miraculouslie
chosen Pope, and living and dying an holy Saint, made diverse decrees, generally
bindinge all Christians as: That every Christian should communicate thrice a
year, that is to say, at the feasts of Easter, whitsonday, and the birth of
our Savior, that priests should not be punished in profane courts. And the
like. Ed. Grymston. in Fabian. Pope. Rob. Barns l. de vit. Pontif. Romans in
Fabiano.

THE FOVRTH CENTVRIE OR HUNDRED YEAR.
THE VIII. CHAPTER. Wherein is proved likewise by the Protestant divines, and
Antiquaries of England, that the Popes of Rome, ever claymed and exercised,
this their highest power here in this Age.
NOw we are come to the fourth hundred year, in the beginning whereof,
Diocletian the persecutinge Emperor dyinge, although he had put even in this
Island, diverse thousands of Christians to death, and one thousand in one time
and place, Lichfeild, ( Theater of great Brit. l. 6. Stowe histor. in the Romans
in Coill.) (taking thereupon the name of a Field of Blood.) yet he was so
far from extinguishinge the name of Christ, that we had a continual
succession at that very time of Bishops, priests, religious, and other clergy
men, without intermission deudced from this Roman institution in this
kingedome. And this testified by the best Antiquities we have, S. Gildas, S.
Bid, and allmoste all after them both Catholics, and Protestants. ( Gildas l.
de excid. and conquest. Brit. cap. 8.) The words of Saint Gildas ar these, as
Protestants publish him.

Bilustro supradicti turbinis necdum ad integrum expleto, emercescentibusque
nece suorum Authorum nefarijs decretis, laetis luminibus omnes Christi Tyrones
quasi post hyemalem ac prolixam noctem, temperiem lucemque serenam aurae
celestis excipiunt, renouant ecclesias ad solum vsque destructas, Basilicas
Sanctorum Martyrum fundant, construunt, perficiunt, ac velut victricia signa
passim propalant, dies festos celebrant, sacra mundo cord, oreque conficiunt,
omnes exultant filij gremio ac si matris ecclesiae confoti. When ten years of
the said persecution were not wholly expired, and the wicked decrees were now
void by the death of their Authors, all the souldiars of Christ with joyful
countenance, as it were after a winter long night, receive the temper and
clear light of the heavenly air, they renew their churches destroyed even to
the ground, they build churches of the holy martyrs, frame, and perfect them,
and as it were publicly set forth every where their victorious Ensigns,
they celebrate holy days, they perfect their sacrifices, or sacred things with
a clean heart, and mouth, they all do rejoice, as it were children fostered in
the lap of their mother the church.

The very same has S. Bid who adds ( Bed. histor. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 8.)
Progressi in publicum fideles Christi, qui se tempore discriminis, siluis ac
desertis, abditisque speluncis occultauerant. The faithful servants of Christ
show themselves now in public, who in the time of the danger had hidd
themselves in woods, and wildernesses, and hidden dens. And then he writes as
S. Gildas before. By which public and hierarchicall Acts and offices of
Bishops, and priests, as founding and dedicatinge churches, to the honor of
holy Martyrs, that had late suffered in that persecution, in institutinge and
celebratinge their festiuities, renewing and consecrating other defaced
churches, which none but Bishops might do, and saying Mass, which he
expressly by perfecting their sacrifices or sacred rites, with a clean heart,
and mouth, the preistly office and function, it is most evident, that diverse
both priests and Bishops, with other clergy men escaped in this persecution,
and so still continued the hierarchicall succession of Archbishops and
Bishops, so universally established here before by the Popes of Rome, and with
the same dependence which they had before. For noe history makes mention, of
any change, neither of our Bishops then putt to death, except S. Amphibalus,
unless we will conjecture without warrant, that S. Angulus suffered martyrdom
in this time. And notwithstanding so many losses, and desolations of our
Antiquities, we have testimony of some Bishops in particular then living, the
persecution being ended.

For who can think but some of those which fledd into Scotland, whether the
persecution extended not, with S. Amphibalus, remained there still in the
Episcopal See of Mona, which king Chrathlinte, had so honorably endowed to
that purpose, and long after was an Episcopal See? I have named diverse of
these renowned men before, of whom some one in all probability after the
return of Saint Amphibalus into these parts, supplied that place and dignity
there. And here in England it is evident by those antiquities we have left,
that we had preserved from the fury of that persecution, many both Bishops,
and Archbishops. To exemplify in London, we have the names of Sixteen
Archbishops there, before the cominge of S. Augustine hither, as both Iocelin
of Furnes, the Protestants, Stowe, Godwyn and others collect them. ( Iocelin
Catalog. of British Bish. Stowe histor. in Lucius. Godwyn. Catalog. in London,
1. council. Arelat. in Subscript. tom. 1. council. Stowe and Godwyn supr.) And it
is manifest that either Restitutus which was Archbishop of London, and was
present at the council of Arles in France, in the year 326. soon after this,
or Thedred, or Hillary supposed to be his immediate predecessors, was then
Archbishop. And so because every Archbishop infers inferior Bishops under
him, that we had Bishops also. I will instance only in Winchester, where we
ar informed both by an old Manuscript Author, and a new Protestant Bishop. (
Godwyn Catalog. of Bish. in Winchest. 1. old M. S. apud eundem supr.) That one
Constans was Bishop there in this time, and in the year 309. or 310. did upon
the 15. day of march, hallowe and dedicate unto the honor and memory of S.
Amphibalus, that had suffered death for Christ in the late persecution, a
church there reedified with such wonderful forwardnes and zeal, as within one
year and thirty days, both it and all the edifices belonginge unto it, were
quite finished in very seemly and convenient manner. And that Deodatus was
Abbot of this new erected Monastery. Thus this Protestant Bishop from an old
Manuscript.

By which, and that which is spoken before in this chapter, it is evident, that
England this part of Britanie then had both Bishops, and Archbishops
continuinge in the same order and manner as they were first instituted here by
the Sea of Rome: neither did they now begin to depart or separate themselves
from obedience to that See Apostolic; for soon after this, the first general
council of Nice beeinge called, these Protestants have told us, we had Bishops
there, and most evident it is, that it was received in this kingdom. And yet
the canon of that council is so manifest for the Popes of Rome supreamacy, at
the least over this western world, wherein England is, both in the time of this
holy council, and before, that a Protestant Bishop does thus confess it. (
Field. l. 3. p. 60.61.) In the time of the Nicen council, and before, as
appears by the Acts of the council limitinge their bounds, there were three
principal Bishops, or Patriarchs of the christian church: namely the Bishop of
Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch. So writes the Protestant Archbishop Whitgift,
Fox and others, whereof one says. ( Whitgift def. of the Answ. p. 331. Fox
tom. 1. page 12. Rob. Barns in vit. Pont. Romans in Siluestro.) Sollicitudinem
ecclesiarum, pro recepta consuetudine veterum habendam esse statuerunt. The
fathers of the nicen council did decree, that according to the custom
received from them of old, that the three chief patriarchs of Rome, Antioch,
and Alexandria, should have chardge of the churches.

So that if we would seek noe further then to these great enemies themselves
of the Roman See, yett they confess unto us, that it was not only decreed in
this nicen council, where, as our Protestants have told us, we had Bishops
consentinge, and our king and contriman Constantine the great Emperor also
submittinge himself unto it, but that it was the old custom and tradition of
the church, that the Bishop of Rome was the principal Bishop, and commaundinge
Patriarch of all western churches, among which this of our Britanie was ever,
now is, and of necessity must be one, and if we will be members of the
church of Christ, except we can remove Britanie from the uttermost part of
Europe, to lepp to Alexandria in Afric, or Antioch in Asia, we must needs by
this council as it is glossed by our Protestants, be subject to Rome, as we
ever were by the old custom before that council. The words of these
Protestants Whitgift and Fox are these. ( Whitgift Def. page 331. Fox tom. 1.
page 12.) The council of Nice which was the year of our Lord 340. and in the
sixth canon of the said council we find it so decreed, that in every
province, or precinct some one church or Bishop of the same, was appointed and
set up, to have the Inspection and Regiment of other churches about him,
secundum morem antiquum, that is after the ancient custom, as the words of
the council do purport. So that the Bishop of Alexandria should have power
of Libia, and Pontapolis, in Egypt, for as much as the Bishop of Rome has the
like or same manner.

Therefore seeing there is none named either by the council, or custom
related by that council, but the Bishops of Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria to
have this high Regiment and power over the churches, we must needs adhere and
appeal to Rome by these men, as we ever did by the old custom from the
beginning of our first life in Christ: otherwise we shall fall into errors
and conclude inualidate things even in the highest matters, these men assuringe
us, that at this time there were but three (...) Metropolitan churches before
recited, and that to use their words. ( Whitgift def. page 359.) The church of
Rome is called all that is subject to the Bishop of Rome: And ( Whitgift
Answer to the Admonit: cap. 2.17. division.) that notable and famous council
of Nice must be, and is of all wise and learned men next unto the scriptures
themselves reverenced, esteemed and embraced, in the sixth canon of that
council it is thus written: This council does determine him to be noe
Bishop, which is made without the consent Metropolitani Episcopi, of the
Metropolitan. Which chief Metrotropolitane to us then as these men have told
us, was the Bishop of Rome; so that it is evident by them, that we could not
here have any Archbishop, or Bishopp made without his allowance.

And yett these our Protestant Bishops and Doctors must needs eleuate this
power spiritual higher, then to make it only chief over Britanie, those West
nations and Europe, and give, it the highest place in the whole church of
Christ, for so all that can be pretended by these Protestants, to have had
interest in such things at that time, whether the Pope himself S. Siluester
and others, our king and Emperor Constantine, or the Bishops of Britanie, and
other nations; for all these in those days acknowledged the Supreamacy in the
Roman See over all churches. S. Siluester Pope with the consent, and
Subscription of the Emperor Constantine his Mother S. Helena, and 284. western
Bishops, and 45. priests, decreed. ( Council. Roman. sub Syluestro can. 20. to.
1. Council.) Nemo Iudicabit primam sedem: quoniam omnes seeds a prima sede
desiderant temperari, neque ab Augusto, neque ab omni clero, neque a Regibus,
neque a populo Iudex iudicabitur. Noe man shall judge the chief See (of Rome):
because all Sees desire to be governed by the chief See. The judge (Pope of
Rome) shall not be judged, neither by the Emperor, nor by all the clergy,
nor by kings, nor by the people. Where we see the Pope of Rome to be by all
consent the highest judge, and subject to noe others judgment, whosoever. The
honor and reverence which Constantine yielded to Saint Siluester then Pope, is
sufficiently known by Eusebius in his life and others. ( Eusebius. de vita
Constantini.) I will only exemplify by the warrant of an english Protestant
Bishop, how this great duty and Reverence of him to that holy Pope, and
endowinge that Apostolic See with honor and riches, was such, that it was
long before foretold by an Angel from heaven, to S. Blasius. saying ( l. 1.
de Act. Romans Pontif. in Syluestro.) That in the time of Constantine, Idolatry
should cease by his means, and this Constantine for his honor to the Sea of
Rome, should translate the seat of his Empire from thence, into Thracia, and
there settle it at the mouth of the River Bosphorus, and leave Italy and Rome
to the Pope, Christ's vicar there. Adueniet Princeps, sub quo pacabitur orbis:
and finem accipiet veteram cultura deorum. Constantinus apud Thraces, qua
Bosphorus aequor Thracius Euxinis Aegaeum ingurgitat vndis, constituet sedem
Imperij: latiumque relinquet Christo and Romuleam septem in collibus vrbem.

Now for the Bishops of Britanie there can be noe question, but they gave this
primacie to S. Siluester: for first it is most probable some of them were
present at this Roman council, so great, consistinge of the western Bishops.
Secondly in all Judgments they must needs acknowledge this supreamacy either in
the Pope, or Emperor; But not the Emperor which yielded it to S. Siluester.
Thirdly because the next Pope Saint Mark, who was Pope but three years,
claimed for the Roman See to be, matter omnium ecclesiarum, the mother of all
churches, and privileged from heresy. ( Marcus epist. ad Athanas. and caeter.
Egipti Episcopos.) And as these Protestants tell us, his successor S. Julius
appointed appeals to the Sea of Rome, and taught noe council could be kept
lawfully without his consent. (Rob. Barns in vita Pontif. Roman. in Iulio.) And
two other Protestant Bishops speaking of this time affirm: The cano^ of the
primative church made every thing void that was done without the Bishop of
Rome. (Bilson true differ. page 66.67.) And again: The canon of the primative
church forbad any council to be called, without his consent. (Morton Appeal
page 286.) And to make all sure in this matter, that the whole clergy of
Britanie and Christians under them, at this time attributed this spiritual
supreamacie to the Pope of Rome, our Protestants have told us before, which
ancient Authorities also affirm ( Theater of great Britanie l. 6. Sulpit.
Sever. sacr. histor. lib. 2. Athan. apol. l. 1. cont. Ar. Council. Sardic. can.
4.7.) that we had of this nation diverse Bishops in the general council of
Sardis, a city of Lydia in Asia with 300. Bishops; and therefore this kingedome
with the rest, acknowledged the supreamacie of the Pope of Rome in all places,
and that Appeals were to be made to him as highest judge.

And whereas the council of Arles in France in the time of S. Siluester, in
the subscription of the Bishops there, many Protestants and other Antiquaries
assure us, ( Council. Arelat. in subscript. Theater of Brit. lib. 6. Stow
histor. in Lucius. Godwyn. catalog. in London. 1.) that Restitutus our
Archbishop of London was present there, and subscribed for this nation, that
place beeinge so remote from London, we must needs say, that he was called
thither by the Pope of Rome, or do that, which never any yett would allow, to
grant a superiority unto the Bishops of France over them of this kingedome.
And so for those our Bishops which were at the council of Ariminum in this
time, for noe others meddled in these affairs in those days. Which we are
further taught by the Example of our holy Bishop S. Ninian, ( Capgrau. in
Catal. in Ninian. Bed. hist. Anglic. Theater of great Britanie. lib. 6. Bal.
centur. 1. de script. in Ninian^ Bernini.) who toward the later end of this
centurie of years, was made Bishopp at Rome by the Pope there, and by him sent
Apostle to the Western parts of Britanie, to people there which had not yett
received the faith of Christ. Where he converted the nation of the Picts,
preached the gospel through the contryes of the Britans, Scots, and Picts,
ordained there priests, consecrated them Bishops, and divided the contry into
parishes, as both Catholics and Protestants are witnesses. Audiens Pontifex
Romanus quosdam in occiduis Britanniae partibus necdum fidem Christi
suscepisse, ad Episcopatus gradum Ninianum consecrauit. Concreditum a Deo
talentum per Britannorum, Scotorum, australium Pictorum terras, ad senium vsque
latissime profudit. Ordinauit presbyteros, Episcopos consecrauit, and totam
terram per certas parochias diuisit. And living in this preachinge until he
was very old, as a Protestant Bishop writes, (Bal. centur. 1. in Ninian.
Palladio Patricio.) he died in the year of Christ 432. before which time S.
Palladius, S. Patricius, SS. Germanus and Lupus were sent hither by S.
Celestine Pope of Rome. And yett that he came hither in the fourth century, it
is evident: for in his cominge hither from Rome, he came by S. Martin Bishopp
of Tours, in France as Capgraue and others writ, ( Ioh. Capgr. in S.
Ninian.) and yett by Sigebert and others, S. Martine died within the first 400.
years. ( Sigebert. in Chronic. ad an. 399.) In which time also we had
Coelius Sedulius of this nation, scholar (as a Protestant Bishop writes) to
Hildiberthus a learned Bishop of Scotland, ( Ioh. Bal. centur. 1. in Coel.
Sedul.) after whose death he travailed many nations for learning sake, as
Spain, France, Italy and Asia, and beeinge excellently learned returned to
Rome, where he long time continued, and was so learned holy and grateful a
man to the Popes of Rome, that Pope Gelasius (to use the Protestants words) in
the decrees distinct 15. calls him, venerable Sedulius, and much prayseth his
writings.

Neither can we think otherwise of his Master, Bishop Hildibertus, of whom
he was instructed, and directed in these courses. And this Sedulius himself
also was a Bishop, as both Sigebertus, and Bostius our contryman, and the
Protestant Bishop Bale from them, are witnesses. (Sigebertus and Bostius apud
Bal. centur. 1. de Script. in Coel. Sedul.) In which time also lived S. Kebius
our Cornish Bishop, successor, though perhaps not immediate, to S. Amphibalus
in the Bishopric of Mona. ( Ioh. Capgrau. in S. Kebio. Harpesf. histor. page
26. Pits. in Kebio.) Who lived long time with S. Hilary Bishopp of Poicters
in France, that worthy pillar of the true Catholic faith, and honor of the
church of Rome, and Successor of Saint Peter there, that he calls him.
(Hilar. ad Psalm. 131. and in Matthew. can. 16.) Ecclesiae fundamentum, caelestis
Regni Ianitor, cuius arbitrio aeterni aditus traduntur, cuius terrestre
iudicium praeiudicata authoritas sit in caelo: Foundation of the church, porter
of the kingedome of heaven. The happy foundation of the church, the blessed
porter of heaven, to wose will die eternal passadges are committed, whose
judgment on earth is preiudicate authority in heaven.

Such a tutor, pedagoge, and consecrator also had this our happy contryman
Saint Kebius, in those turbulent heretical times of the Arrians, and their
opposition against the Roman church, a great means by this our holy Bishop,
S. Restitutus, Fastidius, Priscus, our Archbishops then, and other godly
Bishops of this nation, to preserve this kingedome in the true faith, and
obedience to the Pope of Rome, in so much that S. Hilarie himself, ( lib. de
Synodis aduersus Arr.) commends the Bishops of Britanie for the sincerity in
those times, to their eternal honor. He dyed, as our Protestants write, in
the year of Christ, 370. And in this age also was that renowned S. Vrsula,
with her glorious company of Bishops, other clergy men, Virgins and others,
as those Protestants ar witnesses, who as both Ptolomaeus Lucensis, Capgraue,
the Antiquities of Collene, and the German histories testify ( Baleus centur.
1. in Vrsula. Cynosura an. 390. Stowe histor. an. 394. in Theodosius.
Martyrolog. Roman. die 21. and 22. October. and Beda hac die and Vandelbert.
Baron. in annot. Ptolom. Lucens. in S. Vrsula. Capgrau. in S. Vrsula. and
Annal. Coloniens. etc.) made that their most holy pilgrimadge to Rome, and at
their return received the crown of Martyrdom at, or near Cullen in
Germany, where, as also in the whole Christian world, and both to their honor
and the glory of our country, they are celebrated in the most ancient
Martyrologes, in which sacred company, as Capgrauius and diverse others
testify, there were many Bishops of this kingedome, as namely Willielmus or
Michael, Columbanus Ywanus, Eleutherius and Lotharius. Which I rather name,
that we may know, how this kingedome at that time, both was so replenished
with Bishops, that it might spare so many to be sent from hence, with those
holy Virgins, and to give evidence how devoted and respective, the Bishops and
clergy, with the rest the Christians of this kingedome, were toward the Sea
of Rome, in these days.

THE FIFTE CENTVRIE OR HUNDRED YEAR.
THE IX. CHAPTER. Shewinge by these Protestants of England, how both the Popes
highest spiritual power, was still here continued, and a perpetual succession
of our Bishops and Clergy also in Britanie from the Sea of Rome, as in the
other Ages before.
NOw we are come to the fifth Century, in the beginning whereof the first
Fathers of Heresy, and Opposers against the holy Apostolic See of Rome, which
I find to have been of our British nation, were the monstrous rebellious
Heretics Pelagius and Timotheus, not that I find them more formally and
directly opposite to the Sea Apostolic then other Heretics were, but as the
nature and necessity of heresy is, to be ever contrary and disobedient to
their chief judge, and commander in such cases, the Pope of Rome, with
councels assembled: for as our Protestants tell us, diverse Popes of Rome both
by themselves, and in councels had condemned Pelagius for an heretic, and
yett he obstinately persisted in his condemned errors. Innocentius the first
condemned, Pelagius the monk, and Coelestius of heresy, for preferringe free
will before the grace of God, and said the vvil of man by it self, was
sufficient and able to fulfill the commandments of God, and took away the
necessity of Baptism and faith in Christ. (Rob. Barns in vit. Pont. Romans in
Innocent. Bal. centur. 1. de Scriptorib. in Pelagio heresiarcha.) Innocentius
primus Pelagium monachum, and Coelestium haereseos damnauit: quod liberu^
arbitrium gratiae Dei praeferrent, dicerentque voluntate^ per se sufficere, ad
implenda Dei ma^data, praesul ordinatus Pelagius sui nominis haeresim
fabricabat, asserens hominem sine peccato nasci, ac solo voluntatis imperio
sine gratia saluari posse, vt ita nefarius baptismum ac fidem tolleret.
Pelagius after he was made a Bishopp, framed an heresy of his name,
affirminge that man was borne without sin, and by the only command of his
will, without grace by Christ, might be saved, that the wicked man might so
take away both baptism and faith.

Pope Sozimus also, as these men tell us, condemned this heretic, and to use
their words. (Rob. Barnes sup. in Sozimo Papa.) That Sozimus might declare,
that nothing was in any place ratified, that was done in holy things, except
it were done by the Popes authority, he sent Faustinus a Bishop, and two
priests, to the council of Carthadge. The decrees of the council were brought
to Pope Sozimus, which beeinge by him approved, the Pelagian heresy was
condemned every where. Vt Sozimus declararet, nihil vsquam ratum fore, quod in
rebu^ sacris ageretur, nisi id Romani Pontificis authoritate fieret, Faustinum
Episcopum, and duos presbyteros, ad Cathaginensem Synodum misit. Synodalia
decreta ad Sozimum perlata sunt: quibus approbatis, Pelagiana haeresis passim
damnata est. Thus we see by these Protestants, that the Popes of Rome, even in
this time, when they were most afflicted, and Rome it self taken, and sacked
by Goths, in the time of this Pope, (Barns supr,) beeinge Pope but one year
3. months and twelve days, Sozimo Pontifice, Roma a Gothis capta est: They
still exercised and practiced this highest spiritual power in all places, even
in Africa, as these Protestants assure us, and not only in Europe where our
Britanie is: In which they showed, and exercised this their highest supreamacy
in many and diverse matters in that time.

And first in this Business of Pelagius, the monk or Abbot of Bangor, in Wales;
Thus writes a Protestant Bishop with consent of Antiquities. (Bal. centur. 1.
de Scriptor. in Palladio Graeco. Hector Boeth. hist. Scotor. l. 7. fol.
132.133. Holinsh. histor. of Scotland. Ed. Grymston cap. Relig. of Scotland
page 20. Prosper. in Chronico.) Palladius Graecus a Caelestino Romanorum
Pontifice Antistes mittebatur, vt Pelagianam haeresim, quae tunc magnam
Britanniae partem inquinauerat, a Britannorum gente arceret, atque Scotorum
populum ad veram pictatem, a qua continua bellorum atrocitate paulum aberrarit,
rite reduceret. Hunc ferunt concionibus pijs a quibusdam gentilium
superstitiu^culis ecclesias illas purgasse, atque ob id in hodiernum vsque
diem, Scotorum Apostolus appelatur. Palladius a Grecian was by Celestine Pope
of Rome, sent a Bishop, to drive from the nation of the Britans, the Pelagian
heresy, which then had defiled a great part of Britanie, and rightly to reduce
the Scots to true piety, from which by the continual cruelty of wars they
had erred. The saying is, that with his godly sermons, he purged those
churches from some superstitions of the gentiles, and so is to this day called
the Apostle of the Scots. Here we see it first left to the Popes Judgment,
what was heresy to be condemned, what was error to be recalled, superstition
to be reformed, and in his power spiritual (the temporal Roman then having
nothing to do in any part of this Island) to assign, and send a Bi-Bishop, and
Apostle to that nation, which was never subject, either in temporal respects,
to the Roman Emperors, who so performed the highest sacred duties, and
authority in that church, that, as before, and by all writers he is called,
Scotorum Apostolus, the Apostle of the Scots: as justly he deserved it,
settling all things there, by his legatine power, making a Bishop, an
Archbishop, and the like matters of greatest Jurisdiction, as namely S.
Seruanus Bishop of the Orchads, and S. Teruanus Archbishop of the Picts,
Palladius Seruanum Episcopum ad Orchadas Insulas missum, vt Populum rudem
christiana pietate institueret, creauit, and Teruanum quem Infante^ lustrico
lauerat font, Pictoru^ Archiepiscopum constituit. Palladius created Seruanus a
Bishopp, and sent him to the Orchads Islands, to instruct the rude people, in
the christian faith, and he appointed Teruanus, whom he baptized when he
was an Infant, to be Archbishop of the Picts. Hector Boeth. hist. Scotor. l.
7. folio 133. page 1. Georg. Buchan. Rerum Scoticar. l. 5. Rege 42. page 146.
Polidor. Verg. hist. Anglic. l. 3. page 58.59.

Thus the Scottish histories teach us. By which it is evident, that the whole
state of the church of Scots, and Picts also, was then settled by the
Authority of this Roman Legate, and that the other Governors which he
appointed in it, were also sent from Rome, for, if Teruanus whom he appointed
Archbishop of the Picts, was baptized when he was but an Infant, as these
Scottish historians tell us, he was baptized at Rome or those parts where S.
Palladius then lived, and not in this kingdom, where it is confessed by all
antiquities, that S. Palladius lived a very short time. And S. Teruanus
beeinge made by him an Archbishopp among the Picts, it both informs, that
there were other Bishops there under him, else he could not be Archbishop,
chief of the Bishops there; and makes probable, that S. Ninian, who as a
Protestant Bishop writes, ( Bal. cent. 1. in Ninian. Bernic.) died about this
time, was also Archbishopp there, and now dyinge Teruanus was by Palladius his
legatine power ordained his successor: or that both these were Archbishops of
York, so appointed by the Sea of Rome, and named Bishops of the Picts,
because they with other provinces, were subject to the Archbishops See of
York, a subordination neither altered by S. Celestine or any other Pope until
such time, as I have before declared, except in such extraordinary cases, of
special legates sent immediately from Rome, with chief authority, such as S.
Palladius was, who by that prerogative exercised this jurisdiction
extraordinarily, in consecrating and instituting Bishops, within the limits of
the Metropolitan of York, which ordinarily belonged unto his See, by the
order of Pope Eleutherius from the beginning of our public receiving of the
faith of Christ. And the same care and chardge which S. Celestine then Pope of
Rome took of the Scots, and Picts, at this time, the same also he had, and
as chief pastor performed, both to this kingedome of Britanie, and Ireland
also.

Concerning Britanie, these Protestants assure us, that when Pelagius was dead
before, and his heresies by many Popes and counsels condemned, yett it being
maintained here by Leporius Agricola, a very learned Heretic. ( Bal. centur.
1. de scriptor. in Leporio Agricola and l. 2. de Act. Pontif. Romans in
Celestino. Rob. Barns l. de vita Pontif. Roman. in Caelestin.) That Saint
Palladius of whom I have spoken, the Popes Legate in Scotland, informed S.
Celestine Pope hereof, who therevppon sent the twoe french Bishops, Germanus
and Lupus hither to strengthen the Britans in the true doctrine of heavenly
grace, and to confute the wicked doctrine of the sufficiency of man's works
without the grace of Christ. Quod per Palladium audie^s Caelestinus Pontifex
Romanus, Germanum Antissiodorensem, and Lupum Tracafessum, Gallicanos Episcopos
illuc misit vt Britannos, in fide gratiae caelestis solidarent, and impiam
atque Hipocriticam humanorum operum doctrinam confutarent. And that we may be
fully informed, that S. Celestine the Pope did not send these two holy Bishops
into Britanie only to suppress the pelagian heresy, but to supply the
spiritual wants in this kingdom, this Protestant Bishop and greatest enemy to
the Sea of Rome, will tell us more plentifully, where he describes that holy
Pope and his doctrine in this manner. ( Balaeus l. 2. de act. Pontif. Romans in
Coelestino. Robert. Barns in vit. Pont. in Coelestino.) Caelestinus Campanus,
Introitum graduale, Responsorium, tractum, and offertorium papisticae missae
inseruit: atque vt Sacerdotes pontificum Canones scire^t, a^e praecepit.
Germanum in Britanniam, Palladium in Scotiam, and Patricium cum quodam Segetio
in Hiberniam, vt pelagianas haereses extirparent, Episcopos misit, obijtque
anno Christi 435. Confessorum numero asscriptus. Pope Celestine borne in
Campania, did put to the Papisticall mass the introite, graduale, responsorie,
tract, and offertorie; and straightly commanded, that priests should know the
canons of the Popes, he sent Bishops, Germanus into Britanie, Palladius into
Scotland, and Patricke with one called Segetius into Ireland, to root out the
Pelagian heresies. And he died in the year of Christ 435. in the number of
Confessors.

An other interpretinge this addition he made to the mass, says. ( Barns
supr.) In initio sacrificij, vt Psalmus Iudica me Deus and discern causam meam
etc. a sacrificaturo diceretur, ordinauit. Graduale in missa ordinauit, vt
Sacerdotes canones sacros tenerent, praecepit. Pope Celestine ordained, that in
the beginning of the sacrifice, when a priest was to sacrifice, he should say
the psalm which begins, Judge me o God, and discern my cause etc. he did
order the graduale in the Mass, and commanded that priests should understand
or keep the holy canons as before. And the Protestant Archbishopp Whitgift. (
Whitg. Answer to the Admonition page 44. sect. 1.2.) Speaking of this holy
Pope writes: Celestine was a godly Bishop, and the church of Rome at that
time, had the substance of the Sacraments: according to gods word: neither was
there any superstition mixed with them, the Introite that he appointed, was
one of the psalms. The like has Master Fox, ( Fox tom. 2. in Queen Mary
page 1401.) who affirms, this use of a psalm before the Mass was used
long before in the Greek church. And it is the common opinion of our English
Protestants, their Bishops, Antiquaries, and doctors that the Religion which
these holy Legates of Rome SS. Germanus and Lupus taught here, was in all
things, veritatis praedicatio, doctrina sincera, sincerissima, purus Dei
cultus, qualis ab Apostolis mandato diuino Christianorum Ecclesiis traditus
erat. The preaching of truth, sincere doctrine, most sincere doctrine, the
pure worship of God, such as by the commandment of God, was by the Apostles
delivered to the churches of Christians: and so it continued here in this
purity long after. Matthew. Parker Antiq. Britan. page 6.45.46. Goscelin.
histor. Bal. l. 2. de act. Pontif. Romans in Greg. 1. and l. de Script. centur.
1. in August. Dionatho. Godvvyn. Conuers. of Brit. Povvel. in annot. in lib.
Girald. Cambr. de Itinerar. Cambr. c. 1. Fox page 463. edit. an. an. 1576.
Fulk. Answ. to a count. Cathol. page 40. Midleton Papistam. page 202. Stovve
histor. in Ethelb. Holinsh. histor. of Engl. cap. 21. page 102.

Therefore we may not now make any doubt of any thing, done here by these
holy Bishops, by power from the Pope, either in causinge the decrees and canons
of the Popes so much dignifyinge the highest spiritual power in the Sea of
Rome, generally to be used and received here, by all priests, and clergy
men, as this holy Pope had commanded, nor in consecratinge Bishops, and
Archbishops, with limitation of their Jurisdictions, and the like, but they
were most Justly, and religiously performed. ( Matthew. West. an. 446. Matthew.
Park. antiq. Brit. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. Sigibert. an. 428. Stowe and Howes
histor^ in Theodosius. Bal. centur. 1. in Leporio Agricola.) And yett besides
their powerable, and authoritatiue condemninge of the Pelagian heresies here,
together with the Timothean Heretics, they ordained and consecrated so many
Bishops in this nation, that some writers among Protestants. ( Godvvin
Conuers. of Britanie page 25.) are of opinion, their number was greater then of
those that were consecrated here in the time of King Lucius: among whom a
Protestant Bishop writteth in this manner: I cannot but rest persuaded, that our
Britanie had very few Bishops until the cominge over of Germanus and Lupus, to
suppress the Pelagian Heresy: concerning which matter, I think it not
amiss to offer unto the Reader, what I find in our history of Landaff.
Postquam praedicti Seniores (Sanctus Germanus Episcopus and Lupus) Pelagianam
heresim extirpauerant, Episcopos pluribus in locis Britanniae consecrauerunt.
Super omnes autem Britannos dextralis partis Britanniae, beatum Dubricium,
summum Doctorem, a Rege and ab omni parochia electum Archiepiscopum
consecrauerunt. Hac dignitate, ei a Germano and Lupo data, constituerunt ei
episcopalem sedem, concessu M^nrici Regis, Principum, Cleri and populi, apud
podium Lantaui, in honor S. Petri Apostoli fundatam, and cum finibus istis
etc. Which thus he englisheth: After the said elders (S. Germanus Bishop, and
Lupus) had rooted out the Pelagian Heresy, they consecrated Bishops in many
places of Britanie. Over all the Brittans dwellinge on the right side of
Britanie, they consecrated for Archbishop, S. Dubritius, who was chosen for
the supreme doctor by the king and all the Diocese. This dignity being
bestowed upon him by Germanus and Lupus, they with the consent of Mo^ric the
king, the nobility, clergy and people, appointed his See to be at the
manner of Lantaui, and founded the same there, to the honor of S. Peter,
boundinge the territories thereof in this wise. etc. Then he adds
immediately: This was about the year of Christ 430. about which time also,
Palladius did first appoint Bishops and ordeine Bishoprics in Scotland, as
Buchanan has delivered. The words of Buchanan the puritan are these. ( Georg.
Buchan. l. 5. Reg. 42. page 146. Rer. Scotic.) Creditur Palladius primus
Episcopus in Scotia creasse. Palladius is thought to be the first that created
Bishops in Scotland.

Where we are taught, by these great Protestants themselves, that the first
Bishops, that ever were in this Island, whether Scotland, or this other part of
England, and Wales, were instituted together with their Sees, Jurisdictions,
and limitts by the Popes authority, and this Protestant Bishop in translating
his Antiquity has abused his reader, that is ignorant of the latin tongue,
for where he translateth. ( who was chosen for the supreme doctor by the
king and all the diocese:) there is noe such thing in that antiquity, as
he himself alleged it, but only that the king consented with the diocese
to his consecration in Archiepiscopall dignitye by the Popes Legates, or at the
most that they did choose him rather then any other: for that he was a chief
doctor here long before, and that by the Popes approbation, I will show
herafter. And it seems to be certain, both by himself, and others, that
this Protestant Bishop where he speaks of the kings and peoples election,
did add it of his own Invention, for both by others, and himself also in
other places, there is no such thing in this narration. John Capgraue whom
this man much commends, thus relates this history. ( Godwin Conuers. of
Brit.)

Cum Sanctus Germanus and Lupus haeresim illam (Pelagianam) extirpassent:
Episcopos in pluribus locis Britanniae consecrarunt: and dextralis partis
Britanniae beatum Dubritium, summum Doctorem and Archiepiscopum statuerunt: and
Landauensem ecclesiam in honor beati Petri fundatam, sedem cathedralem
collocarunt: collatis autem ecclesiae Landauensi a Rege multis possessionibus
and ecclesijs, Dubricius discipulos per ecclesias diuisit, quasdam nouas
ecclesias fundauit, Danielem in Episcopum Bangerensem, and Sanctum Iltutum in
loco ab illo Lanitut, id est Ecclesia Iltuti vocatum ordinauit. (Ioh.
Capgrauius in Catalog. in S. Dubritio.) When S. Germanus and Lupus had rooted
out that (Pelagian) heresy, they consecrated Bishops in many places of
Britanie: and they appointed blessed Dubritius, chief Doctor, and Archbishop
of the right hand part of Britanie, and placed the church of Landaffe founded
in honor of S. Peter the cathedral See, and many possessions and parishes
being given by the king to the church of Landaffe, Dubricius divided his
disciples by the churches: builded some new churches. He ordained Daniel
Bishop of Bangor, and S. Iltutus in a place called of him Lanitut, that is, the
church of Iltutus. The very same words without any word added or detracted, ar
in the life of S. Dubritius, in the great old Manuscript of many Saints,
written diverse hundreds of years since. ( Manuscript antiquum and permagnum
pr. gloriosi ac Deo dilecti. in S. Dubricio.) And both these Antiquities teach
with all others, that Aurelius Ambrosius king, was here at that time, with
general command, and that he with the whole clergy, consented to have S.
Dubritius Archbishop of Wales, and S. Sampson of York, their words be: Sancti
Episcopi praedicti consentiente Rege Ambrosio Aurelio, necnon and omni clero,
Dubritium Archiepiscopum consecrarunt. The twoe holy Bishops (S. Germanus and
Lupus) the king Ambrosius Aurelius, and all the clergy consentinge,
consecrated Dubritius Archbishop, and again: Impositum est Diadema capiti
Regis Aurelij Ambrosij, and de communi consensu sedem Eboracensem contulit
Sampsoni viro Sancto, vrbis vero Legionum Archiepiscopatum inclito Dubritio
dedit. Aurelius Ambrosius was crowned king, and by common consent (of the
Legates and clergy) he bestowed the Sea of York on Sampson an holy man, and
the Archbishopric of Caerlegion on renowned Dubritius.

So that it clearly appears, that if there was any such king, as Monric at
that time, he was but a little Regulus in the co^try about Lantaui, and perhaps
temporal Lord of that place, and so his consent for the settlinge of the
Archbishops See there, by the Legates was requisite, and granted, and in noe
other sense. For this Protestant Bishop himself. ( Godwin Catalog. in S.
Dauies. Roger Houeden. Matthew. Parker antiquit. Britan.) Producer of this
Antiquity, is wittnes, with all writers, that at this time, and at the cominge
of S. Augustine so long after, the Bishoprics of Exeter in Devonshire, Bathe
in Sommersettshire, Hereford, and Worcester, which could not belong to any
petty Prince or Regulus, were subject to that Archiepiscopall See, therefore
such things were rather done by the direction, or command of the Legates,
Iubente Sancto Germano, as our Protestants publish in their British history. (
Galfrid monum. histor. Reg. Britan. lib. 6. c. 14.) And as much confessed by
this Protestant Bishop himself, in diverse others places, and in these plain
terms. ( Godwin Catalog. in S. David's in Dubritius.) Dubritius was made.
Archbishopp of all Walls, by Germanus and Lupus, twoe Bishops of France that
were entreated by Aurelius Ambrosius, the King, or Ruler of Britanie, to come
over, and yield their best help, for extinguishing the Pelagian heresy, that
had then taken great root in this contry And they appointed his See to be at
Landaff, which soon after was removed to Caerlegion upon Vske in
Monmoutshire. And in an other place thus he writes. ( Godwyn. Catalog. in
Landaff. 1. in Dubritius.) The cathedral church of Landaffe is reported to have
been first built in the time of Lucius, about the year of Christ 180. But I
perceive not, that any Bishop satt there before Dubritius, that by Germanus
Bishop of Altisiodore, and Lupus of Trecasia (two Bishops of France) was
first consecrate Archbishop of those parts, and sat sometimes at Caerleon,
sometimes at Landaffe. Where he quite forgets his king Monric,
attributinge all to the Popes Legates. And a little after, citinge the very
same book of Landaffe which he did before, he produces many Bishops of that
See, to have excommunicated the kings or princes of that contry; of which
hereafter. Godvvyn. Catalog. of Bish. in Landaff. page 518.520.521.523. and
edit. an. 1615.

So that there is not the least suspicion left, either by the book of
Landaffe, or any antiquity, but the chief spiritual power and jurisdiction
in this kingedome, was ever acknowledged generally, to be in the holy
Apostolic See of Rome, and at this time executed here by those holy Legates
from thence. Which more appears in this holy Archbishop S. Dubritius, who
was not only thus consecrated and disposed of in those highest spiritual
affairs, by authority from Rome, but was also himself the Popes Legate here
in Britanie, as Robertus Caenalis the french Bishop, the British history and
other witters say. ( Robert. Caenal. Gallic. hist. l. 1. perioche 6. Galfr.
monum. l. 9. cap. 12. histor. Brit.) Ex Vrbe Legionu^, Dubritius hic Britaniae
primas, and Apostolicae sedis Legatus, tanto religione clarebat, vt quemcumque
langore grauatis orationibus suis sanaret. Dubritius Archbishop of Caerlegion,
Primate of Britanie, and legate of the Sea Apostolic, was so holy, that he
healed all sick parsons by his prayers. Therefore being the Popes Legate, and
living here so long until the year of Christ 522. as two Protestant
Bishops tell us. Godwyn sup. Bal. centur. 1. in Dubricius.) And Primate of
Britanie, there can be noe doubt of the Popes power here in this time, if we
had noe other instances and Arguments to Insist upon in this matter for those
days.

But these Protestant Antiquaries. Galfrid. monum. histor. Reg. Britan l. 6. c.
13. Io. Capgrau. Catal. in S. Dubritij Manuscript. of Saints old in Dubrit.)
and others tell us, that these Legates thus sent from the Pope, did not come
hither only to extirpate those heresies, but to preach the true Religion in
all other things, for the christianity of the Britans was then corrupted, not
only by the Pelagian heresy, but by the Pagans which the king had brought
hither, and by the preachinge of these blessed men (the Popes Legates) the
Religion of true faith was restored among them. In tempore illo venit S.
Germanus Antissiodorensis Episcopus, and Lupus Trecensis Episcopus vt verbum
Dei Britonibus praedicarent, corrupta namque fuerat christianitas eorum, tum
propter Paganos quos Rex in societatem little posuerat, tum propter Pelagianam
haeresim. Beatorum igitur virorum praedicatione, restituta est inter eos verae
fidei Religio. And in particular besides the common Pelagian heresies against
the necessity of Baptism, and grace of Christ, it seems the Pelagian
priests and Bishops, contrary to christian Religion, in all churches, had
women, whom they called their wives, for we read that Leporius Agricola, the
great promoter of that heresy here, was the son of Seuerianus a Pelagian
Bishop, says one Protestant. ( Stowe histor. in Theodosius the younger.) Seueri
cuiusdam Pelagianorum Sacerdotis in Britannia filius, the son of one Seuerus
a Pelagian priest in Britanie, says an other. Io: Bal. centur. 1. de Scriptor.
in Leporio Agric.) And the king Vortiger so countenanced the Pagan Saxons,
that we hear, that many christians intermarried with them, as the king
himself had done, although he had then alive his christian wife, by whom he
had three sons, to wit Vortimer, Catigern, and Pascentius, yett he married
the Pagan daughter of Hongistus the Pagan, named Rowenna, and so advanced the
Infidels, that the whole kingedome was endaungered, and to aggrauate these
sins, this king kept in wicked manner his own daughter which he had by
his Christian wife, and begott a child a daughter of her. (Mattheus
Westminster. anno 450.) Generat etiam ex eadem coniuge filiam, quam in
societatem thori suscipiens, filiam ex ea proceauit. Whereupon (to speak in
Protestant words.) (Stovve and Hovves histor. in Vortigern.) Vodine
Archbishopp of London, a man of singular devotion, and good life, by the advice
of Vortimer (the kings eldest son and next king) went to Vortiger, and said
to him that he had not done as a Christian prince, in departinge from his
lawful wife, and taking an other woman, whose father was an enemy to the
Christian faith, and also went about to conquer the crown of Britanie.
Hengist hearing Vortiger make lamentation, forth with slew the good Archbishop
Vodine, and many other priests, and Religious parsons, all the churches in lent
were polluted with blood, the Nuns with other religious parsons, were by
force putt from their howses, and goods, and constreined to pollutio^ of their
bodies. The Britta^s consideringe the daily repair of the Saxons into this
Realm, showed to their king the Ieoperdie that might thereof ensue, and
advertised him of the danger, but all was in vain: for Vortiger by reasons of
his wife, bare such favor to the Saxons, that he would in noe wise hear the
counsel of his subjects. Thus far these Protestants.

But Nennius in his manuscript history writing as a Protestant Bishop says.
Io: Bal. centur. 1. in Nennio Bamachorensi. Nennius in M. S. histor. in
Guorthigirno Rege.) a thousand years since, writes plainly, that among
other wickednesses of this king, he took his own daughter for his wife, and
had a daughter by her. Which when it was proved to S. Germanus ( the Popes
Legate) he came with all the clergy of Britanie to correct the king: And
when a Synod of the clergy and nobility was assembled. The king arose and
was very angry, and sought to fly from the face of S. German, and he was
accursed, and condemned by blessed German, and all the council of the Britans.
Super haec omnia mala adijciens Guorthigirnus, accepit filiam suam propriam in
vxorem sibi, quae poperit ei filiam. Hoc autem cum compertum esset a Sancto
Germano, venit corripere Regem, cum omni clero Britannum: and dum conuenta
esset magna Synodus Clericorum in vno concilio, ipse Rex surrexit, iratusque
est vehementer, and vt a facie Sancti Germani fugeret, quaerebat, and
maledictus est, and damnatus a beato Germano, and omni concilio Britannum. Our
english Protestants in their Matthew of Westminster, as he is published by
them, ( Matthew. Westminster. an. 450.) Thus tell us: A S. Germano and ab omni
Episcoporum conuenta est excommunicatus. Vortiger was excommunicated by S.
German, and the whole assembly of Bishops, yet this notwithstanding, he also
went about to overthrow both christian Religion, and the kingdom, ioyninge
with the Pagan Infidels, and having three wives of which one an Infidel enemy
to the land, the other his own daughter; which and such things noe christian
could or would do, yet it does not appear by Ne^nius. ( Nennius supr.) That
he was deposed, but straungly punished by God, neither does the British
history or Matthew of Westminster say, he was deposed, but deseruerunt eum.
The Britans forsook Vortigern, ioyninge with their enemies the Saxons
Infidels, whereby he rather relinquished to be their king, then they deposed
him, although afterward they say, Vortimerum filium eius in Regem erexerunt,
they made Vortimer his son king to defend the kingedome, being driven to
those extremities. ( Galfrid. monum. l. 6. c. 13. Matthew. Westminster. But our English
Protestants, (noe unlearned scholars in deposing kings) write confidently: The
Brita^s with one mind deprived him of his royal dignity, when he had
reigned six years, and ordained to be their king, Vortimer his eldest son.
(Stow and Hov hist. in Vort. Hol. hist of Eng. Matthew. Park. ant. Brit. p. 78
prot. a^not. in Matthew. Westminster. in Mer. a^. 454.

And these men are so far from findinge fault herein, that generally they
applaud, and much commend the fact. I will Instance only in one their first
Protestant Archbishop, which relatinge the continual preseruinge of true
Religion inuiolate by the Britans, does exemplify in this as an heroical Act
in that kind, his words be these. ( Matthew. Parker. antiquit. Britan. page
7.8.) Magnum est Britannorum perfectae in Christum fidei argumentum, illa
expostulatio and Querela, qua in Vortigernum suum Regem vehementer egerunt:
quod Hengisti Infidelis filiam matrimonio sibi iunxisset. Quare Incensi
proceres, Vortigerno regia potestate abdicato, Vortimerum eius filium Regem
creabant. It is a great Argument of the perfect faith in Christ of the Britans,
that their expostulation and quarrel by which they dealt vehemently against
Vortigern their king, because he had martyred the daughter of Hengist an
infidel; wherefore his noble men being offended, deprive him of his kingly
power, making Vortimer his son their king. This is our Protestants
Relation, and construction of this matter. Who propose unto us an other like
example, of the same S. Germane in the case of Bulie, king of Powsey, in
walls. (Holinsh. histor. of Engl. l. 5. page 84.) Who contemninge the
preachinge of S. German, was miraculously punished with death, and a mean man
a christian called Ketell, by Nennius, placed in that dignity, and they cite
Ranulphus Higeden, who as they write cites Gildas for the same history. But
Ne^nius has it at lardg, and says of this Ketell, so erected. ( Nennius M.
S. in S. German.) Et omnes filij eius facti sunt Reges, and a semine eorum
omnis Regio Prouisorum regitur vsque hodiernam diem. And all his sons after
him were kings, and from their seed the whole Region of Pouis is ruled to this
day. From the time of S. German to the writing of Nennius.

And it is evident by Nennius, the Relator of this history, that S. German was
not a deposer of this wicked king. For first it is manifest by the history,
that he was a pagan, which was in noe wise subject to Christian discipline, or
coercion, secondly he and his kindred were miraculously destroyed and consumed
by God, and noe heir left of that linadge to inherit. Then if S. German with
the consent of the nobles, and people; now destitute of a Ruler, gave way to
the election of an other, a worthy and holy man, what wrong or injury in any
opinion was here committed by him? none at al, but an action which all
Religions does allow, and commend unto us.

But to leave these things to Protestants, as their property quarto modo in
all places, and times, when they have prevailed, and which I would not have
mentioned, but beeinge thus called upon, by them, we are further taught by
them, that in this time our dependence here in Britanie, was so great on the
Popes of Rome, that not so much as as a public schole was here kept without
his allowance, and the audience of other matters was referred to him. These
things appear to be so, in the case of the schole of Cambridge, privileged
by the holy Popes S. Leo, and Simplicius in this age, and S. Iltutus, that
renowned Master of many most Learned Scholars. ( Honor. Papa. supr. Caius
Antiquitat. Cantabrig. l. 1. p. 147. lib. vit. Sanctoaum Wall. in Iltuto.) To
whom, magistralis cura concessa est a Pontifice: The magistrall chardge was
committed by the Pope. How renowned this man was in this kind, as also S.
Dubritius in the like case, having a thousand scholars, as our Protestant
testify. ( Caius supr. p. 145.146. Bal. l. de script. centur. 1. in Dubrit.
and Iltuto. Godvvin Catalog. S. David. 1. Bal. cent. 1. in Macceo.) And Macceus
a disciple of S. Patricke beeinge accused at Rome, was constrained to purge
himself there, edito libello Romanae vrbis pontifici satisfecit, and satisfied
the Pope of Rome in his book published to that purpose.

Neither without great cause, were these duties performed to the Pope from
hence, or he did require them singularly of the Britans in this time: for
these our Protestants assure us, that the Pope in those days, claimed and
exercised that their highest spiritual power, over all churches, and parsons
how eminent soever, temporal or spiritual, For to insist in these men's very
words. ( Io: Bal. l. 2. de Act. Romans Pont. in Hilario. Rob. Barns in vit.
Pontif. Romans in Hilar.) Hilarious decreta synodalia fecit, and per vniuersum
mundum seruanda, publicauit. Pope Hilary (about the year 142.) did make
synodall decrees, and published them to be kept throughout the whole world.
Faelix Achatiu^ Co^stantinopolitanum episcopum vna cum Petro Eutichiano
excommunicat, quod Eutichianum exilium propter baeresim puisum, reuocauerat.
Pope Faelix the third, did excommunicate Achatius patriarch of Constantinople
with Peter an Eutichian heretic, because he had recalled an Eutichian, that
for heresy was exiled. Gelasius Anastasium Imperatorem a coetu Christianorum
exclusit, quod Achatio and alijs haereticis faueret. (Idem in Gelasio) Gelasius
the Pope, did exclude Anastasius the Emperor from the company of Christians,
because he favored Achatius and other heretics. And they further tell us, (
Balaeus and Barns in Anastasio 2.) how Pope Anastasius the second, did also
excommunicate the same Emperor for the like. So it is evident by this our
English Protestants, that the Popes of Rome in all this age both claymed, and
exercised this their supreme spiritual power and command in this kingedome
of Britanie. And because the kingedome of Ireland is now belonging to the
crown of great Britanie, and S. Patricke (generally called the Apostle of
that nation) was borne in this our Britanie, and sent to Ireland by the same
Pope Celestine, who sent S. Palladius Germanus and Lupus hither, I must say
somewhat of him, and his proceedings in this matter.

The very name of the Apostle of Ireland which is given unto him in all
Antiquities, and that he was thus sent from the Pope of Rome, Saint Celestine,
with that high spiritual power requisite in such a case of the conversion of
so great a contrye, will sufficiently warrant the dependence of the same in
spiritual things of the Apostolic See of Rome. For to speak nothing of his
miraculous and powerable proceedings with great opposites unto him, remembered
by the writers of his life and others, Nennius himself is thus far a witness
for this renowned Saint and Irish Apostle. (Nennius in manu-scripto codice
antiq. in Patricio.) Sanctus Patricius Euangelium Christi externis nationibus
per annos 40. Praedicabat, virtutes Apostolicos faciebat, caecos illuminabat,
leprosos mundabat, surdos audire faciebat, daemones obsessis corporibus
fugabat, mortuos numero vsque nouem suscitauit, captiuos multos vtriusque sexus
proprijs donis redemit, scripsit Abegetoria 300. sexaginta quinque, aut
amplius, ecclesias quoque eodem numero fundauit, trecentas sexaginta quinque,
ordinauit Episc^pos 365. aut amplius, in quibus spiritus Dei erat, presbyteros
autem vsque ad tria millia ordinauit, and duodecim milia hominum in vna Regione
Conachta ad fidem Christi conuertit, and baptizauit, quadraginta diebus
totidemque nocti^us in cacumine montis Eile ieiunauit. S. Patrick did preach
the gospel of Christ 40. years to externe nations, he wrought Apostolical
miracles, he made the blind to see, cleansed lepers, caused the deaffe to
hear, drove away devils from possessed bodies, he raised to life nine dead
parsons, he redeemed many captives of either sex, with his own goods, he
wrote Abegetories 365. or more, he founded churches in the same number, three
hundred sixty five, he ordained three hundred three score and five Bishops or
more, in whom there was the spirit of God, he ordained priests to the number
of three thousand, and he converted to the faith of Christ and baptized,
twelve thousand men in one Region called Conacht, he fasted forty days and
so many nights in the topp of the montaine Eile.

Thus this ancient British Author comparing this holy Bishop S. Patrick, to
Moses in four things: first for his speakinge with an Angel, in rubo, in a
bushe: secondly for his fast of forty days and nights: thirdly for the
years of his age 120. fourthlie for the place of his burial unknown. By
which narration of Nennius so ancient, and recommended an Author, that S.
Patricke did consecrate so many priests and Bishops, especially aaboue three
hundred and threescore holy Bishops, when the fourth part of them could not be
employed for these Islands of Britanie and Ireland, it is an evident argument,
that his legatine power from the Sea Apostolic of Rome, did not confine it
self in these Islands, but extended it self to other parts far off, which we
now call America, because neither France nor any nation in the old continent,
was then subordinate to Britanie, or Ireland, to receive Bishops and preachers
from them. And this Nennius seems to insinuate, when he says Saint Patricke
preached the gospel, externis nationibus, to externe and strange nations,
the Popes power spiritual rechinge unto all Regions, and this is confirmed by
the writers of the life of S. Brendan, who as both an old manuscript which I
have seen ( an old manuscript in the life of S. Brendan.) written diverse
hundreds years since; and John Capgraue, ( in Catal. in S. Brendan.) who
wrote long before, (and was published in print an. 1516.) the late discovery
of America, are witnesses, found in diverse places, many days saylinge from
Ireland, in America and Islands belonging unto it, diverse religious Christians
that came thither in the time of S. Patricke, and sent or brought thither by
him. And the Island called still S. Brendan, in those parts, may seem to have
taken, and still to keep the name from that holy Saint, beeinge there in those
his holy travails. Insul. Sancti Brendani in descript. Amaric. apud Abrah.
Ortel. and alios.

And yet to conclude the labors of Saint Patrick, and his testifyinge the
spiritual prerogative of the Roman See here in Britanie, where he was borne,
these Protestants have before recommended his epistle unto us, wherein he
declares, that as Saint Phaganus, and Deruuianus (Damianus by others) obtained
ten years Indulgence of S. Eleutherius for the holy place of Glastenburie. (
Antiquit. Glasten. apud M. S. antiq. Ioh. Capgrau. and al. in S. Patricio.) so
he obtained of S. Celestine Pope, who sent him into these parts, twelve
years of Indulge^ce for the same place. Et ego frater Patricius, a piae
memoriae Caelestino Papa duodecimo annos Indulgentiae acquisiui. And to make
all clear, that neither S. Palladius, S. Germanus, and Lupus, or S. Patricius
did any thing in these parts, nor any under them, but by the Popes actual or
virtuall approbation, or allowance, thus it is testified by our Protestant
historians in these words. ( Raphael Holinsh. John Hooker histor. of Ireland
page 53.) Palladius Landed in the North of Ireland, whence he escaped right
hardly with his life, into the Isles adioyninge, where he preached the
gospel, and converted noe small number of Scots to the christian faith, and
purged that part which was christened from the infection of the Pelagians. He
was required by the Scots that inhabited here in Britanie, to leave the Isles,
and come over unto them, there to Instruct the people in the way of true
salvation, to the which with the Popes License, he seemed willinge enough, and
the Bishop of Rome the more redily condiscended thereunto, for that in the
instant time, when Palladius was to depart, and Patrick attended at Rome,
suinge for license to be sent into Ireland, the Pope therefore granted that
Palladius might pass over to the Scots in Britanie, and appointed Patricke to
go with authority from him into Ireland. Thus we see all ecclesiastical
things, ordered and disposed here by the Popes authority in this age.

THE SIXTE CENTVRIE OR HUNDRED YEAR.
THE X. CHAPTER. Wherein the same highest spiritual power of the Popes of
Rome, is still by these English Protestant Divines and Antiquaries continued,
in this kingedome.
IT is evident by that which is entreated before, that in the beginning of
this sixth hundred years, and long after, the supreme papal power continued
inuiolably in this kingedome; for S. Dubritius the Popes Legate lived until
the year 522. And many or most of the renowned men in this age in Britanie
were his Scholars, taught, and instructed by him: thus the Antiquarie of
Cambridge writes. ( Ioh. Caius antiquit^ Cantabrig. l. 1. page 148. Catal.
Sanct. Wall. in S. Dubrit. In vetusto codice, cui titulus est de vitis
Sanctorum Wallensium, in vita S. Dubritij ista lego: creuit illius (Dubritij)
fama cum vtriusque legis notae and veteris peritia, P^rtotam Britanniam, ita
quod ex omni part totius Britanniae Scholares veni^bant, non tantum rudes, sed
etiam viri sapientes, and doctores ad eum studendi gratia confluebant. These I
read in an old book entitled of the lives of the Saints of Walls, in the
life of Saint Dubritius: The fame of him (Dubritius) with his knowledge both of
the new and old law, so increased throughout all Britanie, that out of every
part of all Britanie scholars came unto him, not only the ignorant, but wise
men and doctors, flocked unto him to study: cheifely S. Helian, Sampson his
disciple, Vbelinus, Merchiguinus, Elguoredus, Guninus, Longual, Artbodu,
Longur, Arguistus, Iunabin, Conbram, Goruan, Guernabin, Iouan, Elhebarn,
Iudnon, Curdocui, Aidan, Cinnarh, and with these he had a thousand clergy men
seven years together, in the villadge Hentlan, upon the river fide of Guy, in
the study of divine and humane learning, giuinge them example in himself, of
a religious life and perfect charity. Therefore these so many renowned men
out of all parts of Britanie, and scholars to a Master the Popes Legate, and
primate of Britanie, and many of them by the same authority, after made Rulers
in the church of Britanie, and one of them S. Sampson Archbishop of York, they
could not in any equal judgment, be otherwise affected to the Sea of Rome,
then that their so glorious and renowned Master, and instructor was; for
otherwise they could not have be named his scholars, and being so many a
thousand and more in number, it is not credible but all, most, or many of
them, followed him in this, as in other doctrines.

Like was the case of S. Iltutus of whom I have breiflye spoken before, he
also lived long after this time, as a Protestant Bishop wittnesseth, in the
year of Christ 520. Bal. l. de Script. centur. 1. in Ilchat. Morgan. fol. 29.)
Egregius iste Britannorum Magister (inquiunt Vincentius and Antoninus) ex
discipulis erat diui Germani. Qui omnium scripturarum, veteris ac noui
testamenti, and omnium artium philosophiae, cunctorum suae gentis
scientissimus, futura Dei dono praenouit^ In magno numero discipulos iste
habuit, tam Gallos quam Brita^nos, quorum fuere praecipui Sampson, Paulinus,
David and Gildas Badonicus. This excellent Master of the Britans (say
Vincentius and Antoninus) was one of the disciples of S. German (the Popes
Legate) who among all of his nation, was the most skillful in all scriptures,
both of the old, and new testament, and in all arts of philosophy, and by the
gift of God knew things to come. This man had disciples in great number,
as well French men as Brita^s of the which the chiefest were Sampson, Paulinus,
David, and Gyldas Badonicus. The same is proved unto us by other Protestants. (
Merchiannus Rex in Dipl. apud Caium antiq. Cantabr. l. 1. page 147. Catalog.
Sanct. Wall. in S. Iltuto.) And how the Pope granted him this privilege of
such public teachinge: Magistralis tibi cura a Pontifice concessa est, as the
king of those parts in his princely grant with others witness. Therefore if
the greatest doctors and teachers of others in Britanie in these times, were
thus licenced by the Popes, their Legates, and scholars of their legates, we
cannot question, but such as the Masters, such likewise the scholars and
disciples were, especially when we find their chiefest Scholars S. David, S.
Sampson, made Archbishops by the Poopes Authority, and this former primate of
all Britanie, by the Popes grant as hereafter, Matthew. Westminster. ad An. 727.

And that the scholars of Britanie were not then allowed, without the Popes
privilege, does further appear by our Protestants, Hardinghe, Lydgate, and
others. ( Ioh. Hardinge apud Bal. in praefat. ad l. de Script. Stow histor.
Ioh. Caius l. 1. antiq Cantabrig. Brian Twin. apol. Oxon. l. 1.) testifying,
that in the time of S Gregory, the universities or public Schools of
Stamford, Caerlegion and perhaps some others, were interdicted by the Pope for
some errors they held at this time. The Antiquaries of Cambridge contend (
Caius sup. l. 1.) that their university was then Innocent, and so preserved
and privileged. (Brian. Twyn. apol. l. 2. page 143.) They of Oxord seem to
grant and glory in it, that S. Germanus the Popes Legate, did confirm the
orders and constitutions of the university of Oxford, and allege Asserius
Meneuersis to that purpose. ( Asser. Meneu. apud Brian. Twyn. supr.) Diuum
Germanum Oxoniam aduenisse, annique dimidium illic esse moratum, qui ordines
and instituta illius loci mirum in modum comprobauit. Saint German came to
Oxford, and stayed there half a year, and greatly approved the orders and
institutions of that place. And to prove that all the Christians of this
Britany then in this age, acknowledged this power, of the Pope or Rome, and
their dependence of him in spiritual things, the Archbishops See of London
beeinge wasted and persecuted by the pagan Saxons, most swayinge in the
provinces subject unto it, we do not read of any Archbishop of London after
the martyrdom of S. Vodinus, until Theonus Bishop of Gloucester took charge
thereof in the year 553. as a Protestant Bishop writes in this manner. (
Godwyn Catalog. of Bish. in Land. in Vodinus and Theonas. Stow. histor. in
Lucius.) I find only one of them named, viz. Theonus, that being first
Bishop of Gloucester, forsook it, and took the chardge of London upon him, in
the year 553. so write other Protestants. Therefore we must now seek to the
other two Archiepiscopall Sees, Caerlegion and York. For S. Dubricius, he was
both consecrated by the Popes Legate, S. Germanus, and he himself also both
the Popes Legate, and Primate of all Britanie. Britanniae Primas, and
Apostolicae sedis Legatus. (Galfrid. Monum. hist. Reg. Brit. l. 9. cap. 12.
Godwyn. Catal. in S. David's 1. and Landaff. 1.) So that there is noe question
of him, but he acknowledged this highest spiritual power in the Sea of Rome,
whose Legate he was then in this kingedome.

Neither can there be any doubt of the Archbishop of York in this behalf, at
this time, for S. Sampson was then Archbishop there, who as before, was both
scholar to S. Dubritius, so earnest a patro^ of the Roman See, and also of
S. Iltutus, as before, scholar to S. German, the Popes Legate, and warra^ted
to be public professor, and teacher here, by the Popes allowa^ce, and to give
more certaynety herein, this holy man S. Sa^pson was miraculously chosen of
God, as Capgraue and others write, to the Archiepiscopall See of York, ( Ioh.
Capgrau in Sampsone.) and was consecrated by S. Dubritius the Popes Legate, and
primate of Britanie. Therefore there cannot be the least suspicion, but that,
both he, and the provinces both of the North of England, and Scotland also,
then under his jurisdiction, were of the same opinion in this matter. And if
the Metropolitan See of London a little before destroyed, as our histories tell
us. ( Galfrid. mon. histor. Reg. Brit. l. 8. cap 9.) by the pagan Saxons, with
other churches of that province, had then any Archbishop, whose name is not
remembered, noe man of indifferent judgment will think, that he differed in
opinion in this matter, from those glories of this kingedome, and church
thereof, S. Dubritrius the Popes Legate and S. Sampson consecrated by him, by
whom also, and whose authority from the Sea of Rome, if London then had any
Archbishop at this time, he was likewise consecrated, noe others then being
to intermedle in that business. And our kings of that time Vortimer, Aurelius
Ambrosius. Other Pendragon and Arthur crowned kings by these holy Archbishops,
Legates, patrons and known mainteyners of the privileges of the Apostolic
See of Rome. King Vortimer belonged to the age before, therefore I only here
say of him, as I am directed by our Protestants in the Brittishe history, as
they approve it. ( Galfrid. Monum. l. 6. cap. 14. Matthew. Westminster. an. 454.) That
after he was chosen king and obtained victory of the pagans, so soon as,
it was in his power, he did all things, especially apperteyning to Religion,
by the direction or rather command, as the words be, of S. Germanus the Popes
Legate: Victoria potitus Vortimerus caepit reddere possessiones ereptas
ciuibus, ipsosque diligere ac honorare, and Ecclesias iubente Sancto Germano
renouare. Vortimer having obtained victory, began to restore the possessions,
that were taken from the citizens, and to love, and honor them, and by the
commandment of S. German to renew the churches.

Neither can we make it a strange thing, if we will follow so many
Protestant guides to lead us, as before, that king Vortimer followed the
commandment of Saint German the Popes Legate, in such affairs, when they
have assured us, that by his direction and order, both his Father Vortigern
king before him, was deposed, and this man by the same power, and order was
chosen and erected to be king. And the same is the condition and case of
Aurelius Ambrosius, by the same power and proceedings made king, as these
Protestants tell us, when Vortigern was deposed the second time. ( Protest.
Catalog. Regum Britan. Stowe histor. in Vortiger. Aurel. Ambros. and Vterp.
Holinsh. in eisd.) So likewise of Vterpendragon his brother both of them made
kings by common consent of the clergy, and nobles, the line of Vortigern
beeinge quite disinherited, and he himself (to write in Protestant words
(burnt in his castle in Wales by Aurelius Ambrosius and his brother Vter.
(Galfrid. monum. histor. Reg. Brit. l. 8. cap. 2.17.) But Nennius writes, that
one opinion is, which is in libro S. Germani, in the book of S. German, that
he with his wicked wives or concubines, was burned with fire miraculously from
heaven. An other opinion there is, that he wandered up and down vagrantly,
and his heart burst in sonder. The third, that the earth miraculously opened
and swallowed him up alive. All agree that for betraying the country to the
Infidels, and his other most horrible sins, he was justly and grievously
punished by God, and died miserably with eternal infamy: and the others were
renowned patrons and obedient children to the church of God, which had
advanced them, to the regal dignity. Matthew. Westminster. an. 465.466.488.490.498.
Nennius in M. S. histor. in Guorthigurno.

And if we will follow Nennius the best Author we have of these things, S.
German omitted noe means to procure king Vortigern to penance, and when
nothing would prevail, notwithstanding the most horrible sin of him with
his own daughter, he baptized the son so begotten naming him Faustus, he
brought him up and so instructed him in piety, that he was a glorious Saint.
(Nennius supr.) Quartus filij Guorthigirni fuit Faustus qui illi de filia sua
natus est, quem Sanctus Germanus baptizauit, enutriuit, atque docuit: vnam
habuit filiam quae vt diximus, matter fuit Sancti Fausti. Next to these was
king Arthur, who allthough he was by birth disabled, as our Protestants say,
ex furtiue concubitu Vtheri and Dulcissa Cornubiana natus. Yett to speak in
Protestants words. ( Protest. Index in Galfrid. monum. V. Arthurus. Galfrid.
mon. histor. Reg. Brit. l. 8. c. 19. Stowe histor. in K. Arthur.) Arthur the
son of Other, at the age of fifteen years, was crowned king of Britanie by
Dubritius Archbishop of Legions, the Popes Legate, as before. And this was not
the sole Act of that Saint, but of all the Bishops, and nobles of the
kingedome: Defuncto Rege conuenerunt Pontifices cum clero Regni, and populo,
ipsumque more regio humauerunt. Quo facto Dubritius vrbis Legionum
Archiepiscopus, sociatis sibi Episcopis, and magnatibus. Arthurum filium eius
iunenem quindecim annorum, in Regem magnifice exercuit. (Matthew. Westminster. an. 516.
Galfrid. mon. lib. 9. cap. 1.) King Other being dead, the Bishops assemble
together with the clergy and people of the kingedome, and bury him in kingely
manner. Which beeinge ended Dubritius Archbishop of the city of Legions, the
Bishops and Nobles being associate unto him magnificently erect for
king-Arthur his son, a young man of fifteen years old.

And yett this worthy prince so by birth by himself disabled, and for age
unfit to manadge so many and great matters, yett made king by the power I
have related before, and followinge the direction of the Pope in matters
requisite, and his Legate, and Bishops here, became so renowned and glorious a
king as all histories report. This king, besides the common benefits he
bestowed on the church of Christ in Britanie, then allmoste desolate by the
rage of the pagan Saxons, he did in particular, to show his grateful and due
dependence on the Popes of Rome, With the consent and counsel of all the
Bishops and peers of the kingedome, and with license of the Sea Apostolic,
grant privilege to the school of Cambridge, to be exempt and free from
public vectigals and burthenous works, and this he did for the love of the
heavenly kingedome, and remedy of the souls of his Ancestors: as the
Protestants of Cambridge produce unto us out of his own charter beginning
thus. Charta Regis Arthuri de priuileg. Cantabr. apud Ioh. Caium lib. 1. de
antiquit. Cantabr. page 68.69.) Arthurus regali a Deo fultus dignitate, omnibus
suis salutem pro amore caelestis patriae, remedioque animarum antecessorum
meorum Britannia Regum, pro augmentatione insuper Reipublicae Regni mei
Britanniae, ac profectu spirituali Scholarium in lege Domini iugiter
Cantabrigiae studentium, consilio, and assensu omnium and singulorum
Pontificium, and Principum huius Regni, and licentia sedis Apostolicae, statue
praesenti scripto, and firmiter decerno, vt ciuitas Scholarium praedicta, a
publicis vectigalibus and operibus onerosis absolua^tur. Where we see the
Popes license requisite, and first obtained of this king, even from freeing
that schole in temporal respects.

This license as it seems, being obtained from Pope John the second, for the
Charter bears date, anno ab Incarnatione Domini 531.7. die Aprilis, iu
ciuitate Londoni, the year of Christ 531. the seventh day of April in the
city of London, at which time John the second, is commonly thought to have
been Pope. How many Popes confirmed that schole and exempted it from all other
jurisdiction but the Sea Apostolic I have written before, and now add from
Pope Sergius the first, ( apud Caium. lib. 1. de antiquit. Cantabr. accadem.
page 78.79.80.) shewinge how his predecessors in the Sea Apostolic had done
the same: Sergius Episcopus seruns seruorum Dei, praesentium authoritate
decreuimus, vt nulli Archiepiscope, seu Episcopo, alijue ecclesiasticae
personae, vel seculariliceat, vniuersitatem vestram, aut aliquem vestrum
suspendere, seu excommunicare, vel quolibet sub interdicto ponere, absque summi
Pontificis assensu, vel eius mandato speciali: prohibemus insuper, ne quis
priuilegia, a sede Apostolica gratiose concessa, vel indulta, ausu temerario
infringere, seu restringere praesumat, vel attemptet, nulli igitur hominum
omnino liceat, hanc paginam nostrae concessionis, and exemptionis infringere,
vel ei quouismodo contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare praesumpserit,
indignationem omnipotentis Dei, and beatorum Apostolorum Petri, and Pauli se
nouerit incursurum. Sergius Pope servant of the servants of God. We have
decreed by the Authority of these presents, that it shall be lawful for noe
Archbishop, Bishop, or other parson spiritual or secular to suspend, or
excommunicate, or any way to interdict your university, or any of you, without
the Popes assent, or special commandment. We further forbid, that noe man by
temerarious boldness, presume or attempt to infringe, or restrict the
privileges graciously granted and given by the Sea Apostolic. It shall be
lawful for noe man at all, to infringe or contradict, the tenure of this our
grant and exemptio^, if any man presume to attempt it, let him know that he
shall incurr the indignation of almighty God, and the blessed Apostles Peter
and Paul. Where we see all parsons in Britanie then, subject and subordinate
in spiritual jurisdiction, to the Pope of Rome.

And this testified by our Protestants themselves. ( Will. Lamb. in l. de leg.
Reg. in Legib: Edward^ fol. 126. Ingulph. histor. in fine.) Who go furher in
such things, and assure us from the common laws themselves of our ancient
kings S. Edward the confessor, and others, and confirmed by king William the
first, both as Ingulphus and out Protestant antiquaries acknowledge, that this
kingdom at that time, and kings thereof, did acknowledge as great power in the Sea of Rome in matters concerning this nation, as any catholic now may yield
unto it: for our ancient public laws warranted by our Protestants thus
Instruct us. ( Leges S. Eduardi titul. de iure and appendicijs coronae Regui
Britanniae. Guliel. Lamb. sup. p. 137.238. Hackluit book of travails, page
244.) Impetrauit temporibus illis Arthurus Rex a Domino Papa, a a Curia Romana,
quod confirmata sit Norweia in perpetuum coronae Britanniae, in augmentum Regni
huius, vocauitque illam Arthurus Cameram Britanniae. Hac vero de causa dicunt
Norwegienses se debere in regno isto cohabitare, and dicunt se esse de corpore
regni huius, scilicet de corona Britanniae. Thus in english by a Protestant
minister: king Arthur obtained in those days of the Pope, and Court of Rome,
that Norway should be for ever annexed to the crown of Britanie, for the
enlardgment of this kingdom, and he called it the chamber of Britanie. For
this cause the Norses say, that they ought, to dwell with us in this kingedome,
to wit. that they belong to the crown of Britanie.

And if we would be as little beholding to the Sea of Rome, for confirming
Norway to this kingedom, as to Pope Eleutherius before, to the Islands, and say
king Arthur claymed Norway, by a former Title, as De^marke was before, or
Iurebelli, as a conqueror, and the Pope did nothing, but confirm these, or
one of these Titles, it suffices to asscribe the judgment of that question to
the Sea Apostolic.

This seems to me, to confess and acknowledge great, and ample prerogative
in the Pope of Rome in spiritual matters, and directing also of temporal to a
spiritual end, as Catholics now attribute unto him, or he demand. And yett
we are by these Protestans (who freely acknowledge the Popes and church of
Rome then to have been holy) assured that the holy Pope and court of Rome, so
practiced it. That our king, Christianus optimus fuit, king Arthur was an
exceeding good christian, who sought, and accepted it, and both he the Bishop
and clergy and the whole kingedome so approved thereof, that it was by
public authority received for a law in this nation, and ratified both by our
Brita^s, Saxons, and Normans after them. For it is set down in this law
before, that from that time the Norses or Norwegians claymed privilege to be
free here, by those proceedings. Which is more plainly expressed afterward in
the same law in these words by Protestants translation: The people of Norvvay
may, and ought from henceforth, dwell, and remain in this kingdom, with us,
as our louinge and sworn Brethren. Qua de causa possint and debent praedicti
decaetero nobiscu^ cohabitare, and remanere in regno, sicut coniurate fratres
nostri (Guliel. Lamb. in leg. Eduardi sup. Richard. Hackluyt p. 245.) And the
motive whereupon the Pope then so proceeded, in annexing and confirminge the
kingdom of Norway to the crown of Britanie, seems to be the very same, the
spiritual good both of that contrie, this kingedome also, and the church of
God, in ordine ad spiritualia. Which the present Pope and Catholicque divines
allege ordinarily, for privileges of the Sea Apostolic, in such causes,
the spiritual good and help of all, or many, and hurt of none at all.

For besides many histories of those times so testifyinge, and to be passed
over, it is recorded in these very laws themselves so warranted by
Protestants and antiquities. ( Leges S. Edwardi supr. titul. de Iure and
Appendicijs.) Fuerunt gentes ferae, and indomitae, non habuerunt legem Dei, nec
proximi, fuerunt autem ibi Christiani occulte. Arthurus autem Christianus
optimus fuit, and fecit eos baptizari, and vnum Deum per totam Norweiam
venerari, and vnam fidem Christi semper inuiolatam custodire. caperunt vniuersi
proceres Norweia vxores suas de nobili gente Britonum tempore illo, vnde
Norwegienses dicunt se exijsse de gente, and sanguine regnihuius. They were
wild and barbarous nations. They had not the law of God, nor neighbor, but
there were Christians there secretly. But king Arthur was an exceeding good
Christian, and caused them to be baptized, and throughout all Norway to
worship one God, and to receive and keep the faith of Christ inuiolably, all
the noble men of Norway took wives of the noble nation of the Britans.
Whereupon the Norwegians say, that they are descended of the race and blood of
this kingedome. And then immediately follows that which is cited before: The
aforesaid king Arthur obtained in those days of the Pope and Court of Rome,
that Norway should be for ever annexed to the crown of Britanie. Whereby it
seems by these Protestants, the motive of the Pope to join Norway to the
crown of Britany, was the spiritual good of both kingdoms, and the church of
God, king Arthur so worthy a christian, having procured so strange and
happy an alteration in the kingedome of Norway; his victories there against the
barbarous giving free liberty and access to such christian preachers, as by
the Popes license, and allowance were directed thither. For S. Kentegern, made
Bishop by S. Palladius the Popes Legate, if we may believe the puritan
historian of Scotland: went seven times to Rome, and the Pope sent him to
perform the work of the ministry enjoined him by the holy ghost. Vir Dei
septies Romam adiens, sanctus Papa illum virum Dei and Spiritus sancti gratia
plenie intelligens, in opus ministerij a Spiritu sancto illi iniuncti
destinauit. Georg. Buchan. Rerum Scotic. l. 5. Rege 42. page 146. Ioh. Capgr.
in Catal. in S. Kentegerno.

And as our Protestants with others testify this Apostolic man, thus
warranted and privileged, sent of his disciples some to the Orchades, to
Norway, and Island, that they might receive the light of faith by their
instructions. For he had in his college at Elguel in Walls, three hundred,
sixty, and five learned men, always so prepared to preach. (Bal. l. de
Scriptor. centur. 1. in Kentegerno Elguensi. Cap. supr. eod. Hector Boeth.
Scot. hist. l. 9.) Ex discipulis suis quosdam ad Orchadas, ad Norwegiam and
Islandiam misit, vt eorum instructionibus fidei lumen reciperent, nam in
Elguensi collegio, trecentos and sexaginta quinque literatos viros ad id semper
paratos hahebat. And to add further to the honor of the Sea Apostolic of Rome,
by the example of this most blessed man S. Kentegern, he never being but an
ordinary Bishop sometimes in Walls, sometimes in Scotland, yett by the
privilege he had from the Popes of Rome in that kind, besides his labors
here in Britanie, Norway, and the remembered other places, to write in a
Protestant Bishops words. ( Ioh. Bal. centur. 1. in Kentegerno in Elguen.)
Formam primitiuae seruauit Ecclesiae, Apostolico more pedes ad praedicandum
porrexit, plaerosque ad fidem conuertit, Apostatas reuocauit, Pelagianos
ciecit, nondum renatos baptizauit, simulachra subuertit, Ecclesias construxit,
agrotis ministrauit, languores curauit, atque in magna vixit abstinentia,
praedicabat ad flumen vsque Fordense, and ad mare Scotium, Caledonos, Athalos,
Horestos ac vicinarum Albainae regionum Incolas, docendo, mouendo, hortando, ad
verae pietatis obseruationem instigauit. He kept the form of the primative
church, after the manner of the Apostles goinge on foot to preach, he
converted very many to the faith, recalled Apostats, cast forth Pelagians,
baptized those that wanted baptism, overthrew the Idols, builded churches,
ministered to the sick, cured diseases, and lived in great abstinence: he
preached even to the river of Fordune, and the Scottish See, he incited by
teaching, admonishinge, and exhortinge to the observation of true piety, the
Caldonia^s, Athals, Horests, and the inhabitants of the Regions near to
Albania. This holy Bishop being first Bishop of Glascow in Scotland, came into
Walls about the year of Christ 560 and there settled an episcopal See, he
being the first Bishop thereof by the river Elwy, and notwithstanding he was
at the first resisted therein by Malgo, or Malgocunus a British king in that
contry, yett his authority and power so prevailed, that to speak in a
Protestant Bishops phrase. ( Hector Boeth. hist. Scot. in Kentigern. Godwin.
Catalog. in Assaph. 1.

The king at last was content to allow the same church to be an episcopal
see, and moreover to bestow upon it, diverse Lordships, manners, immunities,
and privileges. Kentegern having stayed here some number of years gave over
his Bishopric unto a disciple of his named Assoph, a man of great virtue and
learning, who writ the life of his Master Kentegern; and besides that he was
disciple to so great a patron of the Apostolic Roman See, to give Evidence
that he himself was so also affected, notwithstanding there were then many
Bishops, and Archbishops also in Britanie, yett a Protestant Bishop writes. (
Bal. centur. 1. in Asapho.) a Pontificis Romani discipulis Angliam
aduentantibus, authoritate and vnctionem accepit. He received both authority
and consecration from the disciples of the Pope of Rome, that came into
England, and lived until the year of Christ 590. claruit anno a communis
salutis origin 590. Within four years of S. Augustines coming hither. Before
which time also and in this age S. Iuo a Persian by birth, and an holy
Archbishop, was sent by the Pope of Rome into this our Britanie or England,
together with Sithius his Nephew, Inthius his Kinsman, and others of whom the
Town yet called S. Iues in Huntington shire, where about he most lived took
the name, dyinge after many years in the year of Christ 600. or there about,
beeinge here long time by the Pope of Rome his mission before S. Gregory his
sendinge S. Augustine hither. John Capgrau. in S. Iuone. Flor. Wigorn. an. 600.
An^r. Leucand. and Got^elin. in vita eius.

Neither were our own Archbishops that lived in this age after S. Dubritius,
Vodinus and Sampson otherwise affected in this matter. First S. Sampson being
driven by the pagans from York, Pyramus, or Pyrannus, chapleyne to that great
friend of the Roman See, king Arthur was Archbishop there, conuocato Clero
and populo, with common consent, and consecrated by S. Dubricius the Popes
Legate, and primate here then, noe other being to consecrate him. ( Galfrid.
Monum. histor. Reg. Brit. lib. 9. cap. 8. Matthew. Westminster. an 522.) The immediate
successor to S. Dubricius, both in his legatine power from the Sea of Rome,
and primate Metropolitan here, in those times by common consent of writers,
Protestants and others was, (Godwyn. Catalog. in S. David's. 1.2. and Landaffe
1. Bal. centur. 1. in Dubrit and David. Capgrau. Catalog.) that glory of this
nation, S. David, to whom S. Dubritius resigned in his life, living as an
Exemite. Delicto Episcopatu eremiticam vitam elegit ac tenuit. S. David by his
legatine power translated the Archbishops See from Caerlegion, where it was
instituted by Pope Eleutherius, to Meneuia, S. David's, of this name, where it
after remained. ( in S. Dubrit. and S. David. Giral. Cambr. itinerar. Cambr.
Capgrau. in S. David.) We read of this our holy and learned Metropolitan,
that having expelled the Pelagian heresy, and restoringe the true faith,
Saint David was constituted Archbishop of all Britanie, and his city dedicated
the Metropolitan See of all the contry, see that whosoever should govern it,
should be Archbishop: Therefore all heresy being expelled, all the churches
of Britanie, received the manner and Rule by the Roman Authority, monasteries
or builded in all places, and S. David was made the highest protector,
chiefest preacher, from whom all received the Rule, and form of well
living. He was an order, correction, and imitation to all: learning to the
Readers, life to the needy, norishment to Orphans, a susteyner of the naked,
the head of the contry, a Rule to monks, life to seculars. Expulsa haeresi,
fides sanis pectoribus reboratur, and sanctus David totius Britanniae
Archiepiscopus constituitur, necnon ciuitas eius totius patriae Metropolis
dedicatur, ita vt quicumque eam regeret, Archiepiscopus foret. Expulsa itaque
haeresi, omnes Britanniae Ecclesiae modum and regulam Romana authoritate
acceperunt. Monasteria per loca construuntur, and sanctus David summus
protector, summus praedicator, a quo omnes normam atque formam recte viuendi
acceperunt, effectus est. Ipse cunctis or do, correctio, innitatio, legentibus
doctrina, egentibus vita, orphanis nutrimentum, nudis fulcimen, patriae caput,
monachis regula, secularibus vita fuit.

The Archbishop of London in this time, as our Protestants tell us. ( Matthew.
Parker. antiquitat. Brit. page 7. Godwyn. Catal. in London in Theonus. Stowe
histor. in Lucius. Holinsh. histor. of Engl. Matthew. Westminster. an. 586. Galfrid.
Monument. hist. i. 11. c. 10.) was Theonus, or Theanus, who taking the
chardge of London upon him the year 553. the year 586. he with Thadiorus
Bishop of York, taking their clergy, and relics of Saints, with them, get
them into Walls and Cornwall to the rest of their contrymen, whom the Saxons
had drovven thither. So that except these Protestants deceive themselves and
others, this Archbishop of London and Thadiorus of York also must needs be
of the same mind with the others before for the Roman spiritual power in this
nation; for these Protestants, ( Godwyn Catal. in S. David's 1.2.) telling us,
that S. Dubritius lived until the year of Christ 522. and S. David which
succeeded him, sat long, to wit 65. years, they both must needs be made
Bishops under him, and their flyinge into Walls and ioyneninge with the
Britans there, does planely convince, that they were of that opinion: for if
S. David was now dead, which cannot appear, yet most manifest it is, that
both S. Kentegern and S. Asaph, those most worthy Bishops chiefest then in
those parts, and all Britanie also, if S. David was dead, were long time
living and ruling after this, and yett such patrons of the Roman spiritual
power, with their whole clergy, as before is evidently proved by these
Protestants, that noe Catholic may yield more to the Sea of Rome in these,
then they did in those days. And if S. David was dead; yett the next
successors of him in that Archiepiscopall See, which were Cenauc and S. Teliaus
or Eliud, must needs also succeed him in that opinion of him toward the Roman
See: for though little is written of Bishop Cenauc, but only that he was
Bishop of Pattern and after successor to S. David in the Sea Archiepiscopall of
S. David's, this sufficiently conuinceth it, for the Bishopric of Pattern
being then under the jurisdiction of S. David, (...) cannot think that the
Bishop thereof was otherwise affected in this matter, then his so holy and
learned Metropolitan, to whom he owed obedience.

And his very being Archbishop of Meneuia immediately after S. David does prove
the same by these Protestants before, ( Godwyn. Catal. in S. David's. Girald.
Cambr. itiner. Cambr. antiquit. eccles. Meneuen. apud Godwyn. supr.) who have
told us, that by the power of the Roman See, Meneuia was made the Metropolis,
and this Bishop did not, nor could accept it in any other sense, or by other
Title, of S. Teliaus the matter is more manifest, more beeinge written of him
by Protestants and others, that he was Scholar to S. Dubritius the Popes
Legate, the undivided companion of S. David, in their holy pilgrimadge, not
only so far as Rome, but to Jerusalem it self where he was consecrated
Bishop, and after his return home, and the death of Cenauc, being Archbishop
of Meneuia, then had principality over all the churches of the west Britanie
unto the end of his life. Principatum super omnes ecclesias occidentalis
Britannia vsque ad ^em vitae sua tenuit. (Godwyn in Landaffe. Girald. Cambr.
Caius antiquit. Cantabrig. l. 1. page 146. Catal. Epis. Landaf. Ioh. Capgr. in
Catal in S. Thellao. Engl. Martyrol. die 25. November.) And was Archbishop
there at, and after also by some, the death of S. Augustine. For it is evident
by the British history, as it is allowed by our Protestants, and by their
own chronology of the kings of Britanie, that S. David himself lived within
16. years of S. Augustines coming hither. ( Galfrid. monum. histor. Reg. Brit.
l. 11. cap. 3.) Tunc obijt sanctissimus vrbis Legionum Archiepiscopus David
Meneuia ciuitate, intra Abbatiam suam, and iubente Malgone Venedotorum Rege in
eadem Ecclesia sepultus, pro eo ponitur in Metropolitana sede Kincos
Lampaternensis. Ecclesia Antistes, and ad altiorem dignitatem promouetur. Then
David the most holy Archbishop of the city of Legions, died in the city of
Meneuia within his own Abbey, and by command of Malgo king of North walls,
was buried in the same church Kincus (he which by others before is called
Cenauc) Bishopp of the church of Pattern, is placed in the Metropolitan See,
and promoted to an higher dignity. For as these Protestants, Matthew of
Westminster, and others are witnesses. (Protest. Catalog. Rer. Britan. in
Malgo. Matthew. West. an. 586 581.) this king began his Reign in the year of
Christ 581. or 580. so that by this calculation, there cannot be from the
death of S. David dyinge in this kings time, and the coming of S. Augustine
hither by all accounts in the year 596. above 15. or 16. years at the most.
So that we either must say, these two. Successor of S. David lived a very
short time, after they were called to that dignity (the contrary whereof is
set down before) or that S. Telaus this patron of the Sea of Rome, and a
canonized Saint of that church, was living in the time of S. Augustines
preaching in this kingedome.

Which is the more confirmed by all those histories, which relate the
opposition of some British Bishops and religions men against S. Augustine (
Bed. lib. 2. histor. cap. 2. Galfrid. mon. lib. 11. hist. Matthew. Westminster. an.
603. Capgran. in S. Augustino.) and speaking of an Archbishop of the city of
Legions, and yett not any one of them makes the least mention, that any
Archbishop did either resist S. Augustine, or pretend the least dislike of the
spiritual supreamacie in the Sea of Rome, or gainesay any order or decree of
the blessed Pope S. Gregory which sent him hither, nor any Protestants though
diverse of them name the Bishops as they conjecture which resisted S. Augustine,
( Matthew. Parker ant. Britan. in August. Godwyn. Conuers. of Brit. Stowe histor.
in Ethelb. Bal. l. de Act. Pont. Romans in Gregor. 1.) do once name S. Telaus,
or any Archiepiscopal See, at S. David's, or any other place in Walls at that
time, to have consented to that opposition.

Hardinge in his Cronicle makes this matter plain, that the Britans which
gainsaid S. Augustine did not deny the supreme spiritual power of the Pope of
Rome in Britanie at that time, but rather defended and maintained it, and
thereby also, as they thought, did justly refuse S. Augustine, for when he
demanded obedience of them thus they answered by this Author: Ioh. Hardinge
Chronicle cap. 88. in Ethelbert king of Saxons fol. 83.84.

To which Brito^s answered that they not knew
That he had such estate in all Britanie,
For they had three Archbishops, to obeyu,
Of Caerlion, London and York city
By Bishops of Rome granted to us and ordinate
Full long before ye had such dignity
Wherefore we will obey noe new primate
And specially none English new prelate,
For Englishmen and Saxons have us noyed,
And have our Land and all our kyn destroyed.
Where we see the Britans were so far from disallowinge the Popes Authority
in such things, that by the same they both claymed, and maintained the power,
and prerogatives, of three Archbishops, among them, now four hundred years
since

But these Protestants themselves with others acknowledge, that the most
renowned Bishops that were in this kingedome at that time, both received the
Authority of the Pope of Rome, and submitted themselves to S. Augustine his
holy Legate. Of the holiness and learning of S. Assaph, I have spoken before,
yett a Protestant Bishop says of him, ( Bal. centur. 1. in Assaph.) A Gregorij
Pontificis Romani discipulis Angliam aduentantibus, authoritatem accepit, he
received authority from the disciples of Gregory the Pope of Rome that came
into England. S. Asaph in the life of his Master S. Ke^tegern. Capgraue and
others after, affirm as much of S. Kentegern. ( S. Assaph and Ioh. Capgrau. in
vit. S Kentegerni.) that he did acknowledge this high power in S. Gregory the
Pope, and received power, and confirmation from him. All our histories with
general consent affirm the same of S. Lethardus, the french Bishop that lived
with Queen Bertha in Kent. I have proved the same of S. Iuo the Persian
Archbishop, that then preached in Huntington-shire. Of S. Telaus also the
Archbishop of Walls, sufficient is said already. And yet these were only the
chief holy, and learned Bishops here in that time, not any one comparable to
the meanest of these mentioned in any writer I can find, to have resisted
either the Popes ordinance, or his Legates authority.

And to satisfy a vain objection of some Protestant writers; That S.
Columbanus the holy Irish, or Scottish Abbot, whose authority some Britans in
the time of S. Augustine pretended for defense of their error in observing the
feast of Easter, and not presently submitting themselves to the command of the
church of Rome, it is evident by auntie^t histories, that both this S.
Columban, and the chiefest of them, submitted themselves wholly unto it, and
received both instruction and jurisdiction from thence. For it is testified in
a very old Manuscript cited by Surius, that both S. Kelian, which was the most
renowned of them, and that S Columbanus and S. Gallus, submitted themselves
with their associats to the Pope of Rome in all things at that time. Thus it
testifies of S. Kelia^, made Bishop of Herbypolis Wirtzburg in Franconia by
the Pope. ( Sur. in vit. S. Kel. M. S. peruetust. apud eund. supr.)
Praedicationi abstinuit, donec Romano se Pontifici praesentaret, quatenus apud
Romana^ sedem and integru^ christianae Religionis dogma, and licentia^
praedica^di acciperet. Hibernia siquidem olim Pelagiana faedata fuerat haeresi,
Apostolicaque censura damnata. He abstayned from preaching, until he
presented himself unto the Pope of Rome, that he might receive from the Sea
of Rome, both the sownd doctrine of Christian Religion, and license to preach.
For Irland (his contry) was auntiently defiled with the pelagian heresy, and
condemned by apostolic censure: and there shows how he had companions both
of his journey and submission, among others Saint Columbanus, and S. Gallus,
leaving the first in Italy, and the other in Almayne. The like has John
Capgraue, and a very old manuscript which he follows, if not the same with
that of Surius. ( Ioh. Capgrau. in S. Kilian. M. S. antiq. pr. gloriosissimus
Rex Eduardus in S. Kiliano.) In oppido orientalis Fraunciae quod Wirttzburch
eorum lingua dicitur, cum aliquo tempore sub silentio stetisset, Romam
profectus est, and officio praedicandi a Papa recepto, Episcopus ordinatus:
socijs eius Columbano scilicet in Italia, and Gallo in Almania remanentibus.
Saint Kilian stayed in a Town of east France, called in their languadge
Wirtzburch, and when he had been there some time in silence, he went to
Rome, and receiving from the Pope power to preach, and being ordained a
Bishop, returned, leaving his Companions, Columbanus in Italy, and Gallus in
Almayne. Where it is evident not only these Scottish Saints did not only
submitt themselves to the Pope in all matters both of doctrine and
jurisdiction, but the Pope at that time extended and exercised that his
supreme spiritual power, both in Italy, France, Almayne, Britain, and
Ireland, both to censure a whole nation, and to disable any to preach or
exercise spiritual function without his license.

And although the kings of Britanie after King Arthur even to the desolation
of the Britans, were by all histories even of their own as Gildas, Nennius,
the British history, and others, most wicked men, and such that by all
testimony of Protestants, and others, their kingedome was overthrown by God
for the sins of them, and their people, yett not any one of them by any
history did deny this power of the Sea Apostolic, but even their last king
Cadwalladar, as their own historian writteth. ( Gildas de excid. Britan.
Galfrid. mon. l. 11. histor. cap. 3.4.5.6.7.8. monum. histor.) being
admonished from heaven: Nolebat Deus Britones in Insula Britanniae diutius
regnare: that God would not have the Britans reign any any longer in the Island
of Britanie, went as he was admonished on pilgrimage to Rome, submitted
himself to Pope Sergius, and died an holy Saint, in so much that our
Protestants thus note of him. ( Galfrid. mon. l. 12. cap. 17.18. Bed. l. 4.
histor. and in Epitom. an. 688. Matthew. Westminster. an 688.689. Protest. annot. in
Matthew. Westminster. an. 688.) Regnum relinquens propter Deum, Romam venit: leauinge
his kingdom for gods sake, he went to Rome. An other says. ( Stowe histor in
Cadwallader.) Cadwallader forsakinge his kingely authority, went to Rome, who
after became a monk, and was buried in S. Peter's church at Rome, he was the
last king of Britanie, says Geffrey ( Galfrid. Mon. l. 11. cap. 12.) And for
the Archbishop of Walls to whom some British Bishops in the time of S.
Augustine said, they ought obedience, cum suum Archipraesulem haberent, there
is not the least color, or pretense of any title by these Protestants
themselves, how he or his See could be exempted from the Popes Authority:
for as these men have told us before, it was first instituted by Pope
Eleutherius, in the time of king Lucius, and by the succeedinge Popes and
their Legates here as is before declared, confirmed and ratified, they received
their Palle, the sign of an Archbishop from Rome, and after their union with
the Saxons and disciples of Pope Gregory, in the time of S. Theodore Archbishop
of Canterbury used it, and Archiepiscopall Authority in all degrees, and by
the Popes permission and allowance, five and twenty Archbishops successively
from S. David to Archbishop Sampson, and had seven Bishops subject unto them
until this Sampson, flyinge the contry in a time of sickness carried away the
Pall into little Britanie. Among many others a Protestant Bishop thus
relates this matter. Girald. Cambren. in Itinerar. Cambr. Antiquit. eccl. S.
David apud Godwin S. David. Matthew. Park. antiquit. Brit. Rog. Houeden. Godwin
Catalog. in S. David's in Sampsone.

In the time of Sampson the Sea of S. David had seven Bishops Suffragans
subject unto it, as the Antiquity of the church of S. David declares, to
wit, Exeter, Bathe, Hereford, Landaff, Bangor, S. Assaph, and Furnes in
Ireland. Roger Houeden, which I account more likely, reckons these,
Landaffe, Lanpatern in Cardigan shire, Bangor Saint Assaph, Chichester,
Hereford, and Worcester. While he was Bishop it happened the people of all that
contry were wonderfully vexed, with Ianudise, so as great numbers of them died
daily of that disease. By the importunity of his clergy and disciples, he
was induced to fly the contry, and sailed into Britanie, where the Bishopric
of Dola being void, he was straight way elected unto the same. He had
brought thither with him the Archiepiscopall Pall of S. David, and used it
duringe his life, as did also his successors there, for many years, until
they were compelled by the Pope, at the suite of the Archbishop of Turon, to
leave it, and make profession of obedience unto him, as in former times. By
this occa^on it fell out that the Successors of Sampson in Saint David's, what
for want of their Pall, or for poverty, or negligence, or some other occasion,
lost their Title of bishop, and to this day never recovered the same. Howbeit
they used all authority belonginge to an Archbishop by consecratinge of other
Bishops; and neither did they ever make profession of subjection unto
Canterbury until the time of Henry 1. King of England. ( Godwin supr. in
Bernard. 46.) When Bernard Chaplain unto King Henry the first, and
chancellor to his Queen, was consecrate by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Iulij 12. 1115. not chosen by the clergy of Walls as hitherto had been
accustomed, but forced upon them by the King of England. And there with others
declares, how this Bernard took upon him the title of Archbishop, but
Theobaldus Archbishop of Canterbury, prouinge before the Pope in the council
of Rhemes, by witnesses, cum suam fidem and obseruantiam cantuariensi
astrinxisse: that Bernard had promised obedience unto the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the cause was by the Pope adjudged against Bernard, and the Sea of
S. David. Match. West. an. 1115. Matthew. Par. an. 1115. Godwin. supr. Girald.
Lambr. in Itiner. Camb. and Topogr Harps. secul. 12. cap. 46.

So it is evident, that from the beginning thereof to the endinge of the same,
the Archiepiscopall See of Walls depended of the Pope of Rome, and it was not
he, but the Acts of their own Bishops, which overthrew the dignity and
privileges of it, which the Popes had granted and confirmed. Of the Popes
power here after the cominge of S. Augustine there is noe denial among
Protestants, all generally consentinge that from that time now above a thousand
years, the Popes supreamacy ever ruled here in spiritual things, he
changed the Metropolitone See of London to Canterbury, constituted that of
York, interdicted our universities, constituted Bishops in places as seemed
best to him, King Ethelbert changed his laws, and received the customs of
the Romans: cassatis paternis legibus, nouas Sapientum consilio iuxta Romanorum
consuetudines Anglorum sermon constituit. (Bal. centur. 1. in Ethelberto.) The
great flaterer of King Henry the eight, who first denied the Popes
supreamacy, and took it to himself, Polidor Vergil, speaks of that
parliament. ( Polidor Verg. l. 27. page 689) Habetur concilium Londini, in quo
ecclesia Anglicana formam potestatis nallis ante temporibus visam induit:
Henricus enim Rex caput ipsius ecclesiae constituitur. A parliament is held at
London, in which the church of England did put on a form of power, never seen
in any time before: for King Henry was made head of the church. The first
Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury speaking of the laws of that parliament
plainly confesses. ( Matthew. Parker. antiquit. Britan. in Tho. Cramner page
329.) His legibus potentia papalis quae nongentis amplius annis in Anglia
durauit facile concidit. By these laws the power of the Pope, which had
continued here in England above neyne hundred years, was easily overthrown.
The present Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, director to Francis Mason, and
he with others in their book of pretended consecration of Bishops, speaking
of the same Matthew Parker. ( Fran: Mason Book of consecrat. 3. cap. 4. page
131. vit. Matthew. Parkeri.) say: Concerning Archbishop Parker being the 70.
Archbishop after Austin, yett of all that number, he was the only man, and
the first of all, which received consecration without the Popes Bulls. To this,
this man himself, together with their Protestant Bishop, Godwin, Goceline and
others, in the lives of the Archbishops of England do plainly testify; to
this all antiquities and antiquaries agree, none dissenteth. Matthew. Parker in
antiq. Britan. Godwin Catalog. in Canterbury and York, Goceline in epist.

THE XI. CHAPTER. How by these Protestants the Britans and Scots which opposed
against S. Gregory's disciples, did take upon then greater or as ample power in
Princes matters, as ever the Popes of Rome or their Legates did in this
kingedome.
BEcause our Protestant Antiquaries and writers of England do with a common
consent agree in this, that the Britans at the coming of S. Augustine hither,
from S. Gregory, did truly and inuiolably keep in all points that holy
Religion which was planted here in the Apostles time, especially they which at
the first opposed against the proceedings of that our holy Apostles. ( Matthew.
Park. antiq. Britan. page 1. Godwin Conuers. page 43.44. Bal. l. 2. de Act.
Pont. Romans in Gregor. 1. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. cap. 9. David Povvel. in
annot. in l. 2. Girald. Cambr. Itiner. Cambr. c. 1. Holinsh. histor. of Engl.
cap. 21. page 102. Fulk. Ansvv. to a count. cath. page 40.) therefore to walk
still by their directions, let us now learn of them, what was the opinion and
practice of those Scots, and Britrans in this question of Jurisdiction in
spiritual Rulers, claimed and derived from whomesoeuer they will, or any of
them shall please, though it is evidently proved in all ages before, that never
any such was practiced here, but that which was derived and approved from, and
by the Apostolic Roman See. And we shall plainly see, that these their so
much by them commended gayne-saiers to S Augustine, and the Pope also, as many
of these men contend, did further intermeddle with Princes and temporal
affairs, then the Popes of Rome, or any their Legates in this kingedome: our
Protestant Antiquaries with others, write of King Frequahard or Frechard the
first of Scotland son to Eugenius, in this manner. Hect. Boeth. lib 9. fol.
179. page 1. Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scotic. lib. 5. Reg. 52. page 160. Holinsh.
histor. of Scotand in Frequahard page 112.

Frequahard besides other his wicked behauiours, was also infected with the
erroneous opinion of the Pelagian heresy. Which suspicion was the more
increased, for that he used to have sundry British priests in his company:
the which nation had been ever noted with the spot of that damnable
infection. The nobility of the Realm moved herevvith sommoned him to come to
a council, which they had appointed to hold of all the states, that they
might there understand, if it were true or not, which was commonly reported
of him. But he refusinge to come, they assembled together, and beseiged him in
a castle, wherein he had enclosed himself, and vvinning the place, got him
into their hands, and immediately thereuppon committed him to safe keepinge.
This done they consult together for the administration of the Realm, whether
they should quite depose Frequahard, or restore him to his place. Then it
followerh how they deposed him, and sent to S. Fiacre his Brother then an
Eremite in France, to govern the kingedome, but he refused it. Then these
Protestants add. ( Holinsh. and Buch. supr. and Hect. Boeth. supr.) The Lords
of the land assembled themselves together in Argile, about the choosinge of a
new king, where by common consent, Domoald the third son of Eugenius
being called thither with Bishop Conan, out of the I Will of Man, was invested
king with great joy, and triumph.

Where we see that S. Fiacre though next heir living in France, where the
Popes Authority was generally embraced, would not consent to the deposition of
king Frequahard, to gain a kingedome, when his Brother Domoald and all those
Scots which by these Protestants then opposed against the Popes Authority,
performed this with great Joy and triumph. Of king Frequahard the second they
write in this order. ( Holinsh. histor. of Scotl. page 114. Buchan. Rer.
Scoticar. l. 5. Reg. 54.) He was covetous, wicked toward God, a Tormentor of
the just and righteous people, insatiable in all unlawful affections, such of
the prelates, as he understood to be wealthy, he rested not till he had
picked one matter, or other unto them, whereby they were suer to forfeite all
their Treasure unto his coffers. Buchanan adds, which I am ashamed to
translate. ( Buchan. supr.) Eandem in suos furorem vertit, Iugulata vxore, and
stupratis filiabus, ob haec scelera communione christianoru^ fuit exclusus. For
these wicked offenses he was excluded from the communion of Christians. (
Holinsh. supr.) The Bishops of the Realm, namely those two reverend Fathers,
Colman, and Finnan perceyuinge such wickedness in the prince, blamed him sharply
sundry times for the same: and at length because they savv he regarded not
their admonishments, he was by them excommunicated. Thus continuinge certain
years in his wickedness, at length the nobles began to conspire against him,
so that they would have devised a mean how to have ridd him out of the
way, if Bishop Colman, had not forbidd them that practice. Then follows how
being miserably punished for his sins, and beeinge at the last penitent, he
was absolved of his excommunication by the same Bishop Colman: who was that
great opposer against the disciples of Saint Gregory, and Saint Augustine, and
disputant for the Scots against S. Wilfride.

And the Bishops of Walls which were in the same opposition to the disciples
of S. Gregory the Pope, were in the same case by these Protestants: One a
Bishop and antiquary among them writes, from the ancient antiquities of that
nation. ( Godvvin Catalog. in Landaff. Annal. eccles. Landaffen: in Oudoceus.
3.) King Morcant having killed one Frioc his Uncle, beeinge therefore
excommunicate by the Bishop, upon his absolution, besides a grant of diverse
privileges unto the church of Landaff, gave Cyncirill and certain land called
Cynfall, as also the churches of Ythat-Haffern. ( In Guruan. 10.) Bishop
Guruan excommunicated Tendur king of Brechinianc, for killing Engistill a king
of that contry trecherously, and for absolutio^ had from him the gift of
Lannihangel tref. ceria^c. Guoderec slew his own Brother Merchion. ( In
Greciclus.) for which deed, he was by Bishop Grecielus excommunicate, and
enjoined by way of penance before he might be absolved, to spend a year in
pilgrimadge to the church of Dola in little Brittanie. Garcan the son of
Guina^ ( In Berthygion 14.) kept his own stepmother, and being excommunicate
for that Incest, gave to the Bishop Marchywis. ( In Bish. Cerenhir 18.) Houel
King of Glewissig by perjury circu^uented Gallu^ the son of Cidrich, for
which he was held under excommunication, by the space of a year, at the time
of his absolution he gave Merthir-buceil, Merthirminor, and Tircollan. Like
was the case of Ili the son of Conblus who upon the like occasion gave
Gulipe. Aquod son of Ioua falling out with the Bishop, drove him and his men
into the church of Landaff, and threw stones at them into the very church, for
so doing he was excommunicate, and to be absolved, was glad to give
Pennoun, with the church of Lautilul, and certain other Lands. ( In Bish.
Joseph. 28.) Monric King of Glamorgan beeinge excommunicate for puttinge out
the eyes of Ergum, the son of Guriat of Gueinscot in the time of a truce, to
have his absolution gave Painiprisc.

Who desires more of such proceedings by the Britans, so recommended by
Protestants, may enquire the^ in the ancient Annals of Landaffe, and this
Protestant Bishop Francis Godwin, Protestant Bishop there, who in his treatise
of that See, is very plentiful in such Examples. And this shall suffice for
this short history of the Popes preeminence and proceedings here, from the
beginning of our first faith in Christ, by them and their happy instruments
therein. By whom, and whose preeminence spiritual, this kingdom from that
time, has received many great and irrecomprehensible graces and benefits,
both spiritual and temporal, to bind us everlastingly to honor and reverence,
with all duty, that Apostolic See, and chiefest pastors thereof, successors to
our most glorious first Fathers and founders in the faith of Christ, and our
chief Sheephards on earth, except we will desperately run away and cast our
selves out of the blessed flock and fold of the militant church of God, out of
which there is noe salvation.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 42. line 1. distributor, read, distribution page 52. line 19. there
nowned, read, the renowned. page 153. line 19. this, read, these.

AN ADVETISEMENT. Whereas in the first hundred year it is as suppose written
in the story of S. Mansuetus, that Ireland was never plainly called Scotia, I
wish it thus to be qualified. page 34.
For if we grant as some few write, that Ireland has been called Scotia, or
Scotia Mayor, Scotland, or the greater Scotland, yett that is very seldom
found in histories, but it is commonly called in them ancient and late,
Hibernia, Iuernia, Inuernia, and Ierne, Iris, and Ogigia little Brittanie, and
by the Irish themselves, Erin, when the part of great Britanie, after the name
of Albania ceased, is commonly in all historians named Scotia, Scotland.
Aristotil. l. de mundo Pompon. Mela l. 3. Solinus Poly. histor. c. 25. Strab.
l. 4. Iuuenal. Satyr. 2. Claudian. l. 7. Stangh. Hunfrid. Lhuid. Stow Holinsh^^
hist. Hect. Boeth. Buchan. Capgr. in Catalog. ^ Gryimst. in Ireland.


