SERMONS UPON THE SACRAment of the Lords Supper: PREACHED IN THE KIRK OF
EDINBVRGH BE M. ROBERT BRVCE, MINISTER OF CHRIST'S Euangel there: at the time
of the celebration of the Supper, as they were received from his mouth.

JOHN. 6. 54. 63. Quhasaeuer eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has
eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. It is the Spirit that
quikneth, the flesh profits nathing, the words that I speak unto ou, are
Spirit and life. AT EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY ROBERT WALDEgraue, Printer to the
Kings Majesty.

Cum Priuilegio Regali.

IN MY DEFENC GOD ME DEFEND

royal blazon or coat of arms

TO THE MAY HIGH, PVISSANT, AND CHRISTIAN Prince, JAMES the sixth, King of
Scots: grace and peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
PLease our Majesty, Iwes not of mind at the first, that this warkesuld have
commed out in my time: For the conscience of my awn weakness, testifies unto me,
that nathing worthy of light can proceed from sik a ane: it notwithstanding,
being overcome at the last, be the instant suit of our Kirk and Session, Iwes
content, that their authority should command me in this. And gifit sall please
the Lord to bless it, in sick sort, that poor and simple anes* may find,
ather comfort or instructioun in it: suppose learned ears find na
conteniment, I will think my self abundantly satisfied: For seeing God hes
sanctified me in some measure to his warke, it mann be an argument of his
everlasting blessing, that giff, quhill life lasts, it may be employed always
to the profit of his Kirk: For quha am I, that should not employ his awin
graces to his awin glory? and I pray God, that it may be found in that great
day, that how mean that ever they be, it they were accompanied with this
special grace, that they were well used. And suppose ee be ane King, Sir, of
this kingdoome presently, and Apparent of anevther: it think with our self,
that all our magnificence, honor, wealth, liberty, and all the rare gifts,
quhilk God of his mercy hes planted in ou, cannot be vtherwayis weill
employed, except they be employed to the defense of the truth, and of that
pure and sincere discipline, grounded thereupon: quhilk to our Majesty's great
praise, and to our singular comfort, hes this lang time, be our M. authority
been established in this Country: For this sort of doing shawes, that God hes
not only made ou an heir to earthly kingdoms, but also hes appointed ou, to
be ane fellow* heir with Jesus Christ, of that immortal kingdom, and glorious
Crown, that cannot fade or fall away. And as our M. life and liberty, hes
hithertils been conjoined, with the standing and liberty of Jesus Christ's
kingdom with in our Country: continue and stick be this liberty: and, na
doubt, Jesus Christ sal stick be ou. I will not fash our M. with money words:
only this I do our M. to wit, that I cleeth not this warke with our M. name
and authority, for onie worthiness that I thought to be in it* for it is
rudely set out, in sensible and hamelie terms, as it was receued of my mouth,
and as it pleased GOD for the time to give me it: But I had this respect, that
as it is the first thing that proceds from me: sa I thought meet, to make it
the first testimony of my thankfulness and sincere affection, als weill to the
truth of God, as to our M. service: quhome under God, I tender as mine awn
life: and wald be glad, that God wald bliss me with they moyans, that might
advance our highness name or estimation, both here in this present world, and
in the world to come. And in the mean time, because I may not as I wald, I sall
do as I may, in my prayers continually remember our royal persoun, together
with the Queen our bedfelow: and crave continuance of our race, at the hands
of the almighty God, through the righteous merits of Jesus Christ: under quhais
protection, for now and ever, I leave our Majesty. From Edinburgh, the 9. of
December. 1590.

our Majesty's may humble and obedient subject: M. ROBERT BRVCE, Minister of
Christ's Euangell.

THE FIRST SERMON, UPON THE SACRAMENTS IN General: Preached the first of
February. 1589.
1. COR. 11. 23. For I have received of the Lord, that which I also have
delivered unto ou, to wit, that the Lord Jesus, in the night that he was
betrayed, took bread, etc.
THEIR is nathing in this world, nor out of this world, mair to be wished of
every ane of ou, mair to be craved and sought of every ane of ou; nor to be
co^joyned with Christ Jesus, nor anis to be maid ane with the God of glory,
Christ Jesus. This heavenly and celestial conjunction is purchased and brought
about, be two special means: It is brought about be the mean of the word, and
preaching of the gospel: and it is brought about be the mean of the
Sacraments and ministration thairof. The word leads us to christ be the ear:
the sacraments leads us to Christ be the eye; Two senses of all the rest, quhilk
God hes chosen, as may meet for this purpose to instruct us, and bring us to
Christ. For that doctrine mann be may effectual and moving, that walkens and
steirs up moniest of the outward senses: that doctrine that walkens not only
the ear, bot the eye, the taist, the feeling, and all the rest of the outward
senses, mann move the heart may, mann be may effectual and pearcing in the
saul: Bot sa it is, that this doctrine of the Sacraments mouis, steirs up, and
walkins moniest of the outward senses; Therefore it mann be (gif we cum weil
prepared to it) may effectual to steir up the inward senses of the dull heart.
But their is a thing, that ee mann ever remember; Their is na doctrine, nather
of the simple word, nor it of the sacraments, gif Christ abstract his haly
Spirit, that is able to move. Therefore, quhen ever e come to hear the doctrine,
quhider it be of the Sacraments, or of the simple word: crave of God, that he
wald be present be his haly Spirit, or vtherwais all the doctrine in the earth
will not avail ou. Always, this doctrine of the Sacraments, steires up, and
walkens moniest of the outward senses, and therefore there is na questioun, but
it is ane effectual and potent instrument to walken, prepare and steir up our
hearts.

Then to lat ou see, quhat the word Sacrament meanis: and to remove the The
diverse taking of the word Sacrament.
ambiguitie of it; It is certain, and out of all questioun, that the Latin
Theologs, quha were may ancient, did interpret the Greek word (...), be
the word Sacrament, and they used the greek word, not only to signify the
hail action, as the hail action of Baptism, and the hail action of the Supper
of the Lord: but they used the word mystery, to signify quhatsoeuer is dark,
and hid in it self, and not frequented in the commoun use of men: as after this
manner, the Apostle Ephesians. 39
callis the vocation of the Gentiles a mystery. Ephesians. 5. 32
This conjunction quhilk is begun heir betwixt us and Christ, is called a
Mystery, and the Latin interpreters, callis it a Sacrament, and to be
schort, ee will not find in the book of God, a word mair frequent, nor the
word Mystery. But as to the word Sacrament, quhairby they signify the Greek
word, we find not this word be the same Theologs to be taken sa largely:
nather is it taken sa largely in any pairt of the book of God. Alwayis, the
word Sacrament, is very ambiguous in it self, and there raise about the
ambiguitie of this word, many tragedeis, quhilke are not it ceased, nor will not
cease, quhil the world lasts: quher vtherwais, gif they had kept the Apostles
words, and called them as the Apostle callis tham, signs and seals: all this
digladiatioun, strife and contention, appearandly had not fallen out. But
quhere men will be wiser nor God, and give namis to things beside God, upon
the wit of man, quhilk is but mere folly: all this cummer fallis out. Weill
than, to come to the purpose. The ancient Theologs, took the word Sacrament,
as we may perceive, in a fourfauld manner. Sometime they took it for the hail
actioun, that is, for the haill ministry of the Elements. Sometime, they took
it not for the haill actioun: but for the outward things, that are used in the
action of Baptism, and of the Supper, as they took it, for the water and
sprinckling of it: for the Bread and Wine, breaking, distributing, and eating
thereof. Thirdly again: they took it not for the hail outward things, that are
used in the actioun; but only for the material and earthly things, the
Elements: as for Bread and Wine in the Supper, and water in Baptism. And after
this sort, sayis AUGUSTINE: The wicked eats the body of our Lord, concerning
the Sacrament only, that is, concerning the Elements only. Last of all: they
took it not only for the Elements, but for the things signified be the
elements. And after this manner, IRENEE sayis, that a Sacrament sta^ds of two
things, the ane earthly, the other heavenly. The ancients then, taking the
word after their sorts, na question, all their wayis they took it rightly.

But leuing the ambiguitie of the word, I take the word Sacrament, as it is
taken and used this day in the Kirk of God, for a haly sign and seal, that is
annexed to the preached word of God, to seal up and confirm the truth,
contained in the same word, in sick sort, that I call not only the seal
separated fra the word, a Sacrament: For as there cannot be a seal, but that
quhilk is the seal of ane evident, and gif the seal be separated fra the
evident, it is not a seal; Bot look quhat it is be nature, it is na mair: sa
there can not be a Sacrament, except it be hung to the evident of the word; Bot
look what the Sacrament was be nature, it is na mair. Was it a com mo^ piece
bread, it remains common bread except it be hung to the evident of the word.
Therefore the word only cannot be a Sacrament; nor the eleme^t only cannot be a
Sacrament; bot word and element con iunctly man make a Sacrament: and sa
AVGYSTINE said weill, lat the word come to the element, and sa e sal have a
sacrament: in sick sort, that the word mann come to the element, that is the
word preached distinctly, and all the parts of it opned up, man ga before the
hinging to of the sacrament, and the Sacrament, as a seal mann follow and be
appended therefter. Then I call a Sacrament, the word and seal coniunctlie, the
ane hung to the other.

It is without all controversy, and there is na debait in it, that all
Sacraments are signs. Now gif a Sacrament be asign, as the sign is in a
relation, in that Category; for saw man speak it: Sa the sacrament man be
placed in that same Categorie of relation. Now every relation again man stand
of force betwixt two things, for an thing cannot be the correlatiue of it self:
but in a lawful relatioun, of force there man be two things, quhilk two, hes
ever a mutual respect, the ane to the other. Therefore in every sacrament that
hes a relation, their man be two things, quhilk two hes ever a mutual respect
the an to the other. Take me away ane of their two things fra the Sacrament; e
tine the relation, and tyning the relation, e tyne the Sacrament. Confound me
ane of their two, with the other: make ather a confusion or permixion of tham, e
tine the relation, and tyning the relation, e tine the sacrament. Turn me over
the an into the other, sa that the substance of the ane, starts up and
euanishis in the other: e tyne the relation, and sa e tyne the Sacrament. Than
as in every sacrament, there is a relation, sa to keep the relation, e man ever
keep two things severally in the Sacrament.

Now for the better consideration and understanding of their two diverse things
quhilk are relative to vthers, we sal keep The heads to be entreted in this
Sermon.
this ordour by Godis grace: First, we sal lat ou see, quhat is meaned be a
sign in the Sacrament. Nixt we sal let ou understand 1
quhat is meaned be the thing signified. 2
Thirdly, how their two are coupled, 3
be quhat power and virtue they are 4
conjoined, and quherfra this power and virtue dois flow. Fourtlie, and last
of al; we sall let ou understand, quhither ane and the self same instrument,
geuis the sign and the thing signified or not, quhither they be geuin in ane
actioun or two, quhither they be offered to ane instrument or two, or gif they
be given after a manner or two to both the instruments. Mark their diversities,
the diverse manner of receiving, the diversity of the instruments, and the
diversity of the geuaris: and ee sall find little difficulty in the sacrament.

Now to begin at the signs: Seeing all 1
sacraments ar signs, quhat call we the The signs in the Sacrament.
signs in the sacrament? I call the signs in the Sacrament, quhatsoeuer I
perceive and takis up be my outward senses, be mine eye especially. Now ee
see in this Sacrament, there is two sorts of thing is subject to the outward
senses, and to the eye especially; e see the elements of bread and wine are
subject to mine eye: Therefore they man be signs. e see again, that the rites
and ceremonies quhereby their elements are distributed, broken and given, are
subject to mine eye also. Then I mann make two sorts of signs, ane sort of
the bread and the wine, and we call them elementall: ane other sort of the
rites and ceremonies, quhereby their are distributed, broken and given, and we
call them ceremonial. Be not deceived with the word ceremony, think not,
suppose I call the breaking of the bread, the eating of the bread, and
drinking of the wine ceremonies, think not that they are vayn, as ee use that
word ceremony for a vain thing, quhilk hes na grace, nor profit following
after it: na, suppose I call them ceremonies, there is never a ceremony quhilk
Christ instituted in this supper, but it is als essential as the bread and the
wine are, and ee cannot leave a jote of them, except e pervert the hail
institutioun. For quhat ever Christ commanded to be done, quhat ever he spoke
or did in that hail actioun, it is essential and mann be done, and e cannot
leave a jote thereof, but ee will pervert the hail actioun.

The reasoun, quherefore I call them Quhy they are called signs.
signs, is this: I call them not signs, be that reason that men commonly
call is them signs: because they signify only, as the bread signifies the
body of Christ, and the wine signifies the blood of Christ. I call them not
signs, because they represent only, but I call them signs because they have
the body and blood of Christ conjoined with them, ee sa truly is the body of
Christ conjoined with that bread, and the blood of Christ conjoined with that
wine, that als soon as thou receauis that bread in thy mouth, (gif thou be a
faithful man or woman) als sone thou receuest the body of Christ in thy saull,
and that be faith. And als soon as thou receauis that wine in thy mouth, als
sone thou receauis the blood of Christ in thy saul, and that be faith. In
respect of this exhibitioun cheiflie, that they are instruments to deliver, and
exhibit the thing that they signify, and not in respect only of there
representatioun, they are called signs. For gif they did nathing bot
represented or signified a thing absent; Then any picture or dead Image, should
be a Sacrament: For there is na Picture, as the Picture of the King, but at the
sight of the Picture, the King will come in our mind, and it will signify to
ou, that that is the Kings Picture. Sa, gif the sign of the Sacrament did na
further; all Pictures should be Sacraments; but in respect the Sacrament
exhibites and delivers the thing that it signifies to the saul and heart, sa
sone as the sign is delivered to the mouth: for this cause especially, it is
called a sign. There is na Picture of the King, that will deliver the King
unto ou: there is na other Image that will exhibit the thing quhair of it is
the Image: therefore, there is na Image can be a Sacrament. Then in respect,
the Lord hes appointed the Sacraments, as hands to deliver and exhibit the
thing signified: for this delivery and exhibitioun chiefly, they are called
signs. As the word of the Euangell is a mighty and potent instrument to our
everlasting saluatioun: sa the Sacrament, is a potent instrument appointed be
God, to deliver to us Christ Jesus, to our everlasting saluatioun. For this
spiritual meat is dressed, and given up to us in spiritual disches, that
is, in the Ministry of the word, and in the ministry of the Sacraments. And
suppose this Ministry be external, it the Lord is said, to deliver spiritual
and heavenly things, be their external things: Quhy? Because he hes appointed
them as instruments, quhairby, he will deliver his awin Sone to us. For this is
certain, that nane hes power to deliver Christ Jesus to us, except God and his
halie Spirit: and therefore, to speak properly, there is nane can deliver
Christ bot God be his awin Spirit: he is delivered be the Ministry of the
halie Spirit: it is the halie Spirit that seals him up in our hearts, and
confirmis us mair and mair in him: as the Apostle geuis him this style 2. COR.
1. 22. To speak properly: there is nane hes power to deliver Christ, bot God
the father, or himself: there is nane hes power to deliver the Mediator, bot
his awin Spirit: it it hes pleased God to use sum instruments and meanis,
quhairby he will deliver Christ Jesus to us: the means are their: the ministry
of the word and the ministry of the Sacraments: and in respect he uses their
as meanis to deliver Christ, they are said to deliver him. But heir ee have to
distinguish, betwixt the principal efficient deliverer, and the isntrumental
efficient, quhilk is the word and the Sacraments: Keeping this distinction,
both their are true, God be his word, and God be his Spirit, delivers Christ
Jesus to ou. Then I say, I call tham signs, because God hes maid them potent
instrumentis to deliver that same thing quhilk they signify.

Now I ga to the thing signified, and I call the thing signified be the
signs in the Sacrament, that quhilk IRENEE, that auld writer, call is the
heavenly and spiritual thing, to wit: haill Christ, with his hail gifts,
benefits and graces, applied and given to my saul. Then I call not the 2
thing signified be the signs of bread and Quhat is the thing signified in the
Sacrament.
wine: the benefits of Christ, the graces of Christ, or the virtue that flowis
out of Christ only; But I call the thing signified, togidder with the benefits
and virtues flowing fra him, the very substance of Christ himself; quherefra
this virtue dois flow: The substance, with the virtues, gifts and graces, that
flows fra the substance, ar the thing signified here. For as to the virtue
and graces, that flows fra Christ: It is not possible, that thou can be
partaker of the virtue, that flows fra his substance, except thou be first
partaker of the substance it self: For how is it possible, that I can be
partaker of the juice that flows out of any substance, except I be partaker
of the substance it self first. Is it possible that my stomach can be
refreshed with that meat, the substance quhairof, come never in my mouth? Is
it possible, that my drouth can be slokned with that drink, that passed never
over my halse? Is it possible, that I can sowck any virtue out of onye thing,
except I get the substance first: Sa it is impossible, that I can get the juice
and virtue, that flows out of Christ, except I get the substance, that is,
himself first. Sa I call not the thing signified, the grace and virtue that
flows fra Christ only, nor Christ himself and his substance, without his
virtue and graces only: But jointly the substance with the graces, haill
Christ, GOD and man, without separatioun of his natures, without discretioun of
his substance fra his graces, I call the thing signified, be the signs in
the Sacrament. For quhy? Gif na mair be signified be the bread, bot the
flesch and body of Christ only, and na mair be signified be the wine, but
the blood of Christ only, thou can not say, that the body of Christ is
Christ, it is but a cowpon of Christ: thou cannot say that the blud of Christ,
is hail Christ, it is bot a part of him, and a cowpo^ of thy Savior, saved
thee not, a part of thy savior wroght not the wark of thy salvation: and sa
suppose thou get a cowpon of him in the sacrament, that cowpoun wald do thee na
good. To the end therefore, that this sacrament may nurish thee to life
everlasting; thou man get in it thy haill Savior, haill Christ God and man,
with his haill graces and benefits, without separation of his substance fra his
graces, or of the ane nature fra the other. And how get I him? Not be my mouth.
It is a vain thing to think, that we will get God be our mouth: but we get
him be faith: As he is a Spirit, sa I eat him be faith and belief in my saul:
Not be the teeth of my mouth, that is a vain thing. I give the, that thou
might eat the flesh of Christ with thy teeth, and this were a cruel manner of
doing: it thou may not eat the God head with thy teeth: this is a gross
faschioun of speaking. Sa, gif ever e get good of the Sacrament, ee mann get
haill Christ, and there is not ane instrument to gripp him, bot be faith
only: therefore come with a faithful heart.

O! but e will speere at me, and appearandlie the definitioun laid down of the
thing signified, gives a ground to it; gif the flesch of Christ, and the blood
of Christ be a pairt of the thing signified: how can I call his flesche a
spiritual and heavenly Question.
thing, and Christ in respect of his flesche a heavenly thing? e will not say
that the substance of Christ's flesch is spiritual: or that the substance of
his blood is spiritual, quherefore then call e it ane heavenly and spiritual
thing? I will tell ou: the, flesch of Christ is called a spiritual thing, and
Christ is called spiritual, in respect of his flesh, not that his flesh is
becomd a spirit, or that the substance of his flesh is becomd spiritual: Na,
it remaned true flesh and the substance of it is ane; as it was in the womb
of the virgin, his flesh is not called spiritual nather, in respect it is
glorified in the heavens at the right hand of the father: be not deceived with
that, for suppose it be glorified; it it remains true flesh, that same flesh
quhilk he took out of the womb of the Virgin. It is not spiritual nather,
because thou seeis it not in the Supper, gif thou war quhere it is, thou might
see it: but it is called spiritual, in respect of the spiritual end,
quherunto it seruis to my body and saul: Answer.
because the flesch and blood of Christ, seruis to nurish me; not to a
temporal life: but to a spiritual and heavenly life. Now, in respect this
flesh is a spiritual food, serving me to a spiritual life; For this cause it
is called a spiritual thing. Gif it nurished me, as the flesh of beasts dois,
but to a temporal life, it should be called but a temporal thing: But in
respect, it nurishes my saull, not to ane earthly and temporal life, but to
ane heavenly, celestial, and spiritual end: In respect of this end, the flesh
of Christ, and Christ in respect of his flesh, is called the spiritual thing
in the Sacrament. It is called also, the spiritual thing in the Sacrament, in
respect of the spiritual instrument, quherby it is received. The instrument
quhereby the flesh of Christ is received, is not a corporal instrument, is not
the teeth and mouth of the body; but it is spiritual, it is the mouth of the
saull, quhilk is faith: and in respect the instrument is spiritual: Therefore
Christ, quha is received, is also called spiritual. In respect also, that the
manner of receiving, is a heavenly, spiritual and celestial manner, not a
natural, nor external manner, in respect that the flesh of Christ, quhilk is
given in the Sacrament, is received be a spiritual and secreet manner, quhilk
is not seen to the eyes of men. In all their respects, I call Christ Jesus the
heavenly and spiritual thing, quhilk is signified be the signs in the
Sacrament.

Now: I say in the end, the thing signified ^he thing ^gnified, ^an be ap^^ied.
mann be applied to us. Quhat auails it me, to see my health in a buist,
standing in ane Apothecaries booth? quhat can it work toward me, gif it be
not applied? Quhat auails it me, to see my saluatioun afar off, gif it be not
applied to me? Therefore it is not aneugh to us to see Christ: bot he mann be
given us; or else he cannot work health and salvation in us. And as this
saluatioun is given us; we mann have a mouth to take it. Quhat auails it me to
see meat before me; except I have a mouth to take it? Sa, the thing signified
in the Sacrament, mann be given us be God, be the three persons of the
Trinity, a God, be Christ lesus, quha mann give himself, and as he gives
himself; sa we man have a mouth to take him. Suppose he presents and offers
him self: it he can profit or avail nane, but them, quha hes a mouth to
receive him. Then ee see, quhat I call the thing signified: haill Christ
applied to us, and received be us: hail Christ God and man, without separatioun
of his natures, without discretioun of his substance fra his graces, all
applied to us. Then I say, seeing we come to the Sacrament, to be fed be his
flesh, and refreshed be his blood, to be fed to ane heavenly and spiritual
life: and seeing there is na profit to be had of this Table, without some
kind of preparatioun: Therefore lat na man prease to ga to that halie Table,
except in some measure he be prepared. Some will be prepared in a greater
measure the^ vthers. Alwayis, lat na man presume to ga to it, except in some
measure his heart be sanctified. Therefore my exhortation concerning the way,
quhairby every ane of ou ought to prepare our selfis, that e may dress ou the
better to the table, is this: There is never ane of ou, that comes to the Table
of the Lord, to cast before the Lord, our integrity, justice and vprightnes:
But quhasoeuer gais to the Table, he ought to ga with the acknowledging and
confessioun of his misery: he ought to ga with a sorrowful heart, for the
sins quhairin he hes offended God: he ought to ga with a haitrent of they
sins; not to protest, that he is halie, just, and upright: But to protest and
confess* that he is miserable, and of all creatures, the may miserable. And
therefore, he gais to that table, to get support for his misery, to get a
gripp of mercy at the throne of grace: and to get remissioun and forgiveness of
his sins; to get the gift of repentance, that mair and mair, he may study to
live vprightlie, halilie and soberlie in all time coming. Therefore, except ee
have entered in this course, and are of purpose to continue in this course, to
amend your life bigane, to repent ou of our sins, and be the grace of God, to
live mair vprightlie and soberlie, nor ee have done, for Gods cause ga not to
the Table. For quhere there is not a purpose to do weil and to repent, of
necessity, there mann be a purpose to do ill: and quhasoeuer coms to that
Table, with a purpose to do ill, and without a purpose to repent: he comes to
mock Christ; to skorne him in his face, and to eat his awin present
conde^natio^. Sa, lat na man come to that table, that hes not in his heart a
purpose to do better: that hes not a heart to sorrow for his sins bigane: and
thinks not his bigane folly and madness over meekle. Lat na man come to that
table without this, under the pain of damnatioun. But gif e have in our heart,
a purpose to do better, suppose our bigan life hes been dissolute and loose: it
gif e be tuitched in our heart, with any feeling or remorse of our bigane life,
ga not fra the table, but come with a protestatioun of thy misery and
wretchedness, and come with a heart to get grace. Gif with a dissolute life, I
mean not of open slanders, thou have also a purpose not to amend, but to do
war, for Gods sake abstain. This far for the thing signified.

Into this general consideration, there rests their things it to be maid
plain unto ou. First, how the signs and the thing signified are coupled
togidder, and how they are conjoined. Nixt, it rests to be tauld ou; how the
sign is delivered, and how the thing signified is delivered, and how both are
received, als weill as they are delivered. This being done, I fall speak
shortly of the other part of the Sacrament, quhilk is the word: And last of
all, we sall lat ou see, quhat sort of faults they are, that peruerts the
Sacrament, and makes it of na effect. And gif time sall serve, we sall enter in
particular, to this sacrament, quhilk we have in hand.

Then to come back again. In the third room, it coms in to be considered;
How the sign and the thing signified are jovned togidder.
how the sign and the thing signified are coupled: For about this conjunction,
all the debait stands: all the strife that we have with them, that varies
fra the straight truth, stands about the manner of this conjunction. Some will
have tham conjoined after ane way, and some after ane other way; and men
strives very bitterly about this matter, and continues sa in strife, that
through the bitterness of contention, they tyne the truth. For quhen the heat of
contentioun rises, and specially in disputation, they take not tent to the
truth, but to the victory: Gif they may be victorious, and it were but be a
multitude of words, they regard not suppose they tyne the truth. Read their
works, and books about this coniunctioun, and ee sall crave, rather conscience
nor knawledge: ea, gif they had the quarter of the conscience, that they have
of knawledge: na questioun, this controversy might be easily taken up; but
men laking conscience, and having knawledge, an evil conscience peruerts the
knawlege and draws them to ane evil end. To tell ou now, how their two are
conjoined: it will be far easier for me, and better for ou to understand, to
tell ou first, how they are not conjoined: for I sall make it very clear unto
ou, be letting ou see how they are not conjoined: but it is not possible, to
make it so clear, by telling ou the manner how they are conjoined. ee may
perceive clearelie be our awin eyes, that the sign and the thing signified are
not locally conjoined, that is, they are not both in ane place. ee may
perceive also be our outward senses, that the body of Christ, quhilk is the
thing signified, and the signs are not conjoined corporally: their bodies
tuitches not vthers. ee may perceive also, they are not visiblie conjoined,
they are not both subject to the outward eye. Sa it is easy to lat ou see,
how they are not conjoined. For gif the sign and the thing signified were
visiblie and corporally conjoined, Quhat misterd us to have a sign? Quherefore
should the sign in the Sacrament serve us? Is not the sign in the Sacrament
appointed to lead me to Christ? Is not the sign appointed, to point out Christ
to me? Gif I saw him present be mine awin eye, as I do the bread, quhat
mister had I of the bread? Therefore ee may see clearlie, that there is na sik
thing as a corporal, natural, or any siclike physical conjunction, betwixt
the sign, and the thing signified. Sa I say, it is easy to let ou see, how
they are not conjoined. Then come on, how are they conjoined? We cannot crave
here any other sort of coniunctioun, nor may stand and agree with the nature of
the Sacrament: For na thing can be conjoined with ane other after ane other
sort, nor the nature of it will suffer. Therefore there cannot be heir ane
other sort of conjunction, nor the nature of the Sacrament will suffer. Now the
nature of the sacrament, will suffer ane sacramental conjunction. O but that is
als hard it: e are never the better of this: but I sall make it clear be Gods
grace. ee know, every Sacrament is a mystery; there is not a Sacrament, but it
conteinis a high and divine mystery. In respect then, that a Sacrament is a
mystery, it follows that a mystical, secret and spiritual coniunctioun,
agreis weill with the nature of the Sacrament. As the coniunctioun betwixt us
and Christ is full of a mystery, as the Apostle lets ou see, EPHESIANS. 5. 32. as
it is a mystical and spiritual conjunction; Sa na dout, the conjunction
betwixt the Sacrament, and the thing signified in the Sacrament, man be of that
same nature, mystical and spiritual. It is not possible to tell ou be na
ocular demonstratioun, how Christ and we are conjoined. But quha ever wald
understand that coniunctioun, his mind mann be enlightened with ane heavenly
eye, that as he hes ane eye in his head to see corporal things: Sa he mann
have in his mind and heart, ane heavenly eye, to see this mystical
conjunction. A heavenly eye to take up this secret conjunction, that is
betwixt the Son of God and us, in the Sacrament. Sa I mister not to insist;
Except ee have this heavenly illumination, ee can never understand, nather our
awin conjunction with Christ, nor it the conjunction betwixt the sign and the
thing signified in the Sacrament. But I keep my ground: As the Sacrament is a
mystery: Sa the coniunctioun that is into the Sacrament, na dout, man be a
mystical, secret and spiritual conjunction. Beside this, I lut ou see, be the
general deduction, that in every Sacrament there is two things: quhilk two,
hes a relatioun, and a mutual respect the ane to the other. Sa that a relative
conjunction, agrees weill with the nature of the sacrament. Then speirs thou
quhat kind of conjunction it is? I give thee the conjunction that agrees with
their nature, to wit, a relative and a respective conjunction, sik a
conjunction, quhairin the sign hes a continual respect to the thing signified,
and the thing signified to the sign. Then crauis thou in a word, the sort of
conjunction, that is betwixt the sign and the thing signified? I call it a
secret and a mystical This conjunctioun is maid cleir, be the conjunction
betwixt the word, and the thing signified thereby.
coniunctioun, that stands in a mutual relatioun, betwixt the sign and the
thing signified. There is ane other conjunction, beside the coniunctioun that
is betwixt Christ and us, that may make this coniunctioun betwixt the sign and
the thing signified in the Sacrament mair clear: and this is the conjunction
quhilk is betwixt the word that e hear, and the thing signified be the same
word. Look quhat sort of conjunction is betwixt the word quhilk ee hear, and
the thing signified that comes in our mind: the like coniunctio^ is betwixt the
sign that e see, and the thing signified in the Sacrament. ee may perceive
easily: there is a conjunction be the effect, suppose ee cannot know the sort
of conjunction. For quhy? ee hear not the word sa sone spoken be me, but
incontinent, the thing, quhilk my word quhairof I speak signifies, comes in
your mind: speak I of things bigane, of things to come, or of things that are
never sa far absent: I cannot sa sone speak to ou of them in this language,
but the thing signified comes in our mind; Na doubt, because there is a
conjunction betwixt the word and the thing signified* Sa, every ane of ou may
easily perceive, that there is a coniunctioun betwixt the word, and the thing
signified be the word. As for example, suppose Paris be far distant fra us; it
speak I of Paris, the word is not sa sone spoken, but the town will come in
our mind: Speak I of the King, suppose he be far distant fra us, the word is
not sa soon spoken, but the thing signified will come in our mind. Sa this
coming of the thing signified in the heart and mind, lats ou see clearlie, that
there is a conjunction betwixt the word, and the thing signified be the word.
To tell ou of this sort of coniunctioun, it is not sa easy: Because the thing
signified is not present to the eye, as the word is to the ear. Gif every
thing signified, war als present to our eye, as the word is to our ear; it
were easy to see the conjunction. But seeing the conjunction is mystical,
secret and spiritual: therefore it is hard to make ou to understand it.
Always look quhat conjunction is betwixt the simple word, and the thing
signified be the word: that same sort of conjunction is betwixt the sacrament
and the thing signified be the Sacrament. For the Sacrament is na other thing,
but ane visible word. I call it a visible word, quhy? Because it conuoyes the
significatioun of it, be the eye to the mind. As this is ane audible word,
because it conuoyes the signification of it be the ear to the mind, in the same
sacrament, sa often as ee look on it, ee sall not sa soon see that bread with
our eye, but the body of Christ sall come in our mind: ee sall not sa soon
see that wine, but after the preaching and opning up of the parts of the
Sacrament, the blood of Christ sall come in our mind. Now this conjunction
betwixt the sign and the thing signified in the Sacrament; stands chiefly, as
e may perceive, in two points: First in an relation betwixt the sign and the
thing signified, quhilkrises of an likeness and proportion, betwixt their two:
for gif there were na proportion and analogy, betwixt the sign and thing
signified be the sign; there could not be a Sacrament or ane relatioun. Sa
the first pairt of this conjunction stands in a relation, quhilk rises upon ane
certain similitude and likeness, quhilk the ane hes with the other. And this
likelines may be easily perceived. For look how able the bread is to nurishe
thy body to this life earthly and temporal, the flesh of Christ, signified be
the bred, is als able to nurish both body and saull to life everlasting. Sa ee
may perceive some kind of proportion betwixt the sign and the thing
signified. The secound point of the conjunction, stands in a continual and
mutual concurring of the an with the other, in sik sort, that the sign, and
the thing signified, ar offered both together, received together, at ane time
and in ane actioun: the ane outwardelie, the other inwardly, gif sa be that
thou have a mouth in thy saull, quhilk is faith, to receive it. Then the
secound point of the conjunctioun stands in a joint offering, and in a joint
receiving, and this I call ane concurrence. Then speere ee, quhat sort of
conjunction is betwixt the sign and the thing signified? I say, it is a
relative conjunction, a secret and a mystical conjunction, quhilk stands in a
mutual relatioun.

There is na farther to be observed heir, except only this: that suppose e
conjoin their two, be war that e confound them not, be war that ee turn not
over the ane in the other: but keep every ane of them in their awin
integrity, without confusion or permixtion of the ane with the other, and sa
ee sall have the lawful conjunctioun that sulde be in the sacrament. There is
not a lessoun that can be learned of this, at least that I can mark or gather,
except only the lessoun of the kindenes and goodness of the everliuing God;
quha hes invented sa money wonderful sorts of conjunctioun, and all to this
purpose, that we might be conjoined, to advance this great and mystical
conjunctioun, betwixt the God of glory and us: In the quhilk conjunctioun, our
weil, felicity and happiness in this life, and in the life to come, dois only
stand: That he is sa cairfull to conjoine himself with his word and
Sacraments, that we, in his word and Sacraments might be conjoined with him.
Gif we were moved with the care and love of God, uttered in their
conjunctiones, and it were never sa little on our pairts: assuredly we wald not
defraud our selfs, of the fruit of that happy conjunction, nor bring it in sik
a loath and disdain as we do this day: for we be following and preferring of
our pleasures to Christ and his counsel, hes made the stomachis of our saules
sa foul and ill disposed, that ather they receive him not at all, or gif he be
received, he is not able to tarry: And quhy? because ane foul stomach is not
able to keep him, for incontinent we chok him sa, ather with the lustis of the
flesh, or with the cares of this warlde, that he is compelled to depart: and
gif Christ be not both, devoured and digested, he can do us na good: And
this digestion can not be quhere there is not a gredy appetite to the receipt of
him; for gif thou be not hungry for him, he is not ready for thee. And I am
assured gif all the men in this country were examined after this rule, that
there were nane that receuis Christ, bot he that hes a stomach and is hungry
for him, it fearis me that few should be found to receive him. It fears me, that
we have taken sik a loath and disdain of that heavenly food, that there is not
sick a thing, as any kind of hunger, or appetite of it in our saules. And
quhat is the cause of this? I will tell ou: Suppose we have renounced the
corporal and gross Idolatry, wherein our fathers were drowned and plunged of
before, and quhilk men in some parts gais about to erect now: it as the manners
of this country, and the behavior of every ane of us testifies, there is
never a man that hes renou^ced that damnable Idol, that he hes in his awin
saul, nor the invisible Idolatry, that he hes in his awin heart and mind. There
is never a man but to that same Idol quherewith he was conceived and borne,
and whereunto he addicted himself and was a slave off before, but to that
Idol he geuis his service it: and therefore meruell not, quhen thou hes
addicted thy service: set thy affection, and powered out thy heart upon that
pleasure of thine awin, upon that Idol of thy awin, upon that lust and
mischief of thy awin: meruell not, suppose thou have na appetite of Christ, nor
of that heavenly food. Quhen thou hes thy saull powered forth on some villainy
and wickedness, and hes send it far a field: how is it possible to the, to
retire it, or draw it hame again, to employ it quhere thou should on Christ
Jesus? Then let every ane in his awin rank, tak heed to his awin domestik
Idol, that ludges within his awin heart, and prease to clear him of it, or
vtherwayis, e cannot see the face of Christ, nor be pertakers of his kingdom.
There is not ane other lessoun in christianity but this: this is the first and
the last lessoun; to shake off our lustis and affectiouns, piece and piece, and
sa piece and piece renounce thy self, that thou may embrace Christ. I grant,
there is greater progress in this point, in some nor in vthers, some less,
some mair profits in this; But except in some measure ee cast of our self, or
quhatsoeuer in our awin eyes, ee count may precious, to come be Christ; ee
are not worthy of him: And this is very hard to be done. It is very easy
for a man to speak it, to bidd a man renounce his awin Idol, quhilk I call
his affections; but it is not sa sone done. Assuredly the stronger mann come
in, to ding out the affection: ea the stronger nor the devil, man come in to
ding out the devil, quha makes residence in the affection; or else he will
remain there for ever. Therefore, there are not money that hes renounced them
selfis, and examine thine heart quhen thou will, gif there be any thing in the
world, that thou louis better nor christ, gif thou be not content, to leave
father and mother, to leave wife and children, or quhatsoeuer is dearest to
thee in this world, for Christ, thou art nor worthy of him. Gif thou be not
content to cast off, quhatsoeuer maks thee a stranger to Christ, thou art not
worthy of him. And is this onie little matter, seeing there is na part nor
power of our saul, but it is enemy to this, and repines to this heavenly
conjunction; Is this onie little matter, to cast off and renounce our selfis,
that we may come to Christ? e saw never a greater matter nor this. It hes not
entered into every heart to consider of this, for this wark of our new creatioun,
is ten thousand times greater nor the warke of our first creation. And
therefore it were very necessary, that every man took tent to himself: For
the Devil is so crafty in this point, that he erects ever ane Idol or other
in our saul, and sometimes under the show of virtue, quhilk of all is may
dangerous: And in every wark that is in our hand, gif it war never sa halie,
he is at our right hand, and maks him to have interest in it. And he
contents himself not with this, under the show of virtues to dissaue ou: But
he is sa walkrife, that even in the best turn, and quhen e are best occupied
in our may virtuous actions, he mixes them with sins, and sa dois the
thing that lies in him, to make ou tine our profit, and loose our reward. For
quhen ee are best occupied, he gais about to engender in ou an opinion of our
selfis and sa defraud God of his glory. Or vtherwayis in doing of good turns,
he makes ou sa slack and negligent, that gif e do them, ee do them caldlie,
or sa indiscreetly, that he maks ou begin at the last first, and makes it that
should be first last; and sa as MARTHA was, to be occupied, and over bissie in
they things, quhilk are not sa necessar, as the things quherin MARIE was
occupied. For she should have preferred first the hearing of the word, to the
preparing of Christ's Supper. This is but to give ou ane insight, and to lat ou
see, that the devil is sa crafty, that ather he casts in a false conceat of
our selfs in doing any turn, or else makes us to do that last quhilk should be
first, or then maks us altogidder sa sluggish and sa negligent that we do the
warke of the Lord caldly, and sa ane way or other, he halds us ever in a
continual business. Sa that we cannot be half walkrife: For we have to do with
principalities and powers, with spiritual wickedness, quhilk are above us, and
within us also. For he is not, that hes corruption within him, but Satan is in
him: Sa we cannot be half walkrife, ever studiing to cast out the Devil, to
renounce our selfis, and to submit us to the obedience of Christ. This far
concerning the conjunction.

Now, seeing that the sign and the thing How the sign and the thing signified
are given and received.
signified, are diverse: it rests to be considered how the sign is delivered,
and how the thing signified is delivered; and after quhat manner they are
received: And Considerations thereof.
therefore of this consideration, ee have their things to wey. ee have first to
consider, quhidder both the sign, and the 1
thing signified, be delivered to ou be ea man or not. Secondly ee have to
consider, 2
quhidder the sign and the thing signified, be delivered to ou in ane actioun
or not. Thirdly, ee have to consider, 3
quhidder both their things be given to ane instrument or not. And fourtly, ee
4
have to consider, quhidder the sign and the thing signified, be offered and
received after ea manner or not. Now after that ee have considred all their, in
the end ee sal find that the sign and the thing signified, are not given be a
man; e sal find nixt, that they are not given in a sort of actioun. Thirdly, e
sal find, that they are not both offered and given to ane instrument. And
fourtly, ee sall find, that they are not both given and received after ane
manner. Sa finding this diversity, ee have this to do: Mark me the
diversity of the propiners and giuers: Mark me the diversity of the actions:
Mark me thirdly, the diversity of the instruments, and mark fourtly, the
diverse manner of receiving. Mark me all their diligently, and ee sall find
little difficulty in the Sacrament. For first to make it clear unto ou, I say,
that the sign, and the thing signified be the sign, are not both given be ea
man; and this ee see clearly. For as to the sign, that bread, and that wine,
e see our self, that the Minister offers unto ou the sign, he gives ou that
Sacrament: as that sign is ane earthly and corporal thing, sa it is ane
earthly and corporal man that gives it. Now the thing signified is of ane
other nature: For it is ane heavenly and spiritual thing; therefore this
heavenly thing, is not given be an earthly man, this incorruptible thing, is
not given be ane natural and corruptible man; But Christ Jesus hes locked up
and reserved the Ministry of this heavenly thing to himself only. Therefore
there is two giuers in this sacrament: The Minister gives the earthly thing,
Christ Jesus the Mediator, gives ou the heavenly thing in the Sacrament: For
Christ in giving the earthly thing, will not use his awin Ministry
immediately, nor the Ministry of ane Angel: but only the Ministry of ane
earthly man. And as to the dispensatioun of his awin body and blood, he will
not give it to na heavenly creature, lat be to ane earthly man; but he hes
kept this Ministry to him self, and he dispenses his awin body and blood,
to quhom and quhen he pleasis: For quhy? gif any man in the world, had power to
give Christ's body and blood, na question this man should have power, to cleanse
the heart and conscience; For the blood of Christ hes this power with it: and
consequently should have power to forgive sins. Now it is only GOD that may
forgive sins: and therefore it is not possible, that the Ministry of the
heavenly thing, can be in the power of any man. Exemple we have in JOHN the
Baptist, MAT. 3. 11. Sayis he not, the ministry that I have is of the element,
I am commanded to Minister the eleme^t of water only: but as to the Ministry
of the fire and of the spirit, Christ hes reserved it to himself. Therefore
look not to get the spirit at man's hand, but at the hands of Christ himself
only, and without this inward Ministry, I will not give a straa for the
outward Ministry. For my outward Ministry: ea, suppose it were the
Ministry of ane Angel, and suppose Christ were present in his flesh, to
minister unto ou their outward things: except he conjoyne the inward ministry
of his spirit therewith, it auailes nathing: It may weill make up a dittay and
process against ou, against the day of that general assembly: but to our
salvation, it will never profit ou. Therefore this ee should ay crave, that the
Lord wald water our hearts be his halie spirit, as he waters our ears be the
hearing of the word. Then there is two offerers: the Minister offers the sign,
Christ Jesus offers himself, the thing signified. The three persons, ea God,
offers the Mediator, or the Mediator offers himself, and that be the power
and virtue of his awin spirit.

As there is two propiners, two persons The sign and the thing signified are
offered in two actions to two instruments, and after two manners
that offeris and geuis the Sacrament, and the thing signified be the
Sacrament: Sa their two ar offered and given in two actions. Christ, quha is the
heavenly thing is offered and given to ou, be ane inward secreet and
spiritual actioun, quhilk is not subject to the outward eye. The sign again
is offered and given, in ane outward actioun, after a corporal and visible
manner. As there is two sorts of actions, sa there is two sorts of
instruments, quherevnto the sign and the thing signified are offered: for the
thing signified, that is, Christ: is never offered to the mouth of my body. The
blood of Christ, the flesh of Christ, haill Christ, or the spirit of Christ is
not offered, nather in the word nor in the sacrament to the mouth of my body,
get me that in any part of the Bible, that there is any other manner of
receiving of Christ, bot be faith, and tak it to them. Sa there is not an
instrument, as I taulde ou, nather hand nor mouth to grippe Christ, bot faith
only. As Christ, quha is the thing signified, is gripped be the hand and mouth
of faith: sa the sign that signifies Christ, is gripped be our awin natural
mouth and hand. ee have a mouth in our head, and in our body, als proper to
gripp the sign, as faith is to grippe Christ. Swa the sign and the thing
signified ar offered and given, not to ane instrument, but to two: the ane to
the mouth of the body, the other to the mouth of the saull. Now look be quhat
way their things are offered and given, be the same way they are received. As the
sign is corporal, and naturally offered to a corporal instrument: sa is it
received after a corporal and natural manner. For thou man tak the bread and
the wine, ather be thy hand, or be thy mouth: the thing signified is not taken
after a corporal manner, bot after a secreet and spiritual manner: and as it is
offered, sa it is taken: there cannot be a thing clearer, the ane is taken after
a natural manner, the other after a secret and spiritual manner. Sa in this last
part e have their things to mark: distinguish me betwixt the outward action and
the inward, betwixt the sign and the thing signified, and keep me a
proportion and analogy, betwixt the inward and the outward actions: Think
weill with our self, that gif ee be a faithful man, Christ is als bissie
working inwardly in our saull: as the Minister is working outwardly toward
our body. Look how bissie the Minister is in breaking that bread, in pouring
out that wine, in giving that bread and wine to thee; als bissie is Christ in
breaking his awin body to thee, and in giving thee the juice of his awin body,
after a spiritual and ane invisible manner. Sa keep me this distinction, and
think weill with our selfs, that be faith, Christ is als weill ocupied toward
our saul to nurish it, as the Minister is outwardly toward our body. Keep me
this, and thou hes the hail sacrament. Then of this discourse and deduction: e
maytak up a doble matter, quher of the Sacrament stands. It stands of two sorts
of materials: that is, of ane earthly matter, and of ane heavenly matter: The
sign and the thing signified; And as there is a double matter in the Sacrament,
sa the Sacrament mann be handled after a double manner, be ane outward actioun,
and ane inward action. Keep the distinction in their things, betwixt the sign
and the thing signified, and e sal not easily slip in the understanding of the
Sacrament.

This being said, concerning the general of the other part of a Sacrament
quhilk is the word.
consideration of the elements (for all this apperteins it to the elements.) It
rests that we speak somequhat concerning the word, quhilk I call the other
part of the Sacrament. Quhat we mean and understand be the word, I take the
word quhairvnto the elements are annexed, for that thing, quhilk quickens this
haill action, quhilk serves as it were a saul, and gives life to the haill
actioun. For be the word, and the appointment of Christ in the word, the
Minister knawis quhat is his part, the hearer knawis quhat is his part, and
every ane is prepared, how to deliver and how to receive: the Minister how he
should deliver, and the hearer how he should receive. Sa the institutioun of
Christ, is the quickening of the haill action. For all the action hes the
warrant fra the institution set down in his word. In the institution of Christ,
there is two things chiefly to be considered. ee will find in the
institutioun of Christ a command, and ee will find in it a promise: The
command is this, quhere he sayis, take eat: the command oblishes ou to obey,
and craves obedience. There is a promise also in the institution, and it is
contained in their words, This is my body. The promise craves faith. As the
command craves obedience; sa the promise craves belief: Therefore come not to
the Sacrament, except ee bring both faith and obedience with ou. Gif thou come
not with a heart minded to obey Christ, at least, mair nor thou was wont to
do, thou comes to thine awin damnation. And gif thou bring a heart alwais void
of faith, thou comes to thine awin damnation. Sa, lat every ane that comes to
the Sacrament, bring with him a heart minded to do better, that is, to obey and
believe Christ, better nor he did off before. Except ee bring their two in some
measure, come not to the Sacrament: for whatever thou do, except it flow of
faith, can profit nathing. This far concerning the word shortly.

Now there rests only this, and it wald be speered, quhat mister is there,
that their Sacraments and seals should be annexed to the word? Quherefore are
they annexed, seeing we gat na mair in the Sacrament, nor we get in the word:
and we get als meekle in the very simple word, as we gat in the Sacrament:
Seeing then we get na new thing in the sacrament, but the same thing, quhilk
we gat in the simple word, quherefore is the Sacrament appointed to be hung
to the word? It is true certainly, we get na new thing in the Sacrament: nor
we get na other thing in the Sacrament, nor we gat in the word, for quhat
mair walde thou crave, nor to get the Son of God, gif thou get him weill? Thy
heart cannot wish nor imagine a greater gift, nor to have the Son of God, quha
is King of heaven and earth. And therefore I say quhat new thing walde thou
have? For gif thou get him, thou gettis all things with him, thy heart cannot
imagine a new thing beside him: quherefore then is the sacrament Answer.
appointed? Not to get thee a new I
thing. I say it is appointed to get thee that Be the sacrament we possess
Christ mair fully nor be the simple word.
same thing better, nor thou gat it in the word. The Sacrament is appointed,
that we may get a beter grip of Christ, nor we gat in the simple word, that we
may possess Christ in our hearts and minds mair fully and largely, nor we
did off before in the simple word. That Christ might have a larger space, to
make residence in our narrow hearts, nor he could have be the hearing of the
simple word: and to possess Christ mair fully, it is a better thing. For
suppose Christ be ea thing in him self: it the better grip thou have of him,
thou art the surer of his promise. The Sacraments are appointed, that I might
have him mair fully in my saull, that I might have the bounds of it enlarged,
that he may make the better residence in me: This na doubt is the cause,
quherefore their seals are annexed to the 2
evident of the simple word. They serve to They serve to confirm the truth
contained in the word.
this end also, to seal up and confirm the truth, that is in the word; for as
the office of the seal hung to the evident, is not to confirm ane other
truth, nor that quhilk is in the evident; and suppose ee believed the evident
off before; it be the seals ee believe it the better. Even sa, the Sacrament
assures me of na other truth, nor is contained within the word: it because it
is a seal annexed to the word, it persuades me the better of the same, for ay
the maa and the mair that the outward senses be walkned, the mair is the inward
heart and mind, persuaded to belief. Now the sacrament walkens all the outward
senses, sick as the eye, the hand, and all the rest: And the outward senses
being moved, na question, the spirit of God concurring therewith, mooues the
heart the mair. The Sacraments are then annexed to the word, to seal up the
truth contained in the word, and to confirm it mair and mair in thy heart.
Then quhat have ee to do, the word is appointed to work belief, and the
sacrament is appointed to confirm ou in this belief: but except ee feel the
truth of this inwardly in our hearts, except e have our hearts als ready as our
mouth, think not that any thing will avail ou; All the seals in the world
will not work, except Exhortation
the spirit of God concur, and seal the same truth in our hearts, quhilk the
Sacrament seals outwardly. Except he make clear the sight of thy mind
inwardly, and work a feeling in thy heart, both word and Sacrament, sall tyne
their fruit and effect quhilk they should have. All the Scriptures are full of
this. The hail Scriptures of GOD are but a slaying letter to ou, except the
spirit of God concur to quicken inwardly. Sa our haill endeavor should be, to
prease to feel Christ quick in our awin hearts: that finding him in our hearts,
and seeing him in our minds, both word and Sacraments may be effectual: gif
not, our saul's remains dead, ee are not translated fra that death quhairin e
were conceived. Therefore all the study of a Christian should be, quhen they see
the Sacraments, and hears the word, to labor to find and feel in their
hearts and minds, that, quhilk they hear and see, and this I call to find
Christ quick in our awin saul's. This cannot be, except ee sanctify his
ludging: For gif all the nukis of thy saul remain a midding, Christ can not
dwell there. And sa, except e study to a continual sanctification, and sever
our self fra every thing that seuers ou fra Christ; It is not possible, that
he can live or dwell in ou. This is a great lesson, and it is not possible to
do this, except, as I have said, a stronger come in and possess us, and make
us to renounce our selfs. Then, the seals had not been annexed to the word,
except for our cause. For there is na necessity on Gods part, that God should
ather swear, or confirm be seals, the thing that he hes spoken. For his
word is als good as any aith or seal: but the necessity comes of us. There is
sick a great weakness in us, that quhen he hes sworn, and set his seals to
his word, we are als new to belief, as gif he had never spoken a word. Sa to
help our belief, our weakness and inhabilitie that is in us: For we are sa
unable be nature, that we can believe nathing, but that quhilk is of our
selfis, and the mair we lean to our selfis, the farther we are fra God. I
say, to help this wonderful weakness, quhairby we are ready to mistrust God
in every word, he hes hung to his sacraments, and beside his Sacraments, he
swears the things that concerns may our salvation; As ee hard in the
Priesthead of Christ, PSALM. 110. 4. He will not speak only, but he swears,
and that for our weakness and infirmity; but gif he abstract it the Ministry
of his spirit, all their means will do na good.

Now, quhat is the last thing? The last is, how the Sacrament is perverted, and
^^ults that per^erts the Sacra^ent.
how we are defrauded of the fruit and effect thereof. Two sort of faults
peruerts the Sacrament, and defrauds us of the profit and use thereof, and
their faults are ather in the form or in the person: In form, gif the
essential form be spoiled, we get nathing: for quhen the sacrament is spoiled
of the essential form, it is not a Sacrament. There is ane essential form in
Baptism, and ane essential form in the Supper, quhilks gif they be taken
away, ee tyne the use of the Sacrament. The essential form of Baptism is, I
baptize thee in the name of the Father, the Son, and the halie Ghaist: Leave
ee out ane of their three, or do ee it in the name of any ane of the three
persons only, e tyne the essential form of Baptism: In the Supper, gif ee
leave out the least ceremony, e tine the essential form; and sa it is not a
Sacrament: I speak of the essential form, in respect of the Papists, quha
kept the essential form in Baptism; suppose they have brought in trifles of
their awin and mixed with it: it in respect they kept the substantial form:
It is not necessar, that they quha were baptitized under them, be rebaptized.
Indeed gif the virtue of regeneration flowed fra the person, it were some
thing: but in respect, Christ hes this to give to quhome, and quhen he pleasis,
the essential form being kept; it is not necessare, that this Sacrament be
reiterated. Now quhat are the faults in the person that peruerts the sacrament?
The fault may be, ather in the persoun of the giver, or in the persoun of the
receauer. (I speak not of they common faults, quhilk are common to all: but of
sik faults as inhables the person of the giver, to be a distributer of the
sacrament, and taks the office fra him.) Sa quhe^ the person of the giver, is
this way inhabled, na question, it is not a Sacrament. Then again, in the
person of the receauer, the fault may be, gif their children be not in the
covenant, but out of it, they get not the Sacrament. Indeed, if the Parents
efterward comes to the covenant, the children, suppose they be gotten out of
the covenant, may be received. Siklike in the Supper, gif a man be ladened with
any burden of sin, without ane purpose to repent, he aught not to receive
it. Sa then, gif ee lack a purpose to repent, e tine the use of the sacrament.
It is only this purpose to repent, that maks me, quha receauis the sacrament,
to get the fruit and effect thereof. Therefore every ane that gais to that
Sacrament, look quhat purpose he hes in his heart: Hes thou a purpose to shed
blood, to ga to harlatry, or to commit any other ill vice, or ill turn that is
in thy heart, and is not of purpose to repent: in showing thee to be without
repentance, thou shows thee to be without faith: And consequently thou coms
to thy damnation, and not to thy salvation. Now take heed quhat is our purpose,
for gif with a dissolute life ee have a dissolute purpose, ee come to our
damnation.

I was of mind, to have entered particularly Conclusion with an exhorration.
to this sacrament, quhilk we have in hands: but because the time is past, and
some of ou (I dout not) are to communicate only this: Remember that e addres not
our selfs to that table, except ee find our hearts in some sort prepared. The
first gree of preparation stands in contrition, in sorowing for sin, in a
feeling of our awin sins, quhairin ee have offended God. A sorrow in our hearts,
that e have offended sa gracious a God: gif e be able, as that woman was, be
the tears of a contrit heart to wesh the feet of Christ, humbly to kiss his
feet, and to get a grippe of the foot of Christ, suppose ee dare not presume sa
high, as to get him haill, e are in a good case. But gif thou want all their,
and hes them not in some measure: thou lacks all the grees of preparation:
Therefore lat nane ga to the table, except he have their in some measure. But
quhere there is a displeasure for sin, a purpose to do better, and an earnest
sobbing and sighing to get the thing that thou wants: In that saul quher God
hes placed this desire of Christ; It is the work of Gods spirit, and Christ
will enter there. And therefore suppose that saul, be far fra the thing that he
should be at: lat him not refuse to ga to the table, but lat him ga with a
professioun of his awin infirmity and weakness, and with a desire of the thing
that he wants. Every an of ou that finds our selfs this way disposed, lat him
ga in Gods name to the Table. And the Lord work this in every an of our hearts,
that this Ministry may be effectual in ou at this time, and that in the
righteous merits of Jesus Christ: To quhom with the Father and the halie
Ghaist, be all honor, praise and glory, for now and ever,

Amen.
THE SECOND SERMON, UPON THE LORDS Supper in particular: Preached the eight of
February. 1589.
1. COR. 11. 23. For I have received of the Lord, that which I also have
delivered unto ou, to wit, that the Lord Jesus in the night that he was
betrayed, took bread: etc.
WE ended the consideration of the Sacraments in general, in our last lesson:
(weilbeloued in Christ Jesus) Of the Supper of the Lord in particular.
Now it rests, that we dress us, to the consideratioun of this sacrament of
the Supper in particular. And that ee may the better attain to the knawledge,
and consideratioun of the great variety of matter, that is contained in this
Sacrament of the Supper: I sal prease, as God will give me the grace, to premit
certain things, for the easier understanding Heads to be entreated
of it. And first of all, I sall lat ou see, quhat names are given to this
sacrament in the Bible, and I sall show ou some names, that are given to the
same sacrament be the Ancients. Nixt we sal 2
lat ou understand, for quhat chief ends and respects, this Sacrament was
instituted and appointed be Christ Jesus. Thirdly, 3
we sall come to the things, that are contained in the Sacrament, how their
things are coupled, how they are delivered, and how they are received. And
last; we 4
sall meet certain objections, quhilk may be casten in the contrare of this
doctrine; and, as GOD sall give the grace, we sall loose them, and swa end
this present exercise. Now, we find sundry names given first head ^enerall.
to the Sacrament of the Supper, in the book of God, and every name, caries a
Of the ^ames given ^^ this sacra^ent, both ^^ the Bible and be the ^ncients.
special reason with it. We find this Sacrament, called the body and blood of
Christ. This name is given it, na doubt, because it is a heavenly and
spiritual nuriture; It conteins a nuriture of the saull, that is able to
nurish and train up the saull, to a life spiritual, to that life everlasting:
For this cause it is called the body and blood of Christ. It is called also the
Supper of the Lord, to put a difference betwixt it and ane profane Supper:
for this is the Lords Supper, a halie Supper, not a profane nor common Supper;
a Supper appointed for the increase of halines, for the food of the saull in
halines, to feed the saul to life everlasting. Not a Supper appointed for the
belly, for he had ended that Supper, that was appointed for the belly, or ever
he begouth this Supper, quhilk was appointed for the saul. A supper, na doubt,
having respect to the circumstaunce of time, be reason it was first instituted
in the article of that time, when they used to suppe. It is called also in the
Bible, the Table of the Lord: It is not called the Altar of the Lord, but the
Apostle calls it a Table to sit at, and not ane altar to stand at, a Table to
take and receive, and not an Altar to offer and propine. It is called also the
Communion, and participaon of the body and blood of Christ: We have their names
given to it, beside some vthers in the Scriptures of God.

The ancients of the Latin, and of the Greek Kirks, gave it sundry names,
for sundry respects: They called it a publict action. And this was a very
general name; Sometimes they called it a thanksgiving: Sometimes they called it
a Banquet of love: and sometimes they gave it ea name, and sometimes ane other.
And at the last, in the declining estait of the Latin Kirk, and in the falling
estait of the Roman Kirk, this Sacrament begouth to be perverted, and with
this decay, there comes in a perverse name, and they called it the Mass. They
trouble thameselfs meekle concerning the deriuation of this name, quherefra
this word is driven: Sometime they seek it fra ane Hebrew origin: Sometime
fra an Greek, and sometime fra ane Latin origin. But it is plain, as the
word sounds, that it is taken fra ane Latin origin. And it is a word quhilk
might have been tolerable, quhen it was first instituted: For na doubt, the
Sacrament at the first institutioun of this word, was not then halely
perverted: but now, seeing that be the process of time, corruption hes
prevailed sa far, that it hes turned over our Sacrament in a sacrifice: And
quhere we should take fra the hand of God in Christ, they make us to give: This
is plain Idolatry: And therefore quhere the word was tolerable before; Now it
ought not to be tolerable in any way; It aught not to be suffered. And out of
questioun, gif we had eaten and drunken, als often the body and blood of Christ
in our hearts and saules, as we have eaten that bread, and drunken that wine,
quhilk are the signs of his body and blood: we wald not have thoiled this
word of the mass; lat be the very action of it, to be sa rife in this
Country: But in respect, we have but played the counterfeit, and defrauded
our saul's of the body and blood of Christ, and took only the outward
Sacrament: Therefore it is, that our zeal decayis: Therefore it is that our
love decayis: Therefore it is that our knawledge and light decayis. And for
fault of zeal, love, and knawledge, the word of the mass is become
customable unto ou, and not only the word, but the very action. I will not run
out heir, I am only tell and ou, quhat comes of the abuse of the hearing of
the word, quhat judgment follows upon the abuse of the perception of the
Sacraments.

I ga to the nixt, that is, to the ends Second he^^ general.
quherefore the Sacrament was appointed. This Sacrament was instituted in the
signs of bread and wine, and was appointed Of the ends quhy this sacrament was
instituted.
chiefly for this end, to represent our spiritual nuriture, the full and
perfect nuriture of our saull. That as he quha hes bread and wine, lacks
nathing of the full nuriture of his body: sa he, or that saul, quha hes the
participation of the body and blood of Christ, lacks nathing of the full and
perfect nuriture of the saull: To represent this full and perfect nuriture, the
signs of bread and wine in the sacrament, were set down and instituted. The
second end, quherefore this Sacrament was instituted, is this; that we might
testify to the world, and to the Princes of the world, quha are enemies to our
profession, that we might openly avow, and testify unto them our religion,
and our manner of worshipping: in the quhilk we avow and worship Christ: And
that we might also testify our love toward his members, our brethren; this
is the second end quherefore it was instituted. The third end, quherefore it
was instituted, is this; to serve for our special comfort and consolation, to
serve as a souerain medicin for all our spiritual diseases, as we find our selfs
ather ready to fall, or provoked to fall be the Devil, the flesh or the
world; or after that we have fallen, and are put to flight be the Devil, and
wald feign flee away fra God; God of his mercy, and of his infinite pity, and
bothomles compassion, hes set up this Sacrament, as a sign on a high hill,
quhairby it may be seen on every side, far and near, to call all them
again, that have run shamefully away; and he clockes to them, as a Hen dois
to her chickens, to gather them under the wings of his infinite mercy. The
fourth end, quherefore this sacrament was instituted, is this; that in this
action, we might thank him for his benefits, and rander to him hearty
thanks, that he hes come down sa familiarlie to us, bowed the heavens, as it
were, and given us the body and blood of his awin Son, that we might rander
unto him hearty thanks, and sa sanctify his benefits to us: for this
thanksgiving, this Sacrament was also instituted. This far concerning the ends
shortly.

Now I come to the things contained in Third head general.
this Sacrament. e see with our eyes, there is casten before ou corporal
things, visible things, sick as the bread and the wine. There is again hid
fra the eye of of the things contained in this Sacrament out ward and inward,
quherein sundric heads are entreated.
our body, but present to the eye of our mind, spiritual things, heavenly and
inward things, both their are in the Sacrament. The corporal, visible, and
outward things, they are the things that are appointed, to signify the
spiritual, heavenly and inward things: And quhy? Nathing without a reasoun.
Their corporal signs are appointed to signify the spiritual things, be
reasoun we are corporal, we are earthly bodies, we have our saull ludging
within ane carnal body, in a tabernacle of claye, a gross tabernacle, quhilk
cannot be walkned nor moved, except be the things that are like to it self:
It cannot be induced to the consideration of heavenly things, except, be gros,
temporal and corporal things. Gif we had been of the nature of the thing
signified, that as the thing signified is spiritual and heavenly, sa we
always had been spiritual and heavenly; we had not mistered a corporal thing.
Siclike, gif the thing signified had bin as we are, corporal, earthly and
visible; we had not mistered a sign, to carry us to the consideration of it.
But be reason the thing signified is spiritual, and we are corporal;
therefore to bring us to the sight of their spiritual things, he uses a
corporal mean and an outward sign. This is the resoun quherefore their
corporal signs are appointed, to signify the spiritual thing. The
spiritual thing in both the Sacraments, is ane and the self same Christ
Jesus, signified in both the Sacraments: it in diverse respects, he is the
thing signified in Baptism, and he is the thing signified in the Supper. This
Christ Jesus in his blood chiefly, is the thing signified in the Sacrament of
Baptism; for quhy? be reason that be his blood he weschis the filth of our
saul's; be reason that be the virtue of his blood, he quickens us in our saul's,
with a heavenly life; be reasoun that be the power of his blood, he ingrafts
and imps us in his awin body: for that sacrament is a testimony of the
remissioun of our sins; that is of the cleanes of our conscience, that our
consciences be that blood, are weschen inwardly. It testifies siklike, of our
new birth, that we are begotten spiritually to a heavenly life: It testifies
sicklike, of the joining of us in the body of Christ. As it is a testimony, sa
it is a seal; It not only testifies, but seals it up in our hearts, and maks
us in our hearts, to feel the taist of that heavenly life begun in us; that we
are translated fra death, in the quhilk we war conceived, and imped in the body
of Christ. Tak heed then, Christ in his blood, as he is the lawer of our
regeneration, is the thing signified in Baptism. In this sacrament of the
Supper agane, this same Christ, is the thing signified in ane other respect; to
wit, in this respect, as his body and blood serves to nurish my saul to life
everlasting; for this sacrament is na other thing, but the Image of our
spiritual nuriture, God testifing how our saul's are fed, and nurisched to
that heavenly life, be the Image of ane corporal nuriture* Swa, in diverse
respects the same thing; that is, Christ Jesus, is signified in baptism, and
is signified in the Supper. In this Sacrament the fruits of Christ's death,
quhereof I spoke, the virtue of his sacrifice, the virtue of his passioun: I
call not their fruits nor their virtues only, the thing signified in the
Sacrament of the Supper; but rather I call the thing signified, that substance,
and that person, out of the quhilk substance, this virtue, and their fruits dois
flow and proceed. I grant to thee, and it is may certain, that be the
lawful use and participation of the Sacrament, thou art partaker of all their
fruits, it their fruits are not the first and chief thing, quherof thou art
partaker in this sacrament; but of force thou man get ane other thing first. It
is true, that na man can be partaker of the substance of Christ, but the same
saul mann be also partaker of the fruits that flowis fra his substance: it
notwithstanding, thou man discern betwixt the substance, and the fruits that
flowis fra the substance, and thou mann be partaker of the substance in the
first room. Then in the nixt room, thou mann be partaker of the fruits that
flows fra his substance. To make this clear in baptism, the fruits of baptism,
are remission of our sins, mortification, the slaughter of sin, and the
sealing up of our adoptioun to life everlasting. The substance, out of the
quhilk their fruits dois flow, is the blood of Christ: e mann heir of force
discern betwixt the blud quhilk is the substance, and betwixt remissioun of
sins, wesching and regeneratioun, quhilk are the fruits that flowis fra this
blood. Sicklike in the sacrament of the supper. The fruits of the Sacrament, ar
the growth of faith and the incres in halines. The thing signified, is the
substance; that is, the body and blood of Christ is the substance, out of the
quhilk, this growth in faith and halines dois proceed. Now see ee not this; ee
mann discern then betwixt the substance and the fruits, and e mann place the
substance in the first room, sa that the substance of Christ, that is, Christ
him self is the thing signified in this Sacrament; for our awin experience
makis this clear unto ou: or our stomach be filled with any food, ee mann eat
the substance of the food first, or ee be filled with bread, ee man eat the
substance of that bread first: Or our drowth be quenched with any drink, ee
mann of force, drink the substance of the drink first. Even sa, after this
samemaner, or the hunger of our saules be satisfied, and the thirst thereof
quenched, ee man eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood first, and that
be faith. Sa consider the ane be the other; look to quhat use bread and wine
serves to thy body, to the same very use, the body and blood of Christ serves
to thy saull, and he that appointed the ane to serve for thy body, the same
God appointed the other to serve for thy saul. Swa look how impossible it is to
thee, to be fed with that food that coms never in thy mouth, or to recover
health of that drog quhilk was never applied, nor come never out of the
Apothecaries booth: It is als impossible to thee, to be fed upon the body of
Christ, and to get thy health of the blood of Christ, except thou first eat his
body and drink his blood. Then e see, that the thing signified in the supper,
is not the fruit sa meekle, as the body and blood of Christ Jesus, quhilk is
the fountain and substance, quhairfra their fruits dois flow and proceed.

Now I say, suppose Christ quha is the The thing signified in both the
sacraments is an, the signs are not ane.
thing signified, remain ay ane, and the same in both the Sacraments: it the
signs quhairby this ane Christ is signified in the Sacraments are not ane, nor
of ane equal number nather: for in Baptism, the thing that represents Christ,
is water: Into the supper, the things that represents Christ, are bread and
wine. Water is appointed to represent Christ in Baptism, and quhy? He hes
chosen out water, because it is meetest to represent the blood of Christ, to
represent our weshing with the blood of Christ. For quhat is meeter to wesh
with, nor water? Sa there is nathing meeter to wesh the saull, nor the blood of
Christ. Into this Sacrament, he hes appointed bread and wine; quhy? Because
there is nathing meeter to nurish the body, nor bread and wine. Sa the Lord
hes not chosen their signs without a reason. As the signs in the sacraments
are not alwayis ane; sa the same in both, are not of ane number: For in
Baptism, we have but ane element, into this Sacrament we have two elements.
Now quhat is the reason of this diversity, Qahy in baptism there is but ane
sign, and in the Supper two.
that the Lord in the ane Sacrament, hes appointed two signs, and in the other
but ane sign? I sall give ou the reason: he hes appointed only ane sign in
Baptism, to wit, water: because water is sufficient aneugh to do the haill
turn. Gif water had not been sufficient to represent the thing signified, he
wald have appointed ane other sign: but in respect, water dois the turn, and
represents fully the weshing of our saul's, with the blood of Christ: quhat
mister then have we of ane other sign? Now in this Sacrament, ane sign will
not suffice, but there mann be two: for quhy? Wine cannot be sufficient alane,
nor bread can not be sufficient alane: For he that hes bread only, and wine
only, hes not a perfect nuriture corporal; therefore, that they might
represent and let us see, a perfect nuriture, he hes given us, both bread and
wine: (For the perfect nuriture corporal, stands in meat and drink) to
represent the full and perfect nuriture of the saul. Look how full and perfect
a nuriture, he hes to his body, that hes store of bread and wine; sa he that
hes Christ, laks nathing of a full and perfect nuriture to his saul. Then e see
the reason, quherfore there is two signs appointed in this Sacrament, and
only ane sign in Baptism.

There rests it concerning their signs, Two quest^ons. Quhat power hes that
bread to b^ a sign in the sacrament, and how lang that power endures.
two things to be speered: First, quhat power hes that bread in this
Sacrament, to be ane sign, mair nor the bread that is used in commoun houses:
quherefra flows that power? Nixt, gif it hes a power; how lang indures and
remains that power with the bread? As to the first, concerning the power quhilk
that bread hes, beside any other bread. I sall tell ou, that bread, hes a power
given to it be Answer that bread ^es that po^er fra Christ's in^^itutioun
Christ, and be his institution, be the quhilk institution, it is appointed to
signify his body, to represent his body, and to deliver his body. Then
speeres thou of the power? That bread, hes a power flowing fra Christ and his
institutioun, quhilk other common bread hes not: Sa that, gif any of ou wald
speere, quhen the Minister in this action, is breaking or distributing that
bread, pouring out, and distributing that wine: gif ou wald spear, quhat sort
of creatures are one? A ready answer here; they are halie things; ee mann
give this name, to the signs and seals of the body and blood of Christ. That
bread of the Sacrament is ane halie bread, and that wine is an haly wine, quhy?
Because, the blessed institution of Christ, hes severed tham fra the use,
quhereunto they served of before, and hes aplied tham to an haly use; not to
feed the body, but to feed the saull. This far concerning the power of that
bread: It hes a power, flowing fra Christ and his institution. Now the second
thing is this: how lang continues this power with that bread? How lang hes
that bread this office? In a word, I 2. Answer That power continues enduring
the service of the table
say, this power sticks with that bread, enduring the time of the actioun,
enduring the service of the table. Look how lang that action continues, and
that the service of the Table lasts: sa lang it continues ane halie bread, sa
lang continues the power with that bread: but look how soon, the action is
ended; sa soon ends the halines of it: Look how soon the service of the
Table is ended; that bread becomes common again, and the halines of it ceasis.
Then this power continues not for ay, but it continues, only enduring the time
of the action and service of the Table: this far concerning the elements.

There is beside the elements, an other Of the ceremonial signs
sort of signs in the Sacrament: there is not a reat nor ceremony in the
Sacrament of the Supper, but every reat and ceremony is a sign, and hes the
awin spiritual signification with it: As namely, looking to the breaking of
that bred, it represents to thee, the breaking of the body and blood of
Christ: not that his body was broken in bone or lith, but that it was broken
with dolor, with anguish and distres of heart, with the weight of the
indignation and fury of God, that he sustained for our sins quhilk he bure.
Then the breaking is ane essential ceremony: the pouring out of the wine,
also is ane essential ceremony: For quhy? as ee see clearlie, that be the
wine, is signified the blood of Christ: sa be the pouring out of the wine, is
signified, that his blood was severed fra his flesh, and the seuering of their
two, makes death; for in blood is the life, and consequently it testifies his
death. The pouring out of the wine, then tells thee, that he dies for thee,
that his blood was shed for thee: Sa this is an essential ceremony, quhilk man
not be left out. Siclike, the distribution, giving and eating of that bread,
are essential ceremonies: And quhat dois the eating testify to thee? The
applying of the body and blood of Christ to thy saul: Sa that there is never
ane of their reits, but they have there awin significatioun, and there can not
ane of them be left out, but ee sall pervert the haill action. This far
concerning the signs.

Now quhat profit can ee make of An observation.
all this discourse? Carry me this lessoun with you, and ee sall make our
profit of their things: In respect that every sign and ceremony, hes the awin
spiritual significatioun: Sa that there is not a ceremony in this haill
actioun, that wants the awin spiritual significatioun. Take up this
consideratioun, and think with our selfs in that time especially, quhen ee
are at the Table, and in the sight of that actioun; that look quhat thou sees
the Minister doing outwardelie, quhat ever it be: Is he breaking that bread,
is he dealing that bread? Is he pouring out that wine, and distributing that
wine? Think weill with thy self, that Christ is als bissie doing al their
things spiritually to thy saul; he is als bissie giving to thee his awin
body, with his awin hand: he is als bissie giving to thee his awin blood,
with the virtue and efficacy of it: Siclike in this actioun, (gif thou be an
faithful communicant) look quhat the mouth dois, and how the, mouth of the
body is occupied outwardelie: Sa is the hand and mouth of the saul (quhilk is
faith) ocupied inwardly. As the mouth takis that bread and that wine, sa the
mouth of thy saull takis the body and blood of Christ, and that be faith: for
be faith, and a constant perswasioun, is the only way to eat the body, and
drink the blood of Christ inwardlye, and doing this, there cannot but follow
a fruitful manducatioun. This far, for the consideratioun of the signs.

Now comes in the matter, quherein gretest difficulty standis, quhereof I
spak How the signs and the thing signified are conjoined in the Sacrament.
the last day as God gave me the grace, it in the particular we man speak, as
weil as in the general, but somequhat mair schortlie. Then ee have to
understand for the better informatioun of our conscience, and for the better
preparation of our saul's: ee have to understand how that bread and that wine,
quhilk are the signs, are cowpled with the body and blood of Christ, quhilk
are signified thereby; quhat sort of conjunctioun is this, and quherefra flows
this conjunctioun, I sall be short in it, because I spak of it at great length
the last day. Take heed, for and ee give not attendance, it is not possible
that ee can take up this conjunction. As to this sort of conjunction, how their
two are cowpled, wald ee knawe it? Do this first. Take tent first of all, to
the nature of the signs, and to the nature of the thing signified, e man take
tent to both their natures, and quhy? Be reason nathing can be coupled nor
conjoined with an other, but in sa far as the nature of it will suffer: gif the
nature of it will not suffer ane conjunctioun, they cannot be conjoined: or will
the nature of it suffer a conjunction, look how far it will suffer a
conjunction, sa far are they conjoined. Now mann I look to the nature of the
things that are conjoined? is: First of all then, look to the thing signified,
quhat is the nature of the thing signified; looking to this, thou seeis that
the thing signified is of a spiritual nature, of a heavenly and mystical
nature; Then conclude, na questioun this spiritual thing will suffer a
spiritual conjunction, a mystical and secreet conjunction. Look over agane
to the sign: The sign of his nature, as I taulde ou in the beginning, hes a
relatioun to the thing signified. And the thing signified of his nature, hes a
relatioun to the sign. Swa then the sign and the thing signified will suffer
to be conjoined be ane mutual relatioun: Both the sign and the thing
signified, in respect they have a mutual relatioun the ane to the other, they
will suffer them selfs to be conjoined be a relative conjunction. Now speer e
at me, quhat sort of conjunctioun is betwixt that bread and that wine, and the
body and blod of Christ. To tell ou in a word, I say it is a secreet and
spiritual conjunctioun, sick a conjunction as stands in a mutual respect,
betwixt that bread and the body of Christ, and betwixt that wine, and the
blood of Christ. Then I say, it is a secreet and a spiritual conjunctioun.
Thou wald not be sa inquisitiue of this conjunction, gif it were corporal,
visible, or local, gif thou saw them both before thine eyes, thou wald not
speer how they are conjoined: Or gif thou saw them both in an place; but in
respect thou sees but the ane with thine eye, and the other is hid: this makis
the conjunction the mair difficill to be uttered and understood. And how is
it possible that ee can take up this secreet and hid conjunctioun* except ee
have the eyes of our mind illuminat be the spirit, quhereby ee may come to the
right understanding of it: But gif ee have any insight in their spiritual
matters that comes be faith, this conjunction sall apeare als cleirly be the
eye of our faith, as the Physical conjunctioun dois to the eye of our body.
Now will ee have this matter maid plain. There is ane other conjunctioun
quhilk serves to make this conjunctioun very clear: To wit, the conjunction
betwix the word quhilk I speak, and the thing signified be that same word.
Speak I of things to ou in a language that ee understand: As be gods grace e
understand this language now; speak I of things bigane, and it were never sa
lang syne: speak I of things to come, and they were never sa far off: speak I
of things absent and they were never sa far distant: it sa sone as I speak the
word; quhither it be of things bigane or to come, the thing it self will come
in our mind. The word streiks not sa soon in our eire, but the thing
signified be the same word come in our mind. Quhat maks the thing signified,
suppose it be absent, to com in my mind? This could not be, except there were
a conjunction betwix the word and the thing signified be the word: As for
example, speak I of the King, quha is now a good piece distant from us, (I
pray god save him) ee will not sa soon hear the word, but the King quha is the
thing signified be this word, will come in our mind. Speak I of things
bigan, suppose they be already expired, it the thing signified will ay com in
your mind: Sa there is a conjunction e see, betwixt the word and the thing
signified be the word. Tak heed to this conjunctioun, and e sal get the nature
of the conjunction, and cowpling of the sign with the thing signified in the
Sacrament: for look quhat sort of conjunctioun is betwixt the word and the
thing signified be the word, that sam sort of conjunction, is betwixt the
sacrament, quhilk is seen to the eye of our body, and the thing signified be
the sacrament, quhilk is seen to the eye of our saull only. As for example,
sa soon as thou seeis that bread taken in the hand of the Minister, thou seeis
it not sa soon, but incontinent the body of Christ man come in thy mind:
their two are sa conjoined, that they come both together: the ane to the
outward senses, the other to the inward senses. This is not aneugh now, but
because in the institution, e are commanded to ga farther, and not only to look
to that bread and that wine, but to take that bread and that wine: Incontinent
as our hand taks the ane, sa our heart taks the other: as our teeth eats the
ane, sa the teeth of our saull quhilke is faith, eats the other, that is*
applies Christ to our saull. Swa ee see, there is a conjunctioun heir, secreet
and mystical: and therefore Christ cannot be conjoined but be a secreet and
mystical conjunctioun. The conjunction betwixt Christ and us, is a secret and
mystical conjunction, quhilk the Apostle EPHESIANS. 5. calls that spiritual
conjunctioun, full of ane high mystery. This conjunctioun cannot be taken up at
the first: Sa seeing the conjunctioun is secret and spiritual, and not
perceived but be the spirit of God: All is for nocht, except ee have some
portioun and mesure of his spirit; All that is taught in the word and
sacraments, will never do you good; will never carry our saull to heaven, except
the spirit of GOD illuminat our minds, and make ou to find in our saul's, the
thing that e hear in the word. Then learn this, seeing the word cannot be
understand, but be the spirit of God: crave that the Lord wald illuminat the
eyes of our minds be his spirit: and be ee als cairfull to get the spirit, as
ee are cairfull now in the hearing of the word. This far concerning the
conjunctioun.

Now e have hard, how the sign is conjoined How the sign and ^he thing
signified ar received.
with the thing signified: Quhat rests there for ou to know? There rests to
know, how the sign is received, and how the thing signified is received;
quhider they be both received with ane mouth or not: quhider the sign and
the thing signified, be received after ane fashion and manner or not: And
marking me the diverse manner of receiving, and the diversity of the
instruments: ee sall not easily err in the Sacrament. The sign and the thing
signified, are received be two mouths, for ee see the signs, that is, that
bread and wine, quhervnto they are geuin, they are given to the mouth of the
body: Then the mouth of the body is the instrument that receuis that bread and
that wine, quhilk are the signs. As that bread, and that wine, are visible and
corporal; sa the mouth and instrument quherby they are received, is visible
and corporal. The thing signified be the bread and wine, is not received be
the mouth of the body: Na, the Scriptures denies that plainly; but he is
received, be the mouth of the saull. Then there is two mouths; that bread, and
that wine, quhilk are the signs, are received be the mouth of the body:
Christ, quha is the thing signified, is received be the mouth of the saul; that
is, be a true faith. Swa, bring me not to the Table, ane mouth only (for gif
ee bring the mouth of our body only, al is wra^g) but bring with ou also, the
mouth of the saull, a constant persuasion in the death of Christ, and all gaies
weill. Now, as to the manner, how the signs are received, and the fashion how
the thing signified is received: ee may easily knawe, that their corporal and
natural signs, mann be received after a corporal and natural manner: They
mann be taken, with the hand or mouth of the body. Again, a supernatural
thing mann be received, after a supernatural manner: A spiritual thing, mann
be received, after a spiritual manner. Swa, as the signs are corporal, and
received after a corporal manner, with the hand, or the mouth of the body:
siclike, the thing signified is spiritual, and received after a spiritual
manner, with the hand and mouth of the saull; quhilk is true faith. Then e have
shortly taken up unto ou, the hail preparation, that is necessary for the
understanding of this Sacrament.

Now, quhat doctrine gather I of this? Of this last point, quhere I say, that
Christ is Quhat kind ^f perception ^ established ^ the sacrament,
the thing signified, and cannot be perceived, but be faith, cannot be
received nor digested, but be ane faithful saull: quhat kind of perception
establish I, in this sacrament? I establish na kind of perception of Christ,
but a spiritual perception; he cannot be received, nor perceived but be
faith; and faith is spiritual. Therefore in the Sacrament, I establish only a
spiritual perception of Christ, and not ane orall, carnal, or fleshly
perceptioun. This is the ground: now lat see, quhat inconvenient can follow upon
this ground? The Papists sayis, that upon this ground, this inconvenient sall
follow: gif there be na perception of Christ, but a spiritual perception (say
they) then our sacrament Inconuenients, caste^ in be the papists against the
spiritual perception of Christ in the sacrement.
is in vain; this Sacrament of the Supper, was instituted for naught. And
quhat is their reason? Gif there be na way, sayis the Papists, to perceive
Christ, but be faith; quhat misters ou a Sacrament? ee perceive Christ be faith
in the word, be the naked and simple preaching of the word ee get faith; sa
the simple word may staike ou; quhat mister have ee of a Sacrament; gif ee get
not some new thing in the Sacrament, quhilk ee culd not get in the word? This
is their argument, quherof e see their conclusion to be this: we get na other
new thing in the First inconvenient. That the sacrament is superfluous.
Sacrament, other nor we do in the word: gif there be na perception but
spiritual: Ergo, the Sacrament is superfluous. We admit the antecedent to be
true, we get na other thing, nor na new thing in the Sacrament, but the same
thing, quhilk we gat in the word. I will give thee to devise, and imagine with
thy self, quhat new thing wald thou have: Lat the heart of man devise
imagine, and wish; he durst never have excogitat, to have sik a thing, at the
Son of God, he durst never have presumed, to have pearsed the clouds, to have
gane sa heigh, and to have craved the Son of GOD in his flesh, to be the
food of his saull; having the Son of God, thou hes him, quha is the air of al
things; quha is King of Heaven and Earth, and in him thou hes all things;
quhat mair then can thou wish? Quhat better thing can thou wish? He is equal
with the Father, ane in substance with the Father, true God, and true man;
quhat mair can thou wish? Then I say, we get na other thing in the Sacrament,
nor we get in the word; content thee with this: But suppose it be sa; it the
Sacrament is not superfluous. But wald thou understand, quhat Refutation of
their first inconvenient.
new thing thou gets, quhat other thing thou gets: I will tell thee; suppose
thou get that same thing, quhilk thou gat in the word; it thou gets that same
thing better: quhat is that better? Thou gets a better grip of that same thing
in the sacrament, nor thou gat be the hearing of the word. That same thing,
quhilk thou possessed, be the hering of the word, thou possessest now mair
largely, he hes a greater bounds in thy saull, be the receiving of the
Sacrament, nor vtherways he could have, be the hearing of the word only.
Then speers thou, quhat new thing we get? I say, we get this new thing, we
get Christ better nor we did before, we get the thing that we gat, mair
fully, that is, with a surer apprehension, nor we had off before; we get a
better grippe of Christ now: For be the Sacrament, my faith is nurished, the
bounds of my saull is enlarged, and sa, quhere I had but a little grip of
Christ before; as it were, betwixt my finger and my thoumbe; now I get him in
my haill hand, and ay the mair, that my faith grows, the better grip I get of
Christ Jesus. Sa the Sacrament is felloun necessary, and it were na mair, but
to get Christ better, and to get a faster apprehension of him be the Sacrament,
nor we culd have off before: For gif it were true, that the Sacrament is
superfluous: be the same reason it sall follow also, that the repetition of the
Sacrament, is superfluous; for quhen e come to the Sacrament the second time,
ee gat na other thing, nor ee did the first time: quhen ee come to the
Sacrament the third time, ee gat na other thing, nor ee did the first time: and
it na man will say, that the third and second coming is a superfluous thing;
and quhy? Because in the second coming, my faith is augmented: I understand
better, I grow in knawledge, I grow in apprehensioun, I grow in feeling; and
getting the grouth of all their, als often as I come: There is na man will say,
that the often coming to the Sacrament is superfluous, and it were, ilk day
ains; Sa their first inconvenient, availes not; we get na new thing in the
Sacrament: Ergo, the Sacramentis superfluous. This far for the first.

Then there comes on ane other thing on the same ground: Gif Christ be not
perceived but be faith; then say we, na wicked body can perceive him; he
that lacks faith, cannot perceive him; he that lacks faith, may perceive that
Sacrament of that bread, and that wine, and may eat of that bread, and that
wine; but he that lacks faith, may not eat of the body and blood of Christ,
signified be that bread, and be that wine. Sa there is the ground: Na faithles
people can perceive Christ, Second inconvenient
nor eat the body of Christ in the Sacrament. Against this ground, they delash
their artillery siclike, and they bring their argument out of the same words
of the Apostle quhilk I have read. The words are their: He that eats of this
bread unworthily, sayis the Apostle, and drinks of this cup unworthily, is
guilty of the body and blood of Christ: Theris their ground; Sa that their
argument will suffer this form, as gif they wald say, after this manner: Na man
can be guilty of that thing, quhilk he hes not received; they have not
received the body and blood of Christ: therefore they cannot be guilty of the
body and blood of Christ: but sa it is; the Apostle sayis, they are guilty:
therefore they have received the body and blood of Christ. I answer to the
proposition, Refutation of the second inconnient objected, quhere in, are
sundry reasons given, quhy the wicked are counted guilty of the body and blood
of Christ*
and I say, it is very false: They could not be guilty of that body and blood,
except they had received it: For they may be guilty of that same body, and
of that same blood, suppose they never received it, but tak heed to the text.
The text sayis not, that they eat the body of Christ unworthily, but it says
that they eat that bread, and drinks that wine unworthily. And it because they
eat that bread, and drinks that wine unworthily, they are compted before God,
guilty of the body and blood of Christ. Now quherefore is this? Not because
they receive him, for gif they received him, they culd not but receive him
worthelie, for Christ cannot be received of any man, but worthelie. But they
are compted guilty of the body and blood of the Son of God, because they
refused him: For quhen they did eat that bread, and drink that wine, they
might, gif they had had faith, eaten and drunken the flesh and blood of Christ
Jesus: Now because thou refuses the body of Christ offered to thee, thou
contemns this body offered to thee, gif thou have not ane eye to discern and
judge, upon this body that is offered: For gif they had had faith, they might
have seen his body offered with the bread, be faith they might have taken
that same body, and be faith they might have eaten that same body; therefore
lacking their spowsing garment, lacking faith, quhereby they should eat the
body, and drink the blood of Christ: lacking faith quhilk is the eye of the
saul to perseaue, and the mouth of the saull to receive that body, quhilk is
spiritually offered, they are compted guilty of that same body and blood. Now
come on, this may be made mair clear be a similitude* e see amangs warldly
princes, their custom is, they will not suffer their majesty to be interest
in the smalest thing that they have: Quher can there be a smaller thing, that
concernis the majesty of a Prince, nor a seall, for the substance of it is but
wax, it gif thou disdainfully use that seall, and contemn it, and stamp it
under thy feet, thou art compted als guilty of his body and blood as he
that puttis hand in him, and thou will be handled after ea way: meikle mair, gif
thou come as ane Sow, or as ane Dog to handle the seals of the body and blood
of Christ, mekle mair may thou be compted to be guilty of his body, and of his
blood. This far for the eating of the body of Christ: The wicked cannot eat
the body of Christ, but they may be guilty of it. The Apostle maks this
speech mair clear it, be ane other speech quhilke I have sometime handled fra
this place: I remember that in the 6. Heb. 6. it is said, that Apostats, they
that makis filthy defection, they crucify the son of God agane, and their
falling away, maks them as guilty as they were quha crucified him. He is now
in the heavens, they cannot get him out of the heavens to crucify him, it the
Apostle say is they crucify him: Quhy? Because their malice is als great as
theirs that crucified him, because they match in malice with them that
crucified him; sa that gif they had him in the earth heir, they would do the
like: therefore they are said to crucify the son of GOD: Sicklike in HEB. 10.
29. there is ane other speech, the wicked are said to stramp the blood of
christ under their feet: Quhy? because their malice is als great as theirs that
stramped his blood: Now, they are compted for this reason to be guilty of the
body and blood of Christ, not because they eat his body, but because they
refuse it, quhen they might have had it. Now the time remains it, quherein we
may have the body and Exhortation
blood of Christ, this time is very precious, and the dispensation of times is
very secreet, and hes their awin bounds: Gif ee take not this time now, it
will away. This time of grace, and of that heavenly food, hes been dispensed
to ou very lang, but how ee have profited, our life and behavior testifies:
Take up therefore our selves in time, take our penniworthes of it: for ee watt
not how lang it lasts. Crave a mouth to receive, als well the food of our saull
that is offered, as ee do the food of our body: and take this time quhile ee
may have it, or assuredly the time sall come, quhen ee sall cry for it, and
sall not get it: but in place of grace and mercy, sall come judgment,
vengeance, and the dispensation of wrath.

They will not leave this matter sa, but Third in conuenience
they insist it, and they bring ma arguments to prove that the wicked are
partakers of the body and blood of Christ. That bread, say they, ee will
grant, quhilk the wicked man eats, is not naked bread, but is that bread,
quhilk is the Sacrament: Now they make their argument: the Sacrament hes ever
conjoined with it, the thing signified: but the Sacrament is given to all,
therefore the thing signified is given to all. Quhat gif I grant to them all
this argument? There should na inconvenient follow: for the thing signified may
be given to all, that is, offered to all, as it Refutation of ths third
inconvenience.
is offered to all men, and it not received of all: Given to all, therefore
received of all, it follows not. I may offer ou two things, it it is in our
awin will, quhither ee will take them or not, but ee may take the ane and
refuse the other, and it he that offers, offered ou the thing that ee refused,
as truly as the thing quhilke ee took. Sa God deceauis na man nor woman, but
with the word and sacraments, assuredly he geuis two things gif they wald take
them: Into his word, he offers the word to the ear, he offers Christ Jesus
to the saull: Into his Sacraments; he offers the Sacraments to the eye, he
offers Christ Jesus to the saul. Now it may be, that quhere two things are
truly and conjointlie offered, a man may receive the ane, and refuse the other,
he receauis the ane because he hes ane instrument to take it, he refuses the
other because he lacks ane instrument: I hear the word, because I have ane ear
to hear it with: I receive the Sacrament, because I have a mouth to receive it
with: but as to the thing, quhilk word and Sacament represents, I may refuse
it, because I have not ane mouth to take it, nor ane eye to perceive it; and
therefore the falt is not upon Gods part, but upon our part. The wicked gets
the body and blood of Christ offered to them conjointlie, with the word and
Sacraments: but the fault is upon their part, they have not a mouth to take
him, and GOD is not bound to give them a mouth: (Take heed to that) And were
not of his special grace and mercy, he geuis me ane eye to perceive him, and
a mouth to receive him, I wald refuse him, as weill as they do. Sa this
argument dow not, Christ is offered to all, ergo, he is received of all, happy
were they, and they received him. This far for the third argument.

Quhat rests now for the full understanding How the saul is said to eat the
body and drink the blood of Christ.
of the Sacrament? There rests it some things, we man understand now the
sacramental speeches, that are used in the sacrament: for e see, we use to
speak of them, God uses to speak of them, and the Ancients uses to speak
of tham: We use to say, that the saull eats the body of Christ, and drinks
the blood of Christ. Their speeches wald be opened up to ou, how the saull is
said to eat the body, and drink the blood of Christ. Their speeches are
sacramental; ee are not the wiser it, but I sall make it clear to ou, be
Gods grace. They are sacramental, quhat is that? e know it is proper to the
body to eat and drink, their ar the proper actions of the body only: Now he
ascriues them to the saul, be ane translation, be ane figurative manner of
speaking, that quhilk is proper to the body, is ascriued to the saul, and it
is said that the saull eats and drinks. The eating of the saull man resemble
the eating of the body: then the eating of the saul is na other thing, but the
applying of Christ to the saul, to believe, that he hes shed his blood for me,
that he hes purchased remissioun of sins to me. Now come on, quherefore call
ou this ane eating? Quhat call e the eating of the body lat see? Eats thou not
the body, quhen thou applies the meat to thy mouth? Gif then the eating of the
body be na other thing, but the applying of meat to the mouth, the eating of
the saull mann be na other thing, but the applying of the nuriture to the
saull. Then e see quhat is meaned be the eating and drinking of the saul: Na
other thing, but the applying of Christ to my saull, and the applying of his
death and passion to my saull, and this is only done be faith: therefore he that
lacks faith cannot eat Christ. This far for the eating and drinking of the
saull, quhilke are sacramental speeches.

Quhat rests now of al their great things, Observation.
and of all this doctrine that hes bin taught? learn me but this ane lesson,
learn me to apply Christ rightly to thy saull, and thou hes win all, thou art
a great Theolog, and thou have learned this weil. For in the right application
of Christ, to the sick saull, to the wounded conscience, and diseased heart;
heir begins the fountain of all our felicity, and the welspring of al our
joy. And I sall tell ou, quhat this application works, look quhat the
presence of thy saull within thee, (suppose thou want Christ in thy saull) dois
to this earthly body, to this lump of clay, as be the presence of the saul,
it lives, it moves, it feiles, as the saull gives to the body, life, moving,
and senses: that same very thing dois Christ to thy saull. Hes thou ains
gripped and applied him to thee? As the saull quickens the body: sa he
quickens the saull, not with an earthly or temporal life, but with the life
quhilk he lives in heaven: he maks the to live that same life quhilk the angels
lives in heaven: he maks the to move, not with warldly motions, but with
heavenly, spiritual, and celestial motions: Again, he inspyres in thee, not
outward senses, but heavenly senses; he warks in thee a spiritual feeling,
that in thine awin heart and conscience, thou may find the effect of this word.
Swa, be the conjunction of Christ with my saull; I get a thousand times a
greater benefit, nor the body dois be the saull: For the body, be the
presence of the saull, gets only ane earthly and temporal life, subject to
continual misery; but be the presence of Christ in my saull, I see a blessed
life, I feel a blessed life, and that same life takes daily, mair and mair
increas in me. Then the ground of all our perfection and blessedness, stands in
this conjunction; and sa, suppose thou lived METHVSALEMS days, and were ever
crauand: it, gif in the last hour, thou get this conjunction, thou may think
thy traueill weil wared, thou hes gotten aneugh: Sa should ee not be bissie in
craving, gif ee were to live a thousand year: for gif e get him in the last
hour, e have gotten aneugh: gif ee have gotten Christ, ee have gotten all with
him: Sa the aplying of Christ to my saul, is the fountain of all my joy and
felicity.

And how get we this conjunction, lat see? This is a spiritual conjunction; a
conjunction, hard and difficile to be purchased, obtained, and gotten of us:
How then is this conjunction brought about, quhilk ar the moyaners of this
co^junction, upon the part of God; and quhilk are the moyaners upon the part of
man; to get me Christ, to put Christ Jesus in my saul, and to make Christ Jesus
ane with me? There is ane moyaner upon the part of God, that helps to get us
Christ; and there is ane other upon our part: upon the part of GOD, there is the
halie spirit: quhat does he? He offers the body and blood of Christ to me.
Now upon our part, there mann be a moyaner; or else, suppose he offer, we will
not receive: Therefore, of necessity, there mann be faith in our saul's, to
receive that quhilk the halie spirit offers, to receive that heavenly food of
the body and blood of Christ, quhilk the halie spirit offers. Then faith and
the halie spirit, are the two moyaners of this spiritual and heavenly
conjunction. Be their two moyaners; be faith, and be the halie spirit; I get the
body of Christ; the body of Christ is mine, and he is given to my saul. Now
here coms in the questioun: how can thou say, that the body of Christ, is
given or delivered to thee, seeing the body of Christ, is sittand, at the
right hand of God the Father? and look how great distance, is betwixt heaven
and earth; als great distance is there, betwixt the body of Christ, and thy
body: how then say ee, that the body of Christ is given to ou? The Papists
cannot get this understood; and therefore they imagine, ane gross and carnal
conjunctioun: except the spirit of God reveal their things, they cannot be
understand; the spirit of God, mann illuminate our minds, and be bissie in all
our hearts, or we come to the understanding of this. Then wald thou understand,
how Christ is given thee? This ground is true, that the body of Christ, is at
the right hand of the Father, the blood of Christ, is at the right hand of the
father: it notwithstanding, suppose there be als great distance, betwixt my
body, and the body of Christ, as is betwixt heaven and earth, it Christ's body
is given to me: and how is he given to me? Be reason, I have ane title of his
body given to me: the right and title, quhilk is given to me of his body and
blood, makes me to possess his body and blood: The distaunce of the place,
hurts not my title, nor my right: For gif any of ou, have a piece of land,
liand in the fardest part of Orknay; gif ee have a good title to it; the
distance of the place cannot hurt our title. Sa I say, the distance of place,
hurts not my title, and my right, that I have to Christ: But suppose, he be
sitting at the right hand of the Father; it the title and right, that I have to
him, makes him mine; sa that I may say truly, this man is my property: Then
Christ is not made mine, because I pike him out of the heavens: but he is
mine, because I have an sure title and right to him, and having a sure title,
and a just right to him, the distance of place, how far soever it be, can on
na ways hurt my title, nor my right; but quhaireuer he be, he is mine, because
I have a right and title to him. ea, not only, have I a title to him, but this
title is confirmed to me: for as I get a title to him in the word, (and gif I
gat not a title to him in the word; I durst not come to the Sacrament.) Sa in
the Sacrament, I get the confirmation of my title, I get the seal quhilk
confirms my title. Then to come to the point: Christ's body is sittand at the
right hand of the Father; and it he is mine, and is delivered to me, because I
have right to his body, be quhere it will; he was borne for me, given to me,
and delivered to me. Swa distance of place, hurts not the surety of my title,
as propinquitie of place, helps not the surety of the same. I give thee, that
Christ wald bow the heavens, and twitch thee with his body, as he did IVDAS: it
this could not help thee a quhit; for gif thou had not a title to him, thou
durst not call him thine. Swa it is not the nearenes, nor proximitie of places,
that makes Christ mine: It is only the right that I have to him. I have right
to him, only be faith: Sa be faith only, Christ is made mine. But they
think they have gotten a great vantage of us, gif we be sa far fra Christ, as
the heaven is fra the earth; but that sal be taken fra tham also, be gods grace.
I have a title to his body; his body is distant fra my body; it his body is
not distant fra me; that is, fra my saull: I say, his body, and my saull are
conjoined. That is a strange ledder, that will climb betwixt the heaven and
the earth; I get a cord Faith is the cord that couples us and Christ
that gais betwixt the heaven and the earth, that couples me and him together;
and this is only true faith. Be true faith, christ suppose he be in the
heavens, is coupled and conjoined with me, quha am here on earth: How can
this be? I sall show ou Similitude taken fra the sun.
how: Is not the body of the Sun in the lift? It is impossible to ou, to
twitch the body of the Sun; it the body of the Sun and ee are conjoined:
how? Be they same beams that shines on ou, be that light that shines on ou:
Quhy may not the body of Christ then, suppose it be in the heavens, be
conjoined with me that am in the earth, to wit, be the beams, be the light and
gladness, that flowis fra his body? my body and the body of Christ, are
conjoined be the virtue and power that flowis fra his body; quhilke virtue and
power quickens my dead saull, makis me to live the life of Christ, to begin to
die to my self, and ay the mair I die to my self, the mair I live to him.
This conjunctioun now is the ground as I tauld ou, of all our felicity and
happiness, and I have made it clear to ou for the present, sa far as God hes it
given me insight, gif he geuis any farther heirafter, as he communicats it, ee
sall have it. Always ee see this conjunction is moyaned, be two special
moyans, be the moyan of the halie spirit, and be the moyan of faith: Gif there
be na other moyaner, but their two, quhy craves thou a carnal or a visible
conjunctioun? Faith is invisible, and the spirit is invisible: therefore thou
cannot see it nor tak it up with the eye of thy body, the power of the halie
spirit is sa subtle, secreet, and invisible, that thou cannot perceive it, nor
take it up with the eye of thy body, and he will work great effects in thy
saul, or ever thou take up his working. In respect therefore, that the moyaners
of this conjunctioun are sa subtle, secreet, and spiritual, quhy thinks thou
to get a sight of this conjunctioun with the eye of thy body? Quhy imagins
thou sick a carnal conjunction, as this quhilk wald not do thee good, suppose
thou had it? Knawis thou not that the spirit, that cowples us and Christ is
infinite, sa that it is als easy to the spirit, to couple Christ and us, how
far distant that ever we be, as it is easy to our saull to cowple our head,
and the feet of our body, suppose they be distant. Then, seeing this conjunctio^
is the ground and fountain, of all our happiness, and seeing this ground of
happiness is sa subtle, and sa spiritual, quhat is our part? ^xhortation
Remove all our outward senses: Remove al our natural motions, remove our
natural discourses, and our natural reason, and follow the sight and
informatioun of the spirit of God: Crave that it wald please him to illuminat
our understanding, that be the light of his spirit, e may se cleirly the
spiritual conjunctioun. Except the eye of the spirit be given ou to take up
this spiritual conjunctioun: It is not possible that ee can get any insight in
it. But will the Lord of his mercy bestow some measure of his halie spirit
upon ou, out of question, e sall sone come to the understanding of it, and e
sall think the time happy, that ever e heard this word. Except e have some
part of this spirit, it is not possible that ee can be spiritual: that quhilk
is born of flesh and blood, man remane flesh and blood, except the spirit come
in and make it spiritual: therefore ee man be borne agane of the spirit, ee
man be borne in the body of Christ, his spirit man quicken ou. This is called
the quickening and living spirit of Christ be JOHN, and sa sone as this spirit
coms in us, quhat dois it? It chases away darkness out of the understanding:
quhereas before I knew not God, now I see him not only generally, that he
is a God, but that he is a God in Christ. Quhat mair dois the halie spirit? He
opins the heart as well as the mind: and quhat dois he there? That same thing
quherevpon I bestowed the affectioun of my heart, and employed the love of my
saull, is be the working of the halie spirit made gaull to me, he maks it
vennome to me, and to be as deadly hated of me, as poison. He works sick ane
inward disposition in my saull, that he maks me to turn and fly from that
same thing, quhervpon I employed my love of before, and to employ it upon God.
(this is a great perfectioun) Always in some measure, he maks me to love God,
better then any other thing: he changes the affections of my saull, he
changes the faculties, and qualities of my saull, and suppose our hearts and
minds be made new, it the substance of them is not changed, but only the
faculties and qualities are changed, in respect of the quhilk change, we are
called new creatures, and except ee be found new creatures, ee are not in
Christ.

Conclusion with ane exhortation,
Now to come to the point, this secret conjunction is brought about be faith,
and be the halie spirit; be faith we gripp the body and blood of Christ: and
suppose we be als far distant, as Heaven and earth ar, the spirit serves us as
a ledder to conjoyn us with Christ: As the ledder of JACOB, quhilk reached fra
the ground to the Heaven, to the self same use serves the spirit of God, to
conjoyne the body of Christ with my saull. Then take up all in a word: quhat
maks ou to have any right, or title to Christ? Nathing but the spirit, nathing
but faith: Quhat should be our study then? Prease be al means possible to get
faith, that as PET. Act. 15. 9. says, our hearts and consciences may be
sanctified be faith. And gif ee prease not as weill to get faith in our hearts,
as in our minds, our faith avails not. Quhat avails the faith, that fleets in
the fantasy, and brings a naked knawledge, without the opening of the heart,
and consent of the will; Swa their man be ane opening* of thy heart, and ane
consent of thy will, to do that thing that GOD bids do, or thy faith availes
not. Then prease to get faith in our hearts and minds, and doing sa, ee do the
duty of Christians. This is not done without the dilligent hering of the word,
and diligent perception of the Sacraments. Sa, be diligent in their excercises,
and be diligent in prayer: Praying in the halie Ghaist, that he wald nurish our
saules inwardly, with the body and blood of Christ, that he wald increase
faith in our hearts and minds, and make it to grow up mair and mair daily,
quhill e come to the full fruition of that blessed immortality. Unto the
quhilk, the Lord of his mercy bring us, and that for the righteous merits of
Christ Jesus. To quhome with the Father and the halie Ghaist, be all honor,
praise, and glory, for now and ever

Amen.
THE THIRD SERMON, UPON THE LORDS SVPper, preached the 15. of February, 1589.
1. COR. 11. 23. For I have received of the Lord, that which I also have
delivered unto ou, to wit, that the Lord Jesus in the night that he was
betrayed, took bread: etc.
WE heard (well-beloved in Christ Jesus) in our last lessoun, quhat names was
given to the Sacrament of the Supper, als well in the book of God, as be the
Ancients of the Latin and Orient Kirks. We heard the chief ends,
quherefore, and quherevnto this haly Sacrament was instituted. We heard the
things that were contained into this sacrament, quhat they war, how they are
coupled, how they are delivered* and how they are received. We heard also some
objections, that might be casten in the contrair of this doctrine: we hard
them proponed, and as God gave the grace, refuted. And last of all, we hard
how the faithful saul, is said to eat Christ his body, and to drink his blood:
We heard the manner how Christ is, or can be received of us: And we concluded
in this point; that Christ Jesus, the Savior of mankind, our Savior, cannot
be perceived, nor it received, but be a spiritual way and apprehension;
nather the flesh of Christ, nor the blood of Christ, nor Christ himself; can
be perceived, but be the eye of faith; can be received, but be the mouth of
faith, nor can be gripped, but be the hand of faith. Now faith is a spiritual
thing: for faith is the gift of GOD, powered down in the hearts and minds of
men and women, wrought in the saull of every ane, and that be the mighty
working, and operatioun of the halie spirit. Sa, the only way to grippe
Christ being be faith: and faith of the awin nature being spiritual; it
folowes therefore, that there is not a way to get a grippe of Christ, but ane
spiritual way* There is not a hand to grippe Christ, but ane spiritual hand,
there is not a mouth to digest Christ, but ane spiritual mouth. The scriptures
familiarly be al their terms, points out the nature and efficacy of faith.

We are said to eat the flesh of Christ How we are said to eat the flesh
and drink the blood of Christ.
be faith, and to drink his blood be faith in this Sacrament, chiefly in doing
of two things. First, in calling to our remembrance, the bitter death and
passioun of Christ, the blood that he shed upon the Cross, the Supper quhilk
he instituted in remembrance of him, before he gaid to the Cross. The
commandment quhilk he gave: Do this in remembrance of me: I say, we eat his
flesh, and drinks his bloodspiritually. First, in this point, in recording and
remembering faithfully, how he died for us, how his blood was shed upon the
Cross. This is the first point; a point that cannot be remembered truly,
except it be wrought be the mighty power of the halie spirit. The second point
of the spiritual eating, stands in this; that I, and every ane of ou, believe
firmlie, that he died for me in particular: That his blood was shed on the
Cross, for a full remissioun and redemptioun of me, and my sins* the chief
and principal point of the eating of Christ his flesh, and drinking of his
blood; stands in believing firmlie, that that flesh was delivered to death for
my sins, that that blood of his, was shed for the remissioun of my sins: and
except every saull come near to him self, and firmly consent, agree, and be
persuaded that Christ died for him, that saull cannot be saved; that saull
cannot eat the flesh, nor drink the blood of Christ. Then the eating of the
flesh, and drinking of the blood of Christ; stands in ane faithful memory,
in ane firm belief, and in ane true applying of the merits of the death and
passioun of Christ to my awin conscience in particular.

There was sundry things objected against this kind of perception; and I will
not insist to repeat them, but beside all the objections, quhilk ee heard
objected against this kind of spiritual perceptioun be faith: They say, gif
Christ his flesh, nor his blood, be not perceived, nor received but be the
spirit; be faith in the spirit, then say they, ee receive him but be ane
imagination. Gif he be not received carnally, nor corporally, but only be the
spirit, and be faith: then is he not received, but be way of imagination,
conceat, and fantasy. Sa they count faith, ane imagination of the mind, ane
fantasy and opinion, fleeing in the harnes of man. I cannot wite them to
think sa of faith: for as nane can judge of the sweetness ofhony, but they that
hes taisted of it: Sa, there is nane can discern nor judge upon the nature of
faith, but they that hes felt, and taisted in their hearts quhat it is. And gif
they had taisted and felt in their saul's, quhat faith brings with it; alace,
they wald not call that spiritual jewel, and only jewel of the saul, ane
imaginatioun; they call it ane imagination, and the Apostle descriuing it HEB.
11 1. calls it ane substance, and ane substantial ground: Look how weill their
two agrees, an imagination, and ane substantial ground; they call it ane
uncertain opinioun, fleeting in the brain and fantasy of man: He calls it ane
euidencie and demonstration in the same definition. See how plat contrary, the
Apostle and they are in the nature of faith. Upon this, they infer, that as
it is true in the general, he cannot be delivered nor given, but that same
way that he is received; and look quhat way, any thing is received, that same
way it is given and delivered: sa after them, he being received be way of
imagination, he is also in their fantasy given and delivered, be way of
imagination. For gif he be not given, say they, to thy hand, to thy mouth, nor
to thy stomach corporal; he cannot be given, but be ane imaginatioun, and
fantastical opinion. The reasoun that mouis them to think, that Christ cannot
be theirs, nor given to them truly, in effect and really, except he be given
carnally, is this: that thing quhilk is sa far absent, and sa far distant fra
us: as the heaven is fra the earth; cannot be said, to be given to us, nor to be
ours: But with our awin confession, say they to us, Christ his body, is als
far absent from us, as the heaven is from the earth: therefore Christ his
body, nor his flesh, cannot be given to us, except be way of imaginatioun,
and so not truly nor in effect. This argument framed in this sort, wald
appear to have some force, and moment in the entry: it let us examine the
proposition of it. The proposition is this: that thing quhilk is so far absent
from us, as the Heaven is from the Earth; cannot be said to be delivered to us,
to be given to us, or any way to be ours. Now quhither is this propositioun
true or falls? I say this proposition is flat falls, and the contrair is may
true; a thing may be given to us, and may become ours, suppose the thing in
person it self be as far distant from us, as the heaven is from the earth. And
how prove I this? Quhat maks any thing to be ours? Quhat makis any of ou to
count a thing to be given to ou? Is it not a title, is it not a just right to
that thing? And gif ee have as just right given unto ou, be him, quha hes
power to give it, and ane sure title made to ou, be him, quha hes the power:
suppose the thing that he geuis ou, be not delivered into our hand, it be the
right and title, quhilk he makis to ou, is not the thing ours? This is out of
questioun, for it is not the nearnes of the thing to my body and to my hand,
that makes the thing mine: for it may be in my hand, and it not appertain to
me; Nather is it the distance, nor absence of the thing that makes it not to
be mine, but it may be far absent from me, and it be mine; because the title
is mine, and because I have gotten a right to it, of him quha hes power to give
it. Sa this ground is true, it is a sure title, and an just right, that makis a
thing, suppose it be far absent and distant fra us, to be ours. Now subsume:
But sa it is, that a lively and true faith, in the blood and death of Christ,
makes us to have ane sure title, and ane good right to the flesh and blood of
Christ, and to his merits, look quhat he merited be his death, and sheding of
his blood upon the cross, all that, together with himself also, apperteins to
me, and that be a title and ane right, quhilk I have gotten to him of God,
quhilk is faith: And the surer that my title be, the mair sure am I of the
thing, that is given me be the title. Now this Sacrament of the Supper was
instituted to confirm our title, to seal up our right, quhilk we have to the
body and blood, to the death and passioun of Christ, and sa the body of
Christ is said to be given to us: the blood of Christ is said to be delivered
to us, quhen our title, quhilk we have of him, of his death, of his body and
blood, is confirmed in our hearts* for this Sacrament was instituted, for the
growth and increase of our faith, for the increase of halines and
sanctificatioun; quhilk faith, the greater that it be in our hearts, the mair
sure are we, that Christ his death apertains to us. I grant to thee, as I have
said, that the flesh of Christ, is not delivered in my hand, his flesh is not
put in my mouth, nor enters not in my stomach: it, God forbid, that thou say,
he is not truly given. For suppose Christ's flesh be not put in thy hand, nor
mouth of thy body (and quherefore should it? Hes he not appointed bread and wine
for the nuriture of the body, and may they not content ou? are they not
sufficient to nurish ou to this earthly and temporal life? he hes appointed
Christ to be delivered, to the inward mouth of the saull, to be given in the
hand of thy saul, that thy saull may feed on him, and be quickened with that
life, quherewith the Angels lives, quhairwith the Son of God, and God himself
lives: Sa the flesh of Christ, is not appointed to nurish thy body, but to
nurish thy saul in the hope, ea in the growth of that immortal life) And
therefore I say; suppose the flesh of Christ be not delivered in the hand of my
body; it it is delivered to the part that it should nurish; the saull is the part
that it should nurish: Therefore to the saul it is delivered: ea that bread, and
that wine, are na mair really delivered to the body, and to the hand of the
body; nor the flesh of Christ, is delivered to the saul, and to the hand and
mouth of the saul, quhilk is faith. Therefore, crave na mair a carnal
delivery, nor panse not upon an carnal receuing. Thou man not think, that
ather God gives the flesh of Christ, to the mouth of the body, or that thou, be
the mouth of thy body, receauis the flesh of Christ. For ee man understand
this principal in the Scriptures of God; our saull cannot be joined, nor bound
with the flesh of Christ, nor the flesh of Christ cannot be joined with our
saull, but be ane spiritual band; not by ane carnal band of blood or allya,
nor be the twitching of his flesh, with our flesh. But he is conjoined with
us, be ane spiritual band; that is, be the power and virtue of his halie
spirit: And therefore the Apostle sayis, 1. COR. 12. 13. that be the moyan of
his halie spirit; all we quha are faithful men and women, are baptized in
one body of Christ; that is, we are conjoined, and fastened up with ane Christ,
be the moyan (sayis he) of ane spirit; not be ane carnal band, or be ane
gross conjunction; but anelie be the band of the halie spirit; that same
halie spirit that is in him, is in every ane of us in some mesure: And in
respect ane spirit is in him, and in us: Therefore we are counted al to be ane
body, and to be members of ane spiritual, and mystical body: and in that
same verse he sayis; We are all made to drink in ane, and the self same
spirit, that is: We are made to drink of the blood of Christ, and this blood
is na other thing, but the quickening virtue and power that flows fra christ
and fra the merits of his death. We are made all to drink of that blood,
quhen we drink of the lively power and virtue that flows out of that blood:
Sa there is not a band, that can couple my saull with the flesh of Christ, but
anely a spiritual band, and ane spiritual vnioun; and therefore it is that
the Apostle 1. COR. 6. 17. sayis: He that is cowpled with God, and conjoined
with our Lord, is ane spirit with him, and JOHN, in his third chap. sayis: That
quhilk is borne of the spirit, is spirit: Sa it is only, be the participation
of the halie spirit, that we are conjoined with the flesh and blood of Christ
Jesus; that carnal band, quhither it be the band of blood, running through
ea race; or be the carnal twitching of flesh with flesh: that carnal band,
was never esteemed off be Christ, in the time he was conversant here upon
earth, he lute nathing of that band; and as he hes left behind him in his
book; he had never that carnal band, in any kind of reverence nor estimation,
in respect of the spiritual band: but as to the spiritual band, quhairby we
are coupled with him be an spirit; he ever esteemed of this band, in the time
that he was conversant in the world: and in his book, he hes left the praise
and commendation of the spiritual band. To lat ou see, how lightly he esteemed
of the carnal band, of the blood and alya, quhilk we regard sa meekle. ee have
a place, LVKE. 8. 20. 21. for there they come to him, and they say, Master,
our mother, our brother and kinsfolks stands without, and wald see ou, and be
at ou: ee hear his answer to their demand; how little he esteems of that
carnal band, he answers in the 21. verse, in a manner, denying that band, and
he sayis: They are my mother and brethren, quha hears the word of GOD and dois
it: as gif he wald say; it is not that carnal band that I esteem off, it is
not that carnal conjunctioun that I reverence; it is the spiritual
conjunction, be the participation of the halie spirit, quhairby we are moved
to hear the word of God, to give reverence to it, and to obey it. This carnal
band, was never profitable as that same, LVK. 8. dois plainly testify: For gif
the twitching of Christ's flesh had been profitable, the multitude quhair of
mention is made in that chapter, that thrusted and preased him, had been the
better be their carnal twiching: but sa it is, that there was never ane of tham
the better of their carnal twitching: Therefore the carnal twitching profits na
thing. Sayis he not him self, IOH. 6. to draw tham from that sinister
confidence, that they had into his flesh only; my flesh profits nathing, it is
only the spirit that quickens; as to the other twitching, to twitch him be
the haly spirit, and be faith in thy saull: this twitching be faith hes ever
bin profitable: and we have a plain example of it in the sam chap. Sicklike,
quhair there the poor woman that was lang diseased with ane bloody issue, be
the space of twelve years, and had wasted, and consumed ane great part of her
substance, in seeking remeid, she findis no help at the natural and bodelie
Physician: At last, be the virtue of the halie spirit, working faith in her
heart; be faith she understands and conceuis, that she is able to recover the
health of her body, and the health of her saull at Christ Jesus, quha come to
save both body and saull: and upon this perswasioun quhilk sho hes in her
heart, that Christ may cure both body and saull, she comes to him, and as the
text sayis, sho preasis through the multitude, quhill she come to him, and
quhen sho comes to him, it is not said that sho twitched his flesh with her
hand; in case the Papists wald ascriue the virtue quhilk come out of him, to
her carnal twitching: But it is said, that sho twitched only the hemme of his
garment with her hand, and with faith, quhilk is the hand of the saull, she
twitched her savior God and man. And to lat ou understand, that sho twitched
him be faith, he sais to her in the end: Go thy way, thy faith has saved thee,
sho twitched him not so soon be faith, but incontinent there comes a power
out of him, quhilke power and virtue, sho felt be the effect of it in her
saull, and he felt it quhen it gaid fra him: The effect quhairby sho felt it,
was the health of her faull, and the effect quhairby he felt it, was the
ganging fra him, and sa soon as he felt it ga fra him, he sayis, quha is this
that has twitched me? PETER, quho was ever may sudden, answers, and sayis:
Thou art thrumbled and thrusted be the multitude, and it thou speeris quha hes
twitched thee, he answers again and he sayis, it is not that twitching that I
speak of: It is ane other kind of twitching: There is ane hes twitched me,
quha hes drawin a virtue and power out of me. The multitude taks na virtue fra
me: The poor Woman thinking that she had done amiss, and seeing that sho
could not be hid, sho coms trimbling, and sho sayis; I have done it: he answers
her in the end; and he sayis, depart in peace, thy faith hes saved the, thy
faith hes thrawin out a virtue and power out of me, that has made both saul
and body haill. Sa that this twitching of Christ hes ever been profitable, is
and sall be profitable. Lik as the twitching of Christ with the corporal
hand, hes never been, is not, nor sall never be profitable; for quhy? Christ
is not appointed to be a carnal head, to be set upon the crags of our
bodies, that he may do the office of a carnal head thairvnto, to furnish
natural motioun, and senses to our body, na, the scriptures calls not Christ
ane carnal head: But the scriptures calls him an spiritual head, to be set on
the crag of oursaul, that is, to be conjoined with our saull, that out of him
in our saull, may distill haly motions, heavenly senses, and that there may flow
out of him to us, ane spiritual and heavenly life. Then the Scriptures calls
him ane spiritual head, as they call us ane spiritual body. And as the life,
quhilk we get from him, is spiritual: Sa all our conjunction with him, is
spiritual; and in respect, he works that same operattion in my saull, quhilk
the carnal head dois in the body: Therefore he is counted a spiritual head;
Therefore is he counted the head of his Kirk, be reason he furnishes to her,
spiritual motion and senses, quhilk is the life of the Kirk: Sa to be short,
there is nathing in this conjunctioun carnal; there is nathing gross in it,
there is nathing, that may be compast be our natural judgment and
understanding: And therefore, quhasoeuer wald attain, to any small insight of
this spiritul conjunction, betwixt us and Christ; of force he mann bow down,
and earnestly incall for the spirit, or it is not possible to get any
understanding, and it were never sa small ane insight; how the flesh of Christ
and we are conjoined, except we have some light given us be the spirit: that
is, except our hearts be walkned, be the mighty working of the spirit of
Christ, this sall remain, as a dead and a closed Exhortation
letter to us. Sa ee have to crave, that the Lord in his mercy, wald walken
ou, and illuminat our understandings, and make ou to have a spiritual light, to
discern on their spiritual things. Nixt, ee mann study and be cairfull to
remove all vain cogitations, and earthly fantasies, quhen e enter to hear of
sick ane high matter; ee mann cast off all filthy thoughts, ill motions, and
cairs of the world; and ee man shake off all things that cloggs our hearts: And
thirdly, ee man come with a purpose to hear the word, to give diligent*ear to
the word, and with a sanctified heart to receive it, with ane purpose to grow
and increase in halines, as weill in body, as in saul, all the days of our
life: And coming with this purpose, na question, the halie spirit sal reueal
the things to ou that ee want. And suppose this word pass, and bring not great
commodity for the present, it the halie spirit hereafter, sal reveal to
thee, the truth of that quhilk thou hes heard now. Then this is the point of
all, be present in our hearts and minds, and lat our saul's be emptied of all the cares of the world, that they may receive that liquour, quhilk is offered
in the hearing of this word.

Now I go forward, and I come to the discriuing of the sacrament of the supper,
The definition of the sacrament of the Lords Supper.
and I call this Sacrament of the Supper, ane halie seal, annexed to the
covenant of grace and mercy in Christ, a seal to be ministered publikly,
according alwayis to the halie institutioun of Christ Jesus, that be the lawful
ministry thereof, the Sacramental vnioun betwixt the signs, and the thing
signified may stand, and this union standing, Christ Jesus, quha is the thing
signified, is als truly delivered to the increase of our nuriture spiritual,
as the signs are given and delivered to the body, to the nuriture temporal.
Now we sall examine the words, and parts of this definition. First of all,
I call Quhy th^s sacrament is called a seal.
this Sacrament a seal, be reasoun that this Sacrament serves to the same use
to our saulls, that a common seal serves to a common evident: As the seall
quhilk is annexed to the evident, confirms and seals up the truth contained in
the evident: Sa this Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, confirms and
seals up the truth of mercy and grace, contained in the covenant of mercy
and grace: for this respect it is called a seall: It is called Quhy it is
called a haly seal.
a halie seall, quhy? Because it is taken fra the profane use, quherevnto that
bread served in the night before, and that bread is applied to ane halie use:
there is a power given to that bread, to signify the precious body of Christ
Jesus, to represent the nuriture and feeding of our saul's: And in respect, it
serves now in the sacrament to sa halie ane use, therefore I call it ane halie
seal. As to this word, it is not mine, it is the Apostles word. ROMANS 4. 11.
quhere he geuis the Sacrament the same name, and calls it a seall. And to tell
ou farther, gif the wisdom of Christ in his Apostle, had been followed, and
gif men had not inverted new names of their awn to this Sacrament: but
contented and satisfied them selfs, with the names that God hes given be his
Apostle, and that Christ himself had given to this Sacrament; I am assured,
nane of their tragedies nor great storms and debaites (quhilk never will cease)
had fallen out: but quher men will ga about, to be wiser nor God, and ga
beyond God, in devising names, quhilk he hes never given; upon men's awin
inventions, sick tragedies and debaits hes fallen out. A lesson be the way;
lat na flesh presume to be wiser nor God, but lat tham stoup, and keep the
names Quhy the seal is said to be annexed to the covenaut,
quhilk God hes given to this sacrament. I say thirdly, annexed to the
covenant, annexed and hung to the chartour: because it cannot be called a
seal properly, except it be hunging at ane evident. Look quhat it is be
nature, that same thing is it, and na farther; gif it be not hungin to some
evident, it is only the appensioun to the evident, that makes men to count it
ane seal: therefore it is nathing esteemed, but being hung to the evident.
Euin sa it is here, gif that Sacrament be not ministered and hungin to the
preached word; to the preaching of the covenant of mercy and grace, it cannot
be a seal; but look quhat it is be nature, it is na mair: as be nature, it is
but a commoun piece bread, sa it is na mair; gif it be not hungin to the
preaching of the word, and ministered therewith as Christ hes commanded:
Therefore I say, the seal mann be annexed appended and hungin to the evident,
to the preaching of the word for establishing of the evident, vtherwaies it is
not a seall. But it is not sa with the evident, quhilk is the word of God: for
ee know any evident will make faith, suppose it want a seall, and it will serve
to make a right, gif it be subscriued without a seall: but the seall without
the evident avails nathing: Even sa it is with the word of God, suppose the
Sacraments be not annexed to the word, it the word will do our turn, it
serves us to get Christ; It serves to engender and beget faith in us, and maks
us to grow up in faith: but the seal without the word, can serve us to na
halie use: therefore I say, the seal man be annexed to the word preached, to
the covenant of mercy and grace.

Now there follows in the definition, Quhy the Sacrament, should be ministered
publicly.
that this seal mann be ministered publicly: Quherfore say I publicly? to
exclude all private administratioun of this Sacrament: For gif this Sacrament
be ministered First reason
to an privately, it is not a sacrament; quhy? Because the Apostle calls this
Sacrament a communion; Minister ee it to ane, ee tine the communion: Therefore,
gif ee minister it priuatlie, e tine the sacrament: For this Sacrament, is a
communion of the body and blood of Christ; therefore, of force it mann be, be
way of communication, and sa the action mann Second reason
be publicly ministered. Secondly, this Sacrament mann be publicly ministered;
quhy? Because Christ Jesus, quha is the thing signified in this Sacrament, is
not sick a thing as pertenis to ane man anely; gif it were sa, he might be
priuatlie given and ministered: But seeing Christ, quhilk is the thing signified
in the Sacrament, is a common thing, appertaining to every faithful man and
woman: therefore, he aught to be commonly given to all, in a common action; in
a society and congregatioun of the faithful. Thirdly, this Sacrament is
compted a thanksgiving to God the Father for his benefits: Now it appertains
not to ane or two, to thank God only; but as we are all partakers of his
temporal and spiritual benefits: sa we aught all publicly, to give him
thanks for the same. Therefore I say, in the definitioun, this seal aught to
be publicly, and not priuatlie ministered, as the Papists dois in their
private Mess. This seal mann be publicly ministered, according to Christ's
institution: quherefore say I, Christ's institutioun mair, nor Quhy this seal
man be ministered according to Christ's institution*
man's institution, or Angels institutioun? quhy hauld I my self at Christ's
institution? I sall tell ou quhy; because, a man hes not power, to institute or
make a Sacrament; because an Angel hes not power to make or institute a
Sacrament: For nane hes power to make nor institute a Sacrament, but he that
hes power to give Christ, quha is the thing signified in the Sacrament: But sa
it is, that nane hes power to give Christ, but ather the Father or himself:
therefore nane hes power ^a^e hes power to institute a Sacrament but ^od only.
to make or institute a Sacrament, but ather the Father or the Son; only God
mann make a Sacrament. Secondly, this Sacrament is a part of Gods service and
worshipping: But sa it is, that nane hes power to appoint any part of his
service, or prescriue any part of his worshipping, but only GOD himself:
Therefore nane can make a Sacrament, but God himself. There is na Prince in
the earth will be content, to be served after ane other man's fantesie: but he
will prescriue his service, according unto his awin fantasy: How meekle mair
is it meet, that God should appoint his awin service and worshipping: Therefore
there is nather man nor Angel, hes power to institute a part of the service of
God; the sacraments are ane part of his service; therefore, there is na Angel
nor man, hes power to institute a Sacramenr. The greatest style, that any man
in the earth gets in the Ministry of the word and Sacraments, is that
style, quhilk the Apostle gives them. 1. COR. 1. 4. There we are called
Stewardes, and dispensours of the graces of God; Ministers of they mysteries
and halie things. It follows then of this, that we are not Authors,
Creators, or makers of them; but only Ministers and dispensers of the
Sacraments. Swa it is clear, that na man, nor creature hes power to make a
Sacrament: Then it mann be according to the institution of Christ; his
institution mann be kept: Look quhat he said, look quhat he did, look
quhat he commanded thee to do: all that, mann be said, done, and obeyed: Leave
thou a jot of that undone, quhilk he commanded thee to do, thou peruerts
the institution: for there is nathing left in register of that institution, but
it is essential. Sa, in the celebration of Christ's institution, we mann take
tent, to quhatsoeuer he said, did, or commanded to be done: thou mann first
say, quhatsoeuer he said; and then do, quhatsoeuer he did; For the ministry
of the Sacrament, man follow after the word. First thou mann say, that quhilk
Christ commanded thee to say, and thou man teach, that quhilk he commanded
thee to teach, and then We call the word in the sacrament, the haill
institution.
minister the Sacrament. Then to keep this institution, we man begin at the
saying, and say, quhatsoeuer Christ commanded us, thairester faithfully do
all that quhilk he commanded to be done. Swa, quhat call we the word? I call
the word, the haill institution of Christ Jesus, preached and proclaimed,
denounced distinctlie, clearlie, and sensibly to the people: In sick sort,
that gif we leave any kind of circumstance or ceremony of this institution
undone, we pervert the haill action.

It is agreed and condiscended upon, betwixt us, quha celebrats this
institutioun Word and element man continue to the constitution of a Sacrament.
and all the sects of this world, quha hes separat them selves fra this
institution, that two things are necessare, and mann concur to the nature and
constitution of a sacrament; to wit, there man be a word, and there man be ane
element concurrand; there is not a sect, but they grant this, that the word
man concur with the element, or we get a Sacrament. As they are easy to
admit this general, look how easy they are to admit this general, and how
weill we agree with them in the general, quhen it comes to the special, and
that we enter into particular in the handling and treating of the word, look
how weil we agree in the general, in the particular we loope als far sundry:
For quhen we come to dispute, and reason on their particulers; first, quhat we
mean be the word: Secondly, how this word ought to be entreated: Thirdly,
quhat virtue this word hes: Fourthlie, how far the virtue of this word dois
extend the self: and last of all, to quhome the words ought to be directed and
pronounced: In all their particulers, we are als far sundry, as ever we
appeared to agree in the general.

I leave my conference with any other Quhat we understand be the word in the
Sacrament.
sect, and halde me with the Papists, because we have may ado with them.
And first of all we have to understand, quhat we mean be the word, and quhat
they mean be it: we be the word, as I have said, understands the haill
institution of Christ Jesus, quhatsoeuer he said, quhatsoeuer he did, or
commanded to be done, without eiking, without paring, without alteratioun of
the meaning or sens of the word: This we mean be the word in the Sacrament.
Quhat understands the Papists be the word? They preach not the institution
of Christ, nor taks not the haill institution, as he left it: but in stead
thereof they select, and pyks Quhat the papists understand be the word in the
Sacrament.
out of his institution, four or five words; and they make the haill virtue of
the institutioun, to stand in the four or five words: and it maid noght gif
they contented them with they words, because they are the words of the
institution: but they eike to they words, they pair fra the words and
alters, the meaning of they same words, quhilk they keep as they pleas. That
ee may ken this; In their Mess quhilk they call the Supper, we sal lat ou se
the substance of it. I divide the Mess in substantial things, and accidental
things: To the substance of the Mess there are three things craved. There man
of force be a priest, that is sick a ane, as taks upon him the office of our
mediator Christ Jesus, to intercead betwixt God and man. Secondly, to the
substance of the Mess is craved, that the Priest offer the body and blood of
Christ: We come here to receive they things; there the Priest offers them
to GOD the Father. Thirdly, be this work, (say they) they obtain all good
things; be this work, wrought they obtain remission of sins, als weill to
the dead, as to the quick; but in special, they obtain remissioun of sins to
the Priest, quha is the distributer, and to him quhom to the Priest applies
that sacrafice: And as to the rest of the Kirk, quha are absent, they obtain
this remissioun of their sins, be this work generally. Their three things are
necessare to the substance of the Mess. As to the accidents that mann concur
to the making of a Mess, they are of two sorts: Some of them are always
necessar, with out the quhilk that actioun cannot be: Some are not necessare
again, and the action may be without them, but not without a deadly sin:
Their things that are necessare, concernis partly the priest, and partly the
action it self. The accidents that are necessary to the Priest, are of two
sorts, an sort are sik, as without the quhilk he cannot be a priest, the other
sort the quhilk without he cannot be free of dedlie sin: The things without the
quhilk he can not be a Priest are their: Except he have power given of his
Bishop to consecrate, quhilk power is justified be the vnctioun, and shauing of
his croune; except again he have power to speak, and that the roof of his
mouth be haill, that he may speak, he cannot be a Priest. Their two are
always necessare, and concurs to the person. Other things again, are not so
necessare: as the Priest man be free fra suspension, fra cursing, deadly
sin, and all ecclesiastical pane and censures, their things are necessare to
the person. There is again, two things necessare to the action; ane sort
without the quhilk the action cannot be, without the Lords prayer it cannot
be, without the five words of the institutioun it can not be. Other things
again are not sa necessare, as the consecration of the place, quhere the Mess
is said, the Altar stane, the blessing of the Chalice, the Water, the Murgeons,
singing, he that should help to say Mess, and the rest. Swa they and we in na
ways agreis concerning the word, quhat is meaned be it.

Into the second member, we are als far sundry, how this word ought to be
entreated: We say the word taken as said is, for the hail institution, ought to
be intreted after this manner: First there ought a lawful Pastor, quha hes his
calling of God to entreat it* and this lawful Pastor aught to entreat the word
lawfully; quhat is that? he aught to preach it, to proclaim it, and publicly,
with a clear voice to denounce it. He aught to open up, and declare the haill
parts of it; quhat is the peoples part: and quhat is his awin part; how he
aught to deliver and distribute, that bread and that wine: how the people aught
to receive off his hand, that bread and that wine, to inform theirfaith; how
they aught to receive Christ his body and his blood, signified be that
bread, and that wine; as also, he aught to teach them, how they should come
with great reverence to that Table, and communicate with the precious body and
blood of Christ. This he aught to do in ane familiar language, that the people
may understand him, that they may hear him, that they may perceive and take
up in their hearts, the things that he speaks: For quhat auailes it to ou, to
hear a thing quhispered, and not spoken out, or gif it be spoken out; quhat
availes it ou to hear it, gif ee understand it not? For except e hear Christ
in an familiar and hamelie language, e cannot understand: And except ee
understand, it is not possible to ou to believe; and without belief, there is
na aplication of Christ; and except e believe, and apply Christ to our selfis;
our coming to the Sacrament, is in vain. Sa of force, gif this Sacrament be
lawfully handled; the Pastor mann preach the institutioun of Christ, that it
may be hard, and in ane familiar language, that it may be understood; in sick
sort, that the faithful people may be informed how to receive; and the Minister
may know his part, how to deliver and distribute. This we say, should be the
right handling of the halie institutioun of this Sacrament.

Now quhat do they? They in place of a Minister, Pastor, or Bishop, call him
as thou pleasis, quha is called lawfully of God: they substitute a Priest, and
surrogates an hireling, quha hes na calling, or office now in the Kirk of God.
For the office of a Priest, as they use their Priesthead, is na other thing,
but the office of Christ Jesus, the office of the Mediator betwixt God and us.
For they make their Priests, daily to offer up Christ Jesus to the Father.
Now this is the Mediator, Christ his office; and he did it ains for ay, and
ains for all, sayis the Apostle: sa that, they can have na entry, to do this
turn over again: And in respect, that their Priests preasis to do this turn
over again, quhilk he hes done already; they do it without a command, they
have not a warrant in the word of God, but givand that they had a warrant of
their calling, in the book of God; it they handle the sacrament al wrang: for
quhair they should speak forth clerly, they whisper, and they conjure the
elements be an certain kind of quhispering, quhair they should speak it in ane
knawn language, that the people may un derstand; they speak it in an un knawn
lan guage; and suppose they spak it in an knawin and familiar language: it in
respect they quhisper it, the people cannot be the better of it. And quhat sall
I say, seeing they handle the word this way; suppose it be the very
institutioun it self: it they sa spill it in the handling, that it is not an
halie Sacrament: Then we differ als meekle in the second point; how the word
aught to be handled and entreated.

Now the third point comes in, to wit: Third head controuerred.
quhat virtue this word hes, how far the virtue of this word extends the
self. In this head we grant and acknawlege, that the word hes a virtue, and the
word taken, as said is, works something, euin toward the same elements of
bread and wine; for we acknawledge, that they elements, be the virtue of this
word are changed, not in their substance, not in their nature, nor it in their
substantial and natural properties: But we grant, that the elements are
changed in ane quality, quhilk they had not off before: In sick sort, that
their elements are taken fra the commoun use, quhairvnto they served of before;
and be the institution of Christ, they are applied now to ane halie use: Look
how far, the haly use differs fra the commoun use; their is als great
difference, betwixt the elements this day in the actioun, and the thing that
they were isterday. For I grant that the elements are changed; and it, this
element proceeds not of the nature of the elements, fra an closed virtue,
supposed to be in the words* nor fra the whispering of the words; but it
proceeds, fra the will of Christ, fra the ordinance and appointment of Christ,
set down in his awin institution: for that thing is halie, quhilk GOD calls
haly, and that thing is Third head controuerred.
profane, quhilk God calls profane.

To lat ou understand, how their signs are made haly, it is necessair that their
two How the Elements a^ sanctified.
things be considered. First, quha is he that makes them halie, quhither
God, Angel, or man: Secondly, quhaeuer he be that marks them halie; be quhat
mean and way makes he them halie. And be the consideration of their two, we
sal com to the consideratioun, and right weying of the sanctification of the
elements: As to the first, we say; that God is only he, that may make a
thing, quhilk was common, to be halie: So we say, that God be his will and
ordinance, declared and set down in his word; hes made the things that were
common be his appointment to be haly. As to the way and mean, quhairby they
are made halie; it is the word of GOD, the institution of Christ, the will of
Christ, declaired in his institutioun, that makes them halie: For the
preachinge and opening up of the word, and institutioun of Christ, lats us
see, that God hes made their things halie; and not only, that he hes made them
halie, but lats us see ane halie manner, how they should be used; in quhat place,
at quhat time, with quhat heart, and to quhat end. Sa it is the will of Christ,
declared in his institutioun, quhairby the things that were commoun before,
are now made halie. There is other two things also, that maks the same
elements halie, and their two, are used in this institutioun: there is prayer
and thanksgiving; for prayer and thanks giving, makes the creatures of GOD to
our use halie: quhair vtherwayis, gif we receive the creatures of God like
dogs, and thank him not for them; it is ane sure taken, that they were never
Sanctified to our use.

Be prayer, we obtain grace and strength from God, to use the creatures, and
this hail action halilie and lawfully, as it should be: And therefore, not only
in this haly action, should we begin with God, and at the incalling upon his
name; but in all actions of the world* we should begin in Gods name. Sa it is
the will of God, prayer and thanksgiving conjoined with the elements, that
makes them halie: al their three, contained in the action of the Supper, makes
the seals halie: for beside the will of God, declared in his institutioun; In
the supper, we use ane incalling, and in this incalling, we use ane
thanksgiving: the Sa the Elements are not made halie be the word of God
only: but be the use of prayer and thanksgiving, quhilk three are the only
mean and way, quhereby their things are sanctified.

To express and declair the sanctification The word of blessing and
thanksgiving used in differentlie, the ane expressed be* the other.
of the elements: the Evangelists and the Apostle PAVLE, uses indifferently
the word TO BLES, and TO GIVE THANKS, and commonly they place the one word for
the other: for ee see that MARK, and PAVLE, vsis the word BLES: MATTHEW and
LVKE, uses the word TO GIVE THANKS, and all in ane signification: And MARK
himself in the 14. of his Gospel 22. verse speking of the same action of the
supper, he uses the word TO BLES, and in the 23. verse, he uses the word, TO
GIVE THANKS, and both in ane signification; to lat ou see that the Apostle,
Christ himself, and the Evangelists, uses the word TO BLES, and TO GIVE
THANKS, indifferently, to signify the sanctification, and consecration of the
Elements: except ee take the ane for the other, it sall be hard to get ane
good mening out of the Apostles words: for I remember the Apostle 1. Corinthians,
10. 16. he sayis: the cup of blessing quhilk we bless; quhat is that? I
take the word to signify as I have said, quhilk we bless, that is, quhilk
we sanctify and prepares be blessing. Sa to bless and to give thanks in the
Supper, signifies navther thing, but to sanctify; or vtherwaies gif ee take
the word in ane other signification, ee sall fall in ane error: for quhy? God
is said to bless, and Man is said to bless: God is said to bless, quhen he
gives good things to his creatures, for God his blessing is ever effectual,
and therefore he is said to bless, quhen he gives good things. Man again is
said to bless, ather priuatlie or publicly, quhen he crauis blessing at the
hands of God to any man, quhen he blesses in the name, and at the command of
God, any person or people. Now if ee ascriue blessing in any of their two
significations to the cup, it is all wrang: for we use nather to crave
blessing to insensible Elements, nor it to bless them in the name of God. And
God uses to give good things to the Sons of men, and not to insensible
creatures: Therefore we are compelled to use the word, bless, in the third
significatio: The cup quhilk we bless, that is, quhilk we sanctify and
prepares be blissing. This far we understand, for the sanctification of the
elements.

Now lat see, how they sanctify there elements, and quhat is the form of their
consecratioun; sa far as I understand of it, stands in their five words: Hoc
est enim corpus meum. It stands in they five words; and in the quhispering of
them; for gif ee quhisper them not, e tine the fashion of incantation: for
the thing that we call sanctifieng, they call quhispering: And the quhispering
of they five words, they call the consecration of the elements. And quhen the
words are after this way quhispered, they presuppone sick ane hid and
monstrous virtue, to be enclosed in the syllabs; that the virtue and power
quhilk flows fra they words, is able to chase away halely, the substance of
the bread: Sa that the very bread, and substance of it, is altogether
destroyed be this power. Secondly, that this power that flows fra their words,
is able to rugg and pull down ane other substance; to wit, the flesh and
blood of Christ Jesus, that sits at the right hand of his Father, and is able
to put it within the compass of that bread; that is a strange and ane great
virtue, that not only will thrawe down that substance, but put it within the
compass of that bread. They same five words, quhispered in this manner, hes
sick a monstrous operation, say they, that they are able both to chase away
the ane substance, to rug down ane other, and to put it within the compass of
that bread. We altogether deny, that there is sik a virtue in their words: for
as I have said before; we deny not that the word hes a virtue, but we deny
that there is sick a virtue enclosed in the words: we deny the quality of
the virtue, and the quantity of the virtue, or that it flows from sic a
fountain. For we grant that the word hes a virtue, there is never a word
that God spoke heir, but it hes a virtue joined with it: but we deny that this
virtue is enclosed in the sillabs, in the whispering or pronouncing of the
words: for gif there were sic a virtue and power enclosed in the sillabs, be
that reason it should follow, that there were a virtue in the figure and shape
of the letter that makes up the words. Now there is na man will think, that
there is any virtue in the figure, or shape of the letter, and there is as
little virtue in the sillabs, or in pronouncing of the words themselves: Sa we
deny that there is any virtue enclosed in the sillabs, or resident in the
word; but we say, that there is a power conjoined with the word, and this
power is not resident in the word, but is resident in the eternal word, in the
essential word, quhereof JOHN makes mentioun in the first of his Evangell.
The word quhilk was fra the beginning, that is, the Son of God Christ Jesus.
We say there is not a dram weight of this virtue, and power resident in na
creature that ever God created: but it is only resident in Christ Jesus: And
therefore there flows na virtue from the syllabs, nor fra the words that are
spoken, but fra Christ and his spirit, quha gives the virtue to they words. Swa
we differ in this, we say that there is not a virtue resident in the syllabs;
we say that the syllabs and pronouncing of the sillabs, works nathing: but we
say that the virtue is resident in the person of the son of God, and he
works be his awin word.

Now we say, there cannot be sik a monstrous change, as to say, that the
whispering ofsa money words, should change the ^futation of ^e doctrine of
insubstanti^ion be three ^^ts of argu^ents
awin substance of the bread, Rug down the substance of the body of Christ,
and put his body in sa narrow ane compass: we say that cannot be, and this I
sall preiue be their three rules: to wit, be the verity of the flesh of Christ
Jesus, be the articles of our belief, and be the true end of the institution of
this Sacrament; and sa we sall see be Gods grace, the infinite absurdities that
follows upon their opinion.

The first principle that I lay, is this; seeing that Christ Jesus the son of
God, in ^e first sort argument,
the time appointed, took true flesh of the wembe of the virgin, and united
himself with our nature in ane personal vnioun, to the end, that our nature,
quhilk fell altogether fra integrity in the first Adam; might recover the same
in the second Adam; ea, not only the same; but sa meekle the greter, as our
second Adam excels the first in all degrees; and in respect he took on ane
body, like unto ours in all things, (sin excepted:) Sa, of necessity it mann
follow, that the definition of ane true body, and the inseparable properties
thereof, mann be competent to him. But their are the inseparable properties; to
wit, to be in ane certain place, to be finit, circumscriued, visible and
palpable: For all their conueines ( quarto modo, as the Logicians sayis) to ane
body; sa that they cannot be separate fra the subject, without the
distructioun thereof. Then I reason on this manner; All true humane body, is in
a certain place: Christ Jesus body is a true humane body: therefore it is in
a certain place. I call a place, a certain condition of ane organical body,
quherby it comes to pass, that quherever the body be, of necessity, it is
limitat within that place, and quhill it is there, it cannot be else quhere.
Crave ee the probation of my proposition, of the Doctors? Read AUGUSTINE,
writand to DARDANVS, spekand of this same body of Christ: Take away a certain
rome fra the bodies, and they sall be in na place; and gif they be in na place,
they are not. This same AVGVSTIN writand upon JOHN in his 30. treatise: the
body (sayis he) into the quhilk the Lord raise; of necessity it mann be in
ane place; but his divine efficacy and nature, is diffunded every quhere. And
in his third Epistle, he sayis, how meekle that ever the body be, or how
little that ever the body be; it behooues to occupy the bounds of a place. And
besides their, the history of the Acts, proves may evidently, Christ's body
to be in a certain place, as ACT. 3. 21. the words are their: Quhom the heaven
must contain, until the time that al things be restored, quhilk God had
spoken be the mouth of all his Prophets. Suppose I need not to insist, in the
probation of their things; it I follow forth. Secondly then, I reason after
this manner; All humane body is finite and circumscriued: but the body of
Christ is a humane body: Quhat warrands of the Doctors have I for this? I
leave many purposlie, and takes me only to AUGUSTINE: he writ and to
DARDANVS; believe sayis he, Christ to be every quhere, in sa far as he is God,
but only to be in heaven according to the nature of a true body; and in his
146. Epist. I believe sayis he, the body of Christ to be sa in the heaven, as
it was in the earth, quhen he gaid up to heaven: but it was circumscriued in a
certain place in the earth: Ergo, it is sa in the heaven, and consequently, it
cannot be in the Mess bread, and there both at ane time. The last reason is
this: al humane body, is visible and palpable; but Christ hes a humane body,
and he is corporally present, as e say: therefore Christ's body is visible and
palpable. I prieue my proposition, be Christ's awin words, taken out of LVK. 24.
39. Into the quhilk place, to persuade the Apostles of the verity of his
body, and to prieue evidently, that it was not fantastical; he uses the
argument taken fra their two qualities, and he commands his Apostles to feel
and see, latting them to wit thereby, that as their two senses are the may
certain of all the rest: sa are they may able to discern, quhither gif he
was ane body, or ane spirit: as gif he wald say; gif I be visible and
palpable, ee may be out of doubt, that I have an true body. For as the Poet
sayis, quhilk TERTVLIAN cites also to this sam purpose. Tangere enim and tangi,
nisi corpus, nulla potestres. Be their arguments, it may be evidently seen,
how this transubstantiatioun may na wayis stand with the verity of the body
of Christ Jesus.

And as it fights with the flesh of Christ Jesus, sa it repugnes directly
against the articles of our belief: for into our belief, we profes that
Christ ascended out Second sort of argument
of this Earth to the Heaven; quhere he sits at the right hand of the father;
quher he gouernes and directs all things in heaven and earth; fra the quhilk
place, he is to come in the last day to judge the world* This article lats us
see, that he hes fleeted his dwelling, quhilk he had amangs us in the earth, and
hes ascended into the heuens, quhere he sits at the right hand of his Father,
and sal remain there, according to the testimony of PET. quhilk I cited out
of Act. 3. 21. unto the last day. Gif he sits at his Fathers right hand, and be
to remain in heaven quhil the last day, he is not corporally into the bread: but
the article sais, that he sits at the right hand of his father and PET. sais in
that place, that he is to be contained in the heavens unto the last day:
therefore this transubstantiatioun fightes directly agains the articles of our
belief, and the manifest place of the scripture.

Thirdly, that it fightes agains the end Third sort of argument.
quherfore this sacrament was instituted, it is mair nor evident: for the end
of the Sacrament is spiritual, as the effect that flows thereof is spiritual,
and the instrument quhereby this spiritual food is aplyed to us, is also
spiritual: But of ane natural and corporal presence, ane spiritual effect
can never flow: therefore the corporal and natural presens of the body and
blood of Christ Jesus, repugns directly to the end of this sacrament: for the
corporal presence mann have a corporal eating, of this eating, follows a
digestion in the stomach, and the thing that is digested in the stomach, is
never able to feed thy soul to life eternal: Sa, this corporal presence
mann ay tend to ane corporal end, quhilk is directly contrair to the end,
quherefore this Sacrament was instituted.

Attour, gif the bred were transubstantiate, Other arguments to the same effect.
it should become the thing signified; gif it becomes the thing signified, this
sacrament should want a sign, and sa it should not be an sacrament: for every
sacrament as e hard, is ane sign. Now to say, that the accidents of true
bread, as the hew and the roundnes of it, that they may serve as signs, that
is mair nor folly: for betwixt the sign and the thing signified, there man be
ane conformity: but there is no conformity betwixt the accidents, and the
body and blood of Christ Jesus: for gif sa were, the accidents be houed to
nurish us corporally, as the body and blood of Christ Jesus, is appointed to
nurish us spiritually. Farther, gif the bread become the body of Christ Jesus,
it sulde follow that he had ane body without blood: for he hes instituted
ane sign, a pairt to represent his blood. Alswa, gif there had been sick a
wonderful thing, as they speak of, in this sacrament, there walde have been
plain mention made thereof in the scripture: For God himself works never a
notable work, but he vtters it ather in opin terms, or private terms in the
scripture, that thereby he may be glorified in his wonderful works; as ee may
read in the Evangell JOHN, 2. 8. quher the water was changed into wine, GENE.
2. 22. quhere the Ribbe of ADAM was changed into HEVA. EXODUS 7. 10. quhere
AARONS rod was turned in a Serpent. There ee see, that changing is
manifestly expressed: Therefore I say, gif there had bin sic a monstrous
change in their elements of the Supper, as they affirm, the scripture walde not
have concealed it, but expressed it: but in respect, there is na mention made
of this change in the scripture: therefore there is na sic change in this
action. Farther, gif there were sic a change, as they speak, ather it is
before their words of consecration be spoken, or follows after that same word
be spoken; gif the change be before the words of the consecration be spoken,
the consecration is superfluous, and their proposition is false; gif the change
be after the word be spoken, This bread is my body; their proposition is false
also, because the word bread is spoken, or the last sillab of their five words
be pronounced. Their, and infinite ma absurdities follows of this doctrine.

And it they obstinatly persevere, and vrges us with the letter, affirming that
the words of Christ are sa plain, that they admit na figure. They wald have
spoken mair advisedly, gif they had sought counsall of AUGUSTINE, to have
discerned betwixt ane figurative speech and ane proper: for he into the
third book, and 16. Chap. of Christian doctrine, speaks after this sort, gif
the speech says he, appear to command a wickedness or a mischief, or to forbidd
ane happiness, or ane welfair, it is not proper, it is not figurate, and he
subjoynes for ane Example, a place out of JOHN. 6. 53. Except sayis our Master,
ee eat the flesh of the son of Man, and drink his blood, ee have na life in
ou: quhereunto AUGUSTINE adjoynes, this speech sayis he, apeares to command a
mischief, therefore it is a figurat speech, quhereby we are commanded to
communicate with the sufferings of Christ Jesus, and with gladness to lock up
in perpetual memory, that the flesh of the Lord was crucified and wounded for
us: for vtherwaies it were mair horrible (as this same AUGUSTINE, maks mention
in the second book agains the adversaries of the law) to eat the flesh of
Christ Jesus reallie, then to murder him, and mair horrible, to drink his
blood, then to shed his blood; it notwithstanding, they hauld ay still, on ea
tune, and sayis, that they words aught to be taken properly. Sa that it
appears, that of very malice, for contradictions cause, to the end only,
that they may gainstand the truth, they will not acknaledge this to be ane
sacramental speech. For they are compelled, nil they, will they in other
speeches of the like sort, to acknowledge ane figure, as GENE. 17. 10.
circumcision is called the covenant: and EXODUS 12. 11. the lamb is called the
passover, and MATH. 20. 28. the cupp is called his blood, and LVKE 22. 20. the
cupp is called the new testament, and 1. COR, 10. 4. the rock is called
Christ. All their speeches are sacramental, and receauis a kind of
interpretation, it they maliciously preas to deny us this in their words; ( Hoc
est corpus meum) quhilke they are compelled to grant in the rest, as specialy
quhere PAVL calls the rock Christ.

Now quhen they are dung out of this fortres, they fly als unhappily to the
second: to wit, that God be his omnipotency, may make the body of Christ both
to be in heaven, and in the bread both at ane time: ergo, say they, it is sa.
Gif I denied their consequent, they wald be weil fashed to prove it: but the
question stands not heir, quhither God may do it or not: but the questioun
stands, quhither GOD will it or not, or may will it or not. And we say
reverently, that his majesty may not will it: for suppose it be true, that he
may, money things quhilk he will not: it it is as true; that there is money
things, that he may not will, of the quhilk sort, this is: and their are
reduced to two sorts. First he may not will they things, that are contrare to
his nature, as to be changeable, as to decay, and sic vthers. For gif he might
will their things, they sulde not be arguments of ane puissance, or of ane
power, but rather certain arguments of his impotencie and infirmity: And
therefore suppose he may not will their things, he leaves not of to be
omnipotent: but sa mekle the rather, his constant, and invincible power is
knawin. Secondly God may not will some things, be reason of an presupponed
conditioun, as sick things, quher of he hes concluded their contrair of
before: of the quhilk sort, is this, whilk is now controuerted: For seeing that
God hes concluded that all human body, should consist of organicall parts, and
therefore to be comprehended, and circumscriued within ane, and the awin proper
place: And als, seeing he hes appointed Christ Jesus to have the like body, and
that not for ane time, but eternally. In respect of this determined will, I
say, God may not will the contrair now, ather to abolishe this body quhilk he
hes appointed to be eternal; ather it to make it at ane time, in respect of
ane thing a body and not a body, quantified and not quantified, finite and
infinite, local and not local. For to will their things, quhilk are plain
contradicent in them selfs, he may not, na mair nor it is possible to him to
will a lie. Swa, it may be seen of al men, that we preserve the omnipotency
of God, and with reverence from our hearts, acknawledges him only, to be
only omnipotent, and wills all men to esteem them as calumniators, quha
abuses the ears of the simple anes, to persuade tham the contrair of us.

They are not content with this, but they say, that the Lord may will a
contradiction, and make both the parts to be true at ane time. And to prove
this, they wald bring in, the miracles quhilk GOD works; as they wald say,
every miracle includes a contradiction. As for example: God made a virgin to
bear a son, they think this warke brings with it a contradictioun; to bear
a son, say they, is the ane part of the contradictioun, and to be a virgin,
is the other pairt of the contradictioun. This warke is a miracle, but it
implies na contradictioun: For concerning the halie virgins birth, therein is
na contradiction. There was a miracle indeed, that a Virgin should bear a son
contrare to the course of nature; for to be a virgin, and it to have a child,
are not contradictorie, gif she have conceived and brought forth be miracle, as
did the blessed virgin: but to be a virgin and not a virgin at ane time, this
is the contradictioun. Sa Christ's body to be visible and invisible, local
and not local, at ane time; is in every respect the like contradiction: and
therefore impossible to be true.

Their other Example of Christ's entering in, the doors being closed and shut,
quhat apearance of contradiction hes it? Can they preiue that he entered
through the doors? and gif he did, then there was ane alteration of
qualities, and that be miracle; ather in Christ's body or in the doors, but na
contradiction in nature: unless ou know not quhat is a contradiction. Their
third and last example of the fire in NABVCADNEZERS Oven, quhilk consumed the
ministers, but hurt not them that were in the midst of it; apears to be of
na weight, be that quhllk hes already been answered. They imagine as apears,
that in every miracle, a contradiction is implied, quhilk is absurd. Gif they
can prove that this fire was both hot and cold, then they say some thing to
the purpose: but that it burns up some and hurts not vthers, is na
contradiction; because, be miracles, the force thereof was repressed. Swa,
this second ground halds fast; God may not will that thing, quhilk implies a
contradiction: but sa it is, that the real presence of the body of Christ in
the Sacrament, implies a contradictioun; for it makes the body of Christ,
visible, and invisible, compast and not compast at ea time: therefore, GOD may
not will sick a thing.

Quhen they are dung out of this, they Their las^ refuge.
make their last refuge, to an peremptour defense in their opinioun; for say
they, Christ's body is exemed fra physical rules; for Theology is not subject
to physical rules. It is a very il gathered consequence, to say, that we
subject Theology to Physic; because that we first, according to Theology,
quhilk is the law of God, and nixt, according to Physic, quhilk is the law
of nature, defends the natural properties, of the true and natural body of
Christ Jesus. Then I grant this, that Theology is not subject to Physic;
quhat of this? Ergo, Christ's body is exemed fra physical rules. How follows
that I pray ou? Be quhat law may ee exeme, or can ee exeme the body of
Christ? Be the law of nature, e cannot: for he was maid of the seed of DAVID,
and took on true flesh of the wembe of the virgin: And far less, be the law
of God: quhilk is Theology: For ee know, that Christ was appointed from all
eternity, to take on our nature, and to become true man. Indeed it is true,
that the law of God, cannot be subject to the law of nature: For the law of
nature, flows of the law of God, as out of the awin spring: but it is als true,
that gif ee exeme Christ's body, fra the law of nature, ee sall exeme it also
fra the law of God. For I affirm, that the scriptures sa consents with the law
of nature; that gif ee deny the ane, ee sall deny the other; and gif ee
admit the ane, ee sall admit also the other. Therefore, gif ou look weil
about ou; ee sall find the bauke in our awin eye: for ee pervert, both the
law of God, and the law of nature, be ane new invented physic of our awin:
for quhasoeuer he be, that attributes to ane, and the self same body, natural
and unnatural properties, quhilk directly feights agains them selfs; I say,
this man peruerts both true Theology, and Physic: but ee, to ane and the
self same body of Christ Jesus, attribute natural and unnatural properties:
therefore it is ee that peruerts, both the use of true Theology, and the
ordour set down, and established in nature. Crave ee the reason of my
proposition? I say, it behooues als weill in Theology, as in Physic of
necessity, ane of the contradicent enunciations to be false. But ains to make
ane end with ou; we sal answer to our last subterfuge.

For sa ee reason; a glorified body, is not subject to physical rules; but
Christ's body is glorified: therefore it is not subject to physical rules.
First of all, or we answer directly, we man consider, quherin stands the
glorification of ane body: and then, I say, the answer sall be easy: the
Apostle PAVL, 1. COR. 15. 42. speaks after this manner. Sa also, sayis he, is
the resurrection of the dead. The body is sawen in corruption, and is raised in
incorruption; It is sawin in dishonor, and is raised in glory: It is sawin in
weakness, and is raised in power. And a little after; this corruption mann put on
incorruption, and this mortality, mann put on immortality. Be this clear
Antithesis, PAVLE clearlie descriues, the glorification of ane body: for he
oppones their two; the unglorified body, and the glorified body: And to the
unglorified body, he ascriues corruption, ignominy, infirmity, carnallitie,
and mortality. To the glorified body again, he attributes incorruptioun,
glory, power, spiritualitie, and immortality. Of this opposition, we may
gather easily, quhat the resurrection and glorification apports to the body.
Shortly, be them we see, that the body is only spoiled of corruptioun,
shame, infirmity, naturalitie, and mortality: And to take up all in an word,
it becomes, only spoiled of all the infirmities of our nature; that it may be
cled, with ane mair glorious apparel; as with incorruption, power, glory,
spiritualitie, and immortality. We see then that this glorification imports
ane change indeed; but I believe na man will be sa mad, as to esteem this change
to be made in the sub stance: for gif sa were, the aulde substance behooved to
decay, and ane new sulde arise: but we hear na word of sic things in this
description, and as little is the change made, in the quantity: for we hear na
word, nather of augmentatioun, nor diminution of any substance, quhilk behooved
to be, gif it were in the quantity. The fardest that we can persaue; this
mutatioun consists in the qualities, be the quhilk, the body casts of the
auld coat of infirmity, and cleathes it self, with the coat of Glory: For
Christ after he raise, he both gaide and come, was seen and twitched. Of the
things before deduced, it clearlie follows, that in respect the glory of the
body of Christ, hes wrought na change in his nature and substance; and
consequently, in his natural dimensions; nather it in any other essential
property: that therefore the glorificatioun of his body, exemes it not fra
the rules of physic. For sa lang as the nature of ane true body remains,
there is na supernatural gifts, quherewith it may be glorified; war they never
sa high, sa far as may be gathered of the scriptures of GOD, that may hurt,
ather the nature, or the natural property of it. For there is na gift nor
quality, that may hurt nature, but that gift that is agains nature: but the
supernatural gift, is nather unnatural, nather it agains nature: therefore it
cannot hurt nor impair nature. And my reasoun is this: They gifts, that
decores and beautifies nature, they cannot hurt nor impair nature: but al
supernatural gifts, beautifies and decores nature: Therefore they cannot take
away, nather nature, nor it, the natural property.

They leave us not sa, but out of this same doctrine of PAVLE, concerning the
glorification of the body, they draw ane objection, to prease us. PAVL grants,
that ane glorified body, is ane spiritual body: but ane spiritual body, is
ane invisible body: therefore ane glorified body, is invisible; and be the
consequent, the body of Christ is invisible. Suppose the argument be not
formal; it to make short, I deny our assumption: For gif there were na mair,
but that same word body, that word might be ane argument to ou, that the
spiritual body is not invisible. But it, to open up the matter mair
clearlie, according to the mind of PAVL in that place. PAVLE in ane word, as
it were, in the 44. verse of that same Chap. shows the change that sal become
in the qualities of the body, be the resurrection: For he sayis of ane natural
body, it sall become ane spiritual body. He straight way in the nixt verse,
immediately following, expones their two qualities: for in the 45. verse, that
is called an natural body, says he, quhilk is maintained and quickened, be an
living saul only; sic as Adams was: and again, that is said to be ane
spiritual body, quhilke together, beside the saul, is quickened with ane far
mair excellent virtue, to wit; with the spirit of God, quhilk descended fra
Christ, the second Adam unto us. Then according to this ground, I answer with
AUGUSTINE ad Constantium: As the natural body is not ane saull, but ane
body; even sa, the spiritual body, is not said to be a saull, but ane body;
and be consequent, it is not invisible.

But to take up this head, I sall give them only ane knot to loose, and sa
make an end of this point. Then I reason, gif therefore Christ's body is
naturally and really in the Supper, be reason that it is glorified, it follows
consequently, that quhen it was not glorified, it culd not be reallie present:
but it was not glorified quhen this Supper was first instituted: therefore it
was not reallie present in the bread, at Christ's first supper. Gif his body was
not naturally present in the bred at the first Supper, it cannot be naturally
present now: For quhatsoeuer ee use now in the administration of our Supper,
or of our Mess, call it as e will, according to our awin confessioun, e use it
according to the ordinance, form and manner, that Christ Jesus himself used in
his first Supper: For ee say plainly in our disputatioun at POYSSIE*, and in
all the rest of our works; That Christ Jesus first of all observed that form,
quhilk ee use in our Mess, and left it to his Apostles, and to their
successors, that they sulde do the like: and sa be our awin words, ee have
drawn our selfs in a Hose-net, and crucified our Mess. Quhat can e answer
to this? e will not stand dumb I am assured; for maintenance of our religion,
ee man say something: for gif this reason bear it away, e have done with it.

Then we say, quod the Papists, that suppose the body of Christ, quhilk was
locallie present with the rest of his disciples was not glorified, it the body
quhilk he exhibit in the bread was glorified. ee might as weill have halden
our peace, and said nathing: For take tent to the words of the text, as they
are written. Luke 22. 19. quhere it is said, and he took the bread, and quhen
he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave to them saying, this is my body
quhilke is given for ou, and PAVL. 1. COR. 11. 24. hes their words, Take, eat:
This is my body, quhilke is broken for ou. This relative quhilk, is relative
to the body, quhilke was exhibited in the bred: for according to our awin
confession, they words are pronounced upon the bread, and directed to it. But
that same body was given and broken for us, that is to say, crucified and
demayned with anguish and dolors. Then I reason after this sort. To be
crucified and broken with anguishe and dolours, can on na ways agree and
conueine with a glorified body: but the body that Christ exhibit in the
bread, is said of the Evangelists, to be crucified and broken for us: Ergo,
that body was not glorified.

Now last of all, they are not it content, but sayis, Christ can make the bread
his body, and therefore his body is really present. That Christ can make the
bread his body, we grant: for Christ being God, can do quhatsoeuer he will:
Only let them show, that Christ will make of real bread, his real flesh,
and then this controversy is brought to ane end. Christ indeed makes the bread
his body, not reallie, but sacramentallie: For Christ hes not a body made of
bread, his body was made ains of the pure substance of his blessed Mother: ane
other body then this, or oftener made then ains, hes he nane: quherefore all
doctrine that teaches Christ's body to be made of bread, is impious, and
heretical: The Papists doctrine of real presence teaches, that Christ's body
in the Sacrament is made of bread, be changing the bread into his body,
through force of consecration: quherefore we may bauldlie and truly
conclude, that their doctrine of real presence, is both wicked and
heretical. Now in conclusion of this head, I beseke them, seeing that reasoun
fails them, that they fight not agains God, for maintenance of a lie, how
auld that ever it be, (for the Devil is auld aneugh, and it he could never
change his nature) but lat them rather glorify God, in confessing their
speeches to be sacramental.

Then quhat is the reason and ground, The reason that moves the Papis^es to
think* that Christ's body cannot be present in the Sacrament, except it be
reallie, corporally, and substantialy present.
quherefore the papists pulles down the substance of the body of Christ, and
the blood of Christ, and makes the very substance to be corporally, reallie,
and substantiallie in the Sacrament? The reason is this, because they cannot see
be their natural judgment, nor cannot understand be their natural wit, the
truth of this, to wit, how Christ's flesh and blood can be present in the
Sacrament, except he be present to their corporal hand, to their corporal
mouth and stomach. Gif they had an light to inform them, that Christ might be
present in the Supper, and not to the hand, to the mouth or stomach: they
walde never have thought of sick a monstrous presence, as they count to be
there: but being destitute of the spiritual light, they follow their natural
reasons and maks a natural and carnal presens. Swa that ee have this lessoun
to note of observation
this: There is na man that hes not the spirit of God to understand this word:
this is my body, but out of question, he will do as the Papists does; that
is, he will understand it carnally: and sa they misknowing the right meaning
of it, it is na marvel, suppose they and we differ in this matter.

For will ee spear at the Papist first, The diverse opinions concerning the
presence of the body of Christ in the sacrament.
gif the true body of Christ be there, or gif the true flesh and blood of
Christ be there: he will say, it is there. Will e spear quherein? He will say
in, and under, the accidents of the bread and wine, under the hew and roundnes
of the bread. Will ee spear again at him, be quhat instrument it is
received? he will tell ou be the mouth and stomach of the body: sa this is
their gros understanding of the body and blood of Christ. Will e spear at the
VBIQVITER, gif the true body of Christ be present? he will say it is. Will e
spear gif it be in, with, or under the bred? he will answer, it is in the
bread, contentiue, that is, that the bread conteines it. Will ee spear at him,
to quhat instrument it is offered? he will answer, that the body of Christ,
is offered to the mouth of our body, and that the blood of Christ is offered
to the mouth of our body, as the Papists dois. Will e spear at us again, how
Christ Jesus his true boand Our opinion.
blood is present? we will say, that they are spirituallie present, reallie
present, that is present in the Supper, and not in the bread: we will not
say, that his true flesh is present to the hand, or to the mouth of our
body, but we say, it is spirituallie present, that is, present to thy spirit
and faithful saull; ea even als present inwardly to thy saull, as the bread
and wine, are present to thy body outwardelie. Will e speere then, gif the
body and blood of Christ Jesus be present in the Supper? We answer in a
word, they are present in the Supper: but not in the bread and wine, nor in the
accidents nor substance of bread and wine: And we make Christ to be present in
the Supper, because he is present to my saull, to my spirit and faith. Alswa,
we make him present in the Supper; because I have him in his promeis, This is
my body, quhilke promeis is present to my faith, and the nature of faith, is to
make things that are absente in them selves it present: And therefore, seeing
he is both present be faith in his promeis, and present be the virtue of his
halie spirit, quha can say but he is present in the Supper.

But it the word wald be opened up, quhat we mean be the word present, How
a thing is said to be present and absent.
how a thing is said to be present and absent? And knowing this, ee sall
find all the matter easy. I say, things are said to be present, as they
are perceived be any outward or inward sense, and as they are perceived be
any of the senses; sa are they present, and the farther they be perceived, the
farther present; and be quhat sense any thing is perceived, to that same sens
it is present. As gif it be outwardly perceived, be ane outward sense; that
thing is outwardly present. As for example, gif it be perceived be the
outward sight of the eye, be the outward hearing of the ear, be the outward
feeling of the hand, or taist of the mouth; it is outwardly present: Or gif
any thing be perceived be the inward eye, be the inward taist and feeling of
the saull; this thing cannot be outwardlye present: but it mann be
spirituallie, and inwardly present to the saull. Sa I say, every thing is
present, as it is perceived. Sa that gif ee perceive not a thing outwardly, it
is outwardly absent; and giff e perceive not a thing inwardly, it is
inwardly absent. It is not distance of place that maks a thing absent, nor
propinquitie of place, that makes a thing present: but it is only the
perception of any thing be any of thy senses, that makes a thing present, and
the not perception, that maks a thing absent. I say; suppose the thing it
self, were never sa far distant, gif thou perceive it be thine outward
sense, it is present to thee. As for example, my body and the Sunn, are als far
distant in place, as the heaven is fra the earth; and it this distaunce stays
not his presens to me: Quhy? Because I perceive the Sun be mine eye and
other senses; I feel him and perceive him be his heat, be his light, and be
his brightness: Swa, gif a thing were never sa far distant, gif we have senses
to perceive the same, it is present to us. Then the distance of place makes not
a thing absent to thee, and thou have senses to perceive it. Siclike, the
propinquitie of place makes not a thing present, and it were never sa near, gif
thou have not senses to perceive it. As for example, gif the sun shine in thy
very eine holes, gif thou be blind, he is not present to thee, because thou
cannot perceive him. A sweet tune will never be present to ane deaf ear,
suppose it be sung in the ear of that man, because he hes not a sens to
perceive it: And a weill tauld tale will never be present to a fool, because
he cannot understand it, nor hes not judgment to perccaue it. Swa, it is not
the neernes, north distance of place that makis any thing present or absent,
but only the perceauing, and not perceauing of it.

Now the word being made cleire, speere ee how the body of Christ is How
the body of Christ is present.
present? To give our judgment in aword, as ee have hard fra time to time, he
is present, not to the outward senses, but to the inward senses, quhilk is
faith, wrought in the saull. For this actioun of the Sacrament and of the
Supper, is partly corporal, and partly spiritual. I call this actioun
partly corporal, not in rerespect only, that the objects, that is, that bread
and wine are corporal: but also in respect my mouth, quhervnto their things are
offered; the instrument quherby, and the manner how their things are received,
are al corporal and natural. I call the same action again, partly
spiritual; not only, in respect of Christ Jesus, quha is the heavenly and
spiritual thing of the Sacrament; but also in respect of my saul, quhervnto
Christ is offered and given: in respect the instrument quhereby, and the manner
how he is received, are all spiritual: For I get not Christ corporallye, but
spirituallie. Swa, in their respects, I call this action, partly corporal, and
partly spiritual.

Now confound me not their two sorts of actions, the corporal and natural
signs, with the spiritual thing, signified thereby: Confound not again, the
mouth of the body, with the mouth of the saull: Confound not thirdly, the
outward manner of receiving be the hand of the body, with the spiritual
manner of receiving, be the hand of the saull. And sa it sall be exceeding
clear to see, that ilke thing sal be present to the awn instrument, that is;
the body of Christ, quhilk is the spiritual thing signified, sall be present
to the spiritual mouth and hand; and the bread and wine, quhilk are the
corporal signs, are present to the corporal mouth and hand. Then how is any
object present? A corporal object, is corporally present, and ane inward
object, is inwardly present: Of quhat nature is the thing signified? It is of
ane heavenly nature. Then spear e, how he is present? He is spirituallie and
heavenly present to thy saull, and the mouth of thy saul; quhilk is faith. For
it were a preposterous thing, to make the thing signified present to thy belly,
or to the mouth or eye of thy body; for gif sa were, it should not be
spirituallie present: Because every thing is present, as it accords to the awin
nature: Is it a bodily thing, it is bodily present, and gif it be a heavenly
thing, it is spirituallie present. Sa I think, na man can doubt, how the body
of Christ is present; he is not carnally present, but spirituallie present to
my saull, and to faith in my saull. This far concerning the manner of his
presence.

Now the last part of our conference, is The last head in ^^^trouersie betwixt
us and the papists.
this; we have to consider, to quhome the words aught to be directed and
pronounced: For we and the Papists differs in this last head. We say, that the
words aught to be directed and pronounced unto the people, to the faithful
communicants. They, be the plat contrair, sayis, that the words aught not to be
directed, nor pronounced to the people, but to the elements; and not to be
clearly pronounced, but quhispered on the elements: Sa that, gif they be
spoken to the people, or spoken openly, their charm auails not. Now I say, as
the actioun is perverted be them in all the rest; sa they pervert it in this
point also; in speaking that to the dumb elements, quhilk they should speak to
the people of God. For I sall prove it clearly be three arguments, taken out of
the Scriptures, that the words aught not to be spoken to the bread, but to the
people of God.

And first I say, the promises of mercy and grace, aught to be directed and
pronounced to them, in quhome the Lord performs them, and makes tham
effectual. But sa it is, that the promises of mercy and grace, are performed
and made effectual, not in bread and wine, but in faithful men and women:
Therefore, their promises should be directed to faithful men and women. Now
here is the promise of mercy and grace. This is my body, quhilk is broken
for ou. And this promise, is made to na other thing, but to faithful men and
women; and sa to tham only, it aught to be directed. Secondly, we have to
consider, that this sacrament, seals up a covenant of grace and mercy. Now
quhom with makes God his covenant of mercy and grace? Will he make a covenant
with a piece bread, or any dumb element? There is na man will enter in a
covenant with his servant: lat be to enter in a covenant with a dumb element.
Sa in respect, this Sacrament seals up a covenant; this covenant of necessity,
man be knit up with ane faithful saul, and not with the dumb element: and
therefore, their words cannot be directed to the elements. Thirdly, look to
the end, quherefore this Sacrament was appointed: Is it not to lead us to
Christ? Is it not to nurish my faith in Christ? Is it not to nurish me in ane
constant perswasioun of the Lords mercy in Christ? Was this Sacrament
appointed to make the elements Gods? Na: For will ee mark Gods purpose in this
institution; e will find, that Christ hes not set down his institution, to
nobilitat the elements, to favor and respect the elements, quhilk were bread
and wine isterday, to be Gods to day. We on the contrair, sayis plainly,
that the institutioun of Christ, looks not to the elements, to alter their
nature. Indeed, it is appointed to alter us, to change us, and to make us mair
and mair spiritual, and to sanctify the elements to our use. But the special
end, looks to this; to make us halie, and mair and mair to grow up in a sure
faith in Christ, and not to alter the elements, nor to make them Gods. And
therefore, be all their three arguments, it is evident, that the words, aught
not to be directed to the elements, but to the people and faithful
communicants.

Now to make an end of this, there is Conclusion with an exhortation.
ane thing, without the quhilk, we cannot profit; let us discourse never sa
lang, upon the right understanding of the Sacrament. ee see now, all that is
spoken, concerning the Sacrament, is grounded and depended upon faith: Have a
man faith, albeit it were never sa small, he getts some grippe of Christ, and
some insight in the understanding of this Sacrament: but lacking faith, suppose
a man pain him self, to make the Sacraments never sa sensible, it is not
possible, that he cann get a grippe of Christ, or onie insight in him: For
without faith, we can not be Christians; we can nather get a sight of God,
nor feel God in Christ, without faith. Faith is the only thing, that
translates our saules out of that death and damnation, quhereintill we were
conceived and borne, and plants us into life. Swa the haill study and endeavor
of a christian sulde tend to this. To crave that the Lord in his mercy walde
illuminat his mind, with the eye of faith, and walde kendle in his heart a
love of faith, and work in his heart, a thirst and desire of the object of
faith, and mair and mair to thirst and hunger, for the food of faith, that
nurishes us to life eternal.

Without this faith, (howsoever the natural man, and understanding natural
wald flatter thy self,) surely there is na blessedness, but all his life is
mair nor terrible misery. For quhatsoeuer it be that flatters and pleases thee
now, be it a thought or motioun of the mind, or an action of the body, that
pleases the now without faith: the same very motioun cogitatioun, and actioun,
sall torment thee after this: Swa without faith, it is not possible to please
GOD: and quhatsoeuer pleases not GOD, is done to torment thee. Therefore crave
mercy, for quhatsoeuer motioun, cogitatioun, or actioun, quherein thou hes
offended GOD, or be that same, GOD sall offend and torment thee: And to eschew
the offense of God, there is na moyane, but be true faith. Therefore the study
of a Christian should be, to grow in faith. Now be hearing of the word, thou
gets faith, and be receiving of this Sacrament, thou getts the increase of
faith: and having faith, the receiving of the Sacrament sall be fruitful: But
without faith, thou eats thine awin condem. nation. Sa, the haill study of ane
Christian, is to get faith; and this faith cannot be obtained with idleness, but
be earnest prayer: Therefore lat every ane of ou, fall down, and crave
earnestly this faith, and the increase of it, quhereby, e may be worthy
receauers of this sacrament, and that for the righteous merits of Christ Jesus:
To quhome with the Father, and the haly Spirit: be al honor, praise, and
glory, for now and ever.

Amen.
THE FOVRT SERMON, UPON THE PREPARATION to the Lord is Supper, preached the 22.
day of Feb. 1589.
1. COR. 11. 28. Let every man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat
of that bread, and drink of that cup. etc.
SVppose the doctrine of our trial and due examination, (well-beloved in Christ
Jesus) ought to go before the doctrine and receiving of the Sacrament: it
notwithstanding, seeing that preparation is always, at all times, as well
necessare for the hering of the simple word, as for the receiving of the
visible sacrament. (For no man can hear the word of God frutfully, except in
some measure he prepare his saul, and prepare the ear of his heart how to
hear.) Therefore the doctrine of preparation and dew examination mann come in
the awn place, and be very necessare for every ane of ou. The Apostle in the
words that we have redd, interponis his counsel, and gives his advise: and
not only gives his advise, bot gives his admonition and command, that we should
not come to the Table of the Lord, that we should not cum to the hearing of the
word rashly; but that every ane of us, sulde come to this holy work with
reverence, that we sulde prepare, and sanctify our selves in some measure: and
seeing we go unto the King of heavens Table, it becomes us to put on our best
array: and in ane word, he takis up the haill doctrine and matter of this
preparation, quhill as he sayis: Let every man, and let every woman try and
examine them selves, as gif he would say: let every ane of ou try and examine
our saules, that is, try the estait of our awin heart, and condition of our own
conscience. Look and behold in quhat estaite our heart is with God, and in what
estate our conscience is with our neighbor. He bids not our neighbor try ou,
he bids not our companion try our heart: but he bids our self in person, try
our awin conscience, he bidds our self try our awin heart, by reason nane ca^
be certain of the estait of our heart, or of the condition of our conscience,
but our self. Now he secludis not vthers from the trial of ou neither, (for it
is leisum to the Pastor to try ou) but others can nocht try ou sa narrowly,
as e our self can. For na man can know sa mekill of me, as I know of my self:
na man can be certain of the estait of our heart, and condition of our
conscience, and it e our selfis may be certain of it. As to others, men may
judge of our heart and conscience, according to our works and effects, and
except our works and effects, be very wicked, and altogether vicious; we are
bound in our conscience, to judge charitablie of our heart and conscience.
Therefore there is nane sa meet to try the spirit of a man, to try the heart
or conscience of a man, as is the man himself.

Now that this trial may go on the The heads to be entreated in this sermon.
better fauoredlie, e have first to understand, quhat it is that e should try,
quhat ee call a conscience, quhilk the Apostle 1.
commandes ou to try. Secondly, ee have to wey and considder, for what reasons
2.
and causes should ee try our conscience. Thridly and last of all, ee have to see
in what chief points, e should try and examine our conscience. Then that we
speak not to ou of things vnknawne, it is necessare for every ane of ou
(seeing there is nane of ou that lakes a conscience) to understand what a
conscience is; and so nearely as God shall give me the grace, I will bring ou
to the understanding and knawledge of a conscience. I Definition of conscience,
with the exposition of the partis thairof.
call a conscience, a certain feeling in the heart, resembling the judgment of
the living God, following upon ane deed done be us, flowing from ane knawledge
in the mind, accompanied with ane certain motion in the heart, to wit; fear
or joy, trembling or rejoysing. Now we shall examine the parts of this
definition I call it first of all, ane certain feeling in the heart: for the
Lord hes left sic a stamp in the heart of every man, that he does not that
turn so secretly, nor so quietly but he makes his own heart to strike him,
and to smite him: he makes him to feill in his own heart, whether he hes
done weill or ill. The Lord hes placed this feeling in the heart; quhy? because
the eyes of God looks not sa mekill upon the outward countenance and exterior
behavior, as upon the inward heart. For he says to SAMVEL, in his first book
16. 7. verse, The Lord behaldes the heart. Siclike 1. CHRON. 28. 9. he says
to SOLOMON: The Lord searches all hearts, and understands al imaginations of
thoughts. Also JEREMY, 11. 20. says, the Lord tryes the reins and the heart.
And the Apostle 1. COR. 4. 5. he says, The Lord shall lighten things that are
hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the heart manifest. Sa, in respect
the Lord makes him chiefly, to haif to do with the heart; therefore in the
heart he places this feeling, quhilk is the chief part of conscience. I say
nixt, that this feeling resembles the judgment of God; for this feeling was
left and placed in our saul, for this end and purpose, that we might have as
domesticke and familiar judgment within our selfs, to subscriue and resemble
the secreete and invisible judgment of the high God; a particular judgment to
go before that general judgment, in that general and great day, quhere
every man sall be justified or damned, according to the particular judgment,
that is within his own conscience. In the mean time, this conscience is left
in us, to make out our hail process in this life, to halde in the travels of the
living God, as it were, in that last judgment. For the books of our own
conscience in that last day salbe opened, and every man sall receive according
to the report of the decree, that is within his own conscience; therefore I
say, that our conscience resembles the judgment of God. The third thing that I
say, is this; It follows upon an deed done be us, our conscience, nor our heart
strykes us not, before the deed be done. Our heart strikes us not before the
evil turn be committed: na, it goes not before the deed, but the straik of
the conscience, and feeling of the heart, followis immediately upon the deed, in
sick sort, that the deed is not so soon done be thee, but thy conscience
applyis it to thy self, and gives out the sentence against thy self.
Therefore I say, it is a feeling following upon ane deed done be us. And nixt
I say, flowing fra ane knawledge in the mind, for except the conscience have
information, and except the heart know that the turn quhilk is done is evil,
the heart, nor the conscience, can never count it to be evil. Therefore
knawledge must go before the straik of the conscience. Thy heart can never feel
that to be evil, quhilk thy mind knawis not to be evil. So knawledge must
ever go before feeling, and according to the mesure of thy knawledge, according
to the nature and quality of thy knawledge, accordingly sall the testimony
and straik of thy conscience be. For a light knawledge, a doubting and
uncertain knawledge, makis ane light and small straik: as in the other part,
ane haly and a solid knawledge drawin out of the word of God, makis ane
heavy straike of the conscience: Sa the conscience mann answer to the
knawledge. If we have na other knawledge, but the knawledge quhilk we have by
nature, and be the light and spoonkes that are left in nature, our conscience
will answer na farther, but to that knowledge. But if beside the light of
nature, we have a knawledge of God in his word, and a knawledge of God by his
holy spirit working in our hearts, our conscience then will go farther, and
excuse, or accuse us; according to the light that is in the word: Sa that the
conscience is not acquired or obtained, at quhat time we are enlightened be
the working of the halie Spirit, and hearing of the word of God; but our
conscience is borne with us, is natural to us, and is left in the saul of
every man and woman: and as there are some spunkes of light left in nature; sa
there is an conscience left in it. And gif there were na mair, that same light
that is left in thy nature, sal be aneugh to condemn thee. Sa the conscience
is not acquired, gotten or begun at the hearing of the word, or at that time
quhen we begin to reform our selfs, be the assistance and renewing of the
halie Spirit: bot every man be nature hes a conscience, and the Lord hes
left it in our nature: and except that this conscience be reformed according
to the word of God, that same natural conscience sall be aneugh to condemn
thee eternally. Therefore I say, flowing from a knawledge of the mind. Last
of all, I say, accompanied with a certain motion of the heart: and we express
this motion, in fear or joy, trembling or rejoicing. In very great fear gif
the deed be exceeding heinous, and the straik of the conscience be very heavy:
Than the conscience takis never rest, for guiltines mann ever dreed. Bot gif
the deed be honest, godly, and commendable, it makis a blyth heart, and
makis the heart to burst out in joy. Sa to be short in this matter, (for I
purpose not to make ane common place of it) e see that in every conscience
there mann be two things: First, there mann be ane knawledge, and nixt there
mann be ane feeling, quherby according to thy knawledge, thou applyis to thy
awin heart the deed done be thee. Sa that, according as the word it self
testifyes, it ryses of two partis, it ryses of knawledge, according to the
quhilke it is called science: and it ryses of feeling, according to the quhilk
the CON is put to, and it is called conscience. Then the word Conscience
signifyes knawledge with application.

This conscience the Lord hes appointed, To quhat uses the Lord hes appointed
the conscience to serve in the saull of man.
to serve in the saull of man, for many uses: to wit, he hes appointed every
ane of our consciencis to be ane keeper a waiter-on, and a careful attender
upon every action done by ou: so that that action can not be so secreetlie,
so quietly, 1.
nor so thifteously convoied, but nil thou, will thou, thy conscience sall
bear ane testimony of it: thy conscience sall be ane faithful obseruer of
it, and a day sal be ane faithful recorder of that same action: So the Lord hes
appointed thy conscience to this office, that it attends and waits upon thee in all thy actions, na thing can slip it. Sicklike the Lord hes appointhy 2.
conscience and placed it in thy saull, to be ane accuser of thee: so that
quhen thou dois ane evil turn, thou hes ane domestic accuser within thy awin
saull to find fault with it. He hes also placed 3.
it in thy saull, to bear ane true and steadfast witness against thee: ea, the
testimony of the conscience resembles not only a testimonye or witness, but the
conscience is als good, as ten thousand witnessis. The conscience also is
left in 4.
the saull, to do the part of ane judge against thee, to give out sentence
against thee, and to condemn thee; and so it dois* for our particular
judgment mann ga before the general and universal judgeme^t of the Lord, at
that great day. And quhat mair? He hes left thy conscience within thee, to put
thy awin sentence in execution against thy self: This is terrible: he hes left
it within thee to be ane very torture, and a burriour to thy self: and sa to
put thy awin sentence in executioun upon thy self. Is not this an matter mair
nor wonderful, that ane and the self same conscience, sall serve to sa many
uses in ane saul, as to be ane continual obseruer, and marker of thy actions:
ane accuser, ten thousand witnessis, a judge, and a burriour and tormentour,
to execute thy awin sentence against thy self. Sa that the Lord misters never
to seek a member of court out of thy awin saul, to make out a lawful process
against thee: but thou sall have all their within thy self, to make out a full
process against thy self. Take heed to this, for there is never a word of this
that sall fall to the ground, bot ather ee sall feill it to our weill, or to
our everlasting woe. And this secreet and particular judgment, that every ane
of ou caries about with ou; bydis sa sure and sa fast within ou, that do quhat
e cann, gif e wald employ our hail trauellis, to blot it out, thou sall never
get it scraped out of thy saull: gif e were als malicious and were become als
wicked, as ever any incarnate Devil was upon the earth, e sall never get this
conscience altogether scraped out of our saull: But nill thou, will thou,
there sall als mekill remain of it, as sal make thee inexcusable in the great
day of the general judgment. I grant thou may blot out all knawledge out
of thy mind, and make thy self to become als blind as a modewart: I grant
also, that thou may harden thy heart sa, that thou will blot out al feeling out
of it, sa that thy conscience will not accuse thee, nor find fault with thee,
but thou sall have ane delight in ill doing, without a remorse: but I deny
that any gree of wickedness in the earth, sall bring thee to that point, that
thou may do evil without fear: but ay the mair that thou dois evil, and the
langer that thou continewis in evil doing, thy fear sall be the greater: ea,
in despyte of the devil, and in despite of all the malice of the heart of man,
that fear sall remain: And suppose they walde both conspire together, it
sall not be able to them to banish that fear, but that gnawing of the
conscience sal ever remain: to testify to thee, that there is ane day of
judgment: I grant also, that there sall be ane vicissitude, and that fear
sall not always remain, but sall be some times turned over in security:
Nather sall that security always bide, but sall be turned over again in
fear: sa that it is not possible to get this fear hailelie scraped out, but
the greater that the security be, the greater sall thy fear be, quhen thou are
walkened. I grant thirdly, that this fear sall be blind; for fra time a man
by evil doing, hes banished knowledge out of the mind, and feeling out of the
heart quhat can remain there, bot a blind fear. Quhen men hes put out all
light, and left nathing in their nature, but darkness; there can nathing
remain, but a blind fear: So I grant, that the fear is blind, for nather
knawe they quhairfra the fear commis, quhat progres it ^es, quhereunto it
tendes, quhere, nor quhen it sall end. Therefore they that ^re this way
misseled up in their saull, of ^ll men in the earth they are may mise^able:
for als long as thou may keep in thy mind, a spoonke of this knawledge and
spiritual light, in the quhilk, thou may see the face of God in Christ,
quherin thou may see, ane out-gaite in the death and passion of Christ, and
quherein thou may see, the bowellis of mercy offered in the blood of Christ;
gif thou have any spoonke of this light (albeit it were never so little) to
direct thee: And albeit this knawledge, were never sa evil wounded, it there
is mercy aneugh for thee in Christ. But gif thou close up all the windows of
thy saull, and of thy heart; and make them to become palpable darkness, that thou
nather knawe, quhairfra the terror comes, nor it seeis onye out-gaite; that is
the misery of all miseries.

We have money things to lament, we have the estait of this Country to lament;
Application
they are not present, quhom to this doctrine specially appertains; Alwayis
there is nane of ou, but ee have to take heed to our consciences now, quhill
laiser is given ou, that ee bannish not altogether this light, quhilk is it
offered to ou, and quhereof, some sponks it remains. For I see, the may
pairt of our great men of this country, running headlongs, to banish the
spoonke of light that is in them; and they will not rest, sa lang as there is
a spoonke of it left, quhil it be utterly bannished; and quhen they have done
sa, alas quhat can follow, but a blind and terrible fear in their conscience,
quhilk they can never get scraped out. A fear without an outgait, a fear to
grow and not to decay, a fear to devour tham halelie at the last. Therefore,
every ane of ou, take heed to this light that is within ou, take heed that the
foul affections of our hearts, draw not our bodies after them; see at the
least, that they affections bannish not this light, and sa lang as the Lord
offers to ou this light; in time crave, that of his mercy, he wald give ou that
grace to embrace it, to take up a new course, and it to amend our lives, quhill
ee have time.

The body sall leave the saull, and the saull sall leave the body; but the
conscience sall never leave the saull; but look quhereuer the saul gais, to
the same place sall the conscience repair: and look in quhat estait, thy
conscience is quhen thou dies; in the same estait, sal it meet thee in that
great day. Sa that, gif thy conscience was a burriour to thee, in the time of
thy death, gif thou gat it not pacified, in the time of thy death, it sall be a
burriour to torment thee in that general judgment. Therefore, this matter wald
be weill weyed, and every ane of ou, should study to have an good conscience;
that quhen the saul is severed fra the body, leaving our conscience at rest
and peace with God, it may be restored to ou, and meet ou again, with als
great peace and quietness. This far concerning conscience; quhat it is. I pray
the living Lord, sa to sanctify our memories, that ee may keep their things,
and that every ane of their things, may sa stick with ou in some measure, that
to the end of our life, ee may remember upon them.

The second thing that we have to speak off, is this; we have to try and
consider, wherefore we should examine our conscience; for what causes should a man or
woman be moved to try their awin conscience and saull: I sall take up the
reasons shortly. It becomes every ane of ou, to try our conscience; quhy?
Because the Lord will make his residence in na other pairt of the saull, but in
the conscience: he hes appointed his dwelling to be in the heart of man, and
into the will and conscience of man: and therefore, it becomes ou, to make his
dwelling place clean, and to take heed to our heart. Nixt, suppose the Lord
of heaven made not residence there; it, in respect the eye of God is ane
all-seeing eye, and able to pearce through the very thicknes of the flesh of
man, how dark and gross soever it be, and to pearce through the very secret
hirnes of thy conscience (for unto the al-seeing eye of God, the may secreet
hirne of the conscience, is als patent, clear and manifest; as onie outward,
or bodily thing in the earth can be to the outward eye of the body.) In
respect therefore, that his eye is sa percing, and that he casts his eye only
upon our heart; it becomes us to try our hearts. Thirdly, he is the Lord of the
conscience; There is not a Monarch of the earth, that hes any soueranitie or
lordship over the conscience; only the God of heaven, only Christ Jesus, King
of heaven and earth, is Lord of the conscience; he hes power only to save and
tine: Therefore, quhen thou dresses thee to this Lords Table; becomes it thee
not to look upon thy conscience, to try thy conscience, and to examine the
estait of it? Last of all, quhilk is ane of my chiefest reasons; it becomes
thee to try and examine thy conscience; quhy? Because the welfare and health
of thy saull, dependes upon thy conscience; gif thy conscience that is within
thy saull be weil, gif it be at peace and rest, thy saul is weill; gif thy
conscience be in an good estait, thy saull mann be in ane good estait; gif thy
conscience be in good health; of necessity, thy saull mann be in good health:
For the good health and weill of the saull, depends upon ane good conscience:
Therefore it becomes every ane of ou, to try weill our conscience. There is
not a law that ever was set down or devised; but of all the laws that ever was
made, it is leifsom to us, to have a care of our health, it is leifsome to us,
to seek sic things as may procure our health, preserve and entertain our health;
Now subsume: but the health of thy saull, stands in the health of thy
conscience, and in preseruiug thereof: Therefore be al laws, thou aught to
attend to thy conscience; gif thou keep thy conscience weill, thy saul is in
health; and gif thy saul be in health; lat troubles com quhat will upon the
body, thou will bear them out all: But gif thy saull be diseased, and gif
that dwining siknes occupy thy saull, quhilk ane evil conscience brin gs on,
thou salt not be able to bear out the least trouble, that can come upon the
body: quhere as, gif the conscience were at rest, and in good health; that
trouble could not light upon thy body, but the strength of ane good
conscience, should bear it out. Then have ee not reason, and mair nor reasoun,
to take tent to our conscience, to examine and try our conscience, in quhat
estait and disposition it is.

Now, because it is ane sauourles jest to Certain lessons to b^ learned,
quhair throw a man may preserve health in his conscience and saul.
tell ou, that health is necessare, and not to open up the way, how this health
may be acquired, preserved, and entertained, Therefore, to keep our conscience
in quietness, and in good health; I sall give ou their few lessons. First of all
tak heed, that e keep fast, a persuasion of the mercy of God in Christ Jesus;
examine quhen thou lies down, and examine quhen thou rises up, in quhat estait
thou art with God; quhither thou may look surely for mercy at his hand or
not: art thou persuaded of mercy; assure thy self, thy conscience is at ane
good point, thou hes health in thy saul, for be keeping of faith the conscience
is preserved, as sayis the Apostle, 1. TIMOTH. 1. 19. Keep this persuasion,
halde it haill and sound, hurt it not, bring not thy saul in doubting sa far as
thou may, stay not, nor hinder not thy persuasion, gif thou walde keep health
in thy saull: for gif thou doubt, or in onye ways diminish thy persuasion, and
assurance, assuredlye thy assurance cannot so sone be hindered, nor diminished;
bot in that same article of time, sall follow, the diminishing of the health of
thy saull: ea, it cannot be, but in that same article of time, follows the
hurt of thy conscience, for faith will not dwell, bot in ane haill conscience.
Thairfore in quhat article of time thou dois against thy conscience, in that
same article of time thou loses ane gree of thy persuasion of the mercy of God:
and unto the time that thou fall down at the feet of Christ, and obtein mercy
for that ill deed, purchase peace at his hands, to repair thy persuasion;
thou sall ever doubt of mercy, and want health in thy conscience. Then this
is the first lesson, to keep health in our saulles, look and see, that e be
persuaded of mercy.

The second lessoun to keep a good conscience, or to keep health in thy saul
is this: ee mann flee, eschew, and forbear quhatsoeuer may trouble the health
of our saull, quhatsoeuer may trouble the quietness and peaceable estait of our
conscience: Cast it out, forbear it, and eschew it. This general is good:
but quhat is it, lat see, that troubles the quiet estait of the conscience?
Nathing in the world but sin, nathing in the earth, but an evil nature:
Therefore, we mann of force, to keep health in our saulle; forbear and
eschew sin, we mann flee sin, and rid our hand of it. It is not possible,
that ee can both keep a good conscience, and serve the affections of our
heart: and therefore, to keep peace and health in thy saull; thou mann bidd
thy lusts goodnight: thou mann renounce the lusts and affections of thy heart,
and thou mann not do, as thou was wont to do: thou mann not be given to the
service of thine affections, and of thine appetite, to put them in executioun
as thou wont to do: but incase, thine affection or lust, command thee to do
onie thing; quhat is thy part? Thou mann try, how far this may stand with
the good will of God, and how far that affection quhilk commands thee, may
agree with the law of God. Is there sic an harmony, that that, quhilk thine
affectioun commands thee, may stand with Gods law and halie will? Na question,
it is ane sanctified affection; thou may put it in execution. But after this
trial, gif thou find thine affection to be exorbitant, and out of rule,
carrying thee plat fra God, and agains his law: Beware of it, resist it:
beware, that thou put not the will of it in executioun. Or vtherway is, gif
thou fulfill the will of that affectioun ane hour, quhat pleasure can that
bring with it? It may weill bring with it, a flattering pleasure in the entry:
but it closes ever with a bitter remorse in the end. Then to eschew this
bitter remorse, should ee not all try our affections? ee mann examine and try
tham, be the square of Gods law, e mann see, how far they agree with his law,
or how far they disassent from it: and in sa far as, they disassent fra that
law: lat every man deny himself, renounce his affections; and swa, this
trial being taken this way be thy self, it sanctifies thine affections, makes
Christ to ludge in thy saull, makes thy conscience to be at rest, and the halie
spirit this way, maks both body and saull, to be in good health, and to
rejoice. Then fly fra sin: This is the second lesson.

The third lesson is this, Study to do well: Walde thou keep health in thy
saull; study to do better and better continually: At least, have a purpose in
thy saull and heart, to take up a better course daily. Quhilk is the last
lesson? Seeing that quhen we study to do best, and that the just man, that
is, the may halie man, fallis sa often in the day, as seven times in the
day: ea rather, seuentye times seven times, quhat is thy part in their
slippes, and snappers? Suppose thou fall, as thou can not eschew to fall, ly
not still there: sleep not there quhere thou hes fallen: It is a shame to
sleep there, therefore, rise again: And how sold thou rise? Be lifting up
thy saull, and running to the fountain of grace and mercy: be running to
Christ Jesus to seek to be for a day, or for a ear: but it aught to be every
day, and every ear of thy haill lifetime. For that conscience, that should rest
for ever, with the living GOD, that conscience, quhilk mann ever look upon the
face of the Son of God: It can not be over well scowred, we cannot look over
narrowly to it: the mair curious we be in searching out of this conscience, we
are the better occupied: I speak of our awn conscience, I speak not of our
neighbors.

I ga to the third, and I come to the points quhairintill, every an of ou,
should In quhat points we should examine our conscience.
try and examine our selfis. I give ou two points; quhairintil, every ane of
ou, aught to try and examine our consciences. Try thy conscience first in this
point; quhither thou be at peace with God, quha is the Lord of heaven, or not:
Nixt, try thy conscience in this point: quhither thou be in love and amity
with thy neighbor, or not. Wald thou know, quhither thy conscience, be at
unity and peace with God, or not? thou sall knawe it this way. The God of
heaven, he cann have na society, nor can keep na company, with that saull,
quhilk is alwayis unclean, that is every way defiled: na, he cannot. Now I
speak not sa precisely, that I make a saull to be fully sanctified, and
perfectly halie in this life. Na, in this life, there is wonderful iniquities,
gross sins, and great faults, quherewith, even the righteous ar defiled: But
this is my meaning; There is na saull, cann be at peace with God, or
quherewith the Lord can have any society, but in some measure, it man be
sanctified, and made halie: for GOD cannot make residence in a saull, that is a
stinking midding always: and therefore on force, in some measure it man be
sanctified; there mann be sa meekle made clean, in ane nuke or other of that
saul, quherein the Lord of heaven, be his halie spirit may make his residence.
Now lat see, quhereby is the saul sanctified? PETER Acts 15. 9. sayis, that
the saull of man is purified be faith; that the heart of man is purged be
faith. Sa faith opins and purges the heart: be faith in Christ Jesus, and in
the merits of his blood, we have peace with God. Being justified be faith, we
have peace toward God, thorough our Lord Jesus Christ, sayis the Apostle, ROMANS
5. 1. Now comes in this point, e have to prove our selfs, quhither ee be in
the faith or not, as the Apostle sayis. 2. COR. 13. 5. Try and see, quhither
ee have faith in Christ or not. Examine, gif our saull be seasoned with this
faith: for gif ee have not faith in Christ; Christ is not in ou: and gif Christ
be not in ou, ee are in ane evil estait, e are in the estait of the reprobat
and damned. Sa, every ane aught to look carefully, and see, gif he hes a
belief in the blood of Christ or not: quhither he believes to get mercy be
his merits, and sanctificatioun be his blood or not: For gif thou have na
measure of this faith, thou hes na measure of peace with God: Be reason, our
peace with God, is ingendered, and grows daily mair and mair be true faith in
Christ. Now this faith, quher it is true, quhere it is lively, and couples the
heart with God, as I have spoken; it mann break out in word and deed: It
cannot be halden in, but it mann break out. It mann break out in word, in
glorifying the God of heaven, quha hes forgiven us our sins: It mann break out
in word, be giving a notable confession of they sins, quherein we have
offended him. It mann break out in deed, in doing good works, to testify to
the world that thing, quhilk is within thy heart: to testify to the world,
that thou, quha hes this faith, art ane new man; that be thy good example of
life and conuersatioun, thou may edify thy brethren, the simple anis of the
Kirk of GOD: and that be thine halie life, thou may draw sinners to
repentance, that they seeing thy light, they may be compelled to glorify God
in thee. Then in the first point of trial, let us look to their three; to the
heart, to the mouth, and to the hand: Take heed, that there be ane harmony,
betwixt their three, and that they all sing ane sang: for gif the heart, be
inwardly coupled with God; there is na doubt, but the mouth will outwardly
glorify him: and gif thine heart and mouth be renewed, and be ane: of
necessity, thou mann utter this, in thy conuersatioun: There mann be
agreement betwixt the heart, and the hand: thy conversation mann be changed with
the heart, and be halie, honest and godly, as the heart is: Swa that, gif thy
conuersasion be good; it is a sure taken, that thou art at ane with God: but
gif thy conversation be not good; lat men speak quhat they will, the heart is
but defiled: this true and lively faith, hes na place in it. Then will thou
spear, quhen art thou at ane with God? Quhen thy conuersatioun, thine heart,
and thine mouth sayis all ane thing; then na questioun, thou hes the warke of
faith, wrought be the halie Spirit in thy heart, quhilk makes thee to be at
peace with God. This is the first point, quherein ee should try our selfs.

The nixt point is love; ee mann try, quhither ee be in love, and under
charity with our neighbor or not: For as thou art not coupled with God, but
be the band of faith: sa thou art not coupled with thy neighbor, nor joined
with na member of Christ in this earth, but be the band of love, amity, and
charity. Tak away love, thou art not a member of this body: For love is the
master sennoun, that couples all their members of Christ's body together, and
maks tham to grow up all in a spiritual and mistical unity. Love is the
only mark, quhereby the children of Christ, and members of Christ's body,
are knawen from the rest of the warlde. Love is that halie oil, that refreshes
our saules, and makes us like unto God: and the mair we grow in love, the
mair God be his spirit dwells in us; for God is love. Sa that, except in some
measure, love toward thy neighbor dwell in thy heart, thou can have na
society with thy neighbor, and far less with GOD. Gif the manners of men were
examined be this rule; we should find a multitude of godles people in this
Country, quha hes their hearts raging with malice, ilke ane against vthers: and
quhere the Devil, and a malicious spirit dwells; there is na place there for
the haly spirit: and now suppose the Lord hes began about, be al means possible,
late and air, to instruct them, and to infound in them, this precious love
and amity toward God and their neighbor, and sa to alter their condition:
it they will not suffer them selfis to be walkned, quhill the great vengeance
and malediction of GOD, light on their carcases. Alwayis this love, this honest
and godly conversation, flows all fra the root of faith: sa that, gif thy heart
have faith, in any measure; and it were never sa small; in that same measure,
thou man have love toward thy neighbor: and this love is never idle, but it
is ever uttering the self; ather in ane effect, or other: And in respect faith
is the ground, quherevpon all the rest dependes, and in respect, that this
faith, is sick a jewel, as without the quhilk, it is not possible to onie of
ou, to please God; without the quhilk, al our doings are abomination before
him; without the quhilk, ee are left in a terrible misery: quhilk misery, is
sa meekle the mair terrible, that e are ignorant of it: Is it not good reason,
that we know and understand, how this faith is wrought and created in our
saules be the halie Spirit, and how it is intertayned and nurished in our
saules: That seeing how it is created, and hearing tell the manner, how it is
brought about; e may examine our consciences, and see quhither ee be in the
faith or not. My purpose was to have insisted langer in this matter, nor this
time will suffer. Now therefore, as time will suffer, and as God will give the
grace, I sall lat ou understand, how the halie Spirit imployes his travail,
in the heart and mind of man and woman; and quhat pains he taks in creating and
making up this jewel of faith in their saul's. it or I enter to this wark, to
lat ou see the trauaills of the spirit of God, in working of this faith in our
hearts: It is necessare, and mair nor necessare, that ee understand first, our
awin misery and infirmity: and that e know how the Lord was induced, to
recover ou out of our auld estait, and to recreat ou, quha were lost be the
deed of our fore-father ADAM.

Then to take up the matter the mair highly, I call to our memories this The
mist of man's nation in some me sure disc sed.
ground: That man universally, and every ane particularie being corrupted,
being lost, and that be his first forebears fault: (For gif there were na mair
but that same first fault and sin of his, we are all justly oblished and
bound to ane double death, both of body and saul for ever.) Man, this way
universally and particularly, being utterly lost, without any hope of regres
left in his saull, without any sense of the recovery of that for mer estaite,
or reparing of that image quhilke he had tint throw sin lang of before: he
being lost be this sin, and left in this desperate estait in him self,
quhat dois God? The everliving God, God, only wise; quhais ways are
unsearchable, hes found out ane way, how that man this way lost; it he may
be saved. In this turn, he soght counsel, quhome at? Not at any creature:
but he sought counsel at him self: the persons of the Trinity, sought
counsel at them selfis: ea God was moved to seek counsel at him self,
only moved in him self: for he had not ane external principal outwith him
self, to induce him. Swa he seeking this counsel at him self, and being
moved in him self thereto: AS EPHESIANS. 1. 9. quhat dois he? Quhen all men and
women sulde have died for ever, it pleasis him of his infinite mercy to select
out of all, and to elect a certain number out of the lost race of ADAM, that
should have perished for ever. In this his counsel and decree, moved I say of
him self, and seeking counsel at himself only, he selectes a certain number
out of this rotten race: quhilke certain, he will have sanctified, he will
have justified, he will have glorified. And therefore to bring about the work
of their salvation, quhat dois he? He appointes his awin natural son (for
he had but ane natural son,) he appointes the second person of the Trinity,
his awin natural Son, God in power, glory, and Majesty, als high as him
self: aequall with God the Father in all things; he appoints him to work this
warke, to bring about this wark of our redemption and aeternal salvation: (this
is but the mysterye of it in some measure disclosed.) And therefore in the
fulness of time (for he dispensis all times according to his wisdom,) at sik
time as he appointed, he maks his son to come down, to sease him self in
the wemb of the virgin, to take on our flesh, to take on the likeness of sin,
he took not on sin, but he took on the likeness of sin. Quhat call I that
likeness? our flesh is the likeness of sin: he took on our flesh and nature,
the lyknes of sin, quhilk was perfitelie sanctified, in the very moment of
his conception, in the very wembe of the virgin: He took on this flesh,
that in this flesh and nature, sin might be banished and dung out of us for
ever. And quhere we should all have gane ea gaite, (for there was na exception of
persons be nature;) Christ Jesus our Saueour, hes elected us: and according as
his Father in his secreet election, before the beginning of the world, had
elected us: the same Christ Jesus in his awin time he callis us, he makis us
pertakers of that salvation, quhilk he hes purchased: and he repairis not
only that Image quhilk was lost in our fore-father ADAM, he places us not in a
terrestrial paradise, quhere ADAM was placed at the beginning, (and quhat mair
could have been sought be us?) but he gives us a far mair excellent image, nor
we lost: he places us in a mair high, and in a mair celestial Paradise nor we
lost. For, sa meekill the mair heavenly is the paradise quhilk he gives us,
as the second ADAM is mair excellent nor the first: and as the Son of God, and
God him self, gais far above any creature that ever was; man, or Angel.
Therefore it comes to pas, that be the benefit of the second ADAM, Christ
Jesus our Savior, the Son of God; quhereas, gif we had remained in that
Image quherein our fore-father was first created: we should have settled our
selfis in the earth for ever, we culd not have craved a better Paradise, nor
ane earthlye Paradise for earthly tabernacles. Be the benefit of the Son of
God, I say, it comes to pas, that we are plucked up out of the earth to the
heaven, and to ane heavenly paradise. And quhat have we to do with heaven? Are
we not made of the earth, to return to the earth? becoms not ane earthlye
paradise, ane earthly body? it the Lord in his mercy sendis down his Son, to
draw us up out of the earth to the heaven: This is sa high a thing, that it
cannot be easily considered: For this drawing of us to ane heavenly paradise,
is a thing mair nor could have been thought of, that we should live ane Angels
life in heaven: how could the heart of man think on this? it it pleased the
leuing Lord in the great riches and bowels of his mercy, and in the exceeding
greatness of the power of his mercy toward us: (The Apostle in that Epistle to
the EPHESIANS, can not get words anew to express this; he knawes not how to
begin, nor how to end: quha^ he speaks of the riches of that mercy. And gif e
look that Epistle to the EPHESIANS narrowly, e sall find maa high, and
excellent styles, given to the riches of that mercy, in that Epistle, nor in
any other part of the scripture.) It pleased him, I say, of his awin mercy,
not to give us simply the Image quhilk we lost, nor to leave us in this earth:
but it pleased him to give us, a better image: and beside that, to place us in
heaven, to bide with him for ever.

Now, restes his mercy and grace heir? Na: But that this salvation quhilk he
hes already purchased, and brought about, be his Son our Savior Christ
Jesus, that it might be always accomplished, having nathing lacking in it: As
he redeemed us in his awin person perfitlie: Swa, he makes this same
redemptioun, to come to our knawledge, and makes us sure of it in our own
consciences; and to this end, quhat dois he I pray ou? As he be his death
purchased our full redemption: sa he maks it knawin to us: he intimates it to
us, be our inward calling: letting us both find and feel in our heart,
quhat he did in his body for us: For our Lord* quhen he maks his servants to
proclaim this redemption, and to intimate it to our consciencis: he workis
this jewel of faith in our saulls, quhilk assures us, that the Son of God hes
died for us: For quhat could it avail us, to see our redemption, to see our
salvation and our life a far of, gif a way were not found out, and a hand,
and a moyan given us, quhereby we may apprehend that salvation, and apply it to
our self. Quhat can it avail a sick man, to see a drog in ane Apothicaries
booth, except a way be found out, how it sall be applied to his sick body:
Swa, to the end that this work of our redemption and salvation, may be fully
and freely accomplished: Look how freely he hes given his only Son, to the
death of the Cross for us: als freely hes he found out this way and moyen, and
propyned us with this hand quhereby we may take hald on Christ, and apply him
to our saulls. This moyan, to conclude, is faith. There is not a way, nor ane
instrument in the Scriptures of God, quhereby any man or woman, may apply
Christ to their saulls, but only the instrument of faith: therefore faith
cannot be aneugh commended. Turn to faith, and it will make thee to turn to
God, and swa conjoine thee with God, and make all thine actions to smell weill
in his nease: And there is never a good actio^ that we do, suppose it glau^ce
never sa weill before the warlde, gif it be not done in faith, but it is
abomination before God, and will help foreward to our damnation: Having faith,
all the creatures of God mann laugh on us; they mann all conspire to the
furtherance of the work of our salvation: As be the contrare, lacking faith,
there is never ane of the creatures of God, but they sall be enemies to us, and
conspire to our damnatioun. For faith conjoynis us with the GOD of heaven, and
makis us heavenly. This jewel of faith, seasons all the gifts and graces
quhilk God gives us. I will not give a straw, for all the riches of the earth
to my saull, without faith. And quhat auailes it to any man, to have all the
sciences, wisdom, and knawledge in the earth, without faith? for the devil
hes all this knawledge; and is not the better. Quhat auaillis it to me, to
conques all the Monarchs, Kingdoms, and haill riches in the earth? quhat can
all their auaill to my saull? Na thing; but to make out a process against me,
gif I want faith. Therefore all the benefits and gifts of God, without faith;
auailes nathing, but to augment our misery. All the gifts and graces of God,
are abused without faith: Faith only makes thee to use the benefits and graces
of God rightly: faith only should be sought, kept, and interteined heir in
this life: having faith, all the rest of Gods graces are profitable to thee:
for this jewel keeps them all in order, and makes them al fruitful: quhere,
lacking this jewel, there is nathing heir in this earth, but it will bear
testimony against thee.

Then let us come to speak it of this How faith is created i^ our saul's.
faith, how it is created in every e ane of our saul's. I take my ground out of
the Evangelist JOHN, 6. 44. quhere our master sayis: Na man can come to me,
except the Father quhilk has sent me, draw him. Into the quhilk words, we
see cleaerlie, that except we be drawn, except we be compelled, except we be
rugged, except of unwilling we be made willing, be God the Father; it is not
possible for us to come to his Son. Quhat is the reason of this, that the
spirit of God mann draw us, and make us willing or ever we come to God? Because
be nature, we are not only wounded and lanced be sin and iniquity; but as
the Apostle shawis EPHESIANS. 2. 1. We were halilie dead in trespassis and sins.
ea, farther look, how void any carcass is of a natural life, als void ar
our saul's (suppose they be liuand the natural life) als void are they of the
life of God, of that heavenly and spiritual life, quhereunto we in this life
do aspire: unto the time that the spirit of God draw our hearts and mindis,
that is; quicken our hearts and mindis. Nay, it is not a draught as we take it
commonly, it is a very quickening of a dead thing: It is a quickening of that
thing quhilk was void of the life of the spirit. Then, except the spirit of
God draw us, that is, quicken us with that spiritual and heavenly life: it
is not possible to us to come to heaven. And except he nourish this life,
quhilk he hes begun, it is not possible that we can stand in this life.
Swa, the spirit of God is said to draw us, that is, to begin this life in us,
and be the same halie Spirit to continue and nourish this life in us. Now be
the draught of the spirit, our saul's ar quickened: and be the drawing of the
spirit, I understand na other thing, but the forging and creating of faith in
our saul's, quhilk makis us new creaturs. Let us see now, quhat order the
spirit of God keepis in drawing us, and in forging and creating this faith in
our saul's. First of al, I divide the saull in na ma parts, nor commonly it
vsis to be divided: that is, in the heart and in the mind. Our mind then being
ane clud of darkness, altogether blind naturally: there being nathing in that
mind of ours, but vanity and error, quherby we vanish away, and can never bide
at na good purpose: quhat dois the spirit of God? The first work that ever the
spirit of God dois, he takis order with the mind: and quhat dois he to the
mind? He bannishis darcknes, he chaisses out vanity and blindness, that
naturally lurkes in the mind: and in stead of this darcknes, he places in the
mind, a light* a celestial and a heavenly light, a light quhilk is resident
in Christ Jesus only. Then the spirit chaisses out that clud of miste and
darcknes, and places light in the mind. And quhat dois he be this light? We
getting this inward and heavenly light in the mind, and ane sanctified
understanding; incontinent he makis us to see God: not only, as he is God the
creator of the world: but alswa, as he is God the redeemer, and hes redeemed
us in his Son Christ Jesus. Now before I get this light, quhat is my heart and
mind doing? There is never ane of ou, but ee have experience, as I my self
have, in quhat estait the heart and mind is before this light enter. The mind
is lyand drowned in blindness, and the heart is hardened, and they both conspire
together in ane vice, to set up ane Idol in steed of God: ane domestic and
invisible idol, and quhat a sort of idol is that I pray ou? Na doubt, an
warldly or fleshly affection, ane or other: this is set up in the throne of thy
heart: And on this idol, thou bestows the service of thy hail heart, of thy hail
mind, of thy haill saull and body: Sa, that the service, both of saul and
body, quhilk should be bestowed upon God only, is employed upon that idol,
quhilk is set up in thy heart, that is, in the place of God, in the steed of
the may high God: And thou art mair addicted to the service of that idol, nor
ever thou was to the service of the living God. ea, unto the time that this
Idol of ours be banished, and that this blindness, quherthrow this idol is
served, be taken away; there is not ane of ou, but e are servant to ane lust or
other: and thy saul that should be consecrat to the service of the living God, it
is employed upon ane affection or other: upon ane warldly or fleshly lust of
thin awin But now, fra time the Lord begin to scatter the cluds of our natural
minds and understanding: and begin to chase away this thick mist of the dark
saull; and places therein a sponk of heavenly light, quhilk flowis out of Christ:
And quhere we were children of the night and darkness of before, he makes us to
be light in the Lord, and to be children of the light, and of the day. Then
we see, that all the things in the world, beside the living God, are vanities,
deceaueable allurements, unconstant shadows, fleetand and flowand without any
byding: and then we see that our hearts and minds was set on ill
continually. Then we begin to abhor that Idol, and to seek to serve God
only. Now except the Lord of his awin mercy and goodness, place in us this
light, unto the time that we get some glimmering of this light, we can never
see our awin vanity, lat be to see God. This then is the first warke of the
Spirit, he bannishes darcknes and errors, and places light in our mindis.
Now, this first wark of the Spirit, is termed oftymes in the Scripture, under
the name of faith: for the mind hes the awin assent and persuasion in the awin
kind, als weill as the heart hes: and therefore the mind being illuminat and
seasoned with this light, the assenting and knawledge in the same mind, is
called faith. The Apostle, and the Evangelists gives to this knawledge, the
name of faith: for fra time ains thou have ane eye to ken God, and quhom he hes
sent Christ Jesus, fra ains thou get a sight of him, and gets access to him,
gif it were na farther nor in the mind, it is called faith.

But we are forbidden to stand heir, gif faith ga na farther nor the mind, it
is not the faith we are seekand. For the Faith that justifies, and dois us
good, mann oppin the heart, als weill as it oppinnis the mind: it mann bannish
that idol and affection, out of the heart, and in his steed, set down a Throne
to Christ Jesus. Sa that, except the good Spirit of God ga farther, nor the
mind; and bannish this idol, als weil out of our hearts, as out of our minds,
we get not that justifiing faith, quhereby we may look for mercy. ea, the
Spirit of God mann not only stand in lightening the mind: but it mann
mollify this heart of thine, and change thine affection: And quhere thy
affection was wicked and ill, Gods Spirit mann change the will: and he never
can change the will, except he make the ground of thy heart good: that it may be
set on God, and bring forth good fruit abundantly to the awner. And quhat
teaches this? This teaches ou to seek, for ane honest heart, and to seek
instantly, quhil e obteene it. For quhat auails it to any man to ken quhat is
good, or quhat is ill, except he have a way shawin him, how he sall eschew the
ill, and a moyan given him to make him self pertaker of the good? Is not this
ane idle and unprofitable knawledge to me, to see a far off: and to ken, that
this is good for me, quhen as I find not a moyan how to be pertaker of that
good, that it may be ane special good thing to me. Is it not ane idle
knawledge also, to ken that this is ill for me, that it will do me ill gif I
do it: and it that same very thing I will do; and na other? Swa, the Spirit
of God linckes their two together in this warke: and as he reformes the mind,
he reformes also the heart, and makes ou to be pertakers of that good quhilke
ou see, and to eschew that ill quhilk ee see. And this is the second warke of
the Spirit, not only to present a thing to thee, but to make it thine in
effect. For, howbeit the mind wald do her turn never sa weill, and lat thee
see that Christ is thine; and present him to thee, never sa often; gif the heart
be not reformed, that will, and cruked affection that is in thy heart, will
prefer it self to Christ, and will make thee to count all but folly, in
respect of that Idol. And therefore it were ane idle and ane foolish thing for
me to see my salvation, except I get grace to be pertaker of it: and quhat
auailes it to thee to see the Devil, to see thine awin sins that slayes thee,
except thou get grace to eschew tham: and sa the second wark of the spirit is
this; he enters in the heart, he dantons the heart, and wonderfully cha^ges it,
and makes the will of it obedient; he mollifies the affection, quhilk was hard
of before, in sic sort, that it is made to pour out thy affection in some
measure on the living GOD, quhere it was powered out on ane idol or other of
thine awin before. Then except the heart will do his part, as the mind dois his
part; the haill saull is not consecrate to God: for God hes not made the saull,
that the heart should serve thee, and the mind only should serve him: but thy
service is then only acceptable to GOD, quhen thou consecrates thy heart, as
weill as thy mind to him.

Now this matter is sa clear, that it misters not to be illustrat be
similitude: it A similitude of the app^e hension of the corporal food, to
illustrat the spiritual*
to make it mair clear unto ou, we sal lat ou see be a similitude, that the
apprehe^sion of the mind is not aneugh, except ee get the apprehension of the
heart also. In corporal things, in meat and drink that serves for the use of
our bodies; there mann be of this meat and drink, two sort of apprehensions;
and as there is two sort of apprehensions, of the meat and drink, that is the
food of the body; swa, there is two sort of apprehensions, of the body and
blood of Christ Jesus, quhilk is our meat and drink spiritual. Of meat and
drink corporal, there is ane apprehension be the eye, and be the taist: that
quhil as the meat is present to ou on the table, our eye takes a view of this
meat, discernes on it, and makes a choice of it; ea, not only the eye, but
also the taist, discernes on that meat, and the taist approouing it; that is
called the first apprehension.

Now upon this, quhilk is the first, the second apprehension follows: that is,
after that e have chewed that meat, letten it over our halse, and send it to
our stomachs, quhere it digests, and conuerts in our nuriture: Then in our
stomach, ee get the second apprehension. But gif swa be, that our eye like not
of that meat, and that our taist like not of it nather; the second
apprehensioun follows not: for thou will spit it out again, or reject it, and
prefer an other thing to it, that thou likes better. That meat quhilk thou
likes not, enters never in thy stomach, and sa it can never be converted in
thy nuriture: For it is only the second apprehension of the meat, that is the
cause of the nurishment of the body, to our corporal food: Swa that, gif ee
chewe not this meat, and lat it over; it feeds ou not. Then it is only the
second apprehensioun, that nurishes our body. It is even siclike in they
spiritual things (sa far as they may be compared) in the food of Christ
Jesus, quha is the life and nuriture of our saules and consciences: there mann
be two sorts of apprehensions of Christ Jesus; The first apprehension, is be
the eye of the mind, that is, be our knawledge and understanding* for as the
eye of the body, discerns be ane outward light; sa the eye of thy mind,
discerns be ane inward and renewed understanding, quhereby, we get the first
apprehension of Christ. Now, gif this first apprehension of Christ, like us
weill, then the nixt follows: we begin to cast the affectioun of our hearts
on him, we have good will of him: For all our affections proceeds fra our
will, and our affection being renewed and made halie: we set it halely upon
Christ, we love him; and gif we love him, we take hald on him, we eat him,
and digests him; that is, we apply him to our saul's: and sa of this love and
liking of him, the second apprehension dois follow. But gif sa be, that we have
na will of him, that we have na love nor lyking of him; quhat do we I pray
ou? Then we reject him, and prefers our awin idol, and the service of our awin
affecton to him; and swa, the second apprehension follows not: We cannot digest
him, and gif we digest him not that spiritual life cannot grow in us. For
look in quhat place, the eye serves to thy body; in that same room, serves
knawledge and vnderstaunding to thy saul: and look in quhat place, thy hand
and thy mouth, the taste and the stomach, serves to thy body; in that same
room, serves the heart and affection to thy saull: sa that, as our body
cannot be nurished, except our hand take, and our mouth eat the meat,
wherthrow the second apprehension may follow. Likewise, our saules cannot feed
on Christ, except we gripp him, and embrace him hartelie be our will and
affection. For we come not to Christ, be any outward motion of our body, but
be ane inward motioun and apprehension of the heart: for God, finding us al in
a reprobat sense, he brings us to Christ, be reforming the affectioun of our
saules, be making us to love him. And therefore, the second apprehension,
quhereby we digest our Savior, will never enter into our saules; except, as he
pleases the eye, sa he please the will and the affection also. Now gif this
come to pass, that our will and affectioun is halelie bent upon Christ; then na
dout, we have gotten this jewel of faith: have ee sic a liking in our mind,
and sic a love in our heart of Christ, that e will prefer him to all things
in the warlde; Then na questioun, faith is begun in ou.

Now, fra time a thing be begun, there is farther required: for suppose this
faith How faith is nurished and entertained in us.
be formed in our minds, in our hearts and saulles, it that is not aneugh, but
that quhilke is formed, man be nurished, and he quha is conceived, mann be
entertained and brought up; or else the love that is begone in me be the halie
spirit, except be ordinare means, it be daily entertained and nurished, it will
decay: except the Lord continue the draught and working of his halie Spirit; it
is not possible that I can continue in the faith. And how mann we nurish and
continue faith in our saules? Two manner of wayis: first, we nurish faith begun
in our saul, be hearing of the word: not of every word, but be hearing of the
word of GOD preached: and not be the hearing of every man; but be hearing
the word preached be him that is sent. For this is the ordinair mean,
quherevnto the Lord hes bound him: he will work faith, be hearing of the
word, and perceptioun of the Sacraments: and the mair thou hear the word, and
the oftener thou receive the Sacraments; the mair thy faith is nurished. Now it
is not only, be hearing of the word, and perception of the Sacraments, that
we nurish faith. The word and the sacraments, are not able of them selfis, to
nurish this faith in us, except the working of the halie Spirit, be conjoined
with their ministry: But the word and sacraments, ar said to nurish faith in
our saul's, because they offer and exhibit Christ to us, quha is the meat, the
drink, and life of our saules: and in respect, that in the word and
Sacraments, we get Christ, quha is the food of our saules; therefore the word
and Sacraments, are said to nurish our saules: as is set down Acts 2. 42. The
Disciples of Christ, were earnestly occupied, and continued in the Apostles
doctrine and fellowshippe, and breaking of bread, and prayers: be their means,
intertening, augmenting, and nurishing the faith that was begun in them. Then
the halie Spirit begets this faith, works this faith, creats this faith,
nurishes and intertaines this faith in our saules, be hearing of the preached
word, and be participation of the sacraments, quhilk are the ordinair means,
quhereby, the Lord nurishes us, and continews this spiritual food with us: For
look be quhat means, the spiritual life is begun, be they same means, it
is nurished and entertained. As this temporal life is entertained and nurished
be they same means, quhereby it is begun.

The^ seeing be their means, the haly spirit Conclusion with an ^^hortation.
begets this work of faith in our saul's: it is our duty to crave, that he will
continue the wark, quhilk he hes begun: and for this cause, we should resort to
the hearing of the word, quhen it is preached, and to the receiving of the
sacraments, quhen they are ministered, that we may be fed in our saul's to life
everlasting. But alas, we are come to sic a loath, disdain, and offcasting of
this heavenly food in this Country: That quhere men in the beginning, wald
have gane, some twenty miles, some forty miles, to the hearing of this word:
they will scarcely now come fra their house to the Kirk, and remain ane hour
to hear the word, but bides at hame. Weil I say, over great wealth, gars wit
waver; and the abundance of this word, ingenders sik a lothsomnes, that it is
a rare thing to find out onye, that hes that thirst and desire to hear the
word, as they were wont to have in the beginning: And as to our great men, they
will not hear it at all: for they cannot hear the thing that accuses them,
and conuicts them, but because this word accuses and conuicts them, they run
fra it. But they should not do swa; they should not run fra Christ, nor fra his
word that accuses tham: but they should hear the word, and as the word accuses
them, they should accuse tham selfs also that thereby, they may come to a
confessioun of their sin, and obtain mercy for the same. Sa, quhen Christ
accuses thee, thou should not run fra him, but thou should draw near to him, thou
should threepe kindness of him and make irruption, as it were, and forciblie enter
in his kingdom. It is not the way, quhen thy sin twitches thee, and quhe^
Christ accuses thee, to run fra him: Na, thou should then turn to him; thou should
confess thy sin, cry Peccaui, and seek mercy: and after that thou hes gotten
mercy, this word sal become als pleasant to thee, and thou sall take als great
delight, to come to the hearing of it; as ever thou delited to fly fra it
before. But alas, our lothsomnes and disdain, is grown to sick ane height;
that truly, I am moved to believe firmly, that the Lord hes concluded, that we
sal not enter in his rest; and that only, for the great contempt of his mercy
and grace, quhilk is now sa richly offered: For why? God cannot deal vtherwayis
with us, nor he dealt with our for fathers the Israelits, for the negligence of
the euangel, quhilk was but then obscurely preached: for the^, it was far fra
the incarnation of Christ; and the farther that it was fra his incarnation, the
Euangell was ay the mair obscurely preached, under dark types and shadows; it
notwithstanding, the fathers that hard that euangel preached, and believed it
not; they perished all in the wilderness, except two, as e have hard sometime
fra this place: And gif they, for the contempt of sa dark ane light perished:
Meeklemair mann e, that are their children perish, for the contempt of the Son
of righteousness, quha is risen sa plainly, and shines sa clearlie now, in the
preaching of the gospel: except the Lord in his mercy prevent ou, and except ee
prevent his judgment be earnest seeking, and except e seek a feeling, and seek
inward senses, that e may see and feel the grace that is offered. Crave
again, that he will sanctify our hearts be repentance, that ee may repent ou
of our sins, and take up ane honest, and ane godly conversation in all
time-comming; that both body and saull may be saved in the day of the Lord.
The Lord work this in our saul's, that e may seek mercy, and seeking mercy,
e may get mercy: and in mercy, ee may get a grip of Christ, and that for his
righteous merits: To quhome with the Father and the halie Spirit, be all
honor, praise and glory, for now and ever.

Amen.
THE FIFTH AND LAST SERMON, UPON THE PREparation to the Lords Supper, preached
the 2. day of March. 1589.
1. COR. 11. 28. Let every man therefore examine him self, and sa let him eat
of that bread, and drink of that cup. etc.
INTO the Doctrine of our trial and due examination; the Apostle, as ee heard,
(weilbeloued in Christ Jesus) he gave us a special command, that every ane of
us, should try and examine narrowly our selfis; that is, that every man should
condescend, and enter into his awn conscience, try and examine the estait of his
awin conscience; in quhat estait he finds it with God, and in quhat estate he
finds it with his neighbor: he inioynes this trial to our selfs, and
commands that every ane of us, should take pains upon the true examination of
our consciences; he injoyns this warke to us, quhy? Be reason na man knawes sa
meekle of me as I do my self; be reason, na man can be sure of the estait of my
conscience, but I my self; be reason na man can sa diligently, nor sa
profitably try my conscience, as I my self: therefore chiefly it becomes every
man, and woman, or ever they enter to the hearing of the word, or give ear to
the word, or their mouth to the Sacrament: It becomes them to try and examine
their awin consciences. Not that the Apostle walde seclude the trial of other
men: for as it is leasume to me to try my self, sa na doubt it is leasume to
my Pastor to try me: It is leasume to other men that hes a care over me, to
try and examine me: but na man can do this, sa profitably to me, as I my self:
and suppose we had never sa money examiners, and triers, all is lost, gif we try
not our selfs: Swa, quhither there be a second or a third trier: let our self
be the first, and let our self be ane: And na dout the Apostles mind hes been
this to let us see clearlie, that he or she that comes to that table, and hes
not that knawledge, nor is not of that ability to try them selfs, are
profane comers, comes uncleanly as dogs, and therefore man come to their awn
destruction. Let every man therefore grow in knaweledge, grow in
understanding, grow in the Spirit, that he may be the mair able to try and
examine his awin conscience.

To the end that e might ga fordward, and proceed in the work of this trial
with the better speed, and with the better fruits: Into this examination we
laid down this ordour. First of all, we lute ou see, quhat is that, quhilk
we call a conscience, and quhat is meaned thereby: Nixt, we lute ou see for
quhat causes e should put our consciences to this trial and narrow examination:
and thirdly, sa far as time suffered, we entered into the points, quhereinto
every ane of ou should try and examine our awin consciences. As to conscience,
that ee may call that difinitioun to our memory; I will resume it shortly.
We call a conscience, a certain feeling in the heart, resembling the
righteous judgment of God, following upon a deed done be us, flowing of
knawledge in the mind: A feeling accompanied with a motioun in the heart, a
motioun, ather of fear or joy, of trembling or rejoysing. I leave the opening
up of their pairts to our memories; and I pray God, that they may be weill
sanctified. I come nixt to the causes, quherefore every ane of ou, should be
careful in trying and examining our awin consciences. The first cause is;
because the Lord of heaven, hes his eye continually upon the conscience; the
eye of God, comes never off the conscience and heart of man; as I proved to
ou, be sundry places. Nixt, be reason this God hes chosen his ludgeing, and
hes set down his throne, to make his residence in the conscience: Therefore,
that he may dwell in cleanenesse, ou aught to have a regard to his dwelling
place. Thirdly, he is the Lord: ea, the only Lord of thy conscience, quha
hes power only to control; quha only hes power to save, or to tine:
therefore, that it may do good service to thy awn Lord, thou aught to take tent
to thy conscience. And last of all, in respect, that the health of thy saull,
stands in the estait of thy conscience; and gif thy saull be in good health,
thy body cannot be evil: Therefore in respect, that saull and body, dependes
upon the estait of the conscience; every ane of ou, should carefully look to
our consciences. I will not amplify this, but remits the matter to our
memories: how the health of the saull, and weilfair of the saull, should be
kept.

Nixt, I come in the third and last rowme, to the points, into the quhilk
every ane of ou, should try and examine our consciences: And as e remember, I
set down two points, quhere into it behoues ou to put our consciences to
trial. First, to know quhether our consciences was at peace with God, or not:
secondly, quhether our consciences was in love, in charity, and in amity
with our neighbor, or not: Into their two points chiefly, ee mann try and
examine our selfis. To ken quhether ee be at peace with God or not, e mann
first try, quhether e be in the faith, or not: (as the Apostle speaks)
quhether ee be in the faith of Christ or not: For, being in the faith, and
justified thereby; of force ee mann have peace with God, as the Apostle
speaks. Then the nixt cair mann be to try our faith, and to see quhether e
have faith, or not. Faith can na ways be tried, but be the fruits: faith can
not be judged on be me, that looks on it at the least, but be the effects:
Therefore to try quhether ee be in the faith, or not: take tent to the fruits:
take tent to thy mouth, take tent to thy hand, take tent to thy words, and to
thy deeds. For, except thou glorify God in thy mouth, and confess to thy
salvation: and except thou glorify him also in thy deeds, and make thine haly
life to testify of thy haly How ane sinceare faith is ^^^w in
faith, all is but vain, all is but mere hypocrisy. Therefore to know the
synceritie of thy faith, thou mann take tent, that there be ane harmony betwixt
thy hand, thy mouth, and thy heart: that there be a mutual consent, that thy
doings prejudge not thy heart, that thy mouth prejudge not thy heart: but that
mouth and hand, may testify of the synceritie of the heart. Gif the heart, the
hand, and the mouth, consent and agree in ane harmony together: Na question,
that heart that breaks forth in sa good fruits, is coupled with God: there is
na question, the light of thy actions, the beams and shyning of thy life, sall
make the name of thy good God to be glorified. Therefore the haill weight of
our trial stands chiefly upon this point: to see quhether we be in the
faith, or not: to examine quhether Christ dwells in us be faith, or not: For
without faith, there can be na coupling, nor conjoining betwixt us and Christ:
without faith our heart can not be sanctified and clenged: and without faith we
can not work be charity: sa all depends on this only. And therefore that e
might the better understand quhether e have faith or not: I gaid somequhat mair
highly in this matter, and I begoud to lat ou see, how the haly Spirit creats
faith, and works faith in our saul's, hearts, and minds. I begouth to let ou
see, quhat order the halye Spirit kept, in forming and in creating this
notable instrument in our hearts and minds: Not only how he ingenders and
begins faith, but alswa how he interteinis it, how he nourishes it: and we
lute ou see, the external means and instruments quhilk he vsis to this
effect. To beget faith in our saul's, the halie Spirit uses the hearing of the
word preached, be him that is sent; and the ministry of the Sacraments, as
ordinary means and instruments: quhilk ordinare means are only then
effectual, quhe^ as the haly Spirit concurs inwardly in our hearts, with the
word striking outwardly in our ear: and with the Sacrament outwardly
received. And except the haly Spirit grant his concurrance to the word, and to
the Sacrament; word and Sacrament will not work faith. Swa, all depends upon the
working of this haly Spirit. The haill regeneration of mankind, the renewing
of the heart and of the conscience, depends on the power of the haly Spirit: and
there fore it becoms us cairfully, to employ our trauails, in incalling for his
haly Spirit. Be the same means and na other, that the halie Spirit begets
faith in us; be the same means he nourishis and augments that, quhilk he hes
begotten. And therefore, as we get faith be hearing of the word; sa be
continual and diligent hearing, we have this faith augmented, and nourished in
us. And heir I drew out my exhortation, that gif e wauld have that spiritual
life nourished in ou, and gif e wald have a farther assurance of heaven: on
force e mann both continually and diligently, hear the blessed word of God.

Now it rests that every ane of ou cairfullie apply this doctrine to our awin
saulls, and enter into the trial of our awin consciences: to see, gif this
faith, as I spoke, be begun in our hearts and minds, or not: How far, or how
little the halie Spirit hes proceeded in that wark, try with me, and I with
ou. The first effect of the haly Spirit, quhereby ee may try our mind,
quhether it be in the faith, or not; is this: Reuolue in our memories, and
remember, gif at any time, it pleased the Lord in his mercy to turn the
darcknes of our mind unto light, to make that darcknes quhilk was within ou to
depart. Be the quhilk darkness, nather had ee ane eye to see our selfis, quhat
ee war be nature: nor et had ee ane eye to see God in Christ, nor any part of
his mercy. Examine I say, quhether gif this darcknes of the natural
understanding, be turned into light, be the working of the Spirit, or not: Gif
thou art become a child of the light, a child of the day: Gif thou art become
as the Apostle speaks, light in the Lord: Gif there be this alteration maid in
thy mind, that quhere naturallye off before, it was closed up in darcknes;
quhere it was filled with vanities and errors; quhere it was closed up in
blindness: gif the Lord hes at onye time, enlightened the eye of thy mind, and
maid thee to see thine awin misery, to see the vgglines of thin awin nature:
to see they heinous sins, in the quhilk be nature thou lies: Gif he hes
granted to thee, ane insight of thy self in some measure: and upon the other
side, gif he hes granted thee ane out-gait: and hes given thee ane insight of
the mercy of God in Christ Jesus: gif thou have gotten ane insight of the
riches of his grace in Christ: Na doubt, the halie Spirit hes begun a good
warke in thee: A wark, quhilk will bring forth repentance, quhilk in his awin
time he will perfect. Sa this is the first cair that e aught to have, and the
first point quherin e aught to examine our minds: to see gif there be any
light in it, quhereby e may know your misery, and have a insight of the mercy
of God in Christ. This being done, that thou finds a sight of their two in thy
mind; fra thy mind, ga to the heart, and as thou hes tried thy mind, sa try
thine heart. And first examine the heart, gif it be altered or not: gif it be in
any sort reformed or not, that the will of it be framed and bowed to Gods
obedience: that the affectioun be turned in the luif of God, and be powered
out on him, as it was powered out on vanities, on filthiness, and on the warlde
off before. Try quhither the ground of the heart, and the fountain quherfra the
motions and affections proceeds; be sanctified, or not: For of ane haly
fountain, halie waters mann distill: of ane halye fountain, halie motions,
halie cogitations, and sanctified considerations mann flow.

Try then and examine our heart, gif the spirit of God hes wrought any sik
reformation (as I spoke off) in the heart or not: And that thou may take up the
working of the halie Spirit, the better in thy heart and conscience, quhilk
makis chiefly residence in the heart: I sall lay before thee the first effect,
that ever the halye Spirit brings forth in thy heart: in framing it, in
mollifying it, and in bowing it to the obedience of God. Thou sall know the
working of the haly Spirit, be this effect: to wit, gif, as thy mind seeis,
and behaldes quhat is ill, seeis and behaldes quhat is good, seeis and behaldes
thine awin misery, and thy sins that hes casten thee in this misery: and
seeis and behalds the riches of the mercy of God in Christ: Gif as thy mind
seeis their two, thy heart be reformed and prepared, to love the sight of them.
As thou seeis in thy mind, the mercy of God, and that in Christ: gif thou hes
ane heart to desire mercy: gif thou hes ane thirst and earnest desire, to be
pertaker of mercy: quhere this desire and thirst is, there the halie Spirit
is, he hes, na doubt, opened the heart. Upon the other side, because, as thou
seeis mercy, thou seeis thy misery: gif as thy mind seeis the misery, seeis
the fountain quherefra thy misery flows a to wit, fra thine awin sins, gif then
thine heart also hates this; the halie Spirit is there. Gif as thou see
sin, quhilk is the cause of thy misery, with the eye quhilk is given thee in
thy mind; thou hate this sin with thy heart: na question, the halie
Spirit is there. And as thou hate it, gif also thou sorrow for it, (for it
is not aneugh to hate it, gif thou lament not the committing of it, and with a
godly sorrow deplore it:) the halie Spirit is there. And thirdly, gif with
thy lamenting, thou have a care and a study to eschew that sin; for quhat
auailes it to lament; gif like a dog, returning to his vomit* thou fall in
that same golfe again. Therefore, quhere there is ane hatrent of sin, a
sorrow for sin, a care and a study to eschew sin: na questioun, the
halie Spirit hes opened the heart, and is working out that precious
instrument. Take up all this in a word, take up all the operation of the haly
Spirit, and working in the heart in a word* and be this examine thy heart.
See and perceive, gif the halie Spirit hes entered sa far with thee, to work
in that hard heart of thine, an ernest, a diligent study, a careful
solicitude, continually to be reconciled with the great god, quhom thou hes
offended: Is there sick a thing, as ane thirst and ane desire to be at amity
with him, quhom thou hes offended, to be reconciled with the God of heaven,
quhom thou hes offended be thy manifald transgressions: quhere this care, and
study of reconciliation is: Gif this care and study of reconciliation be in the
heart; there is na dout, but the heart that thirsts for this reconciliation is
hartelie content, not only to renounce sin, to renounce all the impieties, that
seucred thee fra God: but the heart that is indewed with this thirst, will be
heartily content, to renounce it self, to cast down it self, for als
stubborn as it was off before, to cast down the self at the feet of the
mighty GOD, and be healilie content, in all times coming, to be ruled be his
halie will: Not to follow the awin lust, the awin will and appetite, as it did
off before; but to resign the self healilie in the hands of the mighty God,
to be ruled be his will at his pleasure, and to obey his appetite. And except e
find this dispositioun in our awin heart, to quite our selfis, to renounce our
selfis; it is a vain thing, to ou to speak, that ee have a thirst to be
reconciled. Sa, the greater thirst of reconciliatio^ that we have. And the mair
that this study grow is, the greater that the apprehension of my misery, of
the deep gulfis and very hels (quherunto my saull is subject) grows in my
saull, the mair earnest wald I be to be reconciled: and to be reconciled, I
wald not stand, for the renuncing of the lusts of my heart; but I wald renounce
my heart, and the obedience of the will and appetit of it* Quhy? because I see, I
mann die for ever, except the Lord reconcile him self with me. I see the huge
deepes and oceans of all misery, in the quhilk I sal fall in the end, except in
mercy, the Lord reconceile him self with me. To eschew their deepes and
inconveniences, is there any question, but the heart that has a sense, and is
touched with them; will may willingly quite the self. Again, seeing the Lord
hes taken pains to deliver me out of that deep misery, in the quhilk I
drowned my self, and hes purchased my redemption be sick a coastlie price: not
with gold, nor with silver, or any draffe in the earth: but be sick a
wonderful way, be sick a precious price, and rich ransom: Looking to the
greatness of our misery, and to the greatness of the price, quhereby he hes
redeemed us: quhat heart is it, but it willingly walde renunce the self, to
get a part of that redemption, and to be delivered out of that hell, quherein
we are presently, and quherein we will be in a greater measure ester this,
except we be reconciled. Swa then, with this chose, there is joined a
disposition in the heart, quherby the heart is willing in some measure, to
renunce the self. This lesson is often tauld over to us be Christ, in his
Euangell: We mann ather take up a cross and renounce our selfis also, or we
cannot follow him. The mair that this thirst grows in the heart, the mair this
renouncing of our selfis grows: the mair that this thirst decays, and is
diminished in the heart, the mair cleave we to the world, the mair cleave we
to the flesh, and the mair are we ruled and guided be them. Sa, ather mann we
nourishe a thirst of righteousness, a hunger of life everlasting, a thirst of
mercy, a hunger of that justice that is in Christ; or it is not possible that
in any measure, we can be disciples to him.

Now I ga fordward: The heart that after this sort is prepared, that with a
thirst to be reconciled, is disposed also to renounce the self: this heart into
the quhilk there lies sa earnest a thirst, is never frustrat of the
expectation: that gree die heart is never disapointed: but as the Lord hes
imprented in it, ane earnest study to be reconciled, and to get a grip of
Christ: Sa in his mercy he grants unto that heart the possession of mercy, he
puts that heart in some measure, in possessioun of the mercy quhilke it
seeks, in possessioun of Christ Jesus him self, quhom it seeks. The quhilk
apprehensioun of Christ, the heart sensiblye feels and gripes, in that peace,
quhilk he gives to the conscience: sa that the conscience quhilk was terrified,
exceedingly gnawen, and distracted off before; be the incomming of this peace,
and of Christ with his graces; incontinent it is quieted and pacified: there
comes a calmnes and soundnes in the heart, and all troubles and stormis are
removed. With this peace is conjoined, ane taist of the powers of the world to
come. The heart gets a taist of the swetnes that is in christ of the joy, whilk
is in the life everlasting, quhilk taist is the only arlis-pe^ny, of that full
and perfect joy, quhilk saull and body in that life shall enjoy. And the
arlispennie (as ee know) mann be a part of the sowme, and of the nature of the
rest of the sowme. And therefore, that arlispenie of joy assures us, that quhen
we sall get possession of the haill sowme, it sall be a strange joy. And their
documents halds up the heart, and makes it not to linger, nor weary in the
expectation of that life: but being refreshed now and then therewith, be sa
money arlis pe^nies: they assure us of the full fruition of that joy, for the
quhilk in patience we will sustein all troubles. Swa, as the halie Spirit
works a thirst in us, to be at Christ, a thirst of mercy and reconciliation
with him: the same halie Spirit disapoints not that same expectatioun, nor
thirst; but puts the saull and heart in possession of Christ: be the quhilk the
conscience is pacified, the heart is rejoiced, and we get a taist of the
sweetness, and of the powers of that life to come. The sensible feeling of the
quhilk taist, that passes all natural understanding, quhat dois it in my heart
and conscience? It works a wonderful assurance and perswasioun that God loves
me. The feeling of his mercy in the bowels of my heart, in the bottom of my
conscience, works a certain assurance and persuasion, that he is my God, that
he will save me for Christ's cause; that the promise of mercy, quhilk I durst
not for my life apply to my conscience off before; now be the feeling of
mercy, I dare baldly apply, and say: mercy apperteins to me, life and
salvation apperteins to me.

For the conscience being exceedingly terrified, and seeing na thing in God but
fire and wraith: it is not possible, but it mann flee fra him: it can not
approach to ane consuming fire: but fra time the conscience get a taist of this
peace, mercy, and sweetness; Look how first it fled fra him off before: now
after this reconciliation it will run als fast to him, and will posses him,
mair and mair, fully. Sa the assurance and persuasion of mercy, ryses of the
feeling of mercy in the heart and conscience. And except the heart feel it,
and taste it in some measure: I dare not, nor na conscience dare for the life,
apply God and his mercy to the self. I may be sure in general, that all my
sins are remissable, and that I may come be mercy, or I feel it: but to
apply this mercy in particular to my self, quhill I feel a taist of it
first, I dar not. Swa, this particular application, quhereby we claim God, and
Christ as property to us, as gif na man had title to him but we, and to call
him my God, my Christ, and to claim his promises, as na man had entres to them
but we: this comes of the sense and feeling of mercy in the heart: And the
mair that this feeling grows, and the farther experience, that we have in our
awin heart of this peace and mercy, the greater grows our faith and assurance:
Our persuasion becoms sa strong, that we dar at last come out with the Apostle
and say: Quhat can twin me fra the luif of God? Nather death, nather life,
nather Angels, nor principalities nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, is able to separate me fra the love of God, quhilk is in Christ. This
particular application, quhilk ryses (na doubt) upon the feeling and sens of
mercy, is the specifik difference, the cheef mark and proper note, quhereby
our faith, quha ar justified in the blood of Christ, is discerned fra that
general faith of the Papists. Our faith be this particular application, is
not only disscerned fra the general faith of the Papists, but it is
discerned fra all the pretended faithes, of all the sects in the world. For
the Papist dare not apply the promis of mercy to his awin saul, he compts it
presumption to say, I am ane elect, I am saved and justified. And quherfra
flows this I pray ou? Only fra this, that in their conscience, they have never
felt mercy, they have never tasted of the luif, favor, and sweetness of God:
For, look how fast the conscience fleeis fra God, before it get the taiste of
his sweetness: It runs als diligently on him, and threapes luife on him,
after that it hes gotten that taist. Swa, they miserable bodies contents them
with this general faith, quhilk is na other thing, bot ane historical faith,
that leanes only on the treuth of God, quherby I know that the promises of God
are true: Bot the Papist dare not come, and say: they are true in me; quhy?
because he hes not felt it, and the heart of him is not opned. But our
justifieng faith, as I tauld ou, consecrates the haill saul, to the obedience
of God in Christ. Sa that it rests not only upon the truth of God, nor it rests
not only upon the power of God: suppose their be two chief pillars of our faith
alswa: but specially and chiefly, it rests upon the mercy of God in Christ:
it rests also upon the truth and power of God, but specially upon the promise
of grace and mercy in Christ. The saull of the Papist, being destitute of the
feeling and taist of mercy, dare not enter in this particular application, and
swa he can not be justified. ea: na doubt, sa money of them as are justified,
in the mercy of God gets a taist of his mercy, and kindness, or they die. This
far concerning the effects.

Then e have only this to remember, the opening of the heart, the pacifiyng,
and quieting of the conscience; they work ane assurance and a strong
persuasion of the mercy of God in Christ: The mair that the heart be opened,
the mair that the conscience be pacified, the mair that the taist of that
sweetness continue and remain, the mair art thou assured of his mercy. Swa
then, wald thou know, quhither thy faith be strong or not, quhither thy
persuasion of Gods mercy, be stark or not? Take tent to thy conscience; gif
thy conscience be hurt, assuredly thou will doubt; and gif thou doubt, thou
can not have sick a strong perswasioun, as vtherwayis thou wald have, gif thy
doubting were away. Not that I will have faith to be sa perfect in this life,
that there be always na doubting joined with it. I clame not to that
perfection: but I say that ane hurt conscience mann ever doubt, and the mair
we dout, the les is our persuasion: Swa the mair thou hurt thy conscience, the
less faith thou hes. Then thou mann come to this point: Keep me a sound
conscience; intertaine peace in thy conscience, and thou sall keep faith, and
sal have thy persuasion in that same measure, that thou hes of rest and peace
in thy conscience: and the mair that thy conscience be at peace and rest, the
greater sall thy faith and perswasioun be. Sa this ground halds fast, ane
doubting conscience, makes a weak faith; and the mair the doubting in the
conscience be, the weaker is the faith. Then the Apostle lies not; quha says,
that faith dwells in a good conscience, that faith is locked and closed up in a
good conscience: Sa that gif ee keep a good conscience, e sal keep a strong
faith; and gif ee hurt our conscience, ee sall hurt our faith. Now to make
this mair sensible: How cann I be persuaded of his mercy, quhais anger I feel
kendled against me, and against whom my conscience shows me to be guilty of
many offenses. Na question, sa lang as the sense of his anger, and feeling of
my offenses bides; I cannot have a stark persuasion, that he will be merciful
to me: but quhen I get access to his countenance, and ane sight that he hes
forgiven me; then I begin to be persuaded. Sa keep a good conscience, and thou
sall keep faith; and the better that thy conscience be, the starker mann thy
faith be.

Then the hail exhortation that we gather ^xhortation
on this point, dependes upon this: That every ane of ou, in quhat rank sa
ever ee be; take tent to our conscience: for loosing it, e loose faith; and
losing faith, ee loose salvation. Be ee in the rank of great men, ee aught to
tak tent to our consciences: Specially, in respect, that the Lord hes placed
ou in ane great calling: ee have money things, quherein, e aught to control
our consciences. ee aught to crave the advice of our conscience, or ever e put
our hand to onie warke: In respect ee are bound in manifauld duties to God, and
to our inferiors: And na doubt, gif some of our great men had advised weill,
these dissolutions had not fallen out into their awn bodies. Their oppressions
of the poor, their deadly feids, with their awin companions, walde not burst
out in sick ane heigh measure, gif they had advised weil with their
consciences. But the Lord, seeing them take sa little tent to their
consciences, he spoils them of faith, and of the hope of mercy: and out of
question, ee fall see their end miserable; ee sall see them spectacles of the
judgments of God: they that hes eyes to behauld it, sall see the God of
heaven, make their men, quha gais sa dissolutly to wark, spectacles of his
judgeme^ts to the world: For the Lord leaves not sic men unpunished. Be their
example, it were very necessare, that men of inferior rancks should take tent
to their consciences: and therefore, let every man, according to his calling,
examine his calling, be the rule of his conscience. And specially, this
becoms ou that are judges; It becoms ou, before e pronounce, and gif forth
judgment, to advise with our conscience and law thereof, and in judgment, not
to follow our affection, but to follow the rule of our conscience. Likewayis, ee
that are of inferior ranks to Judges, and ee that are aduocats, controlle our
doings be our conscience, and give not the leages nor subjects of this
Country, just cause to complain on ou: terrify tham not, fra the pleading of
justice be exorbitant prices, and extraordinair kind of doing: but moderate al
our actions sa, that they agree with the rule of our consciences; that sa far
as in ou lies, justice cease not. This that I speak to them, I speak to ou
of the Merchand estait also: See that ee look not sa meekle, to this or that,
as to the conscience that is in ou; quhat in conscience ee may do, according
to the measure of knawledge, that God hes placed in ou: and quhatever ee do;
beware, ee do not against our knawledge. I grant our knaweledge will not be
sa learned, as it should be and this makes money deformed actions; it lat not a
man do against his knaweledge: but let every man do according to the measure
of knawledge, quherwith God hes endued him: And suppose it be not weil
reformed, it or thou do be ges, be advised with thy conscience, and follow thy
knawledge: For that quhilk is done doubtinglie, is sin. Swa, quhateuer thou
do; let not thy eye, thy hand, nor any member of thy body, do against thy
knawledge: For this is a step to that heigh sin against the halie Spirit.
This is the ready way, to put all knawledge out of our mind. For gif me^ do
against knawledge, and continue in doing against knawledge: at last, they will
become a mass of darkness, the Lord will scrape all knawledge out of their
mind, and all feeling of mercy out of their heart, giff they feel it not
better: Therefore, every ane of ou, follow our knawledge, and according to the
measure of our knawledge, let our actions proceed.

It hes pleased the Lord, to pour this Faith is the free gift of God.
liquour, this precious ointment in us; suppose we be earthly and lame vessels,
miserable creatures; it it hes pleased our gracious God, to pour sic a
precious liquor in our hearts and minds, and to concredite sick ane jewel in
our hands and keeping, that be the virtue of this liquour, we may tak hauld on
Christ, quha is our justice, our wisedoome, sanctificatioun, and redemption.
Suppose we be miserable creatures, it the Lord of his mercy, hes a respect to
us in Christ, in giving us this precious liquour, quherby our saul's may be
seasoned to life everlasting. In this, that he powers it in our hearts, we see
clearelie, that it grows not in our hearts, nor breeds not in our nature. Na,
this gift of faith, is not at man's command, nor under his arbitrament: as gif
it lay in his hand to believe, or not to believe, as he pleases. It is the gift
of GOD, poured down freely of his undeserved grace, in the riches of his
mercy in Christ. That it is a gift, ee see clearelie, 1. COR. 12. 1. quhere
the Apostle sayis; and to an other is given faith be the same spirit: as also,
PHIL. 1. 21. quhere he sayis: For unto ou it is given for Christ's cause, that
not only ee should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake. Sa faith is
the gift of the halie Spirit: and this gift is not given to all men and women,
as the Apostle plainly declares: All hes not faith. This gift, suppose it be
given, it is not given to all, but is only given to the elect, that is, to sa
money as the Lord hes appointed to life everlasting. This gift, quhere ever it
is, and in quhat heart soever it be, it is never idle, but perpetually
working, and working weil by love and charity, as the Apostle says. GAL. 5.
6. This gift, quher ever it be, is not dead, but quick and lively, as the
Apostle JAMES says, in his second Chapter. And to let ou knawe, quhither it be
lively and working or not, there is not a way, but to look to the fruits and
effects that flows fra it: And therefore that ee, be our awin effects, may be
the mair assured of the goodness of our faith: I will give ou three special
Certain effects quhere by ane may know, gif we have faith.
effects to look on, be the quhilk e may judge upon the goodness of our
faith. First of all, look to thy heart, and cast thine eye on it: Gif thou hes
a desire to pray, a desire to crave mercy for thy sins, to incall upon Gods
halie name for mercy and grace: gif there be sick a thing in thy heart, as ane
desire to pray, gif there be any piece of thine heart inclined, and hes a
thirst to seek after mercy and grace: suppose the greatest part of thy heart
repine, and wald draw thee fra prayer: it assuredly that desire that thou hes
in any measure to prayer, is the true effect of the right faith. Gif thou have
a heart to pray to God, suppose this desire be but sclender, assure thy self thy
saull hes life: for prayer is the life of the saull, and maks the faith
lively; for why? Prayer is Gods awin gift; it is not our gift, for gif it were
ours, it wald be evil. But it is the best gift that ever God gave man, and sa
it mann be the gift of his awin haly Spirit; and being his awin gift, it mann
make our faith lively. Beside this, thou art not able, nor thou dare not call
upon him, in quhom thou believes not, as the Apostle says. ROMANS 10. 14. For
gif I entreat him be prayer, I mann trust in him. Then prayer is a certain
argument of justifying faith and belief in GOD: For I cannot speak to him;
let be to pray to him, in quhome I trust not: And suppose the heart be not
fully resolved, and weill disposed; it gif there be any part of the heart that
inclines to prayer, stick be it; it is a sure gadge, that that part beleues.
The second effect, whereby thou sal know, quhither faith be in thee or not, is
this; look and advise with thy self, gif thy heart cann be content, to
renounce thy rankour, to forgive thy grudges, and that freely for Gods cause:
may this be done be thee? and will thou forgive thy neighbor, as freely as God
hes forgiven thee? assuredly, that is the effect of the right Spirit; for
nature could never give that. There is nathing, quherevnto nature bends the
self mair, nor to rankour and envy; and there is nathing, quherein nature
places her honor mair guckedly, nor in privy reuengement. Now gif thy heart be
sa tamed and brought down, that it will willingly forgive the injury for gods
cause; that is the effect of the right Spirit: This is not my saying; it is
Christ's saying, MAT. 6. 14. quhere he says: gif ee do forgive men their
trespasses, our heavenly father will also forgive ou; and 15. verse: but gif ee
do not forgive men their trespasses, na mair will our heavenly Father forgive
ou our trespasses. Sa wald Christ say; he that forgiues wrangs, sall get wrangs
forgiven him; but he that will revenge his wrangs, wrang sal be revenged upon
him. Therefore, as thou wald be spared in thy wrangs, done to the mighty
God; spare thou thy neighbor. I will not insist; examine quhither e have faith
or not; examine it be prayer, examine it be the discharge of our awin privy
grudges; for gif ee want their effects: Ane heart full of rankour, an heart void
of prayer, is ane heart faithless, and meet for hell. The third effect of
faith is compassion; thou mann bow thy heart, and extend thy pity, upon the
pure members of Christ's body, and suffer them not to lack gif thou have: for
except ee have this compassioun, ee have na faith. Examine our selfs be their
three effects, and gif ee find their in onie measure; how beeit, it were never
sa small* ou have the right faith in our heart, the faith that ou have, is true
and lively, and assuredly God will be merciful to ou.

This faith of ours, suppose it be lively, it it is not perfect in this world,
but every Our faith man be continually nurished, because it is joined with
douting.
day, and every hour, it craves a continual augmentatioun, it craves ever to
be nurished: for the quhilk increase, the Apostles them selfis, LVK. 17. 5.
incalled and said: Lord increase our faith. And our master commands us to
pray, and say, Lord increase our faith, I believe, Lord help my unbelief.
Then Christ's command lats us see clearly, that this faith, misters
continually to be nurished and helped, and it cannot be helped, but be prayer:
sa we should alwayis continue in prayer. That this faith should be helped, and that
we should be perpetually upon our guard, in fear and trembling to get it
augmented: the terrible doubtings, the wonderful pits of desparatioun, into the
quhilk, the dearest servant of God are casten, dois clearelie teach: For the
best servants of God, are exercised with terrible doubtings in their saules,
with wonderful stammerings, and they will be brought at sometimes, as appears
in their awin judgment, to the very brinke of desperatioun. Their doubtings
and stammerings lets us see, that this faith of ours wald be perpetually
nurished, and that we have need, continually to pray for the increase of it.
It pleases the Lord, at sometimes, to let his servants have a sight of them
selfs, to cast them down, and to let them see, how ouglie sin is: It
pleases him, to let them fall in the bitterness of sin, and to quhat end?
Not that he will devour them, or suffer tham to be swallowed up be desperation.
Suppose EZEKIAH cries out, that like an hungry lion, the Lord is like to
devour him, and bruise him in pieces: it the Lord suffers him not to despair.
And suppose DAVID cry, I cannot away with his consuming fire, I may not bide
the fire of the Lords jealousy; it he dispairs not: But the Lord casts his
servants very low; to quhat end? To the end, that they may feel in their
hearts and consciences, quhat Christ suffered for them in the arde, and on the
cross, in saull and body: ea, we wald think, that there had been plain
collusion betwixt the Father and the Son, and that his suffering had been na
suffering: except we felt in our saul's in some mesure, the hell quhilk he
sustained in full measure. Swa to the effect, that we might clearelie
understand the bitterness of sin, that we might know, how far we are addetted
to Christ, quha suffered sick torments for our sin, and that we may be the
mair able to thank him, and to praise his halie name: he suffers his awin
servants to dout, but not to despair: he forgiues their doutings, he forgiues
their stam rings, and in his awn time, he supports tham, and brings us to the
waters of life.

Their doubtings, as I have often spoken, may ludge in ane saul with faith; for
douting and faith, are not extremely opponed; Only faith and despair, are
extremely Doubting and faith may ludge in ane saul.
opponed: and therefore, faith and despair, can not both ludge in ane saul;
for despair cuts the pillars of hope, and quher there is na hope, there cann
be na faith. But as to doubting, it mann ludge, it will ludge, and hes ludged
in the saules of the best servants that ever God had. Look to the Apostle, we
are alwayis in doubt, says he, but we despair not. Sa, douting and faith may
ludge in an saul: and quherfra flows this doubting? We know, that in the
regenerat man, there is a remnant corruptioun: For we get not our heaven in
this earth: suppose we beginn our heaven here, we get it not fully here:
And gif all corruption were away, quhat should there rest, but a full heaven
here? Sa it is only begun in this life, and not perfited; therefore there
remains in the saul, a great corruptioun, quhilk is never idle, but
continually occupied. This corruption is ever bringing forth the birth of
sin, part less, part mair; every sin hurts the conscience; ane hurt
conscience, impairs the persuasion, and sa comes in the doubting. For there is
not a sin that we commit, but it bannishes light, and casts a slough over the
eye of our faith, quherby, we doubt and stammer in our sight. And were not the
Lord of his mercy taks us up, gives us the gift of repentance, and maks us
every day, als often as we sin, to cry als often for mercy, and sa to repair the
loss that we have of faith, to repair the loss quhilk we have of the feeling
of mercy, we wald gang on, and halely put out that same light. But it pleases
the Lord; suppose we be every day sinning, to give us the gift of repentance;
and be repentance, to repair our faith, to repair the sense and feeling of
mercy in us, and to put us in that same estait of persuasion, quherein we were
off before. Therefore, gif God beginn not, continue not, and end not with
mercy: in that same moment, that he abstracts his mercy fra us, we will
decay. Swa, ee mann be diligent incallers for mercy: e mann be instant
continually, in seeking to have a feeling of mercy. This far for the doubting.

Now, howsoever it be sure and certain that the faith of the best children of
God A doubting and a weak faith, is faith and sall never heali^^^ decay.
is subject to doubting: it it is als sure and certain, that it is never
healilie extinguished, albeit it were never sa weak, it it sall never utterly
decay and perish out of the heart, quherein it makes ains residence. This
comfort and consolation, the Spirit of God hes set down in his word, to hald
up the troubled heart: that howsoever faith be weak, it a weak faith, is
faith: and quhere that faith is, there mann ever be mercy. ee have in ROMANS
11. 29. that the gifts and calling of God, are without repentance. But amang
all his gifts that are of this sort, faith is ane of the cheifest, therefore it
can not be revoked again. ee have in IVDE 3. that faith is ains given to the
saints: ains given: that is, constantly given, never to be changed, nor
utterly taken fra them. The Lord will not repent him of this gift, but the
saul quhilk he hes luifit ains, he will luif perpetually* It is true and
certain, that the spoonks of faith quhilk are kindled in the heart be the
Spirit of God; certain it is, they may be smored for a lang time: they may
be covered with the asses of our awin corruption, and with our awin ill deeds
and wickedness, in the quhilk we fall: it is true, that the effects of a lively
faith will be interrupted, and that thy lusts and affections will prevail for a
lang time: Sa that quhen thou looks on thy self, upon the judgments of GOD
that hangs on saull and body, and quhen thou looks upon thy dissolute life,
and on the anger of God agains this dissolute life: In the mind, in the heart
and conscience of him that hes sa smored and oppressed his faith, it will often
times come to pas in his awin judgment, having his eyes fixed on him self
only: that he will think him to be a reprobate, to be ane affcast, and never
able to recover mercy. Quhere this corruption burstis forth in gros manner,
after that the Lord hes called thee: Look how sone the Lord beginns to walken
thee again: incontinent, thou fixes thine eyes upon thine awin life, and enters
in a deep consideration, als weill of the gravity of thy sin; as of the
weight of the wrath of God, quhilk thou seeis following thereon; and is salaith
to remit thy cogitation, to pans upon the deepnes of the mercy of God;
standing fixed in this consideration, it can not bot come to pas in thy awin
judgment, bot thou art ane aff-cast: And it God forbid it were sa, for suppose
they sponks of the spirit be covered, be the corruption that is within thy
saul, it they sponks are not halily put out

And to let ou see, that they are not put out, suppose they burst not forth in
the outward effects, that the warlde may The sponks of faith suppose they be
smored, they are not halilie put out, no^ are not idle.
know thee to be ane faithful man as it wont to do; it their spoonkes are not
idle, and thou sall find them not to be idle in thee. As for the
confirmation of my argument, that howsoever our bodies be lowsed to all
dissolutioun, after our effectual calling within us in our saul's, and that it
the spoonks are not idle, ee see, that suppose the fire be covered with the
asses; it it is a fire: there is na man will say, that the fire is put out
suppose it be covered: Na mair is faith put out of the saull, suppose it be sa
covered, that it nather shawe hew nor light outwardly. Example of this we
have clearlie in DAVID: After his lamentatioun in that psalm of repentance.
PSALM. 51. 11. he prays to God in their terms: Cast me not away from thy
presence: And quhat subjoines he? And tak not thine halie spirit from me. Had
he not lost the Spirit, be his adultery and murder? Na: for he walde not have
said then, take it not from me, but restore it to me. It is true, he vsis
sick fashion of language, as PSALM. 51. 12. he says: Restore to me the joy of
thy salvation: not that he lacked the Spirit healilie; but that the Spirit
lacked force in him, and mistered strengthening and fortification: It wald be
steered up, that the flame of it might appear. Therefore I say, in respect
DAVID says sa clearlie, after his adultery and murder; take not that Spirit
from me: it is a certain argument, that the faithful hes never the Spirit
of GOD always taken fra them, in their greatest dissolutions. The second point
is this; How prove I that their spoonks are not idle, suppose the outward
effects be interrupted. As DAVID felt this in his conscience, sa every ane of
ou may feel it in our awin consciences. The Spirit of God in man's heart can
not be idle, but their spoonkes, in the mean time that the body is castin
lowse to all dissolutions, their spoonkes are accusing thy dissolution, are
finding fault with thy manners: their spoonkes suffers thee not to take the
pleasure of thy body, without great bitterness, and continual remorse. And
their spoonkes quhere they are, they will make the saull quherein they dwell, to
utter their voces, at ane time or other; ains in the twenty four hours:
Allas, I am doing the ill quhilk I wald not do, gif I hadd power or strength
to resist my affectioun, and gif I might be master of my affection, I wald not
for all the world do the ill quhilk I do. Again, gif I had power to do the
good quhilk I wald do, I walde not leave it undone for all the world. Swa
their spoonkes, suppose they have not sick force and strength presently, as to
resist the affection, and to halde the ill turns undone; it perpetually in
the heart, they are finding fault with thy corruption: and suffers thee not to
take thy pleasure without pain: but last of all makes thee to utter their
voces: Gif I had strength to resist, I walde not do the ill quhilk I do.
Quhere their voces are, na questioun, they are the voces of a saull, quhilk the
Lord hes begun to sanctify: and being ains sanctified, in despite of the
Devil, and of the corruption that is in us, this faith shall never perish: But
gif the haill saull without contradictioun, with a greedy appetite and
pleasure be carried to ill, and hes na sorrow for it: that saull is in ane ill
estait: I can look for nathing to sick a saull but death; except that the Lord
prevent tham. But quhere this remorse and sorrow, and sick voces are in the
saull; that saul in the time that God hes appointed, sall recover strength: The
Lord sall never suffer they spoonkes to be halilie taken away, but in his awin
time he sall fortify tham, and make them to break out before the warlde in
good warks. The Lord in his awin time, he will sanctify tham: he will scatter
the asses of corruption, steir up the sponkes, and make tham to break out in a
better life, nor ever they did before: as e may clearly see that DAVID'S
repentance hes done mair good to the Kirk of God, nor gif he had never fallen.
Thus far concerning the effects

Suppose the effects of repentance be interrupted, it they spoonks are not
extinguished. For, there is na man will think, that the fire quhilk is covered
Similitudes showing that the spoonks of faith, supose they be covered are not
extinguished.
with asses, is extinguished; but being stirred up in the morning, it will
burn als clearlie, as it did in the night before. There is na man will count
the treeis, that now in the time of winter, wants leaves, fruit, and external
beauty to be dead: there is na man will count the Sun to be out of the lift;
suppose it be ouercled with a clud of darkness and mist: There is a great
difference, betwixt a sleepry disease, and death; for men are not dead, suppose
they be sleepand; and it there is nathing lyker to death nor sleep. As there
is great ods, betwixt a drunken man and a dead man: sa there is great odds
betwixt the faith that lurks for a quhil, and vtters not the self, and the
light that is utterly put out. Quhen we burst not forth in outward deeds;
GOD forbid that we should think, that their sponkes are halelie extinguished:
Indeed the saul that is visited after foul defectiouns fra his calling, and
against his knawledge; or this saul recover the former beauty; it is in a
strange danger. For gif the Lord suffer thy corruption to get loose, in sik
sort, that it carry thee as it will, and be all means possible, make thee to
labor, to put out the spoonke of regeneration. Quhen the Lord begins to
challenge thee, or to gar thee rander a count of thy bygane life: the saull of
that man, quhen it is challenged, is in great danger. Sa that, na questioun,
quhen the Lord begins to lay to our charge, our dissolute life, the contempt
and abuse of our calling: Assuredly our saul's are sa near to the brinke of
desperation, that there can be nathing nearer. For, will thou look to God,
thou will see nathing bot his anger kendled, as ane fire against thee: Will
thou look to thy self, thou will see nathing, bot sin provoking his anger:
thou will see the contempt and abuse of thy calling, multiplying his anger:
thou will see nathing, bot matter of despair. And quhat is the best pillar and
surest retreat, quherupon sick a saul that A su^e ret^eat* to rep^se on, in
highest ^ent^tions.
is sa near to the brinke of desperation, may repose? I will give thee ane
help quhereupon, quhen thou art assaulted be all high tentations thou may
repose: quhen there is na thing before thee bot death, quhen thou seeis the
Devil accusing thee, thine awin conscience bearing him witness against thee,
thy life accusing thee, and the abuse of thy calling accusing thee, quhere sall
thou ga? Ga back over again, to thy bygane experience, cast over thy memory,
and remember, gif God at any time, in onye sort hes loved thee: gif ever thou
hes felt the love and favor of God in thy heart and conscience: Remember gif
ever the Lord hes swa disposed thy heart, that as he loved thee, thou loved
him: and had a desire to get him. Remember on this, and repose thine assurance
on this: that as he loved thee ains, he will love thee ay, and will assuredly
restore thee to that love, or thou die. The heart that felt ains this love of
God, sall feel it again: And look quhat gift, or grace, or quhat taist of the
power of the warlde to com, that ever the Lord gave to his creatures in this
life: to that same degree of mercy, he sall restore his creature or ever it
depart this life. Sa the saull that is tossed with high assaults, and great
dangers: quhere present things will not help, it is necessare, that it have
recourse to bigane things, and keep in memory, the bigane experience of
mercy, quhilk the Lord hes freely shawen toward that saul. This same memory
salbe sa pleasant to the saull, that it sal stay it presently fra desperation,
and vphauld it unto the time, the Lord pacify that heart, and give comfort to
that saul: quhilk being done, that saull sall see, that howsaever he was
angry, he was angry only for a quhile.

I speak their things, not that I think, that every an of ou hes taisted of
tham: A lesson.
and it in some measure, the servants of God mann taist of them, and e that
hes not taisted of them, may taist of them or ee die. And therefore, quhither
ee have taisted or not taisted them: It cannot be, but profitable for ou, to
lock up this lesson in our hearts, and remember on it faithfully, that gif the
Lord at onie time, put at our hearts, e may remember, and say with our selfs; I
gat a lesson, to gang back to my bigan experience, and thereon to repose. And
suppose, e be not put at presently our selfs; it, quhen ee visit them that
are troubled in conscience; let their things be proponit to tham as comforts,
and use tham as medicaments may meet to apply to the grief of the inward
conscience: and sa e sal make our fruit of this doctrine, and posses our saul's
in a good estaite. This far for the first point, quherin every ane of ou aught
to try and examine our consciences.

The second point is this, try quhither Of love quhilk is the second point of
ou^ trial.
e have love toward our neighbor, or not: for as we are coupled with God be
faith; sa be the band of love, we are coupled with our neighbor: and gif ee
want love* ee can have na societye with our neighbor. For love is the chief
and principal branch, that springs of the root of faith. Love is that
celestial glue, that co^joins all the faithful members, in the unity of ane
mystical body. And seeing that religion was instituted of God, to serve as ane
pathway to co^uoy us to our chief felicity: and happy we can not be, except
we be like unto our God: like unto him we can not be, except we have love: For
as it is set down 1. IOH. 4. 8. God is love; Sa, seeing God is love it self,
quhasaeuer will resemble him, mann be endued with the oil of love. This only
ane argument testifies to us, that this love is ane principal butt, quherunto
al things that are commanded in religion, aught to be referred To spend lang
time in the praise of love, it sal be na ways necessare, seeing the haly
scripture resou^ds, in blasing the commendation of it: bot that we speak not
of a thing ambiguous, we sall lat ou see, how this word is considered and taken
in How the word love is taken in the Scriptures.
the scriptures. Love is considered, ather as a spring and fontain, quherfra
the rest proceeds: that is, for the love, quhereby we love God. And as love
coms first fra God, and is powered be his halie Spirit in our hearts: sa, it
first redounds upward, and strikes back upon him self: for the love of God
mann ever ga before the love of the creature. Nixt, we take this word for that
love, quhereby we love Gods creatures, our neighbors, and specially them that
are of the family of faith. And thridly it is taken, for the deeds of the
second table, quhilk flows fra this love. Now, quhen I speak of love, I
speak of it as in the second significatioun: to wit, as it is taken for the love
of our neighbor: And taking it swa, I call love the gift of The defini^^on of
love.
God, powered in the hearts of men and women: be the quhilk gift, we first love
god in Christ our savior; and nixt in God, and for Gods cause, we love al his
creatures: bot chiefly our brethren, that are of the family of faith, the
children of ane common father with us. We will examine this definition. I say,
first the love of God, as it Of our lo^^ toward God.
coms fra God, it returns to God: as it coms down fra him, sa it strikes
upward to him again: and is it not good reason? for quhy? Let thy heart fix
thy love als lang as thou will upon the creaturs, thou sall never be satiat,
nor thy affection sall never be content, except thou get a grip of God. But gif
ains thou love God in thy heart, and cast thy affections upon him, and get ains
a grip of him: the langer thou love him, the greater satiety and con tentment
sall thou have: thou sall not thirst for ane other. For, as to the creatures,
there is never a creature that God created, but it is stamped with his awin
stamp, and every creature bears his Image: and looking to the image of God in
the creature, should it not draw thee to him, that thou fix not thy heart upon
the creature: for his awin image in his creature, sulde lead thee to him self.
And therefore the mair that thou knawes the creatures; the greater variety of
knawledge that thou hes of the creatures, the mair should every particular
knawledge of them draw thee to God, and the mair should thou wonder of thy God,
and know thy duty toward him. And seeing that delight flows of knawledge, and
that every knawledge, hes the awin delight with it: as the variety of knawledge
that rises upon the creatures, should make the mind to mount up to the knawledge
of God: sa the variety of delites, that rises upon the diversity of this
knawledge, sulde move the heart upward, to the love of God: and the heart
getting a grip of God and being seized with the love of God: and the mind
being occupied with the true knawledge of God; sa sone as heart and mind is
full of God, the heart is quiet and the mind is satisfied. Sa that the mair
this knawledge grows in thy mind, the greater contentment hes thou, and the
mair the love of him grows in thy heart, the greater joy and rejoising hes thou
in thy saull. For quhy? In God e have not only all the creatures: but ee have
himself, beside the creatures: And therefore in God, e have all the knawledge and
delight that can rise of the creatures: and beside the creatures, e have God
himself quha is the Creator. And swa I say, the mind of man, can never quiet
the self in the knawledge, nor the heart cann never settle the self in the
love of naked creaturs, in respect they are flowing and vanity, as SOLOMON calls
them: but in the infinite God, rightly knawin, and earnestly loved; the mind
sall see a full rest, and the heart sall have a perfect joy. For our affection
is sa insatiable, that na finit thing will satisfy it, nor there can be na
solid settling upon the thing that is transitorious. Sa the love aught to
strike upward, and redound first to God, in quhais face, the heart sall find
full and perfect joy.

The second argument that I use, is this: Of love toward our neighbor.
seeing there is only an precept left be our master in reco^me^datio^ to be
observed be us, to wit; that every ane of us should love anvther: Therefore our
wise master, understanding well, that quhere love was, there misterd na ma
laws: that the life of man, be love only behooved to be may happy, left only
the same in chief recommendation, and taks up the hail law and euangell in a
word, Love. And gif the heart of man were endued with love, his life might be
may happy and blessed: For there is nathing maks this life happy, but the
resemblance and likelihood that we have with God. The nerer we draw to God,
the mair blessed is our life; for there cannot be sik a happy life, as the life
of God. Now sayis IOH. in his 1. epist. 4. 8. God is love; therefore, the mair
we draw near to love, the mair near ar we to that happy life: for we are in
God, and partaker of the life of God. Quhen I speak this, e mann not think,
that love in God, and love in us, is an thing; for love is but a quality in us,
and it is not a quality in God; there is nathing in God but that quhilk is God;
sa love in God, is his awin essence: Therefore, the mair ee grow in love, the
nearer e draw to God, and to that happy and blessed life. For there is nathing
mair profitable, mair agreeable and convenient to nature, nor to love; and
above al things to love God: And therefore it is, that God and his Angels are
may happy and blist, because they love all things, and desires ever to do
good. On the other side, there is nathing mair unhappy, nathing mair noysum,
mair hurtful, and that eats up nature mair, nor to burn with envy and
hatred, And heirfore it is, that the devils ar may miserable, quha torments
them selves with continual malice and hatred, burning with ane vehement
appetite, to be noysum to all creatures. Sa as the life of the Devil is may
unhappy, because he is full of envy and malice: Siclike our life mann be
may happy, gif we be full of love. To speak of love I will na farther:
Only gif e have love, mark the effects of it, set down 1. COR. 13. 4. 5. 6.
7. verse. quhilk effects, gif ee have not in some measure, ee have not true
love.

I end here, ee see in quhat points, every ane of ou aught to be prepared; e
Conclusion with an exhortation
mann be endued with this love, and ee mann be endued with faith: and gif ee
have their in onie small mesure; gang baldly to the hearing of the word, and to
the receiving of the Sacrament. This is the preparation that we allow of: I
grant, the Papists hes a preparatioun, but nathing like to this, and therefore
they cann have na warrant of the word of God. Last of all, seeing we are
commanded to try our selfs: he that lacks knawledge, cannot try himself: A
furious man cannot try himself: A child cannot try himself: therefore they
aught not to com to the Table. All their things being weill considered; he that
hes faith and love in any kind of measure, let him come to the Table. And all
their things seruis, als weil for the hearing of the word fruitfully, as for the
receuing of the Sacrament. Therefore, the Lord of his mercy illuminate our
minds, and work some measure of faith and love in our hearts: that ee may be
partakers of that heavenly life, offered in the word and Sacraments: that e
may begin our heaven here, and get the full fruition of the life to come, and
that in the righteous merits of Christ Jesus: To quhom with the Father, and the
halie Ghaist, be all honor, praise, and glory, for now and ever:

Amen.

