The history of Leonard Aretine, concerning the wars between the Imperialles
and the Goths for the possession of Italy, a work very pleasant and
profitable.

Translated out of Latin into English by Arthur Goldyng.

PRINTED AT LONdon by Rouland Hall, for George Bucke. 1563.

To the right honorable Sir William Sici^ Knighte principal Secretary to the
Queens Majesty and Master of her highness Court of wards and liueries,
Arthur Golding wishes continuance of health, with (...) of honor.
LIke as vines to the intent the bet ter to prosper and preserve their fruit to
the use and pleasure of man, require the stay of trees that be stronger then
themselves: Even so it behooves them that mind to put forth any work to the
behoof^ and commodity of others, to shroude themselves under the favor of
some such person, for whose sake their doing may be the better liked and
accepted of all men.

The which thing this my rude and unpolished translation of the historye of
Leonard Aretine right well perceauyng, at such time as being fully finished and
ended it was now ready to set foot out of doors and to commit it self to the
wide world, beholding it self spoiled of his Romayne garment and turned into a
plain English cote, began to be somewhat abashed and to look about him for
some favorable patron un der whose protection it might adventure to go
abroad. But to who^ rather ought it to present it self then to him under whose
roof it has been harbroughed and fostered from the infancy, until such
time as it came to his full grouth. And therefore although the want of fine
pennyng and eloquent indityng of the hystorye in our language, enforce me to
confess it unworthy to trouble your honor being otherwise busyed in most
weyghtye affairs of this Realm: ye^ not wythstandyng partly in co^syderation
of my duty, but more upon confydence of your clemencye, I have taken
boldness to dedicate the same unto you: so much the rather, in as much as the
work entrea teth of serious and weyghtye matters.

Wherein if it may please your ho nour so to accept my doing, as that this my
simple Translati on may under your favorable protection be bold to show it
self abroad, I shall not only think my travel abundauntly recompensed, but
also account it for a further encou^agemente, to give the adventure upon some
greater matter hereafter. Finished at your house in y^ Str^nd the second of
April. 1563.

By your honors at commandment Arthur Goldyng.

TO THE READER.
Forasmuch as this work of Leonard Aretine entreats of the repulsyng of the
Goths out of Italy by the Captains of themperoure of Constantinople,
touching lightly by the way the cause of their arrival in the same country.
It seems expedient to make further rehearsal of y^ cause of their first
entrance with in the bounds of y^ Roman Empire, (...) of their success in
the same through which they grew so strong in process of time, that they not
only beareft it o^ diverse provinces and members pertaining thereto, but also
gatte into their hands Italy it self with y^ Islands ad^oyning, making
the^felues Lords and Masters of Rome sometime sovereign lady and Empress of
the world, In declaration whereof y^ matter it self will somewhat minister
occasion to speak of the Erules and of (...) out of whose hands the Goths
wrested y^ dominion and possession of Italy: and finally of the two politic
martial and fortunate Captains Belisarius and Narses w^oe after (...) years
wars, recovered the same again to the Empire. The which things I will over
conne as bryefely as the matter will permytte, The Goths therefore by the
assertion and con^ente of allowable Authors, enhabyted sometime beyond the
river Istre or Danow in the Country called in old time Dacia now named
Ualachia. So that the Ostrogoth^s or Easternegothes borderyng upon the c^aste
of Now called (...) maiore
Pontus Eurinus, (of whom this present hystorye (...).) are accounted for the
Gettes and Triballes: and the (...) or (...) enhabytyng more into the (...) and
main land toward the head of Danow and Ger^anie, are accounted for the Da^es
or Daues. Now about the (...) of our Lord God. 373. In the time of Ualens
Emperor of the East, a certain people of Now called Tartarie.
S^ythia named Hunnes assembling them selves in great number, under the
conducte of their Captain Cadaris invaded the Easterngothes and brought them
in subjection. The westerngothes strycken with fear at the sudden misfortune
of their neighbors, abandonyng their natyue Country sent Ambassadors to the
Emperor Ualens* proferyng to receive the Christen faith, and to set themselves
as a wall and bulwark to the Romayne Empire against the assaults of the
cruel Hunnes and other Barbarous nations, so that he would suffer them to
pass the river Danow and g^ue them Mysia to enhabyte. Upon this condition
their request was granted, and they received both Christen Religion and also
governors of the Emperor.

Through the misgoueruement and ex torcion of who^ they were so vered, that
they made insurrection against y^ Em pyre, subdued Mysia and Thrace overcame
the emperor in battle and burnt him in a cotage where he had hidden himself, and
finally besteged Constantinople. Nevertheless afterward as well appeased and
pacified by the virtuous and upright government, as vanquished and subdued by
the force and puissance of The odesius (who succeeded Ualens) they submitted
themselves again to y^ Roman Empire, and served in the wars at
commandment by the space of. xxxv. years, until such time as Stillico
(traitorously practisyng the confusion of Honorius fonne of the said
Theodosius, to the intent to have made his own fonne Eucherius Emperor) by
puttyng them out of wages, and defranding them of their pensions, compelled
them to rebel again. Whereupon taking weapon in hand, they invaded Pa^nonie,
and there making one Alaricicus a noble and valiante gentleman King, wasted all
Pannonic, Thrace, and Sclauonie, with all the countries borderyng upon Italye,
and finally after great slaughter both given and received, spoiled al Italy
with fire and sword, sacked Rome, and conquered Spain, where they also settled
themselves, and within few years afrer grew to such wealth authority and
puissance, that the younger Ualcntinian Emperor of Rome (of whom mention
shall be made in the beginning of this work) enteryng in leage with their King
Theodoriche, used his aid against Attila King of the Hunnes. For the Hunnes
like good bloudhoundes followyng freshly the pursuit of their foresaid victory
against the Easterngothes partly moved of envy toward the state of the
Romayne Empire, and partly solicited thereto by the traitor Ruffin^ whom
T^eodosius had left as governor and protector of his other son Arcadius
Emperor of the East,) associatyng vnt^ them the said Ea^ngothes, the
Gepides, the Erules, and other Barbarous people to the number of five
^thousande men, under the conducte of Attila (worthily surnamed the scourge of
God) afflicted the dominions and provinces of the Romayne Empire, and in
especially wasted and spoiled Italye, razyng her Cytyes to the ground, and
bearyng down all things before them like a most vyolente and horrible
tempeste. After whose return into Pannon^e, the seat of their kingdom,
Attila immediately dyed. Whereupon ensued dyscord between the Hunnes and the
Easterngothes, in which the Goths: drawing to their part: the Gepides,
prevailed, and drove the Hunnes out of Pannonie back again into Tartarie
from whence they first came. Howbeit they left their name still behind them to
the Country, the which after them is called Hungarye unto this day.

About the same time that the Goths had driven the Hunnes out of Hungary,
it fortuned that one Aspar a noble man of great power and author^tye
proclaimed his son Ardaburis Ceaser against Leo then Emperor of
Constantinople. In somuche that Leo was feign to assemble a power and encounter
with him with in the City. In the which conflicte Aspar and Ardaburis being
overcome were yielded to the Emperor and put both to death. The Gothos taking
occasion of advantage upon this ciuyll war, wasted all (...) and never
rested until such time as Leo had granted them Hungarye (from whence they had
utterly expulsed the sons of Attila) together with Misia to have and hold
freely without tribute or subjection to the Empire. Upon which condition
truce was taken, and for better obseruyng thereof.

Theodenur King of the Goths gave his son Theodorich in Hostage unto Leo. It
was not long after but that there fell grudge and consequently war between
Theodenur and his brother Ualanur wherein Ualanur was slain. By means whereof
it came to pass, that Theodenur enjoyed quietly the whole and entier
possession of all Dacia, Masia, and both the Pannonies. Leo therefore fearyng
the power and puissance o^ Theodenur, delivered him his son Theoderich.
Theodenur in recompense of that good turn, turned the truce y^ was taken
between them into continual peace, and so the Goths ceased to molest the
Empire. In the mean season after much alteration and ^surpyng by Tirantes,
Angustu^us a very child the son of Orestes a sage and wise Senator of Rome,
being by favor of the Citizens of Rauenna proclaimed emperor of the Weste,
to the intent to refreshe and ease the Empire of the long continued trouble
that it had suffered many years before, (by the ^unsell of his father Orestes)
took ^e with the Uandales in Affricke, who had always since their first
coming, been evil neighbors to the Empire. But whiles all was caulme and
quiet on the south, behold an hedeous and horrible tempeste rises (...)
against him out of the North. The Erules and Turinges the miserable relics of
the army of Attila, (who after that the said Attila was dead and his sons
driven away, being vanquished by y^ Easterngothes and compelled back again
toward Tartarie with y^ Hunnes, had a while held themselves in quiet about y^
mouth of the ^yuer Danow) allured with the former spoil of Italy (to whose
utter undoing well nigh all the wars that were made in those days did tend,)
came back again and conqueryng it, slew Orestes and deposed Augustulus, in
whom the honorable and renouned name of Augustus decayed the. 517. year after
that (...) Ceser first had that name and title of honor given unto him of the
Senate and people of Rome. By means whereof it came to pass, that Italy and
Rome became afterward the common pray of Barbarous kings, so y^ he that could
make himself strongest enjoyed the possission thereof. For Odoacer and his
Erules had scarcely yet fully settled themselves, when y^ Easterngothes (who
after the decease of Theodenur were now under y^ government of his ^ne
Theoderich) envying y^ prosperity of y^ Erules, and therewith calling to
remembra^e how their own countryme^ the westerngothes had already conquered
Spain, y^ Uandales Affricke, the Frenchmen, and Burgonions Gallia, y^ Saxons
Britain, and other nations other pleasant and fertile countries, earnest ly
besought and required their king, to lead them into Italye to the ^utent as
well to advance the fame and renoune of their Cheualrie, as also to place
themselves in y^ co^ntrye which as it was the head and sovereign of all others,
so had it also the report to be the most pleasant, welthie, and fertile of all the Regions of Europe. Theoderich albeit he were in manner constrained by his
subjectes to do the thing that they requested, yet as one myndfull of the
great benefits that his ancestors had received of y^ Emperors of
Constantinople, and of the honorable enter tainem^nt that he himself had had
at such time as he lay in hostage in the Emperors Court, he advertised the
Emperor Zeno thereof, protesting y^ he would do nothing without his con sent.
Zeno who at that time stood in fear of Theoderich and the Goths, (as one that
for doubt least he should grow to strong for him in that part of Europe, was
fully determined before, to have proffered that vo^age unto him though no such
question had been moved) gladly condescended to his pet^o^ and for the more
honor created him Co^full. Herevppon Theoderich and his countrymen with their
wives and children removed into Italye. Of whose good success and of the good
success of his posterity in that country, together with their expulsing or
rather subduing by the Imperialls, for as much as this History of Leonard
Aretine does at large entreat I will not be tedious in repeating the same.
Howbeit it is to be understood that after the battle of Nuceria where Teias
last king of the Goths was slain, although some departed away with such
things as they had according to covenant yet the greater part of them tarried
still: ye which degenerating into ye name of Italians, lost both their empire
and own name for ever the lxxi. year after their first coming into ye country
under Theoderich, being ye year of grace CCCCC L. IIII. Now as concerning the
two noble and valiant captains Belisarius and Narses the Conquerours and
subduers of them, it is to be doubted whether the miserable misfortune of the
one be more to be lamented, or the unadvisedness and follye of the other (if I
may term the thing according to desert) be to be blamed. For Belisarius
after that he had recovered (...) from the Uandales, vanquisshed the Persians,
fought prosperously against the Medes, abated the power and pulled down the
high courages of the Goths openinge a way of conquest to his successor, and
atcheued so many hault enterprises and Marciall exploytes that the glorious
fame of his doings did sprede his renown over all the world and made his
name immortal, in so much that he was accounted as a perfect and
incomparable Mirror for all Captains to behold, and a verrye master of
Cheualrye, whom neither ambytion the common corrupter of noble hearts, nor the
licentyous lybertye of the Camp, nor the instigatyons of mighty Princes could
withdraw from his allegeans and promise made to the Emperor Justinian. Was in
the end in his old days upon light suspicion without proof, by the same
Emperor for whom he had so often put his life in peril: to whom he had
acquired so much honor, whose favor he had esteemed more then to raygne
himself (...) an Emperor, deprived of both his eyes, and constrained to beg
his bread miserably from door to door, an unworthy reward for so many good
deeds and so much good service done to the Empire. And ^arses the subduer of
the Goths and reducer of Italy to the Empire when he had governed it quietlye
many years together to bys great honor and admyration, at the last (like a
shrewd cow which when she has given a good quantity of milk overthrows
the payle with her heel and spyllethe the same) provoked only by the
presumptuous words of a vain and envious woman, weued such a web (according
to his own words) as neither she nor the Emperor were able to wear out, no
nor he himself to unweave again after he had ones put it into the loome,
though he did the b^sts he could to have stayed it, so hard and difficult a
matter is it to stop a mischief of the course, when it ones has gotten the
reins in the neck, and has set foot forward to run the race. For the
Lombardes being by him in the ecstasy of his fumyshe rage called out of
Pannonie (which by that time was become the common receptacle of the enemies of
the Empire) not only within short time after his decease brought Italye in
subjection to them, but also syns that day hitherto (which thing neither the
Goths, Hu^nes Uandales, Erules, nor any other of the barbarous nations with
their manyfolde and terrible assaults were able to compass and bring to
effect) have held a portion thereof as a perpetual possession and inheritan^
to themselves, which retains their name unto this day. But forasmuch as
these things were done somewhat after the subduing of the Goths, and do
little or nothing pertain to the present purpose of this History I will not
stand any longer upon them, but remit the to the reading of mine Author.

The preface of Leonard Aretine, unto his books of the wars in Italye
against the Goths.
Although it had been a far greater pleasure to me, to have written of the
prosperous and (...) estate of Italy, then of the slaughte^s and destruction of
it: yet notwythstanding forasmuch as the time requires otherwise, we also will
change with the time and follow the mutabilitie of fortune reportinge in these
books the invasions of the Goths, and the wars through the which almost all
Italy was brought to utter ruin and destruction. Sure ly a sorrowful matter,
but yet for the knowledge of things done in those days, necessary to be
entreated of. For I cannot think but that when Xenophon of Athens that
excellent Clerk, did write of the beseging and fainishing of Athens and of the
throwing down of the walls of it, he was sorry in his heart that he had o^you
so to do. And yet he wrate it, because hethought it expedient that the (...)
of ^h things should not perish. Neither does our Liuy deferue les praise when
he rehe^th y^ taking and burning of Rome by the Frenchine^, then when he
sets out y^ famous triumph of Paulus Emylius over the Macedones, or the
noble conquestes of Scipio Affricanus. For it is the duty of an history to
put in writing all adue^tures as well unfortunate as fortunate. And therefore a
man may wyshe y^ best, but he must write be it good or bad as occasion
offers. I assure you as I was inditinge these matters, albeit many things did
grieve me, for thentier love y^ I bear to my native country, yetnot
wythstandyng this reason I had to comfort me, y^ although Italy suffered at y^
time most extreme miseries. yet at the length she not only gate thupper hand
and e^pulsed those foreign nations but also has remained from y^ day to this
most welthy and puissant both by sea and land, and that from that time forth
her Cities have flourished in riches and aucthorie most abundantly, and do
florishe still at this hour, thonour and dominion of the^ now stre^ing it self
far of on al sides, so that the things that have happened unto her, seem not
so much to be lamented as to be rejoiced at, like unto Hercules whose great
exploits made him more famous then ever he should have be^e if he had (...)
those dangerous enterprises. I will not speak of the great ^litie, good
Nurtute, ^sye, and trad of all Liberal arts and lear^ing, of y^ which Italy
^weth it self to be a natural ^ther and a very nourice, for I will let y^
comendations of her alon until another time. As concerning ye wa^es y^ we now
must entreat of, there remained (...) mention of the^ among ye Latin writers
only there went a report from man to man and that very sle^der and ob^, y^
Belisarius and Narses captains of ye emperor Justinian drove y^ Goths out of
Italy, but where or in what sort, or by what means, there was no ^nkling at al
left in wri ting. We came by y^ knowledge of the^ out of y^ ^ek Chroncles.
Wherefore as I had don by many other things before, so also I endeavored to
bring again to light these things (...) wellny blurred and blotted out of
memory. And y^ so much ye rather, because y^ other stories for y^ most part do
concern thaffaires and do ings of st^s, but this ^cer ^th wholly our own
matters. Wherein it may be worth a man's labor to search and peruse y^ state
of Italye in those days what Cities, and what kind of people were in it what
towns and cities were beseged, which were won and brought in subiectio, and
in what places battles were fought. For to know all these things it is a
great praise, and not to know the^ it is a foul shame. For it is a toke^ that
a man loves his country, not to be ignorant in thoriginall and procedings
thereof, or whatsoever else has fortuned unto it in times past. Furthermore y^
knowledge of Histories does greatly delight the mind ^ycause all we men do of
nature couit to know things, and also it brings great profit for as much as
it contains y^ examples of like affairs to what end they came, and gives
experi ens in many things, through the which old men are accounted wiser then
yongme^, because they have seen ^o things in their lives time, and by
experiens not only of their own but also of other men's perilles, are made more
ware, and therefore are able to give better judgment and are wont to be led by
better counsel. For when they read of the rich^s and Empires of y^ greatest
kings and y^ puissantest nations and percayue how sone they com to decay, they
un derstand by and by what a folly it is to boast and be proud for those
things, which no man is able to assure himself that they shall continue with
him until night. Thus does an Historye make us both more wise and more modest
in our dooinges. And therefore right reverend father I determined to dedicate
these Books unto you, as well to thentent you might understand my entier love
and affection to wards you, as also that you might be as a Judge of my work
and travel, the which I shall think very well bestowed if so wise and well
learned a man as you are, do allow them and take them in good worth.
Whereupon I will take occasion to go in hand with the process of mine
Historye. Farrewell.

The first Book of Leonard Aretine, concerning the wars in Italy against the
Goths.
The first Chapter.
The dispotition of Agustulus, the division of the lands through Italy, the
cause of the coming of the Goths thither, and of their encoun^er with
Odoacers Captains.

IN the time that Zeno was Emperor of Rome, the Goths under the leading of
Theodorich, determined to invade Italy, lately before soore afflicted with
diverse rodes and invasions of barbarous people, and at that time oppressed with
the tyranny of Odoacer: of the which things I purpose to entreat, repeatyng
somewhat deper the state of those times, to the intent it may be known from
whence the Goths first came, and what hope moved them to invade the Empire.

After the death of the younger Ualentinian, The does of Valentinian.
who (as it is well enough known) was ^ayne at Rome of his own Subjects, the
Empire of the West began to waver, and to be as it were without life or
soul.

Now, there were at the same time in Italy, great armies of forreyners raised
latelye before by Ualentinian for fear of Attila, and afterward associated
by the Romans against the Uandales. These forreyners perceiving the
empoueryshemente and weakness of the Empire, and therevppon taking courage,
conspired together, and demanded to have the third part of the lands
through all Italye divided among them.

The name of the Empire remayn^ed at that time in one Augustnlus, who being
but a very ^ylde, was g^uerned by his father Orestes a Senator of Rome.
Therefore at such time as the men of war demanded a partition of the
lands, and that Orestes being a wise and sage person wythstoode their
request, the Souldyours ^ewe him, and fourthewyth following their Captain
Odoacer, camme to Rome Augustulus (...) deposed and Odoacer (...) peth.
and deposed Augustulus. By means whereof having now the law in their own
hand, they divided the third part of the lands among them Odoacer having by
this means gotten the Soueraygnytye, in his own name and in the name of the
army ruled the Cytyes at his own lust and pleasure.

Zeno also Governor of the East Empire lying at Constantynople, began to
dread soore the power of The cause of the commy^ of the Goths into Italy.
Theodorich. For the Goths that inhabited the upper coaste of Thracia, had
already begone to vere and disquiett the Countries borderynge upon them.

And it was none other like, but that they would make some insurrection
against the Romain Empire. Whervppon to the intent to deliver himself and the
countries there aboutes from fear of the Goths. He persuaded Theodorich to
pass into Italy, and to deliver the cities there out of the hands of the
wrongful withholders of them. Induced with these persuation Theordorich
remouyng out of Thrace, and leadyng with him the Goths with their wives and
children and all that ever they had through Syrmium and Illyricum, went toward
Italy: where at his first entrance, the Captains of Odoacer camme against him
with their armies. The first battle betwirt them was fought not far from the
City of Aquileia, upon the river Fontius. In the which conflict after a long
and sharp encounter, the Goths gate the victory, and put the (...) of
Odoacer to flight.

The. ij Chapter.
Theodorich king of the Goths besieges Odoacer in Rauenna, the matter is
ended by composition, (...) of them lies in wayre to destroy other,
Theodorich preventing Odoacer kylleth him at a banquet, by means whereof he
obteyneth the soueraignitie of Italy, of the acts of Theodorich and of his
death.

AFter this, when the Goths had won the cities there aboutes, Odoacer is
besieged.
and vanquysshed the power of their enemies in other places also, at length
they besieged Odoacer in the City of Rauenna. The siege held the Goths tack
longer then they thought it would have done at the first, and that happened
by reason of the situation of the place. For neither can Rauenna be easlye
besieged upon that side that is toward the sea, because it stands hard
upon the shore, neither upon that side that is toward the land, because it
has a diche cut from the river Po, and is enuyroned with certain standing
waters and marisses. By means whereof, the Goths lay well nigh full three
years at the siege thereof and could not win it.

But yet in the mean season, they won all the towns nere about, saving
Cesena, the which also was kept with a strong garrison of Odoacers.

At the last as well the Assaylaunts as the Defendauntes being weryed, the
Composition, between Odo acer and Theodorich.
matter was decided by composition, that Theodorich and Odoacer should be
Comperes and Fellows in Empire. After that things were thus set at a stay,
Theodorich and his Goths entered into Rauenna, neither was there any part of
all Italy that was not content to receive him.

But this copertnershyppe in the Empire lasted not long. For when as the one
bare grudge in his heart preuelye against the other, Theodorich preuentyng
Odoacer badde him to a Banquet and there killed him, and The death. of Odoacer.
so with h^s Goths ^are all the (...) alone in Italy. How be it, to say the
truth, his government was not very intolerable, albeit he retained for his
people ye third part of the lands, in such sort as Odoacer had lately before
divided them. For he suffered The raygne and acts of Theodorich.
the cities to be governed by their own laws and by their own citizins.

Appoyntyng Rauenna to be the Sea of his kingdom, where he also planted him
self. Thyrtye and seven years raygned Theodorich in Italye: neither sat he
still Idellye like a cowarde all the while. For he both annexed Sicill with
all the Ilelandes about it unto his kingdom, and also subdued Dalmatia.
Moreover, during the said tym^ of his raygne, he led an huge host over the
Alps and the river Rhone into France against the French men.

Thus did this King many noble (...), and his name was famous and (...),
saving that in his latter days, he was noted of ^rucltye and outrage, for
puttyng to death of Symmachus and Boethius Symmachus. ^tius.
Senators of the city of Rome, with certain other noble men, only upon
suspicion that they sought to set the city at libertic.

The. iij. Chapter.
Amulusuentha the daughter of Theodorich with her son Athalaricke succeed in
the kingdom, the severity of the Queen in executing of justice, the
wilfulness of the Goths in the education of their king, the untimely death of
the said Arhalarick the great fr^dship of the Queen toward Theodatus, and the
ingratitude of him toward her again, the emperor Iust^an sends Belisarius
against the Goths, and he con^uereth all Sicill.

THeodorich being deceased with out issue male, his daughter Amulusuentha, as
then a Widow, with her son Athalaricke succeeded in the kingdom. This
Athalaricke was but a child to speak of, and therefore all the whole care of
the government lay in the Queens neck. Who having great regard of her infant,
An example of the good education of a Prince.
immediately did put him forth to be brought up in learning and good nurture.
For she gave him learned men to be his teachers, and appointed certain Lords
of the Goths, men ancient, of great gravity and good bringyng up to be
continually about him. And she her self looked very straightlye to the
government of the Empire, prohibiting the Goths as well to do wrong as to
take wrong, and also repealyng diverse acts of her Justice and clemency in a
woman.
father Theodorich, reducyng them to a moore gentleness and clementie.

Amongst the which this was one, that she restored to the sons of Boethius
and Symmachus their fathers goods and inheritance, which Theodorich had lately
before confiscate: affirming that they were wrongfully con dempned through
false accusations, whereto the king unadvisedly had given light credit.
Furthermore, she compelled her cosyn german Theodatus Justice without
parcialiti^
(who having great possessions in Thuscane had taken many fermes and manners
violently from his neighbors like a tyrant) to make restituition of the harms
he had done, with a sharp rebuke for his great misbehauiour. This seueriti^ of
the Queen, made many of the Goths to become her enemies. And therefore,
certain of the chief of them conspiring together, determined to bring up her
son contrary to her disposition, man gre her power. Whereupon they came unto
her saying, it lyked not the Goths that their king should live in subjection
under tutors and teachers, or that he should be kept in awe of his elders, they
said it was meet for a King of such pusaunce as he should be to set his mind
upon cheualrye and feats of arms, and to exercise hyms^f among lus^y young
gentlemen, rather than to learn to way^e upon a master, or to sit glummyng
among a sort of old Dotards. For by this means both the body and the mind of
their King should be effeminated: But through the other he should increase as
well in strength and courage, as also in conning and experience. For he was not
made king to thentent to instruct his people in learning, but to enlarge his
dominion by knighthod and cheualry. The Queen albeit she were not igno rau^t
to what end and purpose all this drift was driven, yet not withstanding because
she would not seem to be utterly against their requests, she co^descended unto
the^. The young prince being delivered to the company of as youthful as
Licentious liberty corruption of youth
himself, wtin a little while after, fell to a more lasciuius trade of living
folowi^g altogether y^ lust of ye flesh, and such other kinds of filthy
pleasures. And against his mother he became so stoberne and self willed through
th^nticement of ill cou^ sell that he disdeined to go unto her or speak to her.

The Queen when she saw her self by such policies assaulted of her adversary
Evil counsel the confusion of counselors
and bere^t of her kingdom, being a woman of a stout courage, could no longer
bear with their doings, but sent certain of her officers privily, and put to
death three of the ch^ of the Goths, which were the ryngleaders and
counsaylers of her son unto all noughtinesse. And so having reconciled him
unto her, she took vpp^n her the government again. But Athalaricke being
fallen into diverse The death of Athalarick^.
surffetts and diseases through the disorder of his former lascivious living,
deceased in the. (...). year of his age, when he had reigned with his mother x.
years after the death of Theodorich. The Queen after the decease of her son,
thinking that she should be the bet ter able to wade through with the weightye
affairs of the realm, if so be she had some partaker and assistent, took her
cousin Theodatus (of whom I made Theodotus is made king.
mention before) to be her pertner in the kingdom. This Theodatus was
excellently well learned both in Latyne and in Greek, and had given himself
much to the readyng of Plato and other philosophy. Nevertheless, being of
nature feeble and unconstant An example of excedyng ingratitudo.
he was distayned with many vices.

Through which where as the queen of her mere bounty and good will, had
raised him from a subject to the state of a king, he forthwyth requited her
with the greatest ingratitude and trea cherie that could be. For he conspired
secretly with her enemies, and took and sent her as a banyshed person, into
the Ilelande in the lake of (...). And ere it was long after, he suffered her
to be killed by the kynsfolke and children of them, whom she had put to death
in the time of the obstinat rebellion of her son against her. This so great
untruth and treacherye of Theodatus, did greatly disquiet many of the Goths,
lamenting the unworthy mischaunce of the Queen, and to see the posterity of
Theodorich so wickedly destroyed, in so much that it wanted but little, but that
the Goths had made insurrection against him.

Whereof as soon as ^he Emperor The cause of the wars be twene the Emperor
and the Goths.
Justinian had intelligence (for after Zeno, Anastasius, and Iustine, the
Empire descended unto him) thinking that the time now scrued to set Italy at
liberty, he applied all his whole mind and study how to compass and bring
the same to effect. Hereunto his prospe rous success since he was Emperor
provoked him: in as much as lately before by his captain Belisarius, he had
^anquished the Uandales and wrested Afric out of their hands. And therefore
h^ thoug^t it was not to be abidden, that (contrary to the honor of the Romain
Empire) Italy should be held in subjection by the barbarous. Induced The effect
of themperours ambassade un to Theodatus
with these reasons, he sent Ambassadors to Theodatus, requiring him to
surrender up Italy and Sicill, in recompense whereof he proffered him other
dignities and promotio^s: the which offer if he refused, then he denounced open
war against him. Upon the refusal of these offers made by Theodatus, the
Emperor entending to make no further Belisarius is appovnted in to Italy and
(...) into Dal^.
delay, commanded Belisarius to pass into Italy with his army. Howebeit
whiles he was making preparation he pretended as though he would have sent his
navy into Affricke, and not into Sicill. About the same time also he commanded
another of his captains called Mundus to invade Dalmatia with another power:
to the intent that the Goths being assailed on all sides at once, might the
easlyer be oppressed.

Mu^dus entering into Dalmatia won Salons and set all the country on an uproar.
Belisarius having rigged his ships and embarked his Souldyours, Beli^ (...)
into (...) and of his do ing there.
sailed toward Sicill. He had of footmen a sufficient number, all tall men and
pyked Soldiers, and his Horsemen were conveyed with him by water also.

Captains of his footmen were Con stantine, Bessas, and Herodian: captains
of his horsemen were Ualentine, Innocent and Magnus: and lieutenaunt general
and sovereign of them all was Belisarius. Who following the commaundment of the
emperor his master whereas he pretended to sail toward Cartharge, arrived by
the way in Sicill, and there A politic Captine.
going a land as it had been to refreshe him self and his souldyours, when he
espied time and occasion for his purpose, sodenly^ he assailed the city Catina
and won it. Then showing him self with his army abroad, and disclosing his
prepensed purpose, within few days after, he received Now called Saragoza
Syracuse by composition. After this it is a wonder to see how victory ran on
his side, and how the Cities of their own accord yielded and called him to
them. The cause hereof was the hatred that the Sicilians bare to the Goths, and
the authority of the Empire of Rome, together with the presence of Belisarius.
Whom (for as much as he had delivered A^ricke from the Uandalians) they hoped
should do the like by the Goths thorough Sicil and Italy. Moreover, the Go
these had made no preparation in Sicil, because they looked not for any war
there. By means whereof it came to pass, that as many of the Goths as were
in Sicill, being amazed at the sudden invasion of Belisarius, and the hasty
reuoltyng of the cities, thought more of runnyng away then of making
resistance. Only the city of Now called Palerno.
Panormus (by reason there was a strong garrison of the Goths in it) abode the
The siege of Panormus and the ^ynnyng thereof.
siege, and endured it to the uttermost. The which city being very defensible
and well forti^ed toward the land, and therevppon setting light by any thing
that thenemie could work against it, at the last by a nauye sent into the
haven was won by the sea. For the haven (...) hard to the walls of the
town: And Belisarius had marked how that in diverse places, the tops of the
mastes reached a great hight above the walls of the city. Wherefore he set
Archers and ^yngers in the topeastles of the ships, who with arrows and
darts did so beat their ene mies underneath them on all sides, that the walls
were left naked without defendaunts: so that their company went without
danger to the foot of the wall, and brake it down. Thorough The good suc
cesse of Belisariu^.
which distress their enemies being discomforted, yielded up the town. This
was the last City of all Sicill that came in subjection. When Belisarius had
recovered Panormus he returned to Syracuse, and there making sumptuous and
royal pageants, threw Gold and Silver among the poople. For it was the
last day of his Consulshyppe the which was given him in honor of the
victory that he gate of the Uandalians. And Fortune was so favorable unto
him, that besides all his form^ victories, even the very last day of his
Consulshyppe she closed up with the recouerye of all Sicill. Thus went the
world in Sicill.

The. iiij. Chapter.
Of the doings of Mundus in Dalmatia against the Goths, of the death of the
said Mundus and his son Maurice, and how on^ G^ppa a noble man of the
Goths recouereth all that Mundus had conquered before.

IN Dalmatia both parts raised great powers and (...) toward The doing^ of
Mundus (...) Dalmatia.
the City of Salons. Now when they were comme near unto the town, and that
the war was whote on both parts, at length there was a battle fought, not
prepurposed but by chance upon the sudden without knowledge before of any of
both parts. The cause thereof was this. The captain Mundus had a son call
led Maurice a goodly young gentleman and a tall man of his hands. Who having
the leadyng of a troop of Horsemen, rode to view the Camp of the Goths. Now
by chance the Gothish horsemen met with him, and as soon as the one part had
espied the other, there was no tarience but straight to the skirmishe. So they
encountered for a time very fiersly, and many of the stou test of the Goths
were slain, and at the last Maurice also was killed.

Both the Camps hearing of the skirmishe, made speed to rescow their com
Sudden battle between the ^thes and the (...)
(...). Whiles that Mundus was on hi^ (...), ^dings was brought him of the
loss of his son. Then the man being of nature fierce and warlyke, ran in a
rage like a mad man upon his enemies. By that time was all the host of the
Goths come thither, and the encounter was with the whole power o^ ^yther part,
the battle was very bloo^ and cruel. At length the Goths being discomfited
with great slaughter and loss of their people were put to flight. But Mundus
whiles he vnsaciably followed the slaughter of the Se the end of (...) furye.
Goths, and for anger and sorrow of the loss of his son pursued the chase
to far, was recountered of his dispersed enemies and slain: and so the father
through the outrageous reuengement of his son, in thend did seek his own
confusion. After this battle both armies departed a sundre. For the Goths
being vanquished durst not abide in those quarters, and the Emperors
soldiers being dismayed with the loss of their Captain, left Salons and
retired back again. I think it not good to suppress with filens a thing that
many authors have made mencio^ of. They say there were certain old verses of
Sibill in the which it was prophesied, that when Affricke should be A prophecy
of Sybill.
recovered by the Romans, then should Mundus (which word as it is here a man's
name: so also it signifies the world) and his issue should peryshe. This
prophecy of Sybill made many men affrayed, doutyng least heaven and earth
with all mankind should utterly have decayed. But after the time that Afric
in the former wars was recovered by the pussau^ce of Belisarius, then it
appeared how that S^ill prophesied of the destruction of this Captain and his
son. So depely are all prophesies wrapped in doutfull circumstaunces. After
the death of this Captain and the departure of his army, the Goths began to
grow the stronger in those parts. For Grippa one of the noble men of the
Goths, The Goths recover all that Mundus had conquered
imediatly thervppon raising a new power recovered. Salons and all that ever
Mu^dus had gotten before ^ those places. In so much that the Goths were far
of greater power then their enemies in those borders. And therwithall Theodatus
the king taking stoutly upon him thought himself able to match or rather to
overcome the emperor in battle.

The. v. Chapter.
The Emperor sends a new Lieutenaunt into Dalmatia, named Constantian, who
recouereth all Dalmatia and Lyburnia.

WHEN Justinian heard of the things that were done in Dalmatia, he made one of
his Courtyers Constantian made lieutenant of Dalmatia.
named Constantian Lieutenant of the wars there. And therewythall wrote to
Belisarius that he should without further delay pass into Italy. Constantian
therefore having repaired his army and throughlye furnyshed his nauye of all
things, after that he had tarried a while about the doing thereof at
Dyrrachin^, removed from thence and sailed to Khagusium. There were at
Khagusium certain skowtwatches set there by Gryppa, who seeing y^ navy of
Co^stantian passing along the shoreside, beautiful to behold both for the
buylding and number of the ships, by and by returned unto Grippa, and where
as ye thing was great of it self, they reported it to be far greater then The
sudden fear of Grippa at the arrival of Constantian.
it was in deed. At the which tidinges Grippa was at his wits end and wist not
in the world what to do. For he thought it both perilous and also great folly
to encounter against so great a power: and to enclose him self within Salons he
durst not, because he had the Citizins more then half in a gelousie of treason,
and the walls of the town were in diverse places decayed and fallen down for
lack of reparation. Moreover, considering that his enemies were to strong for
him on ye sea, he was afraid he should soon be brought to scarcetie of
victuals. Being distressed with these cares, at length (which is Counsel the
refuge of cares
the refuge in such extremities) he fell to counsel. According to the same he
conueyghed all his host a good way out of Salons, and encamped in a place
convenient. In the mean time Constantian arrived with all his ^ete at Lysne,
there having intelligence what was done, he sailed to the next shore, and there
setting his men a land sent CCCCC of them before, to take the straight and
narrow passages in the night season, which are within a little way of Salons.
The which thing being executed, he him self the next morning brought all his
army to the city, Constantian gets Dalmatia and Lyburnia.
and without any trouble recovered the same. When Grippa had understanding
thereof, he tarried not past two or three days there, but that he determined to
depart thence, and so he returned to Kauenna by water, leauyng up utterly to
the enemy both Dalmatia and Ly^rnie, the which immediately Dalmatia, Lyburnia,
and Illy ricu^, are no^e called all by one name of Sclauony.
without any re^istence came into the hands of Constantian.

The. vj. Chapter.
Belisariua arriueth in Italy, and after long (...) wynneth Naples.

BElisarius upon the receipt of the The arrival of Belisarius in Italy,
Emperors letters, when he should pass into Italy, leaving garrisons of
soldiers at Syracuse and Panormus, went with the residu^ of his army to
M^ssana: and there wosted over unto Regium. From thence he led his army by
land through the Brutians and Lucanes, commanding his navy to coast him by
the shore of the neither sea as nere the land as might be. As he went forward,
the inhabitants of those countries revolted to him thick and threfold. When he
had after this sort certain days continued his journey, Belisarius comes to
Naples.
at length he stayed about Naples, the which city was kept with a great and
strong garrison of the Goths.

There he commanded his ships to lie at anchour in the haven, but yet without
the shot of artillery, and he himself in the mean time bringing his army nere
unto the town, viewed the situation of the city and the nature of y^ place
upon the land. It was not long after but that he took by composition a strong
bulwark standing in the Suburbs. Therevppon as he was about to plant his
siege, the Neapolitans sent their Orators unto him, among whom was one
Stephan a man of much wisdom and authority in the city.

He spoke these words in effect: that The words of the Neapolitan ambassador
to Belis.
Belisarius did not well to make war upon the Neapolitans, which never had
done him any wrong in all his life. They inhabited a city kept by the
garrisons of Theodatus and the Goths, by means whereof he could not hope for
any thing at their hands being under the jurisdiction and sub^ion of other men.
But if so be it he might be so bold to say his mind, he did unadvisedly to
l^nger there in vain. For had he once gotten Rome, he should strayghte
ways obtain Naples. But if he were set beside Rome, he were not able to
keep Naples though he had it.

Wherefore it had been meeter for him to have gone first of all to Rome
against the Goths that were there, and not to have stayed at Naples, the which
should fall as an overplus to the lot The answer of Belisarius to
thembassadour.
of the Conqueror which way so (...) the world went. Belisarius replied
thereunto, that whether he did advisedly or unadvisedly in tariyng about
Naples, was no part of their charge to determine, for he asked not their
counsel therein: but rather to take thought for those things that perteined to
them selves, namely whether it were better for them to procure their own
saufegarde and liberty by receyuynge the Emperors army, or by continuyng in
bondage under the barbarous Goths worthily to be besieged and utter ly
destroyed. For he was fully purposed not to depart thence until he had the
city at his pleasure, his desire was to obtain the town rather without
their destruction then with it. This was his saying openly. And secretly he
persuaded Stephan to (...) his Citizens rather to seek themperours good will
and Good counsel if it had been taken.
favor, then his indignation and displeasure. Thoratours at their re^ourne
into the city, reported the words of Belisarius. And when they came to consul
tation as concerning the same, Stephen being demanded his opinion in the case,
said he thought it to dangerous a matter for the ^politanes, to turn the
brunt of so great a war upon themselves, and therefore he wisshed them by
some composition or other, to provide for their saufegarde. This counsel was
furthered also by one Antiochus a Syrian borne, who had continued long time at
Naples as in the way of traffic and merchandise, a man of great wealth and
of much credit among the Neapolitanes, he by persuading the like that Stephan
had done, had moved many to be of his opinion: the people also and the commo^s
of the city were desirous of the same. In so much that shoutes were openly
heard crying out to have the gates set open and Belisarius let in. There were
about eight hundred Goths in garrison, who albeit that it grieved them to see
these things, neuerthelcsse for as much as they durst not withstand the will
of the people, gathered themselves together. Pastor and Asclepiodotus citizens
of Naples being The craftye dealing of Asclepiodotus and Pastor.
friends of the Goths, and therefore sorye to (...) the prescnt estate of the
city altered, when they saw how the people were bent, durst not openly
gainsay their desires, but wrought by an overthwart means to break
thagrement. And there upon allowyng and praising openly all that was
determined in the assemblye, as though it had lyked them very well, they
counseled to knitte up the matter stronglye with many bands and couenaunts,
requirynge Fair words make fools feign and wise men to some^.
an oath for performinge of the same. The articles that they had devised were
such as they thought Belisarius would not have consented unto, in especially
seeing he should be sworn to the performaunce of them. Therefore in as much
as they seemed to speak these things of good will to the people, they
obtained to have the decree made according to their own devise. And
therevppon all things were penned and fair words engroced. Stephan was sent
with the Book from the City to Belisarius. Who after he had perused the
same agreed to every article, and offered to be sworn for the keeping of the^.
Stephan returned and brought word thereof into the city. Whereat the people
The malice of Pastor and (...) brusteth (...).
greatly rejoicing began to run to the gates, saying that Belisarius should
be let in. Pastor and Asclepiodotus seeing this, when they perceived that their
first crafts took no place, called together the Goths and citizens of Naples
such as were of their own faction. Declaring unto them that it was a folly to
lose the town at the (...) of the unskillful multitude.

For what man had so little wit that could not understand, that if Belisarius
were in any hope at all of winning the city, he would never have consented to
tharticles that were sent unto him. But now because he was out of all hope, he
had granted to those things which he would not stand to, to thentent to make
them traitors at their vttermoste peril. For if he bare them so much good
will as he pretended, he would not have there taricd to surprise the^ by
subteltie, but would have kept on his way to try the matter by battle against
Theodatus and his Goths. By alledgynge these and such other things, they both
persuaded the Citizens to make resistance, and also encouraged the Goths to
stand to the de fence of the City. Besides this they armed the Jews, of the
which there was a great multitude in Naples, and caused them to take their
part. By means whereof the rest of the citizins were put in fear, and all
the communicatio^ and couenaunts with Belisarius were broken. Belisarius
therefore after that time addressed himself to the siege. Oftentimes when he
attempted to win it by assault, he was put to the repulse with great loss
and peril of his soldiers. For the walls of Naples are partly environed
with the sea, and partly do stand upon high and steep places, so that it is a
very hard matter to scale them. The conduit pypes by which water ran into
the city, albeit they were all broken by Belisarius: yet not withstanding it
seemed to be no great discommoditie to them that were besieged, because they had
many Wells in the town, so that they could want no water. But most of all
hurted them the hope of help to come, for as much as they had sent their
Ambassadors to Rome for aid against their enemies. Now as Belisarius was in
manner paste hope, and thought to have broken up his siege, Fortune wonderfully
opened the way of conquest unto him. There was a wa ter chanel cut deep into
the ground by which water was wont to be conveyed into the city. This at the
beginning of the siege had Belisarius broken (as he had done other before). A
certain soldier of Clandiople by chance entering into the same, went in it
hard to the walls of the city. There was at the place where it went under the
wall Good fortune of Belisarius.
a stone not laid by man's hand but of nature, through the which there was a
hole bored to let the water into the city. But the hole was not so wide that a
man might enter in at it. The which when the soldier had well viewed, he
perceived that if the hole in the stone were made wyder, they might have
passage into the City.

And therevppon he made Belisarius priuye to all that he had seen. The
Captain greatly reioysyng thereat, and promisynge great rewards, bade the
souldyer choose some of his fellows to help him, and to open the stone more,
not by diggynge and heawynge least the noise of the strykynge should be wray
them, but by fyling and scrapyng and that very softly. Look as the Captain
commanded so the souldyer did. To be short, through the continual and
diligent paynestakyng of the souldyer it was brought to that point, that a man
in harness with his sword and his target in his hand might eas^y go through.
When the matter stood in this case, Belisarius perceyuyngc he should be
master of the City when he list hyinselfe, the clementie and mercy of
Belisarius.
and loathe that his souldyers should sack it, called out Stephan unto him
again, and put him in remembrance of the miserable chances that are wont
to happen unto Cities that are taken perforce, as the slaughter of men, the
rauyshyng of women at every Uarlettes pleasure, the burning of houses, the
sackyng and reuing of all places, and all other kinds of mischiefs.

Wherefore he willed the Neapolitans to have respect unto them selves, and not
to abide the uttermost at their peril, for as yet they had time to repent them
of their folly, Stephan hearing these things, at his return declared the
same to his citizens with sighs and tears. But they despising his words had
him in derison for his labor.

Belisarius therefore executynge his The mean whereby Belisarius won Naples.
prepensed purpose, when he had fully determined to take the city, provided
for the same in this manner. As Soon as ever it began to be dark, he chose
out four hundred soldiers, commaundynge every one of them to put on his
harness and to take his sword^ and his target in his hand, and being so armed
in a readiness, to keep themselves close without noise, until they had
knowledge what they should do. He appointed leaders of them Magnus and Emias
stout men, in whose puissaunce he did put much confidence. When it was now
past mydnyght, he disclosed the matter to the leaders, and showing them the
place commands them to lead che soldiers through the channel by
torchelyght. And as soon as they were gotten into the city, he taught them
what they should do, wyllyng them to take some part of the wall, and to give
token thereof by the sound of a trumpet. He him self had prepared before hand
a great sort of ladders to scale the walls with, commaundyng all his army to be
ready in their harnes, whereof he had the nymblest and best practiced about his
own person. Whiles he was Shame surmounteth dread of dau^ ger.
thus about his matters, many of the soldiers that were with Magnus retired
back for fear of the danger, and could not be made to go forward, neither
by fair means nor by foul. Whom Belisarius sent away with great rebuke,
supplying their rooms with two hundred of them* that he had about him. Upon
the which reproach even they that before refused to go, followed. The soldiers
went a long and a blind way in the channel. For it ended not at the wall, but
led further into the city, being vaulted over aloft with B^cke In so much that
y^ soldiers wist not where they were, until they espied the sky at the end
of the vault. Then they perceived themselves to be in the mids of the city,
out of the which place it was a hard matter for them to escape, because they
had ylfauoured clymbing up upon the high walls wherewt it was enclosed round
about. Nevertheless at length when one had helpe^ up another and all were come
out, they went to the walls Naples is tate^.
there having slain the watchemen took two towers, and from thens gave asigne
by sownding atrumpet, and making a great shoute. By and by Belisarius made
toward the same plates, and rering up ladders commanded his souldyers to scale
y^ town. In the same place happened much trouble and much taryens, by reason
the ladders (being made secretly by ame) were not able to reach the top of
the wall. By means whereof they were driven of necessity, to bind two
ladders one at thend of another, and so to get up. This was done on the
northside of the town, and at the same instaunt was a sharp encounter at the
other side of y^ town that is toward the sea. For in the same place fought a
multitude of Jews, lewd and desperate persons, such as hoped for The desparate
fighting of the jews.
no favor nor mercy if y^ city were taken. And therefore they stood stoutly
at defens, giving no place of entrance to thenemie. Another part of the host
had set fire on y^ East gate, and made have to break into the city. In the
mean season the day began to break, and the soldiers y^ had scaled up by
ladders, had bro ken open a gate to let in tharmy, and there withal the other
company russhed in at the East gate y^ was before set on fire. Then was there
running through the city, and all places were defiled with slaughter and (...).

But inespecially those souldyers played the Butchers, whose brothers or
kinsfolk had been slain in the former conflictes by the Neapolitans a boute
the City. For they after that ye town was taken, used the victory very
cruelly, sparing no age young nor old man nor woman. And the Jews, which
defended that part of the Town that is toward the sea, when all the rest of
the town was taken, stood never the lose styfly at their defens, neither gave
they over before that the soldiers ronuyng about the City, assailed them
behynd. Then was enterans made on that part of the City also, and every place
was repleneshed with slaughter The clementie and gentle using of the victory
by Belisarius.
and sacking. But Belisarius himself after the taken of Naples, used the
victory very gently. For after that weapon was ones Laid out of hand, he
suffered not any Citizen to be either slain or taken prisoner, and he restored
the women to their husbands and parents vnrauished and undefiled at all.
Toward the Goths also which were there in garrison, he showed no manner of
cruelty. As for Pastor and Asclepiodotus the Authors and causes of so great
mischiefs, not Belisarius, but Evil counsel worst to the geuers thereof
the people of the town themselves did justice upon. Who the next day after
the taking of the city, ran to their houses and finding Asclepiodotus at
home killed him and drew him thorough the city. But they could not find
Pastor. For he even in the very tumult of the taking of the city, either
wilfully slew him self, or else dyed for despair and sorrow of mind. Yet
notwithstaindinge the people bearing a deadly hatred against him, never left
sekyng him, until such time as they fawe his dead carcas with their eyes.
Neither could they be satisfied, but that they tare his body in pecces every
member from other. And Belisarius did bear with their outrageous dealing, for
the evil which they had committed, upon whom such cruelty was extended. Naples
therefore was by this means both taken and saved.

The. vij. Chapter.
The Goths kill Theodatus and set up Virigis to be their King, Vitigis makes
an oration to the Senate and people of Rome, and leads away the chief of
them with him for pledges, he marryeth the daughter of Amulusuentha and
enters in league with the French men. Belisarius comes to Rome, which is
yielded to him by the Citizens, he fortifieth and victaileth the city and
gets certain towns from the Goths.

THE Goths that dwelte at Rome and other places thereaboutes, hearing of these
things that were done at Naples, were stryken with great fear and mistruste
in them selves. For they believed undoubtedly that Belisarius would come against
them. Wherefore encouraging one another, and calling forth the rest that were
men of war of their own nation, they encamped themselves between the cities
of Ana^a and Taracina. There when the chief men of war of the Goths were
assembled together, findyng great fault with the former misgouernent and
present The election of Vitigis with the depo sition and death of Theodat^
to wa^dnesse of Theodatus, finally they made insurrection against him in the
camp, and set up Uitigis to be their king. This Uitigis was not borne of the
blood royal, but he had always be^e known for a stout Captain and a good man
of war, and through his valiant behavior he had purchased much honor and
authority. Theoda tus when he hard thereof, stale privily away and fled toward
Rauenna with all the speed he could make. But the new king sending of his guard
immediately af fer him, ouertooke him by ye way and killed him. After this
Uitigis came to To me, and there making an oration to the Senate and the
people, put the^ in remem brance of the bene^its of Theodorich, The oration of
Vitigis to the Romans.
exhorting the^ not to work any novelties. For he told them that the Goths
had a great power in Italye, and that those things which had lately hapened
chanced not through the imbecillitie and weakness of their nation, but because
that the Goths could not find in their hearts to love and obey Theodatus. But
now considering they agreed all in one will and drew all by one line, clean
contrary effects must needs follow. And therefore no man should be able to
attempt any alteration hereafter in Italy, but that he should be met with to
his cost. Al these things he did discourse before Liberius bishop of Rome. And
for because he was but a new found king, he caused the bishop and the people
to swear to be true unto him. For the more assurance whereof, he chose many of
the Senators and people of Rome, whom he led with him as pledges,
committing the charge of the citic to one of his noble men called Luderis, with
whom he left four thousand chosen souldyers to keep Rome withal. He him
self with the residue of his army made toward Rauenna. When he came thither,
to the intent the moore to establishe his estate, he took in marriage the
daughter of Amulusuentha Vitigis marieth.
(...) unto the late Theo dorich, whom Theodatus had kept in ward like a
prisoner. And so by aliyng him self with the blood royal, he advanced the
honor and dignity of his crown. This done, he ceased not to muster the
Goths through all his realm, and to furnysh them thoroughly with horse and
harness, and vigilantly to provide for all kind of munitions and artilerie
for the wars.

But as Uitigis was about to assemble the Goths that were about the river Po
and the city Pauie and other places in Lu^bardy of which there was great power
and an huge number, a stop was cast in his way, namely the fear of the
French nation. For at that time they had extended their dominion even unto the
Alps, and on this side the Alps the Goths possessed al. These two nations
were scarce friends one to another, but rather more then half enemies through
privy hartburnyng among them selves. Furthermore it was well known, that
the emperor (...) ente^eth in league with the Frenchmen.
had lately solicited the French men to make war against the Goths. For the
which causes Uitigis sen ding his Ambassadors into France endeavored to rid
himself of that fear, the which he at length obtained by entering in league and
frendshippe with them. While Uitigis was laying for these things before hand,
in the mean season Belisarius having refreshed and furnished his army,
determined to go to Rome. Whereupon leaving Herodian with a garrison at
Naples, and another garrison likewise at Cume, he with the residue marched
toward Rome. His journey lay by the way that leads from Rome into Latium. The
Romans hearing of Belisarius approach, were nothing discontended therewith. It
chauuced so that one Fidelis of Millaine (who in the time of Athalericke had
been steward of the kings house) departing from Rome met with Belisarius, and
counseled him to bring his host with all speed nere to y^ The Romai^ become
impe rialles.
city, for he told him that the Romans were not minded to shut their gates
against y^ emperors army. And in deed by all men's talk it was to be seen that
the people were of the same mind with in the city. With the which things the
Goths being sore dismayed that were left there in garrison, determined fully
to go all away: saving the Captayn Luderis: who standing upon his reputation,
had rather to have died then to abandon the town committed to his charge. The
Romans gave y^ Goths free passage without interruption. And so it fortuned that
at y^ very same day and hour that the Goths went out of Rome at the gate of
Flaminius, Be lisarius entered in at y^ gate Celimontana, otherwise called
Asinaria. After y^ Belisarius had been received into y^ town with great joy and
gladness of all ^ates, he made an oration before the Senate and the people, and
afterward used great diligence in repairing the walls and fortifiyng
Belisarius fortifi^h and vic tayleth Rome
of the city. For he not only mended the walls and builded bulworks in
places convenient, but also cast up trenches and rampyres about them. And
moreover conueyghed thither great store of grain by water, the which he caused
to be laid up in common graners. The Romans although they wondered at the
wisdom of their captain, yet they lyked not this his so exquisite diligence
in fortifiyng of the city. For so noble a captain as he was being entered
into Rome with the emperors army, ought not to think of being besieged, but of
besieging others. Howbeit to say the truth Belisarius weying with himself his
own weakness and the great power of the Goths, did already in his mind
forese what was like to ensue. And yet was he not altogether idle in y^ mean
season, but by his petie captains Constantin^ and Bessas, the same time he
Belis^ g^ teth three towns from the Goths.
recovered Narma, Spolet, and Peruse by composion. Also there was a battle
fought against the Goths not far from the city of Now called Perugio.
Peruse. For Uitigis immediately upon intelligence of the reuolting of y^
Perusians, sent Uuilas and Pyssa with an army into Thuscane to the intent as
well to keep still in due obedience such as had not reuol ted, as also to
subdue again such as had forsaken their allegeaunce.

(...) The. viij. Chapter.
A battle is fought at Peruse between the Goths and the Imperialles to the
loss of the Goths. Vitigis marchynge toward Rome stays at the river Anio,
where the next day encountryng with Belisari^ he puts him to flyghte and so
proceeds to the siege of Rome with two hundred thousand men.

THere was at Peruse Constantine one of Belisarius captains, and he had
assembled thither all his men of war saving a few soldiers A battle
between the Goths and the imperialls
that he had left in garrison at Spolet. Now at such time as the Gothishe
army approached and was come almost hard to the walls of Peruse, Constantine
with his men in order of battle ready to fight, issued out of the City and
set upon the Goths. Great was thencounter with much force and puissans on
both sides. The Goths were greatly furthered by their multitude, and the
soldiers of Constantine by the advantage of the place, and thassistens of the
City at hand. After long fyghtinge, the Goths at length were overcome and
put to flight, great slaughter was made of them and many were taken prisoners,
among who^ Uuilas and Pyssa the Captains were taken and sent to Rome unto
Belisarius. Uitigis therefore having besides the loss of his towns received
moreover this slaughter, thought it was not to make any further delay, but
with all the power of the Goths that he was able to raise, set forward to ye
wars. when he removed from Rauenna toward Vitigis marches toward Rome with
200000. souldyers.
Rome, he had in his host. CC. M. fyghting men, of which y^ most part were
armed in Almain riuetts. With this so huge host he marched toward Rome in
such terrible manner, and with such speed, that it was to be doubted least
that Belisarius would not have abydden his coming. And therefore he made not
any stay either at Spolet, Peruse, or Narma, but kept on his way still
toward Rome. Belisarius when he perceived so great a brunt of wars turned
upon his neck, commanded Constantine and Bessas to return to him out of
hand, with such power as they had about them. Constantine obeyed his
commandment and came with his army forthwyth out of Thuscane to Rome. But it
was somewhat later ere that Bessas did set out of Narma, in so much that he was
entangled with the first foreriders of the Goths. For Uitigis way lay hard
under Narma. Whether as soon as y^ Currours were come, Bessas issued out of the
city and skirmished with them, and he put many of their troops to flight and
slew diverse of the^. Nevertheless by reason of resort of mo and mo still to ye
res ^owe, he was compelled to withdraw hi^ self again into the city. From
whence he made have to Rome and bare tidinges that ye Goths were at hand and
within kenning. The Goths passing by Nar ma went through the country of ye Sa
bines into the fields of Rome. When they came nere the town they stayed at the
river Anio. For belisarius had fortt fied the bridge on both sides y^ water we
bulwarks and enclosures, and had set a garriso^ of soldiers to keep it. By
means whereof ye Goths at their first coming being not able to get over,
encamped themselves beyond the river Anio. But The shameful flight of the
soldiers of Belisarius.
y^ next night following they y^ were set to keep the bridge, being dismayed at
ye number and fercenesse of the barbarous people, forsook the towers and
bulwarks of the bridge, and stealing privily away went into Ca^panie for fear
least Belisarius should punish the^ for their labor. Belisarius was minded to
have pitched his camp by the river Anio directly against ye camp of the
Goths, to thentent to have detained them the longer in ye same place. And
therefore ye next day he went thither with a M. horsemen to view the country and
the Deameanour of his enemies and also to chose a meet ground to encampe in.
As he An encounter unlooked for.
was going thither, when he came almost at the river, contrary to his
expectation he met with the Gothyshe horse men. For the Goths but even a
little while before, perceiving ye bulwarks of the bridge to be abandoned, had
broken open the gates and the barryers, and had passed over the River in great
number. Whose sudden approach upon Belisarius other wise then he looked for,
constrained him whether he would or no to put himself to the encounter.

At the beginning Belisarius executed nothing but thoffice of a Captain,
encouraging and commanding his soul diers and sh^winge what every man should
do. But when he saw his men ouerlayed and like to go by the worse end of the
staff, then was he of necessity compelled to leave the office of a Captain,
and to play the stout soldier. For he was fayn^ to put himself into the
forefront of the battle, and there to lay his hands about him stoutlye and
valia^tly as other of his soldiers. The which day surely he was in great dan
ger upon such occasion. He had a goodly horse, upon which he was commonly wont
to ride, of color bay with a white list from his foreheade down to the
nostrelles, as he fought upon the same horse among the formest in the battle,
certain runnagats knowing him, cried out to strike the Uale. (For so do the
Goths term a bay horse in their l^nguage,) and there was none other noise
over all the fyeld but to strike ye Uale. By means whereof it came to (...),
that all the brunt of the battle was tur ned upon Belisarius. And undoubtedly
Danger the whetstone of courage.
if a puisant band of his very familier friends had not clustered about him
and styked notably to him, yea and with their own bodies and their own armor,
kept of a thousand strok^s and a thousand weapons both from the horse and
from Belisarius himself also, it had never been possible for him to have
escaped. But as at y^ time he was valiantlye defended, both by his own prowess
fighting most expertly and conningly, and also by the help of his friends and
familiars, who with incredible love clynged fast about^ him. In this place
many of Belisarius v^rye fr^nds were slain, and inespecially one Maxentius a
man of singular actiuity who fyghting about. Belisarius, after that he had
showed many profes of his manhood and prowess^, and s^aine ma ny of the Goths,
at the last being very sore wounded fell down dead. At the length such as were
about Belisarius making prease upon their enemi^s, put the^ to open flight, and
pursued them har^ to the bridge. But the footmen y^ stod at the bridge
recountred Belisarius and his men, and easly put them back. The horsemen seeing
y^, turned again and assai led the^ behind, by (...) whereof they were of
necessity compell^d to wtdraw themselves for their own saufgard unto a
higherground. There also thencou^ Belisarius is compelled to (...).
ter of horsemen being renewed, and the number of the enemies still increasing,
after y^ many had been slain on both par tes, at length they were forced to
fly to ward Rome upon the spur. They ran toward the gate that is
commonly called Pincian. The Goths chaced Belisarius hard to the gate inso
much y^ some were stricken from the wall. There was also much a do in the same
place. For the Romans that kept the walls, for fear of their enemies so nere
at hand, durst not open the gate. Neither was Belisarius him self known,
albeit he called alowd un to them, because the Sun was then down, and he sore
disfigured with duste and Belisarius puts the Goths to flight.
swette. Therefore when they had cast themselves in a ring before the gate and
could notbe let in, and that thenemy was hard at their backs, Belisarius
encouraging his men, gave a new charge up on his enemies, and putting the^ to
slight drove them far from the gate. So when he had dispersed his enemies, he
was then perfectly known, and led his soldiers into the city. The feyght of
this day was very sore and variable. For it began anon after the son
rising, and it ended not until it was dark night. Belisarius by the judgment
of al me^ was demed the best warrior that day that was on his side. And among
the Goths, (...). When Belisarius was returned into the City, he commanded
as well his own souldyers as the Townesemen to keep watch on the walls that
night.

Distributinge the gates to his Captains every one, one to keep. Geuyng them
charge that if any alarm were given, no man should stir out of the place
where he was appointed. The A larmes geven to the City of ^ome. in the night.
same night many Alarmes were given and diverse of them false. For it was cried
through the City that thenemye was entered in at the gate of Ianiculu^, and
therevpon^ weapon was fearfully taken in hand. And the noise could not be
stynted, until such time as messengers coming from thence, brought word that
all was quiet and no enemy seen or heard of there. At the gate Salaria was
another Alarm, and that not without some cause. For the Goths coming to the
gate in the night, called to the Romans that stood upon the walls, and there
one of them named Bachius a man well known in Rom^ whom Uitigis had sent
thither for the same purpose, spoke unto them saying The words of Bachius to
the Romans.
How is it with you ye Romans are ye not ashamed of your follye? to commit
your selves to the tuicion of a few Grekyshe men, mariners, and plaiers, of
enterludes, and good for nothing else, despising y^ power of the Goths, which
even at their very first coming have put them to flighte and beseiged them?
Surely the Goths have not de served that ye should work so great treason
against them. But repent and amend, for this is thonely way for you to escape,
if you will open the gate for the Goths to enter in, not against you but
against those Greeks. But if ye be so mad to persist in your folly, look
assuredlye for such war at the Goths hands, as, will be to whote for you to
abide. This our king Uitigis commanded to be told unto you. The To maines
made none answer at all to his words. But as soon as it was reported that ye
Goths were there, there was ronning thither from all parts of the city. The
Goths having tarried a little while, returned to their kings tent which was
between the city and the river. And thus passed over y^ first night. The next
day the Goths seeing no body come forth to give them battle in the field,
adressed themselves to the sieg^. Thorder whereof was this.

The. ix. Chapter.
Thorder of the seige of Rome, the pollitique provision of Belisarius for the
defense of the same, what engines the Goths made for to assault the same, and
of their going to the assault.

THey pitched their tents in six The siege of Rome.
places about the city, from the way of flaminius, unto the way that leads
to Preuesie. This camp beseged five gates of the city. Afterward they
embattelled the. vii. camp on the further side of the bridge Miluius. This
last Camp bes^iged the gate of Aurelius and cut of the ways that lead over
the River Tyber. They fortified their camps with diches and trenches and
turrettes of timber. And as well on the oneside as on the other of the Tyber
they made havoc of all y^ came in their way. Belisarius on the contrary part
provided in this wise for the defense of the city. The gate called Pinciana
which was directly against the greater camp of the Goths, toge there with the
nextegate unto it on y^ right hand called Salaria, and whatsoever was on that
part of the walls therabouts. Belisarius took unto himself tokepe. The gate
toward Preueste he committed to Bessas. The gate of Flaminius which is on the
left hand of the Pincian gate, he delivered to Co^stantin: and at every other
of the gates he set a keeper. The Goths going about the City brake all the
Conduittes. The cond^ about the City.
There were of them in all fourtene made of wonderful work^, by the whi ch
water was conveyed into the City. By the breaking of these, the Romans were
not so greatelye afflycted with scarcetye of water, as with want of (...).

For the conduit that ran down from the top of Ianiculum, through the
furtherside of Tiber into the city, run ning swiftly down the stepe hill, did
drive many mylles. The like commodity of grinding was also ministered by other
of the conduits in diverse places. The which being then broken, brought great
distress upon them that were be seiged. Against this displeasure Belisa A
provision for grinding of corn.
rius provided this remedy. Two ligh ters with a space between them for a
whele to go in, were fastened together with strong rafters of timber, upon the
which the milles were set and so driven with the swiftnes and violence of the
stream, and the lighters were stayed with Cables streyned hard and made fast
on both sides of the River. These lyghters he placed hard by the firsie bridge
that leads over Tiber. After those he set other lyghters on a row. And least
the enemy might hurt the lighters by casting down fire or other stuff from
alofte, there were cheynes of iron drawn by the bridge to receive all such
gere, and men set on both sides to take the same and carry it away. Thus was
good prouison made to supply the want of milles, for those lighters suffyced to
grynd as much as they would. As for the want of water, that did the river Tiber
supplye. Belisarius had on diverse places of the walls devised many engines to
strike and put back thenemy withal. On the otherside the Engines for to
assault the town,
Goths provided great store of artillery and engines for the winning of the
City. The engines were these. First fowr^ battle Rams which were made
after this fashion. Four posts of timber of like high equallye distant are
set square one ageinste another. These pyllers are fastened with eight
ouerwayes four at the top and four at y^ foot, so that it stands as it
were a pretye square house. The same is c^uerd above with leather to the intent
that such as are within it should not be hurt from the walls. Aloft is laid
a beam overthwart at the end whereof hangs down another beam as it were to
the middell of y^ pillars fastened with plates of iron, y^ which has a great
square head of stelelike unto an anuild. The whole engine is driven upon four
wheles fastened in the feet of pillars. When it is removed from place to place
there are not fewer then L. souldyers within it to drive it forward. Who after
the time they have brought it nere unto the wall, do with a certain wynch
wey up the foresaid beam that The great force of the battle Ram.
lies overthwart, and when it is aloft do let it fall with all the whole
swaye that it has. Then the head of y^ beam being let down, partlye with
violence and partly with weight falling upon y^ wall, does batter and break
in pieces all that ever it lights upon. Moreover the Goths made Turretes of
Timber of like heigh with the walls, the which went upon five wheles a piece.
Also they prepared a great number of skaling ladders, together with an
innumerable sort of faggottes of shrubbes and straw to fill up the dyches.
When all things were in sufficient readiness, Uitigis commanded all his men
to be in armor by the break of the next day, whom he divided into companyes,
appoyntynge what he would have every man to do The Goths were very glad of
it Thassault of Rome.
and wonderful desirous of thassault, some carrying faggotts, some bearing
skalyng Ladders and other some dryuyng the engines toward the walls.
Belisarius stood upon the vamure before the gate with the tallest men
Thvnskilfulnesse of the Goths.
that he could chose out in all his host, geuynge all the rest of his
retinewe charge, not to stir out of their places before he gave them
warning. The Turrettes (which I toolde you that the Goths had prepared) were
drawn with Oxen and set before the rest of the other engynes.

The which thing when Belisarius beheld, he laughed at the simplicity of the
Goths, that they should think naked Oxen able to draw an engine against
armed enemies. And thereupon he commanded all his men to dyscharge their
arrows at them, the whi ch being done and thoren forthwyth ^aine, the engine
stood still and could be removed no further. Such as carried skalinge ladders
and faggottes to fill up the dyches, being repulsed with the number of weapons
coming from the vamure, could neither fill the diches, nor get unto the
walls, nor yet bring the battle Rams nere. Nevertheless the battle of the
Goths abode by it, and castinge their sheldes over their heads, sometime with
plain force came hard to their enemies, howbeit they were never able to win
the vamure. Thencounter was with arrows, darts, Iauelings ^kes and all other
kind of artillery.

The. x. Chapter.
The manner of the assault, the description of the tumbe of the Emperor Adrian
and the d^acing of the same, the repulse of the Goths, the murmuringe of the
Romans against Belisarius, whercp^n he aduerti^eth the emperor of his peril
and necessity.

While these things were in doing at the Pincian and Salaria gates, The
continuance of the assault.
Rome was assaulted in three other places. For Uitigis setting part of his
army to keep Belisarius occupied, went himself with a number of soldiers to
the gate that leads to preneste. And at the same instant another company of
the Goths assaulted the gate of Aurelius. Another sort of them endeavored to
brust in at the gate that is on y^ tope of Ianiculum. Thus was Rome assaulted
in four places at ones at the gates Pinciana and Salaria which Belisarius
himself kept, at the gate prenestine where Bessas stood, and at the gates of
Aur^ius and Ianiculum. But the Goths that assaulted Ianiculum were easlye put
^acke. For the place is stepe and uneasy to ^ome unto, insomuch that a man
could not well get to the wall though there were no body to let him. And
therefore must their enterprise needs be to none effect, the place being
defended by Paul one of Belisarius cap taines with a puissant band of
soldiers. At the gate of Aurelius was some what more danger. The way was
v^ulted over that leads to the church of Saynct Peter thappostle. The Goths
Thassaulting of Adri^s Pyle.
hydynge themselves in the said Porche, (...) as they espied time for their
purpose, brake sodaynely out of their ambushe, and in all haste made toward
Adryans Pyle to win it. And they did so much with their Ladders, that at the
first brunte they took the vttermoste wall which encloseth the Pile and was
four square. This Pyle was the sepulcher of the Emperor Adrian builded of
most The (...) of Adri^ tumbe.
excellent and costly workemanshippe. The first circuyt was made fowresquare,
all of white Marble of the Island Paros, garnyshed throughoute with most
exquysite works and portraytures. In the inyddes of this square ryseth up as
it were a tower of a very great heyg^th, and of such a breadeth that a man
were scarce able to throw a stone directclye from the one side to the other of
the floor that was on the top. It has a bridge leadynge from thcnce over
the Tyber into the City. For the City endethe at the River Tyber, and this is
on the furthersyde of the River. Yet notwythstandynge because it had a bridge
stretchynge hard to the walls of the City, and was (as it were) a certain
Tower or bulwark, Belisarius provided before hand to have it well manned and
kept with his own soldiers, committing the charge thereof to Constantine.
Constantine therefore when as a little before he saw his enemies passinge over
the River Tiber in botes, to assault that part of the City which is be twene
the field of Mars and the gate of Aurelius, f^aring the lowness of y^ watles,
(for they were not very strong and defensible theraboutes nere unto the River)
ran thither from Adrians pyle with a band of soldiers, leaving but a few
behind him for the defense of the pyle. The Goths hereupon (as we said before)
having by means of thabsence of the Captain gotten the outer ci^cuit,
endeavored also to win the pyle it self. The soldiers that were about, to
thentent the more to endomage and repulse their enemies, The defacing of an
excellent pie^ of work
committed an evil act. There were in the top of the pyle on every side,
upon the battlementes great images of men, horses, and chariottes, conning ^y
devised and ^cellentlye wroughte. Some of these the souldyers tumb led down
w^ole upon their enemies, other some they brake in pieces to throw at the^.
And so whether it were through the rudenes or through the lewdnes of the
soldiers, within few hours were destroyed the excellent inventions of ye
conningest workmen in all the world, which cost so many years in making, and
which were the greatest ornamen tes and the very beauty of the tumbe. A drians
pyle is rescowed.
Constantyne having in the mean while repulsed the enemy from the river,
hearing in what (...) the pile was, rescowed it by the bridge, and assailed his
enemies from beneth, wherewith his own soldiers were greatly recomforted and
encouraged. By this means the Pyle at length was sau^d, and the enemy
repulsed. At the gate to ward pren^e also (where Uitigis and the Goths that he
brought with him gave the assault) was great danger. For not far from the
said gate was a place called Uiuariu^. The same was double walled, with a good
space between the two walls. The ground be twene the^ was very plain and
level, and the walls somewhat weak. Uitigis ^ome i^ dau^ ger to be taken by
as(...).
therefore and the Goths giving assault to the ^ttermoste wall, albeit that
there was valiant and manful de fence made against them, yet they wanne it by
fine force. Then Bessas (to whose charge that part was committed) mistrustinge
that he was not able to continue long against so great power of his enemies,
sent word in all haste to Belisarus in what peril he stood, desyring him to
come to his rescow with all the ^pede he could make. Belisarius somewhat moved with
the mat ter. Left sufficient defense behind him at the gate Salaria, and
himself with a band of his best souldyers ran tho row the City to the same
place. At his coming thither thencounter was renewed a fresh, and the
soul^iers began to take heart at the presence of their Captain. The Goths
had undermined the wall, and a great company of them enteryng in at the brea^h
stood between the two walls. By means whereof the feyghte was very sharp
and cruel in the same place. In fine thassaulte came to this end, that the
Goths were constrained to retire out at the same gappe where they ^ame in,
with great slaught^r and loss of their people. As soon as The repulse of the
goths at the first assault.
they were gotten out, their enemies pursewynge hard upon them, chaced them
away, and set all their engines on fire. The like chance happened unto them
at the Gate Salaria. For the souldyers breaking out upon them, burnt up
all their Turrets and other engynes. Thus was Rome in one day both earnestlye
ass^lted in many places at ones, and valeantlye defended. There were slain at
these assaults about three thou sand Goth^, but yet the syege endured still.

The Romans albeit they had Belisarius The Romans murmur against Belisarius.
in great admiracion for his prowess, yet they murmured against him in that
against so great a puissans of y^ Goths, he had with so small a handful in
comparison styrred up so great wars and cast the Citi^ of Rome into such
extreme peril and imminent danger. The which thing Belisarius perceiving
Belisarius wri (...) to the ^mperour.
(for it was not done in huther mu there) although he had diverse other times
before advertised y^ Emperor Justinian thereof. Yetnotwithstanding being as
then greatly moved with the matter, he wrote more earnestly unto him, declaring
the beseigement of the City of Rome, with the huge multitude of his enemies
and the little handful of his own men. For he said he had been feign to
diminishe his ^rmye that he brought forth with him, by leaving garrisons of
soldiers at Panormus and Syracuse in Sicill: and by manninge of Naples Cume,
and other places in Italye, as ned^ required for their defense and saufgard: so
that he had no mo then v. thousand remaining about him, and yet he was beseged
with an host of. CC. M. The Romans unacquainted with such perils, would not
endure the hasard of y^ siege. As for his own part, he had once vowed to spend
his life in the Emperor Justinians service, the end whereof he passed not
greatly whether it came sone or late. Howbeit he said there was respect to be
had how much the same should redound to the honor or dishonor of the Empire
of Rome.

The. xi. Chapter.
The Emperor sends new succors in to Italy. Asinarius and Vligisalus
Captains of the Goths besege Salons in Dalmatia, Vitigi^ wins Portua, and
causes all the Romans to be put to death whom he held at Rauenna as
hostag^s. B^lisarius puts all unable folk for the wars out of the city
for consuming of victalls, and banisheth the pope upon suspicion of treason.

THe Emperor Justinian was be The Emperor sends ne^ succors into Italy^.
rye sore moved at the receipte of these letters: and ther^vpon commanded that
certain souldyers whi ch had been put in a readynesse before (...) immediately
sail into Italy, en tending with all speed to levy a greater power. Ualerian
and Martia^ were appointed Captains of th^se souldyers which he had already
prepared and which had wyntered all the dead time of that year in A^toly and
A^arname. The news hereof being brought to Rome, put the Romans in good
comfort lokynge for their arrival as soon as the time of the year would serve.
While these things were a dooynge at Rome, Asinarius and Uligisalus Captains
of the Goths The (...) besege Salo^^ (...).
(whom Uitigis had sent with an host of men into Dalmatia, appoyntynge to them
moreover for their more strength a nauye of ships), be^ Salons both by sea
and land For Constantian (...) him self to weak to match so huge a power as
his enemies had, fortifyed the City thoroughly before hand and abode the syege.
During the which, sometime yssewinge out of the town, he did great harm to
the Go^es both ^y sea and by land. In this mean time, Rome b^ganne to be more
hardly distressed by the seyge. For Uitigis after the time that he had taken so
dishonorable repulse at the foresaid assault, being therewith somewhat
quickened, ceased not to s^ke and search all means possible to be devised,
whereby he might anoye his beseeged enemies. There was a haven by the Sea side
standinge on the right hand of the River Tyber, and adjoining to the same a
City en^yroned with a strong wall. In the which place were wo^te to be set
a land all such things as were brought (...) water: and from thence agay^
Vitigi^ wynneth (...),
either by land^ or by water were conveyed to Rome.

Uitigis therefore sending thither sudden ly a great number of his soldiers,
assailed the said city of Portua unawares and won it ere the townsmen could
put themselves in a readiness to make resystens aganst so great a power of the
Goths. By taking of this town strayt ways ^nsued great distress at Rome,
when their vent of fetching in of corn and victiualls was ones stopped. For
the Goths leaving a garrison of soldiers there, did keep both the The cruel
commandment of Vitigis against the Romayne hostages.
town and the mouth of Tiber suffering nothing to be conveyed in. It was not
long after but that Uitigis sent commandment to Rauenna, that all the
Citizens of Rome, which (as is declared) he led from thens and kept for
ho^tages should be put to death. Many of them were of the nobility and many of
the commanaltie (surely worthy per sonages) all the which tasted of one cup
saving a few who having incling of the matter before, escaped by flighte.
Among the which number were Cer Ceruentinus and Reparatus the brother of
Uigilius, that was afterward pope. For they having warning thereof, fled into
France and saved their lives. the rest were all put to death. In the time that
the Romans moorned and lam^nted for the slaughter of their citizens at
Rauenna, there came another sorrow in the neck of it. For Be lisarius fearinge
least grain should fail and wax scarce, made proclamacion that the citizens
should send away their wives and children, with al the other multitude that was
unmeet and unable for the wars compelling his men of war also to do the
like which had either Lemans or lackeys with in the town. There were as yet
two ways left them to pass out at. One leading to Ostia by the left side of
the river Tiber, and another through the fields clean contrary from those
places that were beseged by the^my. For the Goths (as we have said) did not
enui ron the whole City with their syege, but only from the gate of Aurelius
to the gate that goes to Preneste. Beyond those bounds they durst not be bold
to be over busye, or to stray over far. For if they adue^tured over far
from their Camp, they lightly ran in danger of coming short home, they
could not stir any great way unless they went in great companyes. By means
whereof it came to pass, that men might at all times go and come saufely by
the way of Appius and the way of Ostia. The Romans therefore sent forth
their wives and children and all their other people that were vnm^ete for the
wars. Whereof sum abode in Campanie, some at Naples and some in St^ill as
eve ry man thought most for his commoditye and behoof. At Rome Belisarius gave
streyghte commandment and looked narrowlye to it, that the Belisarius
deuideth corn by the pole.
corn was divided by the poll, to the intent y^ no waste nor spoil should be
made of it. The same time Belisarius bannished the town Liberius the pope A
pope banished upon suspicion of t^- son.
upon suspicion of secret conspiratie with the Goths. And anon after was
Uigilius consecrated high bishop and enstalled in his steed. Other of the
nobility of Rome also were bannished upon like presumption, of the which
number was one Maximus, whose great graundfather after the death of Ualentinian
had usurped the name and dignity of the Empire.

The. xij. Chapter.
The aid that the Emperor sent into Ital^ comes to Rome, Belisarius after
practicing his soldiers in skyrmishes, encountereth with the Goths in a main
batt^ll, and is overcome with great slaughter.

While these things were a doing, Martine and Ualerian (whom New (...) comes
to Rome.
Justinian had sent forth as I showed before) came unto Rome, bringing with
them a thousand and six hundred horsemen, the which for the most part with
all Hunnes. Belisarius being recomforted by the coming of these Souldyers,
determined to order his wars after another sort then he had done before. For
he was not minded to stand still with in the City keeping of the walls, but
every day sent out his light horse Belis. practis^th his Souldyers in Sky
^misshes.
men and skirmyshed with his enemies in open fyelde. By means whereof it came
to pass, that both parts were wonderfullye enflamed, and nothing was left
unattempted. For Belisarius being a most expert captain in feats of arms,
taught his horsemen what they should do, showing them how far they should go,
and where and when they should stay. One while he sent out his horsemen suddenly
at the gates Salaria and Pinciana, and disquietted the Goths that encamped
theraboutes. Another while he would issue out at Aurelius gate and be doing
with the Goths that lay between Adrians tumbe and the bridge Miluius. In these
conflictes the soldiers of Be lisarius began to preualle. Not that they were
able to match the whole power of their enemies horsemen, but because they
seemed to be to good for them being equally matched as many to as many, or some
what mo in number then they them selves were, and to be of more conning and
audacitie in their feighting. His horsemen being thus by little and little
practiced, began to set light by the horsemen of their enemies. And the
besieged began to take courage and confidence unto them. To be short, it came
to that point, that they would not any more (...), but feight it out in the
play^e held with hand strokes.

For the Captains and the Souldyers had lain so sore at Belisarius, and had so
often and so earnestly entreated him, that he determined to A battle between
the Go these and Belisarius.
try some greater encounter.

And thereupon he disposed his army in this wise. First he commanded one band
to issue out at the gate of Aurelius and to stand in battle raye before
Adrianus tumbe against their enemies. The charge of this band he committed to
Ualentine Lieutenant of the horsemen, giving him besides his horsemen a
certain of the old expert footmen, and of the people of Rome, which of their
own fre will requested the thing at his hand. He would not have these footmen
stand with the horsemen, but willed them to take the hills which rise over the
playnes on the left hand of Ianiculum. And he gave Ualentine commandment t^
make a show as though he would ever give an onset upon the enemy, but in
any wise not to encounter with them unless he were compelled. For his mind
was no moore but to deteyne that part of the Goths that encamped in that
place, still there, to the intent they should not succor their fellows at the
gate Salaria where he determined to feyght. Then made he two other battles, one
at the gate Saleria, and another at the gate Pinciana. And in them both he
placed the horsemen in the forewarde, and the footmen in the rereward,
commaundynge each battle to issue out at their several gates and to march
toward their enemies. Uitigis king of the Goths having intelligence by
certain runnagates that he should have battle the next morrow, caused the
Goths to arm them selves by the break of the day. In orderyng of his
battelles, he set his footmen in the mids, and on each side of them his
horsemen, as it were in wings. In this order he proceeded against Belisarius
and gave him battle. The Souldyers on both sides encountered together very
fyercely. And the Captains following after them, Belisarius on the one side
and Uitigis on the other, encouraged their parties. At the beginning of the
battle, the Soldiers of Belisarius were far to strong for their enemies,
and many of the Goths were slain. The battle was fought hard by their
camp, by means whereof the Goths abounding in multitude, sent ever fresh
and fresh in steed of them that were overthrown. In this sort the conflict
lasted until it was noone, neither party getting advantage of other. Howbeit
the Souldyers of Belisarius fought more cherefullye. The Goths held it out
only with sufferaunce. In the mean time the battle that stood at the
Sepulcher of Adrian, encountered with their enemies. For the people of Rome
descendynge from the hills gave charge upon the Goths.

And Ualentine perceiving his people entangled with their enemies, marched
forewarde with the Host whereof he was Captain, from the (...) of Adrian, and
assailed his (...) also. By reason whereof the Goths were not able to endure
long against them, in especially for as much as they were abashed at the
great number that came down from the hills, so that being not able to recover
again to their Camp, they were feign to fly further of. Now, the Romans
that came from the higher grounds fell by and by to ryflynge of their enemies
Tents. By means whereof neither they them selves pursued their It is ill
fishing before the (...).
enemies, nor yet the Souldyers, but suffered them to go where they would.
For the Souldyers perceiving them to fall to ryflynge, to the ^ntente they
would not lose their part of the Pray, left the pursuit of their enemies,
and returned to spoil their Tents also. And so the Goths being let slip,
when they saw that no body followed after them stayed in the next mountains.
From thence beholding their tents to be pulled down and carried away, when
they perceived how their enemies kept neither any order nor warrelyke
discipline, they encouraged one another and gave a new charge upon them.
Whom (by reason they were laden and skattered in gatherynge of the spoil)
they easly overcame, and so both saved their tents and also recovered their
pray. By that time Fortune began to change her copy about the kings camp
also. For the Gothishe footmen resorting in great number out of the next
camp, cast them selves upon Belisarius horsemen, and keueryng them selves
with their shieldes in manner of a vaulte, preased so sore upon the forefront
of their battle, that they compelled them to lose ground. The which thing
when their horsemen that stood on the right wynge perceived, they also
assailed Belisarius horsemen on the side. Who being not able to abide the
brunte and force of Belis. and his men put to fleyght.
them any long time, at length retired to the main battle of their footmen.
The which being not of strength sufficient to withstand the violence of the
enemy, was with great slaughter likewise put to flight. How be it, there were
two Peticaptaynes named Principius and Taruunt, whose manhood and audacitie was
well approved in that place to their great com The valiauntnes of Principius
and Taruunt.
mendation and immortal fame. For at such time as all the rest fled, they
two keeping their standings, put them selves against the whole power of the
Goths, and kept them occupied, to thentent that their company might have
space to recover the city, so long until Principius being pitifullys mangled
all his body over, after long feyghtyng fell down, and about him two and
fourtye of his retinewe: and Taruuntes being of like valiantnes and courage,
when he had lost much blood at his wounds, and that his strength began to
fail, was carried out of ye battle to the Pincian gate by his brother whether
he would or no, and there fell down dead.

After whose departure the Souldyers ran full flight toward the City. The
Romans standing upon the The peril of the^ that were overcome.
walls did shut ye gates against them, for fear least their enemies should
have entered in with them. by means whereof agreat forte of the souldyers were
shut out who getting over the Uaumure, stood with their backs to the wales
and their faces toward their enemies, having no way to save their lives but
one, which was to be defended by them that stood upon the walls. For the most
part of them having either broken their wapons in the battle, or ^lls thrown
them a way in the chase, had not where with to defend them selves Howbeit those
that were upon the battelmentes defended them with stones. This battle being
begone at the Camp of the Goths at the last ended hard at the gates and
walls of the Town. There were s^ayne of Belisarius men a great number, and
those of the valiantest and best practiced.

The. xiii. Chapter.
Of diverse skyrmishes duringe the continuance of the syege, the Goths enuiron
the City with another Camp whereupon grows scarcetye, and anon after
enseweth the plague. Belisarius by his pollicye caused scarcetye in the
Gothyshe camp likewise, into the which the plague spredeth it self also.

AFter this battle Belisarius absteyned certain days from feyghtyng, The
syndged child dreadeth ^yer.
and was content to defend the walls only. At the length, when he had well
hartened his soldiers, he began to lead them forth again. But he durst not
any more encounter with his whole power. Only he perseuered to make light
skyrmisshes as he had benn wont to do before. Of the which some were very
notable specially such as were against those Goths that encamped on the
hither side of the bridge Miluius over against the gate of Aurelius. For in the
same Skyrmisshes about the bridge Milui^.
place is a plain ground very fytte for horsemen to skyrmisshe in, and in the
same plain stands a theater builded in old time for masters of fence to
play at weapons in. About the same theater were many whote skyrmisshes.
Because that either the soldiers of Belisarius did take and use it for a
camp, or else the Goths prenentynge them laid ambusshes in the same.
Moreover, both at the gate Salaria, and the gate Pinciana, day by day was
skyrmishyng, almost every day. The Goths therefore considering how the
siege was like to continue long, thought there was no hope of wynnyng of the
City any other way then by famine. For albeit that the taking away of ye
haven might seem to have been a great anoyance: yet not withstandyng (as man's
wit is imaginatiue specially in extremity) the hoyes and such other ships
of bur then as were wont to arrive at Portna, Adversity (...) keth men wise.
arrived at Autium, and there vnloding their corn and other necessaries sent
them from thence to Rome by land. The Goths therefore desirous to cut of
this commodity from the Romans also, pytched the eight Camp about the City
between the way that leads into Latium, and the way of Appius. For there
are in the same place two conduytes, the (...) crossyng each other do stretch
as it were into two arms, and leauyng a certain space betwixt them do mete a
gain a good way of. They are from the City about five miles. The ground
between the said arms the Goths took and enclosed with a Wall of stone
laid with lome. And so by that means they had a strong and well fortified
camp, wherein they placed seven thousand horsemen, who infestyng both the
upper coast and the nether coast, stopped up The great peril that Rome stood
in.
the way into Latium, the way of Appius, and the way to Ostia cuttynge of all
liberty of conueying in of corn. Through this, they that were besieged stood
in worse case then ever they did, and it was none other like but that Rome
should be famished. Yet not wythstandynge as long as there was corn in the
fields, the Souldyers would steal out of the town in the night time, and
fetch in corn, the which they sold very dear to the Citizens, and so relieved
the necessity for a while. But when that this shift once failed, then all
things lay in utter despair. Now was the Sun at the highest and the days
at the longest, and the plage began to reign in the A plage.
town, so that diverse dyed, not only of the common people, but also of
Belisaris Soldiers. They were brought to a great di^resse, and to a sor^
afterdeale, and therefore the Romans resortyng to Belisarius, bewailed their
heavy misfortune, in that they A pitous com playnt.
had brought them selves to such extremity by (...) their faith and allegeans
(...) the Emperor upon his promis^. For their Citizens had been miserablye
murdered at Rauenna by their enemy, their city dish^ norably (...) by y^
Goths, all things without y^ walls wasted and spoiled, and within the walls
oppressed with intolerable famine and penury of all things. Wherefore they
besoughte him to lead them forth against their enemy, for it were better for
them to dye like men wit^ their weapons in their hands then to pine away for
hunger and to abide so great and so dishonorable calamities. When Belisarius
heard them make their moan in this sort, he gave them scarce so gentle
answer as the A rough answer.
case required. He said they were missaduised and led by rasshenes according
to the nature of common people, which are wont to be led by rage rather
then ruled by reason. They knew well enough that he was wont to be always
ruled by Counsel and to do his matters by discretion, and not by wylfullnes.
He looked for an army of men from the Emperor, the which being ones come,
if they were then so willing to feyghte as they made themselves to be, he
might be able to warrant them victory with out fail. The said army did bring
with them an infinite deal of corn and therefore he wylled them to depart
and to let them alone with the order of the wars.

The Romans with these words either the wise pratise and policy of
Belisarius.
recomforted or rather put in fear he began to imagine and devise with
himself, by what means he might bring scarceness of corn among the
Goths. For the performance whereof he practiced this policy. He sent
Constantin and Traiane with a thousand horsemen unto Taracine, and Martine and
Seuthis with ^yue hundred unto Tibur: and he placed another band at Alba. Unto
all these he gave commandment that to the vttermoste of their power they
should stop all victuallers from the Gothishe Camp, and help to (...) them
that were willing to go to Rome. And to thentent that the Camp which lay at
the Conduyt should not anoy them, he caused a bulwark to be fortified at the
church of s. Paul, and appointed a troop of horse men toward in the same
place, to thentent to defend the ways (as far as they could) from
thinuasions of y^ Goths. Reuere^s ha^ to religion.
The church of S. Paul is without the gat^ toward Ostia, quite and clean
another way from the church of S. P^ ter, both of them standing without the
town and each of them having a porch from the gate of the City to the
Church. These two temples of the Apostles The Goths in all the time of their
^ge did never violate. The priests contynuinge in them did their divine
service freely without interruption or trouble, as they had been accustomed to
do in foretymes. Constantine and Traiane therefore going to Taracine, when they
had brought Antonia the wife of Belisarius at (...) the (...) of Beli^
Naples and there left her, returned back again and spoiled all the towns
in those quarters, which ministered rely^e and succor to the Goths, and
within shorts space they brought to pass, that nothing at al was conveyed to
the Goths out of those places. Martine and Senthis also going to Tibur when
they had (...) paired the walls of that town which were decayed, did daily
molest and disquiet the Goths out of that place. By some means or other, and
would not suffer any grain to be carried to their ^ampe, The same thing did
they in like wise y^ were sent to Alba. By means Scarcetie and pestilence in
the Gothishe Camp.
whereof wtin very short space, it came to pass yt the Goths which were ye
besyegers, were put to as much distress as they that were besyeged. And
besides the scarcetye of corn, the pestilence also had sprede it self into
the camp of the Goths.

The. xiiii. Chapter.
A new suppliment of soldiers comes from themp^ur, for the saufe convey
whereof unto Rome Belisarius pollitique ly provides to the great slaughter of
the Goths, who thereupon enter in communication of peace, so that a truce is
taken whiles Ambassadors may go and come from the emperor to whom the determi
nation of all their controversies is referred.

WHile these things were in doing, A new supplement of soldiers.
Iustinia^ sent another host of me^ into Italy. They were of Thracian hor^en
eight hundred, of whom John the son of his brother Uitalian had the leadinge:
and a thousand and three hundred mustered in other places, under the conducte
of Alexander Marcent and Zeno. Moreover three thousand footmen which came by
wa ter led by Paul and Conon. Also there were at Naples five hundred
footenien prepared by Procopius of Cesarea. All these bands assemblyng
themselves together, determined to go to Rome, they brought with them great
plenty and store of vi^uals. The horsemen marched by the sea coast, and the
footmen were conveyed by water. In the same flete was brought great
abundaunce of corn, and much corn was also carried by land in wagons.
Belisarius hau^g knowledge of their coming, for fear least the A (...)
pol^cye.
Goths should meet with them and interrupt them, invented this polli^. He
commanded the gate of Flaminius (which he had dammed up from the beginning of
the syege,) to be opened in the night time and the bagage taken away
wherewythall it was stop ped. The which being done he sent certain of his
souldyers thither the next morning by the break of the day ready harnessed
and well appointed, byddyng them put themselves in array and so keep them
close without noise. Then he sent Traiane and Diogenes with a thousand
horsemen out at the Pincian gate, commaundynge them to run to the camp of
their enemies with as much noise as they could, and when their enemies were
issued out upon them, to retire back again, and not to stay before they came
to the Gate where they went forth. These thinbeynge in all poyn^es thus
accomplished, whiles they were feyghtynge at the Pincian Gate, Belisarius
^odainly issuyng out at the gate of Fla minius with the rest of his army,
made straight to the camp of the Goths, where he found all things
unprovided and in manner emptye on that side, as they that mistrusted no harm
at all from the gate of Flaminius, because that it had been long closed up. a
great ^augh (...) of the Gorhes.
So that it wanted little but that (...) had won their Camp, Then tourning
him self toward the Pincian gate, and there gettyng his enemies in the mids
between his two hoosts, he by assayling them on the backs, and those that were
fled, by retournyng fiersly upon them before, struck them with an incredible
slaughter. And upon this Battle there fell such a terrible fear among
them, that they doubled their watch in their Camp, and took care for
nothing so much, as how to defend themselves from the policies of
Belisarius, The enemy being by this means troubled and put in fear, the
Emperors army without any Commu^ of peace
let came unto Ostia. The Goths therefore being weryed and vexed with many
displeasures, and besides that, understanding how a fresh crewe of Souldyers
were come to the ^yde of Belisarius, began to consulte of breaking up their
siege. For by that time a great part of their camp was dimished either by the
plage or else by the sword, and many had been feign to forsake the Camp,
either for their wounds or else for that they were sick. Uitigis therefore
sendyng Commissioners unto Rome (after that many things had been alleged, and
answered on both sides to and fro, as concerning the equity^ of their case,)
at length agreed to refer the determination of their controuersyes to the
Emperor Justinian, and he to decide the matter as ^e should think good.

Herevppon Ambassadors were sent Truce taken for a time.
to him, and a truce taken for three months until they might return again,
and for the better observing of the truce, and performaunce of couenauntes,
pledges were given and taken one both sides. When things were thus seta at
stay, the army and victuals that were me^ at Ostia, came to Rome both by
land and by water.

Thus ends the first Book.
The second book of Lenard Aretine, concerning the wars in Italy against the
Goths.
The first Chapter.
There rises occasion of g^udge between the Goths and the Imperialls which
grows to altercation, so that in the end the truce is broken. Datius Bishop
of Millaine enformeth Belisarius of the good wills of the Millainers toward
the Emperor and is remised with great thanks. Belisarius is put in danger of
his life by one of his Pe^captaines, whom he would^ have punnished for his
misbehauiour the Goths going about to steal the City and to win it by
treason are twice detected.

Whiles things stood thus at a stay, and that the wars ceased by reason of
the truce that was taken, (Belisarius yet nevertheless in the mean time kepinge
Rome, and the Goths their Camp and bastiles) suddenly there fortuned
complaints and altercation for breaking of the truce Causes of altercation.
contrary to promise, upon this occasion. There was (as I told you before) a
garrison of Goths at the City Portua. Now the souldyers of the said garrison,
when victuals failed them, forsook the town. They were not so sone gonne out
of it, but y^ Pa^le Captain of the Isauriens, remaining with the nauy^ at
(...), entered into it. And within a while after, the souldyers of Belisarius
received another Cyty in Tuskye nere unto the sea side called Centumcelles
being likewise left up by the Goths. Moreover the Goths abandoned up
the City Alba among the marses after the same sort, and the souldyers of
Belisarius took it. When Uitigis knew that his enemies had taken those
Cities, he sent commissioners to Rome, to complain of violatyng the Truce
contrary to the articles of agreement* In that Portua, Centumcelles, and Alba
towns of the Goths, contrary to all equitye and conscience, were taken from
them for the Goths had not given them up, but such as were there in
garryson were comme to him at his commandment, and should have shortly
returned into the same again that which they did they thought they might the
freelyer have done it by reason of the Truce. And therefore of reason,
restitution ought to be mad^. Belisarius made answer to the commissioners in
this wise. Return (quod he) to the King your Mast^r, and tell him that as for
those thin ges that he alleges as concerning the calling of his garrysons
from their charges, to send them thither again, are but feyned matters. For it
was easy to be s^ne for what consyderation the Goths forsook those Cytyes.

He confessed that it was not lawful for him by the truce, to take them
perforce or to steal the^, but to enter upon such as had no owners, nor any
body to keep possession, that he said was not forbidden. Upon this matter
rose preuye grudge and hartburnyng, the Goths seeking means to requite
Belisarius with the like. For those three cities being taken, did Belisarius
great pleasure and service for the wars. Winter drew on a pace. And
Belisarius having men of war good store, determined to send forth his horsemen
to winter in the country. Whervppon besides those that went into other places.
He sent MM. into the Country of the Picents. Over who^ he made captain John
Uitalian geuinge him instructions what he would have him to do. There were in
the same country the wives and children of the Goths, for the husbands and
fathers were al come to the siege of Rome as many as were able to bear armor.
If the truce continued, he had he should not stir, but if the Goths should
happen to work any thing contrary to the articles of the Truce, then he
wylled him to make havoc and spoil, and to take as many towns as he could.
If any town made resistens he commanded him to besyege it, and not to pass
from it until he had won it. For he thought it should not be for his ease
to proceed onward, and leave the Towns of his enemies behind him. With these
words and instructions Belisariaus sent John among the Picentes with an
army. The very same time Datius Bishop Datius bisshoppe of Millaine.
of Myllaine, and with him certain of the head Cityzens came to Belisarius
declarynge unto him, that the City of Myllame should be at the Emperors
commandment, if he would send never so slender a garryson thither. For they
were of power suffycient of theymselues to drive the Goths not only out of
Myllaine, but also out of all Lumbardye, if so be it that the Emperor would
but only bear the name of it. Belisarius entertaynynge them turtuously, and
geuyng them most hearty thanks with gentle and honorable words wylled them
to put no doubt in the matter, affyrmynge that when A soday ne danger.
time served he would fullfyll their requests. Duringe this time that all
things thus prospered and followed their desires, there happened an horrible
danger, the which in one moment had almost turned all things up side
down. There was one Presidius a citizen of Rome who being wont to dwell at
Rauenna, in the beginning of this war stale away from thence, and came to
Rome. In his journey the souldyers of Constantyne which lay at Spolet, had
taken from him a sword curiouslye wroughte and costlye vernyshed. The man
being robbed and taking the dyspleasure in ill part, had made complaint
thereof to Belisarius with request to have his good restored again. And
Belisarius had ge uen commandment that it should be so. But by means of the
war and of the syege which afterward ensewed, the souldyers being
otherwise occupied and the Captain (...) about weightier matters, the thing
was delayed. At the length in this time (as I said) whiles all things were in
joyful estate, as Belisarius rod through the town. Presidius caughte his
Horse by the bridle, and with a loud and complaining voice, in the audyence of
a great number, asked him if it were meet that a Cytyzen of Rome (who
abandoning all that ever he had to the enemy had fled away naked) should also
be robbed by his soldiers of that little y^ he had carried away with him, and be
thus wrongfully and iniurlously dealt withal. He said he had oftentimes put
up his complaynt unto him of the wrong and violence that had been offered, and
could have no redress, and yet they that had robbed him, had his good within
the Cyty, and did wear it daily before his face. These words did stir the
patience of Belisarius very sore.

And therefore as soon as he came home he caused Constantine to be called before
him (for they were his soldiers that had taken away the sword) and gave him
a great rebuke for neglectyng of his commandment so oftentimes in delyuerynge
of the sword. Marry (quod Constantine) I will rather throw it into the Tyber,
then I will restore it to that Uarlet. This was very lewdly and presumptuously
answered. Then said Belisarius unto him, art not thou under me? Yes said he,
for as much as it is the Emperors plea^ure. But yet for all that, in this one
thing I will never be ruled by you whiles I live. When Belisarius hard him say
so, he was more angrye with him then before, and called for the Serieauntes.
Constantine knowing that it should be to his cost that the Serieauntes were
sent for, drew out his Dagger that hung at his thigh and like a Bedlem runnyng
at Belisarius, and dabbed him in a little beneath the stomach. Out of dout if
such as stood by, had not spedely stepped unto him, and wrong the Dagger out of
his hand, and delivered him to the officers, Belisarius had surely died for
it, and his death had drawn all things with it to utter ruin, and the Goths
had the same day been made lords of all. But God of his infinite goodness would
not suffer so great a mischaunce to happen. And after at the commandment of
Belisarius, Constantine was put to death. Within a while after, the Goths
attempted to Treason twice detected.
have taken Rome by stealth, first by a way that they found out in one of the
channells of the conduites in the night time, and afterward by stealing over
the river in botes nere unto the field of Mars. But they missed of their
purpose in both places. For in the channel their own lyghts bewrayed their
covert workyng, by means whereof the channel was stopped, and they enclosed
from gettyng out. And at the field of Mars their treason was detected, and so
their attempt was made frustrat. The treason was devised in this wise. Two
rascal ^arletts that dwelte by S. Peter's church (the Goths as is showed
before, never offered harm or displeasure to that place, but in honor of
thapostle preserved both the buyldynges thereof and those that dwelled in them
unhurt) had secret conference with Uitigis of betraying ye city. And to bring
their purpose to effect, they devised this policy. Beneath the field of Mars
in one place, the walls were very weak and sore decayed for lack of looking
to, by reason (as I think) they y^ had been before times, trusted altogether to^
the defens of the River. Uitigis therefore caused lyghters and barges and al^
kind of botes to be put in a readiness at the bridge Miluius. For had he once
set any con uenient number of his soldiers, over on the other side of the river,
he thought it would be an easy matter, after the landing of the first, to
convey over still mo and mo in the same vessels. He douted nothing so much
as that the watchmen that warded on that side should escrie him and bewray his
devise. For the avoiding of which dout, he corrupted the two Romans for a
piece of money, to further this attempt. To whom he delivered a sleping powder
willing them to give it the watchmen with wine, to thentent that when they had
drunk the same, they might fall into a dead sleep. After these conueances were
thus devised, and agreed upon, the one of them being stryken with repentance,
disclosed the whole matter to Belisarius, and there upon the other being
taken with the slepie medicine about him, that the King had given him, was
put to the torture and compelled to utter all the order of the matter.

The which done, Belisarius caused his nose and ears to be cut of, and
setting him upon an Ass, sent him out at the Pincian gate to the Gothish
Camp, to the intent that Uitigis might perceive how that his close workyng was
detected, and his secret practices browght to light.

The. ij. Chapter.
Upon the discouerrie of the treason the truce ce^th* John Vitalian vvynneth
di^ towns from the Goths. and amongst other Arminine, upon the taking
whereof they break up their si^ge before ^ome.

WHen Belisarius had so openly discovered The truce bro ken between the Goths
and B^rius.
these their crafty packinges, he thought it not mete to observe the truce any
longer with them. Whervppon he wrate to John that he should execute his
commission. He with his two thousand horsemen scouring the country of ye
Picents through, took the wives and children of the Goths prisoners, and
forraged and spoiled all the whole country from the one end to the other.
Moreover encounteryng with Uglitheus uncle of Uitigis by the fathers side,
coming against him with an army of the Goths, (...) vanquished him and slew
the captain himself with a great part of his host, and so like a co^queror
ranged over al y^ whole country. When he had won many towns and that he was
about to bes^ege Auxiuu^, it was not unknown unto him what a slender garrison
was with in the town, but yet the place was of it self very strong and
defensible. And therefore thinkyng it folly to spend the time in vain about
the besieging thereof, he kept on his journey forward. The same opinion also
had he of the b^sieging of Urbine. For the city being well fortified and strong
of it self, seemed of necessity to ask a long time in ye s^ge thereof, and he
had put al his hope in spedie celeritie. He took Fauum and Pisauru^, and then
brought his army against Arimine in hope to get it, because he had heard say
that the men of Arimine could not well agree with the Goths. When he had ones
brought his host to this town, he cast such a terror up pon the Goths
thereby, that they durst not abide thereaboutes, but removed unto Rauenna, and
the townsmen set open their gates to let him in. By this means John took
Arimine, leaving behind two strong cities manned by the Goths, namely
Auximum and Urbinc. All the which doings were clean contrarys to Belisarius
commandments. Howbeit he thought it better to be sure of Arimine, then to
spend his time vaynly in lying still about Auximum and Urbine.

Whereunto he was the rather persuaded, because that Arimine a town so nere
neighbor unto Rauenna being taken, it was not lykelye that the Goths would
tarry any long time after at the siege of Rome, but rather make have to come
away to the defense of Raue^na, and the places thereaboutes. The which thing
came so to pass in deed. For as soon as the Goths understood that Ariminc
was taken, they determined to break up their siege before Rome, and to depart
thence. Uitigis therefore within a few days after set fire on his tents, and
The Goths break up their s^ge before ^ome.
with all the whole power of the Goths, dislodged. In his retyring he suffered
great loss. For when the one half of his army was passed the bridge,
Belisarius commanded his men to set upon them that were behind, among whom
he made such a slaughter, that a great number of them that escaped his
hands, for haste in getting over the bridge were thrown down on both sides
and drowned. This siege of the city of Rome endured a whole year and nine
days, taking his beginning about the. xiiij. or. xv. day of March. Now I
will pursue the acts of either parts, and what provision was made on both
sides after the breaking up of the siege.

The. iii. Chapter.
Vitigis besieginge Arimine is by the diligence and industry of John
disapoynted of an assault that he determined to have given to the town, and
repulsed with great loss.

VItigis albeit he made speed toward Rauenna, yet not withstanding he coueted
to keep the cities of Hetruria and of other Provinces in their accustomed
obedience. And therefore he placed at Clasium a thousand horsemen, as many at
Urbiuetus, five hundred at Tudert, four thousand at Auxiuum, at Urbine. ij.
thousand, five hundred at Cesena, and as Vitigis goes to besege Arimine.
many at Mountferrat. And he himself with the rest of his army went to
besiege Arimine. Belisarius after the departure of the Goths, commanded
Martine and Ildiger with a thousand horsemen to make have to Arimine, and to
bring John and his horsemen that were with him from thence, placing fotemen
there in their steds. The which thing he did to the intent he would not have
that band (wherein were the best horsemen of the host) besieged by the
enemy. For if so be it that Arimine were manned with footmen, he thought
that the Goths would not bestow their labor in besieging of it. And if they
should besiege it, he thought the footmen should be better able to endure out
the siege then horsemen, for as much as it is a difficulte matter to keep
horses in a siege, and footmen might easly be conveyed to Arimine at all times
by water from Aucon, which newly before had yielded it self unto him.
Herevppon (...) and martine forslowing no time, did (...) a wyndlasse far
from their enemies and came unto Arimine. For the Goths by reason of the huge
multitude of their army, were compelled to take more leisure in their journey,
whereas the other being light harnessed, out went them a great way. When
they were come to Arimine and had declared the mind and commandment of
(...), John would ney The ^nesse of John (...).
there obey himself, nor yet suffer his cosyn Damian with his horsemen which
were about four hundred, to be ruled by them. And therefore (...) and
Martine departing from Arimine, led away with them all the horsemen that
Belisarius had delivered unto John at his setting forth, leaving behind
them none but the footmen and those horsemen that John and Damian had of
their own. Immediatlye herevppon Uitigis came and besyeged the Town. At his
first coming thither, he framed a tower of like heyghth with the walls, the
(...) was not drawn with Oxen as the other was before at Rome, but driven by
souldyers that were within the engyne. The Goths therefore set the same
against that part of the wall, where they might with (...) ease approach,
entendynge the next day to have won the Town by assault. But John the
same night The diligence and industry of John in pre uentyng the purpose of
his enemies.
went out with his souldyers, and caused them to cut a brood and a deep
Dyche on that side castyng up all the earth that came out of it on that
browe of the Dyche that was next the wall. And so one nyghtes work
disappoynted the long prepensed labor of the enemy, cuttynge of all
possibilitye of bringing the engyne to the wall. Yet for all that Uitigis was
minded to fill up the dythe, commaundyng all his army to prepare Fagotts and
straw with such other baggage for the same purpose. And to the intent the
tower should not the night followyng be set on fire by the enemy, he
determined to draw it back again to the Camp. As the Goths were about it,
John issued out with his souldyers, and set upon them being busye about the
work. There was a great and cruel combat about the Turret, and many of the
Goths were slain. How be it, after long feyghtyng they drew it back
again out of danger, but with such a (...) and so great loss of their
best men of war, that they (...) utterly in despair of winning the town
by force, determinyng to subdue it by (...).

The iiij. Chapter.
(...) Belisarius seudeth Mundilas with a po^ to receive Millaine, who in (...)
at the City of Pauie by a mis^ loses a noble man of his company called
Fidelis. (...) and (...) other Cities of Lombardye yield unto Mundilas. Vraias
the (...) of Vitigis goes into Lumbardye against the Imperialles. Be^ (...)
diverse towns in Italye by composition. Vitigis sends a (...) of souldyers to
Auxiuum for the more strengthenynge thereof* the which making a rode (...) the
inhabiters of Aucon, through the follye of (...) Cap^ thereof make a greater
slaughter and put the town in danger of taking.

THe very self same time, Be^ granted an aid of souldyers to the
Ambassadors of Millain that came before unto Rome. He appointed Mundilas one
of his (...) a very stout and valiant man to b^ chieftaine of the said army.
In the same band was also Fidelis of Millaine whom we declared to have been
Steward of the kings house. All these being conu^yed to Geane by ship, went
from thence to Millaine on foot. And to thentent they would not be hyndered
of their passage over Po, they carried Bots with them in Wagons, to ferrie over
the river withal. Marching therefore in this sort as I have told^, when they
had passed over the river Po, and were come to the City Ticiuum which is now
called Pauie, the Goths issued out of the town and set upon them. For by
reason that town had a strong castle in it, the Goths had bestowed many and
precious things in the same, and had manned it with a great garrison. The
skyrmy^he was no sooner fought, but that the Goths were driven into the City.

And so Mundilas passed with his army over the bridge that was hard by the
town. In the same place was Fi delis of Millain slain. For he went into a
certain church to make his prayers, and the residue of his company being all
gone, last of all he came out alone, and as he would have taken his horseback,
he ouerthrewe. The which thing his enemies that stood upon the Wall
perceyuyng, rus^hed our upon hy^ ^he death of Fidelis of Mil lain.
and slew him, before that* Mundilas and the souldyers wyste of it.

The death of this man was great sorrow both to the Captain and to the
souldyers. For he was a noble man in his country, and of much power, and such
a one as with his presence might greatly have furthered the war that was in
hand. Mundilas therefore and the rest of his company keepynge on their
journey toward Millaine and other cities of Lumbardy be come Imperial
Millaine, were received into the City. Therevppon, Come, Bergome, Nouaria,
with the rest of the cities in those borders, following thensample of Millaine,
of their own accord received Mundilas and his souldyers. When Uitigis had
knowledge of those things that had happened about Millaine, he sent Uraias
his brothers son with a great army into those costs, to thentent he should
both cause such to keep their allegians to the Goths as had not yet
revolted, and also (if he could) recover such as had already yielded.

Furthermore, he wrate to Thewdeberte King of France (with whom not long
before he had entered in leage) desyring him to minister aid unto Uraias. In
this state or rather in this expectation were the matters of Lumbardie.
Belisarius at such time as corn began to wa^ ripe, setting out of Rome,
marched with his army toward his enemies. The Goths that were left in
garrison at Tudert and Cluse, hearing that Belisarius was making toward them
for as much as they thought themselves over weak to encounter against him,
forthewyth sent messengers unto him and yielded up their Towns by composition.
While these things were in doing, Uitigis sent another army unto Auximum.
For he was utterly determined to reteyne and keep still that City. With this
army he sent a new deputye to have the charge of the Town and the men of
war, named Uacinius. Who adioining his new souldyers and the old crewe
together, purposed to attempt the win nyng of Aucon his next neighbor city,
why^ was manned with a garryson of Belisarius. And therevppon he went with all
his whole power against the inhabiters of Aucon.

That Town in those days was walled onclye on that side, that stood upon.
the hill, the lower places situated on the plain ground albeit they were
replenished with buil dings, yet were they not enclosed with any wall.
Therefore at such time as the Goths approached. (...) captain of the town and
souldyers of Aucon, fearing least the suburbs and the inhabiters thereof
should be wasted and destroyed by thenemye, came down from the upper part of
the town with all his whole crewe, and set himself The fool har dinesse of
Conon.
against his enemy. But in that case Conon was to far ouermatched For he
having scarce a thousand soldiers, encountered with his enemies being four
thousand. And therefore he did quickly abye his foolyshe hardynesse. For
being ^t able to stand agay^ste so many he was at length ^quished, an^ ^eynge
put to flygh^ lost the most part^ of his men, and the City it self was with
much a do hardly saved from taking. For when the soldiers retired full flight
toward the town, the townsmen for doubt least their enemies should enter in
among the souldyers, fearfully closed up their gates. By means whereof
there was a great slaughter made of them even hard under the wall. And the
Captain Conon himself was driven to so narrow an erigent, that he had none
other way to save his life, but to be drawn up the wall by a line. The
Goths rerynge up skalynge Ladders, endeavored to win the City. Othersome
setting fire on the houses that we spoke of before, burnte up all that was
without the walls.

The. v. Chapter.
Narses an Eunuche the Emperors Chamberlain comes into Italy with a new
power and meets with Belisarius about Aucon, where in consultinge what is to
be done after diverse opinions of the other captains Narses persuades to go and
rescow John Vatalian besieged in arimine the which Belisarius ve^ye
pollitiquelye brings to pass. Through flattery and evil instigatio^ ^yseth
emulation and dis cord between Narses and Belisarius Belisarius going with
Narses to the siege of Vrbine is of him forsaken and yet through good fortune
wins the town.

NOT long after that these things The coming of Narses into Italy.
were done at Aucon, Narses came into Italye with a new host of men. This
Narses was an Enuche, a man that stood much in the Emperors favor, and one
that bare great rule and authority about him, For no man might command in
the Emperors court, but he only. Moreover he was threasurer of the Empire
(which is the offyc^ of greattest honor and trust) and one of his priuye
counsel, by w^ome the Emperor was in manner altogether ruled.

He brought with him into Italye five thousand souldyers. The notablest
among whom, was Iustine, Captain of the Illirien souldyers, and another,
Narses a Persian borne. Also there were in his retinew MM. of Therules of whom
were captains Isandre and Phauotheus. In y^ The meeting of Belisarius and
Narses.
mean time Belisarius hearing in what danger the men of Aucon stood was come
among the Picents: and so was Narses in likewise. The captayns and their armies
met both together about the town. There as they were consultinge concerning
the war that they had in hand, and were deuisinge what was most requisite to
be done next of all out of hand, there appeared many doubts and dangers in
the matter. For if they should go and besyege Auximum, John and those that were
besyeged with him in Arimine should be left in apparent ieoper die,
inespecially consydering that food failed them. Again if they should go to
Arimine, they should leave behynd them at Auximum a great garrison of the
Goths, to the prei^dice of their army and damage of the country.

In giving of their verdittes many of Opinions of thofficers against John.
them that were chief officers of the camp spoke much against the rashenesse
of John, in that he had shut up himself in Arimine contrary to the
commandment of Belisarius, and that of a proud an covetous stomach, he had
run upon his own head, without regard of his Captain or of his charge.
When Narses perceived A friend is tried at ^ede.
that, fearing least by ye means John should be abandoned whom he loved most
entierly, he spoke his mind to this effect. My Masters (quod he) when
Thoration of Narses.
men consult as concerning the publyke utility, in my opinion they ought to
have an especial eye thereto, for it own self, and not to hinder it either
for malice or for love. Certainly all other things set a side, when I way
with myself the thing whereof we do co^sult, me thinks I spy this difference
in the matter. If we delay the siege of Auximu^, there is no let but that with
(...) few days after we may attempt the same when we list. But if we make
any taryance in (...) the soldiers that are at Arimine, we cannot afterward
help them when we would. For ere many days to an end hunger will so pinch
them, that they shall be comp^lled to yield themselves to their enemies. And
therefore what indifferent Judge doubts, but that most speed ought to be
made thither where tariance procures unrecoverable danger. But John (ye will
say) deserves not to be succored because he despised his captains command
meant, and through his own wilfulness cast himself into that danger. Admit
that all these things are true y^ are reported of John. What then? shall we for
the hatred we bear to John, wilfully suffer the destruction of so noble and
worthy a City as Arimine is, and of the innocent soldiers besieged in the
same? I (...) the O noble and puissant Captain Belisarius, if John have
offended thee, wylt thou wrek^ his trespass upon the emperor? who thereby should
lose both his town and his soldiers, to the great prejudice of the public
weal? again what shall men think, or what shall men say of us and our armies
if we sitting still like a sort of cowards and beholding it with open eyes,
shall suffer our companions in arms to peryshe, and our besyeged City to be
taken by the enemy, in manner hard under our noses? My opinion is therefore
that without any further protracting of time, we lead our armies to Arimine,
to succor our men that are in danger. And afterward (if it shall seem
expedient) to besege Now called O^^^o.
Aurimu^ and other of our enemis holds. To further thopinion of Narses we al,
ye very same time came letters from John unto Belisarius, aduertising him yt
the soldiers constrained by famine, had fallen to composition with their enemies,
to yield wtin seven days, onles they were rescowed in the mean while.
Hereupon, the opinion of Narses was confirmed by the assent of all the whole
counsel. When it was ones fullye condiscended that succor should be ministered
The ^que (...) of belisarius for the rescowinge of Arimine.
unto John we all speed possible, Belisarius provided for the same in this
wise. First he commanded Ara^us to abide in the same place where they then
were, with a thousand horsemen willing him in any wise not to remove from
thence, nor by any m^anes to attempt fortune for any occasyon, but only to
defend bys camp if the enemy adventured upon him. After that, he furnyshed
his ships and embarked his souldyers, commyttyng the charge of them to
Herodian and Uliarius. But y^ rule of the whole flete he would should be at the
discretion of Ildiger, co^maun ding him forthwe to direct his course toward
Arimine. Another part of his army he betoke to Martine, bidding him coast the
ships and keep we them as ^ere as he could by the shore.

And as soon as they approached their enemies so that they came wein kenning then
of set purpose to kindle many fires in their Camp, to the intent to make the
enemy believe ye they were a greater army then they were in deed. Whiles these
kept by the sea coast, he himself went a contrary way by the City Saluia. The
same was sometime Saluia.
a saire city but it had been destroyed and beaten down to the ground by the
Goths that came first into Italye under Alaricus, so that nothing remained
thereof more then the ruins. Belisarius therefore passinge by this town,
marched by the mountains eschewynge the playner way that leads to Arimine,
by the fyeldes of the Fauenses and Pisauriens. For seeing that his enemies had
a far greatter army about Arimine then he had, and that he had left a
strong garryson of them behind at Auximum, he thought it more for his
behoof to use wisdom and policy against the Goths, then to feight with
them in open field. Marching therefore the way before mentioned, when he came
unto the hills that rise against Arimine, (as (...) needs be lightly in so
great an army) he found certain of h^s enemies ranging abroad. The which
being either slain or else taken prisoners, some of them with their faces
sore mangled he let go again. Who returninge to the Camp of the Goths,
brought tidings that Belisarius was at hand with his whole power, for the
confirmation whereof they showed their faces newlye wounded. It was about
noone when this news was brought to the camp. And thereupon proclamacion was
made to harness, and that every man should fall in order of battle under his
antesygne. The Captains having put their men in array, waited for the
coming of Belisarius, lookyng continually toward the moun taines from whence
he was reported to come. But Belisarius had about midday encamped himself in
the mou^ taynes, a good way of from Ariminie, and came not down to his enemies
that day. By means whereof the Goths having stood gapyng for them all day to
no purpose, at length about the Sun setting brake their array and returned
into their tents. Howbeit, when night came, espying a great sort of fires on
the sea coast, clean contrary to that way that Belisarius was reported to
come, (they were the fires that Martyne and his army made) they were in great
fear all that night, in so much that there was not any of them that either
took any sleep or put of his harness. As soon as it was day, when they
beheld the navy also ready decked and furnysshed making sail toward Arimine,
for fear least The Goths break up their s^ge before Arimine*
they should be entrapped by two hosts at ones, the one from the land, the
other from the water, they by and by brake up their siege, and without any
order fled to (...). First of all arrived Ildeger with his (...) at Arimine,
and going on land spoiled the tents of the Goths. Anon after came Martine
and Belisarius with their armies. When (...) beheld John and his souldyers that
had been beseged, how pale and lean they looked with hunger, turning him
self to John as it were to taunte him for his rashenesse, he said: ye are
much beholdynge to Ildiger, and worthy to thank him for his pains. John
answered proudlye and arrogantlye Occasion of discord among (...)
again, that there was no cause why he should thank Ildiger or any man
else save only Narses. As who should say, he desired to have it known,
that Belisarius would smallye have regarded his delyueraunce, is Narses had
not compelled him. These words troubled Belisarius, and they were the
beginning of discord.

For after. that time, John standing in fear of Belisarius, cleaued unto
Narses. The residue also of his friends See what m^s (...) works.
styrred up Narses with evil counsel against him. Uouching that it was not
for his honor being Threasurour of Thempyre, and one of the Emperors privy
counsel, to be led by thad uise of Belisarius, specially seeing that he him
self, had an army far passing tharmye of Belisarius, both in number and
strength of souldyers, and also in policy of Captains, and therefore he ought
to seek the glory of the recovery of Italy from the Goths, to him self and
not to Belisarius. These flattering persuasions set Narses in such a pride,
that he ever after encamped by him self, and would not follow Belisarins advise
in nothing.

But consulted by him self as touching these wars and all other affairs
that were in hand. Nevertheless they went both together to the fiege of
U^bine, but yet not in one camp. For Belisarius lay on the ^ast side of the
town and Narses on the West. At such time as Belisarius was purposed to have
assaulted the town, and had prepared engines for the same, Narses laughyng him
to sk^rne for his labor, within a day or twain after he came thither brake
up his siege and returned with his army to Arimine, leauyng Belisarius and
his company in worse case, then if he had not come there at all. For the enemy
perceiuinge part of the army to dislodge, began to take a stout cou rage,
^nally regarding that part that remained still behynd. Nevertheless Belisarius
began to rere up ordinance The good for tune of Belisarius.
toward that gate of the town where the ground was most level, and to give
the adventure to win it by assault. Whiles he was putting these things in a
readynesse by a marvelous good fortune it happened that the fountain (the
townsmen of Urbine haning no mo but that one only) dry^d up of the own
accord. Wherthrough it came to pass that the town for fear was yielded, upon
condition that the Goths and the Citizens of Urbine should become subjects to
the Emperor Iusti^an, in as free and ample manner as other Italyans that were
Imperial.

The. vi. Chapter.
Of the great dearth that was through all ^taly, and how the Goths besege
Millaine and win it thro^gh the discord of Belisarius and Narses. Whereof the
Emperor being advertised by Belisarius calls Narses out of Italy. Whereupon
Belisarius having absolute authority agay^ proceeds with the wars, and
besegeth A^mum, the sytuation and strength wh^reof (...) here declared.

WHen (...) was thus yielded un to him for as much as it seemed not as yet
expedient tattempte the ^ege of Auximum, Belisarius led his (...) against the
Urbeuetanes The winning of that town was some what difficult, because it stood
upon a rock so stepe on all sides, that men could not well come to assault
it.

The only hope was to win it by famine. For Italy was as it were so worn to
the hard bones with continual war, and trodden underfoot with many armies,
that there was not one city in all the country, but it suffered Great da^h
through ou^ all Italy.
scarsitie and penury: the which penury Urbeuetus also being at length op
pressed, came in subjection to Belisarius. Narses lyinge at Arimine sent John
with an army of men to win Cesena. At the which town, as he was scalyng of
the walls, he was re^pulsed with many wounds, and lo^ a great sort of his
company. In the same assault was slain Phauotheus captain of the Erules.
Whereupon John desisting from Cesena, went to Forum Cornel^, the which was
yielded unto him by composition. The same time Mundilas and those that were with
him at Millaine, began to be wrapped in great distres. For Teudebert the French
king (as is before specified) being by Uitigis called upon for aid by virtue
of the leage that was between them, had sent to Uraias ten Millane besieged by
the Goths.
thousand Burgonians upon confidence of the which multitude he encamped himself
not far from Millain, suffering neither corn nor any other kind of sustenance
to be conveyed thither. Mundilas had of necessity been driven before to
disperse his soldiers into Come, Bergome, and Nouaria, so that he had no great
number of horsemen about him. How be it the hardest of the mat ter was not
the defense of the city, for the Citizens of Millain with one accor^ knitte
themselves together in the defense thereof. But the fear was least victualle
should fail in so populous a City, if so be it the barbarous Goths should
be suffered to continue long in those borders. Belisarius therefore having
intelligence thereof, sent Martine and Uliarius thither with a great power, to
thentent that Mundilas and they ioynyng together, might remove the Goths
further of. When they came at the river Po, which is from Millain but one days
journey, they durst not pass over for fear of their enemies, but lyngered
many days in the same place, frustrating day by day the hope of Mundilas and
them that were besieged with him. For where as they made promise to have passed
the river and come unto Millaine, they performed no part thereof. Daily both
hope and sustenance failed those that were besiged. At y^ last after long
lyngering Martine and Uliarius confessing the truth advertised Belisarius y^
they alone were not able to pass over y^ river against so great a power of
their enemies, onles they would wylfully run in open danger of their lives.
Wherefore if he thought it good, he should cause John and Iustine which were with
their armies not far from Bononie to join with them. Belisarius hereupon
imediatly wrate unto John and Iustine commaundinge them to join with Martyne,
and to make all the speed they could to relieve their fellows being besieged
and in utter peril of their lives. They sent him word again that they would
nothing do without the commandment of Narses. Therevppon Belisarius wrate
again unto Narses. Who albeit he gave his consent that the army should go
thither, yet not withstanding, for as much as it was a thing done by
Belisarius, he went about it very slowly and negligently as men are wont to do
in other men's businesses. By this means the matter was so long delayed, that
at last they were utterly deceived. In the mean time Millaine was every day
sorer afflicted then other, intolerable hungre welnye pyned them away, and the
city wauing between hope and fear, abode such miseries and anguish as almost
no menwere able to abide again. At y^ length being brought Millane is lost
through the discord of Narses and Belisarius.
to utter extremity Mu^dilas and his soldiers fell to composition to abandon
up the town so they might escape with their lives. After whose departure the
Goths enteryng into the city, spared neither young nor old. For they flew in
every place not only such as were able to bear armor, but also thold men and
young boys. The women were given in servitude to the Burgonions, and the A
notable c^ueltie.
city rased to the ground. Reparatus a citizen of Rome being taken in the
town by the Goths, was hewn in small gobbetts and thrown to dogs. Thus
was one of the goodlyest and most populous cities of all Italy (through the
discord of Narses and Belisarius) put to utter destruction. In this ruin and
over throw of ye city, were slain of y^ Millainers about. xxx. M. When
Belisarius had tidings of it, he took great sorrow for the same, and wrate unto
the emperor Justinian, the beginning and proceeding of all the whole matter.

Justinian being certified of the truth, was much offended thereat, but yet pu
nisshed not any man for it. Only he call led home Narses out of Italy,
committing Narses is called out of Italy.
the whole charge and authority of the war unto Belisarius. Hereupon Narses
with part of his army returned into Greece, and Belisarius with all the rest
abode still in Italy. Who now having no man to overthwart him in his
determinatio^s concerning the war. Although that his chief care rested upon
Uitigis and Rauenna, yet he minded to take two towns mo from the Goths,
before he proceeded with his arinie against Uitigis and Rauenna. The towns that
he desired were Auximum and (...) both of them very strongly situate, and both
of them thoroughly manned by the Gothishe garrisons.

For neither would he leave at his back Auximu^ having in it three thou^sand
of chosen soldiers, which were able to do much displeasure and hinderance to
his adherents: nor yet Fesules because that as long as ye Goths held that
city, he thought nothing should be in rest through Hetruria. Hereupon he
divided his army into three parts, of the which he took one with him to besiege
Auximum, another he sent by Iustine and Cyprian against Fesules, and the third
he betoke to Martine and John Uitalian, commanding them to encampe abouts the
river Po, and to deteyne Uraias with his host as long as they could in those
borders, to thentent they should not come to raise any of the siges among ye
Thuskans and Picents. And if they were not able to keep him still there, then
to follow him in the tail. Martine and John therefore setting forth into
Lubardye with that part of the army that we spoke of before, wanne the city
Dertone situate by the river Po, and from thence did their endeavor to trouble
Uraias and ye Goths. Cyprian and Justin with another army going unto Fesules,
albeit the besieging of that city were very difficil for ye nature and
roughnes of the place, yet not withstandyng they brought their camp as nere as
they could, and be sieged it from a higher ground, where the way lay more
plain to the town. Belisarius himself with the puyssantest Belis. besieges
Auximu^.
company of all, beset Auximum. Uitigis had placed in Auximum the best that he
could pyke out among the Goths, and was very circumspect in fortifiyng of that
town. Coniecturing that which was most true, namely that Belisarius would
never proceed to the besieging of Rauenna, onles he had first subdued Auximum.
When Belifarius had well viewed the situation and nature of the place, he was
past all hope of winning Auximum by force. For the city stands upon somewhat
a high ground, and besides that there were within to defend it, apuyssant
band of chosen men of war, able to give battle even in thopen field. So he
had none other hope, but only to tame them by famine, for as much as there was a
great number enclosed wtin the city. And therefore Belisarius omitting
assault, pitched his camp round about the hill on every side, narrowly
watching that nothing should be conveyed in to them. But like as that large
compass of his camp was good to prohibit the portage of things in, so was it
unprofitable against sudden invasions of the enemy. For they that were wtin,
might at their pleasure make sudden assaults upon what part of the Camp they
lysted out of the town above. And the souldyes of Belisarius lay so far one
from another, that they could not readily help at need. By this means it
came to pass that the enemy continually infested the camp, and diverse
skyrmysshes were therevppon fought. Moreover, there was a certain moist ground
not far from the city, where there grew much grass. This field was as it
were the place of their daily exercises, when either the besiegers or the
besieged resorted thither for forage: and sometime their courages were so
kyndeled on both sides, that almost all the whole Camp ran thither to
feyght. In these encounters the Souldyers of Belisarius prevailed in multitude,
and the Goths by the situation of the place, both parts being equal in
manhod and prowess. The like conflictes were also at Fesules, for there were
many sudden alarmes given, and welnye daily skyrmyshes betwen^ the besiegers
and the besieged.

The besiegers had none other hope of atteynynge their desire, then by keepynge
the besieged from sustenaunce, and famisshinge them for want of food. For
there was no hope to win so strong Cities as those were by force. And
therefore by taking up standynges in places convenient about the towns, they
cut of all carryages and conueyaunce of things in.

The. vii. Chapter.
Of towns that were besieged by the Imperialles, how the French men coming
into Italy after that they had put two armies to flight the one of the Goths
the o there of the Imperials both in one day, returned home again, and how
Fesules was yielded to the Imperialles.

While the war was in this state and that Auximum among the Picentes, and
Fesules among the The cause of the sudden coming of the frenchmen into Italy.
Hetrurians were narowly besieged, there happened a strange chance about the
river Po. For the frenchmen with their Captain Thewdebert, having passed over
the Alps, came in great number into Lumbardye. The cause of their coming (as
afterward was known) was this. Because that when they perceived how war was
made in Lumbardy, they being a warlike people and in manner savage, were of^nded
that such a country being their next neighbor, should fall as a reward to
them y^ could get the upper hand, and that they themselves sytting still like
cowards the mean while, should accept such to be their neighbors, whom the
fortune of victory appointed to them. This was the occasion why they passed
the Alps. The same time Uraias being often written to by Uitigis, had passed
the River Po and was marchinge with his army toward Rauenna. Martin and John
likewise newlye sent thither by Belisarius, preuentinge Uraias, had encamped
themselves not far from the same place, to the intent (if they could) to have
stopped him of his passage. Their camp was distant from the camp of Uraias
about. vij. miles. In the mean season, the Frenchmen suddenly came into those
quarters. Ura^ias and the Goths by reason of the leage that was lately taken
betwixt them, supposed they had come to their aid, like as they had done
before in the wars about Millaine. These french men y^ passed over the Alps
at that The number and armor of the frenchmen
time we Theudebert, were to the number ber of four score thousand, whereof ve ry
few were horsemen and those attended always upon the kings person, all the
residue being footmen. Their armor was not in pikes nor in bows, but to
keuer their bodies with, they bare a tergat and a skull, and to strike the enemy
wtall, a sword and a byll. In the battle they used most commonly their
bills, the which struck we such force, y^ neither head piece nor tergat was
able to hold out the blow, but that they cut through, nor any man was of power
able to wtstand the violence of y^ stripe. These therefore as friends of the
Goths, being suffered to pass over the ry uer Ticinus at the bridge by Pauie,
did afterward much hurt and displeasure to thinhabiters of Pauie, and of a
savage cruelty slew the wives and children of the Goths as they found them
abrod in the country, anon after passing over Po, when they approached nere
Ura^as camp, whether it were of set purpose, The Goths and the imperials
turned both out of their camps by the french men.
or through rashenes, they fell a quareling and consequently a feighting with the
Goths. Thend of the fray was, that the Goths being put to the worse forsook
their camp, and flying not far from the camp of our men, caused the soldiers
of Belisarius to wonder sore what they should mean. For they had hard no thing
of the coming of the Frenchmen, and therefore they thought verily y^
Belisarius had been come by some privy and unknown way, to destroy Uraias.
Herevppon arming themselves in have, when they had gone a little foreward,
sodeinly they met with the frenchmen, and being not able to retire without
battle, were enforced to feight, in the which they were soon overcome, and
for as much as they durst not repair tot heir camp, they had none other way
to save themselves but by flight. The Frenchmen getting the upper hand both of
y^ Goths and tharmy of Belisarius in one day, obtained the camps of them both
also, and rested in them finding good store of victuals in each of them. Uraias
fled to Rauenna, and the soldiers of Belisarius through ye fields of y^
Placentines snd Parmenses gate over y^ mountain Appennine and went into
Hetruria. This sudden coming of the Frenchmen troubled both Uitigis and
Belisarius. The thing that Belisarius feared most, was least the Frenchmen
should come into Hetruria and oppress his army that besieged Fesules. For
through y^ fields of the Placentines and Parmenses, it is but a short and a
The Frenchmen return again into France.
ready way into ^etruria. But y^ french me^ when they had tarried a while about
Po, and could find neither wine nor other necessaries (the country being
left bare by means of the long continuance of the war) so that they had
nothing to feed on but Beof, nor nothing to drink but the water of the
river, within short space they fell into diverse diseases.

Of the which forasmuch as they dyed in great number, they determined to retire
back, and so they went home again into France, ye very same way that they
came out over the Alps. This was the end of the Frenchmens voyage into Italy.
The Goths that were beseged wtin Fesules, being sore Fesules is yielded the
Impe rialles.
constreined with hunger, when they saw that rescow was often promised and yet
none came, at length yielded up the town to Iustine and Ciprian by
composition. When they had received the town and placed a garrison therein,
they went we all the rest of their army unto Auximum. For Uitigis had promised
to come with all his whole power to raise the s^ge before Auximum. And forasmuch
as Uraias was then with him, it was none other like but he would have done so
in deed. By reason whereof Belisarius was compelled to gather all his power
about him out of other places, to thentent that after his long continued
syege, he would not be sett^ beside his purpose. But when this often promised
succor came not, and yet they stiffly held their own to thuttermost,
Belisarius determined to compel them to yield by some extremity maugre their
hearts for the compassing whereof he invented this policy.

The. viii. Chapter.
How after that Belisarius had corrupted the water of a certain well nere unto
Auximum the townsmen yielded themselves and the town unto him by composition.
The besyeginge of Rauenna by Belisarius and of his wonderful good fortune, and
his wise dealing there at such time as the French Ambassadors came thither,
in so much that he caused the offers of the Frenchemen to be rejected and a
Truce to be taken for further communication to be had with the Emperor for a
small peace and agreement. During the which Truce the storehouses and garners
of corn in Rauenna are set on ^yre no man can tell how.

Within a stones cast of the walls of Auximum, on the north side of the town
there was a well with a very fresh spring the which Belisarius purposed to take
from them, because he perceived that the townsmen had none other place to
fetch water at but only there. To bring this matter to effect he commanded
his army to be in armor by the dauninge of the next day, and to give an
approach to the walls. The Goths thinkinge they had prepared them to
thassault, placed themselves orderly upon the battle ments. Belisarius in the
mean time sent five men conninge in such feats. with mattockes and axes, well
pauished with the bucklars and tergattes of a great number that were sent with them
for their defense, to undermine the well and to cut down the timber work.
Who as soon as they came there did get them under the shed that covered the
well, and being saufe out of danger from the walls, began to dig down
the Mason work. But when the Goths perceiuinge that all their endeavor was
about heuing down the well, they issued out of the town and assailed them
very fi^rslye. The An encounter aboutbrea king down of a well.
fraye was hard under the walls in a place of advantage and easy to the
Goths coming down to the defense of the well, but very untoward and un
indifferent for the soldiers of Belisarius to make assault in. In this
coflicte were many slain, but most of Belisarius In this were slain of Beli
sarius souldie^s
soldiers, for the Goths darting from aloft, might easly endomage their
enemies. Howbeit Belisarius was ever at hand calling still upon his men and
encouraging them with a loud voice and would not suffer them to give back, but
ever put fresh men in the places of such as were wounded or slain. This
encounter being begone by the sun rising, lasted until noone. At the last
his soldiers pearsing stout ly upon the Goths, compelled them to recoyle
into the town. Then they returned back and called away those that were
digging down y^ well, supposinge that they had dispatched their work. But
they had done little or nothing to the purpose in mining down of the Mason
work. The cause thereof was by reason that y^ well being made in old time, was
wrought so close and so sure, that it had been an easier matter to cut a
piece out of a whole quar rte then to have dygged down any part of the wall
of it. When it was perceived how that all that they had done, and all their
feyghtynge was but lost labor, Belisarius caused the rest of the water to be
infected with the Iuce of venomous herbs, with stynkinge Carions of dead
cattle, and with a kind of stone called Asuest so long until he had
utterly marred it, that it was not to be occupied any more, so that the Goths
finding scarcetye of water by the mystre of this well, had much a do to
relyeue them selves with that little and corruped water that they had in
filthy puddles within the town.

After this Belisarius never sought to disquiet them any more, either by
skermishyng or by any other means, but satte still peaceablye to behold the
end of the matter. At length mention was made of yeldyng and the Goths
requested that they might depart to Rauenna with bag and baggage.
Belisarius hearing their demaundes, was in doubt what he were best to doo^.

For he thought, that to let go so many good men of war and thereby to
augment the strength of his enemies y^ were at Rauenna, should be nothing to ye
profit of y^ weal public: Again to sit spending of y^ time in vain about
Auximu^, he thought perilous and prejudicial, inespecially seeing it was re
ported y^ y^ fre^chme^ were coming to thaid of y^ Goths. But most of al stoud
in contention with him his own soldiers, who in reco^pens of their miseries and
calamities endured at their long continued siege, looked of duty to have the
spoil of the town, and would not in any wise suffer themselves to be
defrauded thereof by any composition or agreement Finally when on the one side
Auximum vel ded to Belisarins.
the Goths were sore pinched with penu rye and scarceti^ of things necessary,
and on the other side Belisarius in manner forced by the importunity of the time,
at length through Belisarius great travel the matter was concluded, that the
one half of all that was in the town should be given to his soldiers for
their share, and the Goths should keep the other half still, provided that
the Goths which were within the town of Auximum, should serve Belisarius in
his wars, in like case and estate with other of his souldyers. After this
sort were things knytte up and the Town surrendered according to the
composition. When Belisarius had thus gotten Auximu^ into his hand, he
assembled all his power together, myndyng to proceed Belisarius goes to besege
Rauenna.
against Uitigis and Rauenna. As soon as he came thither, by and by he sent
Maximus one of his captains with part of his army to watch and keep the
banckes of the River Po, to thentent that nothing should be conveyed into
Rauenna that way.

For one of the mouths of that river falls into the Sea not far from
Rauenna, from whence there is a certain dych cut out of the whole ground,
wherein the river is conveyed to the Town. Belisarius therefore myndinge first
and formest to disappoint them of this commodity, gave Maximus charge to keep
the hythersyde of the River with that band that he had delivered unto him.
Uitalis also coming out of Dalmatia at the comman dement of Belisarius, had
committed The wonde^full good fortune of Belisarius.
unto him the keeping of the furtherside with another band. There happened the
same time a wounderfull chance, and such a strange thing as has not lightly
been heard of. For as a great number of ships and galeyes were coming out of
France laden with corn and victualles making sail toward Rauenna, the River
fell so low, that ma ny of the ships stood still for want of wa ter to bear
them. Whereby it came to pass y^ they were all taken by the soldiers of
Belisarius. This was y^ first token of good luck wherwt fortune began to
further the procedynges of Belisarius. For it could not be reme^bered that ever
any such thing had hap pened before. By this means was al liberty of caryinge
in and out by the river Po cut of from Rauenna. As for by sea nothing could
be conu^ied in by reason that the enemes of y^ Goths were every where lords
of the sea.

Again on the land Belisarius with his army keept them so short, that he
would not suffer ought to be carried that way. While Rauenna was thus
straightlye besyeged, there came Ambassadors out of France to Uitigis,
offering that the Frenchemen French Ambassadors to Vitigis.
should come into Italy and raise the syege, and doubtless to slay Belisarius
with all his army, if so be yt that the Goths would be content to admit
them as coparteners of their Empire. This stout brag made by the french
Ambassadurs, did set the hearers hearts in a pride. For they promi sed to bring
five bundred thousand men of war, whose coming (if he were in his right
wits) Belisarius would never abide. For if he did, they threatened to s^etch
him and all his company with their holberdes. These high words did partlye
puff up Uitigis and his Goths with pride, and partly made them afraid. For if
the Frenchmen came into Italy, it was not to be doubted that they should get the
upper hand, but it was a difficulte matter to be believed, that they would keep
touch and play the good fellows in parting of the Empire.

And therefore if the Frenchmen should come they mistrusted least they would be
as much to their confusion as to the Belisarius sen death commissioners to
Vitigis.
confusion of their enemies. This doubt of theirs Belisarius helped to
increase. For he being a sage Captain and pollitique in all affairs, as soon as he knew of the coming of the French Ambassadors, sent his commyssioners
also to Rauenna, both to offer the Goths peace and atonement with the
Emperor, and also to wythdrawe them from societye with the Frenchemen, by
putting them in remembrance of their former unfaithful dealing. The Goths
when they had heard the French Ambassadors and Belisarius Commyssioners what
could be alleged on both sides, taking deliberation what was best to be
done, after long debating of and on, preferred thattonement with the Emperor.
By this mea nes the French Ambassade was dismissed without the thing that they
came for, and often treaties were had with Belisarius concerning the same, and
diverse commissioners and messengers went to and fro for conclusion thereof.
Finallye this was the end of the (...) between the Goths and the* (...)
matters debated. That the determynation of all controversies should be
referred to the discretion of the Emperor Justinian. Herevppon Ambassadors
were sent to him and a Truce was taken between the besyegers and the beseged.
In the mean while it fortuned that the common storehouses at Rauenna and all
the corn The storehouses are set on fire.
in them was burned up, ye mischaunce brought the Goths in great distress,
considering their own corn was burnt up, and Belisarius would not suffer
any more to be brought in, the which (he said) he did upon this consideration,
to the intent the Goths should be agreeable to more indifferent articles of
atonement. Howebeit Uitigis was in a mer ueylous mistrust, because it could
not be learned by what means the ^yer ^ame. Some thought they were set a fire
with lightnig, other supposed it to be done by some malicious persons, and
othersome mistrusted that Belisarius should be the doer of it. The Qu^ne also
was suspected for ye matter. Who forasmuch as she was forced to marry with
Uitigis against her will, was therefore demed to bear hatred and malice toward
him in her heart. This burning of the grain did greatly trouble Uitigis and
the Goths, and brought them in manner to utter despair. For if the fire came
by lyghtninge, they might think that God and the heavens were against them.
Or if it were done of a set purpose, they wist not whom they might trust. So
were they like within a while to be quyte wtoute corn, and without all hope
of coming by any more, because ye Beli sarius after the burninge of the
storehouses, looked more straitlye to them that none should be conveyed in.

^he. ix. Chapter.
Diverse of the Goths become Imperial, The Emperor sends his Ambassadors
with articlles of peace to Rauenna the which of the Goths are well lyked and
ioyfullye received. But Belisarius perceiving that more advantage is to be
gotten otherwise wilnot subscribe unto them, by means whereof rises a
suspicion that Belisarius will make himself Em^erour, the which the Goths
being glad of, to further the same, proferre their fubmission and obedience
unto him, and he accepts it promising to take his oath at Rauenna for
performaunce of their demands whereupon be is received royally in to the town,
and dismisse^h the most part of the Gothish soldiers* through whose departure
having made himself strong, he utterly refuses to usurp as long as thempe
^our justinian lives. The goths in Pauie create a new king who makes profer
of submissio^ upon like condition the which (...) utterly (...), and (...)
prisoner to Constantinople with diverse of his noble men and all his Threasures,

About this time many of ye Goths The reuolting of certain Goths. to
Belisarius.
that inhabited the Alps, sent word to Belisarius that they would yield
theymselues unto him.

There are upon the Alps many castles, the which in old time were kept by the
Goths placed there to dwell.

For Tha^pes do disseuer Italy from France, rising of a wonderful hight very
hard to clymb unto or to pass over, the which passages it was expedient to be
well kept. And therefore Theodorich king of the Goths did both place a
puyssaunt company of his country men with their wives and children in those
wast grounds, and also builded them casteles and holds. Sisigis one of ye
Gotishe nobility, who had certain Castles in Thalpes, was the first of all
that of his frewyll received the souldyers sent into those coasts by
Belisarius, persuading other Castles to do the like. The same time Uraias was
in Lumbardy, musteryng of souldyers to carye with him to Rauenna. He had
already raised an army of four thousand men. Of the which the most part were
inhabiters of Thalpes.

Who hearing that Sisigis was revolted to their enemies, and that the Castles
wherein they had their wives and children were assailed, they compelled Uraias
first and formest to lead them thither. Whereupon he took his journey with all the power that he had raised, into Thalpes, and there besieged Sisigis and the
souldyers of Belisarius. When news of this gere came to John Uitalian and
Martine, who the same time had their camp in Lumbardye, they also without
further tariance marched toward Thalpes, and took certain Castles in their
way. In the same were taken many of the wives and children of them that served
under Uraias. When the fathers, husbands, and kinsfolk of them had knowledge
thereof, they forsook Uraias camp and fled to their enemies, to the intent to
recover them again.

Uraias being thus forsaken of his own souldyers, returned with a few into
Lumbardy, and never set his mind any mo^re either about musterynge of other
soldiers, or succouringe such as were besieged. So Uitigis and the Goths that
were at Rauenna, being for saken of their own people and destitute of all hope
of comfort, were still beseiged and suffered every day more distress then
other. While the Goths stood in this estate, thambassadours returned from
the emperor, Dominicus and Maximus both of the Senate. They brought Justinians
answer to those demands that Uitigis and the Goths The answer of the Empo^
to the demands of the Goths.
had made as concerning the concord and agreement. The su^me of the Emperors
decree was this. That Uitigis should hold still all that he had beyond the
river Po, and surrender all that he had on thyssyde. That he should deliver to
the Emperor the one half of his threasure, and keep the other half for him self
and that all the Goths inhabityng on the hither side of the River Po, should
become subjects to thempyrs of Rome. When the Ambassadors had first conferred
with Belisarius, they entered into Rauenna and declared their commission, the
which things both Uitigis and the noble men of the Goths were glad to here,
and consented thereto with all their hearts. But A crafty and suttell kind of
dealing.
Belisarius was very sorry to see it. For it spyted him to the heart, that when
he might fully have had the victory of the Goths, it should be taken out of
his hand. And therefore anon after when the commissioners returned, and
requested him to subscribe the articles he would not put to his hand. The which
thing brought the Goths in a merueylous maze, fearing to be deceived under a
counterfeit pretense of peace. In so much that they began to say openly,
they would do nothing as concerning the peace, without the consent of
Belisarius. Thambassadours themselves and such as were chief officers in the
Camp, were greatly displeased with Belisarius doing, and thought he did not
well in disobeyng themperours commandment. And therevppon bred a suspicion,
as though Belisarius went about to make him self emperor, and were utterly
minded to wtdrawe his obediens from Justinian. This suspicion was almost in
every man's head at that time with the which opinion the Goths being induced,
sent privily unto him, exhorting him to take y^ west Empire upon him himself,
and not to acquire it to another. For if he would so do, they said that the
Goths would be contented to become his sub^tes, and to obey him with all
their hearts, and that he should^ jointly enjoy the kingdom of the Italians and
the Goths, together with an incomparable puissa^. These things were wrought
privily by the Gotishe nobility. Uitigis perceyuinge that such profers were
made, sent his messengers also unto Belisarius encouraging him unto the same.
Belisarius ponderyng these things with himself, and considering they might be
^eatlye for his be^oofe, y^ they were handeled wisely, sent away into sundry
places with their bands, John Uitalian, Bessas, and Aratus, men of much
authority in his camp, but in no wise his friends, pretendynge an excuse as
though so great armies could not well be victualled together in one place,
and that they should find more plenty and abundaunce of victual and forage
in other places.

This excuse was pretended, but in deed they were sent away to the ^ntent
that with their presence they should not interrupt him of his doings.
Afterward he him self sommoning before him all the officers of his camp,
when he had sufficientlye debated with them as concerning the distress that
the Goths were brought unto, what would you ^aye ((...) he) if we should by
this war atteyne at their hands, not only those things wherewyth the
Emperor seems to be con tented, but also greater things.

Every man for him self commended that greater things should be atteyned if
it might be. When he hard them say so, without further disclosinge of the
matter, he dismissed the counsel. And therevppon he sent one of his com pany
to Rauenna, aduertising the Goths that he was contented to do as they had
counseled him, exhorting them to make speed in the matter. The Goths as they
y^ were already oppressed with famine, without any delay sent their
commissioners fully authorized by the prince and the common consent of them all
unto Belisarius. These persons when they came into the camp spoke ^thyng before
the souldyers, but talking with Belisarius alone, told him that they were
come to receive his faithful promise and oath for thaccomplishment of the
matter before debated. There were two kind of promises propounded by them,
where unto they required him to be sworn. The One was that he should govern
them with justice and equity, maineteyne and supporte the customs and laws
of the Goths, and not be offended against any of them for ought that had been
done in times past, with diverse other things of like purport.

The other was that he should from hence forth proclaim himself king of
Italy and of the Goths. If he would agree to these articles and be sworn to
the performance of them, they would set open their gates and receive him and
all his army into Rauenna. Belisarius swear to all the other demaundes according
as the commissioners had requested, but concerning the taking of the kingdom
upon him, he said he would take his oath before Uitigis and his noble men
when he was come to Rauenna. The commisioners mistrusting not but that he
would have been king in deed, delayed the taking of his oath in that behalf,
as though he should have performed the same before the noble men immediately
upon his coming to Rauenna. But Belisarius purposed nothing less. For
Justinian the cause why Belisa. would not take upon him to be em (...).
when he made him Lieutenaunt general of the wars, had bound him with a
great oath, that he should not take upon him nor usurp the kingdom or
Empire, as long as he were alive, nor yet suffer himself to be accounted or
called by the name of tyrant, King or Emperor. This his oath he was determined
to keep unviolated, and did but daly with the Goths in that behalf. Upon
this composition ^he yelding of Rauenna to Belisarius.
the Goths very desirouslye called Belisarius into the town.

And he with his army in royal order, and with his ships trymly decked,
bryngyng in them abundaunce of all kind of victualles, entered into Rauenna to
the great reioycement of the Goths and their army. Now because there were a
great number of men of war of the Goths within the town, Belisarius
minding to abate their power, within a few days after his coming thither,
licensed all such to depart home, as dwelled on this side the river Po. They
being wearyed with their long continued warfare, were very willing to
return home to their friends. And so the multitude that was at Rauenna being
diminished, the army of Belisarius waxed the stronger, and were even as Lords
of the town. As things fell out in this wise the nobility of the Goths
that dwelled in any part of all Italy, either came them selves, or else sent
their commissioners unto Belisarius to Rauenna.

But when Beli^arius began to make delays in the taking upon him of the
kingdom, men began to marvel what he should mean, and also to cast doutes
of his doings. The which suspicion was augmented Belisarius is sent for out
of ^taly.
upon the sudden sendynge of Justinian unto Belisarius commaundyng him to
return home.

For the fame went and certain had made report to the Emperor, that Belisarius
went about to make himself king of Italy, and had already taken it upon him.
For fear whereof Justinian sent for him immediately out of Italy. The Goths
(...) that, could not at the first by any means persuade them selves, that he
would return to the emperor Justinian. But when they saw preparacion made for
the same, and all things put in a readiness toward his journey, then they
knew well enough that Belisarius had won them in by a train and had
utterly de ceiued them. But what remedy? For he had both the town and their
noble men in his hand, so that they could not so much as bewail their
misfortune one to another, but that he m^st needs be priuye to it. When the
Goths that dwelt on the furthersyde of Po, heard ^ydinges hereof, they
assembled themselves together at Pauye, and there bewaylyng one to another the
common misfortune of their nation, and the deceitfullnesse of Belisarius, at
length would have made Uraias their king. The which thing he would not in any
Vraias refuses to be made king of the Goths.
wise suffer them to do, excusing him self by this reason, that for as much
as he was Uitigis brothers son, he might not seem to have done either like a
kynsman or like an honest man if he should take ye kingdom upon him whiles
Uitigis were alive. Through this allowable er^se alleged for himself, he was
the occasion that Ildouade Ildouade is made king of the Goths.
a man of great a^horitie and power among the Goths, and which had been ruler
of Ueron a long time before, was created king. Ildouade therefore being sent
for out of Ueron unto Pauye, was there invested in his purple Robes of estate,
and pro claymed king of the Goths, to the intent he should study and take
care for the saufgard of his country men. Being in this sort made king, he
sent ambassadors by and by to Raue^na unto Belisarius, giving them charge to
put him in remembrance of his ^he effect of the ambassade sent by Ildouade to
Belisarius.
promise lately made for the taking upon him of the kingdom of Italy and of
the Goths, not letting to reprove him openly of breakinge his faithful
promise, through which cautel the Goths were deceived. Wherefore if he would
yet accomplish his promise in proclaiming him self king, and show the same
in his doings, Ildouade offered him self to come to Rauenna, and to lay of
his robes of estate at his feet. But if he had rather be themperours slave
then to be Emperor himself, he ought not to be discontented though Ildouade
and the Goths that remained endeavored to provide for the saufgard of their
weal public. This was the sum of their ambassade.

Belisarius answered openly there unto, An example of a faithful subject and
of an invincible mind.
that as long as the Emperor Justinian lived, he would never take upon him to
be king. With this answer the Ambassadors returned to Ildo^ade unto Pauie.
And Belisarius having decked his Navy, sailed toward Constantinople with
Uitigis and diverse other noble men of the Goths, and all the kings Threasure,
the fyfth year after the war was begone in Italy.

The third book of Lenard Aretine, concerning the wars in Italy against the
Goths.
The first Chapter.
Thentertainement that Belisarius and his prisoners had at Constantinople. A
commendation of Belisarius good government, by comparison between him and the
Captai^es that succeeded him.

WHen Belisarius was come to Constantinople y^ Empero^r Justinian welcomed him
with great joy, and having him in great reputation and honor, put out of mind
all mistrust that he had conceived of his doings before. The Goths whom he
had brought with him were entertained very gently and courteously, and men
wondered to behold them: the which might seem to have chanced not without
good cause. For there was Uitigis king of the Goths that of late What they
were whom^ Belisarius brought prisoners to Con stantinople.
had besyeged Rome with such a multitude, and his wife Amulusuentha, the nece
of Theoderich sometime king of the Goths who first brought them into Italy, and
there gave them possessions. Furthermore there were the two sons of Ildouade
then King of the Goths, whom Belisarius fynding in the Court of Uitigis at
Rauenna, would not suffer to depart, but brought them away with him into Greece.
There were other noble men of the Goths also, whom al men beheld, wondering at
the puissans of Belisarius, that had atcheued so great exploytes, and exto^ling
him with praises to the sky, in that he had lately before subdued Aphrycke,
and now Italy, under the dominion of Justinian. And thus went the world in
Greece. In Italye after the departure of Belisarius, the order of things by the
commandment of the Emperor was committed to the discretion of John, of
Bessas, and of Uitalis. Constantian also was come out of Dalmatia, and was
added to the number of the Governors. It was soon seen what difference there
was between y^ government of these men and of Belisa. For (to omit his
skilfulnesse in feats of war and cheualrie wherein he far surmounted ^he
praise of belisarius.
all the Captains of his time) there was in him a singular humanity and
gentleness, through the which he exhibited himself as well to the poor, as to
the rich. There was no manner of per son, but might have casie and fre access
to his presens: and besides that, he was wondrous bountiful and liberal.
Unto his soldiers that had lost their horses, weapons and armor (so it were
not cowardly) forthwith he gave new again. Of the husbandmen he had so great
regard, that in leading of his army, he would not suffer any of them to be
hurt or endomaged. His soldiers durst not be so bold as to touch the
Apples hangyng on the trees.

Through this his straightness in observing the law of arms, he obtained
that his camp was more plentifully served, then the marketts in any city. So
free and without peril was the conueyance of all things that were to be sold.
His uprightness toward such Cytyes as were in society and leage with him,
no man is able to report as it deserved. Men might hear of the great good
tournes that he did for them, but not that he vered or molested any of them.

But as for them that succeeded him, they were nothing like him, neither in
humanity, neither in prowess, neither yet in vpryght dealing. For both they
them selves were Pyllers and Pollers, and also they suffered their Souldyers to
fall into all kind of licentiousness and disorder, being proud to their
partakers, and easy enough to be entreated toward their enemies, by means
whereof within short space matters began to go clean backward, and to slide
into open and manifest ruin, as I shall show you hereafter.

The. ij. Chapter.
The diligence of Ildouade king of the Goths, the great misgouernaunce of
the Imperial Captains, by means whereof they be brought low and the Goths
incresed in strength and courage. The death of Vraias, the death of Ildouade,
the electtion and death of Ataricus, and the election of Totilas.

ILdouade being newly created king of the Goths (as I declared before) after
the departure of Belisarius, went in hand with his matters very diligently. For
he gave commandment that all the Goths and all the Italians that favored the
Gothyshe part, should at a day appointed meet all together ready furnished
with armor at Pauye. His army at ye beginning was very slen der, but it
continually increased and every day was in better hope and comfort then
other. The covetousness and The iniur^ous dealing of the Empeporours
Collectours causes great alteration.
wrongful dealing of their adversaries did not a little help the Gothish part.
For the collectours of Justinian under the color of forfeytures and arrerages,
began to vex the people of Italy marvelous bytterlye, and to compel them to
the payment of sums that were never due. For by calling an accounpt of all
things that the Italians had taken charge of in the time of Theoderich first
king of the Goths, or of any other of the Kings that succeeded him, together
with the account of all such offices as any Italyan had borne during the
said time, and moreover by making inquisition for the money lately promised by
the Cytyes to the Goths, the which they challenged to the Emperor as due by
the name of forfeyture, they brought every man priuatelye and all the Cytyes
generallye in such a despair, that they wyshed ye Goths to be lords of all
again and therevppon many, of their own free will revolted to Ildouade,
helpinge to augment the number and strength of his army. The like grudge was
also in themperours army. For look with what greadines the money that was
never due was exacted of the Italians, with like pinching were the soldiers
restrained of their due deserved wages. There was no regard had of any thing
but one, which was to satisfye the Emperors insatiable coustousnes, by
gathering of money and spendinge none again. And therefore as well the
souldyers as the Italyans, being constrained with so great wrongs, sought to
bring the Empire to decay. By mea nes whereof Ildouade daylys growing
strong, brought under his obeisance all the Cy^es beyond the ^uer Po, and all
the Cytyes pertey^ynge to the estate of Uenic^, and ^armye was fullye furnished
with number both of Italians and Goths. Through the which within a while he
was so encouraged, that he was not a ^ayde to lead his army into open ^ld, to
try the fortune of battle. This (...) was fought not far A battle between
ildouade and the imperialles.
f^o^ Now called Treuizo.
Taruisium against Uitalis one of the Emperors Captains. In the which
Ildo^ade gerting ^hupper hand made (...) a slaughter of Uitalis army y^ whiles
the capta^e himself with a few sted away, all the rest were ^ither slain or taken
prisoners by the Goths.

Through this ^ictorie being so great and so notable, it is a wonder to see how
the goths were encouraged, and how much the power of their adu^rsaries was
aba^d. In so much y^ not only beyond the Ryu^r Po, and under the dominion of
Uenice, but also all such as on this side the Po, held of the Gothy she part,
were thoroughly strengthened: and the name of Ildouade grew famous even in the
Emperor Iu^ Court, and among foreine nations also.

It was not long after but that he pursued to y^ death Uraias a man of much
authority and estimation among the Goths upon presumption y^ he should
consp^re with his enemies This cause was pretended. Howbeit sum were The
death of Viaias.
of opinion that he took prytch against Uraias because that latly before,
there had been altercation between his wife and the Queen. But surely I cannot
think that Ildouade being a grave and wise man would be so far ouersene as
to be induced with brablinge matters of women, to kill such a man as was
Uraias. I believe rather that the cause why Ildouade did put him to death, was
that he feared his power and authority. For it is manifest that the Goths in
general are of nature very mistrustfull, and scarce sufficientlye faithful
toward their kings. Many of the Goths dissal^wed the death of Uraias, and
openly detested it as a (...) and wicked act. By means whereof it came to
pass, that Ildonade himself was ^ayne by one of his own (...) whiles he sat
at his meat. In The death of Ildou^ade.
his stead was Ataricus created King: but he reigned not long. For wtin five
months after his election, he was slain by his own subjects for his evil
The death of Ataricus.
behavior and misgouernement. Thus having killed two of their kings wtin two
years space, they offered the kingdom Totilas c^ated king.
with one consent unto Totilas. This man before he was made king had borne
great aucthority at Now called Treuizo.
Tarui siner, which is a city of the Uenetians and his father was brother to
(...) late King.

The. iii. Chapter.
A larger declaration of the election and ^ation of Totilas mentioned brieflye
in the Chapter before. The Emperors C^ptaines through their insaciable gredi^
of pray stryuing for the booty before they had gotten it lose the Citi^ Veron
^hiche was delivered into their hands, and bet^ay their ^wne company.

AFter that Ildonade (as I showed before) was s^aine, Totilas dreading to be in
daun ger because (...) was so nere of his kin, sent privily to Kauenna and
made compact with themperours captains to turn unto them with such as he had
rule of and to yield up y^ town of Taruisium into their hands. A day was limited
for performans of y^ matter. But ere ever y^ day came, the Goths repenti^g y^
they had (...) in y^ death of Ildouade, and that they had made (...) their
king, a (...) nether of wisdom nor courage able to defend y^ Goths against so
great, strength of their enemies, began to incline to To tilas the nere ki^sman
of ^douade, and to wish that he were their king. In co^ (...) out of the way,
and made To^ilas king in deed. (...) having intelligence of these things y^ had
^appened in Italy, found great (...) and ^oward nes of his captai^s, y^ in all
the (...) y^ their e^mies were (...) at (...) among themselves, and among so
many alterations and chaunges, they having so great opportunity for ye spe^ding
of their matters, had done nothing at al. The captains moved with this
dishonorable rebuke, assembled together at Raue^. There when it came to ^onsul
as concerning the war, it was thought best, first and formest to send an army
against y^ city Ueron. For they had (...) secretly put in hope of (...) of y^
town. The captains were in (...) of who^ the thie^e were (...) and Alera^der
lately sent thither (...) perour for the collection of his money. Therefore
setting forth with a great army, when they appro^hed (...) Ueron, they
determined to put in trial the hope that was lately given them. For there
was one Martine a noble man of that Country that had a Castle not far from
^eron: (...) (for as much as in his ^rt he was (...)) had allured the ke^r of
one of the gates to let in y^ empero^s army* The matter being in this wise
closely agreed upon, when the captains came thither with their army, they
sent before one Arrauades an Armenian with a number of pycked soldiers to take
the gate, and there to awaite the coming of the rest of the host. No part of
promise was left unperformed in that place. For in the dead of the night when
the souldyers came to the gate, the trai to^r set it wide all open and let them
into the (...). They entering in and having also taken the walls above the
same, gave notyce thereof to the rest of the army, The Goths percei^ing their
enemies within the town, Note the co^ of ^himperialles and what came of it.
(...) out at another gate. The captains hearing that their men had taken the
town, marched forward. But ere ever they came there, they fell at altercation
for the (...) by y^ way, and (...) miles from the ^ifie. In y^ mean while the
(...). Now there is a castle abo^ (...) of ^eron which has a very great
prospect, both into the town, and also far into the country. The Goths
which were fled into this hold, perceiving few of their enemies to be within
the City, and the army to a^yde still without making no approach toward the
walls, suddenly issued out of the Castle, and aduenturyng through the city,
recovered to the gate where their enemies came in and shut it. The souldyers
that were entered by night, were partly oppressed, and partly ^ying to the
walls made resistens from above. Anon after, the captains com ming thither
and finding the gate shut. although y^ soldiers wtin called to the^ for help,
desiring them not to abandon them in that sort, yet notwithstanding they
retired back again out of hand. Some of the soldiers leaped down the walls
and saved themselves: among which number was Artauades the Ar meman their
guide. The rest were either slain or e^s taken prisoners: By this means
through the misgouernement and covetousness of the Captains striving among
they^selues for the pray before they had gotten it, when they should have made
most speed for y^ winning of the same, the matter quailed about Uero^.

The iiij. Chapter.
Totilas by his policy o^rcommeth the Imperials being of greater force and
number (...) his army was, in the which vier^ ^ie he shows great (...).

AFter this the Captains of Justi^ian (for because their attempt fell out so
ylfauoredly and dishonorable at Ueron) began to fall at debate among
th^mselues, every man putting the fault in other, and there upon departing out
of those quarters, they passed over the river Po, and marched toward Plea sans.
At that time was Totilas at Pa uy who hearing of the coming of his enemies,
raised as man men of war as he could with all speed possible. In the mean
time the captains having passed beyond Pleasans, had enta^ped themselves by
the side of the river Po. Totilas albeit he were far ouermat^hed, yet he
determined to go against them with such power as he had and to (...) of
battle. So when both the (...) approached neretogy^her, and that thencounter
was fully ro^ upon by both parties, Totilas in the ^yghte time sent certain
of his horsemen before, commaundyng th^ym to get over the River almost twenty
furl^ges above the camp of their enemies, and as soon as the battle was
joined, to re^e and assail thee nemye (...) with as (...) noise and (...) as
they (...). He himself (when he saw his time) (...) ^warde his ^nemyes. The^
captains did ye like. There ^ A combat hand to hand*
^. Against this man offered himself to the combat Artauades the Armenian of
whom mention was made in the entering into Ueron. So in the sight of both
tharmies, they fetched their races and ran one at another with their spears
in the rest. Artauades thruste the Gothe through the right side with his spear
so that he fell down dead. And he himself being driven by mischaunce upon the
spear of the dead man sticking in the ground through the only force and
violence of his own horse, ran himself upon the poynct of it, in so much
that it wounded him through his Curet, of the which wound he dyed within three
days after. The two battelles in the mean time encountered very fierslye, and
every man showed his conning what he was able to do with his weapon. When the
battle was at the whotest, and that both parts were most intentife to their fe
yghtinge, victory as yet enclining to neither side, y^ souldyers of Totilas
which had passed the river came and set upon Themperours The Imperialls are
vanquished by Totilas.
Captains behind. Whereupon arose a great noise, and many being beaten down,
first they brake the array of the Emperors army, and anon after put them to
open flight. For after the time their battelles were once opened, their enemies
pressed so sore upon them both before and behind, y^ they were sone disper
peled. Many were flain by the Goths in y^ chase, and many escaped by bypathes
and unknown ways. But the greatest number was of the^ y^ were taken prisoners
Moreover (which never happened before) al y^ sta^dards, ba^ners and antesiges,
The great and dishonorable loss in this battle.
of themperours army were taken in y^ battle, and being brought unto Totilas,
made his victory more famous and renou m^d, in y^ he having scars half so many
men in his army as his enemies, had wittingly and willingly encountered with a
greater power then his own, of whom thorough his marciall policy he had
gotten the victory. Having thus gott^ the upper hand, he used the victory very
courteously vexing none of ye prisoners but se^ding diverse away with out ra^some.
The gentleness of Totilas after his victory,
The which his gentleness did greatly augme^t his honor and (...). The
captains of Iustinia^ y^ escaped, fled first unto Pleasans, and from thence
went every man a sundry way, busying themselves as much as might be in raising
a new army of men.

The, v. Chapter.
Iustine one of themperours captains is be seged within Florens, and rescowed
by the other imperial captains, who in the pursuit of their enemies through an
untrue report cast in sudden fear are with great slaughter put to flight.
Totilas recouereth diverse tow nes in Lombardie, raises the walls of Been uent
and besieges Naples, A comparison be twene the good government of Totilas and
the misgouernaunce of the Imperial Captains.

WIthin a while after this victory, Totilas now conceuing greater things in
his mind, sent an army to Hetruria whereof he made captayns three of the
worthiest men of all the Goths, Beldas, Rodericke, and Uliaris. There was in
Hetruria a captain called Iustine, one of those y^ had been at the foresaid
battle. Who after the discomfiture had never ceased leuing of a The beseging
of Florens and the raising of the same.
new power, and fortifiyng of the towns nevertheless tharmie of Totilas came
suddenly upon him, and besieged him wtin ye walls of Florens. Iustine feared
nothing so much as scarcety of victualles. For nothing could be conveyed in,
and that which was within already, was like to be soon spent. Whereupon he
sent to the rest of the Captains at Rauenna and advertised them in what
peril his estate stood, requesting them of succor. Being moved with this
message, Bessas, Ciprian and John Uitalian came into Hetruria with their armies
when the Goths had understanding of their approach, by and by they brake up
their stege and dislodged their camp, not staying any where, until they came
to a place called Muciall which is a days journey from Florens.

As soon as tharmy of confederats was entered into Florens, the Captains
thought it good to leave a few behynd them for defense of the town, and they
themselves with all the rest of tharmi^ to march against thenemie. While they
were on their way, it seemed good ye some one of the Captains should go
quickly before to assail thenemy, and to stay him from going away, and the
rest with all speed should follow after. When lottes were cast, the charge of
going before fell unto John, who with his men in good order of battle, made
haste toward the enemy. Now the enemies being afraid at the coming of the
host, forsook the place where they had emcamped themselves first, and gate
them to a hill thereby both stepe and hard to clymbe unto. Yet for all that
John made no curtesye at the matter when he came to place, but directed his
battle against the hill, and with a noble courage endeavored to get up by
plain force. His enemies stood earnestly at defense, as they that might easlye
make resistens from the higher ground. In this place whiles John strove to get
up, feightinge valiantly among the formest, one of his companions was strike^
through with a pycke and slain hard by his side. An untrue report cause of a
shameful discomfiture.
Whereupon forthwith rose an untrue rumor (which was lightly believed) that
John was slain, and therwithall his men began to run away. The brute hereof
being reported to them that came with the rest of tharmye behynd, together
with the fearful flight of such as were at the battle, made them also most
shamefully to run away. Neither was there any measure of their flight, but
scatteryng themselves here some and there some they brake their array and
forsook their standard. By means whereof the Captains themselves were feign
to take them to flight also without compulsion of any enemy. After this time
they came no more together again, but every man kept by himself one in one
town and another in another, as they had recovered unto out of the chase. Yet
for all that, the Goths returned not to the syege of Florens, partly for
fear of the great power of their enemy, the which although it were
dispersed, yet was it still within the compass of Hetruria, and partlye
because the win ter drew nere. This was the end of the seven years since
Belisarius began the wars first. The next year following, as soon as the
time T^tilas r^couereth towns i^ ^mbardy
of the year served to encampe in the field. Totilas levied an army and came
into Lumbardye, and there besieged Cesen, and Petra the which town is now a
days commonly called by a corrupt name Bretines, as for all the rest of the
towns of that country, for the most part either he had won them by force,
or else taken them by composition, when he had thus compassed his matters in
that country, he passed from thence with his army into Hetruria. There
finding al things whoter for him then he looked for, he determined fullye not
to spend his time in wa^e about them. And therefore passing over the river
^yber which bownd^th Hetruria, he took his journey through the Umbres, the
Sa^ines, and the Matses into Campanye, in the which place Totilas raseth the
walls of Beneuent.
he won the City of Beneuent, and rased down the walls of it to the
ground. For he was loath that so strong and defensible a City should be left
for his enemies, (if they should happen to comme into these borders, to make
their Bulwark and fortress of. The which done The syege of Naples.
he besyeged Naples, having first entreated them gentlye with many words,
that they would rather accept his frendshyppe, then procure his displeasure.
But his words were to no purpose. For there was in garrison Conon one of
Justinians Captains with a band of not so few as a thousand soldiers, who
would suffer nothing to be done in counsel, without his consent. The which
thing when Totilas understood, he planted his siege not far from the City.
How beit he assaulted it not, but sat still in quiet. In the mean while he
sent part of his army abroad, and recovered Cume with certain other towns
in those borders, by the which he gate a great mass of money, Besides this
there happened certain noble women of Rome to be taken in those places. An
example of clementie and magna^imitie.


All the which Totilas caused to be very courteouslye entreated without
restraint of their liberty, and sent the^ home again to their husbands and
parents with an honorable company to saufconduit the^. And forasmuch as in
those borders was not any Captain or any power to withstand the doings of
Totilas, he sent efte one part of his army and efte another, so long until
he had brought under his obeysans Appulia, Lucanie, and Calabre with all their
towns. By means whereof it came to pass, that there was not any more monye
paid out of those countries to Justinians Captains and soldiers, nor any
man See what want of good government does in war.
that would obey the Captains, or set one foot out of doors to go with
them, For the souldyers lurkynge within the walled towns robbed and pylled as
well their friends as their foes, and through their extortion evil rule made
havoc of al things. And the Captains for the same cause keeping themselves
within ye walls, did no more but only defend the towns from the enemy.
For they parted the Cytyes among them, so that John had the charge of Rome,
Bessas the charge of Spolet, Cypryan the charge of Perusia, Iustine the rule of
Florens, and Constantian the keeping of Rauenna. In the mean time Naples began
to be every day in worse case then other, by means of the siege. For Totilas
having sent for his flete had keepte them so short, that nothing could be
conveyed in nei there by water nor by land. Whereby it was to be perceived, that
unless some body rescowed it, that City was like at length to come in
subjection to the enemy.

The, vi. Chapter.
A new Lieuetenant is sent toward Italy whose cowardnesse in protracting of
the time does not a little endomage the imperi alls. Demetrius deuiseth
prudently for the r^owing of Naples, which for want of courage in executinge
the same tourneth to his own destruction.

JUstinian hearing of this, and being disquieted for the miserable A new
lieuetenant sent in to italy.
estate of Italye and the dishonor of the Empire. Sent one Maximius (receyuer
of his revenues) into Italye, to amend and repair things amiss, geuynge him
a nauye of ships and an army of Thracians and Armenians. Captain of the
Thracians was Herodian, and Captain of the Armenians was Phases. Besides
these, he had also in his ships no small The ^ward nes of Maximius.
number of the Hunnes. Maximius departing from Constantinople, came into
Epyre. There in deliberatynge upon the affairs of Italye, hanging in doubt
between hope and fear, through his flouthfullnesse and cowardyse, helost the
time. For this Maximine was a good gentyllman, of a mylde nature, meet for
matters of peace, but altogyther vnskyllfull of warrelyke exploytes, and
therefore fearful, finding delays and eastynge doubts in every trifle. Now
thaffaires of Italy at y^ time, required quick speed both in consultinge and
in workinge. Justinian saw so small hope of any good doing in Maximine, he sent
one Demetrius (because that lately before he had served under Belisarius in the
wars in Italy) with another navy into Si^. This Demetrius when he was
arrived in Sicill, hearing of the syege of Naples, and of the dystresse that
they were put unto that were within, determined to succor The prudent
policy of de metrius if he had followed it.
them, and that without further delay. Now for as much as he thought
himself not able to do it by plain force, because that neither his ships
nor his army were sufficient thereunto, he devised this pollicye. He gate
together all the ships that he could comme by in Sicill, and made of them a
great flete as to the show, the which he fraughted with corn, and so made
sail toward Naples.

This thing did both greatly comfort the besyeged, and also putto the
Goths in great fear. For they had heard say, he was coming with a great
number of ships, and they thought verylye he had brought a great power
of men in them. And surely if he had gonne dyrectlye unto Naples at the first,
all things had happened to good success and the besyeged City had out of
all doubt been saved. For his enemies were so dysmayed at the multitude of his
ships that they durst not have made any countenance of resistens. Howbeit
he knowing his own weakness, durst not arryue at Naples, but went to Rome, to
thentent there to furnyshe his nauye with men, and so to sail stronglye unto
Naples.

But the soldiers that were at Rome would not take shippynge for him. For by
reason they had been vanquisshed by the Goths in two fought battelles, they
stood in fear of them beyond all measure. Being therefore destitute of
this hope, Demetrius was compelled to go against his enemies with those ships
only, that he brought with him from Occasion let slyppe wilnot be cawght
again.
Constantinople. Totilas kept continuallye ready furnysshed certain ^wyfte
Pynesses in the haven of Naples, and always took diligent heed to the flete
of Demetrius. where fore when he heard that Demetrius was set out of Rome
toward Naples, and that he was arrived at the next shore, sodaynelye he set
upon him with his Pynesses through the which sudden unlooked for assault,
the shypmen and souldyers were stryken in such a fear, that they took them
to flyghte.

The Goths pursewinge them with their swyfte Pyn^sses, made a great slaughter
and took all Demetrius ships with their freight and men. For none escaped of
that flete except it were such as at the beginning had leapt into botes and
hidden themselves, among whom was Demetrius Captain of the said flete:

The. vii. Chapter.
(...) Demetrius say linge again to the rescowynge of Naples is taken
prysonner, whereupon Naples is yielded to Totilas who behaueth himself very
courteouslye and frendlye both to the town smen and to the Emperors
souldyers, but toward his own men extends much severity in keeping warlike
discipline.

AFTER this Marimine sailed A cowardly carpet knight.
out of Epyre into Sicill with a greatter nauye, and a greatter furniture of
men. And when he was arrived at Syracuse, through his accustomed cowardyse in
delayinge and driving of, he lost the time again. Neither regardinge the
necessity, nor the intreataunce of such as were besyeged. At the length when
Justinian had sent straighte charge unto him, not without threats, that he
should proceed, yet could not all that cause him to sail against his
enemies, but he delivered the charge of his fleet to Demetrius Herodian and
Phases, and he himself abode still in Sicill.

It was now the dead of the winter when they began to set forth.

And when they came within a little A tempest.
of Naples sodaynely the flete was taken with a vehement tempest, in so much
that neither ores nor any conning in the world could save them but that they
were driven aland perforce upon the shore where their enemies Deme^ius is
taken prisoner.
were encamped. The Goths perceyuinge that, ran thither and without any a
do took the ships If any made resistens they slew them, the rest they took
prisoners. Of the which number Demetrius was one. Whom Totilas commanded to be
brought fettered in chains unto the walls of Naples, where calling Conon
Captain of the Town and the souldyers with the Cytyzens of Naples, Demetrius
by the Kings commandment made an oration, perswadynge them not to look for
any more help. For considering that those two fletes with all their men and
furniture were lost, there remained not any hope for them to trust unto.
They that were besyeged being sore pyned with hunger, when they saw Demetrius
taken and all hope of comfort ^utte of, fell to weepynge and lamentation, not
knowing what to do or which way to turn them in so much that all the
City was in a wonderful trouble and disquietnesse for fear. When Totilas
perceived that, he called them and spoke unto them as they stood upon the
walls in this wise. Ye men of Naples, we have not goone about to besyege your
City, for any anger or dyspleasure that we bear against you, but to
thentent that by settinge you free from the bondage of our enemy, we might
recompense you for the troubles that you have suffered in the time of these
wars at ourc enemies hands, for keepynge your allegeans to the Goths. For
you only of all the Italians utterly against your wills came in subjection
of our enemies, compelled thereto by violence and slaughter, and well nigh by
the utter destruc tion of your City. And therefore me thynkes I am asshamed
that we have besyeged you, but that necessitye constrained us because our
enemies were amongst you. Wherefore assure your selves, rather of a good turn
and of frendshyppe at our hand then of any punishment. Moreover for your
sakes we will not be any thing strayghte laced toward our enemies that are
in the Town with you. For if so be it they will render it up, they shall
have fre liberty and leave to chose, whether they will serve us in our wars
in like estate and case as other of our own souldyers, or else depart
whyther they list themselves with bag and baggage. This our promise we are
contented to confyrme with an oath. Both the Neapolitanes and the Emperors
souldyers commended Totilas his words. Nevertheless to thentent their
yeldynge might seem the more honnest and reasonable, they desired a Truce for
thyrtye days, if perchance any body would rescowe them within that time.
Totilas answered that he was contented to give them not thyrtye, by thryse
Naples is yel ded to rotilas.
thyrtye days respyte. The besyeged wonderynge at so great liberty, and
playnelye perceyuinge that there was no hope of help, within few days after
set open their gates, The (...) and (...) behavior of Totilas toward the
(...)
and received Totilas and his army^ into the Town. When he was comme into
Naples, he entreated not any man otherwise then well neither was he grievous to
any person. but rather used such humanity and courtesye as would not have
been thought to have b^ne in a barbarous Gothe.

For where as many through hunger were brought so bare and so weak, that
they were not able to totre on their legs, and were fallen sick, to the
intent they should not cast theymselues away with ouerlayinge their stomachs
by feedyng to greadely, he looked carefullye and diligently unto them, that
not only the Citizens of Naples. But also the souldyers had every day
twyse, a small pyttans allowed them by wayghte, streyghtelye observing that
they should not have more any where else and that every day by little and
little their meals should be increased. To Conon and the men of war which
were minded to depart, he appointed ships to convey them. And where as by
means of contrary wyndes they could not depart within the day limited unto
them, yet not with standing he gave them free liberty. And furthermore when
as the wind continued still against them, and that they determined to go away
byland, he lent them horses and beasts for their cariages, allowing them
moreover victtualls and money to spend by the way, and also sent of the Goths
with them to sa^fconduyt the^. The severity of Totilas toward malefactors.
Thus Totilas used gentleness toward strangers, but among his own men he
kept so straight order, that he suffered no offense to escape vnponished the
ponyshmente of stealers, quarrellers, and rauishers of women was death, and the
forfeityng of all their goods, to the vsc of them against whom the dyspleasure
was done. By means whereof wheresoever the Goths encamped, or passed in and
out through any of the Cities or countries that were in leage with them, there
was no harm done to any of them. But the case stood far Licencious li berty
pernicious to men of war.
otherwise in those days with the Captains of Justinian. For the Captains
themselves could not hold their hands from doing wrong, and the souldyers
through their evil ensample fallen to all kind of licentiousness, abst^i
from nothing that was evil. Neither was there any thing more miserable in
those days, then the people of Italy that were under thempyre, being without
their walls spoiled by the enemy, and within their walls by their own men
of war. For the Captains having taken the strong holds for their ownc
safeguard, passed not what became of the poor commons. Through this injurious
dealyng, despair so increased day by day more and more, that the Emperor
was feign to determyne with himself to fend Belisarius thither again. For
all the other Captains were so far from recoueryng that which was lost,
that it was not like they should any long time be able to keep that which
they had.

The. viij. Chapter.
Belisarius being sent again into Italy, in his way does (...) Hydrunt (...)
by the Goths. the miserable estate of Italy at that time, Totilas receaueth
Tibur and besieges Auximum, Vitalis is forsaken of ^ys own so^ldiers.
Belisarius sends succor to (...), and repayreth (...) Totilas besieges
Asculum and Firmum. Belisarius diligence (...) chosyng of his (...)


FOr these considerations Belisarius was chosen again to take the charge of
the wars in Italy: and yet the wars were scarcely finyshed the which all
this mean time he had made against the Medes. Therefore when he saw there
was no remedy but to muster new soldiers, (for he had left his old army
at the river Euphrates,) he went about al Thrace, where through his lyberall
spendyng he gathered to the number of four thousand without commission, the
which he embarked spedely, and ^akyng with him vitalles the Lieuetennant of
Illiricum which came newly to him out of Italy, sailed forward, and having
cut over the Ionian sea, arrived at Salons. In the time of this journey, he
raised a siege about Hidrunt a Town of Calabre. For they that were besieged
being compelled The rescowi^g of Hidrunte now called Otronto.
thereto by the Goths for want of victuals, had compounded to yield up the
town by a certain day, if they were not rescowed in ye mean time. Whereof
Belisarius having knowledge, commanded Ualentine to sail thither, and to carry
with him corn and other necessaryes, and to bring away the souldyers that had
been long besieged there, puttyng new in their romes. This was an easy matter
to bring to effect. For the Goths after the truce taken, loke^ In greatest
calm for a storm provide.
but slyghtly to them, not so much as mistrusting that any body would come to
succor them. By means whereof when the flete came suddenly upon the unlooked
for, they trembled for fear and were feign to break up their siege and get
them further of. Ualentyne enteryng into the town, took the old soldiers out
of the hold, and placed new in their steades, leauyng them victuals for a
whole year. The which done ^e returned with those ships that he brought with
him, unto the reast of the (...) at Salons. After his return Belisarius sailed
to Pole, where ha^yng Belisarius arrival in Italy.
(...) a while to practice his young soldiers that he had mustered in Thrace
at length with his whole nauye he sailed to ^auenna. At his coming thither, he
found all things in worse case through Italy the^ he thought they had been.
For his enemies seemed to have the better end of the staff every where, and to
stand in best hope and possibilitye. Contrariwise his friends and adbearentes
The misery of Italy through misgouernement.
were euerywhere through all Italy discouraged and brought in despair^. The
cities and people of the country because they were pilled and ^olested by y^
men of war, and the men of war because the emperor was behind hand with their
wages for a long time and paid none, became stubborn and froward, refusing
either to be ruled by the captains, or to set onefote out of doors to y^
wars. And to say the truth they were brought to a very small number. As for ye
coming of ^elisarius, it did rather en^rease their despair then any whit
comfort them. For albeit he were a A Captain is able to do no thing without
men and monye.
notable captain, and out of all doubt in those days perelesse, yea and in
deed a very Master of Cheualrie, yet notwithstanding forasmuch as he brought
but a slender company with him (for he had but four thousand and those were al
^npractised and fresh water soldiers and had no money to deal amongst them,
when he preached unto them at (...) declaryng the cau^ of his coming and
exhortyng them to go forward with the wars, neither the To^esmen ^or yet
the men of war were glad to hear him speak, or gave any token of comfort
and good hope. Insomuche that it repented Belisarius himself that he was come
into Italy. In the mean time there rose a dissension Totilas (...) ueth Tibur.
between the townsmen and the soldiers of Tibur, by means whereof Totilas
being called to the aid of the one part received the whole town. The City of
Tibur is a nere neighbor unto Rome, being distant from thence no further then
syxtene miles. The taking whereof was a great ey^ sore and noyous to the
Romans, as whereby they were dysappoynted of all things in Latium. After this
Totilas He besieget^ Auximum.
having perfect intelligence of the coming of Bel^arius, went with his army
into the country of the Picentes, and encamped about Auximum. The very same
season had Belisarius ^he unfaithfulness of the Illi^ian souldi ers toward
their captain.
sent Uitalis with a Illirians erewe of Illirians into the country about
Bononie.

After the ^yme he had won a certain town thereabout^s, and had been
received into Bononie, the Illirians without any cause why or wherefore for soke
him, and assemblyng themselves together went their ways home. For y^ which
deed they afterward alleged this excuse unto the emperor, that whiles they were
serving him in his wars in Italy, the Collectors of his tributes, did sell
their lyuelond in their Country, and cast their wives and children out of
house and home, by means whereof they were compelled to return thither to
defend their own. When Totilas heard of this sudden departure of the
Illirians he sent out an army of Goths, in hope to have taken Uitales and
the reast of his company tardie. But they preuentyng him, had recovered unto
Rauenna. Belisarius knowing that they which were besi^ged at (...) were sore
oppressed, sent to their aid a thousand horsemen over whom he made three
Captains Teremunt, Ricilas, and Sabinian, who entering into the town privily
by night, the next day following made a skyrmyshe with the Goths, by who^
Ricilas one of the Captains was slain. The reast within a few days after
determined to depart. For they saw that by their tarying there, they did but
help to spend their friends victuals and necessaryes, and could do their
enemies no harm. Hereuppon stealyng out of the town by night, when they had
gone about three miles on their way, they fell into an ambushe of their
enemies. by whom being be set on all sides and so put to flight, they lost two
hundred of their company together with their apparel, armor, and all other
stuff and the beasts that carried them. The residue after long and weary
travel recovered unto Arimin. Fanum and Pysantum are Cities standing upon the
coaste of thadriatike sea, and are situate beetwene Auximum and Arimine. These
towns at ye beginning of these wars, had Uitigis set on fire, and beaten
down the walls of them mydway to the ground. Of these two Belisarius
Belisarius (...) and manneth i^ now (...)
determined to repair Pysaurum, and to place a Thrope of horsemen in the same,
for the accomplishment whereof, he sent workmen thither secretly, to take just
measure of the gates, the which he caused to be framed at Rauenna with locks,
henges, bars, and all other iron work belongyng unto them, and caused them
to be conveyed by water to Pysaurum, writing to the Captains and horsemen of
Arimine, that they should suddenly take ye town and hang up the gates, and
mende up the walls of rough work, and clens^ the dyches. As for all kind of
dyand he provided that it was sent them by Sea. The horsemen of Arimine
therefore when they had taken Pisaurum, did all things according to Belisarius
commandment. Totilas perceauyng that, went thither with a great power to
interrupte them of their work.

But the soldiers had so busilye (...) them in scowring the dyches, in castyng
of the trenches, in making of Rampyres, in fortefiyng the town, and in
repayring the walls and the bulwarks, that the king wondered to see so many
things so wyttely devised and pollitiquely brought to pass in so few days
And therefore when he had tarried a while there aboutes, forasmuch as he saw he
could do no good, he returned into his camp before Aurimu^, never ye nearer of
his purpose. Howbeit Totilas and the Goths perceauyng that Belisarius showed
not himself abroad in the open fields with themperours army in no part of
Italy, but only kept himself within the walled towns and de^ended them, they
determined not to sit altogether about Auximum only but to make war against
other Cities also. Hereuppon Totilas went Totilas besi^ geth Asculum and Firmum.
with an army and besieged Asculum and Firmum among the Picentes.

Belisarius being not able to (...) such as were besieged that called upon him
daily for help, (for he had not s^ great a power that he durst venture abronde
against ye Goths) was in great perpleritie, and took it very grievously that
his name should be so dishonored. At the length he sent John Uitalian to
The Emperor to inform him of the state of Italy, by who^ he addressed his
letters also, the tenor whereof contained this in effect.

The. ix. Chahter.
The Copy of Belisarius letters to the emperor the good success of Totilas,
the valiant Demeanor of Sisifride the (...) murtheryng of (...) and the
manliness of his soldiers.

Most noble and puyssant Emperor (...) letters to the emperor
your Majesty has sent me into Italy slenderly furnyshed of men, horses, and
monye, the which thing I declared unto you before my departure beseching your
highness to have redressed the matter. In the which (...) albeit I could not
prevail: yet notwithstanding it was my duty^ to be obedient to your
commandment. Whereby I was constrained to come forth with a few Thracians
and Illirians, the same being fresh water soldiers and altogether unskillful
of the wars, not knowing so much as how to hold their weapons in their
hands. And as for the old soldiers that I found in Italy, by reason they had
(...) ^anguished in diverse battles before by the Goths, they are so afraid
of them, that they dare scarce once look upon them. Besides this, forasmuch as
they have been long ^ime defrauded of their wages, they are not able to furnyshe
themselves again with horse and armor lost and broken in the former wars,
neither will they consent to go forth with them. And yet to say the truth,
there is not so great a number of them, that they can encounter against the
power of the enemy, without their own manyfeste perrill and danger. For the
greater part of them that were wont to fight under your highness banner in
Italy, provoked by the aforesaid dyspleasures, have of their own accord
revolted to your (...). Furthermore you may not account hereafter, that you
are like to have any revenues here, toward the payment of your soldiers,
considering that the enemy has recovered y^ greater part of Italy, and that
which remains is so empouerished and afflicted by y^ wars, that it is not
by any means able to yield you tributes. Wherefore if the presence of
Belisarius be sufficient to recover Italy, you have done as much as may be done
in that behalf for I am here in Italy. But if you purpose to overcome your
enemies in deed your Majesty must make other provision. For a Captain (be he
never so valiante, pollitique and fortunate,) is able to do nothing, if he
have not wherwyth to accomplish his deuis^s. And therefore it is requisite
that you send me hither an army of mine own practiced soldiers, together with
a great multitude of the Hunnes and other Barbarous people. Moreover you must
of necessitye provide that we may have always stoore of mony^. for without
that, there is no good to be done in wars. Thus much did Belisarius write to
themperoure at that time. John going to Justinian with these instructions, and
having tarried there a certain time, had a very slow and could suit for he
could bring nothing to effect. In the mean while forasmuch The (...) of
(...).
as no man rescowed Asculum and (...) y^ were besieged by Totilas, he took the^
by composition. From thence he departed out of the Picentes into ^mbria and
besieged Asessum and Spolet. Captain of Spolet was Herodian and Captain of
Asessum was (...). Herodian although his piece were strong and defensible, yet
notwithstanding he took truce for a few days. whitin the which because no
rescue came, yeldyng the town and the hold at the day appointed, he himself
with his soldiers revolted to Totilas. But Sisifride behaved himself more
valiantlye: for albeit his piece The valiant and faithful demeanor of Si
sifride.
were nothing so strong as the others, yet could^ he never abide to here any
word of composition, but like a stout warrior, issued out valiantly diverse
times upon the Goths, and fought sundry skyrmishes with them to his great
praise and commendation. How* beit at the length fighting manfully he was
slain by his enemies. The Citi^ens of Assisis being destitute of the help of
that worthy Captain, within few days after yielded themselves and their town
unto Totilas. From thence Totilas led his army against Perusium. The
traiterous murdering of Ciprian and the ma^fulnesse of his soldiers.
Captain thereof was Ciprian of whom mention is made before among the Captains
of Justinian. Totilas perceauyng y^ he could not win him, neither by fair
means nor by foulecorrupted one of his esquires called Uliarus for a piece of
money, by whose falsehod and treachery he killed him. Nevertheless after the
death of Cipri an, the soldiers punished the treason upon Uliarus head, and
manfully defended the City still.

The. x. Chapter.
Totilas besegeth Rome, and Belisarius pre pareth to (...) the same. The
misfortune of thimperialls at Portua, Pelagius a Decon of Rome goes to Totilas
to entreat for his Citizens and cannot be heard.

TOtilas therefore minding not to linger about it any longer, brake up his
siege there, and made toward Totilas besegeth Rome.
Rome. When he came thither, he planted his siege about the same in places
convenient, but yet he troubled not the husbandmen. For all the time of this
wars he never suffered any of the Tylmen and husbandmen to be hurt or
hyndred by his men of (...). There was in garrison at Rome Bessas one of the
Emperors Captains, and Conon which not long Since had been Captain of
Naples. Also Bel^sarius had sent thither, Artasyras a Persian, and Barbation a
Thracian with a convenient number of souldyers, to look to the saufe kepinge
of the City with the other Captains. The Goths being thus settled about
Rome, Artasyras and Barbation issued out with their retinew and fought with
them. At the first they put them to flyghte, but through followynge the
chase to far, they were at length intrapped by their enemies, and with the
loss of the more part of their men hardlye and narrowlye escaped themselves
into the Cy^ye. From that time forward hope daily decayinge, first came derth
and afterward famyne among them. For nothing could be conveyed into them
by land, by reason the Goths had besette them round about. nor yet by
water forasmuch as the nauye that Totilas had of late buyided at Naples, and
then sent abroad, so scoured the Seas that no ship of burden could pass
for them. Besides this the very same time arose within the City of Rome
great presumptions of treason. For the which Cethegus ^hyefe President of the
Senate of Rome, being bannisshed the City fled to Centmucelles. While these
things were a dooynge at Rome, another army of the Goths by the
commandment of Totilas besyeged Pleasans. The same is a great City by the
River Po, and all only of the Cytyes of that Country, continued in
faythefull obedyence to the Empire. When Belisarius beheld these things, he
was very Belisarius deuiseth to suc cour Rome.
sorrowefull and full of care for the peril of the City of Rome, in as much
as he was not able to remedy it from Rauenna where he was, because that with
that small and slender company which he had about him, it was not for him to
depart from thence, consydring his enemies held all the Countries between him
and Rome, so that he could not go thither by land, whereupon he devised to
succor them another way. For the performance whereof leaving Iustine with a
band of souldyers at Rauenna, Now called Durazo.
he himself went to * Dirrachium in Dalmatia, entendynge there to awayte the
coming of a new army from the Emperor. In the mean time Rome was
strayghtly besyeged in such sort that all things were worse and worse, and
like to fall to utter decay and ruin. Ualentine and Phocas being sent before
by Belisarius, held the Town of Portua, and from thence did greatly moleste
and endomage the enemy with continual rodes almost day by day. After they
had done thus a certain space with good success, and by means thereof
greatly reliued them that were besyeged, at length fallinge into The evil
fortune of the imperialles.
an ambushe and being enuiraned of their enemies they were slain, and but a
very few of their souldyers escaped, the which had much a do to recover
the town of Portua. This slaughter of the Captains and the souldyers drew
with it a greater discommoditie, One mischief in another. neck.
for it was the loss of a great deal of corn by such a means Uigilius the
Bishop of Rome lyuinge at that time in Sicill, hearing that the people of
Rome were sore afflicted with famyne, had shypped a great deal of Corn and
sent it toward Rome. The Goths having knowledge thereof, when the ships
approached conveyed themselves before into the haven, and hiding them behind
the Towers and buyldynges lay ready for them in Am^ushe. The souldyers that
were with in the town for as much as lately be fore they had lost their
Captains, and their companyons for the most part were slain, they being so
^ewe left, durst not adventure out against their enemies, but as well as
they could from the walls and ^warkes with shakinge their garments, with
wagginge their hands and with crying out a loud to them made tokens to the
shyppemen that there was treason in the haven, warning them to beware and not
to arrive there. But the shyppemen (as they that had not heard any thing of
the unfortunate battle and the loss of the Captains) took th^se signs and
tokens that were made, as signs and tookens of gladness and encouragement to
come with more speed. Where upon making the more haste, with a fresh gale of
wind they entered into the haven. Where they were all taken hy the Goths
breaking out of the ambushe, to the great discomforte and despair of the
people of Rome, which hunge wholly upon the only hope of that corn. In so
much that now the Town was oppressed with intolerable famayne. And the
Goths therevppon preased the more An example o^ employng ^tuall ^oodes.
boldly upon them. There was at the same time in Rome a certain Deacon called
Pelagius, who in this distress of famine, had showed very many and notable
works of mercy upon the people of Rome, by laying out his monye and
relieuing the want and ne^nesse of every man. For the which almose deeds
(whereas his name was greatly renoumed in times past, now it was far more
renoumed then before, The romans came unto this man humbly besieching him y^
for the saufgard of the people of Rome, he would vouchsafe to go of Ambassade
to Totilas and entreat him to grant them a tru^e for a few days within the
which unless rescowe came, the City should be given up unto him.

Pelagius forasmuch as he saw there was none other remedy; obeyed the peoples
request, and with his instructions went to Totilas into his camp. Totilas
coniecturinge the effect of Prosperity makes men forget themselves.
his erran^ (for he had learned by the rennegates the utter necessity and
distress that the besieged were brought unto) entertained Pelagius very
honorably at his coming. Howbeit before he had begone to declare his
message, he himself preuentyng him, with a long and bitter oration, inueihed
against the Romans, casting them in the teth with the benefits of Theoderich
and the Goths toward them, and reprouynge them of their untruth toward
the Goths. In thend he concluded that there was no way either of
communication or com position, onles they would beat down their walls, and
wholly submit them selves and all that they had bodies and goods to the will and
discretion of the Goths ^o be dealte withal in such wise as should please
the conquierours. Pelagius hearing him talk so bytterly and disdaynefully and
thynkinge in himself that it booted not to stand in contention with him, said
thus unto him. Forasmuch as thou Totilas have not vouchesaued to here an
Ambassador tell his message, but by preuen tynge him haste abridged him of the
liberty of speaking, we will fly unto God the ^efuge in extremities.
God who of his Justice is wont to abate the courages of men, when they grow
over proud and stately. When he had said those words, he returned by and by
into the City. The Romans seeing him come again without speding of his
purpose, were in such an agony that they wist not what to do nor which way
to turn them. For on the oneside they were afflicted with intolerable famine,
and on thotherside stood before their eyes the outrageous cruelty of Totilas
and of the goths, whose most cruel hands rather then they would fall into,
they fullye determined to starve themselves for hun ger. By means whereof the
people of Rome suffered and abode such things, as it is a misery even to
rehers^ them.

The. xi. Chapter*
John Vitalian comes with a new power from the emperor, whereupon advise is
taken for the succouring of Rome, according to the which Belisarius goes to
Portua by water commaundinge John to mete him there by land. But he through
the prospe^ous snccesse that he has against the Goths comes not there at
all. By means whereof Belisarius is feign to devise another way for the
succouring of the City the which by his industry taking good effect against
thenemy is by the folly of his own men interrupted to his own great sorrow
and appairing of his health through rage of anger and sudden fear, and to the
utter prejudice of Rome. For Totilas anon after takes and sacketh it the
which done he makes an oratyon to his souldyers.

IN the mean time Justinian sent The return of john with answer from
the emperor.
John with an army unto Belisarius. They were not any great number that he set
forth at y^ time, but he prepared to send a greater power out of hand. For the
which occasion he had sent his Chamberlain Narses unto ye Erulians and other
barbarous nations inhabiting about the river of Danow, of the which some were
already come Debating in counsel for the rescowing of rome.
into Thrace. When tharmies were as sembled to Dirrhachiu^, and that consulta
tion was had as concerning the war, it was agreed by one consent first of all
to rescow the romans. But how that might be done there was diversity of
opinions. John persuaded to march with all yt whole power together through Ca
labre and appulia and so to go to Rome. For if they went all in one company
they might be the better able to get the upper hand whereas if tharmie should be
divided and some should go by sea and some by land, none of both parts
should be able to match the enemy. Belisarius said he could well allow the same
opinion, if the people of Rome stood not at such an exigent. But now
considering their estate, it was nedeful to make all speed y^ might be. It was
a long journey to go through Calabre and Appulia, and if their enemies should
mete them they might cast many letts in their way, whereas by the sea if the
wind served, their navy might wtin five days arrive in the Roman haven,
and by their being so nere at hand, put the Romans in certain hope and
comfort. For he had heard of thunfortunate mischaunce of his captains, and
knew of the loss of the corn that was sent out of Sicill, whereupon he
considered in his mind the despair and disstresse y^ the Romans were in.
This opinion was allowed in the counsel, and thereupon Belisarius setting forth
from Dirrhachiu^ arrived at Hidrunt. The Goths which were besieging of that
town being stricken with fear at the presence of Belisarius, brake up their
siege and flying from his sight retired to Brunduse, the which is about two
days journey from Hidrunt. By and by they sent unto Totilas aduertising him of
Belisarius coming, believing that he would have iournyed by land. When Totilas
heard that, forthwith he put himself and his army in a readiness to go
meet him. But when be understood that Belisarius went by sea, he addressed
himself whollye to withstand him about the City of Rome, inespecially
making provision that nothing might be conveyed into the City to them that
were besieged, by the River Tiber. For the accomplishement whereof he devised
this practice* He chose a place about eleue^ miles of from Rome where the
River Tiber is narrowest, and there he laid over long beams from thonesids to
the other in manner of a bridge at each end whereof he builded a Tower of Timber,
and drew a long iron chain by the brydges side, at the ends whereof he made
two bastiles the which and the aforesaid towers he manned with soul diers to
defend the bridge. In ye mean Belisarius comes to Por^ for the rescowing of
Rome.
while was Belisarius come to the To main haven. And having set his men a
land, tarried for John and tharmie that was with him. The Romans knowing of
his coming, endured all their extremityes with better courage upon hope of
rescowe. John af ter the departure of Belisarius, having cut over the narowe
seas, had invaded the Goths looking for nothing less, and having put them
to The good succ^sse of John against the Goths.
flyghte, with great slaughter pursewed them, and at the first assault won
Brunduse. Then having reconciled the people of Calabre and brought them again
to favor the emperor, with many fair promises made unto the^, he departed from
Brunduse, and after v. remouings came to Canusiu^, the which town he also
brought in subjection. Not far from Canusiu^ is y^ vilage of Cannas, Canna^.
where the notable battle was fought between Hanniball and the Romans. In
this place one Tullian ^he son of Uenant a man of great name and authority
among ye Lucans came to John declaring to him that the Lucanes and Brutians
had taken part with his enemies not of their own accord, but compelled by the
displeasures done to them by the Imperialles. Wherefore if the Emperor
would entreat them friendly and gently, the peo ple would willingly return
under his o bedience. John loading him with commendations and thanks promised
him great rewards, and afterward used his help to his great commodity and
furtheraunce. At such time as Totilas hard of John's approach, he sent a crewe of
his horsemen to Capua, commanding the^ to keep themselves close within the
walls, and to make no show at all to their enemies until they were past, and
then to follow the tail of their host. What was to be done afterward he
willed them to ca^ y^ care upon (...). This thing so greatly troubled, John,
that for fear he should be entrapped by his enemies, he left of his journey
toward Belisarius, and turned himself toward the Brutians and Lucanes. There
was among the Brutians a cer taine Gothe, called Richemond set there by
Totilas with an army to keep y^ country in obedience, and to keep the entrance
between Scilla and Charibdis. Him did John suddenly assail, and at the first
brunt put him to flight, and af ter great slaughter received the rest y^ were
left together with their Captain by composition. Hereupon all the Brutians and
Lucanes revolted from the Go these to the emperor. Whiles John occupied himself
in this sort, Belisarius looked daily for him and was wonderful ^ory for his
long tariens, greatly blaminge John's cowardice, that he had not fought
against the horsemen that were at Capua, inespecially seeing that he himself
had so notable a band of Horsemen of the Hunnes.

whereby he might easily have come through maug^ his enemies heads, and neded
not to have turned back again so shamefully. These and such other things
did Belisarius find fault with. But it booted him not to complain, for John
had taken up his standing in Appulia, and there determined to abide, mynding
nothing less then to go to Rome. Belisarius therefore fearyng least the
besieged should think themselves abandoned, and through despair should
chance to miscarry, determined to succor them by y^ Tiber, for his power was
not so great that he was able to encounter with his enemies upon the land: and
therefore he trusted rather to his policy and to the river for the succoryng
of y^ town. Upon this thought he bestyrde him and gate two hundred of those
kind of ships Belisarius p^o uision for the rescowyng of Rome.
which the Greeks call Dromades, these ships have walls of timber on every
side with loopes in places conueniente to let out arrows and other weapons at
the ^nemye. Against the bridge and other things that were set to stop him
upon the river, he (...) this deuyse: he set two ships upon the stream
fastened surely together with bars and crows of iron, upon the same he
builded a tower of timber somewhat higher then the towers that were builded at
the ends of the bridge by his enemies. When these things were in a readiness,
he caused the Dromades to be fraughted with corn and other ^uste nance to be
conveyed to Rome, mannyng them with the stoutest and valiantest soldiers that
he had. Co^maundyng all the residue to go on foot by the rivers side, and to
draw the ships with the tower. With his navy furnished and decked in this
wise he set forward against his enemies. He himself enteryng into one of the
Dromades sailed formest, and the rest followed him in order, his footmen also
went by him upon the ry^er (...). Furthermore he sent to Rome unto Bessas,
that he should issue out at the very same time and keep the enemies as much
occupied as he could. But Bessas did neither that nor yet any thing else that
was to any purpose during all that siege. B^lisarius navy being decked in such
sort as I have told you, went up the stream. Neither did the Goths mete
them in any place, but kept themselves quietly within their bulwarks. When
the (...) came nere y^ bridge there they found a trope of their enemies and
one (...) set at the tone end of the chain, the which Belisarius soldiers
won at y^ (...) assault, and so taking away the chain proceeded to the
bridge. There began a curste fraye, the Goths endeuoryng to defend the bridge,
and the soldiers of Belisarius to win it. For y^ Goths yssuyng from both y^
towers at each end of y^ bridge, fought very valiantly. Again the soldiers
driuyng the ships hard to the bridge, did beat the Goths and would not
suffer them to stand upon it. In the mean while Belisarius caused the ships
wherein the tower of timber was, to be brought as nere the tower of his enemies
as could be. And when they came hard to it he commanded the vessels of
brimstone (which he had hanged in the top of his tower for the same purpose
before) to be set on fire, and to be cast down upon the tower of his
enemies, the which being done, the fire lighting upon the tower of his
enemies, burned it up and all the Goths that were within it. There were not
less then two hundred that perished in ye fire among whom was the Captain of
the hold himself, such a man of his hands as was not among all the Goths
again. Hereuppon the soldiers assayling the reast of the Goths more boldly
and ^er^ly, compelled them to give back, whereby they won ye bridge, ye which
forthwith they purposed to have heaven down, and with their whole flete to
have sailed to Rome. For there remained not now any let in their way, but that
they might have gone to the City and have conveyed in the corn and all other
necessaryes, to the great renoune and commendation of Belisarius, who had
devised such a navy. But fortune (as it should scme) had determined Man
purpoeth and God dysposeth.
other wise. For sodaynely there happened a* wonderful mischau^ce (not by
means of the enemy, but by his own men) which perverted al his devises. The
Goths held the City^ Ostia which stands on the left hand of Tyber by the
sea side over against the which stands the City Portua on the right hand
of the river. When Belisarius set forth with his navy, he had left his wife
and al his househol^ furniture in the said town of Portua, and had appointed
as ruler thereof one Isaac a valiant gentleman and a trusty with a convenient
Crew of soldiers, commaundyng and hart^ly (...) him, that he would not for any
chance or occasion, depart out of the town but keep himself within it and
defend it only: Now at such time as Belisarius had set his enemies tower on
fire (as we have declared before) by and by ran certain to the town of
Portua, and whereas the victory was notable of it self, they reported it
far greater then it was in deed. At the which tydinges Isaac leapyng for ioy^
and exaltyng himself in his own conceit, like a mad bedlem quite forgettyng
what Belisarius had said unto him, commanded his men to arm themselves, and
in this sudden heat and extasye wafting over his men to invade his enemies
that kept their standing on the other side of the river, ran upon them not
far from the town of Ostia. Through his sudden assault at the first
encounter he put them to flight. Howbeit anon after, his enemies gatheryng
themselves together and encouraging one an^ other, returned eftsoon upon him
and having slain a great sort of his soldiers, to cool his ^rye madness,
took him prisoner. Immediately hereupon certain horsemen brought word to
Belisarius that his enemies had taken Isaac prisoner. With y^ which tidings
Belisarius being stryken to the heart, demanded not one word of y^ messa^ger
where or in what sort, but misconstruing that his enemies had taken Portua, and
been Lords of his wife and all that ever he had, he was suddenly strycken with
such an inward sorrow, y^ he was not able to speak. And thereupon turnyng
back again, he retired with his nauye and his soldiers in all haste that
might be, utterly determynyng either to recover y^ town while the matter was
but newly begone, and his enemies had yet scarcely settled themselves, or else
to die in y^ battle. By this means y^ victory which he had as good as gotten
^ypped out of his hands. But when he came to Portua and saw y^ town ^afe and
himself deceived through light credit and mistaking of y^ message, he took so
great sorrow for it, y^ he fell sick and was feign to keep his bed and
besides that, he was taken with a sore and dangerous fever, which held him
long time ere he could be ryd of The worthy reward of wilsul rashenesse.
it. Isaac the author of all this mischief was by the commandment of Totilas
put to death in prison, in reuengement of the death of Rodericke Captain of
the garryson, which had dyed of a wound taken in the foresaid battle. For by
this time had Totilas quyte changed that gentleness which he had pretended
in the beginning of his reign, into statelynesse and cruelty. Uerely either
because his prosperous succeste made him forget himself, or else because his
gentleness being but ^eined at the beginning, could not continue. I assure you
^e would speak so bitterly of ye people of Rome, y^ the very terror thereof was
an occasion that they endured the famyne more obstinately then they would have
done, because every man was afraid of his outrageous The miserable estate of
Rome.
crueliye. Therefore as long as ever there was any hope of help at Belisarius
hand, the people of Rome beyond their power and (to say the truth) beyond y^
bonds of manhood and nature, endured the famyn. For to omit other things,
even the flesh of horses, asses, and mules were deynty^ delicates at that time
in Rome, they thought they had sped well that could get either dogs or myce
or such other unclean beasts to feed on: Othersome were glad to eat all kind
of herbs, even such as the brute beasts would not have touched, and diverse
lived by roots and barks of trees. But when they saw there was no hope of
help, then turnyng to tears and lamentation, some fordyd themselves, and some
stealyng out in y^ night attempted to deceive the watch of their enemies. Many
also ^arued for hunger and want of food within their own houses, and never
came out of their doors. While the City stood in this lamentable and piteous
estate, four Rome is betrayed.
Isaurien soldiers conspyred to be tray it to the enemy these soldiers
warded at the gate Celimontana, commonly called Asinaria, who after the time
they were fully resolved upon the matter, did let themselves down the wall by
a line, and went straight unto Totilas promysyng to betraye y^ City into his
hands. Totilas encouragyng them with promise of great rewards, sent certain
of (...) men with the^ to view the place and to conu^der whyther the thing they
had promised, were possible to be done or no. The Isaurians leadyng the^ to the
walls went up again in their syghte by the ^ame line that they flided down.
And so when the experience of the matter had given sufficient credit, Totilas
at y^ night appointed to the acco^plyshment of the myschiefe, commanded his
host to be ready in armor about him by one of the clock after mydnyghte.
The which being done, he sent certain of his men before to get up by the
line, and he himself followyng closely after with the reast of his army,
stayed a little from the gate. They that were sent by Totilas, were according
to couenante beetwene him and the ^raytours, drawn up the walls, from whence
they proceeded forthwith to the gate and with axes cut it open. Totilas having
by this means entered into Rome, kept his army still, about him at the gate,
not sufferyng any of his men to run into the City, but kept them together
with him until it was day, Suddenly there sprang a noise about that part of
the town, that the ene^ie was gotten within the walls, and thereupon ensued a
wonderful fear every man beginning to fly, Such as fled went out at those
gates that were farthest from the place where ye enemy entered. Many also both
of the nobility and of the commonalty took sanctuarye in the Churches. As Soon
The sackyng of Rome.
as it was day the enemies ran through all the City, and without any
respect slew as many as came in their way.

Totilas marching from Lateran where he had stood al night, went through the
City to Saint Peter's as it had been to perform his vow, accompanied with
traynes of most cruel and bloody butchers, which with their naked swords
bathed in blood, slew all that ever came in their way without regard of any
person. Having in this sort swept through the myddest of the City from the
one end to the other, when he came into the Uaticane unto the portche of Saint
Peter's, Pelagius of whom we Pelagius makes supplication for his Citizens.
made mention before, fearing to approach into presence, ravished in y^
apparel accustomed in solemn ceremonies, and holdyng the Testamente of Christ
in his hand, kneled humblye down on his knees, and said: O king I besieche
thee spare thy humble suppliantes. At that word Totilas dysdaynfully cast a
proud look upon him, saying: come thou now to me Pelagius to make
supplication? Yea even now (quod Pelagius) since it is the will of God to
make thee Lord and Master over me. And therefore my sovereign Lord have mercy
upon thy servant. Therwithall y^ wrath of Totilas was assuaged, insomuche
that he made proclamation y^ from thenceforth there should not any person be
stricke^ with ye sword but that there should be respect from slaughter and
bloodshed. Moreover he gave commandment, that no gentlewoman were she maid,
married, wife or wydowe, should be defiled, y^ which he caused to be observed
with great severity. Only the goods of the Romans he gave for a pray to
his soldiers, g^uyng straight charge that no man should be so bold as to
touch their bodies. Then myndyng to pull down the courages of the Goths,
puffed up with pride for this victory, he somoned them together the next day
and made this oration unto them. Is there any of The (...) of Totilas to his
men of war.
you my companions in arms (quod he) that beholding so great alterations as
have chanced within these few years, dreadeth not the frayltye of man's
estate? And is not able to coni^ure whereupon and wherefore all these
alterations and chaunges have happened? I will not speak of Rome, sometime the
Lady of the whole world, which now is fallen into your hands. For she has
suffered many myschau^ces which were done so long a go that they are not now
to be recounted, and this is not the first ruin that has happened unto her.
Wherefore I had rather put you in remembrance of our own affairs. What thing
was there of grater power and strength before these wars, then the nation of
the Goths through out all Italy? It sent into the field two hundred thousand
fyghtyng men, thoroughly furnyshed with armor, weapons, artillerye, horses,
victualles, gold and silver. It held in possession all Italye, Sicill,
Corsica, Sardinia, and Dalmatia. Who would have believed it had been possible
for (...) thousand Greeks (for there came no mo into Italy at the first) to
have subverted so great a power? And what shall we say of the same Gr^kes: when
they had in manner brought all in subjection to them: and held all as Lords
and conquerers? would any man have thought that you being but a few and
brought almost to beggerye, should have recovered Italy out of the hands of
them being twentye thousand men, con^eryng that at that time ye were not able
to make above four thousand horsemen? and had not a town left you in all
Italy, more then Pauye Ueron, and Now (...) Treuizo.
Taruisium? would any man have thought that eyer ye should have taken Rome
the head of the world? the which Uitigis was not able to subdue with his two
hundred thousand me^ in a whole years besiegement? Surely countryme^ these
things are very great and not a little to be wondered at.

How beit if we list to consider and (...) then^, the causes of these
alterations are most manifest and apparent. For as long as the Goths executed
Justice and used equitye, so long their power flourished, their ^state
prospered, their matters went forward, and whatsoever they took in hand had
good success. But as soon as they were once l^d awry through covetousness,
then bred there preuye grudge among them, the^ rose there inward debate, then
one sought to cut another throat, then sprang up secret treason, through y^
which they brought themselves to utter ruin and decay. Again when these
contagious maladies were passed out of you into y^ captains of Justinian,
through your amendment you easily overcame the^. Wherefore if you wey and
consider these things well, ye have no cause at al to be proud of this
victory, but rather ought to dread God and to fear the mutabilitie of
fortune. For ye must understand that all Empire and power is easily forgone,
^lesse they be maintained by Justice policy, and paynestakinge. Yea my
companions in arms, know ye this and believe it for a certainetie, that the
grea test part of your labor is yet behind. For it is a harder matter to keep
things gotten, then to get them, For as much as in gettinge often ^ymes the
cowardnes of the possessour furthereth a man more then his own prowess. But
to keep things gotten, no man is able without his own prowess and policy.
Thus much spoke ^las at that time and the Goths did greatly commend the
wisdom of their King.

The. xii. Chapter.
The (...) words of Totilas to the (...), and (...) of a noble woman accused
of (...). (...) se^th Ambassadors with letters to the Emperor, at whose
return he defaceth Rome and ^eth it utterly desolate.

AFter this he called the Romans before him and greatly reproved The talk
of ^otilas to the Romans.
their vnthankefullnesse and misdemeanour. In as much as they being in
subjection under Odoacer, and delivered from his tyranny by means of
Theoderich and the Goths, at whose hands they had received so great benefits
as they them selves could scarce have wyshed, through the which they had
been greatly enriched and had lived many* years in great tranquillitle, right
happy if they could have seen when they were well, now in the end without
any wrong or displeasure offered to them, had contrary to their oath and
allegeans revolted to the Greeks, men of all other most vain and without
either manhood or prowess. Who immediately upon their arrival being besieged
by Uitigis, durst never she we the h^ades in the open field, but lu^king within
walls and there staruing themselves for hunger, aboode all the dishonor that
might be. Who after the time they were made lords of the Cities, not through
their own man hoode, but through treason and deceyte, ^ylled all places with
tollgatherers, Pollers, and Promooters: who with marvelous crueltye compelled
the Cities and people of Italye to the payment of those tributes, which had
been forgeuen them and clear^ly released many years before by Theoderich and
the other Kings of the Goths. Who to satisfy the insatiable covetousness of
the Emperor their Master, called as well the people as the magistrates, to a
straight account of such things, as they had taken charge of under the said
kings. Tell me therefore ye Romans (quod he) whether ye ever suffered any
harm by the Gothishe Kings? And tell me again if ever these Greklings did
you any good? And not rather more displeasure to you being their friends, then
to us their enemies? A vicious and wicked kind of people, able to serve to no
purpose, but to forginge of leasinges? whereas on the contrary part the Goths
were borne and brought up among you in Italye, and yet you have set more by
strangers and aliens then by your own countryemen and acquaintance, so much
are ye degenerated out of kind, hating whom ye ought to love, desyring new
things and lothing your own quietness, like restie iades which through over
long standinge in and to much pampering become coltishe and full of evil
touches. Wherefore seeing you have done these things both contrary to your
duty and allegiance, and contrary to your own profit, look as you have
hitherto been worthelye punnis^ed, so shall you also be hereafter. With these
words he dismissed the Romans void of all good hope. About the same time
was pleaded the A noble woman accused for defacing the kings images.
case of a noble woman called Iustiniana. It was laid to her charg y^ she had
caused y^ images of king* Theoderich to be broken and defaced in reuengeme^t
of her husband Bo^tius and of her father Symmachus whom Throderich had put to
death. The endit^ent for defating of y^ Images was supposed to be true.
Howebeit she was thought (...) to be held excused, in as much as her Just
sorrow provoked her thereunto, for because it was manifest lie known that those
worthy personages, were wrongfully put to death. In consideration whereof.
Totilas acquitted the woman, and preserved her from the violence of the Goths.
Afterward he purposed to send an Ambassade to Justinian. The A^bassadours were
An Ambassad sent from rotilas to them perour.
the forenamed Pelagius, and one Theodore an Orator of Roine. These men did
Totilas byn^e with a great oath* to do his mess^ge faithfullye, and to
return to him into Italye with as much speed as might be. The effect of
their commission was, to declare unto the emperor y^ if he would admit him and the
goths into the nu^^er of his friends he would save the city (...) Rom^, and
would more^uer a^ him with a strong power like ^ faithful friend in all his
voyages and wars. But if he would rather continue wars against them, he
would make Rome even with the ground. For he minded not to trouble himself
with the keeping of it while he should be occupied about other wars, nor yet
to leave it up to his enemies.

Furthermore he wrate a letter to Justinian, the tenor whereof was this. The
tenor of ^otilas let ter to the emperor.
What has been d^one about the City of Rome I think you know well
enough. The occasion why we send Ambassadors unto you is this. We covet to be
at atonement with you, and you with us, like as were our noble predecessors
Anastasius the Emperor of Rome and Theoderich King of the Goths. Whose
mutual concord and agreement both caused great tranquillitye and quietness
of those times, and also greatly benefited themselves. If therefore you can
find in your heart to do as they did, I will worthelye accept you for my
parent, and you shall have me and my Goths at commandment to help you in
all your wars. But y^ you be otherwise minded, you shall understand by our
Ambassadors what shall be the sequel. With this message the Ambassadors
sailed into Greece, during whose going and coming Totilas aboode still at
Rome. Belisarius lay all the while at Portua, brought to deaths door with
syckenesse and sorrow. In the mean time John persisted in his doings, and
altered many things among the Lucanes and Brutians. By means whereof Totilas
also was compelled to send among the Lucanes and to renew the war. It was
not long after but that he was certifyed of the Emperors answer. For at such
Themperours answer to the demands of Totilas,
time as the Ambassadors coming before Justinian had first delivered the
kings letters, and afterward declared their Commission, making intercession
and supplication for saving the City of Rome then standing in so great
ieoperdie, they could get non^ other answer at themperours hand but that
Belisarius was in Italy, to whose will and discretion he had committed the
affairs of that country. When Totilas heard that perceiving it was don for
none other purpose then to disappoynt him of his desire, and more over taking
displeasure at John's doings which had made war upon him sytting still in
quiet and abiding for the return of his Ambassadors sent to entreat for
peace, he took counsel The utter sac king and desolation of Rome.
to raze the City of Rome. Where upon rising up with ^aruelous crueltye in
sundry places (...) beat the walls down to the ground, to the mountenance
of the third part of the Circuit of the whole City. That done he set the
Capitol on fire. All was on a lyght^ fire about the market, about Subura, and
about ye holy street. The hill (...) lis smoked, the hill Auentine glistered
with flames and the noise of the fallinge of the houses was heard every where.
While the City was thus burninge, thin habitantes with their wives and
children, were thrown out of their na tiue soil, having not so much liberty
as to be wail their own miseries. All the people and the common sort he
dispersed through the towns of Campanie. But he kept still about him the
Senators and noble men for hostages. After this he departed out of Rome with
all his whole army, leaving it utterly disolate, in so much that there
remained not any man or woman in it.

Thus ends the third Book.
The fourth book of Leonard Aretine, concerning the wars in Italy against
the Goths.
The first Chapter,
Totilas chaseth John Vitalian from place to place* Belisarius repaireth Rome
and gives notable and blody repulses to the Goths attemptyng to let him of
his purpose, and provides for the saufe keeping of the same.

WHen Totilas departed from rome, he set a crew of soldiers against the city
Portua in a place called Algidone, to the intent that Belisarius souldters
should not work any thing in his absence, and The shamful flight of john
Vitalian.
with the rest of his army he went against John into Calabre. As soon as
John heard of his coming, he abandoned up al unto him and ran ^ys way
like a toward, not stayinge in any place until he had recovered to Hydrunt
which is the furthest town of all Calabrie. By means whereof when Totilas
came in those quarters, he quickelye recovered the Lucanes, Brutians, and
Calabrians. whollye saving Hydrunt. The same s^ason Spolet revolted from the
Goths.

There was nothing keept of it but only the Castle, for Totilas had be fore
time overthrown the walls o^ the Town. The author of this reuolting was one
Martian of Constantinople, who being one of the kepers, conspyred with eyghtene
of the soutdyers, and having slain the Captain of the piece, yielded it up
to Be lisarius. About the same time almost The repairing of tarent
was Tarent repaired, whereas before, it had been forsaken and left desolate.
It was repaired by the Calabrians and other people that were driven out of
their own dwellynges by the wars. They were not able to build it of like
bigness as it had been in times paste. But taking one (...) of it buttynge
upon the haven enclosed on both sides with the sea, they easily fortified the
access unto it from the main land. Totilas having brought under his
subjection all the towns of Lucanye and Calabrie saving Hydrunt, determined
to depart thence, and therevppon leaving agarryson of souldyers at the City
Atheruse, with the rest of his army marched* toward Rauenna, In the mean
while Belisarius being recovered of his long contynewed Agew, took in hand
a bold adventure, and (as many a man would have thought) a rash, the
which notwyth^andynge in the end^ proved a courageous and laudable enterprise.
He determined to take upon the sudden and to fortifye the City of Rome
lyinge at that time waste and desolate. Whervppon keeping The repai^g of Rome by
Belisarius.
this purpose secret to himself, he left a few Souldyers at Portua for
defenc^ of the town, and with all the power he could make beside, (no man
either of his own or of his enemies mistrustinge whereaboutes he went) took
the City of Rome and with a wonderful (...) went in hand with repayringe and
fortifyinge it again. And because the walls in diverse places were beaten
down to the hard ground, he filled up part of them with roughe work, and
cut deep ^yches before the walls, and cast up a Rampyre the which he
fensed with Trunkes of trees fastened in the ground by the roots wound one
with in another, with the sharp^ ends upward. And for the more strength of
the wall newelye repaired he builded towers and bulwa^ of timber. The which
things through the earnest labor and willyngnes o^ his souldyers, he furnyshed
it in thr^ and twentye days. And ships came contynuallye from Portua laden
with corn and other (...).

The Citizens of Rome whereof there stayed a great number in the towns nere
aboutes, hearing that their City was repaired, were wonderful desirous to
return into their native Country, and that inespeciallye because there was
plentye of corn there, with scarcetie whereof they were pinched in other
places. As soon as Totilas had word of this, forthwyth all other matters set
a part, he made haste toward Rome. Belisarius was not able to hang up the
gates of the City before his enemies were come. For he had not so good store
of Carpenters to repair them in so short time. The Goths the first day of
their coming encamped themselves not far from the City against the gate
Salaria. The next morning by the rising of the sun, with great noise and
hurly burlye they marched to the assault. Belisarius placed all The Goths
assault Rome and are repulsed.
his tallest and hardyest men at y^ gate the rest he set upon the walls and in
the bulwarks, commaundynge them to beat their enemies down. The encounter
was vehement and whote on both parts. For the Goths came thither of set
purpose to have won the Town at the first pushe. But when they saw better
defense made then they looked for, they were in such a furye and such a rage,
that they ran desperately upon their enemies like mad men, and stryuinge
unadvisedly to get up, were beaten down and killed without mercy. It
was wonder to see how earnestlye and desperatlye it was fought on both sides
that day. For the assault began in the morning and ended not until night.
After that it waxed darcke the Goths retired into their Tents. But the
souldyers of Belisarius partelye kept their standing upon the walls and
bulwarks as they had been placed by him, and partelye warded at the Gates.

And to the intent the enemy should not sodaynely comme upon them in the
night and take them unawares, he caused a great sort of Busshes and Brambles
to be laid before the Gates. The next day the Goths approached to the City
in like sort as they had done before, and Belisarius and his men made like
resistens. But when the assault waxed to long, the souldyers that kept their
standing at the Gate, issued out boldelye and encounteryng with the Goths
hand to hand, at length put them to flyghte on that side and with many
wounds drove them far from the Gate. And so was that assault ended.
Afterward when they had bestowed many days in healinge their wounds and
repayrynge their armor, the Goths advanced again to the assault of the
City.

Belisarius having before well hearted A notable repulse given to the (...) by
Belisarius.
and encouraged his soldiers, leaving nevertheless a convenient number upon
the walls and in the Towers, led the^ out at the gate. There was a whot and an
eager battle fought hard at the gate, in the which when as Totilas his
standerdbearer was stricke^ stark dead from his horse with a spear, and the
standerd overthrown, there was much preasyng about it from both sides. The
Goths striuyng to save their standerd l^aste they should be dyshonored, and
y^ soldiers of Belisarius endeavoring to obtain the honor of wynnyng the
same. At last the skyrmishe grew to this issue, that the Goths recovered
their standard, and the soldiers of Belisarius had the body of the
standardbearer, saving his lift hand which the Goths did cut of for spyght
that their enemies should not have it, because there was a ring of gold upon
it. This done, Totilas perceauyng that his attempt was in vain, blewe to y^
retreit and the nerte day after went his way unto Tybur. For as I told you
before he held that City, and having maruelou^y forti^d the castle thereof
used it as a Camp against the Romans. The Romans to the intent they would
not be molested by their sudden inuations from that side, brake all the
brydges on the river Anio. This river Anio spryngeth among the Heruices, and
ronnyng down from the hills cutteth the plain between Tybur and Rome. It
has very stepe banks, and the channel is so deep of water that it cannot be
passed. And therefore there were brydges made upon it from all the pryncipall
ways, as from the gates Salaria, Nomentana, and Tiburtyne. These brydges being
at that time cut of, there could no rodes be made a gaynst the City of Rome
on that side.

The, ii. Chapte^
After the dep^e of the Goths from Rome. Totilas in the next spring goes to
the syege of Peruse, during whp^ being there, John (...) attempteth many thin
ges in Ca^pane to the great p^eiudice of the Goths, wherewith ^las being
displeased goes with such speed against him that he overcame him before he
heard of his coming. The Emperor sends another ^ande of men into Italye at
who^ coming. Belisarius sailing toward Tarent is driven by tempeste to land
at Croton where for want of forage compelled to send his horsemen into the
Country, through the negligence of the Cap^nes loses them. By means whereof
he is fayneto sail a^aye into Sicill, during the which his absence Totilas
besieges Ruscie.

AFTER the departure of the Goths Belisarius caused the gates and the iron
work of them to be framed quietly, and when he had done, as though he had
conquered the City again by force, he (...) the keys of it into Greece to the
Emperor Justinian. And thus ended the twelueth year of this war. The next
year following as soon as the spryng came, Totilas set out of Tibur and marched
toward Pe^use. The same Town was even then already besieged by another
company of the Goths. And when corn began to wax scarce and other
victualles to fail, Totilas went thither to the intent to keep the town
strayghter, and to take away al hope of succor from the besieged. While
Totilas was occupied about the siege of Peruse, John taking The doyngs of John
in (...).
a vantage of his being ther^ and perceauyng that the Senators and noble men of
Rome which Totilas had led prisoners with him were left in the towns of
Campane under the keeping of his soldiers, thought to win himself a name by
delivering them out of their enemies hands. Whereupon he removed out of
Calabrie with a trope of ^hosen horsemen, never dyscontinuing his sournye night
nor day until he cam^ into Campane. Totilas mistrusting as much, had appointed
a strong band of the Goths thither. When they cam^ unto Minturne they stayed
and s^nt certain of their horsemen before to see what was done in the towns.
Now it fortuned that the Gothyshe horsemen which were sent before, chanced
to light upon John and his horsemen, between who^ there was a sharp
encounter. In the which John gettyng the upper hand slew many of them and
wounded many, and put the reaste to flight. Through this discomfiture they that
a bode behind at Minturne were so discouraged, yt they sled also. By means
whereof John had leisure to lead away whom he lysted at his pleasure. For y^
towns of Campaine were unwalled the Goths having lately before beaten them
down. So that John took all the Romayne prisoners that he found in every
town and delivered them out of y^ h^ndes of the Goths, conueying them quyte
away, all saving Clementine and Orestes of the which the one would not go
away with him, because he feared the Emperor whom he had offended, and the
other making excuse that he wanted horses, tarried in doubt whither he might go
or no. Howbcit there were not Many Senators found in Campaine, but very many
of their wives and daughters. For the men for the most part the same night
that the City was taken, followed the men of war and fled with them to
Portua. When Totilas understood of these things that John had done, he was
greatly mou^d, det^rminyng to be revenged upon him. And thereupon leaving part
of his army The great ce leritie of Totilas.
at y^ siege of Peruse, he himself with the residue, made haste by great
iourneyes through y^ countries of y^ Picentes Marses, and P^ligues, into
Appulia, and never ceased, until, by crossyng the ways at length he found
John in Calabrie where suddenly setting upon him, he put him and al his army to
flight and took his tents. Notwythstandyng as it chanced, the Goths made no
great slaughter, by reason it was night when they assailed y^ camp. By means
whereof y^ soldiers did easily escape and hide themselves in the next
mountains. John and Arnulphc captain of ye Erulians who also served in y^
wars with John, recovered out of ye chase unto Hidrunt, and the soldiers
afterward some one way and some another resorted thither unto the^. This
victory of Totilas did greatly renoune his name. For it was thought to be a
notable matter, for a king to have come from y^ walls of Peruse into Calabrie,
and y^ in so short space as a light iournying man could scarcely have done,
himself being not carried in a horselytter or a charity, but even with as much
pain as the common soldier, on horseback laden with his harness as other
were. Not long after that battle, another band of soldiers sent from
Justinian began to approach unto Hydrunt.

For the Emporour being moved with The Emperor fe^deth a new power into Italy.
often letters from Belisarius, declaryng ye state of the wars and requesting
aid, determined to send a new power into Italy, and had written to Belisarius
that he should hye him into Calabrie to receive his soldiers and to make war
against his enemies there. Captains of this new army were Ualerian leader of
the Armenians, and Uere leader of the Erulians. Belisarius upon the receipt of
the Emporours letters and commandment, leauyng the reaste of his army at
Rome and at Portua under y^ charge and government of his Lieuetennant Conon,
with nine hundred chosen soldiers, (whereof seven hundred were horsemen and
two hundred fotemen) took shippyng and made sail to ward Calabre. It was his
mind to have landed his army at Tarent, the which is two days journey
dystant from Hydrunt, and in the same place to have assembled all the reast of
his power about him. But by means of contrary winds he was compelled to land
his men in the haven of Croton. For the violence of the tempest was such, that
he could sail neither backward nor forward. Therefore when he had landed his
army at Croton, forasmuch as there was not plentye of forage in those quarters,
he was constrained to separate his horsemen from his fotemen. For he himself
and his wife abode with his foteme^ at Croton, to the intent to call John with
the reast of his power unto him, and commanded his horsemen to go further into
the country and to stay themselves in the borders of the Turnies. For in so
doing they should easily come by all things necessary for themselves and for
their horses, and should also be out of all danger, forasmuch as the
mountains of Lucanie sho^yng into the country of the Brutians, do make two
valleys, with narrow enterances into them. And not far from one of the
valleys stands on the sca coast (...) Castle of the Turnies called Ruscie, a
little above the which is the town somewhat further from the water, situate on
a high ground, called Ruscian. The same town did John keep with a strong
garryson of soldiers. Belisarius therefore sent his soldiers. into those
borders, and made Captains over them one Phases a Spanyard a noble man of
war, and Barbation a Thracian, co^maundyng them in any wise to keep Ski^
between the im periall and Gothishe horsemen.
well the entrances of y^ valleys. When these horsemen were come into those
quarters, by chance they met with y^ horsemen of their enemies, who^ Totilas
had sent to attempt y^ town which (as I told you before) was kept by John's
me^ of war. After it came to y^ encoun ter the souldyers of Belisarius albeit
they were fewer in number, yet they easily overcame their enemies and slew
above two hundred of the^. Afterward those y^ abode still in that place,
forasmuch as they were the victours, and far from the sight of their captain,
kept neither order nor array. But straying far from their standarde they
passed not to keep either watch or ward, or to send any skowtes abroad, or to
have any skow tes among the^, nor yet to keep y^ streigh tes at the entrance of
the valley where they might easily have kept out their enemy. Whereof when
Totilas had Belisarius loses his horse men through neglegence of the captains.
understanding he went thither with three thousand horsemen and set upon the^
ere they mystrusted any such thing. For he was passed those narrow streightes
and the entrances of the valleye, before that Belisarius horsemen heard of his
coming. Hereuppon began a great slaughter and discomfiture to be made of
them. Pha^s and Barbation were the Captains. Of the which Phases with his
troop of horsemen setting himself against Totilas, did maruelis in Arms,
how^eit at the length he and all his men were slain. Barbation with no mo but
two companions only escaped by ^yghte, the reast were either slain or taken
prisoners.

Some there were that taking themselves to flyghte at the first beginning,
escaped to Belisarius and carried him tidings of that great slaughter. When
Belisarius had lost his horsemen, misstrustyng that his enemies would come
against him, he took shypping in haste and greatly dismaide with sorrow,
abandonyng himself to the winds arrived the same day at Messaua in Sicill
the which is from Croton about fourscore miles. Totilas having dyspatched
Totilas besie geth Ruscian.
these matters and thereby disposed y^ power of his enemies, determined to
besiege ye town of Ruscian. For in that town were three hundred horsemen
placed there by John, and an hundred foteme^ sent lately thither by Belisarius.
More over there were a great number of Italians both horsemen and foteme^,
which if they should be besieged, it was none other like but y^ they should
want victualles ere it were long. In hope where of Totilas besieged the town.

The. iii. Chapter.
Conon Captain of Rome is slain of his own soldiers. Fortune afflicts the
Imperials, Totilas receaueth Ruscie and puts Colaser Captay ne thereof to
death. Antonia the wife of Belisarius entreats the Emporour that her
housbande is called home out of Italy.

ABout this time, the soldiers that Conon Captain of Rome for his
covetousness is slain of his ownsould^
Belisarius left at Rome, slew their Captain Cono^ in a rage because that by
encroching the corn privily into his hand, he daily raised the price of the
market. Upon the which fact they sent their messengers to y^ Emperor for
pardon of their trespass asserteining him that unless he would grant it, and
moreover pay them their wages that was behind. they would deliver Rome unto
Totilas. For fear whereof the Emperor granted them their whole request. They
that were besieged at y^ town Ruscian, being dystressed with scarcetieof
corn, ^l to communicatio^ with Totilas, and took a truce for a few days,
promising to yield up the town unless they were rescowed in ye* mean time.
Hereupon was preparation made by John, to rescowe them, and by Totilas to
prohibit him. In the mean season Belisarius was come out of Sicill, unto
Hydrunt and had received Ual^rian with the soldiers sent from the Emperor, by
means where of he had a sufficient power. Neither wanted he ships to convey
them into the rescowe of his accomplices. Therefore when al things The pe^rse
fortune of the i^perialls.
were in a readiness he embarked his souldyers and failed toward Ruscie. They
that were besyeged seeing the nauye a far of, (for the City stands upon a
high ground and has a large prospect into the sea) were so glad of it that
they would not render the town at the day appointed. It was not long after
but that there rose such a tempeste that it desposed the nauye into sundry
places. The which afterward metyng all at Crot^n, set outa gain from thence
and made sail to Ruscie. When the ships approached nere the land, Totilas
commanded his men to arm them, and set thems^ues in array upon the shore
willing them with their darts and arrows to prohibit^ the nauye from
arrival. When the Greeks saw that, they were so sore afraid of the danger,
that after they had houered a while their aboutes making pretense to arrive, at
length despairyng to do that they came for, they turned their ships and went
their ways. Afterward as they were consultyng what was to be done for the
safegarde of the^ that were besyeged, it was determined t^t John and Ualerian
with y^ horsemen and the reast of the army should go into the country of
Picene, and there keep as great a styre as they could, to the intent that
Totilas should be compelled to break up his siege to succor his own: And that
Belisarius should with his nauye sail unto Rome, to appease the mutime among
the souldyers that we spoke of before, and to carry corn thither to victual
the town. According to this determination, John went by and by through Appulia
and the Country of the Marses to the Picentes by land. Ualerian chose rather
to go by water? And so having embarked his soldiers he arrived at Aucona, and
joined himself with John. Yet not withstanding for all this Totilas dyssolued
not his syege, but sending two thousand horsemen among the Picentes to defend
ye towns against John and Ualerian, he himself with the reast of his army
continued his syege about Ruscian. The besyeged when victualles utterly failed
the^, and that there remained no hope of restowe, sent one Deofer an Italian
and Godilas a Thracian to Totilas, desyryng pardon and safetye of their lives.
These men contrary to their expectation found Totilas gentle and easy to be
entreated. For he imputed ye breach of the truce to no man but one with the
punnishment of whom he said he would be satisfied, and was contented to pardon
all the residue. If they would serve him they should keep still all that ever
they had, and if they had rather go some where else they should depart every
man with one garment. By this means he received the town, and after The
punishment of Col^ ser for breaking of promise.
that he had caused Colaser Captain of the garryson to be whipped and mangled,
(who was the occasion that the town was not yielded according to covenant), he
commanded him to be put to death. With the rest he keept touch according to
his promise. A great number of the men of war (to the intent to save that
they had) abode still with Totilas. Othersome leaving their horse harness and
all that they had besides, went luyth one garment unto Croton. The goods of
the townsmen Totilas gave for a pray to his souldyers, commaundynge The wise
of Belisarius goes to constanginopls.
their bodies to go at lybertye. About this time Antonia the wife of
Belisarius went to Constantinople to sue to Theodora the Empress to entreat
that her husband might be called home out of Italy. But when she found that
Theodora was deceased a little before, she went to the emperor her self and
with much suit earnestly entreated him that her husband might be called out
of Italye. The which request she easily obtained, so much the rather because
the Emperor stood in great fear of wars in Parthia. Thus Belisarius
Belisarius is called out of Italye.
being called out of Italy returned into Greece almost five year after he came
thither last, not having had altogyther so good fortune in this his latter
viage as he had in his first.

At his departure from Rome he left three thousand of chosen souldyers there
in garryson under y^ governance of his Liuetenant Diogenes a man of much
wisdom and knowledge in feats of arms. Anon after his departing y^ Goths
took by assault Peruse, which they had so long time beseged.

(...) The. iiii. Chapter.
Totilas besegeth Rome now the third time, great suit is made to the emperor
for re^cowing the same, Diogenes captain thereof provides pollitiquelly and
circum spectly for the saufty of it, nevertheless itis (...) and taken, Diogenes
flies to cent mueels, Paul another of themperours cap taines saves him self
and his valiantlye, being besyeged by the goths in the Pyle of Adrian. Totilas
endeuoreth by all means to repair and frequent Rome again, and afterward
sommon^th centmucelles which takes truce with him to yield by a certain day.

TOtilas having set at a stay the Totilas besegeth Rome the third, time.
affairs of Calabrie and Appulia, determined to turn back again and besege
Rome. It made him the bolder that Belisarius was gone, together with the
prosperous suc cesse of the Goths in all their doyngs through Italye, and the
evil fortune of the (...).

Whereupon assemblyng a great (...) from all parts, when al things were in a
readiness, he came to Rome and besyeged it. There were in garryson in the
Town three thousand chosen Souldyers with their Captain Diogenes a man of
singular actiuitie, who by watchyng, workyng, and preventing in places
convenient defended the City stoutly. In so much that the syege was prolonged,
and the Goths had none other hope to win it but by famyshement. During Suit
^ade to the emperor for ^escowig the eyty^ of Ro^.
the syege about the City, Uigilius the Bishop of Rome being as then at
Constantinople, and with him many worthy men of Italy, made earnest suit to
Justinian that he would send Belis^rius again into Italy with an inestimable
power to raise the siege before Rome, otherwise they declared that all was like
to fall to utter ruin. The same thing also requested Goding one that had been
Consul and was sent thither from the people of Rome as an Ambassador.
Justinian made them answer that he would pro uide well enough for thaffairrs of
Italy. Howbeit through his delaying and dri uing of from day to day he did
nothing in effect. At y^ length when he saw the^ ear nestlyin hand with him from
time to time and y^ hecould not be rid of the^, he denou^ced Liberius one of
the nobility of Rome Captain general of the wars in Italy, and at the
beginning was very whote in the furniture thereof. But within a while when
other cares came in his head he began to wax cold again. And so with vain
hope some time making preparation and sometime making d^layes the time passed
away. Rome in the mean while was strayghtly besyeged. For the Goths having
won the City Portua keept them so short that nothing could be conveyed in
by the Tyber unto them that were besyeged. And to the intent Rome should not
be releued from any place, they had gotten into their hands well nigh all the
towns about it. But the foresyght ^he foresight and provision of Diogenes for
the sauig of Rome.
and provision of the Lieutenaunt and his souldyers was wonderful For they
foreseynge these things a good while before, had caused all the void rooms
within the City (where there stood no buyldinges (to be sowed with corn. By
means whereof it came t^ pass that by that time their old corn was spent, new
came up within the walls, where through they endured the syege a long time.
Yea and by all likelihood they had saved the City had Rome is betrayed.
not the treason of a few perverted the^. For at the gate that leads to
Ostia; as ye go to the Church of Sayn^e Paul, there was a ward of Isaurien
Souldyers. They after long continuance of the syege, grudging among
them^lues that they were defrauded of many years wages, in hope of great
rewards at Totilas hand, stale preuely unto him bargainyng to betray him the
gate. Where the^ warded, appoyntyng the time and the mean how to do it. When
the night prefixed was comme, Totilas devised this cautele. He set two Barges
upon the River Tyber with Trumpettours in them, commanding them to row up
the stream and to get as nere the wall as they could, and when they came
there to blow their trumpettes as terrybly as they could. He himself with his
ar^ye went softlye without noys^, and stayed a little way^ from the gate
before men^ioned. All things happened according to his desire. For the
trumpettours when they had rowed to the place appointed, with the terrible and
sudden noise of their trumpettes, struck the Romans in such a fear that they
believed their enemies had been there.

In so much that they ^ocked thither from all parts of the City, and they
that watched in other places left their standinges, and came runnynge thither
fearfully.

Now whiles eu^ry man resorted to that place, and took no heed to the Rome
is taken.
rest, the traitors being left alone brake open their gate and let Totilas
with his army into the City, whervppon immediately ensewed slaughter as well
of the Romans as of the souldyers. There was not than any car^ taken how to
make resistens, but how to run away. They fled by such gates as were
furthest fro the enemy. Diogenes the Captain for as much as he saw there
was none other remedy issued out of Rome with part of his souldyers and
took his way toward Centmucelles. Totilas presupposinge as much before (for
all the rest of the towns were lost and there was no mo left them to fly unto
but only that) laid an ambushe for him by the way, into ye which Diogenes
f^lling lost a great part of his soldiers and himself being sore wounded The
(...) doings of captain Paul.
had much a do to escape with his life. There was at Rome among other
Captains one Paul of Silicia, captain of a trope of horsemen. He in this most
troublesome night after he had skirmished with his enemis in diverse places of
the City in the taking thereof, at length recovered himself with his horsemen
unto Adrians. Tumbe. As Soon as it was day light the Goths swarming about the
City (at what time that the Capitol Esquilie and al y^ rest of ye city was
taken) there was hard feyghting still at Adrians tumbe. For Paul had. CCCC.
horsemen with the which ^e valiantlye defended the Tumbe and the bridge
adioynynge thereto. In so much that he slew many of the Goths in the
skyrmishe upon the bridge, and drove the rest a good way of. The which Totilas
beholding caused his men to retire, I wylnot (^ he) bye the destruction of
these me^ with the bloodshed of any of my people I will dispatch the^ sitting
still and never trouble my self for the matter, considering that neither they
nor their horses have wherwt to sustain their lives un till to morrow. Thus
having called his men from the skirmishe, and set a strong watch against the
tumbe and the bridge, he commanded y^ no man should molest or disquiet them y^
were beseged. Paul and his band of horsemen having (...) all that day and the
night following without meat or drink, the next day began to consult what was
best to be done. There were y^ gave counsel to endure the siege with horse ^eshe.
But this devise seemed horrible for the lothsomnes of y^ unaccustomed feding.
Hope to escap^ by flight there was none, the Goths ^tting the^ on all sides
round about ready at receipt to cut the^ of. So there remained no ^hift but to
yield, and that s^ med both perilous and dishonorable, And therefore Paul
taking upon him The words of Paul to his soldiers.
to speak said in this wise. My fellows and companions in arms which way so
ever we turn us, ye see we are driven to an utter exigent. For there is no
way to escape by flight, the enemies ^roning us round about with their army,
and taking so good head to us. And to yield our selves to them, besides the
disshonor and cowardnes of the fact, we are like to be horribly tormented and
rent i pieces. For y^ cruelty of these bar barous people is not wont to be
co^ten ted with any simple kind of death. As to a bide the siege and to ^de upon
horse flesh, let the^ do it that look to be rescowed. I cannot see what reason
ought to per suade us unto so great sufferance which are utterly destitut of
any such hope unless that like a sort of faintharted boys for fear of death
we had rather pine ourselves with sorrow than have our flesh cut with a sword. And
I assure you either to yield to thenemie or to starve for hunger, I count it the
property of them that have neither heart nor blood in the^. But unto us which
are men of our hands, and acquainted with feighting, an honorable death is
rather to be em braced then a shameful life.

And therefore let us in such wise dye, that we may bath our selves in ye blood
of our enemies and not die unrevenged. Let not our enemy laugh at our
destruction but weep. Neither let us hold up our throtes to be cut by them, but
let us with our weapons cut theirs. For what can the respit of a few years
profit us? sythens that if we should escape alive now, yet are we sure we
shall die ere it be long after. Glory may lengthen men's lives, but nature
cannot. Advance your selves forth with me therefore to an honorable death, the
which our enemies as well as our countrymen may wonder at and extol with
eternal praises to the sky. The horsemen encoraged with these words vowed
them selves to death. And therevppon embracyng and kyssyng one another they
prepared themselves to the battle full beent and determined to spend their
lives manfully. Their purpose was to run upon the Goths that warded next
unto them, and to bestow e their lives in the slaughter of their enemies.
Fortune (...) reth the couragiou^.


When Totilas saw them thus bent to try the utter most, for fear least the
desperate endeavor of them should do the Goths more displeasure, then
otherwise so small a number were able to do, he sent an herault to them
offering them choice whether they would depart with their lives leauyng their
Horse and armor behynd them, or else retaynyng all still serve him in his
wars in like estate with other of his Souldyers. When the horsemen heard that
they were very glad, and at the first chose to leave all that ever they had
and to go to Constan tinople. But afterward considering y^ long journey, and
the dangers that might happen by the way^, they returned their minds and
chose to abide all with Totilas, saving their Captain Paul and Mundus an
Isaurien. These two for as much as they had wife and children at home, desired
to depart. And Totilas shows himself earnest in reparing and peopling of Rome.
Totilas helping them liberally with v^and and other necessaries sent them
again to Constantinople. Furthermore he commanded y^ no man should be so hardy
as to offer any wrong to any of the other soldiers in garrison that had taken
sanctuary in y^ church. Toward the City of Rome he neither extended any
cruelty, nor went about to make it desolate as he had done before. But made a
search for the Citizens thereof in the towns of Campanie and in other pla ces,
and reduced them home again. Furthermore he made in Rome tourneies and iustes
and such other princelye pastimes as are wont to be done in fortunate and quiet
Cities with great cost and solemnity, to the intent the Citizens should
conceive good hope, and have a desire to the City. The houses also which had
been overthrown or consumed with fire in the former desolation of the town, he
went about to reedifie and repair. Finally he showed now as great a desire of
replenishinge Rome as he had done before of wasting and leauyng it desolate.
This so great mu tabilitie and alteration of his mind, sum believed to have
risen upon a vow that he had made to the Apostles Peter and Paul, whose
temples he might seem to have destroyed when he destroyed y^ city. Othersome
imputed it altogether to the profit and commodity of the wars. And diverse
do report that when Totilas latelye before desired the French Kings
daughter in marriage, answer was made him that he was not King of Italye when
he had subverted the City of Rome. The which Taunt (men say) altered his
mind to the repayrynge of the City. But what so ever was the cause of it, he
endeavored to repair and build again the City of Rome. After this he
prepared to make a vyage into Sicill. For the furniture whereof he builded him
a great flete of Galleyes, and made a great number of hoyes and hulkes while
he was making preparation for y^ same, he determined to besiege both by water
and by land Centmucelles which one City was not yet comme under his
subjection. Captain of that piece was Diogenes who (as is before mentioned)
escaped lately from Rome. He had gathered to him a good strong company of men
of war.

Therefore at such time as the Gothyshe army came thither and had encamped
themselves nere unto the walls of the town. Totilas sendyng an officer (...)
sommoneth cent ^ucelles.
of Arms to him, sommoned him either to come and feyght it out with his po were
against ye goths, or else to yield up y^ town unto hi^. For it was not for him
to look for any help at Justinians hand considering he never releued Rome all the while it was besieged, onles perchance he thought the emperor did set more
by Centmucells then by Rome. Diogenes replied thereunto saying, that as for to
fight with him he was not minded at that time, and as for to yield up the town
saving his honor and fidelity he could not, before he had sent to know the
Emperors pleasure, and to desire help. Whereupon forasmuch as he seemed to
speak that which was honest and reasonable they fell to composition, that
unless the Emperor after warnyng given, did rescowe the town by himself or
by his reputie, Diogenes should surrender it at a certain day. And Totilas
should not in the mean season by any means moleste or dysquiet him. For the
assurance of these Articles Hostages were delivered, and upon this agreement
Totilas brake up his siege.

The. (...). Chapter.
(...) Totilas making war in Sicill be^iegeth Siracuse, a new Lieuetennaunt
is sent from ^he Emperor into Italy.

WHen all things were now in a Totilas makes war in Sicill.
readiness that were to be prepared. Totilas turned himself to the wars in
Sicill, commaundyng that his ships should be ready at hand in the narrow seas
of Sicill. He himself went by land unto Rhegium, purposyng to have won the
town by force. Captains of the town were Teremund and Imere placed there by
Belisarius not long before. Who diverse and sundry times repulsed the Goths
to their great loss, attemptyng to win y^ town by assault. By means whereof
Totilas despayring to get it by violence, determined with long continuance of
his siege to subdue them by famyshment. And therefore leauyng a number of the
Goths about it, he conveyed all the reast of his army by water to win
Tarent, the which he easily obtained. From thence wafting over into Sicil,
after y^ he had either by force of Arms or else by composition gotten into his
hand certain of y^ lesser towns, at length he besieged Siracuse The syege of
Siracuse.
both by sea and by land. By that time the Goths which (as ye heard before)
were sent among the Picentes against John and Ualerian, having associated great
aid unto them and gotten the upper hand in diverse conflyctes, took the City
Arimine. And in another encounter not far from (...), they sl^ Uere Captain
of the Elurians with all his ho^. Moreover (...) and Imere which were be^ged
in the town of Rhegium, for want of victuals were feign to y^e themselves and
the town to the Goths. All these things being declared to the Emperor at
one instant, namely the taking of Rhegium, Tarent, and Arimine, and the passing
of Totilas into Sicill, made him utterly astonyed to hear of so many
misfortunes at once. And there upon he denounced one Germa^ his cousin Germine
by y^ fathers side captain of y^ wars in Italy against y^ Goths commanding
great preparation to be made for y^ same. When y^ fame hereof A new
Lieuetennant s^nte into Italy from the emperor,
was blown into Italy, it greatly abas shed y^ enemy and reco^forted his
friends. For this Genna^ was a man of a hault courage, and of no le^e wisdom
and pollicye, wonderful lyberall, and very well-beloved both with the people
and with the souldyers. Besides this he had after the death of Uitigis taken to
wife Mathasuta the nece of King Theoderych, the which thing won him the
hearts of the Goths: and therefore as the fame of him was great, so was he
greatly looked and longed for in Italy.

The. vi. Chapter.
Diogenes dalayeth with Totilas in deliue^yng up of Centmucelles according to
composition. The new Lieuetennant of Italy, dies in his way whose sons are
commanded to prosecute their father^ charge.

WHen German was now in Illiricke, The Sclaui^
the nation of the Sclauines having passed y^ river of Danow, ^aded the
provinces of the Empire of Rome. A kind of people cruel and outragius beyond
all measure, who turnyng themselves toward Macedonie and Thrace, put Justinian
in such a fear, that he commanded German to stay his journey into Italy.
Through this taryans the Goths had leisure (...) do what they list in Italy
and Sicill. In the mean season came the day appointed The answer of Diogenes
to To^ or Centmucell^
that Diogenes should have deli^ered Centmucellcs, whereupon Totilas s^ndyng
unto him required him to perform his promise. Diogenes alleged that Germane
was newly created Captain of the wars in Italye. By reason whereof he said
the state of things was wholly altered, so that it lay not in his power to
yield y^ town, seeing y^ Lord and proper owner of it was on his journey and
would with in two or three days be in Italy. Totilas was be sieging Siracuse
in Sicill, and the Gothishe men of war skowring through the whole country,
made (...) of al things. In Italy Rauenna, Auchon, Hydrunt, and Centmucelles
with certain other towns remained still imperial. The Goths held all the
reast. One only hope stayed them, namely the coming of German, the which also
failed them. For whereas he was sore longed for in Italye, he was taken with a
disease, and to the great sorrow of all y^ were belonging The death of ^ermane.
to him dyed in Illiricke. German had two sons whom he led with him into
Italy. Them did the Emperor command to proceed with their fathers
enterprise, ioynly together with their kynseman John Uitalian the Captain so
well known in Italy. For John. had married the daughter of German. John
therefore and the sons of Germa^ taking the charge of the army upon them, came
unto Salons. And forasmuch as winter was at hand they determined to abide that
season there, and in the beginning of the nerte spring to pass over to
Rauenna. About the same time well nigh, Liberius being sent from the emperor
with a nauye entered into Siracuse, mawgre the Goths that kept their station
in the haven to pro^yte their arrival. Howbeit for doubt of scarcety of
victuals which so great a number was soon like to cause in a City
besieged, he purposed to go his way again: and therefore with in a (...) days
after his coming he took shippyng again and departing from Syracuse arrived
at Panorme.

The, vi. Chapter
Narses is sent again Lieuetennant into Italye with a great power and great
treasure, Totilas sends a nauye into Greece to infeste those countries, and
besyegeth Aucon in Italye. The Captains of Totilas are overcome on the sea by
the ^mperialls and Aucon is rescowed The Goths receive another overthrow upon
the land, after the whichcertain Gothishe Captains become imperial.

Narses marches with an inestimable pow er to Rauenna and from thence toward
Rome in the which journey he ^sheth a Captain of the Goths and kills him
at Arimine. He encountereth with Totilas who in the same conflicte is slain
and Teias created king of Goths in his ^eade.

IN the mean while the Emperor Marses is made themperours Lieue tennant in
I^ly.
alteryng his purpose, made his Eunuch Narses Lieuetennant general of the
wars in Italy, making him large promyses of men and money. Also he wrote to
John that he should not pass into Italy, but tarry still at Salons and there
abide the coming of Narses. Narses therefore taking the charge courageously
upon him, endeavored to levy a great power from all places. To the performance
whereof greatly auayled his favor and authority. For he was one of the
Emperors preuis Counsel and ruled him in manner as he list, and he had great
friendship and Aliance with the Kings and the great Princes of the Barbarous
nations. When his Narses is stayed by the Hunnes.
furniture was in a full readiness, and that he had commanded his men of
war to mete him all in Illiricke, as he was outward on his journey, and was
come to Philippople in Thrace, he was of necessitye constrained to stay and
abide a time in the same place. For the Hunnes enteryng with a great army into
Macedonie and Thrace, made spoil of all things, and had closed his way that he
could not pass. At the length when one part of the Hunnes was gone to
Thessalonicke and the other to Constantinople, Narses went from thence and kept
on his journey. By this time Totilas (hearing of the great preparature of his
enemies) was returned into Italy. Leaving for Lieuetennantes of the wars in
Sicil four of his captains, and he himself made provision in Italy for all
things that seemed nedeful and requisite. And to the intent to vaunt his Totil^
se^deth a na uye into Greece.
power to the Greeks (as who should say he was as well able to invade them as
they had been to have invaded hi, he sent a great flete into Greece, co^maundyng
them to make as much havoc and spoil of all things as they could according
to the same commandment this nauye, spoiled first Corsyra and the Isles
adioynyng thereunto, and afterward aduenturyng upon the main land, wasted and
spoiled with fire and sword all the coast of Cypous, Acarnauia and Aetolia.
And so keeping still the seas, did cut of many Greek ships by y^ way as they
were sailing toward Italy and Illirium, in so much y^ no ship could The
besyegig of Aucon.
stir abroad for them. While these things were a doing in Greece, Totilas
sendyng a fresh crewe of soldiers into the Country of the Picentes,
commanded that Aucon should be besieged both by sea and land. He made three
Captains of this enterprise: Scipuar Udilas and Gothidil, to whom he gave a
flete of seven and fortye Galleyes. When Aucon was thus besyeged, there were so
whote assaults given both by sea and by land, that it stood in great
perrill. Wherefore Ualerian who had the rule of Rauenna, forasmuch as (...)
thought himself to weak to rescowe them that were besyeged, he wrote to John
Uitalia^ lying at Salons, requessting him to join with him and so to rescowe
them together. John Albeit the Emperor had given him commandment that he
should not pass into Italye before the coming of Narses, yet notwythstandyng
forasmuch as he thought it against his honor to lie still and look on
while his companions were in such ieoperdye, he chose out the best men in
all his host and embarkyng them in eyghtene ships, set out of Salons and
sailed toward Rauenna. As he was in his way Ualerian met him with twelve
galleyes well decked and furnished to fight. When y^ Captains had commoned
between themselves, and by the advice of such as were about them had determined
as seemed best, they sailed with their whole nauye together against their
enemies. And when they came nere unto Aucon, they drew to the shore at a place
which the inhabiters do call Duasse. The which Battle on the sea between the
Goths and the imperialls
thing as soon as the Gothyshe Captains perceived, they also addressyng
themselves to the encounter furnished their navy with the best soldiers y^
they could chose, and when they had put themselves in a readiness, launched
forth and set themselves in good order against their enemies. The Gothyshe
ships were in number seven and forty, and the Greeks were thirty^, Captains
whereof were John and Ualerian, and Captains of the Gothishe navy were Udilas
and Gothidill: for Scipuar abode with the reast of the army to keep the Camp.
Therefore after that the Captains of either part had encouraged their men,
and with warlyke orations inflamed their minds with hope of victory, with
eager stomachs they joined battle. At the very first beginning the encounter
was (...), meting with stem to (...) and each endeuoryng to ouermatche other,
and the matter was handled with great courage on both parts. For there was
not any one in all that great company which had not his hands full. Insomuch
that the matter was tried with darts, Iauelyngs, pykes, and swords as if it
had been a battle upon the land. Howbeit in continuance the Gothyshe navy
began to go by the worse. For albeit Conning and (...) perience preuayleth
against force.
they were good men of their hands and stowt^ warryours, yet forasmuch as
they wanted (...) in sea matters, they troubled themselves. For in some places
they clustered so together, that one had not rome to (...) by another, and
other some again to eschew that fault, disseuered themselves so far from the
help of their company, that their enemies had them always at advantage.
Whereas on the contrary part (...) Greeks were greatly furthered through their
connyng the good order of their Sea men there was no array broken. A man could
not have seen among them any throngyng, nor scatteryng, but y^ they were ^uer
nere at hand to help their company and to be helped of them. And therefore as
reason was, at length they gatte the upper hand. Some of the The Goths are
vanquished and Aucon (...)
Gothyshe ships were sunk with their men of war mariners and al. Many be
ing won by fine force were with incredible slaughter taken. The which when
the Goths beheld, by and by they took them to flight. There were no mo but ten
of their ships that escaped to land unperished. The reast were either taken
or else drowned, there was made a great slaughter of the men in the battle and
in the chase. They that escaped to land, did forthwith set their ships on
fire, to the intent their enemies should not obtain them, and returned into
their Camp. Where they were stricken with such a fear, that they determined to
break up their (...). Whereupon in all haste they forsook their Camp and
fled unto Auximum. John and Ualerian enteryng into the haven of Auco^ with
their victorious nauye to the great comfort and incredible reioycement of the
(...), made have to ryfflyng of the enemies Camp. The which they findyng
forsaken, caused all the virtualls and artillery that they found there to be
conveyed into the city. They themselves within few days (...) tur neth
a^aynst he Goths.
after departed, Ualerian unto Rauenna and John unto Salons. This battle did
sore discourage the hearts of y^ Goths, and was as it were a preparatiue of a
greater ruin y^ was toward them. For Totilas being not a little disquietted with
this loss pulled back a great part of his army out of Si^ill. By means
whereof Artauanes the E^perours Captain subrogated in y^ rome of Liberius
having received his nauye of him, began to grow y^ stronger in Sicill.

Insomuche that he not only delivered his confederates from y^ besiegemente,
but also besieged the Goths in diverse places in their own towns. Moreover
The Goths receive another (...).
ere it was long after, an other navy of Greeks coming unlooked for to the
rescowe of the Crotoniens long time besieged by the Goths, raised y^ siege
and discomfited their enemies with great bloodshed and slaughter. The Goths be
ing dispersed fled some to Tarent, and some withdrewe themselves into the next
mountain called Scyllaum, the which overthrow together with ye former
slaughter, did much more discourage the hearts of the Goths, In especially
forasmuch as there went a great brute through out all Italy of Narses coming
and of his preparation for y^ wars, what great furniture he brought with him,
and that there began already to spring up certain rebellions against Totilas.
For one Reguaris a noble man among Reuoltyng to the part of the impe^.
the Goths Captain of Tarent, and Morras captain of Acheruse, revolted to
the Emperor with their towns and soldiers whereof they had charge. The power
of Na^s.
Furthermore tydinges was brought of another insurrection against the Goths
in Sardinia. While things were in this estate in Italy, Narses assemblynge his
power in the winter season, addressed himself to his Journey: he had such an
army of men, as scarce all the Captains being put all together, brought
with them into Italye during the whole time of this war. For the Emperor
gave him so large allowaunce of monnye, and he himself was so bountefull and
lyberall in bestowing and distributing of the same, y^ he levied a great power
not only in Thrace and Greece, but also out of diverse Albuine kin^ of Lombardes.
other places. For he had entertained a boue five M. Lombardes notable me^ of
war by y^ consent of Albuine their Cumades (...) Persian,
King, and, MMM. of the Erulians. Furthermore there came unto him a great
number of the H^nnes.

Also there was one Cumades a Persian that had been trained up in the Roman
wars, who with a valiant band of Persians resorted unto him. Moreover there
came to him a warlyke young gentleman called Assuades with five hundred
feyghtynge men of the Sepides: and John surn^ed Phagas with an host of the
Greeks and Thracians. Besides this, John Uitalian, and the sons of German
served him with their armies. Narses therefore having this so great an host,
as soon as the spring time approached, passed out of Illiricum through
Dalmatia and Liburnia and so coastynge about the elbowe of the Sea came by
land into Italye, not stayinge any where until he was among the Uenetians.
There were two ways by the which he might handsomelye pass from the
Uenetians. The one by the Adriaticke Sea, the other through the main Land,
both which seemed to have many lettes. For by the Seas side the River
Athesis makes great Lakes which fall into the Sea in many Chanelles, and
the river Po being divided into many streams, does in diverse places
interrupte the Journey, with many quamyers and mooryshe grounds, so that an
Army can not well be led that way without great trouble. Again in the way
by the main T^ias afterward king of the goths.
Land one of the Goths called Te^as placed at Uer^n with an Army by Totilas,
had intercepted his passage over the Ryuers of Athesis and Po. These two
streams runnynge down from the Alps which deuyde Italy from France and
Germanye, do fall into the Adriatycke sea. And therefore they that will pass
from Uenice, must needs pass over them either by the Seas side where as be
Lakes and meres falling by diverse Chanelles into the Sea, and where the
mowthes of Po do overthwart them between Rauenna and Clodius diches: or else
they must pass the same rivers in the main land, where they be great and
undivided, and where they may easly be stopped of their passage, if there be
any body to withstand them. Wherefore seeing ye Teias was at Ueron the which is a
city standing upon the River Athesis, and had a power sufficient to let him of
his passage Narses left the way through the maine land, and chose to go by the
coast of the Adriaticke sea, both because it was weout im peachment of enemies,
and besides that, was nearer way then the other. And so Na^ses coming to Rauenna.
marchig by Clodius diches and the felds of Adria, and passing over the Rivers
whersoeuer they crossed his way, some where with brydges and somewhere we
botes, at length he came with all his ar mie unto Rauenna. There Captain
Ualerian and Captain Iustine with their bands, joined themselves with Narses.
There were in Italye a great number of old soldiers, who by reason the
Emperor was behind hand with their wages for a long tym^ together were
offended in their hearts, and would not go forth to the wars.

Narses paid them all their wages, whereby he healed their griefs and gave
them courage again*

Having spent nine days in dooinge these things and in refreshing his army
at Rauenna, he removed from thens and march^d toward Rome. The A conflict at
Arimine.
same time was one (...) captain of Arimine as notable a warrior as was among
al ye goths. Who ((...) as the ^oward of Narses ho^te was come into the felds
of (...)) went about to stop them of their passage. The River that runs by
Arimine was ryse^ with rain, upon the which was a bridge so hard under
neath the Town that it was an easy matter to stop the passage.

(...) therefore yssuynge out of Arimine before that any number of his enemies
had passed the (...), set himself at defense on the furthersyde, and
encountered with his enemies even hard under the walls of the town. In the
which conflycte a certain man of Arines of the Erulians feyghtyng with (...)
hand to hand slew him, and his soldiers discouraged with the death of their
Captain, retired fearfully into the Town^. The head of Usorilas was brought
unto Narses, at the which Narses (...) and taking it for a tooken of good
luck, that the chyefe of his enemies was (...) by his men at the fyrsts
confly^te, kept on his way full of good hope and comfort. For albeit he had a
good furtheraunce to the taking of Arimin^ at the same instant, yet
notwtstanding he would not tarry about it to the intent so great an army should
not be let^ed about the sege of one town, and therefore ^e passed by Arimine
and continued on his iourny. Totilas having intelligns of those things y^ were
done among y^ Uenitians, and understanding of the passage of Narses and of his
coming to Raue^na, although almost al his whole power were at that time with
Teias, yet The death of Totilas.
notwithstanding he determined to en counter with Narses, the which he did, and
in the battle was slain for his labor* As many of the Goths as escaped from
the field, fled over the river Po and assembled together at Pauie and there
abouts. In the which place as they consulted of making a new governor of
their Teias is created king of the goths.
people, Teias was preferred by the judgment of all men and chosen king of the
Goths. After that he was thus in stalled in the siege roial, by and by he took
to his use the threasures that Totilas had laid up at Pauie, diligently going
in hand to repair his power, to raise a new army, to give and distribute horse
and armor, and to do^ all other things vigilantlye, and moreover to send to
the Frenchmen to allur^ them to take his part in the wars.

The. viii. Chapter.
Narses continuinge his journey receives Narma and Peruse, and wins Rome by
assault, whereupon the goths extend a marvelous crueltye against the Roman
prysonners.

NARSES hearing thereof, commanded Ualerian to lie as it were in garrison with
his band about the River Po, to the intent the Goths should not straye to
far abroad at their pleasure without fear and he himself with the rest of
his army marched to Rome. In his way Narma was yielded up to him and he
granted the men of Spolet certain of his soldiers for their defense until
they might repair their walls which Totilas had beaten down. Also he sent
to Peruse to sommon that Town, there were in Peruse two Captains Melegidius
and Ulithus. Who being at variance between theymselues drew soundrye ways.
For Melegidius coueted to yield up the City. But Ulithus Melegidius and
Vlithus Captains of the Goths.
being gyltye of the treason and the murder latelye committed against
Cyprian, strove against it, for fear to be punnished according to his
deserts. By means where of there rose contention, in the which Ulithus was
slain, and Peruse was yielded up to Narses by Melegidius. After this Narses
proceedynge to Rome besyeged it. The City of Rome at that time stood in this
estate. The Cityzens being afflycted with the former calamytyes resorted not
in any great number into the City. Ye should have seen whole streets emtye
and neither man nor woman dwell lynge in them, and the houses either fallen
down or else bourned.

For Totilas not able to repair it again specially the Cytyzens being so
sore wasted and in manner destroyed.

The Goths therefore distrusting their own weakness that they were not
sufficient to defend the whole City, had chose^ a piece of ground not very
big nere unto Adrians tumbe, the which they strongly fortified with a diche
and a rampyre and joined it to the wall of the rest of the City. Into the
which place they conveyed all their munitions and artillery using it as a fort
or a hold. Nevertheless they did not utterly aban don up the city, but
defended it as well as they could. Narses therefore determining to win the
city, assaulted it in diverse places at ones. And the Goths resorting to the
same places stood at defense from ye walls. While these Narses takes Rome,.
things were a doing, another company of the souldyers of Narses stealing
about to the further side and finding no body there, rered up their ladders
and skailed the walls. The noise that was made there upon bewraied that the
City was taken, and the Go these leaving their defense, some fled to the town
of Portua and some wythdrew themselves to the forte at Adrians tumbe. By this
means Narses gate The cruelty of the goths tovvarde the Romans.
Rome, and after he had a while besyeged the hold, he took it by composition.
There were in Campanie many Senators and Senators children, whom Totilas for
the great authority and favor that their ancestors had, would not suffer to
return into the City. Besides them, there were diverse of the nobility
which the Goths had sent thither upon mistrust. All the whi che, with their,
children and kynsfocke the goths did put to death. Moreover Totilas had chosen
CCC. yongme^ as it had been to serve him in y^ wars, but in very deed to keep
the^ for pledges, and therefore he sent them on a vyage beyond the River Po.
The which like wise after that Rome was come into y^ hands of Narses, were put
^o death every chone by the Goths.

The ix. Chapter,
The falsehoode and treason of a gothishe Captay ne named Regharis. Narses
recouereth Portua. Teias king of the gothe^ and the said Narses encamp^one
against another by a Ryuers side the watter runnynge betwyxte them without
any battle until after long time Teias having through treason lost (...)
ships and by means thereof being (...) of victualle and artillerye to keep
that ground any longer remoueth to a hill not far from the same place,
where being in manner besyeged by Narses, he sets his men in ^tell raye and
geuynge ferce assault vp^on (...) enemies after a whole days (...) and many
a noble deed of prowess by him done he is at last slain and the battle
cease for that ^yghte the which begins again the next morning, conty
newinge all the day (...) ^yll it be darcke night. Whereupon they send
commissioners unto Narses for peace why che upon reasonable condytions is
granted and the wars in (...) are brought to a fynall end and quietness.

ABOUT the same time The falsehod and treason of Reg^.
Regnaris Captain of Tarent when he heard that Te^as was made King and that
the Frenchemen would comme to his aid, repented him that he had reuoulted
to the Emperor, and determined to turn to the Goths again. Now to the
entente he would recover again his hostages, he ymagined this subteltye. He
sent to Macurius Captain of Hydrunt, desiring him of aid against an army
of the Goths which he falselye alleged were coming against him.

Ma^urius mystrustynge no deceipte sent him fyftye of his Souldyers to Tarent,
whom Regnaris immediatlye cast into prison, and wrat unto Macurius that if he
would have his soldiers, he should deliver him the hostages that he had of
his in keeping. Upon the receipt of this message, Macurius was sore troubled in
his mind, and leauyng a few men behind him for the defense of his piece, went
with the rest of his army against Regnaris. Regnaris making no delay in the
matter, put to death all the Souldyers that he had received, and then yssuynge
out of Tarent to encounter with Macurius was put to the worse, and being
driven to fly with the loss of most of his souldyers when he could not
recover to Tarent for that the ways wers sorelayed, he gate him to Acheruse.
In the mean season Narses sendyng Narses recouereth Portua.
his army to Portua, besieged the town and at length recovered it. After this
he assailed Centmucelles and in likewise brought it in subjection. Teias also
ceased not to solicit the French nation and to allure them to take his part
in the wars, promysinge them sometime monnye and sometime copertenershyppe of
the kingdom of Italye. But the Frenchemen had already determined not to
entermedle themselves in any such wars. By means whereof the Goths were
disappoynted of their hope. Totilas in the time of his life had gathered
together a great Threasure at Pauye, and had laid up no small mass of monny
in the fortress of Cume, and had made his brother Captain of the same
fortress. When Narses had understanding thereof, he sent part of his army to
besyege Cume, and he himself abiding still at Rome, endeavored to repair the
City and to replenyshe it with people. And to the entente that the Goths that
were beyond the River Po should not rescowe Cume or any other of the places
that were besyeged, he commanded John Uitalian and Philimunt with their bands
to abide in Hetruria, to set themselves against the enemy at the first
approach and cut them of ere they came any further. For Teias when he
perceived that Cume was besyeged, determined fullye to go and rescowe it.
Whervppon setting out of Pauye, by long and ouerthwarte iourneyes he led
his host by the shore of the upper sea and so through the countries of the
Picentes and Marses into Campanye. The which when Narses understood he called
John with his band out of Hetruria. After whose coming he marched forward
into Campanye with his whole power fullye purposing to encounter with Teias.
There The mountain Vesuuius.
is a hill in Campanye called Uesuuius out of the tooppe whereof oftentimes
ryseth up smoke and flames of fire. But in the foot of the same mountain are
springs of sweet water the which do make a brook called Dracon that runs
not far from the City Nuceria. this brook is not very broad, but it is so
deep that neither horseman nor foteman can pass it. About this river both
armies encamped Narses Narses and Teias encamp (...) gether part with a (...).
on the hither side and Teias on the furtherside, the river ronning in the
mids between the^ both. There was but one bridge over it, and that had the
Goths taken. By means whereof it lay in their hand to chose whyther they
would fight or not fight. The armies abode in this sort by the space of two
months, so that Narses and his me^ which were desirous to come to hand
strokes, could not by any means come to their enemies, only they came to the
rivers side from both Camps and shot arrows and threw darts one at
another. Also there were fought many co^bates and many chalenges were performed
on both sides during the said time, and the Gothyshe soldiers passing over the
bridge did ^ight with the soldiers of Narses hand to hand. The sea was well
and nere at hand and the Goths had their ships upon the water which always
brought corn and victuals and set it a land nere unto them, from whence The
Goths lose their ship pes by (...).
it was ^il conveyed to the Camp. But after the time that their navy through
treason was lost, and that they could have no more ^ualls and artillery^
brought to the^ by the sea, the Goths were constrained of necessitye to
dyslodge from that place. Whereupon forsaking the bridge and the ground by the
rivers side, they departed to the next ^yll which the inhabitants of the
cou^trye do call the mylkie hill. Narses pursuyng them (forasmuch as he could
not assail them by reason of the stepenesse of the hill,) settled himself
about the foot of it. The Goths being in the same place also as much
oppressed with (...) as they were before, determined to put the matter in
trial by the sword. And thereupon puttyng themselves A cruel battle between
the Goths and the imperialls.
in array upon the top of the hill, they descended from above and sodaynely
assailed their enemies thynkyng nothing less, then of any such matter, in
so much that they had not any leisure to order their battles or to encourage
their soldiers, but were feign to set themselves against the enemy
according as every man's fortune had appointed him. And for because the Goths
had left their horfes and fought on foot, Narses did set his fotemen also to
encounter with them. The battle was cruel and bloody in all places. For ^n
the one side the Goths fought obstinately as men in despair, and on the other
side the soldiers of Narses were (...) to give place being so many in number
as they were, in especially consyderyng that but even the other day they had
compelled them to forsake their first camp, and had we^ nie beu^eged them now
in the hill which they had fled to for their refuge. Both parties being
incensed with these persuasions, fought The ^table p^owesse and courage of Te
ias king of the Goths*
very valiantly* I will not pass over with (...) the noble Demeanor of Teias
King of the Goths in his hattel For he being endued as it were with an
heroical prowess, would needs put himself into the forefront of the battle
among the formest fyghters. He was easy to be known from the reast by his
goodly armor and his rich apparel. In the lift hand he held a target and
in his right hand he brandished a Iauelyng. Many that encountered against him
he struck stark dead, and yet darts came flying at him from all sides Howbeit
he being of an incredible courage and strength did maruayles in arms. At the
length when his shylde stake full of darts so that he could not handsomely
wield it, standing with his face toward his enemies and calling to his
harnessebearer by name he commanded him with a loud voice to bring him
another target. When it was brought unto him, he let slyppe his old one, to
have taken the new in his hand, in the which change it was his chai^^ to
receive his death swou^de by a ^art that was sent at him. By the which (...)
he lost much blood, yet notwithstanding like a most puyssant champion he never
gave foot back nor never turned his face, but standing stoutly toward his
enemies, fought it out as long as he was able to stand on his legs, until
at length ^ebled with travel and loss of bloods he fell down flat upon
his face. It was almost ^yre of the clock when Teias dyed. And yet the Goths
The death of Teias.
were nothing at all dyscouraged with the death of their King, but held out
the battle until it was night never geuyng one foot back. Fiynallye when
it was so dark that they could not see, the battle ceased, being begone at
the son rysyng. That night both the armies watched in their harness, and
assoons as the day pered^, they fell to fyghtyng a fresh, contynuing so still
unto the son going down to the great ^aughter of both parts. At length the
Goths sent unto Narses offering to depart out of Italye so he would suffer
them without impeache^e to carrye such things as they had away with them.
But if he would not grant them this request, they said they would never leave
fightyng, as long as the breathe was in their bodies. When Narses had heard
their demau^des, by the advice of his counsel he condys^nded unto the^, to the
intent he would not to the great preiudy^e and loss of hy^ men, seek the
advantage of his desperate enemy. In the mean time about a thousand
horsemen ^ed out of the Camp of the Goths, and by great iourneyes came unto
Pau^e and other towns beyond the ry^ Po^. The residue fell to a fynall
agreement with Narses, promisyng to depart (...) Italye, carrying nothing more
then every man his own, and never after to make war upon the Romayn^ Empire,
provided always that they themselves should retain ^till their freedom and
liberty without any bondage or subjection to the Empire. The which being done
according to covenant, Narses received Cume and al other towns that held with
the Goths, and so ended the eyghtenthe year of this war.

FINIS

