The mind and exposition of that excellent learned man Martyn Bucer / upon
these words of S. Matthew: Woo be to the wordle because of offenses. Math.
xviij. Faithfully translated in to English, by a faithful brother, with
certain objections and answers to the same.

Matthew. 15. Every plant that my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be
plucked up by the rotes. Printed at Emden. 1566.

To the godly Reader.
Understanding (dearly beloved in the Lord Jesus) by a faithful brother, of
the contention that now is in my native country, concerning popish apparel
and ceremonies, to the great grief and sorrow of the godly, and to the
reioysinge of the enemies, (which hops daily for the rest of their father
dregs) I thought it mete (as one wyshing good to my country) to translate
the work of that excellent instrumente of the Lords vinyarde Martyn Bucer,
entreatinge upon the words of our Savior, written by S. Matthew in the.xviij
chap. saying: Woo be unto the wordle because of offenses: wherein he declares
not only what an offense is, and how it is taken, but also as occasion does
serve concerning rites and ceremonies of the church, to the great comfort of
the godly. Wylling and requyring that ye stand fast in the liberty, wherewith
Christ Jesus has made you free and wrappe not your selves in the yoke of
bondage. For it is not now time to slip back from the liberty of the
Gospel, but manfully to abide therein, yea even, though it be with life to
confirm ye same as worthy souldiars in Christ's church, always lokinge for
the coming of our Savior Jesus

Thus fare ye well.
The mind and exposition of that excellent learned man Martin Bucer, upon
these words of Matthew: Woo be to the world, because of offenses. Math. xviij.
HEre Christ speaks not of such offenses as the good are wont to give unto
the evil, but of such as the evil give unto ye good, or to those that
endeavor to become good and godly. These offenses (as may be gathered by the
places of scripture which make mention thereof) are what things so ever be
spoken or done, geuinge any occasion of sin, either because they are evil of
them selves, or else because they are not discretly done and according to
Christian charity. For this cause Paul in the.2. epist. and.6. chap. to the
Corinth. exhorting us, that in nothing we give occasion of offense, does
declare by those things which he mencioneth by and by after, that then we give
no offense at all, when we approve our selves in all things as the ministers
of God: that is to say, when we so behave our selves in all things which we
either speak or do, that they may make to edification and appear to be done
in the spirit of Christ. Where upon we may take that to be an offense, the
definicion of an offense.
what soever we say or do that makes not to the furtherance of Gods glory
and the salvation of our brethren, procedyng of a sound and unfeigned faith and
ordered according to sincere and true love.

Now this mind and purpose all the wicked have not, I mean to do all things
to the glory of God and the commodity of men: and therefore not only all that
they speak or do may well be called offenses, but they themselves also because
their whole life is nothing else but an offense, are of the Lord him self
before in the.13. chap. called an offense. Seeing therefore the world is now
full of such offenders, it is not without great cause that the Lord here says:
It is nedfull that offenses should come. For seeing there be so many evil
trees, there must needs be great abundance of evil fruit also. Moreover
even the very elect, because they are never free from sin, being always
compelled to say: Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us, do give many occasions of offense, when so ever they speak or do
any thing that proceeds not of faith and love. Therefore Paul exhorts and
beseech those men to beware that they receive not the grace of God in vain,
giving occasion of offense to no man. He exhorts us also to the same thing
as often as he wills us to walk circumspectly and warely following in all
things the will of God. For we are planted to this end, that we should bear
fruit, and bring many to true righteousness and godliness. wherefore if we
commit any thing either in word or deed, which tends not to this end, we
give therein occasion of offense, and do contrary to our vocation: and
forsakinge the kingdom of Christ, we promote the kingdom of Satan: which
thing how horrible it is for a Christian man to do, who sees not? For this
cause S. Paul in the xiiij. to the Romans and in the.j. epist. and.viij. chap. to
the Corint. Vehemently detesteth even those offenses which they that
indiscreetly use the Christian liberty give unto the weak by such things as
of themselves in deed are not evil, but yet are not done according to
charity.

When the new Testament was confirmed by the blood of Christ emonges the
elect, where soever they were, and of what stock and kynred so ever they came,
and that without any law of ceremonies: then were all rites and ceremonies
included in the precepte of love, and all kinds of meats and days were made
then alike. But yet when many of the Jews were converted unto Christ, their
faith was more weak then that they durst use this liberty. They abhorred all
such meats as were forbidden by Moses law, and specially such as were offered
to ydolles: And this was the infirmity of their faith, that they were not
persuaded, that to the faithful nothing can be vnpure. Now, those that of
love had no regard or very little, which seeks in all things the salvation
of our neighbors, did eat all kinds of meats in the presence of all men,
having no respect to the infirmity of faith in many, and so they gave unto
them a dowble offense. For either they caused them through their contempt to
fale to variance and discord with them, or else they allured them to use the
like liberty, but yet with an unlike faith, so that they would not stick to
eat all kinds of meats indifferently although their consciences did
persuade them that it was sin so to do. Against the first offense Paul
writes To. 14. If (says he) by occasion of meat thy brother be grieved, thou
walk not now charitablie. Concerning the second offense, thus he writes:
albeit he adds somewhat also touching the first: All things in deed are
pure, but it is evil for the man that eats with offense, it is good neither
to eat flessh neither to drinck wine, nor any thing else whereby thy brother
stumbleth or is offended, or made weak. Where he says he stumbleth, I
understand that to be spoken of the first kind of offense, concerning variance
and discord. Where he says, he is offended: I understand that of the second
kind of offense, in that he vsinge his liberty peruersely, and by his example
drawing him that is more weak to do the same, is to him as a snare, whiles he
gives him an occasion to eat that thing against his conscience, which he
judges not to be lawful. And where he says, or else is made weak, I judge
that to be spoken of those men, who seeing their brother do that thing which (as
they are yet persuaded) is against ye law of God, do not turn so far back
that they will fale to variaunce and contention with them, neither do they
follow that with they think to be evil and unlawfully done: but yet they are
grieved in ye mean time, and bear less zeal and love to the gospel and the
mainteyners thereof, especially such as then use the liberty thereof and this in
deed is to be made weak.

Now a godly and a charitable brother rather then he would that this should
come to pass, ought to avoid the use of all unnecessary things, because the
kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joye in
the Holy Ghost: Much more ought he then rather never to eat flesh, then by
his liberty to give occasion to his brother so to stumble that he should
thereby either fale in to an hatred and contempt of him, or else contrary to
his faith and conscience should attempt to do the same things that he does.
In deed S. Paul in the first epistle and.8. chapt. to the Corinth. speakinge
of this later kind of offense, concludes in this manner: Wherefore, if meat
offend my brother, I will never eat flesh whiles the world stands.

But we must note in all these things, that he continually uses the name of a
brother. For of that plant which the father has not planted, that is, of the
reprobate, we must have no regard: Whom in deed the more godly you are, the
more you shall offend. This therefore must be our chief entente and purpose,
so to do and order all things that they make to the edifyeng of our brethren.
So shall it come to pass, that some times we shall see cause to use our
liberty, and some times not to use it. For when words are to be approved by
deeds, the liberty that is preached must needs be confirmed with examples.
This did Peter and Barnabas with certain other Jews very godly at Antioch.
And therefore when they dissembled the same again for fear of such as came
from James, Paul withstode Peter openly and blamed him vehemently. Gal. ij.
This example ought to be well considered. For if Peter in this slypperye place
took a fale, what is he that ought not herin to be careful, and take good
heed of the like danger: They that came from James, were brethren: and
therefore it seemed that it was better for them not to touch any flesh for ever,
then to give them an occasion to stumble, or to be offended, or at the least
made weak. Therefore Peter seems not without good cause to dissemble and hyde
from them his liberty, for whose sakes he dissembled. But if you will have
respect unto them for whose sakes Paul was zealous and careful, you will then
say yt Peter dissembled without cause, and that he was worthily reprehended of
Paul. For he had preached unto them that by Christ alone all men are justified:
and therefore the ceremonies of the Law were not necessary. Which thing he
had confirmed before by his own example, eating indifferently all manner of
meats, and that both godly and profitablie. But when for fear of those which
came from Jerusalem, he dissembled again and cloked this liberty, he sore
offended the Gentyles, causynge them to doubt of this doctrine, that by Christ
only we be justified and saved: of the Gentyles there were many, but of those
that came from Jerusalem, there were but few. Moreover, the offense given to
the Gentyles, was such as might have caused them utterly to fale away from
Christ: whereas, if the Jews had been offended, it might peradventure have been
a cause only of some discord, where by some emonge them might have been
weakened, or else through weakness of conscience might then have defiled them
selves: but yet they should not have been so clean alienated from Christ, but
that some of them might have been won^e again to sound and perfect faith,
when Peter according to that his example which he had before given them, should
diligently and soberly have declared unto them the cause of his liberty, as
Paul afterward did. To conclude, seeing we should continually press forward
toward the perfection and fulness of faith, there should more regard have been
had of ye Gentyles, which were already come to a clear knowledge of Christ,
then of those which as yet did stick to the ordinances and ceremonies of the
world: which also through long custom and observation might have been the
more confirmed in their error. This did Paul consider, when he would not
circumcise Titus: And he rejoices that he gave no place to those that
contended for that matter, not for an hour. And this did he that the verity
of the Gospel might continue.

Furthermore, we must consydre, whether they be true or false brethren, which
go about to diminishe and impair the Christian liberty: for we must have
only a regard to the true brethren. For albeit we ought at all times to have
such a consyderation of all men, yea even of the professed enemies of the
truth, that we give occasion to none to speak evil of our welldoynge, and
for that cause also we must forgo and forsake even much of our liberty: yet
ought we this always to do in such sort that the truth of the Gospel be not
hyndred thereby. As for example: If a man would at this day, for the obstinate
enemies of the Gospelles sake (which do abhor and blaspheme all that comes
from us, he applies this doctrine of offenses by example of outward things,
to our time and state of religion.
seeing they abhor and blaspheme Christ him self and his Gospel) still
dissemble the liberty of outward things, which the false churchmen have
taken from the people of God by subtiltye and tyranny: he in so doing should
not only make them nothing the better, but rather more confirm them in evil
and greatly offend those which have received Christ, whiles he should still
preach unto them the naked truth and utterly void of examples.

For there is no small number which will hardly be persuaded, that all things
are laid up for us in Christ alone, when there is so much attributed and so
much credit given to man's inuentio^s. Out of dout there is great fault
committed herin now a days, not only of the common people, but even of the
head and chief standard bearers of the Gospel now revyuinge and springinge
up again. In deed I confess yt what so ever has been ordained against the
liberty of external things, Emonges these are to be placed cappes,
typpettes, copes, surplesses, cakebreade.
as difference of persons meats, days, places, and other like things
innumerable, has been altogether brought in by the rabble of Antichrist yet
because the common people were persuaded that all such things were
commandments of the Church, ruled and guyded by gods spirit: therefore
they received them generally as things procedinge from gods will and
appoyntmente. Note here why and when we ought to use our liberty: that is,
when ye people lacking instruction, esteem these ceremonies as things
commanded of God, or else not.
And for this cause we must even in these our days be circumspect in using
the liberty purchased for us by Christ, and with Paul somtymes circumcise
Timothy: that is to say, for our parts, use well some ceremonies which other
men abuse: sekyng (as it were) an occasion by that means, to preach Christ
syncerely and purely. Albeit these inventions of men can by no means be
compared to circumcision and such like ordinances of God.

But what is the common practice of men in these matters: many there be, which
fearinge the selaunder of the cross, and in vayn sekinge to please both men
and God, yea even there, where the gospel has been long preached, when now
words and talk require examples of works and deeds, the pretenses of the
faint and cold gospellers.
pretending other men's weakness, whereas they are alltogeather clogged with their
own infirmity: do not only continue still slaves them selves to men's
traditione: but also bring other men in to the like slavery and bondage. Oh,
say they, nothing is to be attempted rasshely: these things have continued many
years: they can not be taken away suddenly: We must have a regard to the
weak. If we should go hastily and rasshely to work, we should not plant the
Gospel but overthrow it. But these faint hearted Gospellers I would have to
consydre what this saying means: The kingdom of God suffers violence, and
the violente take it by force. Math. xj. And moreover that these things are not
rasshelye or vnadvisedlye attempted, but when they be changed where as Christ
is not yet preached, and without faith: but they are not so where Christ is
already preached, and the net of the Gospel has been so long cast
forth, that it has in manner taken so much as in that country or place may
be taken, and now nothing remains, but to bring credit to our words and to
confyrme the same by examples of doings. Surely the case standing thus,
such works also as men have put their confydence in more then in Christ,
must be forsaken, and men must consydre that there can be no felloushipp
between Christ and Antichrist.

And it is a thing absurd and folish, to go about to prescribe a long time
for the receiuyng of the truth, because falshode and untruth has by little and
little crepte in, and grown of long time. In deed so should we have no more
hold of Christ then of Antichrist. Dowtles, if we receive him not as soon as
we know him, we shall never enjoy him. Moses, Samuel, Elias, Ezechias, Josias,
dealt not in this sort, mark the danger if we receive not Christ purely, for
sakinge all Antichristian ceremonies, so sone as we know him
but so sone as they had restored the knowledge of the Law to the people,
forthwith they abolyshed all abominations at once, and restored the Ceremonies
of God. Wherefore yt is to no purpose, that they say which always brag that
there are greater things to be urged and called upon, then the reformation of
Ceremonies: so becommynge patrones of Antichrists relics and remnauntes.
Ceremonies are the badges or testimonies of religion, the ceremonies of our
religion are only baptism and ye supper: wherefore we should make no delay in
abolishyng of all other ceremonies of a^tichrist
and therefore we begin also our Religion with the Ceremonye of Baptism. And
also if any man after he is excommunicated for his wickedness, be received again
through his repentance, he is straight reconciled to the Church by the
Sacrament of the lords supper / wherefore they must needs be very weak in the
faith of Christ, which prolong and differ the remouynge of Antichrists
Ceremonies: And dowtles it will be long ere newnes of life appear in those men
if ever it appear at all. In deed, we see at this day cold and slack
procedinges in Christian profession in those places where Antichrists
Ceremonies are borne with all, The cause why antichrists ceremonies remain
unreformed.
and suffered to continue, and all things much more lively and effectual
where they be abolished. For if they stay and remain any time unreformed,
there can be no other cause thereof but that either the word of God is not
thoroughly received or not esteemed and regarded accordingly. For how so ever
those that suppose them selves to be strong in the faith, will excuse them
selves that they use not these things: where is yet, I pray you, their zeal
for Christ's glory, or their care for their brethren: which as they yet still
use them so (no doubt) they do it of weakness of faith. Undoubtedly as there is
no agremente at all between Christ and Beliall, so sincere and unfeigned
Christians can by no means suffer them selves to be clogged with any whitt of
Antichrists trashe and trumpery yea and withal they will endeavor so to purge
the Church thereof as the glory of God may chefly be thereby advanced. And
further, they will have such regard of the weaker sort that they will do
nothing vnaduysedlye or out of season, but will teach ye weak with all
gentleness to wax stronger in knowleadge, and labor with examples also to
bring them forward, not regardinge the blyndnes of a feawe who are to much
addycted to Antichrists Ceremonies, and perhaps no true nor faithful
brethren, whereby they might in the mean time offend many other weak ones,
who continuallye think thus with them selves: If these things were so evil as
they are taken to be, they should surely be abolished. And again, if the other
were so good, all men, especially such as reckon them selves Christians, would
in deed receive and embrace them. These men surely, if they be elect, shall at
the length be confirmed, although all ye world offend them, and no man edifye
them: but in the meanetyme, woo be unto them by whom they are offended.
Wherefore as soon as true godlynes and the right worshipp of God has been
preached and professed of many, Antichrists Ceremonies and rites ought by and
by to be abrogated, and the reformation hereof may not be prolonged and delayed
until godlynes be in all points grown to perfection: for else should they
never be abolished.

These are in deed over mylde and toetoe soft and sobre Christians, which can
bear with all such Antichristian trasshe: like unto them who at Corinth
knowing that an Idol was nothing, did eat things offered to Idols, and
bosted (as these our men do) in this wise: In outward matters we are free:
what is that to me that an other uses those things nowghtely? I will use them
well. For as these men weakened the faith of many both in that through their
example they did the less abhor Idols, and also in that for the most
part, they communicated with them against their consciences: so (no doubt) do
these our luke warm and milk soppe Gospellers now a days. They know right
well that Antichrists Ceremonies, that is to say, all such as have been
brought in without Gods word, are not worth a russhe. And because they are
outward things, wherein we have fredome, they will use them frelye, not
consyderinge that many things are laufull which are not expedient, and that
our liberty ought to be employed to the commodity of other, whom they in the
mean time offend and obscure the glory of Christ: for they confirm them in
their error, which as yet know not that these things are free and at
liberty. As for the patrones thereof, the professed enemies of Christ, they
cause them to rejoice and set them a gogge. And finally they weake^ the faith
of the feeble which had forsaken them and cast them away. Thus do they forsooth
provide goodlye for the weak ones, yea they serve rather their own belies,
sekyng to gratifye such as either are Christ's enemies or else backeslyders.
Mark what they be that contend for superstitious ceremonies
For no man besides these will earnestly contend for superstytious Ceremonies.
This is their modest bearyng and delayenge, where with they are so far from
furtherynge of the Gospel, that by little and little they do utterly abolishe
it. Surely we may thank these men, Mark the cause why the Gospel goes not
foreward: God will have no felowshipp with Beliall.
that at this day all things are turned vpsyde down in many places where the
Gospel has been long time preached: where as we have never yet seen the like
come to pass, where, at the earneste and sincere preachinge of Christ,
Ceremonies have also ben reformed, according to the rule of his word.

For as much therefore as Christ so sore detesteth offenses, and cries woe
unto the wordle because of offenses: woo unto the man by whom offense comes:
we must with all diligence, take heed both in these things and in all other,
that we be offensive to no man, but especially the little ones: I mean not in
age only, but in faith and understanding also. The perfect knowledge of God
and of Christ, is life everlasting. What so ever therefore may either hinder or
obscure it by any means, let it neither be spoken nor don^e of us. But let us
remove all such things to the uttermost of our powers. And let us provoke
them both by exhortations and examples, that they express and declare those
things in their life, geuinge no place herin either to their own affections
or other men's, seeing that it is better to be drowned in the sea then to give
offense.

Objections and Answeares concerning apparel of Prestes and Mynysters.
An objection.
THIS apparel was used in King Edwardes days of Godly men, as Crammer,
Rydley, and such like, therefore now Godly men ought not to refuse yt:
although also the Papists being ungodly men ever abused yt.

Answer.
The manner of the fast, which John's dyscyples used being good, was not
therefore also exacted of Christ's dyscyples: but rather for that yt was an
obseruacion of manes deuyse corruptly abused of the Pharesies, no more mete for
the syncerytye of the Gospel, the^ old barrels for new wine, or new clothe
for an old garment, so now the fillinge and clowtinge up of old Popish
apparel, with the new pureness of the Gospel, must yether cause corruptione
to burst and lose both, or else make the rentinge of the new from the old
worse.

Objection,
Seeing some men which be now Preachers, did in King Edwardes days use this
apparel with fervent zeal and good conscience, the same now refusing yt
seem not to be moved with zeal and conscience, but of desire of novelties and
singularity.

Answer.
Paul did fearve God in fervent zeal and good and pure conscience even from
his progenytors, yet coming to more knowleadge, did find and confess these
things to be hurtful and vile, which he had esteamed and used as profitable,
and albeyt he had circumcysed Tymothe, yet would he not suffer Tytus to be
cyrcumcysed: so some such as proceade in knowleadge and experyence does find
this apparel vile and hurtful, which before they thowght profitable and not
hurtful. And albeit that charity did move them to bear with the weak, as it
did Paul in circumcysynge Tymothe, yet faythefullnes to keape the truth of the
Gosspell, where yt has been long preached, cawsythe those same Preachers not
to yealde or shrynke for any force or portunytie, as Paul not circumcysyng
Tytus, not of syngularitie and desire of novelties, but of faythfullnes, zeal,
and good conscience.

Objection.
Because all Bishops in Ingland, and many other good Preachers, which had
once refused this apparel yet now by occasion have receauid yt again, and
but few there be that still yet refuse yt, therefore yt seems more expedient,
and les damage of offense and dysagrement in the church to bring few in
small estymacion to a co^formytie with the Byshopes, and their multitude much
esteemed: the^ either to reduce the Bishops to other inferiors, or suffer
inferiors to dyffre in those things from them being Bishops.

Answer.
When as Paul and Peter being at Antioche did both eat meat with the
Gentylls, and at the coming of certain from James, Peter fearinge them of the
cyrcumcysion withdrewe and separated him sealfe, so as other Jews then with
Barnabas wear browght in to that Ipocrysie and dissymulation: then Paul openly
withstode Peter as worthy of reprofe by such dealinge, compellinge the
gentills to Iewishe observacions, and so not rightlye proceeding to the truth
of the Gospel. Therefore if right procedinge to the truth of the Gospel, have
once made both these parties to agree, leauinge of Popyshe apparel, as Paul
and Peter in leauinge of the Iewishe rites, and the fear and respect of some
persons move now the one party, as Peter was moved to shrink to reicted
rytes again in such a case: the most expedient way to avoid danger of
offense and dysagrement in the church, is without regard of personages, fear,
or pleasure of men, to keape and maintain the truth of the Gospel with
synceritie, and liberty inseperable from the same.

Objection.
Christyan obedyence requires obseruacion of all things indifferent,
commanded by auctoritye: apparel is indifferentt now in Ingland, commanded by
authority: therefore christian obedyence requires obseruacion of yt.

Answer.
Washinge of hands before meats among the Jews, was a thing as indifferent
of yt felfe as this apparel, and not so much abused of the Pharysies as this
of the papists, and being commanded and urged by them that had authority,
Christ teachinge true Christian obedience, defendith not the obseruinge of it,
and chargyth such as do observe and urge it, with breakinge of Gods
co^mandementes for their own traditions, ypocrisie, and blind leadinge the
blind, and so concludes as euydentlye may appear, that the obedience and
authority of Christians consysteth nether in commandinge nor observinge, but
rather rotyng up all such plants not planted by his heavenly father.

Objection.
If the Prince may thereto be persuaded all Bishops seame that they would be
glade to abolish these garments of the popish blassphemous and ydolatrous
presthodes, but if the Prince will force all Mynisters to receive and retain
them, or else putt them out of their lyvinges and mynisterie, then yt seameth
better to keape lyvinges, liberty of sincere doctrine with this apparel,
then without yt to lose lyvinge, keape silence and leave the church destytute
of so many good preachars, yea and so offend a godly Prince, by whom God
has gracyouslie restored the prechars and preachinge of Christ's Gospel.

Answer.
If all Bishops and Preachers resspectinge God, and the cause only have
wyshed and persuaded not to use this apparel, as Ioab not to nombre the
people, and yet respectinge the Princes commandemente contrary to their
formal wyshinge and persuadynge should yield in deeds as Ioab did. Then wear
to be feared such sequel of plagues on the people with great grief to the
Prince, now hear as was then there: and as the Ismalites destroinge many of
the Ammorytes according to Gods commandementt, yet leaving some relyques of
the same by their own negligence, or affection, or pollycie, wear
continually corrupted, polluted, and plagued with the Ammorytes, so is it to be
feared in Ingland, that the abolyshinge of much Papystrye according to Gods
will reveled by his word, and by reseruinge of some relics of the same by
humayn negligence, affectione, and pollycie, should cause this realm
contynually to be polluted, corrupted, and plagued with Papistrie: these things
well co^sydered move many good preachars to be constantt, zealous, and sincere,
as in will and doctrine, so in conversation and manners, reprouyng and
refusinge all things propre and belonginge to Papistrie: especially to the
Idolatrous blashphemous and traitorous presthoode, most pestilent enemy to
all Christyane auctoritye, and princely dignity, and therefore many good
preachers the rather dysposed for ye preseruacion of the Prince and the people,
losinge lyuinge, life to confyrme their doctrine preached, then keapinge
liuinges with flattery, with danger of the Prince, and the people to buyld and
bring again, that which by faithful preachinge has been destroyed, reprouid
and refusyd, so ca^ no such preachers be put to silence, their deeds declaringe
and confyrminge their doctrine: nor such be thought to be left destytute of
those preachers, by whose doctrine and manners also the church is taught as to
know and embrace true doctrine, and sincere rites and manners, and so shall
Godly and faithful doctrine co^fyrmed with like deeds, by Gods grace give no
offense, butt unfeigned thankfulness to a godly Prince restoringe and receiving
true doctrine with sincere rites and manners to Gods glory, to the Princes
honor, and the people edyfycation thorowgh Christ our Lord. Amen.

It is good for a man to be fervent in good things. Galat. 4.
A prayer mete and necessary for our time and all times to be used.
OH Lord God maker of all things, thou ye art fearful and glorious, thou
righteous and marcyful. Thou which only art most gracious, only liberal,
only just, almighty and everlasting: thou yt of thyn accustomid and rich
mercyes deliuerydst thyn elect and chosen from all trouble, vouchsaffe for thy
Sons sake to deliver, and preserve us from all evil, and also from doing of
those things, which thou in thy holy word have forbidden. Oh be gracious
unto us, and thinck upon thy couenante made with our forfathers of old, as
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, thy true, and faithful servants. And give us all
such hearts, that we may unfeignedly love, and serve the by true obedience to
thy holy Laws, and Commandments. Send us inward peace in conscience, that
we may be at one with the, so that thou never forsake us in the time of
trouble: be unto us in all our need and necessytye as a suer rock, defense,
buckler and shyeld, that under the wings of thy divine majesty we may be
saffly kept, and couetyd, that Satan and his wicked imppes never prevail
against us, by any cruel tyranny, or oppression. But grant (good Lord) for
thine own glories sake, yea for thy Son Christ Jesus sake, that we in the
time of trial may show our selves as valiant warriors firmlye and
constantly to fight under thy banner, and not like cowardes at every blast of
wind, be ready to rune away, starting back, and slyding from the fellowship of
Gods saints. Thincking here in this wicked world for a long time to enjoy
the riches and pleasures thereof, the which time if we consider is but as one
drop of rain comparid to the hole sea, yea if for this short and momentanie
time we might get the hole world, and loose our own souls, what should it
profit? or what is there (oh Lord) to redeem our souls again with all: In
every souldyer that in this world takethe in hand under his Captain to fight,
there is required in him, that he be stout, valiant and manly, that when the
pinche of the battle co^mith, he may then surely stand and fight in hope of
victory. Even so like wise (oh good Lord) it is required of every one of us,
which profess thy holy gospel, that we show our selves manfullye to fight
for the defense of the same, that when the brunt of persecution by Gods
providence to us is mynistred, we may then show our selves as true and
faithful Christyans, to fight that good fight for an eternal tryumphe and
victory, in giving and offering up our own bodies, for a sacryfice unto the
Lord our God, who is ever ready to strenghthen them that put their full trust
in him. Oh good Lord, grant for thy names sake unto us such plenty of thy
grace, that when time requirethe, as we do believe in heart to iustyfication,
eue^ so by mouth we may make true confession to salvation, that the fruit of
the same may be to us in the latter day, joy, comfort, and eternal
consolation, thorough Jesus Christ, by whose death and merytes we are made
inheretours of his everlasting kingdom. To whom with the Father, Son and
Holy Ghoost be praise glory and dominion world without end. AMEN.

OH Lord destroy all the works of satan: confort thine that are in
adversytie: help those that be in troble for thy names sake, have mercy upon
us, and make us thy true faithful obedient and thankful sernaunts, Lord
inclyne our hearts into thy testimonies, and not into any unlawful lust. Oh
turn away our eyes, that they behold not vanytie, but quycken thou us in thy
law: bestow upon us thy word (oh Lord) so that we never abuse it, neither
turn it unto wantonness, but that entering into the grace of true repentance
we may therein increase, and therein contynew, and that till our lives end.

To the Reader.
TO my faithful Brethren, we give thanks to God for your constancy and
vpryght delynge in this great controversy now raysyd by packynge of enemies
about the wearinge of popish apparel, and as ye have well begone, there is no
doubt, but the Lord in mercy shall keep ye pure and blameles to the end. It
has byne no small joy and comfort to many godly and good Churches, which
daily and howerly prays for your perseuera^ce, and that it would please God
to ease it, when his good will and pleasure is. So on the other side much
lamenting the blyndnes of those that goes about to defend it: but
especially those that are become persecutors of their godly and faithful
brethren: but as charity requires we desire God never lay it to their charge,
but give them grace to rise again unto whom we leave them wether they stand or
fall. Let Lottes wife be a warning in time to take heed. Moses that blessed
servant of God would not alter the value of a curten, or a lytill pyne in the
Arcke, so zealous was he in the Lords work: nor never brought any thing out
of his own head to the people: But had always the warrant of the word for
him, to conclude, what so ever may be objected against the refusars of those
ydolators garments, for what so ever they bring, may be redused into this
points, that Godly men either need not or ought not to be scrupulous in so
small a matter, which answer ye shall understand as folowith with an answer to
a question at the end hereof. The Lord for his Christ sake make Ephrahim and
Manassis agree, that we may all with on heart and mind vnfaynydly seek Gods
glory, the edificacion of his people, that we may live in all godly peace,
unity, and concord. This grant, o Lord, for Christ Jesus sake, to whom, with
the, and the Holy ghost, be all praise, glory, and honor for ever and ever.
Fare ye well dear Brethren.

DEarly beloved, you that have wit, understanding, and will to be instructyd
in this controversy now raysyd in the Church about apparel, at this time
this shall suffyce. Yt is true that the teachers of handye crafts affirm,
that no man can attain to such excellent perfeccyon in work, as may be
disputed of by reasone, much less when the rule of religion must be framyd
according to the rule of Gods will, which is ye rule of all perfeccyon, may
we look that any thing can so perfectly be performyd of imperfect man, that in
all points yt may answer to the perfeccion that God requirith: nevertheless God
requirith his service to be such as him sealfe is, deuyne, pure, sincere,
unmingled, and in no part corruptyd, and as lack of strenthe shall not excuse
us, in that we can not, so neclygence makythe us more wicked, if that we may
perform, and we will not. First we are requityd to love God with all our
hearts, all our minds, and all our strength, that precisenes is comendable,
which withholdith not a lytill, when all is requiryd. Thou shall be perfect
with thy Lord thy god. Deuteronomy. 18.
Thou shall not bend either to thy ryghthande, or to the leafte. Thou shall
nether add, nether diminishe of that which is co^maundyd. Thou shall not
inquier for the gods of the Gentyls, saying: How did those Gentyles serve
their gods. Thou shall not do so to the Lord thy god. For whatsoever the
Lord abhors, that did they to their gods. God will have his children so to
abhor these supersticion, yt they should fle even from that infeccio^ that
comythe by hearing. The zeall that God requirith.
Furthermore, so many things as ar co^mandyd of leprous, me^streous, dead
bodies, were many, which might not be touchyd without defyling, what other
things were they in that rude people, God keep us from all outward show of
Popery.
but exercises of precyse pureness and cleanes, the observance of such
shadows, although it has been long since abolyshyd, yet the everlasting
truth remaynyth: much more in presence of the body, that no profane or
defylyd thing may be minglyd with gods service. Moreover god forbydyth all
strange corruptious mixtures, when he forbyddyth them to sow land with diverse
seeds, to plowghe with an ox and an ass, to wear lynyne and woollen to
gether. For lyberte and costome even in ye least matters bredythe boldness, and
in his commandment god has also respect to the kind of apparel. Finally
when this cleanes is streachyd even to brute beasts, mark well.
who would not believe that God requirith an utter detestacion of all uncleanness,
especially in religion. Seeing all these laws perteyne to the first
commandment, according to the same precise rule did the holy fathers exercise
them selves unto puryte, therefore it is never read that the godly Patriarchs
did sacrifyce upon the Idolators alters, but whythersoeuer they remouid,
Example of holy men.
always they buyldid new alters. Furthermore Abraham would not take a thryde
of the King of Sodoma. Jacob buried the earinges that wear ornaments of
supersticion, with the Idols them selves. Moses to blemishe the service of
God would accept no conditions at all, there shall not remain on house,
says he very precislye. Dauith would not take the names of the Idols in his
lypes. Ezechias brake the brazen serpent, not only cha^gyd the use of it. What
greter herytykes ca^ there be, then the Papists?
The Holy ghost praysithe those godly Kings, which destroyed the high places,
as Ezechias and Josias, in which places sometime the people did worship god.
Elyazer would not feign that he did eat swynes flesh. S. Pawle byddythe,
Refrain from all show of evil. S. John forbyddyth us to salute an herytyke.
And Polycarpus his disciple, as Ireneus wytnessith, when he met an herityke,
would not give him other answer, but that he knew him to be the Deuells
eldeste son. for such fear had the Apostels and their disciples, that they
would not comunicate with on word with any that had corruptyd the faith.
Finally S. Pawle in plain words co^mandyth precisnes, Ephe. 5.
saying, Take heed that ye walk precislye or exactlye, for so the greek word
signifies. Last of all, let us not forget what our Savior Christ says: He
that is faithful in the least, will be faithful in the most. Who also
teachith us, how faithfully and precislye we should walk, what cold be more
precisly spoken of, the law shall pass until all be fullfyllyd, and he that
breakyth one of the least commandments, and teachith other so to do, either by
word, or by example, shall be least in the Kingdom of heaven. Yt is evident by
these reasons and examples, that no precisenes or scrupulosite in gods
religion, can be to much or blame worthy. Towchinge ye substance, there is no
controversy, but yt is lawful as the good creature of god, and to this purpose
pertayne those sayings: The kingdom of heaven is nether meat nor drink.
Meat co^mendith us not to god. Whatsoever enterithe in to the mouth, defylyth
not the man. All things ar clean to them that are clean. and other like
places of scripture, all which they pertayne to the matter or creature and
substance only, not to every use, fassion, or manner of using. It is to much
doltyshenes, not to understand all thing a right, except we will also
conclude of the same places, that by glotony, dronkenes, whordome, disquisyd
aparell, and such like, the law of god is not broken. garments therefore that are vrgyd in respect of the form and use, they are not indifferent, and first
of the end, which they labor so much to prove that it is chaungyd, that those
things which before were vsyd to supersticio^, now are co^mandyd for order and
comlynes. No godly man doubtyth, but the Queen's Majesty intendinge an other end
in commanding of those things, then the Papists vsyd them for. But who so
well considerith ye nature of those things, shall plainly se, that the end
which the commander propoundyth, does not follow, but according to the
diversity of them yt use them, and them that judge of them, a clean contrary
end ensuythe, for many popish prestes use them to the same supersticious end
that they did in Popery, and greatest of all is ye multitude of ignorant
people, that iudgith none otherwise of them. Cor. 8.
All men have not knowledge, for some with conscience of the Idol, even yet do
eat meat offered to Idols. So Gedeon made an Ephode, Iud. 8.
not that ye people should go a whorynge after it, yet was it the destruction
of him and his house forever. Secondly it can not serve for order and comlynes,
Cor. 14.
which has in it no necessary cause of edifying. Let all things be done for
edifying. Nether can it be conuertyd to ye comlynes of the Christian Church,
which is the chaste spowse of Christ, which is taken from Antichrist, and the
filthy whore of Babylon. What consent has Christ with Belyall? what portion
has the faithful with the infydell? or what agreement has the temple of God
with Images? If the reason of S. Paul be examynyd, 2. Cor. 6.
by the which he dissuadith the Corynthians from eating of meat offeryd to
Idols, the same may be also extendyd to garments consecratyd to Idolatry. The
nature of cerymonies and rytes is to make the vser to have fellowship with the
principal of that religion, as the Jews of the alter, Christians with Christ,
and Gentiles with Deuells. As many as are partakers of the bread which we
break, are partakers of the body of Christ. They therefore that eat meat
offeryd to Idols, are partakers of deuells. And as many as are baptized have
put on Christ: it is not to be fearyd, least as many as wear antychristes
robes, will take more if auctorite command it, neither does the auctoryte of the
Christian Magistrate excuse us, except we think, that Sergius Paulus might
permyte that S. Paul had forbidden the sentence of Iamys, which is, Act. 15.
Deuteronomy. 12.
that the gentyls should abstain from the polucion of Idols, God will borowe
nothing of Idols to garnysh or become his religion. thou shall not do so to
the Lord thy god, but rather he commandyth utterly to destroy their alters,
woddes, pyllers, and their very names. He forbyddyth them also to bring any
thing in to their howses that belongythe to Idols. Esaye chap. 30. byddyth
those that are earnestly turnyd to the worship of god, to cast away the
relics of Idolatry, You shall, says he, put out the covering of the Imagis
of silver, that is all thing belonging to Idolatry.
and the precious vestyme^ts of the golden Imagis, and thou shall cast them
away like a menstrous clowte, and say unto yt: Anawnte, or get the hence.
Fynallye when all godly men abhor the monstrous apparel of Friars, Monks,
Chanons, I can not se, by what order they should exteme the ornaments of
Popish Preastes, whose order is as wicked as Freyers, Monks, or any other,
which thing may be said of the rest of the Popish ceremonies, which may all
with like precepte and color, and by as good reason be receuid in the
Churches as those. But admyttinge that these things were never so indifferent,
yet it can not be that we should think them lawful, for us to use them: for
eue^ those things, which by them sealues are lawful, when an other
circumstance is ioynyd to them, then become they unlawful for a Christian to
use them, as in these cases. First we can not cast of all doubtfulnes, having
so many reasons on our side, and so many examples both of learnyd men, and
best reformyd Churches, but in all things most indifferent. Saint Paul
chargith every man to be certanly persuadyd in his own mind, which some men
untruly translate, Let every man abownde in his own sense, for he that with
doubt of conscience eatyth, which of it sealfe is lawful, is condemnyd,
because he does it not of faith. Now the assurance of faith must be sought no
where, but in Gods word. Secondlye, thowghe we should satisfye our
consciences, yet this man is defylid, which is not persuadid by Gods word, but
increased by our examples, that he dare do that, whereof before he doubted, and
this is to give an offense, as they commonly call it to anger them, for they
that are best pleasyd with these matters, are most offendyd, that they stomble
and fall, we must not do what so ever is lawful, but what so ever also is
profitable to edifying: nether must we only regard what lyberte permyttyth,
but rather what our brothers proffyt requiryth. Thyrdlye, we may not
altogether neclecte what infydells judge of us in the using of things lawful
by them sealfes, and therefore S. Paul byddeth them that are called to the
feasts of the gentyls, so sone as mencyon is made of meat offeryd to Idols,
to abstain from eatinge of it, because of him that told of it, and his
conscience, not of him sealfe, but of an other. What the Papists judge of us,
may easily be seen by this, ye Harding for the retayning of those Popish
cerymonies, co^teynith hope that popery shall be restoryd: what the ignorant
people judge of the reamnants of papistri retaynyd, wise men may well consider.
Herunto might have byne ioynid the sentences of old Doctors, Justinius,
Ireneus, Tertullianus, Agustyne, Ambros, Chrysostums, Celestinus, and almost
all the rest, for abhorrynge the customs and ryghtes of the Jews and gentyles
and heritykes, but Gods truth nedyth not man's auctoryte, except they that be
against us, in this cause will appeal to the fathers, the^ shall they
perceive, that in number both of Doctors, and sentences, we shall be nothing
inferior to them. In the mean time this may suffyce, to show first that the
precysians is blameles, secondly the garments are not indifferent, and thyrdly
that thowghe they were indifferent, yet there is sufficient reason at this time,
why we should not wear them. Come Lord Jesus, and make an end of this wicked
wordle, that thy saints may come to gether, that we may sing with the in thy
holy hill for ever. He that ouercomith, shall be crownyd. Pray, pray, as the
Apostell Peter says: the end of all things is at hand.

An Answer to a question, that was mouyd, whi the godly men would not wear a
surples.
Although we must needs confess, Answer.
that we have to much consentyd heretofore with the Papiste in robbing and
bereuinge God of his glory and honor, yet may we not now in the light of Gods
truth contynew a partaker with you in the adulteracion of Christ's
sacraments, contrary to our consciences and knowledge, wherein we judge our
sealues only, not preiudisynge other men's doing, who^ we leave to God, before
who^ they either stand or fall. For our parts we must render account, not
obstinatly bent against any thing yt shall be approuyd by Gods word.

We are persuadyd, Mayor.
that we may not use any thing repugnant to Christian lyberte, nor maintain
an opinion of holiness where none is, which were Ipocrisy, nor consent to
Idolatri, which were denial of the truth, or discorage the godly, incoragynge
the wicked, nor distroying ye Church of Christ, which are bownde to edifye,
nor consent unto confusion, where God requiryth order, nor show disobedience,
where God requiryth to obey.

Minor.
But in using of a surples, we should do that which is repugnaunt to Christian
liberty, maintain an opinion of holiness, where none is, show consent to
Idolatry, deny the truth, dyscorage the godly, and incorage the wicked or
ungodly, consent to confusion and show disobedience, where God commandithe to
obey.

Conclusion
We may not with good conscience, as we are persuadyd wear a surples.

The Mayor is prouyd by Saint Paul Gal. 5. who commandyth to Christian
liberty, by the example of Christ Matt. 15. who would not have his disciples to
maintain an opinion of holiness, note the example of good men.
which the Jews had in wasshyng of hands: by the doctrine of Pawle. 2. Cor.
6. who will have no agreement with the temple of God and the Idols: by the
example of Danyel. 6. who openid his wyndowe toward Jerusalem, lest he might
seame to deny his profession or consent with ye wicked: by the example of
Paul Gal. 2. who reprouyd Peter for the discoragyng of the godly gentiles, and
incoraging of the froward Jews: by the doctrine of the same Apostell. 2. Cor.
13. where he teachith that Mynysters have power to edifye, not to destroy: by
the example of Patriarchs, and Prophets, which in the worshipping of God, wear
by no means confowndyd with the Idolators: by the doctrine of Peter and John
acts, which affyrmithe to be more right to obey God, then men. But for more
evident proof hereof, we may let you se some practices of ancient Fathers.
Tertulian in his book De corona militis, lykythe them unto dom^e Idols, such
as do use any thing according to the ornament of Idolles: and further, if to
lean upon an Idol, is strange from the faith, fasting is good, yet the godly
would not use it that day, as the herytyk did.
what shall seame upon the habyte of an Idol. Augustyne ad Casulanum, warnythe
not to fast on the Sunday, least thereby consent might be showed to the
wicked Maniches. They that wear any thing after the manner of Idols, and if
it be strange from faith to lean upon an Idol, what is it to wear the habyt
of an Idol. The fourth Counsel of Toletane Canon. 5. for avoiding of consent
with Herytyckes, decreed that once dyppynge should be vsyd in Baptysme. A
Papist of our time affyrmith that the Apostels to avoid consent to Iudaisme,
abolysshed the Sabothe day, and sanctyfyed the day of the Lord. The great
Clarke Orygen, as Epiphanius wrytith in his. 2. book. Beware of decemblyng.
1. Tome, carried palm with those that offeryd to the Image Serapis, allthoughe
he protestyd openly, that he did offer unto Christ, and not unto Serapis, yet
was he excomunycatyd, and cast out of the Church by the Marters and Confessors
which then were at Athens. The Christian sowdiars which by Julian sultelte
were browght to offer incens, Beware of deceytfull practyses.
as it is written Historia Tripartita lib. 6. chap. 30. when they perceuyd their
fault, which unawares they had committed in consentyng to Idolatri, they rane
forth into the streats professede their relygion, testified them sealues to be
Christians, affyrmyng that their hands only had co^sentyd unto Paganism, the
nature of true Christian.
and that their hearts did nothing agree thereunto, and whereas their hands had
offendyd vnadvysydlye, they wyshyd to bestow their whole bodies to be
tormentyd for Christ, although with torments and pains most creuell and
horyble. I trust we need not to labor any further for the proof. By the use
of the surples men are iniciat in to ye Popes clergy, as it aperith by ye
Pontifycall, De clerico faciendo. If ye Galathians by circumcision rather lost
their lyberte in Christ, then profytyd any thing, by iniciatinge them sealues
in to Iudaisme. How may you retain the lyberte in Christ, and profyt in his
religion by wearinge the Popes lyuerye, we can not perceive? But by the use of
the surples, is mayntaynyd an Ipocritycall opinion of holiness, ye Pontifical
termithe it Habitum sancte religionis, the habyt of an holy religion. Durand
lib. 3. De rationale diuinorum, says, That it is Vestis linea, the lyuyne
garment, in which they that serve about the services of the alter and holy
things, ought to use upon their clothes, a surples, it is for the whitnes of
it, or it signifies the puryte or chastete, according to that saying: Let
your garments, that is, your works, be white at all times, that is clean:
Mark what lying signs is in the surples inuentyd by Papists.
but for his name, it figurith the mortificacion of the flesh. It is called a
Surples, because that in the old time they did wear it upon skynny coats,
made of the skynnes of the dead, which is vsyd to this day in certain
Churches, representynge that Adame, after he had synnyd, with what good
conscience can the godly wear yt, judge good Brother.
was clothed with such garments. Thyrdly, it notith Innocenci, and therefore it
is put on before all other holy vestures, because that they that are deputyd
to worshippynge, ought to excel in life and in all virtues, according to the
saying of the psalm: Innocencies do ryghtly cleue unto me. Fourthely, for the
bredthe of it, it betokenythe Charity, wherefore they are worn upon profane
and common vestures, it is to be markyd that charity coueryth the multitude of
sins. Fyftlye, for the fassyon of it, in that is it made like a Cross, or
Jews gallows, it fygurythe the passion of the Lord, and they yt wear, that
ought to be crewcyfyed with the vices and concupiscences. In mayntayninge this
opinion of holiness, with all other inue^cions, which by lyinge seignes, which
they have had to it, we know not how to avoid consent unto that Idolatri,
which Durant and the Papiste maintain and profess, and to deny the Popes
ceremonies, the doctrine which we reach, how should it not dyscorage the
godly, and incorage the supersticious in their errors? we can not edefye the
Church of Christ apparentlye, shewinge our sealues to be on of the Popes
clergy. Seeing S. Paull These. 3. willythe to avoid all apparens of evil, and
to be shufflyd in a surples, which the Popes clergy wear, were rather a
confusion then an order, which they them sealues would be loathe to suffer, if
they might get again the keys into their hands, they would cry with open
mowthe, as their pontifical teach them, and pluck the surples of our backs
by the autoryte of almyghtie God the Father, the Son, The surples is an holy
garment of the Papists.
and the Holy ghost. saying, and we take from the all our clerkly habyt, and
we put on ye apparel of religion, and depose, degrade, and spoil the of all
orders clerkely benefice, and clerkelye lyuinge, Mark the follye of Papists.
and we restore the to the servitude and ignominy of the secular habyte. Is it
not a disorder, that Christians should show them selves slaves to the Popes
order? were it not better to serve God in commun attire, then to please the
Pope by disquisinge our selves in supersticious surplessis? were it not better
to obey God, who wyllyth us to serve him in spret, and in truth, then to obey
men, followyng the deuyse of Pope Syluester, the fassyon of the Jews, and
practyse of the Papists: where it not better, by leaving of a Surples to
follow Christ in breaking men's tradicions, the^ by the use thereof to be a
companion of Popes and Pharisees? If this do not seame sufficient to prove the
Minor at this time, it shall be more at large dyscoursyd hereafter. Concerning ye
Queen's Maiestes commandment, herein we acknowledge our sealues bownde to obey
in all things lawfullye commaundyd, so can not we be persuadyd to use that in
the minysteri, which our consciences teaches us to be replenished with
Idolatrous Ipocrisye, and also the example of other men which does were it,
ought nothing at all to move us to were a surples in the minysterie, no more
then to consent with them in persecutyng those men whom they term sedicious
scismatyckes for leauyng them of. Thus as ye se, shortly dear Brethren, we
leave the surples, as the Popes badge to the shaven Clergy, and you as Gods
chosen to the protection of the almyghtie whysshynge, that God may give us
grace as well inwardelye as outwardlye, to seek for syncerite, and to wayght
with all patience the good will and pleasure of the almyghtye, who will and can
healpe when pleasith him. Fare ye well in the Lord Jesus.

A Godly Prayer.
OH Lord God and heavenly Father, which art a just Judge to punish all them,
that do contynewe to offend the, as thou art a Father most pytyfull to receive
to mercy all those, which give over themselves to please the, show me thy
grace and favor, so that I may be truly touchid with inward displeasure of my
sins, and that in the place of flattering my self to sleep in sin, I may be
so cast down in heart, that the rather I may truly with mouth confess most
humbly to give the, the honor, glory, and praise, dew unto thy holy name, and
that as thou of thy great mercy doste instruct us thereunto by thy holy word,
so (for thy names sake) make that ye same may so lighten and clear our
conscience, that in dew examination of all our hole lyffe, we may truly learn
to be angry and displeasid with all our former, and corrupt living. Oh that it
may please the to draw nere unto us, in addressyng and guydyng our footsteppes
in the true and perfect way of obedyence to thy holy laws and commandments.
Send thy holy Angel to nitche his tents round about us, that (...) his
infernal army, never prevail against us, but allways with strong faith we may
thorough Jesus Christ withstand all his crafty engines and snares, knowing
undoubtedly that thou never forsakest them that put their trust in the. Oh let
us not be led by the infirmytie of our untoward flesh, but strenghten us by
the virtue of the holy spirit. Suffer us not to lie under thy heavy wrath and
vengeance through Ipocrysye, but rather touch us so inwardly, that we may
without ceasyng, syghe, and groan unto the, by true and unfeigned repentance.
And although we be not always so well disposyd to ask and pray, as we ought
to do, yet (good Lord) for thy names sake, stretche out thy mighty hand, that
by the gracious workyng of thy holy Spirit, our minds and hearts may be
drawn from all erthly and corruptible things, so that our prayers may proceed
of an ernest and inward affection, so that we never presume to come besore yt
with a dobell heart, knowing that whosoever askethe and prays for any thing
of the, not asking in faith, can not obtain. Increace our faith therefore (oh
merciful Father) that we presently may ly^ely (...) the benefit of remission
and pardon or all our sins, thoroughe the merytes and death of Christ Jesus
our Savior, and so work in us forever hereafter to live in thy fear, and to
stand in awe of thy displeasure, that thou may contynew our merciful Father
world without end. God grant yt.


