A NEW MANVAL OF OLD CHRIstian Catholic Meditations, and prayers faithfully
collected and translated, without any word altered, or added: except in tytles
of Chapters, citations of places, and some few merginal annotations, for the
most part taken forth of holy Scriptures, or the holy Fathers within the first
four hundred years of Christ. And not any one in probable opinion, after the
first six hundred years: nor forth of any Author, but such as are by all
english Christians, accounted Saints, and to be in heaven: that none
professing Christ, can except against them, or any of them.

Is. 35. 8. This shall be unto you the direct way: so that fools can not err
by it.

1617.

TO ALL ENGLISH Christians of all degrees.
My dearest beloved:
AS you profess your selves in Religion to be Christians: so I am most
assured, none of you will be so profane and impious, as willingly to be deemed
people without Religion, or to have the most odious and impious name of
irreligion, or atheism ascribed unto you. All that be Doctors, Preachers and
Rabines in Religion, among you, do teach, that every christian at least must
undoubtedly hold, all points of faith which they call fundamental and
substantial, namely those articles and Creed which the Apostles of Christ
delivered unto Christians.

Then the first and principal of them which are: I believe in God the Father
almighty maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our
Lord, are principally to be embraced. Denial of the first, denies god,
affirming and proving such denyers atheists. Doubting or denial of the second,
condemns al belief in Christ, and the some of christianity: and takes away
al articles of christian Religion, substantial, or not substantial, if any such
can be in a true Religion: which I may not now dispute, but only demonstrate
this: If there be a God almigh^y maker of heaven and earth: both you, and I,
and all things else, are his work and creatures: we have received our essence,
being, and al of him. In all things we depend of him, and he of none, but
independent: and we owe, and must pay and render unto him, al diuin^ worship,
prayers, supplications, ^oueraigne duty, and Adoration.

If Jesus Christ be his Son, and our Lord, and came to redeem the world: he
tauhgt true Religion unto it. And that Religion could not dy^ with him, whose
death was death to death, but foundation and life of religi^n, and life and
redemption to us and al to the end that shall be sa^ed. The scriptures say, He
shall reign for ever, and of his Kingdom there sbal be Luc. 1. 28 Dan 7. 14
and 17.
noe end. Al people, Tribes, and tongues, shall serve him. His Father haith
given him Mich. 4. 7 Dan. 3. 100. Dan. 4. 31. Ps. 2. 7.
the nations his Inheritance, and his possession the eudes of the earth.

The law of the Gospel teaches, and al good Christians do and must beleue^,
that the law of Moses was but te^porary, a pedagoge to Christ, and in him
euacuated, and ended. That Christ was the Messiah, taught an everlasting Law,
no other to succeed it, the world should never want a true Religion, the
eternal King and Bryde-grome, must have subjects, and a Spouse for ever.

The Jews and Thalmud acknowledge, that the Law of the Messiah, was to succeed
that of Moses* when it had reigned two thousand years, and this of the
Messiah, to endure for ever.

Mahumet that monster, such a pretended reformer as in these days have prou^d
many: freely confesses the truth, and long continuance of the Religion of
Jesus Christ, and was unborn when it had ruled above six hundred years.

Your english protestant Doctors and rule^s in Religion, are far divided from
the Roman Church, yet they freely and generally grant, It was pure and
immaculate, six hundred years near that seducers time.

For my purpose, your good, and contentment, at this time, I ask noe more but
this, to which, al but atheists, have given allowance: That we are bound to
pray, and the doctrine and prayers used in the primative Church, within the
first six hundred years, are holy, to be used and frequented,: except you
will not allow his warrant that said: It behooves always to pray, and not to
be weary. 1. These. ^.
Pray without intermission. or any of you sha^ be so desperate, to equal, or
prefer your selves in pride to Lucifer, to think ther^ is any time, thought,
word, o^ d^ede, wherein you need not the help of God or are not dependant of
him.

Therefore to make alsecure in these unfortunate days of dissension in
Religion, and take all evasion away from all, even those that seek to excuse
excuses in sin. I have collected this manual of psalm. 104
old Catholic devotions, such (to be brief) as the title thereof enformeth
you: And such as by the best testimony of God him self, his holy Primative
Church, and best learned Saints thereof, together with your own conscience
and al present consent, neither will, nor can deceive you. Yet I have not in
this Treatise, but slenderly in respect, handled any controdersies of this
time, but propose unto devotion, Meditations, and Prayers daily and necessarily
to be used of al private and unlearned persons, which may pretend danger to
bes^duced in so great variety of doctrines. The contents will appear, either
in a particular Table, or if that be omitted, in the titles of the Chapters and
spiritual Exercises. If any desire better to inform their understanding of the
chiefest questions in Religion, handled in these days, by this Religious manner
and method of disputing, by the prayers them selves of the primative Church,
and Saints thereof (although they may c^^i^ct^r^ by ^he great words and
brags of many desiring to be called learned, that none of the Roman Church,
whereof ^am^ ^^e^st unworthy ^an perform it for that religion or ch^ife points
thereof) I remit them to my late book dedicated to our present Queen and her
Ladies, of that order in disputing, and subject, where they shall find the
doctrine of the external sacrifising Preisthood, and external Sacrifice:
Transubstantiation, and real presence of Christ's blessed body and blood there:
Invocation and patronage of the blessed Virgin Mary, al holy Angels and
Saints both in general and particular: Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead,
inuincibly (I confidently affirm it, and will mantaine it) and demonstratly
proved by the prayers them selves of the primative Church, and holy Fathers
within the first five hundred years of Christ. The serious consideration of
these two works, I commend to your equal Judgments and best devotions, to give
sentence how you have been led or nusled, used or abused, in this so urgent and
important business. And I make even the unlearned and enemies to be Judges in
this cause, whether the mouth of those that speak unjust things be stopped or not, that at least we of one ps. 62.
nation, kingdom, and kindred, with one faith and mind, may singe, that holy
song with the heavenly Angels, Glory in the highest to God: and in earth Peace
to men of good will. Let us not be wiser To. 12.
then we ought to be wise, but to be wise to sobriety, hating evil, cleeuing
unto good: loving charity of fraternity one with an other: Instant in prayer,
thinking the same together: If it may be, as much as is in you having peace
with all men: Careful to keep the unity of spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4.
Ephesians. 6.
By all prayer and obsecration, praying at al time in spirit, and in it watching
in all instancy and obsecration for all that be holy. that at length we may hope,
the heavenly bedewed tears of holy prayers, may quench, or slake at the least,
that raging and consuming fire, which the poysened blases of polluted mouths;
and rotten fuel o^ defiled lives, have blown, kindled, and mantayned, to flame
so long. God of his rnfinite mercy grant that with one consent and one mouth,
we To. 1^
may honor him; for which I shall ever pray: and so rest:

Your loving and best wishing Cou^try-man, R. B.

OF MEDITATIon and Prayer in general.
OF Meditation out of holy Scriptures.
Deuteronomy. 6. and 11. THe words which I command unto thee this day, shall be in
thy heart: thou shall meditate upon them sitting in thy house, and walking on
thy ^ournay, sleeping, and when thou risest. Ios 1. Let not the volume of this
law depart from thy mouth, but thou shall meditate in it days and nights,
that thou may keep and do al things that are written in it. ps. 1. Blessed is
the man which haith not gone in the counsel of the ungodly, and haith not
stood in the way of sinners, nor sit in the chair of ^estilence: but his will
is in the Law of our Lord, and in his Law he will meditate day and night. ps.
118. O Lord how have I love dthy Law: it is my meditation all the day.
How and upon what a Christian ought to meditate: out of S. Ciprian. lib. de
Spectacul.
Vain, pernicious, and sacrilegious spectacles, are to be avoided by
Christians. We must be careful to keep our eyes and ears. Quikly we accustom
our selves in wickedness which we hear: for the mind of man being inclined to
vice, what will it do when it haith corrupt examples? That which falls of it
self, how will it do if it be pricked forward* We must have our mind retired
from these things. A Christian, if he will, haith bettermatters to behold. He
haith true and profitable pleasures, if he recollect him self. And to omit
those which he can not yet perceive, he haith the bewty of this world to
consider, and wonder at. Let him contemplate the rising of the Sun, and
again the setting thereof in order, causing the days and nights: the globe of
the moon, by increase and waine, designing the courses of times: The multitude
of stars, shyning from the high heaven, with their speedy motion: the parts
of the whole year divided by turn, and the days them selves, with the nights
digested by the spaces of hours: the vast greatness of the earth, poised with
mountains: the rivers with their springes flowing from them: the air extended
in the midst, giving life to al things: sometime rain from the co^densed
clouds: otherwhile fairness of wether, renewing his rarity, and in all these
their proper inhabitants: foul in the air, fish in the waters, men upon
earth. Let these and such other works of God be spectacles for the believing
Christians to meditate upon. What Theater framed by the hands of man, is
comparable to these works* Though it be builded up with great heaps of stones,
they are but the crusts of hills, and though their beams do glister gilded
with gould, yet they are inferior to the shyning of the stars. He will never
wo^nder at the works of man, whosoever knows him self to be the child of
God, He casts him self down from the top of his nobility, who can meruel
at any thing after God. Let a Christian, I say, attend to h^ly Scriptures,
there he shall find things to behold worthy of Faith. He shall find god
ordeyning his world, and among the rest of living creatures, making that
admirable and excellent fram^ of man. He shall view the world in s^nnes, rewards
for the godly, and Punishments for the impious: seas dried up for the people,
and again wate^^ given out of the rock for the people, Haruests coming from
heaven, and not from the fl^u^^s: Rivers brydling their violen^e to give dry
passage: In some Faith wrast^ing with fire: wild beasts conq^ered by
Religion, and turned into meekness. And he shall sce souls recalled from
death it self. And among al these, he shall behold a greater spectacle, the
devil that had triumphed over all the world, lying under the feet of Christ. O
how bewtiful a spectacle to contemplat^ is this* how de^ightfull* how
necessary* for a man always to behold his hope, and open his eyes to his
salvation* This is a spectacle which may be seen though our eyes be lost: this
is a spectacle which neither Praetor, nor Consul shows, but he that is alone,
and before al things, eue^ he from whence are al things, the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and honor world without end. Amen.

Of prayer, and of the excellency thereof, out of the holy Scriptures.
prou. 15. THe Lord is far from the wicked, and he will hear the prayers of
the just. These things says our Lord, my house Is. 56. Mat. 21.
shall be called the house of prayer to al nations.

Ask, and it shall be g^uen you, seek, and Marc. 11 Luc. 19. Math. 7.
you shall find, knock, and it shall be opened unto you: for every one that
asks, receives, and that seeks, fyndeth, and to him that knocks, it shall
be opened.

It behooves always to pray, and not to Luc. 18
be weary. Pray without intermission. In all things give thank^s, for this is
the 1. These. 5. 1. Tim. 2.
will of god in Christ Jesus in all you.

I desire therefore first of al things, that Obsecrations, Prayers,
Postulations, Thanks geuings, be made for all men: for Kings and all that are
in preeminence, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all piety and
chastity: for this is good and acceptable before our Savior god, who will al
men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of truth.

What Prayer is, and the dignity thereof, out of the Fathers, and first S.
Gregory Nyssene.
IT behooves always to pray, and never to be weary, for by prayer we come to
be with God. But he that is with God, is separated from the adversary. Prayer
is the defense and protection of chastity, moderation of anger, appeasing and
suppressing of pride, a rooting out of the settled remembrance of injuries a
putter to flight of envy, taking away of injustice, correction of impiety.

Prayer is a right constitution of Justice and laws in a city, strength of a
Kingdom, victory in war, security in peace, reconciliation of the
disagreeing, consernation of the united. Prayer is the seal of Virginity,
fidelity of matrimony, a shield to trauailers, a keepe^ of the sleeping, trust
of the waking.

Prayer is a conversation and conference with God, a contemplation of things
not seen, a sure confidence of things desired, an estate of the same honor
with Angels, a going forward, and increase of good things, an overthrow of
things that be evil, an amendment of sinners, ^he fruit of things present,
are representation of things to come.

Prayer made the whale an house unto Jonas: Reduced Ezechias from the Jonas. 3.
4. Reg. 20 Dan. 1.
doors of death to life: for the 3. children, it changed the flaming fire, into
a cooling wind, erected a Trophee of victory for the Israelites against the
Amalacites: Exo. 17. 4. Re. 29.
and in one night slew with a^ invisible sword, one hundred, four scoare and
five thousand of the Assirians. And we may find examples not to be numbered, of
such things as are already chanced: by which it is manifest, that among those
things which in this life be embraced and esteemed precious, nothing is to be
preferred before prayer*

When, where, and how to pray: out of S. Chrysostom, homil. contra
Pseudoprophetas.
Hear the Apostle crying, Pray ye without intermission, that is, ^. These. 5.
at al time, both night and day, and every hour, both when thou art about thy
work, in thy Iournay, kepest thy flock, tillest thy ground, and sleep.
Expect not our Lords day, or festiual day, or disterence of places. For the
name of God is not confined with place, for in his hand, are all the ends of
the ps. 94.
earth. Therefore David the Prophet, praying every day and night, expected not
difference of places, but weping said admonishing his soul, O my soul, bless
god in all place of his domination. Therefore ps. 10^
expect not day or hour, but pray even when thou art at home, and in thy
iournay, and when thou lie down, and when thou rysest, and in every place,
and pray vigilantly, and diligently, not requesting riches, not honor or
glory, not prosperity, nor any thing else of this world, transitory, or
unprofitable: for all these things are corruptible, and end in corruption,
whether thou namest the greitest riches, or preeminent humane glory, or any
thing else, of such things as be on earth, with which me^ use to be puffed up.
But pray for thy salvation alone: pray for the necessities of thy neboures: and
pray with humility, with tears, with contrition, and knock continually, or
rather without ceasing, and daily, for every one that asks, receaueth, Math.
7.
and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks, it shall be opened.

Perfection and attention in prayer, out of S. Ephrem, ser. de vi^ginitate.
FOllow the steps of the holy Fathers, which have b^ne eminent in virginal
chastity, and chaste and religious life, in prayers and fastings. Love the
exercise of divine things: desire Prayer, the familiar conference with God.
For every holy and pure prayer, conuerseth familiarly with God. The prayer of
them that perfectly desire God, with gladness and much t^ust, continually
pearceth heau^n it self. In it, the Angels and Archangels r^ioyc^, and present
it before the Throne of the holy and high Lord of al. For then the greatest joy
shyneth unto them, if at any time, they offer before our holy Lord, the prayers
of just men that love God. Therefore study in life and virtues, to be a
follower of the holy Fathers: Walk in the paths of their way and life: keep
the virtue of co^tinency as they did: execute it in mind, execute it in spirit,
execute it in body, and execute it in habit, also in meat, and speech,
behoulding, cogitation, and laughter, that in all things thou may prove a
perfect cha^pion. Look to thy self, lest at any time in prayer, thy mind
wander hither and thither: but when thou stand praying to god, order thy
self before him, with fear and trembling. Cut out of thy heart al thoughts and
cares of earthly things, and be wholly in time of prayer, as an heavenly
Angel: and so st^iue, that thy prayer may be holy and pure, unspotted, and
irreprehensible, that when the heavenly gates shall see it ascend up ward,
rejoicing, they may of their own accord presently be opened: that the Angels,
and Archangels seeing it, may al rejoicing meet it, and offer it before the
holy and high throne of our immaculate lord. The^fore be thou always in prayer
joined to God as the Cherubim and Seraphim. Cause god always to rest in thy
soul, that thou may there be found full of confidence, in that terrible and
dredful hour, when Christ our Lord shall come, to render unto every one
according to his To. 2. Apoe. 22.
work. To whom be glory and power world without end. Amen.

An other out of the same S. Ephrem, ^er. Asc. de vita Rel. and paren. 50.
AS if a man standing before a King and talking with him, being called by his
fellow servant, should leave the honorable and glorious speech of the King, and
turn him self to talk with his servant: even so a Religious man in the time of
his singing, that draws his mind from god and turns him self to fables and
toys with others. Therefore let us consider before whom we are placed. For as
the Angels with great fear and trembling, do stand before the Creator,
singing himnes unto him: even so ought we in the time of prayer and singing, to
appear before god with a pure heart, and with reverence and fear, lest we be
thought to stand before him, and intend to prayers only in body, but in mind
in the mean time, to be occupied with earthly business. For even as a ship
boat that is carried up and down with waves of the sea: even so a Monk, whose
mind is distracted with business and cares of the world.

An other out of the same S. Ephrem. de orand. Deum.
TAke heed thou ceacest not to pray; and as often as thou can kneel down:
when thou can not, call upon God in thy mind, both at evening, morning, and
none-time. If thou put prayer before thy work, and rising forth of thy bed,
shall take the beginning of thy motions from prayer, sin will not enter into
thy soul.

Prayer is a conference with God, equal honor with the Angels, promotion of
the good, auersion from the wicked, and amendment of sinners. There is no
possession in man's life, more precious then prayer. Never suffer your selves
to be separated from this, never depart from this, but as our Lord says, let
us pray, that our labor be not in vain. Mat. 6.

The devotion and attention to be used in prayer, out of S. Ciprian, de orat.
dom.
WHen we are at prayer, we o^ght to attend and give our selves with all our
heart to prayers. Let al carnal and worldly cogitation depart. Let not the
mind then think upon any thing, but that alone which it prays. Therefore the
Priest before prayer, when he haith said the Preface, prepares the minds of
Preface at Mass.
the breth^en saying. Sursum corda. Let our hearts be upward, that when the
people answeareth, Habemus ad Dominum. We have them unto our Lord: they may be
admonished to think o^ nothing but our Lord. Let your breast be shut against
the adversary, and open to god alone. Let it not suffer the enemy of god to
come into it in time of prayer, for he often times suddenly creeps and
enters in, and craftily dec^iuing, calls our prayers from god that we may
have one thing in heart, and an other in voice, when not only the sound of
the word, but the mind and sense, ought to pray with pure intention unto our
Lord. And what a sluggishnesse is it to be carried away with foolish and
profane cogitations when thou entreatest our Lord, as though there were any
thing which thou rather should think on, then that thou speak with god?
How do^st thou desire to be heard of God, when thou hear not thy self? Will thou have god to remember thee when thou ask, and thou remembrest not t^y
self? This is not to beware of the enemy: this is when thou praiest unto god,
by negligence of prayer, to offend the majesty of God.

Where and with whom we may pray, out of S. ClEment Romans
IF because of misbeleuers, we can not go to the Church, but the wicked occupy
the place, thou must flee from that place, because it is profaned by them. For
as the priests do sanctify holy things; so the impious defile them. If the
true beleuers, can not assemble together neither at home nor in the Church,:
let every one by them selves, singe, read, pray, or two or three gathered
together. For Where there be two or three gathered together in Mat. 16.
my name, there am I in the midst of them. Let not the godly pray neither at
home with an heritike, for what society is there ^. Cor. 6
between light and darkness?

Times of prayer out of S. Jerome.
ALthough the Apostle bids us always to pray, and to those 1. These. 5.
that be holy, sleep it self is a Prayer: yet we ought to have divided hours
of praying, that if peradventure we be detained with any work, the time it self
may admonish us to do our duty. There is no man that is ignorant, of the
third hour, sixth hour, ninth hour, morning also, and evening. Let us not go to
meat, except we pray, nor depart from the table, before we give thanks to our
creator. We must rise twice, or thrice, in the night, and meditate such
things as we can say by memory, out of the Sctiptures. When we go forth of our
lodging, let us be armed with prayer: when we come forth of the street, let
prayer meet with us before we sit down. Let not the body take rest, before
our soul be fed. At every action, at every going forward, let our hand make
the sign of the Cross.

PRAYERS AND ME ditations in particular; and first upon our Lords Prayer: The
salutation of the Angel to our B. Lady: and the Creed of the Apostles.
With the Primative Catholic introduction to all prayer before them.
AL whatsoever you do in word or work, al tbinges in the name of Col. 3.
our Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks to god the Father by him.

God forbid that I should glory, but in the Gal. 6.
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Cross is made on the forhead of Ieron. in c. 9. Ezech.
the Christians, and signed by often framing it with our hand.

In the name of the Father, and of the Missa Ethiop. ascribe^ ^^ S. Matthew
Apostle and Mozar. in Miss. S. Iacobi. S. Ephrem, de panopl.
Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen. Humble thy self under the mighty hand of
God, that he may exalt thee in the kingdom of heaven, which our Savior haith
promised to the humble.

But in stead of a shield, defend thy self with the sign of the Cross,
signing therewith al thy members, and thy heart. Sign thy affections, thy going
in, and thy going forth, in all times. Thy sitting down and rising up, thy bed,
and whatsoever things thou passest by. First sign them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, for that armor is most
forcible, and no man can ever hurt thee if thou shall be defended with it. For
if any man carry with him the sign of a^ earthly King, no man dares to hurt
him: how much more can or ought we, that bear such a sign of the heavenly
Emperor, fear any man? Never omit to be signed, and thou shall destroy the
snares which the devil haith laid for thee. S. Ephrem ser. de sanct. ^r^. dom.


The Cross triumphs, which all nations, people, Tribes, and tongues, adore,
in which let us glory with blessed Paul saying. God forbid I should Gal. 6.
glory, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is
crucified unto me, and I to the world. Let us paint and engraue, on our gates
and forheades, and eyes, and mouth, and in all our parts, this viuificant
sign. Let us be adorned and armed with this invincible armor of Christians:
For it is the vanqueresse, of death, hope of the world, light of the ends of
the whole earth. Opener of Paradise, profligatrix, and destructresse of
heresies, the strength of the orthodoxal Faith, a great and saving custody,
perpetual glory of the right beleuers of the Church. Therefore o christian, omit
not to bear about, al days and nights, hours and moments, and in all places,
this armor, do nothing without it, but whether thou sleep or wakest, or
eatest, or drinkest, or trauailest, or sailest, or passest waters, or do any
other thing, ever sign and arm al thy members with this saving and quickening
sign of the Cross, and thou shall never be afraid of the day fear, or the
arrow flying in the day, psalm. 90.
or business walking in darkness, from ruin, and noone-time denil. If thou
shall be assisted with this defense, evil things shall not come unto thee, and
scourge shall not approach thy tabernacle. For so soon as they see this sign,
presently al adversary powers terrified, depart and go away. This sign haith
quashed the error of Idols: this haith sanctified the whole world: this haith
driven away darkness, and restoared light: this haith gathered together the
nations from the east, and west, and north, and south, and joined them together
in Charity, into one Charity, into one Faith, into one baptism. This sign is
the impregnable bulwark of true beleuers. What mouth, or what kind of tongue,
shall be able worthily to praise this victorious armor of the great King Christ
our God?

Of prayer, and espechally our Lords prayer out of holy Scripture.
WHen you pray, you shall not Mat. 6. Luc. 11.
be as hipocrites, which love to stand, praying in Synagogues and corners of
streets, that they may be seen of men: Amen I say unto you, they have
received their reward But when thou shall pray, enter into thy chamber, and the
doare being shut, pray thy Father in secret, and thy Father which sees in
secret, and thy Father which sees in secret, will reward thee. And when you
pray, speak not much as the heathens do, for they think to be heard in their
much speaking, therefore be not likned to them, for your Father knows what
you need before you ask him. Therefore so you shall pray.

Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give The grecke, Acton epionsion.
Supersubstantial Bread.
us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from
evil. Amen.

S. Ambrosius lib. 3. de virginitate
Repeat often in thy chamber psalms with our Lords prayer, either when thou
awakest, or before thou go to sleep.

A devout Meditation or exposition upon this our Lords prayer, out of S.
Chromatius Bishop of Aquileia, in cap. 5. Mathei.
O How faithful and blessed a prayer is this unto us* whose order was
instituted by the Doctor of life, and heavenly master? And how blessed may we
also be, if we observe, not only with duty of mouth, but with most faithful
deed of conversation, these words of our Lords prayer? Therefore our Lord
ordained this form of praying, for his Disciples for the hope of man's
salvation, saying, Our Father which art in heaven. How great is the love of our
Lord toward us, how exceeding his mercy and piety, who haith bestowed a gift
of such grace upon us, that him, which is our Lord and god, we which are but
servants, may lawfully call our Father. By which name, he does not only
demonstrate us now to be the servants, but also the sons of God. Therefore
because we have obtained the grace of so great a gift, that we are made, not
only servants, but sons also: we ought to do and behave our selves as the
children of god, that by spiritual doing, we may prove our selves to be that
which we are called, according to that of John, He that is borne of God,
commits 1. Io. 3.
not sin, because his nativity of god does keep him, and the devil touches
him not. But he that commits sin is not of God, but of the devil, because
the devil sins from the beginning. And therefore keeping the sacrament of our
heavenly nativity, we ought to be free from al sin, that we may deserve truly
to be called, or be, the sons of god. And the holy prophets knew the grace of
this divine mercy, in which it is permitted unto us, to call god our Father, as
Isay says, For thou art our Father, because Abraham haith not known us, and
Israel Is. 63.
haith not known us: but our Lord our Father from the beginning, thy name is
upon us. Likewise also Malachy witnessith in his book saying, For there is one
Father Mal. 2.
of us al. How great is the mercy of our Lord? We which before, by our own
will, had chosen the devil for our father, now being borne again by water and
the holy Ghost, begin to have god our Father. And therefore we ought to walk as
the children of God, l^st doing otherwise the^ becomes gods children, we be
holden guilty under the usurpation of so great a name.

Therefore he says, Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name: not
because the name of god can be hallowed of any man, when he halloweth al men,
which says by the prophet, Be you holy, as I also am holy, says our Lord.
L^uit. ^0.
But therefore we request his name to be hallowed, that it may be hallowed in
us by the works of justice, by the merit of faith, by the grace of the holy
Ghost, which sanctification, that we may receive by such gifts, the aid of
his mercy is necessary: but he that is the fountain of everlasting holiness,
needs not any sanctification.

Then he says, Thy kingdom come. Likewise we do not ask, that he should be
King, who is King of euer-during worlds, whose kingdom haith neither
beginning nor end, but that the kingdom which is celestial, which he haith
promised unto us, may come. But it is a sign of great confidence, and sincere
conscience, confidently to ask, that this Kingdom of our Lord may come. And
therefore because we always pray, that the Kingdom of God may come, we must
show our selves such in the faith of our Lord and his commandments, that we
may be worthy of his kingdom to come.

After this he says. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven, where also
there is the like manner of understanding: for no man can resist or hinder god,
that he do not what he will, seeing al things both in heaven and earth, consist
by his will: But we pray that his will may be done in us. And the will of God is,
that believing in him with all our heart, we fulfill those things which he haith
commanded to be done: of which will of god, the Apostle witnesses saying. The
will of god, is your sanctification, that 1. These. 4.
you abstain from carnal concupiscences. Therefore when ^e say. Thy will be
do^e in earth as it is in heaven: This we pray that as the will of god is
faithfully kept of the Angels in heaven, so also we must with a Religious and
faithful devotion, desire the help of gods assistance, or, Thy will be done in
earth, as it is in heaven, that as in heaven, that is, in holy and heavenly
men, the will of god is fulfilled, so also in earth, that is, we pray, that the
will of god may be done by belief of faith and knowledge of the truth in them
which have not ye^ believed.

Then he says. Give us this day our daily bread. This saying of our Lord we
understand two ways, first that we do not ask any thing but our daily food.
For we are not commanded to ask riches, or superfluity of worldly things,
but our daily bread, which to Christians that live by faith, is only necessary
for this present life, as the Apostle says. Having food, and wherewith to 1.
Tim. 6.
be covered, with these we are content. But w^ must cons^der, that this is
spiritually commanded unto us, that we ask our daily bread, that is, that
heavenly and spiritual bread which we daily receive for the curing of our
soul, and hope of eternal salvation, of which our Lord says in the Gospel.
The heavenly Io. 6.
bread is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. And therefore
we are commanded daily to ask this bread, that is, that through the mercy of
God bestowing it, we may deserve ^aily to receive the bread of the body of our
Lord.

And forgive us our debtes, as we also forgive our debtors. This is plainly a
just and necessary saying for all men. First, that we acknowledge our selves to
be sinners: then that we so pray our sins to be forgeuen of god, as we our
selves forgive them that sin against us. Which if we do not, we make our
selves guilty before god by our own words, the scripture saying. A strong
snare is to man his own lips. Whereupon Solomon not unworthily, also not
ignorant, by the holy ghost, of the form of this our Lords prayer, forwarned
us saying, Thou shall not lie a word in thy prayer. For what man can or dares
to lie unto God in prayer, except peradventure he which according to our Lords
prayer, asking pardon for his sins of god, does not forgive them that sin
against him.

Moreover he says. And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil.
There is a dooble reason, and diverse causes of this temptation. Because by
sin, temptation is brought in, to so^me for their amendment: to others for
proof of their faith: to others, for their glory, as blessed James witnessith,
in his Epistle saying. Blessed is he which Iac. 1.
haith suffered temptation, because being made blessed, he shall receive the
crown of life, which god haith promised to all that love him. Therefore we do
not pray, that we be not tempted at al, but that we be not given over to
temptation, above that which the power of our faith does suffer* The Apostle,
that he might show the same, haith witnessed so saying: But god is faithful,
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you are 1. Cor. i^
able: but will make with temptation also an ouergoing, that you may be able to
sustain.

Therefore we do not pray to have that temptation which may be profitable unto
us, taken away, but that which excedeth the measure of our infirmity. And
therefore fitly and necessarily in the end of the prayer, we pray to be
delivered from evil, which does not give over daly to assault our faith with
diverse temptations, from which to be delivered, we justly daily pray, lest
hindered by his suggestions, we can not keep the commandments of god.
Therefore all The excell^cy of our lo^des Prayer
things necessary to our faith and salvation, are contained in this short
prayer of our Lord: while we profess the profession of the name of Father,
while we ask that the signification of his name be in us, while we ^treate
that the kingdom of god may come, while we pray that his will be done in us,
while we beseech for daily food, earthly or heavenly, for the hope of our
salvation, while we crave pardon of our sins, while we pray to have greauous
temptation taken from us: last of al when we desire continually of our Lord, to
be delivered from that evil which is author of al sin, which thing, how it
was to come to pass, the holy Ghost foretold long ago by Isay, saying. Our
lord Isay. 10.
will make abreuiated word through ^l the world, to whom is honor, p^aise, and
glory, together with the holy Ghost, before al worlds, and now and ever, and
world without end. Amen.

Meditations and prayers upon that petition: give us this day our
supersubstantial or daily bread, out of scripture: and may be used before
receiving. Io. 6.

I Am the living bread, which have descended from heaven: if any man shall eat
of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread which I will give, is my
flesh for the life of the world.

Jesus took bread, blessed, and brake, Mat. 26.
and gave to his disciples, and said, take, and eat, this is my body: etc.
this is my blood of the new testament to be shed for many to remission of
sins. Take this is my body, etc. this is my Mar. 14.
blood of the new testament, which shall be shed for many.

This is my body which is given for Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
you, etc. This is my body etc.

Meditations of this supersubsta^tial bread, out of the fathers. S. Justin.
Apol. 2. ad Anton.
WE do not take these things as common meat or common drink, but even as by
the word of god, Jesus Christ our preserver, being made man, had both flesh and
blood, for our salvation: so also we have received, that the meat which is
consecrated by the prayers of the speech which we received of him, is both the
flesh and blood of Jesus Christ, that was made man. For the Apostles in their
Commentaries which are called Gospels, have delivered, that Christ so
commanded them, that he taking bread, when he had given thanks, said, do
this in memory of me, this is my body.

S. Ciprianus L. de caena Domini.
The supper being ordered among the sacramental banquets, the old and new
institutions met together, and the lamb which the old tradition proposed,
being consumed, the master sets before his disciples, food inconsumbale,
the food of immortality is given, differing from common meats, retaining the
species of corporal substance, but by invisible efficacy of the divine power,
proving the presence to be there. Sacraments signified long ago from the time
of Melchizedech, come forth, and to the children of Abraham, doing his works,
the highest Priest brings forth bread and wine. This is (says he) my body.
They had eaten and drunk of the same bread according to the visible form, but
before those words, that common meat was only fit to norish the body, and
ministered help to the corporal life, but after it was said of our lord: Do
this in my commemoration, This is my flesh, and this is my blood. So often as
with these words, and this faith, the matter is handled, that supersubstantial
bread, and Chalice consecrated by solemn benediction, does profit to the life
and salvation of the whole man, both a medicine, and holocaust to heal our
infirmities and purge iniquities.

The bread which our Lord gave unto his Disciples, changed not in outward show,
but in nature, by the omnipote^cy of the word, is made flesh. And as in the
person of Christ, the humanity was seen, and the divinity lay hid: So the
divine essense unspeakably, haith infused it self to the visible sacrament. As
the common bread which we daily eat is the life of the body: so this
supersubstantial bread, is the life of the soul and health of the mind.

S. Saluianus lib. 2. ad Eccl.
SOme man perhaps will demand why god requires more of christians by the
gospel, the^ before of the Jews by the law, there is a manifest reason of
these things, we pay greater things now to our lord, because we owe greater
things. The Jews had the shadow of things, we the truth: the Jews were
servants, we are addopted children: the Jews received the yoke, we have
received freedom: the Jews malediction, we grace: the I^wes received the
killing letter, we have received the quickening spirit. To the Jews the servant
was sent for a master: to us the Son. The Jews by the sea went into the
wilderness: we by baptisine enter into the kingdom. The Jews did eat Manna:
we Christ. The Jews the flesh of birds: we the flesh of god. The Jews the
dew of heaven: we the god of heaven.

S. Ciril. Hierosolim. catech. mistag. 4.
WHen Christ him self does so affirm and say of bread, This is my body; who
after dares to doubt of it? And when the same affirms and says, This is my
blood, who would doubt and say, it is not his blood?

S. Chrisost. hom. 60. ad pop. Antioch.
Let us obey god in all things, and not contradict him, although that which is
spoken, seems to be otherwise to our cogitations, and eyes: but let his word
be more worthy then our thought, and sight, and so let us behave our selves in
mysteries, and let us not only have respect to things put before our eyes,
but let us hold his words: for his word is infallible, and our sense easy to
be seduced: that does never fail, but this does very often err. Therefore
because the word says, This is my body: let us obey him, believe him, and
behold him with intellectual eyes. He does grant unto thee, not only to see
him but also to eat him, and touch him, and receive him within thee. But no
small punishment is proposed to the unworthy receauers. Consider how thou art
offended against him that betrayed him, against those that crucified him: and
therefore beware lest thou also beguiltie of the body, and blood of christ,
they killed his most sacred body: but thou after so many benefits, receauest it
with a polluted soul. It was not enough for him to be made man, to be beaten
with bufets, but he does mingle him self with us, and not only by faith, but
in very deed does make us his body. Therefore then what, ought he not to be
more pure, that enjoys such a sacrifice? what beam of the son is there,
that the hand which deuideth this flesh, ought not to be more bright then it,
the mouth that is filled with spiritual fire, the tongue that is embrued with
that exceeding dreadful blood? Bethink thy self, with what honor thou art
adorned, what table thou do enjoy: that which the Angels seeing do tremble
at, nor freely dare behold, for the brightness shyning from thence: with this
we are fed, to this we are united.

Primasius in cap. 10. Heb.
This is one sacrifice and not many, how is it one, and not many, when it is
offered of many, in diverse places, and diverse times? Therefore we must most
aptly consider, that the divinity of the word of god, which is one and fills
al things, and is wholly every where, that causes, that it be not many, but
one sacrifice, though it be offered of many, and be one body of Christ with
that, which he received in the virgins womb, not many bodies. Neither that we
offer now an other great an other less, an other to day, an other to morrow,
but always the same, having equal greatness: Therefore this is one sacrifice of
Christ, not diverse, as the Jews sacrifices were, for if it should be
otherwise, because it is offered in many places, there should be many Christ's.
which god forbid to think: therefore he is one, in all those places, existing
whole here and there, having one whole body in all the places. And as he that is
offered every where is one body, and not many bodies: so also one sacrifice.

S. Casarius ep. Arelaten. hom. 7. de pascha.
The heavenly authority confirms; My flesh is truly meat, and my blood truly
dri^k. Therefore let al doubt of infidelity depart, for he that is author of
the gift, he also is witness of the truth. For the invisible priest by the
power of his secret word, does chaung the visible creatures, into the substance
of his body, and blood. When the creatures that are to be blessed with the
celestial words, are laid upon the Altar, before they are consecrated by
invocation of the holy name, there is the substance of bread, and wine: but
after the words of Christ, there is the body, and blood of Christ. And what
marvel is it, if those things which he could create with his word, being
created, he could chaung the^ with his word? Yea it seems now less miracle,
if that which he is known to have made of nothing, now being made, he can
chaung it into a better. Examine what can be difficult to him, to whom it was
easy by the power of his will to make visible and invisible things.

Prayers before receiving the B. Sacrament. Math. 6.

Our father which art in heaven etc. give us this day our supersubstantial
bread.

S. Dion. Areopag. l. cael. hier. c. 3. contem.
O divine and most holy Sacrament, those, as it were vayles, and coueringes,
drawn over thee, by signs of obscurity, being opened, show things clearly
unto us, and replenish the eyes of our mind, with asingular light, and such as
can not be covered.

S. Ambro. orat. praeparator.
O Lord thou have said, with thy holy and blessed mouth, The bread which I will
give, is my flesh for the life of the world. I am the living bread which
descended from heaven: if any man shall eat of this bread, he shall live for
ever. O most sweet bread, heal the taist of my heart, that I may feel the
sweetness of thy love. Cure it from sickness, that I may perceive no
sweetness besides thee. O most white bread, having al delight, and al taist,
who do always refresh us, and never feel defect in thy self. Let my heart
eat thee, let all the bowels of my soul, be filled with the sweetness of thy
taist. O holy bread, o lively bread, o pure bread, which descendedst from
heaven and geuest light unto the world: come into my heart, and cleanse me from
al infection of flesh and spirit. Enter into my soul, heal and cleanse me,
inwardly, and without. Be thou a defense, and continual health of my soul and
body. Drive from me the enemies that lie in wait for me. Let them depart far
from the presence of thy power, that I being both without and within defended
by thee, may come in the right path to thy kingdom, where it is not dealt in
mysteries as in this time, but we shall see thee face to face, when thou shall
deliver the kingdom to god, and the Father, and god shall be al things in all.
For then thou shall fill me of thee with a marvelous satiety, so that I shall
never after hunger, nor thirst, thou who with the same god the Father, and holy
Ghost, live and reignest world without end. Amen.

S. Iacobus in Missa. recept. in Synod. 6. general.
TAist and see, how bountiful our Lord is, who is distributed into Parts, and
is not divided, and given to the faithful, and is not consumed, for remission
of sins, and for life everlasting, now and ever, and forever. In the peace of
Christ let us singe: Taist and see, how bountiful our Lord is, o Psalm. 33.
Lord our god, heavenly bread, the life of al. I have sinned against heaven and
before thee, and I am not worthy to be partaker of thine immaculate mysteries,
but thou o merciful god, make me worthy of thy grace, that without
condemnation, I may be made partaker of thy holy body. etc.

After consecration. Missa Ethiopum, ascribed to S. Matthew Apostle.
THis is the holy, honored, and lively body of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, which is given for remission of sins, and obtaining eternal
salvation, to them that duly receive it. Amen.

This is the blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, holy, honored, and
viuificant, which was given for remission of sins, and to obtain everlasting
life, to them that truly receive it.

Amen. Verily this is the body, and this is the blood of Emanuel our God.

Amen. I believe, I believe, Ibeleue, now and ever. Amen.

This is the body, and this is the blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
which body, and which blood, he took of our holy and immaculate Lady, Virgin
Mary, and united them to his Divinity. Amen.

S. Ignatius Epistol. ad Ephesians.
I desire the bread of god, the heavenly bread, the bread of life, which is the
flesh of Jesus Christ, Son of the living god, who was borne in the last
time, of the seed of David, and Abraham.

S. Lligius Hom. 15. de vtriusque paschalis esu.
CHrist is offered in Sacrifice and eaten, and yet remains one and whole,
sure our redemer, providing for our frailty, delivered this sacrament unto us:
That because he now cannot dye, and we do daily sin, we might have a true
sacrifice, by which we might be purged from our sins. Wherefore with fear,
and compunction of mind, and with all reverence we ought to come to the Altar,
and to the table of the body, and blood of our lord, and humbly say, with Math.
8.
the Centurion: O Lord I am not worthy, that thou should enter under my
roof.

S. Ambros. l. 4. de Sacrament. cap. 5.
It was great and venerable, that to the Jews it rayned Ma^na from heaven. But
understand, what is greater, Manna from heaven, or the body of Christ? Truly
the body of Christ, who is Author of heaven. Thou do not idly say, Amen, now
in spirit, confessing, that thou receauest the body of Christ. The Priest says
unto thee, The body of Christ, and thou say, Amen, that is, true. Let thine
affection hold, what thy tongue confesses. S.

S. Clem. Romans Constable. Apost. l. 2. c. 61.
AFter the Sacrifice is ended, let al in order receive our Lords body, with
shamfastnes and fear as coming to the body of the King. Let the women also,
with their heads veyled, come in order. Let the Bishop give the oblation
saying, The body of Christ. And let him that receaueth, say, Amen. When the
rest receive, let the 33. psalm be said. lib. 8. cap. 20.

Psalmus. 33. I will bless our Lord in all time: his praise always in my mouth.

In our Lord my soul shall be praised: let the meek hear, and let them rejoice

Magnify our Lord with me: and let us exalt his name together.

I have sought our Lord, and he haith hard me: and delivered me forth of al my
tribulations.

Come unto him and be illightned and let not your faces be confounded

This poor one haith cried, and our Lord haith hard him: and haith saved him
from al his tribulations.

The Angel of our Lord will put him self in the circuit of the^ that fear
him: and will deliver them.

Taste, and see, how sweet our lord is: Blessed is the man that hops in him.

Fear our lord, al you his Saints: for there is not want to those that fear
him.

The rich have needed, and have been hungry, but they which seek our lord,
shall want no good.

Come children and hear me: I will teach you the fear of our lord.

Who is the man which will life, loves to see good days; forbid thy tongue from
evil, and thy lips that they speak not deceit.

Turn from evil and do good: seek for peace and follow it.

The eyes of our lord over the just: and his ears to their prayers.

But the countenance of our lord upon them that do evil things; that he may
destroy their memory from earth.

The just have cried, and our lord haith hard them: and haith delivered them
from al their tribulations.

Our Lord is near to them that be of a trobled heart, and he will save the
humble in spirit.

The tribulations of the just are many: and our Lord will deliver them from al
these.

Our Lord keeps al their bones: one of these shall not be broken.

The death of sinners, the worst: and they which have hated the just, shall
offend.

Our Lord will redeem the souls of his servants: and all that hope in him will
not offend.

S. Clem. Romans sup. l. 8. c. 20
When the psalm is ended, let the Deacon say, let us give thanks to him, who
haith made us worthy, to receive his holy mysteries, and we ask that they be
not unto us to judgment, but salvation unto us, to the profit of our soul and
body, for custody of piety, remission of sins, to the life of the world to
come: let us be stirred up in grace.

S. Chrisost. l. 3. de Sacerdot.
When thou behouldest our Lord Sacrificed, the priest occupied in the
Sacrifice, and pouring forth prayers: do thou think thou do converse with
mortal men, and to be on earth? Art thou not rather forthwith transported into
heaven, and casting away al cogitation of the flesh, with a naked mind and pure
understanding, look about the things that be in heaven? O miracle! O bounty
of God! He which sits above with his Father, the same instant time, is
handled with the hands of al: and he gives him self unto them that will
receive him and embrace him.

THE SALVTATION of the Blessed Virgin, commonly called the Aue Maria, by whom
composed, and Meditations upon it out of Scripture.
THe Angel Gabriel was sent of Luc. 1.
God into a City of Galilee, ^alled Nazareth, unto a Virgin, despoused to a man
whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, and the Virgins name was Mary.
And the Angel being entered in, said unto her.

Hail full of grace, our Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women.

As Elizabeth heard the salutation v. 41. 42.
of Mary, the infant did leap in her womb. And Elizabeth was replenished with
the holy Ghost, and she cried out with a loud voice and said, Blesed art thou
among women, and blesed is the fruiet of thy womb.

The Prayer added by the primative Church, as appears by these Saints.
S. Aug. 5. 2. Annun. Dom. Athan, ser. de Deip. Ephrem. orat, de laudib Dei
Matris. Greg. Naz. Trag. Chr. patiens. etc.

O holy Mary Mother of God, pray for us sinners, now and in the hour of our
death. Amen.

A devout Meditation by way of exposition, upon the first part, out of S.
Andreas Archbishop of Hierusa lem, ser, in salut. Angel.
Hail full of grace, our Lord is with thee. Hail organe of gladness, by which
the condemnation of our sin is purged, and a full recompense of true joy is
made. Hail thou who art truly blessed. Hail illuminated: Hail magnificent
Temple of divine glory: Hail consecrated Palace of our King. Hail
Bridechamber wherein humanity was espoused to Christ. Hail thou chosen of God
before thou were borne. Hail gods reconciliation with men. Hail treasure of
incorruptible life. Hail heaven, the Tabernacle of the Sun of glory. Hail
most ample field of God, whom none other place, but thou alone, is able to
comprehend. Hail holy virginal earth, of which the new Adam by an unspeakable
framing, was formed, to restoare the old Adam to salvation.

Hail full of grace, our Lord is with thee: He that said, Let light be made.
Genesis 1.
Let the firmament be made, and afterward, the other works of his powerable
creation. Hail thou new Arc of glory, in which the holy Ghost descending,
rested: the Arc in which the sanctification of new glory, which of his own
nature is holy, meruelously enclosed him self in the virginal womb as in a
shop of nature to be incarnate. Hail thou intellectual glass of contemplative
knowledge, by which the Prophets renowned spirits, have mistically shadowed the
incredible coming down of god unto us. Hail ornament of the Prophets, and al
Patriarchs, and the most true praise of the unsearchable oracles of god.

Blessed art thou among women: And blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And
certes thou art truly blessed, for God blessed thee a Tabernacle to him self.
Among women blessed art thou, who most freely did embrace, as it were, in
the saife promptuary of thy virginity, that heavenly treasure, in whom al other
treasures of wisdom and knowledge are laid up. Thou art truly blessed, who
alone above al other Mothers, was worthy to be the Mother of thy maker. Verily
blessed art thou who alone without man, did conceive, and in thy womb bear
him, who spreads the heavens, and made the earth, of thy virginity, to be
celestial. Blessed art thou among women, who alone have obtained the blessing
which god promised to the gentiles by Abraham. Verily blessed art thou, who art
na^ed the Mother of the blessed child Jesus Christ our Savior, by whom the
Nations do cry, Blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord, and blessed
Math. 21. Psalm. 117. Psalm. 71.
is the everlasting name of his glory. And the whole earth shall be filled with
his Majesty. Among women blessed art thou, whom al generations declare to be
blessed, Kings do glorify, whom Potentates adore, in whose sight, the richest
of the people offer guiftes, on who^ virgins following, and going before, do
attend, into the Temple of the King.

Blessed art thou among women, who^ Isay behoulding with his prophetical Is. 8.
eyes, named the prophetess and virgin. Verily blessed art thou, whom Ezechiel
Ezechiel. 43. Ezechiel. 44. et 46. Daniel. 2.
proclaimed to be the true rising of the sun. A gaite closed, opened by god
alone, and shut again. Thou alone art truly blessed, whom Daniel that man of
desyers did see, to be a great mountain, And admirable Abacuc, a shadowing
mountain: Moreover the mountain of Psalm. 67.
god, and a fertile mountain; Also a pleasant mountain, a mountain in which
it pleased god to dwell, as thy ancestor the king endued with the spirit of god
foretold. Among women blessed art thou: whom Zachary that most heavenly
Zachar. 4.
man did behold as a Candlestick adorned with seven Ca^dl^s, doubtless bright
and shyning with those seven guiftes of the holy ghost. Verily blessed art
thou, beutified with sense and understanding, the Genesis 2.
paradise of the flourishing wood of our salvation, which have within thee the
husbandman him self of the Garden Eden I mean Christ our lord, shadowed by
figures in thee: who by a certain vnspeable power, like unto astreme, issuing
forth from thy womb of life, as it were with four beginninges by his gospel,
haith wattered the face of the world. Blessed art thou among women, and
blessed is the fruit of thy womb. Blessed is that Io. 4.
fruit from which fountains Do flow of water spri^ging up unto life
everlasting. That fruit from which that lively bread, I mean our lords body
is brought forth, and the cup of immortality, the saving potion is given unto
us.

A devout meditation and prayer concerning the second part of the Aue Maria:
out of S. Augustine s. 2. Annun. dom. Tom. 10.
O Blessed Marie, who is able worthily to render unto thee duty of thanks,
and solemnity of praises, who by thy singular assent have succored the world,
that was lost? What lauds shall the frailty of mankind pay unto thee, who by
thy negotiation have found the means to recover it again? Therefore receive
such as they be, very small, such as they be, thanks vneqnal to thy merits:
And when thou have received our prayers, by praying excuse our faults. Admit
our prayers within the Oratorie of thy audience, and bring back unto us, a
preseruatine of reconciliatio^. Let that be excused which we entreat by thee:
Let us obtain that, which we ask with a faithful mind. Receive that, which we
offer, bestow a gain upon us, what we demand, excuse what we fear: For thou
art a singular hope of sinners, by thee we hope for pardon of offenses, and in
thee, o most blessed woman, is the expectation of our rewards. O Holy Mary
succor those that be in misery, assist the weak hearted, comfort those that
weep, pray for the people, entreat for the clergy, make intercession for the
devout woman sex, let al perceive thy help, that celebrat thy name. Be ready
to assist the prayers of them that ask thee, and yield to al, their desired
effect. Have a care d^a^y to pray for the people of god, t^ou o blessed, who
did dese^ue to b^are the Redeemer of the world, who l^uet^ and reigns for
ever. Amen.

An other devout Meditation and prayer concerning the some out of S. Atha^asius
Pa^ri^rcke of Ale^a^dria se^. de Sac^iss. deipara.
THe holy ghost came upon her and Luc. 1.
sanctified her, as the spirit says in the psalms. The most high, ps. 45.
haith sanctified his Tabernacle, and the power of the highest strengthening
oue^ shadowed her. Luc. 1.
He is a King that was borne of the Virgin, and the same our Lord and God.
Therefore also his Mother which brought him forth, is properly and truly
thought, to be our Queen, and Lady, and Mother of God: and it will be lawful
for us so agreably to speak, while we have respect unto ^er, and him that was
borne of her, her son that bears flesh. Wherefore as when we look unto him,
we call him our King, Lord, and God: so also when we cast our eyes to her, we
behold her to be our Queen, Lady, and Gods Mother, and that by contemplation
of our intellectual eye. The Queen is present ps. 44.
on thy right hand, compassed about with her gilded garment garnished.

And now truly, o Daughter of David and Abraham, harken and incline thine ear
to our prayers, and do not forgeat thy people. It becomes thee to be called
Mother, Regeneratrix, Lady, and Mistress: in reguard, that from thee, issued our
King, Lord, and our God. Thou art present unto him, who though he be terrible
unto us, yet is sweet unto thee, and gives al grace: for which cause it came
to pass, that thou was called Full of grace, that is, Luc. 1.
who did abound with algrace, and that by the coming of the holy Ghost ps.
44.
upon thee: Therefore, all the rich of the people, do bes^ch thy countenance,
being made rich with such good things, and spiritual contemplations. To thee
we cry, remember us, o most holy Virgin, who ever after thy delivery,
remainest a Virgin: and give unto us for this little speech, great guiftes out
of the riches of thy graces, thou that art full of grace. Wherefore we use
these words, as from the thing it self, and by nature laudatory: chiefly for
the song of thy praise, if at any time hymn, if at any time praise, be offered
unto thee, either by us, or any creature: To thee, I say, our gracious Lady,
Queen, Mistress, Mother of God, Arc of the Sanctuary.

Behold now at this time, and in the beginning of the day, how the Angel
composed this Eucomion to thee, as the first fruits of praise, sayng. Hail
full of Luc. 1*
grace, our Lord is with thee. Al orders of Angels, and terrestrial things,
pronounce thee blessed: and lifting up their Hierarchial hands, bless thee,
who art blessed in heaven, and declared blessed on earth. Bl^ssed art thou
among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb: For with such blessings,
the first sacred Order, does celebrate thee, which consists of, Thrones,
Cherubins, and Seraphins, who are called Flamines or knowers of the great King,
that is God. Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is thy womb, the bearer
of God, and thy Papps, which he yet an infant, sucked. And the second
Hierarchy, which contains Dominations, Powers, and Potestates, as having
learned it of the higher Hierarchy, and first illuminated, respecting unto
thee, does cry, Blessed art thou among women, an^ blessed is thy wo^b which
conceived God, and thy ceates which brought up god, become a child.

Now the third holy order of Principalities, Angels, and Archangels, unto twhom
it was commanded and permitted from God, by sending forth one Gabriel an
Archangel, does utter the most glorious and most abundant himne in these
words. Haileful of grace, our Lord is with thee. Then from these, we that are
the earthly Hierarchies, bringing the exaltations of god in our voice whether
because we have learned, or have taken these words one from an ps. 149.
other, exalt thee with a great and loud voice, Hail gracious, our Lord is
with the^. O Mistress, and Lady, and Queen, and the Mother of God, make
intercession for us. Because he that was borne of thee, God incarnat, is our
god, to whom is due glory, magnifying, and al honor and adoration, and thanks
giving, with the father without beginning, and with the holy good viuificant
spirit, both now and ever world without end. Amen.

An other out of S. Ephrem. ser. de sanctiss. dei genitricis virginis Mariae
laudibus.
O Lady replenish my mouth, with the grace of thy sweetness; and illuminat my
mind, o full of grace, move my tongue, and lips, cherfully and with joyful
mind, to sing praises unto thee, and cheefely that angelical delightful song,
by far, most renowned, which the angel Gabriel in Nazareth did sing to thee a
virgin, and mother of god most undefiled: That salutation I say, most
convenient, and agreeable, and most worthy health of the world, and medicine
and preservative of our souls. O sacred virgin vouchsafe that I thy humble
servant, may praise thee, and joyfully say: Hail excellent and chosen vessel
of god. Hail lady Mary full of grace: Hail among women, most blessed virgin.
Hail star most refulgent, from which Christ went forth. Hail light most
shining mother and virgin Hail who have most admirablly brought forth, the
king of al. Hail by who^ the most clear sun of justice haith shyned. Hail
Queen and lady, higher then al. Hail song of the Cherubim and Seraphim, and
sacred hymn of Angels. Hail peace, joy, co^solatio^, and health of the world.
Hail gladness of mankind. Hail praise of the fathers, and ornament of the
prophets. Hail bewty of martyrs, and crown of saints. Hail glory of the
godly. Hail most excellent miracle of the whole globe, of the earth. Hail
delight of al earthly cre^tures. Hail paradise of delights, and al
pleasantness, and immortality* Hail tree of life, joy, and pleasure. Hail
mother of al. Hail fountain of grace and al comfort. Hail refuge and harbor
of sinners. Hail propitiatory of them that labor. Hail sanctuary in
Jerusalem. Hail most glorious throne of our Creator. Hail illustrious, and
most shyning brightness of eternity. Hail hope of al good me^ afflicted with
adversity. Hail sweet comfort, and defense of conuertites. Hail Queen and
patroness both of men and women. Hail most effectual conciliatrix of the
whole world. Hail glory, and ^oy of al preistes. Hail vi^gin, comfort of the
solitary livers. Hail Queen of the heavenly Citizens, and Lady of Angels.
Hail our comfortesse that have appeased our sorrows, and mitigated our
greefes, and taken away al our oppressions. Hail sure trust of our soul.
Hail firm sauegard of al Christians, recurring sincerely and truly unto thee.
Hail light most bright, by which the world is illumined. Hail bright mother
of Christ son of the living god. Hail notable protection, and glory of us
al. Hail who have co^prehe^ded him in thy bosom, and arms, that is
comprehended in no space. Hail who have brought up Christ the giver of life:
Christ I say the most merciful creator of al. our most sweet lord Jesus, to
whom belongs al honor, glory, renown and power forever; praise and
iubilation and magnificence together with the eternal father and holy ghost,
now and ever and world without end. Amen.

By the p^aiers and merits of the most holy mother of god, Mary the virgin,
and all the heavenly armies, and whole company of Angels, Cherubim and Seraphim,
prophets and Apostles, Martyrs and Co^fesors, and by the intercessions of al
Saints, and supplications of all the blessed, o my most merciful god have
mercy on thy creature: and place thy humble servants on thy right h^nd, in the
houer of thy dredful Judgment Amen..

An other out of the same S. Eprem. orat. ad Sauctiss. dei Genitricem.
BE present unto me now and ever, o Virgin, Mother of God, Mother of mercy,
benign, and gentle, a fervent protectrise, and helper, in this present course
of life, turning from me al hostile invasions, and placing me in the way of
salvation, and in the last point of life, conseruing my miserabl^ soul, and
driving from it, the dark and horrible sight, of most wicked devils: in the
dreedful day of Judgment, delivering me from everlasting damnation^ and finally
accompting me in the number of the just, and making me heir of the
inaccessible glory of thy son and God, which I desire, o my Lady, and Mother
of God, may after this exile, by thy godly intercession and patronage, be
granted unto me, and unto all that humb^y run to thee, and fasten their hope
in thee, by the grace, mercy, and bounty of thy only begotten Son, our Lord
God, and Savior Jesus Christ: to whom is due, al glory, honor, power, and
adoration, with the Eternal Father, and holy, and viuificant Spirit, now and
ever, and world without end. Amen.

An other out of the same S. Ephrem in Lament. Mar. super pas. dom.
O Pure, and immaculate, and blessed Virgin, Mother of thy mighty Son, and of
the God of al, without offense, perfect and most sacred, the hope of the
dispayring, and guilty, we praise thee, we bless thee as most full of grace,
who brought forth Christ, God and man. We al fall down to thee, al call upon
thee, and beseech thy help. Deliver us o Virgin holy and intemerate, from al
necessity approaching, and from al temptations of the devil. Be thou our
reconciliatrix and Advocate in the hour of death and Judgment, and deliver us
from the unquenchable fire to come, and the outward darkness, and vouchsaife
us the glory of thy Son, o Virgin and Mother most sweet and gentle. For thou
alone with the God of Christians, art our most secure and holy hope. To whom be
glory and honor, renown, and rule for ever. Amen.

Another of S. Ephrem, ser. de laud. Sanstiss. Dei Genitr. Virg. Mar.
OInuiolate, perfect, and wholly pure and chaste Virgin Mary, Mother of God,
Queen of al, our most glorious Lady, higher then the inhabitants of heaven,
brighter then the beams and shyninges of the sun, more honored then the
Cherubim, more holy then the Seraphim, and incomparably more glorious then all the other celestial Arms, the hope of the Fathers, glory of the Prophets,
praise of the Apostles, honor of Martirs, joy of Sainctts, and light of the
most accepted Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. The Ornaments of Aaron, brightness
Iud. 6.
of Moses, and Flease of Gedeon, the crown of the company of holy Princes,
and al Saints and virgins, brightness far exceeding, and splendour
inaccessible, the Golden Censor, most clear Lantherne, most bewtiful vessel,
bearing the Manna of heaven, the Heb. 6.
Table which brought the written Law unto mortal men, the true Arc, most Apoc.
8.
divine Charter, most prudent and wise wise Princess of al, and illuminating
Virgin, most holy comfortesse and guider of al, most sacred Maiden. O flamming
Bush unburned, and flourishing Rod of Aaron. For verily thou art the Rod,
and thy Son the Flower: For from the root of David and Solomon, did spring
Christ our creator god and Lord, omnipotent, and alone most high. Thou
broughtest forth god and man: Thou a Virgin, before birth, in birth, and after
his birth. God thy creator, putting on flesh without seed, in thy virginal
womb, did not take away those keys of the oriental gate that is ever shutt:
and preserving thee, o most bewtiful, such a one as thou was before his birth,
By thee we are reconciled to Christ our God, thy most sweet Son. Thou art
the only adnocatrix, and helper of sinners, and people destitute of help.
Thou the most saife Haven of the^ that fuffer shipwreck.

Thou art the comfort of the world. Thou art the receptacle of orphans,
redemption, and delivery of captives: Thou the exultation of the sick,
consotion of the sad, and health of al. al. Thou art the strength of Monks,
and Eremites, and hope of the secular. Thou art the glory, crown, and joy of
virgins. Thou art the gladness of the world, O Lady, Princess, and Queen
most excellent, exceeding blessed, Maiden most honored, and Lady of ladies most
pure and chaste. We flee under thy defense, o holy Mother of God, defend and
keep us under the wings of thy piety and mercy. Have mercy on us that are
defiled with the filth of sin, who with very manifould offenses and
transgressions, have offended the Creator our god, Judge of al, lest the most
pernicious Satan, be insolent and glory against us, lest the detestable enemy
arise against us, lest we see thy servants to fall from hope of thee: or lest
the tongue of detractors, calumniate us. We have none other hope, then in thee
o most sincere Virgin. Far from our Mothers arms, o our Lady, we wretches are
dedicated unto thee, and called thy Clients. Therefore suffer us not by the
malignant Satan, to be led to the gates of hell. For thou art our haven, o
Virgin immaculate, and president. O holy helper, we are wholly under thy
tuission, and protection. Therefore we flee to thee the only woman, and with
often tears, o most blessed Mother, beseech thee and fall down unto thee,
humbly crying, and praying, lest thy sweet Son our Savior, and geuer of the
life of al, for many sins which we have committed, take us away, and like a
Lion, tear our wretched souls, or cut us up, as the barren fig tree. But we
entreat that we may come securely to Christ, and enter into those palaces of
the blessed, where there are not tears, nor mourning, nor vexation, not
grief, not calamity, not death, not torment, not want of place.

THE HOLY CREED Or Articles of our Faith, delivered to the Church by Tradition,
by the holy Apostles of Christ, as testify these primative Saints
S. Clem. Romans Ep. 1. Amb. Ep. 81 ad Siriac. and ser. 38. Aug. ser. 181. de
temp. Ireu. lib. 1. haer. ca. 2. and l. 3. c. 4. Hier. ad Pamach. Ep. 61. ^a.
9. Leo ser. 11. de pass. dom. Ep. 13. ad Pulcher. Aug. ser. cont. Eu^ych. Max.
Taur. Ep. Hom. de trad. Simb. paschas. praef. lib. de Sanct. and others.

I Believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord. Which was conceived by the holy
Ghost, borne of the Virgin Ma^y. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
dead, and buried. Descended into hell. The third day he arose again from the
dead. Ascended into heaven. Sits at the right hand of God the Father
almighty. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in
the holy Ghost. The holy Catholic Church. The communion of Saints. The
forgiveness of sins. The resurrection of the body. And life everlasting.
Amen.

Direction out of S. Ambrose lib. 3. Virgin.
We ought to repeat daily the Creed as the seal of our heart, in the hours
before day. To which, when we are afraid, of any thing, we must run
continually. For when is a soldier in camp, a warriar in battle, without
his sign of warfare to be decerned by?

A Meditation, or breife exposition upon the same Creed, out of S. Clem. Ep.
1. translated by Ruffinus, within 400 years of Cirist.
Ruffinus in praef ad Gaudent. in Re^ogn. vasen. Conc. can. 6. Alexan. 1. Ep.
ex Conc. Romans Anaclet. Ep. 3.
IT greatly behooves al men that are called by the Christian name, truly to
believe and acknowledge, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, one God and
Lord, and with all their The duty of ^ Christian.
mind, and al their heart, and al their power, to love him and their
neighbors as them selves, and to be instructed, to perfect Doctrine, to
accomplish these. things. For faith and Charity, are ^he foundation of al
Goodness, Heb. 11.
and without Faith no man can can please god. Therefore Christ being risen from
death, and ascended into heaven, after the holy Ghost was sent, the Apostles
having the knowledge of tongues, bestowed upon them, being yet together,
composed the Symbol, which the true believing Church now holds, every one of
them saying what he thought. That when they should depart one from an other,
they might preach this rule throughout al nations. Wherefore so they taught,
proposing a su^me of the whole Catholic faith, in which both the integrity of
our belief, and the equality of one god omnipotent, that is, the holy Trinity,
is declared, and the mystery of the Incarnation, of the Son of god, who for
the salvation of mankind, descending from his Father in heaven, vouchsaifed to
be borne of a Virgin, and by what means, and when he suffered death, how being
buried, he arose, and in his flesh it self, ascended into heaven, and sits
on the right hand of the Father, and shall come to be our Judge, and how he
bestowed remission of sins, to them that be regenerate in holy baptism, and
the refurrection of mankind in the same flesh, for the life to come. For
Symbol in greek, is called in latin, a Collection. And this the said Apostles
among them selves, by the holy Ghost, as before is said, for the good of us.
It is also named a sign, because by this, he that truly believes, is known.
Therefore esaluatio^ of their souls, and everlasting life is by good works
prepared to all that believe the things contained in the fore said Symbol.

An other Meditation upon the same, out of S. Maximus Episc. Thaur. hom. de
tradit. Symboli.
WHen among our Fathers, as the book of Judges makes mention, certain Trib^s
of Israel, fell to civil wars among them selves, and because of the like habit
of one people, there could be no distinction to know the soldiers by: that
Tribe which had the iustest cause of war, because it worthily by the help of
god presumed of victory, ordained to it self a sign in a secret speech, that
those whom one liknesse of armor confounded, the mystery of their watchword
might distinguish. Which example, as I suppose, the blessed Apostles imitating,
delivered the mystery of the Symbol to the Church of God, which they armed
against the malice of the devils fury: that because under one name of Christ,
there would be a difference of beleuers, the sign of the Symbol, might make
distinction between the true faithful, and the misbeleuers. And he that was a
stranger from faith, and enemy of the Church, might appear either as one not
baptized that knew it not, or as an heritik that had corrupted it.

A Meditation necessary, for a direction to al professing Christ crucified,
upon that word of our Creed, Crucified.
Ciril. Hieros. Catech. 4. Illumin.
MAny others have been crucified, but what other that was crucified is there,
whose invocation expels devils? Therefore let us not be ashamed of the
Cross of Christ. But if any man does hide it, sign thou thy self openly in
thy fornead with the Cross, that the devils seeing the sign of the King, may
with trembling fle^ fa^re of. Make this sign, when thou eatest, when thou
drinkest, and sitting, and standing, and speaking, and walking: briefly in all
thy business.

An other of S. Ephrem, ser. de cruce D^mini.
DOminus regnauit a Ligno. Our Lord haith ^e^gned from the tree The Cross
rules, which al Nations adore. The C^^sse is the hope of christians* the
Resurrection of the dead, staff^ of the lame, comfort of the poor, bridle of
the rich, subversion of the proud. The Cross, the triumph against devils, a
father of orphans and pupils, counseler of the just, comfort and ease of the
afflicted, k^eper of infantes, head of men, crown of old men, a light to them
that sit in darkness, magnificence of Kings, freedom offeruantes, wisdom of
the unlearned; philosophy of the barbarous.

The Cross, the preaching of the Prophets, companion of the Apostles,
glorifying of Martyrs, shamfastnesse of virgins, joy of Preistes. The Cross,
foundation of the Church, and security of the world, destruction of the temples
of Idols, scandal of the Jews, strength of the weak, medicine of the s^ck,
food of the hungry, and fountain of the thirsty. This it is, which fastened in
the middle Mat. 27. Marc. ^5.
of the earth, in the place of caluary presently budded forth, the best branch
of grapes of our life. This planted in Luc 23. Io. 19. Phil. 2. Ephesians. 4.
the middle of the earth, most prudently haith comprehended the ends of the
world. On this, Christ our God being exalted, led agaiue captivity captive,
which was detayned by the tyrant beneath. In that Christ destroyed the most
devouring belie of hell, and stopped the working, and wide open gaping mouth of
the devil: He being seen, death did tremble and quake for fear, and dismissed
al free, which from the first man, unto that time, it had held under her rule
and tyranny.

Another of S Chrysostom aduer. gent. demonst. etc. et hom. 55. in Matthew.
THe Cross, which was cursed, which was abominable, a sign of death: is made
a thing more noble then Diademes and Crowns. For the head is not so adorned
with a kingly crown, as with the Cross which is more worthy then any ornament,
and that which in former times, al so much abhorred, now they so much seek to
have the sign thereof. It is now found in every place: with Princes, subjects,
men, women, Virgins, the married, bound, and free. Al men oftentimes sign them
selves therewith, making it on our noblest member, for it is daily figured on
our forhead as upon a pillar. So it shyneth on the holy Table, so in the
ordinations of Priests, so again with the body of Christ in the Mistical
supper. Marvelous is this grace no man is ashamed of it, no man blu^ssheth at
it, thinking that it haith been the sign of a cursed death: but al men are
more adorned with it, then with ^rownes of Diademes, or many Jewels, and
chains, beset with precious stones.

Hieronimus Ep. 128 ad Fabiol. Exodus 28. Thou shall make a plate of the purest
gold, etc fastening it on the forhead etc.
THat which in times past, was demo^strated in the golden plate is showed in
the sign of the Cross. Then the sign, according to the saying of Ezechiel,
was fastened on the forhead of them that mourned: now we that bear the Cross,
do say, O Lord the light of thy co^ntenance, is signed Hier. inc. 9. Ezech.
upon us. K^l none, upon whom you shall see the sign Thou. In the old
characters of the Hebrews, which the Samaritanes vs^ to this day, the last
letter is Than, having the similitude of a Cross, which is made in the
forheades of Christians, and signed, by often forming it with our hand.

A prayer after the Creed, out of S. Hilary, l. 1^. Trin. in fine.
Preserve o Lord, this Religion of my faith unspotted, and til my soul
departs from me, geu^ me this voice of conscience, that I may always keep
that which I have professed in the Symbol of my Regeneration, when I was
baptized, in the Father and the Son, and the holy Ghost, that is, may worship
thee our Father, thy Son together with thce, and may deserve thy holy Spirit
which is of thee by thy only begotten Son. Because there is a fit witness
for my faith unto me saying, Father, al my things are thine, and thine, are
mine: my Lord Jesus Christ remaining in thee, and of thee, and with thee,
always God, who is blessed for ever. Amen.

An other inter oper. sancti Cipriani, de Symb. which some ascribe to S. Cip.
others to Ruffinus.
Our Lord vouchsaife to grant us, that keeping the Faith which we have
received, after our course is e^ded, to expect the crown of Justice laid up in
stoare, and to be found among them that rise again to everlasting life, and to
be delivered from confusion and euerduring reproach, by Christ our Lord, by
whom to God the Father almighty, with the holy Ghost, be glory and rule, world
without end Amen.

Meditations and prayers, upon those words of the Creed, Communion of
Saints, may be used before Iournay, or other business. Genesis 48.
THe Angel which haith delivered me from al evils: bless these children.

The Angel of our Lord, will put him Ps. 33.
self in the compass of them that fear him: and deliver them.

He haith given his Angels charge Psalm. 90
of thee: that they keep thee in all thy ways.

When thou did pray with tears, Tob. 12.
and buriedst the dead, and left thy dinner, and hiddest the dead in the day in
thy house, and buriedst them in the night: I did offer thy prayer to our Lord.

I am Raphael the Angel, one of the seven which stand before our Lord.

The vision was this. Onias which Match. l. 2. c. vlt.
had been high Priest, houlding out his hands, to pray for all the people, of
Israel, and after this an other man appearing, marvelous for age and glory, and
with habit of great comeliness about him, and Onias answearing, to have said:
This is a lover of his brethren, and the people of Israel, this is he that
prays much for the people, and all the holy City, Jeremy the prophet of god.

The four and twenty Elders, fell down before the Lamb, having every Apoc. 5.
one Harpes and Phials of Gold, full of sweet odores, which are the prayers of
Saints.

A Prayer of Judas Machabeus, 2. Machab. cap. vlt.
O Lord, who have sent thy Angel 4. Reg. 10. Tob. 21.
under Ezechias king of Judah, and killed an hundred fourscore and five thousand
of the army of Sennacherib: and Eccl. 48. Is. 7. 1. Mac. 7. etc.
now o Lord of heavens, send thy good Angel before us in fear and trembling of
the greatness of thy strength, that they which come against thy holy people,
may be afraid.

A Meditation out of S. Ciprian, de mortalitate.
WE must consider, and think with our selves, that we have renounced the world,
and live here a while, as strangers, and pilgrims. Let us embrace that day,
which appoints every one to his dwelling house, which restoareth us, being
delivered from hence, and freed from worldly snare, to paradise and the
heavenly kingdom. What man, being a pilgrim far of, would not hasten to
return to his Country? Who seeking with speed to sail unto his friends,
would not wishingly desire, a prosperous wind, that he might quickly embrace
his dearly beloved friends? We account Paradise to be our Country, and have
begone to have the Patriarchs for our parents. Why do we no^ make have and
run, that we may see our country, and salute our parents? A great number of
our dear friends, expect us there, a frequent and abundant company, of
parents, brethren, children, desires us, now secure of their own immortality,
and yet careful for our salvation. What great and common joy is it, both to
them and us, to come to their sight and embracing? What pleasure is there of
the heavenly Kingdoms, without fear of dying, and with eternity of living? How
exceeding and everlasting felicity? There is the glorious company of the
Apostles, there the number of rejoicing prophets, there innumerable people of
Martyrs crowned for their victory of combat and suffering, there Virgins
triumphing, which have subdued the concupiscence of flesh and body, with the
force of continency, there the merciful rewarded, which have done the works of
Justice, with feeding and liberally rewarding the poor, have translated their
earthly patrimonies, to the ^elestial treasures.

Let us with a greedy wishing, hasten unto these, that we may desire soon to
be with these and come to Christ.

S. Leo ser. in Epiph. Dom. c. 4.
Confirm your frendships with holy Angels, enter into the City of god, whose
inhabitation, is promised unto us: and join your selves in company with the
patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs. Rejoice in such things as they
joy in. Covet their richesse, and by good emulation, seek to obtain their
suffrages.

S. Eusebius. Emiss. hom. de S. Stephano.
LEt us enquire what need or reason there is, seeing the holy Martyrs being
placed in that light of paradise, need not humane praises, why they are
celebrated with so great affections of men. Why are their Relics (God
reueling them) so manifested to the world? Doubtless for many causes. First
they are worshipped of careful men, that they may make intercession for their
diligent worshipers. Again, that whilst they are proposed to posterity for an
example of devotion and faith, they may always be increased with new merits:
and now renowned for their virtues, they may also be amplifyed by the profits
of others. And further that the old enemy even before Judgment, may see the
punishment of his malice, by which he understands, that he haith fought for
the glory of Saints: that whom he sees here now honored, he needs not
doubt, but there they will be revenged. That when the whole world does celebrate
the crown of the martired, the killer of Martyrs, must needs bewail his
victory.

S. Augstin. lib. meditat. cap. 20.
O House of God, bright, and beutiful, I have loved thy comeliness, and the
place of the habitation of the glory of our lord, my possessor, and maker. Let
my pilgrimage sigh unto thee day and night. Let my heart be open unto thee. Let
my mind inte^d thee. Let my soul desire to come unto the fellowship of thy
blessedness. I speak unto him that made thee, that he may possess me in thee
because he has made me, and thee. And speak thou, ask thou him, that he make
me worthy of the participation of thy glory, for I do not require thy holy
society, and thy admirable beutifulnes, by my merit, but by his blood, with
which I was redeemed: I do not despair to obtain it, only let thy merits
help me, Let thy most pure prayers, which by no means can be vneffectual with
god, assist my wickedness. I have erred, I confess, as ^ lost sheep, and my
inhabitation is porlonged, and I am cast far from the face of our lord, into
this blindness of exile, where banished from the joys of paradise, I daily be
wail with my self, upon the miseries of my captivity, a doleful song and
great lamentations, when I remember thee, o my mother Jerusalem, while my
feet do stand in thy courts, o holy and beutiful syon, not yet able to look
openly into thy inward things, but I hope to be earied b^e^^^ unto thee, upon
the shoulders of my shepard thy builder, that I may reioyee with thee in that
unspeakable joy, with which they rejoice that are with thee, before god him
self, and our savior, which haith dissolved enmities in his flesh, and Ephesians. 2.
with his blood pacified al things that are in heaven, and in earth. For he is
our peace who haith made, both one, who joining two contrary wales together in
him, haith promised to give unto us, by the like manner, and the same measure,
the continuing felicity of his happiness, saing: They shall be equal to the
Angels of god in Math. 22. Luc. 20
heaven. O Jerusalem the everlasting house of god, next to the love of Christ,
be thou my joy and consolation, let the sweet memory of thy blessed name, be
the relife of my sorrow and weariness.

A prayer out of S. Victor. Vticen. l. 3. pers. Vand.
BE present unto me o you Angels of my god, who are never absent, constituted
in your ministry for them, which shall receive the inheritance of salvation,
Consider, and behold, how Syon the City of our god, is made vile, become
Thren. v ^*
as it wear unseemly, defiled among her enemies. The enemy haith laid his
hand upon al her desirable things, because she haith seen the Gentiles to
invade, and enter her courts, of which thou hadest commanded that they should
not enter into thy Church. Her ways do mourn because no man does come in the
festiual day. Al comeliness and delight are gone from her countenance. Her
virgins and young people brought up in Monasteries, have learned to tread sharp
ways, and are gone into captivity. The holy stones, are scattered abroad, not
only in streets but in filthy places. Pray for her you Patriarchs, which now
is persecuted on earth. O holy Prophets pray, knowing that she, whom before you
have tuned with a prophetical praise, is now afflicted. O Apostles, be you
spokesmen, for her, whom to gather together, you have run as most swift
horses through the whole world, our Lord ascending upon you, chiefly thou, o
blessed Peter, why art thou silent for the sheep and lambs, with great
werinesse and solicitude committed unto thee by our common Lord? Thou holy
Paul Doctor of the Gentiles, who from Jerusalem, to Illyricum, have preached
the Gospel of god, and al you holy Apostles, lament together with us. Let it be
said to the striking Angel, It suffices, now hold thy hand. We prostrate,
ask, that you do not despise your wretched sinners, by him that promoted you
lowly fishers, to the highest Apostolical dignity.

S. August. l. meditat. c. 40.
O Holy and immaculate virgin Mary mother of god, and mother of our Lord Jesus
Christ, vouchsaif to make intercession for me with him, whose temple thou
did deserve to be. O holy Michael holy Gabriel, holy Raphel, o holy Queares
of Angels, Archangels, Patriarckes and Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists,
Martyrs, Confessors, Preistes, Levites, Monks, Virgins, and all the just, I
presume to beseech you, by him, who haith chosen you, and of whose contemplation
you rejoice, that you will vouchsafe to make supplication to God for me that am
sinful, that I may deserve, to be delivered forth of the jaws of the devil,
and from everlasting death.

An other out of S. John Chrisostom. in miss. verse. a Leon. Tusc.
O Apostles, Martyrs, and Prophets, Priests, Confessors, and you the just, who
have well finished your combat, and kept your faith, conseruing your confidence
with our Savior: pray for us, that our souls may be saved. Amen

An other of S. Ephrem, de laud. Mart.
O Most blessed Martyrs, who willingly and readily have undergone torments,
for our Lord our Savior, and for his love, and therefore are familiarly
conjoined with our Lord, we beseech you to vouchsaife to make intercession to
our Lord for us wretches, and sinners, defiled with the filth of negligence,
that the grace of Christ may come upon us, that may illustrate our hearts with
the beam of holy Charity, that we may love him with all our heart.

O most blessed men, and most glorious Martyrs of God, help me a wretch with
your prayers, that I may obtain mercy in that hour, when the hidden things of
men shall be manifest.

Assist before the throne of Majesty, for me a wretch, that by your prayers, I
may deserve to be saved, and enjoy eternal blessedness with you. Amen.

Aug. lib. Med. cap. 24.
O Al you happy Saints of god, which have now passed over the sea of this
mortality, and deserved to come to the haven of euer-during quietness,
security, and peace, you are secure, and quiet, and always pleasant and
rejoicing. I beseech you, by your Charity, that you which are secure for your
selves, will be careful for us: you are secure of your own never fading glory,
be you careful of our manifould misery. I ask you, by him that haith chosen
you, who haith made you such, of whose bewty you are now filled, by whose
immortality, you are made immortal, of whose most blessed vision, you ever
rejoice: be you continually mindful of us. Succor us wretches, who as yet in
the sea of this life, are tossed with storms, enuyroning us rownd about. You
that are the most bewtiful gates, which have risen to a great height, help us a
vile pauement, lying far underneath. Give us your hand, and lift us, that lie
down, upon our feet, that recovering our infirmity we may be made strong in
battle.

Make intercession, and pray constantly and continually for us wretches, and
very negligent sinners, that by your prayers, we may be joined to your holy
company, for we are very frail, dwarfes, of no strength, creatures of the
belly, and bound-slaues of flesh, in whom scarsly any foot-step of virtue,
appears, and yet being placed under the confession of Christ, we are carried
upon the wood of the cross, sailing ^uer this great and spaceous sea, where be
little creatures with great, where the most cruel dragon, is always ready to
devour, where dangerous places be, Scylla and Charybdis, and others
innumerable, in which, me^ unwary, and doubtful in faith, make ship wrack. Pray
unto our Lord, o you most godly, pray unto him, o al you armies of Saints,
and al you companies of blessed ones, pray you, that being helped by your
prayers and merits, with our ship saife, and merchandise preserved, we may
deserve to come to the haue^ of eternal salvation and rest, and continual peace
and security, never to have end.

Missa Romans antiq.
REuerencing the memory, first of the ever glorious virgin Mary, Mother of God,
and our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the blessed Apostles and Martyrs Peter and
Paul, Andrew, James, John, Thomas, James, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon
and Thadee, Linus, Cletus, Clemens, Xistus, Cornelius, Ciprian, Laurence,
Chrisogone, John and Paul, Cosmas and Damianus, and al thy Saints, by whose
merits and prayers, grant o Lord, that in all things we may be defended, by
the help of thy protection, by the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

S. Ephrem. sermon. in laud, omniu^ sanct. Martyrum.
O Most holy Martyrs, we beseech you, who for our Lord our Savior and his love,
have freely and readily sustained most cruel torments, for which you are more
familiarly joined unto him, that you would entreat our Lord for us wretched
sinners, covered with the filth of negligence, that he would power his divine
grace upon us, which may continually lighten and illuminate our hearts with the
beam of holy Charity, by which we may be able to love him with all our heart,
and with all our mind.

Idem, supra.
O Most holy Martyrs of Christ, I beseech you stand before the Throne of the
divine Majesty for me a vile and wretched sinner, that by your prayers, I may
deserve to obtain salvation, and enjoy eternal felicity with you, by the
grace, bounty, and mercy of our Lord and Sauionr Jesus Christ, to whom, with
the Father and holy Ghost, be praise, honor, power, and glory, world without
end. Amen.

The ancient Lytanies used in the Roman Church, especially in dedicating
Churches, confirmed by the primative Fathers, and public Lyturgies, and word
by word registered in ord. Romans part. 2. de Officus c^p. Lytanta in ord. de
aedificanda Ecclesia. Ordo Romans whereto this is joined, and is cited and
expounded by S. Albinus, S. Amalarius, Micrologus etc. And may be used before
Iournay, or any business.
LOrd have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
O Christ hear us.
O Savior of the world, help us.
O holy Mary, pray for us.
Saint Peter, pray for us.
Saint Andrew, pray for us.
Saint James, pray for us.
Saint John, pray for us.
Saint Thomas, pray for us.
Saint James, pray for us.
Saint Philip, pray for us.
Saint Bartholomew, pray for us.
Saint Matthew, pray for us.
Saint Simon, pray for us.
Saint Thadee, pray for us.
Saint Matthias, pray for us.
Saint Luke, pray for us.
Saint Mark, pray for us.
O al holy Apostles and Evangelists, pray.
Saint Stephen, pray for us.
Saint Chrispine, pray for us.
Saint ^hrispinian, pray for us.
Saint Linus, pray for us.
Saint Cletus, pray for us.
Saint Clement, pray for us.
Saint Sixtus, pray for us.
Saint Cornelius, pray for us.
Saint Ciprian, pray for us.
Saint Laurence, pray for us.
Saint Chrysogone, pray for us.
Saint Denise, pray for us.
O al holy Martyrs, pray for us.
Saint Siluester, pray for us.
Saint Hilarious, pray for us.
Saint Martin, pray for us.
Saint Leo, pray for us.
Saint Ambrose, pray for us.
If this S. Gregory be S. Gregory, 1. Pope, and not any of the former Saints
of that name: in all probability he was for his rare sa^ct tie added after, and
so if any other in that state be hear remembered: this manner of Invocation
being used in the Church, long before his days, as the english protestants
the^ selves do grant.
Saint Gregory, pray for us.
Saint German, pray for us.
Saint Remigius, pray for us.
Saint Jerome, pray for us.
Saint Benedict, pray for us.
O al holy Confessors, pray for us.
Saint Felicitas, pray for us.
Saint Perpetua, pray for us.
Saint Agatha, pray for us.
Saint Lucia, pray for us.
Saint Agna, pray for us.
Saint Petronella, pray for us.
Saint Regina, pray for us.
Saint Christina, pray for us.
Saint Margaret, pray for us.
Saint Eutropia, pray for us.
Saint Brigide, pray for us.
O al holy Virgins and Widows. pray for us.
O al Saints, pray for us.
Be merciful unto us: spare us o Lord.
From al evil, o Lord deliver us.
From the deceipts of the devil, o Lord deliver us.
From thine anger, o Lord deliver us.
From al iniquity, o Lord deliver us.
From everlasting death, o Lord deliver us.
By thy Nativity, o Lord deliver us.
By thy Cross, o Lord deliver us.
By thy Passion, o Lord deliver us.
By thy Death, o Lord deliver us.
By thy Resurrection, o Lord deliver us.
By thy Ascension, o Lord deliver us.
By the coming of the holy Ghost the Comforter, o Lord deliver us,

In the day of Judgment, o Lord deliver us.

We sinners beseech thee hear us.

That thou will give us peace, we beseech thee hear us.

That thou will grant us seasonable wether; we beseech thee etc.

That thou will give us the fruits of the earth, we beseech.

That thou will grant us space of penance, we beseech.

That thou will give us remission of our sins, we beseech thee.

That thou will vouchsaife to infuse the grace of the holy Ghost into our
hearts, we beseech.

That thou will vouchsaife to preserve our Lord Apostolic, and al
ecclesiastical order, in holy Religion, we beseech.

That thou will vouchsaife to exalte thy Church. we beseech.

That thou will vouchsaife to consecrate this house, made to the honor of thy
name, a Kingly palace to thee our God, we beseech.

That thou vouchsaife to be merciful to us sinners, we beseech.

That thou will vouchsaife to bring us to the promised reward of thy glory, we
beseech.

That thou vouchsaife to hear us, we beseech thee.

That thou vouchsaif to keep us, we. Son of god, we beseech.

Lamb of god that take away the sins of the world, spare us o Lord.

Lamb of god, who take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Meditations and prayers when we rise in the morning.
IN my bed I have sought him, who^ Cant. 3.
my soul does love, I will rise, and go about the city; by Towns, and
streets I will seek him who^ my soul does love.

O Lord thou art my receauer, my Ps. 3.
glory, and raising up my head, with my voice I have cried to our lord, and he
haith hard me from his holy mountain. I have slept, and slumbered, and have
risen, because our lord haith received me.

O God, my god, I do awake to thee Ps. 62.
from the light, my soul haith thirsted in thee.

O Lord have mercy upon us, for we Is. 33.
have expected thee; be thou our strength in the morning, and salvation in time
of trouble.

S. Athanasius l. de virginitate sieve meditatione.
Whether thou rysest, or sit, or do any work, or eatest, or go to
bed, to sleep, or rysest from bed, let not the praise, of god be absent from
thy lips.

S. Ephrem de Panoplia.
Defend thy self with the sign of the cross, signing therewith, thy sitting
down and rising up, thy bed, and whatsoever things, thou passest by, first
sign them, in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost.

S. Ambros. l. 3. virgin.
Repeat often in thy chamber, our lords prayer either when thou awakest, or
before thou go to sleep.

Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come thy etc.

S. Ephrem ser. de laudib. sanctiss. virg. Mariae.
O Lady, o full of grace, move my tongue, and my lips, to sing praises unto
thee, and especially that angelical so^ge, which the Angel Gabriel did sing
unto thee. Hail Mary full of grace, our lord is with thee: blessed art thou
among women: etc.

S. Ambros. sup. l. 3. virginit.
We ought daily to rehearse the Creed in the hours before day. I believe in
god, the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and in Jesus Christ, his
only son, our lord etc.

S. August. l. mediat. cap. 40.
O Lord god omnipotent, I commend to thee this day, and ever, my soul, my
body, my seeing, hearing, taste, smelling, and touching, my thoughts,
affections, speech, deeds, and al my both external, and internal things,
sense, and understanding, memory, my faith, and belief, and perseverance, into
the hand of thy power, that thou vouchsaife to keep them, days and nights,
hours, and mome^ts.

O holy Trinity, hear me and preserve me from al evil, from al scandal, from
al mortal sin, from al deceiptes and infestations of devils, and enemies
visible and invisible, by the prayers of the Patriarchs, by the merits of the
Prophets, by the intercession of the Apostles, by the constancy of Martyrs, by
the faith of Confessors, by the chastity of Virgins, and by the supplication of
al thy Saints that have pleased thee, from the beginning of the world.

S. Ambrosius in hymn.
O holy Father, now that we have refreshed our body with sleep we arise, and
beseech thee to be present with us, praying unto thee. Let our tongue chiefly
praise thee, and the fervor of our mind, seek after thee, to be the
beginning of our works. Let darkness give place to light, and the night to
day, that al offense which the night haith brought, may suddenly fall down. We
humbly beseech thee, to cut of, al occasion of sins, that we may praise thee
for ever.

S. Ambros. him. ad laud. fer. 2.
O Brightness of the Fathers glory, light of light, and fountain of light,
the day that does lighten the day, and true ^unne: come down into us, shyning
with eue^lasting brightness, and infuse into our senses, the beam of the holy
Spirit. With our prayers, we call upon thee Father, Father of eternal glory,
Father of effectual grace, to aba^don our pronesse to sin, inform our
diligent actions, blunt the teeth of the enemy, prosper our adversities, give
us grace to do our duty, govern and rule our mind.

Aurelius Prudentius, in Cathemerin. hymn. Mat^tin.
O Night, darkness, confused and misty clouds of the world, depart away, the
sky is bright, Christ does come, this hour is profitable for all m^^, for every
one to do his business that he affects, soldier, Citizen, Mariner, workman,
plowman, Merchant. But we that know thee alone, o Christ, do learn to pray
unto thee with a pure and single mind, thee we beseech weping upon our knees, we
live by this art, we begin these duties, now the Sun is risen and shyneth.
Have a care of our senses, and reguard to al our life: let so many things,
obscured with darkness, be purged with thy light. Command that, al uncleanness
being taken away, we continue such as we were made in baptism. Whatsoever the
night of this world haith infected us, with the dark clouds thereof: Thou the
light of the sun, vouchsaife to illuminate with thy chea^ful countenance. Let
that darkness now cease, which hitherto haith drawn us headlong with unhappy
steps, in wandering error. Let this light bestow clearnes upon us, make us
clean, that we speak no subtilty, and think of nothing that is of darkness.
Let the whole day be so spent, that neither our tongue, nor hand, nor eyes,
commit any sin, nor any offense defyle our body. For he that behouldeth al
things from above, is present, that continually sees our actions, from the
beginning of morning, to the evening. He is witness, he is arbitrator, he
behouldeth whatsoever man's mind conceaueth, he is the Judge, whom no man can
deceive.

Missa S. Iacobi Apost. received, Council. Constantinop. 6. general. Can. 32.
LEt us pray to our Lord, to forgive us our sins, and grant pardon to our
offenses, and deliver us from al tribulation, anger, danger, and necessity:
That we may spend al our days, in perfection, peace, and without sin. Let
us al ask of our Lord, the Angel of p^ace, the faithful guide, keeper of our
souls and bodies. Let us ask of our Lord, pardon and remission of our sins
and offenses. Let us ask of our Lord, things that are good and profitable to
our souls and bodies, that he will give peace to the world. Let us ask of our
Lord, that we may finish the rest of our life, in peace and health. Let us ask
of our Lord, that we may persevere in Christian and sincere faith to the end
without sorrow, grief, or infamy: and a good defense before that fearful and
dreadful Tribunal of Christ. Let us ask of Christ, for thou art that good
Annunciation, Illumination, Savior, and keeper of our souls and bodies, God*
and thy only begotten Son, and thy most holy spirit, now, and ever, and
world without end. Amen.

Miss. Mozarab.
The grace of God, the Father almighty, the love of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
the communication of the holy Ghost, be with us for ever.

Meditations, and prayers for the morning.
I Love them that love me, and they Pro 8.
that watch to me in the morning, shall find me.

In the morning I will watch unto Is.
thee.

I have cried to thee, o Lord, and Ps. 87.
in the morning my prayer shall come before thee.

It is good to confess unto our lord, Ps. 91.
and sing unto thy nam^, o most highest, to show forth thy mercy in the morning.

The people did offer their prayers Exodus ^6. Ps. 62.
daily in the morning.

In the morning I will meditate on thee, because thou have been my helper.

The kingdom of heaven is like an househoulder, Mat. 20.
that went forth, early in the morning, to hyre workmen into his vineyard.

S. Clem. Roman. constitut. 55. Apostol. l. 2. c. 63.
Exhort the people, daily to frequent the church, in the morning, and evening,
and never at al, to be absent.

S. Clem. Romans supr. lib. 8. c. 37.
Let every faithful man, or woman, earery in the morning, when they arise from
sleep, pray, before they begin any work.

S. EPiphanius in Compendiar.
Morning Hymns are used continually, in the church, and morning prayers.

A meditation, or preparation to prayer, out of S. Basile, Constable. Mon. c. 2. 3.
THere be two manners of praying, whereof the one is in glorification, yelding
submission of mind: The other in petition, to be used after the former.
Wherefore when thou art to pray, do not presently fall to petition, otherways
thou art an evidence to thy will, that thou make not thy prayers unto god,
until by necessity thou be urged unto it. Therefore when soever thou art
determined to pray, forsake wife, children, and thy self also, and depart far
from things of the earth; climb above the heaven, and leave behind thee al
creatures visible, and invisible, and begin with glorifiing him, that created
al things. And when thou have sufficiently rested on him, say as follows.

I give thanks unto thee o Lord, for thy incredible clemency and gentleness, in
bearing with the offenses of men, who suffer me that sins daily, and
geuest power to us al, to amend our lives. For this is the cause for which thou
art silent, and sparest us o Lord, that we should give thanks unto thee, who
do manadge the salvation of mankind, sometime by threatening, sometime by
exhorting with lenity. And first did visit us by thy Prophets, and lastly by
the coming of thy Christ. For thou have framed us, and not we our selves, thou
art our god.

And when thou have sufficiently given thanks, and glorified god, with praises
of holy Scripture, then again with humility begin and say.

I am not worthy o Lord, to speak before thee because I am excedingly a
sinner. And although to thy self thou art guilty of no sin, yet it behooves
thee so to say. For seeing that in many Iac. 3.
things we al offend, yet we do not understand the greater part of our
offenses. Therefore the Apostle said, I am 1. Cor. 4.
guilty to my self in nothing, but in this I am not instified. Which is the
same as if he had said, I commit many offenses, which I know not, that I commit
them. For this cause also the Prophet said. Who does understand his offenses.
Ps. 18.


And when thou have sufficiently in words showed thy humility and said, I I
give thanks to thee o Lord, that thou have suffered me a sinner, so long time
with thy patience, and to this day exacted of me noe punishment of my sins.
Verily o Lord, I had long since deserved infinite punishments, and was worthy
to be buried most far from thy sight: but thy most patient gen^lenesse haith
most mercifully borne with me a sinner. I give thanks, I say, unto thee,
although I know my self unable to render thanks answearable to thy clemency
toward men.

And so soon as thou have satisfied these two duties, that is of giving
thanks, and humility, then at last ask what thou ought to ask.

A Meditation out of S. Leo, ser. 1. de Natiuitate Domini.
O Christian, acknowledge thy Meditations and prayers for morning.
dignity, and being made partaker of divine nature, do not return by
degenerate conversation, to thine old vileness. Forgeate not, of what head,
and whose body, thou art member. Call to mind, how being delivered from the
power of darkness, thou art translated into the light and king dome of god.
Do not drive away from thee with wicked deeds, so worthy an inhabitant, and
again subject thy self, to the slavery of the devil: because thy price, is the
Blood of Christ, who in justice, will judge thee, who in mercy, haith reedeemed
thee, who with the Father and the holy Ghost, reigns for ever. Amen.

An other Meditation out of S. Athanasius, ser. de sanctiss. Deipara.
CHhrist receiving the throne of Ps. 109.
David, shall reign among Christians for ever, and of his Kingdom Luc. 1. Dan.
7.
there shall be none end. For being borne of a Virgin, and having consummated al
things, that belonged to the business of his death and Cross, after his
Resurrection, he said unto his Disciples, Alpower is given to me, in heaven and
in Math. 28.
earth. Behold now from thence he began to reign, and is declared to be the
King of Christians, as men in the beginning of their prayers, exhorting one an
other, and calling the company together, do use to cry, Come let us adore and
fall Ps. 94.
down, before Christ our King.

Psalm. 94. COme let us rejoice unto our lord, let us make joy to god our
Savior.

Let us approach to his presence in confession, and in psalms let us make joy
unto him.

Because god is a great lord, and a great king above al gods.

Because in his hand are all the bounds of the earth, and the heightes of the
mountains are his.

Because the sea is his, and he made it, and his hands framed the earth.

Come let us adore, and fall down, and weep before our lord, that made us,
because he is the lord our god.

And we are his people, and sheep of his pasture.

To day if you will hear his voice, do not harden your hearts.

As in provocation, like as in the day of temptation in the wilderness.

Where your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works.

Forty years was I offended with that generation, and I said, they always
err in heart.

And these have not known my ways: as I have sworn in my anger, if they shall
enter into my rest.

Pope Damasus ordained Gloria Patri etc. to be said after every Psalm. In vita
Dams. con. Vas. c. 7. proves it ageneral custom. S. Aug. l. 9. confess. c. 7.
etc.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost: As it was in
the beginning, is now and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

Direction out of S. Clement and Athanas. Clem. constable. l. 2. c. 63. Come
together early in the morning, singing and praying: In the morning saying, 62.
psalm. Atharisius l. de virgin. In the morni^g say this psalm.
O God, my god, from the light Ps. 62.
do I watch to thee.

My soul haith thirsted after thee: and my flesh very many ways.

In a land desert, where there is no way, and without water, so in the holy,
have I appeared unto thee: that I might see thy power, and thy glory.

Because thy mercy is better then lives: my lips shall praise thee.

So will I bless thee in my life: and in thy name, will I lift up my hands.

Like as with fat and fatness, let my soul be filled: and my mouth shall
praise, with lips of ioyfulnesse.

So have I been mindful of thee upon my bed, in the morning I will meditate on
thee: because thou have been my helper.

And in the covert of thy wings, I will rejoice, my soul haith cleeued after
thee: thy right hand haith received me.

But they in vain have sought my soul, they shall enter into the lower parts
of the earth: they shall be given over into the hands of the sword, they shall
be made the portions of foxes.

But the King shall rejoice in God: all shall be praised that swear in him,
because the mouth of them which speak wicked things, is stopped.

Glory be to the Father, and to etc. As it was in the beginning etc.

The prayer of Manasses 2. paral. vlt.
O Lord omnipotent, god of our Fathers, Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the
just f^ede of them, who have made heaven, and earth, with all their bewty, who
have tied the sea with the word of thy precept, who have concluded the depth,
and signed it with thy terrible, and laudable name, whom al things do fear,
and tremble before the face of thy power, because the magnificence of thy
glory, is importable, and the anger of thy thretning over sinners,
vnsustentable. Truly great, and inuestigable is the mercy of thy promise,
because thou art Lord most high, bountiful, long suffering, and much merciful,
and sorrowful for the malices of men. O Lord, thou according to the multitude of
thy goodness, have promised peace and remission unto them that have sinned
against thee: and in the multitude of thy mercies, have decreed repentance for
sinners to salvation. Therefore thou Lord god of the just, have not appointed
penance for the just, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, those that have not sinned
against thee, but have appointed penance for me a sinner, because I have sinned
above the number of the sands of the sea, o Lord: mine iniquities are
multiplied, multiplied are mine iniquities, and I am not worthy to behold and
look up to the highness of heaven, for the manifoldnesse of mine iniquities.
I am crooked with a great iron chain, that I may not lift up my head, and
respiration is not in me, because I have stirred up thine anger, and done evil
before thee. I have not done thy will, and have not kept thy commandments, I
have erected abominations, and multiplied offenses: and now do bow the knee of
my heat, beseching goodness of thee. I have sinned o Lord, I have sinned, and
do acknowledge mine iniquities. Wherefore I ask, entreating thee. Forgive me o
Lord, forgive me, destroy me not together with mine iniquities, neither, being
angrye for ever, reserve evil things for me, neither condemn me unto the
lowest places of the earth, because thou art God, God, I say, of those that
repent, and show al thy goodness toward me, because thou will save me
unworthy, according to thy great mercy, and I will praise thee all the days of
my life, because all the power of the heavens praise thee, and to thee is glory
world without end. Amen.

A Prayer of King Solomon. prou. 30.
I Have asked two things of thee, deny them not unto me, before I dye. Set
vanity and lying words far from me. Give me not beggerlinesse, and riches,
give only things necessary for my living, lest peradventure being filled, I
may be provoked to deny thee, and may say, who is our Lord? Or compelled by
want, may steal, and forswear the name of my God.

A Prayer of Esdras. 1. Esdr. 9.
O My God I am confounded, and I am ashamed, to lift up my face to thee,
because our iniquities are multiplied over our head, and our sins have
grown, even unto heaven, from the days of our fathers: yea and we our selves
also have sinned grievously unto this day.

Tobias 3.
O Lord be mindful of me, and take not revenge on my sins, neither remember
mine offenses, nor the offenses of my parents.

Sap. 9.
O God of my Fathers, and Lord of mercy, who have made al things with thy
word, and by thy wisdom have ordained man, to rule the creatures which thou
have made. And that he might dispose the world in equity and justice, and judge
Judgment in direction of heart: grant unto me wisdom, the assistresse of thy
seats, and reject me not from thy servants, for I am thy ser^ant, and son of
thy handmaid, a ^an infirm, and of small time, and too little to understand thy
Judgment and Laws

Ecclesiast. 36.
O God of al, have mercy upon us, and have respect unto us, and show the light
of thy co^miserations to us, and show thy fear upon Nations, which have not
sought thee, that they may know there is no God, but thou, and may declare thy
worthy things.

Ierem. 10.
O Lord I know that the way of man is not his own, neither is it of man, that
he may walk and direct his goinges. Correct me o Lord but with judgment, and
not in thy fury, lest thou peradventure bring me again to nothing. Pour forth
thine indignation upon Nations that have not known thee, and upon Countries
that have not called upon thy name.

O Lord expectation of Israel, al which Ier. 17.
forsake thee, will be confounded: they which go back from thee will be written
in the earth; because they have forsaken the vain of living waters, our lord.
Heal me o lord, and I shall be healed: save me, and I shall be saife, because
thou art my praise.

I beseech thee, o Lord god great and Dan. 9.
terrible, keeping covenant, and mercy to those that love thee, and k^^pe thy
commandementes: we have s^med, we have wrought iniqiuty, and ^one wickedly, and
gone away, and d^parted from thy commandments, an^ iudgme^tes. We have not
obeyed thy servants the Prophets, which have spoken in thy name, to our
Kings, to our Princes, to our Fathers, and to all the people of the land. O
Lord, justice is to thee, but to us confusion of face: o Lord, confusion of
face unto us, and to our kngies to our Princes and Fathers, who have sinned.
But to thee Lord ^ur g^d, mercy and propitiatio^, because we have gone back
from thee, and have not heard the voice of the Lord our god, that we might
walk in his law. O our God, hear the paier of thy servant, and his petitions.

Ieremias in orat. cap. 5. lament.
O Lord remember what haith chanced unto us, and have respect unto our
reproach. Our inheritance is converted to aliens, and our houses unto
strangers. We are made pupils, without fathers or mothers as widows. But o
Lord thou shall remain for ever, thy state, from generation, to generation.
Why will thou forgeat us for ever? Will thou long time forsake us? O lord
convert us unto thee, and we shall be converted.

Baruch. 2.
O Lord look down upon us, ftom thy holy house, and incline thine ear and
hear us. Open thine eyes and see, because the dead that be in hell, whose
spirit is taken from their bowels, will not give honor and justification to our
Lord. But the soul which is sad for the greatness of evil, and goes crooked
and weak, and fainting eyes, and an hungry soul, does give glory and justice
to thee our Lord. And now o Lord omnipotent, Cap. 3.
god of Israel, a soul in distress, and troubled spirit, cries unto thee: o
Lord hear, and have mercy, for o god thou art merciful, and have mercy upon
us, because we have sinned before thee: Remember not the iniquities of our
fathers, but remember thy hand, and thy name in this time, because thou art
lord our God, and we will praise thee o lord.

Eccelsiasticus. 23.
O Lord Father and ruler of my life, forsake me not in their counsel, suffer me
not to fall in that reproach. Who does impose scourges in my thought, and
doctrine of wisdom in my heart, that they spare me not in their ignorances,
and their offenses appear not, and that mine ignorances may not increase, and
mine offenses multiplied, and my sins abou^d, and I may fall in the sight of
mine adversaries, and 'my enemy may rejoice? O Lord, Father, and god of my
life, forsake me not in thought of them. Arrogance of mine eyes, give not unto
me, and al evil desire, turn from me.

A prayer for repentant sinners out of S. Clement Constut. Ap. l. 8. c. 12.
ALmighty everlasting god, Lord of al, Crearor and governor of the world, who
have placed man for the ornament thereof, by Christ, and given him the law,
natural and written, that as a reasonable creature he might have a rule to live
according unto it: and if he should sin in any thing, thou have delivered
unto him the foundation of penance, thy goodness: look upon them that bow
down the n^ckes of their soul and body, unto the^, because thou desire not
the death of a sinner, but Ier. 18.
penance, that he may return from his evil way and live. Thou that did
admit Jonas 3. 1. Tim. 2.
the penance of the Ninevites, who would al men to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of truth.

Who received with fatherly affection Luc. 15.
by penance, the son that lasciueously had consumed his portion: receive now
also the penance of them, that pray unto thee, because there is none, that
sins not against thee. If thou will obse^^e Ps. 129.
our iniqities o Lord, o Lord who shall be able to endure it? Because with thee
there is redemption, and bring them again into thy holy church, restoring unto
the^ their former dignity and honor, by Christ our God and Savior, by whom
glory and adoration be unto thee in the holy Ghost for ever. Amen.

A prayer for devotion and spiritual knowledge: out of S. Ephrem l. de armatura
spirituali cap. 8.
O Lord Jesus Christ, open the ears and eyes of my heart, that I may hear and
understand thy words, and obey thy will. I am a pilgrim on earth, keep not
hidden from me thy commau^deme^ts. Open my eyes, that I may understand, the
things that are admirable in thy law.

A prayer stiring up to give thanks to god for his benefits: out of S.
Augustine in his book de spiritu and litera cap. 17.
Unhappy and wretched man that I am, how much ought I to love my god, who made
me when I was not, redeemed me when I was lost. I was not, and he made me of
nothing, not a stone, not a tree, not a bird, or any other of such creatures,
but he would have me to be a man. He gave me to live, to have sense, to
understand. I was perished, and he descended to mortality, took mortality upon
him, suffered his passion, overcame death, and so restoared me. I was perished
and gone away, because I was sold in my sins, he came after me that he might
redeem me, and he so much loved me, that for me he would pay the price of his
blood, and with such a covenant reduced me, from banishment, and redeemed me
from slavery. Also he called me by his own name, that his memorial might
always be upon me: he anointed me with oil of gladness, with which ^e him
self was anointed, that of him, that is anointed, I might be anointed, and
of Christ, might be called a Christian. So his grace and mercy have always
prevented me, for my deliverer haith often delivered me from many dangers.
When I did err, he reduced me: when I was ignorant, he taught me: when I
sinned, he corr^cted me: when I was sad, he comforted me: when I fainted in
hope, he strengthened me: when I sell, he lifted me up: when I stood, he
sustained me: when I came, he received me. These and many other things, god
haith done for me, of which, it is a pleasant thing to me, always to speak,
always to think, al ways to give thanks, that for all his benefits, I may
always praise and love him.

A prayer to God the holy Ghost, for grace and sanctification, out of S.
Ciprian, l. de Spir. s.
COme holy Ghost, and from heaven enter into those that expect thy consolation.
Sanctify the temple of our body, and conserate it for thy habitatio^, make the
souls that desire thee, glad with thy presence, make the house worthy of such
an in^abitant as thou art, adorn thy bride chamber, and compass about the
staying place of thy rest, with varieties of virtues, strew the pauements with
change of colors, let thy mansion shine with flaming carbuncles, and
brightness of prec^ous stones, and the sweet odoures of al graces, send out
their savor within. Let the liquour of balsam^m, abundantly perfume thy
lodging, with his sweetness, and driving from thence, whatsoever is corrupted,
whatsoever is the seminary of corruption. Make this our joy, stable and
everlasting, and confirm the renewing of thy creation, with incorruptible
bewty for ever.

A Prayer out of S. Gregory Nyssene. l. de S. bap. in fine.
O Lord, thou truly art the pure and everlasting Fountain of goodness, who
justly forsaking us, have mercifully taken pity upon us; hatedst us, and art
reconciled; have cursed, and have blessed us; banished us out of paradise, and
called us back again; put of from us fig leaves, that indecent cou^ring, and
clothed us with a most preceous cloak; have opened the prison, and let the
condemned forth; have sprinkled us with pure water, and cleansed us from
filthiness. If hereafter Adam be called unto thee, he will not be ashamed, nor
his conscience reproving him, for shame hide him self under the grove of
paradise, neither will the fyrie sword compass it about, denying entrance to
them that come to it, and making the place inaccessible. But al things to us
that were heirs of sin, are changed into joy, and Paradise and heaven it
self, lies open for man. Al creatures, both of this, and the world above,
beforetimes at variance, are made friends and reconciled, and men with Angels,
reuerencing their divine learning, are at concord and agreed. Therefore for all
these things, let us sing unto god the hymn of joy, which the mouth endued
with the spirit, long since prophetically pronounced with a loud voice. Let my
soul rejoice in our Lord, for he haith put upon me a saving cloak, and
compassed me about with a coat of gladness: as to a spouse he haith fitted a
myter to me, and adorned me as a bride. The adorner of the spouse is Christ,
who is and was before, and shall be blessed, now and ever. Amen.

A prayer meditating upon the Majesty of God out of S. Augustine Co^f. l. 1.
c. 4.
WHat art thou, o my God, what art thou I beseech thee, but my lord God, for who
is lord but our lord, and who is god but our God? O highest, o best, o most
mighty, most omnipote^t most merciful, and most just, most secret, and most
present, most beutiful, and most strong, stab^e, and inco^prehe^sible,
immutable, chau^ging al things, never new, never old, renewing al things,
bringing the proud into old age, and they are ignorant, always doing, ever
quiet, gathering and not wanting, bearing, and filling and protecting, creating
and norishing, and perfecting, seeking, when nothing is wanting unto thee, thou
love, yet art not truobled, thou art ieleous, and art secure, thou repentest,
and greuest not, thou art angry, and art quiet, thou cha^gest thy works, yet
chaungest not thy counsel, thou receauest what thou find, and never lost,
thou art never poor, yet reioycest with gain, never covetous, and yet
exactest vsery. There is largely bestowed upon thee, that thou might be in
debt, yet who haith any thing that is not thine? Thou payest debtes, owing
nothing, give debtes, loosing nothing. And what do we say, my god, my life,
my holy sweetness, or what does any man say, when he speaks of thee? and woe
to the^ that speak not of thee.

A prayer for all people out of S. Clement Constable. l. 8. c. 18.
WE beseech thee o lord, for thy holy church, which is dispersed through al
places, which thou have gotten with the precious blood of thy Christ, that thou
will vouchsaif to keep it ^uiet and in tranquillity, to the end of the world.
And we also entreat thee, for all Episcopal order, rightly handling the word of
truth, and for all preisthood, for deacons, and the whole Clergy, that being
taught of thee, thou will replenish them with the holy Ghost.

Also we beseech thee o Lord, for our King, and all that are placed in authority,
that by them, we may peaceably live, and perseuering in quietness and concord,
through all the time of our life, may glorify thee, by Jesus Christ, which is
our hope. For Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Lectors, Singers, Virgins,
Widows, Lay people, and for all, whose names thou know. Also we beseech thee
for this City, and all that dwell in it. For those that be sick, and that
suffer cruel servitude, for banished persons, and such as have suffered
forfaiture of their goods. For all that travel by sea, and undertaking far
iournaies, that thou will be an assister, helper, and aider of them al. Also we
beseech thee for them that hate and persecute us, for thy names sake, for those
that be forth and in error, that thou will bring the^ to good, and appease
their fury. Also we beseech thee for the Cathecumens of the Church, and such as
be vexed of the adversary, and for our brethren that be penitents, that thou will perfect these in faith, deliver the other from vexation of the evil,
receive the penance of these, and pardon them and us our offenses. Also we pray
for them, that are let by just cause, or absent, that keeping us al in
godliness, thou will gather us together into the Kingdom of thy Christ, god
of al sensitive and intellectual nature, and our King, constant in good,
inculpable and without sin: because unto thee is al glory, worship,
thankes-geuing, honor, and adoration, to the Father and Son, and the holy
Ghost, both now and ever, world without end. Amen.

Out of the same S. Clement Constable. l. 7. c. 4 7. so by him appointed, A prayer
for morning. Athanas. l. de virg. When day appears say the Himn Gloria in
excelsis. etc.

GLory in the highest to god, and in earth peace to men of good will: we praise
thee, we celebrate thee, we bless thee, we glorify thee, by the great high
priest we adoare thee, god unbegotten, one, inaccessible, alone for thy great
glory, o Lord heavenly king, God, Father omnipote^t, o Lord god Father of
Christ, the immaculate La^be, which takes away the sins of the world,
receive our prayer: thou that sit upon the Cherubim. Because thou alone art
holy, thou alone Lord Jesus Christ of god, of al created nature, of our king,
by whom glory honor and worship is unto thee.

A Prayer out of S. Ciprian. Tom. 3.
HAgios, Hagios, Hagios, Holy, Holy, Holy. O holy of holies, Father of our
Fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, God of Apostles, God of
Prophets, God of Virgins, God of the well living, God of the faithful, God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, we humble, call upon thee, and also beseech
thee, o only begotten Son, who was begotten of the mouth of the highest,
before the disposing of the world, and by mystery brought forh of the womb of
Mary the holy Virgin. Vouchsaif to bestow upon us that pray, spiritual increase
of holy desire, and integrity of heart, that our breast, by holy baptism
renewed, may persevere saife from carnal sins.

We ask with an unspotted faith* an uncorrupted mind, with a strong devotion,
love continual: that thou will suffer us to flourish in thy holy Church, because
unto thee we bend our knees, and bow down our necks, to whom Angels, and
Archangels, thousands of thousands, of Martyrs, the queare of the Apostles,
and glory of Prophets, ^o make joy, to whom al birds do singe praises, whom
the tongues confess, of things celestial, terrestrial, and infernal. Al
waters in heaven, and under heaven, confess thee, the insensible things,
perceive thee. Thou art alone and besides thee, and without thee, there is none.

We beseech thee o Lord, Father omnipotent, who art conspicable to the only
Son, whose Angels and Archangels, obey thee. O Lord Father, we pray to thee,
to give us a sound mind, a pure innocence, devout sincerity, holy conscience,
pure, sober, chaste, walking in glorious faith, against al deceipts of the
world. Grant us a breast defended against al threatninges of the devil, and
carnal inticements, that we may carry sound, the sign of everlasting
salvation, lest we be entangled with the deadly snares of the violent and cruel
enemy.

Put away from us, al uncleanness of the world, and al persuasion of the devil,
let him be snared, thrown down, and overcome, and put away from us, as from
Sara thy servant, Asmodeus the most Tob. 8.
wicked devil suppressed by the holy Angel Raphael. And as thou were present
with Tobias, so vouchsaife to be present unto me. And as thou showed mercy unto
Dan. 3. et 14.
the three children in the furnace, and to Daniel: so vouchsaife to deal with
us thy servants. Thou which have raised the dead, light^ed the blind, given
hearing to the deaf, speech to the du^me, going to the lame, soundness unto
leepers: so also give to us thy servants, who with all the power of our mind
believe that thou were borne, suffered, art to come, to judge the quick and
dead.

Assist us, as thou did assist thine Apostles in bands, Tecla, in the fire,
Paul, in persecutions, and Peter, in the waves. Thou who sit upon the
seven Thrones, at the right hand of the Father, look upon us, and deliver us
from the destruction of eternal death: one in one, the Father in the Son, the
Son in the Father, the holy Ghost, by whom, and with whom, is to thee, in the
holy Church, Honor, Power, Glory, Majesty, Authority, Benedictio^,
Immortality, both now and for ever, always, and world without end. Amen.

A Prayer to avoid damnation, out of S. Andrew, Archbisbop of Cesarga, soon
after S. Basile.
Our Lord grant that we showing forth, by lively works, sincere and true
faith in Christ, may never hear that terrible voice of Christ, Amen, Amen, I
say unto you, I Math. 25. Luc. 13.
know you not. And that other, Depart from me al you workers of iniquity. But
But may hear with open ears, that blessed and, every way, desirable saying.
Come you blessed of my Father, possess Ib.
the Kingdom prepared for you, from the beginning of the world. By the grace,
and clemency, and mercy of him, who for us willingly did undergo the Cross,
that is of Christ, god and our Lord, with whom, to the Father, together with
the holy and vinificant Spirit, be glory now, and ever, and world without end.
Amen.

A Prayer to the blessed Trinity, out of S. Augustine. Medit. ca. 32.
O Blessed Trinity, with my lips, and heart, and all the power I am able, I
praise, I bless, I worship thee, and to thy clemency and goodness give
thanks for all thy benefits, and sing an Himne of glory unto thee, holy, holy
holy. I call upon thee to come in me, and make me a temple worthy of thy glory.
I beseech the Father by the Son, I beseeh the Son by the Father, I beseech
the holy Ghost by the Father and the Son, that al vices may be driven away
from me, and al holy virtues planted in me. Keep me the work of thy hands
hoping in thee and trusting only in thy mercy.

Keep me I beseech thee, here, and every where, now and ever, within and with
out, that no place for the enemies, lie open in me. Thou art god omnipotent,
the keeper and protector, of all that trust in thee, without whom, no man is
saif, no man delivered from dangers.

Thou art god, and besides thee, there is not any other god, neither in heaven
above, nor in earth beneath, who do wonderful, and marvelous, and vnscrutable
things without number. Praise becomes thee, honor be comes thee, himne
becomes thee. To thee al Angels, to thee the heavens, and al Potestates, do
say Himnes, and sing lauds, incessantly, as creatures, to their Creator,
servants, to their Lord, soldiers, to their King: every creature does
magnify, every spirit does praise thee blessed and undivided Trinity.

An other prayer to the blessed Trinity out of the same S. Aug. Meditat. cap.
33.
Grant unto me o Lord, that so long as I am in this frail body, my heart may
praise thee, my tongue may praise thee, and al my bones may say, O Lord, who is
like unto thee? Thou art god omnipotent, whom three in parsons, and one in
substance of Deity, we worship and adore. The Father, not begotten, the Son,
the only begotten of the Father, the holy Ghost, proceeding from both, and
remaining in both, the holy and indeuided Trinity, one god almighty, who, when
we were not, have mightily made us, and when by our offense, we were lost, by
thy piety and goodness, thou have meruelously repaired us. Suffer us not, I
beseech thee, to be ungrateful for so many benefits, and unworthy so many
mercies.

I do beseech, entreat, and desire thee, increase my faith, increase my hope,
increase my Charity. Cause us by that I do thy grace, to be always steadfast
in faith, and effectual in work, that by right faith, and worthy works of
faith, by thy mercy, we may come to eternal life, that there seeing thy glory,
as it is, we may adore thy Majesty, and may say together, whom thou shall make
worthy to see thy glory, Glory be to the Father that haith created us, Glory to
the Son who haith redeemed us, Glory to the holy Ghost, that haith sanctified
us, Glory to the highest and indeuided Trinity, whose works, are inseparable,
whose rule, remains without end.

Praise becomes thee, Himne becomes thee, al honor is due to thee: To thee
benediction and glory, to thee thankes-geuing, to thee our God, honor, power,
and strength, for ever. Amen.

A prayer for all true believers, both deceased, and living, out of S. Basil, in
Anaphora: or whosoever in the primative Church author there of, but commonly
attributed to S. Basile.
O Lord creator of bodies and souls, remember at thy heavenly Altar, al those
that are departed forth of this wretched world, and refresh them in thy
Tabernacle, full of al bewty. Pass them over beyond the horrible mansions of
torment, and place them in thy most lightsome Tabernacles. Deliver them from
the want of light, and darkness, and take them forth of tribulation and grief,
and let thy countenance appear peaceable unto them, neither enter into
judgment with them, nor severely examine their former life, but whether in
word, or work, they have sinned, as men in flesh, forgive and abolish their
errors.

And converted, have mercy on us, which yet beliuing. For behold daily, we
move thee to anger, by our filthy and detestable manner of living.

Because there is one alone that haith not sinned, and delivers from sin,
our Lord and our Savior Jesus Christ, by whom we al hope to obtain mercy, and
remission of sins.

A prayer for remission of sins, by the intercession of the B. Virgin, and al
Saints, out of S. Augustine Med. cap. 35.
O Holy and most merciful Lord, be not made untreatable unto me because of my
sins, but for thy goodness, receive the prayers of thy servant, and grant
me the effect of my petition and desire, the glorious Virgin Mary, thy Mother,
my Lady, together, with all thy Saints, making intercession, and praying, and
obtaining it. Amen.

The usual Hymn of the Church, Te Deum: We praise thee God, composed first (as
witnesith S. Dacius Bishop of Milane lib 1. Cron. ca. 10.) between S. Ambrose
his predecessor, and S. Augustine when he was baptized.
WE praise thee God: we confess thee our lord.

Thee the everlasting Father: all the world does worship.

To thee al Angels: to thee the heavens, and universal powers.

To thee the Cherubim and Seraphim: with vncessible voice do cry out.

Holy, Holy, Holy; Lord God of Saboath.

Full are the heavens, and the earth: of thy majesty of glory.

Thee the glorious Queare of the Apostles.

Thee the laudable number of Prophets.

Thee the white clothed army of Martyrs do praise.

Thee the holy church throughout the world does confess.

The Father of infinite majesty.

Thy venerable true: and only Son.

And also the holy Ghost the comforter.

Thou o Christ the King of glory.

Thou art the everlasting son of the Father.

Thou about to deliver man: did not abhor the virgins womb.

Thou having overcome the sting of death: have opened for believers, the
kingdom of heaven.

Thou sit at the right hand of God: in the glory of the Father.

Thou art believed to be the Judge that shall come.

We therefore beseech thee, succoure thy servants, who^ thou have redeemed with
thy precious blood.

Make us with thy Saints to be rewarded with glory.

O Lord save thy people: and bless thy inheritance.

And govern them, and extol them for ever.

Every day we bless thee.

And we praise thy name for ever: and for ever and ever.

Vouchsaife o Lord this day to keep us without sin.

Have mercy upon us o Lord: have mercy upon us.

Let thy mercy o lord be upon us: even as we have hoped in thee.

In thee o Lord I have hoped: let me not be confounded for ever.

The Hymn of the Angels Luc 2. with the addition by S. Hilarious.
ANd with the Angel there was a multitude of the heavenly army, praising god,
and saying: glory in the highest to god: and on earth, peace to men of good
will. We praise thee, we bless thee, we adore thee, we glorify thee, we give
thakes unto thee for thy great glory. O Lotd god, heavenly King, God Father
omnipotent. O Lord, only begotten son, Jesus Christ. O Lord god, Lamb of
god, son of the Father who take away the sins of the world, have mercy
upon us. Who take away the sins of the world, receive our prayer, who
sit at the right hand of the Father, have mercy upon us. Because thou alone
holy, thou alone lord, thou alone most highest, o Jesus Christ, with the holy
Ghost, in glory of god the Father. Amen.

A prayer, desiring pardon, and grace by Christ's passion: out of S. Isaac l.
de contemptu mundi c. 29.
O Lord that did weep over Lazarus, and pour forth the tears of thy
co^passio^ on him, receive the tears of my bitterness, heal my passions with
thy passions, cure my wound with thy wounds, cleanse my blood with thy blood,
and mingle with my body, the sweet odor of thy quickening body. Let that gawle
which was given to thee to drink by thy enemies, make my soul sweet from the
bitterness, which the enemy adversary, haith drunk unto me. Let thy body,
that was stretched forth upon the wood of the Cross, lift up to th^e my mind,
which by the devils is drawn downward: Thy head, which thou leanedst down,
on the torments of the Cross, lift up my head that is buffeted of my enemies.
Thy most holy hands crucified with nails, raise me up to thee, from confusion
of perdition, as thy most sacred mouth haith promised: Thy face which received
buffetinges, and spittinges upon it, make clean my face, defiled with cursed
iniquities. Thy soul which thou gave up first being on the Cross, bring me
to thee in thy glory. I have not a sorrowful heart to seek thee, I have not
repentance nor compunctio^, that bring again children to their inheritance. O
Lord I have not entreating tears, my mind is darkened with worldly things, nor
can look unto thee with grief, and my heart is withered for multitude of
temptations, and can not be warmed, with tears of thy sweetness. But o Jesus
Christ the treasure of good things, give unto me perfect repentance, a
sorrowful heart: That thereby I may hasten with my soul to seek thee, for
without that which is al goodness, I shall be an Alie^. Therefore o Jesus
Christ give me thy grace: The Father which from eternity without time begott
thee, renew in me the light of thy image. I have forsaken thee, do not thou
forsake me: I have gone out from thee, go thou forth, to seek and bring me
into thy pastures, and number me among the sheep chosen in thy sight, and
place me with them in the portion of the riches of thy s^crets, whose habitacle
is a cleansed heart, and in it, let be seen the brightness of thy revelations,
which are the consolation, and refreshing of those, which have labored for
thee in tribulations, and al kind of afflictions, of which, grant we may be
worthy, by the grace and holiness of our Savior, then, and in the world to
come. Amen.

Augustine l. med. cap. 11.
With all our heart and mouth we confess, praise, and bless thee god, the
Father unbegotten, thee the only begotten Son, thee holy Ghost, comforter,
holy and indiuided Trinity: praise be to thee, world without end. Amen.

Other meditations and praysinges of god, for the morning, as opportuni tie is;
or for variety.
Direction out of scripture.
IN the midst of the Church I will Ps. 21. see Ps. 34. 83. 112. 116. etc.
praise thee.

You that fear our Lord praise him: al you seed of Jacob, glorify him.

Al Nations praise our Lord: al ye people praise him, because his mercy is
confirmed upon us, and the truth of our Lord remains for ever.

Rejoice and praise together, you deserts Is. 52. see c. 49. et Zach. 2.
of Jerusalem: because our Lord haith comforted his people, redeemed Jerusalem.
Our Lord haith prepared his holy arm in the eyes of al Nations, and all the
ends of the earth, shall see the salvation of our god.

Daughter of Syon praise, o Israel cry Sophon. 3.
out for joy, and rejoice in all thy heart daughter of Jerusalem, our Lord haith
taken away Judgment, haith ouerthrone thine enemies, the King of Israel is lord
in the midst of thee, thou shall not fear evil any longer.

At midnight, Paul and Silas, praying, Act. 16.
did praise god.

Direction out of S. Basile, l. quaes. diffuse explicat. quaest. 37.
WE ought to prevent the morning, and rise to prayer, lest the day find us
sleeping and in bed, according to him that says, Mine eyes have prevented the
morning, Ps. 118.
that I might meditate thy words: of which things, they must at no time be
negligent, whose purpose is to live agreably to the glory of god and his Christ.

A Meditation before prayer out of S. Nilus lib. de oratione.
Prayer is a communication of the mind with god. Therefore in what state ought
the mind to be, that it may be stretched forth to his Lord. If Moses, when he
endeavored Exodus 3.
to come to the Bush which he saw, was forbiden, until he loosed the shows of
his feet: how must not he that will see and converse with him, which excedeth
al sense and cogitation, cast away from him self al troubled knowledge? Thou
can not pray purely, if thou be entangled with earthly things and business,
and burdened with daily cares.

As he which is is bound, can not run: so the mind that serves passions, can
not behoulde the place of spiritual prayer: for it is drawn hither and thither
with troubled cogitations, and haith no fixed and settled state.

If thou consider thy condition, thou will rather weep, protesting thy self a
wretch, by the example of Isay, because Is. 6.
thou being vnpure, and in the midst of vnpure people, dare stand before
the Lord of hosts. Know that the holy Angels exhort us to prayer, and stand
with us with joy, praying for us. If thersore we become negligent, and
entertain contrary cogitations, we greatly provoke them, because they strive
so much for us, and we for our selves, refuse to pray to god, but rather
neglecting their ministry, and their Lord, and forsaking god, keep company
with unclean devils. If thou desire to pray, transport thy self from earthly
things, to heaven, and have thy conversation there, not only in words, but
in angelical action and more heavenly knowledge.

S. Athanasius in lib. de virginitate.
WHen day appears, thou shall recite this psalm.

Benedicite omnia opera etc. And say the Hymn, Gloria in excelsis.

Al you works of our Lord, bless Canticle of the 3. Children Dan. 3. in the
burni^g fournace.
you our Lord: praise him, and extol him for ever.

Bless our Lord, ye Angels of our Lord: ye heavens bless our Lord.

Al waters that be above the heavens bless ye our Lord: bless our Lord al ye
powers of our Lord.

Sun and moon, bless ye our Lord: stars of heaven, bless ye our Lord.

Shoure and dew, bless ye our Lord: every spirit of God, bless ye our Lord.

Fire and heat, bless ye our Lord: could and summer, bless ye our Lord.

Dewes and hoare frost, bless ye our Lord: frost and cold, bless ye our Lord.

Ice and snow, bless ye our Lord: nights and days, bless ye our Lord.

Light and darkness, bless ye our Lord: lightninges and clouds, bless ye
our Lord.

Let the earth bless our Lord: let it praise and extol him for ever.

Mountains and little hills, bless ye our Lord: al things that spring in the
earth, bless ye our Lord.

Bless our Lord ye fountains: seas and rivers, bless ye our Lord.

Whales, and all that move in the waters, bless ye our Lord: bless our lord
al ye fowls of the air.

Al beasts and cattle, bless ye our Lord: sons of m^n, bless ye our lord.

Let Isra^l bless our Lord: let it praise and extol him for ever.

Preistes of our Lord, bless ye our Lord: servants of our Lord, bless ye our
Lord.

Spirits and souls of the just, bless ye our Lord: holy and humble men of
heart, bless ye our Lord.

Ananias, Azarias, Mizael, bless ye our Lord: praise, and extol him for ever.
Because he haith delivered us from hell, and saved us from the hand of death,
preserved us from the middle of the burning flame, and pulled us forth from the
midst of the fire.

Confess to our Lord, because he is good: because his mercy is for ever.

Al you that be Religious, bless our Lord, god of gods, praise and confess
unto him, because his mercy is for ever.

A Meditation upon the same out of S. Zeno Bishop of Verona, sermoutb. in Dan.
He was martyred under Galienus about the year 260.
O Wonderful burning, o verily ser 2.
a spectacle worthy of god. They which hear it, do fear, they which kindled
it, do burn, they which were thrown into the fire, go forth of the fournace,
sanctified and saif, by our Lord Jesus Christ.

Sometimes, after a great punishment there follows a greater glory, especially
in divine things, in which happy men with earnest devotion, rather preserve
their Religion, then life.

Understand, o Christian with a believing ser. 5.
heart, a thing marvelous and renowned by all example of virtues.

Three Hebrew children, greater the^ the constancy of old men, stronger then
the force of young men, equal to themselves, defended with the mystery of the
Trinity, firm in one faith of the unity in equality, glorious by the victory
of suffering. These, a barbarous King, commanded to be burned, because they
contemned to worship his statua, who, when they were cast into the fournace of
burning fire, the greedy fire devoutly receaueth them the fawning flames,
refresh them, covered with dew.

A marvelous thing, shadow, is within, burning, is witho^t: within, an Himne is
song, without lamenting is heard. O great power of god, the burners are burned
in the burning, and they that were set on fire, are suruiuors in the burning,
and triumphing, go forth of the fournace, our Lord Jesus Christ ser. 6.
performing it. Rejoice o Christian, and constantly fear god, if thou will not
fear the fire of the devil. Behold the children are not hurt with the
compassing flames, with the roaring fournace. They confound the barbarous
king, are reu^nged of their burners, they see god, death does pass into life,
fear into glory: who would not desire, so to burn? Awake o Christian, and
casting 8.
away al sluggishnesse, of secular sleep, opening the ears of thy heart,
learn virtue of children.

The Canticle of Zachary, father of S. John Baptist. Luc. 1.
ANd Zachary his father, was replenished with the holy ghost, and he prophesied
saying.

Blessed be our Lord God of Israel: because he haith visited and wrought the
redemption of his people.

And haith erected the horn of salvation to us, in the house of David his
servant.

As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, that are from the beginning.

Salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us.

To work mercy with our fathers: and to remember his holy Testament.

The oath which he swear, to Abraham Genesis 22.
our Father, that he would give to us.

That without fear, being delivered from the hand of our enemies, we may serve
him.

In holiness and Justice before him al our days.

And thou child shall be called the prophet Malach. 3.
of the highest: for thou shall go before the face of our Lord to prepare his
ways

To give knowledge of salvation to his people: unto remission of their sins.

Through the bowels of the mercy of Zachar. 3. Malach. 4.
our god, in which the Orient from on high, haith visited us.

To illuminate them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death: to direct
our feet into the way of peace.

Glory be to the Father etc.

A Prayer of praise and thanks-geuing to God for his Benefits, out of S.
Clement Coustitut. SS. Apost. lib. 7. cap. 38.
WE give thanks to thee, o Lord omnipotent, for all thy benefits, because thou
have not taken thy mercies and pity away from us, but in every generation,
and generation, do save, deliver, succor, defend. For thou have succored
in the days of Enos and Enoch, in the days of Moses and Jesus, in the days
of the Judges, in the days of Samuel, and Helias, and the Prophets, in the
days of David, and the Kings, in the days of Hester and Mardocheus, in the
days of Judith, in the days of Judas Machabeus and his brethren: and in our
days thou have relieved us by thy great high Priest Jesus Christ thy Son.
For he haith both saved us from the sword, and by norishing, delivered us from
famine, and freed us from sickness, and defended us from a wicked tongue.

For all thy gifts by Christ, we give thanks, unto thee, who have given us
voice framed for confession. Thou have lent unto us a tongue as an instrument
for the Harp and Organe. Thou have granted unto us, an agreeable taist, a
convenient touching, sight to behold, hearing to apprehend voices, smelling to
perceive odoures, hands to work, feet to walk, and al these things thou
do form of a little drop in the womb, and after information, bestowest an
immortal soul, and bring forth into light, man a reasonable creature, whom
thou have instructed with laws, adorned with iustifications, and after
dissolution of his short time, have promised Resurrection. Therefore what life
could be sufficient, or what excellency of praises would be enough, that we
might give thanks unto thee. But this we are not able to perform answearably
to thy deseruinges: yet we ought devoutly to perform it, so much as we are
ab^e. For thou have delivered us, from the impiety of them that worship many
gods, and those that killed Christ. Thou have freed us from heresies, recalled
us from the error of ignorance, sent Christ unto men, that he might be man,
which was god only begotten, have placed us in the comforter, appointed Angels
over us, dishonored the devil.

When we were not, thou have made us, being made, thou preseruest us, thou
ministrest life, geuest food, have promised penance.

For all these things, glory be to thee and honor by Jesus Christ, now and
ever, and for ever. Amen.

An other prayer of praise or thanks out of the same S. Clement. Constit. SS.
Apost. lib. 7. ca. 35.
GReat art thou o Lord, almighty and great is thy strength, and there is none
end of thy wisdom. Creator, Savior, rich in graces, patient, and shewer of
mercy, which take not away salvation from thy creatures. For by nature thou
art god, and sparest sinners, provoking them to penance, for thy correction is
full of mercies. For how should we sustain it, if we were called to sudaine
Judgment, when long time expected, we hardly cast away infirmity. The heavens
declare thy power, the earth poysed with stability, the sea wauing with
agreeable greatness, feeding infinite multitudes of living creatures. The sand
is bridled, trembling at thy commandment, and causes al men to cry, O Lord
thy works are magnified: thou have Ps. 103.
made al thing in wisdom, the earth is replenished with thy works.

The ardent army of Angels, and the intellectual Spirits, do say, one holy,
and the Seraphim, together with the Cherubims, Is. 6.
with their six adorned wings, singing unto thee an Himne of victory with a
never ceasing voice, cry forth, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord of Hosts, the heaven
and earth, are full of thy glory.

Also the other multitudes of orders Angels, Thrones, Dominations,
Principalities, Potestates, Powers, crying forth, do say, Blessed be the glory
of god, Ezechiel 3.
from his place. But Israel, that is, the Church on earth, gathered together,
of the gentiles, imitating the heavenly powers, day and night, with a full heart
and willing mind do sing, The Chariot Ps. 67.
of god with ten thousands manifould, thousands of reioycers, our lord among
them in Sinai in the holy. The heaven haith known him, because he arched it,
resting upon noe supporter, and made it stable as a apiece stone: who also
gathered togethe^ into one, the earth and water, and diffused the air, from
whence life and spirit should be drawn, to which he joined the fire for
warmness, and putting away of darkness.

The company of stars is amazed, showing forth him that numbreth them, Ps.
146.
and declaring him, who names them. The living creatures also are astonished
at him, that inspireth their life, and the trees at him that planteth them: Al
which things created with thy word, denownce the greatness of thy power.
Wherefore every man ought with all his heart to give praise unto thee, by Christ
for all those things, seeing by thee he posseseth them al, for thou art
gracious in granting benefits, and boutiful in showing mercy, who alone art
omnipotent: for when thou will, power is in thee, to be able to do it: For thy
eternal Dan. 3. Dan. 14. Iou. 2.
might cools the flame, bridl^th the lions, makes the whale gentle:
succourreth the sick, overthrows powers, destroys the army of enemies, and
the proud multitude of people. Thou art in heaven, in earth, in the sea, in
the uttermost bonds, thy self circumscribed with no bond: of thy greatness
there Ps. 144.
is no end. And o Lord, not we alone say this, but it is the oracle of thy
servant saying: And thou shall know with thy heart, Deu. 4.
that thy lord thy god, is god in heaven above, and in earth beneath, and there
is no other but he, for there is no god but he alone. There is not an holy
besides thee, lord god of knowledge, the God of Saints, holy above all that
are holy. For they which are made holy, are under thy hand: thou art glorious,
exalted, invisible by nature, unsearchable in judgments, whose life wants
nothing, duration without change, and variety, operation without labor,
majesty contained with no bounds, Comeliness everlasting, a mansion place
inaccessible, an habitation vntransmigrable, knowledge interminable, truth
inuariable, a work with out middle, power without deceiptes, rule without
succession, strength without adversary, the multitude of thine army is great.
For thou art the father of wisdom, author of nature by the Mediator, as
cause, diposer of providence, Lawgiuer, replenisher of poverty, revenger of the
impious, and rewarder of those that be just, of Christ God, and Father, and the
Lord of those that worship him, whose promise is infallible, judgment
incorruptible, sentence not entreatable, piety vnexhausted, benignity eternal,
for whom, worthy and deserved adoration is due to thee, of every reasonable and
holy nature.

Judith. 16.
LEt us singe an Himne unto our Lord: let us sing an Himne unto our god.

Adonai, Lord thou art great and excellent in power, and whom noe man can
overcome.

Let every creature serve thee, because thou have said the word, and things
were made, thou have sent thy spirit, and they were created, and noe man can
resist thy will.

The mountains shall be moved from the foundations with waters: the rocks shall
melt as wax before thy face, but they which fear thee, shall be great
Ecclesiastic. 51. 1. 2.
with thee in all things.

O Lord our King, I will confess unto thee, and praise thee god my Savior.

I will confess unto thy name, be 10. 11.
cause thou art made my helper and protector.

I looked for the help of men, and it was not.

I remembered thy mercy o Lord, for thou deliuerest those that expect thee.

I have called upon our Lord, the Father of my Lord, that he would not leave me
in the day of tribulation, and in the time of the proud without help. I will
praise thy name daily, and extol it 14.
in confession, and my prayer is heard, and thou have delivered me from
perdition, 15. 16. 17.
and taken me forth from the wicked time. Therefore I will confess, and speak
praise unto thee, and bless the name of our Lord.

Heu, heu, heu, o Lord god: behold Ierem. 32.
thou have made heaven and earth, in thy great strength, and stretched arm,
nothing will be dificult to thee, who show mercy on thousands, and payest
the iniquity of the parents, into the bosom of their children after them, o
most strong, great, and mighty, the Lord of hosts is thy name, great in
counsel and incomprehensible in cogitation: whose eyes are open upon all the
ways of the children of Adam, that thou may render to every one according
to his ways and according to the fruit of his inventions.

Blessed art thou, o lord god of our fathers, Dan. 3.
and to be praised, and exalted for ever. And the blessed name of thy glory
holy, and laudable, and exalted in all worlds. Blessed art thou in the holy
temple of thy glory, and exceedingly to be praised, and eminently glorious for
ever. Blessed art thou in the throne of thy kingdom, and superlaudable and
extolled for ever. Blessed art thou, who behouldest the depthes, and sit
upon the Cherubim, and laudable and extolled for ever. Blessed art thou in the
firmament of heaven, and laudable and glorious for ever.

I will joy in our lord, and rejoice in Habacue. 3.
god my Jesus.

A brief exercise of meditations and prayers, for such as desire to observe
al canonical hours of prayer, used in the primative church: and still among the
religious: And first for prime or first hour of the day.
THe sun is risen and man shall Ps. 103
go forth to his labor, and work until evening.

A wise man will give his heart, early Ecclesiast. 39.
to watch to our lord, that made him, and will make his prayers in the sight of
the highest.

The kingdom of heaven is like to a Math. 20.
man, that is an houshoulder, which went forth in the morning, to hyre workmen
into his vineyard, and having made covenant with the workmen for a penie a day,
he sent them into his vineyard.

And very early the first of the sabothes, Mare. 16.
they come to the monument, the sun being now risen.

we must prevent the sun to bless Sap. 16.
thee, and worship thee when the day appears.

when morning was come all the chief Ma^h. 17.
Prei^^es* and aun^i^nts of the people consulted together, against Jesus, that
they might put him to death, and they bring him bound, and delivered him to
Pontius Pilate, the pres^dent.

From the holy primative Fathers.
AT these hours, let us y^ld thanks, S. ^enedictus in Regula. S. Ch^^s^st. l.
^. de orando Deum.
to our Creator, Matins, Prime, etc.

We ought in forsaking our beds to prevent the sun rising, with divine
worship. Tell me with what countenance will thou behold the sun, except
first thou have adored him, that sends that most sweet light to thy eyes?
Meditate in the holy s^riptures: Athanasius l de virginitate.
have the psalter, and learn the psalms: let the sun rising see a book in
thy hands.

A meditation out of S. Athanasius ser. in id. profecti etc. inuenietis pullum
alligatum etc.
THe scribes and pharasies came together into the court of Caiphas, and took
counsel against Jesus. For those most desperate men were ignorant, that his
death would give unto us immortality, and this descending procure unto us, our
ascending into heaven: for our lord arose the third day, from the dead, having
spoiled hell, trodden the enemy under foot, abolished death, broken the bounds
of sins, wherewith we were holden, and delivered those that were bound,
saying: arise, let us depart hence being delivered from the se^uitude of the
devil. Therefore let us acknowledge our benefactor, let us glorify the Father,
with the Son, and holy Ghost, let us confess one deity: for so ordering our
life, we shall possess the kingdom of heaven, in Christ Jesus our lord.

An other meditation out of S. Ciprian de orat. dominica.
BEsides the hours which were au^ciently used, now both the spaces and
Mysteries, are increased. For also we must pray in the morning; that the
resurrection of our lord may be celebrated by morning prayer. If in the holy
scriptures Christ be the true sun, and the true day, no hour is excepted from
Christians, but God ought often and always to be adored: that we which are in
Christ, that is in the sun and the day, apply our selves to supplicatio^s,
and to pray all the day.

A meditation and prayer out of S. Andreas Bishop of Cesaraea in Capadocia. c.
vlt. in Apocalip.
SVrely our Lord is a consuming fire, and warmeth the soul, which chastely and
quietly, conuerseth with him, although it be could with sin, and makes it
capable of that fire, which was borne to cons^me uncleanness: Even also as the
sun, whylest it does more forceably reflect upon a vessel of glass, full of
water, by a certain kind of boiling, and refraction, draws fire out of it,
though being could. Therefore this being so, let us exhibit our selves, not as
a filthy and earthen vessel, or such as cannot receive impression of the
heavenly beams, but as the Temple Cor. 6.
of the holy Ghost, and clean and bright glass, to the sun of justice, that
is to Christ, who would al men to be saved, and 1. Tim. 2.
come to the knowledge of truth: and does bestow, and offer unto al, so
plentifully, and without offense, the grace of his brightness: although it be
not equally participated of al, but according to the measure of the purity of
the inward eye. Our merciful Lord that for our sake suffered in flesh, that is,
Jesus Christ our God, grant, that we may obtain this pure and chaist eye of
mind: To whom together with the Father and holy and viuificant spirit, is due,
al glory, and honor, and adoration, now and ever, and for ever. Amen.

A prayer for this hour, out of S. Clement Constit. S. Apost. lib. 8. cap. 44.
O God of spirits and al flesh, in comparable, wanting nothing, who have given
the sun to gui^e the day, and the moon and stars to rule the night:
Behold us now with thy merciful eyes, and receive our morning geuinges of
thanks, and have mercy upon us, for we have not stretched forth our hands to
a straung God, for there is not any new god to us, but thou everlasting and
infinite, who have given unto us by Christ, that we might be, and by him have
bestowed upon us, that we might be well. Now by him make us worthy of
everlasting life: to whom, with thee and the holy ghost, be glory, honor, and
worship for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer out of S. And^eas of Cesarea, super cap. 47.
GOd almighty grant, that our conversation and order of life be such, that it
may be cause of confusion and deiection, unto the devils, and bring occasion of
gladness unto the Angels, that together with them we may celebrate a f^^^^uity
with voice of exultation, and sound of conf^ssi^n, and may give thanks for
victory obtained against the wicked devils, unto Christ one god, with whom,
glory is due to the Father and holy Ghost, now and ever, and world without end.
Amen.

A Meditation upon Christ's being brought before Caiphas, out of S. Leo ser. 6.
de pas. Domini.
Jesus being brought to Caiphas, chief of the Preistes, whether the Scribes,
and all the preistly order, were assembled, false testimonies are sought against
our Lord, and Caiphas, to ex^ggerate the envy of the speech which he heard,
r^n^ his garments, and not knowing what he signified by this ma^nesse,
deprived him self of preistly honor. O Caiphas, where is the Rationale of thy
breast? Where is thy Girdle of continency? Where is thy Superhumerale of
virtues? Thou spoil^st thy self of that mistical and consecrated attire, and
with thine own hands, pullest into Pieces, thy Pontifical vestiments,
forgeating that precept which thou had red of the chief Priest: He Leuit. 22.
shall not lay of the Cidaris from his head, and shall not break in sunder his
garments. But thou from whom this dignity was now alienated, thou thy self, to
thy self, art executioner of reproach. And to manifest the end of the old
Testament, belongs the same rending in pieces of the preisthood.

Meditations and Prayers for the 3. Isodor. l. 1 eccl. offic. c. 19.
Hour, or middle space, between Sun rising and Noone.
Direction out of Scripture.
PIlate again answearing, said unto Marc. 15.
them, what will you then that I do to the King of the Jews? But they again
cried, crucify him etc.

And it was the Third Hour.

Suddenly there was made a sound from Act. 2.
heaven, and there appeared to them parted tongues, as it were of fire, and it
sat upon every one of them, and they were al replenished with the holy Ghost
v. 15.
etc. It is the third Hour of the day.

Direction out of the Fathers. Ignatius Epist. ad Trallian.
At the Third Hour, Christ, by his Fathers permission, received sentence of
Pilate. At the Sixth Hour, he was crucified. And at the Ninth Hour, yielded up
the Ghost. And before the Sun setting, was taken from the Cross and buried
in a new Sepulcher.

We find that in making prayers, the Ciprian. de orat. domin. see S. Hieronim.
epist. 122. c. 16. ad Eustochium.
three children with Daniel, observed the Third Hour, Sixth Hour, and Ninth
Hour, doubtless in mystery of the Trinity, which was to be manifested in the
last times, and it was after made manifest, that they were mysteries in old
times, that before, the just men prayed in that manner. For the holy Ghost
descended upon the Disciples at the Third Hour, who fulfilled the grace of our
Lords promise.

Make your prayers early in the morning S. Clem. Co^st. S. Apost. l. 8. c. 4.
at the Third Hour etc. At the 3. Hour, because at that hour, our Lord had
sentence of Pilate.

A Meditation out of S. Basile, l. q. diffus. explicat. q. 37.
ABout the Third Hour, let us arise to prayer, remembering the gift of the
spirit, which was given to the Apostles about the Third Act. 2.
Hour. Let us pray al with one mind, that we also may be made worthy, to
rec^aue sanctification, asking of him direction and instruction, to that which
is profitable, according to him that said O god create in me a new heart, and
renew Ps. 50.
a right spirit in my bowels. Cast me not away from thy face, and take not thy
holy Spirit from me. Restoare unto me the gladness of thy salvation, and
confirm me with thy principal Spirit. And in an other place. Thy good Spirit
will lead me into the Ps. 142.
right land.

A Meditation of Christ's bearing his Cross, out of S. Leo. ser. 8. pass.
Domini.
Our Lord delivered over to the will of raging men, to the scorn of his Kingly
dignity, was commanded to be the bearer of his own punishment, that it might
be fulfilled, which Esaias the Prophet had foreseen saying, Behold a Child is
borne, Is. 9.
and a son is given unto us, whose rule is upon his shoulders. Therefore when
our Lord bore the tree of his Ctosse, which he would turn into the scepter of
his power: this surely was a great scorn among the eyes of the ungodly, but it
was showed for a great mystery to true beleuers: because the most glorious
c^^querour of the devil, and the most mighty subduer of the enemies strengthes,
in a bewtiful show, did carry the Trophee of his triumph, and bore vp^n his
shoulders of invincible patience, the sign of salvation, to be adored of al
Kingdoms, as though even th^n he would, with the Image it self of his work,
confirm al his followers, and say, He that does not take his Cross and Math.
10.
follow me, is not worthy of me.

A prayer out of S. Basile de Ieiunio, concione. 1.
Our Lord that haith brought us unto this instant of time, vouchsaife to give
unto us, as to men in cumbate, that to these cumbates we may show firmnes, and
strength of constancy, and come to the appointed day of crouning, now of the
remembrance of his saving passion, and in the world to come, of retribution,
according to our life, in the just judgment of Christ him self. To him be
glory for ever Amen.

An other out of the same Father l. exercitam. ser. 6.
HE that comes unto god, ought to embrace poverty, and in all things to be
perced through with the fear of god, according to him, that said: Perce my
flesh with thy fear, I have feared for thy judgments. Our Lord grant unto
us, that with all perfection we may receive those things, that are referred to
the glory of god, and show forth fruits worthy of the spirit, according to the
will of god, and cooperation of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

A prayer for graces of the holy Ghost: out of the mass attributed to S. Mark
the Evangelist.
O Ruler, our lord Jesus Christ, the eternal word of the Father without
beginning, who for our salvation did become like unto us, in all things,
excepting sin, who sent thy holy Disciples, and Apostles, to preach and teach
thy gospel, and to cure al sickness and infirmities in the people: now also o
Lord, send forth thy light and truth, and illuminate the eyes of our mind,
that we may understand thy divine words: grant that we be fit hearers of
them, and not only hearers, but that we may be made doers of thy word: that we
may encreace and bring forth good fruits, from thirty to an hundred, that we
may be accounted worthy of the kingdom of heaven. And let thy mercies soon lay
hold on us, for thou art our Euangelisme or message of good Savior, and
keeper of our souls, and bodies, o Lord god, and we offer unto thee glory, and
thanksgiving, and thrice holy himne, to the Father, and the Son, and holy
Ghost, now and ever and world without end. Amen.

A meditation and prayer to the holy Ghost: out of S. Basil ser. de libero
arbitrio.
MAry haith chosen the best part Luc. 10.
which shall not be taken from her. O those precious tears like unto Margarites
flowing from her blessed eyes, o her divine and obedi^nt ears, o manlike and
wise mind, o swiftness of spiritual love, greatly hasting to the unpolluted
brydegro^e, o prick of desire of a soul to god the word, o indissoluble
society of the spouse to the brydegrome, imitate her o son, imitate her
looking after nothing else, but him that said: I came to cast fire, and what will
I, but to have it kinled, for there is an heat of the spirit stirring up of
men's hearts: wherefore that immaterial and divine fire does illuminate souls,
and proves them within, as gold not counterfaite in a furnace, and consumes
wickedness as stuble and thorns. For our God is a consuming fire, who takes
vengeance in a flame of fire, upon them that know him not, and them, that obey
not his gospel. This fire wrought in the Apostles, when Act. 2.
they spoke with fy^^e tongues, this is the fire that shyned with glory round
Act. 9.
about Paul, and illuminated his mind, but darkened the since of his sight. For
fleshly sight does not receive the force of that light. This fire was seen to
Exodus 3.
Moses in the bush. This fire in the shape of a Chariot took away Helias.
Blessed David seeking after the actio^ of this fire, did say: Prove me o lord,
and examine Ps. 25.
me, burn my reins and my heart. This fire warmed the hearts of Cleophas,
Luc. 24.
and him that travailed with him, when our Savior talked with them after his
resurrection. Whereupon the Angels Ps. 103.
and ministering spirits are termed a burning fire. This fire consuming the
beam in the inward eye, makes the mind pure, that receiving the natural
strength of seeing, it may continually see the miracles of god, according to
him that says, Reueile mine eyes, and I will Ps. 118.
consider the marvelous things in thy Law.

Therefore this fire drives away devils, consumes wickedness, it is the
force of resurrection, work of immortality, illumination of holy souls, and
confirmation of reasonable powers.

Let us pray unto this fire, that it will also come into us, that always
walking in the light, we never offend at al, but as lights, shyning in the
world, we keep continually the doctrine of life, that enjoying God, with our
Lord Jesus Christ, we may rest in life world without end. Amen.

S. Ephrem post Thren.
WOE to me, to me burdeined with greatest sins. I have sinned above the number
of the sands of the sea, and go crooked 2. Par. 36. Luc. 18.
with the burden of my sins, as laden with a great weight of iron. For I
dare not lift up mine eyes, and behold the highness of the heavens. Therefore
to whom shall I flee, but to thee most merciful and gentle? O god have Ps. 50.
mercy on me, according to thy great mercy. And according to the multitude of
thy miserations, blot out mine iniquity. Wash me more o Lord from mine
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. Because I acknowledge mine iniquity, and
my sin is always against me. I have sinned to th^e alone, and door evil
before th^e. I flee unto thee for thine infinite piety. I have pr^uoked thee,
to th^e I return, because of thine exceeding clem^ncy. To thee, because of thy
great beningnity and goodness, I run back, and b^seeching, cry out. Turn
thy face away from my Ps. 50.
sins, and blot out al mine iniquities, for thy holy name. For I have nothing
which I may offer unto thee, not any good works, not cleanesse of heart. But I
trust in thy mercies, and cast myself into them, asking, that thou will Ib.
create a clean heart in me, and confirm me with thy principal Spirit, lest I
easily fall again into sin: but from henceforth, may serve thee in holiness
and justice, all the days of my life. Because thine is the kingdom, and Rule,
world without end. Amen.

Meditations and prayers for the sixth hour, or at noone time.
Direction out of scripture.
AT Noone time I will declare, and Ps. 54.
show forth, and he will hear my voice.

And after they came to the place, Luc. 23. Marc. 15. Math. 27.
which is called Caluary, there they crucified him, etc. And it was almost the
sixth hour.

Peter went up to pray in the higher Act. 10.
parts, about the sixth hour.

O tell me, thou who^ my soul does love, Cant. 1.
where thou feedest, where thou lie, at noone time, lest I begin to wander
after the flocks of my fellows.

M^k^ your prayers at the sixth hour, Clem. Constable. l. 8. c. 40. Cip. l. de orat.
dom.
because our lord was then crucified.

We find that in praying, the three children with Daniel, observed the third
hour, sixth hour, and ninth hour. etc. Peter at the sixth hour ascending into the
higher parts, was instructed both with the sign, and voice of god,
admonishing him that he should admit al to the grace of salvation. And our lord
being crucified at the sixth hour, at the ninth hour washed away our sins with
his blood.

A Meditation upon the Cross for this Hour, out of S. Ciril, Archb. of
Jerusalem, Catech. 13. Illumin.
THe Tree of life is set into the earth, that the earth which was cursed, might
enjoy benediction, and the dead, might be delivered, and quickened. Therefore
let us not be ashamed to confess, him that was crucified, but let us
confidently impresse with our fingers, the sign of the cross on our forhead,
and let the Cross be made in all things else, in eating our bread, in drinking
our drink, and in going forth, and entering in, before sleep, in lying down,
in rising, in going, and resting. Great is this saifguarde which for the poor
is freely given, without labor for the weak, seeing this grace is of god, the
sign of the faithful, and fear of ^euils: for he triumphed over them in this
sign. She wit forth boldly, for when they shall see the Cross, they ^^member
him that was crucified, they f^a^e him that c^ushed in pieces the Genesis 3.
dragons head.

An other Meditation upon the crucifying of Christ, out of S. Leo. ser. 6. de
pas. Do.
CHrist was crucified in the place called Golgatha. By the tree, the fall, by
the tree is lifted up, and by the taist of gal and vinegre, the bait of sin
is blotted out. Worthily had our Lord said before he was betrayed, When I shall
be exalted, I will draw Joan. 12.
al th^nges unto me: That is, I will plead all the cause of mankind, and that
nature which was lost, I will recall to integrity. Al infirmity shall be abolished
in me, al wounds shall be healed in me. And that Christ drew al things unto
him, it is showed, not only by the suffering of our substance, but by
alteration of all the world. For our Lord hanging in his tormente, every
creature did groan with him, and all the elements together, did feel the
nails of the Cross: nothing was free from that punishment: that drew both
earth, and heaven, to communicate with it: that brake the rocks, opened the
graves, unlocked hell, and hid the beams of the Sun, with horror of gross
darcknesse. The world did owe this testimony to his Author, that in the ending
of their maker, al things would have an end. Therefore, being delivered from
the power of darcknesse, and loosed from the bands of our old cap^i^ity, with
so great a price, so great a Sacrament: do your endeavor, o most beloved, that
by no cunning, the devil corrupt the integrity of your minds. Let all that are
regenerated by water and the holy Ghost, remember whom they have renounced, and
by what profession, they have cast of from them selves, the yoke of tirannical
ouerruling.

Let them neither in pros^erity nor adversity, run to the deadly help of the
devil. If god be for us, Who is against us? Romans 8.
Who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us al: how haith he not also
with him, given us al things. who lives and reigns world without end. Amen.

A Meditation upon Christ's Pas. in Mount Caluary, out of S. Athanasius, in
passion. Saluat.
THey cast lottes for his coat, Math. 27. Ps 21. Ps. 15.
that Christ might be our lotte, as the psalmist writes, Our Lord is the
portion ^f mine inheritance, and my cup. Wherefore he suffers 4 To this
consent, Tertul. l. 2. cont. Marc Basil. in c. 5. leuit. Epiph. haeres. 46.
Chrisost. ho. 84. in Joan Ambros. l. 5. ep. 9. August. de temp. ser. 71. et q.
161. ingen. and others*
not in any other place, nor in any other Region, but in the place of Caluary,
4 which the Masters of the Hebrews say was the grave of Adam, for they
affirm that he was buried there after the curse. And if it be so, I can not
but wonder at the peculiar conueniency and fitness of his passion: for it
behooved that our Lord, desireous to make a renouation, should first renew Adam,
that his sin being loosed, he might quite take away sin from mankind. And
forasmuch as Adam heard spoken, unto him, Thou art earth, and into earth Genesis 3.
thou shall return: So now again he might hear. Be thou raised that sleep
Is. 60.
arise from the dead, and Christ will lighten thee. And again. Arise and
follow Ib.
me, that thou tre^^e not the earth any longer, but may ascend to heaven.
For it is needeful that our Savior being raised, Adam, and al descending of
him, should be also raised with him. And as when Adam died we were al dead: so
also our Lords body being raised, of necessity al must be raised with him. For
this is the mind of the words of Paul, writing to the Corinthians, Even as
in Adam, al men dye: so in Christ, al shall be 1. Cor. 15.
quikned.

A Direction or Meditation out of S. Bafil^ q. diffus. q. 37.
WE judge prayer to be necessary at the Sixth Hour, for imitation of the
Saints, that say. In the evening, and morning, and Ps. 54.
Noone-time, I will declare and show, and he will hear my voice. And that I may
be delivered from incursion, and Noon^-time d^uil: let the 90 psalm be said.

HE that dwells in the aid of This psalm is cited in the prayers for
e^eni^g ^lso, by the same S Basile his Direction.
the highest, shall abide in the protection of the god of heaven.

He will say to our Lord, thou art he that receaueth me, and my refuge, my god,
I will open in him.

Because he haith delivered me from the s^a^e of h^nt^^s, and from c^^el sp^ach.

With his shoulders, he will sh^dow thee, and under his wings t^^u shall trust.

His t^u^h shall compass thee about with a sh^^ld: thou shall not be afraid of
the fear of the night.

Of the arrow flying in the day, of the work walking in darkness, of
incursion, and noone-time devil.

A thousand shall fall from thy side, and ten thousands on thy right hand: but
he shall not approach to thee.

But thou shall behold with thine eyes: and see the reward of sinners.

Because o Lord thou art my hope: thou have appointed the most high, for my
refuge.

Evil shall not come to thee: and scourge shall not draw near to thy Tabernacle.

Because he haith given charge to his Angels over thee, that they keep thee in all thy ways.

They shall carry thee in their hands: lest peradventure thou may hitte thy
foot at a stone.

Thou shall walk upon the Aspis and Basiliske: and tread under thy foot the
Lion and Dragon.

Because he haith trusted in me, I will deliver him: I will protect him, because
he haith known my name.

He haith cried unto me, and I will hear him: with him I am in tribulation, I
will deliver him, and I will glorify ^im.

I will replenish him with length of days, and I will show unto him my salvation.

Glory be to the Father etc.

A prayer upon the P^ssion, out of S. Athanasius, in Euang. of the pasion and
Cross of Christ.
WHat must we do here? Nothing else, but that we believe in Christ, and live
according unto him, as paul says, Be folowers of me, as I also am of Jesus
Christ. Philip. 3.
Let us stick unto the Cross, and live worthy of it, and say the same words
with Paul, God forbid I should glory, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Gal. 6.
For when we shall so have lived, and believed in our Lord, we shall know his
assumption into heaven, and his sitting at the right hand of majesty, and
behold the subjection of the Angels unto him, and his coming again with
glory, whom the Angels foreshew, the Saincctes do singe unto, and al seeing,
rejoice, and are glad in Christ Jesus, by whom to the Father, be glory and rule
for ever. Amen.

An other out of S. Ephrem, S. de passione Domini.
O Lord I worship thee, O divine, I bless and praise thee, O holy, I beseech
thee, O god lover of men, I fall down unto thee, and glorify thee o Christ:
that thou, the only begotten Lord of al things, alone without sin, art for
me, a most unworthy sinner, delivered unto death and death of the Cross, that
thou might deliver the soul of a sinner from the bonds of sins. And what
shall I render to thee for all these things o Lord?

O most bountiful, glory to thee. Glory to thee, o most merciful. Glory to
thee, o most patient. Glory to thee, that remittest the sins of al. Glory to
thee, that did descend, to save our souls. Glory to thee, that wast
incarnate in the Virgins womb. Glory to thee, that wast borne for us. Glory to
thee, that wast held for our cause. Glory to thee, that wast bound. Glory to
thee, that wast whipped. Glory to thee, that wast spitte upon. Glory to thee,
that wast mocked. Glory to thee, that wast crucified. Glory to thee, that wast
buried. Glory to thee, that did arise from the dead. Glory to thee, that art
preached. Glory to thee, in whom we believe. Glory to thee, that wast assumpted
into heaven. Glory to thee, who with great glory, sit on the right hand of
the Father, and again shall come in the glory of the Father, and the holy
Angels, to judge every soul that haith despised thee, and thy holy passions,
in that fearful and dreadful hour, when the powers of the heavens shall Math.
24. Luc. 21.
be moved, when also the Angels and Archangels, Cherubim and Seraphim, shall
come with fear and trembling in sight of thy glory: when agai^e, the
foundations of the earth shall tremble, and every living thing shall be afraid
for the incomparable glory of thy great Majesty. I beseech thee, that in that
hour thy grace may hide me under thy wings and my soul may be delivered from
that horrible fire, gnashing of teeth, external darkness, and everlasting
weping, that I may say, blessing, and thankesgeuing, to thee. Glory be to thee
o Lord, who, according to the multitude of the mercies of thy great piety, have
vouchsaifed to save me a sinner. who with the Father and holy Ghost, live and
reignest, world without end. Amen

S. Athanasins l. Meditat.
At the Sixth Hour, end thy prayers, with psalms, weping, and tears, because
at this Hour, the Son of God did hang on the Cross for thee.

Meditations and prayers for the Ninth hour.
THere was darkness upon the Luc. 23.
whole earth, until the ninth hour, and the sun was darkened: and the veil of
the temple was rent in the midest. And Jesus crying with a loud voice, said:
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit: and saying this, he gave up the
ghost.

Peter and John went up into the temple Act. 3.
at the ninth hour of prayer.

He saw manifestly in a vision, as it Act. 10.
were the ninth hour of the day, the Angel of god, coming in, to him, and said
unto him, thy prayers and alms have ascended in memory, in the sight of god.

Make your prayers, at the ninth hour: Clem. Constable. Aopst. l. 8. c. 40.
Athanas. l. de meditat.
because al things were troubled, when our lord was crucified.

At the Ninth hour, thou shall be in Himnes, and glorifications, and with
tears, and confession of thy sins, praying to god, because at this hour our
lord hanging on the cross gave up the ghost.

The Ninth hour is delivered by the Apostles them selves, in the Acts to be
Basil. l. q. diff. q. 37.
necessary for prayer, where it is told that Peter and John went up into the
Temple, at the ninth hour of prayer. Act. 3.


S. Denis the Areopagite, S. Paul's scholar: epist. ad S. Policarp.
Demand of him what he thinks He means Apoliphanes, the philosopher.
of the Eclips of the Su^ne, which happened, when our Savior was crucified, for
we were then both together, and stood at Heliopolis, and did sodanly see, when
the Moon objected it self to the Sun, not being the time of their
conjunction: and again, when the same opposed it self, above the order of
nature, to the middle line of the sun, from the ninth hour to the evening. And
recall further some other thing to his memory, for he knows also how that
interposition was seen of us, to begin from the rising of the sun, and come
to the last point of it: and after to vanish away: and again, that the
interposition, and recession, did not chance from the same part of the sun,
but from that, which (so to speak) was diametrically contrary. These are the
wonderful things of that time, which Christ, the author of al things, is
only able to perform, who makes great, and Job. 5.
mereulous things, of which there is noe number. If it be lawful for thee, and
if thou can, o Apoliphanes, refute The testimony of gentile Philosophers for
Christ.
these things against me, who was then both present with thee, and did
behold, and examine al things, with greatest admiration. And I cannot devise
whereupon Apoliphanes then began, and conferring with me the things that were
done, said thus: O Dionisius, these are the changing of divine matters.

An other Meditation, how al creatures seemed to lament, at the death of
Christ, out of S. Leo ser. 2. pas. Dom.
WHen Christ yielded up the Ghost, all the elements did tremble. The brightness
of the sun, covered with thick darkness, did extraordinarily subject the day
to night. The earth weakened with deep quakinges, did not retai^e it stability.
And the firm rocks, their strength being broken, fell into pieces. The veil
of the Temple, with which the mysteries of former things, were now noe longer
to be shadowed, was cut asunder. And the bodies of many Saints, being
raised up, to prepare the faith of the Resurrection, their graves lay open.
Therefore o Jews, against you heaven and earth have given sentence. The sun
haith withdrawn his service, and the day from you, all the orders of the
elements, have denied to serve you, and the ministry of the creature
departing from his laws, your blindness, your confusion was was signified.
For you saying, His Math. 27.
blood be upon us, and upon our children, this is worthily repayed unto you,
that what the wicked portion of your stock has lost, that the believing
fullness of the gentiles should obtain. Therefore most beloved, let us to whom
our lord Jesus Christ crucified is not a scandal, nor 1. Cor. 1.
foolishness, but the power of god and wisdom of god, let us, I say, the
spiritual seed of Abraham, not begotten of the Issue of servitude, but
regenerated in the family of freedom, for whom brought forth with a strong
hand and mighty arm, from under the oppression of the rule of Egypt, the true
and immaculate lamb Christ is 1. Cor. 5.
offered: let us embrace the meruealous mystery of his saving pasouer, and be
reformed to the image of him, that was conformed to our deformity, let us be
lifted up to him, that made the dust of our baise condition, to be the body of
his glory, and that we may deserve to be partakers of his resurrection, let us
in all things become agreeable to his humility, and patience. We have undertaken
the warfare of a great name, the discipline of a great profession. It is not
lawful for the folowers of Christ, to depart from the kings way, but worthy it
is, that they which tend unto eternal things, be not occupied in things
temporal* and because we are redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, let us
glorify and bear g^d in our body, that we 1. Cor. 6.
may deserve to come to those things, that are prepared for the faithful by
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer upon Christ's passion out of S. Gregory Nazianzen orat. in S. Pascha.
in fine.
GOd was crucified, the su^ne darkened, and lightened again: for it behooves
creatures, to compassionate with there creator. The veale was cut, water and
blood flowed out of his side, the earth quaked, the rocks were rent, the dead
rising, do testify the faith of the last and common resurrection. Al which
things who is able worthily to praise? But none was such, as the miracle of my
salvation, a few drops of blood reforming all the world. But o great and holy
pasouer, and expurgation of all the world.

O word of God, and light, and life, and wisdom, and power, for I joy at al
thy names. O Issue, and cogitation, and seal of that great mind: o word
intelligible, and man visible, who bear al things, crowned with the word of
power: let us suffer noe evil: stay the tyranny which the body bears against
us. Thou see o Lord, whom, and how it bears down, except we be purged by
thy suffrage, or by thy self. But if we shall worthily be dissolved from this
desire, and received in the celestial tabernacles: peradventure there also, we
shall acceptab^y sacrifice unto thee, on thy holy Altar, o Father, and word,
and holy Ghost, because al glory, honor, and power, is to thee for ever. Amen.

PRAYERS DAILY To be used for the Evening.
The Meditation or Preparation to Prayer out of S. Cesarius, Bishop of Arles,
Hom. 31.
LEt us pray with sighing, and forceable crying or groa^ing, according to that
prophetical saying: I did roar for the groaning of my heart. Ps. 37.
Let us pray, not with a sounding voice, but with a conscience, crying unto our
Lord. When we pray, so much as we are able: Let us labor by the help of god,
that noe extrauagant cogitation creep into us, lest peradventure, we may have
one thing in our heart, and utter an other with our mouth, lest by chance
while our tongue prays unto god, our cogitation occupied with diverse things,
may go away from the meaning of our prayer, and so from thence procure sin,
from whence it might have had remedy.

For if before any mighty person, thou would plead any necessary cause, and
suddenly turning from him, breaking of thy speech in the midst, thou
should busy thy self with some scurrilities: what injury think thou, thou
should do unto that person with whom thou did speak? or how should thou
procure his anger against thee? If therefore speaking with a man, we labor
with all intention of mind, lest thinking on any other thing, we may be thought
to do a wrong to him unto whom we speak: When we speak unto god, in prayer,
and alledg the miseries of our sins before so great a Majesty, are we not
ashamed, do we not blush, our senses being made captives, to run about hither
and thither, and with many business, to abstracte our unhappy mind, from
behoulding the divine Majesty? And therefore every one before he kneleth down
in prayer, by the help of god, let him put away al superfluous cogitations,
from the intention of his mind, that our soul being inflamed with the fervor
of the holy Ghost, may consume al vice with the fire of compunction, or prayer,
and disperse far of, al wavering and wandering cogitations, that only v^rtue
and holy Meditations, may always, find place in our hearts.

Meditations and prayers for Evening.
LEt every one take a Lamb throughout their families, or houses. Exodus 12.
And the whole multitude of Israel, shall offer it in sacrifice at the Evening.

Let my prayer be directed as incense Ps. 140.
in thy sight: the lifting up of my hands an evening sacrifice.

While it was even, he sat down Math. 26. Mar^. 14. Luc. 22.
with his twelve Disciples. And whiles they were at supper, Jesus took bread
and blessed, and brake, and he gave to his Disciples, and said, Take ye and
eat This is my body. And taking the Chalice, he gave thanks, and gave unto
them saying, Drink ye al of this, for This is my blood of the new Testament
which shall be shed for many, unto remission of sins,

When it was evening, there came a Math. 27.
certain rich man of Arimathea named Joseph, who also himself, was Disciple
to Jesus. He went to Pila^e, and asked the body of Jesus. Then Pilate
commanded, that the body should be delivered.

Watch therefore, for you know not Marc. 13^:
when the Lord of the house may come, whether late in the evening, etc.

I have cried to god, and our Lord Ps. 54.
will save me.

In the evening I will declare and show, and he will hear my voice.

A Meditation of S. Basile orat. in S. Iulittam.
When the day is ended, give thanks unto him, who haith given the same unto
us, to serve our daily labors, and fire to lighten night, and for the rest of
the necessities of life. And let the night propose unto us other arguments of
prayer.

When thou shall look up unto heaven, and have thine eyes fixed on the beauty
of the stars: pray unto the Lord of visible things, and adore god the best
workman of al creatures, who made al things in wisdom, when thou shall see al
nature of living creatures, detained in sleep. Again adore him that loses
us, though against our will, by sleep, from the continuance of labors, and by
a little rest, reduces us again to the force of our strength.

S. Clem. Constable. Apost. lib. 8. cap. 4.
Make your prayers at the evening, giving thanks, because our Lord haith given
us the night for a rest of our day labors.

Daily come together in the morning, l. 2. c. 63.
and evening, singing and praying in Churches, in the evening saying the 140.
psalm.

O Lord I have cried unto thee, Ps. 140.
hear me: Harken unto my voice, when I shall cry unto thee.

Let my prayer be directed as incense in thy sight: the lifting up of my
hands, an evening sacrifice.

O Lord put a watch to my mouth: and a doare of standing about, to my lips.

Decline not my heart into words of malice: to excuse excuses in sins.

With men that work iniquity: and I will not communicate with the chosen of
them.

The just shall correct me in mercy, and rebuke me: but the oil of a sinner
shall not anoint my head.

Because as yet also my prayer in things of their delight: their Judges are
swallowed up joined to the rock.

They shall hear my words, because they were able: as the thickness of the
earth, is broken out upon the earth.

Our bones are scattered abroad, near to hell: because to thee o Lord, o Lord
mine eyes, in thee I have trusted take not away my soul.

Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me, and from the scandals of
those that work iniquity.

Sinners shall fall in his net: I am alone til I pass away.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Clem. Constable. Ap. l. 8. c. 41.
RAise up and save us o God by thy Christ, lifting up our selves, let us desire
the mercies of our lord and his commiserations, the Angel of peace, good and
profitable things, christian Princes, a peaceable evening, and night, and
without sin, and all the time of our life with out offense: let us mutually
commend one an other to the living God by his Christ.

A thanksgiving for the night.
Cap. 42.
O God without beginning and end, creator of al things, king of al things
intelectual, and sensible who have made the day, for the works of light, and
the night for the rest of our weakness, for thine is the day, and the night,
for thou have ordained the light, and sun; o gentle and good lord, now
patie^tly rec^aue this our evening thanksgeuing who leadest us by the length of
the day, and bring us to the beginning of the night, preserve us, by thy
a^noi^nted, give unto us a quiet evening, and night without sin, and make us
worthy of everlasting life, by thy Christ, by whom to thee be glory, honor,
and worship, in the holy Ghost for ever. Amen.

Cap. 43.
O God of Fathers, and lord of mercy, who by thy wisdom have made man a
reasonable creature, and among things in earth, alone dear to god, and given
authority unto him, to rule them, and by thy sentence have appointed Princes,
and preistes, them for security of our life, these for just serving of thee: o
Lord omnipotent, now harken unto us, and show thy mercy upon this people,
bending down the necks of their heart, and bless them by Christ, by whom
thou have illightned us, with the light of knowledge, and renealed thy self
^^to us, to whom with thee, and the (...) Ghost, is due, worthy adoration of al
reasonable, and holy nature, for ever. Amen.

A Meditation and prayer for evening out of S. Athanasius hom. desemente.
MAny are careless in their prayers, and all the day long busy them selves,
about worldly affairs, and contemn the holy works of prayers. To this man
our Savior Math. 12. Marc. 3. Luc. 6. 1. Tim. 2.
may say, stretch forth thy hand, as Paul says, I will men to pray in all
places, lifting up holy hands. And let us stretch forth our hands, and not
only in the day, but by night also. In the night stretch Ps. 133.
forth your hands to the holies, and bless our Lord, and let us reach forth
holy hands, those that be washed among innocents, Ps. 25.
that caling upon the God of al things, we may enjoy his help, by Christ
Jesus, our Lord, by whom glory be to God, together with the holy Ghost, now and
^uer, and world without end. Amen.

A prayer of S. Policarpus.
O God Father of thy beloved, and Eusebius. eccl. Hist. l. 3. cap. 15. Nicephor.
eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 35.
blessed son, Jesus Christ, by who^, we have received knowledge of thee, God
of Angels and powers, and of al creatures, and the whole kind of just men, al
which do live before thee, I bless thee, who have vouchsaifed to bring me to
this day, and this hour. Thou art true, and without falsehood o God, therefore
both in all things, I praise thee, and bless thee, and glorify thee, by the
eternal God, and high Priest Jesus Christ, thy well-beloved son, by whom, and
with whom, to thee, with the holy Ghost, be glory, both now, and for ever
hereafter. Amen.

S. Ephrem, paraenes. 42.
I Have sinned against heaven, and before thee, o Lord god omnipotent, and I am
no more worthy to be called thy child, or lift mine eyes upward, and behold
the highness of the heavens, because of the multitude of my sins, nor to
utter thy glorious name, with the defiled lips of me a sinner. For I have
made my self unworthy, both of heaven, and earth, because I have provoked thee
most best lord to anger, I beseech thee, o Lord, I beseech thee, cast me not away
from thy face, depart not from me, lest I a wretch do perish. For except thy
grace had defended me, I had been lost: I should be as dust before the face of
the wind, as though I had never appeared in this life. For since the time I
have forsaken thy way, no time haith been joyful unto me. For if any day by
chance has seemed more pleasant, that was the most bitter of al. But I trust
hereafter, thy grace which comfort me, may provide for my salvation. And now
suppliant I flee unto thee, and beseech, that thou will receive me again, that
have erred from the path of justice. Pour out on me the multitude of thy
mercies, as thou did long ago upon the prodigal son, vnthriftely loasing
the Luc. 7. Math. 9. Marc. 2. Luc. 5. Luc. 23.
riches of thy grace. I have defiled my life, have mercy on me o God, and
remember not my life brought to extreme villannies. Have mercy on me, as thou
long ago tookest mercy on the offender, and publican. Have mercy on me, as
thou tookest mercy on the theife; for he when he conuersed on earth, was
despised of al men, as lost, and desperate: But thou receauedst him, and made
him an inhabitant of the delights of paradise. Therefore receive the
repentance of thy unprofitable servant, for I also am contemned, and rejected
of al, for thou did come, o Lord, not to call the just, but sinners unto
penance. Glory be to thee, honor, and adoration is due to thee, with the
Father, and holy Ghost, now, and world without end. Amen.

A prayer, upon the passion of Christ, out of S. Ambrose medit. c. 6.
O Holy Father, behold thy most holy son, suffering so cruel things for me,
have respect o most merciful King, who it is, that suffers, and in thy bounty
remember, for who^ he suffers. O my Lord, is not this, that innocent, whom to
redeem a servant, thou have delivered thy son? Is not this, the author of
life, which as a sheep, led unto slaughter, and made obedient unto thee even
unto death, feared not to undergo the kind of most cruel death. Remember o
dispenser of our whole salvation, that this is he: whom although thou begottest
of thy power, yet thou would have him become partaker of my infirmity.
Verily this is thy deity, which haith put on my nature: That ascended the tree
of the Cross, that in his assumpted nature, suffered greauous punishment. O my
Lord, god, reduce the eyes of thy majesty, upon the work of unspeakable piety.
Behold thy sweet son, stretched forth in all his body. Look upon his
guiltles hands, streaming with holy blood, and pacified, forgive the sins
which my hands have committed. Consider his naked side pierced with a spear,
and renew me with that holy fountain which I believe to have flowed from
thence. See his immaculate feet, which stood not in the way of sinners, but
always Ps. 1.
walked in thy law, fastened with cursed nails, and perfect my goinges in thy
paths, Ps. 16.
and bountifully grant, that I may hate all the ways of iniquity. Ps. 118.


O King of Saints, I beseech thee, by this holy of holies, by this Redemer of
me, make me to run the way of thy commandments, Ps. 118.
that I may be united to him, which did not abhorte to be invested with my
flesh. Will thou not attend, o holy Father, unto the head of thy young dearest
beloved So^n, hanging down his bewtiful neck, resolved into most precious
death? Behold, o most meek Creator, the humanity of thy beloved Son, and
take mercy upon the infirmity of thy weak creature. His naked breast is white,
his bloody side is read, his stretched intrales do dry, his comely eyes do
faint, his kingly mouth is pale, his long arms be stiff, his marmour
thyghes, do hang, the water of his blessed blood, does bewe^e his pierced
feet. Behold o glorious Genitour, the torn members of thy most grateful
child, and with bounty remember what my substance is. View the pain of God a
man, and release the misery of man created. Behold the punishment of the
Redemer, and forgive the offense of him that is redeemed. This is he o my Lord,
whom thou have stricken Is. 53.
for the sins of thy people, although he be thy well-beloved, in whom thou have
well Math. 3.
pleased thy self. This is that Innocent in whom deceit was not found, and
yet he was deputed among the wicked. Is. 53.


A Prayer out of S. Ciprian, in his Tom. 3.
prayer before his Martyrdom.
O Lord holy, Father holy, God holy, and holy my god. For who is greater then
thou art? I render thanks and praise to thee, God of Abraham, God of Isaac,
and God of Jacob, God of our Fathers, God of the Apostles, and God of the
Prophets, and God of Martyrs, who wast before the disposing of the world, God
of the living, to come to judge the quick, and the dead, which art the true
God, who sit upon the Cherubim and Seraphim, the seat of thine honor, and
behouldest the depthes, which see al things before they be brought forth,
who have power to kill, and restoare again, and Dan. 3.
might to make the withered to flourish, Thou Lord, ruler of al things, deliver
me from this world, and hear me praying. Woe unto my sins, when thou shall
rise up to crush the earth together under what clifter of the rocks shall I
hyde my self, from before thy power? To what mountain shall I say, fall upon
Math. 25.
me, and unto what hill, cover me from before the fear of our Lord, when thou
shall arise to bruise the earth? I pray thee o Lord help me. Judge me not
according to my doing, for I have obeyed nothing in thy commandments. Hear
me praying, as thou hardest Jonas, from the belly of the whale, Ion. 2. et 3.
so hear me, and cast me forth, from death to life. Blotte out al my sins,
and hear me praying, as thou did hear the three children in the fournace
Dan. 3.
of fire, Ananias, Azarias and Mizael, and sent thine Angel with a shower of
dew, and Nabuchodonosor ruler of the kingdom, was confounded. Hear me
praying, as thou did hear Daniel Dan. 14.
from the Lions den, and sent Abacuc the Prophet, and he brought him diner.
Hear me praying, as thou did hear Tobias, and Sara, while they Tob. 3.
prayed in the entry of their house, then the Angel Raphael offered for them.
their prayers: And so hear thou my prayers, and admit my petitions to thy
holy Court, and presently send thy holy Angel, which may blot out al my sins
as thou did drive the unclean spirit from Sara the daughter of Raguel, and
illighten my heart, as thou di^^st illuminate the eyes of Tobias. Hear me
praying, as thou did hear Susanna, Dan. 13.
among the hands of the Elders: so deliver me from this world, because thou
art the lover of a pure conscien^e.

I beseech thee, o Father of Majesty, who in the end of times, have taken mercy
on us, sending unto us Jesus Christ thy Son, our Lord, God, Savior, borne of
the Virgin Mary, by the holy Luc. 1.
Ghost: And I beseech thee, son of the living God, which have wrought so many
miracles: I beseech thee, o son of the living God, for all my sins committed.
Thou thy self, have made a Testament for us. Ask, and you shall Math. 7.
receive, knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Whatsoever you shall ask my
Father in my name, I ask it of my Father, that you may receive it. I ask,
that I may receive, I seek, that I may find, I knock, that it may be opened
unto me. I ask in thy name, that thou may ask of thy Father, and it may be
given to me. I am ready, for thy name, to shede a sacrifice of blood, and
undergo what torment soever. Thou art, o Lord, my helper and defender: defend
me from mine adversary. Thy Angel of light, protect me, because thou have said,
that what, believing y^u shall ask b^ prayer, shall be given vn^^ you. Every man
is a liar. Thou art true, as thou have promised, thou have power, o Lord, to
give me al thy heavenly sacrament, that I may be worthy to see the face of thy
Saints. Let the spirit work in me. Thy will be done in me, because I have
freely promised, all the days of my life, my self unto thee, which sufferedst
under Pontius Pilate, a good confession, who crucified, did descend, and
did tread under foot, the stinge of death. Death is subdued, the enemy the
devil, is vanquished. Thou did arise again, and appeared to thine Apostles.
Thou sit at the right hand of the Father, which art to come, to judge the
quick and the dead. Thou shall rule: deliver me from the hand of him that
seeks my soul. By thy name, deliver me from the adversary power, that thou
may give help to bind mine enemy, because thou art a potent approuer and
advocate of the prayers and petitions of our souls. Day and night make
intercession for my sins, present my prayer to thy Father.

And thou o Lord holy Father, vouchsaife to have tespect upon my prayers, as
thou did respect the guiftes of Abel. Vouchsaife to deliver me from the
everlasting fire and punishment, and from al torment which thou have prepared
for the impious, by the good and blessed Jesus Christ our Savior, by whom to
thee be praise, honor, power, and glory for ever. Amen.

Other Meditations and Prayers for Evening near Night.
IF I shall give sleep to mine eyes, Ps. 131.
etc. until I find a place for our Lord.

When it was Evening etc. Joseph taking Math. 27.
the body, wrapped it in a clean S^ndone, and laid it in his own new monument.

A Meditation out of S. John Climacus grad. 7. 28.
AT time of thy prayer, stand Grad. 7.
tremblng, nor behave thy self otherwise, then one areigned before the Judge,
that both by thine inward and outward behavior, thou may procure to thy
self, the favor of the just Judge.

To them that pray rightly, prayer is Grad. 28.
a Court, and Judgment, and Tribunal of our Lord, before the Tribunal seat
that is to be hereafter. Whosoever of us go to stand before, and speak with
our King, let us not take this course unprepared, lest peradventure he seeing us
far of, without armor, and not having on a stoale worthy the Kings sight he
command his attendantes, and servants, to cast us bound, far from his
face, into exile, and they vpbraid unto our face, our negligent, and
interrupted prayers.

A Meditation out of S. Basile, l, q. diffus. explicat. q. 37.
WHen the night begins, let petition be made, that the rest which we are to
take, may be without offense, and free from al imaginations: for which intent
also at this hour, it is necessary to say the 90. psalm.

HE that dwells in the help of Ps. 90.
the highest, shall abide in the protection of the God of heaven.

He shall say to our Lord, thou art he that receaueth me, and my refuge, my god,
I will hope in him.

Because he haith delivered me from the snare of hunters, and from cruel speech.

With his shoulders he will shadow thee: and under his wings thou shall trust.

His truth shall compass thee about with a shield: thou shall not be afraid of
the fear of the night.

Of the arrow flying in the day, of the work walking in darkness, of
incursion, and midday devil.

A thousand shall fall from thy side, and ten thousands on thy right hand: but
he shall not approach to thee.

But thou shall behold with thine eyes, and shall see the reward of sinners.

Because o Lord thou art my hope, thou have appointed the most high, for my
refuge.

Evil shall not com to thee, and scourge shall not draw near to thy Tabernacle.

Because he haith given charge to his Angels over thee, that they keep thee in
all thy ways.

They shall bear thee in their hands, lest peradventure thou hitte thy foot
at a stone.

Thou shall walk upon the Aspis and Basiliske: and tread under thy foot, the
Lion and Dragon.

Because he haith trusted in me, I will deliver him: I will protect him, because
he haith known my name.

He haith cried unto me, and I will hear him: with him I am in tribulation, I
will deliver him, and I will glorify him.

I will replenish him, with length of days: and I will show unto him my
salvation.

Glory be to the Father etc.

A Meditation out of S. Athanasius l. de virginitate.
IT is good to pour out tears before our Lord, and to be mindful of the
twelfth hour, because at that, our lord descended into hell, which beholding
him, quaked for fear saying, who is this that is come down with authority,
and great power? Who is this, that descending from heaven, was crucified by me,
when I am death it self, and is not subdued? Who is it that haith broken the
brazen gaites of hell, and sheuered in pieces the Adamant bars?

Who is it, that haith loosed the bands of them, which by me were detained
^aptiues? Who is this, that by his death, haith thrown me down into death.

Therefore at that hour, we ought to be more attentive, and in the night time
to call upon our Lord with tears.

A prayer for Evening, appointed so, by Clemens, lib. 7. Constit. Apostol. cap:
28.
O Children, praise our Lord, praise the name of our Lord. We praise thee, we
celebrate thee, we bless thee, for thy great glory, King of our Lord thine
anointed, the immaculate Lamb, that takes away the sins of the world.
Praise becomes thee, Hymn becomes thee, Glory becomes thee, God, and
Father, by thy Son, in the holy Ghost, for ever. Amen.

Canticle of S. Sim. Luc. 2.
NOw thou do dismiss thy servant o Lord, according to thy word in peace.

Because mine eyes haith seen thy salvation.

Which thou have prepared before the face of al people.

A Light to the revelation of the gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

A Prayer being as it were an abbr^uiate sum of man's faith and salnatio^,
out of S. Sophronius, Arch Bishop of Constantinople, lib. de Angelorum excel.
O Lord, Savior, God and word, who rulest above, without beginning, and
co^taining al things who, in exceeding strength, excellest, bring life to al,
fear to al: who, by thine only beck, have made the heavens and earth, and al
things contained within their compass: who first in thy mind did conceive
the Angels, and thy conceit was thy work, for what thou did conceive in
thy mind, that with thy only word thou have effected, and brought to pass.
By and by with like art and facility, of the dust of the earth, thou framedst
man, according to thine Image and similitude, and being made a little meaner
then Angels and adorned with free will, thou have appointed him King and Lord,
of al created things, that he might enjoy those good things, which thou had
prepared for him in paradise, which he also so long enjoyed, until snared and
seduced by the serpent and wife, he broke thy divine commandments, in eating
the apple of the deadly tree: Wherefore he presently fell from his kingly
dignity, and shut forth of paradise, incurred punishment worthy his deeds,
that is, into weping, and servile behavior, into sweat, labor, and grief,
into sadness and sorrow, and which is truly the most bitter of al punishments,
at last, into justly deserved death, and dissolution into earth, from which, he
was first taken and produced.

But thou o Lord, truly gentle and merciful, did not despise that substance,
which above al dear unto thee, the devils tyranny had oppressed.

But being to effect that dreadful mystery, which before al worlds thou had
decreed, thou did exinanite thy self that art the wisdom, and mind, and
word, and Character, and Bound, and Image, and Seal, and Son, and express
form of the Father. For by the holy Ghost, thou did both dwell in the chaste
Virgin, and received from her a birth which is above al reason. For thou did
not at al loose her Virginal clausures, but as when thou had not flesh,
thou did enter into her, by such means as thou know: so having received
flesh thou did go forth of her again, leaving the doare of her womb shut
as it was before.

Soon after, thou did undergo thy Cross, drinking gaul and vinegre
mingled together, and pierced through with a spear, thrust into thy side.

At the length, freely suffering death have destroyed death it self, and
rewarded the whole world with immortality, and restoared perfectly the deformed
Image: and that old malediction which by the tree was brought upon men, thou
have b^otted out.

Therefore, o thou King and maker of al things, who alone, art the framer of
so great and admirable matters, and have made al things that continually are
extant, for the common profit of mortal men, and art accustomed, not without
Fatherly affection, to punish those which have deserved punishment, when
sitting at thy Tribunal seat, thou shall bring al men to judgment. Vouchsaife
me, with all that I remember in my mind, to stand on thy right hand. O beholder
of al things, and knower of secrets, forgeating all the offenses that ever I
committed, open unto me the doare of the immortal bridechamber, that is thy
heavenly glory.

O immortal Bride-groame, let us hear the voice of blessing. O bountiful,
account me in the number of the just, and make us partakers of thy joy, by the
prayers of thine unspotted Mother, making intercession for us, and holy Angels
and Apostles, and Prophets, and Martyrs, and all the Just that ever were: who
with the Father and holy Ghost, art blessed now and always, and world without
end. Amen.

An Examination of conscience, or prayers before bed.
IF I shall enter into the tabernacle Ps. 131.
of my house, if I shall ascend the bed of my coche: if I shall give sleep unto
mine eyes, and slumbering unto their liddes, and rest to the temples of my
head, until I find a place for our Lord.

I have labored in my groaning, I Ps. 6.
will every night wash my bed, and I will watter my coche with tears.

I will sleep, and I will rest in peace, Ps. 4.
for thou o Lord, have singularly placed me in hope.

A Meditation before sleep out of Aurel. prudent. in Cathemer. himn. ante
somnum.
O Worshipper of God, remember, that thou have been regenerate with the sacred
water of the font of baptism, and renewed with Chrisme. Look, that when being
oppressed with sl^epe, thou go to bed, that thou sign ^^y forehead, and
place of thy heart, with the sign of the Cross. The Cross puts away al
sin, darkness does flee the Cross. The soul dedicated to that sign, can
not waver. O you vain fantasies of wandering dreams, be you far, and far
of. O thou winding serpent, that by a thousand wiles, and deceiptful frauds,
do trouble the quietness of the heart, depart hence, Christ is here,
tremble, the sign which thou know, condemns thine army. Although my
fainting body lie down a while to rest, yet in slu^ber it self I will meditate
on Christ.

An other out of S. Basile l. q. diffus. explicat. q. 37.
WHen the day is ended, let thanks giving be made for those things that in it
were given unto us, or happily done: and a confession made of such things as
we have omitted, e^^he^ volun^a^ily, or o-otherwise: also whethe^ ^^e sin was
committed sec^etly, ^i^^er in words, or in deeds, or in the heart, that for all these things, we may appease God by prayers. For consideration of things
past, brings great profit to this purpose, that afterward, we fall not into
the like. Wherefore David says. Those Ps. 4.
things which you say in your hearts, have compunction of them in your
lo^gi^ges.

The Confucor appointed by S. Damasus.
I Confess to God almighty, to the B. Mary ever Virgin B Mi^ha^l Archangel. B.
John baptist, to the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and al Saints, that I
have greauously ^ff^nded, in thought, word, and deed, through my fault, my
fault, my greatest fault: Therefore I pray the B. Mary ever Virgin, B. Michael
Archangel, B. John Baptist, the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and al Saints,
to pray for me to our Lord God.

S. August. lib. Medit. cap. 10.
O Lord I know, I know, and confess, that I am not worthy for thee to love,
but surely thou art not unworthy whom I should love. Truly I am unworthy to
serve thee, but thou art not unworthy of the service of thy creature, therefore
give unto me of that thou art worthy, and I shall be worthy of that I am
unworthy. Cause me as thou wilt to cease from sin, that I may serve thee as I
ought. Grant that I may so keep, and govern, and end my life, that I may
sleep in peace, and rest in thee. Grant me such end, that sleep with rest,
rest with security, security in eternity, may receive me. Amen.

S. Ephrem apud Sever. Patriarch. Alex. in precat. Sir.
Grant unto me, o my Lord, that waking, I may stand watchful in thy sight, and
if I shall chance to sleep again, let my sleep be without sin. And if in my
awaking, I shall commit any offense, by thy grace, o my Lord, grant me pardon,
and if in my sleep I shall offend thy clemency, forgive me. And by the Crucifix
of thy humiliation, give me the sleep of rest, and deliver me from ^uil
d^eames, and filthy imaginations, and bring me al night, into sleep full of
quietness, lest things that be evil, and cogitations, full of peruersity, have
dominion over me.

Give me the Angel of light, to keep al my members, and from cursed
concupiscence deliver me, by that lively body which I have eaten. I will go to
bed, and sleep, and rest, and thy blood be keeper of me, and of my soul,
which is thy Image. Give liberty to thy creature, and thy right hand* defend my
body which thy hands have framed, and compass me about with a wall of mercies,
as with an acceptable saifguard and trench, that when my body shall rest and
sleep, it may be kept by thy power, and let my sleep be as a perfume of
sweet spices before thy Majesty. Let not the evil one come to my lodging, by
the intercession of her that brought thee forth, and by the Sacrifice that is
offered by me, drive Satan away. I will hear and execute thy will, o my Lord,
that heapest also the night with the quietness of the justice of Jesus Christ
my R^deem^r, because thou art the true light, and thy glory dwells in light,
and the children of light, do adore thee dwelling in light, and abiding in
light. Jesus the word, God, save to lif, the deceased by thy Cross, spare for
thy mercy. And to thee, and the Father that sent thee, and to the holy Ghost,
in all time be praise.

Aurel. Prudent. in Cathemer. Himn. ante somn.
O Fatther most high, whom no man at any time haith seen, and Christ the word
of the Father, and holy Ghost. O one power, and light of this Trinity, God
eue^lasting of God, God sent from them both, be present with me. The labor of
the day is ended, and the hour of rest is come, and sleep does refresh again
our weary limm^s. Grant, that a delightful q^ietnesse, norish our wearied
bod^e, and vain Imaginations, have no power against us.

Ioannes Virid. in Virid.
ALmighty everlasting God, I give thanks, that thou have vouchsaifed, by thy
grace, to keep^ me this day from evil: and I beseech thee, that whatsoever this
day I have offended, in thought, word or deed, thou will vouchsaife by thy
passion and death, mercifully to pardon it to me a sinner, and hereafter, to
keep me from al danger of body and soul, that I may in saifty arise, to
praise the name of thy Majesty, and be able gladly to serve thee with a pure
heart, and a chaste body, with thanks giving. Amen.

Our Father which etc.

Ha^le Mary etc.

O Mary Mother of grace, Mother of mercy, defend us from the enemy, and
remember us in the hour of death.

I believe in God etc

S. Augustinus lib. Meditat. cap. 33.
GLory to the Father which created us, glory to the Son who redeemed us, glory
to the holy Ghost who haith sanctified us, glory to the highest and indeuided
Trinity, whose works are inseparable, whose rule remains without end.

Praise becomes thee, Himne becomes thee, al honor is due to thee, blessing
and brightness to thee, thanks giving to thee, honor to thee, power and
strength to our God, world without end. Amen.

Meditations and prayers before meat.
WHen thou shall eat, and Deuteronomy. 8.
shall be f^l^ed, bless thy Lord thy God etc.

^ They shall eat, and pra^^e our Lord. Is. 62. Math. 14.


He blessed and brake, and gave the loves to his di^ciples.

Whether you eat, or drink, etc. 1. Cor. 10.
do al things to the glory of God.

S. Chrisost. hom. 79. ad popul. Antioch. de orat. ante med.
IT is needful for us, both coming unto, and going from table, to give thanks
to god. For a man prepared to this, will never fall into dru^kennes, or insolency
will never be broken with surfeit: but having expectation of prayer, imposed for
a br^dle upon his senses, will with due modesty take of al things, set before
him, and fill his soul and body, with much blessing. For a table taking
beginning from prayer, will never fail: but more plentifully then a fountain,
will bring us al good things. Therefore let us not pretermit so great a profit:
for it is absurd, that our Servants should give thanks unto us, and go away
with blessing, if they receive from us, any part of those things, that be set
before us: and we which enjoy so many good things, not to render so much
honor to god.

S. Athanasius l. de virginit. sieve meditat.
Eat thy bread, giving thanks to god in this manner.

Blessed be god, who norisheth me from my youth, who gives food to al flesh:
fill our heart with joy and gladness, that in all things having sufficient, we
may abound in every good work, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom, to thee be
glory, honor, rule, to gether with the holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

When thou shall sit at table, and begin to break bread, signing it three
times, give thanks in these words.

We give thanks to thee o Father, for thy holy resurrection, by Jesus Christ
whom thou have made known unto us, that as this bread was sometime dispersed in
many corns, now gathered together, is made but one, so thou will vouchsaife to
gather together thy church, from the ends of the world, into thy kingdom,
because thine is power, and glory, world with out end. Amen.

S. Clem. Romans lib. 7. Constitut. Apost. cap. 48. et S. Chris. in cap. 16. Mat.
idem hab.
Precat. Sir. apud Sever. Patriar. Alex. de eisdem.
GLory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost. O Lord god
grant, this thy nurishment, and fullness, and plenty upon this Table, which
thou have prepared for thy servants and worshipers, and multiply it in thy
blessings, and goodness, which do not pass away, nor fail, because thou
art good and merciful over every creature, which thy holy hands have framed, o
Father, and Son, and holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

Aurelius Prudent. Cathomer. in Himn. ante cibum.
O Good Christ Cross bearer, maker of light, omnipotent, holy, word begotten,
borne of the Virgin, but before mighty in thy Father, before the stars,
earth, and Sea were made: I beseech thee, with a favorable aspect, bow down
thy saving face, with a cheerful countenance, and shine upon us, that under the
honor of thy divine power, we may receive this food.

Prayers and Thanks after meat.
S. Athanas. lib. de virginitate, supra.
WHen thou shall rise from table, again giving thanks, three times, thou
may say, Our gentle and merciful Lord, haith given meat to those that fear
him.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

And again, after the glorification ended, finish thy prayers with these
words.

God omnipoteut, and our Lord Jesus Christ, a name that is above al name, we
give thanks unto thee, and praise thee, because thou have vouchsaifed to make
us partakers of thy good things, thy earthly good things. We ask thee, and
call upon thee o Lord, that thou will give us heavenly meat: and grant that we
reuerene and fear thy venerable and precious name, that we break not thy
commandments.

Place thy name and iustifications in our hearts, sanctify our spirit and
soul by thy beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to thee be glory
and rule world without end. Amen.

Precat. Syriac. apud Seuerum Patriarch. Alexand. in precat.
GLory be to god for his goodness, glory to god for his blessings glory to
god, who haith fed us, glory to god that haith filled us, glory to our merciful
god, who haith taken mercy on us al, by the intercession of the Mother of god
Mary, and al Saints, world wit^out end. Amen.

Prudentius supr. himn. post cibum.
NOw we have fed our bodies, and received food, which the weakness of our
body requires, let us give praise to god the Father, the Father that holds
and rules the Cherubim his sacred seat, and his Seraphim leaning upon his
highest Throne.

S. Chrisostom. in cap. 16. Math.
GLory to thee o Lord, glory to thee o holy, glory to thee o King, because thou
have given us meat, in gladness: fill us with the holy Ghost, that we may be
found without shame, in thy sight, when thou shall render to every one
according to their works. Amen.

A priayer before receiving the B. sacrament out of S. Hierome apud Eusebium
Cremon. de morte Hieron. sic Trithem. l. de scriptor. Verep. l. prec. et alii.
O Holy Jesus, thou, whose magnificence Eusebius. Cremon. scholar to S. Hierom l.
de morte Hieronim. Tom. 4. oper. S. Hieronim. Basil. impress. An. 1565.
is so great, that no creature can express it, whom the heavens, sea, and al
things, which are contained in their circuit, cannot receive, thou at thy
pleasure ruling and preserving al things, art contained under so small a
portion of bread, not by pieces, but wholly and perfectly, and inseparably. O
unspeakable admiration, o nouelty of al novelties: eyes behold whytnes, taist
perceaueth savor, smelling, sent, and touching finds subtilty: but hearing
presents to the heart, that those accidents are not in thee, but exist alone
without subject: for thou art not bread, as seems to humane sense, but whole
Jesus Christ, as thou sit god and man at the right hand of the Father in
heaven. Hail bread of life, who dece^dedst from heaven, giving life to those
that worthily receive thee, surely he that worthily receaueth thee, although
his soul be separated from his body by temporal death, he shall not die
eternally: For that separation is not death, but a passage from death to life.
O great and unsearchable mystery. The accide^tes of bread are broken by pieces,
and yet thou remanest whole, and perfect Christ, in every parc^l as thou wast
before. O noble banquet, in which under the form of bread and wine, whole
Christ God and man is received, and so whole in the form of bread and every
parcel thereof, and in the form of wine and every drop thereof, as in the form
of the whole bread and wine together. For all perfect and whole Christ remains
under the form of bread, and every least parcel thereof, and the same in the
form of wine, and every drop thereof.

Missa Romans D. Petro Apost. asscripta. And used in the primative church.
O Lord Jesus Christ, let not the receiving of thy body, which I unworthy
presume to take, come to me to Judgment, and condemnation, but by thy piety,
let it profit me for defense of soul and body, and receiving cure, who live
and reignest with God the Father in unity of the holy Ghost God, world without
end. Amen.

Laus Deo.

