ENGLISH PROTESTANTS PLEA, AND PETITION, FOR ENGLISH PRIESTS AND PAPISTS, TO
THE present Court of Parliament, and all persecutors of them: divided into two
parts.

IN THE FIRST IS PROVED by the learned protestants of England, that these
Priests and Catholics, have hitherto been unjustly persecuted, though they
have often and publicly offered so much, as any Christians in conscience
might do.

IN THE SECOND PART, IS PROVED by the same protestants, that the same preistly
sacrificinge function, acknowledgeing and practice of the same supreme
spiritual Jurisdiction of the Apostolic See of Rome, and other Catholic
doctrines, in the same sense we now defend them, and for which we ar at this
present persecuted, continued and were practiced in this Island without
interruption in all ages, from S. Peter the Apostle, to these our times.

Odio habuerunt me gratis.

They have hated me without cause.

With permission, Anno 1621.

THE PREFACE TO AL INDIFFERENT AND EQVALL READERS.
RIght honorable and the rest, my dearest and most beloved contrymen, kindred,
and friends: I have by the great providence, protection and mercy of God lived
now amongst you, a priest in persecution, little less then half the life of
an aged man: That which remains, is chief my debt by nature to dye, and make
account to my highest King, and Judge, as of late our most reverend
Arch-preist within these few weeks has done: who (as I interpret his
letters) bequeathed as a legacy to me unworthy, this chardge: To write, and
publish to the world this ensueing treatise, which I name. The protestants
Plea, and petition to the parliament for priests, and papists: (so many
protestants please to style Catholics. If this chardge had not been committed
unto me by my so honored and reverend friend, yett having been so long a
partaker of the miseries which english catholics have in these times endured,
and being well acquainted with the proceedings of both sides, and knowing by
certain experience, that besides their sufferings to their immortal honor,
their published books by diverse our learned priests have so convinced the
understandings of our greatest adversaries in all chief questioned things.
That noe protestant Bishop or other writer has now after diverse years made
any answer at all unto them: and of many former most humble petitions of our
learned priests and catholics, both to our protestant princes, and parlaments,
to have audience in disputation with their best learned protestant Bishops and
doctors, whether to thy could convince us as guilty and worthy to be
persecuted, as we have been, which hither they would never grant, but have
so long and grievously without any trial or condemnation, executed and
persecuted us in so strange a manner: and the present protestant rather
puritan parliament, stormeth now more against us, then the wisest of us can see
reasons to warrant them: I therefore for the honor of God, and reputation of
his holy church and Religion, the love of my country, and to perform my friends
request, do puplish this remembered work to be divided into two parts, and
either of them to be inuincibly proved by the learned protestants of this
kingdom. In the first, because the holy scripture so describes the duty of
well living men: Declina a malo, and fac bonum, declyne from evil and to good:
I am to prove by these remembered protestants, that the catholics of England
do most religiously decline from your Religion, and all participating
therein, and their offers considered, the protestant state does most unjustly
persecute them. In the second, to justify, that fac bonum, we do well, and
therein perform the holy command of God, in professing the catholic
Religion, the same with the church of Rome, shall be demonstratiuely proved by
these protestants, and the best Antiquities and monuments they have of our
first true Apostolic Religion, in these kingdoms of our present most honored
sovereign king James, that not only those chiefest questions, for which we
ar so persecuted, as namely holy preisthood, now treason, the sacrifice of the
mass so punished and the spiritual power, and jurisdiction of the sea
Apostolic, here now so penal and contemptible, but if need require, all
other controversies between us of substance, have ever from the time of S.
Peter the Apostle, in every age, and hundred years, until these days been
practiced and continued here, without interruption, in such sense, manner, and
meaneinge, as we catholics of this kingdom with the church of Rome now do
profess. And here I entreat noe Religious order to take my Title, plea and
petition for priests and papists, as any excluding of their holy labors, and
deserts, which I embrace and reverence: for although I will maintain for them,
that monastical life in England is so ancient, as the days of S. Joseph of
Aramathia, who brought it hither, and dyed here, with his holy company in that
profession: yett I find we had both priests, and Bishops here, in, and of
this nation, long before that time, and many Catholic Christians of the same
Religion we now profess, and so continued until this time without the least
discontinuance or total interruption; which I dare not to affirm of our
Religious men, ceasing for an hundred years after S. Joseph's death: and in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's time for twenty years almost together, failed
here, when many holy priests were laboureing here in this holy work: and after
some Religious men of the society had come hither, they went and left us alone
for diverse years. Therefore to speak consequently (which I must perform) I
must give this happy prerogative to our reverend priests, who never failed or
fainted in this cause and contry. They were the first converted this kingdom,
and did never cease. They first took this quarrel in hand in the time of Q.
Elizabeth, and only were they, that never gave it over. They are principally
they, who in the catalogues of our holy writers of this time, ar styled with
that honor. They are the spiritual fathers, and in Christ Jesus have begotten,
both the present Religious and other catholics of this kingdom. They, who
with their holy doctrine, and effusion of their sacred blood, for this most
glorious cause, have above all others (eight or more to one) been the
continual preachers and propugners of this true faith with us. They (who both
in the presence and absence of all religious) have often offered and humbly
sought, public defense thereof by disputation against the best learned and
selected protestant Bishops and Doctors of this nation. Therefore leauinge
these peculiar honors unto the Reverend priests of England, I will with such
inequallitie as I have before proposed, maintain for all priests, Religious,
and all catholics, that our holy preisthood, sacrifice of Mass, spiritual
Roman jurisdiction, and the like were used and continued ^ere without change,
or intermission, in the same ^enure wherein Catholics now profess them, from
S. Peter to these days, by our protestant warrants and Antiquities. And so I
rest

Your most loueinge and well wishing contry man.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Court of parliament: especially such as therein be
persecutors of Catholics: and to all other such persecutors.
A Breuiate of the undoubted truth of catholic Religion persecuted in England.
Right honorable, and the rest.
THe penalties, and persecutions, which in these days of Protestants, have
been heaped upon, and prosecuted against the sacred priests, and renowned
Catholics of England, have been so heavy, and great by his Majesty's regal
sentence, in public parliament, that they moved him, to these words of
commiseration. My mind was ever free from persecution, or thrallinge my
subjects in matters of conscience: I was so far from increasing their burdens
with Roboham, as I have so much, as either time, occasion, or law could
permit, lightened them* Your Court well knows, what the case of Roboham was
(we need say noe more, and what other heavy burdens have been since then
heaped upon us; And by your present assembly now again to be invented and
added. in his public speech in his 1. parlam.

You cannot possibly be ignorant what an eminent man in your house, and
company, has written of the opinion of the christian world, of these
proceedings: The sufferings (Sir Edwyne Sands speaks unto you, in his book
of the relation of the state of Religion) and martyrdomes of English catholics
in these times, ar accounted to the height of Neroes, and Dioclesians
persecutions, and the sufferings on their side, both in meritts of cause, in
extremity of torments, and in constancy and patience, to the renowned martyrs
of that heroical church age. What Nero, and Dioclesian were, among the
greatest tyrants, and persecutors, your place, and lawe-makers may not plead
ignorance; neither what the honor and glory of that most sacred preisthood,
sacrifice and Religions, which so vehemently, and beyond example, you
persecute. If all catholics would be silent, your own protestant Bishops and
Antiquaries have published in Theaters, and histories to the present world, and
future posterities, that the very same were planted and embraced here, in the
Apostles time, and were never changed in any material thing, until your
pretended reformation. Protest. Bishops in the Theater of Brit. l. 6. Holinsh.
^ist. of Engl. in Claud. Cambden in Britan. Godwyn Conuers. Parker. antiq.
Brit. Grymsto^ book of Esta^es in Engl. Scotland, Ireland.

If we appeal to kings and parlaments, ^ whereon you build,) all the
ancient parlaments, laws, and lives of the kings of Scotland, ^ry out unto
us, that after 80. Christian kings ^here, king James is the first, and only
pro^estant king. The parlaments, laws, lives of kings, and histories of
England, and Ireland do publish unto us, that of all his primogeni^ors kings
of these nations, he alone is protestant king of them. He claymeth nothing
from king Henry 8. Edward 6. or Q Elizabeth ^ee enjoys, (and long and
happily God grant him to enjoy it) this Empire by a better and truer right,
then they could give him. Hector Boeth. Vereca and alij hist. Scot. all English
and ^rish hist. with their parlam. etc.

Your histories and the last wills and testaments of those kings, ar witnesses
against the^ and your Religion, that they labored most ^niustly against the
law of God, and nature ^o suppress the unquestionable right of our
sovereign, and his holy mother. (Edw. Howes preface historial in king Henr. 8.
last will of king Henr. 8.) All those laws, parlaments and antiquities ar
warrant, that from our first conuertion to Christ, we had noe other Bishops,
priests, ministers, or church service, which you call communion, but Roman
catholic Bishops, priests (whom you make Traitors) and sacrifice of mass,
for the living and the dead, now so persecuted by you, until the second
parliament of king Edward 6. a child, most childishly began this innovation.
( Parliament 2. Edw. 6. cap. ^. and an. 5. c. 1. Confer. at hampt. court.) And
in Scotland your ministry and communion devised there by that Traitor to God,
and prince, is of a younger standinge, in the years 1560. and 1571. ( Commun.
book etc. of the kirk of Scotland by John knoxe 9. of march. an. 1560. and
1571.) Your protestant Antiquaries mustar unto us about 1000. approved
classical writers, in this kingdom that be renowned in the christian world;
who were such priests, said mass, preached and proved that Religion they tell
us of many thousand Bishops by continual succession from our first
christianity, of above 1000. canonized Saints, of diverse thousands of
Religious men and women, living in continual poverty, chastity, and
obedience, since the time of Saint Joseph of Arimathia, that buried Christ, and
brought monastical life into this kingdom, we had 700. Religious howses
founded for them, which you have defaced. Baleus l. de Scriptor. centur.
1.2.3.4. Ioh. Leland. de script. Pitseus de vir. illustrib. aetate 2.3.4.5.
etc. Capgrau. and al. de Sanct. histor. Angl. passim. Theater of Brit. per tot.
Stowe hist. Holinsh. histor. Eng. Scot. Irland. Camb. Britan.

Our Religion builded those churches which ^ou have reserved, and many
thowsands which ^ou have defaced; We enjoyed above the ^hird part of England
to our Religion 600. ^eares paste, and after we had more kings, Queens, and
princes Saints in this Island, and ^reland, by your own historyes and
kale^ders, ^hen there ever were since in all the world of ^our Religion. ( Tom.
1.2.3.4. Council.) Our Religion had for external warrant above 20. general
^ouncells. From the first of nyce in the time of Constantine, our King,
Emperor, and con^ryman, and Sardyce, where the popes suprea^acy, mass, and
preisthood are confirmed, Council. Nic. 1. can. 6.7. Sardic. council. Theater of
Bri^an. in Brit. Stowe hist. Holinsh. ib. Camb. Brit. which our brittist
bishops receued, until the ^aste of Trent in the time of Q. Elizabeth to which
our catholic Bishop Pates of worces^er, subscribed for England for us, and
against you, as your protestant Bishop tells us. ( Godwyn. Catalog. of Bish.
in worcester in Rich. Pates) we had consequently all holy fathers, and Bishops
present in them to warrant us. we had, and have, as your protestants
acknowledge, (Casaubon. respons. ad Cardinal. Peron. page 69.70.) all
Apostolic seas for us, against you. we had and have consequently, all those
true, and undeniable motives of true Religion, which moved the christian world,
to embrace the law of Christ, to assure and confirm v^ in this truth, we
see and know that this our holy faith according to the foretelling of Christ,
his prophets, and Apostles, is preached and planted in all the world, Europe,
Afric, Asia, and America, never any Religion in the law of nature, of
Moses, Jews, Turcks, Tartares, protestants, pagans, or other, is, or was at
any time in any degree dilated, as it is. Grymston Book of estates in k^ of
Spain, Europe, Asia, Africa, America.

And for external splendour at home, it was so great, when king Henry 8.
began to envy the glory of it, that he promised the parlame^t (as your
protestant histories assure us, if it would grant him power to visitt the
Religious howses: He would create, (your protestants words) and maintain 40.
Earls 60. Barons 3000. knights, and 40. thousand soldiers with skillful
captains and competent mayntenance for them all for ever, out of the ancient
church reueneues, and the people should be noe more charged with loanes,
subsidies and fifteens. Of all these blessings, and benefits we are spoiled,
and by your Religion deprived; And not only we, that now be catholics in
England, but all faithful souls already departed out of this world, and
those that are not yet borne, if they shall be of the posterity of those holy
founders, to be prayed for, to the end of the world, by those Religious
fowndations, and al pore hungry bodies ^ere releiued with those donations,
which ^otestant times have converted to vanities, ^d that which is unchristian,
to persecute the ^eligion, which fownded these holy howses. and with such
vehemence and cruelty we ar ^ersecuted, as you have before acknowledged, our
laws, records, registers, and our miseries, ^alamities, and martyrdomes have
published ^o all the world. Edw. howes in his historial pre^reface in king
Henry 8.

All this you do unto us, under pretense that we will not forsake our holy
Religion ^oe firmly, and undoubtedly proved, by so ^any undeniable
testimonies, in your own ^udgments, that we cannot be deceived, ex^ept God
(which is impossible) can deceive ^s. And in remayninge and persisting wherein,
and following and frequentinge that order, which it prescribes, the sacrifice
and Sacraments which it uses, we shall by your best ^earned protestants
writing, with your public ^riuiledge, be sure to be saved, when contra^ywise
if we should be so graceless, as for ^eare of torments, and afflictions, to
harken unto you in matters of Religion, the same your ^est learned protestant
Bishops, and others as^ure us again, we shall come into a fallible,
^eceaueable, and actually erroneus Religion, and consequently shall be damned
for ever. ^oue prot. Bish. persuas. Field l. of the church page ^7.182. Couel.
def. of Hooker page 68.73.76. Field page 69. willet Antilog. page 144. Theater
of great Brit. Saxons. Sam. Daniel. hist. etc. Field page 20^ Isaac Casaub.
praef. respons. ad Guard. Peron. Do^ persuas. Morton Apolog. part. 2. page 315.
will^ Antilog. praef. to the Read. universities answer (...) the mill. pet.
Confer. at Hampt. page 47. Protest. R^ lat. of that conference printed by Ioh.
windet in thr^ several copies 1.2.3.

And if God and the truth of his holy caus^ mayntayned in our books, against
you, ha^ not enforced and necessitated these your public writers, thus
publicly to condemn^ you, and forwarne us from communicating^ with you, in
these affairs: yett the lamentable and desolate experience it self in your
parlaments of king Henry 8. k. Edward 6. Q. Elizabeth etc. cries out unto the
world, that all the parlaments and princes supreme heads of Religion by you,
have been deceived, and deceived all, that followed them in these things.
King Henry 8. was the first, ( parliament of k. Henr. 8. after an. Reg. 22.)
and was herein contrary to all antiquity, contrary to k. Edward his son (
parlam. Edw. 6.1.2.3.) daughter Elizabeth ( parlam. 1. Elizab. iniunctionis of
Q. Eliz. an. 1.) and king James. ( Articles of Relig. ann. 1562) and to
himself by diverse parlaments, and his Religion dead with him, and condemned by
you. King Edward was contrary to his father, his sister, to you, and to
himself in diverse public parlaments, and his public injunctions. Queen
Elizabeth was in the same ^se of contradiction, to her father, brother, to ^u,
and herself by public practice, parla^ent, proclamations, and injunctions,
in less ^me then three quarters of one year. And ^uchinge that piece of her
first parliament, ^herein she condemned the mass, there was ^ot one divine,
Bishop or other, that gave co^^ent or could give it unto her, but all against.
and their extrauagant proceedings therein, were such, as they be related by
your own ^ntiquaries, Cambden, Howes, and others, that Paganism, Turcisme,
Epicurisme, Iudais^ne, Atheism, or any other heresy, might as ^asely have
been settled here, as protesta^tisme was: which is not here to be entreated.
King ^ames our present sovereign is generally ta^en to be to too wise, and
learned, to learn Religion of such Tutors. Cambden in Apparat. ^d Annal. and
in Annal. in Elizabeth. Howes histo^iall preface in Q. Elizabeth and others.

King Henry the 8. desired at his death, as ^rotestant histories sufficiently
insinuate, and ^iuers then liueing in his Court have testified, ^o be
reconciled to the church of Rome, and ^n one of his last Acts the inscription
of his Tomb, does plainly omit, and relinquish ^or ever his pretended
supreamacie. And in his ^ast will and testament ( Howes supr. in k. Henr. 8.
^towe an. vlt. Henr. 8. in his last will and testament) ^rdeyned priests, and
masses, (so odious now, and chiefest cause pretended of our perfection* to
continue in England to the end of the world, willinge and chardgeinge (the
words of his will) prince Edward his son, all his executors, all his heirs
and successors that should be kings of this Realm, as they will answer
before almighty God, at the dreadful day of judgment, that they, and every
of them do see it performed. (Exempl. an. 1. Edw. 6. die 14. Februar.) King
Edward 6. was but a child, but both he and his protectors by which he was
ruled, should have been ruled by this will, yet as protestants vle to do,
presently breaking it, for their worldly ends, and breingeing in the protestant
Religion. ( Fox to. 2. Acts and monum. in k. Henr. 8. and an. 1. Edw. 6.)

The chief Actor, and Author of those proceedings, the Duke of Northumberland
Lord protector, when he came to die, renownced protestant Religion for heresy,
and as your protestant histories tell us, ( Stowe histor. an. 1. of Queen Mary:
and others.) was reconciled unto, and dyed in the unity and faith of the
Roman church. For Queen Elizabeth, she, as some noble men, and diverse ladies
of honor can inform you, and some have so testified, died noe good
protestant, neither could endure the sight of her protestant Bishops, at that
time: and protested in her life to the lady Saint-Iohn, widow to the Lord
Oliver Saint-Iohn of Ble^soe, Deus testis, so she confidently related, and
said see could show that Queens letters to that purpose, that she would have
lived a Catholic, but for her ouer-ruling Protestant Counsel: naminge some
of them, no happy members of this kingdom; which your Prote^tant historians
give way unto, that she did very often, before such men by politic devises
with^rew her from it; frequent the Sacraments of Confession, and of the blessed
body of Christ, Mass, and the rites of Catholic Religion (Edw. Howes
historical preface in Queen Elizabeth.) and pro^ested in public Parliament,
never to vex or ^rouble the Roman Catholics concerning any difference in
Religion. Like was the case of William Cecile Lord Burleigh her great
Counsailor, both ^or his Religion, in that time; and at his death, charged his
son Robert Earl of Salisbury, never to persecute any of that Religion. Thus
he acknowledged to a worthy and noble witness; who, as God is witness, so
has testified.

We do not, we will not contest, with our present, most honored, wise, and
learned Sovereign; neither enter into his private judgment: But if any the
best learned protestant Archbishops, or Bishops you have, will justify all
those public speeches, writings, and books which go under the name of our
King, to proceed from him; if it will please him to give way unto ^t, they
shall have maintained against them, that ^y those published writings, it is
damnable for them to persecute us, and we in conscience cannot, if to gain a
thousand worlds, be of your protestant Religion. And we humbly hope this
nothing derogateth to his prudent Majesty; for we openly and willingly write,
that concerning all your best learned Bishops, and others that have written; as
namely Whitguist, and Bancroft, of Canterbury, Bilson, and Andrews of
Winchester, Dove, Barlowe, Godwyne, Field, Bridges, Hooker, Couell, and all the
best students amongst you, were in judgment far from persecution of
Catholics, and as far from assurance, that they themselves were in true
Religion. It is no vain boasting now to write it; because in all
controuersiall points, we have many years since invincibly proved it by your
best learned Protestant Bishops, and Doctors, ( Protestants Recantation in
matters of Religion. l. 1. and l 2 Protestants Demonstrat. for Catholics
Recusancy etc. both in general; that neither Scriptures, Traditions, Counsels,
Apostolic Churches, Fathers, or any authority in divine matters is for you,
but all against you, that you have not, neither hereafter by your Religion can
possibly find any Rule or direction to bring you into truth: That there is
not, nor can be any true and competent Judge or Consistory with you to decide
these contentions, and bring you into the right way. That there is neither true
Bishop, Priest, or Clergy man in your Congregation: That in all particular
questions between us, you are in error.

All these things so inuincibly proved by your selves, that now after diverse
years our books receive no answer at all: And your best ^earned are so far
from taking this charge in ^and, that but for disgrace of these times with ^ou,
they would in their lives and health ^ot live in your wavering religion, but be
recon^iled to the Roman Church, as many of them ^ately at their deaths have
been. And now in ^his your Parliament time, to move you and London, to know the
truth, the late Pro^estant Bishop thereof, Doctor King, in his life ^or
external carriage, a great persecutor of Priests and Catholics, a little before
his death did plainly denounce your Religion to be damnable, renounced (as we
had proved before of all such) that he was any Bishop or Clergy man; was
penitent for his protesting heresy, and humbly at the feet of a Priest, whom
he had formerly persecuted, confessed his sins, received Sacramental
absolution at his hands, and was reconciled to the Catholic Roman Church, of
which he had in his life been so vehement a persecutor. Zealously and openly
protesting, there was no salvation to be had, out of that holy Catholic Roman
Church. Therefore we need not to dispute these matters anew.

But because by the present tempests you raise against us in this your
Parliament, we are assured that your storming persecutions are not ceased, if
your wills and anger can maintain their blustrings, therefore we cannot but
still defend our innocence, and humbly admonish you, that by these courses you
offer and do, and we receive and suffer wrong. And because you see and know,
you are neither able to instruct us, or your selves, persisting in persecution,
you fall into that lamentable estate, preached unto you out of Pulpit by your
now Archbishop of York ( D. Matthewes Sermon. before the Parliament) and in
public Parliament denounced by his Majesty: Persecution without instruction,
is but tyranny (K. James speech in Parliament.) That you cannot, or
uncharitably will not (both lead to that damnable estate) we are now evidently
to demonstrate to you, and make known to the world for our own excuse; which
we can do by no better or more certain means in this case, then publish and
make known to our dearest country, that from the first beginning of these
your persecutions broached and borne in the first Parliament of Queen
Elizabeth, we have in all humble and best means we could, requested, and
sought for instruction, from your best learned Bishops, Doctors, and
instructors, among you, if we be in error, by many and sundry petitions to our
protestant Princes, Parlaments, and others, that were in chief place and
command, to procure it, if there had been any in your Religion that could
perform it. If you had that could, and would not, your estate is more then
dangerous, if you have none, can instruct us, which you make apparent, if you
still persist in persecution. You hear our King and your Archbishop call unto
you: Correction without instruction, is but tyranny.

Therefore in this first part of this Protestant plea, and petition of your best
learned Protestants in both parts to be undeniably proved, and justified by
them; we propose some of those most humble suites and petitions we have by the
best warrant spiritual we had in England, our most Reverend Archpriest, his
learned Priests, and chiefest renowned Catholics, presented, to procure, and
obtain this instruction, in conference and disputation, with your best learned
Protestant Bishops and Doctors, and with such unequal conditions on our
behalf, that except the Catholics of England had bin assured, they were in
truth, and their disputant Priests could not be instructed by any the best
learned in your Religion, they could not in conscience have made so large and
disaduantageous offers unto you, as their several petitions and suits will
witness: Except you will think (to flatter your selves) that these renowned
Priests and catholics, did doubt of their Religion (which their martirdomes
and sufferings for it, do inuincibly reprove) and appeal to you for
instruction, which you denying and yet so persecuting them, can never free your
selves from that doleful condition remembered by our gracious King and your
Archbishop; you will further receive in this first part such just and most
reasonable and vnanswereable reasons by the Religions, and proceedings of all
your supreme heads in spiritual business until his majesty's time (wherein
silence will be used) King Henry 8. King Edward the 6. and Queen Elizabeth;
that as they are set down by your best protestant writers, we cannot yield to
you in matters of Religion; neither you in conscience either persecute us in
these things, or your selves secured in that profession.

How Catholic Religion was unjustly suppressed by Queen Elizabeth, not one
Spiritual person having voice in Parlamente consenting: no disputation or
ordinary defense thereof permitted to the Catholic Bishops and Clergy:
and their duetifull loyalty notwithstanding their piety honored by their
protestant enemies.
IN THE first year and Parlamente of Queen Elizabeth, when our aunciente holy
Catholic Religion was so vnholily, and irreligiously suppressed, and the new
Protestant manner and fashion, by her authority received, as partly before
remembered, from our Protestant Histories, and will by them more amply be
declared hereafter: All the Catholic Bishops of England then living, so far
opposed against it, that as a Protestant Antiquarie relates, observing the
wilful and indirect proceedings of her, and some few of her secret
Councillors, and aduisers in that so importunat business, far above the
compass, calling, and correction of a young woman, and lay men, diverse of them
urged to proceed to excommunicate that Queen at that time. ( Cambd. Annal in
Elizab. p 37. But others which prevailed, advised to reserve it to the Pope of
Rome: And they all jointly contradicted that innovation, and then and there
offered as all protestant historians agree (Stowe and Howes hist. an. 1. Eliz.
Holinsh. hist. of Engl. Ibid. Theater of Brit an. 1. Elizab. Cambd. in Annal.
supr.) publicly to defend and maintain by disputation, against all
adversaries whatsoever, their holy profession and religion, and to that purpose
assigned and appointed these disputants: The then Bishop of Winchester, the
Bishop of Lichfielde, the Bishop of Chester, the Bishop of Carlisle, who had
crowned her, the Bishop of Lincoln, Doctor Cole, Doctor Harpesfield, Doctor
Langdal, and Doctor Chadsey.

But that protestant Q. and her favorites knowing the weakness of their cause to
be such, and how their chiefest champio^s had been not long before in public
schools at Oxford, in the time of Queen Marie so shamefully convinced, by
some of these Catholics, that they were hissed by the learned Auditors, durst
not join with the^ in trial ( Fox in Q. Mary, Cra^. etc. But the Parlame^t
beginning on or about the 23. of January, they had so prepared their way before,
that almost in the beginning of that Parlame^t, they obtained their purpose,
for the receiving their new Religion, and effected that in the very first Act
or law of that Parliament ( Statut. an. 1. Eliz. cap. 2.) and would never harken
to any motion, or petition for disputation, until the last day of March (
Stowe, Howes, Holinsh. and supr.) almost two months after they had thus
utterly excluded the Popes authority, and the cathotholike religion, used and
practiced here in this kingdom, ever since the time of Pope Elutherius, and
King Lucius, as the catholics offered in Parliament to maintain, fourteen
hundred years together, without interruption ( Feckh. orat. 1. Elizab.) and
public Mass and service of ^he church to have been here so long, celebrated
in the latin tongue. And would not then condescend to any disputation at all,
except the catholics would accept, (to write in Protestants words; That
Baconus in Theologicis parum versatus, pontificus in festissimus, and ordinis
v^ndex, tanquam iudex praesideret: Bacon ( a lay man) unskillful in divinity
most infestuous enemy to Papists, and persecutor of their order, should be
judge (Camden Annal. page 27.)

And if we may believe the present protestant Archbishop, the director of M.
Francis Mason in their book of consecration, among so many essential matters
controuersed between the Protestants and us, they would not dispute any one at
all, but only three, concerning some ceremonies. ( Fr. Mason in praef. of
their book of consecrat. and page 103.) 1. about common prayer in the Latin
or vulgar tongue. 2. Of the power of Churches to change ceremonies. The third
and last; whether communion was to be ministered in both kinds: and the trial
of these three ceremonies to be made by a fourth most strange ceremony, in
disputation, only to be put in writing, within two days warning at the most,
vnum and alterum diem de quaestionibus praemoniti; as your Antiquarie writes,
and delivered to their said offensive enemy, Sir Francis Bacon ( Cambden annal.
page 27.) A thing so ridiculous and unequal in the judgment of all learned and
wise men, that if it had been offered before Catholic religion was there
condemned, it could not in conscience, either by those learned Bishops and
Doctors, or the most learned that ever were in the Church of Christ; nor by the
holy Apostles themselves if they had then and there been, be accepted.

Yet Queen Elizabeth and her aduisers in this, notwithstanding that she had in
open Parliament before, as before is testified by our Protestant writers ( Howes
historical preface in Q. Elizabeth.) openly pronounced that she would never
vex or trouble the Roman Catholics, concerning any difference in Religion:
in that very parliament, where she spoke these words, and made that promise,
proceeded to cruel penalties, against those Roman Catholics; all our holy
Bishops were deprived, imprisoned, or exiled: ( Stow histor. an. 1. Eliz.
Holinsh. ibid. Cambden Annal. an. 1. Elizab. Theater of Brit. an. 1. Eliz.
etc.) So were all other Ecclesiastical persons that would not do, as pleased
her. Great forfaitures and punishments were imposed upon all, that should hear
Mass, or not be present at the new devised service, ( Parl. an. 1. Eliz. cap.
1.2.) praemunire loss of lands goods, and perpetual imprisonment, and loss
of life also, with note of Treason to them, that should deny that supreme
spiritual power to be in her, which many Protestants and learned both then and
at this time said, and say, she was incapable of. All which notwithstanding
that most worthy clergy in exile, and prisons at home, so carried themselves
in all civil duty to that Queen, that they are in that respect recommended
and honored by their greatest Protestant adversaries and persecutors; and for
learning and piety dignified and exalted more by theirs and our enemies, then
ever any Protestant Bishops or Ministers, which invaded their holy places since
that time. ( Protest. def. of English Justice. Godwine Catal, in those Bish.
Camden in Annal.) But of this strange innovation of Religion by Q. Elizabeth, I
shall write more largely from these Protestants hereafter.

The virtue, learning, and dutiful loyalty of the Seminary or secular (as
some name them) Priests which came after into England, the unjust persecution
of them, and catholics here, and their most christian and religious offers and
behavior.
AFter Q. Elizabeth had by profane devises and inue^tions of some few
irreligeous cou^cellors, suppressed the ancient catholic religion of this
nation, by such sinister proceedings, as are before insinuated, and to the
wonder of the christian world, orb christiano mirante, as this Protestant
chiefest antiquarie truly notes ( Cambden Ann. p. 39.) for the vnco^scionable
manner, and effecting hereof: though she had in open Parlame^t, as before
protested, never to vex or trouble the Roman Catholics, concerning any
difference in Religion (Hows historical praeface in Q. Elizabeth) yet being
assured, as the truth was, by her pauculi intimi, her very few secret friends
(Cambd. supr.) that except she became a persecutor, against her faith and
promise so publicly, and lately given, and so join craft and violence
together, the weakness of her cause was such, and the learning and conversation
of life, of those her Protestant ministers, whom she must employ in this
business, so unequal, and inferior to the Catholic Bishops, and Clergy of
England, that no hope of such succe^e as they sought could be, except these
holy and worthy men were deprived, imprisoned, banished, or utterly one way
or other, put to silence, in such manner, that after their deaths, our most
sacred order of Priesthood, which had continued in this nation here, in honor
and glory, from S. Peter the Prince of the Apostles, as we have made
demonstrance in other places, might utterly and for ever be abolished and
extinguished, as these few secret friends of those designements open
Antipriests, or Antichristians (for the Religion of Christ, cannot be without
the Priests of Christ's) plotted and hoped to effect. Your principal
protetestant Antiquarie, thus relates that cruel Tragedy. ( Camden in
Annalib. page 36.)

Parlamento dimisso, ex eiusdem authoritate, Episcopis pontificijs and alijs
ecclesiasticae professionis iuramentum suprematus proponitur. Quotquot iurare
abnuerunt, beneficijs, dignitatibus exuuntur, 80. rectores ecclesiarum. 50.
prebendarij, 15. praesides Collegiorum, Archidiaconi. 12. totidem decani. 6.
Abbates and Abbatissae, and episcopi 14. Omnes qui tunc sederunt, praeter vnum
Antonium Landauensem, sedis suae calamitatem.

The Parliament being ended, by the authority thereof, the oath of the Queens
supreamacie was proposed to the popish Bishops, and all Ecclesiastical
persons, as many as refused to swear, were deprived of their benefices,
dignities, and Bishoprics. 80. Rulers of Churches, 50. Prebendaries. 15.
Masters of Colleges, 12. Archdeacons. 12. Deanes. 6. Abbots, and Abbases, and
14. Bishops; all that then remained except one Anthony Bishop of Landaffe, the
calamity of his See. These Bishops inferior in virtue and learning to none in
Europe, as your Protestants acknowledge ( Mason lib. 3. consecrat. c. 1. page
100. Cambd. in Annal. sup. Stowe histor. an. 1. Eliz. Holinsh. hist. of Engl.
16.) thus deposed and imprisoned, and there to languish to death, they thought
none could suruyue to consecrate any more priests for England: and all rulers
of our Colleges in our (then renowned) Universities thus expelled, that would
not forswear themselves in such a sacrilidgeous manner, they thought
themselves assured, we could have no succession of Catholic students here to
enter into that holy priestly order.

But, non est consilium contra Dominum, there is no counsel against our Lord.
The profane craft and wiliness of a few wicked men, joined with a woman's
spiritual supreamacie, was too weak to oppose and battle against the
heavenly wisdom and will of God. For a very small number, and those of the
meanest then, of our glorious Clergy, transporting themselves to Catholic
nations, and by such poor means as they could procure, liueing in collegiall
discipline and order at Doway in Flaunders, where our common happy and
spiritual Nurse and Mother is, have so wounderfull and far beyond the reach of
your protestant polycies and strategems, to the honor of God, and his holy
cause, against you, multiplied and increased, that the number and glory of our
renowned publicly styled writers, which in this time have come from thence,
gives not place to any age, since our first conversion to Christ (Pits. de
virg. illustrib. Brit. aetate 16.17.) our holy Martirs violently put to death
by your Edictes, and proceedings ( Stowe histor. in Henric. 8. Elizabeth. and
Jacob. Catalog. martyr. sub Henric. 8. Elizab. and Jacob. 1.5.) exceed the
number, and are not exceeded in glory by any, that histories among us
remember, or whose memories by iniquity of times are not remaining, except the
nouenius persecution, duringe but nine years (Gyldas de excid.) ours ninetimes
as long) under Dioclesian the tyrant. The Religious men of our Nation, all the
spiritual Children of that Mother, are now possessours of many Religious
Colleges, and Monasteries, under Catholic princes, and some of them in
England, with so many of ours, are enrolled in the Catologue of glorious
martyrs, and a great number here still working in this holy labor with us. And
if to enter into schools with your best learned, we needed their assistance,
we doubt not, but diverse of them are both well able, and also ready to assist
us.

But we have ever been so far from either needing or requiring it, of them,
that when you gave us the greatest hopes of disputation, we never sent for any
of our own re-^enowned professors living in foreign nations: But as true
Priests of England are the successors of Saint Peter the glorious Apostle, and
his holy Disciples in this Nation, by a continued and never yett interrupted
Hierarchicall succession to this day, as we will justify against your best
antiquaries, and divines; and first after our Bishops by you deprived,
imprisoned, and persecuted, undertook this quarrel of God in hand against
you, and gained many souls to Christ; and for no cruelty or persecutions you
raised, or exagerated against them, could at any time be forced to forsake
that holy combat, they had undertaken: But as true Pastors they adventured,
and gave their lives for the sheep of our highest shepherd and redeemer: so
to the hazard of the honor of Catholic Religion, if Protestants could have
put them to foil, in all these miseries and afflictions, destitute of books,
conference and harbor, oftentimes to hide their heads, they were ever ready
to offer, and entreat for trial, with unequal conditions; and so unequal
and prejudicial to the disputante Priests, and Catholics of England, that
except they had been so confidente in their cause, that they could not be
overcome, and the Protestant Bishops and Doctors compleately furnished and
provided of all things requisite to such a conflicte, if their quarrel were
just, had not been desperately diffident in these matters; neither might the
Catholics in conscience have made those suits and offers, or these protestants
without damnable shame have refused them: as the petitions themselves will be
everlasting witness to the world.

And when the protestant state of England had in above twenty of the first
years of Q. Elizabeth, afflicted us with many miseries, and had put many of
our renowned and best learned priests, M. Sherwine, Foord, and others, to whom
they durst not grant private disputation (in the Tower itself though never so
secret) unjustly to cruel death: and had used M. Campion, the glory of that
Society in England, in such measure, never allowing him to defend his own
written book, though never so privately, until by tortures and rackes they had
al-most deprived him of his life; and after with many of our learned and holy
priests, did deprive him thereof; had banished M. Heywood, and M. Parsons had
forsaken England, the three prime English Jesuits of that time; And no other
religious man either of that, or any other order, but only priests being here;
and of them above thirty in prison in the Tower, Marshalsea, King's Bench and
other places: About which time, the 27. year of her reign, Queen Elizabeth
was so unmindful of her promise made in her first parliament before remembered,
that by degrees she clambred up, to the heighest pitch of persecution, against
her Catholic subjects, that she imposed twenty pounds for every month
absence, from that her new service (Parl. of Q. Eliz. tit. Recusancy) at which
to have been present, had been damnable sin and heresy, from our first
conversion to Christ, until the year of K. Edward the sixth a child, both by
the laws of the whole Catholic Church, and of this kingdom.

And not content with this, proceeded to that contempt of the Priestly dignity
of our most blessed Savior and Redeemer, his holy Apostles, and all holy
Bishops, and Priests since their time; that she intended to make it treason;
and all that willingly received such men (as Christ our Savior commands all
men to do) under a great woe and penalty of loss of liberty, lands, goods,
and life also, which she after enacted for a law in that Parliament. Whereupon,
and for prevention of so unchristian proceedings, the chiefest catholics of
this nation, with the consent and direction of their learned secular Priests,
then only here remaining (and no religious men being at that time, or diverse
years after in England) humbly prefered to that Queen, in her Parliament time,
when she decreed that bloody edict, this most christian, and more then equal
petition, following word by word.

TO THE QVEENES MOST Excellent Majesty, the humble petition of her Catholic
subjects of England, in the 27. year of her reign, wherein their innocence
is justified, and their Religion offered to be maintained for holy, against all
Protestants.
MOST mighty, and most excellent, our dread Sovereign Lady, and Queen: the
necessity of our lamentable Case has emboldned, yea necessarily enforced us,
your Majesty's Catholic and approved Loyal subjects, to present our manifold
griefs and miseries, to the merciful view, of your Majesty. We could still
have been contented (as hitherto we have been) with silence to have made virtue
of exceeding great necessities: But now most gracious Sovereign, the Law of
God and nature does Council us, to appeal unto your most excellent Heighnes,
our head-spring, and fountain of mercy, for the lightning of some heavy
yoakes, which by common report we have just cause to fear, are intended
shortly to be laid upon our weakened and wearied necks.

To speak to so potent and prudent a Prince, as it may be reported boldness;
so not to speak in a poor and distressed subject, may be deemed guiltines.
We do therefore, most dear sovereign, with all humility and no less
sorrow, cry out and complain, that our afflicted hearts have conceived an
vnspeakgriefe: For what wound can be more mortal to the body, as treasonable
accusations to innocent minds? We your Catholic subjects, which hitherto have
been, and ever will be as well careful to please your Majesty, as not to
displease almighty God, what lamentable state was ever like to ours, that we
poor wretches in discharging our conscience toward God, are reported of, and
that before your sacred Majesty, to be evil affected toward your Royal
person, and princely dignities, and that upon the ^yle action and intend of
every lewd person, we must be condemned all for traitors? as it appears in
books daily printed against us, wherein we are most odiously termed
blood-suckers, and by uncharitable exclamations, it is published, that your
Majesty is to fear so many deaths, as there be Papists in the land. Would God
our hearts might be laid open to the perfect view of your Majesty, and all the
world; no doubt our thoughts should appear correspondent to the expectation of
so merciful a Queen, in all loving, true, and faithful subjection, and would
give dew deserte of mercy for reward.

For most dear Sovereign, where our greatest accusation ryseth upon our
recusancy, or absence from the Church, which has deuoyded us of all your
wonted graces, and special favors, we take almighty God to witness, that
this our refusing and absenting our selves is not grounded in us upon any
contempt of your Majesty's Laws, or any other wilful or traiterous intent,
but altogether upon mere conscience, and fear to offend God. This God
knows the searcher of all hearts, and to the end, that our sincerity and
dutiful meaning may appear the better; we do protest before the face of the
eternal God, and Lord of us all, and do crave his dreadful indignation in
this world, and sentence of endless dampnation to be our portion in another
world, if we do practice, speak, or write any thing in this point, more
or less in respect of any worldly policy, but only as the duty of
every good Christian Catholic binds him. In which opinion, if happily we
be deceived, yet if we should do contrary to that we think in conscience
to be right, we may justly be accounted men void of all grace and honesty,
pretending in show, and thinking otherwise in heart, false dissemblers,
hateful to God and man, and in truth the most dangerous and worst subjects
that may be in a common wealth, as aptest to any wicked or desperate attempt.

No less is verified in the late most excecrable example of that monster
Parry, whose detestable endeauours, do give euidente testimonye, that the
cruel vypar, ever temporising and making ship-wracke, of all faith and
Religion, has thereby at length, lost both taste and habit of the grace and
fear of God. Let such diabolical dissimulation, and traiterous thirste after
hallowed blood, sink according to Gods judgment to their deserved doom of
deep damnation; we for ^ur parts utterly deny, that either Pope, or Cardinal
^ath power or authority to command, or license ^nie man to consent to mortal
sin, or to com^it, or intend any other act, contra ius diui^um; much less
can this disloyal wicked and unnatural purpose, by any means be made
lawefull; to wit, that a natural subject may seek the effusion, of the
sacred blood of his anointed Sovereign: whosoever he be therefore
spiritual, or Temporal, that maintains so apparent sacrilege, we therein
renounce him, and his conclusion as false, deuilish, and abominable.

But now to return, to our purposed matter, we do promise, that we will
hereafter be reddie and willing to resort unto Churches, and other places,
where public exercise of prayer is used, if the learned now assembled in
conuocations, hall be able by sufficient grounds of Divinity, to prove to
the learned of the catholic Church, that we (being in Religion Catholic) may
without committing mortal sin, frequent those Churches, where the contrary
religion is professed, and exercised. If conscience only had not pressed us in
this point, those of our Religion would never have suffered therefore so many
disgraces, and impouerishments.

And if that the merciful eyes, of your clement Princely nature, could but see
the continual terrors, the straight imprisonment, the reproach full
arraynement, making no difference, in place nor time, between murderers,
felons, and rogues, and between gentlemen of all degrees, descended of
honorable and worshipful parentage. Their arraignements being only and
directly for matters of conscience, as also the famine, and miserable end of
diverse imprisoned, the pitiful whippings, the penalty of twenty pound a
month, by reason whereof many good and worshipful householders, their wives and
children are brought to extreme poverty: Many stand outlawed, and a number
of poor souls remain prisoners for that cause: beside many other strange
distressed Catholics, whose miseries heretofore not thoroughly known to your
Majesty, have been and are disgested with mildness, and tempered with
dutifulness: hoping that now at length our approved patience, will move your
most tender heart, to have some pity and compassion of us.

Moreover (most gracious dread sovereign Lady and Queen) it may please
your most excellent Majesty, to grant us the grace and favor to hear the
unfolding of our greater, and more dangerous calamity hanging over our beads.
For as much as nothing is more often and deeply to be called to our minds
then the frailty of men, and how apt and prone we are to all sin and
wickedness: for the stay and remedy whereof our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, has instituted and left behind him, most holy and blessed
sacraments, for the comfort of mankind, and has commanded the use of them to
be continued and preached in the Catholic Church, as the conduits of his
grace, without the which the benefits of his dear passion cannot ordinarily
descend or be applied unto us, as by which we are received, confirmed,
remitted, fed, governed, multiplied and absolutely prepared to life
everlasting.

These benefits are to be valued at no less price to us, then they were to
our forefathers, who religiously esteemed the want of them more dangerous, and
discomfortable then death it self. The ordinary ministers whereof are, and
always have been catholic Bishops, and Priests, lawfully called and anointed,
to that charge and spiritual authority, whom by divine ordinance we are bound
to hear, receive and obey, with dew honor, and reverence, and to seek unto
them as to the dispensers of the mysteries of God, for counsel and help how
to live and die in the love and favor of him, who has power to cast both the
body and soul of his enemies, into perpetual tormente of hell fire.

In consideration of all which necessary points, and for the humble and true
purgation of our selves, we do protest before the living God, that all and
every Priest, or Priests, who have at any time conuersed with us, have
recognized your Majesty their undoubted and lawful Queen: Tam de iure, quam
de facto. They speak reverently of you: They deuely pray for you; they
zealously exhort your subjects to obey you; they religiously instruct us, to
suffer patiently what authority shall impose on us; yet they precisely
admonish us, that it is an heresy condemned by general Councels, for any
subject to lift up his hand against his anointed. This is their doctrine,
this they speak, this they exhort; and if we know, or shall know, in any
of them one point of treason, or treacherous devise, or any indecent speech, or
any thought injurious to your Royal person: we do bind our selves by oathe
irreuocable, to be the first apprehenders and accusers of such.

If now (most Gracious Lady) these Priests, who have not at any time been
detected, accused or charged, with any act, or devise of treason, shall
offerre to continue within this your Realm, and for so doing, shall be
adjudged traitors, be it for their coming hither, or continuance here, or for
practicing, or administering of the blessed Sacraments only: then
consequently, we your faithful and loving subjects are like to be
capitallie touched with the same, treason: and we know by no possible means,
how to clear and keep our selves from it. For when the Prophets, and
anointed Priests of God, moved by zeal to gain souls, do repair hither,
to distribute Spiritual comfortes, according to every man's need; and coming
to our gates to crave natural sustenance for their hungry and persecuted
bodies, promising us also ghostlye food, and medecin for our unclean souls:
What shall we now do? we do verily believe them to be Priests of Gods
Church, we do certainly know, that they do daily pray for your
Majesty. Their predecessoures in that calling have ministered Baptism, and
Confirmation unto your Majesty, anointed you Queen, and ordinarily and
rightlye placed you in your Royal seat, as all your Majesty's ancestors have
been.

O poor worms! what shall become of us! what desolatione are we brought
unto! O God of Heavens, Earth and Men witness with us, and plead our cause. O
most lamentable condition, if we receive them, by whom we know no evil at
all, it shall be deemed Treason in us: if we do shut our doors and deny
temporal relief to our Catholic Pastors, in respect of their function,
then are we all, already judged most damnable Traitors to Almighty God, and
his holy members, and are most guilty of that curse, threatened to light upon
such as refuse to comfort and harbor the Apostles and disciples of Christ,
saying whosoever shall not receive you, not hear your words, truly it shall
be easier for them of the land of Sodom and Gomorra in the day of
judgment, etc. against which irreprooueable sentence, we may in noe wise
wrestle.

Behold (most gracious and Liege Sovereign) into what straight we are
plunged; be favorable we beseech your heighnesse, to the lives and souls of
men, it is the force of your Royal word, and the protection of your large
prerogative, that can only disperse these torments, and direct us, to the
calm and safe haven of indemnity of conscience. The minds of men, (most
heigh and royal sovereign, are uttered in their wills, and their wills with
affections are commonly expressed in their words and deeds. Let our deeds
thoroughly be examined, and there shall be found harbored, neither in our
wills evil affects: neither in our minds disloyal thoughts. Wherefore with
most deep sighs, prostrate before the throne, and at the feet of your
Heighnes royal Majesty, we with all humility, do submit these our
lamentable griefs: And albeit, that many ways we have been afflicted, yet
this affliction following (if it be not by the accustomed natural benignity of
your Majesty suspended, or taken away) will light upon us to our extreme
ruin, and certain calamity, that either we (being Catholics) must live, as
bodies without souls: or else loose the temporal use both of body and soul.

O most mighty Queen, let your excellent and heavenly virtues now take their
chief effects, let your rare and incomparable wisdom enter into the
consideration of these points, and let that Orient pearl and gracious work of
nature, which in your royal person has so many wealthful years shined
amongst us, and administered most bright and comfortable beams of grace to all
men: Let this unspeakable and singular good nature of yours, dear Lady and
Queen, delight to work another thing like it self, or at least dislike to
suffer a thing contrary to it self. Knit the body and the soul together;
Let not us your catholic, native, english, and obedient subjects stand in more
peril, for the frequenting the blessed Sacraments, and exercising the
catholic religion, and that most secretly, then do the Catholics subict to
the Turk publicly: then do the perverse and basphemous Jews, haunting their
Synagogues, under sundry Christian Kings openly: and then do the Protestants
enjoying their public assemblies under diverse catholic Kings and Princes
quietly. Let it not be treason, for the sick man in the body, even at the last
gasp to seek ghostly council for the salvation of his soul of a catholic
Priest: so shall both soul and body, spiritual and temporal, according to our
most bounden duty serve you truly: and pray for your long and most
prosperous reign effectually. Then shall this your gracious tolleration sound
out your most famous memory so tryumphantly to all nations, that the same shall
be preserved of record from age to age, and consecrated to endless glory and
rerenowne.

Accept most merciful Prince our faithfulness, regard our dutiful heart:
despise not our sincere affection. Let our rehearsed miseries be relieved with
your renowned mercies; account those subjects to be undoubtedly faithful in
whose accusations and lives, has appeared a chief and special care not to
offend God. It now behooves us most humbly to crave your majesty's gracious
pardon: for that we have not observed the usual brevity of supplications,
being destitute of friends to speak in our behalf; we are driven to set
down somewhat largly by writing that which might by speech with les tediousnes
been uttered. Finally we make our humble petitio^s, that your excellency will
give us such credit and affiance to our words and oaths, that we may from
henceforth be deemed clear and voy^e of al suspicion, both in thought, word
and deed: to refrain public places of prayers, only for fear to fall into
damnable sin, and not in any hope or regard of any worldly preferme^t or
policy. Secondly to have that pitiful consideration, and remorse of our
calamities, as may be thought most expedient to the comfort of us afflicted,
and most agreeing with your M. most gracious pleasure and good likeing. Thirdly
and chiefly, not to suffer any law to be made, whereby Catholic Priests of
this realm shall be banished, and their receivers highly punished. Grant, O
merciful Q. that we may do the works of mercy and charity to Gods Priests, so
long as they pray for your M. and use themselves dutifully: we are the more
encouraged thus boldly to entreat with your M. because in former years it has
bin delivered in pulpets, and published by books late printed, and otherwise
diuulged, that your cleme^cy neither has, nor will punish any of your
catholic subjects for their conscience, in matters of religion only. For our
parts what success soever shall grow unto us by reason of this our humble
supplication, we do advisedly and firmly vow to God, that your M. shall find
such subects, as God requires, and your M. desires. That is most loving, most
loyal, and most dutiful. Our Lord God preserve your M. to our inestimable joy,
and your endless felicity. Amen.

The Parlaments unjust proceeding against Priests and Catholics, and
persecution without all cause by their own judgments.
HItherto the petition of the Catholics of England penned by the reverend
Priests in that time, and by their assent presented to Queen Elizabeth, and to
her hands delivered by M. Shelly, in the 27. year of her reign, as she
walked in her Park at Greenewich, and at the time of the Parliament then
holde^, by which Parliament, all English men made Priests since the feast of the
nativity of S. John Baptist, in the first year of her reign, were made
Traitors, and the receivers of them fellons. The same M. Shelly for his
presuming to deliver it unto that Queen, not acquainting her privy Council
therewith before, and for no other cause, as he often protested, was by Sir
Francis Walsingham then chief Secretary, committed close prisoner to the
Marshallsey, where he dyed; which was the sum of the answer made unto this
most humble and religious petition, which notwithstanding, that Queen and her
Parliament then proceeded in making that cruel Law, as commonly the
Protestants since have presumed: Although M. Robert Apreece of Washingly in
Huntingtonshire lately deceased, and in his life, a worthy Confessor, did often
affirm before diverse and credible witnesses, approving it again not three
weeks before his death in the presence of many, being thereof of purpose
demanded, that the Earl of Kent which then was, and present in that Parliament,
did constantly affirm that Queen Elizabeth did not confirm that statue, but
said IN a visera, which disabled it to be a law.

He testified further, God is called to witness of this true relation, that a
gentleman named M. Hambdon, at that time gentleman usher of Bromeley, then L.
Chancellor, and present when the Queen came to allow or disallow the laws,
then entreated, and assuredly justified to the same M. Apreece, and diverse
other gentlemen assembled together at a supper that very day, that this Bill
was not passed by the Queens consent, but she said as the Earl before
affirmed; and that gives more strength for this to be so. The same M. Apreece
confirmed upon his own knowledge, that this statute was not put in the written
copy or Catalogue of the laws that passed in that Parliament, and was
diuulged, and so continued a fourtnight together in common acceptance, without
contradiction.

But howsoever the truth of this is, most true, and too true it was and is,
that by only pretense of such a law, many holy and worthy Priests have been
most cruelly put to death, and most grievous afflictions raised and prosecuted
against the Catholics of England by that only warrant. Yet this Queen
sometime before her death, or at least some of her privy Council gave some
hope of a mittigation, thinking perhaps that after her death, his majesty that
now is, being undoubtedly by his true and most lawful right to succeed,
could no be so well pleased to find the Catholics of England, which had
endured so much for their constant defense of the most unquestionable title of
him and his holy mother, to be so grievously afflicted by the Protestants
estate of this kingdom which had not been so friendly and favorably unto it.
Therefore some hopes were given to the Archpriest of England then, that his
Priests should at the last have disputation with their Bishops and Doctors;
and this was so credibly related and denounced unto him, that two several
times he sommoned and appointed four of his learned Priests to undergo that
combat. His assigned disputants were these: D. Weston. D. Smyth. D. Tho.
Wright, and M. Richard Broughton. Three of these also he appointed to despute,
D. Smith, M. Wright and M. Broughton at the Parliament in K. James his time,
when the new oath was enacted, and for the fourth assigned Doctor Bishop.

And to confirm further this relenting disposition in that Queen, and the
wisest of her counsel, besides that which is written before, those Priests
whom he that writes for the new oath under the name of M. Roger Widdrington
does untruly challenge for his opinion, as both their late Apology to the
contrary, the martyrdom of some of them for only refusing it (as namely M.
Robert Drury) and the confession and acknowledgment of that author himself
upon certain knowledge do testify, they still justify that the council of
Q. Elizabeth promised quietness and tolleration, upon Priests acknowledgement of
temporal obedience unto her, which none denied: and this was the motive as
these Priests have often protested (for I am none of them) that they were
willing to yield so much as their spiritual bond and duty to the Sea Apostolik
which they except, would permit to Queen Elizabeth then their Sovereign.

Neither can we without great aspersion of dishonor, and all hope of all
kind of penitencie in that princess be of other mind. For having publicly
so protested in parliament, never to vex or trouble any Roman Catholic for
matter of Religion, her case (even by protestants judgment, not to persecute
for Religion) should be too desperate by their own proceedings, especially if
we a little reflect upon that, which all the christian world can witness both
for priests and Catholics, and our protestant histories themselus thus deliver
unto us in these words: Elizabeth succeeded her sister, and began her reign
with so general applause, as her sister did, by reason the Clergy, the
Nobility, and most of the commons were Roman Catholics, who nevertheless,
although they knew her full determination, was to alter their settled course in
Religion, yet they all with one consent being set in the Parliament house, when
the certain news was brought the^ of Queen Mary's death, they acknowledged
her immediate right, and presently declared the same by diverse Proclamations,
and forthwith prepared themselves to perform their homage and fealty, which
she graciously accepted. ( Howes Historical preface in Queen Elizabeth.
Stowes History. anno 1. Elizabeth. Cambden in apparal. Annal.)

Thus these Protestant historians, and these renowned Bishops, Priests and
Catholics were so far from raising the least resistance against her, when as we
see they might easily have kept her from being Queen, if they would have
proceeded as Protestants use to do, that those holy Bishops, as your greatest
Protestant antiquarie writes ( Cambden annal. page 27.) though they both
thought Queen Elizabeth at that time to deserve the censure of
Excommunication, and that they had power and authority to inflict it on her,
yet they refrayned to do it, least by that means the people and subjects of
England would take arms against her, and so depose her, being by them
excommunicated. And thus tender of this Queens safety and quiet (though after
excommunicate, and for her birth by our Protestant historians and statutes
themselves not in the best estate, were all Priests of England, after that not
only at that time of the statute against them, they were all most free and
innocent, as is justified in the petition before, and confirmed by our
Protestant historians, which cannot charge any one Priest of those days with
temporal disobedience; but ever after continued in the same duty and
loyalty, not any one accused of the contrary, except they will instance in M.
Ballard, for the business of the Queen of Scotland, and her son his
Majesty that now reigns, and long and happily may he reign amongst us,
which we think for their duty they owe to our Sovereign and King James,
Protestants should not be hasty to urge: and if they should, and that matter
were as the Protestants then pretended, yet but one Priest in 44. years,
serving for their purpose, they may now acknowledge how unequal and unjust a
thing it was, to condemn so venerable and heigh a function, generally for so
an heinous offense, when they find none guilty by their own proceedings.

And this innocence of Priests was that, which in those latter days of Q.
Elizabeth so enforced that Queen and her council, so cunningly as they could
with their politic reputation, not to be altogether contrary to themselves,
and not ingeniously acknowledge the wrongs and injuries they had offered and
done to that sacred vocation, to stay the fury, and mittigate the rage of their
former persecution, by occasion whereof, and Priests proved thus innocent,
diverse religious men, which spareingly before (as those of the Society) or not
at all (as the Monks of the order of S. Benedict, had visited England)
resorted hither in some numbers in those latter days of that Queen. And thus
much of the honor and loyalty of Priests, and undeniable truth of the
Religion they taught in her time.

How the Priests and Catholics of England, never deserved the least
persecution or affliction, under our Sovereign King James, but rather favor,
honor, and reverence.
NOW let us come to the time of our dread liege and Sovereign King James: as
the world well knows, the affection and dutiful love of the Priests and
Catholics of England toward his Majesty's right and most undoubted true title
to this kingdom, in the days of Queen Elizabeth, yet ever performing due
obedience unto her, was not inferior to the best Protestants of this nation:
so it pleased his Majesty without any exception of Priest or Papist, generally
to speak in public Parliament of this whole Island. I am the husband, and all
the whole I Will is my lawful wife: I am the head, and it is my body: I am the
Shepherd, and it is my flock (King James parl. 1. sess. 1.) He therefore
accounts us poor members of this his wife, his body, and flock, for being
but one husband, head and shepherd, he has but one wise, body and flock by
that relation. And at his entrance hither, by his regal testimony, we that
be priests and Catholics applauded and embraced it with as great joy and
alacrity, as those that were Protestants, and of his Religion, as they
pretend: his Majesty terms it ( sess. 1. supr. parl. 1.) a joy full and
general applause, and unexpected readiness of our deserts, memorable resolution,
most wonderful conjunction, and harmony of our hearts, in declaring and
embraceing our undoubted King and governor at his first entry into this
kingdom, the people of all sorts rid and ran, other flew to meet him; their
eyes flaming nothing but sparkles of affection, their mouths and tongues
uttering nothing but sounds of joy, their hearts, feet, and all the rest of
their members in their gestures, discovering a passionate longing, and
earnestnes to meet and embrace, their new Sovereign.

Thus it pleased him to embrace us in general, as his most loving and dutiful
subjects: and in particular thus he pitied our former afflictions, and
intended to mitigate and relieve them: my mind (says he) was ever free from
persecution or thralling my subjects in matters of conscience. (King James in
Parliament) therefore of himself he did not think us worthy to be persecuted
or inthralled, but rather lightened of those miseries, as his next words a
warrant: I was so far from increasing their burdens with Roboam, as I have so
much, as either time occasion, or law could permit, lightened them. And in his
censure against Conradus Vorstius the Dutch heretic, recounting the
differences between protestants and us, he finds not one for which we may
be persecuted, but the contrary.

At his coming in, he set the Catholics and Priests at liberty, gave free
pardons unto all of them, both priests and others, that would sue them forth,
and pay four or five Nobles at the most for them to the Lord Chancellor:
In those pardons, he remitted both the guilt and danger from priesthood, and
much more then any of us had transgressed in, he styled us as our dignities,
discentes, or callings were, gentlemen, priests, or of what degree, dignity,
or preeminence soever he were, his belooued subjects: which words and state
are incompatible wtth the name of Treason: in those pardons he pardoned
whatsoever could be in any rigor interpreted to be within the danger of that
Law, both our coming into England, and abiding and remayninge here: so that
by pardon being dead, they cannot possibly be revived, because the grant is
irreuocable. Our coming in, was but one indiuiall act and offense in Law,
and so remitted, cannot be offense: our continuance, and remaining so long as
we do not reiterate it again, by going forth, and coming in the second
time, is also but one particular, singular, and indiuidual action, without
discontinuance, one ens fluens, as all such not interrupted be: an hour, a
day, a week, a month, a year, a life, an age, and the like. This all
philosophy, and common reason (whereon our common law is, and must be founded)
teaches us. Thus diverse protestant, and good lawyers have answered: thus his
Majesty esteemed, when hearing of a priest named M. Freeman, put to death for
his priesthood, by the Judges of Warwick, soon after his Majesty's coming
hither, with sign of sorrow answered: Alas poor man, had he not four nobles
to buy his pardon: by which he concluded, that a priest being pardoned for his
priesthood, could not after for being a priest be put to death, or termed a
traitor, or endanger his friends and receauers, but was a free and lawful
true subject, from that imputation. His Majesty also allowed the times of
Constantine for times of true Religion, and the Roman Church then, and after,
to be the true, and our mother Church, and not to be departed from.

Then we may not so undervalue the learning and judgment of our learned and
Sovereign in divinity, and histories, but he well knows (which no learned
man is ignorant of) that in the time of Constantine, the Church of Rome had the
same holy sacrifice of Mass, and the same holy sacrifycing priesthood, which
now it has, which I will hereafter demonstrate by the best learned protestant
antiquaries of this nation, as also that the Church of Rome at the revolt of
King Henry the 8. was the same in all essential things, which it was in that
prefixed time of Constantine; And to be liberal to my needy protestant
contrymen in this case, I say, that the Church of Rome, and the Religion of the
Priests of England, their priesthood, and sacrifice of the Mass, is the same
which were in Rome, and in this Island also in S. Peter's time, and in every age
without interruption since then, unto these days of Protestants. And if we may
believe Isaac Casaubon, the stipendarie champion for the Protestants of
England, who says, ab ore regis accepi, and haec est Religio Regis Angliae,
etc. (Isaac Casaubon contra Cardinal Peron. Page 50.51.52.) I have it from the
Kings mouth, this is the Religion of the King, this is the Religion of the
Church of England: The fathers of the Primative church did acknowledge one
sacrifice in christian Religion, that succeeded in the place of the sacrifice
of Moses. The sacrifice offered by Priests, is Christ's body and the same
object, and thing, which the Roman Church believes.

These and such things troubled the heads of some great Protestant persecutors
in England, (their consciences being guilty of somewhat not good) that they
could not enduer the least clemency of his Majesty toward his loyal and
truest catholic subjects, but old stratagems and tragedies of Queen
Elizabeth's time, must needs be renewed and playde again, to bring not only
the Catholics of England, but their holy religion (if possibly it could be
done) into obloquie, especially with his gracious Majesty: and thereupon an
execrable and most damnable treachery by gunpowder was to be invented, for a
few wicked and desperately minded men to do, whom many protestants termed
papists; although the true Priests and Catholics of England knew them not to
be such, nor can any protestant truly say, that any one of them was such a
one, as their laws and proceedings against us, name Papists, Popish recusants,
or the like. What he was, papist or protestant, rich or poor, noble or
unnoble, of Court or country, that was inuentor of this horrible devise, I
will not discuss, but refer all indifferently minded men, and of judgment
able to discern the probable truth in such a cause, to the history and
circumstances thereof, as they are set down by the Protestant historian, M.
Ed. Hows ( histor. of Engl. in King James.)

But to grant to our Protestant persecutors, for arguments sake (that which I
may not) and they will as hardly prove, that this wicked interprise was first
invented by Catesby, and some of his consorts, and that diverse of them were
papists, and had acquaintance with the chief Jesuit then in England, who at
least in confession knew of this conspiracy, and did not reveal it: that
there were four of this company arraigned for the conspiracy, three
gentlemen (though two of these, Fauxe and Keys were but serving men) as the
fourth, Thomas Bates styled yeoma^. that one Knight and three Esquires
concealed it, of which the Knight was so ignorant, that as the Protestant
relator of this matter says, at his death he spoke these words ( Howes supr.
in Sir Edward Digby) If he had known it first to have been so foul a treason,
he would not have concealed it, to have gained a world: Which he could not have
truly said, if he had known it in particular, and in it self a most horrible
damnable thing; and the rest as this author writes, dyed penitent; and
besought all Catholics, never to attempt such a bloody act, being a course
which God did never favor nor prosper. Those that were up in tumult with
Catesby, were (as the Protestants relates (Howes supr.) never full fourscore
strong, besides many of their household servants (no doubt papists if their
masters were so) forsook them how erlie: yet they diuulged many detestable
untruths against the king and state, omitting no scandal which they thought
might serve their traitorous purpose, and that they were assembled and prepared
to some special service, for the advancement of the catholic cause, hoping
thereby to have drawn into their rebellion, those of that religion, and other
wilful malcontents:

And to make evident, it was rather a mad desperate attempt of one private
kindred, or acquaintance, then of any religion. Thus it is creedibly recounted
by them that knew their discents (for I was a stranger to them all) Catesby and
Tresham were sisters children; the two Graunts brethren, and the elder
intermarryed with Winters sister, calling his eldest son Winter Grant: the
Winters Grandmother, was sister to the Gra^dmother of Catesby and Treshame, and
so they were kinsmen. York, and the Winters sisters children, by the
Englebies: the two Wrytes long time dependers of Catesby, and their sister
married to Percy: Catesby, Tresham, T. Winter, two Wrights and Grant were in
Essex rebellion. All these were young except Percy, who gave the Pistol to his
Master the old Earl of Northumberland in the Tower: And if any of these were
Catholics, or so dyed, they were known Protestants not long before, and never
frequenters of Catholic Sacraments with any Priest as I could ever learn:
and as all the Protestant courts will witness, not one of them a convicted or
known Catholic or recusant. And of all these remembered of that conspiracy or
acquainted with it, the L. Mounteagle, now L. Morley, who disclosed it, was
most noted to be a Catholic, as his Lady and Children were.

Therefore seeing (as the Protestants have testified) no Catholics could by
any devise, be drawn into this matter, not one among so many hundredth, or
thousands of known Catholics privy unto it, but detesting it when it was
known, the Archpriest by writing condemning it presently when he understood
it, all his Priests abhorring it, and every one of the^ with the Archpriests
warrant, and the consent of the chiefest Catholics in England, and all they in
their petitions hereafter condemning it for a most horrible offense (
Archpriest letter of prohibit. Author of moderat answ. epist. dedicat. to the
king. Catholics petitions to the parliament and chief Secretary) And not one
either Priest or known Catholic, with all those strickt and diligent
searches and examinations then made by the protestant state about it, was
either proved, or probably suspected to be guilty of it: but so far
freede, that the Lords of the Council, requested that a Priest should be
appointed to persuade and assure Fauxe (a chief agent in it) that he was bound
in conscience to utter what he could of that conspiracy, and M. Tho. Write a
learned Priest did hereupon come to the council, and offer his best service
herein, and had a warrant to that purpose subsigned with 12. privy Counselors
hands, which he showed unto me, and I am witness of his having such a warrant.
But as he said, Fauxe had confessed all they could wish before he could come
unto him, so that no man of conscience can, or will think, but generally all the Priests and Catholics of England did rather deserve favor, honor, and
enfranchisement, from all afflictions, for their most religious, and holy
serving of God, and as loyal obedient and dutiful truth, allegiance and
fidelity to our protestant King and country, then the least disfavor for
this practice.

For if the Priests and Catholics so many thousands in England would have
entertained it, no man can be so malicious, and simple to think, but there
would have been a greater assembly then fourscore, to take such an action in
hand; and the council could not be so winking eyed, but they would have found
forth some one or other culpable, which they could never do, though some of
them most powreable in it, tentered and racked forth their envy and hatred
against us, to the uttermost limits they could extend. To confirm this our
innocence, the kings Majesty in his second proclamation against that
wickedness, calls all the confederates, men of lewd insolent disposition,
and for the most part of desperate estate (Proclamat. 2. against Percy, etc.
an. 1605.) and in his third Proclamation, when they were all discovered and
known, thus he proclaims and publishes: (Procl. 3. an. eod. 1605.) It
appears now in part who were the accomplices in this detestable Treason,
published by our former proclamations, in their assembling together, to move
our people to rebellion, although perhaps many of them did never understand
the secret of his (Percies) abominable purpose. Where we plainly see, that
the King and his counsel then knew the accomplices, and partakers of that
villainy, yet they never taxed any Priest, or known catholic therewith.

And it further proves, that they which joined therein knew not the practice
in particular, neither durst the workers of it disclose it to the^, least for
the vileness of it, they would have rejected or revealed it, as al true
Catholics would have done. And his Majesty in public parliament, does free
Catholics as much as Protestants in this invention, when he plainly says
(as truth is) if it had taken effect, Protestants and Papists should have all
gone away, and perished together (Kings speath parl. an. 1605.) And to
demonstrate from his majesty's public act, that Priests and catholics were
as innocent as Protestants, and as the Kings Majesty himself, of this, and
all such vileness, he declares by Proclamation ( Proclamat. die 7. Nouembr.
an. 1605) We are by good experience so well persuaded, of the loyalty of
diverse subjects (of the Roman religion) that they do as much abhor this
detestable conspiracy, as our self, and will be ready to do their best
endeauours, though with expense of their blood, to suppress al attempters
against our safety, and the quiet of our estate, and to discover whomsoever
they shall suspect to be of rebellious or traiterous disposition. Thus his
majesty by good experience has publicly pronounced.

And though I am no Jesuit, yet religion, justice and charity draw my pen to
write thus much, for the supposed guiltines of M. Garnet, superior of Jesuits
here at that time, we have but the protestants affirmation, and him denying it,
and we have from the same protestants, that which rather iustifyeth his denial,
then their affirmatio^: for they published his examination before the Council,
wherein they set down his opinion ( H. Garnets examination before the Council.
anno 1605.) That the Pope could not depose the king, and they add his reason
thus; because the King was never subject to the Pope; which reason I do not
examine, but thus justify, that if in his opinion, the pope could not depose
the king; and the king was never subject to the pope, then the pope could not
license any man, supposed a Catholic, so to proceed; for himself could not by
this his opinion so do, much less any papist by his allowance: and if the
king was never subject to the pope, he could never be subject to any papist,
the popes and his own subject. And whereas the protestants condemn some other
Jesuits for this matter, and among them Father Baldwyne, yet having him
prisoner diverse years, under their strictest examination, they at last
dismissed him as innocent and guiltless therein, and that with honor. And
how-so-euer the case stood with the accused Jesuits, we are evidently taught
by these greatest authorities, that both priests and catholics were upon this
pretense most unjustly persecuted; although besides all these reasons, we by
public consent both of Archpriest, best learned clergy and Catholics,
presented and offered to maintain our cause and innocence in these humble
petitions: and first to his majesty in this manner.

TO THE MOST EXCELCELLENT and mighty Prince, our gracious and dread
Sovereign, JAMES by the grace of God, King of great Britain, France and
Ireland, in the year 1605. justifying the Innocence of Catholics, and truth
of their holy Religion, against all best learned protestant adversaries.
Most gracious Sovereign.
THe late intended conspiracy against the life of your royal majesty (the
life, union, rule, and direction to these united kingdoms) was so heinous an
impiety, that nothing which is holy, can make it legittimate, no pretense of
Religion can be alleged to excuse it, God and heaven condemn it, men and
earth detest it, innocents bewail it, the nocent and unhappy delinquents
themselves in repentance have lamented it, and your dutiful, religious and
learned Catholics, Priests and others, which have endured most for their
profession, hold it in greatest horror, and will swear, protest, promise and
perform to your Majesty, whatsoever loyalty, obedience and duty, is due
from a subject to his temporal prince, by the word of God, law of nature, or
has been used by the subjects of this kingdom, to any your christian
progenitors from the first to the last: acknowledge and render to your
honorable counsel, and all magistrates in civil causes, so much honor,
reverence and submission, and to all other protestant subjects, like amity and
neighbourly affection, as if they were of the same Religion, which we profess.

Yet, this is the miserable and distressed state, of many thousands your most
loyal and loving subjects (dread liege) for their faithful duty to God, and
a Religion taught in this kingdom, and embraced by all your progenitors, and
our ancestors, so many hundred years; that every adversary may preach, and
print against us, and make their challenge, as though either for ignorance we
could not, or for distrust of our cause, we were unwilling to make them
answer, or come to trial: when quite contrary, we have often, earnestly, and
by all means we could, desired to have it granted, with equal conditions,
against the most selected, and best learned doctors of that Religion.

And at this present, when your chiefest Protestant Clergy, Bishops and others
is assembled, we most humbly entreat, this so reasonable a placet, that
although they will not (as we fear) ever consent to an indifferent choice,
opposition, and defense in questions: yet at the least, to avoid the wonder of
the world, they will be content, that we may have public audience of those
articles, opinions and practice, for which we are so much condemned and
persecuted. If we shall not be able to defend or prove any position generally
maintained in our doctrine, to be conformeable to those rules in divinity,
which your Majesty and the protestant laws of England (we can profer no more)
have confirmed for holy, the canonical scriptures, the first general
councels, the days of Constantine, and the primative Church, let the penalties
be imposed and executed against us. If we perform it, or this petition may not
be admitted, we trust, that both our office to God, and duty to our Prince, is
discharged in this point.

Your royal person, and that honorable Consistory now assembled, are holden in
your doctrine, to be supreme sentencer, even in spiritual business in this
kingdom; we therefore hope, you will not in a Court from whence no appeal is
allowed, and in matters of such consequence, proceed to judgment, or
determine of execution, before the arraigned is summoned to answer, has
received or refused trial, is, or can be proved guilty. If we be condemned,
and our cause be just, and religion true; it is God, and not man, against whom
you proceed in sentence. If our profession be erroneous, and yet for consent
with so many nations, and so long continuance, it is less unpunished: you
only pardon the frailty and ignorance of earthly men, and fight not with the
heavenly. Deny not that to us (your ever true and obedient subjects) in a
religion so ancient, which your collegued princes, the King of Spain, and the
Archduke, do offer to the so many years disobedient Netherlandes, upon their
temporal submittance, in so late an embraced doctrine: that which the Arrian
Emperors of the East, permitted to the Catholics (Bishops, priests,
Churches) tolleration: what the barbarian Vandals often offered, and sometimes
truly performed in Afric: What the Turkish Emperor in Greece, and
Protestant Princes in Germany, and other places, conformable to the examples
of Protestant rulers, not unanswerable to your own princely piety, pity,
and promise, no degust to any equally minded Protestant or Puritan at home, a
iub^ly to us distressed, a warrant of security to your Majesty in all
opinions, from all terrors and dangers. From which of what kind soever, we
most humbly beseech the infinite mercy of Almighty God to preserve your
Heighnes, and send you, your Queen and posterity, all happienesse and
felicity, both in heaven and earth, Amen.

Another petition of the Catholics of England to his Majesty, at the same time.
REmember most worthy Prince, not only how grievous, but how general the
penalties against your catholics be enacted; and yet new threatenings be made,
that new and more strange (as nec inter ge^tes) shall be ordained: The bodies,
honors, reputations and riches of the husbands, to be punished for their wives
religion and souls, to which they are neither husbands nor superiors;
children to be taken from their parents, and parents to be deprived of their
education, which Catholic princes do not, and in conscience cannot offer to
Jews themselves, though (in some opinions) the slaves of Christians. Children,
servants, kinsmen and neighbors to be made hired espials, to betray their
parents, masters, kindred, in things as unlawful, which the whole catholic
world honoreth for holy. Commendable arts, functions of physic, and which
have no connection with religion, to be put to silence in catholics. The severe
penalty (twenty pound a month) for not monthly professing the protestant
faith in churches (when in all divinity the precept of profession of true and
undoubted faith, in se and ex se, binds but seldom) is to be increased. And
others of such condition, too many here to be mentioned, and too grievous and
unnatural: we hope, in your princely opinion, to be concluded by a kings
consent under favor, for all, we instance in one most heavy, and general in
those of our deceased Queen. All Priests, though never so dutiful or
obedient, be censured for traitors, equally with the greatest offender, in the
sin of treason, when many guiltless souls of that sacred order, would not
for thousands of worlds once consent to any such, or far inferior offense. A
thing most strange, and beyond all example, that men in respect only of their
calling and function, and that function so reverenced by all our forefathers,
should without further cause be condemned, as guilty of so detestable a crime.

We defend holy Priesthood to be a Sacrament, which being ordained by God,
cannot be changed by man, Pope, Prelate, or humane power, but remaining in all
things, substance and doctrine, the same, which in those days when it was so
honorably esteemed of all your Christian progenitors, and when our mother
church kept her first integrity by your heighnesse judgment, as we are reddie
to make defense. It is the honor of our King in heaven (most mighty
Sovereign) for which we continue in combat: that religion which the whole
catholic world in all general councels, popes, doctors, and learned men, have
ever professed; wherein this nation (as our Protestants acknowledge) was
converted, all our Christian ancestry embraced, and which all princes in the
school of Christ (of whom your Majesty is descended) mayntained in themselves
and in their subjects. That which is so general, cannot be surre^dred by a small
number, of one kingdom: It is not in the power of man, to resign the honor
of God: if it will please your Majesty to vouchsafe us license to request, and
grace to obtain, that your own princely sentence and censure may stand, that
we ought not to depart further from the Roman Church, our mother Church (by
your judgment) than she is departed from her self, when she was in her best,
and flourishing state: And that the time of Constantine was incorrupted in
religion, we humbly again offer trial before your heignesse, with equal
conditions of schools, against the most selected and chosen protestant Bishops
and doctors of your dominions, to prove or defend any, or every substantial
article, which we now profess, to be agreeable unto (and not, dissenting) the
known public Catholic doctrine of that mother Church, in those your
mentioned incorrupted days of Christianity.

And seeing the disfavor and penalties against lay Catholics, are grounded
upon their recusancie, to be present at your protestant service: we humbly
beseech, it may be called to memory, how they have protested in several
supplications, one to your Majesty, before the end of the last parliament:
and the other to Queen Elizabeth, in the twenty seventh year of her reign,
to be builded only upon fear of offending God. To which their so long and
manifold disgraces, losses, imprisonments, and sufferings, are sufficient
witness: And for further trial thereof, have offered to repair to your
Protestant Churches, and service, without further exception, if the learned of
your Religion can, and do prove to the learned of their profession, that it
may be performed without offense to God, which is so much in the opinion of all
divines, as any Christian subjects can offer in this case.

Th^s if your Protestant Clergy do refuse, or do not satisfy so Christian
a request, we hope your Majesty being wise, learned, iuditious, and gracious,
will perceive, that the severity of the laws against them, for that cause, is
not to be put in practice. These things in most humble manner, we commend to
your heighest and merciful consideration: And so desiring of the Almighty, to
grant all happiness and prosperity to your Majesty, and posterity: we
conclude in all dutiful subjection, with that ancient Father (Tertullian in
Apollget.) We will faithfully serve you in your Palace, we will accompany
other your subjects in the market, we will join with them in the field,
against your nemies, only to you we leave the Churches.

These two petitions were printed and presented to his Majesty in the
Parliament, when the new oath was enacted, and the four remembered Priests
appointed by the Archpriest then to perform that challenge or petition;
likewise at the same time was presented to the Parliament, by the hands of Sir
Francis Hastings, and Sir Richard Knightly, two Puritanes of that Parliament,
from the chief Catholics of England, with the allowance of the Archpriest,
and his clergy; this petition following to the same purpose.

The humble petition of the chief Catholic Recusants of England, presented to
the heigh Court of Parliament, in the year 1605. by the hands of Sir Francis
Hastings, and Sir Richard Knightly, then of that house of Parliament: to both
which it was delivered, by the said Catholics.
THe proceedings of that heigh Court of Parliament, in the days of our late
Queen Elzabeth, against the Catholic subjects of this kingdom, were for
severity far beyond example; which they hoped for many most just, reasonable
true causes, and were to receive their end, when she should cease to live,
and by death, determine her personal quarrels and contentions against the
Religion, and Apostolic power of the Sea of Rome. Especially by the joyful and
happy entrance and Coronation of our most honored King James, most free from
those terms wherewith she was entangled, at temporal peace, amity, and
unity with that holy Sea, with the sacred Empire, all Christian Kings and
Princes, by undoubted royal descent, the most lawful, legitimate, and rightful
King of all these his united kingdoms. We that be Catholics in England, and
had ever been so true and faithful to the only united true title of him and
his blessed Mother, and never entered into any dissotiation against it,
assuredly hoped, he would not singularly draw his sword of persecution
against us, his most dutiful, faithful, and obedient subjects, in whom he could
find nothing to revenge or punish: for he publicly protested in that Court of
Parliament: his mind was ever free from persecution or enthralling his subjects
in matters of conscience, and the burdens of Catholics were rather to be
lightened, then with Roboam to be increased (king James speech in parliament. 1.
sess. 1.)

But seeing all this notwithstanding, your Parliament now assembled (contrary to
our hopes, and otherwise our deseruings, as we hope have been) does rather
presage an intended increase, then either ceasing, or mittigation of these our
miseries, and extreme afflictions: we fear least silence in us might be taken
as an interpretatiue yielding or consent, that we are not altogether
unworthily afflicted, with so strange calamities: for the world cannot
otherwise in wisdom censure, that such punishment by so heigh a judgment
should be imposed upon men (subjects, friends, and kinsmen, so generally)
except guilty of some most heinous, or execrable fact or offense against God,
our King and country. Wherefore you must give us leave in this perplexed case,
to contest against you in the humblest and best manner we may, and leave it a
memorial to potesteritie, that if you persist or proceed in persecution, we
protest before God, and in our consciences, we shall be unjustly persecuted. If
you will continue or increase persecution, you must pretend some motive to do
it, and if you desire to cloth or shadow it, with any cloak or color of
justice, it must be founded upon some probable conviction, if our general
deserving such punishments to be so generally prosecuted against us, which
must needs be some universal disobedience, or disloyalty in us all, either
temporal to our terrestrial king and country on earth, or spiritual to God
and the heavenly kingdom; we know no third to whom your Religion would
vvish us to perform obedience.

For our discharge to the first, we have served now under your vigilant, and
surueying eyes, diverse apprentiships in continual persecution; yet from the
first beginning thereof, unto this day, you have not found by all those narrow
searches, and scrutinies you have made, that we (whom you thus persecute under
the name of Religion) have been thus found disloyal to our temporal prince,
neither is that pretended in any of your laws against us. And in this late
ungracious and hellish conspiracy, if they had been such as your laws and
proceedings style Papists and Recusants, yet his Majesty by his public
proclamation (King James Proclamation in September. an. 1605) gives that
testimony of the loyalty, and love of his Catholic subjects unto him, that
you which persecute us do not, and by his regal words cannot accuse us
therein. And the number of these certainly known convicted Catholques, which
you persecute for religion, and both by his majesty's declaration, and all
protestant most diligent searches and examinations, thus innocent, and which
detest all disloialtie, are 500. to one of those which you prove guilty, by
your public Courts and records. Neither can you find by any such
proceedings against Catholics, that these malefactors were of the number of
those which you have so punished and persecuted for our religion. The
Archpriest of England, and the reverend priests of his company (who best knew
who be Catholics by their frequenting holy Sacraments) have by public
vvritings utterly renounced the^, and condemned their lewed enterprise, for
most wicked impiety.

Therefore in conscience and justice you cannot upon this pretense, raise a
general persecution against us: for in so doing, you should unjustly
persecute thousa^ds of those that be as innocent, as your selves can be, or his
Majesty himself by his own testimony of us (King Iam procl. supr. an. 1605.)
We are by good experience so well persuaded of their loyalties, that they do
as much abhor this detestable conspiracy as our self, and will be reddie to
do their best endeavors, though with expense of their blood to suppress all
attempts against our safety, and the quiet of our state, and to discover whom
soever they shall suspect to be of rebellious or traiterous disposition. This
is his Majesty's sentence by good experience of us his catholic subjects,
your petitioners. Therefore we are confident, we rather deserve fafauour then
affliction at your Court. And yet if contrary to the laws of this Kingdom,
you would say, that the lands, goods, and lives of delinquents (which we do
not think you intend, or we will vvish you to spare in these offenders)
do not satisfy in such cases, you must notvvithstanding (to contain your
proceedings within the shaddowe of justice) not impose the offense and
punishment of the guilty, upon those that be so innocent: The highest law and
rule enacteth: anima quae peccauerit, ipsa morietur: and as a great Counselor
and secretary of estate has now published in print for your direction (solum
necis artifices art perire sua (Rob. Earl of Salisb. in his book an. 1605.)
Therefore we stand so clear in your own knowledges and consciences from all
temporal disobedience, that in rigor of justice, it takes from you all cause,
and pretense, why these or any afflictions at all, should be imposed upon us,
in those respects.

Then you must directly make your quarrel to persecute for religion, or
recusancie, a dependancie thereof: If Religion be objected, we answer as
we have ever done, and desire no further favor for our Religion (in your
own knowledge here so ancient) then you obtained of us for your own so new,
that the examples of Queen Marie her time, (which many of your profession
account notwithstanding tyrannical) may be followed. Let a co^petent number of
our learned priests, be called to any of your universities, or other public
place, where the best learned of your religion shall give them meeting: let
such questions and propositions as concern the especial points in
controversy be proposed, sufficient time of consideration allowed, and other
such equal conditions granted, as were to your chiefest Bishops and doctors, in
the mentioned time. And if our catholic disputation shall not be able to
justify and maintain our religion and cause to be holy, you may at your
pleasure proceed against us, if we persist therein. You have long time, and
with grievous punishments persecuted us, yet you would never vouchsafe us so
mean a trial and justice in this kind: Execution (as you know) before
conviction is preposterous and cruel injustice, and both by your Bishops and
majesty's censure in public, Correction without instruction is but tyranny.
(D. Matthew now protest. Archb. of York, Sermon. before the K. and parl. K.
James speech in parliament.

If our Recusancie, or refusal to be present at your new church-seruice, is
alleged a pretense against us, being a practical act and profession of
religion, it depends upon the former question, concerning religion: for
neither catholics nor protestants do teach, that men so far differing therein
as we and you, can in conscience communicate together in such things. And no
enemy or persecutor of us can imagine, or invent any allegation for this our
refusal, but either obstinacy in our wills, or ignorance in our
understandings: non datur medium: we cannot conceive what you can otherwise
devise. Our imprisonme^ts, losses, disgraces, and seuerest punishments in so
many years, being the whole life of a man, from time of discretion) the
known bridles of obstinate people) will condemn all men of too much will, and
little judgment, that could charge us with this former. That which we have
offered in religion, freeth us in the second, and condemns our accusers.

And to manifest now, (as often we have done before) that we are neither
carried away by wilfulness or ignorance in this debate, we have at sundry
times by most earnest suites and petitions desired and offered and still do,
that if your best learned Protestant Bishops and divines can, and shall prove
unto the learned of our side, that we may repair unto your churches, and there
be present at your service, without most grievous offense to God, we vvil
willingly perform it. Wherefore vee hope that you who in your own
profession would be esteemed zealous and religious, vvil judge this our offer
to be such, that no Christians can offer more: And consequently further reflect
and consider how dishonorable, shameful, and sinful it would be to your
Consistory, and whole Religion, to impose and multiply penalties upon us
(these offers considered) for not doing those things, which by your own
knowledge, your best learned in divinity, on whose words and vvarrant you
hazard your souls, cannot, nor will not, take upon them, to maintain, as
lavvfull for us to do.

But if so many suites, supplications, reasons, and examples will not call you
to a contrary mind, but you have set up your resolution, without any answer
or defense by us, to be our accusers, judges, and executioners, and singularly
without any example at all, in the world, either of Christians, or others, to
persist in vehemency of persecution against our religion: let us find you so
far to harken unto us, that to retain the name of lavve-makers, you will
retain some proportion and anologie (as all so named must do) with the most
ancient law of God, of nature, nations, and this kingdom, not to punish
twice one and the same offense. If by strong hand you will have that to be
offense, which we assure our selves is so far from that name and nature, that
the contrary is great and heigh offense to God; Non consurgat, duplex
tribulatio, and afflixi te, non iterum affligam: and again. Deus non punit bis
in idipsu^. And as a double punishments is not to be inflicted for one offense,
so by these laws, pro mensura delicti erit and plagarum modus; which our
ancient laws in our great charter of England follow: Nullus liber homo
amercietur, sed secundum modum delicti ipsius, saluo tenemento suo (Magna
Charta cap. 14.) Peruse if it please you, but the heads of the punishments
provided against us, for sundry respects, (questionable whether any offense or
no) and shall perceive that your laws do not impose you or prosecute such
severe penalties by many degrees upon sins, that certainly and by all judgments
are confessed and acknovledged to be sins, yea, and great sins against the
law of God, nature, all nations, and this Kingdom.

By this we hope you understand, that if you will have example, either in
heaven, or earth to follow, your persecutions must die, or must diminish, for
we have yielded full satisfaction to all your pretended reasons to persecute us.
That which remains, we desire you to consider what a resemblance there is,
or should be between yours and the heavenly court, from whence the irreuocable
law is proceeded, and with great terror published: Woe to the^ that make unjust
laws, and writing, have written injustice, that in judgment they might
oppress the poor, and do violence to the cause of the humble of my people,
that widows might be their prey, and the spoil of fatherles. So beseeching
the almighty, that in these and other causes, in that heigh Court now in hand,
you may in such sort proceed, as may be to his honor and glory, the security
and good of his majesty, his offspring and posterity, and this common wealth,
we leave you to Gods holy protection.

Your wel-wishing Countrymen, kinsmen, alliance, and friends, the Catholic
Recusa^ts of this realm of England.

An other also of the like tenure, which here ensues, was then with the same
assent subscribed with 23. hands of the chiefest Catholic gentlemen of
England, and presented to the chief Secretary of estate, potent in those
times in court and council, and as the Catholics then feared, not equally
effected toward them, though never so innocent and wel-deseruing, who was one
of them who with other of the council declared to diverse of these gentlemen
(as they confidently reported upon their reputation) that the Kings pleasure
was they should pay no more the penalty of twenty pounds a month for their
recusancie; and after when he had persuaded his majesty to the contrary,
denied his former assertion, of the releace thereof, although the gentlemen
most sincere and just, still insisted and maintained that this messadge was so
delivered unto them: which also the then Earl of Northampton, L. Henry Howard,
did freely confess and acknowledge to be most true. And the same Catholics
were more then jealous, that this practice of co^spiracie was no great secret
to that Secretary, long before diverse of them that were actors in it, and by
him named Catholics, were acquainted with it. We may not enter into judgment,
where men are not defamed of such inventions, to entrappe those they do not
affect: for the rest, let M. Howes his history of that matter make relation
who it was, a great protestant that had more, or not much inferior know ledge
of it by his relation, then some that wer-put to death for concealing it. But
howsoever, the petition follows in these terms.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT, Earl of Salisburie, chief Secretary of
estate to his Majesty: the petition of the Catholics of England.
IF the corrupted and obscured understanding of men not knowing God, could
among other clouds and mystes of ignorance, be so far blind in that wherein
the law and light of nature it self does give sufficient instruction to all
people and nations, that Princes and rulers in authority are to be honored
and obeyed: yet the heavenly and supernatural illumination does clearly deliver
all Christians (especially Catholics) from such darkness and want of duty,
giving knowledge that every soul must be subject to superior powers; that
God is he, per quem reges regnant: and, he that resists power, resists the
ordinance of God.

Wherefore we your Lordshippes humble suppliants, the Lay Catholics of this
Kingdom, so long probationers for religious causes, have ever in our hearts,
words and works abandoned all contrary proceedings, as a Babilonian building
and insurrection against the might and command of heaven: damnable and
rebellious unto all regal and princely power, peace, and unity on earth.
Therefore being admonished by the vvisest King, that there is as well, tempus
loquendi, as tacendi: and occasions of these times being such as enforce us to
speak, least by silence we might be censured by some no equal minded-men
unto us, to be suspected criminal in that, wherein as al matters of that
nature we do, and ever did, by long-knovvne experience, stand most innocent:
we therefore protest, concerning the late conspiracy, that we do condemn
it for a most impious, unnatural, barbarous, and execrable offense, against the
law of nature, the sacred word of God, and the canons and practice of the
holy Catholic Church, wherein we do live: to which, no pretense of
holiness, no petence of Religion, no pretense of private or public
authority, can give vvarrant to make it lavvful. And we take God to
witness that we were neither consenting, co^spiring or privy to that, or
any such w^ked designement, but the very remembrance that any such enterprise
should be intended or devised by any man (especially bearing the name of a
Catholic.) is the continual sorrow of our hearts, and among al tribulations,
the object of our greatest grief.

And for this present, and all future times we offer, profess, and promise, as
great, ample, true, and faithful obedience, loyalty, and duty to his
Majesty, as though he were a Prince of our own religion: as much as any our
ancestors in this Kingdom did yield to any his heighnes progenitors, Kings
and Princes thereof, or as is required of Catholic subjects in other countries
to their Protestant rulers, or as any Protestant subjects observe or perform
to their Protestant or Catholic Sovereigns, in civil obedience: That neither
we can offer, nor his Majesty or estate require more of us, all worlds and
generations of me^, Catholics, Protestants, Christians, Pagans, and whatsoever
in this and all other Kingdoms, past, present, and to come, will witness for
us. And for our sincerity, dutiful and obedient meaning herein, we appeal
to all our persecutors, their most strict, politic, and cunning inquiries and
examinations of our behavior, and carriage from time to time, by which we
stand as clearly unspotted, as irreprehensible, as irreprooueable, as dutiful
in all civil respects and duties, as any Protestant in this Nation.

Therefore, Right honorable, if some few unhappy men of our religion have
made tra^sgression of their allegiance, we hope it shall be no motive to change
your grave and unresolved mind from thinking it undue to impose a burden upon
innocents, for the fact of the guilty, according to your own excellent
speech heretofore used, and now at this present: Solum necis artifices art
perire sua. And your Lordships most christian desire, of one uniformity in
true religion in this kingdom, brings no small hope unto us, that now at
last, our so-long and many times in humble manner requested petitions concerning
our not coming to your churches, may by your honorable mediation to his
Majesty, be brought to trial, by the learned of both parties, whether without
committing sin, it may be done by us, which we take to be the only means
to bring this kingdom to your so-much desired uniformity in religion.

For if your Protestant now assembled, or best learned doctors, can and do
prove it lawful to our learned divines, we absolutely offer to perform it,
without delay or further exception. And may it please your Lordship to call to
mind, the ordinary known practice of Catholics and Protestants in France,
Heluetie, Germany and other countries, where they communicate in civil
societies, and not in churches, and spiritual communications: which pleads
that our refusull is not singular, but having ground and patronage, both from
Catholics and Protestants in this point. Our confidence now is, that his
Majesty, your honor, and the state, will not take this our humble and
necessary petition in evil part, considering that catholic Emperors,
Kings of France and other Princes, have granted the like to their Protestant
subjects, and this in those countries where no other Religion, the^ the
Catholic Roman Religion has been publicly exercised at any time, since
their first conversion from Paganism.

All these petitions being presented according to their titles at that time,
though the two first to his Majesty were printed, and the book after his
manner answered by D. Norton a Protestant Bishop, yet he never took notise of
either of those petitions, or any one sentence of them: and the Parliament was
as silent, for that presented unto it. Only this Secretaty was so much
distasted with the gentlemen that subsigned it, that he told M. Anthony
Skinner, who presented it unto him, that if they were present, he would set
them all by the heels, a punishment for rogues, and not for men of their worth
and reputation. There was no other answer made to these petitions, but only
this, the oath was enacted, and after prosecuted with such violence as the
world can witness, such account and regard has been made of our misery by
these Protestants.

Whether any reformation may be found in the pretended reformers of religion
for Catholics to follow. And first of King Henry the 8. with whom neither
Catholics nor Protestants now join in Religion.
NOW, seeing if we be in error, we cannot possible by all means we can work,
procure that the learned protestant bishops, and doctors, who have controlled
all the christian world in their secret assemblies, will undertake to instruct
a few Priests of England, but suffer in their proceedings many thousands of
Catholics by this means to be tyrannized over both in bodies and souls: let
us return to the first founders of this religion in England. The father King
Henry the 8. his young son and daughter, and see if we can find any motive
in their proceedings to move us from our error, if we be in error. And first
to begin with the first, the father in this new Religion, and spiritual power,
all Protestant antiquaries, Fox, Parker, Stowe, Holinshed, Cambden, Howes, and
the rest entreating of this matter assure us, both that King Henry the 8. and
his fit instrument Cranmer, for a clergy man, were the principal and first
actors in this Tragedy ( Fox tom. 2. in Henr. 8, and Cranmar. Parker antiq.
Brit. in Cranm. Stow hist. in Henr. 8. Holinsh. ibi. Theater of great Brit^in
eod. Howes historial praef. Cambd. praef. hist. Eliz. etc.) and the occasion
King Henry took to make his revolt from the Church of Rome, because the pope
would not consent for his putting away his wife Queen Katherine, that holy
Lady of Spain. For before that time, king Henry was so obedient a child to
the Sea, and Religion of Rome, that by the pen of the blessed Bishop Fisher
(whom he after put to death, for denial of his assumpted Supreamacy) in his
own name he defended them against the scurrilous books of Martin Luther: and
was for that styled by the Pope, Defensor fidei, defendor of the faith (Henr.
8. l. cont. Luther) which his Majesty King James still uses by virtue of that
donation.

One of late among the rest, with greatest warrant, speaking of this his first
reuoult, has these words (Hovves historical praeface to his Hist. in Henry
8.) This was done after the king was deuorced from Catherine of Spain, his
first wife, with whom he had lived above twenty years, and by her had five
children. The clergy nor parlame^t notwithstanding the Kings importunity
would never yield to the divorce, by reason they could not find any just
cause. The King made Cranmar Archbishop of Canterbury, who was very apt, and
ready to perform the Kings will, and he denounced the sentence of divorce.
Then the King, contrary to the good liking of all men, married Anne Bulleyne,
by whom he had the Lady Elizabeth. And then by act of Parliament, made it
treason against all men, that should say the marriage was not lawful. And
presently after her birth, he picked a quarrel against Queen Anne, and then
repealed the former act, and made a new act of Parliament, whereby it was
enacted, that it should be heigh treason, for any to justify his former
marriage to be lawful, and the next day after her behedding, he married her
handmaid, Jane Seymor, and then declared the Lady Elizabeth to be
illegitimate. Thus word by word this Protestant historian: Then by this, and
such like proceedings, as first bringing the clergy into danger of Praemunire,
threats, importunities, and such practices, as these Protestants tell us
(Parker, Stow, Hollinshed, Theater, vt supr.) procuring the title of Supremacy
to himself in matters ecclesiastical.

This Protestant antiquarie thus proceeds in this Kings proceedings: The king
obtained the Ecclesiastical supremacy into his particular possession, and
therewithal had power given him by parliament, to survey and reform the abuses
of al Religious houses and parsons. But the King because he would go the next
way to work, overthrew them, and razed them. Whereat many the Peers and
common people murmured, because they expected, that the abuses should have been
only reformed, and the rest have still remained. The general plausible
project, which caused the Parlaments consent unto the reformation, or
alteration of the Monasteries, was that the Kings exchequer should for ever be
enriched, the Kingdom and nobility strengthened and increased, and the common
subjects acquitted and freed from all former services and taxes: to wit,
that the Abbots, Monks, Friars, and Nuns being suppressed, that then in
their places should be created forty Earls. threescore Barons, and three
thousand Knights, and forty thousand soldiers, with skillful captains, and
competent maintenance for them for ever, out of the ancient church-reuenewes,
so as in so doing, the King and his successors should never want of treasure of
their own, nor have cause to be beholding to the common subject, neither
should the people be any more charged with loanes, subsidies and fifteenes,
since which time there have been more statute laws, subsidies, and fifteenes,
then in five hundred years before, and not long after that, the King had
subsidies granted, and borrowed great sommes of money, and dyed in debt, and
the forenamed religious houses were utterly ruinate, whereat the clergy,
peers, and common people, were all sore grieved, but could not help it. He
also suppressed the knights of the Rhodes, and many fair hospitals. This was
done after the king was divorced from Catherine of Spain his first wife. He
began his reign prodigally, reigned rigorously, lived proudly, and dyed
distemperatly. Through fear and terror he obtained an act of Parliament, to
dispose of the right of succession in the Crown, and then by his last will and
testament contrary to the law of God and nature, conueyes it from the lawful
heirs of his eldest Sister, married to the king of Scotland, unto the heirs
of Charles Brandon and others, thereby to have defeated prevented, and
suppressed the unquestionable, and immediate right from God, of our gracious
Sovereign king James. At his death he was much perplexed, and spoke many
things to great purpose, but being inconstant in his life, none durst trust him
at his death. Thus your Protestant historian has described this first
protestant supreme head of the church in England.

They that desire more knowledge of him, may resort to his own statutes, the
Protestant Theater of Britanie, Sir Walter Raleigh his preface to his history
of the world: and a book of the tyrants of the world, published by the
Protestants of Basile, where they may find him a supreme head among them (
statut. Henr. 8. ab an. Regni 21. Theater of Brit. in Henr. 8. Walter Ral.
histor. of the world. praef. lib. of Tyran. Basil.) And his ghostly father
Cranmer his chief instrument in those most execrable sins, for a Clergy
man was not inferior unto him. He was as your first protestantly ordained
Archbishop Parker in his life, with others witnesses, both the moved and
moving instrument of this king, in this, and many other his wicked
designements. He was of all the Religions of King Henry the 8. and Edward the
6. He diverse times swore to the Pope, and was forsworn: He swore to King
Henry the 8. and was forsworn, when he swore otherwise to king Edward his
son, and was publicly proved a perjured man: he was a chief executor of
king Henry the 8. his will, and within 24. hours of his death, a chief
breaker thereof. He was a continued felon unto him in his life, married against
his laws, making it felony in such men: he was for chastity, to my reading
the first, last, and only trigamus, a Bishop, husband of three wives in the
world. He counterfeited the hands and seals of 50. convocation men, and among
the rest of the blessed martyr, Bishop Fisher. He gave chief consent, and
swore, that Edward the 6. a child of nine years old, was supreme head of
the Church, had al jurisdiction spiritual in himself (Parker antiq. Britan. in
Cranmer. Fox tom. 2. in Cranmer. Stow histor. in Har. 8. Holinsh. Hist. of
Engl. ibid. Theater of great Britanie in K. Henr. Godwyne Catalogue of Bishops
in Canterbury in Tho. Cranmer. Stow, Holinsh, Theater, Fox, and others in Q.
Marie. and Edw. the 6. Harpesfield, in the life of B. Fisher) and all that
Cranmar had he received from him, yea your Protestants witness, by the
Protestant Confessions themselves of Heluetia, Bohemia, Belgia, Augusta,
Wittenberge, and Swe, that boys could not take or give such power. (Th. Rogers
page 140. artic. 23. Confess. Heluet. Bohem. Belg. August. Wittenb. etc.)

If any thing now controuersied, defended and sworn unto, can make a man an
heretic, Cra^mar professing and swearing unto them all, was an heretic and
traitor to God: If conspiracy, open hostility, and rebellion to his true and
lawful prince, Queen Marie, does make a man a traitor to his Sovereign: If
to be hissed in the public schools of Oxford, in public disputation, after
all these changes does convince a man, undertaking so many matters, to be a man
unworthy and ignorant: If to recant heresy, and fall to it again, puts a
man in case of relapse of heresy, all these things be written of this
Archbishop, Archactor, Architector, Arch-hereticke, Arch-traytor, Arch-periured
and profane wretch of your Religion, by your own writers here cited, and were
publicly to the eternal infamy of that unhappy and graceless man, and his
followers therein, proved against him. Therefore, although King Henry the
eight did rather differ from the Church of Rome in matter of Jurisdiction
spiritual (by his claymed Supremacy) as your protestants testify, and his
laws are witnesses ( Stow histor. in. Henr. 8. Holinsh. and Theator ibid.
statut of K. Henry 8. etc.) the^ any way in matter of doctrine, Catholics
cannot in conscience by your Protestants, join either with him, or you
therein, being the first (as they have assured us) that ever claymed it in
this kingdom; and procuring it in so vile and unlawful manner, as your
historians have declared; and practizing it to his wanton and ambitious end,
against his own conscience. For all the foundatio^s of our Religious houses
being pro remedio animaru^, to say Mass and pray for their posterity for
ever. For the honor of God, the most blessed Virgin, and other Saints, as all
our antiquities give warrant to write: he in all his life time continued in
these doctrines, and at his death in his last will and testament, protested
himself to continue in that opinion ( Bed. Henric. Hunt. Guliel. Malmesb.
Roger. Houeden. Matthew. West. Flor. Wigor. Camb. Stow. Holinsq. Theator, etc.)
And for the supremacy it self (as has been proved in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, and your protestant historian, has sufficiently insinuated) he
recanted it ( Book entitled, Lesters common wealth) your Protestants words
of him these be: At his death he was much perplexed, and spoke many things to
great purpose, but being unconstant in his life, none durst trust him at his
death (Howes super. hist. preface in Henry 8.) which relation from a protestant
writer, can carry no other construction. And I take God to witness, I have
heard my father (then living in Court) often make relation, that this king
Henry the 8. at his death, was sorry for his taking that title of supremacy
upon him, was willing to relinquish it, and labored to be reconciled to the
Church of Rome, promising if he lived, so far as he could to make restitution.
But being demanded of him presently to take order therein, he was prevented by
death, and dyed with such burden and horror of conscience, as chances in such
cases: which this Protestant before aymeth at, when he says, he was much
perplexed, and spoke many things to great purpose. Therefore the Catholics of
England, are rather confirmed by this king, then weakened by him, in profession
of their holy faith.

And though in his life he persecuted and put to death many renowned
Catholics, for denial of his supremacy, and sacramentary Protestants (such
as those in England now are) for heretics, yet he never recalled this second,
as he did the first, neither made any new law, by which they were put to
death, but left their trial to the ancient Canons of the Catholic Church;
yet put those Catholics to death only by pretense of his new inacted Edict of
his supremacy, never heard of in England before, as Protestant antiquaries
have told us. Therefore this first supreme head of religion in England, in
all things confirms the religion of Catholics, and condemns that of
Protestants: and this the more if we add from your Protestant historians, how
fraudulently, or rather forcebly he obtained his first colorable title to that
his spiritual supremacy, by which he kept such turbule^t sturres in this
kingdom. A Protestant historian and an Esquire by state, as he styles
himself, thus relates it. William Martine Esquire. in histor. of Henr. 8. page
388.389.

Cardinal Wolsey being dead, the King by his Council was informed, that all the
clergy of England was guilty of praemunire: because in all things they
supported and maintained the authority, and power legatine of the Cardinal:
wherefore to prevent mischief, before it fell upon them, they gave to the King
for their redemption, and for their pardon, the sum of one hundredth thousand
pounds, and by a public instrument in writing, subscribed, and sealed by the
Bishops and fathers of the Church; they acknowledged the King within his own
kingdoms and dominions, to be supreme head of the Church. Thus unjustly he
procured that unlawful prerogative, and more unjustly as before, made his
wicked use thereof. I need proceed no further in his proceedings, for they are
dead with him: the present protestant state, as his own children before, by
laws and Parlaments condemn them; all Protestants in the world reject them,
and he himself before his death (by the most manerly fashion he could)
refused his title of supremacy, in which he most differed from the church of
Rome, as I have brought Protestant witnesses before: therefore Catholics are
rather confirmed, then weakened in their religion, by the proceedings of this
King.

That English catholics cannot be persuaded unto, but much dissuaded from
Protestant Religion, by the Protestant proceedings in the time of King Edward
the 6.
NOW let us come to the next temporal rule, that claymed supremacy in
spiritual matters in England: King Edward the 6. he was but 9. years old,
when this charge was laid upon him, yet he was elleuen years old, when your
religion was first borne in this nation, in the second or third year of his
reign, as all laws and histories of that time give record. ( Parl. 2. and 3.
Edw. 6. Stow hist. in Edw. 6. Holinsh. Theater, and others ibid.) So this
child begot it, and his sister Q Elizabeth nursed it. We know for shame you
will not tie us, to the censure of an infant king; then you must appeal to
those that instructed, and directed him in so great a business, These were
temporal, and spiritual, and chiefly those that were of council, and had
sworn otherwise to King Henry the 8. during his life, lived in his Religion,
and after his death continued the same under this young king in his beginning
and first Parliament ( Parl. 1. of Edw. 6. Stow. Holinsh. and in k. Edw. 6.)
were executors of the last will and testament of king Henry the eight, in which
concerning matters of trust in religion, they truly executed nothing at all:
but in the exheredation of his Majesty's holy Mother and himself, as much as
they could they executed it ( Howes historial preface supr. Stow, Holinsh.
Theater, and in Q. Marie and Edward. 6.

The chiefest of these for spiritual men was Cranmer their Archbishop, and the
rest of the Bishops of that time that were not Catholics, of which we find
but two, only Hooper and Ferrar put to death for their Religion by Queen
Marie: For Cranmer, Ridlie, and Latimer were condemned for treason ( Fox tome.
2. Monumen. in Q. Marie. Godwyne Catalogue of Bishops of K. Edwards time.) and
what can we account of the religion of these two, changing their profession so
often with king Henry and K. Edward? and Ferrar (to use your Bishops words)
was thrust out of the Bishoppricke, in the beginning of Queen Marie, for being
married, and ended his life in the fire: more for being desperate how to live,
then for love of Religion, so far as we can gather. ( Godwyn in S. Daudis 79.
Robert Ferrar) The other, Hooper (Godwyn in Worcester. 75. Gloucester. 2. John
Hooper) a man of such conscience, as your Bishop writes, that being made
Bishop by the child king anno 1550. Bishop of Gloucester held also the
Bishopric of Worcester in commendam by license of King Edward the sixth; this
is his commendation. The rest that fled not the Realm for treason (which were
not of your Protestant religion, but Puritanes in foreign countries) were
deprived in England for being married, which by no Religion Bishops might do:
such were Bush of Bristow, Harley of Hereford, Holgate of York and others that
became Catholics (Godwyn in Brist. Heref. York, etc.) Couerdale was set at
liberty by Q. Marie, and of so small esteem with you in the beginning of Q.
Elizabeth her reign, that no Bishopric was allowed him.

Now let us come to your chief temporal councillors then, these were by
their own creation, the Dukes of Sommerset and Northumberland, called
Protectors to the young king (Stow and Holinsh. and Theater. K. Edw. 6. and Q.
Marie) the first basely put to death in that time for felony: the other for
treason and open rebellion against Q. Marie: And after he had been thus with
Cranmar, the chief instrument to overthrow Catholic Religion, and set up
Protestancie in the time of that young king: he plainly recanted his new
faith, and was reconciled to the Church of Rome. And yet among these unworthy
men, under that young king there were but 6. Bishops, and 6. others that made
the Church-bookes of their religion the^: (Statut. An. 3. Edw. 6. cap. 12.
Fox, Stowe, and others in Edw. 6.) and for religion it self, they had no
Canons, articles, or decrees of it in all the time of that king. Howes your
historian thus writes of it: Edward, at nine years of age succeeded his
father, and then the Church was fleest again, the Bishoprics cut and pared,
all Chantries suppressed, the Bishoppricke of Durrham allienated. By all which,
the Kings Exhequer was very little enriched, neither was the common wealth
eased, or benefited; nor the ancient nobility any way dignified, only some
fevv preferred. The Earldome of Northumberland given to the Suttons, who
obtained the title of the Duke of Northumberland. In the first and second year
of his reign, the Mass was wholy suppressed, and part of King David's Psalms
were turned into english verse, by Hopkins and Sterneholde, Grooms of the
Kings chamber, and set them to several tunes, consisting of galliards and
measures. The Duke of Sommerset, uncle to the King by the mothers side, being
the Kings Protector, did all things in the Kings name, and inclyned overmuch
to the subtle counsel of his secret enemy, the Duke of Northumberland, who
was fully bent to defeat and suppress the apparent heirs of God and nature
unto the Crown, and to prefer the heirs of the Duke of Suffolk, according
to the injurious determination of k. Henry the eight. For the better effecting
whereof, they made a combination, which had as good suc-successe, as so bad a
practice deserved. The Protector among other things that crossed his greatness
in popularitie was, the spoiling of churches and chapels, the defacing of
ancient tombs and monuments, and namely, twelve goodly tombs in
Christ-church: his attempting was to pull down all the Belles in parish
Churches, and to leave but one Bell in a steeple, whereat the commonalitie were
reddie to rebel He reigned seven years, met with a trick of treason. He
means that he was poisoned by his protestant Protector Cranmar, and other
protestants of that most wicked combination.

They that desire to know more of that young kings times, may resort to your
Protestant histories of Fox, Stowe, Holinshed, Speed ( Fox tom. 2. in king
Edw. Holinsh. and Theater ibid. Injunctions an. 1. Ed. 6.) and the childish
Injunctions in matters of Religion, set out in the name of that Nouice, and
Nouecins supreme head of your church: where he may find the chief care of
the council and executors, left by king Henry the eight, spiritual and
temporal, to load themselves with new and great titles, and honors of
dignity, grow rich, by the last ruins of the Church, and to be of no settled
religion at all: For we do not find either in histories, or in confession of
Protestants diligently collected by them, or in any private or public
monument, any form, fashion, shape, articles, canons or decrees of Religion,
either under king Henry the 8. k. Edward the 6. or Q. Elizabeth, until her
fourth year, anno 1562. when the book of the artickles of your religion was
first contryued and published to the world. Book of Articles of Religion, an.
1562.

Therefore we may not join with these men in Religion, as neither you do,
especially with king Henry the eight, but rather marvel why you and all
that claim title to religion from them, do not find great motives rather to
bethink what wrongs they did unto us, then persist in heaping new and more
pressures, and persecutions upon the Catholics of your own nation, and
kindred. For you have heard from your Protestants before, that they obtained
that their power against the Religeous houses of England, only upon this
motive to reform abuses, if they could find them: To create and maintain for
the perpetual defense and security of this Kingdom. 40. Earls, 60. Barons,
300. knights, and fourscore thousand soldiers, with skilful captains, and
competent maintenance for them all for ever, out of the ancient Church
revenues: and yet to leave for the maintenance of religious parsons,
professing and living in the perfect way of christian Religion, chastity,
obedience, and poverty, watchings, fastings, prayers, and austeritie of life,
continued and maintained here from the coming of S. Joseph of Aramathia into
this Island by our kings, even the Pagan kings, Aruiragus, Marius, and Caillus,
and other Christian Princes, and holy founders after, to these days (antiq.
Glaston. apud Lel. in assert. Arthur. Capgraue in S. Joseph. and S. Patric. and
protest. histor.) which neither the Religion of King Henry the 8. King Edward
the 6. Queen Elizabeth, or King James, did or does condemn.

Neither can any of them (as these Protestants have before been witnesses)
dissallow of their Masses and prayers for the dead, but acknowledged the
contrary opinion to be heretical and damnable: yet both to the temporal and
spiritual damage of many thousands, from that time they still persevere in
that estate of injustice, so obnoxious to restitution, and are so far from
performing King Henry the eight his condition, to maintain so many thousand
soldiers and others, and ease their kingdom of taxes and contributions, that
they are not now able to perform the first, nor to maintain their dignities
without the other. In all which, the Catholics of England, are only innocent,
and yet they alone for their innocence, are condemned, and persecuted.

THAT THE PROCEEDINGS OF Q. Elizabeth ar noe warrant for protestants to
persecute Catholics, nor noe true conviction, but rather a confirmation of the
Roman Catholic Religion: by the writings of English protestants themselves.
ALl these protestant arguments conclude much more strongely against the
proceedings of Queen Elizabeth in these matters: for if it was publicly
addiuged for law in the time of king Henry the seventh (our laws remaining
the same) That the parliament could not make the king being a lay man, to have
spiritual Jurisdiction. (temporibus Henrici 7.) How much more an impossible
thing is it, to entitle a woman, and such a woman to that dignity by such
donation? for first even by our protestants, it is the Pepuzian heresy to say
a woman at all is capable of that spiritual vocation she stooke upon
herself, and presumed to impart to others. ( Epiphan. and Aug. in haeres.
Pepuzian.) And thereupon your protestants assure us: The Queens majesty's
parson was never capable of any part of spiritual power: (Ormerod. protest.
Assert. an. 1604. page 218.) Then much less of that supreme power. And if
she had been a man, yett in that case your protestant historians before have
told us, made illegitimate by public parliament, the King, Lords spiritual,
and temporal with the rest, there must have been as great a power to recall
yt, which was not in that her first parliament, for the Lords spiritual, who
only have power in such cases, did utterly dissent to yield her any such
privilege, so that noe man, or company that had power of dispensations, in
such things, dispensed with her, but contrary.

Again, it is a maxim in the Laws (as you Lord Cook writes ( l. 4. fol,
23.) nemo potest plus iuris in alium transfer qnam ipse habet. None can give
more power to an other, then they have to give, and the contrary is
impossible: Therefore seeing no Parliament that ever was in England, when all
the Bishops and Abbots, and chief spiritual men it ever had were assembled,
had at any time, either for themselves, or to give unto any other, that
supreme spiritual power, but as your Bishops have told us before, it was
wholly in the Pope of Rome ever from our conversion, and so could never be
derived to King Henry the eight, or Edward the six. ( Parker antiquit. Britan.
in Cranmer. Polydor. Virg. in Henr. 8. l. vlt. histor. etc.) it is much more
strong against Q. Elizabeth, both for her sex, and the other incapabilitie,
as Protestants assure us. And for her or any to claim it, by that Parliament
wherein she took it upon her, is a thing more then to be wondered at: for all
men of that Parliament, which had any spiritual jurisdiction (as the Catholic
Bishops) did by all means resist and contradict it: and the words of the
statute (as your Protestants have published it) by which she took upon her to
exercise it, and persecute Catholics only by pretense of this power there
given unto her, are these: Most humbly beseech your most excellent Majesty
your faithful and obedient subjects, the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and
the whole commons in this your present Parliament assembled. That the supreme
power spiritual, should be in that Queen, when it is evident by all our
Protestant histories, that not one Lord Spiritual, either desired it, or
consented unto it, but all repugned and gaine-said it; and for that cause were
committed to prison, or otherwise most grievously afflicted. ( Stow histor. an.
1. Elizab. Holinsh. Theater. an. 1. Eliz. Cambd. annal. rerum Anglic. in 1.
Elizab. etc.) And yet there was not any man in that Parliament, that could give
unto her, if she had been capable (as she was not) the least spiritual
jurisdiction over the least parish in England.

And if she had not insisted in her fathers steps of flattery, terrors, and
dissimulatio^, promises of great matters without performance, and in some
degrees (by the cunning of some about her without conscience) exceeded him,
she might have found as little applause, and consent in the Lords temporal
and others; For using all means she could, to further her strange proceedings,
(partly to be hereafter from her Protestant writers remembered) yet she found
such and so manifest reasons opposed against her, that the scarres of those
wounds then given to your religion, will never be recovered. A principal
antiquarie among you writes ( Cambden Annal. in Eliz. page 26.) that the Lord
Vicount Mountague, which a little before had been Ambassador at Rome, with
Bishop Thursby of Ely, for the reconciling of England to the Church of Rome in
Queen Mary's time, publicly in parliament these opposed.

Hic ex Religionis ardore, and honoris ratione acriter instabat, magno Angliae
dedecori esse, si ab Apostolica sede, cui nuper se submisse reconciliarat, mox
deficeret. He out of love of religion and care of honor, did earnestly urge,
how great a shame it would be to England, if it should so soon reuoult from
the Sea Apostolic, to which it had lately submissiuelie reconciled it self:
and would turn to greater danger if excommunicated, it by such defection be
exposed, to the rage of neighboring enemies. He in the name of the nobility,
and all degrees in England, in their name had done obedience to the Pope of
Rome, and must needs perform it. Therefore he vrgently besought them, that
they would not depart from the Roman Sea, to which they were indebted, both
for first receiving the faith from thence, and from thence having it
continually preserved.

This was sufficiently proved at that time of the reconciliation of England to
the Church of Rome, in open Parliament also by Cardinal Pole, as your first
protestantly ordained Archbish. in these words affirms ( Parkerant. Brit. in
Reginald. Polo) Ha^c in sulae nobilitatem, atque gloriam Dei prouidentiae,
atque beneficientiae soli accepta ferendam, sed tamen viam ipsam atque rationem
qua hac nobilitas atque gloria parta est, sede Romana nobis prima semperque
monstratam, and patefactam fuisse. In Romana exinde fidei vnitate nos semper
perseuerasse, fuisseque nostram antiquissimam Romanae ecclesiae subiectionem.
The noblenes of this Island, for being the first of all the Provinces of the
world, that received the Christian faith, and the glory thereof, is to be
acknowledged to have proceeded from the providence and goodness of God, yet
the way it self and means, by which this nobility and glory was won unto
it, was first and always showed and laid open unto us from the Sea of Rome:
we have always from that time perseuered in the unity of the Roman faith,
and our subjection to the Roman Church is most ancient.

And this reconciling of England then to the Roman Church, was so joyful and
honorable a thing to this nation, that to use your Protestant Archbishops
words ( Parker antiquit. Britan. in Polo) In Synodo decretum est, vt dies ille
quo pontifici Romano authoritas restituta fuerit, quotannis festus dies
celebraretur, atque Anglicanae ecclesiae reconciliatio diceretur. It was
decreede in a Synod, that the day on which authority was restored to the
Pope of Rome, should yearly be kept holy day, and called, the Reconciliation
of the Church of England. Abbot Fecknham ( in Parlm. Elizab.) in his oration to
that Parliament of Q. Elizabeth has thus: Damianus and Fugatianus as
Ambassadors from the Sea Apostolic of Rome, did bring into this Realm 1400.
years past, the very same religion, whereof we are now in possession, and
that in the latin tongue, as the ancient historiographer Dominus Gylduas
witnesses, in the prologue and beginning of his book of the Britain
histories, which he would not have dared to utter, in that time and place, but
that then he could produce that antiquity to be his warrant: which with many
others condemning the new religion of Protestants, are by them suppressed. All
the Bishops (of whom more hereafter) and whom terms your Protestant glorious
and renowned men, obfirmate refragati sunt. Did stoutly give their voices
against this innovation. They offered public defense by disputation of
Catholic Religion, both for doctrine and jurisdiction. Cambden Annal. page 26.
in appart. ad annal. page 36 Mason lib. 3. consecrat. page 206. cap. 5. Stow
hist. an. 1. Eliz. Holinsh. ibid. Godwyn. Catol.

But the Protestants knowing how their chiefest champions, had been before so
convinced by them, that they were hissed by the auditors, durst not come to
trial. But the Parliament beginning on the 23. day of January, they presently
proceeded to make Queen Elizabeth supreme head of the Church, and by that
title to make a religion what pleased her, and her few favorites, which by such
indirect means, as is here testified by these Protestants, they brought to
pass in the beginning of that Parliament, and in the very first act and
statute thereof. ( Theater of great Britain. lib. 9. cap. 24. parag. 4.
Godwyn Catal. in the Bish. depriu. an. 1. Elizab. Parliament. 1. an. 1. Eliz.
cap. And would never hearken to any disputation whatsoever, until they had
thus obtained their purpose, and until the last day of March two months
after, as all Protestant histories give evidence.

And when they had by only 6. voices of laye-men, condemned our learned
Bishops, and their holy religion: the religion of the universal Church of God,
they would not then allow them (though condemned thus unjustly) any disputation
at all, except they would accept of that babble and mockery of disputation, and
all religion; which I have from these Protestants remembered before ( Cambden in
Annal. lib. page 27.) Therefore let us pass it over in this place, and desire
your instructing Protestants a little further to instruct and inform us, how
she proceeded, and so strangely prevailed in this matter. Orb Christiano
mirante, to the wonder of all the Christian world, for the profane proceedings
then used, as your Protestants before have testified (Camben annal. supra.)

So soon as she was proclaimed Queen, and long before her Coronation, by
proclamation she silenced the Catholic Bishops and Clergy not to preach, and
by her Injunctions, gave warrant to her lay protestant commissioners, to give
license to preach (Proclamation of Q. Elizabeth. an. 1. Stowe histor. an. 1.
Elizab. Injunctions of Q. Elizabeth, an.) She put in practice the oathe of
Supremacy amongst many which refused that oath, was the Lord Chancellor, D.
Heath, Archbishop of York, from whom she took the privy seal, and remitted
it to Sr. Nicholas Bacon (Stowe histor. in Queen Elizabeth an. reg. 1.) she
putt many from the cowncell, and took new cownsaylers: suis adiunxit, says
your best Antiquary, ( Cambden Annal. in Elizabeth page 18.19) pro temporum
ratione, Gulielmum Parrum, Marchionem Northamptoniae, Franciscum Russellum,
comitem Bedfordiae, Thomam Parrum, Edwardum Rogers, Ambrosium Cauum, Franciscum
Knolles, and Guilielmum Cecilium, pauloque post Nicholaum Bacon, singulos
protestantium doctrinam amplexos, nulloque sub Maria loco: Quos vt reliquos, in
eorum locum iam inde suffectos, ita temperauit and cohibuit, vt sibi essent
deuotissimi, and ipsa semper sui iuris, nulli obnoxij. She joined to hyrs for
the state of the time, William Parr, Marquess of Northampton, Francis Russell,
Earl of Bedford, Thomas Parr, Edward Rogers, Ambrose Cave, Francis Knolles,
and William Cecile, and soon after Nicholas Bacon, all become protestants, in
noe office under Q. Mary, which as the rest which she putt in for those she
displaced, she so tempered, and kept them in awe, that they were most
serviceable to her, she always to do what pleased her, none to contradict
her.

She concluded cum paruulis intimis (Cambden supr. page 22.23.) with a few
most inward with her, de nobilibus a regio consilio amouendis episcopis and
ecclesiasticis de gradu deijciendis, Iudicibus qui pro tribunalibus sederunt,
and hirenanchis per singulos comitatus, qui regnante Maria re and aestimatione
magni erant, hos locos deturbandos, and legum seueritate coercendos, nullosque
nisi protestants ad rerum administrationem adhibendos, and in collegia
vtriusque academiae coaptandos censuerunt, fimulque pontificios praesides ex
academijs, scholarchas ex wintoniensi, Aetoniensi, caeterisque scholis
submouendos. Q. Elizabeth presently after the death of Q. Mary takes order,
with very few of her inward friends how to restore protestant Religion. The
plott by them was, that new co^missions should be directed to judges, with
provision, they should not give any office: new Justices of peace, and
sheriffs should be made in all countries, the noble men should be put from
the council, Bishops and ecclesiastical men displaced, all judges and
justices of peace that were in estimation in the time of Q. Mary, should be
removed in all shires, and severely kept under, and none but protestants to be
admitted to government in the common wealth, and placed in the colleges of both
universities, and all popish presidents of howses, and scholemasters to be
renewed from Wincester Eton and other schools.

And according to this conclusion, this Elizabeth neither being crowned
Queen as yet, nor haueinge by any pretense power to meddle with the Title of
Supreamacie, because to speak in your protestants words, ( Stowe histor. an.
1. Eliz ab. statut. in parlam. an. 1. Mariae) Queen Mary restored all things
according to the church of Rome, reduced all ecclesiastical jurisdiction, unto
the papal obedience: yett to write in the same protestants pen and words:
(Stowe histor supr. an. 1. Eliz.) The Queen took an exact survey of all her
clergy and officers of estate, and putt in practice the oath of supreamacie,
and amongst many which refused that oathe, was the Lord chauncellor D. Heath
Archbishop of york: she committed the custody of the great Seal unto S^.
Nicholas Bacon, a man most malicious against papists, who from that time was
called Lord keeper. Cambden supr. annal. page 27.

Haueing thus displaced through the kingdom all catholic magistrates, and
dissolved the catholic parliament, continueinge at the death of her Sister
Queen Mary, and putt new protestant officers in their places, with all speed
she sommoned a parliament to begin in January followeinge, within twoe months
of her sisters death. ( Stowe supr. Holinsh. histor. an. 1. Elizab. Theater of
Britan. 16. Cambd. Annal. ann. 1. Elizab.) And haueing thus provided for a fit
company in the lower house of parliament, swearers to the supremacy, she and
her pauculi intimi, were as provident to pack some in the upper house also.
Therefore a few days before the parliament, to speak as your protestant,
(Stowe an. 1. Elizab. Cambden annal. supr.) the 13. of January, the Queen in
the Tower created Sr. William Parr, ob laesam maiestatem sub Maria gradu
deiectum, attainted of treason in Q. Maryes time, Lord marquess of
Northampton, Edward Seymor son to the late Duke of Sommersett, attainted,
vicount Beuchamp, and Earl of Hertford: Tho. Howard second son of Tho. Duke
of Norfolk, vicount Bindon; Sr. Oliver Saint Ihon, Baron of Bletsoe; and Sr.
Henry Carey, Lord Hounsdon. Qui singuli a pontificia Religione alieni, all
which were alienated from the popes Religion, all which that Queen and her
pauculi intimi, very few that consented unto her, knew by that means would
give their voices in parliament to what she should desire, and not content with
this, proceeded so in these indirect courses, that as your protestants have
written: ( Cambden Annall. page 27.) plures e protestantibus data opera, e
comitatibus tum e ciuitatibus, and burgis fuisse electos, and Norfolciae ducem,
Arundeliaeque Comitem, inter proceres potentissimos, in suam sieve rem, sieve
spem, Ceciliumque sua solertia suffragia emendicasse. The papists complained,
that more protestants of set purpose were chosen out of Countries, cities, and
burroughts, and the Duke of Norfolk and Earl of Arundell most potent among
the nobility, either for their own good, or hope (by the Queens promises of
marriadge or such things) and Cecyle by his cunninge had begged voices. And to
help and further so bad a cause, the Queen herself (your protestants words)
openly protested at that time in parliament, that she would never vex, or
trouble the Roman Catholics, concerning any difference in Religion.

Neither did this Queen or her pauculi intimi, Cecile and Bacon, take this
strange course in hand, for dislike of catholic Religion: for your Antiquary
tells us of Q. Elizabeth herself: ad Romanae Religionis normam sacra
audiret, and saepius confiteretur. Missam permisit post mortem Mariae and
litanias. Q. Elizabeth heard mass after the Roman order, often went to
confession, and after Q. Maryes death allowed mass and litanies, (Cambden in
Apparatu page 13.) The like is as well known of those her intimi at that time.
But they had other little laudable ends, by protestant proceedings now, thus
expressed by your chiefest Antiquary: ( Cambden in Annal. Rer. Anglic. in
Elizabeth page 21.22.) Nonnulli ex intimis Consiliarijs in aures assidue
insusurrarunt mollissimo ingenio virgini, dum timerent ne animus in dubio
facillime impelleretur, actum de ipsa and amicis esse, conclamatum de Anglia,
si pontificiam authoritatem in dispensando, aut alia quacunque re agnosceret:
duos pontifices matrem illegittime Henrico 8. emptam pronuntiasse, and inde in
eorum sententia iam lata Scotorum Reginam ius in Regnum Angliae sibi arrogare
pontificem sententiam istam nunquam rescissurum. Some of her inward Counsaylors
did daily whisper into her ears, being a maiden of a most tractable
disposition, while they feared least her mind in doubt might most easily be
driven forward (to marry with king Philip of Spain, and so continue the
catholic Religion, that she and her friends were undone, if she should
acknowledge the popes authority in dispenseinge or any other matter. For two
popes had already pronounced, that her mother was unlawfully married to Henry
8. and so in their sentence denownced the Queen of Scots did challendge right
to the kingdom of England. And that the pope would never recall this sentence.

And again: Prospexit huiusmodi matrimonium ex dispensatione contrahendo, non
posse non agnoscere seipsam iniustis nuptijs natam esse. She thus perceived
that this marriadge with king Philipp of Spain her Systers husband, to be by
the popes dispensation, must needs acknowledge that she was borne in unlawful
wedlock. And they knew also that she remaining a catholic must seek for
the popes dispensation of this her birth, not only made and declared
illegitimate, by the pope, but by her father himself, and the whole parliament,
and Title to the crown given her only by the will and testament of her
father, parliament Henr. 8. of Illeg. Lady Elizab.) against which in this case
your protestant h^an thus exclaymeth: ( Howes histor. preface in Henry 8.)
through fear and terror Henry 8. obtained an Act of parliament to dispose of
the right of succession to the crown, and then by his last will and testament
(K. Henry 8. in his last will and Testam.) contrary to the law of God, and
nature, conuayes it from the lawful heirs of his eldest sister, married unto
the king of Scotland, unto the heirs of Charles Brandon and others, (his
daughter Elizabeth and of these others) thereby to have defeated, prevented and
suppressed the unquestionable, and immediate right from God, of our gracious
sovereign, king James, as if it had been in the power of his will, or of the
parliament, to disenherite, and prevent the divine free gift, and grace of
almighty God, by which the kings of this land do hold their crowns.

Thus your protestant and privileged historians: by which is evident that this
proceedinge by such exorbitant courses concerning Religion, was not for love or
likinge of their protestant Religion, further then yt gave them license and
liberty to do and live as pleased their sensual appetites, which the church
and Religion of Rome would not allow. And yett all these sinistre and profane
proceedings not withstandinge, to insist in your protestants words in
chaungeing Religion in that her parliament. ( Howes historial. preface. in Q.
Elizabeth.) In this parliament notwithstanding the presence of the Queen (to
countenance their bad cause) with the apparent likelihood of her long life,
and hope of issue to succeed her, yett the mayor part exceeded the minor but
in six voices, at which time (to wringe out consents) the Queen openly
pronounced, that she would never vex, or trouble the Roman Catholics,
concerning any difference in Religion. Which promise of hirs was as well
performed, as that condition of her fathers before, of bestoweinge the church
revenues, for as your protestants have related, her persecutions which so
unprincely and vnchristianely in her name and power of that strange claymed
supreamacie in a woman, and such a woman, equaled, or exceeded those of Nero,
and Dioclesian, infensiue tyrants and enemies of Christianity. Sir Edwyn
Sands in Relation of the state of Religion.

And in that parliament yt self, where she spoke these words, and proceeded to
cruel inflicted penalties, against those Roman Catholics, as all our holy
Bishops were deprived, imprisoned, or exiled, so were all other
ecclesiastical parsons that would not do as pleased her. ( Stowe histor. an.
1. Elizab. Holinshed Theater ibid. Cambd. in Annalib. Rerum Anglicarum in
Elizab. Parliament. 1. Elizabeth.) great forfaictures and punishments imposed
upon all, that should hear mass, or not be present at her new devised
service, praemunire, loss of lands goods, and perpetual imprisonment, and
loss of life also with note of Treason, to them that would not acknowledge
that spiritual supreme power in her, of which she was so far incapable in
the judgment of her own protestants, that diverse of them wrote, and published
to the world, that a woman could not be a supreme governor in things
temporal; ( Knoxe, Godman and other protest. against the Regim. of women.) and
they were so violent herein, both in England and Scotland, against those two
blessed Queen Maryes: that Q. Mary of England was enforced to make a statute
in parlame^t, to suppress yt: the Abridgement thereof is thus. ( parliament 2.
an. 1. Mar. 20. die April. 1554. cap. 2.) The Regal and kingely power of this
realm, and all the dignities, and prerogatives of the same, shall be as well
in a Queen, as in a king.

How the protestants in England upon such good doctrine rebelled against that
Q. Mary, all know; And in Scotland they rather chosed to crown our Sovereign
in his cradle, then the true Queen his mother should reign, and have any
power spiritual, or temporal at all, in her own hereditary kingdom, (
Holinsh. histor. of Scotland. Stowe hist. an. 1. Jacob.) but by the violence of
those Scottish protestants, to be driuert from thence. And landeinge in this
kingdom of England. ( Cambden in Annal. in the life of Q. Mary of Scotland.)
Where by these protestants before she had such just right of succession, as
they have declared, and left that most undeniable Title, and interest, by which
most truly, lawfully and undoubtedly, her son our sovereign king James
now enjoys both this whole kingdom of Britanie, Ireland, and all the
adjacent Islands by hereditary right from her, she fownde noe further favor
here of the English protestants, but to be a perpetual prisoner in her life,
and to her eternal glory, and english protestants so long endureinge shame,
murdered and martyred at her death. Stowe Holinsh. Theater of Britanie in Q.
Eliz. etc.

Moreover in this so termed parliament, besides the takeinge of this great and
supreme spiritual chardge and office unto a woman (never heard of in the
world before) and suppressinge of the holy sacrifice of the mass, ever since
Saint Peter's time (as before is proved) excepting three years of king Edward
the 6. a child, and in place thereof admittinge a form of communion and common
prayer never used by any people catholics or protestants, but in that short
time also of that young king in England, not any one Article of protestant
Religion either against the 7. Sacraments of the church, invocation of Saints,
prayer for the dead, purgatory, validity of good works, merit, justification
or whatsoever else now contradicted by these protestants, was the^, or until the
fourth year of Q. Elizabeth, concluded by any parliament protestant Authority
in England, but left arbitrary for every man to believe and practice as his
fantasy served, without any rule at all. Book of Articles and Convocation an.
1562.

And for the communion Book yt self, it had not any approbation of any one
parliament man, divine or other, as your protestants assure us, but the chardge
of making or mareing that was only committed says your prime protestant
Antiquary with others, Cambden annal. page 23. Parkero, Billo, Maio, Copo,
Grindallo whitheado and Pilkingtono Theologis, Thomaeque Smitho Equiti: To
Parker, Bill, May, Cope, Grindall Whithead and Pilkington divines, and Thomas
Smyth a knight. The first and chiefest of these seven being Matthew Parker, had
been of seven Religions under king Henry 8. Edward 6. Q. Mary and Q.
Elizabeth, changing in every one of those chaunges, as before is proved, (
Godwyne Catalog. of Bish. in Canterbury Matthew. Parkr. Fox to. 2. in k. Henr.
8. Edw. 6. Q. Mar. etc.) and al Q. Mary's time professinge the catholic
Roman Religion in England, both before and after his deprivation of his
livings, in the second year of Q. Mary for being married.

For the rest of these protestant divines, they were fugitives for mariadge
against the canons of the church, and conspiracy against Q. Mary, before which
time they were in the same disease of chaungeing Religion with the former
princes, and after their going forth of England, professed the religion, and
discipline also of the puritan churches where they lived, namely to exemplyfie
in the liturgy or common book of prayer of the protestants of Franckfort,
published an. 1554. in Q. Maryes time, denyinge both the supreamacy of
temporal princes, and other matters of english protestant Religion: this is
the subscription of the english protestants then in all their names. (Liturgia
seu ritus ministerij in Ecclesia peregrinorum Francofordiae an. 1544. per
Petrum Brubachium in fine in subscript.) Subscribunt Angli ob Euangelium
profugi totius Ecclesiae suae nomine. Johannes Mackbraeus etc. The protestants
of England that were fled for the Gospel, subscribe in the name of their
whole church. Ihon Mackbree minister, Ihon Stanton, William Hamon, Ihon
Bendall, William whithingham, and to assure us that these men in particular
before named, be Authors or correctors of yt, and neither did, nor in their
own judgment could allow yt, it is evident: first both because they were of
this protestant Franckford congregation, secondly because: The first
protestants of this kingdom (your protestants words. Couel in examine. page
72.) in a letter subscribed with eleven of their hands, whereof Knoxe, Gilby,
whithinghame and Godman were four, most of them having judgment and
learning, utterly condemned yt. (Couel against Burges page 69.122.47.185.) So
did Calvin at Geneua, Ridley your protestant Bishopp and supposed martyr in a
letter to Grindal himself a chief agent in it: all the Caluinists in the
world abroad in their public confessions, and at home have likewise ever, and
do still condemn it, as also all Lutherans that ever were, and all those
writers or correctors of it themselus, and all the protestants in that first
parliament in all probable judgment, except four new cownsaylers of Q.
Elizabeth, the Marquess of Northampton, Earl of Bedford, Ihon Gray of Pyrge,
and Cecile her pauculi intimi, to whom only (as says your historian. Ca^bden
supr. in Annal. in Elizab.) this matter was communicated unto: re nemini
communicata, nisi Marchioni Northamptoniae Comiti Bedfordiae, Iohanni Greio de
Pyrgo, and Cecilio.

And this matter was sufficiently proved by some of your late Bishops in the
Conference at Hampton Court, publicly between the protestant Bishops and
puritans, before our king himsemselfe; where Barlowe your Bishop in relating
of that disputation, (Barlowe Conference at Hampton Court page 14. 15.)
brings in Babington, a protestant Bishop of yours openly to acknowledge, that
in the beginning, your protestants religion, and communion book thereof, was
proposed and approved in that first parliament by ambiguous and indirect
dealeinge of the composers of that communion book, and cites the Archbishop
of york to that purpose. And if we may believe your protestant Relations of
that dispute printed with privilege, ( Their protestant Relations of that
Confer. printed by Ihon windet cap. 1.2.3. all annexed to Barlows Relation.)
we ar told, that your protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishop of London,
and Bishop of Wynchester did here upon their knees before his majesty confess
as much of the errors of that book, and their Religion: thus we have from
them in three several relations, and from the fourth by your Bishop Barlowe as
before

Finally thus we pore catholic priests and catholics have toyled ourselves
in searching, seeking and preaching all protestants proceedings, parlaments,
laws writings, lives and dealeings of these pretended reformers, and the
further we wade, the deeper we ar in error, if Catholic Religion could
possibly be error; for as is evident before, we can find nothing in any of
these protestant patterns and examples, but such as confirm us in that faith
we profess with the catholic christian world in all ages. To which God of
his mercy convert them that be in error. And so much for this first part of
this protestant Plea and petition.

But seeing we cannot find any comfort by your own writers and relators of
these things to join with you in your New Religion: we will next prove unto
you by your own doctors and Antiquaries, that holy Religion which we embrace
(and for which you persecute us) to be the same which was first preached here
by Saint Peter and his holy disciples, and so consequently delivered by Christ
himself, and continued in this nation in all ages even since then, until
these times.

FINIS.
APPROBATIO.
Ego infrascriptus legi libellum Anglicanum cui Titulus praefigitur,
Protestants plea and petition for Priests and Papists, and nihil in eo reperi
fidei Catholicae vel bonis moribus aduersum, quin potius eundem vtilem futurum
iudico, and dignum qui in lucem prodeat. Datum Duaci 19. September. 1621.

MATTHAEVS KELLISONVS.


