A SHORT TREATISE OF THE SACRAMENT OF PENANCE.

With the manner of examination of Conscience for a general Confession.

Whereunto is added another Treatise of Confession, for such spiritual or
devout persons, as frequent that Sacrament.

Set forth in Italian by the Reu. Fa. VINCENT BRVNO of the Society of IVSVS.

1597.

THE TABLE OF THE TREATISE OF THE SAcrament of Penance.
What is the Sacrament of Penance and of the necessity of the same. Chap. 1. Of
the parts of Penance. Chap. 2 Of Contrition. Chap. 3. Of Confession. Chap. 4.
Of the conditions of Confession. C. 5 Of the matter of Confession and first of
the kinds of sin. Chap. 6 Of the number of sins. Chap. 7. Of the
circumstances of sin. C. 8. Of some cases wherein the Confession is void and
to be reiterated. C. 9. The manner of examining our Conscience, concerning the
first Commandment. Chap. 10. Of the (...) Commandment. Chap. 11 Of the third.
Chap. 12, Of the fourth. Chap. 13 Of the fifth. Chap. 14. Of the sixth and
ninth. Chap. 15 Of the seventh and tenth. Chap. 16 Of the eight. Chap. 17. Of
Pride. Chap. 18. Of the third part of Penance, which is Satisfaction. Chap. 19.
THE TABLE OF THE CHAPters of the Treatise of Confession.
Of the profitt of often Confession. Chap. 1 Of the Examination of Conscience.
Chap. 2. The manner thereof. Chap. 3. Toward God: with thought. C. 4. By
Words. Chap. 5 By Deeds. Chap. 6. Toward our neighbor, by thought. Chap. 7.
By words. Chap. 8 By deeds. Chap. 9 Toward our selves, by thought. Chap.
10. By words. Chap. 11 By deeds. Chap. 12 Of soro^ for sins. Chap. 13 Of
Confession. Chap. 14 Of the purpose and mean of amendment. Chap: 15
A meditation for the holy Communion.

A TREATISE OF PENAVNCE.
What is the Sacrament of Penance: and of the necessity of the same.
Chap. 1.
First. FOr the comfort of such as are truly penitent, to the end that they
may have some knowledge of this so wholesome a Sacrament, and a brief
instruction, how they ought to prepare them selves, for the obtaining of that
grace, which therein our Lord does use to bestow, together with the remission of
their sins: I will entreat first in general of this Sacrament, what it is,
and how necessary and convenient for our salvation: And afterward what parts
it has briefly discoursing of every one in particular.

Second. Penance therefore is a Sacrament instituted by Christ our Savior, in
the which by the ministry of the Priest, all actual sins are remitted, and
all bonds dissolved, which concerned sin, wherewith man's conscience was in
what manner soeue^ entangled: the everlasting punishment, also of hell, is
pardoned, and part of that temporal punishment, which is dew to sin, and
sometimes all the same wholly, according to the disposition of the Penitent.

Third. Certain it is that if man, after he was created by God in the state of
Innocence, had conserved him self without the spott of sin: he should have
had no necessity of Sacraments. But whereas by the transgression of Gods
commandment, he, together with all his posterity made that miserable
shipwreck: he was by his most merciful Creator succored in the Evangelical
law, by the Sacrament of Baptism, as by a first Table or bourd, wherewith the
wretched man, having broken the ship of Innocence, might save his life, and
recover the grace he lost. But because so many are the temptations and dangers
of this tempestious world, and so great our frailty, that often times it
happens, that loosing by new sins this first table of the grace of
Baptism, we return miserablye to our own drowning: our most benign
Redeemer, unwilling to leave us with out remedy, has provided for us this
Sacrament of PENAVNCE, as a second table, whereby we may be saved, and delivered
from the danger of everlasting death.

Fourth. Whereby we may gather how greatthe necessity of this Sacrament is.
Whereas (according to the determination of the Council of TRENT) it is no less
necessary for the salvation of such as have sinned mortallye after Baptism,
than is the Sacrament of Baptism, for such as have not yet ben regenerat.
Wherefore, as of those, which are not regenerate of water and the Holy ghost, it
is written, that they shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven: So after the
loss of the innocence of Baptism If a man have not recourse, and be takes
not him self unto this table of PENAVNCE: without all doubt, vain is the hope
of his salvation.

Fifth. This Sacrament was also a most convenient remedy, and very
proportionate for our infirmity: invented by that heavenly Physician, who had
very well felt the pulse of our weak and feeble nature. Wherefore with his
infinite wisdom he provided convenient remedies, opposite unto our evil
disposition: ordaining, that as the first man, after he had sinned, did hide
him self, and excuse his sin before God: So if a man would return into
grace: he should manifest and accuse him self before men. And, as a sinner
transgressing the precepts of God, does proudly exalte and oppose him self
against God: so if he would obtain pardon, he should humble and prostrate him
self at the feet of another man: Also, that, as a man with his sin, does
injury and dishonor unto God: So, if he would be forgiven by God, he should
discover his soars and dishonor him self before men. And finally, that look
what things he had disordinately loved, and wherein he had taken delight:
returning unto Penance, he should detest the same, and conceive against the^ a
deadly hatred.

Sixth. On the otherside, although the roots of PENAVNCE do seem at the first
sight to be hard and bitter: yet notwithstanding, for the great profitt, which
a man receives thereby, the fruits thereof are most sweet and pleasant. For
PENAVNCE does make us to return into the grace of God, and unites us with him
in most strait frendshipp. Which reconciliation in such as deuoutlye receive
this Sacrament, is wont for to cause a singular great peace and tranq^illity of
conscience, together with an exceeding great sweetness of spirit.

Seventh. Wherefore this Divine remedy being so profitable unto our souls:
every Christian (if he love his own salvation) ought to shun the being long
time enwrapped in his sins: but so soon as he perceaueth that he has
incurred, any mortal filth: to run without any delay to wash him self in
this fountain of the mercy of God: and this, not only once a year
(contenting him self only not to do against the precepte of the Church:) but
more c^^en^ for the great and many profits which the soul receaueth thereby,
and for the great dangers wherein she remains when she suffers her self
to grow old, with the burden of sin still lying upon her.

Eigth. Four euells and damages there are, which mortal sin does cause unto
the soul, when it is harbored therein.

Ninth. First: at what time soever a man is in mortal sin, when afterward he
falls again into the same, although it be with the very same circumstances:
yet, is not this second sin of equal fault with the former: but much more
greiuous: and consequentlye, the third, greater than the second: and so in
order, infinitely increases the fault, and punishment of every sin. And the
reason here of is: because how much more time God grants unto the sinner for
his conversion and returning unto his grace, so much the more increases his
ingratitude: whilst he uses ill that time, and rather offends him with new
sins every day more and more.

Tenth. The second evil is, because when a man remains in one sin, the way
is made more easy for the fall into another. For as S. GREGORY says, Such is
the burden of sin, that if presently it be not amended: with the weight
thereof it draws a man for to committ another sin: and this other, unto a
third: and so consequently there is made of many sins, as it were a chain,
of many linckes, whereof one draws the other: and who pulls one, pulls
all. For even so a man, if falling into one sin he does not quickly arise: by
little and little he falls into many others.

Eleventh. The third evil is, that he which is in mortal sin, loses all
the good works which he does: because they avail not to obtain any meritt of
everlasting life. And although he should afterward return into Gods grace:
notwithstanding, they are all lost. Wherefore, without repentance of his sin,
he reapeth no fruit, neither of A^mes, nor of Prayers, nor of Fastings, nor of
Indulgences, no not of Martyrdom it self, and sheding his blood for Christ,
if that he be not penitent for his sin: but only such things are available
for the obtaining of temporal benefittes, and as a disposition unto repentance.

Twelfth. The last evil that sin cat seth unto the soul: is, that al^aies
the gate of Gods mercy and pardon is more shut against it. For unto the
sinner, there remains no other good or ref^ge, but only faith, and hope of
the mercy of God. But by how much the more he lingereth in sin, by so much he
is farther of from mercy, and approaches unto gods i^sti^^: always provoking
more his anger for to take revenge of his sins.

Thirtenth. Finally: as we see it happens in exterior things, that how much
the more a spotte in a garment is suffered to continue, so much the harder it
is afterward to take it away: and by how much the more seldom a man combeth
and trimmeth his hair, by so much the more they are knotted together and
filled with filth: So also a soul by how much the more it deferreth her
purgatio^ by Confession, with so much the more difficultye afterward it is
cleansed and purged: and so much the more also it is entangled with the
multitude of sins, and casts it self into so great anxietye, that with
great difficulty, by never so Skillful a Confessor, it may be freed thereof:
and besides it ingendereth and nourishes in it self the worm of conscience
which although it should never feel in this life: yet shall it in the hour of
death be more fiercelye tormented thereby: and much more afterward in the other
world, where this worm shall never die, and the fire, wherewith it shall be
burned shall never be extinguished.

OF THE PARTS of Penance.
Chap. 2.
THere be three parts of the Sacrament of PENAVNCE, Contrition, Confession,
and Satisfaction. For as a man in three manners sins and offends God, that
is, with heart, words and deeds: So is it mere that he submitt him self unto
the keys of the Church, in those very things wherewith he offended: and that
he force him self to pacify Gods wrath: first, with contrition of heart:
secondly, with confession of mouth: thirdly, with satisfaction of works.

Of the first part of Penance which is Contrition.
Chap. 3.
1. COntrition, is a sorrow of the soul, and a detestation of sin committed,
because it is an offense of God: whom we love above all things: with a firm
purpose of changing of life, and not offending any more hereafter.

2 Whence we do gather that it it is not sufficient for a man, that he may
obtain grace: only for to leave sin, or to make a purpose of a new life: But
it is necessary, that he have both the ^re and the other: that is, that he be
^^ry and have a detestation of his life past: and withal make a firm
resolution of si^^ing no more. And this sorrow, it is nor necestary tha^ it be
sensible (although this is also very good and profitable, when it may be ^a^)
but that it be in the will: which takes displeas^re and detestaio^ against the
sin committed. and resolves to co^mitt it no more.

3 This sorrow also, ought to be the greatest of all other sorrows: because even
as God, for that he is the chief good, ought for to be chiefly loved, and his
love must be preferred before all other things: So also sin, by which a man
offends God, is the chief evil: Wherefore it ought chieflye and above all
things to be hated: in such sort that for nothing in all the world: no, not
for to save our own life, it is lawful any manner of way for to sin: whereas
our Lord says: Who loves his father or mother more than me, is not worthy
of me: and, who seeks to save his life, shall loose it. Wherefore a man ought
to wish, rather to have suffered what thing soever then once to have offended
God, or ever more to offend him.

4 Finallye: it is necessary that the Penitent carry an hatred toward all his
sins committed, and be sorry for the same. For if he were penitent and
sorrowful for some only, and not for others: this were not true Penance, but
counterfeite and feined, according to the saying of S. JAMES. Who-soeuer shall
keep the wholle law but offends in one, is made guilty of all.

5 Furthermore: it is not sufficient, to the end that it may be true
contrition, that a man ^o sorrow and repent for that which is past: but he
ought to make a firm and steadfast purpose of a perfect ame^dment of life: as
we read oftentimes in the Gospel, that when our Lord had testered health or
done any benefitt unto any person, he said: Go and sin no more.

6 To this Contrition also (if it be a true sorrow, joined with a purpose of
amendment) appertains a resolution of making satisfaction unto all such as we
have in whatsoever manner offended, whether it be in life, or in goods, or in
honor: Because as S. AUGUSTINE says: Sin is not remitted, unless that
which was taken away be restored: And also of remitting liberallye and
pardoning injuries which one has received of another: our Savior having
said: If you forgive men their offenses, your heavenly Father will forgive you
also your offenses: but if you will not forgive men, neither will your Father
forgive you your offenses.

7 To conclude: for the perfection of this vertew, it is necessary that a man
have purpose to confess all his sins, at the least, those which be mortal:
and to do the penance inioined him by the Priest.

Of the second Part of Penance which is Confession.
Chap. 4.
THe second part of Penance, is Confession. For although Contrition of it
self (if it be true Contrition) has force for to take away sin: yet because
the Pe^itent cannot be trewly contrite, if withal he have not a purpose of
Confession: and also because many times it happens, that a man, although he
be sorry, yet wants that perfect sorrow which of it self is sufficient without
Confession, for the obtaining of remission of sins, and the recovering of
gods grace: therefore it is necessary, if he may that he go to Confession in dew
manner unto the Priest: to the end, that by vertew of the Keys of the Church he
may obtain remission of his sins.

Of the Conditions of Confession.
Chap. 5.
Four are the principal conditions of Confession, that it may be available,
for it must be entire diligent, faithful and obedient.

1 First it ought to be entire. because it is necessary to manifest unto the
Priest all the mortal sins which a man has committed, and whereof he could
have remembrance: expressing every one in particular, in the kind and number,
as afterward shall be declared: procuring for to tell them in such manner, that
the Confessor may understand the greuousnes of every one, and discern whether
it be Mortal or Venial. Besides, concerning venial sins, although they
take not away Gods grace, but may be left untold without sin: notwithstanding
it is very well and profitable to confess them also, as the custom of good
and spiritual men does teach us.

2 The second condition is, that our Confession be dilgent. that is, that
before one goes to Confession, he prepare him self with diligent examination
of his conscience. which diligence every one is bound for to use, more or
less, according to the time whereof he is to make Confession, and according to
his own estate, and profession.

3 The third condition of Confession is, that it be faithful: that is, true
and sincere: not only not sparing to tell any sin which a man has
committed; but also not accusing him self of those, which he has not
committed, but telling the doubtful things as doutfull: and the certain, as
certain. It must also be faithful: that is, plain and simple, not
arteficially composed: confessing sincerely all sins without excuse, or
covering or diminishing any thing at all: remembering that which is written,
that our Lord gives his grace unto the humble.

4 The fourth and last condition is, that it be obedient: that is, that the
Penitent have purpose of doing whatsoever shall be imposed him by his
Confessor: of accepting the remedies for his sins which shall be prescribed:
and avoiding all occasions of the same which he shall forbidd him: likewise of
making restitution, if he have any thing which belongs unto others: or of
making satisfaction unto all such as he owes the same unto, for whatsoever
respect: And finally of accepting the Penance given him by his Confessor.

Of the matter of Confession: that is, of those things which the Penitent is
bound to confess: and first, of the kinds of sins.
Chap. 6.
THe Penitent ought to Confess in particular all the kinds of mortal sins.
and that he may know, which is a mortal sin, and which is not: He must
understand, that all those sins, which are against any particular precept of
God or of the Church, are commonly mortal. Also, whatsoever is against the
love and honor of God, in any matter of importance or which turns to any
grievous harm of our neighbor: is a mortal sin, and he is bound to
confess it: observing in every one of these kinds of sins, that he ought for
to confess, not only that which he has committed, by outward action, but
also by thought, and by words.

Concerning the sins of thought in three cases a man may sin mortally, and is
bound to confess the same.

First, when, thincking of any matter of mortal sin, he gives consent with
determination of putting it in execution, if there were occasion: although,
afterward he do it not.

Secondlye, when a man does not entend to execute the same, but only
willinglye lingereth in that evil thought, consenting expressly to the delight
thereof.

Thirdly, when although he de termined it not, nor have express will to
delight therein: notwithstanding, an evil thought representing it self unto
him, and he knowing it for such, he does not drive it away, but lingereth some
while in the same, and takes delight therein. which sin is properly called,
delectatio morosa, that is lingering delight: For, although there be not
express consent: yet, is there vertuall consent. For, who sees and knows
that he has fire upon his garment, and will not quench it: it is a token that
he desires to be burnt thereby.

Of the number of sins.
Chap. 7.
BEsides the kinds of sins, a man must also confess the number: that is,
how often he has committed any particular kind of sin. and when he does not
remember distinctly the number, he ought for to tell a little more or less, as
he can remember. if he cannot do this: yet let him tell how long time he
perseuered in that sin: and whether he was accustomed to commit the same so
often as he had any occasion, without resistance: and whether such accasion
happened almost every day, or sometimes in the week: specifying as much as he
may the times that it happened unto him.

Of the circumstances of sin.
Chap. 8.
1 BEsides the kinds and numbers of sins, it is necessary also to confess
the circumstances: which in general may be reduced unto four principal heads.

2 The first is, when the circumsta^ce makes, that that sin which of it self
were venial, does become mortal: as if one in jest should take a thing of an
others, for to make him blaspheme: or should steal a penny, with a will to
take much more if he could: which will does make, that that act which otherwise
would have been venial, becomes mortal.

3 Secondly, when the circumstance changes the kind or nature of the sin,
causing that act, which was first a sin of one kind to become a sin of
another kind, or of two kinds together. As a carnal sin committed with a
married person, is adultrye: with a religious or vowed, is sacrilege: with one
of the same kindred, is incest. as also for to steal in the Church, is
Sacrilege.

4 Thirdlye, when the circumstance does multiplye the sin, causing that one
act is many sins together. as if one should eat flesh upon a Friday in
Lent, or if committing one sin in outward action, he should withal commit an
other mortal sin with his mind and thought.

5 Fourthly, when the circumsta^ce is necessarily to be expressed, in respect
of some satisfaction which the Penitent is to make: as, when the sin may
happen to be joined with scandal, or notable harm or injury of our neighbor,
to whom therefore we may be bound either to make satisfaction, or recompense.

6 But to the end that every one may know more in particular these circumstances
which he is bound for to confess: he must observe and express in his
confession particulerly these seven circumstances.

7 The first is, of the person which does sin, or with whom the sin is
committed: whether the same be free, or single, or a virgin, or married, or
religiouse, or vowed, or in holy orders, or joined in consanguinity, or
affinity.

8 The second circumstance is, of the act it self, which is done contrary
unto the law of God, or against our neighbor: of what quantity the same is,
whether great or small: whether it were much that was stolen, or little:
whether the person offended were of great importance or no.

9 The third circumstance is, of the place: which in three cases is to be
confessed. that is, when a man has robbed, or shed blood, or committed any
co^plete carnal act (although lawful) in Church, or in any sacred place.

10 The fourth circumstance is, of the means which were used for the
performinge of the sin: whether it were done with provoking and entising
others to be joined in the same, or to co^curr thereunto, (when they were not so
disposed of them Iesues:) or whether sacred things, or other prohibited means
were used in the same.

11 The fifth, is of the end which a man pretended in sinning, as when he
steals weapons, to the end that he may kill, or kills, that, he may
steal, or commit adultery and likewise when he does or speaks any thing for
to induce others to sin, or for any other evil end, or intention.

12 The sixth circumstance is, of the manner in which he sinned: if secreatly,
or publicly: with scandal of others: or with force and violence: as to rob
with assaulting: and othr like manners which may happen.

13 The seventh and last circumstance is, of the time: as if it were forbidden
under pain of excommunication, that at such time none should commit such a
sin: In this case a man were bound not only to confess the sin: but also
the time of committing thereof.

14 Finally although for to sin upon the Holy Day, is not a circumstance
necessary to be confessed: yet notwithstanding, when upon some notable day, as
were Good Friday, or Easter day, or at such time as a man does receive of God,
some special benefit, a man should commit any enormous sin: it seems more
secure in such case, that this circumstance of the time (which so much
aggrauateth the sin) be uttered in Confession.

Of certain cases wherein the Confession is void, and to be reiterated.
Chap. 9.
1 THe first is, want of examination: when the Penitent knowing that he has
many sins and having been long time from Confession, has not first examined
his conscience, nor used any diligence to remember his sins. In this case, if
the Confessor do not supply the default of the Penitent: the Confession is
void. For it must needs be that he leave untold some sin or other, which
he cannot remember: which were as much, as if he left it of purpose.

2 Secondly, when the Penitent does tell an untruth in Confession, in any
matter of Mortal sin.

3 Thirdly, when the penitent omitteth of purpose to confess some Mortal
sin, or such as he deemed Mortal: For if he did not esteem it mortal, but
after understood that it was Mortal, it were sufficient to Confess that sin
alone, without repeating the whole Confession.

4 Fourthly, when the penitent has not firm purpose and determination to
leave some Mortal sin, or the occasion of that sin in the which he finds
himself.

5 Fifthly, when the Penitent was fallen into some excommunication: and knowing
it, did not first procure absolution from the same.

6 Sixthly, when the Confessor is an ignorant person, and the Penitent, not so
sufficiently learned, that he can perfectly confess, and yet notwithstanding
he knows the insufficiency of his Confessor, maliciously he choseth to
Confess to him. Because in this case, it is likely that there happen many
errors, which have need of greater cure.

7 Seauenthly, when the Confessor could not give Absolution: either because he
had not jurisdiction: or because he was notoriously Excommunicate, and not
tolerated by the Church, and the Penitent knew thereof.

8 In all these cases aforesaid, the Penitent is not only bound to make his
Confession a-newe: but for the injury which he has done unto the Sacrament, by
Confessing euelly: he has committed Sacriledg, and it is a most grievous sin.

HERE FOLLOWS the EXAMINE upon the Ten Commandments: in the which are also
comprehended al other matters wherein a man may sin Mortally.
Of the first Commandment: that is, of honoring God a^oue all thin^s.
Chap. 10.
COncerning FAITH: if he have believed whatsoever the holy ROMAN Church
believes: or rather has had some contrary opinion: or with words, and
exterior signs, has made any show of any infidelity, or heresy.

If he have been ouer-curious, in desiring to search the matters of FAITH: and
if he have doubted of any article of the same.

If he have kept books, either of Heretics, or for any other respect
forbidden by the Church.

If knowing any man to be infected with heresy, and incorrigible by other
means, he have not detected him to whom he ought.

If he have learned the prayers, and other necessary things, which every
Christian is bound for to know: as are the commandments of God, and the
principal mysteries of the faith.

If he have given credit unto, or used any sort of superstition, enchauntments,
deuinings, either by himself, or by means of other.

If he have procured by the way of lotts, for to find out any theft, or to
know any secret thing.

If he have carried about him superstitious writings, for the having his
health, or for other end, or has in duced others to do the like.

If he have given credit unto Dreams, or Southsayings, taking them as a rule
of his actions.

If for too much presumption of the mercy of God, he has committed any sin, or
has perseuered in evil, and deferred his amendment.

If in adversities he has had more confidence in creatures and in worldly
helps, than in God.

If for too much distrust of the mercy of God, he has despaired of the
amendment of life, or of the remission of his sins.

If he have murmured against God, as though he were not just, or blaming his
providence.

If for fear or other humane respect, he has had mind to offend God, or not
to do that which he was bound for his service.

If he have cursed or blasphemed God, or his Saints, and other Creatures:
expressing all the manners and sorts of those blasphemies which he has spoken.

If he have exposed himself to any danger of Mortal sin, or taken delight
of any sin which he has done in time before past.

If he have persecuted, or iniuried with words, Devout Persons: detracting
unto their good works, and being cause that they leave them: and in
particular, if he have dissuaded or hindered any from entering into Religion.

Of the second Commandment, of taking the name of God in vain.
Chap. 11.
IF he have sworn that which was false knowing it to be a lie, or doubting of
the same, although it were in lest, or of a matter of small importance.

If he have sworn to promise any lawful thing, which afterward he has not
observed, or had not intention to perform it, at that time in which he did
swear.

If he have been cause that any did swear false, or not observe the lawful
oathe which he made.

If he have sworn in manner of cursing: as men are wont to say, if I do not
such a thing, let such or such evil happen unto me.

If he has sworn to do any evil or any thing which was a sin: or not to do
any thing which was good.

If in judgment he has sworn false, or being asked by order of law, he has
not answered agreablely to the intention of the Judge, or has counseled
others for to do the like. In which case not only he sins Mortally: but if
thereof followed any harm of his neighbor: he is bound to Restitution.

If he have had a custom of swearing often, without consideration or care, to
know whether it were true or false.

If he have made a vow of doing any good thing, and has not cared to perform
it: or has deferred overmuch the execution thereof.

If he have made any vow with a mind of not fulfilling it.

If he have made a vow of not doing any good thing: or of doing any evil
thing, or of doing any good thing for an evil end.

Of the third Commandment, of Sanctifying the Holy Days.
Chap. 12.
IF he have not observed the holy days, but either done himself, or
commanded others to do such works as are prohibited by the CHVRCH: or
consented unto those which do the like.

If he have omitted to hear a whole MASS upon the holy days commanded,
without lawful cause, or has been cause that others did leave the same.

If being present at MASS upon any holy day commanded, he has been for any
notable time voluntarily distracted, by talking, laughing, or busying himself
in impertinent things.

If he have not procured that those which be under his charge do hear MASS
upon the holy days.

If he have not gone to Confession at the least once a YEAR, or have not
procured that others of his charge have done the same.

If he have gone to Confession, without necessary examination of conscience,
or without purpose of leaving any sin, or for shamefastness, or other humane
respect, has concealed any sin: which is a most grievous Sacrilege.

If every year at EASTER he has Received: and that with convenient
disposition.

If with a conscience or doubt of Mortal sin, he has Received or Ministered
any Sacrament of the Church.

If he have fasted the LENT, VIGILS, and EMBER days, being bound thereunto,
and if on such days he has eaten prohibited meats, or has been cause of
others doing the same.

If for Gluttony he would not have regarded to do against any commandment:
or if he have eaten or druncke over largely, with notable detriment of his
health: or if voluntarily he has been dronck.

If he have violated the Church with any carnal sin, or with sheding of
blood.

If he have incurred any excommunication: or whilst he was excommunicate, have
received any Sacrament, or been present at the holy offices of the Church: or
if he has conuersed with excommunicate persons, or such as were suspected of
Heresy.

If he have done any injury or irreuerence unto Images, Relickes, or other
sacred things.

If being bound to say his office, he have omitted it, wholly, or any part
thereof: or in the saying of it been voluntarily distracted.

If for sloth or negligence, he has left undone any good work unto which he
was bound.

Of the fourth Commandment, of honoring Parents.
Chap. 13.
IF he have borne little reverence to his FATHER and MOTHER, despising them, or
offending them with Deeds or injurious Words.

If he have cursed his father or his mother, or detracted their good name, or
dishonored the^ in their absence.

If he have not obeyed his Parents, or Superiors, in just matters and such as
might result to notable detriment of the family, or of their own soul.

If when his Parents have been in necessity, he has not succored them, if it
were in his power.

If deliberately he have desired their death, that he might have the
inheritance, etc.

If he have not fufilled their Testamentes and Last-Willes after their death.

If he have loved his Parents in such sort, that for their love, he has not
cared to offend God.

If he have not observed the just Laws and Decres of his s^periours.

If he have detracted or spoken evil of Superiors, Ecclesiastical, or
Seculer, of RELIGIOUS persons, Priests, Teachers, etc.

If he have not succored the Poor, if he could, especially in extreme, or
grievous necessity, or if he have been stern or cruel unto them, entreating
them sharply with words or deeds.

If those which be FATHERS and MOTHERS, have cursed, or wished evil unto their
Children.

Also if they have brought them up as they should, teaching them their prayers
and Christian Doctrine, and reprehending them, and correcting them, especially
in matter of sin, and occupying them in some honest exercise, to the end
they be not idle, and take some evil course.

That which is said of Children, is understood also of Servants, and other
of the Family, of whom care is to be had, that they know things which be
necessary, and observe the COMMAVNDEMENTS of God, and of the Church.

Of the fifth Commandment: Thou shall not kill.
Chap. 14.
IF he have carried hatred toward any person, desiring to be revenged: and
how long he has stayed therein.

If he have desired any man's death, or other great evil and damage, as well
in his body, as in good name, honor, temporal and spiritual goods.

If he have been angry with any person, with mind to do him any harm, or to
be revenged of him.

If contending with others, or in other sort, he has stricken, wounded, or
killed: or commanded, or consented unto others to do the same: or (being
done by others) approved it, or given aid, counsel, or favor thereunto.

If having offended others, he has refused to demand pardon, or
reconciliation: or have not sufficiently satisfied for the offense.

If he have refused to pardon, or to remitte injuries to those which have
offended him.

If for hatred he have omitted for to speak unto, or to salute others,
although without hatred, yet with scandal of our Neig^bor.

If in adversities and misfortunes he have desired death: or with fury and
anger has stricken and cursed himself, or mentioned the devil.

If he have cursed others, either alive or dead: and with what inte^tio^.

If he have sowed discord, or caused enmity between others: and what harm
has ensued thereof.

If for hatred or envy, he has been immoderately sorye for the good and
prosperity of others as well Temporal as Spiritual, or has reioiced at any
harm or notable damage of others.

If for anger he has offended others with injurious and contumelious words.

If he have flattered others, praising them of any sinful thing.

If with his evil example, or counsel, or with praising that which was
evil, or reprehending that which was good, he has bin cause that any man
left any good work which he had begun: or if he have induced him to any
sin, or to perseverance therein.

If he have omitted for to correct and admonish any person of any sin when
he could, and probablely hoped thereby the others amendment.

If he have given receipt unto out-lawes, and murderers, or with his counsel
and favor, or otherways, assisted them.

If he have spoken evil of his Neighbor, manifesting any secreat fault of his
for to discredit him, or cause him other harm.

If he have stricken injuriously any ECCLESIASTICAL or RELIGIOUS person,
wherein also there is Excommunication.

Of the sixth and ninth Commandment. Thou shall not commit Adultery. Thou shall
not desire thy Neighbors Wife.
Chap. 15.
IF he have had dishonest and unclean thoughts, and voluntarily has stayed
and delighted therein.

If with deliberate mind he have desired to sin with any Man, or Woman: which
sin is of the same kind, of which the work it self would be.

If with a libidinous intent he has beheld Women, or other persons.

If he have spoken lascivious and dishonest words, with intention to sin, or
to provoke others unto sin, and if he have heard willinglye and with
sensual delight such speeches.

If he have actually sinned with any Woman: and of what quality: that is,
whether a Virgin, or Married, or of Kindred, or Affinity.

If he have with any person sinned against nature.

If he have sinned with persons dedicated to GOD, either by holy Orders, or by
Vow, and if he him self had holy Orders, or Vow of Chastity.

If he have touched vncleanelye br^te beasts.

If he have sinned by himself, with any vncleaunesse, and whether at that time
he thought of any other person desiring the same: for in that case there be two
grievous Mortal sins.

If he have touched vnchastely himself, or others, or permitted the same.

If with desire of sin he has sent messages, letters, or presents, or has
been a mean to induce others unto sin, or has given counsel or aid
thereunto.

If he have gonne to any place, or passed thereby, with evil intention, for to
see Women, and to be delighted in the^, where he must tell of the dangers of
sin, to the which he has exposed himself, and of the occasions which he has
not avoided.

If he have had pollution, either in sleep, or being a-wake, whereunto he
has given any cause, or afterward voluntarily taken delight and complacence
therein.

If he have borne carnal love to any person, pursuing the same with desire of
sin, and how long time he has perseuered therein: and if by his occasion
such person have been noted with any infamy: also diverse acts and sins
which happen between persons which bear such love one to another.

Those which are Married, must examine themselves in particular, if in their
mind, thinking of other Women, or with their intention, not making their end
the begetting of Children, but only carnal delighte: or with extraordinarye
touchings and means, they have committed any sin against the end and honesty
of MARRIAGE.

If he have read Books or Histories which were lascivious, or dishonest with
sensual and carnal delight, or with danger thereof.

Of the seventh and tenth Commandment. Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not
desire thy Neighbors goods.

Chap. 16.
IF he have taken any thing which belonged unto others, by deceit, or
violence: expressing the quantity of the Theft, and in particular, if he have
taken any sacred thing, or out of any sacred place.

If he hold any thing of another, without the consent of the owner, and does
not restore it presently if he be able.

If for not payment of his debtes, (when he is able) his creditours have
sustained any damage.

If finding any thing he has taken the same with mind to keep it for
himself: the like of those things which happen to come to his hands, which
knowing that they belong to others, he has not restored to whom he ought.

If in buying or selling, he has used any deceipte, either in the ware, or in
the price, or in the measure, or in the weight.

If he have bought of those persons which could not sell: as are Slaves, or
Children under age.

If he have bought things that he knew, or doubted to have been stolen: or
wittingly has eaten of any such things.

If only in respect of selling upon trust, he has sold for more than the just
price: or has bought for less than the just price, in respect of payment
made before hand.

If he have had a determinate will to take or to retain, any thing of other
men's, if he could: Or also, if he have had a deliberate mind to gain and
increase his wealth (as men use to say) by right, or by wrong.

If he have committed any sort of Usury, or made any vsurarious contracte, or
entered into any unjust traffic, or partnershippe of merchandise.

If having wages, or pay for any Work, or Office, he has not done it well
and faithfully.

If he have defrauded servant, or worke-folkes of their hire: or deferred
their payment, to their hinderance.

If he have moved anysute in law against justice, or if in just suits he has
used any fraud or deceipte that he might prevail.

If he have played at prohibited games: or if in gaming he have used and won
by deceit, or has played with persons which cannot alienate: as are, Children
under age, and suc^^-like.

If he have defrauded any just impost or tolles.

If he have committed any Symony in what sort soever.

If he have defrauded the Church of that which was due, as are tithes and such
like.

If by unlawful means and evil information, he have gotten any thing which
was not due unto him, or has unjustly hindered others from the obtaining of
any benefit or commodity.

If he have given any help, or counsel, or, in whatsoever other manner,
a-betted to such as have taken other men's goods: or (being able and bound
thereunto) has not discovered or hindered any theft.

Of the eight Commandment. Thou shall not bear false Witness.
Chap. 17.
IF he have borne any false witness in judgment, or out of judgment, or
induced others to do the like.

If he have spoken any untruth, with notable prejudice or hurt of his
Neighbor.

If he have detracted from the good name of others, imposing falsely upon them
any sin, or exaggerating their defectes.

If he have murmured in weighty matters, against another man's life and
conversation, especially of quallified persons, as Prelates, Religious, and
Women of good name.

If he have given ear willinglye unto detractions and murmurings against
others.

If he have disclosed any grievous and secret sin of others, whereupon has
ens^ed infamy. Which although it were true, and not spoken with evil
intention, yet is the speaker bound to restore again the good name.

If he have uttered any secret, which was committed unto him, or which
secretly he came to see, or hear, in which case a man is bound to restore all
damages which afterward happen by such revealing.

If he have opened other men's letters unlawfully, or for any evil end.

If he have rashelye judged the deeds, or speeches of his Neighbor, taking in
evil part that which might have bin well interpreted, and condemning him in his
heart of Mortal sin.

If he have promised any thing with intention to bind himself, and afterward
without lawful cause has omitted to observe his promise, which is a Mortal
sin, when the thing which is promised is notable, or when for want of
performance of the promise, our Neighbor has had any loss or damage.

Of the sin of Pride.
Chap. 18.
IF that good which he has, (whether it be of Mind, or of Body, or of
Fortune) he has not acknowledged as of God, but presumes for to have it of
himself, by his proper industry, or, if he think to have it of God: yet
presumes to have it by reason of his own merits, not giving to GOD the glory
of all.

If he have reputed vainly that he has any virtue which he has not, or, to
be that which he is not, or, more than that which he is: despising others as
inferior unto himself.

If he have gloried in any thing which is Mortal sin: as, for to have taken
revenge, or to have committed any other sin.

If to the end that he might be esteemed and held for a person of value, he
has vaunted of any good, or euel, which he has done (whether truly, or
falselye) with the injury of God, or of our neighbor.

If he have been ambitious, desiring inordinately honors and dignities, etc.
doing to that end that which he ought not.

If to the end that he may not be noted and held of small account, or for fear
of the speeches of men he do that which he ought not, with scandal of his
Neighbor: or neglecte to do that which he ought: as, to correct and
reprehende others: to converse with good persons: to go to Confession, and to
do other CHRISTIAN works.

If he have stubbornly impugned the truth: or, because he would not submit
himself, or seem to be co^uinced, if he has obstinately defended his
manifest errors, against his conscience.

If through arrogancye he has despised others, doing any thing for their
dishonor and despite.

If for haughtiness and pride, he has been at excessive charge, in Apparel,
Servants, Diet, and other vanities, not convenient unto his estate.

Of other Mortall-sinnes, hear is nothing said: because enough has been
said already in the COMMAVNDEMENTS.

Besides all that which has been declared above, those which have any special
Office, Degree, or Exercise, must examine themselves of the defectes and sins
which in the like estates and Exercises may particularlye happen, according
unto the obligation which every one has.

Of the third part of Penance, which is SATISFACTION.
Chap. 19.
THE third part of PENANCE, is Satisfaction: the which is nothing else but a
full and entire payment of that which a man does owe for the sins he has
committed. For two euells does sin bring with it. The one is the spot or
fault: The other, is the PAIN, or PVNISHEMENT.

In Confession by virtue of the Blood of CHRIST which works in this
Sacrament, we are cleansed from the spot or filthe, and the fault is forgiven
us, and consequently we are delivered from the everlasting pain which was due
unto the Mortall-faulte. But because it does not always happen, that when the
fault is pardoned, there is withal released all the Temporal pain, but only
the Everlasting: For the remedy hereof, Satisfaction serves: which when it is
not made in this life, it must of necessitye be made in the other, in the pains
of Purgatory: which (as Saint AUGUSTINE affirms) are so great, that they
exceed all the torments which the holy MARTYRS have suffered in this life.

All the sorts of Satisfactions are reduced unto these three only. Fasting, or
other corporal asperities: Alms and Prayer, the which are correspondent unto
three good things of a man: that is, the goods of the SOVLE, the goods of the
BODY, and Exterior goods. Wherefore with these three virtues, a man does offer
unto God a perfect Sacrifice of himself, and of all that is with in him. For
by Alms he offers his External goods: with Fasting, he makes a Sacrifice of
his proper Flesh: and with Prayer, he offers his spirit and mind unto God.

Also these three manners of Satisfaction, are most convenient for to extirpate
the three principal roots of al sins: which are concupiscence of the Flesh,
against which serves Fasting: concupiscence of the Eyes whereunto is opposite
Alms: and pride of Life, for the remedy where of we are to use Prayer.

Also even as there be three whom we offend by sin, that is, GOD, our
Neighbor, and our Selves: In like manner, Prayer serves for to pacify God:
with Alms we make Satisfaction to our Neighbor: with Fasting we chastise our
Selves.

And although this Satisfaction may be made two manner of ways: First, when the
sinner voluntarily of his own devotion does any of these works: Secondly, when
the same work is enjoined him by the PRIEST in Confession. By both these
ways may Satisfaction be made for sins committed. Yet nowithstanding far
greater and more fruit full is the Satisfaction which is made for obedience of
the CONFESSOVR, in respect of the virtue of the SACRAMENT, whereof it is a
part: then those Satisfactions which are made by proper Devotion. Besides, that
such good works as are done voluntarily, if a man be in state of Mortal
sin: neither then, nor after, when he returns into grace, can avail him
for to make satisfaction unto God: but the works which are enjoined by the
CONFESSOVR, although they be of no profit when they be done in sin: yet
notwithstanding, afterward when he returns into grace, they be of great
profit: and serve for the due Satisfaction for sins.

And albeit a man also may Satisfy unto GOD for the same punishment which is
due for his sins, by means of the favors and INDVLG^NCES of the Church,
when they be ta^en as they ought, that is, in state of the GRACE of GOD: yet
not withstanding he ought not to neglect to help him self also with the
aforesaid works of Satisfaction, asflicting his Body with Fasting, giving
Alms, and occupying himself in holy Exercises of Prayer and Meditation.

Finally all manner of scourges and chastisements which Almighty GOD does send
us, as Infirmity, Poverty, Persecutions, and other Tribulations of this life,
(if a man take the^ with HVMIL^TY and PATIENCE) are of great force, not only
for to Satisfy for the Temporal pains due for our sins, but also for increase
of Grace and Merit. (*)

A TREATISE OF CONFESSION.
FOR SVCHE SPIRITVALL PERSONS AS FREQVENT THIS SACRAMENT
With a Meditation for the most Holy Communion.
Of the profit of often Confession.
Chap. 1
HOW great is the necessity of the Sacrament of Confession, and how great
profit it brings unto the Souls of the Faithful, which with D^uotion do
frequent it: much better is proved by that which every one does try in
himself: than either can be exercised by Words, or declared in many Volumes.
Wherefore CHRIST our Redeemer knowing very well the great necessity which we
had of so wholesome a medicine, would in the end of his Life, under the figure
of washing his APOSTLES Feet, leave it us, as it were in his last Testament,
and by his example exhort us to use the same: and this not only for remedy
of Mortal sins, but also of Venial. For that was the meaning of the same
our LORD, when he said, He which is washed, needs not but to wash his
Feet: That is, the condition of our frail nature being such that it cannot
long maintain it self without some spotte of Venial sin at the least: it is
not sufficient that a man have by this Sacrament cleansed his Soul from the
filth of Mortal sins: but it is necessary to the end that he may maintain
it altogether pure, that from time to time he wash also the Feet of his
affections from the dust of Veriall sins. Now although the authority of so
great a MASTER, who was the institutor of this Sacrament, ought of it self to
suffice to move us to the frequenting thereof: yet notwithstanding I judge it
expedient amongst the many profits which do resulte thereof in our Souls,
to write here a few, that these also may move us for to embrace more
willinglye, and to help our selves of so singular a benefit.

1 First therefore a man which does often CONFESS, and consequently does often
examine his Conscience, is more secure, (because of the fresh memory which he
has of his sins) to CONFESS them all: and so to make his Confession
sufficient and entire: wherefore he has also greater security of the
remission of his sins, and of the obtaining of the GRACE of GOD.

2 Those which often do Confess, partly because they were lately Confessed,
or shortly after are to return to Confession: partly also because of the
continual purpose which they have, and do often also renew a Christian Life,
and of not offending God: are more wary in keeping themselves from evil: more
easily they rise again, if they chance at any time to fall: and more stoutly
they fight and resist temptations.

3 By the frequenting of this Sacrament, a man does always obtain greater
light, not only for to know his sins, be they never so little: whereas in a
fair cloth, more easily are spied small spots, tha^ in that which is foul
and stained: But also, for to know the roots of them, which are his evil
inclinations and passions: Wherefore when the cause of any infirmity is once
found out, more easy is the cure thereof: and these persons now knowing
themselves, know how more easilye to keep themselves from the occasions of
sins, and to maintain their SPIRITVAL health.

4 The ofter a man does CONFESS, so much the more through the virtue of the
Sacrament, he gets always greater grace. And by how much more he
increases in grace: so much the more capable does be become, and more disposed
to receive yet greater grace in other Confessions which follow: whence
oftentimes it proceeds that a sinner often going to Confe^^ion, for the
number of acts which he does of penance, increases so much the more in this
virtue, that after many Confessions he rises again (as Saint THOMAS notes)
with greater grace and fervor of charity, than he had first before he falled.

5 By CONFFSSION, there is not only obtained remission of sins, but in great
part also the releasing of the pains due unto the same sins: And this as
well by the virtue of the Sacrament, as for that sensible pain of sorrow,
and, of that confusion and shame, which every one has in Confessing his
sins. And it may happen that a man so often be Confessed, and receive the
Sacramental Absolution, that at the length (as says S. THOMAS in the fourth
book of Sentences.) There may remain no pain at all for to suffer in
Purgatory.

6 To frequent this Sacrament, is a great help, and gives a great light unto
those which will make choice of an estate of life, wherein they may more
easily be saved: And this, partly through the grace which so often is
communicated unto them, whereby they are made more capeable of the divine
inspirations: partly through the light which the understanding receaueth, by
the which it may better know what is the will of God, and their greater good:
Partly also for the Spirtuall strength which is given to the will, for the
accepting of that which is inspired as better: and finally for the continual
counsel and direction of the Confessor, by whom in the steed of God they are
governed.

7 He that frequenteth this Sacrament of Confession, is neither so often, nor so
grievously tempted of the Devil. For even as the Spiders, do not weaue their
webbes, in the houses of rich persons, because they are often broken by such
as continually sweep them away: So in the Souls which are cleansed by often
Confession, the Devil cannot at his pleasure frame or make the snares of his
temptations: but rather seeing that his deceiptes are often disclosed unto such
as can apply remedy, and that he cannot escape without loss and confusion, in
the end, he runs away: because (as Saint I^ROME says) Look how the power
and forc^ of a Traitor, is brought to nothing, when the treason is revealed: so
those Infernal Thieves do run away, when they perceive that they are
discovered.

8 By how much the more seldom a man is Confessed, so much the more does he
loose remorse of Conscience, and becomes insensible. In such sort, that those
sins which are indeed grievous and Mortal, do seem unto him of no
importance: Wherefore with great facility he commits the^: whereas
contrariwise, those which often are Confessed, do get so great wariness and
purity of Conscience, that they feel remorse of never so small sins: which
causes that they abhor all grievous sins, and not so easily fall into them.

9 Even as those which seldom go to Confession, because they are ordinarily
in state of sin, do never find peace, nor quiet, although they had all the
consolations of the world: So on the contrary side, those which through the
often use of this Sacrament, do maintain themselves in grace, although they
suffer perhaps many troubles of this life: Yet notwithstanding by reason of
the testimony of a good Conscience, they always e^ioy an exceeding peace,
contentment, and tranquilitye of mind.

10 Even as those which often deal with the Puisition, and follow his
precepts, do live in good health, and the longer time. So those which often
discover the infirmities of their Conscience unto their Spiritual P^isition,
and of him receive remedies and cou^sailes, according unto which they govern
themsel^es: do more ea^lye conserve the health of grace, and more securelye
attain unto everlasting Salvation.

11 The hour of Death being so uncertain, by reason of the sudden and
infinite chances, which we see every day do happen unto men: with a more
secure Conscience, and with greater certainty of their Salvation, do such go
out of this life, as are woonte often to be Confessed, they being always
prepared for to die: than those which having bin long time from Confession, and
found unprovided by death, either have not time to make it, or if they do make
it, yet know not what it avails them, such Confession being made with small
preparation, and often imes rather for necessity than for any good desire.
Wherefore concerning this point does Saint AUGUSTINE say: I^ any man when he
is in extremity of sickness, shall demand the Sacrament of Confession, and
shall receive the same, and so depart out of this world reconciled: I confess
unto you that we will not deny him that which he demands: yet do we not
presume that he departs in good estate. He which whilst he is in health is
reconciled, and does Penance, and afterward continues for to live well: this
man goes secure out of this life: But he which at the latter end is
reconciled, and does not Penance, whether he depart from hence secure: I my
self am nothing secure: yet do I not say that he shall be damned, neither also
do I say that he shall be saved. This I know not, I presume not I pro^ise
not.

12 Finally all those great benefits and pritiledges, which (as Saint BERNARD
writes) Those persons do enjoy, who forsaking the world, do retire themselves
unto a Religious life: are also communicated after a sort, unto those which in
the world frequenting the Sacraments, do lead a Spiritual life: that is,
that a man, in this estate also lives more purelye, falls more rarely,
rises more speedily, walks more warely, is comforted more ordinarily,
reposeth more quietly, dies more confidently, is purged more quickly, is
rewarded more abundantly.

To this end therefore, for the comfort of those devout Souls, which desire
to conserve the^sel^es without spotte. I ^aue made this brief treatise, in
manner of a Spiritual Glass, in the which from time to time they beholding
them selves, may more easilye deserve their defectes, although never so small:
that they may afterward by Confession take them away and amend them: where as
the Spiritual persons which attend unto puritye of life, and aspire unto
Christian perfection, ought with all diligence to keep themselves, not only
from Mortal sins, from the which now by Gods Grace they are wont to
abstain but also from V^niall sins: And withal, to be be very careful to
bridle their passions, to reform their affections, and finally to remove as
much as they may out of their Souls all manner of imperfection.

Those therefore, which are wont often to be Confess^d, ought espec^ally in
four things to use great diligence. First, in the exami^ing of their
Conscience. Secondly, insorrowe for their sins. Thirdly, in the act it self
of Confession. Fourthly, in the purpose and means of their amendment.

Of the examining of Conse^ence.
Chap. 2.
CONCERNING the first, that is, the examination of Conscience: it helps very
much for Spiritual prosit, that every Eucning before going to rest, a man
collect himself a little, and do four things. First, that he give thanks unto
our Lord for the benefits received, and particularly of that day. Secondly,
that he Pray for grace and light to know his errors and faults. Thirdlye,
that he examine his Conscience, running over all the actions of that day,
whether he have with Thought, Word, or Decede, off^nded GOD, or his Neighbor.
Finally, if he find himself in any thing culpable, that he procure with
repentance, and with a firm purpose of amendment, and Confession, to return
into Grace with his divine Majesty.

Besides this also, when a man is to go to Confession, let him take a little
time, more or less, according to the time since he was last confessed, and
with greater diligence running over this examination following, let him gather
all his defects and sins which he has committed in all that time. Whereunto
will be no small help for those which have no greatmemorye, to note every day
in the examination which they make at night, such faults as they shall find:
to the end, that when they are to go to Confession, they may the better
remember themselves, and by lokeing upon them somewhat before, make their
Confession with more peace.

The manner of Examination of Conscience.
Chap. 3.
FIRST, let him examine himself about his last Confession, if he omited to
Confess any sin for forgetfulness, or malice.

If he have done his Penance, and performed the counsels and remedies
prescribed him by his Confessor.

Toward God. And first by Thought.
Chap, 4.
IF he have had any doubt or curiosity in matters of FAITH, or has given
credit to Dreams, South-fayings, or other Superstitions.

If he have had that memory of God which he ought: particularly in the MORNING
when he rises, and the EVINING when he goes to rest: asking pardon of his
sins, and commending himself with some PRAYER to his Maiesly.

If in his trot bles and necessities he has had confidence in GOD, and yielded
him thanks for the benefits received.

By Words.
Chap. 5.
THOSE that are bound to rehearse their Office, or other Prayers: if they have
said them with due devotion and attention.

If he have named vainlye the name of God, or complained of him, and of his
providence, when he was in adversity: and if he have spoken with small
reverence of Saints, and of Sacred things.

If he have sworn without reverence or truth, or necessitye: and what
intention he has had in swearing.

If in any accident concerning the honor of God he have omitted for any humane
respect to say and speak that which was agreeable to his glory: especially
at such time as he could, and was bound to do it.

If he have made any VOW which he has not observed.

By Deeds.
Chap. 6
IF on the Holy Days he has attended with particular care unto Devotion, and
to the honor of God: and particularlye if he have heard MASS, and procured
that such as are under his charge, have also heard the same.

If upon the Holy Days commanded he has labored, or caused others for to
labor, or to do any forbidden work.

If he have kept the VIGILS, and observed duly the FASTES of the CHVRCH.

If in respect of his health, or of any other thing, he has used any
superstition.

Toward his Neighbor. And first by Thought.
Chap. 7
IF he have been ready to think evil of others, and if in matters of
importance, he have made any rash judgment.

If he have borne hatred or rancour toward any.

If he have desired death, or other harm, or has had a mind to do any
displeasure to any man.

If he have envied others, being sorye for their good, or rejoicing at their
evil.

If he have had any disordered affection, or sensual, or carnal love toward
any person.

By Words.
Chap. 8
IF he have murmured, or detracted the good name of others, or falsely, or not
with right intention, has spoken evil of others, or revealed their secret
sins.

If he have spoken evil of his Prelates and Princes, and murmured against
them.

If he have given ear unto others which did murmur, or speak of unlawful
things, being cause with his harkening, that they went on in such speeches.

If he have omitted to use due correction to his Neighbor, when he was bound
and able to perform the same.

If he have spoken untruths, or with prejudice of others, exaggerated matters
more than they were.

If he have spoken injurious words, or mocked, or scoffed, or cursed others:
or wished any harm to his Neighbors, either alive or dead.

Those which are Parents, or Rulers of Families, if they have cursed or wished
any cuell to their Children, or others of the Family, or if they have not
reprehended them when it was convenient, nor procured to make them Learn
whatsoever a Christian ought to know.

If he have flattered others, or given them evil counsel, provoking them to
evil, or hindering them from that which is good, or in any other sort causing
them to be disolute, or to commit any sin.

If he have spoken of such things as are lascivious or unseemly: and if
herein he have given any evil edification, or scandal to his Neighbor.

By Deeds.
Chap. 9
IF he have been disobedient to his Father, or Mother, or Superiors, and have
not carried them that respect and honor which is due.

Those which have a Family, if they have behaved themselves evil toward the
persons thereof: or neglected to correct them, in things which concern the
offense of GOD, and the hurt of their souls.

If he have suffered himself to be overcome with choler: and if he have
done, or caused any evil to others.

If he have taken, or usurped any thing of others, or retained the hire of
others, or broken lawful promises.

If in buying or selling he have used fraud and deceit: or in other sort
damnified his Neighbor in Temporal things.

If he have omitted to give Alms, and to succor the poor: according to his
ability.

If for any fear, or humane respect, he have left undone any work
appertaining to the glory of GOD, his Own, or his Neighbors Salvation.

Toward himself. And first by Thought.
Chap. 10.
IF he have esteemed himself of more worth, or goodness than others, for any
inward or outward goods, which he thinks he has: taking therein vainglory,
and desiring to be for that cause more esteemed than others, or commended.

If he have lingered in idle, vain, or ambitious thoughts, taking there in
delight: or desired inordinately Honors, Riches, Dignities, etc.

Concerning Chastity: if he have had temptations of the flesh, or any evil
desire, or unclean thoughts, in which he has stayed, or taken delight, not
presenlye rejecting them.

By Words.
Chap. 11.
IF he have willinglye spoken of himself, and of his own affairs, amplifying,
or praising the same.

Of idle jesting, or vnse emelye talking.

If for any impatience, or despair, he has called on the devil, or wished
any harm to himself.

By Deeds.
Chap. 12.
IF with beholding, or toucing, or by other way, he have given occasion of any
temptation: or if he have done any other sin against Christian Modesty.

If he have given occasion unto any nightly illusion, or taken any delight or
liking therein.

Those which are young, and especially Women: if they have used superfluous
dresses for vanity, or with intention of pleasing others.

If in eating or drinking he have made any excess: or desired exquisite
things, using overmuch solicitudes to satisfy herein rather his sense than his
necessity.

Of the loss of TIME, or evil spending thereof in unlawful Games, and other
inconvenient pastimes.

If he have conuersed with dissolute persons, which provoke him to evil: or if
he have entered into any occasion or danger of sin.

If he have read lascivious, or prohibited BOOKS.

Besides all the aforesaid things: such as have Offices, or particular degrees
and exercises, must examine themselves of the defaultes which therein are wont
to happen, aecording to the obligation of every one.

Finallye concerning this EXAMEN, it is expedient to admonish this one thing:
that when a man has EXAMINED himself, it is not necessary afterward,
neither ought he when he CONFESSES, to discourse through all these points: but
it suffiseth to accuse himself only of those, whereof in his Examining he
found himself faulty. For it is not meant by this EXAMEN, to make men's
CONSCIENCES become scrupulous, but only to set down that which may serve for all: althought it is certain that in many of these points all persons are not
wont to offend.

Of the sorrow for Sins.
Chap. 13.
AFter that thou have examined thy self: making reflection on those sins
which thy Conscience is a witness of against thee: First thou shall conceive
thereof a confusion of thy self: Considering thy small amendment and spiritual
profit, whereas going so often to Confession, notwithstanding thou never
want matter to Confess, but rather always find in thy self the very
same defectes. For which cause thou have great cause to fear, that thou go
not with that sorrow and effectual purpose which were convenient, but rather
for a certain custom: Wherefore thou regarding so little thy amendment: it is
to be feared, that God will withdraw from thee his grace, and it shall be
said unto thee: Because thou art lukewarm, I will begin to vomit thee forth.

Then Considering the great bond thou have to ward the Divine goodness, and
how much thy most loving Redeemer, has done and suffered for to draw thee
to his love, and to the observation of his holy Commandments: seeing how
thou do thus render him evil for good: thou shall conceive sorrow of thy
so great malice and ingratitude: and humbly asking pardon, thou shall desire
him, that he will voutsafe with his Heavenly grace to reform thy affections
and evil inclinations: that for the time to come thou may no more offend him.

Finally thou shall make a sirme purpose to amend thy life, asking of his
Divine Majesty Grace and help for that effect.

Of Confession.
Chap. 14
WHEN thou go to CONFESSION, consider that whenever thou go to receive
this Sacrament, thou go to wash thy self in the Blood of CHRIST our
Savior, the virtue whereof works in the SACRAMENTS. See therefore with how
great reverence and thanksgiving thou ought to go to receive such a
Medicine, which so dearly cost him who made it for thee.

Then in Confession it self thou shall endeavor to observe three things.

First: to Confess entirely all thy sins which thou do remember, and of
which thy Conscience has remorse. Explicating with all the kinds of them, the
number, and the necessary circumstances, as much as possibly thou can.

Secondlye, to procure a plainness and clearenesse in speaking, which may
proceed from an ernest desire of being well understood, to the end that
thou ma^est be the better helped and directed by thy GHOSTLY FATHER: Whereas the
Scripture says: Qui abscondit scelera sua non dirigetur. Who hides his
offenses, shall not be directed. Thou must therefore tell them sincerelye not
hiding, not excusing, nor diminishing any thing: without superfluous words, or
telling of stories, which make not to the matter: and much less telling the
sins of others, but accusing thy self alone.

Thirdly thou must go to Confession, with preparation not only to receive the
Penance, and to make such Satisfaction as thy Confessor shall enioine thee: but
also to admit all the aduises and remedies which for thy sins, and greater
Spiritual good shall be given thee by the same. For all in vain does a sick
person open his infirmities to the Physician, if afterward he refuse to take
the Medicines, and to observe the orders and rules which the Physician has
prescribed.

Of the purpose and means of Amendment.
Chap. 15
AFTER thou have made thy Confession, thou must procure to observe three
things.

The first is, presentlye to perform the Penance enioined, renewing thy
purpose of abstaining from those sins which thou have Confessed, and from all
others: and of avoiding the occasions of the same.

The second is, that thou take such means, as may help thee for thy
amendment: having particular regard of some defectes which thou think are
the cause and root of all the rest, and procuring to arm thy self against
the same.

1 The remedies which may be used for to root out any vice, or imperfection,
are either general or particular. Amongst those which are general, the first
is: a firm resolution not to commit any more the same sin: which purpose
thou must often renew, especially in the MORNING, and whenever it happneth
that thou fall into the same.

2 It will help much, to fly the occasions, which are wont to induce unto
the same sin: as sportes, euill-companye, familiaritye with suspeccted persons,
curiosity in beholding or hearing, and overmuch talk: for it is written, that
Death enters in by the Windows.

3 It avails also much, diligently for to resist at the very beginning of
the temptations, driving away from thee the spark of the evil thought,
before it enter and set fire on thy HEART. Which a man may do by present
recourse unto PRAYER, or by naming the most Holy name of JESUS, or by signing
himself with his Holy SIGN, or by present setting before his eyes the
pitiful figure of CHRIST on the CROSS, Wounded and peirsed for the
punishment of our sins.

4 Very profitable also for the conseruing of the purpose of not offending
GOD, is the often hearing of the Word of GOD, and reading of good BOOKS, and
avoiding to read evil and vain or lascivious BOOKS: For the Word of GOD
collecteth the HEART, mitigateth PASSIONS, and fills our WILL with good and
Holy desires.

5 To the same end helps also to go always in the presence of god, as of a
witness of our thoughts and operations, of whom after we are to be judged.

6 When any person feels any rebellion of the flesh: very profitable it is
to use the body with austerity, as well in Sleeping, Eating, Drincking, and
Clothing, as in other things which might be pleasing thereunto. For whereas
the flesh is a nourisher and kindler of al disordered Passions: how much the
more weak and feeble it shall be: so much the more feeble and fainte will the
Passions be also, which from thence shall proceed.

7 It is a very great remedy also for to shun idleness, which is the
fountain and food of all vices, always procuring to have some honest
exercise of mind or body, that the Devil may never find place in the soul.

8 Much also helps heereunto, the consideration of such things, as may
induce a man unto fear: as of Death, of the final Judgment, and of the
pains Everlasting, prepared for sinners. Or the consideration of the benefits
of God, and of his Divine promises, for to stir us up unto his love, and to
the hatred of all that which is offensive to his Divine goodness.

9 Finally a most effectual remedy is to frequent the use of the most holy
Sacraments of Confession and Communion. For (as the Apostle says) the
principal remedy against sin, is the grace of God, which by these
Sacraments is obtained: besides that they be instituted by Christ our Savior,
as certain Heavenly medicines, not only for to deliver us from sins: but
also for to heal our disordered affections, to suppress our passions, to
remedy our weakness: and finally, as certain kindlers of love, whereby our
WILL being inflamed, may more easilye resist our evil inclinations, and
overcome all the temptations of the World, the Flesh and the Devil.

Besides all these there be also other remedies more particular and proper for
every defecte, which may be used and applied according to the counsel of
the Confessor. And both these and the other also ought to be admitted with
great courage and perseverance, and with a sure hope of victory, grounded on
the help and grace of Christ our Lord.

The third and last thing which a man ought to observe after Confession
(because it is written) that it is not sufficient to forsake evil, but it is
necessary also for to do good:) is, for to use all manner of diligence for
the recompense of sins which we have committed in the time past, with new
services and fervor: and to procure by the memory of the evils committed, to
become every day more humble and fervent in the exercise of good Works:
occupying our selves not only in works of Penance, and of Devotion, but more
particularly in the works of Charity, and mercy toward our Neighbor. For as
it is written, They which shall use mercy, shall also find mercy before
Almightye God.

A MEDITATION FOR THE HOLY COMMUNION.
THE PREPARATION FOR the Meditation.
WHEREAS such is the excellency of the Sacrament of the BODY and BLOOD of our
LORD, that if thou hadest all the purity of Angels, and the holiness of Saint
JOHN BAPTIST: thou should notwithstanding in no sort be worthy to receive
it: for this cause in that wherein human frailtye does fail (whereas our
LORD will so have it, and so commands) thou shall run unto the help of his
grace, asking him a great hunger and burning desire of this holy Meat, and
that with a most profound humilitye and reverence thou may approach to this
Sacrament, to the end that it may work in thee those effects, which it uses
to cause in the worthy receivers.

Points for the Meditation.
THINK with thy self that thou art mui^ed of our Lord, that thou may be
made worthy to sit in the company of the Angels at his Table, by those most
loving words: Venite, comedite Panem meum, and bibite vinum quod miscui vobis.
Comedite amict, and bibite, and inebr^amini carissimi. Come, eat my Bread,
and drink the Wine, which I have mingled for you. Eat O my frindes, and
drink, and fill your selves O my dearest.

2 Consider how pretiouse a meat this is, and how dainty a banquet, to the
which our LORD inuiteth thee, that thou may be fed therewith. And verily it
is no other, but thy very LORD and God, which was made man for thee: and thou a
creature so weak, and full of all malice and filth, go for to receive thy
Creator and Maker, that infinite power, and sovereign beuty: thou miserable
man, go to receive that God which having created thee according to his own
Image, and afterward, for the great love he bears thee, having taken upon him
thy nature and likeness, desires to come and dwell with thee, that thou
may be united unto him, in such sort that thou may become one selfsame
thing with him. And if that good ZACHEVS esteemed himself happy, only because
he might see Christ: what felicitye is that of a Soul, that she may when
she pleases converse with her God, speak unto him face to face, and harbor
him in her very breast!

3 But on the other-side if Saint JOHN BAPTIST sanctified in his Mothers womb,
and chosen of God for his forerunner, thought not himself worthy to touch
Christ, nor to loose the latchet of his shoes: how shall I unclean sinner
presume to touch him, and to receive him in my house!

4 If Saint PETER prince of the Apostles, reputed himself unworthy that Christ
should remain in his ship, saying: Exi a me, quia homo peccator sum Domine:
Depart from me O Lord, for I am a sinner: What shall I a miserable wretch say,
and how shall I presume to approach unto him, and to receive him within my
Soul!

5 If for to eat the Loaves of Proposition were necessary so great puritye and
cleanenesse (as said ACHIMFLECH the high priest to DAVID) Si mundi sunt pueri,
mancent: What shall I do, a filthy sinner, how shall I frame to eat with my
unclean mouth, the Bread of Angels!

6 If for the eating of the Paschal Lamb which was a figure of this Divine
Sacrament, it was necessary for to eat it with wild Lettice, with Unleavened
Bread, and with the Loins girded, and so many other observations which the
holy Scripture sets down: how shall I presume to dra^e near for to eat
the true Lamb without spot, which is the Son of God, with out having sorrow
for my sins, and without procuring to be free from the leaven and malice of
sin, and knowing my self to be so far from that purity which is required for
to receive this most divine Sacrament!

7 If OZA the Priest only because he touched the Arc of the Testament, not
with such reverence as he ought, was punished by God so severely with sudden
death: how much more justly ought I to fear, who not only go to touch the
Arc of the testament, but the most divine Body of Christ our Lord, the true
Arc, in whom are laid up all the treasures of the wisdom of God.

8 If the Bethsamites were also punished so seuerelye by God, with the death of
fifty thousand of them only because they had beholden curiously and without
reverence the Arc of the Testament: how much greater reason have I of fear to
come to this Divine Sacrament, which I must not only behold, but touch also,
and receive within my Soul!

9 After this, reflecting thy eyes upon thy self, see a little what life thou
have lead, and consider how often thou have made more account of a point of
honor or credit of a little chasfe of worldly i^terest, and of the dirte of
carnal de^ights, than of the grace and frindship of God, of the glory and
bliss everlasting: thou boarest the name of a Christian, but thy works were
indede rather of a Devil: wherefore thy life has bin rather after the manner
of those infernal ministers, which making show of worshipping Christ, said
unto him: Aue Rex Iudeorum: And on the other-side spatt in his face, and
buffeted him.

10 Thou therefore being such a one, with what face will thou come to this
Sacred Table, and presume to bring into thy House that mirror of infinite
purity and cleanenesse, and to lodge the everlasting Word Incarnate in that
House which has been a harbor of beasts, and a neest of serpents.

11 On the other-side, although thou know thy self thus miserable, and
unworthy of all good: yet must thou not for all this refrain, but with greater
confidence repair unto thy God: Considering that that Lord which with so great
and loving kindness inuiteth thee, is the very same which traueled in this
world, and holds the same Doctrine now in Heaven, which he taught here in
Earth: and bears us the same love, and the same care, and desire which here
below he had for to save sinners. He therefore said when he was amongst us.
Those that are in health have no need of the Physician, but those which are
sick. And in like manner. I am come not to call the just, but those which are
sinners. And in another place: Come unto me all you which labor and are
burdened, and I will refreshe you: So good also is this Lord, that he never
rejected any Sinner, or Weakeling, which was desirous to come unto him.
Wherefore he refused not MARY MAGDALEN, nor the Leper, nor the Woman which by
touching him, was cured of the flux of blood: yea rather, as we read, all the
blind, lame, and other diseased persons sought to go unto christ, and to touch
him: for out of him there issued a virtue which healed all.

12 Then, O my Lord God, I am infirm, and weak, I have great need for to
come unto thee my true Physician: if I be a sinner I must go and seek out him
which may iusti fieme: if I be full of disordered passions, and grievously
laden with the weight of my sins: to who^ should I run for ease, but unto
thee, who only can and wilt help me! Far greater are my sins than those
of MARY MAGDALEN: a more ugly Leper I am, than he which came unto thee: and in
my soul I suffer another manner of flux, and far more dangerous than that
Woman. I am also blind when I see not thee my true light: I am lame when I
walk not with paces of love toward thee: I am maimed, when I exercise not my
self in good works, and do not help my Neighbors as I ought. And therefore
al these my necessities and infirmities, do force me to run unto thee for
help and remedy having confidence in thy goodness, that as thou did not
reiecte them, so thou will not reject me: because thou said with thy most
holy Mouth: That those which come unto thee, thou will never cast forth.

The Prayer.
WITH very great reason sweet LORD, that holy Prophet, astonished at thy
great goodness, and at thy exceeding love which thou bear toward man spoke
those words: Quid est homo quia magnificas eum, aut quid apponis erga eum cor
tuum: What am I O my God, of what worth or merit, that thou the most blessed
and most glorious God, who have no need of me, nor of any thing of mine,
should have me in such estimation, and procure in all manner possible to
exalt me and magnify me, and communicate thy self, and what soever is thine
so liberallye unto me! What am I but a little dust and ashes! And if I will
compare my self unto the height of thy Godhead, I shall utterly fail in my
sight, and know my self altogether to be nothing. And yet notwithstanding
behold thou inclinest the heavens, and voutfafest to come unto me, to repair
the ruins of my Soul, and to wash away, not with the water of the Red Sea,
but with thy own Blood, my filthiness: and to satisfy my deadly hunger, not
with the Manna of the desert, but with thy own supersubstantiall and most
Divine flesh. If that good Centurion, whose faith thou preferredst before all
Israel, understanding that thou were coming unto him thought not himself
worthy that thou should come near unto his house: and thy holy Forerunner
which was sanctified before he was borne, and then whom amongst all men there
was not a greater, when he saw thee come unto him, did prostrate himself
with so great humility at thy feet, saying: Tu venis ad me! How much more I
miserable wretch, all borne in sin, and of so many several ingratitudes and
offenses toward thee, as have been thy benefits toward me, which I have
repaied with so unworthy exchange: I which for my wickedness am not worthy to
lift up my eyes unto Heaven, nor that the earth should uphold me: and if thou
would enter into judgment with me, all the pains of this, and of the other
life, were not sufficient for to punish the thousand part of my demerites,
thou coming with so great love and gentleness unto me: ought to prostrate my
self unto the earth: yea, if it were possible to lay my self under the earth,
and with far greater reason and marvel, cry out, Domine tu venis ad me! O
LORD do thou come to me! I am not worthy that thou enter into my House, but
speak but one only Word, and my Soul shall be safe.


