A MANVAL OF PRAYERS USED BY THE FATHERS OF THE Primative Church, for the most
part within the four first hundred years of Christ, and al before the end of
the sixth hundred year: divided into several Chapters.

Wherein by the very prayers of the Apostles, and their successors, (here
related without any word or syllable, added or altered) all the chiefest
questions now in controversy, are inuincibly proved for the holy doctrine of
the present Roman Church; by which we are instructed how to believe, and what
to practice in devotion.

By R. B. P.

Simb. Apostol. I believe the holy Catholic Church.

With License. 1618.

TO OUR MOST Renowned Queen Anne: And al her Right honorable, and other Ladies.
MOST GRACIOUS QVEENE.
RIght noble, and other worthy Ladies; as by place of dignity you are
honorable in this world, and honor is that which many of you enough, if not to
much, affect to have: and being had, continue as careful to increase, and
fearful not to loase it: So seeing you consist (as al men and women do) of
two portions: the chief and best by nature immortal, and the other, after a
short life and death, to be clothed with immortality; and al honors, and
pleasures here, be fading and mortal, and no objects of delight for creatures
immortal: It is wisdom in time, for all that love and desire honor, to provide
how to join honor and immortality together: for most sure it is, that both
you, and al humane kind shall be immortal, and if we seek not here for a
better honor then this which is mortal, we shall remain without honor, and be
in dishonor for ever. And al who have or claim title unto honor, must also
render true and due honor to every one more honorable in degree. For, to
render honor is the urgent and bynding law of God, Nature, and Nations.

But they which be often honorable in this world, are not always so strictly
bound for accepting or seeking honor. And because I do not doubt, but many,
or most of you, are expert enough in the second case of admitting honor unto
your s^^ues, and as negligent, or ignorant in the former, so generally
commanding precept of performing honor, office, and duty: I have (to condemn
ignorance, wilfulnes, and al vain euasions) perused the books of armorie, of
the best and most anutient Heraldes, in the Religion of Christ: next under him
his holy Apostles, their happy successors, the practices of Apostolic and al
Churches, with the learned virtuous Fathers of this sacred Primative unspotted
Church, of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, and none after the sixth
hundred year after Christ: and out of them gathered together, and set down in
this breife Summarie of true honor: To whom, when, where, how, and what
honor, these most divine and honorable persons, yielded unto others: nor by
any private inference or exposition of mine own, but in the very words and
prayers them selves, without any syllable added, or altered; by which those
holy Churches and Fathers, publikly professed and proposed to al posterities,
that inward faith which they believed; and also, that office, duty, and honor,
which they and al good Christians owe, and ought to render. That except any
men or women, naming them selves Christians, will be so impious Antichristians,
to condemn these most holy guides, and Pastors in the kingdom of Christ, and
now by these professions of their faith, and performinges of duty and honor,
glorious and happy Saints in heaven, and our most B. Savior and Redemer him
self, Christ Jesus, to be a seducer: the chiefest controversies of this time in
Religion, being in this short Treatise, by these invincible Arguments and
authorities demonstratiuely proved, made evident, and adjudged, for the most
sacred doctrine of the present Roman Church, will have an end: the wilful and
obstinate inuincibly refuted, the ignorant truly instructed, the unjustly
persecuted truly rewarded and pitied, most sacred preisthood and Sacrifice, by
many so prophanly used, will here thus proved appear most reverent, holy, and
glorious. To be breife, what homage, honor, duty, love, pity, compassion, or
releife we owe, and must render, to the Church Triumphant, Militant, or
patient, that we may truly, with the other Articles of our holy Creed, believe
and confess the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints: they are
here thus manifestly and undeniably determined: and al chiefest matters now
called into question, so decided. Diverse prayers of this subject, I have wholly
here omitted, being already lately published in my Manual of Meditations and
Prayers. And in some few Controversies (though of least moment) because their
prayers do not belong to al estates for which this book is published, I have
been silent. The cause why I principally dedicate it to you, is not to make you
patrons of the prayers of Saints, and their holy faith, but to make them
Patrones unto you: not to constitute you Judges of the honor which is due to
the High Queen and Lady in Heaven, but to make you ladies there: nor to make
your unlearned sex vmpeare over the whole Church of God, but to procure you to
be true members of that holy company, forth of which there is no salvation;
not because I would exclude your Lords, whom I duly honor, but to have it
presented to them by you, and you in knowing, and performing the true honors
and duties here remembered, to be more honorable both to them and others; and
them, by this and your example, to learn and do the honors and duties they
owe to others. Neither do I omit the inferior of your kind, to be grateful
unto you, (though the virtuous among you, I honor with double honor) that
live in state. But because virtue or vice, is often learned from the higher, I
wish you the first, and you therein to be imitated, and made a Rule. And so in all duty I shall ever rest

Your Majesty's dutiful subject and Ladyships. true servant and friend. R. B. P.

The Table of the contents.
The first Chapter contains prayers concerning Justification, which is not by
faith alone. The 2. Chapter; Justification and merit of Alms, Sacrifice,
suffering persecution, Prayers of Saints, and other good deeds in grace. The
3. Chapter, of the Communion of the Militant Church, with the Triumphant, in
honor, prayer, and protection; and first of our B. Lady S. Marie, the Mother
of God. The 4. Chapter, of the same. The 5. Chapter, of Prayer and honor to
the holy Angels, and their Protection. The 6. Chapter, of prayer and honor to
all the Saints in heaven in general, and their protection. The 7. Chapter, to
Saints in particular, deceased before the Passion of Christ. The 8. Chapter,
of prayer and honor unto, and the patronage of Saints in particular, after
the Passion of Christ. The 9. Chapter, the old Lytanies of the Church. The 10.
Chapter, Reverence of holy Relics. The 11. Chapter, prayers for one departed
out of this life. The 12. Chapter, prayers for all faithful deceased. The 13.
Chapter, prayers before receiving the B. Sacrament, proving it to be the true
Body, and Blood of Christ. The 14. Chapter, prayers after receiving, this B. S.
proving the same. The 15. Chapter, of Sacramental Confession, a due preparation
for that B. Sacrament. The 16. Chapter, the external holy preisthood, and
Sacrifice of Christians, Christ's true Body and Blood offered both for the
living and dead. The 17. Chapter, the preeminence of S. Peter, and his
Successors, in the Apostolic Roman Sea, in this holy preisthood. The 18.
Chapter, what diversity of orders belong unto holy Preisthood; their Vows,
Virginity, Chastity, and al degrees of the Church.
PRACTICE AND PRAYERS OF THE PRIMATIVE CHVRCH.
How Man is or may be justified: but not by Faith only.
Chapter 1.
Whosoever will be saved; S. Athanasius Creed.
before al things it is needeful that he hold the Catholic Faith. Which
except every one shall keep whole and inuiolate; without doubt, he shall perish
for ever. And the Catholic Faith is this, that we worship one God in
Trinity, and Trinity in unity etc. But it is necessary to eternal
salvation, that he also believe faithfully, the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus
Christ etc. At whose coming, al men must rise with their bodies; and render
account of their own deeds. And they which have done good things shall go into
life eternal: and they which have done evil things, into everlasting fire.
This is the Catholic faith, which except every man faithfully and firmly
believe, he can not be saved.

August. meditat. cap. 33.
O Lord, I beseech, entreat, and desire thee, increase my faith, increase my
hope, increase my Charity. Cause us by thy grace, to be always steadfast in
fatih, and effectual in work, that by right faith, and worthy works of faith
by thy mercy, we may come to eternal life.

August. Sermon. 39. de verbis Domini.
Decline from evil and do good, and when thou have done this, secure expect
life; and then boldly thou shall say; O Lord, I have done what thou have
commanded, pay unto me what thou have promised.

S. Ephrem Ser. de laud omnium Martyrum.
O most holy Martyrs, we beseech you, that you would entreat our Lord for us
wretched sinners, that he would power his divine grace upon us, which may
continually lighten and illuminate our hearts with the beam of holy
Charity, by which we may be able to love him with all our heart, and with all
our mind.

Gregor. natal. SS. Innocent. These Innocents none above two years old, could
have actual faith: much less the new found faith.
O Lord help us we beseech thee, by the prayer of those Saints, which not yet
able to profess thy Son with humane voice, were crowned with celestial
glory, for his Nativity. O Lord we beseech thee, let them obtain for us,
purity of minds, whose innocence, we solemnly celebrate.

O God look upon us, and make, S. Iacobus in Mis.
that our Oblation sanctified by the holy Ghost, be acceptable for
propitiation of our sins, and those sins which the people by ignorance
haith committed: and for the rest of the souls of them which are departed
before us.

O Lord God, Seuerus Patriarch. Alexand. de tit. Bap.
grant unto us that with joy we may keep and fulfill thy commandementes all the
days of our life.

There remain (says the holy Apostle Paul) Hope, Faith, and Charity, S.
Gaudentius Bririen. Epis. Ser. 10. ad Neophitos, An. 386. 1. Cor. 13.13.
these three: but the greatest of these is Charity. Faith is that, by which we
conf^sse the Trinity to be of one substance. Hope is that, by which we hope
the Resurrection of the flesh; and rewards to be hereafter for merits.
Charity is that, by which we so love Christ, that we would suffer our selves
with a willing mind, to be put to death for his name. But because al which are
baptized in the Apostolic faith, believe surely in the Trinity, and hope for
things to come: yet al can not say forth of affection with the holy Apostle,
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? tribulation? or distress? or
persecution? or famine? or nakedness? or danger? or the sword? Therefore some
of our water pottes hold two measures, He there expounds Christ's first
miracle of water turned into wine, some pots holding two measures others three.
Io. 2.
but some three measures. Therefore our Lord Jesus rich toward al, and oueral
who call upon him, vouchsaife to give, that we may receive three measures
perfect in his love. Also that without war of persecution, constant in the
love of God, with prepared minds, for all suffering of present pains, we may
well Merit the Renowned crown of a vanquishing conscience, by the triumph of
secret conflict.

Gotticum Mis. sale antiquis. To. 6. Bibl. SS. Part.
Let us with prayer, beseech our holy and blessed God of reward, entreating for
our brethren and sisters, by whose ministry and cost, they which are needy in
the Church, do not suffer want, that our Lord will communicate spiritual riches
unto them, which give relief of worldly substance, to the poverty of faithful
souls by our Lord Jesus Christ.

Merciful God, grant unto the prayers of thy servants, that whosoever;
^indful of thy heavenly precept^s, do minister necessaries to the poor, may be
crowned with incorruptible and heavenly glory, of thy miseration and mercy,
by our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

O God from whom Judas the traitor received the punishment of his offense,
Supr. Ord. Romans antiq. in ser. S. i^ caena Domini.
and the theife the reward of his confession: grant unto us the effect of our
holy petition, that as our Lord Jesus Christ in his Passion, gave to them both
the stipendes of their merits; so he will bestow upon us the grace of his
Resurrection.

Christ our God and our Lord, Missa Indor antiq.
who by his grace has made us worthy to receieu his precious Body and Blood:
grant that we may please him in our words, deeds, and thoughts, that this
Sacrament which we have received, and shall receive, be unto us a pledge of
remission of our debtes, and great hope of Resurrection from the dead.

O Lord our God, Can. universe. seu Mis. Ethiop.
make us pure and clean from al il odoures of feines, and worth i^ of thy
(...) and (...).

O lover of men, make us just without spotte, with gladness all the days of our
life. O Lord our God, protect, nourish, and govern us, by the powers of the
Princes of thy Angels. Separate us from al evil works, conioine us with all
good works by Christ thine only Son.

Aug. l. medit. cap. 20.
O house of God, bright and bewtiful, I have loved the dwelling place of the
glory of our Lord my possessor and maker. Speak thou, ask thou him, that he
may make me worthy of the participation of thy glory. I do not despair to
obtain it; olny let thy merits help me.

Mis. Indor. antiq.
O my Lord, I beseech thee, that this oblation, may be to us, o my Lord, a
loosing of our debtes, and remission of sins, and new life in the heavenly
kingdom.

Muzarab. in fest. S. Iacobi.
O Lord my God, grant to me so to receive the body and blood of thy So^n, our
Lord Jesus Christ, that by it I may merit to receive remission of al my
sins, and to be filled with thy holy Spirit, (...) our God, who live and
reignest world without end. Amen.

O God by whom we reprove the error of them which think, August. lib. 5.
soliloq. c. 1.
there be no merits of souls with thee.

O Lord let blessed Agatha the Martyr, Gregor. in natal. S. Agathae.
who has been acceptable to thee both by merit of Chastity, and profession
of thy virtue: obtain Pardon for us.

O holy and blessed Paula: Hieronim. epist. 27. ad Eustochium,
thy faith and works, associate thee to Christ.

That Prayers, Sacrifice, suffering persecution for Christ, Almes-deedes and
other good works, done in grace are meritorious.
Chapter 2.
O Lord we reverence the memory first of the glorious always Virgin Marie,
Mother of God, Gregor. l. Sacrament. in Ordnar. Missae. et Mis. Romans antiq.
and our Lord Jesus Christ. Also of the blessed Apostles and Martyrs Peter and
Paul, Andrew, James, John, Thomas, James, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon
and Thadee: Linus, Cletus, Clemens, Xistus, Cornelius, Ciprian, Laurence,
Chrisogonus, John and Paul, Cosmas and Damianus, and of al thy Saints; by
whose merits and prayers, vouchsaife to grant, that in all things, we may be
defended by the help of thy protection.

Gregor. l. Sacram. in natal. S. Io. Baptist.
O God almighty, we beseech thee that by the intercession of B. S. John Baptist,
we may be defended. That he may obtain indulgence and favor for us, that we
may be helped by his merits; that by his patronage meriting it, we may have
increase of security.

Grant we beseech thee, that thy family, by the intercession of thy
forerunner, blessed John Baptist, may be freeed from al sins, and merit to
come to him whom he foretold.

S. Ephrem.
O most gentle God, by the prayers of the Mother of God, ever a Virgin, and the
heavenly army, and company of Angels, Cherubins, Seraphines Prophets,
Martyrs, godly Rulers: by the intercessions of holy Religious people, and
supplications of all the blessed, have mercy on me thy creature.

O God mercifully hear us, Gregor. she. in Octau. Apost.
and grant that by the merits of blessed Peter, and his coapostle Paul, we
may obtain, the glory of eternity.

O God almighty we beseech thee, In vigil. S. Andr. Apost.
that blessed Andrew thy Apostle, may obtain help for us. Let us be protected
by his merits.

Pelag. 2. epist. 4. ad Episco. Germ. et Gal. Greg. in vigil Apost. Pet. and
Paul. in praef. S. Gregory teaches the like prayers of the Church before his
time of the other Apostles, in particular, S. James, S. Matthew, S. John, S.
Thomas, Matthias, Philip, James.
O Lord it is worthy and just, right and helping to salvation, humbly to pray
thee, that thou, o eternal Shepherd, wilt not forsake thy flock, but wilt
keep thy people with continual protection, by thy blessed Apostles, that it
may be governed by the same Rulers, who being the vicars of thy work, thou have
appointed Pastors to rule it.

Gregor. sup. in natal. SS. Abdon et Sennen.

Natal. S. Hermet.


O God grant to thy servants, that by the merits of thy Saints, Abdon and
Sennen making intercession for us, we may deserve to be delivered from al
adversities.

O Lord let the intercession of blessed Hermes thy Martyr, not cease to pacify
thy justice, and make our service devout unto thee.

Natal. S. Cornel. et Ciprian.
O Lord by the intercession of thy Saints Cornelius and Ciprian, turn^ from us
al evils, which we justly deserve.

Nntal. S. Georgii.
We humbly beseech thee o God omnipotent, that by the intercession of B. George,
thy Martyr, thou will grant us worthily to serve thee. O Lord cleanse us from
al guilt of our sins, by the intercession of blessed George thy Martyr.

Natal. S. Anastas.
Grant o Lord, that the guiftes, which we offer, may be to the help of our
salvation, the merit of blessed Anastasia making intercession for us.

Natal. S. Cecil.
O God we beseech thee, that by the intercession of blessed Cecilie, we may
deserve to receive the benefits of thy gift.

Natal. S. Saturn.

S. Greg. sup. has above 50. other the like, used by the Church before his
time.

Prudentius to S. Vincentius in Him. S. Vincentii.


O God grant us to be helped by the merits of blessed Saturninus thy Martyr.

O twice renowned, be present now and receive the humble words of them that
pray unto thee, and be an effectual orator for our offense at the throne of
the Father. We beseech thee by thy self, by that prison, the increase of thy
(...); by thy bonds, flames, hooks, the block of thy prison; by those
potsheardes, The pauement of his prison strowed with sharp pieces of
potsherdes, whereon his naked body after other torments, did lie.

Sophron. Hierosol. Encom. Angel.


by which thou obtained victory, by which, we that come after thee, with
reverence kiss thy bed: have mercy on our prayers, that Christ being
pacified will not impute our sins unto us.

O most laudable and excellent spirits, openly propose the infinite mercy of
God, praying the bountiful and gentle God, that by your intercession, he will
vouchsaife to admit, all the afflictions, and sickness, and calamities, which
in all my life I have suffered, for a recompense of my sins, and release and
pardon of the condemnation and greauous torments which I have justly deserved,
and account them in their stead and place.

Of the Communion of the Church (...) with the Triumphant by Prayer and honor
to the Saints there, by us on earth: and their patronage unto us and first of
the most B. Virgin Marie.
Chapter. 3.
S. Ephrem orat. de laudibus Sanctis. Dei matris.
O Virgin vouchsaife, that I thy servant may praise thee. Hail most bright, and
most bewtiful vessel of God, Hail Lady Marie fuf of grace: Hail among women
most blessed Virgin. Hail most shyning star, from which Christ went forth.
Hail most glorious light, Mother and Virgin. Hail Lady higher then al. Hail
song of the Cherubins, and Himne of Angels. Hail peace, joy, and salvation of
the world. Hail gladness of mankind. Hail praise of the Fathers, and honor of
the Prophets. Hail beauty of Martyrs, and crown of Saints, Hail glory of
the godly. Hail most excellent ornament of the heavenly holies. Hail most
worthy miracle of the world. Hail tree of life, joy, and pleasure. Hail quiet
Haven, and deliueresse of those that be troubled. Hail the helper of them that
be in danger. Hail ^^ou^^ of grace and consolation. Hail refuge of sinners.
Hail hope of all that be virtuous, and afflicted with adversities. Hail Queen
and defense both of men and women. Hail most glorious Mediatrix of the world.
Hail doare of heaven. Hail opening of the gates of Paradise. Hail key of
heavens, and the kingdom of Christ.

O immaculate, unspotted, S. Ephrem orat. de sanctis. Dei genetrice.
uncorrupted, chaste Virgin, Spouse of God, our Lady, only hope of the
dispaired, help of the oppressed, and most speedy aid of those that run
unto thee, and refuge of al Christians: admit my prayer, most vile, and
uttered with unclean lips; and also entreat thy Son my Lord and God, with
thy motherly gentleness, that he may also open unto me, those most merciful
bowels, of his piety: and setting aside mine innumerable sins, convert me to
penance, and grant me truly to fulfill his commandementes.

O merciful, gentle, and bountiful Lady, be always present unto me; in this
life an earnest protecti^^ and helper, driving back mine enemies invasions,
and bringing me to salvation, and in the last moment of my life, keep my
wretched soul, driving far from it the vgsome sight of wicked devils, and in
the terrible day of Judgment, delivering me from everlasting damnation; lastly
making me heir of that inaccessible glory, of thy Soon and God. Which by
thine intercession and favor I beseech thee again and again, most holy
Lady, Mother of God, that I may obtain by thy grace, mercy and gentleness of
thine only begotten Son our Lord, and God, and Savior Jesus Christ.

As thou art the Mother of the most merciful God; so mercifully receive me a
sinner: be present with me, o merciful, gentle, and bountiful Virgin.

S. Ephrem in lamen. Sanctis. Dei genetricis etc.
O immaculate and blessed Mother, (without sin) of thy Son, and God of al,
pure, sound, most sacred; we praise thee, we bless thee, as full of grace, who
broughtest forth Christ. We al prostrate ourselves to thee, we al beseech thee.
Deliver us o unspotted, from al necessity, from al temptations of the devil.
Be our Reconciliatrix and Advocate in the hour of Judgment. Deliver us from the
fire to command darkness: and vouchsaif us the glory of thy Son; for thou art
the most holy hope of Christians with God.

To whom be honor world without end. Amen.

O holy and immaculate Virgin Marie Mother of God, August. meditat. c. 40.
and Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, vouchsaife to make intercession for me,
to him whose Temple thou deseruedst to be.

I beseech the Intercession of blessed Marie the Virgin; Ambros. orat. praeparat.
that my prayer may be effectual.

O holy Mother of God Virgin Marie, pray for us. Greg. in Antiphonar.


O Queen of heaven and Lady of earth, ever most holy Virgin, Io. Cassian.
Coufes. Theolog. part. 3.
Mother of God and our Lord Jesus Christ; pray for us and daily, yea
continually make intercession for me thy servant, and for all the holy Church of
God, for remission of sins, purging of vices, for increase and perfection of
virtues, for the peace and health of the faithful people, for the fruictes of
the earth, for the stabilitie of the Church, the order of Saints, and for all
servants of God, men and women, both living and departed, that by thy prayers
and holy merits, God almighty may take mercy on a people full of sins,
here, and for ever.

S. Leander Liturg. Muzarab. infest. S. Iacobi.
Hail o Queen, Mother of mercy, life, sweetenes, and our hope al haille. We
that are the banished children of Eve do cry unto thee. To thee we sigh
groaning and weping, in this vale of tears. Therefore o thou our advocate,
turn those thy merciful eyes unto us, and show unto us after this exile,
blessed Jesus the fruit of thy womb. O merciful, o full of pity, o sweet
Virgin Marie. Pray for us o holy Mother of God. That we may be made worthy of
the promises of Christ.

Athanas. ser. de sanctis. Deipara To. 3.
Harken o daughter of David and Abraham, and incline thine ear to our prayers,
and forgeat not thy people. We cry unto thee, o most holy Virgin, remember
us, and render unto us for this little speech, great guiftes out of the riches
of thy graces, thou who art full of grace. We use these words for thy praise,
If at any time Himne, if at any time praise, be offered unto thee, either by
us, or any creature, to thee I say our gracious Lady, Queen, Mistress, Mother
of God, Arc of the Sanctuary. Al orders of Angels and earthly things
pronounce thee blessed. We exalt thee with a great and loud voice saying:
Hail gracious, our Lord is with thee, o Mistress, and Lady and Queen, and
Mother of God, make intercession for us.

O venerable Virgin, chaste, S. Gregor. Nazian. in traged. Christ patiens.
most happy, adorned with the garment of immortality, accounted as a Goddess:
be mercifuly present to my prayers, receive my petitions.

O Lady grant that I may so depart forth of this life, that having thee so
great a gouernesse of it, I may always find thee for me a most acceptable
Patroness to thy Son. Suffer me not to be delivered over as it were to be
crucified and exposed to the scorn of him that is the sworn enemy and plague
of al mortal men.

O maiden equalled by none in grace, Mother and Virgin, comely above al virgins,
and the greatest, who excedest al orders of heavenly inhabitants, Queen,
Lady, the good of mankind: be always a friend to mortal men, and to me every
where the greatest saifguard.

O thrice blessed Mother, o light of virgins, which inhabitest the most
glorious Temple of heaven, free from the stianes of mortality: now thou art
adorned with the stoale of immortality, harke^ gently from above to my words,
and I beseech thee o Virgin, receive my prayers.

S. Chrisostom. in mis. translated by Erasmus of Roterad.
It is worthy and just, to glorify thee Gods Mother, and always most blessed,
and wholly undefiled Mother of god more honorable then the Cherubins, and,
incomparably, more Glorious, then the Seraphins, which without corcorruption,
have brought forth God: verily we magnify thee Gods Mother.

O glorious Mother of God, who brought forth true God: pray unto him to save
our souls.

O Mother of God, because thou art more excellent then al creatures, we which
are not able to praise thee worthily, do freely beseech thee, have mercy upon
us.

Hail full of grace, our Lord is with thee. S. Andreas Archiepis. Hierosolym.
ser. in salutat. S. Mar. Deiparae to. 2. Bibl. SS. Patr. An. 550.
Hail organe of joy, by which the condemnation of our offense is purged, and
full co^pensation of true joy is made. Hail truly blessed. Hail illuminated.
Hail magnificent Temple of Divine glory. Hail consecrated Palace of the King.
Hail bride chamber, in which humanity was espoused to Christ. Hail elected
to God before thou were borne. Hail Gods Reconciliation with men. Hail
treasure of life which never fades. Hail heaven celestial, Tabernacle of the
sun of glory. Hail most ample field of God, whom none other place but thou
alone, could comprehend. Hail holy virginal earth, of which the new Adam by
an unspeakable framing, was formed; which should restoare the old Adam to
salvation.

Hail Marie full of grace, S. Jacob. in mis. received in council. 6. genral.
Can. 32.
our Lord is with thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit
of thy womb; for thou have brought forth the Savior of our souls. It is
worthy, it is worthy that we call thee who art truly blessed the Mother of
God always blessed and every way irreprehensible, and the Mother of our God,
more honorable the^ the Cherubins, and more glorious then the Seraphins: who
without corruption, have brought forth God the word. We truly magnify thee the
Mother of God, o full of grace, to thee every creature makes joy, the company
of Angels, and mankind: thou who art the sanctified Temple, the spiritual
paradise, the glory of virgins, of whom God received flesh, and became a
child, our God who is before the world: for he made thy belie his Throne, and
thy womb more spacious and large, then the heavens them selves. To thee o full
of grace, every creature does gratulate; glory to thee.

Precat. Syriac. apud Sever. Patriarch. Alex. in prec. Sir. to. 6. Bibl. SS.
Patr.
O holy Marie Mother of God, pray for us, I say sinners. Amen.

O Mother of God, Queen of heaven, doare of paradise, Lady of the world,
begin prayers for my sin.

Amen.

Eutichian. in vit. S. Theophili.
O my blessed Lady, and defense of mankind, the harbor and protection of them
that flee unto thee. I know o my Lady Mother of God, that I have greatly
offended thee. For who o my Lady has hoped in thee and was ashamed? or what
man has faithfully asked thy help, able to al things, and has at any time
been forsaken? verly no man at any time. Wherefore I a sinner also and wicked
person, ask thy euer-during fountain, from which cures do flow to our
souls, be merciful unto me.

Of the same praying unto, and honoring this most blessed Virgin Marie.
Chapter. 4.
Hail full of grace, S. Andreas Hierosol. in salutat. Angel. Sermon.
our Lord is with thee. He that said Let light be made, let the firmament, and
the rest of the works of wonderful creation, be made. Hail Mother of
immeasurable joy. Hail new Arc of glory, in which the spirit of God
descending, rested; Arc in which rested the sanctification of new glory.
Hail ornament of al Prophets and Patriarks, and most true praise of the
unsearchable oracles of God. Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the
fruit of thy womb, and verily thou art truly blessed, for God has blessed
thee a Tabernacle to him self. Blessed art thou among women, who alone have
got the blessing which God had promised to the Gentiles by Abraham. Genesis 12.
Verily thou art blessed, who art called the Mother of the blessed child Jesus
Christ our Savior; for whom the Gentiles cry, Math. 22.
Blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord, and blessed the eternal
name of his glory. Blessed art thou among women, whom al generations proclaim
blessed, kings do glorify, whom Potentates adore, whom virgins both following
and going before thee, do attend into the Temple of the King.

August. ser. 2. de anuntiat. et assumpt. B. Mar.
O haphie Marie, and worthy of al praise. O Virgin, o glorious Mother of God, o
high child-bearer, to whose bowels, the maker of heaven and earth is committed.
O B. Marie, admit our prayers within the sacrarie of thy Auditorie, and bring
again unto us grace of reconciliation. Obtain what we ask and excuse that we
fear; for we find none more excellent in merits, to pacify the Judges anger,
then thou art, who have deserved to be the Mother of our Redemer and Judge.

Succor those that be in misery, assist the weak hearted, comfort those that
weep, pray for the people, entreat for the Clergy, make intercession for the
company of Monks, beseech for the devout woman sex. Let al persons perceive
thy help, that celebrate thy name. Have compassion upon the afflicted, bear a
merciful affection to us that be pilgrims from heaven. present our wepinges
unto God, and for us entreat him as thine own son. We on earth are yet
afflicted, entertained with injuries, affected with reproaches: do hunger,
thirst, are detained in prison. But thou in heaven art preferred before al
companies of virgins, thou folowest the Lamb whether soever he goes. Thou in
that most happy Region of the blessed, have got the chiefest dignity. To
thee a kingly Queare of Angels is placed in the palace of the eternal King. And
the King of kings himself loving thee above al, with an embracing of love,
does sociate thee to him seif, as his true Mother and comlie Spouse. Therefore,
possessing these felicities, turn thy self to the salvation of our souls:
assist the prayers of them that ask thee; be careful daily to pray for the
people of God, thou being blessed, did deserve, to bear the Redemer of the
world: who lives, and reigns, for ever. Amen.

August. supr.
O blessed Marie, who is able worthily, to render duty of thanks, and
solemnity of praises unto thee, who, by thy singular assent, have sucoured the
world which was lost? What praises shall the frailty of man yield unto thee, who
by thy negotiation alone, have? found the means to recover it again Wherefore
receive such as they be, very small, such as they be, thanks unequal to thy
merits; and when thou have received our prayers, by praying, excuse our
faults.

Blessed among women, Andreas Cretens. in salut. Angel. in Encom. 2. dormit.
Deipar. c. 8.
pacify our Lord for his common creature. For so long as thou did converse
on earth, a little portion of the earth had thee: but since thou art translated
from earth, the whole world contains thee a common propitiatory.

O Mother of God, cap. 12. supr.
to us that honor thee give again this reward of a little gift, that we may
have more precious and resplendant then riches, humble prayers to thy Son and
our Lord, and King, and God.

O unspotted, S. Ephrem orat. de laudib. sanctis. Dei matris.
and wholly pure Virgin, Gods Mother, Queen of al, hope of the desolate, my
most glorious Lady, higher then the inhabitants of heaven, more pure then the
beams and brightness of the Sun, more to be honored then the Cherubim, more
holy the^ the Seraphim, hope of the Fathers, glory of the Prophets, praise of
the Apostles, and honor of Martyrs, joy of Saints, and light of the godly
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, ornament of Aaron, shynnig of Moses, fleece of
Gedeon, the Crown of the company of sarced Prelates, and al Saints and
Virgins; inaccessible for brightness. By thee we are reconciled to Christ, my
God, thy Son. Thou art the helper of those that sin, and are destitute of
aid, comfort of the world, renowned deliverer of the imprisoned. Thou the
receiver of orphans. Thou the redemption of captives. Thou the exultation of
the sick and saiftie of al. Thou the ornament, crown, and joy of virgins,
have mercy on me that am defiled, who with vetie many sins, have offended
my Creator, my God, and Judge, that most hateful Satan do not glory against
me. O sincere Virgin, I have none other trust. for thou, o inuiolate Virgin,
art my harbor and ready helper. Lastly I am wholly under thy winge and
protection. most renowned Mother I beseech thee with frequent tears, I lie
prostrate to thee, o my Lady, humbly craving, that thy sweet Son, and geuer
of the life of al, do not take me away, for many sins which I have committed.

Basilius Seleucus orat. 1. de verb. Incarnat.
O thrice holy Virgin Marie, look upon us from heaven with a merciful eye, and
now lead us from hence in peace, place us free from confusion before the Throne
of the Judge, and at last make us partakers of the station at the right hand;
that from thence being taken to heaven together with the Angels, we may praise
the increated, and Homousion Trinity.

O Virgin Mother of God and Christ, Canon vniuer.+sal. or mis. Ethiop. to. 6.
Bibl. po^^.
at al times carry up our prayer with the elect of thy Son, that our sins
may be forgeuen. Be joyful o Lady because thou have brought forth to us the
true light: pray for us with him, that he will have mercy on our soul; pray
for us in the sight of the Throne of thy son Jesus Christ: be joyful, o
immaculate, verily our Queen: be glad, o glory of our parents, because thou
have brought forth unto us Emanuel: o verily Mediatrix before our Lord Jesus
Christ. We humbly beseech thee, that thou will be mindful of us, that our
iniquities may be blotted out.

Verily the blessed Virgin Marie was a great miracle: for what was, S.
Chrisostom. apud Metaphrast. et Breu. Romans 12. September.
or ever shall be found at any time greater, or more renowned then she? She
alone (...) assed heaven and earth in renown. What more holy then she? Not
the Prophets, not Apostles, not Maryrs, not Patriarchs, not Angels, not
Thrones not Dominations, not Seraphim, not Cherubim; Lastly no other thing
among things visible, or invisible, can be found greater or more excellent,
The same is the handmaid and Mother of God. The same a Virgin and Mother. This
is the Mother of him, who before al beginning, was begotten of his Father; whom
Angels and men acknowledge Lord of al things. Will you know how much this
Virgin is more excellent then the celestial powers? They with fear and
tembling do assist: she offers Mankind to him whom she brought forth. By her
also we obtain Pardon of sins. Hail therefore o Mother, Heaven, Maiden,
Virgin, Throne, of our Church the renown, glory, and firmament: pray for us
daily to Jesus, thy Son, and our Lord, that by thee we may find mercy in
the day of Judgment, and obtain those good things, which are laid up for
those that love God, by the grace, and bounty of our Lord Jesus Christ wit^
whom to the Father and Holy Ghost, be glory, honor, and Rule, now and ever
world without end. Amen.

O holy Mother of God, S. Ciril. Alet. homil. conit. Nestor.
praise be to thee, for thou art the precious pearl of the world. Thou the
unquenchable lamp, crown of virginity, Scepter of true faith, indissoluble
Temple containing him, who can no where be contained: A Mother and Virgin. Thou
art blessed among women, Mother of him that comes blessed in the name of our
Lord. By thee the Trinity is sanctified: By ^^ee the precious Cross is
celebrated and worshipped in all the world. By thee heaven does joy, the Angels
and Archangels rejoice, the devils are driven away, and man him self is called
back to heaven. By thee every creature, detained in the error of Idols, is
converted to the knowledge of the truth, and faithful men have come to holy
baptism, and churches are builded in all the world. Thou being helper, the
Nations have come to penance. What more? By thee the only begotten Son of
God, that true light, has shyned to them that sat in darkness and shadow of
death. By thee the Prohets foretold. By thee the Apostles preached salvation to
the Gentiles. Who shall be able to express the greatness of thy praises, o
Marie, Mother and Virgin. Let us extol her, adoring her Son, the immaculate
Spouse of the Church. To whom be honor and glory world without end.

Amen.
Of Prayer and honor unto the blessed Angels in heaven.
Chapter. 5.
August. meditat. c. 20.
O Jerusalem, the eternal house of God, next to the love of Christ, be thou my
gladness and consolation. Let the sweet memory of thy blessed name, be the
releife of my sorrow and werisomnes.

Io. Cassian. ^^^^es. Theo.
O holy Angels, holy Archangels, holy Powers, holy Potentates, log. part. 3.
et August. meditat. c. 23.
holy Principalityes, holy Dominations, holy Thrones, holy Seraphines, holy
Cherubins, holy Michael, holy Gabriel, holy Raphael, and thou my holy
Angel, to whom our common maker, has committed me to be kept, and al you
administering spirits, and heavenly Citizens, and al orders of blessed Spirits
make intercession and pray for me, a wretch, and your unworthy servant, and
for all the Church of God, that we may be worthy of the promises of Christ,
that by your prayers we may be joined to your B. fellowship for ever.

Let us ask that we may have God, Nemetian. Datiu. Felix et Vict. epist. ad
Ciprian. inter. epist. eius 7^. Mallabar. Indi in mis.

S. Sophron. Hierosol. Encom. Angel.


and Christ, and the Angels, favorers unto us in all our actions.

We beseech the Angel of peace and love with prayer and obsecration.

O you divine armies of God, and immaterial, O Angels intellectual, and
reasonable: But it is better by degree, and in order, to Praise, magnify, and
call upon you. O Seraphines, Seraphines prayed unto.
I beseech you to cleanse the inward corners of my soul, from the filthes of
sin; and utterly expelling and putting away the darkness of my heart, lighten
the internal senses of my mind.

Cherubins.
O you Cherubins adorn me with the knowledge of the heavenly word. Kindle anger
in me against the old serpent and powerablie carry me on high from the earth.

Thrones.
O you Thrones, who are the seate-bearers and rest of God almighty, deliver me
from al deceit and cursed work, and make me worthy of the glory and Majesty
of God.

Dominations.
O venerable Dominations, grant unto me that I may govern the passions of my
mind, which corrupt the understanding: and to the last breath of my life
subdue the deceiptes of the devil which greuosly hurt my soul.

Potentates.
O Potentates, named agreeable to your office, give power unto me against the
visible and invisible enemies, which rise against my soul, and labor to bring
my mind into captivity, and endeavor to overthrow my ways.

Powers.
O you immovable and mighty powers, compass me about with heavenly strength
and power, that am weak and infirm, and make me apt, that I may manfully
drive away, and tread under foot, those spritual snakes and scorpions.

O Principalities, Principalities.
chief in the third order of Angels, be faithfully present, and use your
careful diligence that I may triumph over my most noisome enemies, and resist
them without fear and wound even to the end.

O you the rest of the Angels and Archangels, Archangels. Angels.
I ask and beseech your bounty, o you good and without blemish Angels and
Archangels, o undefiled spirits, I entreat your magnificence preserve my life
without offense, my hope unmoved, manners blameless, my love toward God and
my neighbor perfect, and free from al transgression, I beseech you lead and
guide me with your hand, and direct me to every way of salvation, and
acceptable to God.

Al places are full of Angels, Origin homil. 2. in Ezechiel*
o Angel come receive one cenuerted from old error, from doctrine of devils,
from iniquity speaking against God: and receiving him as a good Physician,
cherish, and instruct him: and call unto thee other fellows of thy ministry,
that al you together may instruct them to faith, which sometime were deceived.
Luc. 25.
For there is greater Joy in heaven for one sinner doing penance then nyntie
nine just.

August. in Job. conc. 2 ad cap. 19.
Have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me o my freindes. he seems to request
the Angels to pray for him: or surely the Saints to pray for a penitent.

August. l. meditat. c. 4.
O holy Michael, holy Gabriel, holy Raphael, o you holy Quiets of Angels, and
Archangels, I presume to ask you by him that has chosen you, and of whose
sight you rejoice, that you vouch saife to pray for me to God a sinner.

S. Chrisost. in Liturg.
O Michael Prince of the heavenly army, we unworthy do beseech thee, that thou will defend us by thy intercessions; keep us with the shadow of thy wings of
an immaterial nature. We fall down, and without ceasing cry unto thee: deliver
us from dangers, as prince of the heavenly powers.

Victor Vticenc. l. 3. persec. Vandal. Hebr. 1.14.
Be present unto me o you Angels of my God which are never absent constituted in
your ministry, for them that shall receive the inheritance of salvation.
Consider and behold, how Syon, the City of our God, is made vile, become as it
were polluted among her enemies. Al comlines and delights, are gone from her
countenance. Her Virgins and young people brought up in Monasteries, have
learned to tread sharp ways,

O you Angels, succor us. Gregor. in agend. mortuor.
Gregor. in Sacramentar.
O God omnipotent, we humbly ask and entreat, that the intercession of
Archangels, be unto our Lord for us, the Intercessions of Michael, and Gabriel,
and Raphael, that we may appear worthy before our Savior, by the intercession
of the neene orders of Angels. The Thrones, and Dominations, and
Principalities, and Powers: also Cherubins, and Seraphimes, vouchsaife to pray
for us.

O thrice most holy and much beloved, and reverenced Prince, Sophron.
Hierosol. Encom. Angel.
S. Machael.
and chief of the Angels Michael, when at the last al those admirable things
which are expected, shall be ended, by the sound which thou shall give: then, o
holy Arch-prince, teacher of those that err, raiser of them that fall, defender
of souls, preserver of bodies, abandoner of devils, and lightner of every
creature: then I beseech thee, vouchsaife to be present, a faithful Patron of
my soul.

O most holy Michael, illustrate my inward senses, and illuminate the internal
eye of my soul, and strengthen my heart, tossed with the waves of this life
and my mind bended down to earthly things, lift it up ward to heavenly wisdom,
and strengthen my weak hands against mine enemies expert in war; and fortify
my feeble feet, that they forsake not the path that leads to heaven; and
cure the rest of the greifes of my miseries and labors.

Michael signifies, who as God.
O Michael both in deed and name, I pray thee, and so much as I am able beseech
thee, that when I shall depart forth of this life, thou will appear joyful, and
pacified, and shrowde me under the honored covering of thy wings: and being
delivered from the narrow and dark places of hell, lead me into the rooms of
the wonderful Tabernacle, leading me even to the house of God.

S. Gabriel.
O most heavenly and excellent Angel Gabriel; o Gabriel obtainer, and geuer of
true gladness: I often request and beseech thee, that thou will l^uing visit me
oppressed with great sickness, and fill me with celestial virtue, and joy of
mind; and being freed from the torments of Belial, and dangers both of
visible and not visible enemies, by thine authority, and intercession to God,
join me to the company of the just and Saints; and at last settle me in
those places which flow with all delghtes.

O heavenly spirits, I desire to ask, and earnestly beseech you, that when as
the last gasp of my life, I shall be compelled to go forth of this earthen
vessel, and you are to weigh in a balance, al mine actions, and take account of
al things, which openly or secretly I have designed, that then either al of
you, or at least they whom God shall send forth of your order, to receive mine
unhappy and wretched soul, will show your selves pleased and gentle unto me;
and those weightes which I with my wicked deeds, have desperately burdened, you
will happily unload, and by all means and skill, as the ministers of our only
mercicul God, disburden.

When the day of confundation cotheth, and the end of the world shall be, when
the heavens shall tremble and the firmament shake, and the dreedful Judge
approach, and you going before his coming, shall run over the bounds and
ends of the earth, to gather together, al mortal men that are dead from the
beginning of the world, and set them before the vncorrupt Judge, for every one
to yield account of every deed, every thought, and conceit of mind: Then I
beseech you, and will never cease to the end of my life to beseech you, who behold
al things, and perform the public ministeries of God, with authority, then
I say, then I beseech you, be mercifully present with me, and as the Princes of
the most excellent King, spare me a wretch, and unhappy, and by your
intercession to God, deliver me from that doleful and angry sentence, that
sends into everlasting fire. And contrariwise, make me, with all my partakers,
and kinsfolks, whose names and calling he knows, who knows al things,
partaker of that joyful and pleasant state and life that is void of al sorrow,
and wants nothing; and lastly pronounce me heir of that joy which never
ends.

Of prayer and honor to all the blessed Sanctes in heaven in general.
Chapter. 6.
O House of God shyning and bewtiful, August. l. meditat. c. 20.
I have loved thy comlines, and the dwelling place of the glory of our Lord,
my possessor and maker.

Let my pilgrimage sigh unto thee day and night: Let my heart be open unto
thee, my mind intend thee, my soul desire to come unto the fellowship of thy
blessedness. I speak to him who made thee to possess me in thee, because he
has made me and thee. And speak thou, ask thou him, to make me worthy of
the participation of thy glory.

I will begin to throw down my self upon my knees, and pray unto al Saints,
Origin in lament.
to succor me, who dare not ask God for the exceeding greatness of my sin, O
ye Saints of God, with exceeding sorrow, tears, and weping, I beseech you, that
you will fall down before his mercies for me a wretch. Amen.

Cassian. Confess. Theolog. part. 3. See S. August. med. c. 23.
O al you heavenly Citizens make intercession and pray for me a wretch, and your
unworthy servant; And also for all the holy Church of God, that we may be made
worthy of the promises of Christ: that by your prayers we may be joined to
your blessed fellowship for ever.

O happy Saints of God, who have now passed over the troublesome sea of this
mortality, and are come to the Haven of everlasting quietness, security, and
peace, and deserved to be fellows of the heavenly powers; you are secure of
your selves, be careful for us. I beseech you by him that has chosen you, who
has made you such, of whose contemplatio^ you now rejoice, with whose beauty
you are now filled, by whose immortality and unchangeableness, you are become
immortal and unchangeable: be mindful of us wretches, yet in the sea of this
life, tossed with waters fownd about us. Make intercession and pray for us
wretches, and very negligent sinners, constantly, and without ceasing, that by
the arms of your prayers, we may be carried to God. We sail as you know, by
this great and vast sea, where the great wahle is ready to devour those that
pass by. where there be dangerous places, Scilla, and Charibdis, with many
others, in which men unawares, and doubtful in faith, do suffer ship wrackes,
wherefore in all things we want your help, we are carried on the tree, and by
the Cross of our Lord hope to pass over to harbor. Let the adverse parts
flee away, by the sight of the sign of Christ. Al you army of the heavenly
country, pray, that by your merits and by your prayers, we may with our ship
saife, and merchandise preserved, happily enter into the haven of eternal
glory; where you are, where you rejoice, where you reign with God with out
end.

We beseech the Saints, S. Hieron^^. ad Psalm. 15.
that we be not separated from thee: if we do not deserve to be clothed with
glory, yet that we be not excluded from pardon.

I beseech the intercession of the Apostles. Ambros. (...) 2. praep^r.


O holy Quiers of Patriarchs, August. l. medit. c. ^0.
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Preistes, Leustes,
Monks, Virgins, and all the just; I presume to ask you by him who has chosen
you, and of whose sight you joy, that you will vouchsaife to pray to God for me
a sinner, that I may be delivered from the jaws of the devil, and from
everlasting death.

S. Chrisost. in mis. verse. a leone Tusco.
O Apostles, Martyrs, and Prophets, Preistes, Confessors, and just men, and
holy women, who have well ended your combat, and kept your faith, being
faithful to our Savior, pray for us, that our souls may be saved. Amen.

Victor vticenc. l. 3. persecut. Vandal.
O you Patriarchs, of whom the Church which now labors on earth, is
descended, make intercession for it. O you holy Prophets, behold how she is
afflicted, whom you have tuned forth with Prophetical praise. O you Apostles,
be you intercessors for her, whom to gather together, you have run about all the world.

Paulin. Nolan. natal. 9. S. Felicis.
O you holy prophets, who foretold the coming of God in our flesh: and you
Martyrs, who with the slaughter of your bodies, and shedding of your blood,
have given testimony to the Lamb that was killed, and is alive: I humbly
beseech you to be present with me.

The Infantes protomartyrs in the order of Saints, S. Ciprian. de stel. et
mag. ^^ Innocent.
acquainted with the divine secrets by their familier nearenes: vouchsaife to
entreat the mercy of God for our labors.

O most blessed Martyrs, who for our Savior, and the love of him, have freely
and perfectly sustained torments, S. Ephrem set. de sanctis Martitib.
and therefore are more familiarly joined to God: We entreat you, that you will
vouchsaife to make intercession to our Lord for us wretches and sinners, and
polluted with the filthiness of negligence, that the grace of Christ may com
upon us, to illustrate our hearts with the beam of his holy love.

O most blessed men, o most glorious Martyrs of God, help me a wretch with your
prayers, that I may obtain mercy in that hour, when the secrets of men shall
be manifest. Stand before the Throne of the Majesty of God for me, that by
your prayers, I may deserve to be saved, and with you to enjoy eternal
blessedness.

I ask the Saints by their intercession, to obtain unto me the goodwil of
God. I ask and beseech, that by the Intercession of al Saints, I may obtain
the help of God.

Theodoret. up. vit. vlt. he means those Saints wose life he had written in
that history.
I beseech those Saints, whose life I have written, that they will not despise
me, living far from their spiritual company, but draw me lying beneath, and
lift me up to the top of virtue, and join me with them, that I may not only
praise the riches of others, but my self may have some occasion of praise,
glorifying the Savior of al, both in deed and word, and thought.

Gregor. antiphonar. ad Process.
O Saints arise, and keep us humble sinners in peace.

Of prayer and honor unto some Saints on particular deceased before the
Passion of Christ.
Chapter. 7.
Origin in lament.
O Father Abraham, pray for me, that I be not driven from the bounds, which I
have greatly desired.

O blessed Job, Origin. l. 2. in Job.
who live for ever with God, and remainest a conqueror in the sight of the
King our Lord: pray for us wretches, that the dreadful mercy of God, defend us
in all tribulations and deliver us from al oppressions of the devil, and number
us among the just, and inrol us with those that are saved, and cause us to rest
with them in his kingdom, where we may continually magnify him with his
Saints, Amen.

O blessed Job, be a guide unto us, Olimpiodorus. in c. 15. Job.
and forsake us not until thou have directed us unto the plain way in which we
may travail saifly, and not err from truth.

The Protomartyrs, Ciprianus de Stel. et magis. he means the holy Innocents
put to death by Herod.
which have the first place in the order of Saints, and acquainted with
divine secrets by their most familiar nearnes: vouchsaife to entreat the
clemency of God for our labors, whom to this day deadly Herod persecuteth:
with whose blood, and death, the devil delights. Therefore these translated
from their cradles to heaven, are made Senators of the heavenly Capitol, and
Judges there, obtaining pardon for some without des^ruing.

Antipater Bostrens. Episcop. orat. in S. Io. Baptist. c. 3 See more supr. cap.
2.
O Baptist, I beseech thee grant unto me the hope of my Prayer, and as thou art
a voice, preserve unto me sure and stable, the senses of the instruments of
voice.

S. Ephrem Sir. l. de laudib. Joseph. Patriarch. his prayer at the Tomb of
Rachel his mother.
O Rachel, Rachel, my Mother, behold Joseph thy Son whom thou have loved, what
has chanced unto him. Behold he is led captive as a malefactor. O Rachel,
receive thy son; O mother, receive me; o my mother hear the mourning and
bitter scriking of my heart; mine eyes can no longer sustain tears, neither
my life suffices, to such lamentations and groaninges.

Of prayer and honor unto Saints in particular, deceased after the Passion
of Christ.
Chapter. 8.
S. Leo ser. 1. de I^^un. 10 men's.
THe most blessed Apostle Peter, vouchsaife by his prayers, to help our
prayers, fastings, and alms.

Blessd Peter and al Saints, S. Leo in ser. octau. Pet. et Pauli.
that have been present with us in many tribulations, vouchsaife to help our
prayers with the merciful God, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Peter, Ambros. in c. 22. Luc. prope finem.
from whence may I call thee to teach me what thou did think when thou did
weep? from whence I say may I call thee? from heaven where thou art among the
Queares of Angels, or from thy grave also? because thou think it no injury
to be there from whence our lord arose; teach us what thy tears did profitt
thee.

O Peter and Paul, Chrisost. ho^^. in natal. Apostol. Petri et Pnuli. To. 3.
sur. Gal. 6. 2. Pet. 1.
pray for us continually, we beseech you. perform your promises, for these are
your couenantes, of one of you this; come with me, and let us not faint in good
things. and of the other, that: I will study after my death, to make mention
of you. Therefore do not forgeat your agreed couenantes, but you which are
immediately present to the B. Trinity without beginning, ask for us al things
belonging to salvation.

O holy Paul Doctor of the Gentiles, and al you holy Apostles, Victor v^. l.
3. persec. V^^^.
lament together with us. We prostrate, ask by him who promoted you lowly
fishers, to the highest Apostolical dignity; that you do not despise your
wretched sinners.

Elpis him. de Petro et Paulo.
O Paul excellent Doctor, instruct our manners, and endeavor to translate us in
mind into heaven.

Mis. or cant. vniuer. Ethiop.
O S. Paul, who have received the Crown, pray and make intercession for us,
that our souls may be delivered by the multitude of the mercies of Jesus
Christ, and his holy name.

Damasus de S. Andrea.
O S. Andrew, cherish us which be fainting, have care of us, that by the
victory of the Cross, we may go to the country of heaven.

Mazarab. in offic. vesper. S. Jacob.
O verily worthily, more holy Apostle, the shyning head of Spain; be a
defendour, patron, and saifguard to us from heaven: drive away from us,
siknes, sore, and sin. Be favorable, that by heavenly help, we may possess
Joy, obtaining the kingdom, may be adorned with eternal glory; that by thee
we may escape hell.

Ciril. Alexand. hom. die Ioh. Evangelist. in Council. Ephesians.
O Evangelist, o blessed John, speak unto us some great and notable thing. O
Aposte, open unto us the well of life, grant now that we may draw from thy
fountains. To S. Clement. Ephrem Episc. Chensonis de S. Clemente. An. 500.


O ornament of Martyrs, and glory of Saints, defend and keep this company
without harm by thy prayers. O most holy, driue-backe the cruel devils with
the dart of thine intercessions.

O holy Lawrence thou have a double mansion, one of thy body on earth,
Prudent. him. 2. de S. Laurent.
and an other of thy soul in heaven. There thou art a chosen Citizen of the
unspeakable city, and wearest a celestial Croune above, in the everlasting
Court. I seem to see a man glittering with illustrious precious stones, whom
the heavenly Rome has chosen unto her for an eternal Consul. What power is
bestowed upon thee, and what great office is given unto thee, is expressed by
the ioies of the Romans, whose petitions thou yeldest unto, what any man does
humbly ask, he prosperously obtains. They ask, they offer, they honor, and
no man departs in sadness, as though thou were always present, embracing in
thy nurcing bosom; thy country Citizens norish them with a fatherly love.
Among these, o honor of Christ, heart me also confessing the sins of my
heart, and bewraying my deeds. I acknowledge and know my self unworthy to be
heard of Christ him self, yet I may receive cure by his Martyrs my Patrones. O
bountiful, hear thy Suppliant: and unbind him from the bands of the world.

August. l. 7. de Baptismo contia Donatist. c. 1.
Blessed Ciprian, vouchsaife to help us with his prayers, in the mortality of
this flesh, as laboring in a dark cloud that by the gift of God, we may, so
much as we can, imitate his good things.

To the same S. Gregor. Naz. orat. in S. Ciprian. in fine.
O noble Maryr, look down mercifully on us from above, and direct our speech
and life, and feed this holy fold, or govern it, and so much as is possible
dispose other things to the best.

To the 40. martyrs. S. Basil. ser. in 40. martyrs.
Where two or three be gathered together in the name of our Lord, there is God.
But where forty shall be, who will doubt but God is present there? He that is
oppressed with any distress; let him flee to these: he that does joy, let him
pray to these. The one to be delivered from things that be evil; the other to
continue in his joys. O holy Queare, o sacred order, o common kepers of
mankind, most excellent fellows of cares, offerers up of prayers and Vows,
most potent Ambassadoures with God, the Stars of the world, Flowers of the
Churches.

O holy S. Albane, S. Amphibalus apud Capgratr. et alios in vit. S. Albani et
Amphibali.
I beseech thee to pray to our Lord for me, that it will please him to send his
Angel to lead me securely that I be not hindered in my way, by the cursed
enemy the devil.

O holy Father Albane, who leaving things terrestrial, have ascended the high
seat of heaven with glory: now we beseech thee with earnest prayer, thee who
art our true glory, unbind by thy devout prayers, the sins of thy servants.
Pray for the English Nation, and for the everlasting peace thereof, and obtain
for us thy suppliants, the eternal joys of life, where Alleluya does sound
continually.

Gradual. antiq. et mis. Salisb. in fest. S. Albani.
O Saint Albane pray for us. O S. Albane, make intercession for the souls of
the deceased.

Litan. Angl. antiq. ante Baptist. et co^mned. animae. allowed by S. Amal. c.
18. litan. l. 1. de offic.
O twice renuomed, descend hither a while, bringing Christ's favor with thee,
To S. Vincentius.

Prudent. him. 5. de. S. Vincent.


that our grieved senses, may feel the ease of pardon. Let no death now
remain, but the noble Soul receive flesh again; that as it has been
partaker of labors and common danger, so it may be coheire of glory for
ever.

Ptudent. in him. 10. S. Romanni. martyr.
O Romanus constant Confessor of Christ our God, be friendly unto me, and move
the organe of my speachles mouth grant me to declare the marvelous things of
thy praises, for thou know that the du^me, may be made to speak.

Gregor. Nys. orat. de S. Theodoro mart.
O blessed Theodorus, be Present unto us; we want many benefits Make
intercession and pray for thy country to our common King and Lord. We fear
afflictions, we expect dangers. As a soldier defend us, that the mad and
wicked Barbarian, rage not against Churches or Altares; that the profane and
impious, do not spurn the holy things, And if there be need of greater
aduocation and prayer, then assemble the company of thy brethren Martyrs, and
pray together for us with them al. Let the prayers of many just blotte out the
sins of the multitude and people, Move Peter's, stir up Paul, and also John
the Divine and beloved Disciple, that they will be careful for the Churches
which they have founded, for which they have borne Chains, for which they have
suffered dangers and death: that heresses do not as thorns ouergrow the
vineyard; let not cocle choke up the wheat, but by virtue of thine own, and
thy fellows prayers, o admirable man, let the Christian common wealth, become a
field of corn, which field may remain to the end in a fertile and fruitful
foil, of faith in Christ, always bringing forth fruit of eternal life.

O Felix, o Saint of God, Paulin. Nolan. natal. 8.

Natal. 3. S. Faelicis.


o beloved of God, be a right hand, and most saife Tower of defense unto me.
Receive the prayers of thy suppliants, and commend the^ to God. Entreat the
dreadful Majesty of our Lord, that by thy abunda^^ prayers, and merits, he
will pardon our offenses

O great Basile, Gregor. Naz. mon. in magnum Basilium, in fine.
look down upon us from heaven, and either command my grief to go away, or
help me, and persuade me so patiently to endure it, that when I shall at last
depart from hence, thou may receive me into the eternal Tabernacles, and that
with thee, I may behold the Blessed Trinity in such manner as it is.

Gregor. Naz. orat. funebri in Athanas. Alex. Epis. in fine.
O Athanasius, look down gently upon us from above, and direct this holy
people, worshipper of the holy Trinity, and nourish us in peace, and defend
us. Direct us in our combat, and receive us: and place us with thy self, and
those that be as thou art.

Gregor. Nis. ser. de vita S. Ephrem.
O holy Ephrem, excellent Father and Doctor of the Church, standing by the
heavenly Altar, and Prince of life, and together with the Angels, sacrificing
to the sacred Trinity: remember al us, and obtain pardon of sins for us,
that we may enjoy the everlasting blessedness of the celestial Kingdom, in
Christ Jesus our Lord. To whom be glory for ever. Amen.

To S. Martine. Fortunatus l. 1. vit. S. Martini.
O merciful, have mercy upon me a wretch: that when the high Judge of the world
shall come, thou will procure that my sins be blotted out. Be a mediator
between our Lord and me. Let thine intercession unbind him, whom his offense
does bind. Let thy gentle piety harken unto me; for with prayer, thou art
powerable with him whose thou art. what I ask, thou art able to do, because
he gives al to his friends.

I beseech thee crave pardon, Fortunat. l. supr.
thou who have got the crown, o sheephard, deliver thy sheep, that it be
not lame nor shut forth. Be unto me a Medidiator between God and the guilty.
Be mindful of thy servants by him whose light thou shall see for ever.

O beloved of God, remember, To S. Honoratus.

S. Hilatius Arelaten. inv^ta S. Honra^. An. 450.


remember us continually: Thou stand without blemish before God singing that
new song, and following the Lamb whether soever he goes. Thou that art a
follower of him, be a Patron unto us, an interpreter of our Prayers, an
acceptable and strong Advocate.

Make intercession for us to our Lord Jesus Christ, To S Germanus.

Constantiu^. Presbiter in vita S Germ. l. 2. c. 7. An. 480.

To S. Simeo^ Priscus. Theodoret. in Philotheo. in vita.


that we may deserve to obtain the song of the heavenly Trmupet, the voice of
that desired sound, and the joys of the holy Resurrection.

I desire Intercession which holy Simeon can give, and I know I shall obtain
it. For he will grant my petition, Imitating the Bountifulness of our Lord.

Theodoret. invit. 8. Sanct. in vit. 10.
I pray also, that I may have the Intercession of holy Aphrates. I ask that I
may also have the Benediction of holy Theodosius.

To one S. James.

Theodoret. sup. vit. 22.


Holy James, vouchsaife with his prayers, to sustain and uphold our weakness,
that being strengthened, we may receive many victories from others that have
gotten them against us, and so depart out of this life with them as Conquerours.

Maximus Taur. bomil. de S. Agnete An. 430.
O most blessed Agnes, glorious unto Christ, bewtiful to the Son of God, and
acceptable to al Angels, and Archangels: vouchsaife to remember us we entreat
thee, with what prayers we are able: that he who has given victory, of thy
labors unto thee, will bestow pardon of sins upon us.

S. Damasus de S. Agnete.
O Agnes a true ornament, the bright image of shamfastnes, o noble Virgin I
beseech thee, favor my prayers.

Prudent. him. 14. de S. Agnete.
Agnes o happy Virgin, o new glory, noble inhabitant of the heavenly tower: bow
down thy face, adorned with a double Diadem, upon our uncleanness.

To S. Agatha. S. Damasus de S. Agatha.
Thou shynest as a bride heaven, ask for me, favor those which honor thee.

O holy and blessed Paula, S. Hieron. epist. 27. ad Eustochium.
help with thy prayers the decaying old age of thy worshipper: thy faith and
works associate thee to Christ; being present thou shall more easily obtain
what thou ask.

THE OLD LITANIES used within the first 600 years. cited by Wallafridus Strab.
l. de rebus Ecclesiast. 28. de lit. agend. S. Amalar. l 2. de eccl. offic. c.
28. Cermonial. antiq. tit. Lytan. and others.
Chapter. 9.
LOrd have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O God the Father of heaven, have mercy upon us.

O God the Son Redemer of the world have mercy upon us.

O God the holy Ghost, have mercy upon us.

O holy Trinity one God, have mercy upon us.

O holy Marie, pray for us.

O holy Mother of God, pray

O holy Virgin of virgins, pray

O holy Michael, pray

O holy Gabriel, pray

O holy Raphael, pray

O al holy Angels and Archangels of God, pray

O al holy orders of blessed spirits, pray

O holy John Baptist, pray

O al holy Patriarchs and Prophets pray

S. Peter, pray

S. Paul, pray

S. Andrew, pray

S. John, pray

S. James, pray

S. Matthew, pray

S. Bartholomew, pray

S. Simon, pray

S. Thadeus, pray

S. Mathias, pray

S. Barnabas, pray

S. Marcke, pray

S. Luke, pray

O al holy Apostles and Evangelists, pray for us.

O al holy Disciples and Innoce^tes, pray for us.

S. Stephen, pray

S. Linns, pray

S. Cletus, pray

S. Clement, pray

S. Fabian, pray

S. Albane, pray

S. Cosmas, pray

S. Damian, pray

S. Primus, pray

S. Faelician, pray

S. Dionise with his fellows, pray

S. Victor with his fellows, pray

O al holy Martyrs, pray

S. Siluester, pray

S. Leo, pray

S. Jerome, pray

S. Augustine, pray

O al holy Confessors, pray

O al holy Monks and Er^mi^e^, pray

S. Marie Magdaleine pray

S. Marie of Egypt, pray

This S. Margaret was in the primative Church, not she of Scotland.
S. Margaret, pray

S. Scholastica, pray

S. Pernel, pray

S. Genouefs, pray

S. Praxedes, pray

S. Sotheris, pray

S. Prisca, pray

S. Thecla, pray

S. Afra, pray

O holy Virgins, pray

O al holy Saints of God men and women, pray for us.

Of honor and reverence to the holy bodies, and other Relics of Saints.
Chapter. 10
S. Ciril. Alex. apud Damas. l. 2. paral. cap. 7.
WE honor the vessels of the bodies of Saints, and repay unto them memory, as
it were reward and wages of their virtue and magnanimity of mind.

The noble relics are pulled forth of their unnoble sepulcher. S. Ambros. l.
9. epistol. 85. Relics worshipped, lying under the Altar: Christ offered upon
the Altar.
The Trophes of victory are showed unto heaven. Let the triu^phant victims
succeed unto the place where Christ is the Sacrifice: But he who suffered for all, upon the Altar: These redeemed by his passion, under the Altar. This place
I had appointed for my self, for it is worthy a priest should rest there,
where a Priest accustomed to offer Sacrifice. But I yeald the right hand
portion to the holy victims. This place belo^ged to Martyrs: therefore let us
bury the sacred relics, and carry them into worthy houses, and celebrate
the whole day with faithful devotion.

O thrice and four times, Prudent. him of S. Laurence.
o 7. times happy, that Citizen who celebrateth thee, and nearha^d the seat
of thy bones, who may lay himself down near them who sprincleth the place
with tears, who presses his breast upon the earth, who offers vows in
secret.

O blessed Apostles, what thanks shall we render unto you, Chrisostom. ser. de
Apostol. apud Metaphrast.
who have labored so much for us. O Peter, I remember thee, and I am amassed. O
Paul, I call thee to mind, and ravished in mind, I am oppressed with tears.
For what I may say, or what I may speak, beholding your afflictions, I know
not. O peter, thou may joy, to whom it was given, to enjoy the Cross of
Christ. Joy thou also o Paul, whose head was cut of with a sword. Let that
sword be to me for a crown; and the nails of Peter, for precious Stones,
infixed in my Diadem.

O who will grant unto me to be rolled about the body of Paul, to be fastened
to his sepulcher, to see the dust of that body, fulfilling the things, which
as yet were wanting in Christ, bearing the signs of his wounds.

Prudent. to S. Vincentius in him. S. Vincent.
O double renoumed, we beseech thee by thy hands, block of thy prison, by those
potsheardes by which thou gainedst conquest; by which we that come after, with
reverence kiss thy bed,: have mercy upon our prayers.

S. Ciril. Hierosol. Cateches. 4.
Here Christ verily was crucified for our sins, and if thou would deny it,
this place apparent disproueth thee. Blessed is this mount Golgatha, in which
now, for him that was crucified, well make joy in him, and the whole globe of
the earth is filled with wood of the Cross by parcels.

When will that day be, Hierom. epist. 17. in the persons of Paula and Eustoch.
c. 8.
that it may be lawful for us to enter into the Sepulcher of our Savior? to
weep in the Sepulcher of our Lord, and then to lick the wood of the Cross;
and in mount Oliuet with our Lord ascending, to be lifted in desire and mind.

Prayer for one in particular deceased.
Chapter. 11.
GOd of his mercy forgive to the departed out of this life, Dionis. Areopag.
l. Eccle. hierarch. c. 12. contempl.
al sins by humane frailty and weakness committed, and bring him into light,
and the Country of the living, into the bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob;
into the Place void of al grief, sadness, and groaning.

Clem. Romans Constitut. SS. Apostol. l. 8. c. 47.
Let us pray for all that rest in Christ, that our gentle God, who has received
his soul, will forgive him al offense, and being merciful unto him, will place
him in the Region of the godly and blessed, in the bosom of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, with all that have pleased him from the beginning of the world, and
performed his will, where there is no sorrow, sadness, or sighing.

God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, God, not of the dead, but of
the living because the souls of al do live with thee, and the spirits of the
Just are in thy hands, and torment shall not touch them, for all that are
sanctified, are under thy hand: Look thou also now upon this thy servant whom
thou have received into the other life, and pardon him whatsoever he has
offended in. Assign gentle Angels unto him, and place him in the bosom of
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, and all that from the beginning of the
world have pleased thee, where there is no sorrow nor horror, but the fellowship
of the godly, and such as rejoice, and the blessed Country of the just,
beholding the glory of thy Christ, by whom to thee be glory, honor, worship,
thanks, and adoration in the holy Ghost for ever. Amen.

O Lord of life, and death. S. Gregor. Naz. orat. in funere Caesatis. By C. is
meant Caesati^s the^ newly dead, but may be used for any faithful departed.

Ambros. orat. de obitu Theodosii Imp.


o keeper and benefactor of our souls, receive the soul of C. whom we commend
to thy wisdom, by which al things are done, and hereafter in time convenient
also, receive us and govern us in our flesh, so long as is profitable for us.

O Lord who kepest little ones, and sauest those that trust in thee, give unto
thy perfect servant, that rest which thou have prepared for thy Saints. Let
his soul return thither from whence it came, where it can feel no sting of
death: where it may know, that this death is not the end of man, but of sin.
For in that he is dead, he is dead to sin, that there may now be no place for
sin. Amen.

O Lord we commend unto thee, S. Leander (...) spal. in Liturg. Mu^arab. in
mis. de S. (...)cobo.
the soul of thy servant, that being dead to the world, he may live to thee.
And the sins which by frailty of worldly conversation, he has committed,
blotte thou out with the pardon of thy most merciful piety, by our Lord. Amen.

In the name of our Lord Jesus, his soul, and al souls of the faithful
deceased, by the mercy of God, rest in peace without end. Amen.

Antiquis vsus apud S. Albin. l. de divine. offic. c. Quomodo moriturus olim
prouidebatur.
Our Lord raise him up again to everlasting life, and be merciful unto us. Our
Lord place him in the bosom of Abraham, and be merciful unto us.

Of prayer, Sacrifice, Alms, and other good deeds, for all true faithful
deceased.
Chapter. 12.
Precat. Syrorum antiq. apud seuerum patriarch. Alex. in precat. Abecedar. To.
6. Bibl. 55. patr.
Opardoner, and clenser; o forgeuer, blotter out, and forgeating our many, and
great sinners withou number, and the sins of al thy faithful people: pardon o
God, and have mercy upon us. Remember us o Lord God in the mercies that are
from thee, and remember our souls, and the souls of our fathers, and
brethren, and instructours, and of our deceased. Finally of al faithful
deceased, children of thy holy and glorious Church. O Lord God, give rest to
their souls and bodies, and sprincle the dew of thy miserations upon their
bones. O Christ our King, take compassion, and be merciful unto us and them.

O thou my God, Armerians divided almost a 1000 years from the Roman Church in
their liturg.
who geuest rest to the dead and raisest again those that be buried: receive
the souls of thy servants, which we have remembered, and place them, o my Lord,
in the blessed mansions of the house of thy Father, with Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, thy friends, and with all Saints, that have performed thy will in
the true faith and of thy Father, and thy holy Spirit for ever. Amen.

O Lord give everlasting rest unto al which have gone before us in the faith of
Christ. O Lord remember, have mercy upon, and show favor to the souls which
rest; pacify, illuminate them, and associate them unto thy Saints in the
kingdom of heaven, and make them worthy of thy love.

Let us bring forth our prayers, Liturg. Eccle. gotticae.
asking of the piety of our Lord, that he will vouchsaife to place the souls
of them that rest, in the bosom of Abraham, and admit them unto the part of
the first Resurrection.

S. Jacob. liturg. Hierosol.
O Lord grant our oblation be grateful and acceptable, for the rest of the
souls of them which are deceased before us.

Epiphanius 75. haer. contra Aerium.
Because, while we are in this world, oftentimes we be deceived, and err, both
unwillingly, and voluntary: we make memory both of the lust, and sinners that
are deceased; for sinners, beseching the mercy of God.

Christom. to. 5. in mis. translated by Erasmus.
O God have respect unto us, and remember all that are deceased in hope of the
Resurrection, and life everlasting, and cause them to rest where the light of
thy countenence is seen.

Mis. Constantinopolt. ascribed to S. Andrew Apost. and S. Christom.
O Lord as merciful, remember thy servants, and pardon whatsoever things they
in their life have offended in.

We Offer unto thee this reasonable duty for the faithful deceased, for our
Brethren and Sisters, by the intercession of Patriarchs, Prophets Apostles,
Martyrs, Confessors, and al Sanctes.

O Lord remember our deceased Princes, Ethiop. in mis. ascribed to S. Matthew.
Apostle.
Bishops, Kings, and all that are dead in the true faith. O Lord remember al
men and women thy servants, brethren and sisters, and all the faithful
deceased, and resting in the sign of the true faith.

O Lord remember al those that sleep in hope of Resurrection of everlasting
life, Liturg. Capadoc. auth. S. Basil.
and refresh them where the light of thy countenance does visit.

O Lord remember al thy servants, Gregor. in mis. Gelasius apud S. Albin. l.
offic. c. de celebrat. missae.
which have gone before us with the sign of faith, and rest in the sleep of
peace. O Lord we beseech thee to grant unto them, and to all that rest in
Christ, a place of refreshing and peace.

Everlasting God, we humbly beseech thee, that thy servant, S. Barnab. or S.
Ambros. in mis. meduil. for a Bishop.
to whom thou have given the government of thy Church being now delivered from
the prison of flesh, and joined to the Prelates of Apostolic dignity, may
deserve to obtain, the reward of eternal life.

My praise and my life, Augustine. l. 9. confess. c. 13. for father and mother.
God of my heart, I beseech thee for the sins of my mother; hear me by the
medicine of our wounds which hanged upon the Cross, and sitting at thy right
hand, makes intercession to thee for us. I know that she dealt mercifully, and
with all her heart forgave offenses to them that had offended her. Therefore
forgive thou also her debts, if she has incurred any, by so many years after
the water of salvation. O Lord forgive her, forgive her I beseech thee; enter
not into judgment with her. Let her rest in peace together with her husband.

Mis. S. Iacobi Apost. allowed Council. general. 6. can. 32.
O Lord our God, remember the souls of the orthodoxal, and true beleuers, from
Abel the just, unto this day: Cause them to rest in the land of the living, in
thy Kingdom, and delights of paradise, in the bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, our holy fathers, from whence is banished, sorrow, sadness, and groaning;
where the light of thy countenance, does rule and shine continually.

S. Basil. in mis. received council. 6. supr. c. 32.
O Lord Creator of bodies and souls, remember at thy heavenly Altar, al those
that are departed forth of this wretched world, and refresh them in thy
Tabernacle full of beauty. Pass them over beyond the horrible mansio^s of
torment, and place them in thy light-some Tabernacles. Deliver them from want
of light, and from darkness, and take them forth of tribulation and grief, and
let thy countenance appear peaceable unto them, neither seuerly examine their
former life. But whether in word or work, as men in flesh, they have sinned,
forgive, and abolish their errors.

O holy Father, we beseech thee for the souls of the faithful departed, Ambros.
pre^. 1. praepar. to. 4.
that they may have eternal salvation, perpetual health, joy and comfort
everlasting.

O Lord make an end of our sins, S. Leander hispal. et S. Isodor. in liturg.
Muzarab.
grant joy, to the afflicted, delivery to captives; health, to the sick, and
rest to the dead.

O Lord our God, Liturg. Alexandr. ascribed to S. Mark Evangelist.
give rest to the souls of the faithful departed in thy holy Tabernacles in
thy Kingdom, grau^ting unto them the good things of thy promises, which the
eye has not seen, and the ear has not heard, and have not ascended into the
heart of man, which thou o God, have prepared for them who love thy name.

O God give rest and good memory Sever. Patriarch. Alex. l. de ritib. Baptismi.
to all having society with us; and to my father, and to my mother, and to my
master who brought me up.

Io. Cassian. 3. part. confess. Theolog.
O most holy Virgin, Mother of God, pray for all servants of God, men and women,
both living and departed out of this life.

Prayers preparatorie, before receiving the most blessed Sacrament of the
Altar Christ's true body and blood.
Chapter. 13.
S. Ignatius Epist. ad Romanos.
I Do not joy in corruptible nourishment, nor in the pleasures of this life; I
desire the bread of God, the bread celestial, which is the flesh of Christ, the
Soune of God; and drink I desire his blood, which is life everlasting.

S. Dionisius Areopag. l. eccle. Hier. c. 5. in contempl.
O divine and sacred Mystery, vouchsaif to open tne couerings of signifying
signs which are about thee, and apparently appeared and replenish the eyes of
our understanding, with a singular and manifest brightness of thy light.

When thou receiuest the holy meat, Origin. in hom. 5. in diuersos Euang.
locos.
and that incorrupted banquet, when thou do enjoy the bread and cup of
life; thou do eat and drink the body and blood of our Lord: Then our Lord
enters Under thy roof, and thou therefore humbling thy self, imitate the
Centurion and say, O lord I am not worthy that thou should enter under my
roof.

O Lord our God, the heavenly bread, S. Jacob. Apost. in Liturg. See S. Ciril.
Hierosol. catech. S. Mistag.
life of al, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and I am not
worthy to be made partaker of thine immacuate mysteries; but as a merciful
God, make me worthy of thy grace, that without condemnation, I may be partaker
of thy holy body and precious blood, to forgeuenes of sins, and life
everlasting.

O Lord who dwell above the Cherubim, Canon universal. seu mis. Ethiop.
ascribed to S. Mateew Apostle.
and look down upon thy people, and inheritance: bless thy servants and
their children; grant a portion to them that come to receive of thy miraculous
Table for purging of their mind, and remission of sins, and union of the
holy Ghost, and health of soul and bo,die, and inheritance of the Kingdom of
heaven. Amen.

Jacob. Apost. in mis. supr.
Taste and see that our Lord is bountiful, who distributed into parts, and not
divided, and bestowed upon the faithful, is not consumed, for remission of
sins, and life everlasting, now and ever and world without end.

Liturg. S. Marci Evangelist.
O Lord God almighty, we beseech thee, to drive away from our thought the dark
assaults of sin, and make our minds ioyfui with the brightness of thy holy
Spirit, that being increased with the knowledge of thee, we may worthily
participate of those good things, which are proposed unto thee, of the
immaculate body, and precious blood, of thine only begotten Son, our Lord,
and God, and Savior Jesus Christ. Forgive unto us al show of sins, by thy
manifold and unsearchable goodness, by the grace, and mercies, and gentleness of
thine only begotten Son, with whom to thee, be honor, and Rule, with the
most holy, and good, and quitning Spirit.

O Lord our God, S. Basil. Anaphor.
who out of the abundance of thy grace, have bestowed upon us al things: Thou
geuest unto us more then we demand, and more bou^tifully then we understand,
thou dealest with us: stretch forth o Lord, thy invisible hand, and bless thy
servants, and handmaides, and cleanse them from al spotte of flesh and spirit,
and vouchsaife us to be made partakers of the body of thine only begotten
Son, that with purity and holiness humble, we may offer our prayers to thee,
and unto thine only Son our Lord Jesus Crist, and to thy most holy Spirit, to
be adored world without end. Amen.

O our God, Basil. sup
let us not be guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ thy Son, nor sick in
mind, or body, because unworthy we participate the sacred Mysteries: but
rather grant unto us, that until our last breath, we may please thee and be
accounted worthy to receive the saving Sacraments of our Lord and Redemer
Jesus Christ, nor to be unworthy of his body and purging blood; but meet to
receive the^, that by them being strenghned, cleansed, and perfected, we may
worthily beseech thee, by that prayer which thy only begotten Son has taught
us, that we may cry with a pure heart and say. Our Father which are in heaven,
hallowed be thy name.

S. Ambros. l. 4. de Sacram. Tom. 4. Eras. praefat. in com. 4. Ambros.
O high Priest and true Bishop Jesus Christ, who have given for us wretched
sinners, thy flesh to eat, and thy blood to drink, cause me by thy grace
always to believe and understand, to think and firmly hold, to say and esteem of
so great a mystery, that which is pleasing unto thee, and profitable for my
soul. O holy bread, o lively bread, bread bewtiful, pure bread which did
descend from heaven, and geuest life to the world, come into my heart, and
cleanse me from al uncleanness of body and soul: enter into my soul, heal it
within, and without. Be thou a perpetual salvation of my body and soul. Drive
back from me the enemies which lie in wait for me. Let them depart from thy
presence, that I being both without and within defended by thee, may come by ^
ready path, to thy kingdom, where things are not handled with mysteries, as
in this time, but we shall see thee face to face, when thou shall deliver thy
kingdoms to God the Father and God shall be al in all. Then thou shall fill me
with thy self with a marvelous fulness, that I shall neither hunger nor thirst
for ever. Who with the Father and holy Ghost, live and reignest world without
end. Amen.

O Lord make me worthy, Chrisost. in liturg. to. 5.
by the Intercession of the unspotted, our Lady, Mother of God, and ever Virgin
Marie, that without condemnation I may receive thy immaculate guist to
remission of sins, to life everlasting, purgation of evil cogitations, for
illustration of thy commandments.

O Lord Jesus Christ, Gregor. in Sacramentar. Isodor. l. 1. offic. c. 1^.
Son of the living God, who by the will of thy Father, the holy Ghost
cooperating, have revived the world: deliver me by this thy sacred body and
blood, from al mine iniquities, and al evils, and cause me always to cleave to
thy commandemens, and suffer me never to be separated from thee: who with the
same God the Father and holy Ghost, live and reignest world without end.
Amen.

O Lord my God, S. Leander in liturg. Muzarab. in fest. S. Iacobi.
grant unto me so to receive the Body and Blood of thy Son our Lord Jesus,
that by it I may deserve to have forgeuenes of al my sins, and be replenished
with thy holy Spirit, o our God, who live and reignest world without end.
Amen.

Hail for ever, o most sacred flesh of Christ, for ever the greatest sweetness.
O Lord I am not worthy thou should enter under my roof, but only say the
word, and my soul shall be cured. O Lord I am not worthy thou shoudest enter
under my roof, but only say the word, and my soul shall be cured. O Lord I am
not worthy thou shoudest enter under my roof, but only say the word, and my
soul shall be cured. The Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, preserve my
body and soul unto everlasting life.

Amen.

S. Citil. Hierosol. mystag. catech 5.
After receiving of the body of Christ, I come to the Chalice of his blood
prostrate in manner of Adoration and worship saying. Amen.

Of Prayers and Thanks after receiving of this most blessed Sacrament of the
Altar, which is Christ's true Body and Blood.
Chapter. 14.
Having received the precious Body and precious Blood of Christ, S. Clem. To.
constitut. Apostol. l. 8. c. 21.
let us give thanks to him, who has made us worthy to receive his holy
Mysteries; And we ask that they be not to us for judgment, but salvation, for
the profit of our soul and body, for preservation of godliness, for remission
of sins, to life of the world to come.

O Lord God omnipotent, S. Clem. supr. l. 8. c. 22.
Father of Christ, thy blessed Son: the hearer of them which rightly call upon
thee, who know the intercessions of the silent. Let us give thanks unto
thee, for that thou have made us worthy of the participation of thy holy
Mysteries, which thou have given unto us for confirmation of things well
known; for keeping of piety, for remission of sins, because the name of thy
Christ is called upon over us, and we are reconciled unto thee: Thou who have
separated us from Communumcatinge with the ungodly, join us with those that be
consecrated unto thee, confirm us in truth, by the coming of the holy Ghost,
reveal things which we know not, fulfill things which are wanting, strengthen
things known, defend Preistes unspotted in thy service, preserve kings in
peace, Magistrates in justice, the air in holso^nes, the fruits in
fertility, the world in perfect providence. Repress warring Nations, convert
them that err, sanctify thy people, conserve Virgins keep the married in
faithfulness, strengthen the ignorant, bring infantes unto ripe age, confirm
nouices, instruct Cathecumens, and make them worthy to be admitted to thy
Mysteries, and gather us al together into the Kingdom of heaven, in Christ
Jesus our Lord, with whom to thee and the holy Ghost, be Glory, Honor, and
Worship, for ever. S. Thomas Apost. apud Abdiam l. 9. hist. Apost. in S. Thomas
Apostol. there the Eucharist was received in one kind.
Amen.

O Lord Jesus, I beseech, that this thy Sacrament, be unto us to life; that it
be to us for remission of sins, for thy Passion was celebrated for us. Thou
did drink gaul for us, that al bitterness of the adversary might dye in us.
Also for us thou did drink vinegar, that our wearines might be comforted.
Thou were spitted upon for us, that thou might sprincle us with immortal
dew. Thou wast stricken with a brittle reed, to make firm our brittlenes to
everlasting life and eternity. Thou wast crounned with thorns, to croune
those which believe in thee with the euerflorishing Laurel of thy love. Further
thou wast wrapped in a Syndon, to inuest us with a certain enwrapping of thy
virtue. Thon would be put in a new Sepulcher, to reform new grace, a new
world unto us. I desire this Eucharist be unto us to life, and the bowels of
mercy, and grace of salvation, and health of our souls. Amen.

O Lord fill our mouth with thy praise, S. Iocobus Apost. in liturg.
and replenish our lips with joy, that we may praise thy glory, and all the
day thy magnificence. We give thanks unto thee o Christ our God, because thou
have vouchsaifed us to be made partakers of thy body and blood, to remission of
sins, and life everlasting.

O God who for thy manifold and unspeakable bounty, have condescended to the
infirmity of thy servants, and vouch saifed to make us partakers of this
heavenly Table: condemn not us sinners, for receiving thine immaculate
mysteries, but bountifully preserve us in sanctification of thy holy Spirit,
that we being made holy, may obtain part and inheritance with all Saints,
which from eternity have been accepted of thee in the light of thy
countenance, by the mercy of thine only begotten Son our Lord and God, and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

O Lord thou have given unto us sanctification, and receiving of the most holy
body and precious blood of thine only begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ.
Bestow upon us also, the grace of thy good holy Spirit, and preserve us without
offense in faith: lead us into perfect adoption, and Redemption, and into those
future eternal fruitions. Amen.

Blessed be God, that blesses and sanctifies the receiving of his holy,
lively, and immaculate Mysteries, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

We give thanks to thee o our God, S. Basilius Anaphora.
we exalt thee the Father omnipotent, and merciful, and praise thee Creator of
the world, and adore thee abounding with mercy and grace, because thou have
taken mercy upon us, and cleansed us, and blotted forth our sins, and
vouchsaifed us the receiving of thy holy and lively Sacraments, which even the
Angels desires to behold: Therefore let their swetnes unto us a cleansing, and
their participation, for remission of sins before committed by us, and for a
medicine of those in which we are yet conversant: Finally for an avoiding and
defense against those which hereafter may be committed by us, and for joy and
exultation with Saints, who from the beginning have pleased thee.

We give thanks unto thee, Chrisost. Liturg.
o most gentle Lord Redemer of our souls, because at this present thou have
made us worthy of thy heavenly and immortal Mysteries. Direct thou our way,
keep us in fear, defend our life, strengthen our goinges, by the prayers and
intercessions of the holy and glorious Mother of God, and always Virgin Marie.
O God he thou exalted above the heavens, and thy glory over all the earth, now
and ever, world without end. Amen.

S. Leander et Isodor. in mis. Muzarab. in fest. S. Jacob.
O Lord my God, Father and Son and holy Ghost, cause me always to seek and
love thee, and by this holy Communion which I have received, never to depart
from thee, because thou art God, and besides thee, there shall be none other for
ever. Amen.

Being refreshed with the body and Blood of Christ, we praise thee o Lord,
Alleluya, Alleluya, Alleluya.

The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which we have received, and his holy blood
which we have drunk, adhere fast unto our bowels, o everlasting almighty God,
that it come not unto us to judgment nor condemnation, but profit to salvation,
and remedy of our souls unto life eternal. Amen.

Liturg. gottic.
O Christ Jesus, who have effected an evening Sacrifice by the Cross, in the
evening of the world: vouchsaif to make us new Sepulchers for thy Body.

Amen.
Of Sacramental Confession, a due preparation before receiving the most blessed
Sacrament of the Altar.
Chapter. 15.
THere is yet an other hard and laborious remission of sins by penance,
Origin. hom. 2. in leui^.
when the sinner does wash his couch with tears, and is not ashamed to tell his
sin to the Priest of our Lord, Psalm. 32.
and seek remedy, according to that, I will pronounce against me, mine
injustice to our Lord: and thou have forgeuen the wickedness of my heart.

Grant o Lord, Mis. Ethiop. ascribe to S. Matthew. Apost.
as thou have given unto to thy Preistes, the preisty office in thy holy
Church: so we beseech thy goodness and clemency, o lover of men, that they may
absolve us thy servants, and al bowing down their heads before thy sight in
this thy holy Sacrifice.

I confess to God almighty, S. Damas. S. Leander liturg. Muzarab. S. Anast.
finair. l. de S. Sina^ micralog. l. eccle. offic. c. ^3. gem. animae antiq.
rit. miss. c. ibi. 64.
to the Blessed Marie ever Virgin, to the blessed Michael Archangel, to the
blessed John Baptist, to the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and al Saints,
and to you my ghostly Father, that I have grievously offended in thought, word,
and deed, by my default, by my default, by my grievous default; Therefore I
beseech the B. Mary ever Virgin, blessed Michael Archangel, the holy Apostles
Peter and Paul and al Saints, and you my ghostly Father, to pray unto God for
me.

Praxis eccl. antiqui ord. Rom tit. confess. penitentialis. S. Albin. l. offic.
eccle. c. in capite Iemnii.
I confess to thee o Lord, Father of heaven and earth, and to thee o good and
most bountiful Jesus Christ, together with the holy Ghost, before thy holy
Angels, and thy Priest, that I was conceived in sin, and borne in sin, and
norished in sins, and conuersing in sins after Baptism, unto this hour: I
confess also, that I have sinned too-much, in pride, vainglory, in proud
looks, and apparel, and al mine actions, in envy, in hatred, in covetousness
as well of honor, as money: in anger, frowardnes, in sloth, in gluttony etc.
Here the penitent makes particular confession of al his sins he can
remember: which done before the Priest absolueth him, Antiq. eccle. Praxis apud
S. Albin. Flac. Alcuin. supr.
he adds as follows. Many surely, and innumerable others are my sins
which I can not remember, in deeds, in words, in thoughts; for all which my
wretched soul is sorrowful and sometime afflicted with sharp penance: therefore
I humbly beseech the counsel and judgment also of thee who art ordained
arbitratour and means, between God and man a sinner. And I humbly beseech thee,
that thou will be an Intercessor for the same my sins.

Because in these and al other vices, Praxis antiq. in ord. Romans supr.
in which humane frailty can sin against his Lord and maker, either in
thought, word, or deed, or delight, or desire, I know and confess my self to
have sinned, and to be guilty in the sight of God, above al men. Therefore I
humbly beseech al you, o holy Angels of God, and al Saints, and thee o
reverend Priest, in whose sight I have confessed al these things, that you may
be witnesses unto me in the day of Judgment, against the devil, adversary and
enemy of mankind, that I have confessed al these things. I also earnestly
entreat thee, o Priest of God, to make intercession for me, and my sins, to
our Lord God, that I may deserve to obtain pardon and Indulgence for these,
and al other my sins, by the merits and Intercessions of al Saints.

The Absolution by the Priest, is not for this place, but diverse forms thereof
are in the Ord. Romans in S. Albin. sup. Canon uniuers. and others.

Of the external preisthood of Christ's Church primarily consisting, in offering
the most holy Sacrifice of Christians Christ his most precious Body, and blood
for the living and dead.
Chapter. 16.
S. Marcus Evangelist. in Liturg.
O Lord, we offer this reasonable and unbloody Oblation, which al Nations offer
unto thee, from the rising of the Sun, to the setting thereof, from the north
to the south; because thy name is great among the Gentiles, and in every
place, Incence, and Sacricfice, and Oblation, is offered to thy name.

S. Clem. To. Co^stit. Apost. l. 8. c. 5. Bishops power and office from the
Apostles time.
O Lord almighty, give unto him participation of the holy Ghost, that he may
have power to remitte sins according to thy commandment; also to give orders
as thou have charged, and of unbinding al band, according to the power which
thou gave to thine Apostles, and to please thee in meeknes, and a clean
heart, offering unto thee without offense always, and without sin, that pure
and unbloody Sacrifice which by Christ thou have appointed, the Mystery of
the new Testament.

O Lord, o Lord, S. Iacobus Apostol. in liturg. see mis. romans antiq.
who have granted unto us abject sinners, and thy unworthy servants, that
with confidence we might come to thy holy Altar, and offer unto thee this
dreadful and unbloody Sacrifice for our sins and ignorances. O Lord let it
please thee, that we may be ministers of the Sacrifice of thine immaculate
Mysteries, and admit us coming to thy holy Altar, that we may be worthy to
offer Sacrifice for our selves, and for those things which the people by
ignorance has committed. O God have respect unto us, and behold this our
reasonable duty, and receive it, as thou receauedst the guiftes of Abel,
Sacrifices of Noe, Preistly duties of Moses and Aaron, pacifyinges of Samuel,
penance of David, Incence of Zachary: as thou receiuedst this true worship of
the hand of thine Apostles, so also from the hands of us sinners, receive by
thy gentleness, these guiftes proposed: and make that our Oblation, sanctified
by the holy Ghost, be grateful and acceptable for propitiation of our sins,
and those which the people by ignorance has committed.

Liturg. Ethiop. ascribed to S. Matthew. Apost.
O Lord, our god, who receiuedst the Sacrifice of Abel, and Noe, and Abraham,
and Elias, and David, and the oblation of the poor widow in the holy Temple:
So receive the oblatio^ of me, and al thy servants, offering in thy holy name;
and let it be a redemption for mine and their sins; and as we offer, so
render reward unto us in the world present, and to com world without end. Amen.

Enschius Cae. sariens. l. 1. Demonst. Euangelic. c. 10.

Malach. 1.11.


From the rising of the Sun, to the setting thereof, my name is glorified
among the Gentyles: and in every place, incense and a pure oblation is offered
unto me. Therefore we Sacrifice to our Lord, most high Sacrifice of praise, we
sacrifice to God the holy sacred Sacrifice, full, and bringing sweetness; we
sacrifice after a new manner according to the new Testament, a pure Oblation.

O Lord God receive our Supplication, make us worthy, Chrisost. in liturg.
Constant.
in offering prayers and the unbloody Sacrifice, for all thy people. Thou did
become Man, and were our high Priest, and as the God of al, deliueredst unto us
the Sacrament of this Mystery and unbloody Oblation. Make me worthy endued
with grace of Preisthoode, to assist to this thy holy Table, and consecrate
thy holy Body and precious Blood. Grant that I may offer these Sacraments unto
thee; for thou art he which offers, and he that is offered, he that
receives, and he that is distributed Christ our God.

O Christ our God, S. Basil. liturg. eccl. Cappad.
thou art he which offerest and art offered. O Lord thou have showed unto us
that great Mystery of salvation, thou have made us, wretches and thy unworthy
servants, to be worthy ministers of thy holy Altar.

O Lord grant, that our Sacrifice be acceptable, and receueable in thy sighr,
for all our sins and ignorance of thy people.

Basil. liturg. Syror.
Make us worthy to offer this reverend and unbloody Sacrifice, to put away our
sins, and for an expiation of thy people, and those sins which by ignorance
it has committed, and for the quiet rest of them that are deceased. O Lord,
holy of holies, God of powers, we offer unto thee, this reverend and incruental
sacrifice for thy holy Churches which are from one end of the earth, to the
other.

S. Barnab. Apost. and S. Ambros. in liturg. mediolan.
Almighty everlasting God, let this Oblation which I unworthy do offer to thy
piety, for me a wretch, and for mine innumerable offenses, be placable and
acceptable unto thee. We humbly ask and beseech, that thou will accept and
bless these guiftes, these offerings these holy unspotted Sacrifices which we
offer unto thee for thy Catholic church. We ask and pray, that thou will
receive this Oblation in thy high Altar by the hands of thine Angels, as thou
did vouchsaife to receive the guiftes of thy servant Abel the just, and
which thy high Priest Melchizedech has offered unto thee.

Ambros. l. 4. de Sacramen.
Being mindful of Christ's most glorious passion, and Resurection from those
below, and ascension into heaven: O Lord we offer unto thee this immaculate
Oblation, unbloody Sacrifice, this holy bread, and Chalice of eternal life: And
we ask and pray, that thou will receive this Oblation in thy high Altar by the
hands of thine Angels, as thou did vouchsaife to receive the gifts of thy
servant just Abel, and the Sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, and which the
high Priest Melchizedech, offered unto thee.

O Lord, Ambros. l. 4 de Sacram.
I being mindful of thy venerable passion, do come to thine Altar (although a
sinner) that I may offer unto thee the sacrifice which thou have instituted and
commanded to be offered in commemoration of thee, for our salvation. O high
God, receive it I beseech thee, for thy holy Church, and for the people which
thou have gotten with thy blood.

O high Priest and true Bishop Jesus Christ, who have given unto us thy flesh
to eat, and thy blood to drink, and have put this Mystery in virtue of the
holy Ghost saying, So often as you do these, you (...) shall do them in memory
of me. I ask by the same thy blood, the price of our salvation, I ask by this
marvelous and unspeakable Charity, with which thou have vouchsaifed to love us
wretches, and unworthy, that thou would wash us from our sins in thy
blood. Teach me thy unworthy servant whom thou have vouchsaifed to call unto
preistly function: teach me I beseech thee, by thy holy Spirit, to handle so
great a Mystery, with that reverence and honor, with that devotion and fear,
with which it behooves, and becomes. For thy great clemency grant me to
celebrate the solemnities of Mass, with a clean heart, and pure mind. For
with how great contrition of heart, and fountain of tears, with how great
reverence and trembling, with how great chastity of body and purity of soul,
is that divine and heavenly Sacrifice to be celebrated, where thy flesh in
truth is received, where thy Blood in truth is drunk, where lowest things are
joined to the highest, earthly things to divine, where the presence of holy
Angels is, where thou meruelously and unspeakably, art constituted Sacrifice
and Priest.

We ask thee also o Lord, for the souls of the faithful departed, that this
great Sacrament of piety, be unto them salvation, health, joy, and refreshing.

O Lord let that invisible and incomprehensible Majesty of thy holy Spirit,
descend, as long agone it did, upon the Oblations of the Fathers, and make our
Oblations thy Body and Blood, and teach me an unworthy Priest, to handle so
great a Mystery, with purity of heart and devotion of tears, with reverence
and dread, that thou may receive pleasedly and gently of my hands, for the
salvation of al both living and dead.

We ask that the holy Ghost coming, Liturg. eccle. Hierosol. auct. S. Iacobo
Apost.
may with his holy, good, and glorious presence, sanctify and make this bread,
the holy Body of thy Christ, and this Chalice, the precious Blood of thy
Christ, that it may be unto al receiving of them, to remission of sins.

O lover of men, Liturg. Ethiop.
we humbly beseech thee, that thou will show thy face upon this bread, and
Chalice, upon this portable Altar: Bless, sanctify, cleanse, and change this
bread into thine immaculate flesh, and this wine into thy precious blood.

S. Basil. liturg. Cappadoc.
O Lord Jesus Christ, our God, attend from thy holy Tabernacle, and from the
Throne of the Glory of thy Kingdom, and come to sanctify us, and vouchsaife
with thy powerable hand, to impart unto us thine impolluted body and precious
Blood, and by us, to all the people.

Basil. Anaphor. sir.
O Lord, make this bread, the glorious Body of our Lord, Jesus Christ, for
expiation of offenses, remission of sins, and life everlasting, to them that
receive it. Amen. And this Chalice the precious blood of our Lord God and
Savior Jesus Christ, for expiation of offenses, and forgeuenes of sins, and
life everlasting to them that receive it.

Amen.

S. Chrisost. in liturg. Constant.
O Lord send forth thy spirit upon us, and upon these guiftes proposed, and make
this bread the precious body of thy Christ, and that which is in this Chalice,
the precious blood of Christ thy Soon, transchanging them with thy holy Spirit.

Gel^si^s apud S. Albin. l. de divine. (...). c. de cel^^^^^. missae. ^t S.
Isodor. hisp^l. l. 1. de offic. c. 15. de mis. et or^ti^^^.
O Lord we beseech thee, that pacified. thou will accept this Oblation of our
service, and of al thy family. Which Oblation, o God, vouchsaif we beseech thee,
in all things to make blessed, ratified, and acceptable, that it may be made
for us the body and blood of thy most beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ.

O lord we thy servants, and thy holy people mindful of so blessed passion,
rising from hell, and ascension into heaven of the same Christ, thy Son our
Lord, do offer to thine excellent Majesty, out of thy guiftes, a pure
oblation, holy oblation, immaculate oblation, the holy bread of eternal life,
and Chalice of everlasting salvation. Vouchsaife to accept them, as thou did
the guiftes of thy servant just Abel, and the Sacrifice of our Patriarch
Abraham, and that which Melchizedech, thy high Priest offered unto thee, holy
Sacrifice, immaculate Oblation.

Humbly we beseech thee, o god almighty, that as many of us as shall receive of
this participatio^ of the Altar, the holy Body and Blood of thy Son, may be
filled with celestial Benediction and grace, by the same Christ our Lord.

Amen.

S. Ciril. Hierosolymitan. catech. mystag. 5.
O Lord, we offer this Sacrifice unto thee, that we may remember al those, which
before us are departed from this world: First the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs; that God by their prayers, will receive our prayers. We pray
for our holy Fathers and Bishops: after we pray for all which are dead among us,
believing it to be the greatest help of souls, for whom is offered prayer of
that holy and dreadful Sacrifice, which is placed upon the Altar. When we pray
for the dead, although they be sinners, we offer up Christ, who was slain for
our sins, that we may procure him who is most bountiful, to be merciful both
to our selves and them.

Litur. gottic.
O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, look upon us, and
have mercy upon us. Thou art made unto us a Sacrifice, who art our Priest:
Thou art our reward, who art our Redemer; keep us whom thou have redeemed, from
al evils.

What preeminence above al others, S. Peter and his Successors in his Sea
Apostolic have, in this sacred Preisthood.
Chapter. 17.
O Peter, S. Chrisost. ser. in adorat. c. 26. to. 4. sur.
the Rock and firmament of the Church, highest topp of the Apostles; I beseech
thee to be present this day, taking pity upon us; and in spirit, converse in
this place.

O B. Peter, Victor. vticen. l. 3. persecut. vandal.
why art thou silent for the sheep and Lambs committed unto thee by our common
Lord, with great charge and carefulnes.

O good Shepherd, gentle Peter, Elpis hi^n. de SS. Petro et Paulo.
receive the prayers of them that pray unto thee, and by authority committed
unto thee: Untie the bands of our sin.

The confession of Peter, S. Hilarious com. in Matthew. c. 16. upon S. Peter's
confess.
obtained plainly a worthy reward; because he had seen the Son of God in
man. Blessed is this man, who was praised to have fixed his eyes, and seen
more the^ a thing humane, Tu ei Christus f^lius Dei vi^i.
not beholding that which was of flesh and blood, but perceiving by the
revelation of out heavenly Father the Son of God, and judged worthy who
should first acknowledge that which was in the Christ of God. O happy
foundation of the Church in naming of thy new name, and a rock worthy of the
building by that Rock which should dissolve the infernal laws, and gates of
hell, and all the cloisters of death.

O blessed porter of heaven gates, to whose will the Keys of the everlasting
entry are committed, whose terrestrial Judgment preuenteth the authority in
heaven; that what things on earth are bound or loosed, obtain the condition
of the same decree in heaven.

Gregor. in sent. Cathedrae. S. Peeri. Apost. ^t in natal.
O God, who did bestow upon S. Peter thine Apostle, the Keys of the Kingdom
of heaven, and give unto him the high Preistly power of binding and loosing:
grant, that by the help of his intercession, we may be delivered from the
bands of our sins.

Gregor. l. 11. epist. 43. c. 44. ^^ Leon(...)sse.
By how much you more fear the maker of al things, so much more you may love
his Church, to whom it was said. Thou art Peter, Matthew. 16.
and upon this rock will build my Church, and the gaites of hell shall not
prevail against it: and I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of
heaven: and what soever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound also in
heaven, and whatsoever thou shall unbind on earth, shall be unbound in heaven.
From whence it is not doubtful unto us, with how strong a love you bind your
selves to him, by whom you desire to be unbound from all the bands of sins.
Therefore I beseech he may be the keeper of the Empire, a Protector to you on
earth, an Intercessor for you in heaven.

Let it be lawful for no man without danger of his state, Council. Romans circ.
An. 460.
to violate either the divine constitutions, or the Decrees of the Apostolic
Sea. We pray, that by S. Peter these things be observed for ever.

We, with all our Nobles, Constantinus magnus Imp. ad Syluest. Pap. Isodor.
hispal. hist. Isodor. Iun. collect. can. Adrian. primus epist. ad Constant. et
Iren.
and the whole Senate, and my Lords; and al people, subject to the Roman glory
of the Empire, have Judged profitable, that as S. Peter, seems to have been
constituted the Vicar of the Son of God on earth: so also the Popes, which
are Successors of the same prince of the Apostles, Ado. vien. Chron. aetat. 6.
etc.
obtain power of principality, more then the terrene meeknes of our Emperial
serenitie, granted from us and our Empire, choosing unto us the same Prince of
the Apostles, and his successors, to be firm Patrons with God.

Pelag. 2. epist. ad illegit. Synod. Constantinop. An. 579.
Pray, that the Ecclesiastical honor, be not euacuated in our days; nor at any
time the Roman Sea, which by our Lords inssitution, is the head of al
Churches, may want, or be spoiled of her privileges in any place.

Canon. vniuersalis or Ethiop. liturg. the. Priests prayer.
O Lord God almighty, who by the mouth of thine only begotten Son, our Lord
God and Savior Jesus Christ, have said to our Father Peter, Thou art a Rock,
and upon this Rock will I build my Church; and the gates of hell shall not preuail
against it (to be shaked) and I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of
heaven: whomsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven; and
whomsoever thou shall unbind on earth, shall be unbound in heaven. Let thy
servants and handmaides be unbound from the mouth of the holy Trinity, the
Father, the Son, and holy Ghost, and also from my mouth, thy servant a
sinner, and full of offenses.

What diversity of orders and degrees belongs to true Preisthood, Vows,
Virginity, Chastity, and al degrees of the Church.
Chapter. 18.
O Lord remember thy holy and only Catholic, Liturg. S. Marci.
and Apostolic Church, from the ends of the earth, unto the last ends
thereof, is diffused, and al thy people, and al thy foldes.

O Lord God omnipotent, we pray and beseech thee, to preserve the most holy, and
most blessed high Priest, Pope N. and most reverend Bishop N: Preserve them
unto us many years peaceably executing holy preisthood, for thy holy, and
blessed will, rightly administering the word of truth, with all orthodoxal Bishops
Preistes, Deacons, Subdeacons, Lectors, singers, and Lay people.

S. Basil. Anaphor. council. 6. general.
O Lord remember the orthodoral Bishops, Preistes, Deacons Subdeacons, Lectors,
singers, Monks, perpetual Virgins, Widows, Lay people living in all places.

S. Gregor. Sacramentar. Mis. antiq. et ord. Romans ser. 6. Parasc.
O Lord who did breath upon the faces of thine Apostles, and say unto them,
Receive the holy Ghost,: so breath upon us thy servants, standing round about
in the entrance of the holy ministry, Bishops Preistes, Deacons, Lectors,
Singers, and Lay people, with all fulness of the Catholic and Apostolic
Church.

O Lord remember our fathers, and brethren, which are dead in the true Faith,
Preistes, Deacons, Subdeacons, Lectors, Monks, living in perpetual chastity.

Let us pray for all Bishops, Preistes, Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolythites,
Enorcistes, Lectors, Ostiaries, Confessors, Virgins, Widows, and for all the
holy people of God.

Liturg. S. Iacobi council. 6. general.
Let us pray unto our Lord for those which live in Virginity and Chastity in
Monasteries, and in venerable Marriage, and for our holy fathers and brethren
that be exercised in mountains, in caves, and holes of the earth.

Let us beseech our Lord, Missal. gottic.
praying for our brethren, which have vowed glorious Virginity in body and
mind, that the spirit of mercy may prosecute them even to the consummation of
their purpose.

O Lord behold sacred Virgins, and voluntary chaste persons, the precious
Margarites of thy Church, that with an equal estimation, they may keep their
bodies and spirit, with an inuiolate conscience of chastity, by Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, thou have showed unto me, S. Thomas Apost. apud Abdiam l. 9. histor.
in S. Thoma.
that I am thine, for which I never took wife, that I might wholly intend to
thee, lest the use of coniugal love, might diminish, or custom dissolve, the
grace of thy Temple.

You Virgins, S. Ignatius ep ad Philadel.
have you only Christ in your prayers before your eyes, and his father, you
being illuminate by the holy Ghost. God grant I may enjoy your sanctity, as
of Jesus the son of Naue, as of Melchizedech, as of Elizeus, as of John
Baptist, as of that beloved Disciple, as of Timotheus, as of Titus, as of
Euodius, as of Clement, which ended this life in purity.

Ambros. l. 4. de Sacrment.
O King of Virgins, and lover of chastity and integrity, with the heavenly dew
of thy blessing, quench in my body, the nurishment of burning lust, that the
tenure of chastity of body and soul remain in me. Mortify in my members the
pricks of flesh, and al lascivious motions, and give unto me true and
perpetual Chastity, with the rest of thy guiftes, which please thee in truth,
that I may be able to offer unto thee the sacrifice of praise, with a chaste
body, and clean heart.

Laus Deo.

