THE MYSTERY OF THE LORDS SVPPER.

CLEARLY MANIFESTED IN FIVE SERMONS; Two of Preparation, and Three of the
Sacrament it self.

BY A REVEREND AND Faithful Preacher of Gods word.

JOHN 6.54.63. Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

It is the Spirit that quickens; the flesh profits nothing: the words that
I speak unto you are spirit and life.

AT LONDON Imprinted for Thomas Man. 1614.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
I Present here unto thy view (good reader) a learned and godly treatise,
wherein the Doctrine of the Lords supper is both plainly and fully handled. A
work which heretofore has been in diverse men's hands, yet not without some
inconvenience; for being at first borne in another soil then our own, it was
written in a language (though but the same, with ours in substance) yet by
reason of the peculiar dialect or propriety so often varying, and more then
sufficient to make them that are not thoroughly acquainted with the difference,
to mistake even things that to our understanding are much more familiar then
the holy mysteries of our salvation. The consideration of which incommodity did
move a worthy and truly religious Gentleman M. S. Michell, to take the pains
to peruse and polishe so good a work to the end to publish it, that so it
might be profitable to all: But having scarce finished and prepared it for the
press, it pleased God to take him to himself, before he could see a final
end of this, and many other his religious and honest endeavors, yet least the
Church should have lost so precious a Jewel (his zeal of good doing
continuing unto the end) he committed the execution of this so godly a desire,
to the special care of one of his good and trusty friends, who being faithful
in the trust committed unto him is a principal means that now it comes
safely to thy hands; receive it therefore and esteem it (as the most godly and
judicious have ever done) the best and most profitable treatise that ever has
bin published of this subject, and cease not to thank God for raising up so
many means to procure thy good, whose sole end in all their labors is Gods
glory, and the furthering of thy true happiness. Farewell.

Thine in Christ Jesus, F. B.

The first Sermon upon the Sacraments in general.
1. Corin. 11.23. For I have received of the Lord, that which I also have
delivered unto you, to wit, that the Lord Jesus in the night that he was
betrayed, took Bread, etc.
THere is nothing in this world, nor out of this world, more to be wished of
every one of you, more to be craved, and sought, of every one of you, then to
be conjoined with Christ Jesus, then once to be made one, with the God of
glory, Christ Jesus. This heavenly, and celestial conjunction, is purchased
and brought about, by two special means; It is brought about, by means of
the word and preaching of the Gospel: and it is brought about, by the means
of the Sacraments, and ministration thereof. The word leads us to Christ, by
the ear; the Sacraments, lead us to Christ, by the eye: Two senses, of all the
rest, which God has chosen, as most meet for this purpose, to instruct us, and
bring us unto Christ. For that doctrine must be most effectual, and moving,
that wakeneth and stirs up most of the outward senses: that doctrine, that
wakeneth not only the ear, but the eye, the taste, the feeling, and all the
rest of the outward senses, must move the heart most, must be most effectual,
and pearcing in the soul. But so it is, that this doctrine of the Sacraments,
moves, stirs up, and wakens most of the outward senses, therefore it must be
(if we come well prepared unto it) most effectual to stir up the inward
senses of the dull heart. But there is a thing, that ye must ever remember;
there is no doctrine, neither of the simple word, nor yet of the Sacraments, if
Christ abstract his holy spirit, that is able to move: therefore, when ever ye
come to hear the doctrine, whether it be of the Sacraments, or of the simple
word, crave of God, that he would be present by his holy spirit, or otherwise
all the doctrine in the earth will not awaile you. Always, this doctrine of
the Sacraments, stirs up, and wakens most of the outward senses, and
therefore there is no question, but it is an effectual, and potent instrument,
to waken, prepare, and stir up our hearts.

Then to let you see what the word Sacrament means: The diverse taking of the
word Sacrament.
and to remove the ambiguitie of it, it is certain, and out of all question,
that the Latin Divines, who were most ancient, did interpret the Greek word
(...), by the word Sacrament; and they used the Greek word, not only to
signify the whole action of the Supper of the Lord, and the whole action of
Baptism: but they used the word Mystery, to signify whatsoever is dark, and
bid in it self, and not frequented in the common use of men: as after this
manner, the Apostle calls the vocation of the Gentiles a mystery. Ephesians 3.9.
Ephesians. 5.32.
This conjunction which is begun here betwixt us and Christ, is called a
Mystery; and the Latin Interpreters, call it a Sacrament: and to be short, ye
will not find in the book of God a word more frequent, then the word
Mystery. But as for the word Sacrament, whereby they interpret the Greek word,
we find not this word by the same Divines to be taken so largely; neither is
it taken so largely in any part of the book of God. Always the word
Sacrament, is very ambiguous in it self, and there arises about the
ambiguitie of this word many controversies, which are not yet ceased, nor will
not cease while the world lasts: whereas if they had kept the Apostles words,
and called them as the Apostle calls them, Signs, and Seals; all this
digladiation, strife and contention, appearingly had not fallen out: but where
men will be wiser then God, and give names to things without warrant from God,
upon the wit of man, which is but mere folly, all this stir falls out.
Well then, to come unto the purpose; The ancient Divines took the word
Sacrament, as we may perceive, in a fourefold manner: Sometime they took it
for the whole action; that is, the whole ministry of the Elements: sometime,
they took it not for the whole action, but for the outward things, that are
used in the action of Baptism, and of the Supper, as they took it, for the
water, and sprinkling of it; for the Bread and Wine breaking, distributing,
and eating thereof. Thirdly again, they took it not for the whole outward
things, that are used in the action, but only for the material, and earthly
things, the Elements: as, for Bread and Wine in the Supper, and water in
Baptism. And after this sort, says Augustine, the wicked eat the body of our
Lord, concerning the Sacrament only, that is, concerning the Elements only.
Last of all they took it not only for the Elements, but for the things
signified by the Elements. And after this manner, Irenaeus says, that a
Sacrament stands of two things: the one, earthly; the other, heavenly. The
ancient Divines then, taking the word after these sorts, no question, all these
ways they took it rightly.

But leaving the ambiguitie of the word, I take the word Sacrament, as it is
taken, and used this day in the Church of GOD, for a holy Sign and Seal that
is annexed to the preached word of God, to seal up and confirm the truth
contained in the same word: so that I call not the seal, separated from the
word a Sacrament. For, as there can not be a seal, but that which is the
seal of an evidence, and if the seal be separated from the evidence, it is
not a seal, but look what it is by nature, it is no more: So there cannot be
a Sacrament, except it be annexed to the evidence of the word; but look what
the Sacrament was by nature, it is no more. Was it a common piece of bread? it
remains common bread, except it be joined to the evidence of the word.
Therefore the word only cannot be a Sacrament, nor the element only, cannot
be a Sacrament; but the word and element coniunctly, must make a Sacrament.
And so Augustine said well, Let the word come to the element, and so ye shall
have a Sacrament. So then, the word must come to the element: that is, the
word preached distinctly, and all the parts of it opened up, must go before
the hanging to of the sacrament; and the Sacrament as a seal must follow, and
so be received accordingly.

Then I call a Sacrament, the word and seal coniunctly, the one hung to the
other. It is without all controversy, and there is no doubt in it, that all
Sacraments are signs: Now if a Sacrament be a sign, as the sign is in a
relation, in that Category, for so we must speak it: so the Sacrament must be
placed in that same Category of relation. Now every relation again must stand
of force betwixt two things; for one thing cannot be the correlatiue of it
self: but in a lawful relation, of force there must be two things, which two,
have ever a mutual respect the one to the other: therefore, in every Sacrament
that has a relation, there must be two things, which two have ever a mutual
respect the one to the other.

Take away one of these two things from the Sacrament, ye lose the relation;
and losing the relation, ye lose the Sacrament. Confound any of these two with
the other, make either a confusion or permixtion of them, ye lose the relation:
and losing the relation, ye lose the Sacrament. Turn over the one into the
other, so that the substance of the one, starts up, and vanishes in the other;
ye lose the relation, and so ye lose the Sacrament. Then as in every
Sacrament there is a relation; so to keep the relation, ye must ever keep
two things severally in the Sacrament.

Now, The heads to be entreated in this Sermon.
for the better understanding and consideration of these two diverse things,
which are relative to others, we shall keep this order by Gods grace. two;
whether they be offered to one instrument, or two; or if they be given after one
manner, or two, to both the instruments. Mark these diversities; the diverse
manner of the receiving, the diversity of the Instruments, and the diversity
of the giuers: and ye shall find little difficulty in the Sacrament.

Now, to begin at the signs, The signs in the Sacrament.
what call we the signs in the Sacrament? I call the signs in the Sacrament,
whatsoever I perceive, and take up by my outward senses, by mine eye
especially. Now ye see in this Sacrament, there are two sorts of things subject
to the outward senses, and to the eye especially: ye see the Elements of Bread
and Wine are subject to mine eye; therefore they must be signs. Ye see again,
that the rites and ceremonies, whereby these Elements are distributed, broken,
and given, are subject to mine eye also: Then I must make two sorts of signs;
one sort of the Bread and the Wine, and we call them Elementall: another sort
of the rites and ceremonies, whereby these are distributed, broken, and given,
and we call them ceremonial. Be not deceived with the word Ceremony; think
not, that I call the breaking of the Bread, the eating of the Bread, and
drinking of the Wine, Ceremonies: think not that they are vain, as ye use
that word Ceremony for a vain thing, which has no grace, nor profit,
following after it. No, although I call them Ceremonies, there is never a
Ceremony which Christ instituted in this Supper, but it is as essential, as
the Bread and Wine are, and ye cannot leave one jot of them, except ye
pervert the whole institution: for what ever Christ commanded to be done, what
ever he spoke, or did, in that whole action, it is essential, and must be
done; and ye cannot leave one jot thereof, but ye will pervert the whole
action.

The reason, wherefore I call them signs, Why they are called signs.
is this: I call them not signs by that reason that men commonly call them
signs, because they signify only; as the Bread signifies the body of Christ,
and the Wine signifies the blood of Christ: I call them not signs because they
represent only; but I call them signs, because they have the body and blood
of Christ conjoined with them. Yea, so truly is the body of Christ conjoined
with that Bread, and the blood of Christ conjoined with that Wine, that as
soon as thou receiuest that Bread in thy mouth (if thou be a faithful man or
woman) so soon receiuest thou the body of Christ in thy soul, and that by
faith: and as soon as thou receiuest that Wine in thy mouth, so soon thou
receiuest the blood of Christ in thy soul, and that by faith: In respect of
this exhibition chiefly, that they are instruments to deliver, and exhibit
the things that they signify, and not in respect only of their
representation, are they called signs. For if they did nothing but represent,
or signify a thing absent; then any picture, or dead Image should be a
Sacrament: for there is no picture, as the picture of the King, but at the
sight of the picture, the King will come in your mind, and it will signify
unto you, that, that is the Kings picture: So, if the sign of the Sacrament
did no further, all pictures should be Sacraments: but in respect the
Sacrament exhibites, and delivers the thing that it signifies, to the soul
and heart, so soon as the sign is delivered to the mouth, for this cause
especially, it is called a sign. There is no picture of the King, that will
deliver the King unto you; there is no other Image, that will exhibit the
thing, whereof it is the Image: therefore there is no Image can be a Sacrament.
Then, in respect the Lord has appointed the Sacraments, as hands to deliver,
and exhibit the thing signified, for this delivery, and exhibition chiefly,
they are called signs. As the word of the Gospel, is a mighty and potent
instrument to our everlasting salvation: so the Sacrament is a potent
instrument, appointed by GOD, to deliver us to Christ Jesus, to our everlasting
salvation. For this spiritual meat, is dressed, and given up to us in
spiritual dishes: that is, in the ministry of the word, and in the ministry
of the Sacraments. And suppose this ministry be external, yet the Lord is
said to deliver spiritual, and heavenly things, by these external things.
Why? Because he has appointed them as instruments, whereby he will deliver
his own Son unto us. For this is certain, that none has power to deliver
Christ Jesus unto us, except God, and his holy spirit: and therefore, to speak
properly, there is none can deliver Christ, but God by his own spirit: he is
delivered by the ministry of the holy Spirit; it is the holy Spirit, that
seals him up in our hearts, and confirms us more and more in him: as the
Apostle gives him this style, 2. Cor. 1.22.

To speak properly, there is none has power to deliver Christ, but GOD the
Father, or himself. There is none has power to deliver the Mediator, but his
own spirit: yet it has pleased GOD, to use some instruments and means, whereby
he will deliver Christ Jesus unto us. The means are these; the ministry of
the word, and the ministry of the Sacraments; and in respect he uses these
as means, to deliver Christ, they are said to deliver him. But here ye have
to distinguish, between the principal efficient deliverer, and the
isntrumental efficient; which is, the word, and the Sacraments: keeping this
distinction, both these are true; GOD by his word, and GOD by his spirit,
delivers Christ Jesus unto you. Then I say, I call the^ signs, because God
has made them potent instruments, to deliver that same thing which they
signify.

Now I go to the thing signified, What is the thing signified in the Sacrament.
that, which Irenaeus, that old Writer, calls, the heavenly and spiritual
thing: to wit, whole Christ, with his whole gifts, benefits, and graces,
applied, and given to my soul. Then I call not the thing signified, by the
signs of Bread and Wine; the benefits of Christ, the graces of Christ, or the
virtue that flows out of Christ only: but I call the thing signified,
together with the benefits, and virtues flowing from him, the very substance
of Christ himself, from which this virtue does flow. The substance, with the
virtues, gifts, and graces, that flow from the substance, is the thing
signified here. As for the virtue and graces that flow from Christ, it is not
possible that thou can be partaker of the virtue that flows from his
substance, except thou be first partaker of the substance it self. For how is
it possible, that I can be partaker of the juice that flows out of any
substance, except I be partaker of the substance it self first?

Is it possible that my stomach can be refreshed with that meat, the substance
whereof came never in my mouth? Is it possible my drouth can be slackned with
that drink, that passed never down my throat? Is it possible, that I can
suck any virtue out of any thing, except I get the substance first? So it
is impossible, that I can get the juice and virtue, that flows out of Christ,
except I get the substance, that is himself, first. So I call not the thing
signified, the grace, and virtue that flows from Christ only; nor Christ
himself, and his substance, without his virtue and graces only; but jointly,
the substance with the graces, whole Christ, God, and man, without separation
of his natures, without distinguishing of his substance from his graces.

I call the thing signified, by the signs in the Sacrament: for why? if no
more be signified by the Bread, but the flesh, and body of Christ only, and no
more be signified by the Wine, but the blood of Christ only, thou can not
say, that the body of Christ, is Christ; it is but a part of Christ: thou can
not say, that the blood of Christ, is whole Christ; it is but a part of him:
and a piece of thy Savior, saved thee not; a part of thy Savior, wrought not
the work of thy salvation: and so suppose thou get a piece of him in the
Sacrament, that part will do thee no good.

To the end therefore, that this Sacrament may nourish thee to life
everlasting, thou must get in it thy whole Savior, whole Christ, God, and man,
with his whole graces, and benefits, without separation of his substance, from
his graces, or of the one nature, from the other. And how get I him? Not by my
mouth. It is a vain thing to think, that we will get God by our mouth: but we
get him by faith. As he is a spirit, so I eat him by faith; and believe in my
soul, not by the teeth of my mouth: that is a vain thing. Be it, that thou
might eat the flesh of Christ with thy teeth, this were a cruel manner of
doing; yet thou may not eat the Godhead with thy teeth: this is a gross
fashion of speaking. Then if ever ye get good of the Sacrament, ye must get
whole Christ; and there is not any instrument whereby to lay hold on him, but
by faith only: therefore come with a faithful heart.

O, but ye will ask me (and by appearance, the definition laid down of the
thing signified, gives a ground to it) If the flesh of Christ, thing, and
Christ is called spiritual, in respect of his flesh: not, that his flesh is
become a spirit; or that the substance of his flesh, is become spiritual. No,
it remains true flesh, and the substance of it, is one, as it was in the
womb of the Virgin. His flesh is not called spiritual, in respect it is
glorified in the heavens, at the right hand of the Father; be not deceived with
that: for suppose it be glorified, yet it remains true flesh, that same very
flesh which he took out of the womb of the blessed Virgin. Neither is it
spiritual, because thouseest it not in the Supper; if thou were where it is,
but in respect it nourishes my soul, not to an earthly and temporal life,
but to an heavenly, celestial, and spiritual end; In respect of this end, the
flesh of Christ, and Christ in respect of his flesh, is called the spiritual
thing in the Sacrament. It is called also the spiritual thing in the Sacrament,
in respect of the spiritual instrument, whereby it is received. The instrument
whereby the flesh of Christ is received, is not a corporal instrument; is not
the teeth, and mouth of the body; but it is spiritual; it is the mouth of the
soul, which is faith: and in respect the instrument is spiritual, therefore
Christ, who is received, is also called spiritual. In respect also, that the
manner of receiving, is a heavenly, spiritual, and internal manner; not a
natural, nor external manner: in respect that the flesh of Christ, which is
given in the Sacrament, is received by a spiritual, and secret manner, which is
not seen to the eyes of men; In all these respects, I call Christ Jesus the
heavenly and spiritual thing, which is signified by the signs in the
Sacrament.

Now, The thing signified, must be applied.
I say in the end, the thing signified must be applied to us. What avails it
me, to see my medicine in a box, standing in an Apothecaries shop? what can it
work toward me, if it be not applied? What avails it me to see my salvation
afar of, if it be not applied to me? Therefore, it is not enough for us, to
see Christ, but he must be given us, or else he cannot work health and
salvation in us. And as this salvation is given us, we must have a mouth to
take it. What avails it me, to see meat before me, except I have a mouth to
take it? So, the thing signified in the Sacrament, must be given us, by God, by
the Three persons of the Trinity, one GOD; by Christ Jesus, who must give
himself: and as he gives himself, so we must have a mouth to take him.
Suppose he present, and offer himself, yet he can profit, and avail none but
them, who have a mouth to receive him. Then ye see, what I call the thing
signified: whole Christ, applied to us, and received by us: whole Christ, God,
and man, without separation of his natures; without distinguishing of his
substance from his graces, All applied to us. Then, I say, seeing we come to
the Sacrament to be fed by his flesh, and refreshed by his blood, to be fed to
an heavenly, and spiritual life: and seeing there is no profit to be had at
this Table, without some kind of preparation; therefore let no man prease to
come to this holy Table, except in some measure he be prepared.

Some will be prepared in a greater measure then others; always, let no man
presume to go to it, except, in some measure, his heart be sanctified:
therefore, my exhortation concerning the way, whereby every one of you ought to
prepare your selves, that ye may fit you the better to this Table, is this;
there is not one of you, that comes to the Table of the Lord, that may bring
before the Lord, his integrity, justice, and vprightnes: but whosoever goes
to the Table of the Lord, he ought to go, with the acknowledging, and
confession of his misery: he ought to go with a sorrowful heart, for the
sins wherein he has offended God; he ought to go with a hatred of those
sins. Not to protest, that he is holy, just, and upright: but to protest,
and confess, that he is miserable, and of all creatures the most miserable:
and therefore he goes to that Table, to get support for his misery, to
obtain mercy, at the throne of Grace: to get remission, and forgiveness of his
sins; to get the gift of repentance, that more, and more, he may study to
live uprightly, holily, and soberly in all time to come. Therefore, except ye
have entered into this course, and have a purpose to continue in this course; to
amend your life past, to repent you of your sins, and by the grace of God, to
live more uprightly, and soberly then ye have done, for Gods cause go not to
the Table. For, where there is not a purpose to do well, and to repent, of
necessity, there must be a purpose to do ill: and whosoever comes to that
Table, with a purpose to do ill, and without a purpose to repent, he comes
to mock Christ, to scorn him to his face, and to eat his own
present-condemnation. So, let no man come to that Table, that has not in his
heart a purpose to do better, that has not a heart to sorrow for his sins
past, and thinks not his former folly, and madness ouer-great: Let no man
come to that Table, without this, under the pain of condemnation. But if ye
have in your heart, a purpose to do better, suppose your former life has been
dissolute, and loose; yet, if ye be touched in your hearts, with any feeling or
remorse of your life past, go not from the Table, but come with a
protestation of your misery and wretchedness, and come with a heart to get
grace: if with a dissolute life (I mean not of open slanders) thou have also
a purpose not to amend, but to do worse, for Gods sake abstain.

Thus far of the thing signified. Unto this general consideration, there
remains these things yet to be made plain unto you: First, how the signs,
and the thing signified are coupled together, and how they are conjoined. Next,
it restes to be told you, how the sign is delivered, and how the thing
signified is delivered, and how both are received, as well as they are
delivered. This being done, I shall speak briefly of the other part of the
Sacrament, which is the word. And last of all, I shall let you see, what sort
of faults they are, that pervert the Sacrament, and make it of no effect. And
if time shall serve, I shall enter in particular, to this Sacrament which we
have in hand.

Then to come back again; In the third place, How the sign and the thing
signified, are joined together.
it is to be considered, how the sign, and the thing signified, are coupled:
For, about this conjunction, all the debate stands; all the strifes, that we
have with them that vary from the straight truth, stand about the matter of
this conjunction. Some will have them conjoined one way, and some, after
another way; and men strive very bitterly about this matter; and continue so in
strife, that through the bitterness of contention, they lose the truth: for
when the heat of contention arises, and especially in disputation, they take
no heed to the truth, but to the victory. If they may be victorious, and it
were but by a multitude of words, they regard not, suppose they lose the truth.
Read their works, and books about this conjunction, and you will crave, rather
conscience, then knowledge: yea, if they had the quarter of the conscience,
that they have of knowledge, no question, this controversy might be easily
taken up: but men lacking conscience, and having knowledge, an evil conscience
peruerts the knowledge, and draws them to an evil end.

To tell you now, how these two are conjoined, it will be far easier for me,
and better for you to understand, to tell you first, how they are not
conjoined: for I shall make it very clear unto you, by letting you see how
they are not conjoined: but it is not possible to make it so clear, by telling
you the manner, how they are conjoined. Ye may perceive clearly by your
eyes, that the sign, and the thing signified, are not locally conjoined: that
is, they are not both in one place. Ye may perceive also by your outward
senses, that the body of Christ, which is the thing signified, and the signs,
are not conjoined corporally, their bodies touch not each other. You may
perceive also, they are not visibly conjoined, they are not both subject to the
outward eye: So it is easy to let you see, how they are not conjoined. For if
the sign, and the thing signified were visibly, and corporally conjoined, what
need were there for us to have a sign? Wherefore should the sign in the
Sacrament serve us? Is not the sign in the Sacrament, appointed to lead me
to Christ? Is not the sign appointed to point out Christ unto me? If I saw
him present by mine own eye, as I do the Bread, what need had I of the
Bread? Therefore ye may see clearly, that there is no such thing, as a
corporal, natural, or any such like physical conjunction, between the
sign, and the thing signified: So I say, it is easy to let you see, how they
are not conjoined.

Now, let us see how they are conjoined. We cannot crave here any other sort
of conjunction, then may stand and agree with the nature of the Sacrament: for,
nothing can be conjoined with another, after any other sort, then the nature of
it will suffer; therefore, there cannot be here any other sort of conjunction,
then the nature of the Sacrament will suffer. Now, the nature of the Sacrament,
will suffer a Sacramental conjunction. O, but that is hard yet, ye are never
the better for this; but I shall make it clear by Gods grace. Ye know every
Sacrament is a mystery; there is not a Sacrament but it contains a high, and
divine mystery. In respect then, that a Sacrament is a mystery, it follows,
that a mystical secret, and spiritual conjunction, agrees well with the
nature of the Sacrament.

As the conjunction between us, and Christ, is full of mystery, as the
Apostle lets you see, Ephe. 5.32. that it is a mystical, and spiritual
conjunction: So no doubt, the conjunction between the Sacrament, and the thing
signified in the Sacrament, must be of that same nature, mystical, and
spiritual. It is not possible to tell you, by any ocular demonstration, how
Christ and we are conjoined. But whosoever would understand that conjunction,
his mind must be enlightened with an heavenly eye; that as he has an eye in
his head, to see corporal things: so he must have in his mind and heart, an
heavenly eye, to see this mystical conjunction; a heavenly eye, to take up
this secret conjunction, that is betwixt the son of God, and us, in the
Sacrament. So I need not to insist any longer heerupon: except ye have this
heavenly illumination, ye can never understand neither your own conjunction
with Christ, nor yet the conjunction between the sign, and the thing signified
in the Sacrament.

But I keep my ground: As the Sacrament is a mystery; so the conjunction that
is in the Sacrament, no doubt must be a mystical secret, and spiritual
conjunction. Besides this, I will let you see by a general deduction, that in
every Sacrament, are two things; which two, have a relation, and mutual
respect the one to the other: so that a relative conjunction, agrees well with
the nature of the Sacrament. Then will thou ask, what kind of conjunction it
is? I answer, the conjunction that agrees in nature: to wit, a relative, and
a respective conjunction; such a conjunction, wherein the sign has a
continual respect to the thing signified; and the thing signified, to the
sign.

Then, would you know in a word, the kind of conjunction, that is between
the sign, and the thing signified? I call it a secret, and a mystical
conjunction, that stands in a mutual relation, between the sign, and the
thing signified. There is another conjunction, besides the conjunction that is
between Christ and us, that may make this conjunction betwixt the sign, and
the thing signified in the Sacrament, more clear: and this is the conjunction
which is between the word which you hear, This conjunction is made clear, by
the coniunctio^ betwixt the word, and the thing signisied thereby.
and the thing signified by the same word. Mark what sort of conjunction is
between the word which you hear, and the thing signified which comes into
your mind; the like conjunction is between the sign that you see, and the
thing signified in the Sacrament. You may perceive easily, that there is a
conjunction, by the effect, although you cannot so well know the manner of
conjunction. And why? You hear not the word so soon spoken by me, but
incontinent, the thing, which my words whereof I speak, signify, comes into
your mind. If I speak of things past, of things to come, or of things that
are never so far absent, I can no sooner speak to you of them in this
language, but presently the thing signified, comes into your mind; no doubt,
because there is a conjunction between the word, and the thing signified: So
every one of you may easily perceive, that there is a conjunction between the
word, and the thing signified by the word. As for example: Suppose Paris be far
distant from us; yet if I speak of Paris, the word is no sooner spoken, but
the City will come into your mind. If I speak of the King, although he be
far distant from us, the word is no sooner spoken, but the thing signified
will come into your mind: So this coming of the thing signified into the heart,
and mind, makes it plain unto you, that there is a conjunction between the
word, and the thing signified by the word.

To tell you of this sort of conjunction, it is not so easy, because the thing
signified is not present unto the eye, as the word is to the ear. If every
thing signified, were as present unto your eye, as the word is to your ear, it
were easy to see the conjunction: but now seeing the conjunction is
mystical, secret, and spiritual, therefore it is hard to make you to
understand it: ever observe, What conjunction is between the simple word, and
the thing signified by the word; the same kind of conjunction, is between the
Sacrament, and the thing signified by the Sacrament: for the Sacrament, is no
other thing, but a visible word. I call it a visible word, why? because it
conueyes the signification of it, by the eye, to the mind; as this is an
audible word, because it conueyeth the signification of it, by the ear to the
mind.

In the Sacrament, so often as ye look on it, ye shall no sooner see that
Bread with your eye, but the body of Christ shall come into your mind; ye shall
no sooner see that Wine, but after the preaching, and opening up of the parts
of the Sacrament, the blood of Christ shall come into your mind.

Now, this conjunction, between the sign, and the thing signified in the
Sacrament, stands chiefly, as ye may perceive, in two things. First, in a
relation, between the sign, and the thing signified; which arises from a
likeness, and proportion betwixt them two: for if there were no proportion, and
analogy between the sign, and the thing signified by the sign, there could
not be a Sacrament, or a relation. So the first part of this conjunction,
stands in a relation, which arises, from a certain similitude and likeness,
which the one has with the other. And this likeness may be easily perceived:
for look how able the bread is to nourish thy body to this life earthly and
temporal; the flesh of Christ signified by the bread, is as able to nourish
both body and soul to life everlasting: so ye may perceive some kind of
proportion between the sign, and the thing signified.

The second point of the conjunction, stands in a continual and mutual
concurring the one with the other; in such sort, that the sign, and the thing
signified, are offered both together, received together at one time, and in one
action; the one, outwardly; the other, inwardly; if so be that thou have a
mouth in thy soul, which is faith, to receive it. Then the second point of the
conjunction, stands in a joint offering, and in a joint receiving: and this I
call a concurrence. Then, would you know what manner of conjunction is between
the sign, and the thing signified? I say, it is a relative conjunction; a
secret and a mystical conjunction, which stands in a mutual relation. There
is no more to be observed herein, but this only, that if ye conioyne these
two, ye be careful not to confound them: beware that ye turn not the one
into the other, but keep either of them, in his own integrity, without
confusion, or permixtion of the one, with the other; and so ye shall have the
lawful conjunction, that should be in the Sacrament.

There is not a lesson that can be learned out of this, at the least that I can
mark or gather, except only the lesson of the kindness, and goodness of the
everliving God, who has invented so many wonderful sorts of conjunction, and
all to this purpose, that we might be conjoined to advance this great, and
mystical conjunction, betwixt the God of glory, and us: In the which
conjunction, our weal, felicity, and happiness in this life, and in the life
to come does only stand: That he is so careful, to conioyne himself, with
his word and Sacraments; that we, in his word, and Sacraments, might be
conjoined with him.

If we were moved with the care, and love of God, expressed in these
conjunctions, though it were never so little on our parts, assuredly, we would
never defraude our selves, of the fruit of that happy conjunction, nor bring it
in such a loathing and disdain, as we do this day: for we by following and
preferring of our pleasures, to Christ and his counsel, have made the stomachs
of our souls, so foul, and ill disposed, that either they receive him not at
all; or if he be received, he is not able to tarry. And why? because a foul
stomach is not able to keep him: for incontinent we choke him so, either
with the lusts of the flesh, or with the cares of this world, that he is
compelled to depart. And if Christ be not both devoured, and digested, he can
do us no good: and this digestion cannot be, where there is not a greedy
appetite, to the receipt of him; for, if thou be not hungry for him, he is not
ready for thee: And I am assured, if all the men in the Country were examined
by this rule, that there were none that receive Christ, but he that has a
stomach, and is hungry for him, I doubt that few should be found to receive
him. I fear that we have taken such a lothing, and disdain, of that
heavenly food, that there is not such a thing, as any kind of hunger, or
appetite of it in our souls. And what is the cause of this? I will tell you:
Suppose we have renounced the corporal and gross Idolatry, wherein our
Fathers were plunged, and drowned, and which men in some parts, go about to
erect now: yet as the manners of this Country, and the behavior of every one
of us does testify, there is not a man that has renounced that damnable
Idol, that he has in his own soul; nor the invisible Idolatry, that he
has in his own heart and mind. There is not a man, but to that same Idol,
wherewith he was conceived, and borne, and whereunto he addicted himself, and
was a slave before, but to that Idol, he gives his service yet. And therefore
marvel not, when thou have addicted thy service, set thy affection, and
poured out thy heart, upon that pleasure of thine own, upon that Idol of thine
own, upon that lust, and mischief of thine own, marvel not if thou have no
appetite to Christ, nor to that heavenly food.

When thou have thy soul poured forth on some villainy, and wickedness, and
have sent it far afield, how is it possible for thee to retire it, and draw
it home again, to employ it, where thou should, on Christ Jesus? Then, let
every one in his own rank, take heed to his own domestic Idol, that
lodges within his own heart, and prease to clear himself of it; or
otherwise, ye cannot see the face of Christ, nor be partakers of his kingdom.

There is not another lesson in Christianity but this: this is the first, and
the last lesson, to shake off your lusts and affections, piece and piece, and
so by little and little renounce thy self, that thou may embrace Christ. I
grant there is a greater progress in this point, in some, then in others; some
less, some more profit in this: but, except in some measure, ye cast off your
selves, and whatsoever in your own eyes ye account most precious, to come by
Christ, ye are not worthy of him. And this is very hard to be done: It is very
easy for a man to speak it, to bid a man renounce his own Idol, which I call
his affections, but it is not so soon done: assuredly, a stronger must come
in, to cast out the affections; yea, a stronger then the devil must come in to
drive out the devil, who makes residence in the affection, or else he will
remain there for ever. Therefore there are not many, that have renounced
themselves; and examine thine heart when thou will, if there be any thing in
the world, that thou love better then Christ: If thou be not content to leave
father and mother, to leave wife and children, or whatsoever is dearest unto
thee in this world, for Christ, thou art not worthy of him. If thou be not
content to cast off whatsoever makes thee a stranger to Christ, thou art not
worthy of him. And is this a small matter, seeing there is no part, or power of
our souls, but it is enemy to this, and repines against this heavenly
conjunction? Is this an easy thing, to cast off, and renounce ourselves, that
we may come unto Christ? There is no greater thing then this; it has not
entered into every heart, to consider of this; for this work of our new
creation, is ten thousand times greater, then the work of our first
creation: and therefore it is most necessary, that every man take heed unto
himself; for the devil is so crafty in this point, that he erecteth ever,
one I doll or other in our souls; and sometimes under the show of virtue:
which of all, is most dangerous. And in every work that we take in hand, be
it never so holy, he is at our right hand, and makes himself to have interest
in it: and he contents himself not with this, under the show of virtue to
corrupt us, but he is so watchful, that even in the best actions, and when
ye are best occupied in your most virtuous actions, he mixeth them with
sins, and so does all that lies in him, to make you lose your profit, and
lose your rewards. For, when ye are best occupied, he goes about to engender
in you, an opinion of your selves, and so defraude God of his glory. Or
otherwise, in doing of good deeds, he makes you so slack, and negligent,
that if ye do them, ye do them coldly, or so indiscreetly, that he makes you
begin at the last, first, and makes it that should be first, last; and so, as
Martha was, to be occupied, and ouerbusie in those things, which are not so
necessary, as the things wherein Mary was occupied: for, she should have
preferred, first the hearing of the word, to the preparing of Christ's Supper.
This is but to give you an in-sight, and to let you see, that the devil is so
crafty, that either he casts in, a false conceit of our selves, in doing
any good deed, or else, makes us to do that last, which should be first; or
then makes us altogether so sluggish, and so negligent, that we do the work
of the Lord coldly: and so, one way, or other, he holds us ever in a
continual business, so that we cannot be half watchful enough. For, we have
to do with principalities and powers, with spiritual wickednesses, which are
above us, and within us also; for, there is not that man, that has corruption
within him, but Satan is in him: we cannot therefore be half watchful, or
studious enough, to cast out the devil, to renounce our selves, and to submit
us unto the obedience of Christ. Thus far concerning the conjunction.

Now, seeing that the sign, How the sign, and the thing signified, are given
and received. Considerations thereof.
and the thing signified, are diverse, it rests to be considered, how the
sign is delivered, and how the thing signified is delivered; and after what
manner they are received. And therefore concerning this, ye have these things to
mark. First, to consider, both given, and received, after one manner. So,
finding this diversity, ye have this to do: mark the diversity of the
offerers and giuers: mark the diversity of the actions: mark, thirdly, the
diversity of the instruments: and fourthly, the diverse manner of receiving.
Mark all these diligently, and ye shall find little difficulty in the
Sacrament. And first to make it clear unto you, I say, that the sign, and the
thing signified by the sign, are not both given by one; and this ye see
plainly. For, as for the sign, that Bread, and that Wine: ye see your selves,
that the Minister offers unto you the sign, he gives you that Sacrament; as
that sign is an earthly, and corporal thing, so it is an earthly, and
corporal man that gives it. Now, the thing signified, is of another nature:
for it is an heavenly and spiritual thing; therefore this heavenly thing, is
not given by an earthly man; this incorruptible thing, is not given by a
natural and corruptible man. But Christ Jesus has locked up, and reserved the
ministry of this heavenly thing, to himself only: therefore, there are two
giuers in this Sacrament; the Minister gives the earthly thing; Christ Jesus
the Mediator, gives you the heavenly thing in this Sacrament. For Christ, in
giving the earthly thing, will not use his own ministry immediately, nor the
ministry of an Angel, but only the ministry of an earthly man. And as for
the dispensation of his own body, and blood, he will not give it, either to
heavenly creature, or earthly man; but he keeps this ministry to himself,
and he dispenses his own body and blood, to whom, and when he pleases. And
why? If any man in the world, had power to give Christ's body, and blood, no
question, this man should have power to cleanse the heart and conscience; for the
blood of Christ, has this power with it; and consequently, should have power
to forgive sins.

Now, it is only GOD that may forgive sins; and therefore it is not possible,
that the ministry of the heavenly thing, can be in the power of any man.
Example we have in John the Baptist, Math. 3.11. Says he not, The ministry
that I have, is of the element; I am commanded to minister the element of
water only: but as for the ministry of the fire, and of the spirit, Christ
has reserved it unto himself. Therefore, look not to get the spirit at man's
hands, but at the hands of Christ himself only; and without this inward
ministry, the outward ministry is not worth a straw. For, my outward
ministry, yea, suppose it were the ministry of an Angel, and suppose
Christ were present in the flesh, to minister unto you these outward things,
except he conioyne the inward ministry of his spirit therewith, it availes
nothing: it may well be as a process against you, against the day of that
general assembly; but to your salvation, it will never profit you. Therefore,
this ye ought always to pray for, that the Lord would water your hearts, by
his holy spirit, as he waters your ears, by the hearing of his word. Then
there are two offerers; the Minister offers the sign, Christ Jesus offers
himself, the thing signified. The three persons, one GOD, offers the
Mediator, or the Mediator offers himself, and that by the power, and virtue
of his own Spirit.

As there are two offerers, The sign, and the thing signified, are offered in
two actions, by two instruments, and after two manners.
two persons that offer, and give the Sacrament, and thing signified by the
Sacrament: so these two, are offered, and given in two actions. Christ, who is
the heavenly thing, is offered, and given unto you, by an inward, secret, and
spiritual action, which is not subject to the outward eye. The sign again,
is offered and given, in an outward action, after a corporal and visible
manner. As there are two sorts of actions; so there are two sorts of
instruments, vvhere-unto the sign, and the thing signified are offered: for,
the thing singified, that is, Christ, is never offered to the mouth of my body:
the blood of Christ, the flesh of Christ, whole Christ, or the spirit of
Christ, is not offered, neither in the word, nor in the Sacrament, to the mouth
of my body. Let the Adversaries find me that in any part of the Bible, that
there is any other manner of receiving Christ, then by faith, and let them have
the victory. So there is not an instrument, as I told you, neither hand, not
mouth, to receive Christ, but faith only. As Christ, who is the thing
signified, is received by the hand, and mouth of faith: so the sign, which
signifies Christ, is received by our own natural mouth, and hand: ye have a
mouth in your heads, and in your bodies, as proper to receive the sign, as
faith is to receive Christ. So the sign, and the thing signified, are offered
and given, not to one instrument, but to two; the one, to the mouth of the
body; the other, to the mouth of the soul.

Now, mark by what way these things are offered, and given, by the same way,
they are received: as the sign is corporal, and naturally offered to a
corporal instrument, so is it received, after a corporal, and natural
manner: for, thou must take the Bread, and Wine, either by thy hand, or by thy
mouth. The thing signified, is not taken after a corporal manner, but after a
secret, and spiritual manner: and as it is offered, so it is taken. There can
be nothing cleerer then this; the one is taken after a natural manner, the
other after a secret, and spiritual manner. So in this last part, ye have
these things to mark, to distinguish between the outward action, and the
inward, between the sign, and the thing signified, and to keep a proportion,
and analogy between the inward, and the outward actions: ye may surely
persuade your selves, that if ye be faithful, Christ is as busy, working
inwardly in your souls, as the Minister is, working outwardly toward your
bodies: look how busy the Minister is, in breaking that Bread, in pouring out
that Wine, in giving that Bread, and Wine, unto thee, as busy is Christ, in
breaking his own body to thee, and in giving thee juice of his own body,
after a spiritual, and an invisible manner. So keep this distinction, and ye
may assure your selves, that by faith, Christ is as well occupied toward your
souls, to nourish them, as the Minister is outwardly toward your bodies.
Keep this, and ye have the whole Sacrament.

Then from this discourse and deduction, you may learn a double matter, whereof
the Sacrament consists. It stands on two sorts of materials; that is, of an
earthly matter, and of an heavenly matter: the sign, and the thing signified.
And as there is a double matter in the Sacrament: so the Sacrament must be
handled after a double manner; by an outward action, and an inward action: keep
the distinction in these things, between the sign, and the thing signified,
and ye shall not easily slip in the understanding of the Sacrament.

This being said, concerning the general consideration of the Elements (for
all this yet appertains unto the Elements) it rests that we speak
somewhat concerning the word, Of the other part of the Sacrament which is the
word.
which I call the other part of the Sacrament. I mean and understand by the
word, where-unto the clements are annexed, that thing, which quickneth this
whole action, which serves, as it were a soul, and gives life unto the whole
action. For, by the word, and appointment of Christ in the word, the Minister
knows what is his part, the hearer knows what is his part, and every one
is prepared, how to deliver, and how to receive; the Minister, how he should
deliver, and the hearer, how he should receive. So the Institution of Christ,
is the quickening of the whole action: for, all the action is warranted from the
institution set down in his word. In the institution of Christ, there are two
things chiefly to be considered: a Command: and a Promise. The Command is
this, where he says, Take, eat. The Command requires obedience. There is a
Promise also in the institution, and it is contained in these words, This is my
body. The Promise craves faith: as the Command craves obedience; so the
Promise craves belief. Therefore come not unto the Sacrament, except ye bring
both faith and obedience with you. If thou come not with a heart minding to
obey Christ, at the least, more then thou wast wont to do, thou come unto
thine own damnation. And if thou bring a heart void of faith, thou come
unto thine own damnation. So, let every one that comes unto the Sacrament,
bring with him a heart minding to do better; that is, to obey, and believe
Christ, better then he did in time past. Except ye bring these two, in some
measure, come not unto the Sacrament: for, whatsoever thou do, except it
flow from faith, it can profit nothing. Thus far briefly concerning the word.
Now it will be demanded, What need is there, that these Sacraments and seals
should be annexed to the word? wherefore are they annexed, seeing we get no more
in the Sacrament, then we get in the word, and we get as much in the very
simple word, as we get in the Sacraments? Seeing the^ we get no new thing in
the Sacrament, but the same thing which we get in the simple word, wherefore is
the Sacrament appointed to be hung unto the word? It is true certainly, that we
get no new thing in the Sacrament, nor we get no other thing in the Sacrament,
then we get in the word: for what more would thou crave, then to get the
Son of God, if thou get him well? Thy heart cannot wish, nor imagine a greater
gift, then to have the Son of God, who is King of heaven, and earth:
therefore, I say, What new thing would thou have? for, if thou get him,
thou gettest all things with him; thy heart cannot imagine a new thing, besides
him. Wherefore then is the Sacrament appointed? By the Sacrament, we possess
Christ more fully then by the simple word.
then thou had it in the word. The Sacrament is appointed, that we may
take better hold of Christ, then we could in the simple word; that we may
possess Christ in our hearts, and minds, more fully, and largely, then we did
before in the simple word. That Christ might have a larger space, to make
residence in our narrow hearts, then he could have, by the hearing of the simple
word; and to possess Christ more fully, it is a better thing. For, suppose
Christ be one thing in himself, yet the better hold thou have of him, thou art
the surer of his promise.

The Sacraments are appointed, that I might have him more fully in my soul;
that I might have the bounds of it enlarged, that he may make the better
residence in me. This, no doubt, is the cause wherefore these Seals are
annexed, to the evidence of the simple word.

They serve to this end also, to seal up, They serve to confirm the truth
contained in the word.
for as the office of the Seal hung to the Evidence, is not to confirm any
other truth then that which is in the Evidence; and though ye believed the
Evidence before, yet by the seals ye believe it better: even so the
Sacraments assure me of no other truth, then is contained within the word:
yet, because it is a seal, annexed unto the word, it persuades me the better
of the same: for the more the outvvard senses are wakened, the more is the
inward heart and mind persuaded to believe.

Now the Sacrament wakeneth all the outward senses, as the eye, the hand, and
all the rest: and the outward senses being moved, no question, the spirit of
GOD concurring therewith, moves the heart the more. The Sacraments are then
annexed unto the word, to seal up the truth contained in the word, and to
confirm it m^re and more in thy heart. The word then is appointed to work
belief: and the Sacrament is appointed to confirm you in this belief. But
except ye feel the truth of this, inwardly in your hearts; except ye have
your hearts as ready as your mouth, think not that any thing will avail you.
All the seals in the world will not work, except the spirit of God concur, and
seal the same truth in your hearts, which the Sacrament seals outwardly:
Except he make clear the sight of thy mind inwardly, and work a feeling in
thy heart, both word, and Sacrament shall lose their fruit and effect which
they should have. All the Scriptures are full of this: the whole Scriptures of
God, are but a slaying letter to you, except the spirit of God concur, to
quicken inwardly. Exhortation.
Therefore your whole endeavor should be, to prease to feel Christ inwardly in
your hearts, that finding him in your hearts, and seeing him in your minds, both
word, and Sacraments may be effectual: If not, your souls remain dead, ye
are not translated from that death, wherein ye were conceived. Therefore all the
study of Christians should be, when they see the Sacraments, and hear the
word, to labor to find, and feel in their hearts and minds, that which they
hear, and see; and this I call to find Christ quick in your own souls.
This cannot be, except ye sanctify his lodging: for if all the corners of thy
soul remain a dunghill, Christ cannot dwell there: and therefore, except ye
study for continual growth in sanctification, and sever your selves from
every thing, that seuers you from Christ, it is not possible that he can live
or dwell in you.

This is a great lesson, and it is not possible to do this, except, as I have
said, a stronger come in, and possess us, and make us to renounce our selves.
Then the seals had not been annexed to the word, except for our cause: for,
there is no necessity on Gods part, that God should either swear, or confirm
by seals, the thing that he has spoken: for, his word is as good, as any
oath or seal. But the necessity comes of us: there is such a great weakness
in us, that when he has sworn, and set his seals unto his word, we are
as near to believe, as if he had never spoken a word. So to help our
belief, our weakness, and inabilitie that is in us, for we are so unable by
nature, that we can believe nothing, but that which is of our selves; and the
more we lean unto our selves, the further we are from God. I say to help
this wonderful weakness, whereby we are ready to mistrust God in every word,
he has annexed his Sacraments; and besides his Sacraments, he swears the
things that concern most our salvation. As in the Priesthood of Christ, Psalm.
110.4. He will not speak only, but he swears, and that for our weakness and
infirmities: but yet if he abstract the ministry of his spirit, all these
means will do no good.

Now, the last thing is, how the Sacrament is perverted; Faults with pervert the
Sacrament.
and how we are defrauded of the fruit, and effect thereof. Two sorts of faults
pervert the Sacrament, and defraude us of the profit, and use thereof: and
these faults are either in the form, or in the person. In form, if the
essential form be spoiled, we get nothing* for when the Sacrament is
spoiled of the essential form, it is not a Sacrament. There is an essential
form in Baptism, and an essential form in the Lords Supper, which if they be
taken away, ye lose the use of the Sacrament. The essential form of Baptism
is: I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost:
leave out any of these three, or do it in the name of any one of the three
persons only, ye lose the essential form of Baptism. In the Lords Supper, if
ye leave out the least ceremony, ye lose the essential form, and so it is not
a Sacrament. I speak of the essential form, in respect of the Papists, who
keep the essential form in Baptism, though they have brought in trifles of
their own, and mixed with it; yet in respect they keep the substantial form,
it is not necessary, that they, who were baptized under them, be rebaptized.
Indeed, if the virtue of regeneration, flowed from the person, it were
something; but in respect Christ has this, to give to whom, and when he
pleases, the essential form being kept, it is not necessary that this
Sacrament be reiterated.

Now, what are the faults in the person that peruerts the Sacrament? The fault
may be either in the person of the giver, or in the person of the receiver (I
speak not of those common faults, which are common to all, but of such
faults, as disable the person of the giver, to be a distributer of the
Sacrament, and takes the office from him) so when the person of the giver is
this way disabled, no question, it is not a Sacrament. Then again in the person
of the Receiver, the faults may be, if their children be not in the covenant,
but out of it, they get not the Sacrament. Indeed, if the Parents afterward com
to the covenant, the children (though they be gotten out of the covenant) may be
received. Even so in the L. Supper; if a man be laden with any burden of sin,
without any purpose to repent, he ought not to receive it. So then, if ye come
without a purpose to repent, ye lose the use of the Sacrament: it is only this
purpose to repent, that makes me, who receive the Sacrament, to get the fruit
and effect thereof; therefore every one, who goes to that Sacrament, must look
what purpose he has in his heart. Have thou a purpose to murder, to continue in
adultery, or to commit any other vile sin that is in thy heart, and art not
resolved to repent? In showing thee to be without repentance, thou show thy
self to be without faith, and consequently thou come unto thy condemnation,
and not to thy salvation: take heed then what your purpose is; for if with a
dissolute life, ye have a dissolute purpose, ye come unto your everlasting
perdition.

I had thought to have entered particularly into the handling of this Sacrament;
Conclusion with an exhortation.
but because the time is past (and some of you I doubt not are to communicate)
only this: Remember that ye address not your selves to that Table; except ye
find your hearts in some sort prepared. The first degree of preparation,
stands in contrition, in sorowing for sin, in a feeling of your sins,
wherein ye have ^ffended so gracious a God. If ye be able, as that woman was,
by the tears of a contrite heart, to wash the feet of Christ, humbly to kiss
his feet, and to get hold of the foot of Christ; though ye dare not presume
so high, as to get him whole, ye are in a good case: but if thou want all
these, and have them not in some measure, thou want all the degrees of
preparation; therefore, let none come to this Table, except he have these in
some measure. But where there is a displeasure for sin, a purpose to do
better, and an earnest sobbing, and sighing, to get the thing that thou
want; in that soul, where God has placed this desire of Christ, it is the
work of Gods spirit, and Christ will enter there. And therefore, though that
soul be far from the thing that it should be at, let him not refuse to go
to the Lords Table; but let him go with a profession of his own infirmity and
weakness, and with a desire of the thing that he wants. Every one of you that
finds himself this way disposed, let him go in Gods name to the Lords
Table: and the Lord work this in every one of your hearts, that this ministry
may be effectual in every one of you, at this time, and that in the righteous
merits of Jesus Christ. To whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all
honor, praise, and glory, both now, and for ever, Amen.

THE SECOND Sermon, upon the Lords Supper in particular.
1. Cor. 11.23. For I have received of the Lord, that which I also have
delivered unto you: to wit, that the Lord Jesus, in the night that he was
betrayed, took bread, etc.
WE ended the consideration of the Sacraments in general, in our last
Exercise, well-beloved in Christ Jesus: now it remains that we proceed, to the
consideration of this Sacrament of the Lords Supper in particular. Of the
Supper of the Lord in particular.
And that ye may the better attain unto the knowledge and consideration of
the great variety of matter, that is contained in this Sacrament of the Lods
Supper, I shall endeavor, Heads to be entreated of.
as God shall give me grace, to set down certain things, for the easier
understanding of it. And first of all, I will let you see, what names are
given unto this Sacrament in the Bible; and I will show you some names, that
are given to this Sacrament, by the Ancients.

Now, First head general.
we find sundry names given unto the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in the
book of God; and every name carries a special reason with it. Of the names
given unto this Sacrament, both in the Bible, and by the ancients.
We find this Sacrament, called the body, and blood of Christ. This name is
given unto it, no doubt, because it is a heavenly, and spiritual nouriture; it
contains a nouriture of the soul, that is able to nourish, and train up the
soul, to a life spiritual, to that life everlasting: for this cause it is
called the body, and blood of Christ. It is called also the Supper of the Lord,
to put a difference betwixt it, and a profane supper: for this is the Lords
Supper, a holy supper; not a profane, or common supper: a supper, appointed for
the increase of holiness, for the food of the soul in holiness, to feed the
soul unto life everlasting. Not a supper appointed for the belly; for he had
ended that Supper, that was appointed for the belly, or ever he began this
supper, which was appointed for the soul. A supper, no doubt, having respect
to the circumstance of time, by reason it was instituted, in the article of
that time, when they used to suppe. It is called also in the Bible, The Table
of the Lord. It is not called the Altar of the Lord: but the Apostle calls it
a Table, to sit at; and not an Altar, to stand at: a Table, to take, and
receive at; and not an Altar, to offer at. It is called also, the Communion,
and participation of the body, and blood of Christ: we have these names given
unto it, beside some others, in the Scriptures of God. The Ancients of the
Latin, and of the Greek Churches, gave it sundry names, for sundry respects.
They called it, a public action; and this was a very general name.
Sometimes they called it a Thanksgiving. Sometimes they called it a banquet
of love; and sometimes they gave it one name, and sometimes another. And at the
last, in the declining estate of the Latin Church, and in the falling estate
of the Roman Church, this Sacrament began to be perverted; and with this
decay, there came in a perverse name, and they called it the Mass. They
trouble themselves much, concerning the deriuation of this name: sometime they
seek it from an Hebrew original; sometime from a Greek; and sometime from a
Latin original: but it is plain, that the word is derived from the Latin;
and it is a word which might have been tolerable, when it was first
instituted: for, no doubt, the Sacrament, at the first institution of this
word, was not then wholly perverted; but now, in process of time, corruption
has preuatied so far, that it has turned the Sacrament into a sacrifice;
and where we should take from the hand of GOD, in Christ, they make us to give.

This is plain Idolatry: and therefore, whereas the word was tolerable
before, now it ought not to be tolerable any way, it ought not to be suffered.
And certainly, if we had eaten, and drunk, as often the body and blood of
Christ in our souls, as we have eaten that bread, and drunk that wine, which
are the signs of his body and blood, we would not have suffered this word of
the Mass, much less the very action of it, to be so rise in this Country:
But because we have but played the counterfaits, and defrauded our souls of
the body, and blood of Christ, and took only the outward Sacrament; therefore
it is that our zeal decays; therefore it is, that our knowledge, and light
decays: and for want of zeal, love, and knowledge, the word of the Mass, is
become customable unto you, and not only the word, but the very action. I will
not run out heerin: I only tell you, what comes of the abuse of the
hearing of the word, what judgments follow upon the abuse of the receiving
of the Sacraments.

Now, Second head general. Of the ends why this Sacrament was instituted.
I come to the ends wherefore the Sacrament was appointed. This Sacrament was
instituted in the signs of Bread, and Wine; and was appointed chiefly for
this end, to represent our spiritual nouriture, of his body: so he, or that
soul which has the participation of the body, and blood of Christ, wants
nothing for the full and perfect nourishment of the soul. To represent this
full and perfect nourishment, the signs of bread and wine in the Sacrament,
were set down and instituted. The second end, compassion, has set up this
Sacrament, as a sign on an high hill, whereby it may be seen on every side,
far, and near, to call all them again, that have run shamefully away: and
he clucks to them, as a Hen does to her chickens, to gather them under the
wings of his infinite mercy. The fourth end, wherefore this Sacrament was
instituted, is this, that in this action, we might thank him for his
benefits, and render to him hearty thanks, that he has come down so
familiarly to us, bowed the heavens, as it were and given us the body and blood
of his own Son, that we might render unto him hearty thanks, and so
sanctify his benefits unto us: for this thanksgiving, this Sacrament was also
instituted. Thus far concerning the ends briefly.

Now, Third head general.
I come to the things contained in this Sacrament. Ye see with your eyes,
there are corporal things, visible things, as the Bread, and Wine. There are
again hid from the eye of your body, but present to the eye of your mind,
spiritual things, heavenly, and inward things: both these are in the
Sacrament.

The corporal, visible, and outward things, are the things which are appointed,
Of the things contained in this Sacrament, outward and inward: wherein sundry
heads are entreated.
to signify the spiritual, heavenly, and inward things. And why? Nothing
without a reason. These corporal signs, are appointed to signify the
spiritual things, because we are corporal, we are earthly bodies, we have our
soul lodging within a carnal body, in a tabernacle of clay, a gross
tabernacle, which cannot be wakened, nor moved, except by the things that are
like to it self. It cannot be induced to the consideration of heavenly things,
except by gross, temporal, and corporal things. If we had been of the nature
of the thing signified, that as the thing signified, is spiritual, and
heavenly; so we had been spiritual, and heavenly, we had not needed a
corporal thing: so, if the thing signified, had been as we are, corporal,
earthly, and visible, we had not needed a sign, to lead us to consider of it:
But because the thing signified, is spiritual, and we are corporal, therefore
to bring us unto the sight of these spiritual things, he uses a corporal
means, and an outward sign. This is the reason, wherefore these corporal
signs, are appointed to signify the spiritual thing.

The spiritual thing in both the Sacraments, is one, and the self same,
Christ Jesus, signified in both the Sacraments: yet in diverse respects, he is
the thing signified in Baptism, and he is the thing signified in the Lords
Supper. This Christ Jesus, in his blood chiefly, is the thing signified in the
Sacrament of Baptism: and why? because, that by his blood, he washes away
the filth of our souls; because, that by the virtue of his blood, he quickneth
us in our souls, with a heavenly life: because, that by the power of his
blood, he ingrafteth, and incorporateth us, in his own body. For, that
Sacrament, is a testimony of the remission of our sins: that is, of the
cleanenesse of our consciences, that our consciences, by that blood, are washed
inwardly. It testifies also, our new birth, that we are begotten spiritually,
to a heavenly life. It testifies also, the joining of us in the body of
Christ. As it is a testimony, so it is a seal: it not only testifies, but
seals it up in our hearts, and makes us in our hearts, to feel the taste of
that heavenly life begun in us, that we are translated from death, in the
which we were conceived, and ingrafted in the body of Christ.

Mark then: Christ, in his blood, as he is the washing of our regeneration,
is the thing signified in Baptism. In this Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
again, this same Christ is the thing signified, in another respect; to wit, in
this respect, that his body and blood, serve to nourish my soul to life
everlasting: for this Sacrament, is no other thing, but the image of our
spiritual nourishment; GOD testifying how our fowls are fed, and nourished to
that heavenly life, by the image of a corporal nourishment. So in diverse
respects, the same thing, that is, Chr. Jesus, is signified in Baptism, and is
signified in the Lords Supper. In this Sacrament, the fruits of Christ's death,
whereof I spoke, the virtue of his sacrifice, the virtue of his passion, I call
not these fruits and virtues only, the thing signified in the Sacrament of the
L Supper: but rather I call the thing signified, that substance, and that
person, out of the which substance, this virtue, and these fruits do flow, and
proceed. I grant, and it is most certain, that by the lawful use, and
participation of the Sacrament, thou art partaker of all these fruits: yet
these fruits, are not the first, and chief thing, whereof thou art partaker
in this Sacrament; but of force, thou must get another thing first. It is true,
that no man can be partaker of the substance of Christ, but the same soul,
must be also partaker of the fruits that flow from his substance: yet
notwithstanding, thou must discern betwixt the substance, and the fruits that
flow from the substance; and thou must be partaker of the substance in the
first room; then in the next place, thou must be partaker of the fruits that
flow from his substance. To make this clear; in Baptism, the fruits of
Baptism, are remission of our sins, mortification, the killing of sin, and
the sealing up of our adoption, to life everlasting. The substance out of the
which these fruit, do flow, is the blood of Christ. Ye must here, of force,
discern between the blood, which is the substance, and between remission of
sins, washing, and regeneration, which are the fruits, that flow from this
blood: so in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the fruits of that Sacrament,
are, the growth o^ faith, and the increase in holiness. The thing signified,
is, the substance; that is, the body and blood of Christ is the substance, out
of which, this growth in faith, and holiness, does proceed. Now, see ye not
this; That you must discern between the substance, and the fruits, and must
place the substance in the first place? So that the substance of Christ, that
is, Christ himself, is the thing signified in this Sacrament. For your own
experience will make this plain unto you: Before your stomach be filled with
any food, ye must eat the substance of the food first; before you be filled
with bread, ye must eat the substance of the bread first; before your drouth
be quenched with any drink, ye must of necessity, drink the substance of
the drink first: Even so, after this manner; before the hunger of your souls
be satisfied and the thirst thereof quenched, ye must eat the flesh of
Christ, and drink his blood first, and that by faith. So, consider the one by
the other; look to what use bread and wine serve to thy body, to the same
use, the body and blood of Christ serve to thy soul; and he that appointed the
one to serve for thy body, the same God appointed the other, to serve for thy
soul. So, look how impossible it is for thee, to be fed with that food
that never comes into thy mouth, or to recover health, by those drugges which
never were applied; it is as impossible, for thee to be fed by the body of
Christ, and to get thy health by the blood of Christ, except thou first eat
his body, and drink his blood. Then ye see, that the thing signified in the
Lords Supper, is not the fruits, so much as the body, and blood, and Christ
Jesus, which is the fountain, and substance, from which these fruits do
flow, and proceed.

Then I say, suppose Christ, The thing signified in both the Sacraments, is
one: the signs are not one.
who is the thing signified, remain always one, and the same, in both the
Sacraments: yet the signs, whereby this one Christ is signified in the
Sacraments, are not one, nor of an ^quall number. For in Baptism, the thing
that represents Christ, is Water. In the Lords Supper, the things that
represent Christ, are Bread, and Wine. Water is appointed to represent Christ
in Baptism, because it is meetest to represent our washing with the blood of
Christ: for, what is fitter to wash with, then water? so there is nothing
meeter to wash the soul, then the blood of Christ. In this Sacrament he has
appointed Bread, and Wine: why? Because there is nothing more meet to nourish
the body, then bread and wine, so the Lord has not chosen these signs
without a reason. As the signs in the Sacrament are not always one; so the
same in both, are not of one number: for, in Baptism, we have but one
element; in this Sacrament, we have two elements. Now, what is the reason of
this diversity, that the Lord in the one Sacrament, Why in Baptism there is
but one sign, and in the Lords Supper two.
has appointed two signs, and in the other but one sign? I will show you the
reason. He has appointed only one sign in Baptism, to wit, Water; because
Water is sufficient enough for the whole. If Water had not been sufficient, to
represent the thing signified, he would have appointed another sign: but in
respect that water do^^ the turn, and represents fully the washing of our
souls, by the blood of Christ, what need then have we of any other sign? Now,
in this Sacrament, one sign will not suffice, but there must be two. And why?
Wine cannot be sufficient alone; neither can Bread be sufficient alone: for, he
that has Bread only, and Wine only, has not a perfect corporal
nourishment; therefore, that they might represent, and let us see a perfect
nourishment, he has given us both Bread and Wine (for the perfect corporal
nourishment, stands in meat and drink) to represent the full and perfect
nourishment of the soul. Mark how full, and perfect a nourishment he has to
his body, that has store of Bread and Wine: So he that has Christ, lacks
nothing of a full, and perfect nourishment for his soul. Then you see the
reason, wherefore there are two signs appointed in this Sacrament, and only
one sign in Baptism.

There remains yet, concerning these signs, two things to be inquired.
First, Two questions: What power the bread has to be a sign in this
Sacrament: And how long that power indureth.
what power has that bread in this Sacrament, to be a sign, more then the
bread, which is used in common houses: from whence comes that power? Next, if
it have a power, how long indureth and remains that power, with the bread?
For the first, concerning the power which that bread has, more then any other
bread: I will tell you.

That bread has a power given unto it by Christ, and by his institution;
Christ, That bread has that power from Christ's institution.
and his institution, which other common bread has not: so that if any of you
would ask, when the Minister, in this action, is breaking, or distributing that
Bread, pouring out, and distributing that Wine; if you would, I say, ask, what
sort of creatures those are? this is the answer: They are holy things. Ye
must give this name, to the signs, and seals of the body and blood of Christ.
That bread of the Sacrament, is a holy bread; and that wine, is an holy wine:
Why? Because the blessed institution of Christ, has seuerd them from that use
whereunto they served before, and has applied them unto an holy use; not to
feed the body, but to feed the soul.

Thus far concerning the power of that bread: it has a power flowing from
Christ, and his institution. That power continues during the service of the
Table.
In a word, I say, this power continues with that bread, during the time of
the action; during the service of the Table. Look how long that action
continues, and that the service of the Table lasts, so long it continues
holy bread; so long continues the power with that bread: but, look how soon
the action is ended, so soon ends the holiness of it: look how soon the
service of the Table is ended; so soon that bread, becomes common bread again,
and the holiness of it, cease. Then this power continues not for ever, but
it continues only, during the time of the action, and service of the Table.
Thus far concerning the Elements.

There is besides the Elements, an other sort of signs in the Sacrament: there
is not a ceremony in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but is a sign, and
has it own spiritual signification with it: as namely, looking to the
breaking of that bread, it represents unto thee, the breaking of the body,
and blood of Christ. Not, that his body, and bones were broken, but that it was
broken with dolor, with anguish, and distress of heart; with the weight of the
indignation, and fury of God, that he sustained for our sins, which he took
upon him. Then, the breaking, is an essential ceremony: the pouring out of
the wine also, is an essential ceremony. For, as ye see clearly, that by the
wine is signified the blood of Christ; so, by the pouring out of the wine, is
signified, that his blood was severed from his flesh; and the seuering of those
two, makes death: for, in blood is the life; and consequently, it testifies
his death. The pouring out of the wine, then, tells thee, that he dyed for
thee, that his blood was shed for thee; so this is an essential ceremony,
which must not be left out. Likewise, the distribution, giving, and eating of
that bread, are essential ceremonies. And what does the eating testify unto
thee? The applying of the body and blood of Christ unto thy soul. So that
there is none of these rites, but have their own signification; and there
cannot one of them be left out, but ye shall pervert the whole action. Thus
far concerning the signs.

Now, An observation.
what profit can ye make of all this discourse? Learn this lesson, and ye
shall make profit by these things. In respect that every sign and ceremony,
has it own spiritual signification, so that there is not a ceremony in this
whole action, that wants it own spiritual signification; consider this, and
think with your selves, at that time especially when ye are at the Lords
Table, and in the sight of that action, that look what thou see the
Minister doing outwardly, what ever it be: (Is he breaking that Bread? is he
dealing that bread? is he pouring out, and distributing that wine?) Think
assuredly with thy self, that Christ is as busy, doing all these things,
spiritually unto thy soul: he is as busy, giving unto thee, his own body,
with his own hand: he is as busy, giving to thee his own blood, with the
virtue, and efficacy of it. So, in this action (if thou be a faithful
Communicant) look what the mouth does, and how the mouth of the body is
occupied outwardly: so is the hand, and mouth of the soul (which is faith)
occupied inwardly. As the mouth takes that Bread, and that Wine; so the mouth
of thy soul, takes the body, and blood of Christ, and that by faith. For by
faith, and a constant persuasion, is the only way to eat the body, and
drink the blood of Christ inwardly: and doing this, there cannot but follow
a fruitful eating. Thus far, for the consideration of the signs.

Now comes in the matter wherein greatest difficulty stands, whereof I spoke
the last day, How the signs, and the thing signified, are conjoined in the
Sacrament.
as God gave me the grace; yet in the particular, I must speak, as well as in
the general, but somewhat more shortly. Then ye have to understand, for the
better information of your consciences; and for the better preparation of your
souls, ye have to understand, how that bread, and that wine, which are the
signs, are coupled with the body, and blood of Christ, which are signified
thereby: What sort of conjunction this is, and from whence this conjunction
flows, I shall be brief; because I have already, in my last Lecture, spoken
of it at large.

Take heed: for if ye give not good attention, it is not possible, that ye can
conceive this conjunction. Concerning this conjunction, would you know how
these two are coupled? Then must you first mark the nature of the signs, and
the nature of the thing signified; ye must observe both their natures: And
why? Because nothing can be coupled, nor conjoined with other, but so far, as
the nature of it will suffer; if the nature of it will not suffer a
conjunction, they cannot be conjoined: or, will the nature of it suffer a
conjunction? look how far it will suffer a conjunction, so far are they
conjoined. Seeing then ye must observe the nature of the things that are
conjoined, first mark the thing signified, what the nature thereof is; marking
that, ye shall see, that the thing signified, is of a spiritual nature; of a
heavenly, and mystical nature: then may ye conclude, that this spiritual
thing, will suffer a spiritual conjunction, a mystical, and secret
conjunction.

Again, observe the sign: The sign, of his nature (as I have told you) has
a relation unto the thing signified; and the thing signified, of his nature,
has a relation unto the sign. So then the sign, and the thing signified,
will suffer to be conjoined, by a mutual relation: both the sign, and the
thing signified, in respect they have a mutual relation, the one unto the
other, they will suffer themselves to be conjoined by a relative conjunction.
Now if ye ask me, what sort of conjunction, is between that bread, and that
wine, and the body, and blood of Christ: To tell you in a word, I say, it is a
secret, and spiritual conjunction; such a conjunction, as stands in a
mutual respect, betwixt the bread, and the body of Christ, and betwixt the
wine, and the blood of Christ: then I say, it is a secret, and a spiritual
conjunction. Ye would not be so inquisitiue of this conjunction, if it were
corporal, visible, or local: if you saw them both before your eyes, you would
not ask how they are conjoined; or if thou did see them both in one place.
But, because you see but the one with your eyes, and the other is hid, this
makes the conjunction the more difficult to be uttered, and understood. And
how is it possible, that ye can conceive this secret, and hid conjunction,
except you have the eyes of your mind illuminated by the spirit, whereby ye
may come to the right understanding? But if ye have any insight into these
spiritual matters that come by faith, this conjunction will appear as
clearly, by the eye of your faith, as the physical conjunction does, to the
eye of your body.

Now, to have this matter made more plain; there is another conjunction, which
serves to make this conjunction very clear: namely, the conjunction betwixt
the word, which I speak, and the thing signified by that same word. As if I
speak to you, of things in this language, which ye understand, be it of
things past, though never so long since; of things to come, though never so far
off; of things absent, though never so far distant; yet so soon as I speak
the word, whether it be of things past, or to come, the thing it self will
come into your mind. The word is heard no sooner by your ear, but the thing
signified by the same word, comes into your mind. What makes the thing
signified, though absent, to come into my mind? This could not be, except there
were a conjunction, between the word, and the thing signified by the word.

As for example; If I speak of the King, who is now a great way distant from us
(I pray God bless him) ye will no sooner hear the word, but the King, who
is the thing signified by the word, will come into your mind. If I speak of
things past, though they be already expired, yet the thing signified, will
presently come into your mind: so there is a conjunction ye see, between the
word, and the thing signified by the word. Mark this conjunction, and ye
shall get the nature of the conjunction, and coupling of the sign, which is
the thing signified in the Sacrament.

For observe, what sort of conjunction is between the word, and the thing
signified by the word, the same sort of conjunction, is between the Sacrament,
which is seen to the eye of your body, and the thing signified by the
Sacrament, which is seen to the eye of your soul only. As for example; so
soon as thou see that bread, taken in the hand of the Minister, thou see
it not so soon, but incontinent, the body of Christ must come into thy mind;
these two are so conjoined, that they com both together: the one, to the
outward senses; the other, to the inward senses. This is not enough now,
because in the institution, ye are commanded to go further; and not only to
look to that bread, and that wine, but to take that bread, and that wine:
incontinent, as your hand takes the one, so your heart takes the other; as your
teeth eats the one, so the teeth of your soul, which is faith, eats the
other; that is, applies Christ unto your soul. So ye see there is a
conjunction here, secret, and mystical: and therefore, Christ cannot be
conjoined, but by a secret, and mystical conjunction. The conjunction between
Christ, and us, is a secret, and mystical conjunction; which the Apostle, in
the fifth of the Ephesians. calls that spiritual conjunction, full of an high
mystery: this conjunction cannot be taken up at the first. So, seeing the
conjunction is secret, and spiritual, and not perceived, but by the spirit of
God; all is as nothing, except ye have some portion, and measure of his spirit.
All that is taught in the word, and Sacraments, will never do you good, will
never carry your souls to heaven, except the spirit of God illuminate your
minds, and make you to find in your souls, the thing that ye hear in the
word. Then learn this, seeing the word cannot be understood, but by the spirit
of GOD, crave that the Lord would illuminate the eyes of your minds, by his
spirit; and be you as careful to get the spirit, as ye are careful now in the
hearing of the word. Thus far concerning the conjunction.

Now ye have heard, how the sign is co^ioyned with the thing signified, what
remains for you to know? This rests yet to know, how the sign is received,
How the sign, and the thing signified, is received.
and how the thing signified is received; whether they be both received with
one mouth, or not; whether the sign, and the thing signified, be received
after one fashion, and manner, or not. And marking the diverse manner of
receiving, and the diversity of the instruments, ye shall not easily err in
the Sacrament. The sign, and the thing signified, are received by two mouths:
for ye see the signs, that is, that bread, and wine, whereunto they are given;
they are given to the mouth of the body. Then the mouth of the body, is the
instrument that receives that bread, and that wine, which are the signs. As
that bread, and that wine, are visible, and corporal: so the mouth, and
instrument, whereby they are received, is visible, and corporal. The thing
signified by the bread, and wine, is not received by the mouth of the body: no,
the Scripture denies that plainly, but it is received by the mouth of the
soul. Then there are two mouths: that bread, and that wine, which are the
signs, are received by the mouth of the body: Christ, who is the thing
signified, is received by the mouth of the soul; that is, by a true faith.

Then, bring not to the Lords Table, one mouth only (for, if ye bring the
mouth of your body only, it avails nothing) but bring with you also, the
mouth of your soul, a constant persuasion in the death of Christ, for that is
availeable.

Now, concerning the manner how the signs are received, and the manner how
the thing signified is received; ye may easily know, that these corporal,
and natural signs, must be received after a corporal, and natural manner:
they must be taken with the hand, or mouth of the body. Again, a supernatural
thing, must be received after a supernatural manner: A spiritual thing, must
be received, after a spiritual manner. So, as the signs are corporal, and
received after a corporal manner, with the hand, or the mouth of the body; In
like manner, the thing signified, is spiritual, and received after a
spiritual manner, with the hand and mouth of the soul, which is true faith.
Thus ye have briefly delivered unto you, the whole preparation, that is
necessary for the understanding of this Sacrament.

Now, what doctrine gather I from this? Of this last point, where I say, that
Christ is the thing signified, and cannot be preceiued, but by faith, cannot be
received, nor digested, but by a faithful soul: what kind of receiving
confirm I in this Sacrament? I establish no kind of receiving of Christ, What
kind of receiving Christ, is established in the Sacrament.
but a spiritual receiving: he can not be perceived, nor received, but by
faith, and faith is spiritual: Therefore in this Sacrament, I establish only
a spiritual taking of Christ; and not a carnal, or fleshly receiving. This is
the ground: Now let us see, what inconvenience can follow upon this ground.
Inconveniences cast in by the Papists, against the spiritual receiving of
Christ in the Sacrament.
The Papists say, that upon this ground, this inconvenience shall follow. If
there be no receiving of Christ, but a spiritual receiving, then (say they)
your Sacrament is in vain; this Sacrament of the Lords Supper, was instituted
to no end. And what is their reason? If there be no way to receive Christ (say
the Papists) but by faith, what need you then a Sacrament? Ye receive Christ,
by faith, in the word: by the naked and simple preaching of the word, ye get
faith. So the simple word, may serve the turn. What need have ye of a
Sacrament, if ye get not some new thing in the Sacrament, which ye could not
get in the word?

This is their Argument; whereof ye see their conclusion to be this: We get no
other new thing in the Sacrament, First inconvenience: That the Sacrament is
superfluous.
then we do in the word, if there be no receiving but spiritual. Ergo, The
Sacrament is superfluous.

We admit the Antecedent to be true: we get no other thing, nor no new
thing in the Sacrament, but the same thing which we got in the word. I would
have thee devise, and imagine with thy self, what new thing thou would
have: let the heart of man, devise, imagine, and wish, he durst never have
thought to have such a thing, as the Son of GOD; he durst never have
presumed, to have pierced the clouds, to have ascended so high, as to have
craved the Son of GOD in his flesh, to be the food of his soul. Having the
Son of God, thou have him, who is the heir of all things; who is King of
heaven, and earth; and in him, thou have all things. What more then can thou
wish? What better thing can thou wish? He is equal with the Father, one in
substance with the Father, true GOD, and true man, what more can thou wish?
Then, I say, we get no other thing in the Sacrament, then we had in the
word: content thee with this. But suppose it be so; yet the Sacrament is not
superfluous. But would thou understand what new thing thou obtainest? what
other thing thou gettest? I will tell thee. Refutation of the first
Inconvenience.
Suppose thou get that same thing which thou had in the word, yet thou
gettest that same thing better. What is that better? Thou obtainest a greater,
and surer hold of that same thing in the Sacrament, then thou had by the
hearing of the word. That same thing, which thou possessedst, by the hearing
of the word, thou do possess now more largely; it has larger bounds in thy
soul, by the receiving of the Sacrament, then other-wise it could have, by the
hearing of the word only. Then will thou ask what new thing we get? I say,
we get this new thing: we get Christ, better then before; we get the thing
which we had, more fully: that is, with a surer apprehension then we had it
before; we get a greater hold of Christ now. For, by the Sacrament, my faith
is nourished, the bounds of my soul are enlarged: and so, whereas I had but a
little hold of Christ before, as it were between my finger, and my thumb, now
I get him in my whole hand; and still the more that my faith grows, the
better hold I get of Christ Jesus. So the Sacrament is very necessary, and if
it were no more but to get Christ better, and to get a faster apprehension of
him, by the Sacrament, then we could have before.

Now, if it were true, that the Sacrament is superfluous: by the same reason it
should follow also, that the repetition of the Sacrament is superfluous. For,
when ye come to the Sacrament the second time, ye get no other thing then ye
did the first time: when ye come unto the Sacrament the third time, yet get no
other thing then ye did the first time: and yet no man will say, that the
third, and second coming, is a superfluous thing. And why? Because by the
second coming, my faith is augmented, I understand better, I grow in
knowledge, I grow in apprehension, I grow in feeling: and in getting the
growth of all these, as often as I come, there is no man will say, that the often
coming to the Sacrament is superfluous, and if it were every day once. So,
their first inconvenience auailes not: We get no new thing in the Sacrament;
Ergo, the Sacrament is superfluous.

Thus far for the first. Then there depends another thing on the same ground.
If Christ be not perceived, but by faith; then, say we, no wicked body can
perceive him; he that lacks faith, cannot perceive him. He that lacks
faith, may perceive that Sacrament, of that bread, and that wine, and may eat
of that bread, and drink of that wine; but he that wants faith, may not
eat and drink of the body and blood of Christ, signified by that bread, and by
that wine. So this is the ground: no faithless people can perceive Christ, nor
eat the body of Christ in the Sacrament.

Against this ground, they bring their Argument out of the same words of the
Apostle, which I have read; the words are these; He that eats of this Bread,
vnvvorthily (says the Apostle) and drinks of this Cup unworthily, is
guilty of the body and blood of Christ.

There is their ground: Second inconvenience.
So that their Argument will suffer this form: No man can be guilty of that
thing, which he has not received: they have not received the body, and blood
of Christ: therefore, they cannot be guilty of the body, and blood of Christ:
but so it is, that the Apostle says, they are guilty, therefore they have
received the body, and blood of Christ.

I answer unto the Proposition, Refutation of the second inconuenie^ce
objected, where in are sundry reasons given, why the wicked are counted guilty
of the body, and blood of Christ.
and I say, it is very false: They could not be guilty of that body, and
blood, except they had received it; for they may be guilty of that same body,
and of that same blood, suppose they never received it. But mark the Text: The
Text says not, that they eat the body of Christ unworthily; but it says,
that they eat that bread, and drink that wine unworthily: And yet, because
they eat that bread, and drink that wine unworthily, they are counted before
God, guilty of the body, and blood of Christ. Now wherefore is this? Not
because they receive him; for, if they received him, they could not but receive
him vvorthily, for Christ cannot be received of any man, but woorthily: but
they are accounted guilty of the body and blood of the Son of GOD, because
they refused him. For when they did eat that Bread, and drink that wine, they
might, if they had had faith, have eaten and drunk the flesh, and blood of
Christ lesus. Now, because thou refusest the body of Christ, offered to thee,
thou contemnest his body, offered unto thee, if thou have not an eye to
discern, and indge of this body, that is offered. For if they had had faith
they might have seen his body, offered with the bread; by faith they might have
taken that same body, and by faith, they might have eaten that same body.
Therefore, lacking their wedding garment, wanting faith, whereby they should
eat the body, and drink the blood of Christ; wanting faith, which is the eye
of the soul, to perceive, and the mouth of the soul, to receive that body,
which is spirituallie offered; they are counted guilty of that same body and
blood.

Now, let us make this more clear by a similitude. Ye see among worldly
Princes, their custom is, not to suffer their majesty to be impeached in the
smallest thing that they have. What meaner thing is there that concerns the
majesty of a Prince, then a seal? for the substance of it is but wax: yet, if
thou disdainfully use that seal, and contemn it, and stamp it under thy
feet, thou shall be esteemed as guilty of his body, and blood, as he that laid
violent hands on him, and thou shall be punished accordingly. Much more, if
thou come as a swine, or as a dog, to handle the seals of the body, and blood
of Christ; much more may thou be rockoned guilty of his body, and of his
blood.

Thus far of the eating of the body of Christ: The wicked cannot eat the
body of Christ; but they may be guilty of it. The Apostle makes this more
plain yet, by another speech, which I have sometimes handled out of this
place. In Hebr. 6.6. it is said, that Apostates, they that fall away, they
crucify the Son of God again; and their falling away, makes the^ as guilty,
as they were who crucified him. He is now in heaven, they cannot fetch him from
thence, to crucify him: yet the Apostle says, they crucify him. Why? Because
their malice is as great, as theirs that crucified him, because they match in
malice, with the^ that crucified him; so that if they had him on the earth,
they would do the like: therefore they are said to crucify the Son of GOD.
So in Heb. 10.29. there is another speech: the wicked are said to stamp the
blood of Christ under their feet. Why? Because their malice is as great, as
theirs that stamped his blood.

Now, they are accounted for this reason, to be guilty of the body and blood
of Christ, not because they eat his body, but because they refused it, when
they might have had it.

Now, the time remains yet, wherein we may have the body, Exhortation.
and blood of Christ. This time is very precious, and the dispensation of times
is very secret, and has it own bounds: if ye take not this time now, it will
away. This time of Grace, and of that heavenly food, has been dispensed unto
you very long: but how ye have profited, your lives and behauiours testify.
Remember therefore your selves in time, and in time make use of it; for ye
know not how long it will last: crave a mouth to receive, as well the food of
your souls, that is offered, as ye do the food of your bodies: and take this
time while ye may have it, or assuredly the time shall come, when ye shall
cry for it, but shall not get it; but in place of Grace, and mercy, shall come
judgment, vengeance, and the dispensation of wrath.

They will not leave this matter so; but they insist yet, and they bring more
Arguments, to prove, that the wicked are partakers of the body, Third
inconvenience.
and blood of Christ; That Bread (say they) ye will grant, which the wicked
man eats, is not naked bread, but is that bread which is the Sacrament. Thus
then they make their Argument; The Sacrament has ever conjoined with it, the
thing signified: But the Sacrament is given to all, therefore the thing
signified is given to all.

What if I grant to them all this Argument? Refutation of the third
inconvenience.
There should no inconvenience follow. For, the thing signified may be given to
all; that is, offered to all, as it is offered to all men, and yet not received
of all. Given to all; therefore received of all, it follows not. I may offer
you two things; yet it is in your own will, whether you will take them, or
no, but ye may take the one, and refuse the other: and yet he that offers,
offered you the thing that ye refused, as truly, as the thing which ye took.
So, GOD deceives no man: but with the word, and Sacraments, assuredly he
gives two things, if they would take them. By his word, he offers the word
to the ear, he offers Christ Jesus to the soul. By his Sacraments, he
offers the Sacraments to the eye, he offers Christ Jesus to the soul.

Now, it may be, that where two things are truly, and conioyntlie offered, a man
may receive the one, and refuse the other. He receives the one, because he
has an instrument to take it: he refuses the other, because he wants an
instrument. I hear the word, because I have an ear to hear it with: I
receive the Sacrament, because I have a mouth to receive it with: but as for
the thing, which the word, and Sacraments represent, I may refuse it; because I
have not a mouth to take it, nor an eye to perceive it: and therefore, the
fault is not on Gods part, but on our part. The wicked get the body, and blood
of Christ offered to them conioyntly, with the word, and Sacraments; but the
fault is on their part, that they have not a mouth to receive him, and God is
not bound to give them a mouth. Mark this: That if it were not of Gods special
grace, and mercy, that he gives me an eye to perceive him, and a mouth to
receive him; I would refuse him, as well as they. So, this Argument holds
not: Christ is offered to all; Ergo, he is received of all. Happy were they,
if they could receive him. Thus far for the 3. Argument.

What rests now for the full understanding of the Sacrament? These things
remain; That we understand the Sacramental speeches, that are used in the
Sacrament: for, we use to speak of them: God uses to speak of them: and the
Ancients use to speak of them. We use to say, that the soul eats the body
of Christ, and drinks the blood of Christ. How the soul is said to eat the
body, and drink the blood of Christ.
These speeches would be opened to you, how the soul is said to eat the body,
and drink the blood of Christ: these speeches are Sacramental; yet ye are not
the wiser: but I will make it plain, by Gods grace. They are Sacramental;
what is that? Ye know it is proper to the body to eat and drink, they are
the proper actions of the body only. Now they are ascribed to the soul by a
translation, by a figurative manner of speaking. That which is proper to the
body, is ascribed to the soul, and it is said that the soul eats and
drinks. The eating of the soul, does resemble the eating of the body: then
the eating of the soul, is no other thing, but the applying of Christ to the
soul; to believe that he has shed his blood for me; that he has purchased
remission of sins for me. Wherefore then call you this an eating? what call you
the eating of the body? They body eats, when thou appliest the meat to thy
mouth. If then the eating of the body be no other thing, but the applying of
meat to the mouth; the eating of the soul is no other thing, but the applying
of the nourishment to the soul. Then ye see what is meant by the eating and
drinking of the soul: no other thing, but the applying of Christ to my soul,
and the applying of his death and passion to my soul; and this is only done
by faith: therefore he that lacks faith, cannot eat Christ. Thus far for
the eating and drinking of the soul, which are Sacramental speeches.

There remains now, of all these great things, Observation.
and of all this doctrine which has bin taught, but this one lesson: That thou
learn to apply Christ rightly to thy soul. Thou art a great Divine, if thou
have learned this well: for, in the right application of Christ, to the sick
soul, to the wounded conscience, and diseased heart, here begins the
fountain of all our felicity, and the wel-spring of all our joy. And I will
tell you, what this application works: Observe, what the presence of thy
soul within thee (suppose thou want Christ in thy soul) does to this earthly
body, to this lump of clay; as by the presence of the soul, it lives, it
moves, it feels: as the soul gives to the body, life, moving, and senses:
that same very thing, does Christ unto thy soul. Have thou once laid hold of,
and applied him to thee? As the soul quickens thy body, so he quickens thy
soul; not with an earthly, or temporal life, but with the life which he
lives in heaven: he makes thee to live that same life, which the Angels live
in heaven: he makes thee to move, not with worldly motions, but with
heavenly, spiritual, and celestial motions. Again, he inspires in thee, not
outward senses, but heavenly senses; he works in thee, a spiritual feeling,
that in thine own heart and conscience, thou may find the effect of this word.
So, by the conjunction of Christ with my soul, I get a thousand times greater
benefits, then the body does by the soul: for the body, by the presence of
the soul, gets only an earthly and temporal life, subject to continual
misery: but by the presence of Christ in my soul, I see a blessed life, I
feel a blessed life: and that same life, takes daily more and more increase in
me. Then the ground of all our perfection, and blessedness, stands in this
conjunction: and suppose thou might live Methushelaes years, and were ever
seking; yet if in the last hour, thou get this conjunction, thou may think
thy travel well bestowed; thou have gotten enough: for if we have obtained
Christ, we have gotten all with him. Then the applying of Christ to my soul,
is the fountain of all my joy and felicity. Now, let us see how we get this
conjunction. This is a spiritual conjunction, a conjunction hard, and
difficult to be purchased, obtained, and gotten of us, How then is this
conjunction brought about? which are the means of this conjunction on Gods
part? and which are the means on our part to get Christ, to put Christ in our
souls, and to make Christ one with us? There is one means on Gods part, that
helps us unto Christ, and there is another on our part. On Gods part, there
is the holy spirit, which offers the body, and blood of Chr. to us: and on
our part, there must be a means, or else, though he offer, we will not receive.
Therefore of necessity, there must be faith in our souls, to receive that
which the holy spirit offers, to receive that heavenly food, of the body and
blood of Chr. which she holy spirit offers. The^ faith, and the holy spirit,
are the two means of this spiritual, and heavenly conjunction. By these 2.
means, by faith, and by the holy spirit, I get the body of Chr. the body of
Chr. is mine, and he is given to my soul. Now, here comes in the question; How
can thou say, that the body of Christ is given, or delivered to thee, seeing
the body of Christ is sitting at the right hand of God the Father? and look how
great distance is betwixt heaven and earth, as great distance is there, betwixt
the body of Christ, and thy body: how then say ye, that the body of Christ is
given to you? The Papists understand not this; and therefore they imagine a
gross and carnal conjunction. Except the spirit of God reveal these things,
they cannot be understood. The spirit of God must illuminate our minds, and be
planted in all our hearts, before we can come to the understanding of this.
Then would thou understand how Christ is given thee? This ground is true,
that the body of Christ, is at the right hand of the Father; the blood of
Christ is at the right hand of the Father: yet notwithstanding, though there be
as great distance betwixt my body, and the body of Christ, as is betwixt
heaven and earth, yet Christ's body is given to me, because I have a title to
his body given to me: the right, and title which is given to me, of his body,
and blood, makes me to possess his body and blood. The distance of the place,
hurts not my title, nor my right: for if any of you, have a piece of Land
lying in the farthest part of England, if ye have a good title to it, the
distance of the place cannot hurt your title: so I say, the distance of place,
hurts not my title, and my right, that I have to Christ. But, though he be
sitting at the right hand of the Father, yet the title, and right, that I have
to him, makes him mine; so that I may say truly, this Christ is my property.
Then Christ is not made mine, because I fetch him out of the heavens: but he is
mine, because I have a sure title, and right to him; and having a sure title,
and just right to him, the distance of place, how far soever it be, can no
ways hurt my title, nor right; but where-euer he be, he is mine, because I
have a right and title to him. Yea, not only have I a title to him, but this
title is confirmed to me: For, as I get a title to him in the word (and if
I got not that title to him in the word, I durst not come to the Sacrament) so
in the Sacrament, I get the confirmation of my title, I get the Seal, which
confirms my title. Then to come to the point, Christ's body, is sitting at the
right hand of the Father, and yet he is mine, and is delivered to me, because I
have right to his body, be it where it will: he was borne for me, given to
me, and delivered to me: So distance of place, hurts not the surety of my
title, as propinquitie of place, helps not the surety of the same. Though
Christ would bow the heavens, and touch thee with his body, as he did Judas:
yet this could not help thee, for if thou have not a title to him, thou dare
not call him, thine. So it is not the neernesse, nor proximity of place, that
makes Christ mine: It is only the right, that I have to him: I have right to
him, only by faith: So by faith only, Chr. is made mine. But they think, they
have gotten a great vantage of us, if we be so far from Chr. as the heaven
is, from the earth; but this shall be answered, by Gods grace: I have a title to
his body, his body is distant from my body: yet his body is not distant from
me, that is, from my soul, I say his body and my soul are conjoined. It is a
strange ladder, that will reach from the earth to the heavens, yet let me tell
you, there is a cord that extends from the earth to the heavens; Faith is
that which couples us and Christ.
and coupleth me and Christ together, and this is only true faith: By true
faith, Christ, though he be in the heavens, is coupled, and conjoined with me,
who am here on earth: I will show you this by a similitude. Similitude taken
from the sun.
Is not the body of the sun in the firmament? It is impossible for you, to
touch the body of the sun, yet the body of the sun, and ye are conjoined,
How? By those beams that shine on you; by that light, that shines upon you:
Why may not the body of Christ then, though it be in the heavens, be conjoined
with me, that am on the earth, namely, by the beams, by the light, and
gladness, that flows from his body? My body, and Christ's body are conioined,
by the virtue, and power, flowing from his body: which virtue, and power,
quickneth my dead soul, makes me to live the life of Christ, to begin to
die to my self: and ever the more I die to my self, the more I live to
Christ: This conjunction now is the ground as I told you, of all our
felicity, and happiness, and I have made it clear to you at this time, so
far as God has given me insight: Always ye see, this conjunction is
brought to pass, by two special means; by the holy spirit, and by faith, If
there be no other means, but these two, what need thou a carnal, or a
visible conjunction? Faith is invisible, and the spirit is invisible, therefore
thou can not see it, nor take it up with the eye of thy body: The power of
the holy spirit is so subtle, secret, and invisible, that thou can not
perceive it, nor take it up, with the eye of thy body, and it will work
great effects in thy soul, or ever thou perceiuest his working: In respect
therefore, that the means of this conjunction, are so subtle, secret, and
spiritual, why think thou to get a sight of this conjunction, with the eye
of thy body? why imaginest thou, such a carnal conjunction, as this, which
would do thee no good, if thou had it? know thou not, that the spirit,
that coupleth us, and Christ, is infinite? so that it is as easy for the
spirit, to couplevs and Christ, how far distant soever we be, as it is
easy for our souls, to couple our head and the feet of our bodies, though
they be distant. Then seeing this conjunction is the ground and fountain of
all our happiness: And seeing this ground of happiness is so subtle, and so
spiritual, What is your part? Remove all your outward senses, remove al your
natural motions, remove your natural discourses, and your natural reason,
and follow the sight and information of the spirit of God: Crave that it would
please him, to illuminate your understanding, that by the light of his spirit,
ye may see clearly, the spiritual conjunction: Except the eye of the spirit
be given you, to perceive this spiritual conjunction. It is not possible, that
ye can get any insight in it. But if the Lord of his mercy, will bestow some
measure of his holy spirit upon you; out of question, ye shall soon come to
the understanding of it, and ye shall think the time happy, that ever ye
heard this word. Except ye have some part of this spirit, it is not possible
that ye can be spiritual.

That which is borne of flesh and blood, will remain flesh and blood, except
the spirit come in and make it spiritual.

Therefore ye must be borne again of the spirit, ye must be borne in the
body of Christ, his spirit must quicken you.

This is called the quickening, and living spirit of Christ, by John. And so
soon as this spirit comes, what does it? It chaseth away darkness out of the
understanding: whereas before, I knew not God, now I see him, not only
generally, that he is a God, but that he is my God in Christ: what more does
the holy spirit? It opneth the heart, as well as the mind: and what does it
there? Those things, whereon I bestowed the affection of my heart, and employed
the love of my soul, are by the working of the holy spirit, made gall to me,
he makes then venom to me, and to be as deadly hated of me, as poison: He
works such an inward disposition in my soul, that he makes me to turn,
and fly from those things whereon I employed my love before, and to employ it
upon God: This is a great perfection. Always in some measure, he makes me to
love God better then any other thing: He changes the affections and
inclinations of my soul, he changes the faculties, and qualities of my soul:
And though our hearts and mind be made new, yet the substance of them is not
changed, but only the faculties, and qualities are changed, in respect of the
which change, we are called new creatures, and except you be found new
creatures, Conclusion with an exhortation.
ye are not in Christ.

Now to come to the point. This secret Conjunction is brought to pass, by
faith, and by the holy spirit: by faith we lay hold on the body, and blood of
Christ: And though we be as far distant, as heaven and earth are; the
spirit serves us, as a ladder to conioyne us with Christ: As the ladder of
Jacob, which reached from the ground to the heaven, to the self same use,
serves the spirit of God, to conioyne the body of Christ, with my soul. Then
observe the whole in a word: what makes you to have any right, or title to
Christ? Nothing, but the spirit: Nothing, but faith. What should be your
study then? Seek by all means possible, to get faith: That as Peter, Acts
the 15.9. says, your hearts and consciences, may be sanctified by faith: And
if you endeavor not, as well to get faith in your hearts, as in your minds,
your faith avails not. What avails the faith, that fleeteth in the
fantasy, and brings a naked knowledge, without the opening of the heart, and
consent of the will? So, there must be an opening of thy heart, and consent of
thy will, to do that thing, that God commands, or else, thy faith avails
not: Then strive to get faith in your hearts, and minds; and doing so, ye do
the duties of Christians: This is not done, without the diligent hearing of the
word, and diligent receiving of the Sacrament. Then be diligent in these
exercises, and be diligent in prayer: Praying in the holy Ghost, that he would
nourish your souls inwardly, with the body, and blood of Christ: That he
would increase faith in your hearts, and minds, and make it to grow up more
and more daily, until you come to the full fruition of that blessed
immortality: Unto the which, the Lord of his mercy bring us; and that for the
righteous merits of Christ Jesus: To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost,
be all honor, praise, and glory, both now and ever: Amen.

THE THIRD Sermon, upon the Lords Supper.
1. Cor. 11.23. For I have received of the Lord, that which I also have
delivered unto you: to wit, that the Lord Jesus, in the night that he was
betrayed, took bread, etc.
WE have heard (wel-beloued in Christ Jesus) in our last exercise, what names
were given to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as well in the Scriptures, as
by the Auncientes, of the Latin, and East Churches: we heard the chief ends
wherefore, and whereunto, this holy Sacrament was at first instituted: we
heard the things, that were contained in this Sacrament, what they were, how
they are coupled, how they are delivered, and how they are received: we heard
also, some objections, that might be objected, to the contrary of this
doctrine: we heard them propounded, and as God gave the grace, refuted: we
heard how the faithful soul, is said to eat Christ's body, and drink
Christ's blood: We heard the manner, how Christ is, or can be, received of
us: And we concluded in this point, That Christ Jesus, the Savior of mankind,
our Savior, cannot be perceived, nor yet received, but by a spiritual way,
and apprehension. Neither the flesh of Christ, nor the blood of Christ, nor
Christ himself, can be perceived, but by the eye of faith; can be received,
but by the mouth of faith; nor can be laid hold on, but by the hand of faith.

Now faith is a spiritual thing: for faith is the gift of God, poured down
into the hearts and minds of men, and women, wrought in the soul of every
one, and that by the mighty working, and operation of the holy spirit. So, the
only way to lay hold on Christ, being by faith, and faith of it own
nature, being spiritual, it follows therefore that there is no way to lay
hold on Christ, but a spiritual way: there is not a hand: to fasten on Christ,
but aspirituall hand, there is not a mouth, to digest Christ, but a spiritual
mouth: The Scriptures, samiliarly by all these terms, describe the nature,
and efficacy of faith. How we are said to eat the flesh, and drink the blood
of Christ.


We are said to eat the flesh of Christ by faith, and to drink his blood by
faith, in this Sacrament: chiefly in doing of two things: First, in calling to
our remembrance, the bitter death, and passiof Christ, the blood that he
shed upon the cross, the Supper which he instituted, in remembrance of him,
before he went to the Cross: The commandment which he gave: Do this in
remembrance of me: I say, we eat his flesh, and drink his blood
spiritually. First in this point, in recording, and remembering faithfully, how
he died for us, how his blood was shed upon the cross. This is the first
point, a point that cannot be remembered truly, except it be wrought, by the
mighty power of the holy spirit. The second point of the spiritual eating,
stands in this, That I, and every one of you, believe firmly, that he died
for me, in particular: That his blood, was shed on the cross, for a full
remission, and redemption of me, and my sins. The chief, and principal
point, of the eating of Christ his flesh, and drinking of his blood, stands
in believing firmly, that that flesh, was delivered to death for my sins;
that that blood, of his, was shed, for the remission of my sins: and
except, every soul come near to himself, and firmly consent, and agree,
and be persuaded, that Christ died for him: that soul can not be saved, that
soul cannot eat the flesh, nor drink the blood of Christ. Then the eating of
the flesh, and drinking of the blood of Christ, stands in a faithful
memory, in a firm belief, and in a true applying, of the merits of the
death, and passion of Christ, to my own conscience in particular.

There were sundry things objected, against this kind of receiving: I will not
insist to repeat them: But beside all the objections, which ye heard objected,
against this kind of spiritual receiving by faith; They say, If Christ his
flesh, nor his blood, be not perceived, nor received, but by the spirit, by
faith in the spirit: Then say they, ye receive him, but by an imagination: If
he be not received carnally, nor corporally, but only by the spirit, and by
faith; Then is he not received, but by way of imagination, conceit, and
fantasy. So they account faith, an imagination of the mind, a fantasy, and
opinion, fleeting in the hearts of men: I cannot blame them, to think so of
faith: For, as none can judge of the sweetness of honnie, but they, that have
tasted of it: So, there is none, can discern, nor judge of the nature of
faith, but they that have felt it, and rasted in their hearts, what it is: And
if they had tasted, and felt in their souls, what faith brings with it; alas,
they would not call that spiritual Jewel, and only jewel of the soul, an
imagination. They call it an imagination: and the Apostle describing it, Heb.
11.1. calls it a substance, and a substantial ground: Mark how well these
two agree, An Imagination, and a substantial ground. They call it an
uncertain opinion, fleeting in the brain, and fantasy of man: He call^th it
an evidence, and demonstration, in the same definition; See how directly
contrary, the Apostle and they are, in the nature of faith. Upon this they
infer, that as it is true in general, he can not be delivered, nor given,
but that same way, that he is received; and look what way any thing is
received, the same way it is given, and delivered: So (as they say) he being
received by way of Imagination, he is also in their fantasy, given and
delivered by way of Imagination. For if he be not given say they, to thy
hand, to thy mouth, nor to thy stomach corporally: he cannot be given, but by
an imagination, and fantastical opinion. The reason that moves them to
think, that Christ cannot be theirs, nor given to them truly in effect, and
really, except he be given carnally, is this: That thing which is so far
absent, and distant from us, as the heaven is from the earth, cannot be said to
be given to us, nor to be ours: But by your own confession, say they to us,
Christ his body, is as far absent from us, as the heaven is, from the earth:
Therefore Christ his body, nor his flesh, cannot be given unto us, except by
way of imagination, and so not truly, nor in effect: This argument, framed in
this sort, would at the first sight, seem to be of some force. But let us
examine the proposition of it: The proposition is this. That thing which is so
far absent from us, as the beauen is from the earth, cannot be said to be
delivered to us, to be given to us, or any ways to be ours.

Now whether is this proposition true or false? I say this proposition is
untrue, and the contrary most true. A thing may be given to us, and may become
ours, though the thing in person it self, be as far distant from us, as the
heaven is, from the earth. And how prove I this? What makes any thing to be
ours? What makes any of you, esteem a thing to be given unto you? Is it not a
Title? Is it not a just right to that thing? If ye have just right given unto
you, by him, who has power to give it; and a sure title, confirmed to you, by
him, who has the power; though the thing, that he gives unto you, be not
delivered into your hands, yet by the right and title, which he grants to
you, is not the thing yours? There is no doubt of it, for it is not the
neerenesse of the thing, to my body, and to my hand, that makes the thing
mine; for it may be in my hand, and yet not belong to me. Neither is it the
distance nor absence: of the thing, that makes it, not to be mine, but it may
be far absent from me, and yet be mine, because the title is mine, and
because, I have gotten a right to it, from him, who has the power to give it.
So then, this ground is true, It is a sure title, and a just right, that makes
a thing, though it be far distant from us, to be ours. But so it is, that a
lively, and true faith, in the blood, and death of Christ, makes us to have a
sure title, and a good right to the flesh, and blood of Christ, and to his
merits: look what he merited by his death, and shedding of his blood upon the
cross; all that, together with himself also, appertains to me, and that by
a title and a right, which I have gotten to him, of God; which is faith: And
the surer that my title is, the more sure am I, of the thing that is given me
by the Title. Now this Sacrament, of the Lords Supper, was instituted, to
confirm our title, to seal up our right, which we have to the body, and
blood, to the death, and passion of Christ: and so, the body of Christ, is
said to be given to us, The blood of Christ, is said to be delivered to us,
when our title, which we have of him, of his death, of his body, and blood, is
confirmed in our hearts. For this Sacrament was instituted, for the grouth and
increase of our faith, for the increase of our holiness, and sanctification:
which faith, the greater that it is in our hearts, the more sure are we, that
Christ his death appertains to us. I grant as I have said, that the flesh of
Christ, is not delivered into my hands, his flesh is not put into my mouth, nor
enters into my stomach: Yet God forbid, that thou should say, He is not
truly given, although Christ's flesh, be not put into thy hand, nor mouth of
thy body: and wherefore should it? Has he not appointed bread, and wine,
for the nourishment of the body, and may not that content you? Are they not
sufficient to nourish you, to this earthly and temporal life? Has he not
appointed Christ to be delivered, to the inward mouth of thy soul, to be
given into the hand of thy soul, that thy soul may feed on him, and be
quickened with that life, wherewith the Angels live, wherewith the son of God,
and God himself live?

So the flesh of Christ, is not appointed to nourish thy body, but to nourish
thy soul, in the hope, yea, in the growth of that immortal life: and
therefore, I say, though the flesh of Christ be not delivered into the hand of
thy body, yet it is delivered to that part that it should nourish: the soul is
that part that it should nourish, therefore to the soul it is delivered.

Yea, that bread, and that wine, are no more really delivered to the body and
to the hand of the body, then the flesh of Christ is delivered to the soul,
and to the hand and mouth of the soul, which is faith: therefore crave no
more a carnal delivery, nor think not upon a carnal receiving.

Thou must not think, that either GOD gives the flesh of Christ to the mouth
of the body; or that thou, by the mouth of thy body, receiuest the flesh of
Christ: For ye must understand this principle in the Scriptures of GOD; our
souls cannot be joined with the flesh of Christ; nor the flesh of Christ,
cannot be joined with our souls, but by a spiritual band. Not by a carnal
band, of blood and alliance; not by the touching of his flesh, with our flesh:
but he is conjoined with us by a spiritual band; that is, by the power, and
virtue of his holy Spirit. And therefore the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 12.13. That
by the means of his holy spirit, all we, who are faithful men and women,
are baptized into one body of Christ. That is, we are conjoined, and fastened
with one Christ; by the means, says he, of one spirit: not by a carnal band,
or any gross conjunction; but only by the band of the holy spirit.

That same holy spirit that is in him, is in every one of us, in some measure:
and in respect one spirit is in him, and in us, therefore, we are accounted
all to be one body, and to be members of one spiritual, and mystical body.
And in the same verse, the Apostle says, We are all made to drink into one
and the self same spirit: that is, we are made to drink of the blood of
Christ. And this blood is no other thing, but the quickening virtue, and power
that flows from Christ, and from the merits of his death: we are made all to
drink of that blood, when we drink of the lively power and virtue, that
flows out of that blood.

So, there is not a band that can couple my soul with the flesh of Christ, but
only a spiritual band, and a spiritual union. And therefore it is that the
Apostle 1. Cor. 6.17. says, He that is joined unto the Lord, is one spirit.
And, John says, That which is borne of the spirit, is spirit. So, it is only
by the participation of the holy spirit, that we are conjoined with the flesh
and blood of Christ Jesus.

That carnal band, whether it be the band of blood, which runs throrough
one race, or the carnal touching of flesh, with flesh, that carnal band (I
say) was never esteemed of by Christ. In the time that he was conversant
here upon earth, he respected nothing that band: for, as he witnessed
himself, by his own words, he never had that carnal band in any kind of
reverence, or estimation, in respect of the spiritual band.

But, as for the spiritual band, whereby we are coupled with him by one
spirit; he ever esteemed of this band, in the time that he was conversant on
earth, and in his word, he has left the praise and commendations of the same.

To let you see how lightly he esteemed of the carnal band of blood and
alliance, which we esteem so much; ye may see in the eight of Luke, 20.21.
for there they coming to him, say, Master, thy Mother, and thy Brethren stand
without, and would see thee: ye shall hear his answer unto them, how little
he esteemed of that carnal band; in the 21. verse, in a manner denying that
band, he says; My Mother, and my Brethren, are those which hear the word of
God, and do it. As if he would have said, It is not that carnal band that I
esteem: it is not that carnal conjunction that I reverence: it is the
spiritual conjunction, by the participation of the holy Spirit; whereby we
are moved to hear the word of God, to give reverence to it, and to obey it.

This carnal band, was never profitable, as that in the 8. of Luke does
plainly testify: for, if the touching of Christ's flesh had been profitable,
the multitude, whereof mention is made in that chapter, that thrusted, and
preased him, had been the better by their carnal touching. But so it is, that
there was never any of them the better by their carnal touching; therefore the
carnal touching profits nothing. Says not Christ himself, John 6.63. (to
draw them from that sinister confidence they had in his flesh only) My flesh
profits nothing; It is the spirit that quickneth? To touch him by the holy
Spirit, and by faith in thy soul; this touching by faith, has ever been
profitable, and we have a plain example of it in the same chapter.

Even so, the poor woman, that had long been diseased with a bloody issue,
the space of twelve years, and had waste, and consumed the greatest part of
her substance, in seeking remedy; she found no help by the natural and
bodily Physician: at the last, by virtue of the holy Spirit, working faith in
her heart, she understands and conceiues, that she is able to recover the
health of her body, and the health of her soul from Christ Jesus, who came
to save both body and soul. And upon this persuasion which she had in her
heart, that Christ could cure both body and soul, she came unto him; and as
the Text says, she preased thorough the multitude, to come to him: and when
she was come, it is not said that she touched his flesh with her hand (in case
the Papists would ascribe the virtue which came out of him, to her carnal
touching): but it is said, that she touched only the hemme of his garment with
her hand; and with faith, which is the hand of the soul, she touched her
Savior, God, and man. And, to let you understand that she touched him by
says, he says to her at the last, Go thy way, thy faith has saved thee.

She touched him not so soon by faith, but incontment, there came a power out
of him: which power and virtue, she felt, by the effect of it in her soul;
and our Savior felt it, when it went from him. The effect whereby she felt
it, was, the health of her soul: and the effect whereby he felt it, was, the
going from him. And so soon as he felt it go from him, he says, Who is it
that has touched me? Peter (who was ever most sudden) answers, and says,
Thou art thronged, and thrusted by the multitude, and yet thou ask, Who has
touched thee.

Our Savior answers again, It is not that touching, that I speak of; it is
another kind of touching. There is one has touched me, who has drawn a
virtue and power out of me: the multitude takes no virtue from me. The poor
woman, thinking she had done amiss, and perceiving that she could not be hid,
came trembling, and said; I have done it. He answered her at the last, and
said, Depart in peace; thy faith has saved thee. Thy faith has drawn out a
virtue, and power from me, that has made both thy soul and body whole.

So that this touching of Christ, has ever been profitable; is, and shall be
profitable: like as the touching of Christ, with the corporal hand, has never
been, is not, nor ever shall be profitable. And why? Christ is not appointed
to be a carnal head; to be set upon the necks of our bodies, that he may do
the office of a carnal head thereunto, to furnish natural motion, and senses
to our bodies. No, the Scriptures call not Christ a natural head, but the
Scriptures call him a spiritual head, to be set on the neck of our souls:
that is, to be co^ioyned with our souls; that out of him, into our souls may
distill holy motions, heavenly senses; and that there may flow out of him to
us, a spiritual and heavenly life.

Then the Scriptures call him a spiritu-head, as they call us a spiritual
body: and, as the life which we get from him, is spiritual; so all our
conjunction with him, is spiritual. And in respect he works that same
operation in my soul, which the carnal head does in my body, therefore he
is called a spiritual head: therefore he is called the head of his Church,
because he furnishes her with spiritual motion, and senses, which is the
life of the Church.

So, to be short, there is nothing in this conjunction, carnal; there is
nothing gross in it; there is nothing that may be compassed, by our natural
judgment and understanding. And therefore, whosoever would attain to any
small in-sight of this spiritual conjunction, between Christ, and us; of
necessity, he must humble himself, and earnestly pray for the spirit;
otherwise, it is not possible to get any understanding, no, not the least
perseverance, how the flesh of Christ, and we are conjoined, except we have
some light given us by the spirit; that is, except our hearts be wakened, by the
mighty working of the spirit of Christ, this shall remain as a dead, and
closed letter unto us. So, Exhortation.
ye are to crave, that the Lord in his mercy would waken you; illuminate your
understandings; and make you to have a spiritual light, to discern of these
spiritual things. Next, ye must study, and be careful to remove all vain
cogitations, and earthly fantasies: when ye come to hear so high a matter,
ye must cast off all filthy thoughts, ill motions, and cares of the world; and
ye must shake off all things that clogge your hearts. Thirdly, ye must come
with a purpose to hear the word, to give diligent care to the word, and with
a sanctified heart to receive it; with a purpose to grow, and increase in
holiness, as well in body, as in soul, all the days of your life.

And, coming with this purpose, no question, the holy Spirit shall reveal
those things to you, which ye want. And though this word pass, and bring no
great commodity for the present, yet the holy Spirit hereafter, shall reveal
to thee, the truth of that which thou have now heard. Then this is the end of
all; Be present in your hearts, and minds, and let your souls be emptied of
all the cares of the world, that they may receive that comfort, which is
offered in the hearing of the word.

Now I come to the defining of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. The
definition of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
I call this Sacrament, A holy Seal, annexed to the covenant of grace, and
mercy in Christ. A seal to be ministered publicly, always according to the
holy institution of Christ Jesus: that by the lawful ministry thereof, the
Sacramental union, between the signs, and the thing signified, may stand:
and this union standing, Christ Jesus, who is the thing signified, is as truly
delivered to the increase of our spiritual nourishment, as the signs are
given, and delivered to the body, for our temporal nourishment.

Now let us examine the words and parts of this definition. Why this Sacrament
is called a Seal.
First of all, I call this Sacrament, a Seal; because this Sacrament serves
to the same use to our souls, that a common seal does to a common Evidence.
As the seal, which is annexed to the Evidence, confirms, and seals up the
truth, contained in the Evidence: so this Sacrament, of the body and blood of
Christ, confirms, and seals up, the truth of mercy and grace, contained in
the covenant of mercy and grace: for this respect it is called a seal.

It is called, A holy Seal. Why? Why it is called a holy Seal.
Because it is taken from the profane use, whereunto that bread served before;
and that bread is applied to a holy use. There is a power given to that bread,
to signify the precious body of Christ Jesus, to represent the nourishing, and
feeding of our souls. And in respect it serves now in the Sacrament to so
holy an use, therefore I call it an holy seal. This is not my word; it is the
Apostles, Romans 4.11. where he gives the Sacrament the same name, and calls
it a seal. And further, if the wisdom of Christ in his Apostle, had been
followed, and if men had not invented new names of their own, for this
Sacrament, but contented, and satisfied themselves, with the names which God
has given by his Apostle, and that Chr. himself has given to this Sacrament;
I am assured, none of these controversies and debares (which never will cease)
had fallen out: but where men will go about to be wiser the^ God, and go beyond
God, in devising names which he never gave, upon men's own inventions, such
debates have fallen out. A lesson by the way; that no flesh presume to be wiser
then GOD: but let them stoop, and keep the names which God has given to this
Sacrament.

Thirdly, Why the seal is said to be annexed to the covenant.
I say, annexed to the Covenant; annexed, and hung to the Charter: because it
cannot be called a seal properly, except it be hung to an Evidence. What it is
by nature, the same it remains, and no more, if it be not annexed to some
Evidence: it is only the hanging of it to the Evidence, that makes men
account it a seal; not being esteemed, except it be hanged to the Evidence.
Even so it is here; if this Sacrament be not ministered, and joined to the
preached word, to the preaching of the covenant of mercy, and grace, it
cannot be a seal; but what it is by nature, it is no more. As by nature, it is
but a common piece of bread; so it is no more if it be not annexed to the
preaching of the word, and ministered therewith, as Christ has commanded.
Therefore, I say, the seal must be annexed, and hanged to the Evidence, to the
preaching of the word, for the confirming of the Evidence; otherwise, it is not
a seal. But, it is not so with the Evidence which is the word of GOD: for ye
know, any Evidence will make faith, though it want a seal; and it will serve
to make a right, if it be subscribed, without a seal: but the seal without
the Evidence, avails nothing. Even so it is with the word of God: though the
Sacraments be not annexed to the word, yet the word will serve the turn: it
serves us to get Christ, it serves to engender, and beget faith in us, and
makes us to grow up in faith. But the seal without the word, can serve us to
no holievse: therefore, I say, the seal must be annexed to the word preached,
to the covenant of mercy, and grace.

Now it follows in the definition, Why the Sacrament should be ministered
publicly.
that this seal must be ministered publicly. Wherefore say I publicly? To
exclude all private administration of this Sacrament. For, if this Sacrament be
administered to any privately, it is not a Sacrament. Why? First reason.
Because the Apostle calls this Sacrament, a Communion. If ye administer it
to one, ye lose the Communion: therefore, if ye administer it privately, ye
lose the Sacrament. For this Sacrament, is a Communion of the body, and blood
of Christ: therefore, of necessity, it must be by way of communication; and so
the action must be publicly ministered.

Secondly, this Sacrament must be publicly ministered, Second reason.
because Christ Jesus, who is the thing signified in this Sacrament, is no
such thing as pertains but to one man only: if this were so, he might be
privately given and ministered. But, seeing Christ, which is the thing signified
in the Sacrament, is a common thing, belonging to every faithful man and
woman, therefore he ought to be commonly given to all, in a common action, in
a society, and congregation of the faithful.

Thirdly, this Sacrament, is a Thanksgiving to God the Father, for his
benefits. Now, it appertains not to one, or two, to thank God only; but as
we are all partakers of his temporal, and spiritual benefits: so we ought all
of us, publicly to give him thanks for the same. Therefore I say, in the
definition, this seal ought to be publicly, and not privately ministered; as
the Papists do in their private Masses.

This Seal must be publicly ministered, according to Christ his institution.
Wherefore say I Christ his institution, more then man's institution, or Angels
institution? Why keep I to Christ his institution? Why this Seal must be
ministered according to Chr. his institution.
Because man has not power to institute, or make a Sacrament: because an Angel
has not power to make, or institute a Sacrament. For, none has power to make,
or institute a Sacrament, but he that has power to give Christ, who is the
thing signified in the Sacrament. None has power to institute a Sacrament, but
God only.
But so it is, that none has power to give Christ, but either the Father, or
himself: therefore, none has power to make, or institute a Sacrament, but
either the Father, or the Son: only God must make a Sacrament. Secondly,
this Sacrament is a part of Gods service, and worship: but so it is that none
has power to appoint any part of his service, or prescribe any part of his
worship, but only God himself: therefore none can make a Sacrament, but God
himself. There is no Prince will be contented to be served after another man's
fantasy: but he will prescribe his service, according unto his own pleasure:
how much more is it meet, that God should appoint his own service, and
worship? Therefore, there is neither man, nor Angel, has power to institute
any part of the service of GOD.

The Sacraments are a part of his service: therefore there is no Angel, nor
man, has power to institute a Sacrament. The greatest style that any man can
have in the ministry of the word and Sacraments, is that style, which the
Apostle gives them, 1. Cor. 4.1. There we are called Stewards, and Dispensers
of the graces of God; Ministers of those mysteries, and holy things. It
follows then, that we are not Authors, Creators, and makers of them; but
only Ministers, and dispensers of the Sacraments. So, it is evident, that no
man, nor creature, has power to make a Sacrament. Then it must be according
to the institution of Christ, his institution must be kept: look what he said,
what he did, what he commanded thee to do; all that must be said, done, and
obeyed. If thou leauest one jot of that undone, which he commanded thee to
do, thou peruertest the institution: for, there is nothing left in register of
that institution, but it is essential.

So, in the celebration of Christ's institution, we must take heed, to
whatsoever he said, did, or commanded to be done: Thou must first say,
whatsoever he said, and then do whatsoever he did. For the Ministry of the
Sacrament must follow after the word. First thou must say, that which Christ
commanded thee to say, and thou must teach, that which he commanded thee to
teach: and then minister the Sacrament: Then to keep this institution, we
must begin at the saying, We call the word in the Sacrament, the whole
Institution
and say whatsoever Christ commanded us, then after, faithfully to do all
that, which he commanded to be done. Then I call the word, the whole
institution of Christ Jesus, preached, and proclaimed, denounced distinctly,
clearly, and sensibly to the people, in such sort, that if we leave any
kind of circumstance, or ceremony of this institution undone, we pervert the
whole action.

It is agreed upon, Word and element must concur in the constitution of a
Sacrament.
and condescended unto, between us, who celebrate this institution, and all
the sects in the world, who have separated themselves from this institution,
That two things are necessary, and must concur in the nature, and
constitution of a Sacrament. To wit, there must be a word, and there must be
an element concurring: There is not a sect, that grants not this, That the
word must concur, with the element, before there can be a Sacrament. Though
they easily admit this general, wherein we agree well with them, yet when it
comes to the special, and that we enter into particular, in the handling and
treating of the word; how well soever we agree in the general, yet in the
particular, we are as far asunder. For, when we come to dispute, and reason
on these particulars; First, what we mean by the word: Secondly, how this
word ought to be entreated: Thirdly, what virtue this word has: Fourthly, how
far the virtue of this word, does extend it self: And last of all, to whom
the word ought to be directed, and pronounced: In all these particulars, we
are as far asunder, as ever we seemed to agree in the general.

I leave to meddle with any other sect, What we mean by the word in the
Sacrament.
but will deal with the Papists only, because we have most to do with them:
And first of all we are to understand, what we mean by the word, and what
they mean by it. We by the word (as I have said) understand the whole
institution of Chr. Jesus, whatsoever he said, or did, or commanded to be
done, without adding, or diminishing, or alteration of the meaning, or sense of
the word: This we mean by the word in the Sacrament

Now, What the Papists understand by the word in the Sacrament.
what understand the Papists by the word? They preach not the institution of
Christ, nor take the whole institution, as he left it. But in place thereof,
they select, and choose out of his institution, four, or five words, and they
make the whole virtue of the institution, to consist in the four, or five
words. And it were nothing, if they would content themselves with these words,
because they are the words of the institution. But they add to the words, they
take from the words, and alter the meaning of the same words, at their
pleasure. That ye may know this; In their Mass, which they call the Lords
Supper, I will let you see the substance of it: I will divide their Mass, into
substantial, and accidental things. To the substance of the Mass, there are
three things required. There must of necessity be a priest.i. such a one, as
takes upon him the office of our Mediator, Chr. Ies. to intercede between God,
and man. Secondly, to the substance of the Mass, is required, that the Priest
offer the body, and blood of Christ. We come here to receive the same things:
There the priest offers them to God the father. Thirdly, by this work (say
they) they obtain al good things: by this work wrought, they obtain remission
of sins, as well to the dead, as to the quick; but in special, they obtain
remission of sins to the priest, who is the distributer, and to him, to whom,
the priest applies that sacrifice: And as for the rest of the Church who are
absent, they obtain this remission of their sins, by this work generally.
These three things are necessary, to the substance of the Mass: As for the
accidents, that must concur to the making of a Mass, They are of two sorts:
Some of them are always necessary, without the which, that action cannot be:
again, some are not necessary, and the action may be without them, but not
without a deadly sin: These things that are necessary, concern partly the
priest, and partly the action it self. The accidents that are necessary to
the priest, are of two sorts: One sort are such, as without the which, he
cannot be a priest; The other sort such, without the which, he cannot be free
from deadly sin. The things without the which he can not be a priest, are
these: Except he have a power given of his Bishop to consecrate, which power is
justified by the unction, and shauing of his crown: Except again, he have
power to speak, and that the roof of his mouth be whole, that he may speak,
he cannot be a priest: These two are always necessary, and concur to the
person. Other things again, are not so necessary; as, that the priest must be
free from suspension, from cursing, deadly sin, and all Ecclesiastical pain,
and censures. These things are necessary to the person. There are again, two
things necessary to the action: One sort, without the which the action cannot
be; without the Lords prayer it cannot be, without the five words of the
institution, it cannot be: Other things again, are not so necessary; as, the
consecration of the place, where the Mass is said, The Altar stone, The
blessing of the Chalice, The water, The singing, he that should help to say
Mass, and the rest. So they and we, in no sort agree concerning the word,
what is meant by it. The second point is, how this word ought to be entreated,
wherein we are as far asunder: we say, the word taken as has been said,
for the whole institution, ought to be entreated, after this manner. First,
there ought to be a lawful pastor, who has his calling of God, to deliver it.
And this pastor ought to deliver the word lawfully; what is that? he ought to
preach it, to proclaim it publicly, with a plain speech to denounce it: he
ought to open up, and declare, all the parts of it, what is the peoples part,
and what is his own part, how he ought to deliver, and distribute that bread,
and that wine, how the people ought to receive, at his hands, that bread, and
that wine, to inform their faith, how they ought to receive Christ's body, and
blood, signified by that bread, and that wine. As also, he ought to teach
them, how they should come with reverence, unto that Table, and communicate with
the precious body, and blood of Christ: This he ought to do, in a familiar
language, that the people may understand him, that they may hear him, that
they may perceive, and lay up in their hearts, the things that he speaks. For
what avails it you, to hear a thing whispered, and not spoken out: or if it
be spoken out, what avails it you to hear it, if ye understand it not? For,
except ye hear Christ, in a familiar, and plain language, ye cannot
understand: and except ye understand, it is impossible for you to believe: and
without belief, there is no application of Christ: and except ye believe, and
apply Christ to your selves, your coming to the Sacrament is in vain. So of
necessity, if this Sacrament be lawfully handled, The pastor must preach the
institution of Christ, that it may be heard; and in a familiar language, that
it may be understood, in such sort that the faithful people may be informed
how to receive, and the Minister may know his part, how to deliver, and
distribute. This I say, should be the right handling of the holy institution
of this Sacrament.

Now what do they? in place of a Minister, pastor, or Bishop (call him as you
please) who is lawfully called of God; they substitute a priest, surrogate an
hierling, who has no calling, or office now, in the church of God. For the
office of a priest, as they use their priesthood, is no other thing, but the
office of Christ Jesus, the office of the Mediator, betwixt God and us: for
they make their priests daily to offer up Christ Jesus, to the Father. Now
this is the Mediator, Chr. his office, that he did it, once for all, once for
ever, says the Apostle: so that they have no entrance, to do this over
again: And in respect, that their priests do this again, which Christ has
done already, they do it without command, they have no warrant in the word of
God. And if they had warrant, for their calling, in the word of God, yet they
handle the Sacrament amiss: for whereas they should speak forth clearly,
they whisper, and they conjure the Elements, by a certain kind of whispering.
Whereas they should speak it, in a known language, that the people may
understand; They speak, in an unknown language: and though they spoke it, in
a known and familiar tongue, yet in that they whisper it, the people cannot be
the better. And what shall I say? Seeing they thus handle the word, though it
be the very in stitution it self, yet they so spoil it, in the handling,
that it is not a holy Sacrament. Then we differ as much in the second point,
how that word ought to be handled, and entreated.

Now the third point is, The third head in controversy.
what virtue this word has, how far the virtue of this word extends it
self: In this point, we grant and acknowledge, that the word has a virtue:
and the word taken, as has bin said, works somewhat, even toward the same
elements, of bread, and wine; for we acknowledge, that those elements, by the
virtue of this word, are changed, not in their substance, and natural
properties: But we grant, that the elements are changed, in a quality which
they had not before; In such sort, that these elements, are taken from the
common use, whereunto they served before, and by the institution of Christ,
they are applied unto another holy use. Mark, how far the holy use differs
from the common use, there is as great difference, betwixt the elements, this
day in the action, and the thing that they were yesterday: For I grant, that
the elements are changed; and yet this change, proceeds not, of the nature of
the elements, from an enclosed virtue, supposed to be in the words, nor from
the whispering of the words: but it proceeds, from the will of Christ, from the
ordinance, and appointment of Christ, set down in his own institution: for
that thing is holy, which God calls holy; and that thing is profane, which
God calls profane.

To let you understand, how these signs are made holy, it is necessary, that
these two things be considered. How the elements are sanctified.
First, what he is that makes them holy, whether God, Angel, or man.
Secondly, whoeuer he be, that makes them holy, by what means, and way, he
makes them holy. And by the consideration of these two, we shall come to the
consideration, and right viewing of the sanctification of the Elements.

For the First, we say, that God is only he, that may make a thing which was
common, to be holy. So we say, that God by his will and ordinance, declared,
and set down, in his word, has made the things, that were common, by his
appointment to be holy. As for the way, and means whereby they are made holy,
it is the word of God, the institution of Christ, the will of Christ, declared
in his institution, that makes them holy. For the preaching, and opening of
the word, and institution of Christ, lets us see, that god has made these
things holy: and not only, that he has made them holy, but lets us see an
holy manner, how they should be used, in what place, at what time with what
heart, and to what end. So it is the will of Christ, declared in his
institution, whereby the things that were common before, are now made holy.
There are two other things also, which make the same elements, holy: and these
two, are used in this institution. There is prayer, and thanksgiueing, which
make the creatures of God to our use, holy: whereas otherwise, if we receive
the good creatures of God, like dogs, and thank him not for them, it is a sure
token that they were never sanctified to our use.

By prayer we obtain grace, and strength from God, to use the creatures, and
this whole action, holily and lawfully, as it should be. And therefore not
only, in this holy action, should we begin with God, with invocation of his
name, but in all actions in the world, we should begin in the name of God. So
it is the will of God, prayer, and thanksgiving, conioined with the elements,
that make them holy. All these three, contained in the action of the Lords
Supper, make the Seals holy: For, beside the will of God, declared in the
institution, In the Lords Supper, we use invocation; and in this invocation, we
use thanksgiving. The elements are not made holy, by the word of God only,
but by the use of prayer and tha^ksgiuing, which three, are the only means,
whereby these things are sanctified.

Now, to express, and laie-foorth, the sanctification of the Elements: The
word of blessing and thanksgiving used indifferently, the one expressed by the
other.
The Evangelists, and the Apostle Paul, use indifferently the word, To bless,
and to give thanks, and commonly they put, the one for the other: For ye may
see, that Mark, and Paul, use the word Bless: Matthew and Luke, use the word
to give thanks, and all in one signification: And Mark himself in the 14. of
his Gospel, 22. verse, speaking of the same action of the Lords Supper, uses
the word to Bless, and in the 23. verse, he uses the word to Give thanks, and
both in one signification, to let you see, that the Apostle, Christ himself,
and the Euangilists, use the word to Bless, and to Give thanks,
indifferently, to signify the sanctification, and consecration of the
elements. Except, ye take the one for the other, it will be hard to gather
any good meaning out of the Apostles words: for I remember the Apostle, 1.
Corin. 10.16. says: The Cup of blessing, which we bless, what is that? I take
the word to signify, as I have said, which we bless, that is, which we
sanctify, and prepare by blessing. So, to bless, and to give thanks in the
Lords Supper, signify no other thing, but to sanctify: otherwise, if ye take
the word, in another signification, ye shall fall into an error: and and why?
God is said to bless, and man is said to bless: God is said to bless, when
he gives good things unto his creatures, for Gods blessing is ever
effectual; and therefore he is said to bless, when he gives good things.
Man again, is said to bless either privately, or publicly, when he craves
blessing, at the hands of God, to any man; when he blesses, in the name, and
at the commandment of God, any person, or people: Now, if ye ascribe
blessing, in any of these two significations to the cup, it is amiss: for
we use neither to crave a blessing, to insensible elements; nor yet to bless
them, in the name of God: And God uses to give good things, to the sons of
men, and not to insensible creatures: Therefore we must needs use the word,
Bless, in the third signification. The cup of blessing, which we bless,
that is, which we sanctify, and prepare by blessing: Thus far we
understand, for the sanctification of the elements.

Now let us see, how they sanctify the elements, and what is the form of
their consecration, so far as I understand of it, it consists in these five
words: Hoc est enim corpus meum: It stands in these five words, and in the
whispering of them; for if you whisper them not, ye lose the fashion of
incantation: for the thing which we call sanctifying, they call whispering: And
the whispering of those five words, they call the consecration of the elements:
And when the words are after this manner whispered, they presuppose, such a
secret, and monstrous virtue, to be enclosed in the syllables, That the virtue,
and power which flows from the words, is able to chase away wholly, the
substance of the bread, so that the very bread, and substance of it, is
altogether destroyed, by this power: Secondly, that this power which flows
from these words, is able to fetch, and pull down an othersubstance, to wit,
the flesh, and blood of Christ Jesus, that fitteth at the right hand of his
father, and is able to put it within the compass of that bread: This is a
strange and a great virtue, that, not only will overthrow that substance, but
put it within the compass of that bread. The same five words, whispered in
this manner, have such a monstrous operation, say they, that they are able, both
to chase a way the one substance, to pull down an other, and to put it, within
the compass of that bread. We altogetheir deny, That there is such a virtue
in these words: for, as I have said before, we deny not, that the word has a
virtue, but deny that there is such a virtue enclosed in the words; we deny
the quality of the virtue, or that it flows, from such a fountain. For, we
grant, that the word has a virtue; there is never a word, that God speaks
here, but it has a virtue joined withit: but we deny, that this virtue is
enclosed in the syllables, in the whispering, or pronouncing of the words: for
if there were such avertue, and power enclosed in the syllables, by the same
reason it should follow, that there were avertue in the figure, and shape of
the letter, that makes up thewords. Now, there is noman will think that there is
any virtue in the figure, or shape of the letter: and there is as little virtue
in the syllables or pronouncing of the words themselves. So we deny, that
there is any virtue enclosed in the syllables, or resident in the word. But
we say, that there is a power conjoined with the word, and this power is not
resident in the word, but is resident, in the eternal word, in the essential
Word whereof John the Evangelist makes mention. Cap. 1. The word which was from
the beginning, that is, the son of God Christ Jesus: we say, there is not a
dram weight of this virtue, and power resident in any creature that ever God
created, but it is only resident in Christ Jesus: And therefore there flows
no virtue from the sillables, nor from the words that are spoken, but from
Christ, and his spirit, who gives the virtue to those words. So we differ in
this; we say that there is not any virtue resident in the sillables, we say
that the sillables, and pronouncing of the sillables, work nothing: but we say
that the virtue is resident in the person of the son of God, and heeworkes by
his own word.

Now we say that there cannot be such a monstrous change, as to say the
whispering of so many words, should change the own substance of the bread,
pull down the substance of the body of Christ, and put his body in so narrow
a compass, we say that cannot be. And this I shall prove by these three
rules; namely, Refutation of the doctrine of tra^substantiation, by 3. sorts of
arguments.
By the verity of the flesh of Christ Jesus; By the articles of our Belief;
And by the true end of the institution of this Sacrament. And so we shall see,
by Gods grace, the infinite absurdities that follow upon their opinion.

The first principle that I lay, is this; The first sort of argument.
Seeing that Christ Jesus, the Son of GOD, in the time appointed, took true
flesh of the womb of the Virgin, and united himself with our nature in one
personal union; to the end that our nature, which fell altogether from
integrity in the first Adam, might recover the same in the second Adam: yea,
not only the same, but so much the greater, as our second Adam excells the
first in all de grees: And in respect he took on him a body, like unto ours
in all things (sin excepted) of necessity it must follow, that the definition
of a true body, and the inseparable properties thereof, must be competent to
him. But these are the inseparable properties; namely, to be in one certain
place, to be finite, circumscribed, visible, and palpable: for all these
concur ( quarto modo, as the Logicians say) to a body; so that they cannot be
separate from the subject, without the distraction thereof. Then Treason on
this manner; A true humane body, is in a certain place; Christ Jesus body, is
a true, humane body: therefore it is in a certain place. I call a place, a
certain condition of an isntrumental body, whereby it comes to pass, that
where-euer the body be, of necessity, it is limited within that place; and
while it is there, it cannot be elsewhere.

If you would have the probation of my Proposition from the Doctors, read
Augustine to Dardanus, speaking of this same body of Christ. Take away a
certain room from the bodies, and they shall be in no place; and if they be
in no place, they are not. The same Augustine, writing upon John, in his 30.
Treatise, says, The body in the which the Lord did arise, of necessity must be
in a place; but his divine efficacy and nature, is diffused every where. And
in his third Epistle, he says, How much soever the body be, or how little
soever the body be, it behoues to occupy the bounds of a place. And, besides
these, the history of the Acts proves most evidently Christ his body to be in
a certain place: as Acts 3.21. the words are these; Whom the heavens must
contain, until the time that all things be restored, which God had spoken by
the mouth of all his holy Prophets. Though I need not to insist in the
probation of these things, yet I proceed. Secondly then I reason after this
manner; A humane body is finite, and circumscribed; but the body of Christ is a
humane body. What warrant from the Doctors have I for this? I leave many
purposely, and will allege only Augustine, who writing to Dardanus, Believe
(says he) Christ to be every where, in that he is God; but only to be in
heaven, according to the nature of a true body.

And in his 146. Epistle, I believe, says he, the body of Christ to be so in
heaven, as it was on the earth, when he went up to heaven. But it was
circumscribed in a certain place on the earth. Ergo, it is so in the heaven.
And consequently, it cannot be in the Masse-bread, and in heaven both at one
time. The last reason is this: A humane body is visible, and palpable; but
Christ has a humane body, and he is corporally present, as they say:
therefore Christ his body is visible, and palpable.

I prove my Proposition, by Christ his own words, taken out of Luke 24.39. In
the which place, to persuade the Apostles of the verity of his body, and to
prove evidently, that it was not fantastical, heevseth the argument taken from
these two qualities, and he commands his Apostles to feel, and see; giving
them thereby to understand, that as these two senses are the most certain of
all the rest: so are they most able to discern, whether he was a body, or a
spirit. As if he would have said, If I be visible, and palpable, ye may be out
of doubt that I have a true body. For as the Poet says, which Tertullian
cites also to this same purpose; Tangere enim, et tangi, nisi corpus, nulla
potestres.

By these arguments, it may be evidently seen, how this Transubstantiation, may
no way stand with the verity of the body of Chr. Jesus: And as it fights with
the flesh of Christ Jesus; so it repugnes directly, the articles of our faith.
For, in our Belief, we profess, Second sort of argument.
that Christ ascended out of this earth, to the heaven, where he sits at the
right hand of the Father, where he gouerns, and directs all things in heaven
and earth; from the which place, he is to come at the last day, to judge the
world.

This article teaches us, that he has changed his dwelling which he had
amongst us, on the earth, and is ascended into the heavens, where he sits at
the right hand of his Father, and shall remain there (according to the
testimony of Peter, which I cited out of the Acts 3.21.) until the last day.
If he sit at his Fathers right hand, and be to remain in heaven until the
last day, the^ is he not corporally in the bread. But the article of our
Belief, says, That he sits at the right hand of his Father: and Peter
says in that place, that the heavens must contain him until the last day.
Therefore, this Transubstantiation, is directly against the articles of our
Belief, and the manifest place of the Scripture.

Thirdly, it is opposite unto the end, Third sort of argument.
wherefore this Sacrament was instituted, and this is most evident: for the end
of the Sacrament is spiritual, as the effect that flows thereof, is
spiritual, and the instrument, whereby this spiritual food is applied to us,
is also spiritual. But from a natural, and corporal presence, a spiritual
effect can never flow: therefore the corporal, and natural presence of the
body and blood of Christ Jesus, repugnes directly the end of this Sacrament:
for the corporal presence, must have a corporal eating: of this eating,
follows a digestion in the stomach: and the thing that is digested in the
stomach, is never able to feed my soul to life eternal. So this corporal
presence, must ever tend to a corporal end; which is directly contrary unto
the end wherefore this Sacrament was instituted.

Further, Other arguments unto the same effect.
if the bread were transubstantiate, it should become the thing signified; if
it become the thing signified, this Sacrament should want a sign, and so it
should not be a Sacrament: for every Sacrament, as ye have heard, is a sign.
Now, to say that the accidents of true bread, as the color, and the roundnesse
of it, that they may serve as signs, that is more then folly: for, between the
sign, and the thing signified, there must be a conformity: but there is no
conformity between the accidents, and the body and blood of Christ Jesus. For
if that were so, the accidents behooved to nourish us corporally; as the body
and blood of Christ Jesus, is appointed to nourish us spiritually.

Again, if the bread become the body and blood of Christ Jesus, it should
follow, that he had a body without blood; for he has instituted another sign
besides, to represent his blood. Also, if there had been such a wonderful
thing as they speak of, in this Sacrament, there would have been plain mention
made thereof in the Scripture: for, God himself works never a notable work,
but he declares it, either openly, or more secretly in the Scripture, that
thereby he may be glorified in his wonderful works. As ye may read in the
Evangelist ^ohn, 2.8. where the water was changed into wine; Gene. 2.22. where
the rib of Adam, was changed into Heua: Exodus 7.10. where Aarons rod was
turned into a Serpent: there ye see, that changing is manifestly expressed.
Therefore I say, if there had bin such a monstrous change in these elements of
the Supper as they affirm, the Scripture would not have concealed it, but
expressed it: but in respect there is no mention made of this change in the
Script. therefore there is no such change in this action. Further, if there were
such a change, as they say, either it is before these words of consecration be
spoken, or follows after the same words be spoken. If the change be before the
words of the consecration be spoken, the consecration is superfluous, and their
Proposition is false: if the change be after the words be spoken, This bread is
my body, their Proposition is false also; because the word bread, is spoken,
before the last syllable of their five words is pronounced. These, and infinite
more absurdities, follow of this doctrine.

And yet they obstinately persevere, and urge us with the letter, affirming that
the words of Christ are so plain, that they admit no figure. They would have
spoken more advisedly, if they had sought counsel of Augustine, to have
discerned between a figurative speech, and a proper speech: for he, in his
third book, and 16. chapter of Christian doctrine, speaks after this sort; If
the speech, says he, seem to command a wickedness, or mischeife, on to
forbid any happiness, or any vvelfare, it is not proper, it is then
figurative. And he adds for an example, a place out of John 6.53. Except, says
our Savior, ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you. Whereunto Augustine adds: This speech, says he, sesmeth
to command a mischief; therefore it is a figurative speech; whereby we are
commanded to communicate with the sufferings of Christ Jesus, and with gladness
to keep in perpetual memory, that the flesh of the Lord, was crucified, and
wounded for us. For, otherwise, it were more horrible (as the same Augustine
makes mention in the second book against the Adversaries of the law) to eat
the flesh of Christ Jesus really, then to murder him; and more horrible to
drink his blood, then to shed his blood. Yet notwithstanding, they are not
ashamed still to hold and maintain, that those words ought to be taken
properly. So that it appears, that of very malice, for contradiction sake, to
the end only that they may withstand the truth, they will not acknowledge this
to be a sacrame^tall speech. For they are compelled, will they, nill they, in
other speeches of the like sort, to acknowledge a figure: as, Genes. 17.10.
Circumcision is called the Covenant; and Exodus 12.11. the Lamb is called the
Passover; and Math. 20.22. the Cup is called his Blood; and Luke 22.20. the Cup
is called the new Testament; and 1. Cor. 10.4. the Rock is called Christ. All
these speeches are sacramental, and receive a kind of interpretation: yet
they maliciously prease to deny us this, in these words (Hoc est corpus meu^)
which they are compelled to grant, in the rest, as especially, where Paul
calls the rock, Christ.

Now, when they are driven out of this Fortress, they fly as unhappily to the
second: namely, That God by his omnipotency, may make the body of Christ, both
to be in heaven, and in the bread, both at one time. Ergo, say they, It is so.
If I denied their consequent, they would be much troubled to prove it. But
the question stands not here, Whether God may do it, or not: but the
question is, Whether God will it, or not; or may will it, or not. And we say
reverently, that his Majesty may not will it: for, though it be true, that he
may many things which he will not, yet it is as true, that there are many
things, which he may not will; of the which sort this is: and these are
reduced to two sorts.

First, he may not will those things which are contrary to his nature: as to
be changeable; as to decay; and such others; for, if he might will these
things, they should not be arguments of any puissance, or of any power; but
rather, certain arguments of his impotencie, and infirmity. And therefore,
though he may not will these things, he cease not to be omnipotent; but so
much the rather, his constant and invincible power is known.

Secondly, GOD may not will some things, by reason of a presupposed condition:
as, such things, whereof he has concluded the contrary before; of the which
sort, is this, which is now controuerted. For, seeing that GOD has concluded,
that a humane body, should consist of isntrumental parts, and therefore to be
comprehended, and circumscribed within one, and the own proper place: and
also, seeing he has appointed Christ Jesus to have the like body; and that,
not for a time, but eternally: in respect of this determined will (I say) God
may not will the contrary, now; either to abolish this body, which he has
appointed to be eternal, or yet to make it at one time, in respect of one
thing, a body, and not a body, quantified, and not quantified, finite, and
infinite, local, and not local: for to will these things, which are plain
contrary in themselves, he may not, no more the^ it is possible for him to will
a lie. So, it may be seen of all men, that we preserve the omnipotency of
God; and with reverence from our hearts, acknowledge him only, to be only
omnipotent: and we desire all men, to esteem them as Calumniators, who abuse
the ears of the simple ones, to persuade them the contrary of us.

They are not content with this: but they say, That God may will a
contradiction, and make both the parts to be true at one time. And to prove
this, they would bring in the Miracles which God works: as if they would say,
Every Miracle includes a contradiction. As for example; God made a Virgin to
bear a son, they think this work brings with it a contradiction. To bear
a son, say they, is the one part of the contradiction; and to be a virgin,
is the other part of the contradiction. This work is a miracle, but it
implies no contradiction: for, concerning the holy virgins conception, therein
is no contradiction. There was a miracle indeed, that a virgin should bear a
son, contrary to the course of nature: for, to be a virgin, and yet to have a
child, are not contradictory, if she have conceived, and brought forth by
miracle, as did the blessed virgin: But to be a virgin, and not a virgin, at
one time, this is the contradiction. So Christ his body, to be visible and
invisible, local and not local, at one time, is in every respect the like
contradiction; and therefore impossible to be true.

Their other example, of Christ his entering in, the doors being closed, and
shut, what appearance of contradiction has it? Can they prove that he entered
through the doors? And if he did, then was there an alteration of qualities,
and that by miracle, either in Christ his body, or in the doors; but no
contradiction in nature, unless you know not what a contradiction is.

Their third and last example, of the fire in Nabuchadnezzers Oven, which
consumed the ministers, but hurt not them that were in the midst of it,
appears to be of no weight, by that which has already been answered. They
imagine, as appears, that in every miracle, a contradiction is employed:
which is absurd. If they can prove, that this fire was both hot and cold, then
they say something to the purpose: but that it burns up some, and hurts not
others, is no contradiction; because by miracle the force thereof was repressed.
So this second ground is sure; God may not will that thing, which implies a
contradiction. But so it is, that the real presence of the body of Christ in
the Sacrament, implies a contradiction; for, it makes the body of Christ,
visible, and invisible; compast, and not compast, at one time: therefore, GOD
may not will such a thing.

When they are driven from this they make their last refuge a peremptory
defense in their own opinion: Their last refuge.
for, they say, Christ his body is freed from physical rules: for, Theology
is not subject to physical rules. It is a very ill gathered consequence, to
say, that we subject Theology to Physic, because that we (first,
according to Theology, which is the law of GOD; and next, according to
Physic, which is the law of Nature) defend the natural properties, of the
true, and natural body of Christ Iefus. Then I grant this, that Theology is
not subject unto Physic; what of this? Ergo, Christ his body is freed from
physical rules. How follows that I pray you? By what law may ye free, or
can ye free the body of Christ? By the law of Nature, ye cannot; for he was
made of the seed of David, and took on him true flesh, of the womb of the
Virgin: And far less by the law of GOD, which is Theology: for ye know,
that Christ was appointed from all eternity, to take on him our nature, and to
become true man.

Indeed it is true, that the law of GOD, cannot be subject to the law of
Nature; for the law of Nature, flows from the law of GOD, as out of the own
spring: but it is as true, that if ye take Christ his body, from the law of
Nature, ye shall free it also from the law of God. For, I affirm, that the
Scripture, so consents with the law of Nature, that if ye deny the one, ye
shall deny the other; and if ye admit the one, ye shall admit also the
other. Therefore, if they look well about them, they shall find the beam to
be in their own eye: for, they pervert, both the law of GOD, and the law of
Nature, by a new invented physic of their own.

For, whatsoever he be, that attributes to one, and the self same body,
natural, and unnatural properties, which directly fight against themselves;
I say, that man peruerts both true Theology, and Physic. But they, to one and
the self same body of Christ Jesus, attribute natural, and unnatural
properties: therefore it is they, that pervert both the use of true Theology,
and the order set down, and established in Nature.

Would you know the reason of my Proposition? I say, it behooves as well in
Theology, as in Physic, of necessity, one of the contrary enunciations to be
false. But once to make an end with them, I will answer their last refuge.
Thus they reason; A glorified body, is not subject to physical rules: but
Christ his body is glorified; therefore it is not subject to physical rules.
First of all, before we answer directly, we must consider wherein stands
the glorification of a body, and then the answer will be easy.

The Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 15.42. speaks after this manner; So also, says
he, is the resurrection of the dead. The body is sown in corruption, and is
raised in incorruption: It is sown in dishonor, and is raised in glory. It
is sown in weakness, and is raised in power. And a little after: This
corruption, must put on incorruption, and this mortality, must put on
immortality. By this clear Antithesis, Paul plainly describes the
glorification of a body; for he opposes these two, the unglorified, and the
glorified body: And to the unglorified body, he ascribes corruption,
ignominy, infirmity, carnalitie, and mortality: To the glorified body, he
attributes incorruption, glory, power, spiritualitie and immortality: Of this
opposition, we may gather easily, what the resurrection, and glorification,
brings to the body. In a word, by them, we see, That the body is only
spoiled of corruption, shame, infirmity, naturalitie, and mortality. And it
becomes only spoiled of all the infirmities of our nature, that it may be
clothed, with a more glorious apparel: as, with incorruption, power, glory,
spiritualitie, and immortality. We see then, That this glorification imports
a change indeed; but I believe no man will be so mad, as to think this
change to be made in the substance: for if that were so, the old substance
behooved to decay, and a new should arise: but we here no such thing in this
description, and as little is the change made in the quantity: for we find no
word, either of augmentation, or diminution of any substance, which behooved to
be, if it were in the quantie: The most that we can perceive, This mutation
consistes in the qualities, by the which, the body casts off the old coat
of infirmity, and cloatheth it self, with the coat of glory: for Christ
after he did arise, he both went, and came, was seen, and touched. Of the
things before deduced, it clearly follows, That in respect the glory of the
body of Christ, has wrought nothing in his nature, and substance, and
consequently in his natural dimensions, neither yet in any other essential
property, That therefore the glorification of his body, freeth it not, from
the rules of Physic: For, so long, as that nature of a true body remains,
there are no supernatural gifts, whereby it may be glorified, were they never
so high, so far as they may be gathered out of the scriptures, that may hurt
either the nature, or the natural property of it: For there is no gift nor
quality, that may hurt nature, but that gift, that is against nature. But the
supernatural gift, is neither unnatural, neither yet against nature:
Therefore it cannot hurt, nor impair nature: And my reason is this; Those
gifts that decore, and beautify nature, they cannot hurt, nor impair nature:
But all supernatural gifts, beautify, and decore nature; Therefore, they
cannot take away, neither nature, nor yet the natural property.

They leave us not so: but out of this doctrine of Paul, concerning the
glorification of the body, they draw an objection to press us withal. Paul
grants, that a glorified body, is a spiritual body: but a spiritual body,
is an invisible body; Therefore a glorified body, is invisible: and by
consequence, the body of Christ is invisible.

Though the argument be not formal: yet to be short, I deny their assumption:
for if there were no more but that word, body, that word might be an argument,
that the spiritual body, is not invisible. But yet to open the matter more
clearly, according to the meaning of Saint Paul in that place: Saint Paul in a
word as it were, in the 44. verse. of that Chap. shows the change, that shall
be in the qualities of the body, by the resurrection: For he says, that our
natural bodies, shall become spiritual bodies: and then, in the next verse
immediately following, he expounds these two qualities: for in the 45.
verse, That is called a natural body says he, which is maintained, and
quickened by a living soul only, such as Adams was. And again, that is said
to be a spiritual body, which together besides the soul, is quickened with a
far more excellent virtue, to wit, with the spirit of God, which descends
from Christ the second Adam, unto us: Then according unto this ground, I
answer with Augustine ad Constantium: As the natural body is not a soul,
but a body: Even so, the spiritual body, is not said to be a soul, but a
body. And by consequent, it is not invisible:: For the further explaining of
this head, I will give them only one knot to loose, and so end this point.
Then I reason: If therefore Christ's body, is naturally, and really in the
Lords Supper, because that it is glorified: It follows consequently, That
when it was not glorified, it could not be really present. But it was not
glorified when this supper was first instituted: Therefore it was not really
present in the bread, at Christ's first Supper. If his body was not really
present, in the bread, at the first supper, it cannot be naturally present now.
For whatsoever they use now in the administration of their Supper, or of their
Mass, (call it as you will) according to their own confession, they use it
according to the ordinance, form, and manner, that Christ Jesus himself used,
in his first Supper: For they say plainly, in their disputation at Poyssie,
and in all the rest of their works, That Chr. Jesus, first, of all observed
that form, which they use in their Mass, and left it to his Apostles, and to
their successors, that they should do the like. And so by their own words,
they have entangled themselves, and crucified their Mass: what can they
answer to this? They will not stand dumb, I am sure: for maintenance of their
religion, they must say some thing. Thus they say, That though the body of
Christ, which was locally present with the rest of his disciples, was not
glorified, yet the body which he exhibited in the bread, was glorified. They
might as well have held their peace, and say nothing. For mark the words of
the text, as they are written, Luke 22.19. where it is said, And he took the
bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave to them saying,
This is my body, which is given for you: and Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 11.24. has
these words, Take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for you. This
relative, which, is relative to the body, which was exhibited in the bread:
for according to their own confession, those words are pronounced upon the
bread, and directed unto it: But that same body was given, and broken for us,
that is to say, crucified, and broken with anguish and dolors. Then I reason
after this sort: To be crucified and broken with anguish and dolors, can no
ways agree and conuene, with a glorified body: But the body that Christ
exhibited in the bread, is said of the Evangelists, to be crucified, and broken
for us: Ergo, that body was not glorified.

Now last of all, they are not yet content, but say, Christ can make the bread
his body; And therefore, his body is really present. That Christ can make the
bread his body, we grant: for Christ being God, can do whatsoever he
will: only let them show, That Christ will make of real bread, his real
flesh, and then this controversy will end. Christ indeed, makes the bread
his body, not really, but Sacramentally: For Christ has not a body, made of
bread; his body was made once of the pure substance of his blessed Mother:
Another body then this, or oftener made then once, has he none: wherefore,
all doctrine that teaches Christ's body to be made of bread, is impious, and
heretical. The Papists doctrine of real presence, teaches, That Christ's
body in the Sacrament, is made of bread, by changing the bread, into his
body; through consecration: wherefore we may boldly, and and truly conclude;
That their doctrine, of real presence, is both wicked, and heretical. Now to
conclude this head: I beseech them, seeing that reason fails the^, That they
fight not against God, for maintenance of a lie, how old soever it be (for the
devil is old enough, and yet he could never change his nature) But let them
rather glorify God, in confessing these speeches to be Sacrame^etal.

Then what is the reason, and ground, wherefore the Papists pull down the
substance of the body of Christ and the blood of Christ, and make the very
substance, to be corporally, The reason that moves the Papists to think that
Chr. body cannot be present in the Sacrament, except it be really, carnally,
and substantially present.
reallie, and substantially in the Sacrament. The reason is this, Because they
cannot see, by their natural judgment, nor can understand, by their natural
wit, the truth of this, to wit, how Christ's flesh, and blood, can be present
in the Sacrament, except he be present to their corporal hand, to their
corporal mouth, and stomach. If they had the light to inform them, That
Christ might be present, in the Sacrament, and not to the hand, to the mouth,
or stomach, they would never think of such a monstrous presence, as they
imagine to be there. But being destitute of the spiritual light, they follow
their natural reasons, and make a natural, Observation.
and carnal presence: So that ye have this lesson to note from hence: There is
no man, that has not the spirit of God, to understand this word, This is my
body, but out of question, he will do as the Papists do, that is, he will
understand it carnally: And so they mis-knowing the right meaning of it, it is
no marvel, though they and we differ in this matter.

For will you ask of a Papist, first if the true body of Christ be there, or
if the true flesh, and blood of Christ be there: he will say, it is there: The
diverse opinions concerning the presence of the body of Christ in the
Sacrament.
will you ask him wherein? he will say, in, and under the accidents of the
bread, and wine, under the hew, and roundnes of the bread: will you ask him
again, by what instrument it is received? He will tell you, by the mouth, and
stomach, of the body: So, this is their gross understanding of the body,
and blood of Christ. Will you ask of the Vbiquiter, if the true body of
Christ be present? he will say it is: will you ask, if it it be in, with, or
under the bread? he will answer, it is in the bread, contentiue, that is, the
bread contains it: will you ask him, to what instrument, it is offered? he
will answer, that the body of Christ is offered, to the mouth of our body,
and that the blood of Christ, is offered to the mouth of our body, as the
Papists do: Will you know of us, how Christ Jesus his true body, and blood
is present? we will say, that they are spiritually present, really present,
that is, present in the Lords Supper, and not in the bread: we will not say,
that his true flesh is present to the hand, or to the mouth of our bodies. But
we say it is spiritually present, that is, present unto thy spirit, and
faithful soul: yea, even as present inwardly, unto thy soul, as the bread,
and wine are present unto thy body, outwardly: Will you ask then, if the
body, and blood of Christ Jesus, be present in the Lords Supper? We answer
in a word; They are present, but not in the bread and wine, nor in the
accidents, nor substance of bread, and wine. And we make Christ to be present
in this Sacrament, because he is present to my soul, to my spirit, and faith.
Also, we make him present in the Lords Supper, because I have him in his
promise, This is my body; which promise, is present to my faith: and the
nature of faith is, to make things, that are absent in themselves, yet present:
And therefore, seeing he is both present, by faith in his promise, and present
by the virtue of his holy spirit, who can say, but that he is present in this
Sacrament?

But yet the word would be explained, How a thing is said to be present and
absent.
what we mean by the word, present, how a thing is said to be present, and
absent. And knowing this, ye shall find all the matter easy. I say, things
are said to be present, as they are perceived, by any outward, or inward
sense, and as they are perceived, by any of the senses, so are they present,
and the further they be perceived the further present: and by what sense any
thing is perceived, to that sense, it is present: As if it be outwardly
perceived, by an outward sense, that thing is outwardly present. As for
example, if it be perceived by the outward sight of the eye, by the outward
hearing of the ear, by the outward feeling of the hands or taste of the mouth,
it is outwardly present. Or if any thing be perceived by the inward eye, by the
inward taste, and feeling of the soul, this thing can not be outwardly
present, but it must be spiritually, and inwardly present to the soul: So I
say, every thing is present, as it is perceived. So that if you perceive not a
thing outwardly, it is outwardly absent: and if ye perceive not a thing
inwardly, it is inwardly absent. It is not distance of place, that makes a
thing absent, nor propinquitie of place that makes a thing present: But it is
only the perceiving of any thing, by any of thy senses, that makes a thing
present; and the not perceiving, that makes a thing absent: I say, though the
thing it self were never so far dista^t, if thou perceive it by thine outward
sense, it is present unto thee. As for example, my body, and the sun are as
far distant in place, as the heaven is, from the earth; and yet this distance
stays not the suns presence from me: why? Because I perceive the sun by
mine eye, and other senses; I feel it, and perceive it by the heat, by the
light, and by his brightness: So if a thing were never so far distant, if
we have senses to perceive the same, it is present to us. Then the distance of
place, makes not a thing absent from thee, if thou have senses to perceiueit:
likewise the neerenesse of place makes not a thing present, be it never so
near, if thou have not senses to perceive it: As for example, if the sun
shine upon thine eyes, if thou be blind, it is not present to thee, because
thou can not perceive it. A sweet tune will never be present to a deaf
ear, though it be sung in the ear of that man, because he has not a sense
to perceive it: And a well told tale, will never be present to a fool,
because he cannot understand it, nor has no judgment to perceive it: So it
is not the neerenesse, nor distance of place, that makes any thing present, or
absent, but only the perceiving, or not perceiving of it.

Now the word being made clear, How the body of Christ is present.
ask you, how the body of Christ is present? To give our judgment in a word,
as ye have heard from time to time, he is present, not to the outward senses,
but to the inward senses, which is faith, wrought in the soul. For this action
of the Sacrament, and of the Lords Supper, is partly corporal, and partly
spiritual: I call this action, partly corporal, not in respect only, that
the objects, that is, That bread, and that wine, are corporal, but also in
respect, my mouth, whereunto these things are offered, the instrument whereby,
and the manner how, these things are received, are all corporal, and natural:
I call the same action again, partly spiritual, not only in respect of
Christ Jesus, who is the heavenly, and spiritual thing of the Sacrament, but
also in respect of my soul, whereunto, Chr. is offered, and given, in respect
the instrument whereby, and the manner how, he is received, are all
spiritual: for I get not Christ corporally, but spiritually: So in these
respect, I call this action, partly corporal, and partly spiritual.

Now, confound not these two sorts of actions, The corporal, and natural
signs, with the spiritual thing, signified thereby: again, confound not the
mouth of the body, with the mouth of the soul. Thirdly, confound not the
outward manner of receuing, by the hand of the body, with the spiritual
manner of receiving, by the hand of the soul: And so it shall be exceeding
clear to see, that each thing shall be present, to the own instrument; that
is, The body of Christ, which is the spiritual thing signified, shall be
present to the spiritual mouth, and hand: and the bread, and wine, which are
the corporal signs, are present to the corporal mouth and hand. Then how is
any object present? A corporal object, is corporally present: and an inward
object, is inwardly present. Of what nature is the thing signified? It is of an
heavenly nature. Then ask you, how is he present; He is spiritually, and
heavenly present to the soul, and the mouth of the soul, which is faith, For
it were a preposterous thing, to make the thing signified present to thy belly,
or to the mouth or eye of thy body; for if that were so, it should not be
spiritually present: because every thing is present as it agrees in it own
nature. Is it a bodily thing? it is bodily present: and if it be a heavenly
thing, it is spiritually present: So I think no man can doubt, how the body
of Christ is present: he is not carnally present, but spiritually present to
my soul, and to faith, in my soul: Thus far concerning the manner of his
presence.

Now the last part of our difference is this: The last point in controversy
betwixt us, and the Papists.
we have to consider to whom the words ought to be directed, and pronounced:
For we and the Papists differ in this last point; we say, that the words ought
to be directed, and pronounced unto the people, to the faithful communicants.
They on the contrary say, that the words ought not to be directed, nor
pronounced to the people, but to the elements, and not to be clearly
pronounced, but whispered on the elements; So that if they be spoken to the
people, or spoken openly, their charm auailes not. Now, I say, that as this
holy action, is perverted by them in all the rest, so they pervert it in this
point also, in speaking that, to the dumb elements, which they should speak to
the people of God: For, I shall prove it clearly, by three arguments taken out
of the Scriptures, that the words ought not to be spoken, to the bread, but to
the people of God.

And first I say, The promises of mercy and grace, ought to be directed, and
pronounced to them, in whom the Lord performs them, and makes them effectual:
But so it is, That the promises of mercy and grace, are performed, and made
effectual, not in bread, and wine, but in faithful men and women: Therefore
these promises should be directed, to faithful men and women. Now here is the
promise of mercy and grace: This is my body which is broken for you: and this
promise is made to no other thing, but to the faithful, and so to them only,
it ought to be directed. Secondly, we have to consider, That this Sacrament,
seals up a covenant of grace, and mercy. Now, with whom will God make his
covenant of mercy, and grace? will he make a covenant with a piece of bread,
or any dumb element: There is no man will enter into covenant with his
servant; much less, will enter into covenant with a dumb element: So in
respect this Sacrament seals up a covenant, this covenant, of necessity, must
be made with a faithful soul, and in no wise with the dumb element: and
therefore, these words cannot be directed to the elements. Thirdly, look to
the end wherefore this Sacrament was appointed. Is it not to lead us to Christ?
Is it not to nourish my faith in Christ? Is it not to nourish me in a constant
persuasion, of the Lords mercy in Christ? Was this Sacrament appointed to make
the elements, Gods? No: for if ye mark Gods purpose in this institution, ye
shall find, that Christ has not ordained this institution, to nobilitate the
Elements, to favor and respect the Elements, which were Bread, and Wine,
yesterday, to be Gods to day. We on the contrary, say plainly, that the
institution of Christ, respects not the elements, to alter their nature.
Indeed, it is appointed to alter us, to change us, and to make us more and more
spiritual, and to sanctify the elements to our use. But the special end, is
this, To make us holy, and more and more to grow up, in a sure faith in
Christ, and not to alter the Elements, nor to make them gods. And therefore, by
all these three Arguments, it is evident, that the words ought not to be
directed to the Elements, but to the people, and faithful Communicants.

Now, to come to an end: There is one thing, Conclusion, with an exhortation.
without the which we cannot profit, let us discourse never so long upon the
right understanding of the Sacrament. Ye see now, how all that is spoken
concerning the Sacrament, is grounded, and depends upon faith. Let a man have
faith, be it never so little, he shall get some hold of Christ, and some
insight, in the understanding of this Sacrament: but wanting faith, though a
man endeavor himself to make the Sacraments never so sensible, it is not
possible that he can get any hold of Christ, or any insight of him. For,
without faith, we cannot be Christians: we can neither get a sight of God, nor
feel God in Christ, without faith.

Faith is the only thing, that translates our souls, out of that death and
damnation wherein we were conceived and borne, and planteth life in us. So,
the whole study, and endeavor of a Christian, should tend to this; To crave,
that the Lord in his mercy, would illuminate his mind with the eye of
faith, and that he would kindle in his heart, a love of faith, and work in
his heart, a thirst, and desire of the object of faith, and more and more, to
thirst, and hunger, for the food of faith, that nourishes us to life eternal.

Without this faith, (hovv-soeuer the natural man, understanding naturally,
would flatter himself) surely, there is no blessedness; but all his life is
more then terrible misery. For, what-soeuer it be that flatters, and pleases
thee now, be it a thought, or motion of the mind, or an action of the body,
that pleases thee now, without faith; the same very motion, cogitation, or
action, shall torment thee hereafter.

So, without faith, it is not possible to please GOD; and whatsoever pleases
not GOD, is done to torment thee: Therefore crave mercy, for whatsoever
motion, cogitation, or action, wherein thou have offended GOD; or, for the
same, God shall offend, and torment thee. And to eschew the offense of God,
there is no means, but by true faith; therefore the study of a Christian
should be, to grow in faith.

Now, by hearing of the word, thou gettest faith; and by receiving this
Sacrament, thou obtainest the increase of faith; and having faith, the
receiving of the Sacrament shall be fruitful: but, without faith, thou eatest
thineowne condemnation. Then the whole study of a Christian is, to get faith;
and this faith cannot be obtained with idleness, but by earnest prayer:
therefore, let every one of us fall down, and crave earnestly this faith, and
the increase of it, whereby we may be worthy Receivers of this blessed
Sacrament; and that for the righteous merits of Christ Jesus. To whom, with the
Father, and the holy Spirit, be all honor, praise, and glory, both now, and
ever, Amen.

THE FOVRTH Sermon, upon the preparation to the Lords Supper.
1. Cor. 11.28. Let every man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat
of this Bread, and drink of this Cup.
THough the doctrine of our trial, and due examination (well-beloued in Christ
Jesus) ought to go before the doctrine, and receiving of the Sacrament: yet
notwithstanding, seeing that preparation is always, at all times, as well
necessary for the hearing of the simple word, as for the receiving of the
visible Sacrament; (for no man can hear the word of God fruitfully, except in
some measure he prepare his soul, and prepare the ears of his heart, how to
hear) therefore the doctrine of preparation, and due examination, must come in
it own place, and be very necessary for cuery one of you. The Apostle, in the
words which we have read, delivers his counsel, and gives his advise; and
not only gives his advise, but gives his admonition, and command, That we
should not come to the Table of the Lord, That we should not come to the
hearing of the word, rashly: but that every one of us, should come to this holy
work, with reverence; that we should prepare, and sanctify our selves in
some measure. And seeing we go unto the King of heavens Table, it becomes us to
put on our best array. In a word, he delivers the whole doctrine, and matter
of this preparation, when he says; Let every man, and let every woman, try and
examine themselves. As if he would say, Let every one of you, try and examine
your souls. That is, try the estate of your own hearts, and condition of your
own consciences. Mark and behold, in what estate you heart is with GOD, and
in what estate your conscience is with your neighbor.

He bids not your neighbor to try you, he bids not your companion to try your
heart; but he biddes your self, in person, to try your own conscience; he
biddes your self, try your own heart; because none can be certain of the
estate of your heart, or of the condition of your conscience, but your self.

Now, he excludes not others from the trial of you neither (for it is lawful
for the Pastor to try you) but others cannot try you so narrowly, as ye your
selves may; for no man can know so much of me, as I know of my self. No man
can be certain of the estate of your heart, and condition of your conscience;
and yet you your selves may be certain of it. As for others, men may judge of
your heart, and conscience, according to your works, and effects; and except
your works and effects be very wicked, and altogether vicious, we are bound in
conscience, to judge charitably of your hearts and consciences. Therefore, there
is none so meet to try the spirit of a man, to try the heart, or conscience of a
man, as is the man himself.

Now, The heads to be entreated in this Sermons.
that this trial may be the better made, ye have first to understand what it
is that ye should try: What ye call a conscience, which the Apost. commands you
to try. Next, ye are to consider, for what reasons and causes ye should try your
consciences.

Thirdly, and last of all; ye are to know in what chief points ye should
try, and examine your consciences. Then, that we speak not unto you of things
unknown, it is necessary for every one of you (seeing there is none of you
that lacks a conscience) to understand what a conscience is: and as nearly
as GOD shall give me grace, I will bring you to the understanding, and
knowledge of a conscience.

I call a conscience, Definition of conscience, with the exposition of the
paits thereof.
a certain feeling in the heart, resembling the judgment of the living GOD,
following upon a deed done by us, flowing from a knowledge in the mind,
accompanied with a certain motion in the heart, to wit, fear, or joy,
trembling, or rejoicing. Now, we will examine the parts of this definition. I
call it first of all, a certain feeling in the heart; for, the Lord has left
such a stamp in the heart of every man, that he does not that thing so
secretly, nor so quietly, but he makes his own heart to smite him, and to
strike him: he makes him to feel in his own heart, whether he has done well,
or ill.

The Lord has placed this feeling in the heart; why? Because the eyes of God,
look not so much upon the outward countenance, and exterior behavior, as upon
the inward heart. For he says to Samuel, in the first book, 16.7. The Lord
beholds the heart. So, 1. Chron. 28.9. he says to Solomon, The Lord searches
all hearts, and understands all imaginations, and thoughts. Also Jeremy 11.20.
The Lord tries the reins and the heart. And the Apostle, 1. Cor. 4.5. says, The
Lord shall lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the
heart manifest. So, in respect that the Lord will chiefly have to do with the
heart, therefore in the heart he places this feeling, which is the chief part
of conscience.

I say next, that this feeling resembles the judgment of God: for, this
feeling was left, and placed in our souls for this end and purpose, that we
might have a domestical, and familiar judgment within our selves, to
resemble, and describe, the secret, and invisible judgment of the high God; A
particular judgment, to go before that general judgment, in that general
and great day, where every man shall be justified, or condemned, according to
the particular judgment, that is within his own conscience. In the mean
time, this conscience is left in us, to arrest us in this life; thereby, as it
were, to ease the living God, at that last Judgment. For the books of our own
consciences, in that last day shall be opened; and every man shall receive,
according to the report of the decree that is within his own conscience:
therefore I say, that our conscience resembles the judgment of GOD.

The third thing that I say, is this; It follows upon a deed done by us: our
conscience, nor our heart strikes us not, before the deed be done; our heart
strikes us not, before the evil deed be committed: no, it goes not before the
deed; but the stroke of the conscience, and feeling of the heart, follows
immediately upon the deed, in such sort, that the deed is no sooner done by
thee, but thy conscience applies it to thy self, and gives out the sentence
against thy self: therefore, I say, It is a feeling, following upon a deed
done by us.

And next I say, flowing from a knowledge in the mind; for except the
conscience have information, and except the heart know, that the deed which
is done, is evil; the heart, nor the conscience can never count it to be evil:
therefore knowledge must go before the stroke of the conscience: thy heart can
never feel that to be evil, which thy mind knows not to be evil.

So, knowledge must ever go before feeling, and according to the measure of
thy knowledge, according to the nature, and quality of thy knowledge,
accordingly shall the testimony and stroke of thy conscience be. For a light
knowledge, a doubting, and uncertain knowledge, makes a light, and small
stroke: as on the other part, a holy and solid knowledge, drawn out of the
word of God, makes a heavy stroke of the conscience. So the conscience must
answer to the knowledge. If we have no other knowledge, but the knowledge
which we have by nature, and by the light and sparks which are left in nature,
our conscience will answer no further, but to that knowledge: but if beside the
light of nature, we have a knowledge of God in his word, and a knowledge of God
by his holy spirit, working in our hearts; our cosciences will then go further,
and excuse, or accuse us, according unto the light that is in the word. So that
the conscience is not acquired, or obtained, at what time we are enlightened,
by the working of the holy Spirit, and hearing of the word of GOD: but, our
conscience is borne with us, is natural to us, and is left in the soul of
every man and woman: and as there are some sparks of light left in nature, so
there is a conscience left in it; and if there were no more, that same light
that is left in thy nature, shall be enough to condemn thee. So, the
conscience is not gotten, or begun at the hearing of the word, or at that time,
when we begin to reform our selves, by the assistance, and renewing of the holy
Spirit: but every man by nature has a conscience, and the Lord has left it in
our nature; and except that this conscience be reformed, according to the word
of God, that same natural conscience shall be enough to condemn thee
eternally: therefore, I say, flowing from a knowledge of the mind. Last of
all, I say, accompanied with a certain motion of the heart: and we express
this motion, in fear, or joy, trembling, or rejoicing. In very great fear, if
the deed be exceeding heinous, and the stroke of the conscience be very heavy;
then the conscience never takes rest, for guiltiness will ever dread. But if
the deed be honest, godly, and commendable, it makes a glad heart, and makes
the heart even to burst out into joy. So, to be short in this matter (for I
purpose not to make a common place of it) ye see, that in every conscience,
there must be two things: First, there must be a knowledge; and next, there
must be a feeling: whereby, according to thy knowledge, thou applyest unto
thine own heart, the deed done by thee. So that, as the word it self
testifies, it arises of two parts: of knowledge, according whereunto it is
called science; and of feeling, according whereunto, the Con is added, and it
is called Conscience. Then the word conscience, signifies knowledge, with
application.

This conscience, To what uses the Lord has appointed the conscience to serve
in the soul of of man.
the Lord has appointed to serve in the soul of man, for many uses: to wit,
he has appointed every one of your consciences, to be a keeper, a wayter on, a
careful attender upon every action done by you. So that, that action can not
be, so secretly, so quietly, nor so closely conveyed, but will thou, nill thou,
thy conscience shall bear a testimony of it; thy conscience shall be a
faithful obseruer of it; and one day, shall be a faithful recorder of that
action. So, the Lord has appointed thy conscience to this office, that it
attends; and waits upon thee in all thy actions. that one, and the self same
conscience, shall serve to so many uses in a soul; as to be a continual
obseruer, and marker of thy actions; an accuser; ten thousand vvitnesses; a
Judge; a Sergeant, and Tormentor; to execute thine own sentence against thy
self? so that the Lord needs not to seek a Sergeant, out of thine own soul
to arrest thee, for thou shall have all these within thy self, to make a
plain declaration against thy self. Take heed to this: for there is never a
word of this shall fall to the ground; but either ye shall find it to your
comfort, or to your everlasting woe. And this secret, and particular judgment,
that every one of you carries about you, abides so sure, and so fast within
you, that do what ye can, if ye would employ your whole travail to blot it
out, thou shall never get it scraped out of thy soul. If ye were as malicious,
and were become as wicked, as ever any incarnate devil was upon the earth, yet
shall ye never get this conscience altogether extinguished out of thy soul:
but will thou, nill thou, there shall as much remain of it, as shall make thee
inexcusable in the great day of the general Judgment.

I grant, thou may blot out all knowledge out of thy mind, and make thy
self become even as a blind man. I grant also, that thou may harden thy
heart, so that thou will blot out all feeling out of it, so that thy conscience
will not accuse thee, nor find fault with thee, but thou shall have a delight
in doing evil, without a remorse: but I deny, that any degree of wickedness
in the earth, shall bring thee to this point, that thou may do evil without
fear; but still, the more that thou do evil, and the longer that thou
continuest in evil doing, thy fear shall be the greater: yea, in despite
of the devil, and in despite of all the malice of the heart of man, thy fear
shall remain. And though they would both conspire together, they shall not be
able to banish that fear, but that gnawing of the conscience, shall ever
remain, to testify, that there is a day of Judgment. I grant also, that
there shall be a vicissitude, and that fear shall not always remain, but
shall be sometimes turned into security; neither shall that security always
abide, but shall be turned again into fear: so that it is not possible, to get
this fear wholly extinct; but the greater that the security is, the greater
shall thy fear be, when thou art wakened. Thirdly, I grant, that this fear
shall be blind; for from that time, a man by evil doing, has banished
knowledge out of the mind, and feeling out of the heart, what can remain
there, but a blind fear? When men have put out all light, and left nothing in
their nature, but darkness, there can nothing remain but a blind fear. So I
grant, that the fear is blind: for neither know they from whence that fear
comes, what progress it has, whereunto it tends, where, nor when, it
shall end: therefore, they that are this way misledde in their souls, or all
men in the earth, they are most miserable. For as long as thou may keep in
thy mind, a spark of this knowledge, and spiritual light, in the which thou
may see the face of GOD in Christ, wherein thou may see a remedy, in the
death and passion of Christ, and wherein thou may see the bowels of mercy,
offered in the blood of Christ; if thou have any spark of this light (albeit
it were never so little) to direct thee, and albeit this knowledge were never
so much wounded, yet there is mercy enough for thee in Christ: but if thou
close up all the windows of thy soul, and of thy heart, and make them to
become palpable darkness, that thou neither know from whence the terror
comes, nor yet perceiuest any remedy, that is the misery of all miseries.

We have many things in general to lament, concerning the estate of this our
Country, Application.
wherein we live. Also particularly, There is not one of you, but have great
cause to take heed to your consciences now, while ye have time; that ye
banish not altogether this light, which is yet offered unto you, and whereof
some sparks yet remain. For I see the most part of men, run headlong to
banish the spark of light that is in them, and will not rest, so long as there
is any spark of it left, until it be utterly banished. And when they have
done so, alas, what can follow, but a blind and terrible fear in their
consciences, which they can never get extinguished; a fear without remedy;
a growing fear, and not a decaying fear; a fear that will devour them
wholly at the last. Therefore, every one of you be careful of this light that
is within you; take heed, that the foul affections of your hearts, dravve not
your bodies after them; see, at the least, that those affections banish not
this light. And, so long as the Lord offers you this light, in time crave, that
of his mercy, he would give you the grace to embrace it, to take a new
course, and yet to amend your lives, while time is given you.

The body shall leave the soul, and the soul shall leave the body; but the
conscience shall never leave the soul: but whether so-euer the soul goes,
to the same place shall the conscience repair; and look in what estate thy
conscience is, when thou departest out of this life, in the self same estate
shall it meet thee in the great Day. So that if thy conscience was a tormentor
to thee at the time of thy death, if thou get it not then pacified, it shall
be also a tormentor to thee, in that general Judgment. Therefore, this matter
would be well weighed, and every one of you should study to have a good
conscience, that when the soul is severed from the body, leaving your
conscience at rest, and peace with God, it may be restored unto you, and meet
you again, with as great peace and quietness.

Thus far concerning conscience, what it is. I beseech the living Lord, so to
sanctify your memories, that ye may keep these things; and that every one of
these things may be so imprinted in your hearts, that ye may be mindful of them,
all your lives.

The second thing that we are to speak of, is this: We are to consider
wherefore we should try our consciences; for what causes we should examine our
own souls and consciences. I will declare the reasons briefly. It behooves
every one of you to try your conscience. Why? Because the Lord will make his
residence, in no other part of the soul, but in the conscience: He has
appointed his dwelling to be in the heart of man, and in the will, and
conscience of man; and therefore it becomes you, to make his dwelling place
clean, and to take heeed unto your hearts.

Next; though the Lord of heaven made not his residence there: yet, in respect
the eye of GOD is an all-seeing eye, and able to pearce through the very
thickness of man's flesh, how dark and gross soever it be, and to enter into
the very secret corners of thy conscience; (for unto the all-seeing eye of GOD,
the most secret corner of the conscience, is as clear and manifest, as any
outward, or bodily thing in the earth, can be to the outward eye of the body):
In respect therefore that this eye is so pearcing, and that he casts his eye
only upon our hearts, it behooves us to try our hearts.

Thirdly, he is the Lord of the conscience. There is no Monarch on earth, that
has any sovereignty or lordshippe over the conscience: only the GOD of
heaven, only Christ Jesus, King of heaven and earth, is Lord of the
conscience, he has power only to save and lose. Therefore, when thou
come to this Sacrament of the Lords Table, thou ought carefully to look
unto thy conscience, to try and examine the state of it.

Last of all, which is a chief reason; It behooves thee to prove thy
conscience, because the welfare and health of thy soul, depends upon thy
conscience. If thy conscience that is within thy soul, be well, if it be at
peace and rest, thy soul is well; if thy conscience be in a good estate, thy
soul must needs be in a good estate; if thy conscience be in good health, of
necessity thy soul must be in good health; for the good health, and happiness
of the soul, dependes upon a good conscience: therefore, it concerns every
one of you, to try well your consciences.

There was never any law made, or devised, that forbade us to have a care of
our healths; it is lawful for us to seek such things as may procure, and
preserve it: but the health of thy soul, stands in the health of thy
conscience, and in preserving thereof: therefore, by all laws, thou ought
to attend thy conscience. If thou keep thy conscience well, thy soul is in
health; and if thy soul be in health, let troubles come what will upon thy
body, thou will endure them all; but if thy soul be diseased with an evil
conscience, thou shall not be able to bear out the least trouble that shall
come unto thy body: whereas, if the conscience were at rest, and in good
health, that trouble could not happen unto thy body, but the strength of a
good conscience would bear it out. Then have ye not reason, and more then
reason, to take heed to your consciences, to try, and examine your consciences,
in what estate and disposition they stand?

Now, Certain lessons to be learned, by which a man may preserve health in his
soul and conscience.
because it is a fruitless thing to tell you, that health is necessary, and
not to show the way how this health may be obtained and preserved; therefore to
keep your consciences in quiet, and good health, I will give you these few
lessons. First of all, be sure, that ye retain steadfast, a persuasion of the
mercy of GOD, in Christ Jesus; examine when thou lie down, and examine
when thou risest up, in what estate thou art with God; whether thou may look
for mercy at his hands, or not.

Art thou persuaded of mercy? Assure thy self thy conscience is in a good
estate, thou have health in thy soul; for, by the keeping of faith, the
conscience is preserved, as says the Apostle, 1. Tim. 1.19. Keep this
persuasion, preserve it whole and sound, hurt it not, bring not thy soul into
doubting, stay not, nor hinder thy persuasion, if thou desire to keep health in
thy soul: for, if thou doubt, or any way diminish thy persuasion, and
assurance, assuredly, thy assurance cannot so soon be hindered, nor
diminished, but at that very instant, shall follow the diminishing of the
health of thy soul; yea, it cannot be, but in that very article of time, shall
follow the hurt of thy conscience; for faith will not dwell, but in a whole
conscience. Therefore, at what time thou do any thing against thy
conscience, at that very time, thou losest a degree of thy persuasion of the
mercy of God: and until such time as thou fall down at the feet of Christ,
and obtain mercy for that wicked deed, purchase peace at his hands, and
repair thy persvvasion, thou shall ever doubt of mercy, and want health in
thy conscience. Then this is the first lesson, to keep health in your souls,
To be persuaded of mercy.

The second lesson to keep a good conscience, or to keep health in thy soul,
is this; Ye must fly, eschew, and forbear, whatsoever may trouble the
health of your soul, whatsoever may trouble the quietness, and peaceable
estate of your conscience: cast it out, forbear it, and eschew it. This
general is good. But let us see what it is that troubles the quiet estate of
the conscience. Only sin; nothing but an evil nature. Therefore we must
of necessity, to keep health in our souls, forbear and eschew sin; we
must fly and avoid sin. It is not possible, that ye can both keep a good
conscience, and serve the affections of your heart: and therefore, to keep
peace and health in thy soul, thou must take leave of thy lusts; thou must
renounce the lusts, and affections of thy heart, and thou must not do as thou
wast wont to do: thou must not be given to the service of thine affections,
and of thine appetite, to put them in execution, as thou have formerly done.
But in-case thine affections, or lust command thee to do any thing, what is
thy part? Thou must try, how far this may stand with the good will of God; and
how far that affection which commands thee, may agree with the law of God. Is
there such a harmony, as that, that thing which thine affection commands
thee, may stand with Gods law, and holy will? Then no question, it is a
sanctified affection, thou may put it in execution. But after this trial, if
thou find thine affections to be exorbitant, and out of rule, carrying thee
from God, and against his law, beware of it, resist it, put it not in
execution; for if thou fulfill the will of thine affections, what pleasure can
it bring with it? It may well bring a flattering pleasure in the entry, but it
closes ever with a bitter remorse in the end. Then to eschew this bitter
remorse, should ye not all try your affections? Ye must examine and try them
by the square of Gods law; ye must see how far they agree with his law, and
how fatre they dissent from it; and so far as they are dissonant from that
law, let every man deny himself, renounce his affections: and so, this trial
being taken in this manner, by thy self, it sanctifies thine affections,
makes Christ to lodge in thy soul, makes thy conscience to be at rest. And
the holy Spirit this way, makes both body, and soul, to be in good health,
and to rejoice. Then fly from sin. This is the second lesson.

The third lesson is this; Study to do well. Would thou keep health in
thy soul? Study to do better and better continually: At the least, have a
purpose in thy soul and heart, to do better daily; which is the last lesson.
Seeing that when we study to do best, and that the just man, that is, the most
holy man, falls so often as 7. times a day, yea rather, 70. times seven
times, what is thy part in these slips, and snares? Though thou fall, as thou
can not eschew to fall, lie not still there; sleep not there where thou have
fallen: it is a shame to sleep there, therefore arise again. And how should
thou rise? By lifting up thy soul, and running to the Fountain of grace and
mercy; by repayring to Christ Jesus, to obtain mercy for thy soul; and to
crave, that he would send out of himself, that measure of peace, that may put
thy conscience at rest, and restore thy soul to health. So, lie not where thou
fallest, but incontinent arise, and crave mercy; and in obtaining mercy, thou
shall repair thy fall, thou shall amend thy life by repentance, and by
repentance thou shall get peace, thou shall have thy conscience at rest, and
get health to thy soul. Now keep this rule, if thou desire to keep thy
soul in health: look that thou sleep not in sin, as David did: lie not still
when thou art fallen, and so fall from one sin, to another; as from adultery,
to murder, from murder, to the next, etc. As commonly, if a man sleep in
sin, and rise not in time, one sin will draw on another; for there is no sin
alone, but always the greater, and more heinous that the sin is, it has the
greater, and worse sins waiting on it. Therefore, when ye fall, delay not to
arise, but repair to the fountain of mercy, and seek grace in time: run
to prayer, run to the Church of God, wheresoever it be, whether in the field,
or in the town: run to Christ Jesus, and crave mercy of him, that ye may
have peace in your consciences; and so by these means, every one of you shall
preserve health in your souls. By these means, ye shall learn what
difference is, betwixt this living word of mercy, and grace, which sounds in
our religion; and that slaying letter, that kills the soul of every one that
hears it; I mean that Idolatrous doctrine, of that dumb Mass.

I mention this unto you, because I see, that many in these days are fallen to
it, and the Lord is beginning to abstract his grace, and mercy from this
Country, for the contempt of this quickening word, which has so clearly
sounded here, and which our countrymen, for the greatest part (running
headlong to the devil in a dumb guise) travail utterly to banish. Is not
this a miserable thing, that so fevv of you have eyes to consider, and
discern, of the time of peace, mercy, and grace, which is so abundantly
offered? The Lord of his mercy, give you eyes in time.

Thus far concerning the reasons, wherefore every one of you should try and
examine your own consciences: and this trial ought not to be for a day, or
for a year; but it ought to be every day, and every year of thy whole life.
For that conscience that should rest for ever with the living God, that
conscience, which must ever behold the face of the Son of God, it cannot be
ouer-well cleansed; we cannot look ouer-narrowly to it. The more curious we
be in searching out of this conscience, we are the better occupied: I speak of
our own consciences, I speak not of our neighbors.

Thirdly, I come to the points, In what points we should examine our
consciences.
wherein every one of you should try and examine your selves. Every one of you
ought to try and examine your consciences in two things: First, whether thou be
at peace with God, who is the Lord of heaven, or not. Next, examine thy
conscience, whether thou art in love and amity with thy neighbor, or not.
Would thou know, whether thy conscience be at unity and peace with God, or
not? Thou shall know it this way; The God of heaven, can have no society nor
company with that soul, which is always unclean, that is every way defiled;
no, he cannot.

Now, I speak not so precisely, that I make a soul to be fully sanctified,
and perfectly holy in this life: no, in this life, there are wonderful
iniquities, gross sins, and great faults, wherewith, even the righteous are
defiled: but this is my meaning; There is no soul can be at any peace with
God, or wherewith the Lord can have any society, but in some measure it must
be sanctified, and made holy. For God cannot make residence in a soul, that
is always as a slinking dunghill; and therefore of force, in some measure it
must be sanctified: there must be so much made clean in one corner, or other,
of that soul, wherein the Lord of heaven, by his holy Spirit, may make his
residence.

Now, let us see whereby the soul is sanctified. Peter, Act. 15.9. says, That
the soul of man is purified by faith; that the heart of man is purged by faith.
So, faith opens and purges the heart. By faith in Chr. Jesus, and in the
merits of his blood, we have peace with God: Being justified by faith, we have
peace toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, says the Apostle, Romans 5.1.
Now then, this point comes in, That ye are to prove your selves, whether ye
be in the faith, or not; as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 13.5. Prove your selves,
whether ye are in the faith. Examine if your souls be seasoned with this
faith; for if ye have not faith in Christ, Christ is not in you; and if Christ
be not in you, ye are in an evil state, ye are in the estate of the
reprobate, and damned. So every one ought to look carefully, and see if he
have a belief in the blood of Christ, or not: whether he believe to obtain
mercy by his merits, and sanctification by his blood, or not. For if thou have
no measure of this faith, thou have no measure of peace with GOD, by reason our
peace with God, is ingendered and grows daily more and more by true faith in
Christ.

Now this faith, where it is true, where it is lively, and couples the heart
with GOD, as I have already said, it must break forth in voord and deed,
it can by no means be held in, but it will break forth. It must break out
in word, in glorifying the God of heaven, who has forgiven us our sins; it
must break forth in word, by giving a notable confession of those sins
wherein we have offended him. It must break out in deed, in doing good
works, to testify to the world, that thing which is within thy heart; to
testify to the world, that thou, who have this faith, art a new man; that by
thy good example of life and conversation, thou may edify thy brethren, the
simple ones of the Church of God; and that, by thy holy life, thou may draw
sinners to repentance; that they seeing thy good light, may be compelled to
glorify GOD in thee.

Then, in the first point of trial, let us look to these three; to the heart,
to the mouth, to the hand. Take heed that there be a harmony betwixt these
three; for, if the heart be inwardly coupled with God, there is no doubt, but
the mouth will outvvardlie glorify him; and if thy heart and mouth be
renewed, and be one, of necessity thou will express it in thy conversation.
There must be an agreement betwixt the heart and the hand, thy conversation
must be changed with the heart, and be holy, honest, and godly, as the heart
is: So that if thy conversation be good, it is a sure token, that thou art at
one with God: but if thy conversation be not good, speak what thou will, thy
heart is but defiled; this true, and lively faith, has no place in it. Then
would thou know, when thou art at one with God? When thy conversation, thy
heart, and thy mouth say all one thing, then without question, thou have the
work of faith, wrought by the holy spirit in thy heart, which makes thee to
be at peace with God. This is the first point, wherein ye should try your
selves.

The next point, is love: ye must try, whether ye be in love, and charity
with your neighbors, or not: for, as thou art not coupled with God, but by the
hand of faith; so thou art not coupled with thy neighbor, nor joined with any
member of Christ in this world, but by the hand of love, amity, and charity.
Take away love, thou art not a member of this body: for love is the master
sinnowe, and couples all these members of Christ's body together, and makes
them to grow up, in a spiritual, and mystical unity: love, is the only
mark, whereby the children of Christ, and members of Christ's body, are known
from the rest of the world: love is that holy oil that refreshes our souls,
and makes us like unto God; and the more we grow in love, the more God by his
spirit dwells in us, for God is love: So that except in some measure, love
toward thy neighbor, dwell in thy heart, thou can have no society with thy
neighbor, and far less with God. If the manners of men were examined by this
rule, we should find a multitude of godless people in this country, who
have their hearts raging with malice, one against another: and where the devil
and the malicious spirit dwell, there is no place for the holy spirit. And
although the Lord has gone about by all means possible, early, and late, to
instruct them, and to infuse into them this precious love, and amity toward
God, and their neighbor, and so to alter their conditions: Yet they will not
suffer themselves to be wakened, until the great vengeance, and malediction of
God fall upon them: This love, this honest, and godly conversation flows
always from the root of faith. So that if thy heart have faith in any
measure, be it never so little, in that same measure, thou must have love
toward thy neighbor: and this love is never idle, but is uttering it self,
in one effect or other: And in respect that faith is the ground whereupon all
the rest dependes, and in respect, that this faith is such a Jewel, as without
the which it is not possible for any of you to please God, without which, all
your deeds are abomination before him, without the which you are in the
greatest misery (with misery is so much the more terrible, in that you are
ignorant of it) Is it not good reason, that ye know, and understand, how this
faith is first wroght and the^ nourisht, in your souls, by the holy spirit?
that seeing how it is created, and the manner how it is brought about, ye may
examine your consciences, and see whether ye be in the faith or not. My purpose
was to have insisted longer on this matter, then this time will suffer. Now
therefore, as time will permit, and GOD shall give grace, I will let you
understand, how the H. spirit imployes his travail in the heart and mind of
man, and what pains the holy Ghost takes in creating, and forming this Jewel
of faith in your souls: Yet, before I enter this work, to let you see the
travails of the spirit of God, in working of this faith in your hearts: It is
necessary, and more then necessary, that ye understand, first your own
misery, and infirmity: and that ye know, how the Lord was induced to
recover you, out of your old estate, and to recreate you, who were lost, by the
fall of your father Adam.

Then to consider of this matter more deeply, I offer to your remembrances
this ground: That man universally, and every one particularly, being corrupted,
being lost, and that by our first fathers fall (for if there were no more, but
that same first fault and sin of his, we are all of us justly condemned, to
a double death both of body, and soul for ever) Man, thus universally, and
particularly, being utterly lost, without any hope at all of recovery left in
his soul, without any sense of the recovery of that fromer estate, or
repairing of that Image which he had lost through sin, long before; he
being I say lost by this sin, and left in this desperate estate in himself:
what does God? The everliving God, only wise, whose ways are unsearchable,
has found out a way, how that man, this way lost, yet he may be saved:
herein he sought counsel, from whom? Not from any creature, but he
counseled with himself; The persons of the Trinity took counsel of them
selves, one God was moved to seek counsel from himself, only moved in
himself: for he had not an external principal without himself to induce
him. So, he seeking this counsel at himself, and being moved in himself
thereto: As Ephesians. 1.9. what does he? when all men should have died for ever,
it pleased him of his infinite mercy, to select out of all, and to elect a
certain number, out of the lost race of Adam, that should have perished for
ever. In this his counsel and decree, moved I say of himself, and seeking
counsel from himself only, he selects a certain number, out of this rotten
race, which certain number, he will have sanctified, he will have justified,
he will have glorified: And therefore to bring to pass the work of their
salvation: what does he? he appointes his own natural son (for he had
but one natural son) he appointes the second person of the Trinity, his
own natural son, God, in power, glory, and majesty, as high as himself,
equal with God the father in all things, he appoints him to work this work,
to bring to pass this work of our redemption, and eternal salvation (This is
but the mystery of it, in some measure disclosed). And therefore in the fulness
of time, (for he dispenses all things according to his wisdom) at such time
as he appointed, he makes his son to come down, to seize himself in the
womb of the Virgin, to take on our flesh, to take on the likeness of sin; he
took not on sin, but he took on the likeness of sin: what call I that
likeness? our flesh is the likeness of sin: he took on our flesh, and
nature, the likeness of sin, which was perfectly sanctified, the very moment of
his conception, in the very womb of the Virgin: He took on this flesh, that
in this flesh, and nature, sin might be banished, and cast out of us forever:
And whereas we should all of us have gone one way (for there was no exception
of persons by nature) Chr. Ies. our savior, has elected us: and according as
his father in his secret election, before the beginning of the world, had
elected us; the same Chr. Jesus in his own time, calls us, and makes us
partakers, of that salvation, which he has purchased, and he repaires not only
that image which was lost in our forefather Adam: he places us, not in a
terrestrial paradise, where Adam was placed at the beginning (and what more
could have bin sought by us?) but he gives us a far more excellent image, the^
we lost, he places us in a more high, and in a more celestial paradise, the^
we lost: For so much the more heavenly is the paridise which he gives us, as the
2d Adam is more excellent then the first, and as the son of God, and God
himself, is far above any creature, that ever was; man, or Angel. Therefore
it comes to pass, that by the benefit of the second Adam, Chr. Jesus our
Savior, the son of God (whereas had we remained in that Image, wherein our
forefather was first created, we should have settled our selves in the earth
for ever, we could not have craved a beter paradise then an earthly paradise,
for earthly Tabernacles) By benefit of the son of God, I say, it comes to
pass, that we are plucked up, out of the earth, to the heaven and to a heavenly
paradise. And what have we to do with heaven? Are we not made of the earth,
to return to the earth? Becomes not an earthly paradise an earthly body? yet
the Lord in his mercy, sends down his son, to draw us up, out of the
earth, to the heaven. This is so high a thing that it cannot be easily
considered. For this drawing of us, to a heavenly paradise, is a thing, more
then could have been thought on. That we should live the life of Angels in
heaven: how could the heart of man, think on this? yet it pleased the living
Lord, in the great riches, and bowels of his mercy, and in the exceeding
greatness, of the power of his mercy toward us (The Apostle in that Epistle to
the Ephesians, cannot get words enough to express this, he knows not how to
begin, nor how to end, when he speaks of the riches of that mercy. And if
ye look well into that Epistle to the Ephesians, ye shall find more high,
and excellent styles, given to the riches of that mercy, in that Epistle, then
in any other part of the Scripture) It pleased him I say, of his own mercy, not
to give us simply the Image which we lost, nor to leave us, in this earth: but
it pleased him, to give us a better Image, and beside that, to place us in
heaven, there to remain with him for ever.

Now, rests his mercy and grace here? No: But that this salvation, which
he has already purchased, and brought about, by his son, our Savior,
Christ Jesus, that it might be wholly accomplished, having nothing wanting in
it: As he redeemed us, in his own person perfectly; So, he makes this same
redemption to come to our knowledge, and make us sure of it in our consciences:
and to this end, what does he? As by his death, he purchased our full
redemption, so he makes it known unto us, he intimates it unto us; by our
inward calling, letting us both find, and feel in our hearts, what he did in
his body for us. For our Lord when he makes his servants, to proclaim this
redemption, and to intimate it to our consciences, he works this Jewel of
faith in our souls, which assures us, that the son of God, has died for us:
For what could it avail us, to see our redemption, to see our salvation, and
our life, a far off, if a way were not found out, and a hand, and means
given unto us, whereby we may apprehend that salvation, and apply it to our
selves. What can it avail a sick man, to see a drugge in an Apothecaries
shop, except he may have it, and apply it to his sick body? So, to the
end that this work of our redemption, and salvation, may be fully, and
freely accomplished: look, how freely, he has given his only son, to the
death of the cross for us; as freely has he found out this way, and means,
and offered us this hand, whereby we may take hold on Christ, and apply him
to our souls: This means, to conclude, is faith: There is not a way, nor an
instrument in the Scriptures of God whereby we can apply Chr. to our souls,
but only the instrument of faith: therefore, faith cannot be enough commended.
Turn to faith, and it will make thee turn to God; and so, conioyne thee with
God, and make all thine actions, well pleassing unto him: There is no good
actio^ that we do, though it seem never so good, before the world, but it is
abomination before God if it be not done in faith, and will forward our
condemnation: having faith, all the creatures of god, are serviceable unto us,
they must all conspire to the furtherance, of the work of our salvation: As on
the contrary, wanting faith, there is none of the creatures of God, but shall
be enemies unto us, and conspire to our damnation: For faith conioynes us,
with the God of heaven, and makes us heavenly: This Jewel of faith, seasons
all the gifts, and graces, which God gives unto us: All the riches of the
earth, is of no value to my soul, without faith. And what auailes it any man,
to have all the knowledge, and wisdom in the earth, without faith? For the
devil has all this knowledge, and is not the better. What auailes it me, to
conquer all the Monarchs, kingdoms, and whole riches in the earth: what can
all these avail my soul? Nothing but accuse me, if I want faith. Therefore,
all the benefits, and gifts of God, without faith auail nothing, but to augment
our misery: All the gifts, and graces of God are abused, without faith: Faith
only makes thee to use the benefits, and graces of God rightly: Faith only
should be sought, kept, and entertained, here in this life: having faith, all
the rest of Gods graces, are profitable unto thee, for this Jewel keeps them
al in order, and makes them al fruitful; whereas, wanting this jewel, there is
nothing here on earth, but it will testify against thee.

Let us then speak of this faith, how it is wroght in you: I take my ground out
of the Evangelist John, How faith is created in our souls.
6.44. where our Savior says, No man can come to me, except the Father
which has sent me, draw him: In the which words, we see clearly, that
except we be drawn, except we be compelled, except we be thrust, except of
unwilling, we be made willing, by God the father, it is not possible for us
to come to his son: What is the reason of this, that the spirit of God must
draw us, and make us willing, or ever we come to God? Because, by nature we
are, not only wounded, and launced by sin, and iniquity, but as the Apostle
shows, Ephesians. 2.1. we were wholly dead, in trespasses and sins: yea,
observe, how void any dead body is, of a natural life, so void are our
souls (though they be living the natural life) so void are they, of the life
of God, of that heavenly and spiritual life, whereunto, we in this life do
aspire: until such time, that the spirit of God draw our hearts, and minds,
that is quicken, our hearts, and minds. No, it is not a drawing as we commonly
speak, it is a very quickening of a dead thing: It is a quickening of that
thing, which was void of the life of the spirit. Then except the spirit of God
draw us, that is, quicken us, with that spiritual, and heavenly life, it is
not possible for us, to come to heaven. And except he nourish this life, which
he has begun, it is not possible, that we can stand in this life: So the
spirit of God, is said to draw us, that is, to begin this life in us, and by
the same holy spirit, to continue, and nourish this life in us. Now by the
drawing of the spirit, our souls are quickened: and by the drawing of the
spirit, I understand no other thing, but the framing, and creating of faith in
our souls which makes us new creatures. Now let us see, what order the spirit
of GOD keeps, in drawing us, and informing, and creating this faith, in our
souls: First of all, I divide the soul, into no more parts then commonly it
uses to be divided, that is, into the heart, and the mind. Our mind then
being a cloud of darkness, altogether blind naturally, there being nothing in
that mind of ours; but vanity, error, and ignorance, whereby we vanish away,
and can never long continue in any good resolution, or purpose; What does the
spirit of God? The first work, that ever the spirit of God does, he takes
order with the mind: and what does he to the mind? he banisheth darkness,
he chasethout vanity, and blindness, that naturally lurketh in the mind; and
instead of this darkness, he places in the mind, a light, a celestial, and a
heavenly light, a light which is resident in Christ Jesus only: Then, the
spirit chaseth out that cloud of miste, and darkness, and places light in the
mind. And what works he by this light? We getting this inward, and heavenly
light in the mind, and a sanctified understanding, incontinent he makes us to
see God: not only as he is God the creator of the world; but also as he is God
the redeemer, and has redeemed us in his son Christ Jesus. Now before I
obtain this light, what is my heart, and mind doing? There is not one of you,
but have experience, as I my self have, in what estate the heart, and mind
is, before that this light enter: The mind lies drowned in blindness, and
the heart is hardened, and they both conspire together in vice, to set up an
Idol in stead of God, a domestical and invisible Idol: what sort of Idol is
that? No doubt, some worldly, or fleshly affection, or other: this is set up,
in the throne of thy heart; and on this Idol, thou bestowest the service of
thy whole heart, of thy whole mind, of thy whole soul, and body: So, that
the service both of the soul, and body, which should be bestowed upon God
only, is employed upon that Idol, which is set up in thy heart, that is, in
the place of God, in the steed of the most high God: And thou art more
addicted, to the service of that Idol, then ever thou wast, to the service of
the living God: yea, until such time, that this Idol of ours be banished,
and that this blindness, whereby this Idol is served, be taken away, there is
not one of you, but are servants to one lust or other; and thy soul, that
should be consecrated to the service of the living GOD, is employed upon one
affection, or other, upon some worldly or fleshly lust, of thine own: But from
the time, that the Lord begins to scatter the clouds of our natural
minds, and understandings, and begins to chase away this thick mist, of
the dark soul, and places therein, some spark of heavenly light, which
flows out of Chr. and whereas we were children of the night, and darkness
before he makes us to be light in the Lord, and to be children of the light,
and of the day. Then we see, that all the things in the world, besides the
living God, are vanities, deceivable allurements, unconstant shadows,
fleeting, and flowing without any abiding: and and then we see, that our
hearts, and our minds, were set on evil continually. Then we begin to
abhor that Idol, and to seek to serve God only. Now except the Lord of his
mercy, and goodness, place in us this light, until such time as we get some
glimmering of this light, we can never see our own vanity, nor yet see God.

This then is the first work of the spirit, he banisheth darkness, and
errors, and places light in our minds. Now this first work of the spirit, is
termed oftentimes in the Scripture, under the name of faith: for the mind
has it own assent, and persuasion in the own kind, as well as the heart
has: and therefore the mind being illuminate, and seasoned with this light,
the assenting, and knowledge in the same mind, is called faith. The Apostles,
and Evangelists, give to this knowledge, the name of faith: for from the time,
that thou once have an eye to see God, and whom he has sent, Christ Jesus,
when once thou gettest a sight of him, and access to him, if it were no more
then in the mind, it is called faith.

But we must not stand still here: If faith go no further then the mind, it
is not the faith that we are seeking. For the faith that justifies, and does
us good, must open the heart, as well as it opens the mind; it must banish
that Idol and affection out of the heart, and in steed thereof, place a throne
for Christ Jesus. So, that except the good spirit of God, go further then the
mind, and banish this Idol, as well out of our hearts, as out of our minds,
we have not that justifying faith, whereby we may look for mercy. Yea, the
spirit of GOD must not only stay at the inlightening of thy mind, but it must
mollify this heart of thine, and change thine affections. And whereas thy
affections were wicked, and evil, Gods Spirit must change thy will: and he
never can change thy will, except he make the ground of thy heart good, that it
may be set on God, and bring forth good fruit abundantly to the owner.

And what teaches this? This teaches you to seek for an honest heart, and to
seek instantly, while ye obtain it. For, what avails it any man, to know
what is good, or what is evil, except he have a way showed him, how he
shall eschew the evil, and a means given him, to make himself partaker of
the good?

Is not this an idle, and unprofitable knowledge to me, to see a far off,
and to know that this is good for me, when I find not a means, how to be
partaker of that good, that it may be especially good to me? Is it not an idle
knowledge also, to perceive that this is ill for me, that it will do me
hurt if I do it; and yet, that same very thing I will do, and no other?

So the Spirit of GOD, linketh these two together in this work; and as he
reformes the mind, he reformes also the heart, and makes you to be partakers
of that good, which ye see; and to eschew that evil which ye perceive. And
this is the second work of the Spirit, Not only to present a thing to thee,
but to make it thine in effect. For, howbeit the mind would do his part never
so well, and let thee see that Christ is thine, and present him to thee never
so often; yet if thy heart be not reformed, that will, and crooked affection
that is in thy heart, will prefer it self to Christ, and will make thee to
account all but folly, in respect of that Idol.

And therefore, it were an idle, and a foolish thing for me to see my
salvation, except I get grace to be partaker of it: and what auailes it thee,
to see the works of the devil, to see thine own sins, that slay thee,
except thou get grace to eschew them? And so the second work of the spirit, is
this, He enters into the heart, he daunteth the heart, and wonderfully changes
it, making the will of it obedient: he mollifies the affection, which was hard
before, in such sort, that it is made to pour out thy affection in some
measure, on the living God, whereas it was poured out on one Idol or other of
thine own before. Then, except the heart will do his part, as the mind does his
part, the whole soul is not consecrate to God: for God has not made the
soul, that the heart should serve thee, and the mind only should serve him; but
thy service is then only acceptable to God, when thou consecratest thy heart, as
well as thy mind to him.

Now, A similitude of the apprehension of the corporal food, to illustrate
the spiritual.
this matter is so clear, that it needs not to be illustrated by similitude:
yet to make it more plain unto you, I will show you by a similitude, that the
apprehension of the mind is not enough, except ye get the apprehension of the
heart also. In corporal things, in meat and drink, which serve for the use of
your bodies, there must be of this meat and drink, two sorts of apprehensions:
and as there is two sorts of apprehension, of the meat and drink, that is the
food of the body: so there is two sorts of apprehension of the body, and blood
of Christ Jesus, which is our meat and drink spiritual. Of meat and drink
corporal, there is an apprehension by the eye, and by the taste: that while
the meat is present unto you on the Table, your eye takes a view of that
meat, discerns it, and makes choice of it: and not only the eye, but also
the taste discerns the meat, and the taste approouing it, that is called the
first apprehension.

Now, upon this which is the first, the second apprehension follows: that is,
after that ye have chewed that meat, swallowed it, and sent it to your stomach,
where it digesteth, and conuerteth into your nouriture; then in your stomach,
ye get the second apprehension. But if your eye like not that meat, neither
your taste like it, the second apprehension follows not; for thou will spet
it out again, or reject it, preferring some other meat unto it, that thou
likest better. That meat which thou likest not, enters never into thy stomach,
and so it can never be converted into thy nourishment: for, it is only the
second apprehension of the meat, that is the cause of the nourishment of the
body, in our corporal food; so that if ye chew not this meat, and swallow
it, it feeds you not; then it is only the second apprehension that nourishes
our bodies.

It is even so in spiritual things (so far as they may be compared) in the
food of Christ Jesus, who is the life, and nouriture of our souls and
consciences. There must be two sorts of apprehension of Christ Jesus. The first
apprehension is, by the eye of the mind; that is, by our knowledge, and
understanding: for, as the eye of the body, discerns by an outward light; so
the eye of the mind, discerns by an inward, and renewed understanding,
whereby we get the first apprehension of Christ.

Now, if this first apprehension of Christ like us well, then the next
follows: We begin to cast the affection of our hearts on him; we have good
will to him: for all our affections proceed from our will, and our affections
being renewed, and made holy, we set them wholly upon Christ. We love him;
and if we love him, we take hold on him, we eat him, and digest him; that is,
we apply him to our souls: and so, of this love, and liking of him, the second
apprehension does follow. But if we have no will to him, if we have no love,
nor liking of him, what do we? Then we reject him, and prefer our own Idol,
and the service of our own affections, to him; and so the second apprehension
follows not. We cannot digest him; and if we digest him not, that
spiritual life cannot grow in us: for mark, in what place the eye serves to
the body, in the same room, serves knowledge, and understanding to thy
soul: and look in what place, thy hand, and thy mouth, thy taste, and thy
stomach, serve unto thy body, in that very place, serve the heart, and
affections to thy soul.

So that, as our bodies cannot be nourished, except our hands take, and our
mouths eat the meat, whereby the second apprehension may follow: likewise,
our souls cannot feed on Christ, except we hold him, and embrace him
heartily, by our wills, and affections. For we come not to Christ, by any
outward motion of our bodies, but by an inward motion, and apprehension of the
heart. For God finding us all in a reprobate sense, he brings us to Christ, by
reforming the affection of our souls, by making us to love him. And therefore,
the second apprehension, whereby we digest our Savior, will never enter into
our souls, except, as he pleases the eye, so he please the will, and the
affection also.

Now, if this come to pass, that our wills and affections, are wholly bent
upon Christ; then, no doubt, we have gotten this Jewel of faith. Have ye
such a liking in your minds, and such a love in your hearts of Christ, that ye
will prefer him, before all things in the world? then, no question, faith is
begun in you.

Now, How faith is nourished and entertained in us.
after a thing is begun, there is yet more required: for though this faith be
formed in your minds, in your hearts, and souls, yet that is not enough; but
that which is formed, must be nourished; and he who is conceived, must be
entertained and brought up: or else, the love that is begun in me, by the
holy spirit, except by ordinary means it be daily entertained and nourished,
it will decay: except the Lord continue the working of his holy Spirit, it is
not possible that I can continue in the faith.

And how must we nourish, and continue faith in our souls? Two manner of
ways. First, we nourish faith begun in our souls, by hearing of the word;
not of every word, but by hearing of the word of God preached: and not by
hearing of every man, but by hearing the word preached by him that is sent. For
this is the ordinary means whereunto the Lord has bound himself; he will
work faith, by the hearing of the word, and the receiving of the Sacraments.
And the more that thou hear the word, and the oftener that thou receiuest
the Sacraments, the more thy faith is nourished.

Now, it is not only by hearing of the word, and receiving of the Sacraments,
that we nourish faith. The word, and the Sacraments, are not able of themselves
to nourish this faith in us, except the working of the holy Spirit be conjoined
with their ministry. But the word, and the Sacraments, are said to nourish
faith in our souls, because they offer, and exhibit Christ unto us, who is
the meat, the drink, and life of our souls: and in respect that in the word
and Sacraments, we get Christ, who is the food of our souls, therefore the
word and Sacraments, are said to nourish our souls. As it is said, Acts 2.42.
The Disciples of Christ, continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowshippe,
and breaking of bread, and prayers; by these means, entertaining, augmenting,
and nourishing the faith that was begun in them. Then the holy Spirit begets
this faith, works this faith, creates this faith, nourishes, and entertaineth
this faith in our souls, by hearing of the word preached, and by the receiving
of the Sacraments: which are the ordinary means, whereby the Lord nourishes
us, and continues this spiritual food with us. For, observe by what means
the spiritual life is begun, by the same means, it is nourished, and
entertained; as this temporal life is entertained and nourished, by the same
means, whereby it is begun.

Then seeing by these means, Conclusion, with an exhortation.
the holy Spirit begets this work of faith in our souls: It is our duty to
crave, that he would continue the work which he has begun. And for this
cause, we should resort to the hearing of the word, when it is preached, and
to the receiving of the Sacraments, when they are ministered, that we may be
fed in our souls to life everlasting.

But alas, we are come to such a loathing disdain, or rejecting of heavenly
food in this Country, that where men in the beginning, would have gone, some
twenty miles, some forty miles, to the hearing of this word: they will
scarcely now, come from their houses, to the Church, and remain there but
one hour to hear the word, but rather abide at home. Well, I say, too much
wealth vvith-drawes their hearts; and the abundance of this word, ingenders
such a loathsomeness, that it is a rare thing to find out any, that have that
thirst, and desire to hear the word, as they were wont to have in the
beginning.

And for those that are in higher places, they will hear it sildome, or not at
all: for they cannot endure to hear the thing that accuses them, and conuicts
them, and therefore they avoid it. But they should not do so, they should not
shun Christ, nor abstain from ^is word that accuses them: but they should
hear the word; and as the word accuses them, they should accuse themselves
also; that thereby, they may come to a confession of their sin, and obtain
mercy for the same.

So, when Christ accuses thee, thou should not run from him; but thou
should draw near to him; thou should threaten kindness of him, and, as
it were, make a breach, and forcible entry into his kingdom. It is not the
way, when thy sins touch thee, and when Christ accuses thee, to run from
him: no, thou should then turn to him, thou should confess thy sin,
cry Peccaui, and seek mercy: and after that thou have obtained mercy, this
word shall become as pleasant to thee, and thou shall take as great delight to
come to the hearing of it, as ever thou delightedst to fly from it before. But
alas! our lothsomnesse and disdain is grown to such an height, that truly, I
am moved to believe firmly, that the Lord has concluded, that we shall not
enter into his rest, and that only for the great contempt of his mercy, and
grace, which is now so richly offered. For why? God can not deal otherwise with
us, then he dealt with our forefathers, the Israelites, for the negligence of
his word, which was but then obscurely preached: for then it was far from
the incarnation of Christ; and the farther that it was from his incarnation,
the word was ever the more obscurely preached, under dark types, and
shadows. Yet notvvithstanding, the Fathers that heard that word preached, and
believed it not, they perished all in the Wilderness, except two; as ye have
sometime heard out of this place.

And if they, for the contempt of so dark a light perished: much more must ye,
that are their children perish, for the contempt of the sun of righteousness,
who is risen so plainly, and shines so clearly now, in the preaching of the
Gospel; except the Lord in his mercy prevent you; and except ye prevent his
Judgments, by earnest seeking; and except ye seek a feeling, and seek inward
senses, that ye may see, and feel, the grace that is offered; crave again,
that he will sanctify your hearts by repentance, that ye may repent you of
your sins, and lead an honest, and a godly conversation, in all time to come;
that both body and soul may be saved in the great day of the Lord. The Lord
work this in your souls, that ye may seek mercy; and seeking mercy, ye may
obtain mercy; and in mercy, ye may lay hold on Christ, and that for his
righteous merits. To whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor,
praise, and glory, both now, and ever. Amen.

THE FIFTH AND last Sermon, upon the preparation to the Lords Supper.
1. Cor. 11.28. Let every man therefore, examine himself; and so let him eat
of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, etc.
IN the doctrine of our trial, and due examination, the Apostle, as ye have
heard (vvel-beloued in Christ Jesus) gave us a special command, that every
one of us, should try, and examine narrowly our selves: that is, that every man
should condescend, and enter into his own conscience, try, and examine the
estate of his own conscience, in what estate he finds it with God; and in what
estate he finds it with his neighbor. He inioynes this trial to our selves,
and commands, that every one of us should take pains upon the true examination
of our consciences. He inioynes this work to us, why? Because no man knows
so much of me, as I do my self; because no man can be sure of the estate of
my conscience, but I my self; because no man can so diligently, nor so
profitably try my conscience, as I my self. Therefore, chiefly it behooves
every man, and woman, before they enter to the hearing of the word, before they
give their ear to the word, or their mouth to the Sacrament; it behooves them
to try, and examine their own consciences. Not, that the Apostle would
seclude the trial of other men: for, as it is lawful for me, to try my
self; so, no doubt, it is lawful for my Pastor to try me. It is lawful for
other men, that have a care over me, to try, and examine me: but no man can
do this so profitably to me, as I my self. And though we had never so many
tryers and examiners, all is nothing, if we try not our selves. So, whether
there be a second, or a third tryer, and examiner, let our selves be one, and
the first. And no doubt, the Apostles mind was this, To let us see clearlie,
that he that comes to that Table, and has not that knowledge, ^or is not of
that ability to try himself, is a profane commer, comes uncleanly; and
therefore, must needs come to his own destruction. Let every man therefore
grow in knowledge, grow in understanding, grow in the spirit, that he may
be the more able, to try, and examine his own conscience.

To the end that ye may go forward, and proceed in the work of this trial,
with the better speed, and with the better fruits; in this examination, we laid
down this order. First of all, I showed, what that is which we call a
conscience, and what is meant thereby. Next, I declared, for what causes ye
should put your consciences to this trial, and narrow examination. And
thirdly, so far as time suffered, I entered into the points, wherein every
one of you should try, and examine your own consciences. As for conscience,
that ye may call that definition to your memory, I will resume it shortly. We
call a conscience, a certain feeling in the heart, resembling the righteous
Judgment of GOD, following upon a deed done by us, flowing from a knowledge in
the mind. A feeling, accompanied with a motion in the heart; a motion, either of
fear, or joy, trembling, or rejoicing. I leave the opening up of these parts,
to your memories, and I pray God, that they may be well sanctified. I come
next, to the causes, wherefore every one of you should be careful in trying,
and examining your own consciences. The first cause is, because the Lord of
heaven, has his eye continually upon the conscience: the eye of God, is never
from the conscience, and heart of man, as I proved to you by diverse places.
Next, because this God has chosen his lodging, and has set down his throne,
to make his residence in the conscience: Therefore, that he may dwell in
cleanenesse, ye ought to have a regard to his dwelling place. Thirdly, he is
the Lord, yea, the only Lord of this conscience, who has power only to
control, who only has power to save, or to cast away: therefore, that it may
do good service, to thy own Lord, thou ought to take heed to thy
conscience. And last of all, in respect that the health of thy soul, stands
in the estate of thy conscience, and if thy soul be in good health, thy body
cannot be ill: Therefore, in respect that the soul, and body, depend upon
the estate of the conscience, every one of you, should carefully look to your
consciences: I will not amplify this, but leave it to your memories: how the
health of the soul, and welfare of the soul, should be kept. Next, I come in
the third, and last place to the points, in the which, every one of you,
should try, and examine your consciences. And as ye may remember, I set down
two points, wherein ye ought to put your consciences in trial: First, to know
whether your consciences were at peace with God, or not: Secondly, whether your
consciences, were in love, in charity, and in amity with your neighbor, or
not: In these two points chiefly, ye must try, and examine your selves. To
know, whether ye be at peace with God, or not, ye must first try, whether ye
be in the faith or not (as the Apostle says) whether ye be in the faith of
Christ, or not: For being in the faith, and justified thereby, on necessity,
ye must have peace with God. Then the next care must be, to try your faith,
and to see whether ye have faith, or not. Faith can no ways be tried, but by
the fruits: faith cannot be judged on by me, that look upon it only, but by
the effects. Therefore, to try whether ye be in the faith or not, mark the
fruits; Take heed to thy mouth, take heed to thy hand, take heed to thy words,
and to thy deeds: for except thou glorify God in thy mouth, and confess to
thy salvation, and except thou glorify him also in thy deeds, and make thy
holy life, a witness of thy holy faith, all is but vain, all is but mere
hypocrisy: How a sincere faith is known.
Therefore to know the sincerity of thy faith, thou must take heed, that
there be a harmony, between thy hand, thy mouth, and thy heart, that there be a
natural consent, that thy doings preiudge not thy heart, that thy mouth preiudge
not thy heart, but that mouth, and hand may testify, the sincerity of the
heart: If the heart, the hand, and the mouth, consent, and agree in one harmony
together; No question, that heart that breaks forth into so good fruits, is
coupled with God; There is no question, the light of thy actions, the beams
and shining of thy life, shall make the name of thy good God, to be glorified.

Therefore, the whole weight of our trial, stands cheefely upon this point,
to see whether we be in the faith, or not; to try and examine, whether
Christ dwell in us by faith, or not: for without faith, there can be no
coupling, or conioyning betwixt us, and Christ; without faith, our hearts
cannot be sanctified, and cleansed; and without faith, we cannot work by
charity: so all depends, on this only. And therefore that ye might the
better understand, whether ye have faith, or no: I was somewhat the more exact
in this matter, and I began to let you see, how the holy spirit creates
faith, and works faith in your souls, hearts, and minds: I began to show
you, what order the holy spirit kept, in forming, and in creating this notable
instrument, in your hearts, and minds. Not only, how he ingenders, and
begins faith, but also, how he intertaines it, how he nourishes it. And I
showed you, the external means, and instruments, which he uses to this
effect: To beget faith in our souls, the holy spirit uses the hearing of the
word, preached by him that is sent, and the ministry of the Sacraments, as
ordinary means, and instruments: which ordinary means, are only then
effectual, when as the holy spirit, concurs inwardly in our hearts, with the
word striking outwardly in our ears, and with the Sacrament outwardly
received: And except the holy spirit grant his concurrence to the word, and
Sacrament; word, and Sacrament both will not work faith. So, all depends, upon
the working of this holy spirit: The whole regeneration of mankind, the
renewing of the heart, and of the conscience, depend on the power of the holy
spirit; And therefore it behooves us, carefully to employ our selves, in
calling upon God for his holy spirit. By the same means, and no other, that the
holy spirit beg^ts faith in us, by the same means, he nourishes, and
augments that, which he has begotten: And therefore, as we got faith by the
hearing of the word, so by continual, and diligent hearing, we have this faith
augme^ted, and nourished in us. And from hence I took my exhortation, That if
ye would have that spiritual life nourished in you, and if ye would have a
further assurance of heaven; of necessity, ye must both continually, and
diligently, hear the blessed word of God.

Now it rests, that every one of you carefully apply this doctrine to your
own souls, and enter into the trial of your own consciences, To see if this
faith, as I spoke, be begun in your hearts, and minds, or not: how far, or
how little, the holy spirit has proceeded in that work, try with me, and I
with you. The first effect of the holy spirit, whereby ye may try your
minds, whether ye be in the faith, o^ not, is this: Reuolue in your memories,
and remember, if at any time, it pleased the Lord, in his mercy, to turn the
darkness of your minds into light, to cause that natural darkness, which
was within you, to depart: Through the which darkness, neither had ye an eye,
to see your selves, what you were by nature, nor yet had ye an eye, to see God
in Christ, nor any part of his mercy. Examine I say, whether this darkness
of the natural understanding, be turned into light, by the working of the
spirit, or not: If thou art become a child of the light, a child of the day;
If thou art become (as the Apostle speaks) light in the Lord: If there be
this alteration made in thy mind; That whereas naturally before, it was closed
up in darkness, whereas it was filled with vanities, and errors, wherens it
was closed up, in blindness: If the Lord has at any time, enlightened the eye
of thy mind, and made thee to see thine own misery, to see the ugliness of
thine own nature, to see the heinous sins, in the which by nature thou lie;
If he has granted to thee, an insight of thy self, in some measure; and on
the other side, if he has granted thee the remedy, and has given thee, an
insight of the mercy of God, in Christ Jesus, if thou have obtained an insight
of the riches of his grace in Christ; No doubt, the holy spirit has begun a
good work work in thee: A work, which will bring forth repentance, which in
his own time, he will perfect: So this is the first care, which ye ought to
have, and the first point, wherein ye ought to examine your minds, To see, if
there be any light in it, whereby, ye may know your misery, and have an
insight of the free mercy of God, in Christ Jesus. This being done, that thou
find a sight of these two in thy mind, from thy mind go to thy heart: and
as thou have tried thy mind, so try thy heart: And first, examine thine heart,
if it be altered, or not, that the will of it, be framed, and bowed to GODs
obedience, that thy affection be turned into the life of God, and be poured
out on him, as it was poured out on vanities, on filthiness, and on the world
before. Try, whether the ground of thy heart, and the fountain from whence thy
motions, and affections proceed, be sanctified, or not: for from a holy
fountain, holy waters must distill: from a holy fountain, holy motions, holy
cogitations, and sanctified considerations, must flow.

Try then, and examine your hearts, if the spirit of God has wrought any such
reformation, as I speak of in your hearts, or not. And that ye may perceive the
working of the holy Spirit the better in your hearts, and consciences (for the
holy Spirit has his chief residence in your hearts) I will declare unto you,
the first effect, that ever the holy spirit brings forth in the heart, in
framing it, in mollifying it, and in bowing it, unto the obedience of God: You
shall know the working of the holy spirit, by this effect: namely, if your
minds see, and behold, what is ill; see, and behold what is good; perceive,
and discern your own misery, and your sins, which have brought this
misery upon you; and withal perceive, and behold, the riches of the mercy
of God in Christ Jesus: If as your minds see these two, your hearts be
reformed and prepared to love the sight of them: and as you see in your minds
the mercy of God, and that in Christ, if ye have hearts, to desire mercy, if
ye have a thirsting, and earnest desire, to be partakers of mercy; where this
desire, and thirst is, there the holy spirit is, he has no doubt, opened the
heart: On the other side if, as thou see mercy, thou see thy misery; if,
as thy mind sees thy misery, it sees also the fountain, from whence thy
misery flows, to wit, from thine own sins; if then, thy heart also hate
this, the holy spirit is there; if as thou see sin, which is the cause of
thy misery, with the eye, which is given thee in the mind; thou hate this
sin with thy heart, no question, the holy spirit is there: And as thou hate
it, if also thou sorrow for it (for it is not enough to hate it, if thou
lament not the committing of it, and with a godly sorrow deplore it) the holy
spirit is there. And thirdly, if with thy lamenting, thou have a care, and a
study to eschew that sin, (for what auailes it to lament, if, like a dog,
returning to his vomit, thou fall into that same gulf again?) Therefore,
where there is an hatred of sin, a sorrow for sin, a care, and a study to
eschew sin; no question, the holy spirit, has opened the heart, and is
working out that precious instrument. Observe all this in a word, all the
operation of the holy spirit, and working in the heart, and by this, examine
thine heart: See, and perceive, if the holy spirit has entered so far in
thee, to work in that hard heart of thine, an earnest, and a diligent study,
a careful solicitude, continually to be reconciled with the great God, whom
thou have offended: Is there such a thing, as a thirst, as a desire, to be at
amity with him, whom thou have offended, to be reconciled with the God of
heaven, whom thou have offended by thy manifold transgressions? where this care
and study of reconciliation is, if this care, and study, of reconciliation be
in the heart, there is no doubt, but the heart that thirsts for this
reconciliation, is heartily content not only to renounce sin, to renounce
all the impieties, that separated thee from God; but, the heart that is endued
with this thirst, will be heartily content, to renounce it self, to cast down
it self, as stubborn as it was before, to cast down it self, at the feet
of the mighty God, and be wholly content, at all times after, to be ruled by
his holy will: Not to follow it own lust, it own will, and appetite, as it
did before, but to resign it self, wholly into the hands of the mighty God,
to be ruled by his will, at his pleasure, and to obey his commaundes. And
except ye find this disposition in your own hearts, To acquit your selves,
to renounce your selves, it is a vain thing for you to say, that ye have a
thirst to be reconciled: So, the greater thirst of reconciliation that we
have, and the more that the care, and study there of grows, the greater that
the apprehension of my misery, of the deep gulfes, and very hels (whereunto my
soul is subject) increases in my soul the more earnest would would I be, to
be reconciled: And to be reconciled, I would not stand, for the renouncing,
of the lusts of my heart, but I would renounce my heart, and the obedience of the
will, and desire: why? Because I see I must die for ever except the Lord
reconcile himself with me: I see the huge deepes, and oceans of all misery,
into the which I shall ^al in the end, except in mercy, the Lord reconcile
himself with me. To eschew these miseries, and inconveniences, is there any
question, but the heart, that has any sense, and is touched with them, will
most willingly endeavor, to acquit it self? Again, seeing the Lord has
taken pains, to deliver me out of that deep misery, in the which I had
drowned my self, and has purchased my redemption, by so dear a price, not
with gold, nor with silver, or any dross on the earth, but by such a
wonderful means, by such a precious price, and rich ransom; Looking to the
greatness of our misery, and to the greatness of the price, whereby he has
redeemed us, What heart is it, but would willingly renounce it self, to get a
part of that redemption, and to be delivered out of that hell, wherein we are
presently, and wherein we shall be in a greater measure hereafter, except we
be reconciled? So then with this, there is joined a di^position in the heart,
whereby the heart is willing in some measure, to renounce it self.

This lesson is often taught us by our Savior Christ, we must both take up
the cross, and renounce our selves also, before that we can follow him. The
more that this thirst grows in the heart, the more this renouncing of our
selves grows in the heart: the more that this thirst decays, and is
diminished in the heart, the more, we cleave to the world, the more we love
the flesh, and the more are we ruled and guided by them: So, either we must
nourish a thirst of righteousness, a hunger of life everlasting, a thirst of
mercy, a hunger after that justice, that is in Christ, or it is not possible,
that in any measure, we can be his disciples.

Now to proceed: The heart, that after this manner is prepared, that with a
thirst to be reconciled, is resolved also to renounce it self, This heart, in
the which there remains so earnest a thirst, is never frustrate of the
expectation, is never disappointed; But as the Lord has imprinted in it, an
earnest study to be reconciled, and to lay hold on Christ: So in his mereie,
he grants unto that heart, the possession of mercy; he puts that heart in
some measure in possession of mercy, which it seeks, in possession of Christ
Jesus himself, whom it seeks: The which apprehension which it has of Chr.
the heart sensibly feels, and apprehends in that peace, which he gives
to the conscience: So that the conscience, which was terrified, exceedingly
gnawen, and distracted before; by the approaching of this peace, and of Christ
with his graces, incontinent it is quieted, and pacified, there comes a
calmness, and soundness into the heart, and all troubles, and storms are
removed: with this peace, is conjoined a taste of the powers of the world to
come; The heart gets a taste of the sweetness that is in Christ, of the joy,
which is in the life everlasting, which taste is the only earnest penny of
that full and perfect joy, which soul, and body in that life shall inioye:
And the earnest penny (as ye know) must be a part of the sum, and of the
nature of the rest of the sum: And therefore that earnest penny of joy,
assures us, that when we shall get possession of the whole sum, it it shall
be a strange joy: And these documents lift up the heart, and make it, not to
linger, nor weary in the expectation of that life: but being refreshed now,
and then, therewith, by so many earnest pennies, they assure us, of the full
fruition of that joy, for the which in patience we will sustain all
troubles: So, as the holy spirit worket a thirst in us, to be with Christ, a
thirst of mercy, and reconciliation with him; The same holy spirit
disappointeth not that same expectation, and thirst, but puts the soul and
heart in possession of Christ, by the which the conscience is pacified, the
heart is rejoiced, and we get a taste of the sweetness, and of the powers of
that life to come: The sensible feeling of the which taste, that passes all
natural understanding, what does it in my heart and conscience? It works a
wonderful assurance, and persuasion, that God loves me: The feeling of his
mercy, in the bowels of my heart, in the bottom of my conscience, works a
certain assurance, and persuasion that he is my God, that he will save me, for
Christ's cause, that the promise of mercy, which I durst not apply unto my
conscience before; now, by the feeling of mercy I dare boldly apply, and say
mercy appertains to me; life, and salvation belongs to me: For the
conscience being exceedingly terrified, and seeing nothing in God, but fire,
and wrath, it is not possible, but it must she from him, it cannot approach to
a consuming fire. But from the time, that the conscience gets a taste of
this peace, mercy, and sweetness; how fast soever it fled from the presence of
God before, now after this reconciliation, it will run as fast to him, and
will possess him, more and more fully. So the assurance, and persuasion of
mercy, arises from the feeling of mercy, in the heart, and conscience. And
except the heart feel it, and taste it in some measure, no conscience dare
apply God and his mercy, to it self: I may be sure in general, that all my
sins are remissible, and that I may obtain mercy, before I feel it: But,
to apply this mercy, particularly to my self, until I feel a taste of it, I
dare not: So, this particular application, whereby we claim God, and Christ,
as a property to us, as if no man had title to him, but we, and to call him
my God, my Christ; and to claim his promises, as if no man had interest in
them, but we; This comes of the sense, and feeling of mercy, in the heart:
and the more that this feeling grows, and the greater experience that we
have in our own hearts of this peace and mercy, the more increases our faith
and assurance. Our persuasion becomes so strong, that we dare at the last
say with the Apostle, What can separate us from the love of GOD? Neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, shall be able to separate me, from the love of GOD, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

This particular application, which arises (no doubt) upon the feeling, and
sense of mercy, is the special difference, the chief mark, and proper note,
whereby our faith, who are justified in the blood of Christ, is discerned from
that general faith of the Papists. Our faith, by this particular application,
is not only discerned from the general faith of the Papists, but it is
discerned from all the pretended faiths of all the Sects in the world. For, the
Papist dares not apply the promise of mercy to his own soul: he accounts
it presumption, to say, I am an elect, I am saved, and justified. And from
whence flows this? Only from hence; That in their consciences, they have
never felt mercy, they have never tasted of the love, favor, and sweetness of
God. For, look how fast the conscience flies from GOD, before it get the
taste of his sweetness; it runs as diligently to him, and threatens love
on him, after that it has gotten that taste.

So, they, miserable men, content themselves with this general faith, which is
no other thing but an historical faith, which groundeth only on the truth of
GOD; whereby I know, that the promises of God, are true. But the Papists dare
not come, and say, They are true in me. Why? Because they have not felt it;
and their hearts are not opened. But our justifying faith, as I told you,
consecrateth the whole soul, unto the obedience of God, in Christ.

So that it rests not only upon the truth of GOD, nor it rests not only
upon the power of God, (though these be two chief pillars of our faith also)
but especially, and chiefly, it rests upon the mercy of God, in Christ. It
rests also, upon the truth, and power of God; but especially, upon the
promise of grace, and mercy in Christ. The soul of the Papist, being
destitute of the feeling and taste of mercy, dare not enter into this
particular application, and so he cannot be justified. Yea, no doubt, so many
of them, as are justified in the mercy of God, get a taste of this mercy and
kindness, before they depart this life. Thus far concerning the effects.

Then ye have only this to remember; The opening of the heart, the pacifying
and quieting of the conscience, they work an assurance and a strong persuasion
of the mercy of God, in Christ. The more that the heart is opened, the more that
the conscience is pacified, the more that the taste of that sweetness
continues, and remains, the more art thou assured of Gods mercy. So then,
would thou know whether thy faith be strong, or not, whether thy
persuasion of Gods mercy be sure, or not? Look to thy conscience.

If thy conscience be wounded, assuredly thou vvilt doubt: and if thou
doubtest, thou can not have such a strong persuasion, as otherwise thou
would have, if thy doubting were removed. Not, that I will have faith to be
so perfect in this life, that there be always no doubting joined with it; I
require not that perfection: but, I say, that a wounded conscience must ever
doubt; and the more we doubt, the less is our persuasion. So, the more that
thou woundest thy conscience, the less faith thou have. Then thou must come to
this point; Keep a sound conscience; entertain peace in thy conscience; and
thou shall keep faith, and shall have thy persuasion in that same measure,
that thou have of rest and peace in thy conscience: and the more that thy
conscience is at peace and rest, the greater shall thy faith and persuasion be.

So, this ground is certain; A doubting conscience, causes a weak faith; and
the more the doubting in thy conscience is, the weaker is thy faith. Then true
it is, that the Apostle faith, That faith dwells in a good conscience; that
faith is locked, and closed up in a good conscience. So that if ye keep a
good conscience, ye shall keep a strong faith: and if ye wound your
consciences, ye shall wound your faith.

Now, to make this more sensible; How can I be persuaded of his mercy, whose
anger I feel kindled against me; and against whom, my conscience shows me,
that I am guilty of many offenses. No question, so long as the sense of his
anger, and feeling of my offenses remains, I cannot have a sure persuasion,
that he will be merciful unto me: but, when I get access unto his presence,
and a sight that he has forgiven me, then I begin to be surely persuaded. So
then, keep a good conscience, and thou shall keep faith; and the better that
thy conscience is, the surer will thy faith be.

Then, Exhortation.
the whole exhortation that we gather from this point, depends upon this;
That every one of you, in what rank soever ye be, take heed unto your
consciences: for losing it, ye lose faith; and losing faith, ye lose
salvation. Are ye in the rank of great, and rich men? ye ought to take heed
unto your consciences: especially, in respect that the Lord has placed you in
a higher calling. Ye have many things wherein ye ought to control your
consciences; ye ought to crave the advice of your consciences, before ye
attempt any great work, in respect that ye are bound in manifold duties to
God, and to your inferioure.

And no doubt, if some great men had advised well with their consciences, such
dissolutions had not fallen out in their own houses, such oppressions of the
poor, deadly feudes with men of their own rank, would not have burst forth in
so high a measure. But the Lord, seeing them take so little care unto their
consciences, depriueth them of faith, and of the hope of mercy; and their end
will be miserable. Ye shall see, that the GOD of heaven, will make those who
live so dissolutely, spectacles of his judgments unto the world; for, the Lord
leaves not such men unpunished.

By their examples, it were very necessary, that men of inferior rank
should take heed unto their consciences: and therefore, iet every man,
according unto his calling, examine his calling, by the rule of his conscience.

Let the Judges, before they give, and pronounce forth Judgment, advise with
their consciences, and the law thereof; and in Judgment, not to follow their
affections, but to follow the rule of their consciences. Likewise, they that
are of inferior degree unto Judges, let them control their doings, by their
consciences; and give not the poor subjects just cause to complain on them.
Let them not terrify them, from the pleading of Justice, by exorbitant prices,
and extraordinary kind of dealings: but let them moderate all their actions
so, that they agree with the rule of their consciences; that so far as in them
lies, Justice cease not. Likewise the Merchants; let not them look so much,
to this, or that, as to the conscience that is in them; what in conscience they
may do, according unto the measure of knowledge, that GOD has placed in them;
and whatsoever they do, let them beware that they do not against their
knowledge.

I grant their knowledge, will not be so learned as it should be; and this
makes many deformed actions: yet, let no man do against his knowledge; but
let every man do, according unto the measure of knowledge wherewith God has
endued him. And, though it be not well reformed, yet do not any thing by
guess, but advise well with thy conscience, and follow thy knowledge: for,
that which is done doubtingly, is sin. So, whatsoever thou do, let not thy
eye, thy hand, nor any member of thy body, do against thy knowledge: for this
is a step to that high sin against the holy Ghost.

This is the ready way to put all knowledge out of your minds: for if men do
against knowledge, and continue in doing against knowledge; at the last, they
will become a mass of darkness, the Lord will scrape out all knowledge out of
their minds, and all feeling of mercy out of their hearts. Therefore let every
man follow his knowledge: and according to the measure of his knowledge, let
his actions proceed.

It has pleased the Lord, Faith is the free gift of God.
to pour this liquor, this precious ointment into us: though we be earthly,
and frail vessels, miserable creatures, yet it has pleased our gracious God,
to pour such a precious liquour into our hearts and minds; and to credit such a
Jewel in our keeping, that by virtue thereof, we may take hold on Christ; who
is our justice, our wisdom, sanctification, and redemption.

Though we be miserable creatures, yet the Lord of his mercy has a respect
to us, in Christ, in giving us this precious liquour, whereby our souls may be
seasoned to life everlasting. In this, that he poures it into our hearts, we see
clearly, that it grows not in our hearts, nor breeds not in our nature. No,
this gift of faith, is not at man's command, nor under his arbitrament, as if
it were in his power, to believe, or not to believe, as he pleases. It is the
gift of God, poured down freely, of his undeserved grace, in the riches of his
mercy in Christ. That it is a gift, ye see clearlie, 1. Cor. 12.9. where the
Apostle says; And to another, is given faith by the same spirit. As also,
Philip. 1.29. For, unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should
believe in him, but also suffer for his sake. So faith is the gift of the holy
Spirit: and this gift is not given to all men and women, as the Apostle plainly
declares; All have not faith.

This gift, though it be given, it is not given to all, but is only given to
the Elect: that is, to so many as the Lord has appointed to life everlasting.
This gift, where-euer it is, and in what heart soever it be, it is never idle,
but perpetually working; and working well, by love, and charity, as the
Apostle affirms, Galat. 5.6. This gift, vvhere-euer it is, is not dead, but
quick, and lively, as the Apostle James testifies, in his second chapter.

And, to let you know whether it be lively, and working, or not, there is no
better means, then to look unto the fruits, and effects that flow from it.
And therefore, that ye, by your own effects, may be the more assured of the
goodness of your faith, I will give you three special effects to observe, by
the which ye may judge of the goodness of your faith.

First, look to thy heart, Certain effects, whereby we may know if we have
faith.
and cast thine eye on it: If thou have a desire to pray, a desire to crave
mercy for thy sins, to call upon Gods holy Name for mercy and grace: if there
be such a thing in thy heart, as a desire to pray, if thy heart be inclined, and
has a thirst to seek after mercy, and grace; though the greatest part of
thine heart repine, and would draw thee from prayer, yet assuredly, that
desire, that thou have in any measure to prayer, is the true effect of the
right faith. If thou have a heart to pray to GOD, though this desire be but
slender, assure thy self, thy soul has life: for prayer is the life of the
soul, and makes thy faith lively. And why? Prayer is Gods own gift; it is
no gift of ours; for if it were ours, it would be evil: but it is the best
gift, that ever God gave man; and so it must be the gift of his own holy
Spirit; and being his own gift, it must make our faith lively. Without this,
thou art not able, nor thou dare not call upon him, in whom thou belieuest
not, as the Apostle says, Romans 10.14. For if I entreat him by prayer, I must
trust in him. Then prayer is a certain argument of justifying faith, and
belief in GOD: for I cannot speak to him, much less pray to him, in whom I
trust not. And though the heart be not fully resolved, and well disposed, yet if
there be any part of the heart that inclines to prayer, it is a sure gage,
that that part belieueth.

The second effect, whereby thou shall know, whether faith be in thee, or not,
is this: Observe, and advise with thy self, if thy heart can be content to
renounce thy rancour, to forgive thy grudges, and that freely, for Gods cause.
Can thou do this? And vvilt thou forgive thy neighbor, as freely as God
has forgiven thee? Assuredly, this is an effect of the right spirit; for
Nature could never give that. There is nothing whereunto Nature bends it
self more, then to rancour, and envy; and there is nothing, wherein Nature
places her honor more greedily, then in privy revenge.

Now, if thy heart be so tamed and brought down, that it will willingly
forgive the injury, for Gods cause, this is the effect of the right spirit.
This is not my saying, it is the saying of Christ himself, in the Evangelist
Math. 6.14. where he thus speaks; If ye do forgive men their trespasses,
your heavenly Father will also forgive you. And in the fifteenth verse, But if
ye do not forgive men, their trespasses, no more will your heavenly Father
forgive you your trespasses.

So that Christ says, He that forgiueth wrongs, shall have wrongs forgiven
him: but he that will revenge his wrongs, wrong shall be revenged upon him.
Therefore, as thou would be spared of thy wrongs done unto the mighty GOD,
spare thou thy neighbor. I will not insist; examine whether ye have faith,
or not; examine it by prayer, examine it by the discharge of your own privy
grudges: for, if ye want these effects, a heart full of rancor, a heart void of
prayer, is a heart faithless, and meet for hell.

The third effect of faith, is compassion. Thou must bow thy heart, and extend
thy pity, unto the poor members of Christ his body, and suffer them not to
want, if thou have: for, except ye have this compassion, ye have no faith.
Examine your selves, by these three effects; and if ye find these in any
measure, though never so small, you have the right faith in your hearts; the
faith that ye have, is true, and lively: and assuredly, GOD will be merciful
unto you.

This faith of ours, Our faith must be continually nourished, because it is
joined with doubting.
though it be lively, yet it is not perfect in this world; but every day, and
every hour, it needs a continual augmentation, it craves ever to be
nourished: for the which increase, the Apostles themselves, Luke 17.5. said,
Lord increase our faith. And Christ himself, commands us to pray, and say,
Lord increase our faith: I believe, Lord help my unbelief. Then by Christ his
own command, we plainly see, that this faith needs continually to be
nourished, and helped; and it cannot be helped, but by prayer: therefore should
we always continue in prayer. That this faith should be helped; and that we
should be perpetually upon our guarde, in fear and trembling, to get it
augmented, the terrible doubtings, the wonderful pits of desperation, into the
which the dearest servants of GOD are cast, do daily teach. For the best
servant of GOD, are exercised with terrible doubtings in their souls, with
wonderful stammerings; and they shall be brought at some times, as appears in
their own judgment, to the very brinke of desperation. These doubtings, and
stammerings, lets us see, that this faith of ours, would be perpetually
nourished; and that we have need continually to pray for the increase of it.
It pleases the Lord at sometimes to let his servant have a sight of
themselves, to cast them down, and to let them see how ugly sin is: It
pleases him to let them fall, into the bitterness of sin; And to what end?
Not that he will devour them, and suffer them to be swallowed up of
destruction.

Though Hezekiah cries out, That like an hungry Lion, the Lord is like to
devour him, and bruise him in pceces; yet the Lord suffers him not to
despair. And though David cry, I cannot away with this consuming fire; I
cannot endure the fire of the Lords Jealousy; yet he despaireth not. But the
Lord casts his servants very low. To what end? To the end that they may
feel in their hearts, and consciences, what Christ suffered for them on the
Cross, in soul and body. Yea, we would think, that there had been plain
collusion, betwixt the Father, and the Son, and that his sufferings had been
no suffering, except we felt in our souls, in some measure, the hell which
he sustained in full measure.

So, to the end that we might clearly understand the bitterness of sin,
that we might know how far we are indebted to Christ, who suffered such
torments for our sins, and that we may be the more able to thank him, and
to praise his holy Name, he suffers his own servants to doubt, but not to
despair; he forgiues their doubtings, he forgiues their stammerings, and in
his own time, he supports them, and brings us unto the waters of life.

These doubtings, Doubting and faith may lodge in one soul.
as I have often said, may lodge in one soul, with faith; for doubting, and
faith, are not directly opposite: only faith, and despair are opposite; and
therefore, faith, and despair, cannot both lodge in one soul. For, despair
overthrows the pillars of hope; and where there is no hope, there can be no
faith. But as for doubting, it may lodge, it will lodge, and has lodged, in
the souls of the best servant that ever God had. Mark the speech of the
Apostle, We are always in doubt, says he, but we despair not. So
doubting, and faith, may lodge in one soul.

And from whence flows this doubting? We know, that in the regenerate man,
there is a remnant, corruption: for we have not our heaven in this earth;
though we begin our heaven here, yet we get it not fully here. And if all
corruption were away, what should there want of a full heaven here? So, it
is only begun in this life, and not perfected: therefore, there remains in
the soul, a great corruption, which is never idle, but continually occupied.

This corruption, is ever bringing forth the birth of finne, more, or less;
every sin hurts the conscience: a hurt conscience impaireth the persuasion,
and so comes in the doubting. For, there is not a sin that we commit, but it
banisheth light, and casts a mist over the eye of our faith, whereby we
doubt, and stagger in our sight: and were it not, that the Lord in his mercy
takes us up, gives us the gift of repentance, and makes us every day, as often
as we sin, to cry as often for mercy, and so to repair the loss that we
have of faith, to repair the loss that we have of the feeling of mercy, we
would wholly put out that same light. But it pleases the Lord, though we be
every day sinning, to give us the gift of repentance; and by repentance, to
repair our faith; to repair the sense, and feeling of mercy in us, and to
put us in that same state of persuasion wherein we were before. Therefore, if
GOD begin not, continue not, and end not with mercy, in that very moment
that he abstracts his mercy from us, we will decay. So we must be diligent,
in calling for mercy; we must be instant continually, in seeking to have a
feeling of mercy. Thus much for the doubting.

Now, howsoever it be sure and certain, A doubting and weak faith, is faith,
and shall never decay.
that the faith of the best children of GOD, is often subject to doubting; yet
it is as sure and certain, that it is never wholly extinct: albeit it were
never so vveake, yet it shall never utterly decay, and perish out of the heart,
wherein it once makes residence. This comfort and consolation, the Spirit of
God has set down in his word, to support the troubled heart; That
howsoever faith be weak, yet a weak faith is faith: and where that faith is,
there will ever be mercy.

Ye have in Romans 11.29. that The gifts, and calling of GOD, are without
repentance. But among all his gifts, that are of this sort, faith is one of the
chiefest: therefore it cannot be revoked again.

Ye have in Jude 3. That faith was once given unto the Saints. Once given,
that is, constantly given, never to be changed, nor utterly taken from them.
The Lord will not repent him of this gift: but the soul which he has loved
once, he will love perpetually.

It is true and certain, that the sparkles of faith, which are kindled in the
heart, by the Spirit of GOD, may be obscured and smothered for a long time; they
may be covered with the ashes of our own corruption, and with our own ill
deeds, and wickedness, into which we daily fall. It is true, that the effects
of a lively faith will be interrupted, and that thy lusts and affections will
prevail for a long time: so that when thou look on thy self, upon the
Judgments of God, that hang over thy soul and body, and when thou look
upon thy dissolute life, and on the anger of God, against this dissolute life:
In the mind, in the heart, and conscience of him, that has so smothered, and
oppressed his faith, it will often times come to pass, in his own judgment,
having his eyes fixed on himself only, that he will think himself to be a
reprobate, to be an outcast, and never able to recover mercy.

Where this corruption bursteth forth in this gross manner, after that the Lord
has called thee; look how soon the Lord begins to vvaken thee again,
incontinent, thou fixest thine eyes upon thine own life, and entrest into a
deep consideration, as well of the weight of thy sin, as of the weight of
the wrath of GOD, which thou see following thereupon, and art loath to remit
these cogitations, to think upon the deepenesse of the mercy of God.

Resting on these considerations, it cannot but come to pass, that in thine
own judgment, thou art an outcast. And yet GOD forbid it were so; for
though these sparks of the Spirit, be covered by the corruption that is within
thy soul, yet these sparkles are not wholly put out.

And to let you see that they are not extinguished, The sparkles of faith
though they be smothered, they are not wholly put out, nor are idle.
though they break not forth in the outward effects, that the world may know
thee to be a faithful man, as heretofore; yet these sparkles are not idle,
and thou shall find them not to be idle in thee. As for confirmation of my
Argument, that howsoever our bodies are let loose to all dissolution, after our
effectual calling within us in our souls: that yet the sparkles are not idle;
ye see, that though the fire be covered with the ashes, yet it is a fire: there
is no man will say, that the fire is put out, though it be covered. No more is
faith put out of the soul, though it be so covered, that it neither give heat,
^or light outwardly.

An example of this, we have clearly in the Prophet David, after his
lamentation, in that Psalm of Repentance, Psalm 51.11. he prays to GOD in
these words, Cast me not away from thy presence. And what adds he? And take
not thy holy Spirit from me. Had he not lost the Spirit, by his adultery and
murder? No: for he would not have said then, Take it not from me: But,
Restore it to me.

It is true, that he uses the like in the verse following, Restore me to the
joy of thy salvation. Not that he wanted the spirit wholly; but that the
spirit lacked force in him, and needed strengthening and fortification: it
would be stirred up, that the flame of it might appear. Therefore I say, in that
David speaks so plainly, after his adultery and murder, Take not that
Spirit from me; it is a certain argument, that the faithful have never the
spirit of God always taken from them, in their greatest dissolutions. The
second point is this: How prove I that these sparkles are not idle, though the
outward effects be interrupted? As David felt this in his conscience, so every
one of you, may feel it in your own consciences.

The Spirit of God, in man's heart, can not be idle; but these sparkles, during
the time that the body is let loose to all dissolutions, these sparkles are
accusing thy dissolution, are finding fault with thy manners: these sparkles,
suffer thee not to take the pleasure of thy body, without great bitterness,
and continual remorse. And these sparkles, where they are, will make the soul
wherein they dwell, to utter these speeches at one time or other, once in the
twenty-foure hours; Alas, I am doing the evil, which I would not do, if I
had power or strength to resist my affection: and if I might be master of my
affections, I would not for all the world, do the evil which I do. Again,
if I had power, to do the good which I would do, I would not leave it
undone for all the world.

So, these sparkles, though they have not such force and strength presently,
a^ to resist the affection, and abstain from doing evil deeds, yet
perpetually in the heart, they are finding fault with thy corruption, and suffer
thee not to take thy pleasure without pain: but last of all, force thee to
utter these speeches; If I had strength to resist, I would not do the evil
which I do. Where these speeches are, no question they are the words of a
soul which the Lord has begun to sanctify: and being once sanctified, in
despite of the devil, and of the corruption that is in us, this faith shall
never perish: but if the whole soul, without contradiction, with a greedy
appetite and pleasure, be carried to evil, and has no sorrow for it, that
soul is in an ill estate; I can look for nothing in such a soul, but death,
except the Lord of his great mercy prevent it.

But where this remorse, and sorrow, and such speeches are in the soul; that
soul, in the time that God has appointed, shall recover strength. The Lord
shall never suffer those sparkles to be wholy taken away; but in his own
time he shall fortify them, and make them to break out before the world, in
good works. The Lord, in his own time, will sanctify them, he will scatter
the ashes of corruption, stir up the sparkles, and make them to break out
into a better life then ever they did before; as ye may clearly see, that
David's repentance has done more good to the Church of God, then if he had
never fallen. Thus far concerning the effects.

Though the effects of repentance be interrupted, Similitudes, showing that
the sparkles of faith, though they be covered, are not extinguished.
yet those sparkles are not extinguished. For, there is no man will think,
that the fire, which is covered with ashes, is extinguished; but being
stirred up in the morning, it will burn as clearly, as it did the night
before. There is no man will think, the trees, that now in the time of Winter
want leaves, fruit, and external beauty, to be dead. There is no man will
think, the Sun to be out of the firmament, though it be ouershadowed with a
clowd of darkness and mist. There is great difference between a sleeping
disease, and death: for men are not dead, though they be sleeping; and yet
there is nothing liker unto death, then sleep. As there is great difference
betwixt a drunken man, and a dead man; so there is great odds, betwixt the
faith that lies hid for awhile, and utters not it self, and the light that
is utterly put out.

When we break not forth into outvvard deeds, GOD forbid that we should
think, that these sparkles are wholly extinguished. Indeed, the soul which is
visited, after foul and heinous backslidings from his calling, and against his
knowledge, before this foul recover the former beauty, it is in a strange
danger. For if the Lord suffer thy corruption to get loose, in such sort, that
it carry thee, as it will, and by all means possible, makes thee to labor, to
put out the sparkles of regeneration; when the Lord begins to challenge
thee, or to make thee render an account of this life past, the soul of that
man, when it is challenged, is in great danger.

So that, no question, when the Lord begins to lay to your charge, your
dissolute life, the contempt and abuse of your calling: assuredly, your souls
are so near to the brinke of desperation, that there can be nothing nearer.
For, vvilt thou look to GOD? thou vvilt see nothing, but his anger kindled, as
a fire against thee: will thou look to thy self, thou will see nothing but
sin provoking his anger: thou will see the contempt, and abuse of thy
calling, enlarging his anger; thou will see nothing but matter of despair.

And what is the best pillar, and surest retreat, whereupon such a soul, that
is so near to the brinke of desperation, may repose? A sure retreat, to repose
on in highest tentations.
I will show you the help whereupon. When thou art assaulted, by all the
greatest tentations thou can imagine; when there is nothing before thee but
death; when thou see the diuill accusing thee, thine own conscience bearing
him witness against thee, thy life accusing thee, and the abuse of thy calling
accusing thee: whither shall thou go? Look back again to thy forepast
experience, cast over thy memory, and remember, if God at any time, and in any
measure, has loved thee; if ever thou have felt the love and favor of GOD in
thy heart and conscience. Remember if ever the Lord has so disposed thy heart,
that as he loved thee, thou louedst him, and had a desire to obtain him.
Remember this, and repose thine assurance on this, that as he loved thee once,
he will love thee ever, and will assuredly restore thee to that love, before
thou departest this life. The heart that felt once this love of God, shall feel
it again: and look what gift, or grace, or what taste of the power of the
world to come, that ever the Lord gave to his creatures in this life, to that
same degree of mercy, he shall restore his creature, before it depart this
life.

So the soul that is tossed with high assaults, and great dangers; where
present things will not help, it is necessary, that it have recourse unto
things past, and keep in memory the afore-past experience of mercy, which the
Lord has freely showed toward that soul. This same memory shall be so
pleasant to the soul, that it shall stay it presently from desperation, and
uphold it unto the time the Lord pacify that heart, and give comfort to that
soul: which being done, that soul shall see, that hovv-soeuer GOD was angry,
he was angry only for awhile.

I speak these things, not that I think that every one of you has tasted of
them; and yet in some measure, the servant of GOD must taste of them: and ye
that have not tasted of them, may taste of them before ye die. And therefore,
whether ye have tasted, or not tasted of them, it cannot be but profitable for
you, to look up this lesson in your hearts, and remember it faithfully, that if
the Lord at any time strike at your hearts, ye may remember, and say with your
selves, I learned a lesson, To look back unto my fore-past experience, A
lesson.
and thereon to repose.

And though ye be not touched presently your selves, yet when ye visit them
that are troubled in conscience, let these things be proposed to them as
co^forts; and use them as medicines most meet to apply to the grief of the
inward conscience, and so ye shall reap fruit of this doctrine, and possess
your souls in a good estate. Thus far for the first point, wherein every
one of you ought to try and examine your own consciences.

The second point is this, Of love, which is the second point of our trial.
Try whether ye have love toward your neighbor, or not. For as we are
coupled with God, by faith; so by the band of love, we are coupled with our
neighbor; and if ye want love, ye can have no society with your neighbor:
for, love is the chief and principal branch, that springs from the root of
faith. Love is that celestial glue, that conioynes all the faithful members,
in the unity of a mystical body. And seeing that religion was instituted of
God, to serve as a pathway, to convey us to our chief felicity: and happy we
cannot be, except we be like unto our GOD; like unto him we can not be, except
we have love (For, as it is 1. John 4.8. GOD is love.) So, seeing God is love
it self, who-soeuer will resemble him, must be endued with the oil of love.
This only one argument, testifies to us, that this love is a principal head,
whereunto, all things that are commanded in religion, ought to be referred.

To spend long time in the praise of love, I hold it not necessary, seeing the
holy Scripture resounds, in blasing the commendations of it: but that we speak
not of any thing ambiguous, I will let you see, how this word is considered,
and taken in the Scriptures. How the word love is taken in the Scriptures.
Love is considered, either as a spring or fountain, from whence the rest
proceeds; that is, for the love, whereby we love God. And as love comes
first from God, and is poured by his holy Spirit into our hearts: So it first
redownds upward, and strikes back upon himself: for the love of GOD, must
ever go before the love of the creature.

Next, we take this word, for that love whereby we love Gods creatures, our
neighbors; and especially them that are of the family of faith. And thirdly,
It is taken for the deeds of the second Table, which flow from this love.

Now, when I speak of love, I speak of it, as in the second signification; to
wit, as it is taken for the love of our neighbor. The definition of love.
And taking it so, I call love The gift of God, poured into the hearts of men
and women: by the which gift, we first love God, in Christ our Savior; and
next, in God, and for Gods cause, we love all his creatures, but chiefly our
brethren, that are of the family of faith, the children of one common father
with us. We will examine this definition; I say, Of our love toward God.
first the love of God, as it comes from GOD, it returns to God; as it
comes down from him, so it strikes upward to him again. And is it not good
reason? And why? Let thy heart fix thy love as long as thou will upon the
creatures, thou shall never be satiate, nor thy affection shall never be
content, except thou lay hold on God: but if once thou love God in thy heart,
and cast thy affections upon him, and once take hold on him, the longer thou
love him, the greater satietie and contentment shall thou have; thou shall
not thirst for any other. For, as to the creatures, there is never a creature
that God has created, but it is stamped with his own stamp, and every
creature bears his Image: and looking to the Image of God in the creature,
should it not draw thee to him, that thou fix not thy heart upon the creature?
for his own Image, in his creature, should lead thee to himself. And
therefore, the more that thou know the creatures, and the greater variety
of knowledge that thou have of them, the more should every particular knowledge
of them, draw thee to God: and the more should thou wonder at thy God, and
know thy duty toward him. And, seeing that delight flovveth from knowledge,
and every knowledge has his own delight; as the variety of knowledge, that
arises from the creatures, should make the mind to mount up, to the knowledge
of God: so the variety of delights, that arise upon the diversity of this
knowledge, should move the heart upward, to the love of God: and the heart
getting hold of God, and being seized with the love of God, and the mind
being occupied with the true knowledge of God; so soon as heart and mind is
full of God, the heart is quiet, and the mind is satisfied. So that, the more
this knowledge grows in thy mind, the greater contentment thou have; and the
more the love of God grows in thy heart, the greater joy and rejoicing have
thou in thy soul. And why? In God ye have not only all the creatures, but ye
have himself, besides the creatures: and therefore, in God, ye have all the
knowledge and delight, that can arise of the creatures; and beside the
creatures, ye have God himself, who is the Creator. And so I say, The mind
of man, can never quiet it self in the knowledge, nor the heart can never
settle it self in the love of naked creatures; in respect they are flowing,
and vanity, as Solomon calls them: But in the infinite God, rightly known, and
earnestly loved, the mind shall find a full rest, and the heart shall have a
perfect joy. For our affection is so insatiable, that no finite thing thing
will satisfy it; nor there can be no solid settling upon the thing that is
transitory. So, the love ought to mount upward, first to God; in whose face,
the heart shall find full and perfect joy.

The second Argument that I use, is this; Seeing there is only one precept
left by our Master, in recommendation to be observed by us; namely, Of love
toward our neighbor.
That every one of us should love another: therefore our wise Master,
understanding well, that where love was, there needed no more laws: that the
life of man, by love only, behooued to be most happy; left only the same, in
chief recommendation, and takes up the whole Law and Gospel, in one word,
Love. And if the heart of man were endued with love, his life might be most
happy, and blessed: for, there is nothing makes this life happy, but the
resemblance, and likelihood that we have with God. The nearer we draw to God,
the more blessed is our life; for there cannot be so happy a life, as the life
of God. In the first Epist. of John, 4.8. God is love: therefore, the more we
are in love, the more near we are to that happy life: for we are in God, and
partakers of the life of God. When I speak this, ye must not think, that
love in God, and love in us, is one thing: for, love is but a quality in us,
and it is not a quality in God. There is nothing in God, but that which is God;
so love in God, is his own essence: therefore, the more that ye grow in love,
the nearer ye draw to God, and to that happy, and blessed life. For there is
nothing more profitable, more agreeable, and convenient unto nature, then to
love; and above all things, to love God. And therefore it is, that God, and his
Angels, are most happy and blessed, because they love all things, and desire
ever to do good. On the other side, there is nothing more unhappy, nothing more
noisome, more hurtful, and that eats up nature more, then to burn with envy
and hatred: and therefore it is that the devils are most miserable, who torment
themselves with continual malice and hatred; burning with a vehement
appetite, to be noysom to all creatures. So, as the life of the devil is most
unhappy, because he is full of envy and malice; so our life will be most happy,
if we be full of love. I will no further speak of love: Only, if ye have
love, mark the effects of it, set down, 1. Cor. 13.4.5.6.7. verses, which
effects, if ye have not in some measure, ye have not true love.

I end here. Conclusion, with an exhortation.
Ye see in what points every one of you ought to be prepared: Ye must be
endued with this love; and ye must be endued with faith; and if ye have these,
in any small measure, go boldly to the hearing of the word, and to the
receiving of the Sacraments. This is the preparation that we allow of. I grant,
the Papists have a preparation, far differing from this, and therefore they
can have no warrant from the word of God. Last of all, seeing that we are
commanded to try our selves; He that lacks knowledge, cannot try himself; A
mad man cannot try himself; A child cannot try himself; therefore they ought
not to come to the Lords Table. All these things being considered aright, he
that has faith, and love, in any kind of measure, let him come to the Table
of the Lord: And all these things serve, as well for the hearing of the word
fruitfully, as for the receiving of the Sacrament. Therefore, the Lord of his
mercy illuminate your minds, and work some measure of faith, and love in your
hearts, that ye may be partakers of that heavenly life, offered in the word,
and Sacraments; that ye may begin your heaven here, and obtain the full
fruition of the life to come: and that in the righteous merits of Christ Jesus.
To whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor, praise, and
glory, both now, and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

