A SEDER OLAM, that is: Order of the world: or years from the fall to the
restoring.

A second Apology for the Angel Gabriels propriety of truth, in his holy
and healthy message, of the cleerenes and certainty for our redemption: And a
further answer to some, little thinking that all humane Libraries may by them
selves, and must by Scripture be controlde: With a long Preface touching the
humanity of the Gentry of Cambridge, and higher, in favor of ancient Learning.

Job. 24, 25. If it be not so now, who will disprove me, and make my words
nothing.

1594.

To the right honorable Henry Earl of Huntingdon, Lord Hastinges,
Hungerford, Botreux, Molins and Moiles, Knight of the most noble order of the
Garter, Lord President of her Majesty's counsel established in the North
parts.
THe register of time (right Honorable) which the Greeks call Chronicon, the
Doctors of the Hebrew kind term Seder Olam: that is, the Order of the
world. They have many phrases from ancient holy men doubtless, which the
Apostles do confirm: as, the World to come, Paradise, the second death, and
such. In like sort Seder Olam, seems to be a phrase used from the Prophets
time. It conteyneth deep matter in it. For who would not be astonished,
considering that God sends all men to learn the age ^f the world from the
record of the Fathers, unto Terah? unless he knew the purpose, to declare the
fathers of whom Christ comes. Now it is more strange, that thence it is not
continued by Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, three so rare men. But the course is
broken of at Terahs death: and soon after a new order is taken: how many days
or months after I dare not discuss. But presently thence in the narration,
from the promise of Christ the Epoche goes: and Abraham's age is told what it
was then: which can not be exactly gathered, how from his fathers age it
depends: as the Learned cast all from Adam to Charans birth, at Terahs
seuentyeth year exactly. From the perigrination upon the promise of Christ,
unto the Lamb, the years are to the very day: and likewise thence to the
Temple: what day of what year from the Lamb it was buylt: in what year of
the king the buylder, and how long he reigned: and how long after the division,
even to what day of what month it was brent, for idolatry. Then the exact
account for day and month is not laid down, though the whole Captivity be
recorded for the just years: When it is ended, thence a new, upon a rare
occasion, to a rare man, by an Angel, the Ierusalemy in Rosh hashana.
only of any created that has a proper name of Angel, the time is pared out
in a rare phrase of speech, unto the death of Christ, our savior, unto the
very time of the euenyng offering, when he offered up him self. The speech and
the matter is so heavenly and precious, that as of old time that prophecy was
openly read of all the Jews, and known of all the East: (it doubtless Josephus
meant. bell. Iud. 7, 12.) So all the world from their Childhood should read
it, and all the learned should still reduce the new Testament unto it, and
expound the old Testament by it. For it is the abridgement of the New, and
the key of the Old. The state after our Lords death, is called A new Heaven:
And his death ended the last Olam, or Iubilee, or yet the later part of the
old world: as that part before the flood is termed of S. Peter. Thus Seder
Olam shall be a goodly title for the Ebrew account, from since the first Adam
stood on the earth, until the second Adam arose from the dust, and went into
the heavens. Certain observations I have writted for this space, registered by
the wisdom of God: to keep the holy text in his native clearenesse, against
entanglementes of Jews and Gentiles. I could wysh the dexterity of Daniels
wit. For the matter is worthy. And that which my pains could breed, I was
desirous to commend to your Lordshyp. Some remembrance I would leave, how
much I am beholding to your Honor: though none writes in a Calender all good
things done to him. Of your Lordshyp I may say out of Odyss. 1.
Homer, that you have been unto me, as a father to the son: and I will never
forget that tenderyng. I found many honorable Patrons, but your Lordshyps
charges were the greatest. The Archbishop of Canterburies grace was the means,
sone after my coming to Cambridge in my young years, to procure me a
continual profession of Homers tongue: Whereupon with all speed, the rest of my
success proceeded, until Sir Walter Mildmayes Lecture in Greek, with the
gift of six Scholershyps as I would, and his fatherlike favor, better
encoraged my pains. And I should injury all the Gouernoures of Cambridge, if
I would not acknowledge continual singular cherishing: and one point in
offering, whether Lecture I would of Iapheth and Sems chief tongues. But
there to me your Lordshyps charges was five and twenty times more then the
private Greek profession, and about ten times the Value of a Fellowship by
year. The greatest alowance that any Noble man granted any Scholar. So great
a desire you had that my paineful and chargeful race of study, which you judged
by your experience able to go through the pikes against common errors, should
there have practice and trial. And when good desert, and the best then, taken
in hand upon grave request, and orderly used, was least regarded, and worst
recompensed in all men's sight, by a good man's error, not of ill will, yet so
that you heard, and hundreths more saw an injury: the same alowance you
continued to my private labor: Whereby my Greek translation of the Hebrew
Prophets was wrought. That diligence calling all East and West forces of
study together, Hebrew, Babylonian, Chaldean, Syrian, Arabian, and al together
mixed in the Cabala: Greeks of all sorts, Latins of all sorts, all (used
skilfully) servants to the Temple: That diligence made me enterprise the
Herculean labor of the Harmony. I think you remember D. Penyes censure
uttered to your Lordshyp, of the Table, entitled, A Sinay sight, how by
conference in those points, he thought that he learned the whole frame of the
Bible, better then by all his Englysh and foraine pains, and conference: and
that one year upon such tried grounds, would do more then ten from the
common course. The learned D. told me what he told your Lordshyp, to harten
me, against the busy: but hartened already enough by rare old tendering. I
must here crave leave of a further digression, to leave a memorial of
tenderyng showed to my young studies. For as soon as I could be Graduate, upon
sudden disputations in the Greek tongue, wherein the readiest of the ancient
Masters came to reply, and many were encoraged to the tongue: word was sent
me, that I should choose where I would be Fellow. I choose to be, where first
an election was: even four days after I was eligible, and to that College I
was chosen: a College which regarded learning as much as any could. Some
parts of a reverent man, the master Master Shepherd I can not omit. He,
when I stood to be Fellow: At the election, told, that he would have no
stranger but one: and either him, or no election, and soon had a general
consent. And thence soon I was allured to Christ's Coledge, to be Sir Walter
Mildmaydes professor. M. Shepherd perceauing that, to stay me, found means
to doble the alowance for all the Fellows. This I did not know until I
departed thence: and the night before the election, sent for all the Seniores,
and me, to supper, and moved them to promise out of their alowance, and doble
from his, all, doble to my Fellowship. I promised not to go from them. On the
morrow I went to thank the other College for their good will. They taking in
grief that I should refuse their such willing favor, requested me one thing:
only to be admitted with them, and after to chose. I not knowing how admission
to one house, did cut off the right of an other, was content: but with these
words: I protest it is against my will, only to satisfy your request. The
admission being done, the learned man D. Still (now reverent Bishop) said, S.
John's is lost. M. Shepherd hearing of it, was sick for grief, as many did
report, and told for whom he took all the pains to amend the Felowshyps: yet
hearing how I protested, and was deceived, sent to the Visitor the Bishop of
Ely to expound the Law, whether it were an admission, when the admitted says,
it is against his will. He resolved the admission lawful, and my place lost with
them. Then they offered to chose me anew. That I refused: But promised to
esteem of their good will, as much as if I came to use their favor. I asked
them, why they should so much regard my young study, of four years? They
said: such a course of making Ebrew and Greek as native in years so young (at
20. of age) will twelve years hence do that with ease, which all our pains
can not come by. And if public cherishyng encorage: I must testify, that my
acts there were so accepted of the Ancient, that none ever could take more
delight in pastime, then their acceptance might make delyght in studying. Of
mine own success, will let others judge: friends desartes, I may write into
a Calender: which also stirred yours. For, to return to your Lordshyps favor:
My labor was bred up by your Lordships charges: I mean the last time of it:
and upon it, the travel in the Concent of Scripture: which I thought to be
more then Hannibals, making a way with pickaxes over the Alps. But I know that
I have not lost my labor: but have soon seen some fruit of it. For since,
men of trade, quiet and thriftie, have showed unto the world greater skill in
the holy story then any, as they, ever have done in our nation. So that few will
believe their works to be theirs, but such as do talk with the men, and see
their dexterity. They may think, and thank your Lordshyp, the paymaister, for
their skill. Some Scholars said, that if all tradesmen were so cunning,
preaching would not be regarded. They forgate the proverb: Knowledge has not
an enemy, but the ignorant. I am sure that if all Scholars in the Realm did so
far pass them, as by profession they are bound, and all the common people
match them: it would be far better with them. Your Lordshyp, has had this
ten years a wonderful desire, to see the Prophets speak to our ears, their
own meaning: and expounded in the margent with their own notes. No man
unlearned could think upon so celestial a pains, to regard it: But would
rather follow custom, to let us still confute our selves, not knowing how the
mistaking of a few places in Scripture, in some points hinder much: and many
years may well be spent upon some one line, which is more. This my little
pains will tell them of that: How the not marking why Moses tells that,
Terah dies (two dry words) has made us, and many nations translate, with
flat untruths, in so weighty things as any can be, of collateral articles.
I am resolved, that the men of great light and sight into Divinity, most
esteem of a Divine: and I for my part, more honor one such, then all
companies of all other. And think my self more beholding to your Lordshyp,
for your bountifulnes in the due time of my study, for the benefit of the
Church, then I could be to any for an Earldom, when years to set forth
Religion can not serve. And not I only, but all Divines must honor you, for
this your opinion known to many: That you thought a learned Divine equal to
an Earl. Divines be Carls, if they will not requite that reverence. As, of my
former Patrones in my Homerique days, when Homer was my profession, I spoke in
particularity after the Poets manner, for some special occasions, which men
acquainted with those days affairs, will soon see. So for your Lordshyp, my
Patron, in my study for the hardest and principal Divinity points, hitherty
not fully cleared since the Apostles time, I was desirous to leave this work,
little in quantity, but not of little study, to be a memorial of my duty, to
your Lordshyp: whom I commend most humbly and heartily to the spirit of grace
and truth.

Your Lordshyps to command, Hugh Broughton.

To the Reader.
THe use of this pains Christian Reader, is to show the honor of Christ: unto
whose service the holy Prophets contriue in record all the Suns iourneys
unto his death, and no further: In story be from Adam to Nebuchad. the years,
when they are past: Thence in prophecy and story the years of captivity:
thence the time to the hour of redemption before hand. This one point, the
Chronicle, might lighten all the glory of the Gospel, to skatter all
Antichristian clouds. The matter is so plain, that the simple can not be
deceived. For if, as Moses places Terahs death presently before the promise to
Abraham, so we will understand him, and believe S. Stephen Act. 7. for that,
and also the Greek Jew Philo, and not wound Moses by students curiosity,
begun from malicious Jews, followed by vnheedy Heathen: That text of Moses
being kept in due plainnes, there is no other color of doubt for Jew nor
Gentile: but both have then cleeredal unto Jeroboam. And unto the burning of
the Temple 390. years after Israel fell away under Jeroboam, there Ezekiel has
one sum: and no plain reader would think of doubt. Likewise for
Nebuchadnezar, Jeremy before tells of 70. years superiority: whereby all
simple Jews held the truth: and later record it. And at the end of them,
the Angel before tells of 490. years for salvation: who so will not make the
Angel a deceauer: but begin from the time of speaking, and end, at the
performaunce of the thing spoken, can not miss. Against curiosity from our
weakness, I write the positions following, to make that clear, which if men
would not resist their own judgment, had never ben thought obscure: but by us
has been perniciously encombred.

Positions opening the Chronicle of Scripture.
HE that will deny the course of time to be in Scripture clearly observed,
even unto the fulness, the year of salvation, wherein our Lord dyed, may as well
deny the Sun to have brightness. The particulers are set down in my book
chayning the Text. And though many do differ in their Chronicles, yet these
points being cleared, all strife ceasseth.

1 One, that the Greek translaters added for a close purpose years betwixt
Adam and Abraham 1350. which years are all feigned. Whereof I wrote at large
in Melchisedek: how in truth the Hebrew must stand: with At Terahs death.
years 2083. and has always in these west parts of the world been followed,
though the Arabique and Ethiopian held after the Greek. The second is:

2 That presently after Terahs death Abraham at 75. years received the
Promise: 430. before the Law: 480. more before the Temple, and 36. more before
Salomons death. The third is:

3 That 390. years Ezekiel. 4. are from Ieroboams drawyng Israel away, unto the
19. of Nebucadnezar. That from his 19. year, or third Captivity of Judah, 52.
from his taking of Jerusalem, are of captivity: and 70. from his first year
to Baltasars death. The fourth and last is:

4 That upon the seauenty of captivity, the 70. seauens of delivery for
eternal freedom must begin: and must end when our Lord by death finds us an
everlasting redemption. These last three I endeavor to clear.

Observations touching some doubts stirred concerning Abraham's age and the
Promise, with a controlment of 60 years error, and of 5. where some fall into
60. only, some 5. only, some 60 and 5.
1 SAint Stephen saying, that God removed Abraham from Charan after his
fathers death, may not be excused as though he had spoken necligently, as
Bucholcherus does qualify his words, but requires belief in the simple
sense of his words.

2 The Greek Philo, the true Philo (not the forged) tells truly, that after
the death of Terah God remooueth Abraham from Charan, and that then Abraham was
75.

3 Jews malicious were the first that feigned Abraham to leave Terah 60.
years in Charan.

4 All they do the like who make Terah father to Abraham at 70. and not at 130.
for add the 75. of Abraham to the 70. of his father, and it makes but 145.
years, and there remain 60. of Terahs 205.

5 It is a fair consequent, that Abraham being 75. years old at his fathers
death, was borne at Terahs 130.

6 The plain order of the text at the first would have taught so much. For
thus the words he in order: And the days of Terah were 205. years, and he
died in Charan, and God said unto Abraham, Get thee from thy fathers house, and
in thee all the nations of the earth shall be blessed: and Abraham was 75. years
old.

7 When Moses says that Terah lived 70. years and begat Abraham, Nachor, and
Charan, he places Abraham first, not as though he had been eldest, but for
other respects.

8 As Moses reckons Noah's sons, not in senioritie thus: Iapheth, Sem, and
Cham, but beginning with the worthiest, and so going to the next in years to
him, and endyng with the eldest* so he begins with Abraham the worthiest,
and ends with the eldest.

9 Also for the weakness of men, Moses hides his mind that the profane
should not soon spy the paradoxe: that Nachor at 29. years old begat
Terah, and dyed at 148. and Terah begat Abraham at 130. They who knew not how
strangeness for Abraham to be father of the world was fittest to stir
study, would at the first stumble at the inequality. And for the same cause
(it may well be thought) the Greek interpreters added 100. years to each
father that was not 100. years old at his fatherhood: as is declared in the
treatise of Melchisedek.

How the malicious Jews condemn them selves.
THe Jews generally granting Sem to be Melchisedek (and that truly) should
make him deliver the blessing to one that dyed before the blesser (which thing
cannot agree with the wisdom of a Prophet) if Abraham were borne at Terahs
70. for he should die not only before Sem 34. years, but also before Selah
3. years.

It is the Rabbines general opinion, that Ischa the daughter of Charan is
Sarai, who was but ten years younger then Abraham: in Zakuto. Wherefore
Abraham even by them selves is determined to be younger then Charan, in
Sanedrin.

Of Gilbert Genebrard.
Genebrard enclyneth to make Charan father to Sarai at 8. years, though the
Jews revoke that: but his error shows* that the Chronicle must stand to
make Abraham borne at Terahs 130. years of age.

Of the Promise, that it was not made five years before God speaks to
Abraham, In thee all nations shall be blessed, nor before Abraham left Charan. Ch*
4.
THe doubt herein aryseth from malicious Jews, seekeing the disgrace of S.
Paul. Gal. 3.17. where he tells that the Law came after the Promise. 430.
years.

The doubt is colored from Genesis 15, 13. Thy seed shall be a stranger in a land
that is not theirs, and shall serve them: and they shall entreat them evil
400. years.

Questions hereupon arise two.
1 Whether the term begins since Abraham left the seed on a strange
land: and both marks go to one time? Or:

2 Whether the affliction be after the fifth of Isaak? These Jews begin the
time from Isaaks birth, Sal. Iarchi, Aben Ezra, Ramban, Abrabbaneel, Baal
Shemoth Rabba, Baalsedar Olamzuta, Baalseder Olam Rabba, Bochai, Chizkuny. And
Rambam in his agreeable Total sum for the world, in Halacoth Iobal. Elias
Misrachi is more vehement, reasoning that the affliction was but in Egypt, and
therefore from Isaaks birth will needs have the term of years: and not from
the affliction.

How these Rabbines should disanull S. Paul.
If 400. years only be from Isaaks birth to the Law: 30. before the birth of
Isaak shall fall to Abraham's 70. Now that promise was not till Abraham's 75.
Therefore the consentyng to the Jews herein, should disanul S. Paul, and that
goodly promise of Christ.

A confutation of these Rabbines from them selves.
1 Aben Ezra says, that the words in Genesis 12. were spoken 5. years before
Abraham left Charan. Abrabbaneel tells him that that is a flat lie, upon Genesis
12. And just cause had he so to do. Ralbag is confuted with him for so much.

2 But Abrabbaneel, and Iarchi, and the seder Olam Rabba, and the more ancient
the Middras, and the other troops, they begin the 430. years from the time of
Abraham's sacrificing. Genesis 15. and feign that Abraham was twyse called from
Charan: once five years before that which is mentioned. But this is nothing
else then to bring a leprosy upon Scripture, to feign a story.

3 Moreover the blind may see, that the speech had in Genesis 15. was after the
slaughter of the kings, and after the promise.

Thus the Rabbine wits can not make the 400. years agree with Isaaks birth,
and the 30. with any story at all, in their sort.

Ralbag detestyng these errors, speaks otherwise, and is confuted in
Abrabbaneel, whose words be these. Ralbag writes, that the 400. years begin
from the birth of Jacob, and the blessed God bastened the end, and brought it
to pass before the time which he promised. But in truth this is an vncuth
opinion. And Ralbag makes the sacrificeing Genesis 15. to begin 15. years before
Isaaks birth, and thence would begin the 430. years, or from Isaaks birth,
nothing caryng for exact truth. Thus we see that God confounds the Jews
tongues, which obscure the Promise: that we should be ashamed any more to
follow them.

The plainnes of the text.
They shall entreat thy seed evil 400. years: These words be as clear as
the Sun, that it must be referred to the affliction of the seed: and the
sixth year of Isaak will well agree with that, when as Ismael persecuted him.
For the term mocking, is of Iarchi termed an Idolatrous flouting: of Ramban
a murtherous floutyng, and usage dangerous, with a pleadyng for the right of
inheritance. And the holy Ghost does term it a persecution: and this must be
done to him being of some capacity. In the cradle the Nurse, and such would
keep him. Also, the anger of Sara, and Gods authority from heaven, argues the
matter to be some great vnreligious dealyng: and this was a fit Epoche or
mark, to have an account from it, and that at 30. years, as our Lord, the
promised, at that age had the floutes of all the Pharisees. And so great a
matter as this was worthy of a prophecy, that Ismael should be cast off: and
Abraham in him should see a form of the afflictions in Egypt, and of the
revenge, and how an Egyptian by the mother now begins it.

A suffering together of Scriptures, where one is wounded.
These textes have a suffering together. The peregrination of the children of
Israel, which were soiurners in Egypt was of 430. years.

The Law which was 430. years after, cannot disanull the covenant, that it
should make the promise of none effect. Gal 3, 17. And this. Get thee from thy
fathers house: and in thee shall be blessed all the nations of the earth. And
this: After his fathers death, God removed him into the land in which ye
dwell. And this: They shall entreat them evil 400. years. One opened,
opens the rest: and one darkened, darkeneth the rest.

How Moses must needs be understood.
The peregrination of Isreal's children since Abraham left his country, and the
day of remouyng in Egypt, are the lymittes of the time. But Charan is the
country of Abraham. That is proved as touching the words Genesis 12. by Abrab.
plentifully, and granted by Midras, Seder Olam, and whole troops of Rabbines,
that make Abraham twice called from Charan. Therefore it is evident that the
430. years could not begin until Abraham left Charan, and from the day of
his journey it must be taken.

A proof from the Greek translation.
The Greek Paraphrast leaves no place of doubtyng, which has letters
speaking thus in our Loegria tongue: The continuance of the children of Israel,
which they continued, they and their fathers in Egypt, and in the land of
Chanaan, they (I say) and their fathers, was 430. years.

The approbation of the Greek.
Talmud Ierusalemy notes this Paraphrase of theirs, That work is ancient,
compiled about our 300. years.
in Megila, as one of 13. places altered by the Translaters for king Ptolomy:
And the peregrination of the children of Israel, which sat in Egypt, and in
the lands, was 430 years.

Here they grant, that no lands but the trodden, after their coming from
Charan, can be called the lands of this peregrination. The Talmud Babylonian
has the same also in Megila Perek. 1. page 9.

The promise, and the entrance into the land promised, should go together,
as they be in the spech together. And so S. Paul tells Christians, that
thence the 430. years must be counted: whence troops of Jews make Abraham to
leave Charan, for Chanaan.

Abraham Bucholcherus learnedly and plentifully cleereth S. Paul herein, to
this effect. To whom for ancient testimonies of Greeks and Latins, I send
the Reader, because I will not carry hither to my self, by my words, the glory
gotten by his pains.

Arguments direct against casting the five years higher, then from the speech
concerning Abraham.
The plain order of the text in Moses, ioynyng the Promise to Terahs death,
ought not to be altered without a forcible argument.

The Ebrew in playnnes lies thus. And God said unto Abraham. Not: For God had
said. And the church has of ancienty followed the plain. The late alteration
must be revoked.

They who alter that, mark not that they make Moses speak thus. And Terah
took Abraham, Lot, and Sarai, and they went from Vr Chasdim, to go into the
land of Chanaan: For God had said unto Abraham: Get thee out of thy fathers
house. The family of Terah was his house, out of which Abraham could not
depart while Terah is with him, as principal of the journey. So their
translation can not stand.

The Ebrew Section, or Perasha, (which is most ancient, and distinguysheth upon
Terahs death, the speech to Abraham from Terahs journey, no less then writers
in distinction of several books separate matter) this distinction can not
suffer the later spech to be the calling of Terah.

If in Terahs life time God had given Abraham the promise of Christ, and
Abraham as a Prophet had told his father of that, Terah no less then Abraham
should have the promise of Christ: But none would so think. Therefore Terah
should be dead before the Promise.

Thus the Exodus 12, 4. Gal. 3, 17. Act. 7, 3. Genesis 11, 26. Genesis 12, 1.
Textes are cleared: which I showed to have a feelyng together: and others of
near kindred to them. The Rabbines of malice disturbed them of the old
Testament, to disgrace the new Testament in their nations eyes, by our yielding
unto them. This they have as a common proverb: A Testament which fails in
part, fails in the whole. Talmud Ierusalemy. San. Perek. 9. Now, they are
ready to quarrel with every part: and we can not be excused that follow them, to
disgrace our Gospel. To one point more I will digress.

An explication of S. Stephens words.
S. Stephen says: The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham, being in
Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran. And said unto him: Get thee out of thy
land, and out from thy kindred, and come into a land which I will show thee.
This text of S. Stephen has been thought to be taken from Genesis the
twelueth, because words much alyke are there: But these words following have
relation to that text: And thence after his fathers death, God removed him into
this land, in which you now dwell. Moses tells by what spech the latter was
done, in these words. And Terah dyed in Charran: and God said unto Abram, Get
thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house,
unto the land that I will show thee. And I will make of thee a great nation,
and will bless thee, and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing. I
will also bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in
thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. So Abram departed, even as the
Lord spoke unto him, and Lot went with him. (And Abram was seventy and five
years old, when he departed out of Charan.) Then Abram took Sarai his wife,
and Lot his brothers son, and all their substance that they possessed, and
the souls that they had gotten in Charan, and they departed, to go into the
land of Chanaan: and to the land of Chanaan they came. Now the former text of
S. Stephen is relied upon Genesis 15, 7. where the Lord says: I am EL, (the Lord)
that brought thee out of VR of the Chaldees, to give thee this land. Moses in
the Genesis 11.
due place closely passes over the appearing to Abraham, as he does the
idolatry of Terah. And to show Terahs repentance, he makes him as principal
of the journey, saying. And Terah took Abram, Lot, and Sarai: and they went
forth with them from VR of the Chaldeans, to go into the land of Chanaan. And
they came to Charran, and stayed there, and Terah died in Charan. Here only
closely he makes Abram autour of the journey, when he says: And they went
forth with them, not with him. When Iosuah says, Our fathers beyond the
River woorshypped strange Gods, even Terah the father of Abraham: he makes
Moses more clear: that to Abraham in VR God appeared, by whom Terah was moved
to go with Abraham. Now Moses mentions only the appearyng to Abraham, and
the bringing of him out of VR, but leaves the speech to be gathered by the
argument: whence S. Stephen does frame it, by the like from Genesis the.12.
saving that after Terahs death, God bids him leave his fathers house, and
not his land and kindred only. They who refer the latter speech to the
first calling, make the departure from Charran to have no calling* though it be
said. And Abraham went as God said unto him. Of this also Bucholcherus has
written well: but that he can not see how VR Chasdim should be in Mesopotamia.
But Abrabbaneel takes part with S. Stephen for that, and proves VR and
Charran to be near together, and both in one country, and both to be the
country of Abraham's kindred. And thus much for the second knot of the
Chronicle.

Of the third knot.
Master Joseph Scaliger affirms, that the Temple stood 427. years: that
is, 37. under Solomon, and 390. after Israel fell from Judah. For the 390. I
have cited else where, many Christians rightly agreeing. But one Jew against
their malicious and deceitefull crew is of more force, then all our testimonies
in our own cause: when we make the Jubilees fall out with our Lord his death:
and they would rather leap into Gehenna, then suffer that brightness of Moses
and the Gospel. So one Jew in this case, has more authority then many of us,
for Ezekiels 390. years. Thus says R. Abraham ben David, in Kabalah. The
Temple stood 427. years. Of this testimony I will speak as Paul speaks of
Epimenides verse: that it is a true testimony.

An Objection.
When we reckon the kings of Iudahes years, their particulers ouerreach this
sum.

Answer.
They are not all perfect and absolute years, which are given to those kings.

Amongst those kings, many fathers and sons reigned together: as in
Iosophat and Ioram eight of their years, in the one of them must be drowned
up, in the account. So three of Ioas are drowned in Amasia, as many of Iotham
are also common with Achas. And that must be tried by comparison with the
years of the kings of Israel: as of ancientie the Jews noted in Talmud
Ierusalemy: in Rosh hashana. Perek. 1.

Many learned men have taken right pains that way: Thedoret for Geeekes,
Genebrard for Romistes, and Math. Beroaldus, whom I hold to have the right
sum, they differ but years a piece for the whole time of Israel: that is
unto the sixth of Ezekias: afterward when Judah is reckoned alone, the like
synarchy or fellowship in government falls not out, because they were not in
such daily troubles then, as while Israel stood.

Also great sums from place to place give great light: where, by broken
imperfect years, the matter would be somewhat doubtful.

Examples of helps by great sums.
The wars of Baasa with Asa were in the 36. year of Asas kingdom: yet Baasa
dyed in the 26. of Asas reign. So the account from the beginning of Asas
kingdom, that of Judah parted from Israel, was the best note: which was the
16. of Asas own reign.

The years of Omry his house, are also told in one sum, when Achazia being
but 22. years old, and his father dying at 40. yet then Achazia is Ben of 42.
(As Saul was Ben of two years) not of his own age, but of the kingdom in
Omryes house, whence Athalia his mother was. The not observing of that, has
bred notes that trouble our teachers and learners.

Of the 65. years in Esaias. 7.
The head of Aramis Damaskus, and the head of Damaskus is Rezin. But when 65.
years come, he shall be broken (to) Ephraim from being any people. Kimchi does
expound this place, to take the account from the time that Amos prophesied:
that Aram should be captiued to Kyr. Iarchi and Abrabbaneel hold it spoken of
Ephraims captivity. But that can not stand, without denial of the 22. years
vacation of king which was after the death of Jeroboam Ben Ioas. For it is from
the death of Jeroboam Ben Ioas (whereas he must die in the 15. of Vziah) unto
the sixth of Ezekias, and end of Isreal's kingdom, above 70. years. There,
this text of Esaias puts all to seek better. Of which place I will not
detemine: but only would show, how great sums call many particulers to a
gross sum.

Such are many accomptes in Jeremy and Ezekiel. The prophet Jeremy reckons
23. years from the 13. of Josias unto the first of Nebuchadnezar. Ezekiel
reckons 40. years alone: which the learned many rightly make to be the time
from Ieremyes prophesying to the burning of the Temple. Also, Ezekiel begins
from the 18. of Josias in the account of his 30. years. Chapter 1, 1. as he is
understood of Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins. And again, he has an account
double for one vision: which was: In the 25. year of our captivity (as he
speaks) and in the 14. year after the city was stricken. Ezekiel. 40, 1. These
places call to a further trial, any error that falls out in accomptes
within these spaces, whereby the truth will be sone known.

Of universal errors of the Jews, invented, continued, and held yet, of
malice against Christ: and followed by Christians of no small note.
THe last place of Ezekiel Chapter 40. where he has a vision of a new City and
new Temple, which should be in the days of Christ (as they grant) makes the
malicious men to go against all Scripture. They seeing, how from the seventh
of Iosuah by plain Scriptures, the Iubilee should fall out with our Lords
death, of a desperate malice invent other colorable matter to hinder that: and
teach full carefully that Ezekiel had his vision of the Christian city and
temple, not in the middle of a Iubilee, but in the very Iubilee, and tenth day
of the first month: which they expound to be September. That year was just
50. years from the findyng of the Law in 18. of Josias: which year also they
will have to be a Iubilee. D. Kimchi upon Ezekiel Chapter 1. sets out this
matter, with great pretense of glory that should be under the Messiah. While
and where this account is holden, Christianity cannot be defended from the
Prophets. And this their error is most ancient. For the Babylonian Talmud
has it in Frachin. Chapter 2. page 12. To make this account stand good, they mu^^
feign that the first Temple stood but 410. properly, only so long when
Nebuzaradan brent it: seventeen less then truth. And also, going back by
fifties unto Iosuahs time, they come to his fiftenth to begin the Iubilee:
whereas by Moses words, Iosuahs eight should be the beginning. And to make
their account uncontrollable by us, they labor to entangle the times of the
kings all through.

Likewise for the time from the burning of Jerusalem by Nebuzaradan, unto the
burning of it by Vespasian, they make it 490. years, pretending Gabriels
warrant Dan. 9. for those limits: and upon those two mistaken grounds, they
disturb all story since Moses. Tremelius has been entangled by them for the
Kings: Bibliander for the Iubilee, Vatablus for Daniels 490. And these two,
their errors, be the bulworkes of all their impiety: of which two points, I
think good to write more at large when occasion serves, in several
treatises, with more plentiful declaration of their wilful infidelity, of
ancienty begun* long continued, and yet stubburnely maynteyned. But now I must
go on to a branch of this second point, and into a matter where the Jews
whole consent holds a most agree^ (...) ^ion of the truth for that (...)
most fit for that portion of story touching our Redemption. Only I will bring
one Autour of singular account among them, and a controller of their great
Maymoni. This man expounds their words, though against all their practice,
yet so as truth forced him to cast his reckonyng, and would force them al. R.
Abraham ben D. is the man. Thus he says in Kabala: Four hundredth and ten
years are reckoned for the Temple, because from the beginning of the
captivity of Ioakim, the kingdom was reckoned as not being. Thus he touches
mine account, endyng the 410. in the first of Nebucadnezar: so making his 18.
to be seventeen more, that is 427. for the Temples ancientie. And this
authority of his dasheth all their Commentaries, for these matters.

Before I come to the fourth point, I must touch the Captivity: wherein the
Hebrews generally hold the truth.

Of the captivity of Babylon, that the 70. years must be reckoned from the
first of Nebucadnezar.
These nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years: And when 70.
years are fulfilled, I will make the land of the Chaldeans a perpetual
desolation. Ier. 25, 11.

Three captiuities of Judah were made by Nebucadnezar.
1 One, when Nebucadnezar in his first year taking Jerusalem, carried Ioakim
king of Judah into Babylon, the place of his Gods, with noble pledges Daniel,
Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, with others, fallers away. Dan. 1.

2 Nebucadnezar in his eighth year captiueth Chonias, Mardochai, Ezekiel, and
many thousands. 2. kin. 24.

Ester. 2. Ezekiel. 4. Ier. 52.
3 Nebucadnezar in his 18. year takes Jerusalem, and burns it in his 19.
year, and carries away a third captivity. Some years might be spent in this
from his 18. to 21. according to that sundry small differences are in writers,
as touching the beginning, middle, or end: some make the captivity hence 52.
years, some 50. some 49. all meaning a like.

That the Jews nation begin the 70. of captivity, from the first of
Nebucadnezar, these show.
Misna, or Gemara in Megila, Seder olam Rabba, Seder olam zuta, R. Abraham ben
David in Kabala, R. Abraham zakuto. in Iuchasim, R. Saadaias upon Da. 5. all
the Geonim, and the more ancient in Aben ezra. upon Da 9. Salomo Iarehi upon
Da. 9. is of the same mind. David Kimchi upon Agg. Chapter 1. follows the same.
and Ralbag on Da. 5.

The second Captivity, that of Iechonias is of 62. years, not 70.
That is called in Ezekiel 4. Our Captivity. Even that in which Iechonias the
king was carried away. Expressly for that Captivity Iarchi reckons 62. years,
with a pleasant token of remembrance upon Dan. 5. And Darius Madai took the
kingdom, being 62 years old. Why does Daniel reckon his years? To tell thee,
that when Nebucadnezar in Ioakims time entered into the Temple, his enemy was
borne: Since the Captivity of Ioakim are 62. years. These words of Iarchi
are pretty.

Of the third Captivity, of 52. years since the 18. of Nebucadnezar.
That part of account the Rabbines follow, when they make 70. years to the
buylding of the Temple under Aggai and Zachari: which sum is noted by Rambam
in Iobal, Kimchi upon Aggai, Iarchi on Aggai, and many of the above named: and
the Talmuds both, with all that follow them for the 420. years above
specified. Thus by the general judgment of the Hebrews, the 70. must be
reckoned from the beginning of Nebucadnezars kingdom.

Greeks of the same mind.
Berosus, Josephus, Tatianus, Theophilus, and others in Clemens.

Inconveniences that would follow them that begin the 70. from the second or
third captivity.
1 Jeremy should be disgraced, that gives Babel but 70. years.

2 Daniel borne long before, and living in office after, should be an officer
near 100. years old: which thing unless Scripture force, we might think
much.

3 Likewise Mardochai of the second captivity, and long alive after it was
ended: should have full eight years more in his rare active old age.

Ezra of the third captivity likewise, and they to whom Aggai speaks, Which
of you saw the former Temple? should have addition to their exceedyng old age.



An objection out of Henry Wolphius.
Moses threatens, that the land should keep a Sabbath 70. years, Leu. 26.
Therefore the captivity must be reckoned from since the whole nation left the
land.

Answer.
The land rested in part, when any of the land were carried from it. So Daniel
reckons even the very desolation of Jerusalem, to have seen seauenty years
in the first of Darius the Mede. Where the strangenes of the phrase made the
Geonim the Rabbine DD. of that title conclude, Aben ezra upon Dan. 9.
that the Prophet was deceived. Their sauciness was intolerable, to claim
more wisdom then Daniel had. Now if Ierusalems desolation begin from the
first surprising: as well may the restyng of the land. But Daniel thence
reckoned, as they grant.

An objection from Ezekiel. 40.
Ezekiel begins from Ieconiahs captivity.

Answer.
Good reason, because then was captiued he, his king* and, first then, whole
thousands: and it was his duty to reckon from his king, not from the
Chaldean. Besides, it was not safe for him being in Chaldea, to glaunce at the
70. years of the king Sheshac: though Jeremy in Judah told that: yet Jeremy
told it obscurely by the king She-Shac, by interpretation: Which is: The
Imperial. David Kimchi in the Root Alan, tells, that in the Arabique tongue,
which joins to the Hebrew, or Chaldean, Shac is a king, yet for this word
the Rabbines hold it to inuert the Alphabet, to take the last letters for the
first. So Sheshac should be Babel. Darkely he was to speak it: and Ezekiel was
not to take his account from Babel. So that objection concludes nothing, and
some Jew would have touched it, if it had been of force: but none did regard
it.

And the hand writing MEAN, He has numbered, Dan 5. ends clearly the
seauenty of Captivity, that from the first of Nebucadnezars house, it must be
reckoned. And we may see that the Sun in his twelve Signs can not show more
clear distinction of times, then do these Scriptures of most noble stories, of
the Temples standing, end, and continuance in desolation.

Of the fourth, and last point.
THe fourth and last point is most wonderful: reckoned not by the Fathers, as
the time from Adam to Abraham: not by the coming from Egypt, as the time of
the Temples buyldyng, nor by the kingdom parted under Roboam and Jeroboam, as
thence to the burning of the Temple, and end of the kingdom, Ezekiel gave one
whole sum: nor by a strange kingdom, as the time of the Captivity: but
told before hand so clearly, in an whole, and parts, with such precious
matter, that Moses on Mount Synai could see no greater light, then our minds
may from the doctrine of this part: delivered in the first year of Darius the
Mede, or of Cyrus the Persian, after they had conquered Babylon, and the time
of Judah was come, that they should look for a return home. Of it Gabriel is
the Messenger to teach, and Daniel is the Scholar. The text may help much,
being laid down according to the clear meaning of the Ebrew. Seauentie
seauens (of years) are cut out, for thy people, and for thy holy City: to
consume wickedness, and to abolysh sins, and to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring righteousness euer-lasting, and to seal vision and
prophet, and to show Christ the holy of holy. This the Angel speaks, and
afterward does divide it. The hour of the day when he spoke it, was the time
of the euenyng offering: that is our three of the clock, as appears by
Talmud Ierusalemy, and Rambam in Tephilla, or Prayer, and act 4. And at the
Jews ninth hour, our Lord gave up the ghost: saying, that all was performed
(for sufferinges.) Thus the Lord meant that exactly 490. years after the
prayer of Daniel, even to the very hour of the day, our redemption should be
wrought.

Assertions touching the certaynty of this text.
Any common Lawyer would determyne, that the term must begin from the
speaking, and end when that is performed which is spoken off.

In the words of an honest man spoken in the like sort, none would doubt what
should be the true meaning. The more to blame are we, who pervert the words
of the living God, to make questions hereupon, to set light by the Rock of
Salua- as though one thing might be spoken, and an other tion, meant.

The profane Jews, who would have the time from Babels fall to Ierusalems,
forty years after our Lord his death, to be shorter by 90. years then this
portion: And likewise the profane Emperors scholars, who feared that
prophecy of Christ, an universal king, who would in an other extremity have
the time herein contained, about 90. years longer: they both are lyghter then
vanity. Also they be extremely ouerseene* and injurious to Gods truth, who
fall to either of extremities.

They, both sorts, should make the dullest think, that the myddle space
should have liklyhood, even to the judgment of any Labeo, Tull. 1. off.
though Gods authority had not been in the Angels words.

Of ancienty it was used, that when a particular chronicle was not in writing,
by successions of lives the matter should be examined: that twenty generations
one with an other, each should make for a distaunce betwixt the birth of a
man, and the time when he is a father about twenty years. So, it falls out
in David's house in two families, Salomons and Nathans before the Captivity,
much in that rate. We have in S. Matthew and S. Luke for Zorobabel, officer at
the return from Babel, two other families, one of Abiud, of very few
discentes, and an other of Rhesa, of 19. generations: both those families
should be extremely iniuried, if we feign, against Gods word far more
years, for fewer later men: then for many above. So S. Matthew and S. Luke
should both be disgraced, if more years should be feigned from heathen for
this time.

A Jew or a Turk would cast off S. Mathewes Gospel, if he saw in the margent
for ten successions from Abiud to Joseph About so much should be by some late
Chroniclers.
527. years, where twenty from Nathan had but about 430. years. The thrusting
of them so long, so many millions of them to Geenna fire, has been a great
sin. Wherefore the cause of that ruin, the exceeding of the Angels Chronicle
should be loathed as extremely hurtful.

That error is most evident. For many have feigned five men more then truth,
betwixt Zorobabel and Joseph: as Tilemanus Stella, and others, have put forth
the Genealogy: which thing was no less loathsome, then to place Idols in the
Temple of God.

The Jews reckonyng of ancienty by Jubilees, neither did miss, nor could
miss in their own Chronicle. If they had missed, they would have resisted
the Apostes by arguments from the time: which is very usually mentioned in the
new Testament. As the time of the kingdom of heaven, Luke 19. the due time of
sufferyng. Romans 5. the fulness of time. Ephesians. 1.

Talmud Ierusalemy treatyng of examinyng witnesses, brings a rule from R.
Symeon ben Iochai, that it must be examined in what Iubilee any matter in
trial fell out. That rancorous Rabbine was of the Apostles age: who yet durst
not object disagreement for the time, by the Iubilee.

The 49000. who came home from Babylon upon Gabriels prophecy, they could not
choose but understand the time to begin at their return: and bid their
posterity believe, that at 490. end, Christ should be their king. To depart
from that meaning, which they once had of the text* it cannot be agreeable to
judgment. Some of them were Prophets.

Every part of the Gospel belongs to some part of Gabriels oration, where he
tells Daniel of Christ: and abridgeth all the Prophets. VVherby they who call
the time in doubt, wound every part of the Gospel. For one part wounded,
equally greeueth all the rest: being no less depending together, then the
members of one body. And the same spirit was in the Prophets.

The ending of all Moses ceremonies is prefixed by the Angel: which matter
touching the Jews and all nations should be so certain, that no Jew* nor any
of any nation, could strive for the meaning of that, so weighty a doctrine.
And God has omitted nothing that should make that plain to the simplest.
Wherefore they deal against the wisdom and honor of God, who seek to
bring doubt to the matter.

The deadliest enemies, who understood not the christianity of Gabriels
oration, yet they grant the words in as plain speech as any Christian could
mean them. Aben Ezra is my warrant: a Jew most spiteful, wanting not wit, but
grace. His testimony might end the cause: The seauenty seauens are from the
going-foorth of the word at Daniels prayer, unto the sealyng of Christ the
most holy* upon Dan. 9, 24.

The ancient Divines who exceed Gabriels account, run into the extremity of
vnheedinesse. For by their myghtiest defenders, they are found to condemn them
selves. For, they make the time from Cyrus permission to return, not to be
above 32. years: and the best learned of their defenders make it but 93.
thence to Alexander. And neither I, nor they, will have it above 360. thence to
our Lord his death: So, the force of the truth dryueth them to agree with it:
when by parts they try it.

The Greek writers profane, who made the ancient Divines give the Persians
230. years for 130. those Greeks rightly examined, will bring the Persians
unto 130. As I have proved in an Apology for Daniel: and may take occasion to
handle again.

Who so defends Olympiades to have any certentie of account, shall find him
self deceived, when he sees whole troops extremely disagreeing: which
disagreement, I have elsewhere put forth.

This I dare say, that the cyting of Olympiades to measure the space of years
betwixt the Alter and Temple, built both in the office of Zorobabel and Iosuah:
and buylt both by the returners from Babylon: that citing of Olympiades, to
teach all Jews and Gentiles to take a new judgment for the Bible: no more
stood with judgment, then it can stand with judgment, to take a reed, of
400. inches broken into 400. pieces and skattered, to meat a yard of cloth:
or any thing of Before the 36 year after the return, the Temple for stone
work was finished.
36. inches. For men differ no less then 400. years touching their beginning:
and in all ancient ages brake of and began new games, and new accomptes, which
are usual in autours, and serve no more for use in divinity, then the idol of
Jupiter Olympius beseemed the holy Temple. And as Antiochus Epiphanes with his
Idol polluted the Temple, so the ancient marred their own authority, when they
agree with the unreconcilable, the Jews and Gentiles, writing upon Daniel,
and the other last Prophet: speaking, vnspeaking: writing, blotting.

Even whole works of profane Greeks must be denied to be the autours, whose
they have always been counted, by the ouerreachers of the Angels sum: as
Dionys Halicarnass rejects certain orations of Lysias, because his Chronicle
will not agree with their argument: yet later Greeks condemn him: Yet
Plutarch and Vlpian admit that oratation.

To the like plundge have Lilius Gyraldus and Hieronimus Wolphius been put, who
censured that Suidas must be amended: because in him Cyrus and Cambyses reign
at the 25. Olympiade: Though all printes, the Basil, the Venice, the Millen,
agree in that. So, Heathen shall be counted as Jude. 7, 22.
Madianites, when they fight against God, and must alter even profane records
for their cause: or whole profane works will fight for Daniel.

And to satisfy heathen records, this may be now briefly touched, that Darius
Hystaspeos age in Ctesias and Herodotus, will not suffer Xerxes war to be
above 30. years from Babels fall. Thereabout Pericles began his glory of
Rethorique. Eunomus Thriasius in Plutarch, able to judge in youth of Pericles
tremblyng, in his beginnings, and in old old age of Demosthenes tremblyng
likewise: whereas Demosthenes began near Philip Macedons reign, 26. years
before Alexanders Monarchy: this man, and whole troops of the like, would make
Greek grammarians, babes in deed, who from Olympiades feign distances:
whereof the lives and writers of the present age, will skantly grant often times
the third part of their account. I had whole flocks of this kind, to have
joined here in defense of Divines, the best learned Protestants and Romistes
of all Christendom: against brauers in Heathen studies, as was Nicholas
Vignier, to disgrace them. But short positions will not admit that store of
large discourses. Severally they must be handled for better taming of our
boisterous young As namely two of Oxf. M* Koph and M. Car-warden.
Students: who triumph, how in their conceit Gabriel and Daniel might be
disgraced.

What paradoxes they fall into, which exceed, for the Persians time, to make
it 200. years, or more: how they must feign 107. betwixt the Alter and
Temple: which opinion was never heard of until 1584. and shakes all
judgments uttered for the holy writers of that age.
THe ouerreachers when they are resolved to exceed, yet when they choose their
place, where to adventure: might as well sound words against the Sun, like
the Lybians in Herodot, as shoot their words against the Prophet Daniels
counters. For they are feign to invent new accomptes, not in ure before: and
far from the common opinion: that, from the return 107, are, to the building
of the Temple. A strange thing.

So should Zorobabel and Iosuah be 107. years officers both together: but
never any were so long.

So all the millions, thousands, hundrethes, and tens, of the Jews and
Gentiles, must alter their opinions for the age of Mardochai, Ezra, Nehemia,
and the generation returned from Babylon, which in Ezra builds the Temple:
all that have written of this matter, and come to notice, or may be thought to
have considered the cause: For by them which have written, we may think of the
rest. And the penners of those books must be counted either Sophisters, to
have deceived continually, or unlearned, as unable to speak to men's capacity.
The like may be spoken for Aggei and Zachary, as for Ezra. And all errors that
would herein fall out, are more in number then can be spoken. So no place
shall be found wherein one may go about to exceed Daniels account: but the
endeavor will appear in faults, to match the number of the sands of the Seas.

Of the Angels partition.
The 490. years the Angel parts: and bestows the first part for the
buylding of Jerusalem: and the last half seven of years for our Lord his
preaching. Aben Ezra even so expounds the first part, and R. Upon Dan. 9.
Mid. Psa. 10.
Iochanan expounds the last part, of the Lords preaching on mount Oliuet,
three years and a half: such borders or ledges are not inferior to that
crowne-worke that was on the edge of the incense Altar, of the table of
Shewbread, and the arc of Covenant. And that partition only might have tamed
all Heathen autorities: though there had been some agreement in them.

Of the Lords day.
When Daniel was taught what day should sabbatize Sacrifice, he knew also
when the Sabbath should rest: during which, Sacrifice was to continue. And so,
when the first day in order, should be the first in dignity, and the Lords
day: in which we should meditate of the revelation of Christ, how in all
visions and Prophets he was under a coueryng. But this could not be known,
unless Gabriel had spoken and meant in most full playnnesse: otherwise he
should have mistaken the time: which thing we should not soon believe of
Daniel the wise. To conclude, the sweet speech of seauenty seauens, a memory
not only of the first Sabbath, but of the late ten Sabbathes of years past in
Babylon, that should have no season in it: but numbered from the delyuery out
of Babylon, unto the delyuery from death by our Lord. So it concludes all by a
most pleasant sabbatique account (as elsewhere I have showed) from the burial
of Moses, unto the burial of his ceremonies. And thus, I trust, all
indifferent readers will confess, that record is in Scripture, how often the
Sun went his course, before he lost his light: that the Son of glory in the
great cloud of our life, might shine to all men: and his word might have a
most constant bryghtnesse.

Of the Jubilees.
AS in all narrations of constant and sure truth, every part will agree: so in
divine narrations the times are not only found agreeable with men's lives
(which is no whit so in the profane, differyng from Judah) but also the
feasts of Gods people fall out often in most notable agreement: that the Lord
of those Sabbathes might be known to be the ruler of the world. Ancient
Divines, Hebrews, Greeks, Latins, note, that Moses was made the seventh
from Abraham by rare counsel: no less then Enoch the seventh from Adam.
Since Israel was placed in a land to have a famous state, the alteration of it
falls out in a goodly order: and most pleasant to be considered.

The conquest of 7. years, and partition.
By the seventh year, seven nations in the land of Chanaan were conquered.
Even that phrase of conquest S. Paul uses, and the Talmuds both, and the
whole thraues of the Hebrew DD. I marvel that a learned man would needs be
blamyng of this speech, in me only. I thought it lawful, and duty, to
speak as other men did. The proof of the seven years is clear by Calebs
age: the Hebrew note that plentifully, and Theodoret for Greeks. His words
lap the text within them. The speech of Caleb shows, that they having warred
seven years space, divided the land. For thus be spoke: Forty years old
was I, when Moses the servant of the Lord sent me from Cadesh Barn to view the
land. And now, the Lord has kept me alive, as he promised. This is the forty
fifth year since the Lord spoke unto Moses. Now after Gods sentence upon the
six hundredth thousand, they continued thirty eight years in the
Wilderness: then, seven remain of the forty five. And this much did the
Lord of the whole world foretell by Moses: When the Lord thy God brings thee
into the land which he promised to thy fathers, after seven years, thou
shall read this Law to all the people. The malicious Jews say, that seven
years the land was in partyng, for their deceit in castyng Ezekiels vision:
which was in a middle of a Iubilee, unto the just Iubilee. Whereby dividing
all by fifties, they shorten the Kings 17. years, and torment the story: and
begin the Jubilees not presently upon the conquest, but from their own
rancorous heads after a full other seven. Rabbi Leui ben Gerson plainly
confesses, that he saw no reason why they should do so. This I note, because
my learned friend M. Henry Wolphius follows them herein: not foreseeing their
malice: yet in other points he could tell that they labored to obscure all.
The holy story tells us (as Theodoret notes) that in the seventh year the
land was parted. And the Jews confess, that the next year to the partition
must begin the reckonyng of fifty years for the Iubilee. All Hebrews and
Greeks rightly agree, that a full fifty go to every Iubilee. Rambam in Iobal.
So that the fifty one must be the first of a new seven. Here Beroaldus,
Codoman, and Wolphius, may not be followed for 49. years to a Iubilee. Moses is
plain, and has plainly been understood. By fifties, the time from the
partition of the land, Tal. Ierus. in Hauebodekin.
being parted, joins the twenty and eight fifty to our Lords death. A proof
for the Jews vein.

Of the first Iubilee.
In tryalles it must be examined in what Iubal the matter fell out.
Iosuah ruled years seauenteene. That is evident, not by expressed testimony,
but by a consequent. For the 480. which are from the Lamb to the Temple, are
all in other rulers, saving 17. years: which are a remnant, and have none but
him to receive them. Forty years after his death see Othoniels victory
against Chusan, and the first Iubilee, six times seven years since the
partition the Jews held their land. The seventh seven Chusan ouerruled,
for their idolatry: in his eight, and in the first fiftieth Othoniel returns
them to their possession. So the first Iubilee is famous by a glorious victory.

Of the seventh Iubilee.
The seventh Iubilee sees the remoouyng of the Arc from Siloh to Judah, the
fall of Ely, the ruling of Samuel, and much alteration to the better.

Of the seventeenth Iubilee.
The seventeenth Iubilee receaueth Iechonias in Babylon, the first whole year
that he lived there: And one Iubilee and more, was wholly spent in Babylon.

Of the last Iubilee.
The twenty eight Iubilee, was the last that the Jews saw in their land. In
that Iubilee year, our Lord is the ransom, redemption, and finisher of
Sabbath unto Israel. Then was a resurrection from death, the lifting up of
sign, the sound of the best Trumpet, the gathering of the skattered Israel,
the openyng of the heavenly Jerusalem, and the workeing of freedom for all,
that all their life were in danger of bondage: that we might all wear Crowns
upon our heads, and have a continual feast, better then that which the
servants in Judah enjoyed. In that year, even all was performed, which the
Jews upon Leuiticus 25. and in Talmud Babylonian, Sanedrin, and Ezekiel the
40. teach that under Christ should be accomplished. In that Iubilee the
clearenesse of the doctrine wringeth good words out of the Hebrew DD. though
their eyes be shut since their fathers undertook, according to their own rule
in Talmud Ierusalemy in capital unjust sentence: Cha 10. Page 22.
That the blood of our Lord should be upon them, and their children through
all generations: as the blood of Abel was upon Cayn. And as those Jews which
said: We have no King but Caesar, knew a better: and confess with R. Akiba in
Massecheth Taanith, O our father our king, we have no king but thee: O our
father our king, for thy own sake take pity: Cha. 9.
So to this day Daniels last words: O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord
attend and do, and differ not for thy own sake, O Lord: These words are in
their daily prayers once, twice, thrice, near together: In Chether malcuth:
Crown of kingdom. page 315. and 316. and 318. t^ be used thrice in expiation
feast.
that if they would hear, if they would have forgiveness, if they would
attend for the next words for Christ, they might see that our Lord differred
not, but in due time performed all goodness. Yet they so often resisted the
light, that their sin came to the highest degree, as them selves expound
Esai the sixth, Rambam. Repentance. cha. 6. Mat. Mark. Luke John. Act.
that they sinned against the holy Ghost: the certainty of the time being no
less clear then the brightness of the Sun. Joseph: Antiq lib. 18. cap. 4.
Josephus confesses not only that Jesus was unjustly killed by Pilate, and
arose the third day, and was the Christ, for which name he went to Gabriel in
Daniel: but also that all the as all the east did.
nation did then look unto the prophecy, that a king should be amongst them,
Joseph. de Bello Iud. lib. 7. cha. 12. Tacit. li. 21. Sueton in Vespasian.
which should rule all the world. That prophecy doubtless can be no other
then that of Daniel: of whose prayer to this day they For the expiation feast
Cyppur: for Christ is taught of Capper, in that feast, and in Daniels. 9. cha.
keep, even the last words, them which were yet in Daniels mouth, when the
Angel came flying unto him, and told of the time: which fell out with the last
Iubilee, to end at once all the ceremonies of the partition wall.

And this far the iourneyes of the Sun be recorded by the holy Ghost, and
no farther then to our Lords death: that his name Shemesh in the holy tongue,
in our Albion, A Servant, should herein show his chiefest service: and we not
only know that Christ is come, but be able to show out of the Prophets when
he was to come, for our own strength, for conuicting the adversary, and
cleereing of the manifold Scriptures for times which hereupon depend: and
have no less use in the body of the holy volume, then the Nerves in a man's
body for the use of motion. And for my resolution touching my adversaries in
this case, I will speak from Job: All the while breath is in me. God forbid
that I should grant your cause to be right. For in the holy record of times,
is the wisdom found, and there is the place of understanding. The Cethem from
Ophir, the Paz from Vphaz, the Topaz, the Onix, the Gabis, the Pearl, the
Saphir, the Crystal, are not so goodly. Dan. 9.
The name of Christ Palmony the wonderful numberer, hither unto belongs: how
from the beginning he draws out the time, until he becomes Eschol Song. 1.
Copher, the cluster of Redemption: which ought to find a lodging betwixt all
faithful breasts.

FINIS.

