Saint Peter's Path to the Joys of Heaven: WHEREIN IS DESCRIBED THE FRAILTY OF
FLESH, THE power of the Spirit, the labyrinth of this life, Satan's subtlety,
and the Souls salvation.

As also the Election, Lives and Martyrdomes, of the twelve Apostles.

By W. B.

Poenitentiae nemo nimis Cupidus.



At London Imprinted by Felix Kingston. 1598.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR RICHARD MVLLENEX KNIGHT: ALL health of body,
increase of joy, with the full fruition of perfect felicity.
RIGHT Worshipful, It is reported that Althema hoping to gratify Alexander
that famous Conqueror, with some excellent piece of workmanship, searched so
far in the depth of his Art, as striving with cunning to be curious, his
pencill past beyond his skill, not being able to make his work perfect: who
being blamed by his friend (Pethieus) for imboldning himself so unadvisedly,
answered, that although Art wanted to beautify the work, yet heart and good
will did make perfect that which lack of cunning had left imperfect: whose
answer (Right Worshipful) as one guilty of a greater crime, I claim for the
sufficient excuse of my folly, in beginning this work rudely, continuing
rashly, and ending rawly.

None can express a Passion that he feels not, neither does the pen
deliver, but what it copieth out of the mind. This passionate Discourse,
thought it reach not to the dignity of Peter's repenting, yet shall I think my
endeavors well apaid, if it may (...) some skilfuller pen to supply in this
matter my want (...) ^bility, and exercise their happier talents in the like
pie^^* I confess my fault in committing these unpolished lines to the Press,
yet I crave pardon with favorable censure, and thus far dare I answer for
my self, that although Demosthenes had a plaudit for his Oration, because it
was curious, yet Nimius got the Sentence for the truth of his plain Tale.

This work of S. Peter's path to the joys of heaven, I humbly commit to your
Worshippes protection, which if it may please you to let this tearie Map
pass under the countenance and credit of your Name, and that you will deigne
to read it over, and therewith seem to be but pleased, I account my self
highly favored.

Apelles presented Alexander with the counterfeit of Campaspe, the face not
fully finished, because he liked the Picture; and I offer these few stanzes
unto you, not well furnished, because I know you are a favorer of virtue.

Achilles made it not dainty to take the view of Phidias homely work, because
it was the Image of the God of War: and I hope your Worship will vouchsafe
the viewing of this silly book, for that it describes the submissiue mind of a
penitent Sinner, although it spring from a barren soil, being a dish of such
fruit as my poor orcharde can yield, not unlike to Zeuxes pictures, which
seemed to the birds to be grapes, but being thoroughly proved, were bare shadowed
colors, yet it may be, that you passing over many learned works, will at last
view this, and smile as Theodosius did at the Pomegranate, not that he scorned
the fruit, but to see the simple meaning of the man that presented him with so
slender a gift, yet I hope by your protection this my labor shall find
acceptance, according to the mind of the giver: and to have as many favorers
as readers, and no more readers that mislike the matter, then like to write some
other as well meant, for that it proceeds from a mind as willing to show it
self thankful, as whosoever else, that commends himself by a greater
present. Thus I humbly take my leave, wishing you all hearts content in this
life, and everlasting happiness in the World to come.

Your Worships in all duetifull service to command WILLIAM BROXVP.

To the courteous and friendly Reader.
GEntle Readers, although I present you with this tearie Map of S. Peter's
submissiue Mind, yet I crave pardon of you, as (Clinius did of Virginius) that
if you find any thing amiss, you will pass it over with favorable censure:
desiring you to read with favor, correct with judgment, and wink at a fault.

After I had writ these few lines, I stood in doubt whether I should commit
them to the Press, let them lie obscurely in corners, or else to remain
privately in my own hands, but being in doubt least any false copy should be
scattered abroad, and by that means it should come corrupt to the Print,
disguised in the fancies of an other man's humor: it imboldened my weak
ability the more to give it passage to the Press: yet it may be, that
courteous skill will make this reckoning, that though it be course in respect
of exquisite labors, yet it may entertain indifferent minds, for that the
ground thereof is piety, and this commodity it will carry with it, that the
Reader may learn the true path to perfect Joy, and how to humble himself in
the school of repentance.

Thus wading over rashly like Gherillus I flattered my self, yet far from
the mind of Terence, when he first began to study Poetry, he thought all
the world would be in love with his writing, but if this may win any one to a
repentant mind, he shall receive the fruits of his good work, and I shall
enjoy the content of my full desire.

Phidios found the more favor in setting out his simple pictures, in that he
did what he could, and I hope to find your favorable judgment for this
imperfect work in that I do what I can. Though Cicero were eloquent, Ennius
was bluntish, high style is not herein used, but a plain Decorum touching the
matter, a work roughly hewed out of a hard rock, not polished by the curious
hands of Artifex, yet brought to the view of the learned, whose clear sighted
judgment may condemn me of boldness, yet this I know, that the well literate
will wink at a fault, when the captious misliker will find fault with every
letter, for the one, I will honor his discreet favor, for the other, I never
meant to please his humor.

Thus I commit my self and my book to your courtesies, wishing the friendly
Readers the fruition of all felicity, committing them to the protection of the
celestial powers, and this my good will toward them, to their favorable
considerations.

Yours to command in all kindness. W. B.

In alios lenis est^.
THE ORDER OF THE Evangelists in laying down the names of the twelve Apostles.
1 Peter. Acts 1. 2 James Zebedeus 3 John. 4 Andrew. Luke 6. 5 Philip. 6
Thomas. 7 Bartholomew. Mark 3. 8 Matthew. 9 James Alph. 10 Simon Zelotes. Matthew.
10. 11 Jude James. bro. 12 Matthias.

THE ELECTION, LIVES and Martyrdomes of the twelve Apostles.
HEre gentle Reader we may behold the Saints of God, which by great care and
entire love, did plant the principles of the Gospel, not sparing their lives
to quench the heat of fire.

By viewing their Martyrdom, we may comfort our selves with this saying:
Sanguis Martyrum, semen Ecclesiae. The blood of the Martyrs, is the seed of
the Church. Christ himself foretold, that whosoever would be his Disciple,
must take up his cross and follow him: these Apostles and these Disciples have
done no less.

1.
PEter, Matthew. 4. 18.
otherwise called Simon, the son of Iona, of the Province of Galile, John 1.
42.
and of the town of Bethsaida, the brother of Andrew, Luke 6. 14.
from a fisherman Christ called him to be an Apostle, commanding him earnestly
three times to feed his sheep: Mark 1. 16.
three times Peter denied Christ: Luke 5. 10.
three times Christ asked Peter, if he loved him: Mark 3. 16.
and three times Peter answered, Matthew. 16. 17.
thou know Lord, John 21. 15.
I love thee. Hieron. lib. de viris illustr.


For denying of Christ, his submission was so great, that by continual kneeling
in prayer to God, his knees and elbowes were grown thick, numme, and hard
like the hoof of an Ox, his arms with leaning on them were grown crooked,
his eyes were bleard with daily weeping, and the streams of tears which
flowed from his eyes, Anton. Chro. part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 4. parag. 1.
made gutters in his cheeks.

Peter the Apostle was ye first Bishop of Antioch, he continued there seven
years, and seven years about Jerusalem and the Eastern regious: Acts 12. 4.
verse 8.
he was imprisoned by Herod Agrippa, and delivered by an Angel: Eusebius
eccle. hist. lib. 3. ca. 9.
Christ came to his house and healed his wives mother of a fever: Matthew. 8. 14.
he preached the Gospel of Christ in 1. Pet. 1.
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Luke 4. 38.
Bythinia, and Asia. Peter was of that courage and boldness, Mark. 1. 31.
that he walked upon the water to go to Jesus.

Peter seeing Christ transfigured, talking with Moses and Elias, he was so
ravished with that joyful sight, Matthew. 14. 29.
that he said unto him, This was upon Mount Thabor.
Lord, here is good being for us, Matthew. 17. 2.
if thou will, Let us make here 3. Mark 9 5.
tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias.

Christ did foretell Peter of his death, Luke 9. 35.
saying, John 21. 18.
When thou wast young, thou girdedst thy self and walkedst whither thou
would: but when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and
another shall gird thee, and lead thee whither thou would not.

Peter was crucified at Rome, Eusebius. Eccle. hist. lib. 3. ca. 1. An. Christi 70.
the third Calends of July, in the last year of Nero, with his head
downwards, which kind of death he himself desired.

Moritur ad terram verso capite in cruce Petrus.



2.
James the son of Zebedeus brother to John, Matthew. 4. 21.
was a poor fisherman, Mark. 3. 17.
and being in the ship mending of his net, Jesus came by and called him to be
an Apostle.

He preached the Gospel of Christ unto the twelve dispersed Tribes, Clem. lib.
7. hypot.
he was the next Martyr after Stephen: Acts 12. 2.
he was slain by the sword in India by Herod Agrippa: Pet de natal. lib. 6.
cap. 133.
his corpse was afterward transported into Compostella in Spain.

3.
John the Evangelist was the son of Zebed and brother to James: Mat. 4. 21.
he was called from the fisher-boate to be an Apostle of Christ: Policrates B.
of Ephesus.
he was of all other beloved of Jesus: he leaned on the breast of our Savior:
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 16. An. Dom. 97.
he was banished by the Emperor Domitian into the Isle of Patmos, where he
wrote the Revelation,

Jerome and Abdias says, Ierenaeus lib. 5 Abdias.
that at Rome he was thrown into a tun of hot burning oil, yet he came
forth and took no harm.

He converted a Thief, The words of John the Evangelist to the thief.
that was Captain of a band of thieves, all wholly bent to slaughter, murder,
and extreme cruelty, saying, Yet there remains some hope of salvation: I
will undertake for thee with Christ: I will die for thee if need be, as Christ
dyed for us, I will hazard my soul for thine: Trust me, Christ sent me.

The Thief hearing this, Tokens of true repentance.
stood still, shook off his armor, trembled for fear, repented and wept
bitterly.

After the death of Domitian, Irenaeus lib. 2. cap. 39. Cle^n.
John the Evangelist returned from the Isle of Patmos, when Nerua had reigned a
little above a year: An. dom. 99.
John governed the Churches in Asia: and remained at Ephesus.

Augustine calls him a martyr by will: Jerome says he dyed the 68 year
after the passion of Christ. anno.
Policrates Bishop of Ephesus, as Eusebius alleges, sticks not to call him
a Priest, a martyr, and a doctor, but that which Augustine and Dorotheus
writes of his end, is strangest of all, and let the credit thereof rest in
the choice of the Reader: Dom. 101.
how John at Ephesus in the presence of diverse people, went alive into his
grave and there dyed, being an hundredth and twenty years old.

4.
ANdrew being a poor fisherman, Mat. 4. 18.
was called with his brother Peter to be an Apostle: Luke 6. 14.
he preached the Gospel of Christ unto the Scythians, Eusebius. lib. 3.
Sogdians, and Sucians, and in the middle of Sebastopilis, cap. 1.
inhabited of the wild Ethiopians: being crucified by Aegeas King of Edessa
the last of November, Dorotheus Eccle. hist. an. Christi.
and buried at Pataris a city in Achaia.

5.
PHilip was chosen to be an Apostle of Christ, Luke 6. 14.
he was borne in the city of Bethsaida, Mark 3. 18.
a city in Galile: when Christ demanded of Philip where they might buy bread
to satisfy the people that followed him, John 6. 9.
Philip answered him, Two hundredth penny worth of bread is not sufficient for
them, that every one may take a little: This was said to prove him: Christ at
that instant fed five thousand men with five barley loaves and two fishes,
Mat. 14. 19.
and when the people were satisfied, the disciples filled twelve baskets with
that which remained: Acts. 8. 9.
Philip preached the Gospel of Christ in Phrygia, Anton. chron. tit. 6. cap
11. pet. de natal. de sanctis. lib. 4. cap. 107.
he went to a city in Samaria, and there converted Simon Magus the sorcerer,
who had a long time seduced the same city with his sorcerie and witchcraft.
The Painims crucified Philip at Hierapotalis.

6.
THomas otherwise called Didymus, John 20. verse 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
was one of the twelve Apostles of Christ: he doubting of the resurrection of
Christ, said unto his fellows which told him that they had seen the Lord,
Thomas said, Except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my
hands into his side, I will not believe. After eight days, Thomas being with
the disciples, Jesus came again, and stood in the midst of them saying,
Peace be unto to you, Agbasus wrote an Epistle unto Christ, acknoledging him to
be the soon of God.
and said to Thomas: Put thy finger here and see my hands, and thrust forth thy
hand, put it into my side, and be not faithless, but faithful. Then Thomas
did conceive a full faith that it was the Lord, and said, Thou art my Lord my
God: which confession Jesus did well accept.

Thomas sent Thaddaeus unto Agbarus king of Edessa, Christ writ to Agbarus
again.
to preach the Gospel of Christ, and to cure Agbarus of his malady: Thomas
the Apostle preached the Gospel of Christ, Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 15.
unto the Persians, Medes, Caramaines, Hircaines, Bastraines, and Magitians:
Anton. chron.
he was slain at the heathen Kings commandment, with a dart in India, Abdias
Apost, hist. lib. 9.
and was buried at Calimina.

7.
BArtholomew was chosen to be an Apostle of Christ, Luk 6. 14.
he preached to the Indians, Mark. 3. 18.
and delivered unto them the Gospel of Matthew in their own language: Mat.
10. 3.
he suffered martyrdom at the commandment of Polemius king of India,
Dorotheus. Abdias B. of Babylon.
the first day of his martyrdom he was beaten with cudgels, the second day
crucified and flayne alive, pet. de natal. lib. 7. cap. 103.
his skin pulled over his ears, as he was fastened to the cross: Anton chron.
tit. 6. cap. 12.
Last of all, while breath remained in him, he was beheaded.

8.
MAtthew the Evangelist was chosen to be an Apostle of Christ, Mark. 3. 18.
he wrote the Gospel of our Lord Jesus in the Hebrew tongue, Abdias. hist.
aspost. lib. 7.
and delivered it to James the son of Alpheus: he preached the Gospel in
Aethiopia: he was by the commandment of Hyrtacus run through with a sword.

9.
James the son of Alpheus and Marie, Eusebius. Eccle. hist. lib. 2. cap. 22.
sister to Marie the Lords mother, called the brother of Christ, was the first
Bishop of Jerusalem, Clemen. lib. 6.
he lived virtuously, he used no woollen vesture, but wore a Syndon, Aegesippi.
s li. 5.
his knees were after the guise of a camels knee, Joseph. Antiq.
benumd and bereft of the sense of feeling by reason of his continual kneeling
in supplication to God: lib. 20 cap. 16.
he continued Bishop thirty years, Abd hist. apo.
and was martyred by the Jews, but especially by Ananias the high Priest,
Dorotheus.
who set him upon a pinackle of the Temple to preach to the people, Anton.
chron. part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 8. anno Do^. 6.
and threw him down headlong: he having breath after his fall, one came with a
Fullers club, knocked him on the head, and brained him.

10.
SImon the Cananite son to Cleopas, Luke 6. 15.
surnamed Zelotes the Lords cousin german, Aegesippus writes that Cleopas
was brother to Joseph.
he was chosen to be one of the twelve Apostles of Christ, he preached the
Gospel throughout Mauritania, Aphricke, Egypt, and Persia: he returned thence
and succeeded James in the Bishopric of Jerusalem: the heretics accused him
that he lineally descended of the stock of David, Simon was the second B. of
Jerusalem.
and that he was a Christian, which profession they hated: he was scourged for
the space of many days together, so that Aticus the Judge and his company was
marueilously amassed, and marueiled, He was crucified anno. do^. 110.
how that he being an hundred and twenty years old, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 11.
29.
was able to abide that bitter torment, in the end, he dyed a death agreeable
with the passion of Christ.

11.
IVde the brother of James called also Thaddeus, Luke 6. 16.
was called to be an Apostle: Mark. 3. 18.
he preached unto the Edessians, and through all Mesopotamia: Dorotheus Eccle.
hist.
he was slain at Berito in the time of Agbarus king of Edessa.

12.
MAtthias one of the seventy Disciples, Acts. 1. 26.
was chosen to be an Apostle in the room of Judas the traitor: he preached
the Gospel first in Macedonia, Pet. de natal.
then in Aethiopia, about the haven called Hissus, lib. 3. cap. 149.
and the river Phasis, afterward he went into India, Anton. chron.
where the Jews stoned him, and last of all he was beheaded with an axe after
the Roman manner. tit. 6. cap. 15.


Thus ends the commemoration of the lives and deaths of the twelve Apostles.
HERE FOLLOWS the Election, Lives and Martyrdoms of S. Paul, Mark the
Evangelist, and Stephen one of the seven Deacons.
PAVL, Act. 7. 58.
which before was called Saul, Act. 8. 3.
was an Apostle of Christ, yet out of the number of the twelve, Eusebius. lib. 2.
cap. 1.
was borne in Jury, Ex Hieron. lib. de viris illust.
in a town called Gascalis, which town being taken by the Romans, he with
his parents fled to Tharsus a town in Cilicia, afterward he was sent up to
Jerusalem, and there brought up in the knowledge of the Law: Eusebius. lib. 2.
cap. 1.
at that time when Stephen suffered martyrdom: Paul was a persecutour, Act. 9.
4.
in raging against the Church of God, Anno Chr. 35.
entering into the houses of the faithful, and gave forth precepts that both
men and women should be imprisoned: he was converted to believe in Christ, by a
voice that spoke to him from heaven, as he went toward Damascus, and from a
persecutour he was made a professor, an Apostle, a martyr, a witness of the
Gospel, and a chosen vessel, not of men, neither by men, but by revelation
from Jesus Christ: among other his manifold labors and trauelles in spreading
the doctrine of Christ, he wanne Sergius Paulus the Proconsul of Ciprus to the
faith of Christ, whereupon his name was turned from Saul to Paul: he began to
preach the Gospel of Christ at Jerusalem, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 27.
and went on still to Ilyricum, Italy and Spain, his Epistles are extant at
this day, full of heavenly wisdom, he was accused before the Emperor Nero,
Abdias de viris lib. 2.
for teaching a new doctrine and stirring up sedition against the Empire,
whereupon Nero commanded him to declare the order of his doctrine: which was to
teach all men peace and charity, how to love one another; that rich men should
not be puffed up in pride, The sum of Paul's doctrine.
nor to put their trust in their treasure, but in the living God; mean men to
be content with food and raiment, and with their present state; poor men to
rejoice in their poverty with hope; fathers to bring up their children in the
fear of God; children to obey their parents; husbands to love their wives;
wives to love their husbands; citizens and subjects to be true to their
Prince. This was the sum of Paul's teaching, which he received from Jesus
Christ, which spoke to him from heaven. When Nero had heard this, he gave
sentence of death, that Paul should be beheaded, unto whose execution Nero
sent two of his Esquires, Paul condemned.
Feraga and Parthemius, to bring him word of Paul's death: Eusebius. lib 2.
he was beheaded at Rome, the last year of Nero, cap. 2. lib. 1.
the third calends of July, and was buried in the way to Ostia, cap. 1. anno
in the thirty sixth year after his conversion, thirty seven years after the
Passion of Christ. Christi. 70.


Mark the Evangelist was the first Bishop of Alexandria, Dorotheus Eccle hist.
he was the first that preached Christ unto the Egyptians: in the time of
Traian he had a cable rope tied about his neck, and drawn through the
streets of Alexandria, Eusebius. lib 2.
that his flesh was rent in pieces, cap. 16. cap. 25.
and the stones colored with blood, he was drawn from Blocus to a place
called Angels, Dorotheus.
where he was burned to ashes by the furious Idolaters, in the month of
April, and buried at Blocus.

STephen was chosen to be one of the seven Deacons, Acts 6. 5.
by prayer and laying on of the Apostles hands, Eusebius. lib. 2.
for the public administration of the Church affairs, cap. 1.
he was stoned to death at Jerusalem by them that slew the Lord, Acts 7. 59.
he was the first of the triumphing Martyrs of Christ, Acts 8. 2.
and as they stoned him, he said: Lord Jesus receive my spirit: Luke 13. 34.
and kneeling down, he cried with a loud voice: Stephen signifies a crown
Lord lay not this sin unto their charge: and so fell asleep in the Lord.

This is to bear the cross of our Savior, Matthew. 10. 38. 39.
this is to drink of one cup with Christ: Christ says, He that takes not
up his cross and follows after me, Matthew. 16. 24, 25.
is not worthy of me, he that will save his life, shall loose it, and he that
loses his life for my sake, shall save it. Psalm. 34. 19.
Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
them all. Through many tribulations we have to enter into the king dome of
heaven: Matthew. 10. 22.
but he that endures to the end, he shall be saved.

Infinite are the number of the Saints of God that have suffered for the
testimony of Christ, as Hierome in his Epistle to Chromatius and Heliodorus,
says: Nullus esset dies quinon vltra quinque millium numerum martyrum reperiri
posset ascriptus excepto die kalendarum Ianuarij. The number of Martyrs in the
primitive Church.
There is no day in the whole year unto which the number of five thousand
Martyrs cannot be ascribed, except only the first day of January.

THus gentle Reader, not meaning to be offensive with long circumstances, I
have briefly described the lives and martyrdomes of the twelve Apostles,
amongst which I have writ of S. Peter more at large then any of the rest: and
if you deigne favorably to read this small ensuing Poem to the end: you
shall encourage me hereafter to present you with some other work that may be
more pleasing to your kind view. Thus I commit thee courteous Reader to the
reading of that which follows.

The Argument.
DID Peter wash his silly soul with tears,
unfeignedly with true repentance weeping,
And yet it was long, ere joy bereaved his cares,
Twixt joyful hope, and sad despair infleeting:
How can we then, the loathed lump of sin,
Without repentance, Joys celestial win?
For every tear that trickled down his cheeks,
From the moist springs of his dim bleared eyes,
Ten thousand sins our sinful closet keeps,
While hardened hearts, not one Peccaui cries:
His tears were infinite, and past recount,
Our tears are nothing, yet our sins surmount.
Did Peter sin, and did he then repent,
Did Peter sin, and did he after weep?
Did Peter sin, and for his sin lament?
Did Peter sin, and was his sorrow deep?
Oh, did he shed whole floods of tears for sin?
Before he could his Masters favor win.
How dare we then presuming hope for grace?
How may we hope, more sinful far then he?
How can we hope for heaven Christ's resting place?
Where none but Saints and holy Angels be?
Except with blessed Peter we repent,
And for our sins with earnest tears lament.
Vbi abundauit peccatum, Superabundauit and gratia.


FINIS.
SAINT PETER'S PATH to the Joys of Heaven.
Luke 22. 62. Peter went out and wept bitterly.
RISE Sinful man, look on the heavenly light,
Be not by Satan, to Hels Bondage brought:
Let not despairing thoughts thy soul affright:
To stroy the Treasure, Christ so dearly bought:
Say not with Cain, the Lord cannot forgive:
His oil of grace will thy sick soul relieve.
His life preseruing-mercy passes all
The glorious works, that ever he did make:
For whosoever faithfully does call
On his great Name, he never does forsake,
Though skarlet sins thy soul do ouergrow,
Yet his sweet blood will wash them white as snow.
Cast not thy looks against the sullen ground,
But look on Christ, fast nailed to the Cross,
His death of life, did death and hell confound,
And therewithal, redeemed thy greatest loss:
Adam wreckt our souls, Christ was souls life beginner,
His blood saved thee; and me the vildest sinner.
If thy lewd heart all wicked sins had wrought,
Or that the worlds whole sins in thee did lie:
Yet our great GOD, that made all things of naught,
Can banish them, with one wink of his eye:
He can, and will, if thou in him do trust,
And make thy soul copartner with the Just.
But if thou ask my Name, that is so bold,
Firmly to urge, Heavens mercy thus to thee,
And Christ's compassion to thy heart unfold:
Let thy sick soul give healthful ear to me,
Of Christ's Apostles, I was counted one,
But sinful'st wretch, that ever men looked on.
To 'this worlds sight, was never man more hateful,
Or that committed greater sin, then I,
Nor for Gods blessings, could be more ungrateful,
Who did my heavenly Master, flat deny,
Falsely swearing, I did never know him,
When diverse folks, to my dull sight did show him.
Then which foul fact, what could be greater sin?
More wickedness, did never man commit:
Yet true repentance did new life begin:
Christ did forgive, and all my sins forget:
Repent therefore, and faithfully believe:
Then God in mercy, will thy sins forgive.
I will declare my foul offenses story,
To give true comfort to despairing souls:
But most of all, to manifest Gods glory,
Whose glorious greatness, Angels still extols:
Then bear in mind, his all sufficient might,
And in thy heart, engraue what I recite.
In launcing out the scumme of my foul crimes,
Whose ulcer smell impoysoneth cleerest sense,
Compare therewith thy faults, of former times
Then note the scope, twixt thine, and mine offense:
Fly fast to Christ, and imitate my tears,
If sight thereof, affright thy soul with fears.
Tears shed in time, does win a blissful hour,
For they perfume the soul with luster joy,
The more in plenty, greater is their power
Combind in bliss, from Satan's foul annoy:
Then let thy tears, for sin in streams arise,
Till death damme up the welsprings of thy eyes.
Such pearled deaw, allureth God to grace,
Styled in the lymbecke of submissiue minds,
With heat of contrite heart, which brings in place,
The liquid juice, that fowlest parts refines:
My suite lay dead, and was deferred by sin,
Til tears, (true Orators) did my verdict win.
Confession first, makes way to mercies seat:
Next true Repentance, mooues the Judge to pity:
Condemn thy self for thy offenses great,
So on thy faults, accusers cannot iettie:
Christ is thy Judge, thy Savior meek and kind,
Then have no doubt, for mercy thou shall find.
Impious wretch, vile object of disgrace,
The map of shame, the excrement of earth,
A wretched impe, the spring of Jones race,
In fair Bethsaida City first took breath,
There took I life, that true life's Lord denide,
The mynt of lies, that truth it self defide.
At man's estate a Fisher I became,
That with hard toil maintained my simple charge,
With my poor brother, Andrew called by name,
Plunged among the mounting waves at large,
Where we with labor, moyld, and wearied sore,
For succor sayld to Galilean shore.
What time behold, on pleasant bancke did stand,
Our sweet Messiah, Savior of mankind,
Whose heavenly voice did call us both to land,
Unworthy men, did such great favor find:
Come follow me, (the Prince of peace did say,)
Fishers of men, I Will make you both this day.
Thus from a base, and servile kind of life,
Unto a sacred Function were we called,
Exempt from former sorrow, care and strife,
Whereto, before, our heavy hearts were thrald,
And in this holy service did we see
The power of God, and his great Majesty.
Attending on our Master most divine,
Unto a blessed Marriage, was he bidden,
There turned he water into wholesome wine,
Showing his Godhead, which before lay hidden:
A foul infected Leaper did he heal,
Who to the Priests the same did soon reveal,
The Captains servant, that lay sick in bed,
And with the shaking palsy sore was grieved,
So soon as Christ, the blessed word had said,
His trembling ioints with health were straight relieved:
From men possessed he threw fierce devils away,
And with his word rebukt the raging sea.
He did restore the blind unto their sight:
Lame crippled persons, he did make to go:
The dumb to speak, and by his powerful might
The dead he raised, that long lay stinking so:
And with five loaves of bread, he did suffice
Five thousand men, before my sinful eyes.
Could I so kind and loving Lord forget?
That in my wants, my need supplied ever,
Careful he was, in paying my due debt,
My wives sick mother, healed he of a fever,
When I lackt coin, great Caesar's right to pay,
A fish he forced, to bring me some straightway.
To grace me with a blessed Apostles right,
Three times he charged me for to feed his sheep,
But I false wretch did disobey him quight,
His flock from harm, I had no care to keep:
Oh, how could I, to them a Pastor be?
When I my self, did stray so grieuouslie.
Yet was his gracious favor such to me,
He took me up, into the mountain hie,
His Transfiguration for to see,
Which then appeared, in mighty Majesty,
Where Moses, and Elias both did walk,
And with out blessed Savior fell in talk.
Bright as the Sun, in chiefest of his pride,
So did the glory of his face appear,
His seamelesse garments shin'de on every side,
Like to the light, when it is found most clear:
All this and more did I behold and see,
Yet fearelesse fell to foul iniquity.
Who would against this blessed God offend?
Who durst a Judge, so mighty, quite deny?
Who would not fear, and learn his life to mend?
Since such a Lord, his secrets can discrie:
Who would not mon'th, day, minute, time, and hour,
Yea always dread his Justice, might and power.
Yet I transgrest against this Prince of might,
Whose Majesty sits in a glorious Throne,
His eyes like fire, shining pure and bright,
His face more clear, then any precious stone:
Angels and Saints attend in his presence,
Thrones, Prophets, Powers, Martyrs, Innocents.
Sweet Lord, with favor measure my offense,
Let true repentance counteruaile thine ire,
Let tears appease, where trespass does incense,
Let pity move: let humble hope desire:
Lord scourge me not, according to desert,
Let sinners see how merciful thou art.
The holy feast of Easter drawing nie,
Unto Jerusalem would my Savior go,
Showing to us, what death he was to die,
As holy Prophets often did foreshow,
That he thereby, might save from death and hell,
The soul of man, which by transgression fell.
Thus Adams trespass brought a scourging rod,
His poor successors to torment for sin,
Which plucked from pleasure, the Image of our God,
See what destruction Adam did begin?
His fall brought sin, and sin did death require,
Sin drowned the world, and Sodom set on fire.
Ah wretched Eve, that first procured this strife,
By tasting of the Tree, both good and ill,
Which brought to us a woeful laboring life,
With sweating face, the barren earth to till:
For which offense, the holy Godhead said,
Return to earth, whereof thou first wast made.
For this foul fact, man's soul was damned to hell,
And nothing could appease Gods wrathful ire,
But his Sons blood, whom he beloved so well,
Who for our sakes did shameful death desire:
We did transgress, and he did suffer smart,
But then this knowledge was not in my heart.
Wherefore when I did understand and hear,
That Christ to fair Jerusalem would go,
The Scribes and Elders I did greatly fear,
Which sutly sought, his life to overthrow:
Then did I take my Lord aside, and say,
Look to thy self, Lord shun this bainfull way.
But my rash zeal, full sore my God offended,
Who called me Satan, laying to my charge,
I favored not his holy will intended,
But like a flatrer, slipped my words at large:
False fainting zeal, shadowed with good pretense,
No veil can hide the shame of my offense.
Now mark the sorrow that I shall unfold,
When he to fair Jerusalem was come,
The traitor Judas, his good Master sold,
For thirty pence, God wot, a slender sum:
Which damned deed, although he sought to hide
Christ knew full well, by whom all hearts are tried.
Then when he had his blessed Supperended,
Up to mount Oliuet did he sadly go,
And we upon our heavenly Master tended,
In whose sad soul deaths sorrow then did grow:
Who said to us, when he the hill ascended,
All you this night, through me shall be offended.
For it is written, and it shall be so:
I Will smite the Shepherd on the fertile plain,
Then all his flock shall scatter to and fro:
But when from vanquished death I rise again,
By mighty power and heavenly deity,
I Will walk before you into Galile.
But hereupon, this answer I did make,
And freely spoke, what I in heart intended,
My Lord and Master will I not forsake,
Though all the world, with thee should be offended:
But Jesus said, Before the cock crow twice,
This night, (for fear,) thou will deny me thrice.
Upon these words, I did my speeches double,
And told my Lord, what ever came of me,
I would not shrink, for any worldly trouble,
Respecting not, enforced calamity,
In all disgraces, Peter first will die
A lingering death, ere he his Lord deny.
Then went my Lord himself alone to pray
With heavy heart, and laid him on the earth,
Who said to us, VVatch you a while and stay,
For my sed Soul is heavy to the death.
But while he sweat cold water mixed with blood,
We careless, slept, and did no other good.
Three times came Christ, and found us fast asleep,
While he attended Judas spiteful hour,
To think thereon, it makes my heart to weep,
Christ tasting then, a bitter bleeding shower:
Thus lay we careless, while his care increast,
We slept, and he in praying never ceast.
What drowsy drones were we? that had no power,
On Gethseman, to watch a little space,
Ah, could not we, forbear one sleeping hour?
While Christ lay praying, with a watrie face:
Whose Agony that time, was found so great,
That he all over bathed in bloody sweat.
Then came our Savior unto us, and said:
Sleep now henceforth, and ever take your rest,
The hour is at hand, the plot is laid,
That wretched sinners must have their request:
Arise, arise, so drowsy do not stand,
I shall be took, the traitor is at hand.
Our Savior had these words no sooner spoken,
But Judas came, with others very strong,
The Traitor gave a kiss, which was the token
Betrayed my Lord: so took they him along:
O Sin of sins, what falsehood worse then this?
To harbor Treason in a trothlesse kiss.
My Savior thus abus'de, I banished fear,
At this lewd troop, I straight drew out my sword,
And smiting Malcus, I cut off his ear,
For which my Christ gave me a checking word:
Then leading him away, on my reproof,
With lingering steps I followed him aloof.
Oh Coward, here thy hollow heart begins,
I followed in the dark, as all unknown,
Which does increase my great and grievous sins,
In Calender of shame, my name is shown:
I that erewhile such mighty brags did make,
With pale-fac't fear did now begin to shake.
False hearted man, and full of wicked ill,
Into the court of Caiphas did I go,
And warmed me there, while cold my heart did kill:
Coldness of faith, the root of all my woe:
O wretch of all men, well deserving hate,
For buying fire, at such a damned rate.
There came to me a Wench, and thus she said:
Thou sure art one of this Man's company,
For by thy countnance is the same bewraid:
But what she said, I stiffely did deny:
O sinful soul for this thy lack of grace,
Weep, weep, till tears make gutters in thy face.
With that the quick rebuker of my vice,
The wakefull cock did then begin to crow,
Yet ere he crew, I did deny him thrice,
And swore I knew him not, whom I did know:
O sin of sins! O excrement of earth!
Forgive me Christ, though my desert be death.
Then Christ on me did cast a glorious view,
Like to a Star that glanced in the sky,
Whereby behold, my foul offense I knew,
That my hearts thoughts were open to his eye:
And thereupon the Cock again did crow,
The heavy watchword of my overthrow.
But when I saw his piercing eyes look back,
As I pronounst my perjury within,
O how my soul did feel a sudden wrack,
Thus struck against the damned rock of sin:
Which made me straight to get me out of door,
And on the thirsty earth my tears to power.
And with a woeful bitter bleeding heart,
Thus I began to thunder out my cry:
Lord look not on me, after my desert,
I have deserved, eternal death to die:
Though I on earth have here denied thee,
Yet of thy Kingdom, Lord, deny not me.
Celestial power, Creations sole beginner,
View here thy poor Apostles relenting,
Meekely forgive, a true repentant sinner,
That with salt tears is evermore repenting:
But who? a wretch, unworthy to be known,
A Saint? O no, not Gods, nor yet his own.
All weeping eyes, resign to me your tears.
From weeping will I never cease, but weep,
For why? my sins have filled my soul with fears,
And floods of sorrows breaks my soundest sleep:
The more distills the liquid Olive tree,
The better will the fruit in season be.
And that makes me, lament my life so ill,
With streaming tears, so long as I have breath,
Least sin and hell my spotted soul should spill,
Which daily threatens my eternal death:
Though death eternal be my due desert,
Yet Lord forgive my sad repenting heart.
Accusing Satan, fills my soul with fears,
Demanding, how I dare for mercy call?
A reeking voice, from hell rings in my ears,
That I of force, must to perdition fall:
Whose foggy stem does seek my soul to blind,
That the true way to Christ I might not find.
Damned wretch (say they) how can thou hope for grace?
Christ's sacred word is precious and most pure,
Ashamed thou wast to know thy Masters face,
Therefore ashamed of thee, he will be sure:
For fear of death, thy life for to prolong,
Thou slew'st thy soul, by rashness of thy tongue.
Christ in a parable plain, bewrayes this case,
He damned the slothful servant found asleep:
And he that to the wedding forced was:
The foolish Virgins, wanting care to keep
Their lamps with oil, when they with him should go.
Were for this trespass throw'n to lasting woe.
See how severely Christ, does sinners use,
He spared not Saul, although his true anointed,
But cast him off, and did him quite refuse
For sparing Agag, otherwise appointed:
If Christ spared not chief branches of his tree,
Then sinful soul, what shall become of thee?
Then bootles spend not thou thy loathed breath,
In vain thou do for grace and mercy cry,
Thou have with Judas won a traitors death,
He sold his Lord, and thou do him deny:
O wretched soul, nay most accursed devil,
For none but fiends would do so bad an evil.
Thou mask of shame: badge of a guilty mind:
Thou map of sin: thou common foe of fame:
Outcast on earth: thou whelpe of Tygres kind:
God from his book, has* blotted out thy name:
At thy complaint, the Lord does stop his ears,
He naught respects thy groans or bitter tears.
Curse wretched man, the time that thou wast borne,
On thy birth day, soul sin imbraste thee fast;
To vanquish thee, and make thee thus forlorn:
Thereby from grace to have thee quite out cast.
What then, a saint, no no, a beast, nay worse,
Abiuring Christ, thou have a lasting curse.
False fainting heart which fear did overthrow,
To save thy life, thou did thy promise break:
How can thou think, that Christ will mercy show,
When as thy faith was found to him so weak?
To add small time, unto a fleeting life,
Thy soul is filled with sorrow, woe and strife.
O purchase base, to length thy life by sin,
Infamous wretch, deserving death for meede,
Would thou permita woman's words to win
Thy love from Christ, even in his greatest need,
What favor can thou find that Christ deluded
Angels for sin, from Heaven were excluded.
Wherefore was such a caytife namde a Saint,
Whose speeches vowed spit and bitter gall,
That in Christ's quarrel cowardly did faint:
Could an Apostle catch so foul a fall?
Black fiends of hell hereat do laugh and smile,
That they did Peter in such sort beguile.
Despair and dye, rip thy foul intrals out,
To search thy conscience make no long delay,
It Is foul and guilty therefore out of doubt:
It Will witness be against thee at that day.
Both clarke and Judge, and jury will it be,
For to condemn, but not to set thee free.
Thus sin and Satan did my soul accuse,
Setting the filth of sin before my eyes,
My heart with terror did he sore abuse:
Who said that Christ my prayers would despise:
But yet defying him, though flesh were frail,
Through grace I began my faults thus to be wail.
Most mighty Lord, sick is my soul within,
To think that I against my God offended:
Sweet Christ forgive the greatness of my sin,
Save me Lord Jesus, else I am condemned.
Rent heart, weep eyes, and plead thou wicked tougue,
Plead thou for mercy, that did Christ such wrong.
O holy spirit that see my restles tears,
Read joyful lessons to my painting heart:
For Satan speaks of naught, but rufull fears,
And grief conceales my souls incessant smart.
My guilty eyes, that still pursues my sin,
Each moment does my grief afresh begin.
Look on the thoughts of a perplexed mind,
Their irksome days, that leads a loathsome life,
There is no joy, or comforts I can find,
Such vain illusions keeps me still in strife:
O brittle life! that vadeth like a flower,
Unstable mind! often changed in an hour.
This world allured me with deceiving hours,
Living I find a Lab'rinth void of measure,
A grove of grief, a field of blasted flowers,
A stony ground, where grows no spark of pleasure:
A witching phrenzie, pleasant to the ears,
A dreadfulll den, a surging river of tears.
O splendent Christ! which suffered for my sin,
Celestial Substance! let me taste thy sweet,
That my poor soul may be refresht within,
Which this false world does clog with cares unmeet,
The holy Ghost to my poor spirit apply,
That on thy mercy I may still rely.
Behold my eyes, with daily weeping tears
Are blear'd and parcht, for my offenses done,
Thy grace I crave, my heart thy Justice fears,
With trembling joints, my souls distress begone:
Sin causes grief, for sorrow is their share,
That in the shop of shame trades perjured ware.
Sins farm I rented, with hard intrest bought,
The rent my soul, yet all my gain was grief,
Dear was that purchase, which my downfall wrought
In Caiphas court, I lost my souls relief:
O wretched men! that buys the curse of hell,
With wrecke of souls, the wares that devils sell.
Lord let thy mercy be the only key,
To open the door of my afflicted heart,
Where my accounts in secret hidden lie,
Griping my conscience with extremest smart:
And thereby let thy holy spirit in,
Which is of force to dispossess my sin.
Lord seek the sheep, that long has gone astray:
The prodigal to thee his moan has made,
I have procured and wrought my own decay,
And of damnation am I sore afraid:
If thou will help, O sweet Christ! help me now,
And make not Peter break, although he bow.
O write my tears within the book of life!
The register of thine elected fold,
Where mercy and compassion shines rife,
There Lord, let Peter's name be sure intold:
Protect me Lord, and free me from all fears,
Whose soul is drencht within a shower of tears.
With mildenes measure, my submissiue mind,
Meekely forgive, I crave with contrite heart
Let thy poor servant, thy free mercy find,
With sighs I beg, release of earned smart.
Bent knees, thick sobs, wet eyes, sad heart begin,
Plead clients plead, Gods mercy sweet to win.
Sinful Disciple, fall flat on thy face,
And warm the thirsty earth with flowing tears:
Yea, rise not up, till thou have purchaste grace
Ring rufull sobs, repentant in his ears.
A true and contrite heavy soul for sin,
The Lord regardes, and most does joy therein.
Redeem me then with ransom of thy love,
Release my bondage from sins captive gaile:
Let Peter's true repentance pity move,
And let thy mercy be my souls sure bail.
Tender my sui^e, cancel offenses great,
With fear I crave, with hope I do entreat.
O that I had not borne so base a mind,
As to deny my Christ, that did me make:
But that I had, with constant Steven been kind
To have been stoned for my masters sake.
Then had I never known this hellish smart,
That wounds my conscience, and does kill my heart,
What did produce me to this cursed crime?
How came I so securely rockt asleep:
The monster sin, my wings of faith did lime,
I could not fly that hellish danger deep.
Blasphemous heart, benumd with deadly cold,
Thou did my tongue, to periuries unfold.
Ah woe is me, I am that cursed Caine,
That murdered Abel, I may justly say,
His precious blood does issue out amain,
And it was my sins, that did my Savior slay:
Had I so many eyes, as Stars in sky,
For this offense, well might I weep them dry.
I do bewail my foul committed sin
Against Christ, redeemer of my soul from hell,
Sweet Savior, let my soul thy mercy win,
That I among the damned may not dwell:
For I confess without thy mercies store,
I shall be damnd in hell for evermore.
Ah servile fear, that maskes a drooping mind,
Subject to sin, base captive unto thrall:
Could thou permit a silly woman kind,
To be contriuer of thy shameful fall.
Were now the Cock to crow as thrice he crew,
No woman (though I did) should me subdue.
O hasty rashness, where true faith was fled,
Unsavory tree, where fruits of sin do grow
For want of faith, let floods of tears be shed,
Baptize anew, thy soul in streams of woe:
Too long they live, that live till they be naught,
How cheap sold I, what Christ so deerly bought.
Come idle eyes, it is long time since ye wept,
Strain out my sorrows, fruits of my untruth,
That springing streams of tears may still be kept,
To blaze with plaints the Echoes of my ruth:
Unkind in kindness, where faint fear took place,
To spit thy poison in thy makers face.
O wretched Peter, far worse then the Jews,
That hist at Christ, like poisoned stinging snakes,
Whose scornful mocks, his patience did abuse,
Who notwithstanding dyed for their sakes:
My oaths were darts, my cruel tongue the sting,
My God the mark, and him I did malign.
With sin, O Lord, my soul is sore attainted,
My mind, my thoughts, my heart is clogged with grief,
Heart throbbing fear, and treason has me haunted,
All these are ruins of my souls relief:
Inconstancy, foul fraud, and false self will,
These gave attendance, my poor soul to kill.
Despair not Peter, do not thy God forget,
To call for mercy do thy best endeavor,
Never did he refuse a sinner yet:
Nor craved his death, but wished him life for ever.
All burdned souls come unto me says he,
And of your grief you shall released be.
Therefore I think my self thrice happy blessed,
For that I hope I shall behold his bliss,
Although this flesh be frail, full of unrest,
Against the spirit, working much amiss:
Yet Christ his mercy flows like a spring,
While his wounds bleed, received for my sin.
I did offend thee Lord with periurde speech,
Which wicked deed I do from heart repent:
Therefore sweet Lord I humbly do beseech,
To save his soul that does for sin lament:
For I believe, and for a truth I know,
My scarlet sins thou can convert to snow.
Lord cleanse me then, thy blessing on me spread,
With many foes my soul is hard beset:
Be thou my strength and helmet for my head;
And with thy treasure pay my servile debt,
As tears of vines foul leprosy does cure,
So ulcer sins, is by thy blood made pure.
Why then my soul, wherefore art thou so sad,
And why art thou disquieted within?
Pluck up thy self, be joyful and most glad,
Christ by his passion washed away my sin:
Though of all men the worst to be esteemed,
Yet by my Savior is my soul redeemed.
Then Peter break from that vilde tirant strong,
Shake off his chains, and burst his hellish bands:
Sin has thee kept in servitude too long,
And run to Jesus where he meekely stands,
Spread on the Cross wide open with his arms,
Thee to embrace, and keep thee from all harms.
Lo thus with faith and hope still did I pray:
Christ heard my suite, and all my sins forgave,
Poor sinners suites no time he does delay;
He came from Heaven, repenting souls to save.
None can on earth a greater sinner be,
Then I was found, and yet he saved me.
The wicked Jews that halde him to the Cross
With many taunting terms, and hateful scorns,
He greatly grieude their souls eternal loss,
While they did crown his holy head with thorns.
They whipped his body, bored his hands and feet,
Yea pearst his side, and did rejoice to see'r.
But this Beathlemite, dear son of God,
Which by his wisdom could have staide this strife,
Yet rather chose, to feel Gods heavy rod,
Then we should lose the joys of blessed life:
For rather then we should hels torment try,
He spared not to yield himself to die.
Yet cursed Scribes did take no pity when
The bloody streams from his goard sides did sink,
The Soldiers Spear was the registring pen,
His precious blood was made the staining ink,
Whereby he did Heavens bliss to us reveal,
And Consummatum est was his true seal.
Why should I cease, posterities to tell,
That Christ alone did work our exaltation,
He raisde us up, that by transgression fell,
And suffered death with great humiliation,
To pluck us from the plunging pit of sin,
Or else we had in darkness ever bin.
Stricken he was, and thereby were we healed,
And by his death, he brought us lasting life,
In his fair hands our foul offense was sealed,
That so we might be freede from Satan's strife.
Our hateful sins, these bitter torments urged,
But by his blood, our sins had never been purged.
Take heed, detest, abhor, fly sin amain,
Which brought our Lord to his most doleful death:
And since his wounds are now made whole again,
Do not renew them by sin-poysning breath:
O do not mock and offer him a teede;
Rub not his wounds afresh to make them bleed.
Now he is crowned with eternal glory,
And high installed in a heavenly Throne,
Pluck him not down, but for thy sin be sorry,
Least like the Jews thou sealest him in stone:
He does more grieve at one poor sinners loss,
Then all the panges he suffered on the cross.
The pricking Thorns that gorde his holy head,
Was sure our sins; the nails our sins also,
That pierst his hands and feet, till he was dead;
Our sins the spear, that made the blood to flow.
Our sins were those, yt whipped him with such strife,
Our sins the Cross, that took away his life.
If Mary mourned for our sweet Messiah,
For Benjamin, if Rachel did lament,
If Isreal wept for their good King Josias,
If flintie stones at Christ's death did rent:
Then may we rent our hearts, and weep as much,
That for our sins Christ's torment should be such.
O be thou earnest to subdue thy sin,
And strive with God till he have blessed thee,
As Jacob did; so he his wish did win:
Of Jacobs race if thou will counted be,
In faithful sort he did Gods favor seek,
Wrestling by prayer, and submission meek:
The Ostridge wild, with swift wings cannot fly,
But lifts his body up when he does run,
Pricking himself with spurs, faster to hie,
And so his present danger does he shun:
So prick your hearts, and run from sin amain,
The deadly danger of eternal pain.
Look sinful soul, and looking view thy fill,
Mark in man's body how the Artiers run,
Beating the veins, and never stand they still,
Least that the blood should grow corrupt and number:
So beat thy heart, with praying never cease,
Least corrupt sin does more and more increase.
And pray that thou may see his glorious face,
Who is the joy of Angels and of Saints;
He gives reward to them that asks grace,
They shall obtain the bliss that never faints:
Who ever shall be safe from all anoy,
Crownde with true honor and eternal joy.
Blessed is that soul, which has truly warded,
Where Saints are Clerks, and Jesus is the Judge,
Angels the Jury, Innocence the Verdit,
Where is no fees, nor cause of any grudge:
Who would not shed whole floods of tears awhile,
Which afterward might have such cause to smile?
Esteem the worth of true heart-grieued tears,
Obtaining mercy, at Gods sacred seat;
And pleading pardon in his gracious ears,
Repentance true, does hide offenses great:
Tears tie the tongue of an accusers grudge,
Softning the rigor of seuerest Judge.
Tears like true Advocates won my Lords love,
By tears, first did I fly from sin to grace,
By tears, I did my Christ to mercy move,
By tears being washed, Christ did my soul embrace:
By tears, great plagues the Ninevites did prevent,
At Jonas preaching when they did lament.
These weeping tears did quench Gods kindled ire,
Appeasde his fury, winning heavens bliss,
Procured Gods grace, purchased my souls desire,
Whereas the spring of life eternal is:
Then Christ by grace I found my hearts direction,
Who then instal'd my soul with true perfection.
Perfection pure, where springes of mercy rise,
Whereas the crown of life is free from fear,
Where the cheer's joy, a Kingdom is the prize,
Saints faithful subjects, Angels are the queare:
Where Gods temple the Lamb of glorious light
Is guarded in his Throne with Angels bright.
Bright is his Glory, as the purest Sun,
Where company of Saints thou shall enjoy,
Receipt of a Diadem thy soul has won,
Where life's fee simple suffers no annoy:
Joyful Receipt, where souls are not distressed,
But live in pleasure, and are ever blessed.
Blessed? o thrice ten times blessed are they,
Attaining joy of heaven with mournful tears,
Where Is life without impeachment or decay,
Where souls are settled free from former fears,:
O happy soul! thrice happy there to dwell,
Where joy passes conceit, for tongue to tell,
Sweet Jesus take my soul into that place,
Which I so long time longed for to see,
Where I may view my Lords illustrate face,
And laud the greatness of thy Majesty:
O joy of joys! O pure celestial sight!
Where mercy shines with sweet abundant light.
O sinful man, think on this blessed fruit,
Which true repentance to thy soul does bring:
Cease not to pray, till God does grant thy suite,
Peccaui cry, with David royal King.
Hearts true contrition, is souls bliss beginner,
Heaven joys to see a true converted sinner.
While sorrow sits with moan and casts her count,
While woe and misery brings their muses thither,
To nurse thy griefs in numbers that amount,
Use sighs in lieu of tears and sobs together:
By sighs and groans rue thy distresses deep,
When dried eyes denies thee tears to weep.
The Lord will sure accept thy inward cries,
When faith with love, on spotless Christ is plaste,
Thy heart may weep, though dried be thy eyes:
For Adams sighs and groans the Lord imbraste,
For when she used, nor words, nor weeping tears,
God said, why cri'st thou thus within my ears.
Our wretched minds besiegde with fruitles toys,
Inchainde in sin, and trained unto thrall,
In errors lap lies luld with brittle joys,
Till grief does ring the ruin of our fall:
Which wounds our souls with inward bleeding sores,
That stepped in danger of deaths fatal doors.
From woe, sin, and sorrow shall we never be free,
Till death to our acquittance sets his hand,
Nor receive the charter of eternity,
Till our souls present at the sealing stand:
But when death comes to put his pen to write,
None knows the day, the time, the hour, or night.
Consider well, all mortal flesh is grass,
The beauty thereof fades like a flower:
All things are vain we seek to bring to pass,
Surety of life, no creature has one hour.
Then place thy soul, to please the Lord of light,
So shall thou live for ever in his sight.
This life is like the seasons of the year,
A harvest that abides the reapers will:
Some in the seed, the blade, some in the ear,
Is blasted, cropped, cut, mowne and reaped still.
A shade, a breath, a blast, a span, a flower,
A mornings deaw that is dried in an hour.
First mark the sorrows of this wretched life,
And how thy soul still clogged is with sin;
How worldly cares do keep thee still in strife,
The many perils thou art wrapped in.
Then shall thou see this life to us has lent,
But hearts vexation, grief and discontent.
Our greatest pleasures end in pains distress,
The Elements offend us with their heat,
The earth with vapors cold does us oppress,
Our health is mixed with sickness, dangers great:
To be alone, alack it grieves us sore,
And company disturbeth us much more.
Admit the Lord has lent thee earthly treasure,
And thou enioyest the labor of thy hands,
Thy wife and children is to thee a pleasure;
Thou raisest sumptuous buildings on thy lands.
What is all this, were thou a Prince of power,
Having no charter of thy life one hour?
This life (alas) is but a wink of Time,
And on eternity our joys depend:
Our mortal bodies are but earth and slime,
Ordainde of God, his glory to attend,
Like to a bubble, weak as brittle glass,
Or like a shadow that full soon does pass.
Why should we sleep or slug one night in sin,
Seeing that night might chance to be our last,
What grievous danger should our souls be in,
If vnpreparde so sinful hence we past:
Then every minute wail thy sin with sorrow,
Men here to day, are laid in earth to morrow.
But thou will say, the world bids me delay,
And tells me that I need not fear my life,
I shall live long, and in great pleasure stay:
And have much time t'auoide all future strife.
Ah think not so, the flattering world does lie,
While yet thou speak, thou may on sudden die.
Amend thy life therefore without all let,
Least when the time approaches thou should dye;
Thou do thy souls chief comfort quite forget,
When thousand cares will lead thy thoughts awrie.
Repent, repent, death has thy life in gage,
Repent in youth, stay not till crooked age.
O think what woeful state thy soul is in,
When death draws near with terrible assaults:
That hour may thou be vexed so with sin,
So much tormented with thy filthy faults,
And with thy bodies pain so vexed be,
That true repentance will be far from thee.
What time thy woeful mind will chiefly run,
Which way thou may have ease of bodies smart;
And how thou may those bitter gripings shun,
That with such sorrow burdens thy poor heart.
How ill aduisde wast thou in fainting breath,
To post repentance to the hour of death.
What horror then will thy poor heart endure,
When fear of death does so afflict thy mind,
When phisickes help cannot thy conscience cure;
Nor for thy soul a remedy can find,
When thou shall see the devil accusing stand,
And gaping hell upon the other hand.
But in respect this grief is naught at all,
Touching thy soul, and whither it shall go,
After she leaves this fading life mortal:
She at Gods judgment seat her self must show,
Sentence to have, and glory to obtain,
Or else sad sorrow and eternal pain.
O think what torments sinners have in hell,
That Is mad with pain, and there does rore and cry;
In extreme torment which no tongue can tell,
Always a dying but can never die:
O heart! o mind! o eyes behold and see,
Observe and mark what endless torments be.
Judas too late does there himself excuse,
Too late for Achan, to restore his gold,
Gehezi does his gifts too late refuse,
And Dives all too late his faults unfold.
Lord though with these we have deserved pain,
Yet to thy kingdom let our souls retain.
The seas saltnes is tasted by one drop,
False oaths describes a guilty heart within,
The world wins our flesh to a servile lot:
Fear does seduce us unto deadly sin.
Most mighty Lord, therefore to thee we pray,
That thy true spirit may our conscience stay.
Sweet Jesus Christ, resplendent in thy seat,
Which purchased by thy death, man's perfect joy,
For my misdeedes, thy pardon I entreat;
With wings of mercy shroude us from anoy:
Thy death slew death, thy pains was our protection,
Thou triumphst over all by glorious resurrection.
It was foretold, and truly spoke of thee,
By holy Prophets many years ago,
Gods glorious son should no corruption see,
Laid dead in grave, from grave alive should go.
The sealed stone, the careful watchmens eye,
Could not keep down thy mighty majesty.
But when I had my Saviors presence lost,
Inforste I was unto my former trade,
On surging waves my fishing boat was tossed,
Yet of great labor little gain I made:
All day I toyld, but all in vain I wraught,
And all the tedious night, nothing I caught.
But when the cheerful mornings light appeard,
Upon the sandy shore my Savior stood,
Whose heavenly voice, our heavy hearts so cheard:
Calling to us, upon the surging flood.
My friends (quoth he) what? have you any meat?
We answered no; nor yet one bit to eat.
Then said the Lord, that made both sea and land,
Upon the right side of your sliding ship,
Cast forth your tangling nets with nimble hand,
And you shall find, what erst from you did slip.
We did the same, whereby such store we got,
As never like did fall unto our lot.
So full of skipping fish the net was found,
That we by all our force, our strength and power,
Not able were to draw it from the ground,
Such was the store we got that instant hour:
At that one draught, my self did tell and see,
An hundred mighty fishes fifty three.
I knew not Lord thy sacred majesty,
For sin and shame, had dulled Peter quite,
Till John to me, thy glory did descrie:
I quite forgot my Christ, the Lord of might:
Yet see my Savior in my greatest need,
Forsook me not for all my heinous deed.
This did revive my heavy mournful mind,
A treble comfort did my joy restore:
John, child of grace, did soon our Savior find,
Who said, it is Jesus stands on the shore:
It is the Lord, undoubted it is he,
As by this work we may sufficient see.
I hearing that, in have did leave my net,
And to my Savior sworm, whereas he stood,
Through many mounting billows did I get,
For he presern'd me in the raging flood:
The peaceful shore, when so I had attaind,
There saw I fire, and fish, and bread ordaind.
A heavenly dinner on the earth below,
New raised Christ, for us had there preparde,
He saw our want, and did our hunger know,
Poor men distressed, the Lord does still regard:
Christ therefore calde, and bad us come to dinner,
The righteous Lord eats with a wretched sinner.
With his most holy hand he brake us bread,
And gave us fish, our hunger to assuage:
A gracious countnance, on us did he spread,
Whose conquest did, both death and hell enrage.
And this was now, the third time truly known,
To his Disciples, Christ himself had shown.
Then after dinner, Christ took me aside,
And thrice he asked me if I loved him:
Thrice I confessed, and three times I replyde,
Thou know my God, my love to thee is firm:
And meet it was, that thrice I should reply,
I loved him, whom thrice I did deny.
Full forty days did Christ on earth remain,
After his glorious rising from the dead;
Showing himself to his Disciples plain,
In most familiar manner, breaking bread:
When all was done, his Godhead had intended,
Most suddenly the bright heavens he ascended.
In fair Bethania did he leave us all,
While blessing us with his abundant grace,
He was taken up with power maiesticall;
A glorious cloud, his body did embrace:
We gazing after, did his power adore,
Whom Heaven inclosde, and we beheld no more.
On right hand of the fathers brightest clear,
In glory great he sits every hour,
Till in the clouds he shall again appear:
To judge the world by his eternal power.
Lord send our souls, to that most blessed place,
To see the splendour of Iehouahs face.
Our mighty God, as Daniel plain does show,
In throne does sit, the Sheep from Goats to cull;
His raiment all more white then winters snow,
His silver hair like to the purest wool,
His seat bright shining like a fiery flame,
And thousand thousands, for to serve him came.
God make us servants to so great a Lord,
To know his mercy and admired love:
Whose praise all Angels sing with one accord,
By whom all earthly creatures live and move.
With him is life that never shall decay,
Souls perfect joy does in his presence stay.
The wounded heart, by hateful sin misled,
His grace does cure, and makes for ever sound,
The bitter tears that contrite sinners shed,
Within his city is preserved and found:
Sin, death, nor hell, cannot that soul destroy,
Whom this most mighty Lord preserues for joy.
For he will lay it in a bed of peace,
And lap it round, with joy on every side,
Where is no sorrow, mourning shall surcease;
No cause of grief shall in that place abide.
It is a kingdom fraught with all delight,
Such as no heart can think, no pen can write.
No tribulation of this mortal life,
No smart, no sorrow that can happen here,
No torment, torture, no heart-killing strife,
Is worthy of the joy prepared there:
Then come all griefs, that ever eye did see,
From love of Christ, they shall not separate me.
If I do suffer for Christ Jesus name,
His dearest Saints have been as fore afflicted;
Some sawne asunder, some on sudden slain,
Imprisoned, stoned, and extremely whipped:
But yet most blessed were they, though pained so,
Heaven is their meede, where is no taste of woe.
And thither is our Savior gone before,
For us a glorious kingdom to prepare,
Where we shall live, and reign for evermore,
In heavenly pleasure passing all compare:
Then fear no foes, to them it is damnation,
But unto us a sign of sure salvation.
For why, this is a doctrine firm and sure,
Worthy of all men to be still embraced,
Christ came on earth, the sinful soul to cure,
To save all such, whom Satan has disgraced:
And when we end this life so transitory,
We shall be crownde with everlasting glory.
Then Peter cease thy ouer-mournfull dittie,
In highest heavens remains thy greatest treasure,
And with Saint John, describe that holy City,
Which is the palace of eternal pleasure:
Where Angels dwell, and Saints all clothed be,
In purest white, with palms of victory.
All pau'd with gold are those Celestial streets,
With precious stones, and Diamonds enterlaced,
Twelve gates of pearls, called Margarets,
The walls foundation, preciouslie is placed
With Chalcedon, Em'rald, Birle, Topaz, Jasper,
Chrisolet, Sardonex, Amthest and Sapher.
Christ in this heavenly City is the light,
In midst whereof, his glory does appear,
There needs no sun, for there is never night,
And from his seat, descends a river clear,
Whose precious springs with crystal streams are rife,
The banks all set with trees of lasting life.
Into this City enters none at all,
But such as are within the book of life;
No discord, no adversity does fall,
No sin, no shame, no sorrow, pain, or strife,
Among those souls which there so blessed be,
Nor ought that tastes of mortality.
But there is joy and mirth without all sadness,
Rest without labor, gain without all loss,
Health without pain, abundance ioynde with gladness,
Life without death, and cleanness without dross?
All joy unspeakable, in Gods most glorious sight,
Where Saints and Angels sing both day and night.
O joy of joys, joy without all measure,
Where Saints do bathe in everlasting bliss,
And swim in streams of ever during pleasure,
Where all the host of noble Martyrs is,
Where Abraham, Isaacke, and all Patriarchs be,
Singing sweet Alleuia's of eternity.
Mirth to the heart, and music to the ears,
Is the fruition of Gods sacred sight,
Health to the soul, and joy for bitter tears;
And to the grieved conscience sweet delight:
The crown of saints, the diadem of grace,
Whose powrefull deity rules in every place.
O when shall I behold this heavenly sight?
When shall I hear my blessed Saviors voice?
When shall I enter in this glorious light?
When shall my soul on Syon hill rejoice?
Most mighty Lord, protector of my will,
Let me sing Himnes upon thy holy hill.
Let all sick souls, laden with extreme sin,
Come unto Christ, in faith and trembling fear,
Fear ioynde with love, though they have dazeled bin,
Christ on the Cross did all offenses bear:
And then will he by his imperial might,
Blot their transgressions clean out of his sight.
Stand steadfast man, and strive thou to attain
That high immortal Crown of purity:
Till death approach, still faithful do remain,
So shall thou find Heavens true felicity.
Most glorious God (oh) hear my mournful cries,
With wings of mercy wipe my watrie eyes.
And so let all relenting sinners say,
With faith and hope in this unstable state,
With trust in God, drive damnd despair away,
And so come boldly to Gods mercy gate:
In christian armor, wrestle, strive, and venture,
Until thy soul the blissful city enter.
Where Is full fruition of thy souls salvation,
Where holy Angels still do sing and laud,
Where Saints shall triumph at thy blessed crownation,
And all the heavenly court thy joys applaude:
Warrant this Lord, free us from Satan's den,
Forget, forgive, sweet Jesus say Amen.
FINIS.

