TEXTES of Scripture, Chayning the holy Chronicle until the Sun lost his
light, and the Son brake the Serpents head: dying, rising, and ascending.

Search the Scriptures: for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they
are they which testify of me. John. 5. 39. Imprinted at London, for Gabriell
Simson and W. White: and are to be sold at their house in Fleetelane. 1591.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
IN humane affairs (gentle Reader) of Princes reign, the years wherein things
fall out, are noted of common necessity for distinction and certaynety arising
by record of time. But this record has not of ancientie continued to
posterity. For the Lord, who alters times and seasons, changes states in
such variety, that the true report of their memory perished with them. For
Divine stories, times have more use then for humane affairs: no less then
heavenly things ouermatch earthly. And as the work of God is perfect: so he
begins and continues times register, from the Creation to the Redemption.
The golden Chain which Solomon drew before the door of the most holy Debyr,
has not so much admiration as this Chain: continued from since Paradise was
shut to Adam, until the Lord opened the heavens unto the Thief, that craved
remembrance in his kingdom. The Fathers in the noblest line, draw in their age
these years, slyding by the Suns course, from the promise made to Eve,
until one of those Fathers fell once away from hope of that promise. Terah was
he that fell away: after whose death the Promise is revived to Abraham. Thence
the Lynkes of this holy Chain are fastened on other points: stately in story,
to be sooner marked: few in number, to be easily remembered: deep in
signification, to be carefully studied. These are, the Lamb and the Temple:
fit stars to draw out the times, until the true Lamb buyldeth the Temple,
raising up the temple of his body. For the distance from the Promise unto the
Lamb, even the very day is by Moses set down. Likewise the distance thence,
until the buyldyng of the Temple by Solomon. Thence the whole years of
Salomons reign: and from the departure of ten Tribes unto the burning of the
Temble. Ezekiel 4. How long the Temple lay without any decree of buyldyng it
again, we may certainly gather by the whole Captivity which Judah suffered in
Babylon. For Nebuchad-nezars house was to reign Seventy years: and Judah so
long to be in captivity. Wherefore the beginning of that Captivity must
needs be, when Nebuchad-nezar took Jerusalem, in the first of his reign, and
brought the noblest to Babylon. In the ninteenth year of Nebuchad-nezar the
Temple was brent: and thereupon the third Captivity followed. Wherefore fifty
full years are to finysh the Seventy, when Cyrus came up, and made a decree to
build the Temple again. Cyrus was not moved so to do, until Daniel was
taught by an Angel, when Christ the true Temple would consecrate him self.
That he was taught: for the very hour, when he prayed, at the time of the
euenyng offering, how long it should be until the Lord did make himself the
euenyng Offering, when the veil of the Temple rented. For this last part, the
Lord has taken special care, so long before tellyng the matter plainly: and
ceassing further particulers beyond that age, that men should rest in the
playnnes of his word, as his holy Prophets then taught of Redemption.

Holy writings touching these points, I have joined together. The playnnes
whereof, if any strive to overthrow, I will no more yield to him, then Job
would to Eliphaz, Zophar, and Bildad. Although many differ in their
Chronicles, yet these places only being noted, all strife ceasseth. One, that
after Terahs death, Abraham at seventy and five years old, received the
Promise: whereof I have disputed at large in the treatise of Melchisedek. An
other, that three hundredth and ninety years. Ezekiel. 4. are from Ieroboams
drawyng Israel away to the burning of the Temple, with the third captivity:
which time, both in particulers, many have cast aright: and for the general
sum these agree: John Calvin upon Ezekiel 4. Gerard Mercator, Clement Schubert,
Math. Beroald, Joseph Scaliger, Henry Bunting. An other is, that
Nebuchad-nezars house reigned but seventy years: which the Talmud, wherein
lies all Countrey-Iewes consent, expressly holds: also old Tatianus in
Eusebius, and old Grecians commonly, no less of antiquity then the Apostles
age: in him, and in Clemens, with late writers very many, from Dan. 1. and Ier.
25. and the common rate of ages, in such as were carried captive: and saw both
the first Temple, and the second builded. The fourth knot is, the Seauens of
Daniel: wherein the propriety, as Daniel understood it, and penned it,
should suffice.

These four places ryghtly holden, end the endless controversies. Read the
textes, and understand them. The Lord teach us so to number our days, that we
may bring the heart to wisdom.

H. B.

The chief points of the holy Chronicle.
FRom the first Promise of Christ, to restore life upon death, brought in by
the Serpent: unto the second Promise made to Abraham upon the death of Terah:
whom first of the Fathers the Serpent drew to Idolatry, are years. 2083. That
space is recorded by the particular Fathers. From the Promise unto the Lamb,
appointed to express the Lamb of God, are years. 430. From the Lamb, to the
beginning of the Temple: a shadow of the truer Temple, are years. 480. From
the buyldyng of it, unto the burning: or rather the captivity upon that, are
years. 427. Thence to the end of the Captivity, where Cyrus mad a decree of
building it again, are years full. 50. Thence, until the Temple of our Lord
his body arose the third day, are years. 490. The whole sum is. 3960.
Textes of Scripture, chayning the Chronicle until the Sun lost his light,
and the Son brake the Serpents head: dying, rising, and ascending.
ADAM lived an hundredth Genesis 5. 3.
and thirty years, and begat Seth.
Seth lived an hundredth and five years, and begat Enosh.
Enosh lived nintie years, and begat Kenan.
Kenan lived seventy years, and begat Mahalaleel.
Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and begat Iered.
Iered lived an hundredth sixty and two years, and begat Henoch.
Henoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah.
Methuselah lived and hundredth eighty and seven years, and begat Lamech.
Lamech lived an hundredth eighty and two years, and begat Noah.
And Noah was five hundredth years old: and Noah begat Sem, Cham, and
Iapheth. And Noah was six hundredth years old when the flood of waters was
upon the earth.
SEM was an hundredth years old, and begat Arphaxad Genesis 11. 10.
two years after the Flood.
Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and begat Selah.
Selah lived thirty years, and begat Eber.
Eber lived four and thirty years and begat Peleg.
Peleg lived thirty years, and begat Regu.
Regu lyuen two and thirty years, and begat Serug.
Serug lived thirty years and begat Nahor.
Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat Terah.
Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran. So the days
of Terah were two hundredth and five years, and Terah died in Haran.
The Promise made to Abram, when his Father was dead. Acts. 7.
ANd God said to Abram, Get thee out of thy land, Genesis 12. 1.
and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house, unto the land that I will
show thee. And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse
thee, and in thee all the families of the earth shall be blessed. And Abram went
as the Lord commanded him, and Lot went with him. And Abram was seventy and
five years old, when he departed out of Haran. Then Abram took Sarai his wife,
and Lot his brothers son, and all their substance that they possessed, and
the souls that they had gotten in Haran, and they departed to go to the land
of Chanaan: and to the land of Chanaan they came.

The departure from Egypt, or Passover, and Law.
SO the peregrination of the children of Israel, which Exodus 12. 40. 41. 42.
were soiourners in Egypt, was four hundredth and thirty years. And when the
four hundredth and thirty year were expired, even the self same day departed
all the hosts of the Lord out of the land of Egypt. It is a night to be kept
holy to the Lord, because he brought them out of the land of Egypt: this is
that night of the Lord, which all the children of Israel must keep throughout
their generations. This is ye law of the Passover. etc. The Law which was
four hundredth and thirty years Gal. 3, 17.
after, can not disanull the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in
respect of Christ, that it should make the Promise of none effect.

The Temple of Solomon.
ANd in the four hundredth and fourscore year (after 1. Kin. 6. 1.
the childred of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt) and in the fourth
year of the reign of Solomon over Israel, in the month Zif (which is the
second month) he buylt the house of the Lord.

The whole time of Solomon, and the division of the kingdom.
THe time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over 1. King. 11. 42.
all Israel, was forty years.

And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for all Israel were 1 King. 12. 1. 2 20. 19.
come to Shechem, to make him king. And when Jeroboam the son of Nebat heard
of it (who was yet in Egypt, whyther Jeroboam had fled from king Solomon, and
dwelt in Egypt.) And when all Israel had heard that Jeroboam was come again,
they sent and called him unto the assembly, and made him king over all Israel:
none followed the house of David, but the tribe of Judah only. And Israel
rebelled against the house of David unto this day: and said. What portion have
we in David? we 1. King. 12. 16. 17.
have none inheritance in the son of Ishai. To your tents, O Israel: now
see to thine own house, David. So Israel departed unto their tents. Howbeit
over the children of Israel, which dwelt in the cities of Judah, did Rehoboam
reign still.

The Captivity of seventy years, nineteen years before the burning of the
Temple. This captivity must needs begin with the first year of
Nebuchad-nezar, seeing his house reigned but 70. years, and so the Hebrews
continually, and most ancient Greeks have held it: Greeks, both the profane
and Christians.
IN the third year of the reign of Iehoiakim king of Dan. 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
6. 21.
Judah, came Nebuchad-nezar king of Babel unto Jerusalem, and besieged it. And
the Lord gave Iehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, with part of the vessels
of the house of God, which he carried into the house of Shinar, to the house of
his God, and he brought the vessels into his gods treasury. And the king
spoke unto Ashpenaz the master of his Eunuchs, that he should bring certain
of the children of Israel, of the kings seed, and of the princes: children in
whom was no blemyshe, but well favored, and instruct in all wisdom, and well
seen in knowledge, and able to utter knowledge, and such as were able to
stand in the kings Palace, and whom they might teach the learning and the
tongue of the Caldeans. And the king appointed them provision every day of a
portion of the kings meat, and of the wine which he drank, so nourished them
three years, that at the end thereof they might stand before the king. Now
among these were certain of the children of Iudab. Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael,
and Azariah. And Daniel was unto the first year of king Cyrus.

The burning of the Temple showed in a vision, and performedin story: and the
last captivity of. 50. years.
1 THou son of man, take thee a Brick, and lay it Ezekiel. 4* 1. 2. 3* 4. 5. 6
7. 8. 9* 10. 11, and. 12. verses.
before thee, and pourtrey upon it the city, even Jerusalem, and lay siege
against it, and build a fort against it, and cast a mount against it: set the
camp also against it, and lay engines of war against it round about.
Moreover, take an iron pan, and set it for a wall of iron between thee and the
city, and direct thy face toward it, and it shall be besieged, and thou shall
lay siege against it: this shall be a sign unto the house of Israel. Sleep thou
also upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it:
according to the number of the days, that thou shall sleep upon it, thou
shall bear their iniquity. For I have laid upon thee the years of their
iniquity, according to the number of the days, even three hundredth 390.
years from Jeroboam. 427. from the foundation of the temple. 40. years since
Jeremy began in. 13. of Josias..
and ninety days: so shall thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.
And when thou have accomplyshed them, sleep again upon thy right side, and
thou shall bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days: I have
appointed thee a day for a year, even a day for a year. Therefore thou shall
direct thy face toward the siege of Jerusalem, and thine arm shall be
uncovered, and thou shall prophecy against it. And behold, I will lay bands
upon thee, and thou shall not turn thee from one side to another, till thou
have ended the days of thy siege. Thou shall take also unto thee Wheat, and
Barley, and Beans, and Lentiles, and Miller, and Fitches, and put them in one
vessel, and make thee bread thereof according to the number of the days, that
thou shall sleep upon thy side: even three hundredth and ninetic days shall
thou eat thereof. And the meat whereof thou shall eat, shall be by weight,
even twenty fhekelles a day: and from time to time shall thou eat thereof.
Thou shall drink also water by measure, even the sixth part of an Hin: from
time to time shall thou drink. And thou shall eat it as Barley cakes, and thou
shall bake it in the doung that comes out of man, in their sight.

The story of the Vision.
2 ANd in the ninth year of Zedekiahs reign, the 2. King, 25. 1, 2. 3, 4. 5,
6 7. 8 9. 10. and 11 ver.
tenth month and tenth day of the month, Nebuchad-nezer king of Babel came,
he and all his host against Jerusalem and pitched against it, and they buylt
fortes against it round about it. So the city was besieged unto the eleventh
year of king Zedekiah. And the ninth day of the month the famine was sore in
the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land. Then the
city was broken up, and all the men of war fled by night, by the way of the
gate, which is between ye two walls that was by the kings garden: now the
Caldees were by the city round about: and the king went by the way of the
wilderness. But the army of the Caldees pursued after the king, and took him
in the desartes of Jericho, and all his host was scattered from him. Then they
took the king, and carried him up to the king of Babel to Riblah, where they
gave judgment upon him. And they slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes,
and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in chains, and carried him to
Babel. And in the fifth month, and seventh day of the month, which was the
ninteinth year of king Nebuchadnezer king of Babel, came Nebuzar-adan chief
steward and servant of the king of Babel to Jerusalem, and burnt the hause of
the Lord, and the kings house, and all the houses of Jerusalem, and all the
great houses burnt he with fire. And all the army of the Caldees that were
with the chief steward, brake down the walls of Jerusalem round about. And
the rest of the people that were left in the city, and those that were fled
and fallen to the king of Babel, with the remnant of the multitude, did
Nebuzaradan chief steward carry away captive.

The last captivity of. 50. years, complete.
3 THey that were left by the sword, carried he away to 2. Chro 36. 20. to the
end.
Babel, and they were servants to him and to his sons, until the kingdom
of the Persians had rule, to fulfill the word of the Lord by the mouth of
Jeremiah, until the land had her fill of her Sabbathes: for all the days that
she lay desolate, she kept Sabbath, to fulfill seventy years.

The Babylonians fall by Cyrus, who sends the Jews home, after Daniel was
taught, the year of our Lord, his death, and the decree for buylding the
Temple.
1 IN the first year of Cyrus king of Persia (when the Ier. 25.
woroe of the Lord, spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah, was finished) the Lord
styrred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, and he made a Proclamation
through all his kingdom, and also by writing, saying, Thus says Cyrus king of
Persia, All the kingdoms of the earth has the Lord God of heaven given me,
and he has commanded me to build him an house in Jerusalem, that is in
Judah. Who is among you of all his people, with whom the Lord his God is? let
him go up.

For when King Belshazzar made a great feast to a Dan. 5. 1. 5. 9. 27. 25.
thousand of his Princes, and drank Wine before the thousand: At the same
hour appeared fingers of a man's hand, which wrote over against the
candlestick upon the plaster of the wall of the kings palace, and the king
saw the palm of the hand that wrote. Then was king Belshazzar greatly
troubled, and his countenance was changed in him, and his Princes were
astonished. Then Daniel said before king Belshazzar, This is the writing that God
has written, MEAN, MEAN, TEKEL VPHARSIN. This is the interpretation of the
thing, MEAN, God has numbered thy kingdom, and has finished it. TEKEL, thou
art weighed in the balance, and art found too light. PEERS, thy kingdom is
divided, and given to the Medes and Persians. Then at the commandment of
Belshazzar, they clothed Daniel with purple, and put a chain of gold about
his neck, and made a proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third
ruler in the kingdom. The same night was Belshazzar the king of the Caldees
slain: and Darius of the Medes cook the kingdom, being threescore and two
year old. But not alone: for the Persians and they had a fellowship in the
division: as expressed. words show.

Daniels Seuens.
2 IN the first year of Darius the son of Ahashuerosh, of the seed of the
Medes, which was made Dan. 9. 1. 2. 3. 20. to the end.
king over the realm of the Caldeans, even in the first year of his reign, I
Daniel understood by books the number of the years, whereof the Lord had
spoken unto Jeremiah the Prophet, that he would accomplysh Seventy years in
the desolation of Jerusalem. And I turned my face unto the Lord God, and sought
by prayer and supplications with fasting and sackcloth and ashes. And while I
was speaking and praying, and confessing my sin, and the sin of my people
Israel, and did present my supplication before the Lord my God, for the holy
Mountain of my God: yea, while I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel,
whom I had seen before in a vision, came flying, and touched me about the time
of the euenyng oblation: and he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O
Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee knowledge and understanding. At the
beginuyng of thy supplications the commandment came forth, and I am come to
show thee, for thou art greatly beloved: therefore understand the matter and
consider the vision. Seventy seuens (of years) are cut out for thy people,
and for thy holy City, to consume wickedness, and to abolysh sins, and to
make reconsiliation for iniquity, and to bring in righteousness everlasting,
and to seal vision and prophet, and to show Christ the Holy of Holy. Know
then and mark: From the outgoing of the Word, to return and to build
Jerusalem, unto Christ the governor, shall be seven seuens (of years) and
sixty and two seuens: in the other, it shall be restored and builded, street
and wall: and troublous shall these times be. In that after the sixty and two
seuens Christ shall be killed: and not for him self: thereupon the City and
holy place shall he destroy, the Governors own people to come, and their end
shall be with a Flood: and at the end of war, it shall have a final judgment
to desolation. But he shall confirm the Testament for many the last seven,
when in Half that Seven he shall end the Sacrifice and Oblation. Afterward
by an army abominable he shall make a desoliation, even till utter destruction
and final judgment flow upon the desolate.

The decree of buylding the Temple.
3 ANd there was found in a coffer (in the palace that Ezra 6. 2. 3. 4. 5.
was in the province of the Medes) a volume, and therein was it thus written,
as a memorial: In the first year of king Cyrus, king Cyrus made a decree for
the house of God in Jerusalem, Let the house be buylt, even the place where
they offered sacrifices, and let the walls thereof be joined together: let ye
height thereof be threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof three score
cubits, three orders of great stones, and one order of timber: and let the
expenses be given of the kings house. And also let them render the vessels of
the house of God (of gold and silver, which Nebuchadnezar took out of the
Temple which was in Jerusalem, and brought unto Babel) and let him go unto the
Temple that is in Jerusalem to his place, and put them in the house of God.

The Jews Temples fall, an others arysing.
Jesus went out, and departed from the Temple, and Math. 24. 1. 2. 3. 15.
his Disciples came to him, to show him the buyldyng of the Temple. And Jesus
said unto them, See ye not all these things? Uerily I say unto you, there
shall not be here left a stone upon a stone, that shall not be cast down. And
as he sat upon the mount of Olives, his Disciples came to him a part, saying,
Tell us when these things shall be, and what sign shall be of thy coming, and of
the end of the world. When ye shall see the abomination of desolation spoken
of by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the Holy place: (let him that reads,
consider it. Therefore, when ye see Jerusalem besieged with Soldiers, Luke 21.
20. 21. 22. 23. 24.
then understand that the desolation thereof is near. Then let them which are
in Judea, flee to the Mountains: and let them which are in the mids thereof,
depart out: and let not them that are in the country, enter therein. For these
be the days of vengeance, to fulfill all things that are written. But woe be
to them that be with child, and to them that give suck in those days: for
there shall be great distress in this land, and wrath ever this people. And
they shall fall on the edge of the sword, and shall be led captive into all
nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden under foot of the Gentiles, until the
time of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

Jesus said unto them, Destroy this Temple, and in John. 2. 19.
three days, I will raise it up again. Then said the Jews, Forty and six
years was this Temple a buyldyng (from the third of Cyrus, Dan. 3. Ezra. 4.
until Nehemias obtained the kings letters to Asaph for timber, to build the
gates of the Cloister Palace, hard by the house of God) and wylt thou rear it
up in three days? But he spoke of the Temple of his body.

Then there arose certain, and bare false witness against Mark. 14. 57. 58. 59.
him, saying, We heard him say, I will destroy this Temple made with hands,
and within three days I will build another, made without hands: But their
witness yet agreed not together.

At the dispensation of the fullness of time, when the time of the promise was
come, then spoke Jesus, and said.

Father, the hour is come: glorify thy Son. etc. John. 17. 1. John. 19. 14.
15. 16. 17.
Then Pilate on the preparation of the Passover, about the sixth hour, said
unto the Jews, Behold your king. But they cried, Away with him, away with
him, crucify him. Pilate said unto them, Shall I crucify your king? The high
Priests answered, We have no king, but Caesar. Then delivered he him unto them,
to be crucified. And they took Jesus, and led him away. And he bare his
cross, and came into a place named of dead men's skulles, which is called in
Hebrewe Golgotha: where they crucified him, and two other with him, on either
side one, and Jesus in the mids. It was (I say) about the sixth hour, and
there was darkness over all the land until the ninth hour: and the Sun was
darkened.

The time of the evening offering. Dan. 9.
ABout the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, Math 27. 46. 47. 48 49.
50 51. 52 53.
saying, Eli, Eli, lamasabachtani? that is, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? And some of them that stood there, when they heard it, said, This
man calls Elias. And straight way one of them ran, and took a Spondge, and
filled it with Uineger, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink. Other
said, Let be: let us see if Elias will come and save him. Then Jesus cried
again with a loud voice, and yielded up the ghost. And behold, the veil of
the Temple was rent in twain, from the top to the bottom, and the earth did
quake, and the stones were cloven, and the graves did open themselves, and many
bodies of the Saints which slept, arose, and came out of the graves after his
resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many.

Christ is king Dan. 9
ANd Pilate wrote also a title, and put it on the Cross, Ioh. 19 19. 20. 21 22
38.
and it was written, Jesus of Nazaret the king of the Jews. This title then
read many of the Jews, for the place where Jesus was crucified, was near to
the city: and it was written in Hebrewe, Greek, and Latin. Then said the
high Priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The king of the Jews, but
that he said, I am king of the Jews. Pilate answered, What I have written, I
have written. And after these things, Joseph of Arimathea (who was a Disciple
of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews) besought Pilate that he might
take down the body of Jesus. And Pilate gave him license. He came then and
took Jesus body. And there came also Nicodemus (which first came to Jesus by
night) and brought of Mirrhe and Aloes mingled together, about an hundredth
pound. Then took they the body of Jesus, and wrapped it in linen clothes
with the odours, as the manner of the Jews is to bury. And in that place where
Jesus was crucified, was a Garden, and in the Garden a new Sepulcher, wherein
was never man yet laid: there then laid they Jesus, because of the Jews
preparation day, for the Sepulcher was near. Now the first day of the week
came Marie Magdalene John. 20. 1. 16. 17.
early while it was yet dark, unto the Sepulcher, and saw the stone taken
away from the Tomb. Jesus says unto her, Marie. She turned her self, and
said unto him, Master. Jesus said unto her, Fasten not so upon me: for I go
not yet up to my Father, etc.

Also he presented him self a live after that he had suffered, Act. 1. 3. 4.
5. to the. 13. verse
by many infallible tokens, being seen of them by the space of forty days,
and speaking of those things which apperteine to the kingdom of God. And when
he had gathered them together, he commanded them, that they should not
depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the Father, which, said
he, ye have heard of me. For John in deed baptized with water, but ye shall be
baptized with the holy Ghost within these few days. When they therefore were
come together, they asked of him, saying, Will thou at this time restore the
kingdom to Israel? And he said, It is not for you to know the times, or the
seasons, which the Father has put in his own power: but ye shall receive power
of the holy Ghost, when he shall come on you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me
both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost
part of the earth. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he
was taken up: for a cloud took him out of their sight. And while they looked
steadfastly toward heaven, as he went, behold, two men stood by them in white
apparel, which also said, Ye men of Galile, Why stand ye gasing into heaven?
This Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come as ye have
seen him go into heaven.

FINIS.

