THE WAY TO TRVE PEACE AND REST. DELIVERED AT EDINBOROVGH In XVI. Sermons: on
the Lords Supper: Hezechiahs Sickness: and other select Scriptures. By that
reverend and faithful Preacher of Gods word: Mr. ROBERT BRVCE, for the
present, Minister of the Word in Scotland.

Dulcia non meruit, qui non gustauit amara.

JOHN 10.27.28. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any man pluck them out of my hand.

LONDON. Printed by R. Field for Thomas Man and Jonas Man, dwelling in
Paternoster row at the sign of the Talbot. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL MASTER ADRIAN MOORE Esquire, etc. And to the no less
religious and virtuous Gentlewoman Mistress MARIE MOORE, his Wife, Patrones of
Piety, all peace and happiness in both Worlds.
RIght Worshipful, It must not seem strange unto you that a new occasion has
made also a new change of style; since occasion daily shows so many changes
in the world. Amongst all which alterations, I must beg of you still to
continue your countenance unto these few plain homely Sermons: In token that
no change (I hope so long as I live) shall keep me from manifesting unto the
world (as all occasions shall serve) how much in duty I am bound to your true
unfeigned love and undeserved favors to me the unworthiest of all. For which I
can but wish you to be ever attended with those two faithful companions of the
Saints: peace of conscience and joy in the holy Ghost: and at the last to have
a speedy hearing when your Spirits shall fail, to transport them into
Abraham's bosom; there to enjoy eternal and unspeakable rest, for ever and
ever.

Yours in all duty much and ever bound, I. H.

TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader: The Author of these Sermons not being present at their going to
the press again, to reuiew and correct them: I doubted whether in these
learned and curious days, such homely lines as these might not be distasteful
amongst such multitudes of learned ones every where swarming in the press; so
much the rather, since their Author has ever thought so meanly of himself,
that no work of his could be worthy of the press. Notwithstanding since the
importunity of many did long since (as it were) wring and extort these few
Sermons from him, in the beginning of his ministry before things could be so
well, ripely, and methodically digested, as possibly he could have wished if
now they were to do: I have made bold also once again to send them unto thy
view: chiefly to the hungry: Because (as Solomon speaks) he who is full
despises an honey comb; but to the afflicted soul every sour thing is
sweet. The first five on the Lords Supper, were englished by a late Gentleman
of worthy memory, M. S. Mitchell, who was gathered to his fathers before he
could see them at the press; the rest were perused and englished by another
friend. All the care and pains taken has been for Gods glory and thy good.
If it please thee now therefore to use Philips counsel to Nathaniel, and see
whether any good things come out of Nazareth, it may be thou shall not think
thy pains and time lost; which that thou may the sooner do, I cease to
trouble thee, remaining

Thine in the Lord Jesus: I. H.

The Contents and substance of the Sermons following.
SERMON I. Out of 1. Cor. 11.28. Entreating of preparation to the Lords Supper:
Shows that a man must make this trial in his conscience. The Definition of
conscience: the causes why conscience was by God left in us: The way how to
keep a good conscience. In what things we must chiefly examine our
consciences: how to try our peace with God and love with our neighbors: of
man's first misery and recovery, and so how faith is wrought in the heart, how
it is nourished in us.

SERMON. II. Out of 1. Cor. 11.28. Entreating of Preparation to the Lords Supper:
Shows how a sincere faith is known: that he who for Christ can renounce
himself, cannot be disappointed of his expectation. That faith is the free
gift of God: Certain effects whereby we may know if we have faith: That
because it is joined with doubting, it must be nourished. That faith and
doubting may lodge in one soul. That a faith mingled and maistered with much
doubting, is yet a true faith. That faith smothered, yet is not extinguished. A
sure rest in the most dangerous tentations. The definition of love, what our
love unto God and our neighbor is.

SERMON. III. Out of 1. Cor. 11.23. Entreating of the Sacraments in general:
Shows the definition and diverse acceptions of the word Sacrament, what the
signs in the Sacrament are, why they are called signs, what the thing
signified in the Sacrament is. The necessity of the application thereof. How
the sign and the thing signified are joined together. The Illustration of this
Conjunction: what considerations are needful, when the Sign and the thing
signified are given and received. The other part of a Sacrament, which is the
word. To what uses the Sacrament serves us more then the word. Faults which
pervert the Sacrament, etc.

SERMON. IIII. Out of 1. Cor. 11.23. Entreating of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper:
Shows the diverse Names both in the Scriptures and by the Ancients given
unto this Sacrament of the Lords Supper. The ends why this Sacrament was
instituted. The things both outward and inward contained in this Sacrament.
That the things signified in both Sacraments are one, but the signs are not
one: why in Baptism there is but one sign, and in the Lords Supper two? What
power and perpetuity the bread has to be a sign. How the Signs and the thing
signified are conjoined in the Sacrament? How the Sign and the thing signified
is received. What inconveniences are cast in by the Papists against this
spiritual receiving of Christ in the Sacrament. How the soul is said to eat
the body and drink the blood of Christ. Faith is that which coupleth us to
Christ. A similitude explaining the same.

SERMON. V. Out of the 1. Cor. 11.23. Entreating of the Sacrament of the Lord
Supper:
Shows our union with Christ by virtue of communion of the same Spirit. The
definition of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Why this Sacrament is called a
seal: Why a holy seal. Why the seal is said to be annexed to the Covenant.
Why the Sacrament should be administered publicly. Why this seal must be
ministered according to Christ's institution. That the word and element must
concur in the institution of a Sacrament. What we mean by the word, in a
Sacrament: what the Papists understand by the word, in this action, and our
differences from them. How the outward Elements are sanctified. How the Papists
sanctify these Elements. The refutatio^ of Transubstantiation by diverse
arguments. The reasons why the Papists cannot think Christ's body present in
the Sacrament unless it be really and substantially present. The Diverse
opinions concerning the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament. How a thing
is said to be absent and present. How the body of Christ is present. Our
difference with the Papists, to whom the words ought to be directed, etc.

SERMON. VI. Out of Isaiah 38. Entreating of Hezechiahs Sickness, v. 1.2.3:
Shows that the greatest are not exempt from great and sore trials. That
Hezechiahs disease was (though not in the greatest extremity) that which we by
an emphasis call the Sickness. Why God thus visits his children. The time
when the King fell into this disease. What is our duty in the like case of
distress, from the Prophets plain dealing with the King. That the Prophet (as
appears) was not too rigorous in his denuntiation, in adding affliction upon
affliction to the King. The Kings excellent behavior in this Sickness: His
gesture in the same expressing the signs of a good conscience. His recourse
(in extremity) to the same great power which now did smite him and seem to be
his enemy: our lesson from thence.

SERMON. VII. On Isa. 38.4.5.6. Entreating of Hezechiahs Sickness, shows
The speedy issue and hearing of the Kings prayer: our lessons from thence: It
is a mercy to be visited at home, as this King was. The author of the Kings
comfort was God, using the means of his minister and word. Why mention is made
of David in this comfort the King received. Why David is called the Kings
Father. Our lessons from this preface. That the Lord is near the prayers of
his children. That as this King received more then he asked from God: so for
the most part do all the Saints.

SERMON. VIII. On Isaiah 38.7.8.9.10.11. Entreating of Hezechiahs sickness,
Shows why the King sought a sign, how some refuse signs. How the sign was
showed. Why the Sign was wrought in the Dial. Why in the body of the Sun.
What profit is to be gathered of signs. By whose power this sign was wrought.
The force of prayer. The Kings thankfulness for the benefit received. A short
sum of the Kings life. Our lesson from thence. The Kings song, showing first
when he was troubled. The diversity of the fear of death in the godly and
wicked. The way to eschew the fear of death. The reasons why death seems now
so grievous to the King. A censure of these his reasons.

SERMON. IX. Out of Isaiah 38.12.13.14. Entreating of Hezechiahs sickness.
Shows the similitudes whereby the King amplified his present lamentation.
Why the Patriarks conuersed in tents. Our uses thence. The extremity of the
Kings disease. Why God suffers his children to fall into such extremities.
Our lessons thence. By what means the King in this extremity seeks unto
God. Why the King sought the prorogation of his days. In what respect it is
lawful to seek the prolonging of our days. That faith and doubting may
remain in one soul. If Christ in his agony had contrary voices, no marvel
this King had also. How this King teaches us to pray in extremity.

SERMON. X. On Isaiah 38.15.16. Entreating of Hezechiahs sickness,
Shows the Kings thankfulness in three things. That a good conscience
gives thanks for every thing received. How the King expresses the greatness
of the mercy received. What effects this mercy did breed in him. How the
sweetness of this mercy did make him burst forth in praise of the word. How a
man shall know if the Spirit of life be begun in him. How the Spirit is sai^ to
be nourished in us, and how banished, etc.

SERMON. XI. On Isaiah 38.16. to the end of the chapter, Entreating of Hezechias
sickness,
Shows, how from the other effects of the word, the King continues to extol
the same. The time when this King did thus fall sick. The manner of the Kings
delivery. That sin is the only thing punished in the wicked, and purged in
the godly. That remission of sins cures all diseases. That when God
forgiueth sins, he also forgets them. That God only forgiueth sins. The
cause and reasons, why God did forgive this King his sins. Doctrine from
thence, why the Lord works by means and secondary causes.

SERMON. XII. Out of Psalm 76, From 1. to the 8. ver. Entreating of the great
delivery in 88. from the Spanish tyranny:
Shows the purpose of the Prophet in this Psalm: what is meant by the name
of God. That the true knowledge and praises of God accompany each other. The
profit which comes to us by thanksgiving. That it is a mercy to have God
near us, and to dwell with us. The place of this overthrow. What that is,
which drives God from any place. How this victory was obtained. How the Lord
is said to rebuke. Gods former dealing with his Church. To what end the Lord
appoints enemies unto his Church. How of Gods great mercyes follows
admiration.

SERMON. XIII. On Psalm 76.8.9.10.11.12. Entreating of the former subject,
Shows, that God only did this great work. The effects that this great work
brought forth. One lesson from thence. The time of this great judgment. The
times of Gods sitting and rising To what end God commonly rises. An objection
of the Church prevented. Exhortation to thankfulness. That we should upon
extraordinary mercyes chiefly stir up our selves to the same.

SERMON. XIIII. On Psalm 40. preached in a public fast enjoined by authority.
The parts of this Psalm. In the 1. part, from David's experience diverse
observations. How Hope differs from Faith. The life of hope. Hope and
mourning may stand together. How to obtain patience in trouble. How to know
when God hears our prayer, though he grant not instantly our suit. How
constant mourning in trouble unto God, argues certain deliverance. Why the
Lord delayeth to help his servants. The end why our prayers are heard. Two
sorts of abusing the grace of God.

SERMON. XV. Out of 2. Tim. 2.22. preached at the public Repentance of the Earl
Bothwell, in the Church of Edinborough.
Shows the sum and meaning of the words: what these things be, which all
young men should fly. What is meant by the lusts of youth. Whence the restraint
of sin does come. By what means the Lord restrains sin in us. What
things young men should seek after. The definition and sorts of Repentance. In
what respects wordly sorrow is called a blind terror. What godly sorrow is. A
caution to be observed in Repentance. What the greatest sin a a man can
commit is. The effects of godly sorrow. The manner of Repentance: Why some
parts of Repentance, have the name of Mortification and Vivification. That in
the work of Repentance, the devil stays nothing more then our sincere
confession of Sins. A caution to beware of Presumption. That there be two
sorts of Repentance, etc.

SERMON. XVI. Out of 2. Tim. 2.13. In way of an Exhortation to a Provincial
Assembly,
Shows at whose hands the Pastor ought chiefly to seek approbation. How to
obtain true approbation. The weight of ministerial function. The groundworke
of the ministry. Whereupon it consists. What it is to rule in the Lord. etc.

THE FIRST SERMON, UPON THE PREPARATION TO THE LORDS SVPPER.
1. COR. 11.2. Let every man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of
this Bread, and drink of this Cup.


Well-beloved in Christ Jesus: The Apostle in the words which we have read,
delivers his counsel, and gives his advice; and not only gives his advice,
but gives his admonition and command: That we should not come to the Table of
the Lord, that we should not come to the hearing of the word rashly: but that
every one of us should come to this holy work with reverence; that we should
prepare and sanctify our selves in some measure. And seeing we go unto the
King of heavens Table, it becomes us to put on our best array. In a word, he
delivers the whole doctrine and matter of this preparation, when he says;
Let every man, and let every wowan, try and examine themselves. As if he would
say, Let every one of you, try and examine your souls. That is, try the
estate of your own hearts, and condition of your own consciences. Mark and
behold in what estate your heart is with God, and in what estate your
conscience is with your neighbor.

He bids not your neighbor to try you, he bids not your companion to try
your heart; but he bids your self in person, to try your own conscience;
he bids your self, try your own heart; because none can be certain of
the estate of your heart, or of the condition of your conscience, but your
self.

Now he excludes not others from the trial of you neither (for it is lawful
for the Pastor to try you,) but others cannot try you so narrowly as ye your
selves may; for no man can know so much of me as I kn^^ of my self. No man can
be certain of the estate of your heart and condition of your conscience; and
yet you your selves may be certain of it. As for others, men may judge of your
heart and conscience according to your works and effects; and except your
works and effects be very wicked and altogether vicious, we are bound in
conscience to judge charitably of your hearts and consciences. Therefore, there
is none so meet to try the spirit of man, to try the heart or conscience of
man, as is the man himself.

The heads to be entreated of in this Sermon.
Now that this trial may be the better made, ye have first to understand what
it is that ye should try: what ye call a a conscience, which the Apostles
commands you to try. Next, ye are to consider for what reasons and causes ye
should try your consciences.

Thirdly, and last of all ye, are to know in what chief points ye should try
and examine your consciences. Then, that we speak not unto you of things
unknown, it is necessary for every one of you (seeing there is none of you
that lacks a conscience) to understand what a conscience is: and as nearly
as God shall give me grace, I will bring you to the understanding and knowledge
of a conscience.

Definition of conscience, with the exposition of the parts thereof.
I call a conscience, a certain feeling in the heart, resembling the judgment
of the living God, following upon a deed done by us, flowing from a knowledge
in the mind, accompanied with a certain motion in the heart, to wit, fear or
joy, trembling or rejoicing. Now, we will examine the parts of this definition.
I call it first of all, a certain feeling in the heart; for the Lord has left
such a stamp in the heart of every man, that he does not that thing so
secretly, nor so quietly, but he makes his own heart to smite him, and to
strike him: he makes him to feel in his own heart, whether he has done well
or ill.

The Lord has placed this feeling in thy heart; why? Because cause the eyes of
God look not so much upon the outward countenance and exterior behavior, as
upon the inward heart. For he says to Samuel, in the first book, 16.7. The
Lord beholds the heart. So, 1. Chron. 28.9. he says to Solomon, The Lord
searches all hearts and understands all imaginations and thoughts. Also,
Jeremy 11.20. The Lord tries the reins and the heart. And the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 4.5. says, The Lord shall lighten things that are hid in darkness, and
make the counsels of the heart manifest. So, in respect that the Lord will
chiefly have to do with the heart, therefore in the heart he places this
feeling, which is the chief part of conscience.

I say next, that this feeling resembles the judgment of God: for this
feeling was left and placed in our soul for this end and purpose, that we
might have a domestical and familiar judgment within our selves, to resemble
and describe the secret and invisible judgment of the high God; a particular
judgment, to go before that general judgment, in that general and great
day, where every man shall be justified, or condemned, according to the
particular judgment that is within his own conscience. In the mean time this
conscience is left in us, to arrest us in this life, thereby as it were, to
ease the living God at that last judgment. For the books of our own
consciences, in that last day shall be opened; and every man shall receive,
according to the report of the decree that is within his own conscience:
therefore I say, that our conscience resembles the judgment of God.

The third thing that I say, is this; It follows upon a deed done by us: our
conscience nor our heart strikes us not before the deed be done; our heart
strikes us not before the evil deed be committed: no, it goes not before the
deed; but the stroke of the conscience and feeling of the heart follows
immediately upon the deed, in such sort, that the deed is no sooner done by
thee, but thy conscience applies it to thy self, and gives out the sentence
against thy self: therefore, I say, it is a feeling, following upon a deed
done by us.

And next I say, flowing from a knowledge in the mind; for except the
conscience have information, and except the heart know that the deed which is
done is evil, the heart nor the conscience can never count it to be evil:
therefore knowledge must go before the stroke of the conscience: thy heart can
never feel that to be evil, which thy mind knows not to be evil.

So knowledge must ever go before feeling, and according to the measure of thy
knowledge, according to the nature and quality of thy knowledge, accordingly
shall the testimony and stroke of thy conscience be. For a light knowledge, a
doubting and uncertain knowledge, makes a light and small stroke: as on the
other part, a holy and solid knowledge drawn out of the word of God, makes a
heavy stroke of the conscience. So the conscience must answer to the
knowledge. If we have no other knowledge but the knowledge which we have by
nature, and by the light and sparks which are left in nature, our conscience
will answer no further but to that knowledge: but if beside the light of
nature, we have a knowledge of God in his word, and a knowledge of God by his
holy Spirit working in our hearts, our consciences will then go further, and
excuse or accuse us, according to the light that is in the word. So that the
conscience is not acquired or obtained at what time we are enlightened by the
working of the holy Spirit, and hearing of the word of God: but our conscience
is borne with us, is natural to us, and is left in the soul of every man and
woman: and as there are some sparks of light left in nature, so there is a
conscience left in it; and if there were no more, that same light that is left
in thy nature, shall be enough to condemn thee. So the conscience is not
gotten or begun at the hearing of the word, or at that time when we begin to
reform our selves by the assistance and rene^ing of the holy Spirit: but every
man by nature has a conscience, and the Lord has left it in our nature; and
except that this conscience be reformed according to the word of God, that same
natural conscience shall be enough to condemn thee eternally: therefore, I
say, flowing from a knowledge of the mind. Last of all, I say, accompanied
with a certain motion of the heart: and we express this motion, in fear, or
joy, trembling, or rejoicing. In very great fear, if the deed be exceeding
heinous, and the stroke of the conscience be very heavy; then the conscience
never takes rest, for guiltiness will ever dread. But if the deed be honest,
godly and commendable, it makes a glad heart, and makes the heart even to
burst out into joy. So, to be short in this matter, (for I purpose not to make
a common place of i^) ye see, that in every conscience there must be two
things: First, there must be a knowledge; and next, there must be a feeling,
whereby according to thy knowledge, thou appliest unto thine own heart, the
deed done by thee. So that, as the word it self testifies, it arises of two
parts: of knowledge, according whereunto it is called science; and of feeling,
according whereunto, the Con is added, and it is called Conscience. Then the
word conscience, signifies knowledge, with application.

This conscience, To what uses the Lord has appointed the conscience to serve
in the soul of man.
the Lord has appointed to serve in the soul of man for many uses: to wit, he
has appointed every one of your consciences, to be a keeper, a wayter on, a
careful attender upon every action done by you. So that, that action cannot be
so secretly, so quietly, nor so closely conveyed, but will thou, nill thou, to
do the part of a Judge against thee, to give out sentence against thee, and to
condemn thee: and so it does; for our particular judgment, must go before the
general and universal judgment of the Lord at that great day.

I grant, thou may blot out all knowledge out of thy mind, and make thy
self become even as a blind man. I grant also, that thou may harden thy
heart, so that thou will blot out all feeling out of it, so that thy conscience
will not accuse thee, nor find fault with thee, but thou shall have a delight
in doing evil, without remorse: but I deny, that any degree of wickedness in
the earth shall bring thee to this point, that thou may do evil without
fear; but still, the more that thou do evil, and the longer thou
continuest in evil doing, thy fear shall be the great^r: you, in despite of
the devil, and in despite of the malice of the heart of man, thy fear shall
remain. And though they would both conspire together, they shall not be able
to banish that fear, but that gnawing of the conscience shall ever remain, to
testify, that there is a day of iudg^ment. I grant also, that there shall be a
vicissitude* and that fear shall not always remain, but shall be sometimes
turned into security; neither shall that security alw^ies abide, but shall be
turned again into fear: so that it is not possible, to get this fear wholly
extinct; but the great^r the security is, the greater shall thy fear be, when
thou art wakened. Thirdly, I grant that this fear shall not be blind; for from
that time a man by evil doing has banished knowledge out of the mind, and
feeling out of the heart, what can remain there but a blind fear? When men
have put out all light, and left nothing in their nature but darkness, there
can nothing remain but a blind fear. So I grant, that the fear is blind:
for neither know they from whence that fear comes, what progress it has,
whereunto it tends, where, nor when, it shall end: therefore, they that are
this way misled in their souls, of all men in the earth they are most
miserable. For as long as thou may keep in thy mind, a spark of this
knowledge and spiritual light, in the which thou may see the face of God in
Christ, wherein thou may see a remedy in the death and passion of Christ, and
wherein thou may see the bowels of mercy offered in the blood of Christ; if
thou have any spark of this light (albeit it were never so little) to direct
thee, and albeit this knowledge were never so much wounded, yet there is mercy
enough for thee in Christ: but if thou close up all the windows of thy soul,
and of thy heart, and make them to become palpable darkness, that thou neither
know from whence the terror comes, nor yet perceiuest any remedy, that is
the misery of all miseries.

We have many things in general to lament, concerning the estate of this our
Country wherein we live. Also particularly, Application.
There is not one of you but has great cause to take heed to your consciences
now while ye have time, that ye banish not altogether this light which is yet
offered unto you, and whereof some sparks yet remain. For I see the most part
of men run headlong to banish the spark of light that is in them, and will not
rest so long as there is any spark of it left, until it be utterly banished.
And when they have so done, alas, what can follow, but a blind and terrible
fear in their consciences, which they can never get extinguished? a fear
without remedy, a growing fear, and not a decaying fear, a fear that will
devour them wholly at the last: Therefore, every one of you be careful of
this light that is within you; take heed, that the foul affections of your
hearts draw not your bodies after them; see, at the least, that those
affections banish not this light. And so long as the Lord offers you this
light, in time crave, that of his mercy he would give you the grace to embrace
it, to take a new course, and yet to amend your lives while time is given you.

The body shall leave the soul, and the soul shall leave the body; but the
conscience shall never leave the soul: but whither soever the soul goes, to
the same place shall the conscience repair; and look in what estate thy
conscience is, when thou departest out of this life, in the self same estate
shall it meet thee in the gteat Day. So that if thy conscience was a tormentor
to thee at the time of thy death, if thou get it not then pacified, it shall be
a tormentor to thee in that general Judgment. Therefore, this matter would be
well weighed, and every one of you should study to have a good conscience,
that when the soul is severed from the body, leaving your conscience at rest
and peace with God, it may be restored unto you, and meet you again with as
great peace and quietness.

Thus far concerning conscience, what it is. I beseech the living Lord, so to
sanctify your memories, that ye may keep these things; and that every one of
these things may be so imprinted in your hearts, that ye may be mindful of
them all your lives.

The second thing that we are to speak of, is this: We are to consider
wherefore we should try our consciences; for what causes we should examine our
own souls and consciences. I will declare the reasons briefly. It behooves
every one of you to try your conscience. Why? Because the Lord will make his
residence in no other part of the soul but in the conscience: He has
appointed his dwelling to be in the heart of man, and in the will and
conscience of man; and therefore it becomes you to make his dwelling place
clean, and to take heed unto your hearts.

Next, though the Lord of heaven made not his residence there, yet in respect
the eye of God is an all-seeing eye, and able to pierce through the very
thickness of man's flesh, how dark and gross soever it be, and to enter into
the very secret corners of thy conscience; (for unto the all-seeing eye of God,
the most secret corner of thy conscience is as clear and manifest, as any
outward or bodily thing in the earth can be to the outward eye of the body:)
In respect therefore that this eye is so piercing, and that he casts his eye
only upon our hearts, it behooves us to try our hearts.

Thirdly, he is the Lord of the conscience. There is no Monarch on earth that
has any sovereignty or lordship over the conscience: only the God of heaven,
only Christ Jesus King of heaven and earth, is Lord of the conscience, he has
power only to save and lose. Therefore, when thou come to this Sacrament of
the Lords Table, thou ought carefully to look unto thy conscience, to try
and examine the state of it.

Last of all, which is a chief reason; It behooves thee to prove thy
conscience, because the welfare and health of thy soul depends upon thy
conscience. If thy conscience that is within thy soul be well, if it be at
peace and rest, thy soul is well; if thy conscience be in a good estate, thy
soul must needs be in a good estate; if thy conscience be in good health, of
necessity thy soul must be in good health; for the good health and happiness
of the soul, depends upon a good conscience: therefore, it concerns every
one of you to try well your consciences.

There was never any law made or devised, that forbad us to have a care of our
healths; it is lawful for us to seek such things as may procure and preserve
it: but the health of thy soul stands in the health of thy conscience, and
in preserving thereof: therefore, by all laws, thou ought to attend thy
conscience. If thou keep thy conscience well, thy soul is in health; and if
thy soul be in health, let troubles come what will upon thy body, thou will
endure them all: but if thy soul be diseased with an evil conscience, thou
shall not be able to bear out the least trouble that shall come upon thy body:
whereas, if the conscience were at rest and in good health, that trouble could
not happen unto thy body, but the strength of a good conscience would bear it
out. Then have ye not reason, and more then reason, to take heed to your
consciences, to try and examine your consciences, in what estate and
disposition they stand?

Now, because it is a fruitless thing to tell you that health is necessary,
Certain lessons to be learned, by which a man may preserve heal^h in his soul
and conscience.
and not to show the way how this health may be obtained and preserved;
therefore to keep your consciences in quiet and good health, I will give you
these few lessons. First of all, be sure that thou retain a steadfast
persuasion of the mercies of God in Christ Jesus; examine when thou lie
down, and examine when thou risest up, in what estate thou art with God;
whether thou may look for mercy at his hands, or not.

Art thou persuaded of mercy? Assure thy self thy conscience is in a good
estate, thou have health in thy soul; for by the keeping of faith, the
conscience is preserved, as says the Apostle, 1. Tim. 1.19. Keep this
persuasion, preserve it whole and sound, hurt it not, bring not thy soul into
doubting, stay not, nor hinder thy persuasion, if thou desire to keep health
in thy soul: for, if thou doubt, or any way diminish thy persuasion and
ass^rance, assuredly thy assurance cannot so soon be hindered nor diminished,
but at that very instant shall follow the diminishing of the health of thy
soul; yea it cannot be, but in that very article of time shall follow the hurt
of thy conscience; for faith will not dwell but in a whole conscience.
Therefore, at what time thou do any thing against thy conscience, at that
very time thou losest a degree of thy persuasion of the mercy of God: and
until such time as thou fall down at the feet of Christ, and obtain mercy
for that wicked deed, purchase peace at his hands, and repair thy persuasion,
thou shall ever doubt of mercy, and want health in thy conscience. Then this
is the first lesson, to keep health in your souls, to be persuaded of mercy.

The second lesson to keep a good conscience, or to keep health in thy soul,
is this; Ye must fly, eschew, and forbear, whatsoever may trouble the health
of your soul, whatsoever may trouble the quietness and peaceable estate of your
conscience: cast it out, forbear it, and eschew it. This general is good. But
let us see what it is that troubles the quiet estate of the conscience. Only
sin; nothing but an evil nature. Therefore we must of necessity, to keep
health in our souls, forbear and eschew sin; we must fly and avoid sin.
It is not possible that ye can keep a good conscience, and serve the
affections of your heart: and therefore to keep peace and health in thy soul,
thou must take leave of thy lusts, thou must renounce the lusts and affections
of thy heart, and thou must not do as thou wast wont to do: thou must not be
given to the service of thine affections, and of thine appetite, to put them in
execution as thou have formerly done. But in case thine affections or lust
command thee to do any thing, what is thy part? Thou must try how far this may
stand with the good will of God, and how far that affection which commands
thee, may agree with the law of God. Is there such an harmony, as that thing
which thine affection commands thee, may stand with Gods law and holy will?
Then no question, it is a sanctified affection, thou may put it in execution.
But after this trial, if thou find thine affections to be exorbitant and out
of rule, carrying thee from God and against his law beware of it, resist it,
put it not in execution; for if thou fulfill the will of thine affections, what
pleasure can it bring with it? It may well bring a flattering pleasure in the
entry, but it closes ever with a bitter remorse in the end. Then to eschew
this bitter remorse, should ye not all try your affections? Ye must examine and
try them by the square of Gods law, ye must see how far they agree with his
law, and how far they dissent from it, and so far as they are dissonant
from that law, let every man deny himself, renounce his affections: and so,
this trial being taken in this manner by thy self, it sanctifies thine
affections, makes Christ to lodge in thy soul, makes thy conscience to be at
rest. And the holy Spirit this way makes both body and soul to be in good
health, and to rejoice. Then fly from sin. This is the second lesson.

The third lesson is this; Study to do well. Would thou keep health in thy
soul? Study to do better and better continually: At the least, have a purpose
in thy heart, to do better daily, which is the last lesson. Seeing that when we
study to do best, and that the just man, that is, the most holy man, falls
so often as seven times a day, yea rather, seventy times, what is thy part in
these slips and snares? Though thou fall, as thou can not eschew to fall, lie
not still there, sleep not there where thou have fallen: it is a shame to
sleep there, therefore arise again. And how should thou rise? By lifting
up thy soul, and running to the Fountain of grace and mercy; by repairing to
Christ Jesus, to obtain mercy for thy soul, and to crave that he would send
out of himself that measure of peace, that may put thy conscience at rest, and
restore thy soul to health. So, lie not where thou fallest, but incontinent
arise and crave mercy, and in obtaining mercy, thou shall repair thy fall,
thou shall amend thy life by repentance, and by repentance thou shall get
peace, thou shall have thy conscience at rest, and get health to thy soul. Now
keep this rule, if thou desire to keep thy soul in health: look that thou
sleep not in sin as David did: lie not still when thou art fallen, and so fall
from one sin to another; as from adultery to murder, from murder to the
next, etc. As commonly if a man sleep in sin, and rise not in time, one sin
will draw on another; for there is no sin alone, but always the greater and
more heinous that the sin is, it has the greater and worse sins waiting on
it. Therefore when ye fall, delay not to arise, but repair to the fountain of
mercy and seek grace in time: run to prayer, run to the Church of God
wheresoever it be, whether in the field or in the town: run to Christ Jesus
and crave mercy of him, that ye may have peace in your consciences; and so by
these means every one of you shall preserve health in your souls. By these
means ye shall learn what difference is betwixt this living word of mercy and
grace, which sounds in our religion; and that slaying letter that kills the
soul of every one that hears it, I mean that idolatrous doctrine of that
dumb Mass.

I mention this unto you because I see that many in these days are fallen to
it, and the Lord is beginning to abstract his grace and mercy from this
Country for the contempt of this quickening word which has so clearly sounded
here, and which our Countrymen for the greatest part (running headlong to the
devil in a dumb guise) travel utterly to banish. Is not this a miserable
thing that so few of you have eyes to consider and discern of the time of
peace, mercy and grace, which is so abundantly offered? The Lord of his mercy
give you eyes in time.

Thus far concerning the reasons wherefore every one of you should try and
examine your own consciences: and this trial ought not to be for a day or for
a year, but it ought to be every day and every year of thy whole life. For
that conscience that should rest for ever with the living God, that conscience
which must ever behold the face of the Son of God, it cannot be ouer-well
cleansed, we cannot look ouer-narrowly to it. The more curious we be in
searching out of this conscience, we are the better occupied: I spoke of our
own consciences, I speak not of our neighbors.

In what points we should examine our consciences.
Thirdly, I come to the points wherein every one of you should try and examine
your selves. Every one of you ought to try and examine your consciences in two
things: First, whether thou be at peace with God who is the Lord of heaven, or
not. Next, examine thy conscience whether thou art in love and amity with thy
neighbor, or not. Would thou know whether thy conscience be at unity and
peace with God, or not? Thou shall know it this way; the God of heaven can have
no society nor company with that soul which is always unclean, that is
every way defiled; no he cannot.

Now I speak not so precisely that I make a soul to be fully sanctified and
perfectly holy in this life: no, in this life there are wonderful iniquities,
gross sins and great faults wherewith even the righteous are defiled: but
this is my meaning; There is no soul can be at peace with God, or wherewith
the Lord can have any society but in some measure it must be sanctified and
made holy. For God cannot make residence in a soul that is always as a
stinking dunghill; and therefore of force in some measure it must be
sanctified: there must be so much made clean in one corner or other of that
soul, wherein the Lord of heaven by his holy Spirit may make his residence.

Now let us see whereby the heart is sanctified. Peter, Act. 15.9, says, That
the soul of man is purified by faith, that the heart of man is purged by
faith. So faith opens and purges the heart. By faith in Christ Jesus and in
the merits of his blood we have peace with God: Being justified by faith, we
have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ, says the Apostle, Romans
5.1. Now then this point comes in, That ye are to prove your selves whether ye
be in the faith or not; as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 13.5. Prove your selves
whether ye are in the faith. Examine if your souls be seasoned with this
faith, for if ye have not faith in Christ, Christ is not in you; and if Christ
be not in you, ye are in an evil state, ye are in the estate of the reprobate
and damned. So every one ought to look carefully and see if he have a belief
in the blood of Christ or not: whether he believe to obtain mercy by his
merits, and sanctification by his blood or not. For if thou have no measure of
this faith, thou have no measure of peace with God, by reason our peace with
God is ingendered and grows daily more and more by true faith in Christ.

Now this faith where it is true, where it is lively and couples the heart with
God, as I have already said, it must break forth in word and deed, it can by
no means be held in, but it will break forth. It must break out in word in
glorifying the God of heaven who has forgiven us our sins; it must break
forth in word, by giving a notable confession of those sins wherein we have
offended him. It must break out in deed in doing good works, to testify to
the world that thing which is within thy heart; to testify to the world that
thou who have this faith art a new man; that by thy good example of life and
conversation thou may edify thy brethren, the simple ones of the Church of
God, and that by thy holy life thou may draw sinners to repentance, that
they seeing thy good light may be compelled to glorify God in thee.

Then in the first point of trial let us look to these three, to the heart,
to the mouth, to the hand. Take heed that there be an harmony betwixt these
three, for if the heart be inwardly coupled with God, there is no doubt but the
mouth will outwardly glorify him; and if thy heart and mouth be renewed and be
one, of necessity thou will express it in thy conue^sation. There must be an
agreement betwixt the heart and the hand, thy conversation must be changed with
the heart, and be holy, honest, and godly as the heart is. So that if thy
conversation be good, it is a sure token that thou art at one with God: but if
thy conversation be not good, speak what thou will, thy heart is but defiled,
this true and lively faith has no place in it. Then would thou know when
thou art at one with God? When thy conversation, thy heart and thy mouth say
all one thing, then without question thou have the work of faith wrought by
the holy Spirit in thy heart, which makes thee to be at peace with God. This
is the first point wherein ye should try your selves.

The next point is love, ye must try whether ye be in love and charity with
your neighbors or not: for as thou art not coupled with God but by the hand of
faith, so thou art not coupled with thy neighbor nor joined with any member of
Christ in this world, but by the hand of love, amity and charity. Take away
love, thou art not a member of this body: for love is the master sinnew, and
couples all these members of Christ's body together, and makes them to grow up
in a spiritual and mystical unity: love is the only mark whereby the
children of God, and members of Christ's body, are known from the rest of the
world: love is that holy oil that refreshes our souls, and makes us like
unto God; and the mo^e we grow in love, the more God by his Spirit dwells in
us, for God is love. So that except in some measure love toward thy neighbor
dwell in thy heart, thou can have no society with thy neighbor, and far
less with God. If the manners of men were examined by this rule, we should
find a multitude of godless people in this Country, who have their hearts
raging with malice one against another: and where the devil and the malicious
spirit dwells, there is no place for the holy Spirit. And although the Lord
has gone about by all means possible early and late to instruct them, and to
infuse into them this precious love and amity toward God and their neighbor,
and so to alter their conditions; yet they will not suffer themselves to be
wakened, until the great vengeance and malediction of God fall upon them. This
love, this honest and godly conversation flows always from the root of
faith. So that if thy heart have faith in any measure be it never so little, in
that same measure thou must have love toward thy neighbor: and this love is
never idle, but is uttering it self in one effect or other. And in respect
that faith is the ground whereupon all the rest depends, and in respect that
this faith is such a Jewel, as without the which it is not possible for any of
you to please God, without which all your deeds are abomination before him,
without the which you are in the greatest misery, (which misery is so much
the more terrible, in that you are ignorant of it) is it not good reason that
ye know and understand how this faith is first wrought, and then nourished in
your souls by the holy Spirit? that seeing how it is created, and the manner
how it is brought about, ye may examine your consciences, and see whether ye
may be in the faith or not. My purpose was to have insisted longer on this
matter then this time will suffer. Now therefore, as time will permit and God
shall give grace, I will let you understand how the holy Spirit imployes his
travail in the heart and mind of man, and what pains the holy Ghost takes
in creating and forming this Jewel of faith in your souls. Yet, before I
enter this work, to let you see the travails of the Spirit of God in working
of this faith in your hearts: it is necessary and more then necessary, that
ye understand, first your own misery and infirmity: and that ye know how the
Lord was induced to recover you out of your old estate, and to recreate you,
who were lost by the fall of your father Adam.

Then to consider of this matter more deeply, I offer to your remembrances
this ground: That man universally and every one particularly being corrupted
and lost, and that by our first fathers fall; (for if there were no more but
that same first fault and sin of his, we are all of us justly condemned to a
double death, both of body and soul for ever) Man thus universally and
particularly being utterly lost, without any hope at all of recovery left in
his soul, without any sense of the recovery of that former estate, or
repairing of that Image which he had lost through sin long before; he being I
say lost by this sin, and left in this desperate estate in himself, what
does God? The everliving God, only wise, whose ways are unsearchable, has
found out a way, how that man this way lost, yet he may be saved: herein he
sought counsel, from whom? Not from any ^reature, but he counseled with
himself; The persons of the Trinity took counsel of themselves, one God was
moved to seek counsel from himself, only moved in himself: for he had not
an external principal without himself to induce him. So he seeking this
counsel at himself, and being moved in himself thereto, as Ephesians. 1.9, what
does he? When all men should have died for ever, it pleased him of his infinite
mercy to select out of all, and to elect a certain number out of the lost race
of Adam, that should have perished for ever. In this his counsel and decree,
moved I say of himself, and seeking counsel from himself only, he selects a
certain number out of this rotten race, which certain number he will have
sanctified, he will have justified, he will have glorified. And therefore to
bring to pass the work of their salvation: what does he? He appoints his own
natural son (for he had but one natural son) he appoints the second person
of the Trinity, his own natural son, God, in power, glory, and majesty, as
high as himself, equal with God the father in all things; he appoints him to
work this work, to bring to pass this work of our redemption, and eternal
salvation. (This is but the mystery of it in some measure disclosed.) And
therefore in the fulness of time, (for he dispenses all things according to his
wisdom) at such time as he appointed, he makes his son to come down, to
seize himself in the womb of the Virgin, to take on our flesh, to take on the
likeness of sin; he took not on sin, but he took on the likeness of sin.
What call I that likeness? Our flesh is the likeness of sin: he took on our
flesh and nature, the likeness of sin; which was perfectly sanctified the very
moment of his conception, in the very womb of the Virgin: He took on this
flesh, that in this flesh and nature, sin might be banished and cast out of
us for ever. And whereas we should all of us have gone one-way, (for there was
no exception of persons by nature) Christ Jesus our savior has elected us:
and according as his Father in his secret election before the beginning of the
world, had elected us, the same Christ Jesus in his own time calls us, and
makes us partakers of that salvation, which he has purchased: and he repaires
not only that image which was lost in our forefather Adam: he places us, not
in a terrestrial paradise, where Adam was placed at the beginning (and what
more could have been sought by us?) but he gives us a far more excellent
image then we lost, he places us in a more high and in a more celestial
paradise then we lost: For so much the more heavenly is the paradise which he
gives us, as the second Adam is more excellent then the first, and as the Son
of God, and God himself, is far above any creature that ever was, man, or
Angel. Therefore it comes to pass that by the benefit of the second Adam,
Christ Jesus our Savior, the Son of God, (whereas had we remained in that
Image wherein our forefather was created, we should have settled our selves in
the earth for ever, we could not have craved a better paradise then an earthly
paradise for earthly tabernacles:) By benefit of the Son of God, I say, it
comes to pass, that we are plucked up out of the earth to the heaven, and to
a heavenly paradise. And what have we to do with heaven? Are we not made of the
earth, to return to the earth? Becomes not an earthly paradise an earthly
body? Yet the Lord in his mercy sends down his Son, to draw us up out of
the earth to the heaven. This is so high a thing that it cannot be easily
considered. For this drawing of us to a heavenly paradise, is a thing more then
could have been thought on. That we should live the life of Angels in heaven,
how could the heart of man think on this? Yet it pleased the living Lord, in
the great riches and bowels of his mercy, and in the exceeding greatness of the
power of his mercy toward us: (the Apostle in that Epistle to the Ephesians
cannot get words enough to express this, he knows not how to begin, nor how
to end, when he speaks of the riches of that mercy: and if ye look well into
that Epistle to the Ephesians, ye shall find more high and excellent styles
given to the riches of that mercy, in that Epistle, then in any other part of
the Scripture:) It pleased him I say, of his own mercy, not to give us simply
the Image which we lost, nor to leave us in this earth: but it pleased him to
give us a better Image, and beside that, to place us in heaven, there to
remain with him for ever.

Now rests his mercy and grace here? No: But that this salvation, which he
has already purchased and brought about by his Son our Savior Christ
Jesus, might be wholly accomplished, having nothing wanting in it: as he
redeemed us, in his own person perfectly, so he makes this same redemption to
come to our knowledge, and makes us sure of it in our consciences: and to this
end what does he? As by his death he purchased our full redemption, so he makes
it known unto us, he intimates it unto us; by our inward calling, letting us
both find and feel in our hea^ts, what he did in his body for us. For our
Lord when he makes his servants to proclaim this redemption, and to intimate
it to our consciences, he works this Jewel of faith in our souls, which
assures us that the Son of God has died for us. For what could it avail us to
see our redemption, to see our salvation, and our life, a far off, if a way
were not found out, and a hand and means given unto us, whereby we may
apprehend that salvation, and apply it to our selves? What can it avail a
sick man, to see a drugge in an Apothecaries shop, except he may have it, and
apply it to his sick body? So to the end that this work of our redemption
and salvation may be fully and freely accomplished: look how freely he has
given his only Son to the death of the cross for us, as freely has he
found out this way and means, and offered us this hand, whereby we may take
hold on Christ, and apply him to our souls. This means, to conclude, is
faith: There is not a way, nor an instrument in the Scriptures of God whereby
we can apply Christ to our souls, but only the instrument of faith:
therefore, faith cannot be enough commended. Turn to faith, and it will make
thee turn to God; and so conioyne thee with God, and make all thine actions
well pleasing unto him. There is no good action that we do though it seem
never so good before the world, but it is abomination before God if it be not
done in faith, and will further our condemnation: having faith, all the
creatures of God are serviceable unto us, they must all conspire to the
furtherance of the work of our salvation: As on the contrary, wanting faith,
there is none of the creatures of God but shall be enemies unto us and conspire
to our damnation. For faith conioynes us with the God of heaven, and makes us
heavenly: This Jewel of faith seasons all the gifts and graces which God
gives unto us: all the riches of the earth is of no value to my soul without
faith. And what avails it any man to have all the knowledge and wisdom in
the earth without faith? For the devil has all this knowledge, and is not the
better. What avails it me to conquer all the Monarchs, kingdoms, and whole
riches in the earth: what can all these avail my soul? Nothing but accuse me
if I want faith. Therefore, all the benefits and gifts of God without faith
avail nothing but to augment our mise^ie: All the gifts and graces of God are
abused without faith; faith only makes thee to use the benefits and graces of
God rightly: Faith only should be sought, kept, and entertained here in this
life: having faith, all the rest of Gods graces are profitable unto thee, for
this Jewel keeps them all in order and makes them all fruitful; whereas
wanting this jewel there is nothing here on earth but it will testify against
thee.

Let us then speak of this faith how it is wrought in you. How faith is
created in our souls.
I take my ground out of the Evangelist John, 6.44. where our Savior says, No
man can come to ^e, except the Father which has sent me draw him: In the which
words we see clearly, that except we be drawn, except we be compelled, except
we be thrust, except of unwilling we be made willing by God the father, it is
not possible for us to come to his Son: What is the reason of this that the
Spirit of God must draw us, and make us willing or ever we come to God? Because
by nature we are not only wounded and lanced by sin and iniquity, but as
the Apostle shows, Ephesians. 2.1. We were wholly dead in trespasses and sins:
yea obse^ue how void any dead body is of a natural life, so void are our
souls (though they be living the natural life) so void are they of the life
of God, of that heavenly and spiritual life whereunto we in this life do
aspire: until such time that the Spirit of God draw our hearts and minds, that
is, quicken our hearts and minds. No, it is not a drawing as we commonly
speak, it is a very quickening of a dead thing: It is a quickening of that thing
which was void of the life of the Spirit. Then except the Spirit of God draw
us, that is, quicken us with that spiritual and heavenly life, it is not
possible for us to come to heaven. And except he nourish this life which he
has begun, it is not possible that we can stand in this life: So the Spirit of
God is said to draw us, that is, to begin this life in us, and by the same holy
Spirit to continue and nourish this life in us. Now by the drawing of the
Spirit our souls are quickened: and by the drawing of the Spirit I understand
no other thing but the framing and creating of faith in our souls, which makes
us new creatures. Now let us see what order the Spirit of God keeps, in
drawing us and informing and creating this faith in our souls: First of all I
divide the soul into no more parts then commonly it uses to be divided, that
is, into the heart and the mind. Our mind then being ^ cloud of darkness
altogether blind naturally, there being nothing in that mind of ours but
vanity, error and ignorance, whereby we vanish away and can never long
continue in any good resolution or purpose; what does the Spirit of God? The
first work that ever the Spirit of God does, he takes order with the mind:
and what does he to the mind? He banisheth darkness, he chaseth out vanity
and blindness that naturally lurketh in the mind; and in stead of this
darkness he places in the mind a l^ght, a celestial and heavenly light, a
light which is resident in Christ Jesus only: Then the Spirit chaseth out that
cloud of mist and darkness, and places light in the mind. And what works he
by this light? We getting sanctified understanding, incontinent he makes us to
see God: not only as he is God the Creator of the world, but also as he is God
the Redeemer, and has redeemed us in his Son Christ Jesus. Now before I
obtain this light, what is my heart and mind doing? There is not one of you
but have experience as I my self have, in what estate the heart and mind is
before that this light enter: The mind lies drowned in blindness, and the
heart is hardened, and they both conspire together in vice to set up an Idol in
stead of God, a domestical and invisible Idol: what sort of Idol ^s that? No
doubt some worldly or fleshly affection or other: this is set up in the throne
of thy heart; and on this Idol thou bestowest the service of thy whole heart,
of thy whole mind, of thy whole soul and body: So that the service of thy
soul and body which should be bestowed upon God only, is employed upon that
Idol which is set up in thy heart, that is, in the place of God, in the stead
of the most high God. And thou art more addicted to the service of that Idol
then ever thou wast to the service of the living God: yea until such time that
this Idol of ours be banished, and that this blindness whereby this Idol is
served be taken away, there is not one of you but are servants to one lust or
other; and thy soul that should be consecrated to the service of the living
God, is employed upon one affection or other, upon some worldly or fleshly lust
of thine own. But from the time that the Lord begins to scatter the clouds
of our natural minds and understanding, and begins to chase away this
thick mist of the dark soul, and places therein some spark of heavenly
light which flows out of Christ, and whereas we were children of the night
and darkness before, he makes us to be light in the Lord, and to be children
of the light and of the day. Then we see that all the things in the world
besides the living God, are vanities, deceivable allurements, unconstant
shadows, fleeting and flowing without any abiding: and then we see that our
hearts and our minds were set on evil continually. Then we begin to abhor that
Idol, and to seek to serve God only. Now except the Lord of his mercy and
goodness place in us this light, until such time as we get some glimmering of
this light, we can never see our own vanity, nor yet see God.

This then is the first work of the Spirit, he banisheth darkness and errors,
and places light in our minds. Now this first work of the Spirit, is termed
oftentimes in ye Scripture under the name of faith: for the mind has it own
assent and persuasion in ye own kind as well as the heart has: and therefore
the mind being illuminate and seasoned with this light, the assenting and
knowledge in the same mind is called faith. The Apostles and Evangelists give
to this knowledge the name of faith: for from the time that thou once have an
eye to see God, and whom he has sent Christ Jesus, when once thou gettest a
sight of him and access to him, if it were no more then in the mind, it is
called faith.

But we must not stand still here; if faith go no further then the mind, it is
not the faith that we are seeking For the faith that justifies and does us
good must open the heart, as well as it opens the mind; it must banish that
Idol and affection out of the heart, and in stead thereof place a throne for
Christ Jesus. So that except the good Spirit of God go further then the mind,
and banish this Idol as well out of our hearts as out of our minds, we have
not that justifying faith whereby we may look for mercy. Yea the Spirit of
God must not only stay at the inlightening of thy mind, but it must mollify
this heart of thine and change thine affections. And whereas thy affections
were wicked and evil, Gods Spirit must change thy will: and he never can
change thy will except he make the ground of thy heart good, that it may be set
on God, and bring forth good fruit abundantly to the owner.

And what teaches this? This teaches you to seek for an honest heart, and to
seek instantly until ye obtain it. For what avails it any man to know what
is good or what is evil, except he have a way showed him, how he shall eschew
the evil, and a means given him to make himself partaker of the good?

Is not this an idle and unprofitable knowledge to me, to see a far off and
to know that this is good for me, when I find not a means how to be partaker
of that good that it may be especially good to me? Is it not an idle knowledge
also to perceive that this is ill for me, that it will do me hurt if I do it;
and yet that same very thing I will do, and no other?

So the Spirit of God linketh these two together in this work; and as he
reformeth the mind, he reformeth also the heart and makes you to be partakers
of that good which ye see; and to eschew that evil which ye perceive. And this
is the second work of the Spirit, not only to present a thing to thee, but to
make it thine in effect. For howbeit the mind would do this part never so well,
and let thee see that Christ is thine, and present him to thee never so often;
yet if thy heart be not reformed, that will and crooked affection that is in
thy heart, will prefer it self to Christ, and will make thee to account all
but folly in respect of that Idol.

And therefore it were an idle and a foolish thing to me to see my salvation,
except I get grace to be partaker of it: and what avails it thee to see the
works of the devil, to see thine own sins that slay thee, except thou get
grace to eschew them? And so the second work of the Spirit is this; he enters
into the heart, he danteth the heart and wonderfully changes it, making the
will of it obedient: he mollifieth the affection which was hard before, in such
sort that it is made to pour out thy affection in some measure on the living
God, whereas it was poured out on one Idol or other of thine own before. Then
except the heart will do his part as the mind does his part, the whole soul is
not consecrate to God: for God has not made the soul that the heart should
serve thee, and the mind only should serve him; but thy service is then only
acceptable to God when thou consecratest thy heart as well as thy mind to him.

Now this matter is so clear that it needs not to be illustrated by
similitude: yet to make it more plain unto you, A similitude of the
apprehension of the corporal food, to illustrate the spiritual.
I will show you by a similitude, that the apprehension of the mind is not
enough except ye get the apprehension of the heart also. In corporal things,
in meat and drink which serve for the use of your bodies, there must be of
this meat and drink two sorts of apprehensions: and as there is two sorts of
apprehension of the meat and drink that is the food of the body: so there is
two sorts of apprehension of the body and blood of Christ Jesus, which is our
meat and drink spiritual. Of meat and drink corporal there is an
apprehension by the eye and by the taste, that while the meat is present unto
you on the table, your eye takes a view of that meat, discerns it and
makes choice of it: and not only the eye, but also the taste discerns the
meat, and the taste approouing it, that is called the first apprehension.

Now upon this which is the first, the second apprehension follows: that is,
after that ye have chewed that meat, swallowed it and sent it to your
stomach, where it digesteth and conuerteth into your nouriture, then in your
stomach ye get the second apprehension. But if your eye like not that meat,
neither your taste like it, the second apprehension follows not; for thou will spet it out again or reject it, preferring some other meat unto it that
thou likest better. That meat which thou likest not enters never into thy
stomach, and so it can never be converted into thy nourishment: for it is
only the second apprehension of the meat that is the cause of the nourishment
of the body in our corporal food; so that if ye chew not this meat and
swallow it, it feeds you not; then it is only the second apprehension that
nourishes our bodies.

It is even so in spiritual things, (so far as they may be compared) in the
food of Christ Jesus, who is the life and nouriture of our souls and
consciences. There must be two sorts of apprehension of Christ Jesus. The first
apprehension is by the eye of the mind; that is, by our knowledge and
understanding: for as the eye of the body discerns by an outward light, so
the eye of the mind discerns by an inward and renewed understanding, whereby
we get the first apprehension of Christ.

Now if this first apprehension of Christ like us well, then the next
follows: we begin to cast the affection of our hearts on him; we have good
will to him: for all our affections proceed from our will, and our affections
being renewed and made holy, we set them wholly upon Christ. We love him, and
if we love him we take hold of him and digest him; that is, we apply him to our
souls: and so of this love and liking of him the second apprehension does
follow. But if we have no will to him, if we have no love nor liking of him,
what do we? Then we reject him and prefer our own Idol and the service of
our own affections to him; and so the second apprehension follows not. We
cannot digest him; and if we digest him not, that spiritual life cannot grow
in us: for mark, in what place the eye serves to the body, in the same room
serves knowledge and understanding to thy soul: and look in what place thy
hand and thy mouth, thy taste and thy stomach serve unto thy body, in that
very place serve the heart and affections unto thy soul.

So that as our bodies cannot be nourished except our hands take, and our
mouths eat the meat whereby the second apprehension may follow: likewise our
souls cannot feed on Christ, except we hold him and embrace him heartily by
our wills and affections. For we come not to Christ by any outward motion of our
bodies, but by an inward motion and apprehension of the heart. For God finding
us all in a reprobate sense, he brings us to Christ by reforming the
affection of our souls, by making us to love him. And therefore the second
apprehension whereby we digest our Savior, will never enter into our souls,
except as he pleases the eye, so he please the will and the affection also.

Now if this come to pass that our wills and affections are wholly bent upon
Christ, then no doubt we have gotten this Jewel of faith. Have ye such a
liking in your minds, and such a love in your hearts of Christ, that ye will
prefer him before all things in the world? then no question faith is begun in
you.

How faith is nourished and entertained in us.
Now after a thing is begun, there is yet more required: for though this faith
be formed in your minds, in your hearts and souls, yet that is not enough; but
that which is formed must be nourished; and he who is conceived must be
entertained and brought up: or else the love that is begun in me by the holy
Spirit, except by ordinary means it be daily entertained and nourished, it
will decay: except the Lord continue the working of his holy Spirit, it is not
possible that I can continue in the faith.

And how must we nourish and keep faith in our souls? Two manner of ways.
First, we nourish faith begun in our souls by hearing of the word; not of
every word, but by hearing of the word of God preached: and not by hearing of
every man, but by hearing the word preached by him that is sent. For this is
the ordinary means whereunto the Lord has bound himself; he will work
faith by the hearing of the word and receiving of the Sacraments. And the more
that thou hear the word, and the otfner that thou receiuest the Sacraments,
the more thy faith is nourished.

Now it is not only by hearing of the word and receiving of the Sacraments
that we nourish faith. The word and Sacraments are notable of themselves to
nourish this faith in us, except the working of the holy Spirit be conjoined
with their ministry. But the word and the Sacraments are said to nourish
faith in our souls, because they offer and exhibit Christ unto us, who is the
meat, the drink and life of our souls: and in respect that in the word and
Sacraments we get Christ who is the food of our souls, therefore the word and
Sacraments are said to nourish our souls. As it is said, Act. 2.42. The
Disciples of Christ continued in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and
breaking of bread and prayers; by these means, entertaining, augmenting, and
nourishing the faith that was begun in them. Then the holy Spirit begets this
faith, works this faith, creates this faith, nourishes and entertaineth this
faith in our souls by hearing the word preached, and by the receiving of the
Sacraments: which are the ordinary means, whereby the Lord nourishes us, and
continues this spiritual food with us. For, observe by what means the
spiritual life is begun, by the same means it is nourished, and
entertained; as this temporal life is entertained and nourished by the same
means whereby it is begun.

Then seeing by these means the holy Spirit begets this work of faith in our
souls, Conclusion, with an exhortation.
it is our duty to crave that he would continue the work which he has
begun. And for this cause we should resort to the hearing of the word when it
is preached, and to the receiving of the Sacraments when they are ministered,
that we may be fed in our souls to life everlasting.

But alas, we are come to such a lothing disdain, or rejecting of heavenly
food in this Country, that where men in the beginning would have gone, some
twenty miles, some forty miles, to the hearing of this word: they will
scarcely now, come from their houses to the Church, and remain there but one
hour to hear the word, but rather abide at home. Well, I say, too much wealth
withdrawes their hearts; and the abundance of this word ingenders such a
loathsomnes yt it is a rare thing to find out any that have that thirst and
desire to hear the word, as they were wont to have in the beginning.

And for those that are in higher places, they will here it seldom, or not at
all: for they cannot endure to hear the thing that accuses them, and conuicts
them and therefore they avoid it. But they should not do so, they should not
shun Christ, nor abstain from his word that accuses them: but they should
hear the word; and as the word accuses them, they should accuse themselves
also, that thereby they may come to a confession of their sin, and obtain
mercy for ye same.

So when Christ accuses thee, thou should not run from him, but thou
should draw near to him; thou should threaten kindness of him, and as
it were make a breach and forcible entry into his kingdom. It is not the way
when thy sins touch thee, and when Christ accuses thee, to run from him: no,
thou should then turn to him, thou should confess thy sin, cry
Peccaui, and seek mercy: and after yt thou have obtained mercy, this word
shall become as pleasant to thee, and thou shall take as great delight to come
to the hearing of it, as ever thou delightedst to fly from it before. But
alas! our lothsomnesse and disdain is grown to such an height, that truly I
am moved to believe firmly, that the Lord has concluded, that we shall not
enter into his rest, and that only for the great contempt of his mercy and
grace, which is now so richly offered. For why? God can not deal otherwise with
us, then he dealt with our forefathers the Israelites for the negligence of his
word, which was but then obscurely preached: for then it was far from the
incarnation of Christ; and the farther that it was from his incarnation, the
word was ever the more obscurely preached, under dark types and shadows. Yet
notwithstanding the Fathers that heard that word preached, and believed it not,
they perished all in the Wilderness except two; as ye have sometime heard out
of this place.

And if they perished for the contempt of so dark a light, much more must ye
that are their children perish, for the contempt of the Sun of righteousness,
who is risen so plainly and shines so clearly now in the preaching of the
Gospel; except the Lord in his mercy prevent you, and except ye prevent his
judgments by earnest seeking; and except ye seek a feeling and seek inward
senses, that ye may see and feel the grace that is offered; crave again that
he will sanctify your hearts by repentance, that ye may repent you of your
sins, and lead an honest and a godly conversation in all time to come; that
both body and soul may be saved in the great day of the Lord. The Lord work
this in your souls, that ye may seek mercy; and seeking mercy ye may
obtain mercy; and in mercy, ye may lay hold on Christ, and that for his
righteous merits. To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor,
praise and glory, both now, and ever. Amen.

THE SECOND SERMON, UPON THE PREPARATION TO THE LORDS SVPPER.
1. COR. 11.2. Let every man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of
this Bread, and drink of this Cup.


IN the doctrine of our trial and due examination, the Apostle (as ye have
heard, wel-beloued in Christ Jesus) gave us a special command, that every one
of us should try and examine narrowly our selves: that is, that every man
should condescend and enter into his own conscience, try and examine the
estate of his own conscience, in what estate he finds it with God; and in what
estate he finds it with his neighbor. He enioynes this trial to our selves,
and commands that every one of us should take pains about the true
examination of our consciences. He enioynes this work to us, why? Because no
man knows so much of me, as I do my self; because no man can be sure of the
estate of my conscience, but I my self; because no man can so diligently, nor
so profitably try my conscience, as I my self. Therefore chiefly it behooves
every man and woman, before they do enter in to the hearing of the Word, before
they give their ear to the Word, or their mouth to the Sacrament, it behooves
them to try and examine their own consciences. Not that the Apostle would
seclude the trial of other men: for as it is lawful for me to try my self,
so no doubt it is lawful for my Pastor to try me. It is lawful for other men
that have a care over me to try, and examine me: but no man can do this so
profitably to me as I my self. And though we had never so many tryers and
examiners, all is nothing if we try not our selves. So whether there be a
second or a third tryer and examiner, let our selves be one, and the first. And
no doubt the Apostles mind was this, to let us see clearly, that he that
comes to that Table, and has not that knowledge, nor is not of that ability
to try himself, is a profane commer, comes uncleanly; and therefore must
needs come to his own destruction. Let every man therefore grow in knowledge,
grow in understanding, grow in the spirit, that he may be the more able to try
and examine his own conscience.

To the end that ye may go forward and proceed in the work of this trial,
with the better speed, and with the better fruits, in this examination we laid
down this order: First of all, I showed, what that is which we call a
conscience, and what is meant thereby. Next, I declared for what causes ye
should put your consciences to this trial, and narrow examination. And
thirdly, so far as time suffered, I entered into the points, wherein every one
of you should try and examine your own consciences. As for conscience, that ye
may call that definition to your memory, I will resume it shortly. We call a
conscience, a certain feeling in the heart, resembling the righteous judgment
of GOD, following upon a deed done by us, flowing from a knowledge in the mind.
A feeling, accompanied with a motion in the heart; a motion either of fear, or
joy, trembling or rejoicing. I leave the opening up of these parts to your
memories, and I pray God, that they may be well sanctified. I come next to the
causes, wherefore every one of you should be careful in trying and examining
your own consciences. The first cause is, because the Lord of heaven has his
eye continually upon the conscience: the eye of God is never from the
conscience and heart of man, as I proved to you by diverse places. Next because
this God has chosen his lodging, and has set down his throne, to make his
residence in the conscience: Therefore, that he may dwell in cleanness, ye
ought to have a regard to his dwelling place. Thirdly, he is the Lord, yea the
only Lord of this conscience, who has power only to controlle, who only
has power to save or to cast away: therefore that it may do good service to
thy own Lord, thou ought to take heed to thy conscience. And last of all,
in respect yt the health of thy soul stands in the estate of thy conscience,
and if thy soul be in good health, thy body cannot be ill: therefore in
respect that the soul and body depend upon the estate of the conscience, every
one of you should carefully look to your consciences. I will not amplify
this, but leave it to your memories, how the health of the soul and welfare of
the soul should be kept. Next I come in the third and last place to the
points, in the which every one of you should try and examine your consciences.
And as ye may remember, I set down two points wherein ye ought to put your
consciences in trial: First, to know whether your consciences were at peace
with God or not: Secondly, whether your consciences were in love and charity,
and in amity with your neighbor or not: In these two points chiefly ye must
try and examin^ your selves. To know whether ye be at peace with God or not,
ye must first try whether ye be in the faith or not, (as the Apostle says)
whether ye be in the faith of Christ or not: For being in the faith, and
justified thereby, of necessity ye must have peace with God. Then the next
care must be to try your faith, and to see whether ye have faith or not. Faith
can no ways be tried but by the fruits: Faith cannot be judged of by me that
look upon it only, but by the effects. Therefore, to try whether ye be in
the faith or not, mark the fruits; Take heed to thy mouth, take heed to thy
hand, take heed to thy words and to thy deeds: for except thou glorify God in
thy mouth, and confess to thy salvation, and except thou glorify him also in
thy deeds, and make thy holy life a witness of thy holy faith, all is but
vain, all is but mere hypocrisy. How a sincere faith is known.
Therefore to know the sincerity of thy faith, thou must take heed that there
be a harmony between thy hand, thy mouth, and thy heart, that there be a
natural consent, that thy doings preiudge not thy heart, that thy mouth
preiudge not thy heart, but that mouth and hand may testify the sincerity of
the heart. If the heart, the hand, and the mouth, consent and agree in one
harmony together; no question, that heart that breaks forth into so good
fruits is coupled with God; there is no question, the light of thy actions, the
beams and shining of thy life, shall make the name of thy good God to be
glorified.

Therefore, the whole weight of thy trial stands chiefly upon this point, to
see whether we be in the faith or not; to try and examine whether Christ dwell
in us by faith or not: for without faith there can be no coupling or conioyning
betwixt us and Christ; without faith our hearts cannot be sanctified and
cleansed; and without faith we cannot work by charity: so all depends on this
only. And therefore that ye might the better understand whether ye have faith
or no, I was somewhat the more exact in this matter, and I began to let you see
how the holy Spirit creates faith, and works faith in your souls, hearts
and minds: I began to show you what order the holy Spirit k^pt in forming and
in creating this notable instrument in your hearts and minds. Not only how he
ingenders and begins faith, but also how he entertaineth it, how he nourishes
it. And I showed you the external means and instruments, which he uses to
this effect: To beget faith in our souls, the holy Spirit uses the hearing of
the word preached by him that is sent, and the ministry of the Sacraments, as
ordinary means and instruments: which ordinary means are only then
effectual, when as the holy Spirit concurs inwardly in our hearts with the
word striking outwardly in our ears, and with the Sacrament outwardly
received. And except the holy Spirit grant his concurrence to the word and
Sacrament, word and Sacrament both will not work faith. So all depends upon
the working of this holy Spirit: the whole regeneration of mankind, the
renewing of the heart and of the conscience, depend on the power of the holy
Spirit; and therefore it behooves us carefully to employ our selves in calling
upon God for his holy Spirit. By the same means and no other, that the holy
Spirit begets faith in us, by the same means he nourishes and augmenteth
that which he has begotten: And therefore as we got faith by the hearing of
the word, so by continual and diligent hearing we have this faith augmented
and nourished in us. And from hence I took my exhortation, that if ye would
have that spiritual life nourished in you, and if ye would have a further
assurance of heaven, of necessity ye must both continually and diligently
hear the blessed word of God.

Now it rests that every one of you carefully apply this doctrine to your
own souls, and enter into the trial of your own consciences, to see if this
faith as I spoke, be begun in your hearts and minds, or not: how far, or how
little the holy Spirit has proceeded in that work, try with me, and I with
you. The first effect of the holy Spirit whereby ye may try your minds,
whether ye be in the faith or not, is this: Reuolue in your memories and
remember, if at any time it pleased the Lord in his mercy to turn the darkness
of your minds into light, to cause that natural darkness which was within you
to depart: through ye which darkness, neither had ye an eye to see your selves
what you were by nature, nor yet had ye an eye to see God in Christ, nor any
part of his mercy. Examine, I say, whether this darkness of the natural
understanding be turned into light, by the working of the Spirit or not. If
thou art become a child of the light, a child of the day; if thou art become
(as the Apostle speaks) light in the Lord: if there be this alteration made
in thy mind, that whereas naturally before, it was closed up in da^kenesse,
whereas it was filled with vanities and errors, whereas it was closed up in
blindness: If the Lord has at any time enlightened the eye of thy mind, and
made thee to see thine own misery, to see the vglines of thine own nature, to
see the heinous sins in the which by nature thou lie; If he has granted to
thee ^n insight of thy self in some measure; and on the other side, if he has
granted thee the remedy, and has given thee an insight of the mercy of God
in Christ Jesus, if thou have obtained an insight of the riches of his grace in
Christ; no doubt the holy Spirit has begun a good work in thee, a work which
will bring forth repentance, which in his own time he will perfect. So this is
the first care which ye ought to have, and the first point wherein ye ought to
examine your minds, to see if there be any light in it, whereby ye may know
your misery, and have an insight of the free mercy of God in Christ Jesus.
This being done, that thou find a sight of these two in thy mind, from thy
mind go to thy heart: and as thou have tried thy mind, so try thy heart: And
first examine thine heart, if it be altered or not, that the will of it be
framed and bowed to Gods obedience, that thy affection be turned into the life
of God, and be poured out on him, as it was poured out on vanities, on
filthiness, and on the world before. Try whether the ground of thy heart and
the fountain from whence thy motions and affections proceed be sanctified or
not: for from a holy fountain holy waters must distill: from a holy fountain,
holy motions, holy cogitations, and sanctified considerations must flow.

Try then and examine your hearts, if the Spirit of God has wrought any such
reformation, as I speak of in your hearts or not. And that ye may perceive the
working of the holy Spirit the better in your hearts and consciences, (for the
holy Spirit has his chief residence in your hearts) I will declare unto you
the first effect that ever the holy Spirit brings forth in the heart, in
framing it, in mollifying it, and in bowing it unto the obedience of God. You
shall know the working of the holy Spirit by this effect: namely, if your minds
see and behold what is ill, see and behold what is good, perceive and discern
your own misery and your sins, which have brought this misery upon you; and
withal perceive and behold the riches of the mercy of God in Christ Jesus. If
as your minds see these two, your hearts be reformed and prepared to love the
sight of them: and as you see in your minds the mercy of God, and that in
Christ, if ye have hearts to desire mercy, if ye have a thirsting and earnest
desire to be partakers of mercy; where this desire and thirst is there ye holy
Spirit is, he has no doubt opened the heart. On the other side, if as thou
seeest mercy, thou see thy misery; if as thy mind sees thy misery, it
sees also the fountain from whence thy misery flows, to wit, from thine
own sins; if then thy heart also hate this, the holy Spirit is there: if as
thou see sin, which is the cause of thy misery, with the eye, which is
given thee in the mind; thou hate this sin with thy heart, no question the
holy Spirit is there. And as thou hate it, if also thou sorrow for it (for it
is is not enough to hate it, if thou lament not the committing of it, and with
a godly sorrow deplore it) the holy Spirit is there. And thirdly, if with thy
lamenting, thou have a care and a study to eschew that sin, (for what auailes
it to lament, if like a dog returning to his vomit, thou fall into that same
gulf again?) Therefore, where there is an hatred of sin, a sorrow for
sin, a care and a study to eschew sin; no question, the holy Spirit has
opened the heart, and is working out that precious instrument. Observe all this
in a word, all the operation of the holy Spirit and working in the heart, and
by this examine thine heart: See and perceive it the holy Spirit has entered so
far in thee, to work in that hard heart of thine an earnest and a diligent
study, a careful solicitude, continually to be reconciled with the great God
whom thou have offended: Is there such a thing as a thirst, as a desire, to be
at amity with him, whom thou have offended, to be reconciled with the God of
heaven, whom thou have offended by thy manifold transgressions? where this care
and study of reconciliation is, if this care and study of reconciliation be
in the heart, there is no doubt but the heart that thirsts for this
reconciliation, is heartily content not only to renounce sin, to renounce
all the impieties that separated thee from God; but the heart that is endued
with this thirst, will be heartily content to renounce it self, to cast down
it self as stubbo^^e as it was before, to cast down it self at the feet of
the mighty God, and be wholly content at all times after to be ruled by his
holy will: Not to follow it own lust, it own will and appetite, as it did
before; but to resign it self wholly into the hands of the mighty God, to be
ruled by his will, at his pleasure, and to obey his commands. And except ye
find this disposition in your own hearts, to acquire your selves, to renounce
your selves, it is a vain thing for you to say, that ye have a thirst to be
reconciled. So the greater thirst of reconciliation that we have, and the more
that the care and study thereof grows; the greater that the apprehension of
my misery, of the deep gulfes, and very hels (whereunto my soul is subject)
increases in my soul, the more earnest would I be to be reconciled. And to be
reconciled, I would not stand for the renouncing of the lusts of my heart, but
I would renounce my heart, and the obedience of the will and desire: why?
Because I see I must die for ever except the Lord reconcile himself with me: I
see the huge deepes and oceans of all misery, into the which I shall fall in
the end, except inmercie the Lord reconcile himself with me. To eschew these
miseries and inconveniences, is there any question but the heart that has any
sense and is touched with them, will most willingly endeavor to acquit it
self? Again, seeing the Lord has taken pains to deliver me out of the deep
misery in the which I had drowned my self, and has purchased my redemption
by so dear a price, not with gold nor with silver or any dross of the earth,
but by such a wonderful means, by such a precious price, and rich ransom;
looking to the greatness of our misery, and to the greatness of the price
whereby he has redeemed us, what heart is it but would willingly renounce it
self, to get a part of that redemption, and to be delivered out of that hell
wherein we are presently, and wherein we shall be in a greater measure
hereafter, except we be reconciled? So th^n with this there is joined a
disposition in the heart, whereby the heart is willing in some measure to
renounce it self.

This lesson is often taught us by our Savior Christ; we must both take up the
cross and renounce our selves also* before that we can follow him. The more
that this thirst grows in the heart, the more this renouncing of our selves
grows in the heart: the more that this thirst decays and is diminished in
the heart, the more we cleave to the wo^ld, the more we love the flesh, and the
more are we ruled and guided by them. So either we must nourish a thirst of
righteousness, a hunger of life everlasting, a thirst of mercy, a hunger
after that justice that is in Christ, or it is not possible that in any measure
we can be his disciples.

Now to proceed: A man renouncing himself, is never disappointed of his
expectation.
The heart that after this manner is prepared, that with a thirst to be
reconciled, is resolved also to renounce it self; this heart in the which
there remains so earnest a thirst, is never frustrate of the expectation, is
never disappointed. But as the Lord has imprinted in it an earnest study to
be reconciled, and to lay hold on Christ: so in his mercy he grants unto that
heart, the possession of mercy; he puts that heart in some measure, in
possession of mercy which it seeks, in possession of Christ Jesus himself
whom it seeks: the which apprehension which it has of Christ, the heart
sensibly feels, and apprehends in that peace which he gives to the
conscience. So that the conscience which was terrified, exceedingly gnawen and
distracted before; by the approaching of this peace and of Christ with his
graces, incontinent it is quieted and pacified; there comes a calmnesse and
soundness into the heart, and all troubles and storms are removed. With this
peace is conjoined a taste of the powers of the world to come; the heart gets a
taste of the sweetness that is in Christ, of the joy which is in the life
everlasting, which taste is the only earnest penny of that full and perfect
joy, which soul and body in that life shall enjoy. And the earnest penny (as
ye know) must be a part of the sum, and of the nature of the rest of the
sum. And therefore that earnest penny of joy assures us, that when we shall
get possession of the whole sum, it shall be a strange joy: and these
documents lift up the heart, and make it not to linger, nor weary in the
expectation of that life: but being refreshed now and then therewith, by so
many earnest pennies, they assure us of the full fruition of that joy, for the
which in patience we will sustain all troubles. So as the holy Spirit works
a thirst in us to be with Christ, a thirst of mercy and reconciliation with
him; the same holy Spirit disappointeth not that same expectation and thirst,
but puts the soul and heart in possession of Christ, by the which the
conscience is pacified, the heart is rejoiced, and we get a taste of the
sweetness and of the power of that life to come. The sensible feeling of the
which taste that passes all natural understanding, what does it in my heart
and conscience? It works a wonderful assurance and persuasion that God
loves me: The feeling of his mercy in the bowels of my heart, in the bottom
of my conscience, works a certain assurance and persuasion that he is my
God, that he will save me for Christ's sake yt the promise of mercy, which I
durst not apply unto my conscience before, now by the feeling of mercy I dare
boldly apply, and say, mercy appertain^th to me; life and salvation belongs
to me. For the conscience being exceedingly terrified, and seeing nothing in
God but fire and wrath, it is not possible but it must fly from him, it cannot
approach to a consuming fire. But from the time that the conscience gets a
taste of this peace, mercy and sweetness; how fast soever it fled from the
presence of God before, now after this reconciliation, it will run as fast to
him, and will possess him more and more fully. So the assurance and persuasion
of mercy arises from the feeling of mercy in the heart and conscience. And
except the heart feel it and taste it in some measure, no conscience dare
apply God and his mercy to it self. I may be sure in general, that all my
sins are remissible, and that I may obtain mercy, before I feel it. But to
apply this mercy particularly to my self until I feel a taste of it, I dare
not. So this particular application whereby we claim God and Christ as a
property unto us, as if no man had title to him but we, and to call him my God,
my Christ; and to claim his promises, as if no man had interest in them but
we; this comes of the since and feeling of mercy in the heart: and the more
that this feeling grows, and the greater experi^nce that we have in our own
hearts of this peace and mercy, the more increases our faith and assurance.
Our persuasion becomes s^ strong, that we dare at the last say with the
Apostle, What can separate us from the love of God? Neither death, nor life,
nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, shall be able to separate me from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

This particular application which arises (no doubt) upon the feeling and
sense of mercy, is the special difference, the chief mark and proper note,
whereby our faith who are justified in the blood of Christ, is discerned from
that general faith of the Papists. Our faith by this particular application,
is not only discerned from the general faith of the Papists, but it is
discerned from all the pretended faiths of all the Sects in the world. For the
Papist dares not apply the promise of mercy to his own soul: he accounts
it presumption to say, I am an elect, I am saved and justified. And from whence
flows this? Only from hence; that in their consciences they have never felt
mercy, they have never tasted of the love, favor and sweetness of God. For
look how fast the conscience flies from God before it get the taste of his
sweetness; it runs as diligently to him, and threatens love of him, after
that it has gotten that taste.

So they miserable men, content themselves with this general faith, which is
no other thing but an historical faith, which groundeth only on the truth of
God, whereby I know that the promises of God are true. But the Papists dare not
come and say, They are true in me. Why? Because they have not felt it, and
their hearts are not opened. But our justifying faith, as I told you,
consecrateth the whole soul unto the obedience of God in Christ.

So that it rests not only upon the truth of God, nor it rests not only
upon the power of God, (though these be two chief pillars of our faith also)
but especially and chiefly it rests upon the mercy of God in Christ. It
rests also upon the truth and power of God, but especially upon the promise
of grace and mercy in Christ. The soul of the Papist, being destitute of the
feeling and taste of mercy, dare not enter into this particular application,
and so he cannot be justified. Yea no doubt, so many of them as are justified
in the mercy of God, get a taste of this mercy and kindness before they
depart this life. Thus far concerning the effects.

Then ye have only this to remember; The opening of the heart, the pacifying
and quieting of the conscience, they work an assurance and a strong persuasion
of the mercy of God in Christ. The more that the heart is opened, the more yt
the conscience is pacified, the more that the taste of that sweetness
continues and remains, the more art thou assured of Gods mercy. So then
would thou know whether thy faith be strong or not, whether thy persuasion
of Gods mercy be sure or not? Look to thy conscience.

If thy conscience be wounded, assuredly thou will doubt: and if thou doubtest,
thou can not have such a strong persuasion as otherwise thou would have,
if thy doubting were removed. Not that I will have faith to be so perfect in
this life, that there be always no doubting joined with it; I require not that
perfection: but I say, that a wounded conscience must ever doubt; and the more
we doubt, the less is our persuasion. So the more that thou woundest thy
conscience, the less faith thou have. Then thou must come to this point; Keep
a sound conscience, entertain peace in thy conscience, and thou shall keep
faith, and shall have thy persuasion in that same measure that thou have of
rest and peace in thy conscience: and the more that thy conscience is at peace
and rest, the greater shall thy faith and persuasion be.

So this ground is certain; A doubting conscience causes a weak faith; and
the more the doubting in thy conscience is, the weaker is thy faith. Then true
it is that the Apostle says, That faith dwells in a good conscience, that
faith is locked and closed up in a good conscience. So that if ye keep a good
conscience, ye shall keep a strong faith: and if ye wound your consciences, ye
shall wound your faith.

Now to make this more sensible; How can I be persuaded of his mercy whose
anger I feel kindled against me, and against whom my conscience shows me
that I am guilty of many offenses? No question, so long as the sense of his
anger, and feeling of my offenses remains, I cannot have a sure persuasion
that he will be merciful unto me: but when I get access unto his presence,
and a sight that he has forgiven me, then I begin to be surely persuaded. So
then keep a good conscience, and thou shall keep faith; and the better that
thy conscience is, the surer will thy faith be.

Then the whole exhortation that we gather from this point, depends upon
this; Exhortation.
That every one of you in what rank soever ye be, take heed unto your
consciences: for losing it, ye lose faith; and losing faith, ye lose salvation.
Are ye in the rank of great and rich men? Ye ought to take heed unto your
consciences: especially in respect that the Lord has placed you in a higher
calling. Ye have many things wherein ye ought to control your consciences; ye
ought to crave the advice of your consciences before ye attempt any great
work, in respect that ye are bound in manifold duties to God, and to your
inferiors.

And no doubt if some great men had advised well with their consciences, such
dissolutions had not fallen out in their own houses, such oppressions of the
poor, deadly feudes with men of their own rank would not have burst forth in
so high a measure. But the Lord seeing them take so little care unto their
consciences, depriueth them of faith, and of the hope of mercy; and their end
will be miserable. Ye shall see that the God of heaven will make those who live
so dissolutely, spectacles of his judgments unto the world: for the Lord
leaves not such men unpunished.

By their examples it were very necessary, that men of inferior rank should
take heed unto their consciences: and therefore let every man according unto
his calling examine his calling by the rule of his conscience.

Let the Judges before they give and pronounce forth judgment, advise with
their consciences, and the law thereof; and in judgment not to follow their
affections, but to follow the rule of their consciences. Likewise, they that
are of inferior degree unto Judges, let them control their doings by their
consciences; and give not the poor subjects just cause to complain of them.
Let them not terrify them from the pleading of Justice, by exorbitant prices
and extraordinary kind of dealings: but let them moderate all their actions
so, that they agree with the rule of their consciences; that so far as in him
lies, Justice cease not. Likewise the Merchants, let not them look so much
to this, or that, as to the conscience that is in them; what in conscience they
may do, according to the measure of knowledge that God has placed in them; and
whatsoever they do, let them beware that they do not against their knowledge.

I grant their knowledge will not be so learned as it should be; and this
makes many deformed actions: yet let no man do against his knowledge; but let
every man do according unto the measure of knowledge wherewith God has endued
him. And though it be not well reformed, yet do not any thing by guess, but
advise well with thy conscience, and follow thy knowledge: for that which is
done doubtingly is sin. So whatsoever thou do let not thy eye, thy hand,
nor any member of thy body, do against thy knowledge: for this is a step to
that high sin against the holy Ghost.

This is the ready way to put all knowledge out of your minds: for if men do
against knowledge, and continue in doing against knowledge, at the last they
will become a mass of darkness; the Lord will scrape out all knowledge out of
their minds, and all feeling of mercy out of their hearts. Therefore let
every man follow his knowledge: and according to the measure of his knowledge
let his actions proceed.

It has pleased the Lord to power this liquor, Faith is the free gift of God.
this precious ointment into us: though we be earthly and frail vessels,
miserable creatures, yet it has pleased our gracious God to power such a
precious liquor into our hearts and minds, and to credit such a Jewel in our
keeping, that by virtue thereof we may take hold on Christ; who is our justice,
our wisdom, sanctification, and redemption.

Though we be miserable creatures, yet the Lord of his mercy has a respect to
us in Christ, in giving us this precious liquor, whereby our souls may be
seasoned to life everlasting. In this that he poures it into our hearts, we see
clearly that it grows not in our hearts, nor breeds not in our nature. No,
this gif^ of faith is not at man's command, nor under his arbitrament, as if it
were in his power to believe, or not to believe, as he pleases. It is the gift
of God poured down freely of his undeserved grace, in the riches of his
mercy in Christ. That it is a gift ye see clearelie, 1. Cor. 12.9. where the
Apostle says; And to another is given faith by the same Spirit. As also,
Philip. 1.29. For, unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should
believe in him, but also suffer for his sake. So faith is the gift of the holy
Spirit: and this gift is not given to all men and women, as the Apostle
plainly declares; All have not faith.

This gift though it be given, it is not given to all, but is only given to
the Elect: that is, to so many as the Lord has appointed to life everlasting.
This gift where-euer it is, and in what heart soever it be, it is never idle,
but perpetually working; and working well by love and charity, as the Apostle
affirms, Gala. 5.6. This gift where-euer it is, is not dead, but quick and
lively, as the Apostle James testifies, in his second Chapter.

And to let you know whether it be lively and working, or not, there is no
better means then to look unto the fruits and effects that flow from it. And
therefore that ye by your own effects, may be the more assured of the
goodness of your faith, I will give you three special effects to observe, by
the which ye may judge of the goodness of your faith.

Certain effects, whereby we may know if we have faith.
First look to thy heart, and cast thine eye on it: If thou have a desire to
pray, a desire to crave mercy for thy sins, to call upon Gods holy Name for
mercy and grace: if there be such a thing in thy heart, as a desire to pray, if
thy heart be inclined, and has a thirst to seek after mercy and grace;
though the greatest part of thine heart repine, and would draw thee from
prayer, yet assuredly that desire that thou have in any measure to prayer, is
the true effect of the right faith. If thou have a heart to pray to God, though
this desire be but slender, assure thy self thy soul has life: for prayer is
the life of the soul, and makes thy faith lively. And why? Prayer is Gods
own gift, it is no gift of ours; for if it were ours, it would be evil: but
it is the best gift that ever God gave man; and so it must be the gift of his
own holy Spirit; and being his own gift, it must make our faith lively.
Without this thou art not able, nor thou dare not call upon him in whom thou
beleeuest not, as the Apostle says, Romans 10.14. For if I entreat him by
prayer, I must trust in him. Then prayer is a certain argument of justifying
faith and belief in God: for I cannot speak to him, much less pray to him,
in whom I trust not. And though the heart be not fully resolved and well
disposed, yet if there be any part of the heart that inclines to prayer, it is
a sure gage that that part belieueth.

The second effect whereby thou shall know whether faith be in thee, or no, is
this: Observe and advise with thy self, if thy heart can be content to
renounce thy rancour, to forgive thy grudges, and that freely, for Gods cause.
Can thou do this? And will thou forgive thy neighbor, as freely as God has
forgiven thee? Assuredly, this is an effect of the right Spirit; for nature
could never give yt. There is nothing whereunto nature bends it self more
then to rancour and envy; and there is nothing wherein nature places her
honor more greedily, then in privy revenge.

Now if thy heart be so tamed and brought down, that it will willingly forgive
the injury for Gods cause, this is the effect of the right Spirit. This is not
my saying, it is the saying of Christ himself in the Evangelist, Math. 6.14.
where he thus speaks; If ye do forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
Father will also forgive you. And in the fifteenth verse, But if ye do not
forgive men their trespasses, no more will your heavenly Father forgive you
your trespasses.

So that Christ says, He that forgiueth wrongs, shall have wrongs forgiven
him: but he that will revenge his wrongs, wrong shall be revenged upon him.
Therefore, as thou would be spared of thy wrongs done unto the mighty God,
spare thou thy neighbor. I will not insist; examine whether ye have faith or
not; examine it by prayer, examine it by the discharge of your own privy
grugdes: for if ye want these effects, a heart full of rancour, a heart void
of prayer, is a heart faithless and meet for hell.

The third effect of faith, is compassion. Thou must bow thy heart, and extend
thy pity unto the poor members of Christ his body, and suffer them not to
want, if thou have: for except ye have this compassion, ye have no faith.
Examine your selves by these three effects; and if ye find these in any
measure, though never so small, you have the right faith in your hearts; the
faith that ye have is true and lively: and assuredly, God will be merciful
unto you.

This faith of ours, though it be lively, Our faith must be continually
nourished, because it is joined with doubting.
yet it is not perfect in this world; but every day and every hour it needs
a continual augmentation, it craves ever to be nourished: for the which
increase the Apostles themselves, Luke 17.5. said, Lord increase our faith. And
Christ himself commands us to pray, and say, Lord increase our faith: I
believe, Lord help my unbelief. Then by Christ his own command we plainly
see, that this faith needs continually to be nourished and helped; and it
cannot be helped but by prayer: therefore should we always continue in prayer.
That this faith should be helped, and that we should be perpetually upon our
guard, in fear and trembling, to get it augmented, the terrible doubtings, the
wonderful pits of desperation, into the which the dearest servants of God are
cast, do daily teath. For the best servants of God are exercised with terrible
doubtings in their souls, with wonderful stammerings; and they shall be
brought at some times, as appears in their own judgment, to the very brinke
of desperation. These doubtings and stammerings let us see that this faith of
ours would be perpetually nourished, and that we have need continually to pray
for the increase of it. It pleases the Lord at sometimes to let his servants
have a sight of themselves, to cast them down, and to let them see how ugly
sin is: It pleases him to let them fall into the bitterness of sin; and
to what end? Not that he will devour them, and suffer them to be swallowed up
of destruction.

Though Hezekiah cries out: That like an hungry Lion, the Lord is like to
devour him, and bruise him in pieces; yet the Lord suffers him not to
despair. And though David cry, I cannot away with this consuming fire; I
cannot endure the fire of the Lords jealousy, yet he despaireth not. But the
Lord casts his servants very low. To what end? To the end that they may feel
in their hearts and consciences, what Christ suffered for them on the Cross,
in soul and body. Yea, we would think that there had been plain collusion
betwixt the Father and the Son, and that his suffering had been no suffering,
except we felt in our souls in some measure, the hell which he sustained in
fullmeasure.

So to the end that we might clearly understand the bitterness of sin, that
we might know how far we are indebted to Christ, who suffered such torments
for our sins, and that we may be the more able to thank him, to praise his
holy Name, he suffers his own servants to doubt, but not to despair; he
forgiues their doubtings, he forgiues their stammerings, and in his own time
he supports them, and brings us unto the waters of life.

These doubtings, as I have often said, Doubting and faith may lodge in one
soul.
may lodge in one soul with faith; for doubting and faith are not directly
opposite: only faith and despair are opposite; and therefore faith and
despair cannot lodge both in one soul. For despair overthrows the pillars
of hope; and where there is no hope, there can be no faith. But as for
doubting, it may lodge, it will lodge, and has lodged in the souls of the
best servants that ever God had. Mark the speech of the Apostle, We are
always in doubt, says he, but we despair not. 1 Cor. 4.
So doubting and faith may lodge both in one soul.

And from whence flows this doubting? We know that in the regenerate man,
there is a remnant of corruption: for we have not our heaven in this earth;
though we begin our heaven here, yet we get it not fully here. And if all
corruption were taken away, what should there want of a full heaven here? So it
is only begun in this life, and not perfected: therefore there remains in the
soul a great corruption, which is never idle but continually occupied.

This corruption is ever bringing forth the birth of sin more or less; every
sin hurts the conscience: a hurt conscience impaireth the persuasion, and so
comes in the doubting. For there is not a sin that we commit, but it
banisheth light, and casts a mist over the eye of our faith, whereby we doubt
and stagger in our sight: and were it not that the Lord in his mercy takes us
up, gives us the gift of repentance, and makes us every day as often as we sin,
to cry as often for mercy, and so to repair the loss that we have of faith,
to repair the loss that we have of the feeling of mercy, we would wholly put
out that same light. But it pleases the Lord though we be every day sinning,
to give us the gift of repentance; and by repentance to repair our faith; to
repair the sense and feeling of mercy in us, and to put us in that same state
of persuasion wherein we were before. Therefore if God begin not, continue not,
and end not with mercy, in that very moment that he abs^racts his mercy from
us, we will decay. So we must be diligent in calling for mercy; we must be
instant continually, in seeking to have a feeling of mercy. Thus much for the
doubting.

A doubting and weak faith, is faith, and shall never decay.
Now howsoever it be sure and certain, that the faith of the best children of
God is often subject to doubting; yet it is as sure and certain, that it is
never wholly extinct: albeit it were never so weak, yet it shall never utterly
decay and perish out of the heart, wherein it once makes residence. This
comfort and consolation the Spirit of God has set down in his word, to
support the troubled heart; That howsoever faith be weak, yet a weak faith is
faith: and where that faith is, there will ever be mercy.

Ye have in Romans 11.29. that the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance. But among all the gifts that are of this sort, faith is one of the
chiefest: therefore it cannot be revoked again.

Ye have in Jude 3. That faith was once given unto the Saints. Once given, that
is, constantly given, never to be changed, nor utterly taken from them. The
Lord will not repent him of this gift: but the soul which he has loved once
he will love perpetually.

It is true and certain, that the sparkles of faith which are kindled in the
heart by the Spirit of God, may be obscured and smothered for a long time; they
may be covered with the ashes of our own corruption, and with our own ill
deeds and wickedness, into which we daily fall. It is true that the effects of
a lively faith will be interrupted, and that thy lusts and affections will
prevail for a long time: so that when thou look on thy self, upon the
judgments of God that hang over thy soul and body, and when thou look
upon thy dissolute life, and on the anger of God against this dissolute life:
in the mind, in the heart and conscience of him that has so smothered and
oppressed his faith, it will often times come to pass in his own judgment,
having his eyes fixed on himself only, that he will think himself to be a
reprobate, to be an outcast, and never able to recover mercy.

Where this corruption bursteth forth in this gross manner, after that the
Lord has called thee; look how soon the Lord begins to waken thee again,
incontinent thou fixest thine ey^s upon thine own life, and entrest into a
deep consideration as well of the weight of thy sin, as of the weight of the
wrath of God, which thou see following thereupon; and art loath to remit
these cogitations, to think upon the deepenesse of the mercy of God.

Resting on these considerations, it cannot but come to pass that in thine
own judgment thou art an outcast. And yet God forbid it were so; for though
these sparks of the Spirit be covered by the corruption that is within thy
soul, yet these sparkles are not wholly put out.

And to let you see that they are not extinguished, The spa^kles of faith
though they be smothered, they are not wholly put out, nor are idle.
though they break not forth in the outward effects, that the world may know
thee to be a faithful man as heretofore; yet these sparkles are not idle, and
thou shall find them not to be idle in thee. As for confirmation of my
argument, that howsoever our bodies are let loose to all dissolution, after our
effectual calling within us in our souls, that yet the sparkles are not idle;
ye see that though the fire be covered with the ashes, yet it is a fire: there
is no man will say, that the fire is put out, though it be covered. No more is
faith put out of the soul, though it be so covered that it neither give heat
nor light outwardly.

An example of this we have clearly in the Prophet David, after his
lamentation in that Psalm of Repentance, Psalm. 51.11. he prays to God in
these words, Cast me not away from thy presence. And what adds he? And take
not thy holy Spirit from me. Had he not lost the Spirit by his adultery and
murder? No: for he would not have said then, Take it not from me: but, Restore
it to me.

It is true that he uses the like in the verse following, R^store me to the
joy of thy salvation. Not that he wanted the Spirit wholly, but that the Spirit
lacked force in him, and needed strengthening and fortification: it would be
stirred up, that the flame of it might appear. Therefore I say, in that David
speaks so plainly after his adultery and murder, Take not thy Spirit from
me, it is a certain argument, that the faithful have never the Spirit of God
always taken from them in their greatest dissolutions. The second point is
this: How prove I that these sparkles are not idle, though the outward effects
be interrupted? As David felt this in his conscience, so every one of you may
feel it in your own consciences.

The Spirit of God in man's heart cannot be idle; but these sparkles during the
time that the body is let loose to all dissolutions, these sparkles are
accusing thy dissolution, are finding fault with thy manners; these sparkles
suffer thee not to take the pleasure of thy body without great bitterness and
continual remorse. And these sparkles where they are, will make the soul
wherein they dwell to utter these speeches at one time or other, once in the
twenty-foure hours; Alas, I am doing the evil which I would not do, if I had
power or strength to resist my affection: and if I might be master of my
affections, I would not for all the world do the evil which I do. Again, if I
had power to do the good which I would do, I would not leave it undone for all
the world.

So these sparkles, though they have not such force and strength presently as
to resist the affection and abstain from doing evil deeds, yet perpetually in
the heart they are finding fault with thy corruption, and suffer thee not to
take thy pleasure without pain, but last of all force thee to utter these
speeches; If I had strength to resist, I would not do the evil which I do.
Where these speeches are, no question they are the words of a soul which the
Lord has begun to sanctify: and being once sanctified, in despite of the
devil and of the corruption that is in us, this faith shall never perish: but
if the whole soul without contradiction, with a greedy appetite and pleasure
be carried to evil, and has no sorrow for it, that soul is in an ill estate;
I can look for nothing in such a soul but death, except the Lord of his great
mercy prevent it.

But where this remorse and sorrow, and such speeches are in the soul, that
soul, in the time that God has appointed, shall recover strength. The Lord
shall never suffer those sparks to be wholly taken away; but in his own time
he shall fortify them, and make them to break out before the world in good
works. The Lord in his own time will sanctify them, he will scatter the ashes
of corruption, stir up the sparkles, and make them to break out into a
better life then ever they did before; as ye may clearly see that David's
repentance has done more good to the God, then if he had never fallen. Thus
far concerning the effects.

Though the effects of repentance be interrupted, Similitudes, showing that the
sparkles of faith, though they be covered, are not extinguished.
yet those sparkles are not extinguished. For there is no man will think that
the fire which is covered with ashes, is extinguished; but being stirred up in
the morning, it will burn as clearly as it did the night before. There is no
man will think the trees that now in the time of Winter want leaves, fruit,
and external beauty, to be dead. There is no man will think the Sun to be
out of the firmament, though it be ouershadowed with a cloud of darkness and
mist. There is great difference between a sleeping disease, and death: for men
are not dead though they be sleeping; and yet there is nothing liker unto death
then sleep. As there is great difference betwixt a drunken man, and a dead
man; so there is great odds betwixt the faith that lies hid for a while and
utters not it self, and the light that is utterly put out.

When we break not forth into outward deeds, God forbid that we should think
that these sparkles are wholly extinguished. Indeed the soul which is
visited after foul and heinous backslidings from his calling, and against his
knowledge, before this soul recover the former beauty, it is in a strange
danger. For if the Lord suffer thy corruption to get loose, in such sort that
it carry thee as it will, and by all means possible makes thee to labor to
put out the sparkles of regeneration; when the Lord begins to challenge thee,
or to make thee render an account of this life past, the soul of that man when
it is challenged, is in great danger.

So that no question, when the Lord begins to lay to your charge your
dissolute life, the contempt and abuse of your calling, assuredly your souls
are so near to the b^inke of desperation that there can be nothing nearer. For
will thou look to God? Thou will see nothing but his anger kindled as a fire
against thee. Will thou look to thy self? Thou will see nothing but sin
provoking his anger: thou will see the contempt and abuse of thy calling
enlarging his anger; thou will see nothing but matter of despair.

And what is the best pillar and surest retreat, whereupon such a soul that is
so near to the brinke of desperation, may repose? I will show you the help
whereupon. When thou art assaulted by all the greatest tentations thou can
imagine, A sure retreat, to repose on in highest tentations.
when there is nothing before thee but death; when thou see the devil
accusing thee, thine own conscience bearing him witness against thee, thy life
accusing thee, and the abuse of thy calling accusing thee: whither shall thou
go? Look back again to thy forepast experience, cast over thy memory, and
remember if God at any time, and in any measure, has loved thee; if ever thou
have felt the love and favor of God in thy heart and conscience. Remember if
ever the Lord has so disposed thy heart, that as he loved thee thou louedst
him, and had a desire to obtain him. Remember if ever the Lord has so
disposed thy heart, that as he loved thee, thou louedst him, and had a desire
to obtain him. Remember this, and repose thine assurance on this, that as he
loved thee once he will love thee ever, and will assuredly restore thee to that
love before thou departest this life. The heart that felt once this love of
God, shall feel it again: and look what gift or grace, or what taste of the
power of the world to come that ever the Lord gave to his creatures in this
life, to that same degree of mercy he shall restore his creature before it
depart this life.

So the soul that is tossed with high assaults and great dangers, where
present things will not help, it is necessary that it have recourse unto
things past, and keep in memory the fore-past experience of mercy, which the
Lord has freely showed toward that soul. This same memory shall be so
pleasant to the soul, that it shall stay it presently from desperation, and
uphold it unto the time the Lord pacify that heart, and give comfort to that
soul: which being done, that soul shall see, that howsoever God was angry, he
was angry only for a while.

I speak these things, not that I think that every one of you has tasted of
them; and yet in some measure the servants of God must taste of them: and ye
that have not tasted of them, may taste of them before ye die. And therefore
whether ye have tasted or not tasted of them, it cannot be but profitable for
you to lock up this lesson in your hearts, and remember it faithfully, that if
the Lord at any time strike at your hearts, ye may remember and say with your
selves, I learned a lesson: To look back unto my forepast experience, and
thereon to repose. A lesson.


And though ye be not touched presently your selves, yet when ye visit them
that are troubled in conscience, let these things be proposed to them as
comforts, and use them as medicines most meet to apply to the grief of the
inward conscience, and so ye shall reap fruit of this doctrine, and possess
your souls in a good estate. Thus far for the first point, wherein every one
of you ought to try and examine your own consciences.

The second point is this; Try whether ye have love toward your neighbor or
not. Of love, which is the second point of our trial.
For as we are coupled with God by faith, so by the band of love we are coupled
with our neighbor: For love is the chief and principal branch that springs
from the root of faith. Love is that celestial glue that conioyneth all the
faithful members in the unity of a mystical body. And seeing that religion
was instituted of God, to serve as a pathway to convey us to our chief
felicity: and happy we cannot be except we be like unto our God; like unto him
we cannot be, except we have love. (For, as it is 1. John 4.8. God is love.) So
seeing God is love it self, whosoever will resemble him, must be endued with
the oil of love. This only one argument testifies to us, that this love is a
principal head, whereunto all things that are commanded in religion ought to
be referred.

To spend long time in the praise of love, I hold it not necessary, seeing the
holy Scripture resounds in blasing the commendations of it: but that we speak
not of any thing ambiguous, I will let you see how this word is considered and
taken in the Scriptures. How the word love is taken in the Scripture.
Love is considered either as a spring or fountain, from whence the rest
proceeds, that, is for the love whereby we love God. And as love comes first
from God, and is poured by his holy Spirit into our hearts: so it first
redounds upward, and strikes back upon himself: for the love of God must ever
go before the love of the creature.

Next, we take this word for that love whereby we love Gods creatures our
neighbors, and especially them that are of the family of faith. And thirdly,
it is taken for the deeds of the second Table, which flow from this love.

Now when I speak of love, I speak of it as in the second signification; to
wit, as it is taken for the love of our neighbor. The definition of love.
And taking it so, I call love The gift of God, poured into the hearts of men
and women: by the which gift we first love God in Christ our Savior; and next
in God, and for Gods cause, we love all his creatures, but chiefly our brethren
that are of the family of faith, the children of one common Father with us. We
will examine this definition; I say, first the love of God as it comes from
God, Of our love toward God.
it returns to God; as it comes down from him, so it strikes upward to him
again. And is it not good reason? And why? Let thy heart fix thy love as long
as thou will upon the creatures, thou shall never be satiate, nor thy
affections shall never be content, except thou lay hold on God: but if once
thou love God in thy heart, and cast thy affections upon him, and once take
hold on him, the longer thou love him, the greater safety and contentment
shall thou have; thou shall not thirst for any other. For as to the creatures
there is never a creature that God has created but it is stamped with his own
stamp, and every creature bears his Image: and looking to the Image of God
in the creature, should it not draw thee to him, that thou fix not thy heart
upon the creature? For his own Image in his creature, should lead thee to
himself. And therefore the more that thou know the creatures, and the
greater variety of knowledge that thou have of them, the more should every
particular knowledge of them draw thee to God: and the more should thou
wonder at thy God, and know thy duty toward him. And seeing that delight
flows from knowledge, and every knowledge has his own delight; as the
variety of knowledge that arises from the creature should make the mind to
mount up to the knowledge of God: so the variety of delights that arise upon
the diversity of this knowledge, should move the heart upward to the love of
God: and the heart getting hold of God, and being seized with the love of God,
and the mind being occupied with the true knowledge of God; so soon as heart
and mind is full of God, the heart is quiet and the mind is satisfied. So that
the more this knowledge grows in the mind, the greater contentment thou have;
and the more the love of God grows in thy heart, the greater joy and
rejoicing have thou in thy soul. And why? In God ye have not only all the
creatures, but ye have himself beside the creatures: and therefore in God ye
have all the knowledge and delight that can arise of the creatures; and besides
the creatures ye have God himself, who is the Creator. And so I say, the mind
of man can never quiet it self in the knowledge, nor the heart can never
settle it self in the love of naked creatures; in respect they are flowing and
vanity, as Solomon calls them: But in the infinite God rightly known, and
earnestly loved, the mind shall find a full rest, and the heart shall have a
perfect joy. For our affection is so insatiable that no finite thing will
satisfy it; nor there can be no solid settling upon the thing that is
transitory. So the love ought to mount upward, first to God, in whose face the
heart shall find full and perfect joy.

The second argument that I use is this; Seeing there is only one precept left
by our Master in recommendation to be observed by us, Of love toward our
neighbor.
namely, That every one of us should love another: therefore our wise Master
understanding well, that where love was there needed no more laws, that the
life of man by love only behooued to be most happy, left only the same in
chief recommendation, and takes up the whole Law and Gospel in one word,
Love. And if the heart of man were endued with love, his life might be most
happy and blessed: for there is nothing makes this life happy, but the
resemblance and likelihood that we have with God. The nearer we draw to God,
the more blessed is our life; for there cannot be so happy a life as the life
of God. In the first Epist. of John, 4.8. God is love: therefore the more we
are in love, the more near we are to that happy life: for we are in God, and
partakers of the life of God. When I speak this, ye must not think that love
in God and love in us is one thing: for love is but a quality in us, and it is
not a quality in God. There is nothing in God but that which is God; so love
in God is his own essence: therefore the more that ye grow in love, the nearer
ye draw to God, and to that happy and blessed life. For there is nothing more
profitable, more agreeable and convenient unto nature then to love, and above
all things to love God. And therefore it is that God and his Angels are most
happy and blessed, because they love all things, and desire ever to do good.
On the other side, there is nothing more unhappy, nothing more noisome, more
hurtful and that eats up nature more, then to burn with envy and hatred:
and therefore it is that the devils are most miserable, who torment themselves
with continual malice and hatred, burning with a vehement appetite to be
noisome unto all creatures. So as the life of the devil is most unhappy,
because he is full of envy and malice; so our life will be most happy, if we
be full of love. I will no further speak of love: Only if ye have love, mark
the effects of it set down, 1. Cor. 13.4.5.6.7. verses, which effects if ye
have not in some measure, ye have not true love.

I end here. Conclusion, with an exhortation.
Ye see in what points every one of you ought to be prepared: Ye must be endued
with this love, and ye must be endued with faith; and if ye have these in any
small measure, go boldly to the hearing of the word, and to the receiving of
the Sacraments. This is the preparation that we allow of. I grant the Papists
have a preparation far differing from this, and therefore they can have no
warrant from the word of God. Last of all, seeing that we are commanded to try
our selves, he that lacks knowledge cannot try himself, a mad man cannot
try himself, a child cannot try himself; therefore they ought not to come
to the Lords Table. All these things being considered aright, he that has
faith and love in any kind of measure, let him come to the Table of the Lord.
And all these things serve as well for the hearing of the word fruitfully, as
for the receiving of the Sacrament. Therefore the Lord of his mercy illuminate
your minds, and work some measure of faith and love in your hearts, that ye
may be partakers of that heavenly life, offered in the word and Sacraments;
that ye may begin your heaven here, and obtain the full fruition of the life
to come: and that in the righteous merits of Christ Jesus. To whom with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor, praise and glory, both now and for
ever, Amen.

THE THIRD SERMON, UPON THE SACRAMENTS IN GENERAL.
1. COR. 11.23. For I have received of the Lord, that which I also have
delivered unto you, to wit, that the Lord Jesus in the night that he was
betrayed, took Bread, etc.


THere is nothing in this wo^ld, nor out of the world, more to be wished of
every one of you, more to be craved and sought of every one of you, then to be
conjoined with Christ Jesus, then once to be made one with the God of glory,
Christ Jesus. This heavenly and celestial conjunction is purchased and brought
about by two special means; It is brought about by means of the word and
preaching of the Gospel: and it is brought about by the means of the
Sacraments, and ministration thereof. The word leads us to Christ by the
ear; the Sacraments lead us to Christ by the eye: two senses of all the rest
which God has chosen as most meet for this purpose, to instruct us and bring
us unto Christ. For that doctrine must be most effectual and moving, that
wakeneth and stirs up most the outward senses: that doctrine that wakeneth
not only the ear but the eye, the taste, the feeling, and all the rest of the
outward senses, must move the heart most, must be most effectual and piercing
in the soul. But so it is that this doctrine of the Sacraments moves,
stirs up and wakeneth most the outward senses; therefore it must be (if we
come well prepared unto it) most effectual to stir up the inward senses of the
dull heart. But there is a thing that ye must ever remember; there is no
doctrine, neither of the simple word, nor yet of the Sacraments, if Christ
abstract his holy Spirit that is able to move: therefore when ever ye come to
hear the doctrine, whether it be of the Sacraments or of the simple word,
crave of God that he would be present by his holy Spirit, or otherwise all the
doctrine in the earth will not avail you. Always this doctrine of the
Sacraments stirs up and wakens most the outward senses, and there is no
question therefore but it is an effectual and potent instrument, to waken,
prepare and stir up our hearts.

Then to let you see what the word Sacrament means, The diverse taking of the
word Sacrament.
and to remove the ambiguity of it, it is certain and out of all question,
that the Latin Divines, who were most ancient, did interpret the Greek word
(...), by the word Sacrament; and they used the Greek word, not only to
signify the whole action of the Supper of the Lord, and the whole action of
Baptism: but they used the word Mystery, to signify whatsoever is dark and
hid in it self, and not frequented in the common use of men: as after this
manner the Apostle calls the vocation of the Gentiles a mystery. Ephesians. 3.9.
Ephesians. 5.32.
This conjunction which is begun here betwixt us and Christ, is called a
mystery; and the Latin Interpreters call it a Sacrament: and to be short, ye
will not find in ye book of God a word more frequent then the word Mystery. But
as for the word Sacrament, whereby they interpret the Greek word, we find not
this word by the same Divines to be taken so largely: neither is it taken so
largely in any part of the book of God. Always the word Sacrament is very
ambiguous in it self, and there arise about the ambiguity of this word many
controversies, which are not yet ceased, nor will not cease while the world
lasts: whereas if they had kept the Apostles words, and called them as the
Apostle calls them, Signs and Seals; all this digladiation, strife and
contention, appearingly had not fallen out: but where men will be wiser then
God, and give names to things without warrant from God, upon the wit of man
which is but mere folly, all this stir falls out. Well then, to come unto
the purpose; The ancient Divines took the word Sacrament, as we may perceive,
in a fourefold manner. Sometime they took it for the whole action, that is,
the whole ministry of the Elements: sometime they took it not for the whole
action, but for the outward things that are used in the action of Baptism and
of the Supper; as they took it for the water and sprinkling of it, for the
Bread and Wine, breaking, distributing, and eating thereof. Thirdly again they
took it not for the whole outward things that are used in the action, but
only for the material and earthly things, the Elements: as for Bread and Wine
in the Supper, and water in Baptism. And after this sort, says Augustine, the
wicked eat the body of our Lord, concerning the Sacrament only, that is,
concerning the Elements only. Last of all, they took it not only for the
Elements, but for the things signified by the Elements. And after this manner
Irenaeus says, that a Sacrament stands of two things: the one earthly, the
other heavenly. The ancient Divines then taking the word after these sorts, no
question, all these ways they took it rightly.

But leaving the ambiguity of the word, I take the word Sacrament, as it is
taken and used this day in the Church of God, for a holy Sign and Seal that
is annexed to ye preached word of God, to seal up and confirm the truth
contained in the same word: so that I call not the seal separated from the
word, a Sacrament. For as there can not be a seal but that which is the seal
of an evidence, and if the seal be separated from the evidence, it is not a
seal, but look what it is by nature, it is no more: So there cannot be a
Sacrament, except it be annexed to the evidence of the word; but look what the
Sacrament was by nature, it is no more. Was it a common piece of bread? It
remains common bread, except it be joined to the evidence of the word.
Therefore the word only cannot be a Sacrament, nor the element only, cannot be
a Sacrament; but the word and element coniunctly, must make a Sacrament. And so
Augustine said well, Let the word come to the element, and so ye shall have a
Sacrament. So then the word must come to the element: that is, the word
preached distinctly, and all the parts of it opened up, must go before the
hanging to of the Sacracrament; and the Sacrament as a seal must follow, and
so be received accordingly.

Then I call a Sacrament, the word and seal coniunctly, the one hung to the
other. It is without all controversy, and there is no doubt in it, that all
Sacraments are signs: Now if a Sacrament be a sign, as the sign is in a
relation in that Category, (for so we must speak it:) so the Sacrament must be
placed in that same Categorie of relation. Now every relation again must
stand, of force, betwixt two things; for one thing cannot be the correlatiue of
it self: but in a lawful relation, of force there must be two things, which
two have ever a mutual respect the one to the other: therefore in every
Sacrament that has a relation, there must be two things which two have ever a
mutual respect the one to the other.

Take away one of these two things from the Sacrament, ye lose the relation;
and losing the relation, ye lose the Sacrament. Confound any of these two with
the other, make either a confusion or permixtion of them, ye lose the relation:
and losing the relation, ye lose the Sacrament. Turn over the one into the
other, so that the substance of the one starts up, and vanishes in the other;
ye lose the relation, and so ye lose the Sacrament. Then as in every Sacrament
there is a relation; so to keep the relation, ye must ever keep two things
severally in the Sacrament.

Now for the better understanding and consideration of these two diverse things
which are relative to others, The heads to be entreated of in this Sermon.
we shall keep this order by Gods grace. in one action or two; whether they be
offered to one instrument or two; or if they be given after one manner or two,
to both the instruments. Mark these diversities; the diverse manner of the
receiving, the diversity of the instruments, and the diversity of the giuers:
and ye shall find little difficulty in the Sacrament.

1. The signs in the Sacrament.
Now to begin at the signs, seeing all Sacraments are signs, what call we the
signs in the Sacrament? I call the signs in the Sacrament whatsoever I
perceive and take up by my outward senses by mine eye especially. Now ye see in
this Sacrament, there are two sorts of things subject to the outward senses,
and to the eye especially: ye see the Elements of Bread and Wine are subject to
mine eye; therefore they must be signs. Ye see again, that the rites and
ceremonies, whereby these Elements are distributed, broken, and given, are
subject to mine eye also. Then I must make two sorts of signs; one sort of the
Bread and Wine, and we call them elementall: another sort of the rites and
ceremonies, whereby these are distributed, broken, and given; and we call them
ceremonial. Be not deceived with the word Ceremony; think not that I call
the breaking of ye Bread, the eating of the Bread, and drinking of the Wine,
Ceremonies: think not that they are vain, as ye use that word Ceremony for
a vain thing, which has no grace nor profit following after it. No, although
I call them Ceremonies, there is never a Ceremony which Christ instituted in
this Supper, but it is as essential as the Bread and Wine are, and ye cannot
leave one iotte of them, except ye pervert the whole institution: for what ever
Christ commanded to be done, what ever he spoke or did in that whole action, it
is essential and must be done; and ye cannot leave one jot thereof, but ye will
pervert the whole action.

Why they are called signs.
The reason wherefore I call them signs is this: I call them not signs by that
reason that men commonly call them signs, because they signify only; as the
Br^^d signifies the body of Christ, and the Wine signifies the blood of
Christ: I call them not signs because they represent only; but I call them
signs, because they have the body and blood of Christ conjoined with them. Yea
so truly is the body of Christ conjoined with that Bread, and the blood of
Christ conjoined with that Wine, that as soon as thou receiuest that Bread in
thy mouth (if thou be a faithful man or woman) so soon receiuest thou the
body of Christ in thy soul, and that by faith: and as soon as thou receiuest
that Wine in thy mouth, so soon thou receiuest the blood of Christ in thy
soul, and that by faith: In respect of this exhibition chiefly, that they are
instruments to deliver and exhibit the things that they signify, and not in
respect only of their representation, are they called signs. For if they did
nothing but represent or signify a thing absent, then any picture or dead
Image should be a Sacrament, for there is no picture, as the picture of the
King, but at the sight of the picture the King will come in your mind, and it
will signify unto you that that is the Kings picture. So if the sign of the
Sacrament did no further, all pictures should be Sacraments: but in respect
that the Sacrament exhibites and delivers the thing that it signifies, to the
soul and heart, so soon as the sign is delivered to the mouth, for this
cause especially it is called a sign. There is no picture of the King that
will deliver the King unto you; there is no other image that will exhibit the
thing whereof it is the image: therefore there is no image can be a Sacrament.
Then in respect the Lord has appointed the Sacraments as hands to deliver and
exhibit the thing signified, for this delivery and exhibition chiefly they are
called signs. As the word of the Gospel is a mighty and potent instrument to
our everlasting salvation: so the Sacrament is a potent instrument appointed by
God to deliver us to Christ Jesus, to our everlasting salvation. For this
spiritual meat is dressed and given up to us in spiritual dishes: that is,
in the ministry of the word, and in the ministry of the Sacraments. And
suppose this ministry be external, yet the Lord is said to deliver
spiritual and heavenly things by these external things. Why? Because he has
appointed them as instruments whereby he will deliver his own Son unto us.
For this is certain, that none has power to deliver Christ Jesus unto us,
except God and his holy Spirit: and therefore to speak properly, there is none
can deliver Christ but God by his own Spirit: he is delivered by the
ministry of the holy Spirit; it is the holy Spirit that seals him up in our
hearts, and confirms us more and more in him: as the Apostle gives him this
style, 2. Cor. 1.22.

To speak properly, there is none has power to deliver Christ but God the
Father or himself. There is none has power to deliver the Mediator but his
own Spirit: yet it has pleased God to use some instruments and means,
whereby he will deliver Christ Jesus unto us. The means are these; the
ministry of the word, and the ministry of the Sacraments; and in respect he
uses these as means to deliver Christ, they are said to deliver him. But here
ye have to distinguish between the principal efficient deliverer, and the
isntrumental efficient, which is the word and Sacraments: keeping this
distinction, both these are true; God by his word, and God by his Spirit,
delivers Christ Jesus unto you. Then I say, I call the^ signs, because God
has made the^ potent instruments to deliver ye same thing which they signify.

2. What is the thing signified in the Sacrament.
Now I go to the thing signified, and I call the thing signified by the signs
in the Sacrament, that which Irenaeus that old Writer calls the heavenly and
spiritual thing: to wit, whole Christ with his whole gifts, benefits and
graces, applied and given to my soul. Then I call not the thing signified by
the signs of Bread and Wine, the benefits of Christ, the graces of Christ, or
the virtue that flows out of Christ only: but I call the thing signified
together with the benefits and virtues flowing from him, the very substance of
Christ himself, from which this virtue does flow. The substance with the
virtues, gifts and graces that flow from the substance, is the thing signified
here. As for the virtue and graces that flow from Christ, it is not possible
that thou can be partaker of the virtue that flows from his substance,
except thou be first partaker of the substance it self. For how is it possible
that I can be partaker of the juice that flows out of any substance, except I
be partaker of the substance it self first?

Is it possible that my stomach can be refreshed with that meat, the substance
whereof never came into my mouth? Is it possible my drought can be slackned
with that drink, that never passed down my throat? Is it possible that I can
suck any virtue out of any thing, except I get the substance first? So it is
impossible that I can get the juice and virtue that flows out of Christ,
except I get the substance, that is, himself first. So I call not the thing
signified, the grace and virtue that flows from Christ only; nor Christ
himself and his substance, without his virtue and graces only; but jointly
the substance with the graces, whole Christ, God and man, without separation of
his natures, without distinguishing of his substance from his graces.

I call the thing signified by the signs in the Sacrament: for why? if no more
be signified by the Bread but the flesh and body of Christ only, and no more
be signified by the Wine but the blood of Christ only, thou can not say,
that the body of Christ is Christ; it is but a part of Christ: thou can not
say, that the blood of Christ is whole Christ; it is but a part of him: and a
piece of thy Savior saved thee not; a part of thy Savior wrought not the
work of thy salvation: and so suppose thou get a piece of him in the
Sacrament, that part will do thee no good.

To the end therefore that this Sacrament may nourish thee to life everlasting,
thou must get in it thy whole Savior, whole Christ God and man, with his whole
graces and benefits, without separation of his substance from his graces, or
of the one nature from the other. And how get I him? Not by my mouth. It is a
vain thing to think that we will get God by our mouth: but we get him by
faith. As he is a Spirit, so I eat him by faith and belief in my soul, not
by the teeth of my mouth: that is a vain thing. Be it that thou might eat
the flesh of Christ with thy teeth, this were a cruel manner of doing; yet
thou may not eat the Godhead with thy teeth: this is a gross fashion of
speaking. Then if ever ye get good of the Sacrament, ye must get whole Christ;
and there is not any instrument whereby to lay hold on him but by faith only:
therefore come with a faithful heart.

O, but ye will ask me (and by appearance, the definition laid down of the
thing signified gives a ground to it) If the flesh of Christ and the blood of
Christ be a part of the thing signified, Question.
how can I call his flesh a spiritual thing, and Christ in respect of his
flesh, a heavenly thing? Ye will not say that the substance of Christ's flesh is
spiritual, or that the substance of his blood is spiritual; wherefore then
call ye it an heavenly and spiritual thing? I will tell you. The flesh of
Christ is called a spiritual thing, and Christ is called spiritual in respect
of his flesh: Answer.
not that his flesh is become a Spirit; or that the substance of his flesh is
become spiritual. No it remains true flesh, and the substance of it is one,
as it was in the womb of the Virgin. His flesh is not called spiritual in
respect it is glorified in the heavens at the right hand of the Father; be not
deceived with that: for suppose it be glorified, yet it remains true flesh,
that same very flesh which he took out of the womb of the blessed Virgin.
Neither is it spiritual, because thou see it not in the Supper; if thou were
where it is thou might see it: but it is called spiritual in respect of the
spiritual ends whereunto it serves to my body and soul, because the flesh
and blood of Christ serves to nourish me, not to a temporal but to a
spiritual and heavenly life. Now in respect this flesh is a spiritual food
serving me to a spiritual life, for this cause it is called a spiritual
thing: if it nourish me as the flesh of beasts does, but to a temporal life,
it shoud be called but a temporal thing: but in respect it nourishes my
soul, not to an ear^hly and temporal life, but to an heavenly, celestial,
and spiritual end; in respect of this end, the flesh of Christ, and Christ in
respect of his flesh, is called the spiritual thing ^n the Sacrament. It is
called also the spiritual thing in the Sacrament, in respect of the spiritual
instrument whereby it is received. The instrument whereby the flesh of Christ
is received, is not a corporal instrument; is not the teeth and mouth of the
body, but it is spiritual, it is the mouth of the soul which is faith: and
in respect the instrument is spiritual, therefore Christ who is received, is
also called spiritual. In respect also that the manner of receiving is
heavenly, spiritual, and an internal manner; not a natural, nor external
manner: in respect that the flesh of Christ which is given in the Sacrament, is
received by a spiritual and secret manner, which is not seen to the eyes of
men; In all these respects I call Christ Jesus the heavenly and spiritual
thing, which is signified by the signs in the Sacrament.

Now I say in the end, the thing signified must be applied to us. What avails
it me to see my medicine in a box, The thing signified must be applied.
standing in an Apothecaries shop? what can it work toward me, if it be not
applied? What avails it me to see my salvation afar of, if it be not
applied to me? Therefore it is not enough for us to see Christ, but he must be
given us, or else he cannot work health and salvation in us. And as this
salvation is given us, we must have a mouth to take it. What avails it me to
see meat before me, except I have a mouth to take it? So the thing signified
in the Sacrament, must be given us by God, by the three persons of the Trinity
one God, by Christ Jesus, who must give himself: and as he gives himself, so
we must have a mouth to take him. Suppose he present and offer himself, yet he
can profit and avail none but them who have a mouth to receive him. Then ye
see what I call the thing signified: whole Christ, applied to us, and received
by us: whole Christ, God and man, without separation of his natures, without
distinguishing of his substance from his graces, all applied to us. Then I say
seeing we come to the Sacrament to be fed by his flesh, and refreshed by his
blood, to be fed to an heavenly and spiritual life: and seeing there is no
profit to be had at this Table without some kind of preparation; therefore
let no man prease to come to this Table, except in some measure he be prepared.

Some will be prepared in a greater measure then others; always let no man
presume to go to it, except in some measure his heart be sanctified: therefore
my exhortation concerning the way, whereby every one of you ought to prepare
your selves that ye may fit you the better to this Table, is this; There is not
one of you that comes to the Table of the Lord, that may bring before the Lord
his integrity, justice, and vprightnes: but whosoever goes to the Table of the
Lord, he ought to go with the acknowledging and confession of his misery: he
ought to go with a sorrowful heart, for the sins wherein he has offended
God; he ought to go with a hatred of those sins. Not to protest that he is
holy, just and upright: but to protest, and confess, that he is miserable, and
of all creatures the most miserable: and therefore he goes to that Table, to
get support for his misery, to obtain mercy at the throne of Grace: to get
remission and forgiveness of sins; to get the gift of repentance, that more
and more he may study to live uprightly, holily and soberly in all time to
come. Therefore except ye have entered into this course, and have a purpose to
continue in this course, to amend your life past, to repent you of your sins,
and by the grace of God to live more uprightly and soberly then ye have done;
for Gods cause go not to the Table. For where there is not a purpose to do well
and to repent, of necessity there must be a purpose to do il: and whosouer
comes to that Table with a purpose to do ill, and without a purpose to repent,
he comes to mock Christ, to scorn him to his face, and to eat his own
present condemnation. So let no man come to that Table, that has not in his
heart a purpose to do better, that has not a heart to sorrow for his sins
past, and thinks not his former folly and madness ouer-great: Let no man
come to that Table without this, under the pain of condemnation. But if ye
have in your heart a purpose to do better, suppose your former life has been
dissolute and loose; yet if ye be touched in your hearts with any feeling or
remorse of your life past, go not from the Table, but come with a prostation of
your misery and wretchedness, and come with a heart to get grace. If with a
dissolute life (I mean not of open slanders) thou have also a purpose not to
amend, but to do worse, for Gods sake abstain.

Thus far of the thing signified. Unto this general consideration, there
remains these things yet to be made plain unto you: First how the signs and
the thing signified are coupled together, and how they are conjoined. Next it
rests to be told you, how the sign is delivered, and how the thing signified
is delivered, and how both are received as they are delivered. This being done,
I shall speak briefly of the other part of the Sacrament, which is the word.
And last of all, I shall let you see what sort of faults they are that pervert
the Sacrament, and make it of no effect. And if time shall serve, I shall enter
in particular to this Sacrament which we have in hand.

Then to come back again; In the third place it is to be considered, how the
sign and the thing signified, How the sign and the thing signified, are
joined together.
are coupled: For about this conjunction all the debate stands; all the strifes
that we have with them that vary from the straight truth, stand about the
matter of this conjunction. Some will have them conjoined one way, and some
after another way; and men strive very bitterly about this matter, and continue
so in strife, that through the bitterness of contention they lose the truth:
for when the heat of contention arises, and especially in disputation, they
take no heed to the truth but to the victory. If they may be victorious, and it
were but by a multitude of words, they regard not, suppose they lose the truth.
Read their works and books about this conjunction, and you will crave rather
conscience then knowledge: yea if they had the quarter of conscience, that they
have of knowledge, no question this controversy might be easily taken up: but
men lacking conscience, and having knowledge, an evil conscience peruerts the
knowledge, and draws them to an evil end.

To tell you now how these two are conjoined, it will be far easier for me, and
better for you to understand to tell you first how they are conjoined: for I
shall make it very clear unto you, by letting you see how they are not
conjoined: but it is not possible to make it so clear by telling you the
manner how they are conjoined. Ye may perceive clearly by your eyes, that the
sign and the thing signified are not locally conjoined: that is, they are not
both in one place. Ye may perceive also by your outward senses, that the body
of Christ which is the thing signified, and the signs, are not conjoined
corporally, their bodies touch not each other. You may perceive also they are
not visibly conjoined, they are not both subject to the outward eye. So it is
easy to let you see how they are not conjoined. For if the sign and the thing
signified were visibly and corporally conjoined, what need were there for us to
have a sign? Wherefore should the sign in the Sacrament serve us? Is not the
sign in the Sacrament appointed to lead me to Christ? is not the sign
appointed to point out Christ unto me? If I saw him present by mine own eye,
as I do the Bread, what need had I of the Bread? Therefore ye may see clearly,
that there is no such thing as a corporal, natural, or any such like
physical conjunction between the sign and the thing signified. So I say, it
is easy to let you see how they are not conjoined.

Now let us see how they are conjoined. We cannot crave here any other sort of
conjunction then may stand and agree with the nature of the Sacrament: for
nothing can be conjoined with another after any other sort then the nature of
it will suffer; therefore there cannot be here any other sort of conjunction
then the nature of the Sacrament will suffer. Now the nature of the Sacrament
will suffer a Sacramental conjunction. O but that is hard yet, ye are never
the better for this; but I shall make it clear by Gods grace. Ye know every
Sacrament is a mystery; there is not a Sacrament but it contains a high and
divine mystery. In respect then that a Sacrament is a mystery, it follows,
that a mystical secret, and a spiritual coniuction agrees well with the
nature of the Sacrament.

As the conjunction between us and Christ is full of mystery, as the Apostle
lets you see, Ephesians. 5.32. that it is a mystical and spiritual conjunction:
so no doubt the conjunction between the Sacrament and the thing signified in
the Sacrament, must be of that same nature mystical and spiritual. It is not
possible to tell you by any ocular demonstration, how Christ and we are
conjoined. But whosoever would understand that conjunction, his mind must be
enlightened with an heavenly eye; that as he has an eye in his head to see
corporal things: so he must have in his mind and heart an heavenly eye to see
this mystical conjunction; a heavenly eye to take up this secret conjunction
that is betwixt the Son of God and us in the Sacrament. So I need not to
insist any longer hereupon: except ye have this heavenly illumination, ye can
never understand neither your own conjunction with Christ, nor yet the
conjunction between the sign and the thing signified in the Sacrament.

But I keep my ground. As the Sacrament is a mystery; so the conjunction that
is in the Sacrament, no doubt must be a mystical, secret and spiritual
conjunction. Besides this, I will let you see by a general deduction, that in
every Sacrament are two things; which two have a relation and mutual respect
the one to the other: so that a relative conjunction agrees well with the
nature of the Sacrament. Then will thou ask what kind of conjunction it is? I
answer, the conjunction that agrees with nature: to wit, a relative and a
respective conjunction; such a conjunction wherein the sign has a continual
respect to the thing signified, and the thing signified to the sign.

Then would you know in a word the kind of conjunction that is between the
sign and the thing signified? I call it a secret and a mystical conjunction,
that stands in a mutual relation between the sign and the thing signified.
There is another conjunction besides the conjunction that is between Christ
and us, that may make this conjunction betwixt the sign and the thing
signified in the Sacrament more clear: and this is the conjunction which is
between the word which you hear, This conjunction is made clear, by the
conjunction betwixt the word and the thing signified thereby.
and the thing signified by the same word. Mark what sort of conjunction is
between the word which you hear, and the thing signified which comes into
your mind; the like conjunction is between the sign that you see, and the
thing signified in the Sacrament. You may perceive easily that there is a
conjunction by the effect, although you cannot so well know the mann^r of
conjunction. And why? You hear not the word so soon spoken by me, but
incontinent the (thing which my words whereof I speak, signify) comes into
your mind. If I speak of things past, of things to come, or of things that are
never so far absent, I can no sooner speak to you of them in this language,
but presently ye thing signified comes into your mind; no doubt because there
is a conjunction between the word and the thing signified. So every one of you
may easily perceive that there is a conjunction between the word and the thing
signified by the word. As for example: suppose Paris be far distant from us;
yet if I speak of Paris, the word is no sooner spoken, but the City will come
into your mind. If I speak of the King, although he be far distant from us,
the word is no sooner spoken but the thing signified will come into your mind.
So this coming of the thing signified in the heart and mind, makes it plain
unto you, that there is a conjunction between the word and the thing signified
by the word.

To tell you of this sort of conjunction it is not so easy, because the thing
signified is not present unto the eye, as the word is to the ear. If every
thing signified were as present unto your eye as the word is to the ear, it
were easy to see the conjunction: but now seeing the conjunction is mystical,
secret, and spiritual, therefore it is hard to make you understand it. Ever
observe what conjunction is between the simple word and the thing signified by
the word; the same kind of conjunction is between the Sacrament and the thing
signified by the Sacrament: for the Sacrament is no other thing but a visible
word. I call it a visible word, why? Because it conueyeth the signification of
it, by the eye to the mind; as this is an audible word, because it conueyeth
the signification of it by the ear to the mind.

In the Sacrament so often as ye look on it, ye shall no sooner see that Bread
with your eye, but the body of Christ shall come into your mind; ye shall no
sooner see that Wine, but after the preaching and opening up of the parts of
the Sacrament, the blood of Christ shall come into your mind.

Now this conjunction between the sign and the thing signified in the
Sacrament, stands chiefly as ye may perceive in two things. First, in a
relation between the sign and the thing signified; which aris^th from a
likeness and proportion betwixt them two: for if there were no propor^ion and
analogy between the sign and the thing signified by the sign, there could
not be a Sacrament or a relation. So the first part of this conjunction
stands in a relation, which arises from a certain similitude and likeness
which the one has with the other. And this likeness may be easily perceived:
for look how able the Bread is to nourish thy body to this life earthly and
temporal; the flesh of Christ signified by the Bread, is as able to nourish
both body and soul to life everlasting. So ye may perceive some kind of
proportion between the sign and the thing signified.

The second point of the conjunction stands in a continual and mutual
concurring the one with the other; in such sort that the sign and the thing
signified are offered both together, received together at one time, and in one
action; the one outwardly, the other inwardly; if so be that thou have a mouth
in thy soul, which is faith, to receive it. Then the second point of
conjunction stands in a joint offering, and in a joint receiving: and this I
call a concurrence. Then would you know what manner of conjunction is between
the sign and the thing signified? I say, it is a relative conjunction, a
secret and a mystical conjunction, which stands in a mutual relation. There
is no more to be observed herein but this only, that if ye conioyne these two,
ye be careful not to confound them: beware that ye turn not the one into the
other, but keep either of them in his own integrity, without confusion or
permixtion of the one with the other; and so ye shall have the lawful
conjunction that should be in the Sacrament.

There is not a lesson that can be learned out of this, at the least that I can
mark or gather, except only the lesson of the kindness and goodness of the
everliving God, who has invented so many wonderful sorts of conjunction, and
all to this purpose, that we might be conjoined to advance this great and
mystical conjunction betwixt the God of glory and us: In the which
conjunction, our weal, felicity and happiness in this life, and in the life
to come, does only stand: That he is so careful to conioyne himself with his
word and Sacraments, that we in his word and Sacraments might be conjoined with
him.

If we were moved with the care and love of God expressed in these
conjunctions, though it were never so little on our parts, assuredly we would
never defraud our selves of the fruit of that happy conjunction, nor bring it
in such a loathing and disdain as we do at this day: for we by following and
preferring of our pleasures to Christ and his counsel, have made the stomachs
of our souls so foul and ill disposed, that either they receive him not at
all, or if he be received, he is not able to tarry. And why? Because a foul
stomach is not able to keep him: for incontinently we choke him so, either
with the lusts of the flesh or with the cares of this world, that he is
compelled to depart. And if Christ be not both eaten and digested, he can do us
no good: and this digestio^ cannot be where there is not a greedy appetite to
the receipt of him; for if thou be not hungry for him, he is not ready for
thee. And I am assured, if all the men in the Country were examined by this
rule, that there were none that receive Christ but he that has a stomach and
is hungry for him, I doubt that few should be found to receive him. I fear
that we have taken such a loathing and disdain of that heavenly food, that
there is not such a thing as any kind of hunger or appetite of it in our
souls. And what is the cause of this? I will tell you: Suppose we have
renounced the corporal and gross idolatry wherein our Father were plunged and
drowned, and which men in some parts go about to erect now: yet, as the manners
of this Country, and the behavior of every one of us does testify, there is
not a man that has renounced that damnable idol that he has in his own
soul, nor the invisible idolatry that he has in his own heart and mind.
There is not a man but to that same idol wherewith he was conceived and borne,
and whereunto he addicted himself and was a slave before, but to that idol he
gives his service yet. And therefore marvel not, when thou have addicted thy
service, set thy affection, and poured out thy heart upon that pleasure of
thine own, upon that idol of thine own, upon that lust and mischief of
thine own, marvel not if thou have no appetite to Christ nor to that
heavenly food.

When thou have thy soul poured forth on some villainy and wickedness, and
have sent it far afield, how is it possible for thee to retire it and draw it
home again, to employ it where thou should, on Christ Jesus? Then let every
one in his own rank take heed to his own domesticke idol that lodges
within his own heart, and prease to clear himself of it; or otherwise ye
cannot see the face of Christ, nor be partakers of his kingdom.

There is not another lesson in Christianity but this: this is the first and
the last lesson, to shake off your lusts and affections piece and piece, and so
by little and little renounce thy self, that thou may embrace Christ. I
grant there is a greater progress in this point in some then in others; some
less, some more profit in this: but except in some measure ye cast off your
selves, and whatsoever in your own eyes ye account most precious, to come by
Christ, ye are not worthy of him. And this is very hard to be done: It is very
easy for a man to speak it, to bid a man renounce his own idol, which I call
his affections; but it is not so soon done: assuredly a stronger must come in
to cast out the affections; yea, a stronger then the devil must come in to
drive out the devil, who makes residence in the affection, or else he will
remain there for ever. Therefore there are not many that have renounced
themselves; and examine thine heart when thou will, if there be any thing in
the world that thou love better then Christ: if thou be not content to leave
father and mother, to leave wife and children, or whatsoever is dearest unto
thee in this world, for Christ, thou art not worthy of him. If thou be not
content to cast off whatsoever makes thee a stranger to Christ, thou art not
worthy of him. And is this a small matter, seeing there is no part or power of
our souls but it is enemy to this, and repines against this heavenly
conjunction? Is this an easy thing, to cast off and renounce our selves, that
we may come unto Christ? There is no greater thing then this: it has not
entered into every heart, to consider of this; for this work of our new
creation is ten thousand times greater then the work of our first creation:
and therefore it is most necessary that every man take heed unto himself; for
the devil is so crafty in this point, that he erecteth ever one idol or other
in our souls; and sometimes under the show of virtue: which of all is most
dangerous. And in every work that we take in hand be it never so holy, he is
at our right hand, and makes himself to have interest in it: and he contents
himself not with this, under the show of virtue to corrupt us; but he is so
watchful, that even in the best actions and when ye are best occupied in your
most virtuous actions, he mixeth then with sins, and so does all that lies
in him to make you lose your profit, and lose your rewards. For when ye are
best occupied, he goes about to engender in you an opinion of your selves, and
so defraud God of his glory. Or otherwise, in doing of good deeds he makes
you so slack and negligent, that if ye do them, ye do them coldly, or so
indiscreetely that he makes you begin at the last first, and makes it that
should be first, last; and so as Martha was, to be occupied and ouerbusie in
those things which are not so necessary as the things wherein Mary was
occupied: for she should have preferred first the hearing of the word, to the
preparing of Christ's Supper. This is but to give you an in-sight, an^ to let
you see that the devil is so crafty, that either he casts in a false conceit
of our selves, in doing any good deed, or else makes us to do that last which
should be first; or then makes us altogether so sluggish and so negligent, that
we do the work of the Lord coldly: and so one way or other, he holds us ever
in a continual business, so that we cannot be half watchful enough. For we
have to do with principalities and powers, with spiritual wickednesses, which
are above us, and within us also: for there is not that man that has
corruption within him, but Satan is in him: we cannot therefore be half
watchful or studious enough to cast out the devil, to renounce our selves,
and to submit us unto the obedience of Christ. Thus far concerning the
conjunction.

Now seeing that the sign and the thing signified are diverse, How the sign,
and the thing signified, are given and received. Considerations thereof.
it rests to be considered how the sign is delivered, and how the thing
signified is delivered; and after what manner they are received. And therefore
concerning this, ye have these things to mark. mark thirdly, the diversity of
the instruments: and fourthly, the diverse manner of receiving. Mark all these
diligently, and ye shall find little difficulty in the Sacrament. And first to
make it clear unto you, I say, that the sign and the thing signified by the
sign, are not both given by one; and this ye see plainly. For as for the
sign, that Bread and that Wine, ye see your selves, that the Minister offers
unto you the sign, he gives you that Sacrament; as that sign is an earthly
and corporal thing, so it is an earthly and corporal man that gives it. Now
the thing signified is of another nature: for it is an heavenly and spiritual
thing; Therefore this heavenly thing is not given by an earthly man; this
incorruptible thing is not given by a natural and corruptible man. But Christ
Jesus has locked up and reserved the ministry of this heavenly thing to
himself only: therefore there are two giuers in this Sacrament; the Minister
gives the earthly thing; Christ Jesus the Mediator, gives you the heavenly
thing in this Sacrament. For Christ, in giving the earthly thing, will not use
his own ministry immediately, nor the ministry of an Angel, but only the
ministry of an earthly man. And as for the dispensation of his own body and
blood, he will not give it either to heavenly creature, or earthly man; but he
keeps this ministry to himself, and he dispenses his own body and blood,
to whom and when he pleases. And why? If any man in the world had power to
give Christ's body and blood, no question, this man should have power to cleanse
the heart and conscience; for the blood of Christ has this power with it; and
consequently, should have power to forgive sins.

Now, it is only God that may forgive sins; and therefore it is not possible
that the ministry of the heavenly thing can be in the power of any man.
Example we have in John the Baptist, Math 3.11. Says he not, The ministry
that I have, is of the element? I am commanded to minister the element of water
only: but as for the ministry of fire, and of the Spirit, Christ has
reserved it unto himself. Therefore look not to get the Spirit at man's hands,
but at the hands of Christ himself only. And without this inward ministry
the outward ministry is not worth a straw. For my outward ministry, yea
suppose it were the ministry of an Angel, and suppose Christ were present in
the flesh to minister unto you these outward things; except he conioyne the
inward ministry of his Spirit therewith, it avails nothing: it may well be
as a process against you, in the day of that general assembly; but to your
salvation it will never profit you. Therefore this ye ought always to pray for,
that the Lord would water your hearts by his holy Spirit, as he waters your
ears by the hearing of his word. Then there are two offerers; the Minister
offers the sign, Christ Jesus offers himself, the thing signified. The three
persons, one God, offer the Mediator, or the Mediator offers himself, and
that by the power and virtue of his own Spirit.

As there are two offerers, The sign and the thing signified are offered in
two actions, by two instruments, and after two manners.
two persons that offer and give the Sacrament and thing signified by the
Sacrament: so these two are offered and given in two actions. Christ who is the
heavenly thing is offered and given unto you, by an inward, secret and
spiritual action, which is not subject to the outward eye. The sign again is
offered and given in an outward action after a corporal and visible manner. As
there are two sorts of actions, so there are two sorts of instruments whereunto
the sign and the thing signified are offered: for the thing signified, that
is, Christ, is never offered to the mouth of my body: the blood of Christ, the
flesh of Christ, whole Christ or the Spirit of Christ, is not offered either in
the word or in the Sacrament to the mouth of my body. Let the Adversaries find
me that in any part of the Bible, that there is any other manner of receiving
Christ then by faith, and let them have the victory. So there is not an
instrument as I told you, neither hand nor mouth to receive Christ, but faith
only. As Christ who is the thing signified, is received by the hand and mouth
of faith: so the sign which signifies Christ, is received by our own
natural mouth and hand. Ye have a mouth in your heads, and in your bodies, as
proper to receive the sign, as faith is to receive Christ. So the sign and
the thing signified are offered and given, not to one instrument but to two;
the one to the mouth of the body, the other to the mouth of the soul.

Now mark by what way these things are offered and given, by the same way they
are received: as the sign is corporal and naturally offered to a corporal
instrument, so is it received after a corporal and natural manner: for thou
must take the Bread and Wine, either by thy hand or by thy mouth. The thing
signified is not taken after a corporal manner, but after a secret and
spiritual manner: and as it is offered so it is taken. There can be nothing
clearer then this; the one is taken after a natural manner, the other after a
secret and spiritual manner. So in this last part ye have these things to
mark, to distinguish between the outward action and the inward, between the
sign and the thing signified, and to keep a proportion and analogy between
the inward and the outward actions: ye may surely persuade your selves, that if
ye be faithful, Christ is as busy working inwardly in your souls, as the
Minister is working outwardly toward your bodies: look how busy the Minister
is in breaking that Bread, in pouring out that Wine, in giving that Bread and
Wine unto thee, as busy is Christ in breaking his own body unto thee, and in
giving the juice of his own body after a spiritual and invisible manner. So
keep this distinction, and ye may assure your selves that by faith Christ is
as well occupied toward your souls, to nourish the^, as the Minister is
outwardly toward your bodies. Keep this, and ye have the whole Sacrament.

Then from this discourse and deduction you may learn a double matter, whereof
the Sacrament consists. It stands on two sorts of materials; that is, of an
earthly matter, and of an heavenly matter: the sign and the thing signified.
And as there is a double matter in the Sacrament, so the Sacrament must be
handled after a double manner; by an outward action, and an inward action:
keep the distinction in these things, between the sign and the thing
signified, and ye shall not easily slip in the understanding of the Sacrament.

This being said concerning the general consideration of the Elements, (for
all this yet appertains to the Elements) it rests that we speak somewhat
concerning the word, which I call the other part of the Sacrament. I mean and
understand by the word whereunto the Elements are annexed, that thing which
quickneth this whole action, Of the other part of the Sacrament, which is the
word.
which serves as it were a soul, and gives life unto the whole action. For
by the word and appointment of Christ in the word, the Minister knows what is
his part, the hearer knows what is his part, and every one is prepared how to
deliver and how to receive; the Minister how he should deliver, and the hearer
how he should receive. So the Institution of Christ is the quicking of the
whole action: for all the action is warranted from the Institution set down in
his word. In the Institution of Christ, there are two things chiefly to be
considered: a Command, and a Promise. The Command is this, where he says,
Take, eat. The Command requires obedience. There is a Promise also in the
institution, and it is contained in these words, This is my body. The Promise
craves faith: as the Command craves obedience, so the Promise craves
belief. Therefore come not unto the Sacrament, except ye bring both faith and
obedience with you. If thou come not with a heart minding to ob^y Christ, at
the least more then thou wast wont to do, thou come unto thy own damnation.
And if thou bring a heart void of faith, thou come unto thine own
damnation. So let every one that comes unto the Sacrament, bring with him a
heart minding to do better; that is, to obey and believe Christ better then he
did in time past. Except ye bring these two in some measure, come not unto the
Sacrament: for whatsoever thou do, except it flow from faith, it can profit
nothing. Thus far briefly concerning the word. Now it will be demanded, what
need is there that these Sacraments and seals should be annexed the word?
wherefore are they annexed, seeing we get no more in the Sacrament then we get
in the word, and we get as much in the very simple word as we get in the
Sacraments? Seeing then we get no new thing in the Sacrament but the same thing
which we get in the simple word, wherefore is the Sacrament appointed to be
hung unto the word? It is true certainly that we get no new thing in the
Sacrament, nor we get no other thing in the Sacrament then we get in the word:
for what more would thou crave then to get the Son of God if thou get him
well? Thy heart cannot wish nor imagine a g^eater gift then to have the Son
of God, who is King of heaven and earth: therefore I say, what n^w thing
would thou have? for if thou get him, thou gettest all things with him; thy
heart cannot imagine a new thing besides him. Wherefore then is the Sacrament
appointed? An^wer.
Not to get thee any new thing: I say it is appointed to get thee that same
thing better, 1. By the Sacrament, we possess Christ more fully then by the
simple word.
then thou had it in the word. The Sacrament is appointed that we may take
better hold of Christ then we could in the simple word; that we may possess
Christ in our hearts and minds, more fully and largely then we did before in
the simple word. That Christ might have a larger space to make residence in our
narrow hearts, then he could have by the hearing of the simple word; and to
possess Christ more fully, it is a better thing. For suppose Christ be one
thing in himself, yet the better hold thou have of him, thou art the surer of
his promise.

The Sacraments are appointed that I might have him more fully in my soul;
that I might have ye bounds of it enlarged, that he may make the better
residence in me. This no doubt is the cause wherefore these Seals are annexed
to the evidence of the simple word.

2. They serve to confirm the truth contained in the word.
They serve to this end also, to seal up and confirm the truth that is in the
word: for as the office of the Seal hung to the Evidence, is not to confirm
any other truth then that which is in the Evidence; and though ye believed the
Evidence before, yet by the Seals ye believe it better: even so the Sacrament
assures me of no other truth, then is contained within the word: yet because it
is a seal annexed unto the word, it persuades me the better of the same: for
the more the outward senses are wakned, the more is the inward heart and mind
persuaded to believe.

Now the Sacrament wakneth all the outward senses, as the eye, the hand, and
all the rest: and the outward senses being moved, no quest^on, the Spirit of
God concurring therewith moves the heart the more. The Sacraments are then
annexed unto the word, to seal up the truth contained in the word, and to
confirm it more and more in thy heart. The word then is appointed to work
belief; and the Sacrament is appointed to confirm you in this belief. But
except ye feel the truth of this inwardly in your hearts, except ye have your
heart as ready as your mouth, think not that any thing will avail you. All
the seals in the world will not work, except the Spirit of God concur and
seal the same truth in your hearts, which the Sacrament seals outwardly:
except he make clear the sight of thy mind inwardly, and work a feeling in
thy heart, both word and Sacrament shall lose their fruit and effect which
they should have. All the Scriptures are full of this: the whole Scriptures of
God are but a slaying letter to you, except the Spirit of God concur to
quicken inwardly. Exhortation.
Therefore your whole endeavor should be, to prease to feel Christ inwardly in
your hearts, that finding him in your hearts, and seeing him in your minds,
both word and Sacrament may be effectual: If not, your souls remain dead, ye
are not translated from that death wherein ye were conceived. Therefore all the
study of Christians should be when they see the Sacraments and hear the word,
to labor to find and feel in their hearts and minds, that which they hear
and see; and this I call to find Christ quick in your own souls. This cannot
be except ye sanctify his lodging: for if all the corners of thy soul remain
a dunghill, Christ cannot dwell there: and therefore exept ye study for
continual growth in sanctification, and sever your selves from every thing,
that seuers you from Christ, it is not possible that he can live or dwell in
you.

This is a great lesson, and it is not possible to do this, except, as I have
said, a stronger come in, and possess us, and make us to renounce our selves.
Then the seals had not been annexed to the word, except for our cause: for
there is no necessity on Gods part, that God should either swear, or confirm
by seals, the thing that he has spoken: for his word is as good as any oath
or seal. But the necessity comes of us: there is such a great weakness in
us, that when he has sworn, and set his seals unto his word, we are as near
to believe as if he had never spoken a word. So to help our belief, our
weakness and inability that is in us, (for we are so unable by nature, that we
can believe nothing but that which is of our selves; and the more we lean unto
our selves, the further we are from God:) I say to help this wonderful
weakness whereby we are ready to mistrust God in every word, he has annexed
his Sacraments; and besides his Sacraments, he swears the things that concern
most our salvation. As in the Priesthood of Christ, Psalm. 110.4. he will not
speak only, but he swears, and that for our weakness and infirmities: but
yet if he abstract the ministry of his Spirit, all these means will do no
good.

Faults which pervert the Sacrament.
Now the last thing is, how the Sacrament is perverted; and how we are defrauded
of the fruit and effect thereof. Two sorts of faults pervert the Sacrament, and
defraud us of the profit and use thereof and these faults are either in the
form, or in the person. In form, if the essential form be spoiled, we get
nothing: for when the Sacrament is spoiled of the essential form, it is not a
Sacrament. There is an essential form in Baptism, and an essential form in
the Lords Supper, which if they be taken away, ye lose the use of the
Sacrament. The essential form of Baptism is: I baptize thee in the Name of
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Leave out any of these three, or do
it in the name of any one of the three persons only, ye lose the essential
form of Baptism. In the Lords Supper, if ye leave out the least ceremony, ye
lose the essential form, and so it is not a Sacrament. I speak of the
essential form, in respect of the Papists, who keep the essential form in
Baptism, though they have brought in trifles of their own, and mixed with it;
yet in respect they keep the substantial form, it is not necessary that they
who were baptized under them, be rebaptized. Indeed if the virtue of
regeneration flowed from the person, it were something; but in respect Christ
has this, to give to whom and when he pleases, the essential form being
kept, it is not necessary that this Sacrament be re^terated.

Now what are the faults in the person that peruerts the Sacrament? The fault
may be either in the person of the giver, or in the person of the receiver: (I
speak not of those common faults which are common to all, but of such faults
as disable the person of the giver, to be a distributer of the Sacrament, and
takes the office from him) so when the person of the giver is this way
disabled, no question, it is not a Sacrament. Then again in the person of the
Receiver the fault may be; if their children be not in the covenant, but out of
it, they get not the Sacrament. Indeed if the Parents afterward come to the
covenant, the children (though they be gotten out of the covenant) may be
received. Even so in the Lords Supper, if a man be laden with any burden of
sin, without any purpose to repent, he ought not to receive it. So then if ye
come without a purpose to repent, ye lose the use of the Sacrament: it is only
this purpose to repent, that makes me who receive the Sacrament, to get the
fruit and effect thereof; therefore every one who goes to the Sacrament, must
look what purpose he has in his heart. Have thou a purpose to murder, to
continue in adultery, or to commit any other vile sin that is in thy heart,
and art not resolved to repent? In showing thee to be without repentance, thou
show thy self to be without faith, and consequently thou come to thy
condemnation, and not to thy salvation: take heed then what your purpose is;
for if with a dissolute life, ye have a dissolute purpose, ye come unto your
everlasting perdition.

I had thought to have entered particularly into the handling of this Sacrament;
but because the time is past, (and some of you I doubt not are to communicate)
only this: Remember that ye address not your selves to that Table, Conclusion
with an exhortation.
except ye find your hearts in some sort prepared. The first degree of
preparation stands in contrition, in sorrowing for sin, in a feeling of
your sins, wherein ye have offended to gracious a God. If ye be able as that
woman was, by the tears of a contrite heart to wash the feet of Christ,
humbly to kiss his feet, and ^o get hold of the foot of Christ; though ye
dare not presume so high as to get him whole, ye are in a good case: but if
thou want all these, and have them not in some measure, thou want all the
degrees or preparation. Therefore let none come to this Table, except he have
these in some measure. But where there is a displeasure for sin, a purpose to
do better, and an earnest sobbing and sighing to get the thing that thou
want; in that soul where God has placed this desire of Christ, it is the
work of Gods Spirit, and Christ will enter there. And therefore though that
soul be far from the thing that it should be at, let him not refuse to go to
the Lords Table; but let him go with a profession of his own infirmity and
weakness, and with a desire of the thing that he wants. Every one of you that
finds himself this way disposed, let him go in Gods name to the Lords Table:
and the Lord work this in every one of your hearts, that this ministry may
be effectual in every one of you at this time, and that in the righteous
merits of Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all
honor, praise and glory, both now and for ever, Amen.

THE FOVRTH SERMON, UPON THE LORDS SVPPER IN PARTICVLAR.
1. COR. 11.23. For I have received of the Lord, that which I also have
delivered unto you: to wit, that the Lord Jesus in the night that he was
betrayed, took Bread, etc.


WE ended the consideration of the Sacraments in general in our last Exercise,
well-beloved in Christ Jesus: now it remains that we proceed to the
consideration of this Sacrament of the Lords Supper in particular. Of the
Supper of the Lord in particular.
And that ye may the better attain unto the knowledge and consideration of the
great variety of matter that is contained in this Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, I shall endeavor as God shall give me grace, Heads to be entreated of.
to set down certain things for the easier understanding of it.

Now we find sundry names given unto the Sacrament First head general.
of the Lords Supper in the book of God; and every name carries a special
reason with it. We find this Sacrament called the body and blood of Christ.
Of the names given unto this Sacrament, both in the Bible, and by the Ancients.
This name is given unto it, no doubt, because it is a heavenly and spiritual
nouriture; it contains a nouriture of the soul, that is able to nourish and
train up the soul to a life spiritual, to that life everlasting: for this
cause it is called the body and blood of Christ. It is called also the Supper
of the Lord, to put a difference betwixt it and a profane supper: for this is
the Lords Supper, a holy supper; not a profane or common supper: a supper
appointed for the increase of holiness, for the food of the soul in
holiness, to feed the soul unto life everlasting. Not a supper appointed for
the belly; for he had ended that supper that was appointed for the belly, or
ever he began this Supper which was appointed for the soul. A supper no doubt
having respect to the circumstance of time, by reason it was instituted in that
very same time when they used to sup. It is called also in the Bible, The Table
of the Lord. It is not called the Altar of the Lord: but the Apostle calls it
a Table to sit at; and not an Altar to stand at: a Table to take and receive
at; and not an Altar to offer at. It is called also the Communion and
participation of the body and blood of Christ: we have these names given unto
it, besides some others in the Scriptures of God. The Ancients of the Latin
and of the Greek Churches, gave it sundry names for sundry respects. They
called it a public action; and this was a very general name. Sometimes they
called it a thanksgiving. Sometimes they called it a banquet of love; and
sometimes they gave it one name and sometimes another. And at last in the
declining estate of the Latin Church and in the falling estate of the Roman
Church, this Sacrament began to be perverted; and with this decay there came in
a perverse name, and they called it the Mass. They trouble themselves much
concerning the deriuation of this name: sometime they seek it from an Hebrew
original; sometime from a Greek; and sometime from a Latin original: but it
is plain that the word is derived from the Latin; and it is a word which
might have been tolerable when it was first instituted: for no doubt, the
Sacrament at the first institution of this word was not then wholly perverted;
but now in process of time corruption has prevailed so far, that it has
turned the Sacrament into a sacrifice; and where we should take from the hand
of God in Christ, they make us to give.

This is plain idolatry: and therefore whereas the word was tolerable
before, now it ought not to be tolerated any way, it ought not to be suffered.
And certainly, if we had eaten and drunk as often the body and blood of Christ
in our souls, as we have eaten that bread and drunk that wine which are the
signs of his body and blood, we would not have suffered this word of the
Mass, much less the very action of it, to be so rise in this Country. But
because we have but played the counterfeits, and defrauded our souls of the
body and blood of Christ, and took only the outward Sacrament; therefore it
is that our zeal decays, therefore it is that our knowledge and light
decays: and for want of zeal, love and knowledge, the word of the Mass is
become customable unto you, and not only the word, but the very action. I will
not run out herein: I only tell you, what comes of the abuse of the hearing
of the word, what judgments follow upon the abuse of the receiving of the
Sacraments.

Now I come to the ends wherefore the Sacrament was appointed. Second head
general.

Of the ends why this Sacrament was instituted.


This Sacrament was instituted in the signs of Bread and Wine; and was
appointed chiefly for this end, might testify to the world and to the Princes
of the world, who are enemies to our profession; that we might openly avow and
testify unto them our Religion and our manner of worshipping, in the which we
avow and worship Christ: and that we might also testify our love toward his
members our brethren: this is the second end wherefore it was instituted.

Third head general.
Now I come to the things contained in this Sacrament. Ye see with your eyes
there are corporal things, visible things, as the Bread and Wine. There are
again hid from the eye of your body, but present to the eye of your mind,
spiritual things, heavenly and inward things: both these are in the Sacrament.

Of the things contained in this Sacrament outward and inward: wherein sundry
heads are entreated.
The corporal, visible and outward things, are the things which are appointed
to signify the spiritual, heavenly, and inward things. And why? Nothing
without a reason. These corporal signs are appointed to signify the
spiritual things, because we are corporal, we are earthly bodies, we have our
soul lodging within a carnal body, in a tabernacle of clay, a gross
tabernacle, which cannot be wakened nor moved except by the things that are
like to it self. It cannot be induced to the consideration of heavenly things,
except by gross, temporal, and corporal things. If we had been of the nature
of the thing signified, that as the thing signified is spiritual and heavenly,
so we had been spiritual, and heavenly, we had not needed a corporal thing:
so if the thing signified had been as we are, corporal, earthly, and visible,
we had not needed a sign, to lead us to consider of it: But because the thing
signified, is spiritual, and we are corporal, therefore to bring us unto the
sight of these spiritual things, he uses a corporal means, and an outward
sign. This is the reason wherefore these corporal signs are appointed to
signify the spiritual thing.

The spiritual thing in both the Sacraments, is one and the self same, Christ
Jesus, signified in both the Sacraments: yet in diverse respects, he is the
thing signified in Baptism, and he is the thing signified in the Lords Supper.
This Christ Jesus, in his blood chiefly, is the thing signified in the
Sacrament of Baptism: and why? Because that by his blood he washes away the
filth of our souls; because that by the virtue of his blood, he quickneth us
in our souls, with a heavenly life: because that by the power of his blood he
ingrafteth and incorporateth us in his own body. For that Sacrament is a
testimony of the remission of our sins: that is, of the cleanenesse of our
consciences, that our consciences by that blood are washed inwardly. It
testifies also our new birth, that we are begotten spiritually to a heavenly
life. It testifies also the joining of us in the body of Christ. As it is a
testimony, so it is a seal: it not only testifies, but seals it up in our
hearts, and makes us in our hearts to feel the taste of that heavenly life
begun in us, that we are translated from death, in the which we were conceived,
and ingrafted in the body of Christ.

Mark then: Christ in his blood, as he is the washing of our regeneration, is
the thing signified in Baptism. In this Sacrament of the Lords Supper, again,
this same Christ is the thing signified, in another respect; to wit in this
respect, that his body and blood serve to nourish my soul to life everlasting:
for this Sacrament is no other thing but the image of our spiritual
nourishment; God testifying how our souls are fed and nourished to that
heavenly life, by the image of a corporal nourishment. So in diverse respects
the same thing, that is, Christ Jesus, is signified in Baptism, and is
signified in the Lords Supper: In this Sacrament, the fruits of Christ's death
whereof I spoke, the virtue of his sacrifice, the virtue of his passion; I call
not these fruits and virtues only, the thing signified in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper: but rather I call the thing signified, that substance and
that person, out of the which substance this virtue and these fruits do flow
and proceed. I grant and it is most certain, that by the lawful use and
participiation of the Sacrament thou art partaker of all these fruits: yet
these fruits are not the first and chief thing, whereof thou art partaker in
this Sacrament; but of force thou must get another thing first. It is true that
no man can be partaker of the substance of Christ, but the same soul must be
also partaker of the fruits that flow from his substance: yet notwithstanding,
thou must discern betwixt the substance and the fruits that flow from the
substance, and thou must be partaker of the substance in the first room; then
in the next place, thou must be partaker of the fruits that flow from his
substance. To make this clear; in Baptism, the fruits of Baptism are
remission of our sins, mortification, the killing of sin, and the sealing
up of our adoption, to life everlasting. The substance out of the which these
fruits do flow, is the blood of Christ. Ye must here of force discern between
the blood, which is the substance; and between remission of sins, washing,
and regeneration, which are the fruits that flow from this blood: so in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the fruits of that Sacrament are, the growth of
faith, and the increase in holiness. The thing signified is the substance;
that is, the body and blood of Christ is the substance, out of which this
growth in faith and holiness does proceed. Now see ye not this; That you must
discern between ^he substance and the fruits, and must place the substance in
the first place? So that the substance of Christ, that is, Christ himself, is
the thing signified in this Sacrament. For your own experience will make this
plain unto you: Before your stomach be filled with any food, ye must eat
the substance of the food first: before you be filled with bread, ye must eat
the substance of the bread first; before your drowth be quenched with any
drink, ye must of necessity drink the substance of the drink first. Even so
after this manner; before the hunger of your souls be satisfied, and the
thirst thereof quenched, ye must eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood
first, and that by faith. So consider the one by the other; look to what use
bread and wine serve to thy body, to the same use the body and blood of Christ
serve to thy soul; and he that appointed the one to serve for thy body, the
same God appointed the other to serve for thy soul. So look how impossible it
is for thee, to be fed with that food yt never comes into thy mouth, or to
recover health by those drugs which never were applied; it is as impossible for
thee to be fed by the body of Christ and to get thy health by the blood of
Christ, except thou first eat his body, and drink his blood. Then ye see,
that the thing signified in the Lords Supper, is not the fruits so much as the
body and blood, and Christ Jesus, which is the fountain and substance, from
which all these fruits do flow and proceed.

Then I say, suppose Christ who is the thing signified, The thing signified in
both the Sacraments, is one: the signs are not one.
remain always one and the same in both the Sacraments: yet the signs
whereby this one Christ is signified in the Sacraments, are not one, nor of an
equal number. For in Baptism the thing that represents Christ is Water. In
the Lords Supper, the things that represent Christ, are Bread and Wine. Water
is appointed to represent Christ in Baptism, because it is meetest to
represent our washing with the blood of Christ: for what is fitter to wash with
then water? So there is nothing meeter to wash the soul, then the blood of
Christ. In this Sacrament he has appointed Bread and Wine: why? Because there
is nothing more meet to nourish the body then bread and wine; so the Lord has
not chosen these signs without a reason. As the signs in the Sacrament are
not always one, so the same in both, are not of one number: For in Baptism,
we have but one element; in this Sacrament, we have two elements. Now what is
the reason of this diversity, Why in Baptism there is but one sign, and in
the Lords Supper two.
that the Lord in the one Sacrament, has appointed two signs, and in the
other but one sign? I will show you the reason. He has appointed only one
sign in Baptism, to wit, Water; because Water is sufficient enough for the
whole. If water had not been sufficient to represent the thing signified, he
would have appointed another sign: but in respect that Water does the turn,
and represents fully the washing of our souls by the blood of Christ, what
need then have we of any sign? Now in this Sacrament one sign will not
suffice, but there must be two. And why? Wine cannot be sufficient alone,
neither can Bread be sufficient alone: for he that has Bread only, and Wine
only, has not a perfect corporal nourishment; therefore that they might
represent, and let us see a perfect nourishment, he has given us both Bread
and Wine (for the perfect corporal nourishment stands in meat and drink)
to represent the full and perfect nourishment of the soul. Mark how full and
perfect a nourishment he has to his body that has store of Bread and Wine: so
he that has Christ lacks nothing of a full and perfect nourishment for his
soul. Then you see the reason wherefore there are two signs appointed in this
Sacrament, and only one sign in Baptism.

Two questions:

What power the bread has to be a sign in this Sacrament:

And how long that power endures.


There remains yet concerning these signs, two thing to be enquired. First,
what power has that Bread in this Sacrament, to be a sign more then the bread
which is used in common houses: from whence comes that power? Next, if it have
a power, how long endures and remains that power with the bread? For the
first, concerning the power which that bread has more then any other bread, I
will tell you.

That Bread has a power given unto it by Christ and by his institution; 1.
Answer.
by the which institution it is appointed to signify his body, to represent
his body, and to deliver his body. That bread has that power from Christ's
institution.
That Bread has a power flowing from Christ and his institution, which other
common bread has not: so that if any of you would ask, when the Minister in
this action is breaking or distributing that Bread, pouring out and
distributing that Wine; if you would I say, ask what sort of creatures those
are? this is the answer: They are holy things. Ye must give this name to the
signs and seals of the body and blood of Christ. That Bread of the Sacrament
is a holy Bread; and that Wine is an holy Wine: Why? Because the blessed
institution of Christ, has severed them from that use whereunto they served
before, and has applied them unto an holy use; not to feed the body, but to
feed the soul.

Thus far concerning the power of that Bread: it has a power flowing from
Christ and his institution. Now the second thing is, 2. Answer.
how long this power continues with that Bread; how long that Bread has this
office. In a word, That power continues during the service of the Table.
I say, this power continues with that Bread during the time of the action;
during the service of the Table. Look how long that action continues, and
that the service of the Table lasts, so long it continues holy Bread; so
long continues the power with that Bread: but look how soon the action is
ended, so soon ends the holiness of it: look how soon the service of the
Table is ended; so soon that Bread becomes common bread again, and the
holiness of it ceasseth. Then this power continues not for ever, but it
continues only during the time of the action and service of the Table. Thus
far concerning the Elements.

There is besides the Elements another sort of signs in the Sacrament: there
is not a ceremony in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but is a sign, and
has it own spiritual signification with it: as namely, looking to the
breaking of that Bread, it represents unto thee the breaking of the body and
blood of Christ. Not that his body and bones were broken, but that it was
broken with dolor, with anguish and distress of heart; with the weight of the
indignation and fury of God, that he sustained for our sins which he took
upon him. Then the breaking is an essential ceremony: the pouring out of the
wine also is an essential ceremony. For as ye see clearly, that by the Wine
is signified the blood of Christ, so by the pouring out of the Wine, is
signified that his blood was severed from his flesh; and the seuering of those
two makes death: for in blood is the life; and consequently it testifies his
death. The pouring out of the Wine then tells thee, that he died for thee,
that his blood was shed for thee; so this is an essential ceremony which must
not be left out. Likewise the distribution, giving and eating are essential
ceremonies. And what does the eating testify unto thee? The applying of the
body and blood of Christ unto thy soul. So that there is none of these rites
but have their own signification; and there cannot one of them be left out but
ye shall pervert the whole action. Thus far concerning the signs.

Now what profit can ye make of all this discourse? Learn this lesson, An
observation.
and ye shall make profit by these things. In respect that every sign and
ceremony has it own spiritual signification, so that there is not a
ceremony in this whole action that wants it own spiritual signification;
consider this and think with your selves at that time especially when ye are
at the Lords Table, and in the sight of that action, that look what thou see
the Minister doing outwardly, what ever it be: (Is he breaking that Bread? is
he dealing that Bread?) Think assuredly with thy self that Christ is as busy
doing all these things spiritually unto thy soul: he is as busy giving unto
thee his own body with his own hand: he is as busy giving to thee his own
blood with the virtue and efficacy of it. So in this action (if thou be a
faithful Communicant) look what the mouth does, and how the mouth of the
body is occupied outwardly: so is the hand and mouth of the soul (which is
faith) occupied inwardly. As the mouth takes that Bread and that Wine; so the
mouth of thy soul takes the body and blood of Christ, and that by faith. For
by faith and a constant persuasion, is the only way to eat the body and
drink the blood of Christ inwardly: and doing this, there cannot but follow a
fruitful eating. Thus far for the consideration of the signs.

Now comes in the matter wherein greatest difficulty stands, How the
signs, and the thing signified, are co^ioyned in the Sacrament.
whereof I spoke the last day as God gave me the grace; yet in the particular I
must speak as well as in the general, but somewhat more shortly. Then ye have
to understand for the better information of your consciences; and for the
better preparation of your souls ye have to understand, how that Bread and
that Wine which are signs, are coupled with the body and blood of Christ which
are signified thereby: What sort of conjunction is this, and from whence this
conjunction flows I shall be brief; because I have already in my last
Lecture spoken of it at large.

Take heed, for if ye give not good attention, it is not possible that ye can
conceive this conjunction. Concerning this conjunction would you know how these
two are coupled? Then must you first mark the nature of the signs, and the
nature of the thing signified; ye must observe both their natures: And why?
Because nothing can be coupled nor conjoined with other, but so far as the
nature of it will suffer; if the nature of it will not suffer a conjunction,
they cannot be conjoined. Or will the nature of it suffer a conjunction? look
how far it will suffer a conjunction, so far are they conjoined. Seeing then
ye must observe the nature of the things that are conjoined, first mark the
thing signified what the nature thereof is; marking that, ye shall see that the
thing signified is of a spiritual nature, or a heavenly and mystical nature.
Then may ye conclude, that this spiritual thing will suffer a spiritual
conjunction, a mystical and secret conjunction.

Again, observe the sign: The sign of his nature (as I have told you) has a
relation unto the thing signified: and the thing signified, of his nature has
a relation unto the sign. So then the sign and the thing signified will
suffer to be conjoined by a mutual relation: both the sign and the thing
signified, in respect they have a mutual relation the one unto the other, they
will suffer themselves to be conjoined by a relative conjunction. Now if ye
ask me what sort of conjunction is between that Bread and Wine and the body
and blood of Christ: to tell you in a word, I say, it is a sec^et and
spiritual conjunction; such a conjunction as stands in a mutual respect
betwixt the Bread and the body of Christ, and betwixt the Wine and the blood
of Christ: then I say, it is a secret and a spiritual conjunction. Ye would
not be so inquisitiue of this conjunction if it were corporal, visible, or
local: if you saw them both before your eyes, you would not ask how they are
conjoined; or if thou did see them both in one place. But because you see but
the one with your eyes, and the other is hid, this makes the conjunction the
more difficult to be uttered and understood. And how is it possible that ye can
conceive this secret and hid conjunction, except you have the eyes of your mind
illuminated by the Spirit, whereby ye may come to the right understanding? But
if ye have any insight into these spiritual matters that come by faith, this
conjunction will appear as clearly by the eye of your faith, as the physical
conjunction does to the eye of your body.

Now to have this matter made more plain; there is another conjunction which
serves to make this conjunction very clear: namely, the conjunction betwixt
the word which I speak, and the thing signified by that same word. As if I
speak to you of things in this language which ye understand, be it of things
past though never so long since; of things to come though never so far off;
of things absent though never so far distant; yet so soon as I speak the
word, whether it be of things past or to come, the thing it self will come
into your mind. The word is heard no sooner by your ear, but the thing
signified by the same word comes into your mind. What makes the thing
signified, though absent, to come into my mind? This could not be, except there
were a conjunction between the word and the thing signified by the word.

As for example; if I speak of the King who is now a great way distant from
us, (I pray God bless him) ye will no sooner hear the word, but the King who
is the thing signified by the word, will come into your mind. If I speak of
things past, though they be already expired, yet the thing signified will
presently come into your mind: so there is a conjunction ye see, between the
word and the thing signified by the word. Mark this conjunction, and ye shall
get the nature of the conjunction and coupling of the sign, which is the thing
signified in the Sacrament.

For observe what sort of conjunction is between the word and the thing
signified by the word, the same sort of conjunction is between the Sacrament
which is seen to the eye of your body, and the thing signified by the
Sacrament, which is seen to the eye of your soul only. As for example; so
soon as thou see that bread taken in the hand of the Minister, thou see it
not so soon, but incontinent the body of Christ must come into thy mind;
these two are so conjoined, that they come both together: the one to the
outward senses; the other, to the inward senses. This is not enough now,
because in the institution ye are commanded to go further; and not only to
look to that bread and that wine, but to take that bread and that wine:
incontinent as your hands take the one, so your heart takes the other; as your
teeth eats the one, so the teeth of your soul, which is faith, eats the
other; that is, applies Christ unto your soul. So ye see there is a
conjunction here, secret and mystical: and therefore Christ cannot be
conjoined but by a secret and mystical conjunction. The conjunction between
Christ and us, is a secret and mystical conjunction, which the Apostle in the
fifth of the Ephesians. calls that spiritual conjunction, full of an high
mystery: this conjunction cannot be taken up at the first. So seeing the
conjunction is secret and spiritual, and not perceived but by the spirit of
God; all is as nothing except ye have some portion and measure of his Spirit.
All that is taught in the word and Sacraments will never do you good, will
never carry your souls to heaven, except the Spirit of God illuminate your
minds, and make you to find in your souls the thing that ye hear in the
word. Then learn this; seeing the word cannot be understood but by the spirit
of God, crave that the Lo^d would illuminate the eyes of your minds by his
Spirit; and be you as careful to get the Spirit as ye are careful now in the
hearing of the word. Thus far concerning the conjunction.

Now ye have heard how the sign is conjoined with the thing signified, How the
sign, and the thing signified, i^ received
what remains for you to know? This rests yet to know, how the sign is
received, and how the thing signified is received; whether they be both
received with one mouth or not; whether the sign and the thing signified be
received after one fashion and manner, or not. And marking the diverse manner of
receiving, and the diversity of the instruments, ye shall not easily err in
the Sacrament. The sign, and the thing signified, are received by two mouths:
for ye see the signs, that is, that bread and wine, whereunto they are given;
they are given to the mouth of the body. Then the mouth of the body is the
instrument that receives that bread and that wine, which are the signs. As
that bread and that wine, are visible and corporal: so the mouth and
instrument, whereby they are received, is visible and corporal. The thing
signified by the bread and wine, is not received by the mouth of the body; no,
the Scripture denies that plainly; but it is received by the mouth of the
soul. Then there are two mouths: that bread and that wine, which are the
signs, are received by the mouth of the body: Christ, who is the thing
signified is received by the mouth of the soul; that is, by a true faith.

Then bring not to the Lords Table one mouth only, (for if ye bring the mouth
of your body only, it avails nothing:) but bring with you also the mouth of
your soul, a constant persuasion in the death of Christ, for that is
available.

Now concerning the manner how the signs are received, and the manner how the
thing signified is received, ye may easily know that these corporal and
natural signs must be received after a corporal and natural manner: they
must be taken with the hand or mouth of the body. Again, a supernatural thing
must be received after a supernatural manner* And a spiritual thing must be
received after a spiritual manner. So as the signs are corporal, and
received after a corporal manner with the hand or the mouth of the body; in
like mannner the thing signified is spiritual, and received after a spiritual
manner with the hand and mouth of the soul, which is true faith. Thus ye have
briefly delivered unto you the whole preparation, that is necessary for the
understanding of the Sacrament.

Now what doctrine gather I from this? Of this last point, where I say that
Christ is the thing signified, and cannot be perceived but by faith, cannot be
received nor digested but by a faithful soul: what kind of receiving
confirm I in this Sacrament? I establish no kind of receiving of Christ but a
spiritual receiving: What kind of receiving Christ, is established in the
Sacrament.
he can not be perceived nor received but by faith, and faith is spiritual:
Therefore in this Sacrament I establish only a spiritual taking of Christ;
and not a carnal, or fleshly receiving. This is the ground: Now let us see
what inconvenience can follow upon this ground. The Papists say,
Inconveniences cast in by the Papis^s against the spiritual ^eceiuing of
Christ in the Sacrament.
that upon this ground this inconvenience shall follow. If there be no
receiving of Christ but a spiritual receiving, then (say they) your Sacrament
is in vain; this Sacrament of the Lords Supper was instituted to no end. And
what is their reason? If there be no way to receive Christ (say the Papists)
but by faith, what need you then a Sacrament? Ye receive Christ by faith, in
the word: by the naked and simple preaching of the word, ye get faith. So the
simple word may serve the turn. What need have ye of a Sacrament, if ye get
not some new thing in the Sacrament, which ye could not get in the word?

First inconvenience: That the Sacrament is supe^fluous.
This is their argument; whereof ye see their conclusion to be this: We get no
other new thing in the Sacrament then we do in the word, if there be no
receiving but spiritual. Ergo, The Sacrament is superfluous.

We admit the Antecedent to be true: we get no other thing, nor no new thing in
the Sacrament, but the same thing which we got in the word. I would have thee
devise and imagine with thy self, what new thing thou would have: let the
heart of man devise, imagine, and wish; he durst never have thought to have
such a thing as the Son of God; he durst never have presumed, to have pierced
the clouds, to have ascended so high, as to have craved the Son of God in
his flesh, to be the food of his soul. Having the Son of God, thou have him
who is the heir of all things; who is King of heaven and earth; and in him
thou have all things. What more then can thou wish? What better thing can
thou wish? He is equal with the Father, one in substance with the Father, true
God, and true man, what more can thou wish? Then I say, we get no other thing
in the Sacrament then we had in the word: content thee with this. But suppose
it be so; yet the Sacrament is not superfluous. But would thou understand
what new thing thou obtainest, Refutation of the first Inconvenience.
what other thing thou gettest? I will tell thee. Suppose thou get that same
thing which thou had in the word, yet thou gettest that same thing better.
What is that better? Thou obtainest a greater and surer hold of that same thing
in the Sacrament, then thou had by the hearing of ^he word. That same thing
which thou possessedst by the hearing of the word, thou do possess now more
largely; it has larger bounds in thy soul by the receiving of the Sacrament,
then otherwise it could have by the hearing of the word only. Then will thou
ask what new thing we get? I say, we get this new thing: we get Christ better
then ^^fore; we get the thing which we had more fully: that is, with a surer
apprehension then we had it before; we get ^ greater hold of Christ now. For by
the Sacrament my faith is nourished, the bounds of my soul are enlarged: and
so, whereas I had but a little hold of Christ before, as it were between my
finger and my thumb, now I get him in my whole hand; and still the more that
my faith grows, the better hold I get of Christ Jesus. So the Sacrament is
very necessary, and if it were no more but to get Christ better, and to get a
faster apprehension of him by the Sacrament then we could have before.

Now if it were true that the Sacrament is superfluous: by the same reason it
should follow also, that the repetition of the Sacrament is superfluous. For
when ye come to the Sacrament the second time, ye get no other thing then ye
did the first time: when ye come unto the Sacrament the third time, ye get no
other thing then ye did the first time: and yet no man will say, that the third
and the second coming is a superfluous thing. And why? Because by the second
coming my faith is augmented, I understand better, I grow in knowledge, I grow
in apprehension, I grow in feeling: and in getting the growth of all these, as
often as I come there is no man will say that the often coming to the Sacrament is
superfluous, and if it were every day once. So their first inconvenience
avails not: We get no new thing in the Sacrament; Ergo the Sacrament is
superfluous.

Thus far for the first. Then there depends another thing on the same ground.
If Christ be not received but by faith, then, say we, no wicked body can
receive him; he that lacks faith cannot receive him. He that lacks faith
may receive that Sacrament of that Bread and Wine, and may eat of that Bread
and drink of that Wine; but he that wants faith, may not eat and drink of
the body and blood of Christ signified by that Bread and by that Wine. So this
is the ground: No faithless people can receive Christ, nor eat the body of
Christ in the Sacrament.

Against this ground they bring their Argument out of the same words of the
Apostle which I have read; the wor^^ are these; He that eats of this Bread
unworthily (says the Apostle) and drinks of this Cup vnworworthily, is
guilty of the body and blood of Christ.

Second inconvenience.
There is their ground: So that their Argument will suffer this form: No man
can be guilty of that thing which he has not received: they have not received
the body and blood of Christ: therefore they cannot be guilty of the body and
blood of Christ: but so it is that the Apostle says, they are guilty,
therefore they have received the body and blood of Christ.

I answer unto the Proposition and say, it is very false: They could not be
guilty of that body and blood, Refutation of the second inconvenience
objected, wherein are sundry reasons given, why the wicked are counted guilty
of the body and blood of Christ.
except they had received it; for they may be guilty of that same body and of
that same blood, suppose they never received it. But mark the Text: the Text
says not, that they eat the body of Christ unworthily; but it says, that
they eat that Bread and drink that Wine unworthily: and yet because they eat
that Bread and drink that Wine unworthily, they are counted before God guilty
of the body and blood of Christ. Now wherefore is this? Not because they
receive him; for if they received him, they could not but receive him worthily,
for Christ cannot be received of any man but worthily: but they are accounted
guilty of the body and blood of the Son of God, because they refused him.
For when they did eat that Bread and drink that Wine, they might if they had
had faith, have eaten and drunk the flesh of Christ Jesus. Now because thou
refusest the body of Christ offered to thee, thou contemnest his body offered
unto thee, if thou have not an eye to discern and judge of this body that is
offered. For if they had had faith, they might have seen his body offered
with the Bread; by faith they might have taken that same body, and by faith,
they might have eaten that same body. Therefore lacking their wedding garment,
wanting faith whereby they should eat the body and drink the blood of
Christ; wanting faith which is the eye of the soul to perceive, and the mouth
of the soul to receive that body which is spiritually offered; they are
counted guilty of that same body and blood.

Now let us make this more clear by a similitude. Ye see among worldly
Princes, their custom is not to suffer their majesty to be impeached in the
smallest thing that they have. What meaner thing is there that concerns the
majesty of a Prince then a seal? for the substance of it is but wax: yet if
thou disdainefully use that seal and contemn it, and stamp it under thy
feet, thou shall be esteemed as guilty of his body and blood as he that laid
violent hands on him, and thou shall be punished accordingly. Much more if thou
come as a swine or a dog to handle the seals of the body and blood of Christ;
much more, I say, may thou be reckoned guilty of his body and of his blood.

Thus far of the eating of the body of Christ: The wicked cannot eat the
body of Christ; but they may be guilty of it. The Apostle makes this more
plain yet by another speech which I have sometimes handled in this place. In
Hebr. 6.6. it is said that Apostates, they that fall away, crucify the Son
of God again; and their falling away makes them as guilty as they were who
crucified him. He is now in heaven, they cannot fetch him from thence to
crucify him: yet the Apostle says they crucify him. Why? Because their
malice is as great as theirs that crucified him, because they match in malice
with them that crucified him; so that if they had him on the earth they would
do the like: therefore they are said to crucify the Son of God. So in Heb.
10.29. there is another speech: the wicked are said to stamp the blood of
Christ under their feet. Why? Because their malice is as great as theirs that
stamped his blood.

Now they are accounted for this reason to be guilty of the body and blood of
Christ, not because they eat his body, but because they refused it whem they
might have had it.

Now the time remains yet wherein we may have the body and blood of Christ.
This time is very precious, Exhortation.
and the dispensation of times i^ very secret and has it own bounds: if ye
take not this time now, it will away. This time of grace and of that heavenly
food has been dispensed unto you very long: but how ye have profited, your
lives and behauiours testify. Remember therefore your selves in time, and in
time make use of it; for ye know not how long it will last: crave a mouth to
receive as well the food of your souls that is offered, as ye do the food of
your bodies: and take this time while ye may have it, or assuredly the time
shall come, when ye shall cry for it but shall not get it; but in place of
grace and mercy, shall come judgment, vengeance, and the dispensation of
wrath.

They will not leave this matter so, but they insist yet, and they bring more
Arguments to prove that the wicked are partakers of the body and blood of
Christ; Third inconvenience.
That bread (say they) ye will grant which the wicked man eats is not naked
bread, but is that bread which is the Sacrament. Thus then they make their
Argument; The Sacrament has ever conjoined with it, the thing signified: But
the Sacrament is given to all, therefore the thing signified is given to all.

Refutation of the third inconvenience.
What if I grant to them all this Argument? There should no inconvenience
follow. For the thing signified may be given to all; that is, offered to all,
as it is offered to all men, and yet not received of all. Given to all;
therefore received of all, it follows not. I may offer you two things; yet it
is in your own will, whether you will take them or no, but ye may take the one
and refuse the other: and yet he that offers, offered you the thing that ye
refused, as truly as the thing which ye took. So God deceives no man: but
with the word and Sacraments assuredly he gives two things, if they would take
them. By his word he offers the word to the ear, he offers Christ Jesus to the
soul. By his Sacraments he offers the Sacraments to the eye, he offers Christ
Jesus to the soul.

Now it may be that where two things are truly and conioyntly offered, a man may
receive the one and refuse the other. He receives the one, because he has an
instrument to take it: he refuses the other because he wants an instrument.
I hear the word, because I have an ear to hear it with: I receive the
Sacrament, because I have a mouth to receive it with: but as for the thing
which the word and Sacraments represent, I may refuse it; because I have not a
mouth to take it, nor an eye to perceive it: and therefore the fault is not on
Gods part, but on our part. The wicked get the body and blood of Christ offered
to them conioyntly with the word and Sacraments; but the fault is on their
part, that they have not a mouth to receive him, and God is not bound to give
them a mouth. Mark this: That if it were not of Gods special grace and mercy,
that he gives me an eye to perceive him, and a mouth to receive him, I would
refuse him as well as they. So this Argument holds not: Christ is offered to
all; Ergo, he is received of all. Happy were they, if they could receive him.
Thus far for the 3. Argument.

What rests now for the full understanding of the Sacrament? These things
remain; That we understand the Sacramental speeches that are used in the
Sacrament: for we use to speak of them: God uses to speak of them: and the
Ancients use to speak of them. We use to say, that the soul eats the body
of Christ, How the soul is said to eat the body, and drink the blood of
Christ.
and drinks the blood of Christ. These speeches would be opened to you, how
the soul is said to eat the body, and drink the blood of Christ: these
speeches are Sacramental; yet ye are not the wiser: but I will make it plain
by Gods grace. They are Sacramental; what is that? Ye know it is proper to the
body to eat and drink, they are the proper actions of the body only. Now
they are ascribed to the soul by a translation, by a figurative manner of
speaking. That which is proper to the body, is ascribed to the soul, and it is
said that the soul eats and drinks. The eating of the soul does resemble
the eating of the body: then the eating of the soul is no other thing but the
applying of Christ to the soul; to believe that he has shed his blood for me;
that he has purchased remission of sins for me. Wherefore then call you this
an eating? Thy body eats when thou appliest the meat to thy mouth. If then
the eating of the body be no other thing but the applying of the meat to the
mouth; the eating of the soul is no other thing but the applying of the
nourishment to the soul. Then ye see what is meant by the eating and drinking
of the soul: no other thing but the applying of Christ to my soul, and the
applying of his death and passion to my soul; and this is only done by faith:
therefore he that lacked faith cannot eat Christ. Thus far for the eating
and drinking of the soul, which are Sacramental speeches.

There remains now of all these great things, and of all this doctrine which
has bin taught, Observation.
but this one lesson: That thou learn to apply Christ rightly to thy soul.
Thou art a great Divine, if thou have learned this well: for in the right
application of Christ to the sick soul, to the wounded conscience, and
diseased heart, here begins the fountain of all our felicity, and the
wel-spring of all our joy. And I will tell you what this application works:
Observe what the presence of thy soul within thee (suppose thou want Christ in
thy soul) does to this earthly body, to this lump of clay; as by the presence
of the soul, it lives, it moves, it feels: as the soul gives to the
body, life, moving, and senses: that same very thing does Christ unto thy
soul. Have thou once laid hold of, and applied him to thee? As the soul
quickens thy body, so he quickens thy soul; not with an earthly or temporal
life, but with the life which he lives in heaven: he makes thee to live that
same life, which the Angels live in heaven: he makes thee to move not with
worldly motions, but with heavenly, spiritual and celestial motions. Again,
he inspires in thee not outward senses, but heavenly senses; he works in
thee, a spiritual feeling, that in thine own heart and conscience, thou may
find the effect of this word. So by the conjunction of Christ with my soul,
get a thousand times greater benefits, then the body does by the soul: for the
body by the presence of the soul gets only an earthly and temporal life,
subject to continual misery; but by the presence of Christ in my soul I see a
blessed life, l feel a blessed life: and that same life takes daily more and
more increase in me. Then the ground of all our perfection and blessedness,
stands in this conjunction: and suppose thou might live Methushelaes
years, and were ever seeking; yet if in the last hour, thou get this
conjunction thou must think thy travel well bestowed; thou have gotten
enough: for if we have obtained Christ, we have gotten al with him. Then the
applying of Christ to my soul, is the fountain of all my joy and felicity.
Now let us see how we get this conjunction. This is a spiritual conjunction, a
conjunction hard and difficult to be purchased, obtained and gotten of us. How
then is this conjunction brought about? which are the means of this
conjunction on Gods part? and which are the means on our part, to get Christ,
to put Christ in our souls, and to make Christ one with us? There is one
means on Gods part, that helps us unto Christ, and there is another on our
part. On Gods part, there is the holy Spirit, which offers the body and blood
of Christ to us: and on our part, there must be a means, or else though he
offer, we will not receive. Therefore of necessity there must be faith in our
souls, to receive that which the holy Spirit offers, to receive that heavenly
food of the body and blood of Christ which the holy Spirit offers. Then faith
and the holy Spirit are the two means of this spiritual, and heavenly
conjunction. By these two means, by faith and by the holy Spirit, I get the
body of Christ, the body of Christ is mine, and he is given to my soul. Now
here comes in the question; How can thou say that the body of Christ is given
or delivered to thee, seeing the body of Christ is sitting at the right hand of
God the Father? and look how great distance is betwixt heaven and earth, as
great distance is there betwixt the body of Christ, and thy body: how then say
ye, that the body of Christ is given to you? The Papists understand not this;
and therefore they imagine a gross and carnal conjunction. Except the Spirit
of God reveal these things, they cannot be understood. The Spirit of God must
illuminate our minds, and be planted in all our hearts before we can come to
the understanding of this. Then would thou understanding of this. Then
would thou understand how Christ is given thee? This ground is true, that
the body of Christ is a^ the right hand of the Father; the blood of Christ is
at the right hand of the Father: yet notwithstanding, though there be as great
distance betwixt my body and the body of Christ, as is betwixt heaven and
earth, yet Christ's body is given to me, because I have a title to his body
given to me: the right and title which is given to me of his body and blood,
makes me to possess his body and blood. The distance of the place, hurts not
my title nor my right: for if any of you have a piece of Land lying in the
farthest part of England, if ye have a good title to it, the distance of the
place cannot hurt your title: so I say, the distance of place hurts not my
title and my right that I have to Christ. But though he be sitting at the right
hand of the Father, yet the title and right that I have to him makes him mine;
so that I may say truly, this Christ is my property. Then Christ is not made
mine, because I fetch him out of the heavens: but he is mine because I have a
sure title and right to him, and having a sure title and just right to him, the
distance of place, how far soever it be, can no ways hurt my title nor
right; but where-euer he be, he is mine, because I have a right and title to
him. Yea not only have I a title to him, but this title is confirmed to me.
For as I get a title to him in the word, (and if I got not that title to him in
the word, I durst not come to the Sacrament) so in the Sacracrament I get the
confirmation of my title, I get the Seal which confirms my title. Then to
come to the point, Christ's body is sitting at the right hand of the Father, and
yet he is mine, and is delivered to me, because I have right to his body, be
it, where it will: he was borne for me, given to me, and delivered to me. So
distance of place hurts not the surety of my title, as propinquity of place
helps not the surety of the same. Though Christ would bow the heavens, and
touch thee with his body as he did Judas, yet this could not help thee; for if
thou have not a title to him, thou dare not call him thine. So it is not the
neerenesse nor proximity of place that makes Christ mine: It is only the
right that I have to him: I have right to him only by faith: So by faith only
Christ is made mine. But they think they have gotten a great vantage of us, if
we be so far from Christ as the heaven is from the earth; but this shall be
answered by Gods grace. I have a title to his body, his body is distant from
my body* yet his body is not distant from me, that is, from my soul; I say
his body and my soul are conjoined. It is a strange ladder that will reach
from the earth to the heavens, yet let me tell you, there is a cord that
extends from the earth to the heavens; and coupleth me and Christ together,
and this is only true faith: Faith is that which couples us and Christ.

Similitude taken from the Sun.


By true faith, Christ, though he be in the heavens, is coupled and conjoined
with me who am here on earth. I will show you this by a similitude. Is not the
body of the Sun in the firmament? It is impossible for you to touch the
body of the Sun, yet the body of the Sun and ye are conjoined, How? By
those beams that shine on you, by that light that shines upon you: Why may
not the body of Christ then though it be in the heavens, be conjoined with me
that am on earth, namely, by the beams, by the light and gladness that
flows from his body? My body and Christ's body are conjoined by the virtue
and power flowing from his body: which virtue and power quickneth my dead
soul, makes me to live the life of Christ, to begin to die to my self: and
ever the more I die to my self, the more I live to Christ. This conjunction
now is the ground, as I told you, of all our felicity and happiness, and I
have made it clear to you at this time so far as God has given me insight.
Always ye see this conjunction is brought to pass by two special means; by
the holy Spirit and by faith: If there be no other means but these two, what
need thou a carnal or a visible conjunction? Faith is invisible, and the
Spirit is invisible, therefore thou can not see it, nor take it up with the
eye of thy body: The power of the holy Spirit is so subtle, secret and
invisible, that thou can not perceive it nor take it up with the eye of the
body, and it will work great effects in thy soul or ever thou perceiuest his
working. In respect therefore that the means of this conjunction are so
subtle, secret, and spiritual, why think thou to get a sight of this
conjunction with the eye of thy body? why imaginest thou such a carnal
conjunction as this, which would do thee no good if thou had it? Know thou
not that the Spirit that coupleth us and Christ is infinite? so that it is as
easy for the Spirit to couple us and Christ, how far distant soever we be, as
it is easy for our souls to couple our head and the feet of our bodies
though they be distant. Then seeing this conjunction is the ground and
fountain of all our happiness: and seeing this ground of happiness is so
substill and so spiritual, what is your part? Remove all your outward senses,
remove all your natural motions, remove your natural discourses and your
natural reason, and follow the sight and information of the Spirit of God:
Crave that it would please him to illuminate your understanding, that by the
light of his Spirit ye may see clearly the spiritual conjunction. Except the
eye of the Spirit be given you to perceive this spiritual conjunction, it is
not possible that ye can get any insight in it. But if the Lord of his mercy
will bestow some measure of his holy Spirit upon you; out of question ye shall
soon come to the understanding of it, and ye shall think the time happy that
ever ye heard this word. Except ye have some part of this Spirit, it is not
possible that ye can be spiritual.

That which is borne of flesh and blood will remain flesh and blood, except
the Spirit come in and make it spiritual.

Therefore ye must be borne again of the Spirit, ye must be borne in the body
of Christ, his Spirit must quicken you.

This is called the quickening and living Spirit of Christ by John. And so soon
as the Spirit comes, what does it? It chaseth away darkness out of the
understanding: whereas before I knew not God, now I see him, not only
generally that he is a God but that he is my God in Christ. What more does the
holy Spirit? It opens the heart as well as the mind: and what does it there?
Those things whereon I bestowed the affections of my heart and employed the
love of my soul, are by the working of the holy Spirit made gall to me, he
makes them venom to me, and to be as deadly hated of me as poison: He works
such an inward disposition in my soul, that he makes me to turn and fly
from those things whereon I employed my love before, and to employ it upon God.
This is a great perfection. Always in some measure he make^h me to love God
better then any other thing: He changes the affections and inclinations of my
soul, he changes the faculties and qualities of my soul: And though our
hearts and minds be made new, yet the substance of them is not changed, but
only the faculties and qualities are changed, in respect of the which change
we are called new creatures, and except you be found new creatures ye are not
in Christ.

Now to come to the point. Conclusion with an exhortation.
This secret conjunction is brought to pass by faith and by the holy Spirit:
by faith we lay hold on the body and blood of Christ: And though we be as
far distant as heaven and earth are, the Spirit serves us as a ladder to
conioyne us with Christ: As the ladder of Jacob which reached from the ground
to the heaven, to the self same use serves the Spirit of God to conioyne the
body of Christ with my soul. Then observe the whole in a word: What makes
you to have any right or title to Christ? Nothing but the Spirit: nothing but
faith. What should be your study then? Seek by all means possible to get
faith: that as Peter, Acts 15.9. says, your hearts and consciences may be
sanctified by faith. And if you endeavor not as well to get faith in your
hearts as in your minds, your faith avails not. What avails the faith that
fleeteth in the fantasy, and brings a naked knowledge without the opening of
the heart and consent of the will? So there must be an opening of thy heart and
consent of thy will to do that thing that God commands, or else thy faith
avails not. Then strive to get faith in your hearts and minds; and doing so,
ye do the duties of Christians. This is not done without the diligent hearing
of the word, and diligent receiving of the Sacrament. Then be diligent in these
exercises, and be diligent in prayer: Praying in the holy Ghost, that he would
nourish your souls inwardly with the body and blood of Christ: That he would
increase faith in your hearts and minds, and make it to grow up more and more
daily, until you come to the full fruition of that blessed immortality: Unto
the which the Lord of his mercy bring us; and that for the righteous merits of
Christ Jesus: To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all honor, praise
and glory, both now and ever: Amen.

THE FIFTH SERMON, UPON THE LORDS SVPPER.
1. COR. 11.23. For I have received of the Lord, that which I also have
delivered unto you: to wit, that the Lord Jesus in the night that he was
betrayed, took Bread, etc.


WE have heard (wel-beloued in Christ Jesus) in our last exercise, what names
were given to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as well in the Scriptures as
by the Ancients of the Latin and East Churches: we heard the chief ends
wherefore, and whereunto this holy Sacrament was at first instituted: we heard
the things that were contained in this Sacrament, what they were, how they are
coupled, how they are delivered, and how they are received: we heard also some
objections that might be objected to the contrary of this doctrine: we heard
them propounded, and as God gave the grace, refuted: we heard how the faithful
soul is said to eat Christ's body, and drink Christ's blood: We heard the
manner how Christ is, or can be received of us. And we concluded in this point:
That Christ Jesus the Savior of mankind, our Savior, cannot be perceived nor
yet received, but by a spiritual way and apprehension. Neither the flesh of
Christ, nor the blood of Christ, nor Christ himself, can be perceived but by
the eye of faith; can be received but by the mouth of faith; nor can be laid
hold on, but by the hand of faith.

Now faith is a spiritual thing: for faith is the gift of God, powered down
into the hearts and minds of men and women, wrought in the soul of every one,
and that by the mighty working and operation of the holy Spirit. So the only
way to lay hold on Christ being by faith, and faith of it own nature being
spiritual, it follows therefore that there is no way to lay hold on Christ
but a spiritual way: there is not a hand to fasten on Christ but a spiritual
hand, there is not a mouth to digest Christ but a spiritual mouth. The
Scriptures familiarly by all these terms describe the nature and efficacy of
faith.

We are said to eat the flesh of Christ by faith, and to drink his blood by
faith, in this Sacrament: How we are said to eat the flesh, and drink the
blood of Christ.
chiefly in doing of two things: First, in calling to our remembrance the
bitter death and passion of Christ, the blood that he shed upon the cross, the
Supper which he instituted in remembrance of him, before he went to the Cross:
the commandment which he gave: Do this in remembrance of me: I say, we eat
his flesh, and drink his blood spiritually. First in this point, in recording
and remembering faithfully how he died for us, how his blood was shed upon the
cross. This is the first point, a point that cannot be remembered truly, except
it be wrought by the mighty power of the holy Spirit. The second point of the
spiritual eating stands in this, That I and every one of you believe
firmly, that he died for me in particular: That his blood was shed on the
cross, for a full remission and redemption of me and my sins. The chief and
principal point of the eating of Christ his flesh and drinking of his blood,
stands in believing firmly that that flesh was delivered to death for my
sins; that that blood of his was shed for the remission of my sins: and
except every soul come near to himself, and firmly consent and agree, and
be persuaded, that Christ died for him: that soul can not be saved, that soul
can not eat the flesh, nor drink the blood of Christ. Then the eating of the
flesh, and drinking of the blood of Christ, stands in a faithful memory, in
a firm belief, and in a true applying of the merits of the death and passion
of Christ, to my own conscience in particular.

There were sundry things objected against this kind of receiving: I will not
insist to repeat them: But beside all the objections which ye heard objected
against this kind of spiritual receiving by faith, they say, If Christ his
flesh nor his blood be not perceived, nor received, but by the Spirit, by faith
in the Spirit: then say they, ye receive him but by an imagination: if he be
not received carnally nor corporally, but only by the Spirit and by faith;
then is he not received but by way of imagination, conceit, and fantasy. So
they account faith an imagination of the mind, a fantasy and opinion,
fleeting in the hearts of men. I cannot blame them to think so of faith: For
as none can judge of the sweetness of honey, but they that have tasted of it:
so there is none can discern nor judge of the nature of faith, but they that
have felt it, and tasted in their hearts what it is. And if they had tasted and
felt in their souls, what faith brings with it; alas, they would not call that
spirirituall Jewel, and only ^ewell of the soul, an imagination. They call
it an imagination: and the Apostle describing it, Heb. 11.1. calls it a
substance and substantial ground: Mark how well these two agree, An
imagination, and a substantial ground. They call it an uncertain opinion,
fleeting in the brain and fantasy of man: He calls it an evidence and
demonstration, in the same definition. See how directly contrary, the Apostle
and they are, in the nature of faith. Upon this they infer, that as it is true
in general, he can not be delivered nor given, but that same way that he is
received; and look what way any thing is received, the same way it is given
and delivered: So (as they say) he being received by way of imagination, he is
also in their fantasy, given and delivered by way of imagination. For if he be
not given, say they, to thy hand, to thy mouth, nor to thy stomach corporally:
he cannot be given but by an imagination and fantastical opinion. The reason
that moves them to think that Christ cannot be theirs, nor given to them
truly in effect and really, except he be given carnally, is this: That thing
which is so far absent and distant from us as the heaven is from the earth,
cannot be said to be given us, nor to be ours: But by our own confession, say
they to us, Christ his body is as far absent from us as the heaven is from
the earth: Therefore Christ his body, nor his flesh, cannot be given unto us,
except by way of imagination, and so not truly nor in effect. This argument
framed in this sort, would at the first sight seem to be of some force. But
let us examine the proposition of it: The proposition is this; That thing which
is so far absent from us as the heaven is from the earth, cannot be said to
be delivered to us, to be given to us, or any ways to be ours.

Now whether is this proposition true or false? I say, this proposition is
untrue, and the contrary most true. A thing may be given to us, and may become
ours, though the thing in person it self be as far distant from us as the
heaven is from the earth. And how prove I this? What makes any thing to be
ours? What makes any of you esteem a thing to be given unto you? Is it not a
title? Is it not a just right to that thing? If ye have a just right given unto
you, by him who has power to give it and a sure title, confirmed to you by him
who has the power; though the thing that he gives unto you, be not delivered
into your hands, yet by the right and title which he grants to you, is not
the thing yours? There is no doubt of it, for it is not the neernes of the
thing to my body and to my hand, that makes the thing mine; for it may be in
mine hand, and yet not belong to me. Neither is it the distance nor absence of
the thing that makes it not to be mine, but it may be far absent from me and
yet be mine, becaue the title is mine, and because I have gotten a right to it
from him who has the power to give it. So then this ground is true, It is a
sure title and a just right that makes a thing, though it be far distant from
us, to be ours. But so it is, that a lively and true faith in the blood and
death of Christ, makes us to have a sure title and a good right to the flesh
and blood of Christ, and to his merits: look what he merited by his death,
and shedding of his blood upon the cross, all that together with himself also
appertains to me, and that by a title and a right which I have gotten to him,
of God; which is faith: And the surer that my title is, the more sure am I of
the thing that is given me by the title. Now this Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, was instituted to confirm our title, to seal up our right which we
have to the body and blood, to the death and passion of Christ: and so the
body of Christ is said to be given to us, the blood of Christ is said to be
delivered to us, when our title which we have of him, of his death, of his
body and blood, is confirmed in our hearts. For this Sacrament is instituted
for the growth and increase of our faith, for the increase of our holiness and
sanctification: which faith the greater that it is in our hearts, the more sure
are we, that Christ his death appertains to us. I grant as I have said, that
the flesh of Christ is not delivered into my hndes, his flesh is not put into
my mouth, nor enters into my stomach: Yet God forbid that thou should say,
He is not truly given, although Christ's flesh be not put into thy hand, nor
mouth of thy body: and wherefore should it? Has he not appointed bread and wine
for the nourishment of the body and may not that content you? Are they not
sufficient to nourish you to this earthly and temporal life? Has he not
appointed Christ to be delivered to the inward mouth of thy soul, to be given
into the hand of thy soul, that thy soul may seed on him and be quickened
with that life wherewith the Angels live, wherewith the Son of God and God
himself live?

So the flesh of Christ is not appointed to nourish thy body, but to nourish
thy soul in the hope, yea in the growth of that immortal life: and therefore
I say, though the flesh of Christ be not delivered into the hand of thy body,
yet it is delivered to that part that it should nourish: the soul is that part
that it should nourish, therefore to the soul it is delivered.

Yea that Bread and that Wine are no more really delivered to the body and to
the hand of the body, then the flesh of Christ is delivered to the soul and
to the hand and mouth of the soul, which is faith: therefore crave no more a
carnal delivery, nor think not upon a carnal receiving.

Thou must not think that either God gives the flesh of Christ to the mouth
of the body; or that thou by the mouth of thy body receiuest the flesh of
Christ: For ye must understand this principle in the Scriptures of God; our
souls cannot be joined with the flesh of Christ, nor the flesh of Christ
cannot be joined with our souls but by a spiritual band. Not by a carnal
band of blood and alliance; not by the touching of his flesh with our flesh:
but he is conjoined with us by a spiritual band; that is, by the power and
virtue of his holy Spirit. And therefore the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 12.13. That
by the means of his holy Spirit, all we who are faithful men and women, are
baptized into one body of Christ. That is, we are conjoined and fastened with
one Christ by the means, says he, of one Spirit: not by a carnal band or any
gross conjunction, but only by the band of the holy Spirit.

That same holy Spirit that is in him, is in every one of us in some measure:
Our union with Christ by one and the same Spirit.
and in respect one Spirit is in him and in us, therefore we are accounted all
to be one body, and to be members of one spiritual and mystical body. And
in the same verse the Apostle says, We are all made to drink into one and the
self same Spirit: that is, we are made to drink of the blood of Christ. And
this blood is no other thing but the quickening virtue and power that flows
from Christ, and from the merits of his death: we are made all to drink of
that blood when we drink of the lively power and virtue that flows out of
that blood.

So there is not a band that can couple my soul with the flesh of Christ, but
only a spiritual band and a spiritual union. And therefore it is that the
Apostle 1. Cor. 6.17. says, He that is joined unto the Lord is one Spirit. And
John says, That which is borne of the Spirit, is Spirit. So it is only by the
participation of the holy Spirit that we are conjoined with the flesh and blood
of Christ Jesus.

That carnal band whether it be the band of blood which runs through one
race, or the carnal touching of flesh with flesh, that carnal band (I say)
was never esteemed of by Christ. In the time that he was conversant here upon
earth, he respected nothing that band: for as he witnessed himself by his own
words, he never had that carnal band in any kind of reverence or estimation in
respect of the spiritual band.

But as for the spiritual band whereby we are coupled with him by one Spirit;
he ever esteemed of this band in the time that he was conversant on earth, and
in a word, he has left the praise and commendations of the same.

To let you see how lightly he esteemed of the carnal band of blood and
alliance, which we esteem so much, ye may see in the eight of Luke, 20.21. for
there they coming to him, say, Master, thy Mother and thy brethren stand
without, and would see thee: ye shall hear his answer unto them, how little he
esteemed of that carnal band; in the 21. verse, in a manner denying that band,
he says; My Mother and my brethren, are those which hear the word of God and
do it. As if he would have said, It is not that carnal band yt I esteem: it
is not that carnal conjunction that I reverence: it is the spiritual
conjunction by the participation of his holy Spirit; whereby we are moved to
hear the word of God, to give reverence to it and obey it.

This carnal band was never profi^able, as that in the 8 of Luke does plainly
testify: for if the touching of Christ's flesh had been profitable, the
multitude, whereof mention is made in that Chapter, that thrusted and preased
him, had been the better by their carnal touching. But so it is that there was
never any of them the better by their carnal touching; therefore the carnal
touching profits nothing. Says not Christ himself, John 6.63. (to draw them
from that sinister confidence they had in the flesh only) My flesh profits
nothing; It is the Spirit that quickneth? To touch him by the holy Spirit and
by faith in thy soul, this touching by faith has ever been profitable, and we
have a plain example of it in the same Chapter.

Even so the poor woman that had long been diseased with a bloody issue the
space of twelve years, and had wasted and consumed the greatest part of her
substance in seeking remedy; she found no help by the natural and bodily
Physician: at the last by virtue of the holy Spirit working faith in her
heart, she understands and conceiues that she is able to recover the health of
her body and the health of her soul from Christ Jesus, who came to save both
body and soul. And upon this persuasion which she had in her heart, that
Christ could cure both body and soul, she came unto him; and as the Text
says, she preased through the multitude to come to him: and when she was come,
it is not said that she touched his flesh with her hand (in case the Papists
would ascribe the virtue which came out of him to her carnal touching:) but it
is said, that she touched only the hemme of his garment with her hand; and
with faith, which is the hand of the soul, she touched her Savior God and
man. And to let you understand that she touched him by faith, he says to her
at the last, Go thy way, thy faith has saved thee.

She touched him not so soon by faith, but incontinent there came a power out
of him: which power and virtue she felt by the effect of it in her soul; and
our Savior felt it when it went from him. The effect whereby she felt it, was
the health of her soul: and the effect whereby he felt it, was the going from
him. And so soon as he felt it go from him, he says, Who is it that has
touched me? Peter (who was ever most sudden) answers and says, Thou art
thronged and thrusted by the multitude, and yet thou ask who has touched
thee.

Our Savior answers again, It is not that touching that I speak of; it is
another kind of touching. There is one has touched me who has drawn a virtue
and power out of me: the multitude takes no virtue from me. The poor woman
thinking she had done amiss, and perceiving she could not be hid, came
trembling and said; I have done it. He answered her at the last and said,
Depart in peace; thy faith has saved thee: Thy faith has drawn out a virtue
and power from me, that has made both thy soul and thy body whole.

So that this touching of Christ has ever been profitable; is and shall be
profitable: like as the touching of Christ with the corporal hand has never
been, is not, nor ever shall be profitable. And why? Christ is not appointed to
be a carnal head, to be set upon the necks of our bodies, that he may do the
office of a carnal head thereunto, to furnish natural motions and senses to
our bodies. No, the Scriptures call not Christ a natural head, but the
Scriptures call him a spiritual head, to be set upon the neck of our souls:
that is, to be conjoined with our souls; that out of him into our souls may
distill holy motions, heavenly senses; and that there may flow out of him to
us, a spiritual and heavenly life.

Then the Scriptures call him a spiritual head, as they call us a spiritual
body: and as the life which we get from him is spiritual, so all our
conjunction with him is spiritual. And in respect he works that same
operation in my soul, which the carnal head does in my body, therefore he is
called a spiritual head: therefore he is called the head of his Church,
because he furnishes her with spiritual motion and senses, which is the life
of the Church.

So to be short, there is nothing in this conjunction carnal; there is nothing
gross in it; there is nothing that may be compassed by our natural judgment
and understanding. And therefore whosoever would attain to any small in-sight
of this spiritual conjunction between Christ and us, of necessity he must
humble himself and earnestly pray for the Spirit; otherwise it is not possible
to get any understanding, no not the least apprehension how the flesh of Christ
and we are conjoined, except we have some light given us by the Spirit; that
is, except our hearts be wakened by the mighty working of the Spirit of Christ,
this shall remain as a dead and closed letter unto us. So ye are to crave that
the Lord in his mercy would waken you, Exhortation.
illuminate your understandings, and make you to have a spiritual light to
discern of these spiritual things. Next, ye must study and be careful to
remove all vain cogitations and earthly fantasies: when ye come to hear so
high a matter, ye must cast off all filthy thoughts, ill motions and care of
the world; and ye must shake off all things that clog your hearts. Thirdly, ye
must come with a purpose to hear the word, to give diligent ear to the word,
and with a sanctified heart to receive it; with a purpose to grow and increase
in holiness, as well in body as in soul all the days of your life.

And coming with this purpose, no question, the holy Spirit shall reveal
those things to you which ye want. And though this word pass and bring no
commodity for the present, yet the holy Spirit hereafter shall reveal to
thee the truth of that which thou have now heard. This then is the end of all;
Be present in your hearts and minds, and let your souls be emptied of all the
cares of the world, that they may receive that comfort which is offered in the
hearing of the word.

Now I come to the defining of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. The
definition of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
I call this Sacrament, An holy Seal, annexed to the covenant of grace and
mercy in Christ. A seal to be ministered publicly, always according to the
holy institution of Christ Jesus: that by the lawful ministry thereof, the
Sacramental union between the signs and the thing signified, may stand: and
this union standing, Christ Jesus who is the thing signified, is as truly
delivered to the increase of our spiritual nourishment, as the signs are
given and delivered to the body, for our temporal nourishment.

Why this Sacr^ment is called a Seal.
Now let us examine the words and parts of this definition. First of all, I call
this Sacrament a Seal; because this Sacrament serves to the same use to our
souls, that a common seal does to a common Evidence. As the seal which is
annexed to the Evidence, confirms and seals up the truth contained in the
Evidence: so this Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, confirms and
seals up the truth of mercy and grace, contained in the covenant of mercy and
grace: for this respect it is called a seal.

Why it is called an holy Seal.
It is called An holy Seal. Why? Because it is taken from profane use,
whereunto that bread served before; and that bread is applied to an holy use.
There is a power given to that bread, to signify the precious body of Christ
Jesus, to represent the nourishing and feeding of our souls. And in respect it
serves now in the Sacrament to so holy an use, therefore I call it an holy
seal. This is not my word; it is the Apostles, Romans 4.11. where he gives the
Sacrament the same name and calls it a seal. And further, if the wisdom of
Christ in his Apostle had been followed, and if men had not invented new names
of their own for this Sacrament, but had contented and satisfied themselves
with the names which God has given by his Apostle, and that Christ himself
has given to this Sacrament; I am assured, none of these controversies and
debates (which never will cease) had fallen out: but where men will go about
to be wiser then God, and go beyond God in devising names which he never gave,
upon men's own invention such debates have fallen out. A lesson by the way,
that no flesh presume to be wiser then God, but let them stoop and keep the
names which God has given to this Sacrament.

Thirdly, I say, annexed to the Covenant; Why the seal is said to be annexed
to the covenant.
annexed and hung to the Charter: because it cannot be called a seal properly
except it be hung to an Evidence. What it is by nature the same it remains,
and no more, if it be not annexed to some Evidence: it is only the hanging of
it to the Evidence that makes men account it a seal; not being esteemed
except it be hanged to the Evidence. Even so it is here; if this Sacrament be
not ministered and joined to the preached word, to the preaching of the covenant
of mercy and grace, it cannot be a seal; but what it is by nature, it is no
more. As by nature it is but a common piece of bread; so it is no more if it be
not annexed to the preaching of the word, and ministered therewith as Christ
has commanded. Therefore I say, the seal must be annexed and hanged to the
Evidence, to the preaching of the word, for the confirming of the Evidence;
otherwise it is not a seal. But it is not so with the Evidence which is the
word of God: for ye know any Evidence will make faith though it want a seal;
and it will serve to make a right, if it be subscribed without a seal: but the
seal without the Evidence avails nothing. Even so it is with the word of
God: though the Sacraments be not annexed to the word, yet the word will serve
the turn: it serves us to get Christ, it serves to engender and beget faith
in us, and makes us to grow up in faith. But the seal without the word can
serve us to no holy use: therefore I say, the seal must be annexed to the word
preached, to the covenant of mercy and grace.

Now it follows in the definition, Why the Sacrament should be ministered
publicly. First reason.
that this seal must be ministered publicly. Wherefore say I publikly? To
exclude all private administration of this Sacrament. For if this Sacrament be
administered to any privately, it is not a Sacrament. Why? Because the Apostle
calls this Sacrament a Communion: therefore if ye administer it privately, ye
lose the Sacrament. For this Sacrament is a Communion of the body and blood of
Christ: therefore of necessity it must be by way of communication; and so the
action must be publicly ministered.

Secondly, this Sacrament must be publicly ministered, because Christ Jesus who
is the thing signified in this Sacrament, Second reason.
is no such thing as pertains to one man only: if this were so, he might be
privately given and ministered. But seeing Christ which is the thing signified in
the Sacrament, is a common thing belonging to every faithful man and woman,
therefore he ought to be commonly given to all, in a common action, in a
society, and congregation of the faithful.

Thirdly, this Sacrament is a Thansgiuing to God the Father for his benefits.
Now it appertains not to one or two, to thank God only; but as we are all
partakers of his temporal and spiritual benefits, so we ought all of us
publicly to give him thanks for the same. Therefore I say, in the definition,
this seal ought to be publicly, and not privately ministered; as the Papists
do in their private Masses.

This Seal must be publicly ministered according to Christ his institution.
Wherefore say I Christ his institution, more then man's institution or Angels
institution? Why keep I to Christ his institution? Because man has not power
to institute or make a Sacrament: Why this seal must be ministered according to
Christ his institution. None has power to institute a Sacrament but God only.
because an Angel has not power to make or institute a Sacrament. For none
has power to make or institute a Sacrament, but he yt has power to give
Christ, who is the thing signified in the Sacrament. But so it is that none
has power to give Christ but either the Father or himself: therefore none has
power to make or institute a Sacrament, but either the Father or the Son:
only God must make a Sacrament. Secondly, this Sacrament is a part of Gods
service and worship: but so it is that none has power to appoint any part of
his service, or prescribe any part of his worship, but only God himself:
therefore none can make a Sacrament but God himself. There is no Prince will be
contented to be served after another man's fantasy: but he will prescribe his
service according unto his own pleasure: how much more is it meet that God
should appoint his own service and worship? Therefore there is neither man nor
Angel, has power to institute any part of the service of God.

The Sacraments are a part of his service: therefore there is no Angel nor man
has power to institute a Sacrament. The greatest style that any man can have
in the ministry of the word and Sacraments, is that style which the Apostle
gives them, 1. Cor. 4.1. There we are called Stewar^s and Dispensers of the
graces of God, Ministers of those mysteries and holy things. It follows then,
that we are not Authors, Creators and makers of them, but only Ministers and
Dispensers of the Sacraments. So it is evident, that no man nor creature has
power to make a Sacrament. Then it must be according to the institution of
Christ, his institution must be kept: look what he said, what he did, what he
commanded thee to do; all that must be said, done and obeyed. If thou leauest
one jot of that undone which he commanded thee to do, thou peruertest the
institution: for there is nothing left in register of that institution but it
is essential.

So in the celebration of Christ's institution we must take heed to whatsoever
he said, did or commanded to be done: Thou must first say whatsoever he said,
and then do whatsoever he did. For the Ministry of the Sacrament must follow
after the word. First thou must say that which Christ commanded thee to say,
and thou must teach that which he commanded thee to teach: and then minister
the Sacrament. We call the word in the Sacrament, the whole institution.
Then to keep this institution we must begin at the saying, and say whatsoever
Christ commanded us; then after, faithfully to do all that which he commanded
to be done. Then I call the word, the whole institution of Christ Jesus,
preached and proclaimed, denounced distinctly, clearly and sensibly to the
people in such sort, that if we leave any kind of circumstance or ceremony of
this institution undone, we pervert the whole action.

It is agreed upon and condescended unto between us who celebrate this
institution, Word and element must concur in the constitution of a Sacrament.
and all the sects in the world who have separated themselves from this
institution, That two things are necessary, and must concur in the nature
and constitution of a Sacrament. To wit, there must be a word, and there must
be an element concurring. There is not a sect that grants not this, That the
word must concur with the element, before there can be a Sacrament. Though they
easily admit this general, wherein we agree well with them, yet when it comes
to the special, and that we enter into particular in the handling and treating
of the word; how well soever we agree in the general, yet in the particular we
are far asunder. For when we come to dispute and reason on these particulars;
First, what we mean by the word: Secondly, how this word ought to be
entreated: Thirdly, what virtue this word has: Fourthly, how far the virtue
of this word does extend it self: And last of all, to whom the word ought to
be directed and pronounced: In all these particulars we are as far asunder as
ever we seemed to agree in the general.

What we mean by the word in the Sacrament.
I leave to meddle with any other sect, but will deal with the Papists only,
because we have most to do with them: And first of all we are to understand
what we mean by the word, and what they mean by it. We by the word (as I have
said) understand the whole institution of Christ Jesus, whatsoever he said, or
did, or commanded to be done, without adding or diminishing, or alteration of
the meaning or sense of the word: This we mean by the word in the Sacrament.

What the Papists understand by the word in the Sacrament.
Now what understand the Papists by the word? They preach not the institution of
Christ, nor take the whole institution as he left it. But in place thereof,
they select and choose out of his institution four or five words, and they make
the whole virtue of the institution to consist in the four or five words. And
it were nothing if they would content themselves with these words, because they
are the words of the institution. But they add to the words, they take from
the words, and alter the meaning of the same words at their pleasure. That ye
may know this; In their Mass which they call the Lords Supper, I will let you
see the substance of it: I will divide their Mass into substantial and
accidental things. To the substance of the Mass there are three things
required. There must of necessity be a Priest, that is to say, such a one as
takes upon him the office of our Mediator Christ Jesus, to interceede between
God and man. Secondly, to the substance of the Mass is required, that the
Priest offer the body and blood of Christ. We come here to receive the same
things: There the Priest offers them to God the Father. Thirdly, by this work
(say they) they obtain all good things: by this work wrought they obtain
remission of sins as well to the dead as to the quick; but in special they
obtain remission of sins to the Priest who is the distributer, and to him to
whom the Priest applies that sacrifice: And as for the rest of the Church who
are absent, they obtain this remission of their sins by this work
generally. These three things are necessary to the substance of the Mass. As
for the accidents that must concur to the making of a Mass, they are of two
sorts: Some of them are always necessary, without the which that action
cannot be: again, some are not necessary, and the action may be without them,
but not without a deadly sin. These things that are necessary, concern
partly the Priest, and partly the action it self. The accidents that are
necessary to the Priest are of two sorts: One sort are such, as without the
which he cannot be a Priest; The other sort such, without the which he cannot
be free from deadly sin. The things without the which he cannot be a Priest,
are these: Except he have a power given of his Bishop to consecrate, which
power is justified by the unction and shauing of his crown: Except again, he
have power to speak, and that the roof of his mouth be whole that he may
speak, he cannot be a Priest. These two are always necessary, and concur
to the person. Other things again are not so necessary; as that the Priest
must be free from suspension, from cursing, deadly sin, and all
Ecclesiastical pain and censures. These things are necessary to the person.
There are again two things necessary to the action: One sort without the
which the action cannot be; without the Lords prayer it cannot be, without the
five words of the institution it cannot be. Other things again are not so
necessary; as the consecration of the place where the Mass is said, the Altar
stone, the blessing of the Chalice, the water, the singing, he that should
help to say Mass, and the rest. So they and we in no sort agree concerning
the word what is meant by it. The second point is, how this wo^d ought to be
entreated, wherein we are as far asunder: we say, the word taken as has been
said, for the whole institution, ought to be entreated after this manner.
First, there ought to be a lawful Pastor, who has his calling of God to
deliver it. And this Pastor ought to deliver the word lawfully; what is that?
he ought to preach it, to proclaim it publicly, with a plain speech to
denounce it: he ought to open up and declare all the parts of it, what is the
peoples part, and what is his own part, how he ought to deliver and distribute
that Bread and that Wine, how the people ought to receive at his hands that
Bread and that Wine, to inform their faith how they ought to receive Christ's
body and blood signified by that Bread and Wine: As also he ought to teach
them how they should come with reverence unto that Table, and communicate with
the precious body and blood of Christ. This he ought to do in a familiar
language, that the people may understand him, that they may hear him, that
they may perceive and lay up in their hearts the things that he speaks. For
what avails it you to hear a thing whispered and not spoken out? or if it be
spoken out, what avails it you to hear it if ye understand it not? For
except ye hear Christ in a familiar and plain language, ye cannot understand:
and except ye understand, it is impossible for you to believe: and without
belief there is no application of Christ: and except ye believe and apply
Christ to your selves, your coming to the Sacrament is in vain. So of
necessity if ^his Sacrament be lawfully handled, the Pastor must preach the
institution of Christ that it may be heard, and in a familiar language that it
may be understood, in such sort that the faithful people may be informed how
to receive, and the Minister may know his part, how to deliver and distribute.

This I say, should be the right handling of the holy institution of this
Sacrament.

Now what do they? In place of a Minister, Pastor or Bishop (call him as you
please) who is lawfully called of God, they substitute a priest, surrogate an
hireling, who has no calling or office now in ye Church of God. For the office
of a priest as they use their priesthood, is no other thing but the office of
Christ Jesus, the office of the Mediator betwixt God and us: for they make
their priests daily to offer up Christ Jesus, to the Father. Now this is the
Mediator Christ his office, and he did it once for all, once for ever, says
the Apostle: so that they have no entrance to do this over again: and in
respect that their priests do this again which Christ has done already, they
do it without command, they have no warrant in the word of God. And if they had
warrant for their calling in the word of God, yet they handle the Sacrament
amiss: for whereas they should speak forth clearly, they whisper and conjure
the elements by a certain kind of whispering. Whereas they should speak it
in a known language that the people may understand, they speak in an unknown
language: and though they spoke it in a known and familiar tongue, yet in that
they whisper it, the people cannot be the better. And what shall I say? Seeing
they thus handle the word though it be the very institution it self, yet they
so spoil it in the handling that it is not an holy Sacrament. Then we differ
as much in the second point, how that word ought to be handled and entreated.

Now the third point is what virtue this word has, The third head in
controversy.
how far the virtue of this word extends it self: In this point we grant
and acknowledge that the word has a virtue: and the word taken as has been
said, works some what even toward the same elements of bread and wine; for we
acknowledge that those element by the virtue of this word are changed, not in
their substance and natural properties: but we grant that the elements are
changed, in a quality which they had not before; in such sort that these
elements are taken from the common use whereunto they served before, and by the
institution of Christ they are applied unto an other holy use. Mark how far
the holy use differs from the common use; there is as great difference betwixt
the elements this day in the action, and the thing that they were yesterday.
For I grant that the elements are changed; and yet this change proceeds not
of the nature of the elements, from an enclosed virtue supposed to be in the
words, nor from the whispering of the words, but it proceeds from the will of
Christ, from the ordinance and appointment of Christ, set down in his own
institution: for that thing is holy, which God calls holy; and that thing is
profane, which God calls profane.

To let you understand how these signs are made holy, it is necessary that
these two things be considered. First what he is that makes them holy, How the
elements are sanctified.
whether God* Angel, or man. Secondly, whosoever he be that makes them holy,
by what means and way he makes them holy. And by the consideration of these
two, we shall come to the consideration and right viewing of the sanctification
of the Elements.

For the First, we say that God is only he that may make a thing which was
common to be holy. So we say, that God by his will and ordinance declared and
set down in his word, has made the things that were common, by his
appointment to be holy. As for the way and means whereby they are made holy,
it is the word of God, the institution of Christ the will of Christ, declared in
his institution, that makes them holy. For the preaching and opening of the
word and institution of Christ, lets us see that God has made these things
holy; and not only that he has made them holy, but lets us see an holy
manner how they should be used, in what place, at what time, with what heart,
and to what end. So it is the will Christ, declared in his institution, whereby
the things that were common before are now made holy. There are two other
things also which make the same elements holy: and these two are used in this
institution. There is prayer and thanksgiving, which make the creatures of God
holy to our use: whereas otherwise if we receive the good creatures of God,
like dogs, and thank him not for them, it is a sure token that they were never
sanctified to our use.

By prayer we obtain grace and strength from God to use the creatures, and
this whole action, holily and lawfully as it should be. And therefore not only
in this holy action should we begin with God and with invocation of his name,
but in all actions in the world we begin in the name of God. So it is the will
of God that prayer, and thansgiuing conjoined with the elements, do make them
holy. All these three contained in the action of the Lords Supper, make the
Seals holy: For beside the will of God declared in the institution, in the
Lords Supper we use invocation; and in this invocation we use thanksgiving.
The elements are not made holy by the word of God only, but by the use of
prayer and thanksgiving, which three are the only means whereby these things
are sanctified.

Now to express and lay forth the sanctification of the Elements: The word of
blessing and thank^giuing used indifferently, expressed by the other.
The Evangelists and the Apostle Paul use indifferently the word, To bless and
to give thanks, and commonly they put the one for the other: For ye may see
that Mark and Paul use the word Bless: Matthew and Luke, use the word to give
thanks, and all in one signification: And Mark himself in the 14. of his
Gospel, 22. verse, speaking of the same action of the Lords Supper, uses the
the word to Bless, and in the 23. verse he uses the word ^o Give thanks, and
both in one signification to let you see, that the Apostle, Christ himself,
and the Evangelists, use the word to Bless, and to Give thanks indifferently,
to signify the sanctification and consecration of the elements. Except ye take
the one for the other, it will be hard to gather any good meaning out of the
Apostles words: for I remember the Apostle 1. Corinthians 10.16. says: The
cup of blessing which we bless; what is that? I take the word to signify, as
I have said, which we bless, that is, which we sanctify and prepare by
blessing. So to bless and to give thanks in the Lords Supper, signify no
other thing but to sanctify: otherwise if ye take the word in another
signification ye shall fall into an error; and why? God is said to bless, and
man is said to bless: God is said to bless when he gives good things unto
his creatures, for Gods blessing is ever effectual; and therefore he is said
to bless when he gives good thing. Man again is said to bless either
privately or publicly, when he craves blessing at the hands of God for any
man; when he blesses in the name and at the commandment of God, any person or
people. Now if ye ascribe blessing in any of these two significations to the
cup, it is amiss: for we use neither to crave a blessing to insensible
elements; nor yet to bless them in the name of God: and God uses to give good
things to the sons of men, and not to insensible creatures. Therefore we must
needs use the word Bless, in the third signification, The cup of blessing
which we bless, that is, which we sanctify and prepare by blessing. Thus
far we understand, for the sanctification of the elements.

How the Papists sanctify the outward Elements.
Now let us see how they sanctify the elements, and what is the form of their
consecration; so far as I understand of it, it consists in these five
words: Hoc est enim corpus meum. It stands in these five words, and in the
whispering of them; for if you whisper them not, ye lose the fashion of
incantation: for the thing which we call sanctifying, they call whispering: and
the whispering of those five words, they call the consecration of the elements.
And when the words are after this manner whispered, they presuppose such a
secret and monstrous virtue to be enclosed in the syllables, that the virtue
and power which flows from the words, is able to chase away wholly the
substance of the bread, so that the very bread and substance of it is
altogether destroyed by this power. Secondly, that this power which flows
from these words, is able to fetch and pull down another substance, to wit,
the flesh and blood of Christ Jesus that sits at the right hand of his
Father, and is able to put it within the compass of that bread. This is a
strange and a great virtue, that not only will overthrow that substance, but
put it within the compass of that bread. The same five words whispered in this
manner have such a monstrous operation, say they, that they are able both to
chase away the one substance, to pull down another, and to put it within the
compass of that bread. We altogether deny that there is such a virtue in
these words: for as I have said before, we deny not that the word has a
virtue, but deny that there is such a virtue enclosed in the words: we deny
the quality of the virtue, or that it flows from such a fountain. For we
grant that the word has a virtue; there is never a word that God speaks
here, but it has a virtue joined with it: but we deny that this virtue is
enclosed in the syllables, in the whispering or pronouncing of the words: for
if there were such a virtue and power enclosed in the syllables, by the same
reason it should follow, that there were a virtue in the figure and shape of
the letters that make up the words. Now there is no man will think that there
is any virtue in the figure or shape of the letters: and there is as little
virtue in the syllables or pronouncing of the words themselves. So we deny
that there is any virtue enclosed in the syllables or resident in the word. But
we say that there is a power conjoined with the word, and this power is not
resident in the word, but is resident in the eternal word, in the essential
word whereof John the Evangelist makes mention, Chap. 1. The word which was
from the beginning, that is, the Son of God Christ Jesus. We say, there is
not a dram weight of this virtue and power resident in any creature yt ever
God created, but it is only resident in Christ Jesus: And therefore there
flows no virtue from the sillables, nor from the words that are spoken, but
from Christ and his Spirit, who gives the virtue to those words. So we differ
in this; we say, that there is not any virtue resident in the sillables, we say
that the sillables and pronouncing of the sillables work nothing: but we say
that the virtue is resident in the person of the Son of God, and he works
by his own word.

Now we say that there cannot be such a monstrou change, as to say the
whispering of so many words should change the own substance of the bread, pull
down the substance of the body of Christ, and put his body in so narrow a
compass, we say that cannot be. And this I shall prove by these three rules;
Refutation of the doctrine transubstantiation, by three sorts of arguments.

The first sort of argument.


namely, By the verity of the flesh of Christ Jesus; By the articles of our
belief; And by the true end of the institution of this Sacrament. And so we
shall see by Gods grace the infinite absurdities that follow upon their opinion.

The first principle that I lay is this; Seeing yt Christ Jesus the Son of
God in the time appointed, took true flesh of the womb of the Virgin, and
united himself with our nature in one personal union; to ye end that our
nature which fell altogether from integrity in the first Adam, might recover
the same in the second Adam: yea not only ye same, but so much the greater as
our second Adam excels the first in all degrees. And in respect he took on
him a body like unto ours in all things (sin excepted,) of necessity it
must follow, that the definition of a true body, and the inseparable
properties thereof must be competent to him. But these are the inseparable
properties; namely, to be in one certain place, to be finite, circumscribed,
visible, and palpable: for all these concur (quarto modo, as the Logicians
say) to a body; so that they cannot be separate from the subject without the
distraction thereof. Then I reason on this manner; A true humane body is in a
certain place; Christ Jesus body is a true humane body: therefore it is in a
certain place. I call a place a certain condition of an isntrumental body,
whereby it comes to pass that where-euer the body be, of necessity it is
limited within that place; and while it is there, it cannot be elsewhere.

If you would have the probation of my Proposition from the Doctors, read
Augustine to Dardanus, speaking of this same body of Christ. Take away a
certain room from the bodies, and they shall be in no place; and if they be
in no place, they are not. The same Augustine writing upon John, in his 30.
Treatise says, The body in the which the Lord did arise, of necessity must
be in a place; but his divine efficacy and nature is diffused every where. And
in his third Eple he says, How much soever the body be, or how little soever
the body be, it behooves to occupy the bounds of a place. And besides these,
the history of the Acts proves most evidently Christ his body to be in a
certain place: as Acts 3.21. the words are these; Whom the heavens must
contain, until the time that all things be restored, which God had spoken by
the mouth of all his holy Prophets. Though I need not to insist in the
probation of these things, yet I proceed. Secondly then I reason after this
manner; A humane body is finite and circumscribed; but the body of Christ is
a humane body. What warrant from the Doctors have I for this? I leave many
purposely, and will allege only Augustine, who writing to Dardanus, Believe
(says he) Christ to be every where in that he is God; but only to be in
heaven, according to the nature of a true body.

And in his 146. Epistle, I believe, says he, the body of Christ to be so in
heaven as it was on the earth, when he went up to heaven. But it was
circumscribed in a certain place on the earth. Ergo, it is so in the heaven.
And consequently, it cannot be in the Masse-bread and in heaven both at one
time. The last reason is this: A humane body is visible and palpable: but
Christ has a humane body, and he is corporally present, as they say:
therefore Christ his body is visible and palpaple.

I prove my Proposition by Christ his own words taken out of Luke 24.39. In
the which place, to persuade the Apostles of the verity of his body, and to
prove evidently that it was not fantastical, he uses the argument taken from
these two qualities, and he commands his Apostles to feel and see; giving
them thereby to understand, that as these two senses are the most certain of
all the rest, so are they most able to discern, whether he was a body or a
Spirit. As if he would have said, If I be visible and palpable, ye may be out
of doubt that I have a true body. For as the Poet says, which Tertullian
cites also to this same purpose; Tangere enim, and tangi, nisi corpus, nulla
potest res.

By these arguments it may be evidently seen, how this Transubstantiation may
no way stand with the verity of the body of Christ Jesus. And as it fights
wi^h the flesh of Christ Jesus, so it repugnes dir^ctly the articles of our
faith. For in our Belief we profess, Second sort of argument.
that Christ ascended out of this earth to the heaven, where he sits at the
right hand of the Father, where he gouerns and directs all things in heaven and
earth; from the which place, he is to come at the last day to judge the world.

This article teaches us, that he has changed his dwelling which he had
amongst us on earth, and is ascended into the heavens, where he sits at the
right hand of his Father, and shall remain there (according to the testimony
of Peter, which I cited out of the Acts 3.21.) until the last day. If he sit
at his Fathers right hand, and be to remain in heaven until the last day,
then is he not corporally in the bread. But the article of our belief says,
That he sits at the right hand of his Father: and Peter says in that place,
that the heavens must contain him until the last day. Therefore this
Transubstantiation is directly against the articles of our Belief, and the
manifest place of the Scripture.

Third sort of argument.
Thirdly, it is opposite unto the end wherefore this Sacrament was instituted,
and this is most evident: for the end of the Sacrament is spiritual, as the
effect that flows thereof is spiritual, and the instrument whereby this
spiritual food is applied to us, is also spiritual. But from a natural and
corporal presence, a spiritual effect can never flow: therefore the corporal
and natural presence of the body and blood of Christ Jesus repugnes directly
the end of this Sacrament: for the corporal presence must have a corporal
eating: of this eating follows a digestion in the stomach: and the thing
that is digested in the stomach is never able to feed my soul to life
eternal. So this corporal presence must ever tend to a corporal end; which
is directly contrary unto the end wherefore the Sacrament was instituted.

Further, if the bread were transubstantiate, Other arguments unto the same
effect.
it should become the thing signified; if it become the thing signified, this
Sacrament should want a sign, and so it should not be a Sacrament: for every
Sacrament, as ye have head, is a sign. Now to say that the accidents of true
bread, as the color and the roundnesse of it, may serve as signs, that is
more then folly: for between the sign and the thing signified, there must be a
conformity: but there is no conformity between the accidents, and the body and
blood of Christ Jesus. For if that were so, the accidents behooved to nourish us
corporally; as the body and blood of Christ Ie- pointed to nourish us
spiritually.

Again, if the bread become the body and blood of Christ Jesus, it should
follow that he had a body without blood; for he has instituted another sign
besides to represent his blood. Also if there had been ^uch a wondefull thing
as they speak of, in this Sacrament, there would have been plain mention made
thereof in the Scripture: for God himself never works a notable work but he
declares it either openly or more secretly in the Scripture, that thereby he
may be glorified in his wonderful works. As ye may read in the Evangelist
John 2.8. where the water was changed into wine; Gene. 2.22. where the rib of
Adam, was changed into Heua: Exodus 7.10. where Aarons rod was turned into a
Serpent: there ye see that changing is manifestly expressed. Therefore I say,
if there had been such a monstrous change in these elements of ^he Supper as
they affirm, the Scripture would not have concealed it, but expressed it: but
in respect there is no mention made of this change in the Scriptures, therefore
there is no such change in this action. Further if there were such a change, as
they say, either it is before these words of consecration be spoken, or
follows after the same words be spoken. If the change be before the words of
the consecration be spoken, the consecration is superfluous, and their
Proposition is false: if the change be after the words be spoken, This bread is
my body, their Proposition is false also; because the word bread is spoken,
before the last syllable of their five words is pronounced. These, and infinite
more absurdities follow of this doctrine.

And yet they obstinately persevere, and urge us with the letter, affirming that
the words of Christ are so plain that they admit no figure. They would have
spoken more advisedly if they had sought counsel of Augustine, to have
discerned between a figurative speech, and a proper speech: for he in his third
book and 16. chapter of Christian doctrine, speaks after this sort; If the
speech, says he, seem to command a wickedness or mischief, or to forbid any
happiness or any welfare, it is not proper, it is then figurative. And he
adds for an example, a place out of John 6.53. Except, says our Savior, ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in
you. Whereunto Augustine adds: This speech says he, seems to command a
mischief therefore it is a figurative speech, whereby we are commanded to
communicate with the sufferings of Christ Jesus, and with gladness to keep in
perpetual memory, that the flesh of the Lord was crucified and wounded for us.
For otherwise it were more horrible (as the same Augustine makes mention in
the second book against the Adversaries of the law) to eat the flesh of
Christ Jesus really, then to murder him; and more horrible to drink his
blood, then to shed his blood. Yet notwithstanding they are not ashamed still
to hold and maintain, that those words ought to be taken properly. So that it
appears, that of very malice for contradiction sake, to the end only that
they may withstand the truth, they will not acknowledge this to be a
sacramental speech. For they are compelled will they, nill they, in other
speeches of the like sort to acknowledge a figure; as Genes. 17.10.
Circumcision is called the covenant; and Exodus 12.11. the Lamb is called the
Passover; and Math. 20.22. the Cup is called his Blood; and Luke 22.20. the
Cup is called the new Testament; and 1. Cor. 10.4. the Rock is called
Christ. All these speeches are sacramental, and receive a kind of
interpretation: yet they maliciously prease to deny us this in these words (Hoc
est corpus meum,) which they are compelled to grant in the rest, as especially
where Paul calls the rock Christ.

Now when they are driven out of this Fortress they fly as unhappily to the
second: namely, That God by his omnipotency may make the body of Christ to be
in heaven, and in the bread both at one time. Ergo, say they, it is so. If I
denied their consequent, they would be much troubled to prove it. But the
question stands not here, whether God may do it or not: but the question is,
Whether God will it or not; or may will it or not. And we say reverently, that
his Majesty may not will it: for though it be true that he may many things
which he will not, yet it is as true, that there are many things which he may
not will; of the which sort this is: and these are reduced to two sorts.

First, he may not will those things which are contrary to his nature: as to be
changeable, as to decay, and such others: for if he might will these things,
they should not be arguments of any puissance or of any other power, but rather
certain arguments of his impotency and infirmity. And therefore though he may
not will these things, he ceasseth not to be omnipotent; but so much the rather
his constant and invincible power is known.

Secondly, God may not will some things by reason of a presupposed condition:
as such things, whereof he has concluded the contrary before; of the which
sort is this which is now controuerted. For seeing that God has concluded,
that a humane body should consist of isntrumental parts, and therefore to be
comprehended and circumscribed within one, and the own proper place: and also
seeing he has appointed Christ Jesus to have the like body, and that not for a
time, but eternally: in respect of this determined will (I say) God may not
will the contrary now, either to abolish this body which he has appointed to
be eternal, or yet to make it at one time, in respect of one thing, a body and
not a body, quantified and not quantified, finite and infinite, local and not
local: for to will these things which are plain contrary in themselves he may
not, no more then it is possible for him to will a lie. So it may be seen of
all men, that we preserve the omnipotency of God; and with reverence from our
hearts, acknowledge him only to be only omnipotent: and we desire all men to
esteem them as Calumniatours, who abuse the ears of the simple ones to
persuade them the contrary of us.

They are not content with this: but they say, That God may will a
contradiction, and make both the parts to be true at one time. And to prove
this, they would bring in the miracles which God works: as if they would say,
Every miracle includes a contradiction. As for example; God made a Virgin to
bear a Son, they think this work brings with it a contradiction. To bear
a Son, say they, is the one part of the contradiction; and to be a Virgin,
is the other part of the contradiction. This work is a miracle, but it
implies no contradiction: for concerning the holy Virgins conception, therein
is no contradiction. There was a miracle indeed, that a virgin should bear a
Son, contrary to the course of nature: for to be a virgin, and yet to have a
child, are not contradictory if she have conceived and brought forth by miracle,
as did the blessed Virgin: But to be a virgin and not a virgin at one time,
this is the contradiction. So Christ his body to be visible and invisible,
local and not local, at one time, is in every respect the like contradiction;
and therefore impossible to be true.

Their other example, of Christ his entering in, the doors being closed and
shut, what appearance of contradiction has it? Can they prove that he entered
through the doors? And if he did, then was there an alteration of qualities
and that by miracle, either in Christ his body, or in the doors; but no
contradiction in nature, unless you know not what a contradiction is.

Their third and last example of the fire in Nabuchadnezzars Oven, which
consumed the ministers, but hurt not them that were in the midst of i^,
appears to be of no weight, by that which has already been answered. They
imagine, as appears, that in every miracle a contradiction is employed: which
is absurd. If they can prove that this fire was both hot and cold, then they
say something to the purpose: but that it burns up some and hurts not others,
is no contradiction; because by miracle the force thereof was repressed. So this
second ground is sure; God may not will that thing which implies a
contradiction. But so it is that the real presence of the body of Christ in
the Sacrament implies a contradiction; for it makes the body of Christ
visible and inu^sible, compast and not compast at one time: therefore God may
not will such a thing.

When they are driven from this, they make their last refuge a peremptory
defense in their own opinion: Their last r^fuge.
for they say, Christ his body is freed from physical rules: for Theology is
not subject to physical rules. It is a very ill gathered consequence, to say,
that we subject Theology to Physic, because that we (first, according to
Theology, which is the law of God; and next, according to Physic, which is
the law of Nature) defend the natural properties of the true and natural
body of Christ Jesus. Then I grant this, that Theology is not subject unto
Physic; what of this? Ergo, Christ his body is freed from physical rules.
How follows that I pray you? By what law may ye free or can ye free the body
of Christ? By the law of Nature ye cannot; for he was made of the seed of
David, and took on him true flesh of the womb of the Virgin: And far less
by the ^aw of God, which is Theology: for ye know that Christ was appointed
from all eternity, to take on him our nature and to become true man.

Indeed it is true, that the law of God cannot be subject to the law of
nature; for the law of Nature flows from the law of God as out of the own
spring: but it is as true, that if ye take* Christ his body from the law of
Nature, ye shall free it also from the law of God. For I affirm that the
Scripture so consents with the law of Nature, that if ye deny the one, ye
shall deny the other; and if ye admit the one, ye shall admit also the other.
Therefore if they look well about them, they shall fi^de the beam to be in
their own eye: for they pervert both the law of God and the law of Nature, by
a new invented natural knowledge of their own.

For wha^soeuer he be that attributes to one and the self same body, natural
and unnatural properties, which directly fight against themselves; I say, that
man peruerteth both true Theology and Nature. But they to one and the self
same body of Christ Jesus, attribute natural and unnatural properties:
therefore it is they that pervert both the use of true Theology, and the order
set down and established in Nature.

Would you know the reason of my Proposition? I say, it behooves as well in
Theology as in Nature, of necessity one of the contrary enunciations to be
false. But once to make an end with them, I will answer their last refuge. Thus
they reason; A glorified body is not subject to natural rules: but Christ his
body is glorified; therefore it is not subject to natural rules. First of
all, before we answer directly, we must consider wherein stands the
glorification of a body, and then the answer will be easy.

The Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 15.42. speaks after this manner; So also, says
he, is the resurrection of the dead. The body is sown in corruption, and is
raised in incorruption: It is sown in dishonor, and is raised in glory: It
is sown in weakness, and is raised in power. And a little after: This
corruption must put on incorruption, and this mortality must put on
immortality. By this clear Antithesis, Paul plainly describes the
glorification of a body; for he opposes these two, the unglorified and the
glorified body: And to the unglorified body he ascribes corruption,
ignominy, infirmity, carnalitie, and mortality: To the glorified body he
attributes incorruption, glory, power, spiritualitie and immortality. Of this
opposition we may gather easily, what the resurrection and glorification
brings to the body. In a word, by them we see that the body is only
spoiled of corruption, shame, infirmity, naturalitie, and mortality: and it
becomes only spoiled of all the infirmities of our nature, that it may be
clothed with a more glorious apparel: as with incorruption, power, glory,
spiritualiti^, and immortality. We see then, that this glorification imports a
change indeed; but I believe no man will be so mad, as to think this change to
be made in the substance: for if that were so, the old substance behooved to
decay, and a new should arise: but we hear no such thing in this description.
And as little is the change made in the quantity: for we find no word either
of augmentation or diminution of any substance, which behooved to be, if it were
in the quantity. The most that we can perceive, this mutation consists in
the qualities, by the which the body casts off the old coat of infirmity,
and is clothed a new with the coat of glory: for Christ after he did arise,
he both went and came, was seen and touched. Of the things before deduced, it
clea^ely follows, That in respect the glory of the body of Christ has
wrought nothing in his nature and substance, and consequently in his natural
dimensions, neither yet in any other essential property. that therefore the
glorification of his body freeth it not from the rules of Nature. For so long
as that nature of a true body remains, there are no supernatural gifts
whereby it may be glorified, were they never so high (so far as they may be
gathered out of ye Scriptures) that may hurt either the nature or the natural
property of it: For there is no gift nor quality that may hurt nature, but
that gift that is against nature. But the supernatural gift is neither
unnatural, neither yet against nature: therefore it cannot hurt nor impair
nature. And my reason is this; Those gifts that decore and beautify nature,
they cannot hurt nor impair nature: But all supernatural gifts beautify and
decore nature; Therefore they cannot take away either nature, or yet the
natural property.

They leave us not so: but out of this doctrine of Paul, concerning the
glorification of the body, they draw an objection to press us withal. Paul
grants that a glorified body is a spiritual body* but a spiritual body
is an invisible body; Therefore a glorified body is invisible: and by
consequence, the body of Christ is invisible.

Though ^he argument be not formal: yet to be short I deny their assumption:
for if there were no more but that word, bod^e, that word might be an argument
that the spiritual body is not invisible. But yet to open the matter more
clearly, according to the meaning of Saint Paul in that place: Saint Paul in a
word as it were, in the 44. verse of that Chapter, shows the change that
shall be in the qualities of the body by the resurrection. For he says, that
our natural bodies shall become spiritual bodies: and then in the next verse
immediately following, he expounds these two qualities: for in the 45. verse,
That is called a natural body, says he, which is maintained and quickened by a
living soul only, such as Adams was. And again, that is said to be a
spiritual body, which together besides the soul is quickened with a far
more excellent virtue, to wit, with the Spirit of God, which descends from
Christ the second Adam unto us. Then according unto this ground I answer with
Augustine ad Constantium: As the natural body is not a soul, but a body:
even so the spiritual body is not said to be a soul, but a body. And by
consequent, it is not invisible. For the further explaining of this head, I
will give them only one knot to loose, and so end this point. Then I reason:
If therefore Christ's body is naturally and really in the Lords Supper, because
that it is glorified: It follows consequ^ntly, that when it was not
glorified, it could not be really present. But it was not glorified when this
supper was first instituted. Therefore it was not really present in the bread
at Christ's first Supper. If his body was not really present in the bread at
the first Supper, it cannot be naturally present now. For whatsoever they use
now in the administration of their Supper or of their Mass, (call it as you
will) according to their own confession, they use it according to the
ordinance, form, and manner that Christ Jesus himself used in his first
Supper: For they say plainly in their disputation at Poyssie, and in all the
rest of their works, That Christ Jesus first of all observed that form which
they use in their Mass, and left it to his Apostles and to their successors,
that they should do the like. And so by their own words they have entangled
themselves, and crucified their Mass: what can they answer to this? They will
not stand dumb I am sure: for maintenance of their religion they must say some
thing. Thus they say, That though the body of Christ which was locally present
with the rest of his disciples, was not glorified, yet the body which he
exhibited in the bread was glorified. They might as well have held their peace,
and say nothing. For mark the words of the text as they are written, Luke
22.19. where it is said, And he took the bread, and when he had given thanks,
he brake it, and gave to them saying, This is my body which is given for you:
and Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 11.24. has these words, Take, eat, this is my body,
which is broken for you. This relative, which, is relative to the body which
was exhibited in the bread: for according to their own confession, those words
are pronounced upon the bread and directed unto it. But that same body was
given and broken unto us, that is to say, crucified and broken with anguish and
dolors. Then I reason after this sort: To be crucified and broken with anguish
and dolors, can no ways agree and accord with a glorified body: But the body
that Christ exhibited in the bread, is said of the Evangelists, to be crucified
and broken for us: Ergo, that body was not glorified.

Now last of all they are not yet content, but say, Christ can make the bread
his body; and therefore his body is really present. That Christ can make the
bread his body, we grant: for Christ being God, can do whatsoever he will: only
let them show, That Christ will make of real bread, his real flesh, and then
this controversy will end. Christ indeed makes the bread his body, not really
but sacramentally: For Christ has not a body made of bread; his body was
made once of the pure substance of his blessed Mother: Another body then this,
or oftener made then once, has he ^one: wherefore all doctrine that teaches
Christ's body to be made of bread is impious and heretical. The Papists
doctrine of real presence teaches, that Christ's body in the Sacrament is made
of bread, by changing the bread into his body through consecration: wherefore
we may bodly and truly conclude; That their doctrine of real presence is both
wicked and heretical. Now to conclude this head: I beseech them, seeing that
reason fails them, that they fight not against God for maintenance of a lie
how old soever it be, (for the devil is old enough, and yet he could never
change his nature.) But let them rather glorify God in confessing these
speeches to be Sacramental.

Then what is the reason and ground wherefore the Papists pull down the
substance of the body of Christ and the blood of Christ, The reason that moves
the Papists to think that Christ's body cannot be present in the Sacrament,
except it be really, carnally, and substa^tially present.
and make the very substance to be corporally, really, and substantially in the
Sacrament? The reason is this, Because they cannot see by their natural
judgment, nor can understand by their natural wit, the truth of this to wit,
how Christ's flesh and blood ca^ be present in the Sacrament, except he be
present to their corporal mouth and stomach. If they had the light to inform
them, that Christ might be present in the Sacrament, and not to the hand, to
the mouth, or stomach, they would never think of such a monstrous presence as
they imagine to be there. But being destitute of the spiritual light, they
follow their natural reason, and make a natural and carnal presence. So that
ye have this lesson to nore from hence: Observation.
There is no man that has not the spirit of God to understand this word, This
is my body, but out of question he will do as the Papists do that is, he will
vmderstand it carnally: And so they misknowing the right meaning of it, it is
no marvel though and we differ in this matter.

For will you ask of a Papist, first if the true body of Christ be there, or
if the true flesh and blood of Christ be there; he will say, it is there: will
you ask him wherein? The diverse opinions concerning the presence of the body
of Christ in the Sa^rament.
he will say in and under the accidents of the bread and wine, under the hew
and roundnesse of the bread: will you ask him again, by what instrument it is
received? He will tell you by the mouth and stomach of the body: So this is
their gross understanding of the body and blood of Christ. Will you ask of
the Vbiqueter, if the true body of Christ be present? he will say, it is: will
you ask, if it be in, with, or under the bread? he will answer, It is in the
bread, contentiue, that is, the bread contains it: will you ask him to what
instrument it is offered? he will answer, that the body of Christ is offered
to the mouth of our body, and that the blood of Christ is offered to the mouth
of our body, as the Papists do: Will you know of us how Christ Jesus his true
body and blood is present? We will say, that they are spiritually present,
really present, that is, present in the Lords Supper, and not in the bread: we
will not say, that his true flesh is present to the hand, or to the mouth of
our bodies; but we say it is spiritually present, that is, present unto thy
spirit and faithful soul: yea, even as present inwardly unto thy soul, as
the bread and wine are present unto thy body outwardly. Will you ask then, if
the body and blood of Christ Jesus be present in the Lords Supper? We answer in
a word; They are present, but not in the bread and wine, nor in the accidents,
nor substance of bread and wine. And we make Christ to be present in this
Sacrament, because he is present to my soul, to my spirit, and faith. Also we
make him present in the Lords Supper, because I have him in his promise, This
is my body; which promise is present to my faith: and the nature of faith is to
make things that are absent in themselves, yet present. And therefore se^ing he
is both present by faith in his promise and present by the virtue of his holy
Spirit, who can say but that he is present in this Sacrament?

But yet the word would be explained, How a thing is said to be present and
absent.
what we mean by the word, present, how a thing is said to be present, and
absent. And knowing this, ye shall find all the matter easy. I say, things are
said to be present, as they are perceived by any outward or inward sense, and
as they are perceived by any of the senses, so are they present, and the
further they be perceived the further present: and by what sense any thing is
perceived, to that sense it is present. As if it be outwardly perceived by an
outward sense, that thing is outwardly present. As for example, if it be
perceived by the outward sight of the eye, by the outward hearing of the ear,
by the outward feeling of the hands or taste of the mouth, it is outwardly
present. Or if any thing be perceived by the inward eye, by the inward taste
and feeling of the soul, this thing cannot be outwardly present, but it must
be spiritually and inwardly present to the soul. So I say every thing is
present, as it is perceived. So that if you perceive not a thing outwardly, it
is outwardly absent: and if ye perceive not a thing inwardly, it is inwardly
absent. It is not distance of place that makes a thing absent. nor propinquity
of place that makes a thing present: but it is only the perceiving of any
thing by any of thy senses that makes a thing present; and the not perceiving
that makes a thing absent: I say, though the thing it self were never so far
distant, if thou perceive it by thine outward sense, it is present unto thee.
As for example, my body and the Sun are as far distant in place, as the
heaven is from the earth; and yet this distance stays not the Suns presence
from me: why? because I perceive the Sun by mine eye and other senses; I
feel it and perceive it by the heat, by the light, and by his brightness. So
if a thing were never so far distant, if we have senses to perceive the same,
it is present to us. Then the distance of place makes not a thing absent from
thee, if thou have senses to perceive it: likewise the neerenes of place makes
not a thing present, be it never so near, if thou have not senses to perceive
it. As for example, if the Sun shine upon thine eyes, if thou be blind it is
not present to thee, because thou can not perceive it. A sweet tune will
never be present to a deaf ear, though it be sung in the ear of that man,
because he has not a sense to perceive it: and a well told tale will never be
present to a fool, because he cannot understand it, nor has no judgment to
perceive it: So it is not the nearenesse nor distance of place that makes any
thing present or absent, but only the perceiving or not perceiving of it.

Now the word being made clear, How the body of Christ is present.
ask you how the body of Christ is present? To give our judgment in a word,
as ye have heard from time to time, he is present, not to the outward senses,
but to the inward senses, which is faith wrought in the soul. For this action
of the Sacrament and of the Lords Supper, is partly corporal, and partly
spiritual: I call this action partly corporal, not in respect only that the
objects, that is, that bread and wine are corporal, but also in respect my
mouth whereunto these things are offered, the instrument whereby, and the
manner how these things are received, are all corporal and natural. I ^all
the same action again, partly spiritual, not only in respect of Christ Jesus
who is the heavenly and spiritual thing of the Sacrament, but also in respect
of my soul whereunto Christ is offered and given, in respect the instrument
whereby, and the manner how he is received, are all spiritual: for I get not
Christ corporally but spiritually. So in these respects I call this action
partly corporal and partly spiritual.

Now confound not these two sorts of actions, the corporal and natural
signs, with the spiritual thing signified thereby: again, confound not the
mouth of the body with the mouth of the soul. Thirdly, confound not the
outward manner of receiving by the hand of the body with the spiritual manner
of receiving by the hand of the soul. And so it shall be exceeding clear to
see, that each thing shall be present to the own instrument; that is, the
body of Christ which is the spiritual thing signified, shall be present to
the spiritual mouth and hand: and the bread and wine which are the corporal
signs, are present to the corporal mouth and hand. Then how is any object
present? A corporal object is corporally present: and an inward object is
inwardly present. Of what nature is the thing signified? It is of an heavenly
nature. Then ask you how he is present; He i^ spiritually and heavenly present
to the soul, and the mouth of the soul, which is faith. For it were a
preposterous thing to make the thing signified present to thy belly, or to the
mouth or eye of thy body; for if that were so, it should not be spiritually
present: because every thing is present as it agrees in it own nature. Is it
a bodily thing? it is bodily present: and if it b^ a heavenly thing, it is
spiritually present. So I think no man can doubt how the body of Christ is
present: he is not ^arnally present, but spiritually present to my soul, and
to faith in my soul. Thus far concerning the manner of his presence.

The last point in controversy betwixt us and the Papists.
Now the last part of our difference is this: we have to consider to whom the
words ought to be directed and pronounced: For we and the Papists differ in
this last point; we say that the words ought to be directed and pronounced unto
the people, to the faithful communicants. They on the contrary say, that the
words ought not to be directed nor pronounced to the people, but to the
elements, and not to be clearly pronounced, but whispered on the elements; So
that if they be spoken to the people, or spoken openly, their charm avails
not. Now I say, that as this holy action is perverted by them in all the rest,
so they pervert it in this point also, in speaking that to the dumb elements
which they should speak to the people of God: For I shall prove it clearly by
three arguments taken out of the Scriptures, that the words ought not to be
spoken to the bread, but to the people of God.

And first I say, the promises of mercy and grace ought to be directed and
pronounced to them in whom the Lord performs them and makes them effectual:
But so it is that the promises of mercy and grace are performed, and made
effectual not in bread and wine, but in faithful men and women: Therefore
these promises should be directed to faithful men and women. Now here is the
promise of mercy and graces: This is my body which is broken for you: and
this promise is made to no other thing but to the faithful, and so to them
only it ought to be directed. Secondly, we have to consider, that this
Sacrament seals up a covenant of grace and mercy. Now with whom will God make
his covenant of mercy and grace? will he make a covenant with a piece of bread
or any dumb element: There is no man will enter into covenant with his
servant, much less will enter inter covenant with a dumb element. So in
respect this Sacrament seals up a covenant, this covenant of necessity must be
made with a faithful soul, and in no wise with the dumb element: and
therefore these words cannot be directed to the elements. Thirdly, look to ye
end wherefore this Sacrament was appointed. Is it not to lead us to Christ? Is
it not to nourish my faith in Christ? Is it not to nourish me in a constant
persuasion of the Lords mercy in Christ? Was this Sacrament appointed to make
the elements Gods? No, for if ye mark Gods purpose in this institution, ye
shall find that Christ has not ordained this institution to nobilitate the
elements, to favor and respect the elements which were Bread and Wine
yesterday, to be Gods to day. We on the contrary say plainly, that the
institution of Christ respects not the elements to alter their nature. Indeed
it is appointed to alter us, to change us, and to make us more and more
spiritual, and to sanctify the elements to our use. But the special end is
this, to make us holy, and more and more ^o grow up in a sure faith in Christ,
and not to alter the elements nor to make them gods. And therefore by all these
three Arguments, it is evident that the words ought nor to be directed to the
elements, but to the people and faithful communicants.

Now to come to an end: Conclusion, with an exhortation.
There is one thing without the which we cannot profit, let us discourse never
so long upon the right understanding of the Sacrament. Ye see now how all that
is spoken concerning the Sacrament, is grounded and depends upon faith. Let a
man have faith be it never so little, he shall get some hold of Christ, and
some insight in the understanding of this Sacrament: but wanting faith, though
a man endeavor himself to make the Sacraments never so sensible, it is not
possible that he can get any hold of Christ, or any insight of him. For without
faith we cannot be Christians: we can neither get a sight of God, nor feel God
in Christ without faith.

Faith is the only thing that translateth our souls out of that death and
damnation wherein we were conceived and borne, and planteth life in us. So the
whole study and endeavor of a Christian should tend to this; To crave that the
Lord in his mercy would illuminate his mind with the eye of faith, and that he
would kindle in his heart a love of faith, and work in his heart a thirst and
desire of the object of faith, and more and more to thirst and hunger for the
food of faith that nourishes us to life eternal.

Without this faith (how-soeuer the natural man understanding naturally, would
flatter himself) surely there is no blessedness; but all his life is more
then terrible misery. For whatsoever it be that flatters and pleases thee
now, be it a thought or motion of the mind, or an action of the body that
pleases thee now without faith, the same very motion, cogitation, or action,
shall torment thee hereafter.

So without faith it is not possible to please God; and whatsoever pleases not
God, is done to torment thee. Therefore crave mercy for whatsoever motion,
cogitation, or action, wherein thou have offended God; or for the same God
shall offend and torment thee. And to eschew the offense of God there is no
means but by true faith; therefore the study of a Christian should be to grow
in faith.

Now by hearing of the word thou gettest faith; and by receiving this Sacrament
thou obtainest the increase of faith; and having faith, the receiving of the
Sacrament shall be fruitful: but without faith thou eatest thine own
condemnation. Then the whole study of a Christian is to get faith; and this
faith cannot be obtained with idleness, but by earnest prayer: therefore let
every one of us fall down, and crave earnestly this faith and the increase of
it, whereby we may be worthy receivers of this blessed Sacrament; and that for
the righteous merits of Christ Jesus: To whom with the Father and the holy
Spirit, be all honor, praise and glory, both now and ever, Amen.

THE SIXTH SERMON UPON THE 38. CHAP. OF the Prophecy of ISAIAH, preached in
the presence of the Kings Majesty.
ISAIAH 38. 1 About that time was Hezekiah sick unto the death, and the
Prophet Isaiah the son of Amos came unto him, and said unto him, Thus says
the Lord, Put thine house in an order, for thou shall die, and not live.

2 And Hezekiah turned his face unto the wall, and prayed to the Lord.

3 And said, I beseech thee, Lord, remember now how I have walked before thee
in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy
sight; and Hezekiah wept sore.


IN these words which I have presently read (well-beloved in Christ Jesus,) the
heavy disease whereinto this godly King fell, is at length described, and the
manner of his behavior under this disease is well set down. It pleased the
Lord to exercise this godly King with this heavy tentation amongst many more.
And suppose it be true that diseases are common to all flesh, yet the manner
how to behave our selves under diseases, is not common. Therefore let all flesh
take heed to the several parts of this history, that they may learn so to
behave themselves in the day of their misery, that taking up this Kings
behavior, they may in the end obtain his comfort.

Heads to be entreated in this Sermon.
long continuance and diuturnity of the plague; in the judgment of man and in
the judgment of him that is afflicted, sometime it shall come to pass that he
shall think himself in a worse case then any of the reprobate. But howsoever
it be so esteemed in the heart and judgment of man, yet it is far otherwise
in the judgment of God. For there lies hid one thing in the heart of God
concerning us that are his children; and an other thing concerning the
Reprobate, in such sort, that suppose affliction be common to us and them; yet
the cause from whence the affliction proceeds, is not common, not the end
whereunto it tends. For as to us our affliction sloweth from the favor, love
and mercy of God in Christ Jesus, and tends to our great profit and
commodity; to wit, that we being corrected here, should not perish hereafter
with the wicked world. But as for the affliction of the reprobate, it flows
from the hot wrath and indignation of God upon them, he as a righteous judge
beginning their punishment here which shall last for ever. So affliction that
is unto them a part of his justice, unto us is a merciful correction. The
Prophet Isaiah in his 27. chap. expresses this matter so lively, that I think
there is no part of Scripture in the which there is greater comfort. In the 4.
and 7. verses of that chapter he says to the Church, I am not, says he, in
fury, I am not in rage; suppose I strike thee, yea suppose I beat thee, says
he, I strike not thee as I strike them that strike thee, I slay not thee as I
them that slay thee: for in correcting thee I purge thee from thine iniquity,
in striking thee I remove thy sins from thee, but I do not so with the rest.
First lesson.
Then the first lesson that ye have to learn here is this, Measure not the
favor of God by any external thing in the earth, whether it be prosperity or
adversity.

The second thing that ye have to learn here, is this, Second lesson.
ye see Kings may have the Plague. There is no Prince in the earth exempted
from the judgment of God, when he pleases to apply them. Thus far for the
name of the disease.

The second thing that is noted here, is the time when the King fell into this
disease: The time when the King fell into this disease
there is no certain time set down here; but the time specified is relative
to the last history: It is relative to that time when the King of Ashur took
arms against him, which was the 13. year of his reign. So it was the 14.
year of his reign that he fell into th^s disease: for this godly King reigned
29. years; 15. of them were given him after his disease: In the 14. year of
his reign the wars began, and this time is relative to that history; so it
must be in the 14. of his reign that he fell into that disease, whether the
disease was after the siege, or during the same the judgment of the learned
differs: although in 2. Chron. 32. chap. it appears that he fell into this
disease after the siege and time of his delivery. For we read in that history,
that the King in the mean time of this siege, was building up the ruinous
walls, was stopping the conduites of the waters, was sending messengers to
Isaiah, and was resorting to the Temple. These were all arguments of a
wholesome and well disposed King, and there is no argument of infirmity here So
it appears, that it was after the siege that he fell into this disease.

Observation.
Now take heed where my note rises; he is scarsly freed from the fearful
wars, when he falls into a terrible plague. Doctrine.
We see then, that the estate of the godliest and best Princes, is to be
subject to continual tentation, grief and vexation, so that the issue of one
trouble is the beginning of another. So it pleases the Lord to exercise them.
And to what end I pray you? To the end that this life, with the pleasures and
glory of it, may become bitter to their taste; and so they may be moved to
seek for a better. And this lesson appertains to all Christians: for if thou
be a Christian, thou must look for trouble, of necessity thou must take up thy
daily cross and follow Christ. As for the fed carcasses of this world, the
Lord in his righteous judgment has appointed them for slaughter. But if thou
be one of them whom he has not appointed for slaughter, thou must be subject
to a continual exercise, either in soul or in body, in family or fame, one
way or other, thou must be subject to a continual exercise. For there is no
way to pierce the clouds, but by a continual tribulation. And seeing it is so,
it becomes us not to have our hearts here gruntling upon this earth; but it
becomes us to have our hearts hoissed and our minds lifted up to the heavens
where our Master reigns in glory, and to use the things of this world as
they may best further us to the next world: or otherwise, terrible is the
judgment and incommoditie that the things of this world shall bring upon us.
Thus far concerning the time.

As to the greatness of the disease, I find it noted in the verses which I
have read by sundry things: First, the Prophet shows the greatness of the
disease, whereas he says, he was sick even to ye death. Secondly, the
greatness of his disease is aggrauated, while as the Prophet gets command in
the name of the Lord to assure him of death. And thirdly, the byle it self
which broke out, was deadly, and shows also the weight of the disease.

Now in this extremity the Prophet visits him, The Prophet visits the
King, and inioyneth two things to him.
and in the name of the Lord enioyneth him two things: first, to take order
with his house: next, to prepare him for death, and to pull his heart the more
from all present things and all earthly comfort, assures him of death shortly:
and for his further assurance, he doubleth the word, saying, Thou shall die,
and not live. It is so hard a thing to have the hearts of Kings pulled from
their wealth, and from their glory.

The Prophet in visiting of the King, The duty of the Pastor toward his
diseased brethren.
learneth us a point of duty toward our diseased brethren, a point whereunto
we are bound by nature, by charity, and by all sorts of laws; but chiefly we
who have the care of souls, and represent Esaias in our office, at this time
chiefly we are bound to visit our brethren; for at such times the Devil is
most busy, the bodies of men are abstracted from the hearing of the preached
word, and old sins begin to revive and return to their memories, and
therefore at that time there is great need of comfort. We are also informed
here by the Prophet how to propound our comfort, lest we spend our time in idle
and unprofitable talk, as worldly men do: To wit, first of all that we bid the
patient take order with his house, that is, make his testament, and lay aside
the worldly part, that so his heart may be ready to go when the Lord calls
on his soul. The most part of the world are so negligent in this point of
duty, that there are very few that have their heart free when the Lord
knocks: but they are compelled to leave their heart behind them where their
treasure is, or where they love best, and that because they set themselves here
as in a permanent City. And in their life time they will not so much as once
think of death, but dream to themselves length of days: and which I wonder
most of; there is not a man about them that will do so much as once to put them
in mind of death, yea not when the Lord begins to strike; but some say, it
will trouble him and make him heavy; others come in and say, they would do it,
but they cannot for tears and sorrow: The Doctor says, Nature is strong
enough, be of good comfort. So that if the Pastor leave this point of duty,
there is not a friend almost that begins to admonish a man until his
outward senses begin to leave him. Now as it becomes the Pastor to propound
this, so it becomes the Patient to obey it: for this command is not given by
man, but by God. For Esaias gives it in the Name of God: and it is not only
given to Kings, but it reaches to all masters of families whosoever: for the
Lord has willed them to have a care of their families, not only in their life
time, but in their death also, that by this means all occasion of quarrels and
debates might be cut off after their death. The Patriarchs, the godly Kings,
they have left their example registered concerning this point; so that I will
not insist at this present further in it. Now the worldly part being set aside,
and the conscience put at rest, the soul is prepared to hear of death: and so
the Prophet comes in the second place with the denunciation of death. Indeed
Esaias in his denunciation appears to be very strict, but how strict soever he
was, he has his warrant: We have not the like warrant, therefore we ought not
to use the like strictness toward the Patient. Always generally we ought to
exhort him to vnbu^den his conscience, to disburden his soul, and to make
(...) whenever it shall please the Lord to call (...) the chief points of
our visitation stande^h (...) two: first, to bid the Patient lay aside the
(...): and next, to prepare for the heavenly part.

Yet ere I leave the denunciation, the^e ^ppeareth in the denunciation three
faults to concu^^^* The first omission that appears to be in this
denunciation.
First it seems that the Prophet in his denunciation (...) over rigorous
against so godly a King, and handl^^ ^he King over extremely in this heavy
disease: for he cu^^ from him at the first, all hope of this present life. He
does far otherwise then our Doctors of medicine; for if they see any certain
sign of death, they will not show it to the Patient himself, but to some of
his friends: he on the contrary denounces death to himself, constantly
affirming that he shall die. Now this appears to be very hard: But I answer,
if this denunciation had been used against an Ethnic or a licentious liver,
indeed it had been an hard denunciation. For as to an Ethnic who has his hope
only in the earth, it is not possible that he can make his hope to mount above
the earth, so that he thinks when he is gone, all is gone to him. Secondly,
this denunciation would appear hard and extreme to them that live according
to the flesh; for o how bitter is death, says Solomon, to them that live
according to the flesh! And I pray you what is the cause that death is so
bitter unto them? Because in the agony of death they feel another thing then
this violent separation of the soul from the body: for beside this, they
feel a conscience of iniquity gnawing them: they feel also the heavy wrath
of God kindled against their sin and iniquity, and the sense of this wrath
strikes such a horror in their souls, that at the very memory of death they
tremble. Therefore I say to such kind of persons as those, this would have been
a hard kind of threatening: But unto Christians, and namely to such a godly King
as this was, it was no hard language. For as to us that we Christians, we must
not look on death as she is in her own nature: But we must look upon her as
she is made to us, by the benefit and mercy in Christ Jesus. And looking on
death this way, is not death spoiled of her sting, is she not sanctified to us
in the death of Christ, and is she not made to us an entry to everlasting
felicity, is she not a returning from our banishment, and passing to our
everlasting heaven? So looking on death not in the own nature, but as she is
made to us in Christ, at the voice of death we ought to lift up our eyes and be
glad, that the redemption of our soul is so near; when the separation shall be
made, and the Lord shall call on us, we ought to rejoice, seeing he has made
death to us, a further step to joy, and a means of a stricter conjunction. But
it is not possible that words can make men prepare them for death. The readiest
way to eschew the horror of death is to think upon death, and yet
notwithstanding of all the great spectacles that we see daily, we are never an
hair moved. Always the readiest way, as I have said, is, to take up such a
life presently as may best agree with that life which we aspire unto. Thou must
take up a new course, thou must conform thy life here with the life to come,
that an harmony being betwixt the two lives, death may be to thee an entry to
that everlasting joy. Thou must bid all thy foul affections good night, for
thou and they cannot come both to heaven: Thou must bid sin whereunto thou
art a slave and an ordinary servant, farewell; for except thou be this way
altered, thou must not think that death shall be to thee a passage to heaven.
Then learn ye that would have death pleasant, so to rule and square this life,
that it may agree in some measure with the life to come.

The second omission.
The second omission that appears in this denunciation is this, ^t seems to
be superfluous: for why? the kind of plague assured him of his death, the
Physicions assured him, the weakness of his own nature assured him that he
should die. So the denunciation seems to be superfluous; but it is not
superfluous in deed, if we shall examine our own nature, how loath all men are
to die; for we know by experience, that there are some who will scarcely take
death to them, even at the last gasp; and what love we have to this life, it
is known to all men. Therefore the Prophet so strictly denounced death, that
by this strict denunciation, the King may be moved to lift his hope above
nature and all natural means, and of God only to seek support where nature
had denied him: And so the denunciation is not superfluous, it is the ready way
to make him run unto the right way.

Now the last omission that appears in this denunciation is this. The Lord
seems by his Prophet to dissemble, The third omission.
for is not this an high dissimulation, to say that he shall die, and yet
notwithstanding to mean the contrary? So there appears a great dissimulation
on Gods part denounced by his Prophet, that he should die instantly: and yet he
was of mind that he should live fifteen years after this. To answer unto
this, this general must be laid down for a ground, that Unto all the
threatenings and promises of God there is a condition annexed, which condition
is either secretly enclosed in the promise or threatening, or else it is openly
expressed. That this is true, see Ezechiel the 18.1. and Dan, 4.27, this
condition has place.

Then this being the nature of the threatenings of God, this terrible
denunciation how terrible soever it appear, yet it has a condition in it, to
wit, Except he repent, except he seek me, and make his recourse to me by
prayer. For out of question, the Lord was of mind to punish Nini^e, except
they had prevented him by repentance. So I say, all the promises and
threatenings of God have a condition annexed, which is either openly expressed,
or covertly to be understood. And therefore the denunciation has a secret
condition, and this condition made the King to live: for suppose it be simply
propounded, yet it is not to bring him to despair, but only to make him the
more instant to s^eke grace and health at the hands of the living God. Now have
I touched the greatness, the time, and the kind of the disease. Let us make
our profit thereof; for it is necessary that this doctrine be applied to our
times.

Then I say, praised be the living God, our King is not diseased, but surely
his country is heavily diseased; for so long as Papists and Papistry remain in
it, so long as these pestilent men remain in it, and so long as these floods
of iniquity which flows from the great men, remain, there is an heavy
judgment hanging over this Country. And in my conscience, I cannot but look
for a heavy judgment until these things be removed. There is no great man,
but whatsoever likes him, he thinks it lawful: And not only is this in
this part of the land, but in all other parts of this Nation gross iniquities
are committed; and the Church is made a prey to all men, there is such disdain
and contempt of the word in the whole estate. Except these things be purged, I
cannot look but the Lord shall raise some if it were out of the furthest
Indies to plague this land. Albeit I doubt not but the liberty of the Church
here, and the sobs and sighs of the godly here, have delayed the judgment
from the whole land: yea, I am assured of it, and therefore I pray God that he
may so work in your heart (Sir) by grace, yt ye may put to your hand to purge
your part of the I Will. The Lord of his mercy establish your heart by grace, that
for no man's pleasure ye communicate with other men's sins. Three manner of
ways we are said to communicate with other men's sins. First, when both with
heart and hand we do one thing with them. Secondly, when we consent with our
heart only. Thirdly, when we ouersee where we should reprove, and forbear
where we should punish And in this way Magistrates are only guilty. Thus far
for the application. Now I go forward to my text.

The last thing that we have to speak of, is the manner of the Kings behavior
under so terrible a disease; The King, behavior in this disease.
we have in the second three verses, his behavior lively expressed. As to his
behavior, I speak only of it as the text speaks; I doubt not but he
reasoned otherwise, and gave other answers to Isaiah: But I content me with
that which the text says. Then in his behavior we see, he retyreth himself,
first to God by prayer, and to testify that he prays from his heart, it is
said that he weeped bitterly. Surely this is an evident argument that his
prayer flowed from his heart, and was indicted by the right Spirit; for if God
leave us to our own natural spirit, we neither know what to pray, nor how to
pray: But as it is said, Romans 8.26. it is the Spirit of God that inditeth our
prayer, that raises these sighs and these sobbes, that makes our heart to
melt in those tears that are pleasing to him. So it appears here by the
earnestness of his prayer, that it flowed from the right fountain, and
therefore it can not be but pleasing to God.

This prayer and manner of his behavior, The Kings beh^uiour makes us certain
of his faith and repentance.
assures us of two things; first, it makes us certain of his faith; Secondly,
of his repentance: I say, it makes us certain of his faith. For how is it
possible that I can crave any thing at the hands of him in whom I trust not? Or
how can we call upon him (says the Apostle) in whom we believe not? Then
Prayer to God is an evident argument, that we trust in God. So I say, it is an
argument of his faith, and where faith is, of necessity repentance must be; for
these two companions, Faith and Repentance, are inseparable. As Peter
testifies in the Acts, 15. chap. For so far as the heart is purged, so
far is the life renewed: so faith, and newness of life going together, faith
and repentance must also go together. Then his prayer testifies his faith, his
faith testifies his repentance, his repentance testifies of the secret
condition enclosed in the threatening; and the condition being fulfilled, the
threatening can not strike. So by this deduction it may appear, that suppose
the Prophet denounced very strictly, yet under the denunciation there was a
condition, which condition takes effect in the King. Thus far concerning his
behavior.

Now as to his gesture, I shall be short in it: The Kings gesture in his
disease.
It is said that he turned him to the wall, he did this out of question for two
respects. First, that he might weep the more bitterly: for it is said, that he
powered forth his soul in tears. And so he desired not that he should be
seen. Secondly, he turned him to the wall, to the end that his eyes should not
carry his mind from God. For we know easily, that when any of us is making our
prayer in any public place, there is no object that falls before our senses,
but it will draw us from that communing which we have with God. So it is
necessary for them yt would pray earnestly, to withdraw them unto a secret
place, according as our master commanded his Disciples to enter into their
secret chamber. Thus far for his gesture.

The words of his prayer.
As to the words of the prayer, they are set down in the third vers^: in his
prayer he suppresseth his petition (for his petition is the prorogation of his
days;) according to the custom of the godly men of old, as Daniel 9.4. And in
place of the petition he sets down the reason why his petition should be
heard. As to the reasons, they are three in number.

Remember Lord, that I have walked in thy truth. I have walked with an upright
heart. I have done that which is good in thy sight. In all these three it would
appear, that he is boasting of his own merits: for the words appear to be
full of ostentation and pride. But to answer to this, the Lord measures not
ostentation and pride by words, but by the heart from whence the words
proceed: A broken, a contrite and humble heart, is ever acceptable to him, use
what form of words you will. And a proud heart is ever displeasing to him, use
what form of words it will.

Now what is he doing here? he is not making a vaunt or bragging of his works
only; he is showing to God, yt howsoever his plague was great, yet he had a
good conscience, the testimony whereof vpheld him: In such sort, that suppose
all outward things said that God was angry at him, yet he could not be
persuaded in his conscience but he was his friend.

And therefore in his whole prayer he reasons as though he would say after
this manner: Lord, thou know that the profane men of this country will
think it an extreme curse that I shall die without children, and by this they
will esteem the deeds to be accu^sed which I have done before: they will
curse and damn the religion that I have reformed, and the order of thy house
which I have begun. And yet notwithstanding I am assured in my conscience, that
I have the warrant of thy Law in all that I have done: For I sought not my
self, but thee only; therefore (Lord) deliver me. So this kind of reasoning
comes neither of ostentation nor of pride. Now as to my self (would he say,)
when I examine my doings, I find my conscience so pure, that in all my
proceedings I had a good warrant; and in all my doings I sought not mine own
particular, but thy glory: And therefore Lo^d remember me, and take not my
life from me, that I be not a stumbling block to the weak ones, and a
rejoicing to mine enemies. This is the only thing which we a^e taught here; We
see this good King when all worldly comfort fails him, and in his greatest
extremity, he reposeth himself upon the testimony of a good conscience; this
is the only thing that sustaineth him, this is the only thing that comfort
him, and wherein now in the very instant of his death he has to glory. Surely
when I read through the Bible, I find that all the servants of God in their
greatest trouble, had recourse to this testimony of consci^nce. Ye see Moses
when he has to do with Core, Dathan, and Abiram, he ha^h recourse to the
testimony of his conscience. Ye see David when he has to do with Saul, he
has recourse to this testimony of conscience. Ye see Nehemiah makes recourse
to this: Ye see Daniel makes recourse to this, 6.23. Dan. 6.23. 1. Cor. 4.
And the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 4. makes his recourse to this, and says, I
pass very little for your judgment or any man's judgment; my glory is the
testimony of mine own conscience. And the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, in his last Chapter: I am assured (says he) that I have kept a good
conscience in all things. So go through all the servants of God, and ye shall
see they have had ever recourse to this testimony of conscience; and blessed
is that man that i^ not condemned in his doings by his own conscience. For if
we are not able to eschew the condemnation of our own heart, how shall we be
able to eschew the condemnation of God, who sees all the secrets of the heart?
So that man is more then blessed that is not condemned of his own heart. For
as to this conscience it is a faithful pledge keeper: the pawnes yt it
receives it renders; of good turns it gives a joyful testimony, of evil
turns it gives a bitter testimony. And suppose the most part of our deeds be
now covered from the eye of man, and her testimony for the most part hid from
our self; yet there is a day coming which now is at hand, in the which all
these things that are now hid under darkness shall come to light, and the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. The books of conscience shall be
cast open, and he that brings not in these books, the discharge of his
sins in register, purchased by the blood of Christ Jesus whereby our
consciences are only washen from these dead works; he that brings not this
discharge with him, to him shall his whole sins present themselves. So that
not only shall he be judged by the sentence of the righteous Judge, but his
own conscience which in this life foreiudged him, shall condemn him there,
and all the Angels of God with his elect children shall justify his judgment:
Therefore it is time we had now our discharge registered.

Now would God I might obtain this of the office bearers in Church or Policy,
that they would now cast them in their life, to have the approbation of their
conscience in the time of their death. The Lord grant it to all them that seek
to serve him: But specially, the Lord make you (Sir) so to walk in your life,
that you may have a joyful testimony of your conscience in your death; that
being approved with your own conscience, and the testimony of God within your
conscience, in the mouth of these two faithful witnesses your salvation may be
sure, not in your self, but in the blood of Christ Jesus, whose mercy is
only our merit.

As this is desired in him, so it is required in the rest of the
office-bearers: Lord grant that they may follow such a trade of life, that in
their death their conscience may make mention of their deeds to their joy. Thus
far for this part of his behavior.

Now rests one thing to speak, and so I shall end: T^ke up the manner of his
behavior under this disease, he is straightened with the extremity of his
disease on the one side, and with the Lords threatening on the other: what does
he in this strait pinch? He se^keth by prayer to the same God that struck him,
and now by his P^ophet threatens him. This is wonderful: A wonderful thing
to have recour^e unto the same God who smites.
for if he had had to do with any other person, as namely, if he had had to do
with the King of Ashur as before, it had been an easy matter to have retired
to God: But now having to do with God, and God apparently being his enemy, it
is wonderful that he should have recouse to God. This is a notable faith in
him, for he hops against hope, he runs to that same God that smites him.
So notwithstanding that he threatens him with death, yet he runs to him,
and he appealeth from his justice to mercy in the merits of Christ: he
appealeth from God as a righteous Judge, unto him as a Redeemer in Christ, and
his appellation is heard. For, as we shall hear hereafter (by Gods grace) he
is healed: Thus far concerning his repentance. Now as to the prorogation of
his days, the question might rise, whether it was lawful for him to crave it
or not. I shall touch it but in general; and first I say, in Hezechias person
it is very lawful: for he lacked posterity, and in this the promise of God
had not taken effect in him, and so it was lawful for him to seek the
accomplishment of the Lords promise made to his father David: and also the
reformation of the Church was but new begun, the commonwealth was not as yet
established, and all these craved the presence of the King. So if we look to
the particular, in him it was lawful. I come to the general, it is lawful at
some times to seek at God prorogation of days, and my reason is this; Length
of days is one of the greatest blessings temporal that we have, as in that
promise annexed to the commandment appears. And as the Apostle in the 2.
Chap. 27. to the Philip. when he makes mention of the disease of Epaphroditus,
he says, No doubt he was sick very near unto death, but the Lord had mercy
on him, and not only upon him, but on me also. So he counts the prorogation
of days a special mercy. And there is no mercy nor benefit of God but it
may be craved, so that it be craved to the right end. For we directing our life
to the glory of God, and using it as Pilgrims and strangers seeking our home,
and having it ready to lay down in the hands of God at his pleasure, why is it
not lawful to crave it? Indeed John in his 12. Chap. 25. ver. seems to
gainsay this, where he says, He that loves this life shall lose it. This knot
may be soon loosed. There is a love of this life which is commendable, and
there is a love which is worthy of reproof, whereof John speaks, to wit, an
extraordinary love, and such a love whereby we place our whole felicity in
this life, not looking for a better after this. So this love is damned by John.
The other love which is of God, is when we are ready to lay down our life at
his Majesty's feet, and seek the prorogation of our life for no respect but
for his glory, (as this King did,) as he shows clearly in the end of his
own words, in the 18 and 19 verses. Thus far concerning the petition. So if
we respect God and his glory we may seek this blessing. Always ye see in the
greatest extremity, the only comfort that he has is the testimony of a good
conscience: ^esson.
And this ought to be our stay when we are threatened of God, either with plague
or any other calamity.

Well, as I said in the beginning, if it were possible that the Lords
threatenings could make us to have recourse to him that he might cleanse our
consciences in time, we should have as great comfort in our trouble as this
King had. Would God he would give us melting hearts.

Lord work this in you (Sir) that as he has honored in your birth, so ye may
honor him by your doings in your government. The Lord of his mercy give us
hearts to crave this; Lord give us hearts to sigh for the things we cannot
amend: Lord give us grace to have recourse to Christ Jesus, and by his mercy to
enter into that City, for without it there is nothing but swine and dogs,
nothing but Papistrie and idolatry. Let us, I say, have recouse to this God,
who is only able to preserve both Church and Country. To this God be all
honor, praise and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

THE SEVENTH SERMON UPON THE 38. CHAP. of the Prophecy of ISAIAH, preached in
the presence of the Kings Majesty.
The text. 4 Then came the word of the Lord to Isaiah saying,

5 Go, and say unto Hezekiah, Thus says the Lord God of David thy Father: I
have heard thy prayer, and seen thy tears: Behold, I will add unto thy days
fifteen years.

6 And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the King of Ashur, and this City:
for I will defend this City.


IN the describing of this Kings disease, Recapitulation
we observed; first, the manner and kind of the disease. We noted secondly,
the time when it took him. We noted thirdly, the greatness of this disease.
And last of all, we marked his behauior under this disease. As to the kind of
the disease, we marked it to have been a pestilent kind of byle like unto the
botch of Egypt, a byle of the worst kind that could be in those days. So it
pleased the Lord to exercise the patience of his tender servant; suppose he had
an entire liking of this King, yet it pleased him so roughly to handle him.
Upon this we marked, that the favor and hatred of God should not be esteemed by
any external thing in the earth: suppose plagues and afflictions be common
both to good and evil; yet the cause from whence they come is not common, and
the end whereunto they tend is not common. The Spirit of God assures us, that
this kind of exercise is the only way to purge our iniquity. By this kind of
exercise the sins of Jacob are removed. Then let no man judge the woe of his
brother by reason of affliction. Secondly, we marked the time when he took
this disease, we noted this time to have been the 14. year of his reign,
shortly after he was delivered out of the hands of Senacherib: So he is not so
soon delivered from one fearful war, but he falls in the hands of a
terrible plague. And here we gathered, that the life of a good King is a
continual grief, and a continual tentation: so that the issue of one trouble
is the beginning of a greater, and their whole life is as it were, a continual
vexation. So it pleases the Lord to exercise the patience of his own, to the
end he may engender a bitterness of this life into them, that this life being
bitter, they may seek for a better; for the Lord feeds not his own as
slaughter oxen: No, but he holds their backs under continual crosses, that
by this they may learn to have their minds aloft, that they may learn how to
use the world and all these trifles beneath, to wit, as they may serve them to
the life to come. Thus for the time.

As for the greatness of the disease, we painted it forth by two
circumstances. First, by nature it was deadly, for there was no force of nature
that could prevail over it. Secondly, the servant of God by a denunciation
assured him that it was deadly, and this aggrauateth highly the greatness of
this disease. Upon this denunciation, we took up a general lesson concerning
the promises and threatenings of God: to wit, that in all his promises and
threatenings, there is a condition annexed, which either is expressed, or
perpetually to be, understood; So it is here; for suppose the Prophet used the
simple form of denunciation, yet it was not to bring him to despair, but that
he might the more earnestly seek grace and mercy at God. Lastly we marked his
behavior under this disease, and we found, that suppose the plague threatened
him on the one hand, and God terrified him on the other hand; yet in this
extremity he makes his recourse to him that terrifieth him. It was an easy
matter to have retired to him, when the King of Asshur terrified him. But this
is a wonderful triumph of faith, yt the Lord appearing to be his enemy, yet he
makes his recourse unto him. This he could not have done, except he had been
sustained by the testimony of a good conscience; it is not possible that he
could have retired to God that is a consuming fire in a guilty conscience,
except he had been vpholden by the testimony of a good conscience; having this
testimony, he knew that this threatening was to amend him and not to slay him,
in word, and not indeed. Upon this we gathered this observation; Blessed is
the man that is not condemned in his own conscience: for if we cannot escape
the condemnation of our own heart, how much less can we be able to escape the
condemnation of God who made the heart? for The Lord condemns no man but him
whom his conscience first condemns: so the Lord has placed this conscience
here, to resemble the judgment which is to follow after. For whom the
conscience condemns, assuredly the Lord condemns. And whom the conscience
with the warrant of the word approves, no question the Lord approves. Then
the the lesson we gathered was this: All office-bearers ought so to behave
themselves in this life, that in their death they may have the testimony of a
good conscience: for it is not possible that the conscience can testify well,
except in time he take up a new trade of living, except you keep your hands
free of other men's sins. And therefore I exhorted all inferior magistrates,
superior, and in special the supreme, that the Lord by his spirit would so
rule your conscience (Sir) that ye may keep your self free from other men's
iniquities. Thus far we proceeded in our last exercise.

Now follows the comfort that the King being placed in this extremity did
find: the Lord sends him comfort from heaven. The form and manner of the
comfort is set down in there verses which I have read; but the circumstances
are more particularly set down in the 2. King. 20. chap. Always this order is
kept in these verses: First in the 4. verse is set down the circumstance of
time, Di^is^on.
when this comfort was offered; and upon the circumstance of time, the
circumstance of place, where he was when he received this comfort may easily
be gatherd. Besides this, the persons, the Author, the giver of this
commission, the Minister and bearer are noted. Unto this verse, before that he
come to the comfort, he uses a preface: in the end of this preface there is a
narration, that the Lord had heard the kings prayer, and had seen his tears.
In the third place he propounds the comfort. And last of all, we have the
confirmation of this proposition, by a wonderful sign and miracle from heaven.

Then to come back to the 4. verse, he touched the circumstance of time very
obscurely, when the King received this comfort, for it is said, Then came the
word of the Lord. This particle (Then) is relative to that time, which is more
chearely set down in 2. King, 20. This then is to be understood, when the
Prophet was in the middle court, when the word of the Lord came unto him, and
commanded him to stay: look how much space there was betwixt the Kings bed
where he lay, and the second hall, as great space is there betwixt the
denunciation, and the recalling thereof. He was not as yet passed the second
hall, when the word of the Lord came unto him, and commanded him to go back,
and to recall that same sentence in a moment with one mouth, which before he
pronounced: now he commands him to pronounce the contrary. This is a
wonderful change in such a suddainnes, and upon this suddainnes there are many
notable things that offer themselves worthy of consideration. First, of this
suddainnes mark this lesson: First lesson.
we see how pithie and effectual the prayer of the King has been; this prayer
is so effectual that in a moment it moves the great God to reuerse that same
sentence which he had pronounced: that which heaven nor earth nor any other
creature was able to alter, he makes the prayer of his own servant to call
back. Beside this, his prayer purchased health of body, length of days, a
sure and prosperous estate; and afterward all this is confirmed by such a
wonderful miracle, ye like whereof was never seen nor heard of before. Look
then if the prayers of the faithful be not wondrous effectual. It is not
possible that all these effects can flow of the pithinesse of prayer, seeing
there is nothing so weak in it self, but it comes of the free nature of God,
whose nature is to be merciful; and it is the nature of mercy to have pity
upon misery. This is the reason why our prayers are in an instant of time
heard. 2. Lesson.
And here also we may learn how well God answers to the names that are given
him, Exodus 34.6. where he is called exceeding merciful, slow to anger, ready
to forgive: he utters himself to be a God of great compassion and exceeding
in mercy toward us: in such sort, that in an instant sometimes he grants our
requests. The last thing that I mark upon the suddainnes, 3. Lesson.
is the strict and entire conjunction that is betwixt the faithful soul in
earth on the one part, and God in heaven on the other part. This conjunction is
so entire and strict, that it makes God as present to our prayers, as if
heaven and earth were joined together. This conjunction makes his Son Christ
to be as near in time of need, as if he had placed his throne of grace in the
bed where we lie. To prove this, ye see how speedily his prayer mounteth, ye
see how swiftly the answer returns* and with such celeritie all this matter
is done, as if there were no distance betwixt heaven and earth. So the lesson
is this, The faithful soul has God as present, as if heaven and earth were
joined together. Doctrine.
There is no distance of place, no distance of room that can make God to
consume time in doing of his will, but where faith is, it makes him so
present, that incontinently we get our dispatch. Crave not therefore (o Papist)
any other presence then this, and examine not this presence by natural reason;
for where faith has place, natural reason must cease. Examine not these
things by reason of nature, which are above nature. Thus far concerning the
circumstance of time.

The circumstance of peace.
Now of the circumstance of time I gather the circumstance of place, where the
King was when he received this comfort. For if the Prophet was commanded to
turn back when he was in the second hall, it behooves the King to be at
home, lying on his own bed. And this by the way, is a great sign of the
favor of God toward him, that his sickness takes him at home where he might
be best eased without the trouble of others. This is by the way.

Third circumstance.
Now as to the third circumstance; The Author of the comfort no doubt was God:
for there is no good gift but it flows from him. The minister that he used is
his own Prophet: He uses the ministry of his Prophet in applying of the
comfort, not that he was forced to use the ministry of man in doing of this
thing; but so it pleases the Lord to engage and bind himself to his
instruments, that he will not work beside them, and so it pleased him to bind
him to his preached word, that beside his word he will not work. And therefore
he calls his word a Sword, a fire, an hammer, and an arrow: and that from the
diverse effects that he works by his word. As he binds him to his word, so
he willingly binds him to his servants, who are the Ministers of his word to
work by their ministry: In such sort, that he will not be bound to the word
pronounced by every man and woman, but by them whom he sends. And therefore
they are in an error who think that by their own reading of the Scriptures in
their private houses, they are able to get as great profit as by hearing
proaching: Yea suppose they say they can read better then he can preach. No,
read as much as they will, their reading shall never bring forth faith, for it
is by hearing that faith comes; and where the ministry is, and they contemn
the hearing, they contemn faith: for faith comes only by hearing ordinarily.
Thus far for the circumstances.

Now, The comfort that the King received.
the effect of the comfort is set down in three points: the first two points
agree with the petition, the third is further then came in his mind to seek.
The health of body is the first: it agrees with the petition: Length of days
is the second, it agrees also with the petition: The third, is further then he
could have looked for, and more then he sought, what is that? A sure estate, a
prosperous estate, and a glorious estate promised to him during all the rest of
his days. This was more then he sought. Now as to the order that the Prophet
keeps ere he come to the comfort, he uses a short preface. The words are
these: The Lord calls on him and he says, Go to Hezekiah, thus says the
Lord God of thy father David. This preface differs in two points from the
preface that he used in the beginning of the chap. First, there is here mention
made of David, which is not in the former, and so often as ever ye find mention
made of David in the beginning of any preface, so often let the singular favor
and mercy of God come in your mind. And when ever ye see David placed in any
preface, let Christ come in your mind, because David was a type of Christ.

This mention of David placed here, is to let the King see that the readiness
of his comfort flowed from the Messiah, Why mention of David is here made.
to wit, Jesus Christ, from whom all true comfort flowed, and without whom
there is neither comfort nor consolation. He calls himself the God of David;
because the principal promises of grace were made to David and his house, and
specially that promise concerning the Messiah, in whom all the rest of the
promises are yea and Amen, fully accomplished in him.

This is the first point of difference: Why David is called Hezechias Father.
the second point wherein they differ is this; in this preface he calls David
the Kings father; as if he would say, The man whom I love so well I see him to
be thy father, and thee to be his child and his son, not only by nature but
by graces; I see thee to be his son by faith: And therefore the whole promise
of grace made to him and his seed, must properly appertain to thee; where
otherwise if thou had been his son by carnal propagation only, these
promises of grace had no more appertained to thy person, then they did
appertain to the person of Achaz thy father. But by reason thou art not only
his son by nature, but also by grace, therefore the whole promise of grace
appertains to thee: for as the Apostle says, What makes us the sons of God.
Romans 9. It is not carnal generation that makes us sons of the promise: for
not all that are of Israel, are Israel in deed. They are not all the sons of
God, that are the sons of the flesh, but only the sons of the promise are
the children of God; that is, they that through belief in the promise of
mercy become the sons of mercy, and are made the children of God. Then this
belief in the promises, makes us not only sons to God, but sons to David
and Abraham; for following the footsteps of Abraham in his faith, by imitation
of his faith we become his sons. Thus far concerning the words of the preface.

1. Lesson.
Of this I mark two or three things, and first, by these words ye see the
Prophet stays not nor bideth not, but holds forth his course till he be
commanded of the Lord to stand and stay, he has a special command for him ere
he return. This teaches all Officebearers, that in Gods errand no m^n ought
to enterprise any thing at his own hand, but to have the Lords own advice ere
he proceed to his work; we have his advice when we have the warrant of his
word. The second thing I mark, as soon as he is commanded to go, 2. Lesson.
he stays not, but so soon as God says the word, he obeys, he makes no
doubting, he a^keth no reasons at God, he takes it not to his aduisement, he
makes no opposition* but incontinently he obeys: and surely this is true,
that if ever flesh and blood had any reason to have repined, Isaiah had reason
at this time. And why? In a moment and with one mouth he was commanded to
recall that severe sentence which he had pronounced, and to pronounce the
contrary; which might have ingendered a wonderful suspicion in the Kings heart
in respect of the suddainnes. If Isaiah had been as short and as angry as
Jonas, no question he would have asked a reason at God: For Jonas was not
commanded to recall his sentence, neither was he sent in such suddainnes to
call it back, but he seeing the words of his threatening not to come to pass,
therefore he fretteth and fumeth against God; where if he had been commanded in
such suddainnes to go and recall his sentence, ye may easily conjecture what
should have been his part. This perturbation that was in Jonas lets us see
that he was ignorant of the nature of the threatenings of God. For if he had
understood, that in all the threatenings of God there is a condition annexed, he
would not have taken it so highly. And if he had understood that the mind of
God was not to cast off a sinner, he had not taken it so angerly. But being
ignorant of this, he falls into this fuming and fretting against God.

So I say, there is two things here to be noted, one thing to be eschued of the
teachers in the person of Jonas, another thing to be followed of them in the
person of Isaiah. The thing that is to be eschued is this: A fault to be
eschued in Jonas person.
Jonas stands so precisely upon his reputation, that he is exceeding angry
that God should change his judgment in mercy. Now I say, this fault would be
eschued of all, and specially of office-bearers; and I am sure there is no
office-bearer, which has the fear of God in his heart, who would not rejoice
exceedingly, and be glad to see all these threatenings which from time to time
are pronounced against these bloody men; all those threatenings that are
pronounced against the manifest oppressors, and against these sacrilegious
persons; I am assured there is none but he would exceedingly rejoice, to see
these threatenings turned in mercy. Again, I am assured there is not a
spiritual office-bearer that has the fear of God in his heart, who would not
exceedingly rejoice to see all the threatenings and admonitions directed from
this place to Magistrates of all ranks, inferior, superior, and supreme,
turned in mercy. He is more then unhappy that is so inclined to threatening,
that if he see the Spirit of God offer the contrary occasion, will not be a
thousand times more ready to comfort: Application to the King.
And therefore the Lord in his mercy give you grace. (Sir) that ye may have
that testimony of a good conscience to uphold you, without the which there is
no true comfort. But alas, when I look on the misery and calamity of this
Country, I am almost out of hope; for why? Your subjects have gotten such a
custom of sin and evil doing, whereby they have drawn on such an habit and
hardness of heart, that nothing is pleasant to them but that which is
displeasing to God, and nothing displeasing to them but yt which is pleasing to
him. What is it, I pray you, that custom will not bow? What is it that custom
will not alter? What is it that continual use will not harden? There is no
potion so bitter-tasted in ye beginning, but if thou use it a little while, it
shall appear not so bitter: continue yet further in it, it shall appear
nothing bitter at all: and go forward yet in it, and in the end it shall become
sweet, suppose in ye beginning it were most bitter. Even so it stands with
that miserable man that casts his whole delight in ill doing that he has
such a custom in evil doing, that nothing is pleasing to him but which is
displeasing to God: and nothing displeasing to him but that which is pleasing
to God. For the mischievous custom of evil doing banisheth light out of the
minde^ And as it banisheth light out of the mind, it so banisheth all feeling
out of the conscience, and in stead of light comes darkness, and in stead of
feeling comes hardness. Now the conscience being hardened, and the mind
being darkened, what remains but a desperate and an obstinate condition like
to the devil, who is said to be bound in chains under perpetual darkness?
This is wonderful, that such continual thundering of these threatenings is not
able to move them. But it is no marvel, for there is no words will move them;
yea it is impossible to the bloody man or oppressor to refaine, from time they
be once given over to sin. For from time the sin has gotten superiority in
them (as Peter says,) it commands them more absolutely then a Prince would
command his subject; for sin has made them such slaves, and they are so
carried with impotency of their affections, that they dare no more refrain
from the service of sin, then a good servant from his masters service. I pray
God that he so multiply the Spirit of government upon you (Sir,) and that holy
unction of Kings, that we may once see this great insolency that breaks out
in so great contempt, condignly punished, that ye may keep your conscience pure
and holy. Thus much concerning the thing that is to be eschued in Jonas.

Now follows another lesson to be learned in the person of Isaiah; A virtue
to be followed in Esaiahs person.
ye see Isaiah is ready to do what the Lord commands. When the Lord bids
him blow the blast of judgment, he blows it: When the Lord bids him come,
he comes, and when the Lord bids him go, he goes. Then the lesson is this,
We that are the Trumpetters of the Lord, we must not blow as our affections and
men bid, but as the Lord bids us: we must not sound the retreat when we
should sound the march, nor we must not sound the march, when we shauld sound
the retreat. We must not sound judgment when the Lord bids sound mercy,
and we must not sound mercy, when the Lord bids sound judgment. But now the
sins of the Land crave that all pulpits sound judgment: Therefore judgment
must be sounded. There is no way to auert this judgment, but that every man
according to his calling put to his hand to reform, according to the bounds
and power that is committed unto him. And the best way were, that ye that are
Noble men concur with your Prince, and his Majesty concur with heart and
hand to repair the ruins of this Country. Thus far for the second lesson.

Now he subioyneth the Narratiue. In the Narratiue he says to the King, That
the Lord has heard his prayer, and has seen his tears: as if he would say,
Suppose thou lay in thy chamber and turned thee to the wall, yet I heard all
the words that thou spoke: and I saw all the tears that distilled from thee.
And suppose it was not in the temple, yet all was manifest to me. This is a
great comfort. Then the lesson in general is this: Doctrine.
In all places, and to all estates the Lords ear is ever fastened to the cries
of his own, and he sees their tears, and he hears their words. And suppose
he be not always as ready to dispatch them as he was to Hezechia, yet he leaves
them not, but he susteineth them in the mean time by the comfort of his
spirit, and in the end he grants them their petition so far as is
sufficient. And if it be according to his will, he gives them more then they
sought. If this be true, that the Lords ear is present to hear the prayer of
his own, and his eye to see their tears, will not the Lord be moved at the
cries of them that are oppressed with these bloody men? Application
It is wonderful that no threatening nor denunciation will move these men; but
if every tear be powered in the Lords viole, and every word heard of the Lord:
how much more shall every drop of blood be in the Lords viole? What is the
reason that these bloody men will not give ear? The reason is this; they have
laid this ground, and upon this false ground they build all their false
conclusions with Atheists, that there is not a God; and upon this ground they
build all their mischievous works. But I would demand of these men that have
laid this ground, if there be not a God, whence flows this fear and terror
of conscience? this trembling and unquietness, which gnaweth them? if there be
not a God, how is it that they are so tormented? Suppose they have banished
knowledge out of their mind, and feeling out of their conscience, and all that
should fear them out of their heart; yet they have even this fear and
trembling in their soul. And it is not possible to banish this fear, do what
they can; yea the more murders they commit, the greater is their fear. So
where men think to make themselves sure by slaughter, it is the high way to
cast themselves in greater vnsurety, and make their heart more fearful then
it was. From whence come these torments but from God forewarning them of Hell?
and these are the beginning of hell to thee in this life. Which if God would
let off the all full measure, they would not fail to put violent hands on
themselves, thinking thereby to get an outgate to their soul; for they think
if the soul were out of this body it should be in a better case, where in the
mean time they pass to ouglier pains and greater torments. Now all these
torments and ugly pains which eat them up, move them not, and except the
Lord work it they will never be moved: he has commanded all to hear his
word, and he has promised to work by his servants who utter his word, and
therefore I say, these bloody men and oppressors they ought to be here
present, that the Lord if it be possible, by this means may call them back by
repentance, that they may prevent that terrible judgment whereof they have but
little feeling as yet. But ere they go they will feel it better.

Now I come to the proposition, and there I shall end: he propounds the
comfort shortly in three points, The points of the comfort that the King
received.
two of them are according to the petition. The third is more then he craved:
health of body agrees to the petition, prorogation of days agrees to the
petition, a glorious estate, a sure and a prosperous estate came not in his
mind; and this also he gets, he not only will deliver him out the hands of
Ashur, but deliver the whole City. And this promise of a prosperous and
joyful estate is more then he thought on or looked for. Of this there might be
many things marked, but I leave them. And this only I observe. Observation.
The Lord having to do with this King, to make him thankful in times coming,
he grants him more then he sought, and provoke him as it were after this
manner, saying; What ever thou lackest, seek it of me. Lackest thou health of
body? seek it of me. Lackest thou prorogation of days? seek it of me.
Lackest thou a sure, glorious and prosperous estate? seek it of me. There
cannot be a more affable kind of entreating, then is betwixt God and the King;
he desires him what ever he lackes to seek it of him. Application.
Except Kings humble them to honor God, and hold them in his continual
favor, it is not possible that they can look for these things of him. But by
the contrary, if Kings humble them to serve God, and hold them in his favor,
there is no honor nor dignity that he has provided for the^ by birthright or
otherways, but if he see it serve to their good, in despite of the world they
shall have it. But if they fall from the service of God and cast themselves out
of his favor, they shall lose dignity, birthright, privilege of nature, and
all other things, and themselves beside. Examples of this we have in the
Scriptures: Cain being Adams eldest son, and having the birthright, so long
as he kept him in the favor of God he was in hope of it; but from time he lost
the favor of God by the slaughter of his brother Abel, he was banished from
the face of God, and lost his birthright with all his inheritance. Ismael in
like manner was Abraham's eldest son, yet because he was not in the favor of
God, he gat no part of his inheritance. Esau was his fathers eldest son, yet
because he fell from the favor of God, his brother was preferred to him, and
his birthright helped him not. Now the general doctrine is this: Observation.
It is only the favor of God that makes men to enjoy privileges, dignities,
or whatsoever they have right to; if they keep the favor of God, it is not
possible that they can be disappointed. Exhortation to the Kings Majesty.
So the exhortation is easy unto you (Sir:) as your majesty thinks to
possess that which the Lord has appointed for you, so look that you keep
you in the favor of God. There is no way to keep the favor of God, but to
purge your country of these two, Idolatry and blood; for under these I
comprehend all the sins committed against the two tables. Let this be done,
and it is not possible that ye can be disappointed of any thing that may serve
for your wealth. For it is the favor of God that shall make you to enjoy not
only your possessions, but all other privileges that ye are borne to. The
Lord of his mercy work it in your heart (Sir,) that we may see this as an
argument that ye are in his favor, when ye shall put to your hand to reform
this country, and so make it known that ye fear God and love his people.
This being done, suppose men would be inconstant and lie, yet God is not as man
not as the son of man, says Balaam, that he should lie. Depend on him. The
Lord work it in our hearts that we may earnestly crave it and obtain it, that
your heart being established by grace, ye may obey his holy will. The Lord
grant it for Christ's sake, to whom be all honor, praise and glory, for now
and ever, Amen.

THE EIGHTH SERMON, UPON ISAIAH, CHAPTER 38.
7 And this sign shall thou have of the Lord, that the Lord will do this thing
that he has spoken.

8 Behold, I bring again the shadow of the degrees (whereby it is gone down
in the dial of Achaz by the Sun, ten degrees backward: so the Sun returned
by ten degrees, by the which degrees it was gone down.

9 The writing of Hezechiah King of Judah, when he had been sick, and was
recovered of his sickness.

10 I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gates of the
grave, I am deprived of the residue of my years.

11 I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the living,
I shall see man no more among the inhabitants of the world.


IN our last lesson (well-beloved in Christ Jesus, Recapitulation.
) we heard the manner and form of the comfort that was offered by the Prophet
unto the sick King: we heard when this comfort was offered, we heard where it
was offered, we heard the person that was the giver; we heard the person that
was the bearer; we heard the preface which the Lord used, to make the King
attentive; we heard the narratiue shortly, and the parts o^ the comfort
propounded. As to the circumstances, we noted where the Prophet was when he
received this commission: he was in the middle court, he was not as yet past
the second hall, when the word of the Lord bad him stay and go back again. At
this time he is commanded to recall his former sentence, and with that same
mouth to pronounce the quite contrary. No further distance is there betwixt
the pronouncing of the one sentence and the other, then is betwixt the Kings
bed and the second hall. Look what space the Prophet spent in going betwixt
the Kings bed and the second hall, as great space is consumed betwixt the one
sentence and the other. Upon the suddenness we marked sundry notable things:
and first, we marked the great force of the Kings prayer: to wit, his prayer is
so effectual that it makes the Lord to recall his own sentence in one
instant of time. That same thing which heaven and earth and all the creatures
therein could not have moved him to do, that the prayer of his servant moved
him to do. Now, beside the retraction, the force of his prayer appears in the
health of his body, in lengthning of his days, in giving him a prosperous and
sure estate: and last, in confirming it by such a wonderful sign, that the
like was never heard nor seen before. Judge ye then what is the force and
effect of the prayer of a faithful man. The second thing that I marked was
this, the wonderful inclination that the Lord has to mercy, how well he
answers to his names and styles, whiles he is called a God of compassion, a
God of exceeding and infinite mercy. The third thing that we marked on this
suddenness was, that strict and entire conjunction that stands betwixt the
faithful soul on the one part, and God on the other part, to wit, the
conjunction is so strict, that it makes God as present to the faithful soul,
as if heaven and earth were coupled together. Th^s conjunction by faith makes
Christ our help, to be as near in time of need, as if he had placed his
throne of grace in the bed where we lie. Ye see how swiftly the Kings prayer
mounteth, ye see how swiftly the answer returns, ye see in such a celeritie
the matter is dispatched, as if there were no distance betwixt heaven and
earth. Then by this it clearly appears, that there is no distance of place
that can make the Lord consume time in doing of his will. Also, there is no
distance of place, neither thickness of walls that can hold the Lords presence
from the faithful soul, but he is as present to the faithful soul, as any
corporal object is to the bodily eye: There is no object so present to the
bodily eye, as the Lord is present to the soul. Thus far we proceeded in the
first circumstance. Upon this we gathered and let you see where the King lay:
It behooved him to have been laid in his own house. And we show also that this
was a sign of the favor of God, that he should be diseased there, where he
might be best eased without trouble to others. As to the giver of the gift, it
is God; for there is no good gift but it flows from him. As to the bearer, it
is Isaiah, not of necessity, for the Lord is not bound to any second
instruments, but of a voluntary and free obligation, he has obliged himself
to utter his power, and to work by them. Here I wished you in my exhortation,
be diligent hearers of the word, be not deceived with your foolish conceits: I
will read as good at home and better: I say, the Lord will not work by thy
reading, when thou contemnest the ordinary means; he has bound him to his
instruments that by hearing faith shall come; he will not work by his Spirit,
except thou hear. Hear the word therefore, as long as the Lord gives thee
grace, and continues it. He has bound himself to grant faith by hearing, and
not by reading in contempt of hearing. As to the preface, we show it differed
from the former preface in two points. First, there was mention here made of
David, which was not in the other, and consequently of Christ* in whom the
comfort of the King stood, and on whom all the comfort of the old Testament is
grounded, without whom, there is no true comfort. Secondly, in this preface, he
is called David's son not only by nature, but by grace: and therefore, the
whole promise of grace made unto David, justly appertains to him; whereas
otherwise, if he had been his son by nature only, the promises of grace had
no more concerned him in particular, then they concerned his father Achas. But
because by grace he was made the son of grace: therefore the promises of
grace justly appertain to him. Here we did let you see, that it is not
carnal generation which we draw from our parents, that makes us the sons of
God, faithful as they are; but the generation of the promise, in following the
trade of their faith, we are made the sons of our faithful predecessors.
There was two things marked in the preface: First, the Prophet returns not,
until he got a command. The lesson is this to office-bearers in their calling,
to enterprise nothing in Gods affairs, until they get his own advice. The
other thing, we see in him a wonderful and ready obedience to God. For suppose
the Prophet saw his threatening in an instant of time to be turned in mercy, yet
he is not angry, but rejoices to see the Lord work so with this King. Upon
this we gathered a lesson for teachers: They should not be moved greatly, when
they see the Lords threatenings in an instant of time, if it were possible,
turned in mercy. I think there is none (as I spoke then) but they will be
exceedingly rejoiced to see these threatenings which are threatened against these
bloody butchers, against these adulterers, against these oppressors and
sacrilegious persons: there is none, I think, but he will be exceedingly
rejoiced to see the Lord work so, that the Minister have as great occasion to
comfort as he had to threaten. I think also that there is none that fears
God, who will not rejoice to see the Magistrate, who is the ouerseer, and
should take order with these bloody men: there is none but he will rejoice to
see the threatenings which are justly pronounced, and shall as justly light if
they be not prevented, to be turned in mercy. But surely there is no hope of
it; for iniquity grows so, and it is come to such a maturity, that surely the
Lord from heaven will take vengeance on it, if the Magistrate put not to his
hand in time. On the other part, we learn of Isaiah, to blow mercy when the
Lord bids, and to sound judgment when the Lord bids; for seeing the Lord
has appointed us to be his mouth, we must not speak what we please, for so we
are not the Lords mouth, but our own mouth. So he that takes upon him to be
his mouth, let him sound as the Lord bids him. In the Narratiue he says, he
heard the Kings prayer. And as he heard the Kings prayer, so he hears the
prayers, and sees the tears of the oppressed of this land, which the
Magistrate should both hear and see. And as he hears them, so he has
gathered their tears in his viole, and in his own time he will provide a
remedy. Lastly he pronounces three things unto him, health of the body, length
of days, and a sure and prosperous estate, which never entered in his mind to
seek. And therefore I exhorted him that was present and you all, what so ever
ye want seek it of God, seek it in Christ Jesus, whether it be for the soul
or body; in him are placed full treasures for both, if ye keep you in the
favor of God, and keep you in his protection, nothing shall hurt you: And by
the contrary, if ye lose his f^uour ye shall lose all. Thus far we proceeded
in our last exercise. Now in the words which I have read, first of all, he
confirms that which he said unto the King, The heads of doctrine to be
entreated of.
and he makes him sure that whatsoever God has spoken, it shall be found in
experience, and for his surety he gives him a sign, a wonderful sign, the
like whereof was never heard of nor seen before. The manner of the giving of
the sign was this: First of all, the king he seeks a sign. Secondly, the
Lord grants a sign: Yea look in what manner the King sought it, in that
same manner it is granted. Thirdly, the sign is wrought and manifested, not by
the power of the Prophet, but by the virtue of God. To come back then to the
first, the King seeks a sign as may be seen, 2. Kings 20. and surely in
seeking of it, he did not amiss, for if we look to the circumstance of the
history, he is plainly compelled to seek it: for as Augustine says, writing
on this same place, concerning the miracles of holy writs, While as, (says he)
the Prophet Isaiah propounds in an hour two contrary sentences, which could
not both stand, it behooves one of them to be c^nfirmed by a sign, and so it
was need. Then I say, the King fails not in seeking of a sign, or as if he
had said after this manner to the Prophet: thou came even now, and said, it
b^houed me to die; thou returnest in an instant, and say that I shall live.
Whereby shall I know this last to be true, and what token shall I have of it?
Was it necessary then? surely it was necessary.

The cause why he sought a sign.
As to the seeking of the sign he sought it not of incredulity, nor to the end
to tempt God, but to strengthen and confirm his weak faith, which is weak in
us all. And a weak faith, suppose it be weak, yet it is true faith: for if
our faith be true and lively, howbeit it be weak, it is the right faith. It is
required of faith, that so much as is of it, it be true and lively. But so long
as it is here, weak shall it be. Then for the strengthening of his weak
faith, it was necessary that he should have sought a sign, which was done no
doubt by the advice of the Spirit of God. How the wicked seek signs.
It is true the wicked have sought signs, as Mat. 12. and 16. But when they
seek them, their heart is void of faith, for they cannot seek them to
confirm the thing they have not; but they seek them of incredulity, Some
refuse signs when they are offered.
and of contempt of God. Again, there is another sort, who when signs are
offered they will not receive them, as Achas this man's father: when the sign
was offered to him by Isaiah, and given to him, he would not have it, but he
did cast it off by a shift. This king is not so, but he seeks a sign for the
strengthening of his weak faith. And in this doing he follows the example of
the good servants of God who past before. Gedeon before him sought a sign,
Judge. 6. Moses also that was before him, sought a sign for the confirming and
strengthening of their faith. So I say the King in seeking of this sign does
not amiss; and to testify that he does no wrong, the Lord grants it unto
him, which he would not have done, if he had done amiss in seeking of it.
Beside this, he gives him his choice in this sign, for look in what manner
he craved it, in that same manner it is granted unto him, which testifies that
he did not amiss in seeking of it.

As to the manner of the sign, how he sought it, How the sign was showed.
and how it was granted by God, it is this shortly. The King desires that not
only the shadow of the degrees whereby the hours were discerned in Achas
Dial should be brought back: but also he desires that the Sun with the
shadow should be b^ought back so many degrees. Now the Sun had gone forward
in his course, and had spent ten hours of the day: so he had but two hours to
his going down. In effect therefore he desires the Sun to be brought back
these ten hours which he had spent. So that the day which by nature should
have lasted but for the space of twelve hours, by the drawing back of the
Sun in an instant is made to last for the space of twenty two hours. Look
if this was a wonder or not. Thus far for the meaning of the wonder and the
manner thereof. Ye see this wonder was manifested partly in the body of Achaz
dial, and partly in the body of the Sun. Now in this that it is showed in
the body of the dial, it lets us see that the accurate distinction of
seasons and times, together with the arts and sciences that bring them, are not
altogether displeasant before God. And further it lets us see, that these
same sciences whereby the seasons of times are discerned, had place in Judah in
Achaz days: for naturally we have that knowledge to discern the seasons of
the course of the day and of the course of the night, naturally we have that.
As to the day we divide it into ye dawning, morning, noone, and evening: and in
like manner the night, into evening, midnight, and cockcrow. Now time has
brought in these arts and sciences, which have brought in a more accurate
distinction of times and seasons. These observations appear clearly to have
had place in Judah in Achaz days. We read not that these instruments entered
in Grecia or Rome; not in Grecia before Anaximenes Milesius brought them in;
Not in Rome before one Marcus Valerius Messala brought them in. And he brought
them out of Sicilia forth of a City called Catine. Marcus Varro brought in a
more accurate thereafter. Always this was the first; but I leave these
particulars, I insist not in them: And I come to that which may most edify you
in the faith of God. Why the sign was wrought in the dial.
So I say, this sign was wrought in the body of the dial, and also it was
wrought in the body of the Sun. It was wrought in the dial which was a
public work set up in a public place upon the head of the steps of the
staire of the palace against the Temple where the whole City resorted, so
that the wo^ke was known to the whole City, and consequently to all Judah,
and that by reason of the public place. Secondly, Why it was wrought in the
body of the Sun.
it is wrought in the body of the Sun, that all the world might see the
wonder in the Sun as well as Judah did, both in Sun and dial, that they
might be convicted, seeing him in his wonderful works who of nature is
invisible, that they might say with themselves, We are out of the way and have
worshipped the wrong God, leaving the right God. For surely when I look on the
wonders which God has showed from time to time on this King, I am moved to
think that God had purposely brought him into these extremities and great
dangers, that in his wonderful deliverances he might be known to the whole
world; he brings him into such dangers that whereas nature and natural
means could have no place: he delivers him so miraculously by such wonders,
to make all the world to stoop. Another end was this, that this good King
might be honored of all the world whom God so honored. For good reason it is,
that those whom God so honoreth they should honor. These have been the two
ends why God has wrought so many miracles in the person of this King. For ye
heard how wonderfully in the night by his Angel, he destroyed a hundredth and
fourscore thousands of persons; this is a wonderful thing, and now when he
had fallen in the hands of a terrible plague, so that there is none able to
help it, yet the Lord heals him extraordinarily, and he confirms it by
such a wonder that the like was never heard of or seen before. In deed we
read in Iehoshuashs time, that the Sun was made to stand in the firmament;
but to go back by so many hours and degrees, it was never heard of nor seen
before. Look then if these signs served not to the honor of God, and under
God to the honor of his servant.

The profit that is to be gathered of signs, What profit is to be gathered
of signs.
properly called signs instituted by God, stands in ye representation: for
there cannot be a sign properly, except it represent in some measure the thing
signified by it. There must be some conformity and proportion, or else it is
not a sign, as Augustine says. But this sign whereof we speak is miraculous
and supernatural, and therefore has no such relation as Sacraments have. But
yet there may be a proper and secret relation espied in it, which is this: for
it appears well that God would let us see, and let the King see by the
working of this sign, that look how easy it was to him to bring back the
Sun which had but two hours to his going down, to that same place where he
rose in the morning; as easy it is to him, and far easier to bring back the
Kings life which had but two hours to the time of death, to a fresh morning of
youth again, and to a joyful age: It is as easy to God to work the one as
the other. And so we may take up the end why these signs and such like wonders
was wrought by Christ in establishing of the new covenant. The end no doubt was
to strengthen our faith which we have already received by the preaching of the
Gospel; for signs are not given to create in us faith, they are not given to
begin our conjunction with Christ, it is the preaching of the Gospel that
begins this conjunction: Signs are given as seals to enlarge and confirm
this our conjunction. And as the Apostle says well, Heb. 2. signs serve to
two two ends: first, to bear witness to the truth; secondly, to confirm the
faith of the believer. This ye see clearly in our Sacrament, the Sacrament of
the Supper. This Sacrament was not appointed to make our conjunction first with
Christ; we have not entry unto Christ by this Sacrament, but it makes us to
possess Christ whom we had already in some measure: It makes us to possess
him more fully, and extends the bounds of our narrow heart, that he may be
the more largely received of us; so of this sign the King has great comfort.
I grant there is greater comfort to be had in the word then of the sign, and
greater comfort to be had of the working of the Spirit within, then of either
of them: yet it is as true, that every one of these brings their own
comfort. There is greater comfort to be had of the word then of the sign, and
yet the sign has the own comfort. There is greater comfort to be had of the
Spirit then of the word, and yet the word has the own comfort. And there is
no word able to utter, and far less any heart able to receive that comfort,
yea not half the quarter of that comfort which is prepared for them that love
God. So this sign, suppose there be not so great comfort uttered by it as by
the word, yet it has the own comfort. Thus far concerning the sign it
self.

By whose power this sign was wrought.
As to the third thing, the manifesting of this sign, it is not by the virtue
or power that flowed out of Isaiah, suppose he was an instrument; for the text
resolves this clearly, where it is said, This is the sign of the Lord:
besides this, it is certain that there is no force nor virtue in any creature,
yea not in the devil himself to work any true wonder, but in God himself
only. For why? there is no sign or wonder which is a true wonder, but it
passes the force, bounds, and compass of nature: Therefore there is no
creature able to work any wonder: For why, they are bounded within the
compass and bounds of their nature: and therefore as to all these wonders and
miracles which are wrought by the devil and the Pope his vicar, they are false
and lying wonders; I say it not, but the Apostle says it, 2 Thessalonians. 2. that
the coming of Antichrist shall be in the mighty power of the devil, in the
which he shall work false wonders and lying signs. And as all the rest are
false and lies, so these legs and arms which ye see in the entries and porches
of their Churches, are manifest lies and deceits of Satan.

Now as to the manner of the working of this miracle, it it is said in the 2.
Kings. 20. that it was procured by the Prophets prayer: It is said there, The
force of prayer in procuring this sign.
that the Prophet prayed that the Sun should be brought back. So the prayer
of the Prophet prevented before it came to pass. Now, that same very thing
which the Lord was purposed to do, and promised to do, yet he will do it in such
sort, that he will have the Prophet first to ask it. Now this lets us see
clearly, that there is no merit in our prayers, there is no such force or
worthiness in our prayers as to merit any thing, but the Lord promises
freely; and as he promises freely, so he performs it as freely. Then
wherefore will he have us to pray? Because prayer is a part of the worship of
God, Why the Lord wills us to pray.
he will have us to feel what the want of benefits is, he will have us
exercised in this part of duty; that when we get them, we may use them so much
the more to his glory.

What the prayers of this Country, Application.
specially the prayers of the Church of this town, have purchased in the
withdrawing of the Lords threatening, and chiefly of the last threatening, I
mean that huge Navy of ships; I think now the manifest effects declare. But
what honor God has gotten for it, our manners since that time clearly
testify. For if ye look to the growth of sin, more ougly sins were never
committed then since that fame ceased. So I say, he is mad, and void of all
natural light, much more supernatural, who thinks that the Lord has taken
away his hand, suppose he strikes not. Indeed he has withdrawn his hand, to
let us see the force of our prayers, and to try us how we would use this
benefit; but seeing it is so highly abused, if there were no other thing but
the birth of iniquity wherewith the land is ouerburthened, ere the Lord want
any means to punish the committers and overseers of these iniquities, he will
rather punish the land from heaven immediately, or else make it to spue out the
inhabitants. For suppose the Lord spare, yet he will not forgive this contempt.
But this sparing is of the Lords benignity; he lets them hoord up sin
against the day of wrath. I insist no further in it.

The King^ thankfulness for the bene^ite received.
Now follows in order the Kings thankfulness unto the Lord, for the benefit
which he has received. And forsooth, this King is greatly thankful: and he
has set down and left in register his song of thankfulness, to testify,
that he is not like to us; he has set down a notable song of lamentation and
thanksegiuing, that we read of none better in any King except that which is in
the 51. Psalm. He has set down a song of lamentation, to testify his
infirmity and disease; and he has set down a song of praise, to testify his
thankefulnes toward God.

The parts of the Kings Song.
This song stands of three parts. In the first part he lets us see the
great trouble and perplexity, whereinto he was fallen; what he said, and what
he did in his trouble. In the second part, he makes a rehearsal of the
greatness of ^he benefits that he has received, and promises to put his
trust in him, to make his dependence on God, and on no other. In the third part
he lets us see that he is mindful to be thankful as long as he lives,
and all his days to praise him, and not to be forgetful of him. I think
these be the three parts of the song.

A short sum of the Kings life.
Now ere we enter into the first part, it is necessary that ye understand the
course of this Kings life, and the manner of his behavior in his whole life;
that marking the course of his life at least, if ye will not follow the course
of other common Christians, ye may learn to follow a King. Take heed then
unto the course of his life. In the 14 year of his reign, he was threatened by
the King of Ashur, he was threatened by two sundry Ambassadors, and God his
Master and he himself was in their face blasphemed. After this in his great
extremity what does he? He and the Prophet go to the Church and address them
to prayer, this is one part of his exercise. And upon his instant prayer what
comes to pass? He purchases a wonderful deliverance: and upon this
deliverance what does he? He and the Prophet praises God. So, here ye see
prayer and praise are his chief exercises. Now he is not so soon delivered,
but he falls in the hands of a terrible plague: and death is so present sent
to him, that he sees no outgate. Now what does he? He and the Prophet both
pray, I doubt not. What follows upon this? He is delivered. What follows of
the deliverance? He and the Prophet thank God. So here also ye see prayer and
praise. What further? Upon this deliverance he falls into pride and ambition
he braggeth of all his jewels and treasures, as if he had conquered them by his
own industry. What follows upon this? The Prophet threatens him; Upon this
threatening he is humbled: After humiliation the Prophet comfort him, and
upon his comfort he thanketh God, and says, The word of the Lord is good, but
yet let there be peace and rest in my days. Now take heed to the whole course
of this Kings life, and ye shall see his whole life to be nothing else but a
falling and rising, a praying and praising of God continually. For as long as
we carry about with us these decaying houses of clay, (as Job says) and are
clogged with them, yea, as long as the dregs of iniquity remain in our souls,
we shall be subject to a continual falling and rising, by the grace of God,
and not of our selves. Of the which this his continual praying and praising of
God springs. He prays for strength in his battles, and he prayseth God for
his victory and deliverance.

Now take up the lesson, and learn of a King what should be a Christians
exercise, A Christians chief exercise.
that seeing this mortality wherein we dwell, and the corruption wherewith we
are beset (for our sanctification is but begun, and very imperfect in this
life) makes us to slide; and seeing we are subject to daily trouble, and our
life is but a continual fighting, should not this be our exercise, continual
praying and praising of God? praying God for strength in the time of our falls
and troubles, and praising him for our victories? He that shall follow the life
of this King, shall obtain the like end. And suppose his life be a continual
fighting, yet the Lord shall ever raise him, and comfort him with his Spirit.
He that omitteth this exercise of prayer, is most unhappy; for if he craves
not strength, he is unworthy of rising. There is none of us but we are all
subject to this estate. And therefore if we would rise, we must pray; yea, pray
instantly and continually. So, I recommend prayer and praising unto you all.
Thus far concerning the course of the Kings life. Now to come to the first
part of the song: The first part of the song.
In the first part he lets us see the great trouble, perplexity, and
perturbation of mind wherein he was; he lets us see what he said in this
trouble. Ere he enter to the words, in the beginning of the 9. verse he notes
the circumstance of time, when he was cast into this trouble and perturbation
of mind: and forsooth, the circumstance is worthy of noting. In the
circumstance of time it is said, In the cutting off of my days: when was that?
to wit, at what time the P^ophet told him, that it behooued him to die. Then
this trouble and perturbatio^ came on me. From the time he had once said, it
behooued him to die, he fell into this fear, suppose a godly King, and as well
reported of as any other King in the Scriptures: yet as soon as he hears the
sentence of death pronounced, he trembles and fears exceedingly. And surely
it cannot be otherwise; for death is a violent separation and tearing asunder
of that which the Lord has appointed to be conjoined, to wit, the soul and
the body. If the body had remained in the first estate, and continued under
obedience, these two had never been separated; but by reason of disobedience
and breakeng of the law of God, in came sin, in comes the violent
separation, in comes death, which is the reward of sin, as the Apostle
speaks. Romans 6.

The diversity of seeking death in the wicked and godly.
It is true indeed, (for this is necessary to be known) that there have been
many evil men that have sought death: and it is as true, that there have been
many good men that have sought death: yet never one of these sought death for
it self, for it is not natural to seek the dissolution of our selves. But
these evil men that sought death, and put hand on themselves, in their
appearance they sought it for a better: to wit, to eschew the present torment
and vexation of hell in their conscience wherein they were, thinking that their
miserable soul, being out of the body, should be at greater liberty then if
it were detained in this prison: But they are all deceived. For suppose hell be
begun here, yet it is not in a full measure until this life be done, and so
the miserable caitife deceives himself. On the other side, there have been
good men that have sought death, but not for it self but for a better. If they
knew not and felt not that there were a better life to follow after death, they
would not seek it: but by reason they see there is a greater joy to follow
after it, therefore they regard not to taste in some measure for the present of
the bitterness of death. It it true again and I grant, that death unto thee
who art a Christian is sanctified in the death of our master and Savior
Christ Jesus; (for blessed is the death of them that die in the Lord.) But
suppose the death be sanctified, yet thou art not wholly sanctified: for if
thou were as sanctified as the death, thou would not have such a thing as
terror, pain or grief in thy death. But seeing in the best of us all there is
a remnant of corruption (would to God it were but a remnant) so thick and
foul that it is shame to speak of it; this corruption urges the conscience,
so that where the conscience is urged, there must be a fear; and the more the
conscience be urged, the greater is the pain and terror. It is true that this
fear is tempered by faith that dwells in the soul, and the hope of joy that
dwells in the faithful soul, holds this fear in awe, that hope of
heavenly joy so swalloweth up and deuoureth the fear, and makes it to appear
to the looker on that the soul has no fear: but no doubt there is a fear,
and it is sure there is some grief. It is only as I have said, the hope of
that heavenly joy that holds this fear in awe; where this hope is not,
terrible is that fear, wonderful are these terrors, great is that anguish of
soul that is there, so that I cannot find names to express it. Terrible it is
to see the countenance of God in his justice, there is no creature that can
abide it. Terrible it is to see their own sins present themselves, the
ouglinesse and guiltiness of sin. And beside all these, to be left destitute
of hope, it is not the least part of their grief; and yet this is not regarded.
For men will not rise to get faith, if it should cost them but an hour, they
will not come to hear the word. This is a wonderful and miserable madness
that is in the soul of man, that he will never provide for hell until hell
catch him.

The way to eschew the fear of death
Now to come to our purpose, the less the corruptions be, the less must be the
fear. Wherein then should your exercise stand, should ye not study to
diminish this corruption? For he that would be void of fear, must travel to
diminish this corruption, that the conscience may be clean, and ye may have a
good testimony, which makes men to be without terror. For as long as the
love of this world and of worldly things occupies our soul, it is not
possible that it can be without fear: For why? there is no heart that can
willingly part with the thing that it loves, without exceeding sorrow and
grief. Then we should travel to take order with these affections and love to
worldly things, but so far as they may serve to the love of God, and in God
to love our selves and our neighbor; that when he calls no strange love may
draw us from him. There is a common law in all cities concerning the forbidden
goods, which are discharged plainly to be carried out of the country where we
are presently, and suppose they were carried, they can serve to no use in the
country whither we go. To let you see the exposition of the Parable; I say,
the love of this world and the cares thereof, the love of the flesh and the
lusts thereof, are these forbidden goods which serve to no use in the country
whither we go, yea they are plainly forbidden by the King of the country. For
the heart which is replenished with these, shall have no entry there. There is
a plain discharge sounded concerning these goods, that we cleanse our hearts
of them, and prepare our selves to bring those commodities with us that agree
with the nature of that country. Let us make us for the love of God and of our
neighbor, and let us cast off all contrary love; only let us love God, and
in God let us love our neighbor. Now if I might obtain this one lesson for
all the rest, I would think my travel very well bestowed, and therefore I
insist so much the more in it, that it may sink into your hearts. Now then
this good King fears, which tells me that in all Christians there is some
fear.

I come to the next, what says he in his trouble and perturbation? The effect
of the thing he says is this: First he says He saw his own death prepared
for him: Next, because he was troubled with it and cast in a great
perturbation, he subioyneth the reasons why he was so grieved. And as I may
gather them, they are three in number. But ere I come to the reasons I will
tell you his own words which he said in time of his trouble; he said, I shall
go down to the gates of the grave, I am drawing near to the gates of death.
For so soon as I heard the Prophet say that I should die, so soon I began to
prepare me for it; for if all threatenings come to pass as the Prophet has
said, if I find no outgate in the mercy of God, I must die. For this I know,
that I am a mortal man; and suppose I be a King and a glorious King, yet I am
not exempted from death, and therefore I will prepare me for it. He knew well,
that suppose he made himself ready, he was not one hair nearer to death. Now
surely if ye would follow this King, Application.
ye would be a thousand times readier and more able to live then ye are in your
diseases. But ye are cast up in such a dainty and delicate fashion, that no
man will suffer to hear of death, saying, It is a thing that will further man
to die. But I say the contrary; and the Spirit of God says the contrary. I
say, the readier ye be to die, ye are the readier to live; he that says the
contrary, I say he speaks an untruth, if he were the best Doctor of
Physic. Therefore when sickness which is the messenger of death begins to
pull your ears, the first thing that ought to be propounded to the patient, is
to bid him make him ready for death; for the readier he is to die, as I have
said, he is the more able to live. Then ye see Hezekiah knew, that suppose he
was a King, yet he was mortal. As to his words, he sets down three reasons
wherefore his death grieueth him so much. If ye look to the reasons, The
reason why death was grieuou^ to him.
there appears at the first no weight in them; yet being tried more narrowly,
ye shall find in them a greater validity. The first reason is this, I am
deprived of the residue of my years. He was a man at that time of 38. or 39.
years, and of such age as he might have lived twice as long by the course of
nature, as David says O! but this appears to be a slight reason, and it is
slight indeed if there be no more in it. He is not so much grieved at the
cutting off his years as at the cutting off the affairs which the shortning
of his years brought with it. So there were two respects wherefore this King
was so grieved at the cutting off of his days: The first, because the work of
reformation in Church and policy, which he had begun, would cease. And out of
question this hasty cutting off made him so well prepared in his heart to die,
as he would have been if he had had leisure. So in respect he lacked time; and
yet he was not so void of all preparation as commonly youth is, that cast off
all repentance to the last age, thinking there is time enough before them: In
these respects, that the work of reformation by the cutting off of his time
would be imperfect, and in respect he should not have been so well prepared in
his heart, therefore he is grieved at his death, and says, I am deprived of
the residue of mine years.

Well, to apply this unto our cause, I think there is none but they see
clearly, Application.
that if we come not with better speed to the work of reformation then we are
like to do, I fear that we leave not this work only vn-ended, but vn-begun:
for if this confusion of Church and policy grow from day to day as it does
without interruption, as if there were not a King in Israel, I say if this
confusion endure, no question but the birth of iniquity shall so ouerburthen
the land, that it shall make it to spue forth the inhabitants. I will not
insist, I am assured there is no magistrate of any degree but he is lawfully
forewarned and made inexcusable before God.

The second reason wherefore his death grieved him, is set down in the
beginning of the 11. verse, where he says, The second reason why death was
grievous to the King.
I shall not see the Lord in the land of the living: Then this is it yt grieved
him, because he should not see the Lord. How can this be? I am assured, he had
that same eye in seeing of the Lord that David had. How is it that he says, he
shall not see the Lord? What kind of eye David had is declared in the 16. Psalm.
Where he says, that he set the Lord before him in all his works, he rejoices
exceedingly in his heart; and he says, I am sure that my soul shall be
gathered with the rest of the souls of my faithful predecessors, who are in
the presence of God, where there is fullness of pleasure, and sweetness of
life for ever. I am assured, this good man was not destitute of this eye, but
in some m^asu^e he saw with it, as his father David. How is is then that he
says, He shall not see the Lord? He expounde^h himself a little after; and ye
see a clear commentary in the end of the verse, he says, He shall not see the
Lord in the Land of the living. As though he would say, I shall no^ see him as
I was wont to see him before, I shall not see him in his Church, as the rest of
his faithful servants see him.

How this was, ye know the custom of the Scriptures in this matter. God was
said to be seen of old, How God was said to be seen of old.
when the visible signs wherein he gave his presence, were seen. For God
being in himself invisible, when the visible signs of his presence were
seen, he himself was said to be seen. As when they saw the Temple, God came
in their mind, when they saw the Tabernacle, God was said to be seen, and
chiefly when they saw the Arc, God was said to be seen, because about it
appeared the glory of God: For in that same cloud, which replenished the inward
house, his glory appeared. Now by reason that these visible signs wherein he
gave his presence were seen, God was said to be seen. Then the reason is
this, I shall not see the Lord in the land of the living: That is, I shall be
taken from his service, I shall not see him in his Temple as I was wont to do.
Surely in this, as in all the rest, he follows the footsteps of his good
father David. As we may read in all ye Psalms, made in time of his greatest
persecution. There was nothing grieved him so much as because he had not
liberty to assemble with the rest of the faithful, as Psalm. 84. and 112. he
says, My heart rejoiced when they said to me, Let us go to the house of the
Lord. This singular and godly love of the word of God, among many virtues, is
extreme loss to this King. And for this reason he is now grieved.

Application.
Now let us compare our selves with this King, and try whether ye follow him in
your hearts in this point or not: that is, whether ye have such a desire to
hear the word as he had. But surely, he shall condemmne all estates. For if ye
will look to the profane multitude of this country, how well they like of the
hearing of the word, their manners declare. For as to the multitude, if they
have any business remaining, it is cast off until the Lords day; and if there
be any markets, meetings, appointmentes, and traffiques, all is cast off till
that day. And the best of you has taken such a loathing at the hearing of the
word, that ye are weary to rise in the morning to hear it, if it were but an
hour sooner then your diet. What must this contempt work? Of necessity it
must bring exceeding famine of that same food which we loathed. For the Lord
will not suffer his word which of it self is so dainty and delicate, to be
contemned. And it cannot be but that the same word, which your fathers and some
of your selves have run many miles to hear, is as dainty now as it was then.
And therefore it cannot be that the Lord will suffer this contempt, but either
there must be greater zeal, or of force we shall be spoiled of it. Thus far
concerning the second cause.

The third reason why death was grievous to this King.
As to the third, I shall touch it shortly, and so I shall end. The third cause
is this; he says, he shall see man no more among the inhabitants of the earth.
Now what a cause is this? This appears to be a very slight cause that he
should be grieved at his death, because he should see man no more. For I am
assured, there were men in his days whom he took no pleasure to see, and whom
he could not see without great grief, even such monsters as are now in our
days. This general must be restrained to this, as if he would say, I shall not
see men, that is, faithful men, honest and obedient subjects to God and their
King, of whose company I had delight, and whose protection I was, I shall see
these good men no more. He had such a care of the Church and of the Christian
subjects under him, that in the very hour of his death he shows his
compassion toward them, and is grieved that they should lack his protection in
time coming.

Well, Applicat^on.
the country is exceeding blessed that has such a Prince, who is endued with
the care of his subjects, and specially of the Church, that in his death he is
sorry that they should be deprived of his protection. And turn it over
again: As cursed and unhappy is that country, who has a King yt has no kind
of care or respect of his subjects, much less of Gods Church, which is the
best part of his subjects. Therefore it is every one of your duties that hear
me, and see what it is to lack this blessing, to crave of God, that he would
distill his grace into his Majesty's heart, which may move him to take up
another manner of protection then hitherto he has done. Oh, would to God it
were so. Thus far for the exposition of the causes shortly.

In all these causes, some things are worthy of praise, What is worthy of
praise or reprofe in these reasons.
and some things are worthy of dispraise; for I stand not to justify him in
them all. They are worthy of commendation, so far as they flowed from faith,
and tended to the glory of God and weal of his Church. They are worthy of
reproof, so far as they flowed from ye foolish affection and corruption of
nature, without the which none can be, so long as we be in this life. Then ye
see, the best goods yt we have to carry with us of our own, is this corruption
and foolish affection. No question, Kings have not this power to carry their
jewels and magnificenc^ with them; but surely they carry their vices and faults
of their government with them, which shall meet them. And surely, if this good
King carried any of this stuff with him, much more shall other Kings. And as it
is in Kings, so is it in every of us; we shall all carry with us virtues or
vices. If we carry virtue with us, then shall we have a good conscience to meet
us there.

Conclusion with an exhortation.
Then to end this matter, prepare your hearts, and make both hand and heart
void of the love and affection of the world, that your hearts being busied
only with the love of good things, ye may carry your hearts with you when the
Lord calls. And as your ears are bent to receive this word, so let it be
digested in your hearts, that in your death I may see the fruits and effects
thereof. And seeing we must either carry with us virtues or vices, the favor of
God to mercy, or the favor of satan to judgment, should not our whole
endeavor be that these foul vices may be removed out of our hearts? and should
not our whole study be, that our soul which is holden so fast bound in the
chains of wickedness, may be set at freedom and liberty? That we may have
melting hearts, acknowledging that by the blood of Christ our sins are
forgiven; that through a steadfast faith in his blood, and sure hope in his
mercy, we may seal up that peace which flows from the pacification purchased
by the offering up of his own body? Now when I see mine own conscience
pacified, and my soul so washed from the spots of corruption, that all my
sins are forgiven me, am I not happy? and this can never be, except in your
hearts ye be as attentive as with your ears ye are to hear me. But if this
matter as it is heard by the ear, so it were learned and remembered by the
heart, we should see greater profit in sanctification and newness of life
this day then we do, and death would not be so fearful to many as it is. For
the ready way to eschew the fear of death, is, not to delay your repentance,
but let the whole course of your life be a continual repentance. Happy is he
that learneth this lesson, and more then happy is he that follows it, and as
unhappy he, that never practices it. The Lord work so with us, and grant us
such increase of his Spirit, that we may follow it, and study to practice it in
our life and conversation. The Lord grant this for the righteous merits of
Jesus Christ; to whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all praise,
honor and glory, for now and for ever. Amen.

THE NINTH SERMON UPON ISAIAH, CHAPTER 38.
12 Mine habitation is departed, and is removed from me, like a shepherds
tent: I have cut off like a weauer my life: he will cut me off from the height,
from day to night, thou will make an end of me.

13 I reckoned to the morning, but he brake all my bones like a Lion: from day
to night will thou make an end of me.

14 Like a Crane or Swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a Dove: mine
eyes were lift up on high; O Lord it has oppressed me, comfort me.


IN our last sermon (well-beloved in Christ Jesus) the Prophet assures the King
of his health by a wonderful sign, Recapitulation.
which was given to him. The manner and form of the manifesting of the sign
was this; The King seeks a sign and the Lord grants a sign unto him: and
after the same manner that he sought a sign it was given to him. Thirdly, the
Lord manifests this sign by his own power and virtue, without the support
of any creature. The King seeks a sign, not that he is distrustful of Gods
promise, nor yet to tempt God as the wicked do; but he seeks a sign to
strengthen his belief in the Lords promise. He belieueth the promise, yet his
belief was weak: and to strengthen his weak faith he seeks the sign. The
thing that weakeneth his belief was this: The Prophet in an hour and shorter
space comes to the King, and proposes two contrary sentences: First he says
to him, Make thee ready thou must die; in an instant of time he pronounces
the plain contrary and says, Thou shall live: both these two could not
stand. Therefore he seeks a sign to strengthen his belief, whereby he might
know the truth of the last promise. This sign was given him as ye heard; and
look after what manner he craved it, after that same manner it is granted
according to his desire: The Sun is b^ought back, as also the shadow of it
in his Fathers dial by ten degrees, and the day which otherwise should have
lasted but twelve hours, by this wonder it is made to endure for the space of
22 hours. The sign was wrought partly in the dial, partly in the body of the
Sun. It was wrought in the body of the dial, because it was a public
work, see up in a public place at the head of the palace over against the
Temple: to the end the miracle wrought in it, which was in such an open and
common place, might be known to all the City, and consequently to all that
were in Judea. It was wrought in the body of the Sun, that the knowledge of
that work might come to the whole world, that the whole world who saw that
light, might see in that work a God whom they saw not so before. This sign
was exceeding fit and proper for the purpose, for by this sign the King saw
evidently that it was as easy to God to bring back his life to a flourishing
youth, which was hastening to decay, as it was to bring back the Sun, which
was very near to his going down. This sign is wrought only by the virtue of
God. For that general is true, There is no creature, yea not the devil
himself, that has power to show any true miracle. Then all those miracles
that are in the popish Churches, as the images of legs and arms, wax clothes,
and all the rest of that sort, are deceiving lies of the devil. The King
purchases this sign by his own prayer, to learn us this lesson, That
suppose the Lord be of mind and purpose to give us benefits, and suppose he
has promised to grant benefits unto us, yet he will not give them but to the
seekers, he will have us first seeking them before we obtain them. And so he
would learn us this exercise, to stand constant in honoring and worshipping
of him who has these benefits to give us. Before we entered into the song, we
declared unto you the whole course of this Kings life from the 14. year of his
reign; and in his whole course ye saw, that his whole life was a continual
falling and rising, a continual praying and praising of God: Praying in the
time of his falls and of his trouble, that the Lord would strengthen him by
his Spirit: And praising God for his victories, that he had so mightily
delivered him. In this we see an image of a Christian life, and of a Christian
exercise, to assure every one of you that while ye are here, your life shall be
but a continual falling and rising, rising by the special grace and mercy of
God in Christ Jesus. And therefore it becomes you to be occupied in the same
exercises wherein this King was employed: In the time of your falls and
troubles to be diligent in prayer, seeking strength of the Lord to endure; and
praising him in your victories. He that forgets to pray, forgets to rise,
and therefore take heed that in all your troubles ye have ever recourse to God
by prayer. We took the song to stand of these three parts: In the first part
is set down the great trouble, perplexity and perturbation wherein the King
was, what he said during this trouble, and what he did: In the second part
there is a rehearsal made of the great benefit that he obtained, how singular
and how excellent it was: In the third part he makes a faithful promise, to
be thankful to God for this benefit, to praise him all the days of his life,
and that so long as he lived he would never forget him. In the first part we
marked the circumstance of time when this trouble of mind ouertooke the King;
to wit, at what time the servant of God came to him, and told him it behooued
him to die: from the time he heard death denounced, incontinently the mention
of death strikes a fear and a trembling in him. It casts him in a great
perturbation of mind. Suppose he was a godly King, and indeed such a King of
whom there is as good mention made as of any other King in the Scriptures of
God, yet notwithstanding at the hearing of death he fears and trembles. This
death is indeed a renting asunder of those two parts which were appointed to
have remained together, and therefore it is no marvel, suppose the mention of
it strike a fear in the heart. Our own sin has procured it, and in some
measure it is good that we taste what sin has brought with it. It is true
indeed, our death that are Christians, is fully sanctified in the death of
Christ Jesus: But it is as true on the other side, that suppose our death be
fully sanctified, yet so long as we remain in this earth we are not fully
sanctified. And in respect there remains in us (yea in the best of us all) a
remanent of corruption, yea would God it were but a remanent; of this flows
this fear, trouble and perturbation of mind. It is true, that this faith and
the constant hope of a better life that dwells in the other part of the
soul, do temper the fear, mitigate the trouble, and swallow up the pain of
death: yet in respect of the corruption that remains, some fear must be, and
the greater the corruption is, the greater fear falls upon the conscience.
The chief corruption that grieueth us in the time of death, is the love of the
world, the cares of the world, the inordinate love of flesh and blood: So that
he that would make himself void of fear, must provide to rid his hands and
his heart of these inordinate affections: for experience (although unhappy)
teaches us, that there is no man that can part with that he loves without
exceeding grief. And therefore in the point of death, experience teaches what
it is to cast our affection on frivolous things that suddenly vanish. So I
say, now it is time to rid your hands and purge your hearts of such
preposterous affections, that death which unto others is so terrible, when it
comes it may be a blessing unto you. I show unto you that all those care were
forbidden goods, expressly inhibited by the King of heaven, which are neither
profi^able for you nor to the country whither ye go. And therefore I desired
you to carry with you the love of God, and the love of your neighbor in God:
And these kind of commodities shall both profit you, and be welcome to the
country whither ye go. In this trouble the first thing that he utters, he
says with himself, I see I must die, I am drawing near to the ports of the
grave. Suppose he was very loath to die, as his words do testify, yet he
makes him ready. It is foolish and false to think, that preparation to death
is a furtherance to death: No, the contrary is true. The readier ye are to die,
the more able ye are to live, and the less shall be your anguish when the Lord
calls. As to the reasons I will not insist in them, only the last reason
that makes death to be so fearful to this good King, was the great love
which he had to the Church that was in his country; the great care which he had
of his faithful subjects, who should lack by his death his merciful
protection. And in this I did let you see, that the country had an exceeding
blessing, where the Prince is so careful for the Church in his country, and of
his faithful subjects, that in his death he has mind of them, and is grieved
to depart from them. As on the other side, the Church must be as heavily
cursed, where the Prince has no regard of ye Church in his country, nor of his
faithful subjects. As to the reasons I will not stand precisely in justifying
of them all; I think as the word sounds, that there is some thing worthy of
praise and commendation in them, and some thing worthy of dispraise and
reproof; For so far as they flow of faith and of the good spirit of God, no
question they are worthy of praise, and so far as they flow from the Kings
unruly affections, they are worthy of dispraise. And surely, it appears by
the words, that his affections had been somewhat unruly. Well, the lesson that
I gathered was; This is the profit that we reap of these preposterous
affections, they draw our love from God to the creatures. And ere these
affections can be drawn from the creature, they bring such a grief unto them
as it were another death. Therefore the thing that we craved was, that ye
should set your affection upon God. The truth of love is in God, and therefore
it becomes you to bring your hearts from the creature unto God, and employ
your affection upon him, in whom only is solid joy. Thus far we proceeded in
our last exercise.

The heads to be treated of in this Sermon.
Now in the words which I have read, he returns to his complaint, and he
takes up his lamentation again: and in the first part of the 12. verse, he
utters his trouble wherein he was. In the end of that verse and in the verse
following, he utters the great rage and fury of his sickness. And in the 14.
verse he lets us see what he did in this great rage and extremity of his
disease.

Then to return to the 12. verse: I say in the beginning of it, he returns
to his lamentation, and he utters his complaint as he had wont to do,
bursting out after this manner: Mine habitation (says he) is departed and
transported from me. As if he would say, my life is to depart, and the Lord is
to transport it to another part, I see death is instant, and the Lord is
cutting off this present life of mine.

The manner of the transportation of the kings life, showed in two similitudes.
1. Similitude.
He lets us see the manner how his life is to be transported, by two
similitudes. The first similitude he takes from a shepherds tent: The second
similitude he takes from a Weauer and his web.

As to the first similitude, he says, his life is to be transported from him
like a shepherds tent: Look how the tents of shepherds are removed,
transported and removed, so, says the King, he saw his life to be subject to
the same transportation. It is known to you all that read histories, that in
the East hot countries, as namely among the Tartars and Arabians where the
shepherds in the summer seasons remain under tents, so often as they remove
their flocks, they remove their tents. And in our own country here, when our
shepherds remove their flocks, they remove their other necessaries, alluding
to that same custom: so would the King say, look how these tents are removed
in the summer season and transported, my life is subject to the same condition.
Doctrine to be gathered of the first similitude.


Of this similitude we have matter full of good doctrine: For this similitude
does first teach us, that there is nothing more instable and uncertain, then
is the life of man here beneath: There is nothing more subject to instability
then this life which we live in this body: For, as to the nature of tents, ye
see (whether ye call them tents, pauillions, or tabernacles, all is one) by
experience there is nothing more unstable nor uncertain to dwell in then is a
tent. For why? it lacks a ground, it lacks a foundation and stability, and
in stead of a ground it leans only to certain pinnes which enter not
deeply into the earth; and consequently by the lightest blast of every wind
they are blown up, and when the pinnes fail the tent falls: So the King
would teach us by this similitude, that this life of ours lacks a ground,
lacks a foundation, and lacks a stabilitie. And therefore the King in this
comparison, would send us to the life which has the sure ground, foundation
and stability, he sends us to that kingdom which as the Apostle, Heb. 12.
says, cannot be shaken by no kind of stormy blasts: And, as I remember, Heb.
11 9.10. there in these verses the Apostle makes a flat opposition betwixt
these tents that lack a ground and the City of God, saying; that as tents and
tabernables lack a foundation and ground, so the City of God on the contrary
has a ground and a foundation; and in steed of one, he calls them in the
plural number, foundations, Look, (says he) to the City that has the
foundations, whose craftsman and builder is the God of heaven. He expounds
himself what he means by the foundations, in the last verse, where he says,
Such a kingdom as cannot be shaken; that is, whose ground is so sure, that it
cannot be shaken nor totter by no process of time, nor stormy blasts. Then the
first lesson that ye have from this part of the comparison is this: Learn to
seek for the City yt has sure foundations, seek for the City that can not be
shaken. The Lord give you grace so to do.

In the other part of the comparison he lets us see, that so long as we are
in this life, we have no pernament abode nor certain remaining whereunto we
may lean. For as ye may perceive by the history of Genesis, the Patriarchs
dwelled in tens, to testify unto us two things: First, Why the Patriarchs
dwelled in tents.
to testify that they were no countrymen there, nor native borne men of that
country; but strangers and pilgrims in that country, and as they professed
themselves, that they were not only strangers of that country, but counted
themselus strangers so long as they remained on the face of this earth. The
second thing that they testified by dwelling in tents, is, that they were
minded not to remain there, it was not their purpose to fix their staff (as
we speak,) there: But they were upon their journey, and seeking the way that
leads homeward, the way that led to their native country, to the City that
has the sure foundations, as they confessed themselves. Then (I say) there is
another lesson that we may reap of his similitude: It teaches us that we have
no permanent being here, and we ought not to settle our hearts, nor cast our
love on any thing here; but seeing we are subject to flitting and removing, not
knowing what hour we shall be warned to remove, there is nothing more sure
then that we must remove, and nothing more unknown then the time. Therefore it
becomes us now in time while we have leisure, to transport our goods, and to
send them before us where we are to remain, to send our substance where we are
to abide for ever. For proof hereof your own experience teaches you, that
there is none of you who have warning and are certain that ye are to remove,
but ye will transport your goods and send your substance where ye are to abide.
Therefore, seeing yt this is concluded principally in all your hearts, that
there is no remaining here but we must remove, and ye are uncertain in what
moment ye shall be warned to remove, it becomes us to send our goods, substance
and riches before us. And if it be true that our Master says, that the heart
follows the treasure, let both heart and treasure be sent thither: surely
this is a singular lesson, if it were learned. For he is a mad man, and more
then mad, that will place his felicity where he is not to remain, and where he
knows not what hour he shall be warned to depart: I am assured there is none
here but they will say as I say. Yet on the other side it is as true, there is
none here but he does as pleases himself. Therefore I will call only one
thing to your minds. I remember there is a parable set down, Luke 12.16.
concerning a rich man who did cast down his barns and enlarged them for his
great abundance: when all this was done, he says to his soul, Take thy rest,
eat and drink and take thy pleasure, for I have laid up enough for thee. This
insatiable fool (as our master calls him there) knew not that he was tenant
at will, and he knew not of the thing that was to come: but as if he had had
the times and seasons at his command, he lays this resolution with his soul:
But ye see in this parable how soon he is disappointed, and his soul gets
not the use of this conclusion: for that same night it is taken from him. Well,
I know there are none so gross that in words will lay this conclusion with
this rich man; but I know again, there are none so wise but in effect they do
it: There are none but they say the same to their soul in deed. Always I say,
all these conclusions are false and proceed of a foolish brain, and the
wisdom that brings on this conclusion is plain folly, and their souls
shall be disappointed. There is no certain conclusion but that which flows
from the truth: This word is sure, therefore thou must have thy warrant out of
the word of God: this word says thou have no certainty, no not an hour here.
Therefore this word admonishes all to be ready. And if ye would be rich,
seeing riches is the blessing of God, be rich in good works, and send your
riches before you, and be rich in God, that ye and your riches may remain
together there for ever. If I might obtain of you this lesson and no more, I
would think this days exercise well employed. Then let men take such a
resolution with themselves that they may be so disposed, that when the
messenger of death comes, he cannot come amiss, come when he will. Thus far
concerning the first similitude.

The other similitude is taken from a Weauer and his web. And in the words he
says after this manner: The second similitude.
I have, says he, wrought my life, or wouen the web of my life to the
off-cutting. As the Weauer weaueth his web, so is my life wouen ready to be
cut off: as if he would say in effect, I see I have shortened my days, there is
no remaining for me, I have brought my life to the off-cutting; I have
prevented the just time by mine own doing, I have procured my own death. In
which words he would teach us, that by his own doings he has procured and
hastened his own death, and by his evil life shortened his time. It is true
indeed, that as by sin death entered into the world, so by the multiplying of
sin our death is hastened. For that disease is not that strikes on body or
soul, but it flows of sin, yea the death of soul and body flows of
sin. The thing that shorteneth our days is sin, the thing that makes our
days evil and troublesome, is sin, says Jacob. Sin makes our days full
of anguish and grief, full of trouble and sorrow: Sin wrappeth us in a
thousand cares and exceeding vanities whereby we are deceived, and sin
consumes us with unprofitable labors and travels which are not necessary. And
what more? Sin weakneth this body of ours by deceivable pleasures, it vexes
our mind with such fear and terrors as I cannot express them: Shortly, all
the evil that ever God inflicteth, it flows of sin.

And if it be true that this good King had occasion to say, that his sin
procured his death: Application.
If so godly a King, so good a youth, had occasion to say this, that sin
shortened his days, what may the youth of this country say? what may I pray
you, our young Nobility say? Surely, if this King walked in such paths as made
him to draw near to his death, it appears well that they have taken post in
this way, every one (as appears) contending who should run the speediest
course to an evil end, except God prevent it. The Psalmist says, that the
bloody man shall not live half his days; if this be true, what shall become
of the bloody adulterer, of the sacrilegious blasphemer, much more the Papist
and the Idolater? In the which and infinite other vices they run post. If a
man having this one vice, shall not end the half of his days, how much more
shall his days be shortened in whom these vices concur all in one? this is
sure, it cannot fail. I leave the great men, and come to the inferior sort;
Look to the profane multitude, ye see in their behavior how speedily they
run this post. There are two sinnnes which are joined together in them: to
wit, gluttony and drunkenness. And there are none but they know, that these
two are the fountains of all bodily diseases, and of the chief diseases of
the soul, whereby they perish for ever. Now what, I pray you, says Solomon,
Prouer. 23. with whom (says he) lodges fear, sorrow, contention, debate and
strife? with whom but with the drunken man, and with him that loves wine? and
yet ye see how the greatest part in city and country are defiled with these
vices, procuring so far as in them lies, an evil end to their own souls.
It is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of God, and yet so many as let
them loose to these vic^s must fall into his hands. For it cannot be but the
wrath of God from heaven must be powered upon such ungodliness. And there is
none who has powered forth his love and taken himself to these vices, but
surely, ^xcept he be wonderfully prevented, he shall perish in his sin. And
this is not one of the least judgments of God: For John 8. it is counted one
of the most terrible judgments, when the Lord threatens the Pharisees that
they shall perish in their sin. If the word which is now sounded might have
been able to have called men back, surely it has been clearly and
continually sounded: but when I look to the effects, it appears well that
this word has been sounded to the hardening of the greatest part, and to seal
up their judgment against the day of the Lords wrath, which day they have
blotted out of their minds and put out of their knowledge, that they should not
see it. The Lord nourish this light by his Spirit in us, whereby we may see
that there is a heaven and that there is a hell; that seeing the danger, we may
prease to eschew it; and seeing the felicity, we may haste us to embrace it.
Would God it were so. Thus far for the first part of the similitude.

He goes forward and he says, He has cut him off from his beam, or from the
throombs that go about the beam, as ye call them. As if he would say after
this manner: As the Weauer does cut off the web from the throombs of his beam,
so the Lord has taken resolute purpose to cut off my life from his beam. In
this changing of the persons he lets us see a great discretion and knowledge
in himself; he ascribes the cutting off to God, but he takes the cause to
himself; he ascribes the chastisement to God, but he takes the sin which
is the cause of the chastisement, to himself; and he acknowledged God to have
his beginning in this work, and himself to have his hand in it also: he
acknowledges God to be a doer, as in all works God has his working: And there
is no work so abominable as it flows from the instrument, but as it flows
from God it is both holy and just. So this wise King takes the cause of his
chastisement from God to himself: Happy is he that in time condemns and
judges himself; that he may eschew the condemnation of God. Thus far
concerning the first part of our division.

Now in the end of this verse and of the verse following, the King sets
down the great fury and rage of his sickness. It was a pestilent fever, and
so the raging fury behooued to be exceeding great. He utters the vehemence
of his disease in the words following, and he speaks as if he would say after
this manner; If God hold on as he begins, by the same sickness ere night he
will make an end of me. And in the verse following he says, I propound to my
self and I looked for it, That like a devouring Lion he should bruise my
bones, he should bruise them shortly, yea ere night. For I take all this to be
spoken on one day.

His words beside the disea^e of the body, utter the disease of his soul.
The words indeed (the terrible disease of the body excepted) utters more.
For it is not possible that so good a King could have spoken so of God, except
he had felt some other thing then any distress in his body. So in uttering of
these voices he lets us see, that he had the pains of soul and trouble of
conscience joined with the disease of his body, and that he felt God to be as
it were a consuming fire, it is not possible that he could have uttered such
voices of God, as to call him a devouring Lion, except he felt another kind of
fever then any natural fever. Ye see David when he is in the like extremity
of body and soul, he cries Psalm 6. that his bones are vexed and do quake
for fear.

Of all the diseases that can come upon any person, no question the disease of
the soul and conscience is the greatest. And of all the diseases and troubles
that overtake the conscience, no question this is the greater, when with the
sight of sin which is enough and more then enough for any to sustain, when
with this sight there is a feeling of the wrath of God joined. O! then this
sickness is insupportable, when with the sight of sin is joined a touch and
feeling of the wrath of God: Merciful God, if the horror be not exceeding
great and terrible, so that it is a wonderful matter that the soul can stand
upon any assurance of faith, but it should inco^tinently run to desperation!
Yet it is true, that there is never a one of the chief servants of God but he
has had experience of this either less or more: and he has been touched with
the feeling of that hell which the reprobate shall have in a full measure.

The ends why the Lord suffers his dear children to be in such extremities,
Why the Lord suffers his children to fall into the disease of the soul.
are these, to let them see expressly what Christ has suffered, while as he
suffered the full weight of his Fathers wrath inflamed against their sins.
And not only against their sins, but also against the sins of all the
elect: He casts them, I say, into this extremity, to let them see what
Christ has suffered for them; how far they are bound to Christ, and how
precious that redemption purchased by his blood should be unto us. For it is
not possible that any man can make much of that benefit which they know not to
be a benefit: so it is not possible for you to make much of heaven, except you
have had some taste of hell. And therefore it is that he sends his servants
to heaven, even by the gates of hell; to let them see that there was no
conniuence between the Father and the Son. For it might have been thought
(as many of the wicked think) that there had been a conniuence between God
the Father and his Son Christ: And therefore I say, he lets them taste of
these distractions and pangs of hell, that they may say: I see he has felt
hell in another sort, that has redeemed us from hell: And where that I cannot
sustain this which is tempered in a small measure, it has been a great burden
indeed which our Savior has sustained, whilst he sustained hell for our
sins, and for the sins of the whole elect. O then, this exercise is to let
them see how far they are bound to God.

Application.
The dissolute life of the profane multitude lets us see clearly, that
there is never a one of them that have known the meaning of this article, and
this is a sealed letter to many of you all: Therefore it is that they make no
account of the death of Christ, and think that he died for himself. For it
appears they have no touch nor remorse of sin, which is the thing that will
destroy them except it be prevented. Their manifest contempt testifies this
over well, for they go forward without remorse in all kind of sins, the more
they are forbidden. I remember the Apostle is more sharp in his threatening
against these men, then any man can be: For he says, Heb. 10. at the end: If
he that contemned Moses or any part of his laws died without mercy, how much
more shall he be worthy of punishment that contemns the person of the Son
of God? that treads the Son of God under foot, and counts his blood an
unholy thing? who will not apply the mercy of Christ to themselves, and reject
the Spirit of Christ whereby they should be sanctified. These threatenings,
suppose they take not effect suddenly, as also the promises, suppose they be
not believed of you, yet they must be uttered by us, that these walls may
testify and bear witness to your conscience, that there was a Prophet here:
These things were told us, and we had time to have done them if we had listed.

Ere I leave this, it is necessary for you all that ye mark the examples of
these heavy diseases. There are few that are touched with them, although they
are very worthy of marking. I say, it is necessary that the examples of these
diseases be marked, whether it be men or women that have them, we should mark
them, if it were but to learn this lesson: We may see how easy it is for God
to repress the pride of the flesh: we may see how easy it is to the Lord to
daunt the foolishness and wantonness of youth; in an instant of time, in the
space of twelve hours, a glorious King is brought to the gates of death. Then
ye should say with your selves, It is time for us to change our course, we see
how easy it is to the Lord to bring high conceits low. The Lord does this to
this King, and he seeks no fire nor sword, he uses no external armor, nor
he seeks no foreign instrument to do it, but he takes of the stuff that is
within him, he takes the matter of sin wherein he was conceived and borne,
unhappy sin which is the matter of all judgments and plagues, it is the
matter of death both in body and soul. This matter within our selves is as
ready at the Lords hand as if it were in his own storehouse, to plague thee
best, that intendedst to gainstand him. The^ ye that have your health and the
benefit of it, learn to use it well: for if ye abuse it and use it to defile
your bodies, which he has appointed to be the temples of his holy Spirit;
look how easy it was to him to bring the King low, as easy and far easier
shall it be to him to bring the best of you down. Then I say, ye that have the
benefit of health, employ it to the honor of him, and comfort of his Church,
that gave you it. Thus far concerning the second part of our division.

In the third part contained in the 14. verse, he lets us see what he did in
this great extremity, the raging fury of his sickness being so great, he
lets us see what was his exercise: and he says (as ye may see in that
verse,) that notwithstanding God handled him so, yet he makes his recourse to
the same God who plagued him, and he seeks and presses friendship at the
same God who threatened him. He seeks him as ye may see in that verse, two
manner of ways, By what waie^ Hezechiah sought God.
so long as his tongue served him, that the extremity of his disease took not
away the use of it from him. And whereas the extremity of the disease took
his speech from him, that he could not utter his mind by words, yet he leaves
not off, but where he might not utter his mind by distinct voices and words, he
seeks him by a dolorous mourning, like to the Dove, and by a heavy
lamentation, like to the chattering of the Swallow or Crane. And last of all,
he in his gesture lifts up his eyes to heaven. By this means he retireth
himself to God when the benefit of the tongue was taken from him.

The words that he speaks so long as liberty is granted to him, are few, but
very sententious. Where he says, it has oppressed me, refresh me or weaue me
out, persisting in the similitude: As if he would say, I see well the rage and
fury of my sickness is so great, that neither force of nature nor any
natural means is able to comfort me, the force of the disease has overcome
all force of nature and natural means: Therefore, seeing there is no help in
nature, I make my recourse to the God of nature, to whom it is very easy to
give help where nature has refused it. And therefore I desire of the
omnipotent God that he would weaue out the rest of the web of my life, to
restore me to my health, to his glory and to the comfort of his Church. This I
think be the sum and meaning of his prayer, whether he mourned, whether he
moned, whether he spoke or chattered.

Why the K. sought the prorogation of his days.
As to the words, the petition would only be considered. It might appear
strange that the King should seek the prorogation of his days, as if there
were not a life better then this, or a day after this; but if ye weigh the
matter well, and consider the race of the history, ye shall find that he had
many particulars that moved him to seek the prorogation of his days; and
chiefly we know that Manasses his son was not yet begotten, he lacks as yet
children, in whom he might see the pledges of Gods favor and accomplishment of
the promises made to him and his fathers house; and specially of that promise
concerning the Messiah. Now lacking children, in whom he should see the
accomplishment of this promise, had he not good reason to seek the lengthening
of his days until he see the promise accomplished?

As to the general, I insisted in it before; In what respect it is lawful to
seek the prorogation of days.
and therefore I shall be the shorter. I say, it is lawful in some respect to
crave prorogation of days; for seeing it is the benefit of God, seeing the
servants of God have sought it before, and seeing the Apostle counts it a
special mercy of God, as we may see in the person of Epaphroditus, Phil. 2.
verse 29. we must also esteem the same a special mercy. Whosoever knows
surely in their mind, that the lengthening of their days will serve better to
the glory of God, and comfort of his Church, then present death; I say, it is
lawful, and they may in faith crave it; Although there is a general condition
to be looked to in this, as in all other petitions, that ye submit your will
and affections to be ruled by the good will of God, in such sort, that ye have
your life and the commodities of it ready to lay down at his feet, ready to
offer up in sacrifice when it pleases him.

Of this I shall gather one or two notes, and so I shall end this present
exercise. The first thing that I will you to mark, First lesson.
is the contrary voices that this King utters in the 14. verse and in the
verse foregoing: Read these verses, and ye shall see how contrary he is to
himself. In the 13. verse ye see he utters voices full of doubting, and as
it appears, full of despair, at the least full of doubting, he utters such
voices as if God had been his deadly enemy. In the fourteenth ver. he utters
the flat contrary. And he makes his recourse to the same God, whom he seeemeth
to make his enemy, in the 13. verse, and he seeks a blessing of him; which
testifies that he trusted in him: for none can call on him in whom they trust
not. So this is his behavior in this disease: one while he thinks God a
consuming fire, another while he has his recouse to him as his only refuge.
One while he utters voices full of doubting, another while he utters voices
full of confidence. Now the question arises: Is it possible that faith and
doubting can have place both in one soul? Whether faith and doubting may be in
a soul or not.
I say, it is very possible, and there is never a one of ye servants of God but
they have had it. And this is sure, that there is no conscience so at rest,
that it is without al trouble, and no estate of men so quiet that is without
some inquietnesse in this life: for it is the custom of God, to bring his
dearest children sometime into doubting, and suppose he do so, yet in the mean
time he susteineth them from despair. Know we not that this faith of ours is
imperfect, subject to a continual growing and progress, but never coming to a
perfection so long as we are here, subject to stammering, to manifold errors,
wrastlings, and doubtings? Yet all these imperfections are freely pardoned in
the righteous merits of Jesus Christ. Where is that soul, or who is he that
has that soul, that if he will examine his faith with the absolute perfection
that is in the nature of God, to whon nothing is pleasant but that which is
perfect, who shall not fall in doubting so soon as he beholds him? Examine
your faith with that perfection which is commanded in the Scriptures, and with
that progress that is wished for in the holy Scriptures, and who shall not
doubt? By this examination, let him but cast down his eyes on the manifold
corruption yt is in him, and on the heavy judgment of God that hangs over
both body and soul for sin, and who will not doubt? It is not possible but
he must doubt, having his eyes bent on himself and his affections, wherewith
he is defiled. So I say, doubting is common to all the best servants of God.
There is none of you that will esteem Paul to have been one of the worst; and
yet his words declare, that there was a doubting in his soul: for 2. Corinthians.
4.8. he says plainly, we are always in affliction, but not in distress: We
are in doubt, but we despair not. So he grants that there is a doubting in
the soul that has faith; only he denies despair: As if he would say, I
give you to understand, that doubting may stand in the soul with faith, but
not to despair: for the word despair, imports of it self, the cutting of
the pillars of our belief. Therefore faith and despair cannot both stand in
one soul: But faith and doubting do lodge in my soul, and shall lodge in all
the souls of the faithful to the end of the world. Under doubting, What the
Apostle comprehends under doubting.
he comprehends all the errors, tentations, stammerings and wrastlings
wherewith our faith is assaulted full often, which makes us sometimes incline to
despair, sometimes to hope: whilst we look on our selves, to despair, and
whilst we look on the mercy of God in Christ Jesus, to hope. Now the Apostle
takes this doubting to himself, as a thing whereunto all Christians are
subject.

There are few of you that know what this means, although it is certain ye
may be visited this way; therefore keep in memory this, that suppose ye have
not to do with it your selves, yet ye may use it when you visit others: for
seeing we carry about with us these bodies of sin, (for the spirit of faith
and sanctification fills not all the soul in this life) and the largest part
of the soul being defiled with this remanent corruption, it must utter such
stuff as it has, to wit doubting and stammering. Now seeing there remains
in the greatest part this corruption, of necessity it must be occupied in
doing, it must be working. And what brings it forth? Sin. And what does the
multiplication of sin, but hinders our faith and persuasion, and casts a
veil and a mist betwixt the sight of God and us? and therefore the Prophet
calls it a separation, whereby we are deprived of the sight of God which we
have in the Mediator Christ. Seeing then so long as we are in these bodies of
^lay, we are subject to sin, we cannot but doubt. For suppose we fall not
into these gross iniquities, yet sin and the guiltiness thereof brings a
doubting, and casts a veil over the eye of our faith; and this veil being
on the eye of our faith, out of question it hinders our persuasion, and makes
us not to be so steadfast in our belief as otherwise we would be, for he that
sees evil, will often times take one thing for another. So this corruption is
the cause of our doubting, which in some measure is ever in the soul.

Now what learn we of this? first we learn this comfort, yt it is no new
thing to the servants of God, Doctrine.
to utter contrary voices in their great trouble, to utter voices proceeding of
a deep sense of the love and the mercy of God in one word, and in another word
to utter a fe^ling of his hatred and wrath, as if he were our deadly enemy.
Sometimes this King utters words full of doubting, sometime he seeks
benefits of him as he were his good friend. Christ used these contrary voices.
There was never a special servant of God, but they had them: And Christ had
them himself, more then any servant that he has; not proceeding of any
doubting or mistrust in the mercy of his Father, (because in him there was no
root of infidelity,) but coming of the feeling of his extreme wrath for a
time. Look Matthew 26. There he says twice over, Let this cup depart from me.
The contrary voices that Christ used in his trouble.
And again, he takes up himself and he sath, Not I as will, but as thou will: These are quite contrary; he says to God, why have thou forsaken me, and
yet he calls him, my God, my God. So I say, it is no new thing, to the
servants of God being in trouble, and having some root of infidelity abiding
still in them, to utter voices sometimes full of doubting, and sometimes full of
faith. Thus far for the first. Now again, to testify that the soul having
faith has been subject to doubting, and as faith is on the one part, so
doubting is on the other: this is a thing that has been in all the servants of
God, and shall be to the end of the world. The example of this ye have in
David, ye have the example of it here in Hezechiah, and in all the rest of the
good servants of God. Then suppose many of you know not what I say, yet keep
the lesson in memory, for it shall stand you in great good steed. For this is
sure, that suppose the pains of the body be great, yet there is as great
difference betwixt the pains of the body and the pains of the soul, as is
betwixt God and the creature. Ye would choose rather all the torments of the
body that can be devised, ere ye felt one touch of the consuming wrath of God
in the soul. But yet these words will not effect it, for words will not
mollify the heart, except the Lord by the power of his Spirit work in the
heart. And therefore I have to crave of God, and ye have by your prayers to
assist me, that ye be not unfruitful hearers of the word; but seeing there is
a Hell, ye may study to prevent it. Now last of all, The King teaches us how
to pray in extremity.
ye see the King learneth you a new fashion of prayer, and I beseech you mark
it. When the extremity is so great that he may not utter nor speak distinct
voices, and his speech is taken from him, yet he leaves not off to pray: but
has recourse to his lamenting and mourning, conterfeiting the distinct voices
of the Dove, Crane and Swallow; by this diversity of tunes, uttering his great
anxiety. And what fashion of prayer is this? I say, this kind of sighing,
mourning, and lifting up of the eyes, is as good language to God, as any
language spoken by the tongue. He understands the meaning of thy sigh and
groan, better then thou understand me that speak. And how is this? It is
his own Spirit that raises these sighs and groans, that moves these
mournings. And I pray you, knows he not the meaning of his own Spirit? This
the Apostle declares, Romans 8. He knows the meaning of his own Spirit, and
therefore whether this Spirit move us to sigh, to mourn or to speak, the Lord
understands all alike. Note.
Then learn this form of prayer, when the Lord visits you with sickness,
in such sort that the use of the tongue is taken from you, and ye may not lift
up your hands to praise him, nor lift up your eyes to look unto him, yet let
your moan be made; yea further, suppose the heart would not make moan with
the mouth, yet let the mouth, suppose it has no help, honor and glorify
God. Yea, I say more, suppose the case stand so, as it may be that the heart be
contrary to prayer, and the mind will not assist the mouth to pray, yet ere God
be not honored, let him be honored with the lip; and if the mouth will not do
it, let the hand do it. And every member in like manner, to the which the Lord
ha^h given leave, let the^ honor God; because even this striving against the
hardness of the heart, and provoking of it with the outward members of the body,
is pleasant to God: and no doubt it is he who gives this will as a special
grace, howbeit we get not incontinently the performance. If ye can learn this,
it is not possible that ye can want prayer: for prayer is such, as sometimes is
uttered by tears, sometimes by sighs, sometimes by words, and sometimes by
gesture. And ever let thy Spirit be well occupied, musing upon God and
spiritual things: and whether thou eat, whether thou drink, take thy rest,
or what ever thou do, let thy Spirit have ever thy mind on God, comfort thee
with this. When the Lord visits thee with such kind of disease, that thy
tongue is taken from thee, let the rest of thy members honor him. And if ye be
not so diseased your self, yet in your visitation comfort others herewith,
assuring them that this kind of language is as well understood as if it were
spoken with the tongue. I end here: This king is not exempted from trouble, he
is not exempted from tentation both of body and soul. There is none that cast
them to live godly, but of force they must suffer trouble: There is none that
will make them for heaven, but of all estates, prince or people, or what ever
they be, they must walk in the strait way. As to them that walk in the broad
way, they shall grow worse and worse, as the Apostle says, till they come to
such an height, until at the last the Lord anger them by the same sins,
whereby they anger him. For this is his just judgment, that as thou have
angered him by Adultery, he shall anger thee by the same sin: Have thou angered
him by blood, he shall anger thee by blood also. Have thou angered him by
blasphemy, he shall anger thee with the punishment of blasphemy. Have thou
angered him with drunkenness, he shall anger thee with the punishment of
drunkenness. For every sin has the own punishment in the selfsame. Then as
ye would eschew the punishment of sin: so cast you to eschew sin, that so
far as the Lord will give you grace, ye may keep your selves free. And so ye
shall have, not only joy and long days here, but everlasting joy after this,
purchased to us in the righteous merits of Christ Jesus: To who^ with the
Father, and the holy Spirit, be al honor, praise and glory, for ever and ever;
Amen.

THE TENTH SERMON UPON ISAIAH, CHAPTER 38.
15 What shall I say? For he has said it to me, and he has done it: I shall
walk weaklie all my years in the bitterness of my soul.

16 O Lord, to them that ouerliue them, and to all that are in them, the life
of my spirit shall be known: that thou causest me to sleep, and have given
life to me.


IN our last Sermon, (well-beloved in Christ Jesus) the King returned to his
wonted grief, Repetition.
and took up his old lamentation again, uttering his trouble in these words:
My habitation is departed and transported from me; as if he should say, my life
is ready to depart, death is instant, and my removing is at hand: he shows
the manner of his removing by two similitudes, the one similitude is taken from
a shepherds tent, the other from a Weauer and his web. As to the first, look
in what manner we se the shepherd tents flitted and removed, after the same
manner I see my life to be flitted and removed. In the which we are taught, not
to settle our standing here, nor to fix our anchor here, but that we may be
ready to remove, because we are under warning, and know not what hour the Lord
will call on us. There is none yt is sure that he must change habitation, and is
out of doubt in his conscience that he is to remove, that will settle his heart
in that place which he is not able to keep; but being assured that he shall
remove, he will send his household stuff and substance before him. If this be
true in earthly things, how much more ought we, seeing the Lord gives us
leisure, to send our substance before us? And as it is true that the heart
follows the substance, let both heart and substance be sent to heaven, where
they may both meet us to our comfort. Be rich in God, be rich in good works,
and that kind of substance shall be able to convoy thee, and shall serve and
stand in stead to thee both in heaven and earth. The second comparison was
taken from the Weauer and his web, and the effect of it is this: as the Weauer
brings his web to the off cutting, so, would the King say, I see I have
brought this miserable life of mine to the off-cutting, I have procured my
sudden and untimely death by mine evil life, I have hasted this messenger. It
is true, that all the diseases of the body, and the chief diseases of the
soul flow from sin. And as death entered by sin, so by multiplication of
sin, death is hastened; sin shorteneth our life, sin makes our days
evil, sin makes them full of grief and sorrow, sin inuolueth us in a
thousand cares, sin wrappeth us in infinite unprofitable labors: Sin
weakneth our body by deceivable pleasures, sin vexes our mind with such
terrors as cannot be expressed. Abeit if this good King had occasion to say,
that his evil spent life spurred him to his death, what may our young nobility
say? if it be true that one sin, blood, cutteth the half of the days, as
the Psalmist says; how much more shall an heap of sins concurring in one
person shorten the days? The sacrilegious blasphemer, and the bloody
adulterer, and infinite more other sins, concurring in one person, shall not
these shorten this miserable life? The thing which they fear most, and would
willingliest eschew, that same thing (such is their judgment,) they run
headlong on. As to the profane multitude, ye see these two vices, gluttony and
drunkenness, whereby they d^aw on themselves sudden death: and there is never
a man, but he is subject unto one sin or other, which shorteneth the thread
of his life, and draws on that which he would eschew: Well, I will not insist
in these occasions of death; take heed whether ye walk in mercy, or in your
own sins. If ye walk in your own sins, of all judgments it is the most
terrible to be left to your self: now mercy is offered, and therefore ye that
would be translated from death to life, use this time diligently. In the second
part of that exercise I showed you the rage and fury of his sickness, we did
let you see the weight of his fever was so great, that it made him think that
God was a devouring Lion, ready to bruise all his bones to powder: It made him
to look that both soul and body should be taken from him that day ere night.
We showed that these voices could not flow from a temporal pain only, but
there behooved to be a fire in the soul, a further pain then could come of any
bodily disease in the earth. Of all troubles that come unto man, the trouble of
conscience is the greatest; and of all other troubles this is the chiefest,
when besides a sight of sin, there is a touch of ^he insupportable anger and
indignation of the living God. It appears by these voices, that the King felt
a touch of this wrath, whereby God appears to be a consuming fire. It is the
custom of God to bring his children into these extremities, that feeling the
pangs of hell, they may see how precious the death of Christ ought to be unto
them: How far they are bound unto him, what is the duty they owe unto him
that went betwixt them and so bitter a punishment. This kind of extremity
teaches us how easy it is for the Lord to repress the pride of the flesh,
and to beat down this wantonness of our filthy nature. This glorious King
in the space of 12. hours is brought to the ports of the grave and of
desperation in a manner: So ye see how easy it is for the Lord to bring the
proudest flesh low, and to do this he needs not fire nor sword, nor any other
instrument but such as we have within our selves: he is able to make our own
darlings to be our greatest tortures: For we carry within us either one viper
or other which shall destroy the soul, except the Lord prevent in mercy. Last
of all, we show how this King in his greatest extremity behaved himself,
notwithstanding God appears to be a fire to his soul, yet he retireth to the
same God: and where he might not by words utter the grief and trouble of his
heart when the benefit of his speech was taken from him, yet he ceasseth not,
but he sigheth and makes his moan, counterfeiting the Dove, the Swallow and
the Crane, he chattereth and lifts up his eyes, using all such gestures: so
long as he had his tongue he prays, and the words are few which he speaks,
but they are sententious; It has oppressed, refresh me, or weaue me out. As if
he would say, The force of this disease and fury of this fever is so great,
that it ouercometh all force of nature: Therefore, seeing nature will avail
nothing, I fly to the God of nature to whom it is easy to support nature, and
of this God I crave health and continuance of my days; I crave that as he has
begun, so he would weaue out this web to the glory of his name and comfort of
his Church. From this last part we showed you two things; we marked first these
contrary voices into which the servants of God burst forth in their greatest
troubles, uttering sometimes words full of doubting, and sometimes full of
confidence. In the 15. verse God appears to have been a consuming fire and a
raging Lion to him. In the 14. verse, he makes his recourse to the same God,
and suppose he threatened him, yet he reposeth upon him. Upon this we did let
you see, first, that doubting and confidence may have place both in one and the
selfsame soul: There was never a servant of God but had experience of this:
yea it is proper to the children of God to be subject to this doubting, suppose
in mercy they be kept from desperation. For seeing this faith of ours as long
as we are here is imperfect, how is it possible that any faithful soul
weighing their faith with that perfection which is in God, to whom nothing is
pleasant but that which is perfect, how is it possible, I say* but that soul
must doubt? As the faithful again see the Scriptures and look to that
perfection that is required therein, look to the progress and increase of
faith that is required therein, and see on the other side their great wants,
how far we are from this progress, how is it possible but the soul must
doubt? Again, laying aside this trial, and looking down upon our behavior to
these sins that are in our flesh, and to the lusts whereunto our hearts are
inclined, and to the angry face of God against sin, how is it possible but
we must doubt? Therefore I conclude, There is never a servant of God but in
their souls they had this doubting; looking on themselves they doubted,
looking on the mercy of God in Christ Jesus they believed. That notable vessel
acknowledged himself to be subject to this doubting. 1. Cor. 4.8. where he
says, We are always in affliction, but not in distress, we doubt, but we
despair not. That good vessel acknowledged doubting, only he denies
despair: He grants that this doubting has place in the soul with faith,
but not despair; seeing despair cutteth the pillars of our hope, and
consequently of our faith: Therefore it cannot remain in the soul with faith.
Under doubting he comprehends all other errors, stammerings and wrastlings
whereby the soul is troubled, wrestling between hope and despair: But all
these imperfections are freely pardoned in the righteous merits of Christ, or
else there were no place of salvation for us. I wished those who knew this, to
comfort themselves with it; and they that had not experience of this, to
remember the lesson that they might make use thereof, if at any time it shall
please the Lord to assault them with these terrible visitations. The last
lesson that we gathered of the last part was this: We learned of this King to
make our recourse to God in our greatest anguish of body and soul, and when
the benefit of our speech and tongues are taken from us, that we cannot pray
to God in distinct language, yet not to leave off, but make recourse unto him
by sighing of the heart, by lifting up of eyes, by continual groaning, moning
and lamentation; that in these things God may be glorified: for it is true, the
Lord knows the meaning of thy sigh and sob, as well as thou know this
language which I speak. And how is this? because they are raised by his own
Spirit, and are the works of his own Spirit: and I pray you, knows he not
the meaning of his own Spirit? Therefore when the benefit of the tongue is
taken from you, that ye may not praise him with your tongue, then let every
member of the body and soul concur to praise him as long as there is any of
them free. There is none exempted from these troubles, there is none can enter
into the kingdom of heaven, except first he taste of these troubles: There is
no estate, Emperor, King, or Prince, that looks for life, but he must enter
in that narrow way. Only they that are appointed for damnation walk in the
broad way, but terrible is the narrowness that abides them in the end. They
have a short time of largeness to be recompensed with everlasting straitness:
Therefore their estate is rather to be lamented then envied. Always, ye that
make you for the city that has her foundations, and for the kingdom that
cannot be shaken, ye should not be weary to go forward in the narrow way, but
what ever trouble he has laid upon the soul or body, let us take it in
patience; for these are the pledges of mercy, such as make conformity
between us and Christ Jesus, in whom only is true comfort and salvation. Thus
far we proceeded in our last exercise.

Division.
Now, in that which I have read, he enters into the second part of the song.

Now to return to the 15. verse, I say, while as the King is musing and
pawsing upon the greatness of the benefit, ravished in an admiration of the
wonderful works of God, he cannot contain himself, but he bursteth forth in
these voices of praise and thanksgiving: What shall I say? A patheticke and
cutted kind of speech, signifying that his heart was so stuffed and swollen, his
tongue would not serve him to express the matter. What shall I say? As if he
would say, Where shall I borrow any words to express the matter? Where shall I
borrow praise, that I may answer so great goodness and kindness as I have
found in my particular, in this God of mine? I turned not so soon unto him,
and the tears distilled not so soon from mine eyes, but he accepted my
person, he granted my health, and promised me his favorable and merciful
protection all the rest of my days. How am I able to meet these benefits in
word, much less in deed? Yea, it is not possible to the tongue to utter that
which the heart thinks. But suppose I cannot as I would, I shall praise thee
as I may, and as thou have given me the grace.

A notable kind of thanksgiving learned of his predecessor David, who when he
was in like case, Three things that the King grants in his thanksgiving.
used the like form of praise, saying: What shall I render to God for all his
benefits? A form of praise wherein this good King grants three things: first
he grants this ingeniously, that the benefit which he received was free,
freely bestowed on him without any procurement of his: Yea, he acknowledged
that he procured the quite contrary. Secondly, he grants that he has
nothing in himself to meet this benefit: yea not one word, much less a deed,
yea scarsly is he able to render praise for it. Thirdly, he testifies that
suppose he may not in such measure as his heart would, and as the worthiness
of the benefit required, burst forth in the praise of this great God, yet he
would not be idle. And surely, suppose he speaks few words, yet in these few
he gives the signs of a more thankful heart, then if he had spoken a cart
full of words, or uttered millions of words. It is not the babbling of the
tongue that the Lord looks to; but he looks and has an eye to the inward
disposition of the heart, he looks to the constitution of the spirit, because
he is a Spirit. And therefore the Lord likes of this Kings heart, suppose his
words would not serve him.

Since those corporal sacrifices in the old law ceased, there is not a
spiritual sacrifice more acceptable to God then is the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving: Sacrifice of thanksgiving have succeeded to corporal sacr^fices
of the law.
for the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving sanctifies not only thy person,
but all the benefits which the Lord bestows on thy person. For that which is
true in meat and drink, is true in all the rest of the benefits which are
pledges of his mercy in Christ Jesus. Now the Apostle testifies in the 4 to
Timothy, first Epist. 4. verse, that thanksgiving sanctifies our meat and
drink, and makes it both holy and wholesome. As this is true in these
creatures, so it is true in all the rest of the benefits and blessings of God.

In thanksgiving three things are to be marked.
So when I look on this thanksgiving, I am moved, yea I am compelled to mark
three things in it; first, I am moved to mark the wonderful goodness of
God. Secondly, our horrible ingratitude. Thirdly, the great arrogancy of the
enemies of God, the Papists. A good conscience thanketh God ever for his
benefits.
) there is none of you that has purchased any benefit in a good conscience,
but ye will thank God for it: for a good conscience will never shake off the
memory of God altogether. So when ye forget to thank God, it is an evident
argument that the benefit is purchased in an evil conscience: For the which
cause the curse of God is hanging over your riches. Which appears either in
your time, or suppose the Lord be long-suffering, in your posterity. Then to
testify that the benefits are well come by, be thankful to God for them, and
purchase nothing but that whereof ye have a sure warrant in your conscience.

He shows in the next words the greatness of the benefit, and he takes it
up briefly under two words, The King shows the greatness of the benefit
received.
after this manner: He has said it, and himself has done it: he said it in
his promise, he did it in keeping of his promise; he both said and did it
himself, that the whole glory of the work might appertain to him: he said
it freely, for I procured the contrary; he kept it as freely: for the Lord is
true, suppose all the world be false. Ye see how properly he takes up under
these two words, the mercy and truth of God; the mercy of God in promising,
the truth of God in keeping and pe^forming of his promises: The mercy of God in
promising freely, for he is debtor to no man, and therefore whatsoever he
promises, he promises freely: for there is none of us can make claim to any
better condition, then the natural branches might have made claim to; and if
ye list to read of their natural inclination, ye have many places of
Scripture: Deuteronomy. 32. Exed. 32. Isa. 48.
and in special I send you to Deuter. 32. Exodus 32. Isaiah 48. For there
speaking of the Jews, the Lord says, I foreknew thy stubbornness, I saw the
sinews of thy neck were of brass, and thy face of iron, I foresaw that thou
would remain false and unfaithful: yet notwithstanding I made my promise
freely unto thee, and as freely as I made it, I kept it as feely. It is I, it
is I, says he in the 43. of Isaiah, Isa. 43.
that puts away thine iniquities: it is I, that for mine own name sake
calls not thy sins to memory. If this be true in the natural branches,
how much more is it true in us? Then we have nothing to lay betwixt us and the
judgments of God, but his mercy freely offered us in the blood of Christ
Jesus. It is God, says he, that has done this: As if he would say, all the
rest are liars; only God is true, and ere he fail in one jot of that he
says, he is able to make the world turn vpside down, and to inuert the order
of nature, as ye may see in the former part of the Chapter, in bringing back
of the Sun by ten degrees. And therefore this teaches us, that there lacks
not in God neither a power nor a will; only on our part there lacks an hand,
an instrument to receive and believe the promises: And therefore suppose there
be carts full of promises, and as sure promises that there can be nothing
surer, it is not possible that these promises can avail any thing, except the
Spirit prepare a way for himself, except the Lord create in the soul faith.
Therefore all your care and diligence should stand in this, to crave that with
the hearing of the word, the Lord would conioyne the working of his Spirit:
that faith being wrought, and the heart being opened fully, we may lean and
repose steadfastly on the faithful promises of God.

An effect which issued out of the benefit.
In the end of the verse, he shows a blessed and happy effect which issued
out of this notable benefit: he says, I shall henceforth all the rest of my
years walk, ouerpassing the bitterness of my soul: As if he would say, by
this benefit, the grief of my conscience and the terrors and troubles of my
soul are removed. He makes no mention of the rest of the benefits, of the
health of his body, of his sure and prosperous estate, which was both promised
and given unto him. But he touched that which troubled him most, the grief of
his conscience was the thing that troubled him most, and therefore he makes
mention only of it. This bitterness made such a deep impression in his
soul, that in ye 17. verse he calls it bitter bitterness, he has no words
to express this bitterness, what ever it was. Where the judgments of God
make such a print in the soul, it is long ere sin can blot it out: and so
long as the memory of the judgment remains, it is easy to be thankful, it
is easy to go forward in doing some part of our duty, it is easy to stand in
aw yt we fall not into the hands of God; but when we blot out this memory, we
return to that same puddle out of the which we were delivered. Therefore I
commend to you to crave of God a sanctified memory, that ye may keep fresh the
judgments of God which either ye have seen in others, or felt in your own
bodies, that the feeling of these judgments, may serve you to be thankful to
him, and may make you to stand in aw; and beware to fall into the hands of a
consuming fire.

Now, this King finding this benefit so sweet, The sweetness of the benefit,
makes him to burst forth into the praise of the word, first in general next
in particular.
he is compelled to burst forth in the praise of the word of God, which brought
forth so good an effect: And first he praises it generally from the good it
does unto all men: Then he prayseth it in particular, from his own particular
experience and comfort which he received in his own person. This doctrine is
necessary and notable for these times. First, then he praises the word, from
the good it works in all flesh; By these things (says he) men live: that
this, by the force of these words it comes to pass, that we enjoy the
benefit of this natural life, whereby we live in this body upon earth: For the
Lords word calls on things that are not, as though they were, and his word
makes them to be. By his word he created heaven and earth, by his word he gave
man life and breath, and whatsoever is necessary to him: By his word he
assigned to him the earth, the seasons and bounds of his habitation: To this
end that man being created according to the image of God, he might seek God;
and no doubt, he is not far from every one of us: For as the Apostle says,
Act. 17. In him we live, move, and have our being. And as this is true in this
natural life, so is it as true in the entertainment of this life: for by the
benefit of this word we are sustained. For our life stands not only in meat
and drink, Math 4.
but in every word that proceeds out of the Lords mouth, Mat. 4. that is, in
every thing whereunto the Lord gives power to nourish: For it is the Lords word
that gives power to nourish us. And suppose meat and drink were removed, the
Lord is able to make stones to nourish us. This good King acknowledged this
good effect to come of the word, and therefore he praises the word.

Now, after he had praised it from the general effect, he goes forward, and
praises it from his own particular experience, and he says in the conclusion
of these things: The life of my soul stands; that is, in thy saying and
doing, in thy truth and mercy, in thy promising, and keeping thereof, stands
the life of my soul: as if the King would say: Not only have I this natural
life which I live in this miserable body, by the benefit of the word, but I
have a more precious life, the life of my soul and spirit, which discerns me
from the rest of mankind, which puts me in a better estate then the rest of
the world, which makes mine heaven to begin here, which never shall end. For
as there is a life and death of the body, so there is a life and death of the
soul. The life of the body may be conjoined with the death of the soul, and
the death of the body, may stand with the life of the soul. The life of the
body stands in the presence of the soul; the life of the soul stands in
the presence of the Spirit of life. Except the soul be borne again by the
Spirit of life, ye shall never see the face of God; before the soul be
quickened by the Spirit of life, it remains a dead carrion, dead in sin, dead
in the lusts of the flesh (as the Apostle says) Ephesians. 2. Colos. 2. And
consequently, there remains but a carrio^, both in soul and body: the soul
being as void of a spiritual and heavenly life, as a carrion is of a natural
life. The words of the Apostle in that place, and in sundry places are, Dead in
sin, dead in trespasses, and in the uncircumcised lusts of the flesh: Where
death has place, life must be wholly extinguished; and where death has place,
there can neither be half life, quarter life, nor a breath of life: But so it
is, that death has place in our soul by nature: Therefore by nature there
cannot be so much as a spark of that heavenly life in it. And if there be not
so much as a spark of life in it, where is that half or quarter life whereof
the Papists speak? They will not have it dead, but lamed or crooked: The
Apostle says in plain terms, that it is dead; and therefore that spiritual
life must be wholly put out, and consequently, all kind of will to good, and
all sight of God in Christ is banished away; and this death of the soul
remains perpetually in us, until such time that the participation of the
Spirit of life, which is in the body of Christ Jesus, free us from the law of
sin and from the law of death which is in our own nature. Romans 8.

Now would ye know whether your soul lives or not? How a man shall know if
the Spirit of life be begun in him.
Would ye perceive whether this Spirit of life be begun in you or not? I will
give you certain effects, whereby ye may examine the life of the soul. There
are many effects given us in the Scriptures; as namely, Gala. 6. But I leave
them, and choose three special effects, whereby every one may discern of the
life of the soul. There is first, that inward peace of conscience. There is
next, that joy and rejoicing under trouble. There is thirdly, a love of God, a
love of virtue, and an hatred of vice: where ever any of these three has
place, there the soul lives, where thou find thy conscience refreshed, and
thy soul recreate from the great terrors and manifold pangs of sin, no
question the soul lives: for this is the effect of the right Spirit, and this
is the right peace whereof the world is ignorant, that passes all natural
understanding. The more thou makst this peace to grow, ye more thou live in
thy soul. The more this peace grows, the more sin decays, the more thou
castest out all that baggage of sin, that troubles the quiet estate of the
conscience. In a word, the only thing that troubles the soul, that
disquieteth the conscience, and that we have to cast out, is sin: For sin
is the only thing that seuereth us from God, in whom there is only true peace
and quietness to be found. Therefore our exercise should chiefly stand in
this, to expel this enemy and monster sin, and to possess that saving juice
and wholesome peace that passes all understanding.

The second effect, whereby we may know that the soul lives, is the joy and
rejoicing under trouble. For we know by experience, that trouble of it own
nature, cannot bring forth this joy, but brings forth the contrary effects,
as sadness, heaviness and sorrow. Now, where the Spirit is so disposed that
we rejoice under trouble, this is a sure argument of the blessed Spirit, the
Spirit of life, which only quickneth the soul; and this joy makes us not
only to rejoice in trouble, but to glory also, as says the Apostle: For
surely the cross of Christ is our only joy, and the shame of Christ is our
only honor. Hereby we perceive the great glory that the Lord has called us
to, that not only he makes us to believe his word: but to suffer for him
also: only ye have to take heed to your troubles: For this joy accompanies
not all troubles, but only those troubles that are suffered for Christ's cause,
for righteousness sake, and are vnderserued. For those troubles that are
deserved, the like joy is not to be found in them.

The third effect, whereby we may know that the soul lives, is the love of
God, and hatred of evil: Where this love is kindled in the soul, where we
begin to know God, to love him and to taste of him, (for it is not possible
that we can love him, except we have a taste of his sweetness) this love make
us like to God, for God is love, (as John says.) If love dwell in thine heart,
God dwells in thine heart, and this love is a sure pledge of the life of the
soul; where this love is, of necessity also there must be a hatred of evil.

Now try and examine, if the Spirit of life has wrought these effects in thy
soul in any measure, if it were never so small: it is a sure argument that
this life is begun, and the life which God has begun, he will perfect it.
If the love of God were never so little, and the hatred of evil were never so
little: if any of these effects were but in a small measure, ye may be sure
that Christ dwells in your hearts by faith, and that the soul lives. Ye
that feel this, (as I would that ye all felt it) prease to nourish and
strengthen this life; not weary in well doing, but go forward in working the
works of the Spirit. Sow not in the flesh, go not forward in the lusts and
appetites thereof: for ye may learn of the Apostle, what advantage this labor
brings: to wit, shame and confusion, death of the body, and death of soul.
Romans 6. But on the contrary, go forward in nourishing of the Spirit, and in
well doing. Sow in the Spirit, and as the Apostle says, ye shall reap an
everlasting and incomprehensible life.

This Spirit then is said to be nourished and corroborate in our hearts, How
the Spirit is said to be nourished in us, and how he is said to be banished.
when we nourish the light and knowledge of God in Christ Jesus, when we edify
our selves in our most holy faith, and continue in the exercise of prayer: As
by the contrary we banish this light of the good Spirit, and by our evil doing
we banish the knowledge of God in Christ, when we put out this light, diminish
our persuasion, and leave off the exercise of prayer: For by the same means
whereby the soul lives, they being removed, the soul dies. Therefore those
that would live this way, they ought to nourish the knowledge of God, they
ought to be exercised in well doing, in hearing of Gods word, in edifying them
in their most holy faith, and in continual craving of grace and mercy by
prayer.

Now the King says, he has this life, and he has experience of the good word
in this (for I take this to be a different life from the other, whereof he
spoke before, to wit, this is the life of the soul, which proceeds of the
word of promise,) for this word is the power of God to salvation, to all them
that believe. Romans 1. Set your hearts, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 32, upon this word,
for it is not a vain word; it is your life and felicity. The words which I
speak (says our Master, John, 6.) are Spirit and life; And from, this John
calls him the word of life, the bread of life. Peter says, whom shall we go
to? for in thee are the words of life. It is he that has life in himself,
John, 5. From this also it is said, 1. Cor. 15. that as the first Adam was made
a living soul, 1. Cor. 15.
so the second Adam was made a quickening Spirit: and by reason we are made
participant of this spirit, by the ministry of his word, therefore it is
called the word of the Spirit; and by the same reason we that are his Ministers
are counted the Ministers of the Spirit, as the Apostle calls us, 2. Cor. 3.
They that would read further of the praise of this word, I remit them to the
19. Psalm, where the properties of this word are exactly set down. I will end
here.

Who so looks upon the precious effects of this word, and on the other side,
looks upon our unhappy behauior; I am assured, it would astonish any
Christian heart, to behold how the Lord can suffer our contempt so long as he
does. For formerly, whereas there was skarsly crummes of this bread of life to
be had in this country, men sought it out diligently, and ran to have it with
such zeal, that they compassed both sea and land, they spared neither travel
nor cost; but forcibly as it were, thronged and thrusted in, and made irruption
in this kingdom: But now when it has pleased the Lord to offer unto us great
plenty of this food, we so despise the bounty and liberality of this good
God, that we turn this great grace and mercy of his, into judgment and
vengeance upon our own heads. And as to the greatest part of the multitude,
they disdain it so spitefully, that they had rather embrace the leaven of the
Pharisees, and draw them to that company where they can have no other food,
but songs, maskes, mummings, and unknown Languages: And so think to feed
their souls by the mockery of God.

Now as to the Gentlemen, Earls, Lords, and Barrons, they are so drunken with
sacrilegde, that ere they will part with these goods, they had rather part with
the life of their soul; yea, when it comes to this, that the word cannot be
entertained but by their expenses, they make no choice, but had rather lose
their souls an hundred times, ere they would bestow a halfepenny upon the
Church. This is true in the greatest part: so it is the Lord that wonderfully
continues the light amongst us, that keeps a face of a ministry in
Scotland. There is no good entertainment, but a very great poverty in the most
part of the Ministry. See then if the judgment of God pronounced, 2. These. 2.
goes not fast forward, who has given us over, as appears, to be deceived by
the mighty power and working of the Devil; in such sort, that every man
strives, who shall put his appetites furthest in execution. Oh! unhappy and
wrathful country, that has so abused the merciful calling and great
benignity of God; it is a wonderful thing to look upon this matter, and to
consider our great ingratitude. The more that knowledge grows, the more
conscience decays, as if conscience and knowledge could not both rest in one
breast: look to the works of all men, it appears that the bringing in of
light has banished conscience which was in the time of darkness. What can be
the cause of this, that as light grows, the effect of light decays? It is a
thing that passes the understanding of man, and the end of it shall be more
then terrible. Is it not more then wonderful, that the more that this Country
is watered with the saving and heavenly dew, the more our hearts are hardened?
What must this bring forth? It must bring forth at the last, an eternal
consumption, which consumption must be so much the greater, the greater that
our contempt is: For it is not possible, but that ground which is so often
refreshed with rain and dew, and yet brings forth no other thing but
thorns and briars, but at the last it must be burnt up. How is it possible
that thorns that are provided for the fire, but they must be consumed by the
fire? And seeing our deeds testify that we are nothing but thorns, of
necessity we must be burnt up, except the Lord work otherwise then I have any
expectation: For the longer that judgment is delayed, it shall be heavier when
it lights, seeing the contempt is so great. therefore the Lord give you
grace, that as ye know there is a Hell and eternity of pain, and as ye would
eschew it, so ye may take up a new course of life. But this cannot be, except
the Lord work it by his holy Spirit, except he forget our sins, and assure
us of the remission of them in the blood of Christ. And therefore, I have to
crave with you, and ye with me, that this may come to pass, that in the bowels
of his mercy we may eschew that terrible damnation, from the which the Lord
preserve us, for Christ Jesus his Sons sake. To whom with the Father and the
holy Ghost, be all honor and praise, now and for ever. Amen.

THE ELEVENTH SERMON UPON ISAIAH, CHAPTER 38.
16 O Lord, to them that ouerliue them, and to all that are in them, the life
of my spirit shall be known: that thou causest me to sleep, and have given
life to me.

17 Behold, for felicity I had bitter grief, but it was thy pleasure to
deliver my soul from the pit of corruption, for thou have cast all my sins
behind thy back.

18 For the grave cannot conf^sse thee, death cannot praise thee, they that go
down into the pit, cannot hope for thy truth.

19 But the living, the living shall confess thee as I do this day, the Father
to the children shall declare thy truth.

20 The Lord was ready to save me: therefore I will sing my song all the days
of my life in the house of the Lord.

21 Then said Isaiah, Take a lump of dry figs, and lay it upon the byle, and he
shall recover.

22 Also Hezekiah had said, What is the sign that I shall go up into the house
of the Lord?


IN our last lesson, well-beloved in Christ Jesus, the King entered into the
second part of his song: And first of all as ye heard, Recapitulation.
he bursteth forth of hand into the praise of God. Then after he sets down
the greatness of the benefits received in two words, with the chief comfort
that he found. And in respect the comfort flowed from the word of God, he
entered into the commendation of the word of God. Then first of all, whilst
the King is musing and pausing upon the greatness of the Lords benefits, and
ravished in admiration of the greatness of the works of God, he cannot
contain himself any longer, but the bursteth forth into the praise of God
and says, what shall I say? A patheticke and abrupt kind of speech, whereby he
testifies that his tongue would not serve him to express the matter, his
heart was so swollen with praise, that he was not able to utter it in any
quantity of words. In this doing, suppose his words be few, yet he shows
himself more thankful then if he had uttered a million of words. So
thankfulness stands not in the multitude of sillables and voices, but it
stands in the heart and dispos^^ion of the soul. Where the Lord finds the
heart thankful, there is no word that can flow from that heart but it is
acceptable. And howsoever the Kings words be few, yet in his words he grants
three things. First, he grants the benefit was free and freely bestowed.
Secondly, he grants that he has nothing to render for it; yea not so much as
one word, much less a deed. Thirdly, he lets us see that howso^^er he was
not able to answer to the worthiness of this benefit, yet he was not idle, but
he utters praise as God gave him the grace; for it is not possible that a
good conscience and a godly soul can altogether forget God, but in the due
time it will ever thank God for his benefits; so ^^at whosoever either
forgets or casts off this exercise, they testify their wealth to be evil
purchased, and that there is a curse hanging over them and their riches both;
which curse appears either in their own times or suddenly after in their
prodigal posterity. Therefore ye that would have the curse removed in time,
learned to thank God for his benefits, that ye may possess them with the
blessing of God to you and yours. Therefore he takes up the greatness of the
benefit, and comprehends it under these two words, He said, and he himself
did it: he said it in his promise, he did it in accomplishing of his promise;
he did it and said it himself, that the whole glory of the work should
appertain to him; he said it freely, for the King confessed that he deserved
the contrary; he did it as freely in keeping his promise. For suppose all the
world be false, yet God remained true: ye see how properly he takes up under
these two words the mercy and truth of God: his mercy in promising, and his
truth in accomplishing. All the promises which the Lord makes, they flow from
his mercy, and all his accomplishings, they flow from his truth. His promises
from mercy, why? He is debtor to no man: His accomplishings from his truth,
why? He is truth it self, and there is no promise that he has made but he
will keep, yea he will inuert nature rather, as it appears in the drawing
back of the Sun whereof ye heard: and heaven and earth shall perish ere a
jot of his promise fail. Yet notwithstanding this is true, that there is such
a constancy and fidelity in him, all these promises will not avail us,
except the Lord prepare our hearts; yea except he sanctify our hearts by
means of faith, that in our souls we may see this truth, we shall never
regard it; and except he give us a heart to apply this truth, all the promises
which he has made, and is to make, serve for no use to us. Therefore it is the
duty of all Christians to be instant in craving, that the Lord would prepare
their hearts by faith, that seeing him in their minds, and feeling him in their
hearts, they may find his mercy and truth, and repose in them for ever. After
this we entered into the recommendation of the word of God, and generally we
praised the word from this, that we have the benefit of this temporal life by
it; as this is true in general, so he goes forward, and praises the word
from his own experience in particular, and he grants that not only he has
the benefit of this temporal life by the word, but of the spiritual also. And
as he has the life whereby he lives in his body by it, so he has by it the
life whereby he lives in the soul. For as there is a life and death of the
body, so there is a life and death of the soul. The life of the body may be
conjoined well with the death of the soul; for we may live in the body, and
be dead in the soul at one time. Also, the death of the body may stand with
the life of the soul: for we may depart from this life, and go to a better.
The life of the body stands in the presence of the soul, but the life of
the soul stands in the presence of the Spirit of life: except our souls be
borne anew again by the virtue of that Spirit of life, it is not possible that
we can see God and taste of his joy. For by nature we are not only hurt, lame
and maimed, but altoge^her dead in sin: so that look how void a corpse is of
a natural life, as void are we of a heavenly and spiritual life. The reason
is this, where death has place, there life must be wholly put out: But by
nature death has place in us: therefore the spi^ituall life must be wholly put
out. If the Spirit of life be wholly put out, there remains not so much as a
breath, out of the which any good cogitations or actions may proceed. If so be
there is not so much as one breath, where is all that free will of the Papists,
where is that integrity which remains in the filthy nature? Then I say, we
naturally remain in the death of body and soul still, until that by the
pa^ticipation of the Spirit of life which dwells in the body of Christ,
until I say, that this Spirit free us from sin and death: And so until this
time we shall never mount above the clouds, nor see the face of God. And
therefore as I exhorted you the last day, so I insist in the same exhortation
now, that every one of you mark and perceive your selves, whether you have
such a life begun in you or not. I gave you three effects which will never
deceive you. The first is, if ye find your selves refreshed and recreate in
your spirits from the terrors of your conscience and the fear of sin; which
recreation and refreshment of the spirit, is called that peace that passes all
understanding, whereof the world is ignorant: he that finds any of this, if
it were never so little within him, no question he has this life begun in him,
and the more this peace is augmented, the more the life grows. But this peace
grows by remoouing of sin. Therefore our whole study should be to remove
sin: for the only thing that troubles the conscience is sin. Take away
sin, the conscience shall be at rest: Wherefore this was the chief effect I
willed you to take heed unto. The second effect is joy and rejoicing under
trouble: For we see trouble of the own nature brings not forth this effect,
but rather brings forth sorrow, heaviness and lamentation: Then when our
spirit is so disposed, that under trouble we rejoice and glory in it, this is
the Spirit of life. This joy is not in all troubles, it is not in the trouble
which we procure, but only in the trouble which we sustain for righteousness
sake, and which we sustain for Christ his sake. The third effect is, if ye
have a love of God and good men, and a hatred of evil; where these effects are
in any measure, no doubt but the Spirit of life is there. As by the contrary,
where there is a love of wicked and evil men, no question, let them speak of
Christ as they will, the spirit of the devil has full dominion. This Spirit
of life we show was entertained by nourishing of the knowledge of God, when we
edify our selves in our most holy faith, when we nourish the exercise of
prayer. As by the contrary the Spirit is put out, when by our evil doings we
put out the knowledge of God, when we diminish our persuasion of his mercy in
Christ, and fall from the exercise of prayer. Then ye that have this life
begun nourish it by well doing; for by well doing, no question our faith is
corroborate. Delight therefore in well doing, sow in the Spirit and not in the
flesh, run not with the thief, nor consent not with the murderer: for so ye
shall be participant of their punishment; but sow in the Spirit, and of this ye
shall reap an everlasting and comfortable life, where otherwise, of sin, ye
shall reap nothing but shame and everlasting condemnation. I have discoursed
long on this head, because it is very necessary, and I would wish you to
consider of these things. Think on the great benefits of God granted unto this
country: Think again upon our ingratitude and unnatural behavior. There is
no Christian that will weigh these two in one balance, but he shall conclude
that it is wonderful why the Lord suffers iniquity in this country so long
to be unpunished. Formerly when there was but crumbs of the bread of life, they
ran to seek it, so that they compassed both sea and land, and spared neither
travel nor cost to be ingrafted into the kingdom of Christ: But now when
there is plenty of it, we have taken such a lothsomnesse thereof, that we
abuse the liberality of God offered to us, and turn his grace and mercy into
vengeance on our own heads. For as to the multitude, ye see that they have
already preferred the leaven of the Pharisees, and gone to mumchances, mumries,
and unknown language wherein they pudled before. As to the noble and
gentlemen, they are so drunken with sacrilege, that rather then they will
render these goods, they will hazard both body and soul. There is none but
they see this, and have cause to lament it. I cannot but be ravished in
admiration when I see these two, to wit, the more that light is offered, our
hearts are the harder; the more that light grows and knowledge increases,
conscience decays; as if knowledge and conscience could not dwell both in one
country. The more light increases, the more well doing decays: which
testifies that the darkness wherein the Papists lived, keeping a conscience
in respect of us, shall rise and condemn us that in so great light have lost
all conscience. This is a part of my wonder. Now what must follow of this? The
Apostle, Heb. 6. lets us see, that the ground which is often watered and
refreshed with rain in due season, and in the mean time brings nothing
forth but briers and thorns, which are only meet faggots for the fire,
shall be burnt up in the Lords judgment. Application.
To apply this, howsoever the judgment be delayed, of necessity there
remains an utter burning up, which consumption must be the greater, the
greater that the light is: For the greater light, the greater contempt; and the
greater contempt, the heavier must the judgment be. And surely, I look with
my self and am in a constant expectation, that except matters proceed
otherwise in this country then they have done, it shall be made a spectacle to
all other countries in the earth. Thus far we proceeded in our last exercise.

Now in the end of the 16. verse, he continues and he prayseth that same
blessed word of God, from other effects which he found in his own person, and
in the end of this verse he says; By the benefit of the word I have obtained
health of body: For as sickness had taken all strength from me, and had
spoiled me of my force, by the benefit of the word I am restored to my
strength, to my force and wealth again: Yea not only by the benefit of the
word am I restored to my health, but by the same benefit I am preserved in my
health, and continue therein. So that look from the beginning: First, he
ascribes the life of the body to the word: Secondly, he ascribes the life of
his soul to the word, he ascribes the health of his body and soul to the
word: And last of all, he ascribes the continuance of the health of body and
soul to this word. What comfort is there to be found, but it is in the word?
What comfort can a Christian heart wish, but it is in the word? Yea I say more,
it is not possible to the mouth nor to the heart of man to express the comfort
which the soul has in this word. It is not possible to the mouth to utter the
joy which it works in them in whom this Spirit is effectual. Notwithstanding
all this great benefit that flows of the word, let us see who runs to this
word to seek comfort? If we look to the profane multitude, yea to the best
of us all, there is never a one that runs to this word until all worldly
comfort do fail us: But when nature and all natural means has left us, then
we run as it were compelled to the word; yea we are so late in running, that
often times we get an evil answer when we come, and the gates are violently shut
upon us, as they were on the foolish virgins. Well, the word is daily and
continually sounded: Therefore seek to get comfort of this word in time. Look
that ye hear this word with great reverence, and study to practice it daily
more and more in your daily life and conversation.

Now in the 17. verse of this Chapter he notes the time: Division.
First, when he fell into this disease: Secondly, he lets us know the manner
how he was delivered. As to the time when he fell into it, he says it was in
time of peace, after he was delivered from the hands of Sanacherib, and when he
was at ease in great wealth and abundance; and as he himself confesses, when
he was beginning to forget God and to abuse the great benefit of his delivery;
at that same time God begins to pull his ear, and he casts him out of the
hands of a fearful war into the hands of a terrible plague.

I marked in the entry of this Chapter some things upon this circumstance. And
therefore I content me only with this observations; We may perceive by this
same circumstance, how hard a thing it is to flesh and blood to bear the cup
of great wealth and long health even. Yea it is a thing altogether impossible
to flesh, to bear the cup of prosperity and health equally any long space,
but except the Lord exercise us by one exercise or other, hold us in awe and
tune our ear, like fed horse we begin to repine.

Therefore I say, seeing this is a common sickness unto all flesh (as I have
spoken) we have to seek our counsel of Agur the son of Iake, who fearing to
fall into these inconveniences desires two things of God: first he prays
that he will remove all vanity and lying words from him; that is, that he
will remove and forget his sins, and deliver him from evil. Secondly, that
he will neither tempt him with over great abundance, nor yet with over great
poverty; that he would not tempt him with over great abundance, lest should
forget him, nor yet with over great poverty, lest he should speak evil of
him; but chiefly he craves of God that he will grant unto him his daily bread;
that is, unto every one of us according to the nature of our calling and
estate, so much of these temporal goods as he knows meetest for his glory
and our salvation. Then to eschew the inconveniences of abundance, which do
make us forget God, and of poverty that makes us to blaspheme God, beg of God
that he would grant you your daily bread.

But I pray you, what marvel is it, Application.
that a wealthy and glorious King in the time of his greatest prosperity
should fall into the ignorance of God? What marvel is it that a King, who
commonly takes unto him an absolute power, and has none about him but
flatterers for the most part; and who continually drinks in vanity at all
his senses like water, what marvel is it that lie fall into the ignorance of
God? when we see our own mean Lords who are not Kings, to fall into such
proud contempt, that they are always ready, as appears, to take up open
wars against God? so that Julian was no greater professed enemy then they are
like to be if they continue. Suppose a King fall into this ignorance of God,
what marvel is it, seeing that these mean Lords in very mean wealth do the
like, yea and the greater? Well this King was chastised in the mercy of God,
that he should not fall into the condemnation of the Reprobate. And that man if
he be not chastised in time by the mercy of God, he shall find it terrible to
fall into his hands. It is terrible to fall into the hands of a consuming fire:
sport with flesh as they please, but jest not with God; he shall find in
experience if he run out this course, that he shall curse the day of his
birth, and disclaim the hour that ever he saw this light, except that same
God whom he blasphemed, preserve him in mercy.

In the end of the verse he lets us see the manner how he was delivered, The
manner how the King was delivered.
and he shows in the end of that verse, that it pleased the Lord to turn his
bitter bitterness into a far better contentment of spirit. The way whereby
he did it was this, he removed his sins from him, he forgave him his
iniquity; for except the Lord had forgiven him his sins, it had not been
possible that the bitterness of his soul and conscience could be removed.
Then so soon as he turned him to his God, acknowledged his life bygone, and
sought mercy by all manner of ways, as sometimes by word, by groaning, by
tears, by sighs, by dolorous moan and lamentation, and by all kind of humble
gesture, he obtained mercy: so that the Lord did cast his whole sins behind
his back. The cause that moved the Lord to show mercy, he notes in the
midst of that verse. There was no occasion in the King, for he deserved the
contrary; it was only the love of the Lord, only the kindness of the Lord in
Christ Jesus his Messiah, who was to come of this King himself.

In the manner of his deliverance, this King acknowledged three things which
are worthy of marking. First, the King acknowledges, Sin is the only thing
that is punished in the wicked, and purged in the godly.
that sin is the only cause of our misery, whether it be in our conscience,
body or soul; surely this King speaks very true. For there is nothing that
God can hate in us but sin, there is nothing that he can correct in us but
sin; there is nothing that his furious jealousy can burn up but sin;
there is nothing that he can purge in us but sin. Take away sin, and the
punishment of the wicked shall cease: yea, there shall be no such thing as a
wicked one, and the purgation of the godly shall not need. So both punishment
and purgation shall cease, sin being taken way; for sin is the only thing
that is punished in them, and purged in us. Now this King acknowledging this,
ran unto God, confessed his sins, and found mercy. Lesson.
So note the lesson: Whether the Lord visit us with trouble of body or
conscience, seeing that sin is the cause of our trouble, let us run the
high way to God, examine our bypast life, acknowledge our offenses, and run
unto the throne of grace for mercy: And whosoever runs to that throne, shall
find mercy in the day of his greatest necessity; this is the first thing that
he acknowledged.

The second thing that he acknowledges is this; he acknowledges the remission
of his sins, Remission of sins cures all diseases.
(the best and surest cure that can be applied to any disease.) For there
cannot be a better cure, nor a surer cure, then to remove the cause of the
disease: Therefore the removing of sin cures the disease. The unhappy world
when they are visited with any disease, they run only to the body, and seek
the cause of the disease only in the body, as though the body had the only
wit; they run never to the soul; when in the mean time the body is but an
instrument to the soul. For if the soul were well, it is impossible that we
could be diseased. Therefore, seeing the cause of the disease lurketh in the
soul, when the Lord visits you with any disease run to the soul,
acknowledge that sin is the cause, lay the fault where it is, and crave mercy
of God; for this is the ready way to cure our diseases. Would God this lesson
were learned, for if it were well observed, we should not see so many kind of
pestilent diseases raging in this country, as at this day we do.

The third thing the King acknowledged, is, that it is not his own integrity
that procured his deliverance; he acknowledges, that it was not his innocence
in life, nor his good deeds, as may appear in the beginning of the chapter:
For in his prayer he appears to have made an ostentation of his good deeds
and innocence of life: but here in the end of this verse he resolves this
doubt, he lets us see it was the mercy of God in Christ Jesus, that was the
only cause of his deliverance. Thus far for the meaning of the words.

Now let us mark the form of speech: The form is this, because (says he) he
has cast all my sins behind his back. This form of speech is borrowed
from our custom. For those things that men may not behold, that are filthy and
abominable, we cast them behind our back that we may not see them. When God
forgiueth he also forgets.
Now sin being the only thing which is abominable in the presence of God,
when he forgiueth us our sins, he is said to cast them behind his back. The
only thing yt hides the countenance of God from us, is sin; for there is
nothing that can separate man from his creator, but sin only. And what lose
we, when we are separate from the countenance of God? We lose true pleasure and
perfect pleasure: There can neither be true nor perfect pleasure, but in the
sight and countenance of God. And whilst we are by sin debarred from his
countenance, we are deprived both of true and perfect pleasure. Then the
diligent care of a Christian should stand in this, that sin debar him not
from the countenance of God: But we should be diligent in begging mercy for
Christ his cause, that enjoying his countenance, we may have satiety of
pleasure to last for ever. The second thing that I mark in these words, is
this: Where he says, He has cast all his sins, etc. he says not, he has
cast a part, and l^ft another part: he says not, that he has forgiven venial
sins, and left mortal sins; but he says, all sins, of what sort, rank,
or degree soever they be, he has cast them all behind his back. Al these
sorts of sins that sever us from God, and deteine us from his countenance,
may be all brought under these three sorts. Under the first I understand this
original corruption, this foul puddle, this rotten root, of the which all
these rotten fruits do flow and proceed: This corruption, in the which we are
both conceived and borne, which makes us the children of wrath, dead in sin,
and in ^he uncircumcision of our flesh. Under the second sort, I comprehend all
motions, cogitations, and actions of our whole life, whereby we decline never
so little, and go aside from that perfect duty which we owe to God and to our
neighbor: So, in a word, I comprehend under this second sort, all our actual
sins. This natural corruption, which we call original sin; by the which
it comes to pass, that suppose the substance of our body and soul be not
abolished, yet both body and soul is so hurt, changed and altered, that they
appear not to be the thing they were at the first. For as to the body, by
reason of this corruption it is subject to death, and from death it is resolved
to powder and ashes: As to the soul, suppose the substance of it decay not,
yet ye see the qualities of it are so altered and changed, that the light of
the understanding is turned in darkness, the integrity of the will in
wickedness, the vprightnes and intention to good, is turned in a declining
from good, and in a bent purpose to do evil. And shortly, in a word, by this
corruption we have lost the image of God, which shined so brightly in us in our
creation. Under the third sort of sin, I understand the lack of the obedience,
and want of the accomplishment of the Law. For by nature in our first creation,
we were not only bound to abstain from sin, but to accomplish all
righteousness, and to conform us to the will of God perfectly in all things.
Now by this corruption we fail in this point, as well also as in the rest, and
so we are guilty of all sorts of sin; and being guilty of all sorts of
sin, of necessity we must be subject to death and condemnation, for the
reward of sin (as the Apostle says) is death. Now the King says not, that
the Lord has freed him from one or two sorts, and not delivered him from the
third; bur he says he has delivered him from all his sins, and consequently
from death and condemnation. For this is the custom of God in Christ, if ye
mark it well, from the time he begins to call his children to repentance, and
to work with them inwardly, he forgiueth them not a part of their sins, but
from the time he enters to this work, at an instant he forgiueth them all the
sins of their whole life past, present, and to come; as the Parable, Mat.
18.23. testifies, where ye see the Lord forgiueth the whole debt. The reason
of this is Christ his Son, who took our debt on him, and was surety for us;
he died not for a part of our sins only, nor satisfied not his Father for a
part only, but for the whole business: And therefore the debt being once
paid, the Father cannot require further; and so when he begins to forgive
us our sins, he forgiueth us all our sins, simul and semel. The remission
of sins is freely offered to all flesh in Christ, by the publishing of the
Gospel, and is freely applied by the working of the Spirit of God, and is
received only by the hand of faith which is in the heart. Except the Lord
purify the conscience, cleanse the heart, and open it, as he did Lydias heart,
offer what remission ye will, it is not possible we can apply it unto our
selves, except the conscience and soul be recreated in the sweetness and peace
that flows out of Christ. Offer remission never so often, the conscience dare
not be so bold as to apply it to it self. And therefore the whole study of a
Christian should stand in this, that he be not deceived with presumption in
steed of faith, which presumption in the end, tends to desperation. And let
us not be flattered by every slight faith and light opinion that flies in the
fantasy: For justifying faith must open the heart and be digested in the heart
inwardly, that the heart may be turned thereby. For where the heart is only
touched with a light taste which is not steadfast, incontinently as soon as the
truth comes, this taste is spued forth: but where this grace is digested in
the heart, in such sort yt the stubbornness of our will is abated, our
understanding changed, and our affections altered, no question, we have access
to God, and seeing him in our mind, and feeling him in our heart, there is no
storm that can make us to run from him, but the greater the storm is, the
nearer we will draw to him. Seeing we know there is a better life with him then
is here, all this is the duty of a Christian: therefore every one of you, try
your hearts and minds, urge God continually, by importunate suiting, and wring
this grace out of him, that it may please him to open our hearts. For except
the heart be opened, that ye may feel the sweetness, and that your will and
affections be altered, it is not possible that ye can be inclined to good.
Desire of God therefore increase of faith, that we may abide the storm, blow
when soever it will.

Now, ere we go from the words of this verse, he says, It is he that has cast
all my sins, etc. God only forgiueth sinner.
Which he is this? God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, three persons, one
God, has done it, no creature but God only. And ye see, as ye may read, Luke
5. yt the Pharisees were not ignorant of this, that God only might forgive
sins. For in that same place Luke, 5. in that conference which the Pharisees
have, they say, What a blasphemy is this? Who has power to forgive sins, but
God only? Now, look to the behavior of Christ after these words, who pa^tlie
by his silence approves them, and partly by a miracle he ratifieth their
speech to be true, that God in heaven has only power to forgive sins; and
there is a good reason, even in our natural judgment, that ratifieth this to
be true; for who has power to forgive the debt, but the creditor? Now, God
only is our creditor, therefore God only has power to forgive; for it is
the law of God that is transgressed: For all sin is the transgression of ye
Law, and therefore al sin offends him, mediatly, or immediately: and seeing he
prope^ly is offended, he only must forgive. As to Christ Jesus man, he
hanging on the cross, craves mercy for his murderers, o^ God his Father,
and says, Forgive them Lord, for they know not what they do. And when he
himself forgiueth sins, in this he testifies, that he is true God, as the
Ancients gathered well by this effect that he forgave sins, that he was not a
simple creature, but true God also: and where the Church is said to forgive
sins, they remit in the name and authority of Christ Jesus; or else when they
forgive, they may be called pronouncers and publishers of Gods remission. For
in uttering his word, they show themselves to be his mouth, and not their own
mouth. As to us that are brethren, we are said to forgive others, and we
forgive others indeed, but our remission relieueth not the man of his
guiltiness, but the guiltiness remains ever in the soul, until God remove
it: And in respect the guiltiness remains until it be removed by God, and
none has power to wash away the guiltiness but God; therefore it is God
properly that is the forgiuer of sins: and for this cause it is, that David
in his 51 Psalm cries out and says, Against thee, against thee only I have
sinned. Now seeing it is he only that forgiueth sins, let us seek remission
at God and no other.

The last thing that I mark, is the cause that moved God to forgive him his
sins: The cause that moved God to forgive him his sins.
he says, because he loves his person, and for this love that he did bear
unto him, he neither suffered the bitterness to remain in his soul, nor his
body to see the grave. It is confessed by the King, that there was nothing in
himself worthy of this love: Therefore he is not loved for his own cause; of
necessity then, he must be loved for that man's cause that took away his sin.
Now read over ye Scriptures, what man is that who has taken away our sins,
taken on him our debt, and discharged him honestly and honorably of it, even
he that is God and man also, Christ Jesus; and therefore in these same words,
quietly he acknowledges his sins to be removed for the love which God did
bear to him in Christ Jesus, who was in his loins as yet according to the
flesh. I say, there was no man able to bear and discharge this burden, save
this man which is God also; able because he was God, and as he was able, so he
discharged this burden in his own time. And Christ is justly the only
Mediator betwixt God and Man. And therefore whom the Lord loves, he loves in
him: and to whom the Lord shows mercy, it is for his cause only. For why?
he perfectly satisfied for the whole business, which may be easily seen in
these three points. For first he delivered us from these sins, which we call
actual sins. And how? by his perfect satisfaction, whereby he satisfied
fully in suffering hell in his soul, and death in his body, and that on the
cross. And so freed us from these actual sins, and the punishment thereof:
So that in this point he is a perfect Mediator.

Secondly, he delivered us from the puddle and rotten root, from the which
they proccede. For ye see Christ Jesus was conceived in the womb of the
Virgin, and that by the mighty power of his holy Spirit. So that our nature in
him was fully sanctified by that same power. And this perfect purity of our
nature in his person, covers our impurity: for he was not conceived in sin
and corruption as we are, but by the power of the holy Spirit, who perfectly
sanctified our nature in him, even in the moment of his conception. So he being
thoroughly purged, his purity covers our impurity.

Now in the third point also he is a perfect Mediator, for he not only
satisfied for our sins, but he accomplished the whole law for us, yea and
more then the law required; for the second Table requires only that we should
love our neighbor as our self. But Christ did more then this: for none loves
his neighbor so, that willingly he will die for him. So Christ in dying for
us, shows that he loves us more then the law required: And so he not only
accomplished the law for us, but did more then the law required.

Now this perfect righteousness of his comes in between us and his Father,
and covers our rebellion and disobedience; or else we could not be free from
condemnation in this point also. All these, to wit, perfect purity, perfect
satisfaction, and perfect righteousness, are to be found in Christ perfectly.
And therefore only mercy and remission of sin is to be sought for in him,
and he that has not Christ to be his intercessor, that man shall never taste
of mercy.

Now let us go to the application: what manner of intercession can Christ make
for that man that blasphemeth his Father? It is not possible that the Son can
interceede where the Father is blasphemed wilfully and willingly. Yea of all
judgments this is a most terrible judgment, where the spirit of blasphemy
has such power, that he makes a man to utter such voices against his maker.
Thus far concerning these words.

Now in the next two verses he gives two reasons, The reason^ wherefore the
Lord forgave him his sinne^.
wherefore the Lord forgave him his sins, and delivered him from the death of
his body; and he shows in that 18, and 19 verses, that the Lord in this
work had his own entry and special respect to his own glory, which glory
he saw would be advanced more by the lengthening of his days then otherise by
the shortning thereof. Secondly, that the benefit of his delivery would be a
matter of praise to al generations to the end of the world: For it is said, The
fathers shall instruct their children; and so fathers and children in their
extremities they shall run to God for the like mercy. Now for these two
ends, that God might be praised of the King in his own person, and of his
posterity, and of all the posterities thereafter, the Lord bestows this
benefit upon the King, and gives him health.

I take up the reasons in these two verses, the 18. and 19. And the first
reason is taken up in the 18, and beginning of the 19. for there he says, The
grave cannot confess thee, death cannot praise thee: As if he would say, dead
men and buried cannot praise thee, as we do in these bodies of ours in the land
of the living, living in thy Church here. Dead men that rest in their graves
cannot look for the accomplishment of thy promises. And if I were dead and my
body in the grave, I could not look for the accomplishment of thy promise in
giving me a son. It is only the living, the living that is able to praise
thee. There he doubleth the word, to let you see that they must be endued with
a double life that praise the Lord aright. They must not only be endued with
the life of the body, but also they must live in their soul. Now the King
says, I being restored to this double life, both in body and soul, I shall
praise thee. For none can praise thee worthily as I do this day, but they that
are alive as I am. This is the first reason.

They that are dead in their body leave not off the execise of praise in their
soul.
Now to examine the words, he means not that they who are dead and buried
leave off this exercise; only he means that they who are dead and buried
will not praise God in their bodies, will not praise him as we do here on
earth. And therefore we must not think that they leave off this exercise. Yea
by the contrary we must believe, that the souls of the Saints departed are
more busy in this exercise then when they were alive: and how prove I this?
The nearer the soul is unto God, the greater pl^asure and delight it takes in
him; but after it is departed out of this life, it is so much the nearer
coupled with God. Therefore it takes the greater pleasure and delight in him.
Now the greater pleasure it takes in God, the greater praise it must give to
him: for pleasure cannot come into the heart, but it must redound back to him
that gave it. Therefore the nearer the soul is conjoined with God, it praises
him so much the more. Now after the death of the body, the souls of the
faithful are more straightly coupled with God: therefore after death they
praise him ye more. Where Christ has dwelt once in this life, suppose the
bodies die and be resolved in powder by reason of sin; yet the soul lives
by reason of righteousness. Yea suppose the body be dissolved, yet that Spirit
of life that dwelt in the soul, raises thy soul to heaven: even as the
Spirit of life that dwelt in Christ Jesus raised his body from the grave. And
as the Spirit of life is the only cause that made us to praise him in our
bodies: so that same Spirit makes us to praise him out of these bodies; by
reason, suppose we be absent in body, yet are present in our soul with the
Lord. For the words Romans 8, are these. If Christ dwell in you, suppose the body
be dead by reason of sin, yet the Spirit is alive for righteousness sake.
The meaning of the words is, suppose they that are departed leave off to praise
the Lord in their bodies, and in the earth (which he calls the land of the
living,) yet they leave not off at all.

Now of this I shall mark one or two things. 1. Observation.
Take up the end wherefore the Lord delivers any person, city or country
from any trouble within or without; the chief end of his delivery is this,
That that person, city or country, may serve as an instrument to preach his
benefits, to sound his praise, and to render unto him hearty thanks for it.
Are our sins forgiven us to this end? is there any country or any city set
at liberty to this end that we should provoke God to anger by heavier sins
again? Is this the end wherefore he forgiueth sins? Is this the end
wherefore he bestows his benefits, that we should use them as weapons to
fight against himself? Is not this rather the high way to kindle him to
greater severity? and to sharpen his fury against our selves? Yea, and what
exception I pray you can we use in his greatest severity, seeing we have
provoked it our selves? I speak it to this end: there is not a person in
particular, nor any in general, but of natural knowledge they will say; There
was never a greater benefit bestowed on a country, then in releeuing us of the
fear of that barbarous Nation; he must either confess this, or he is an ass.
This benefit if it were rightly measured and considered, (read over the
Scriptures, confer benefit with benefit, miracle with miracle, all
circumstances being well considered,) ye shall find that since the children of
Israel came through the red Sea there has not been a greater. To what end
delivered he us? is it that we should provoke him with greater sins? Look
since the fear of these strangers past, what sin is there but this country
has defiled her self with it? See ye not slaughter in greater measure,
oppression, murder without any mercy, see ye not all law and equity trampled
under foot? And briefly, see ye not this confusion risen to such a height,
that every Lord in his own bounds is a King? what sort of birth (I pray you)
shall this confusion bring forth? At the last it must bring forth one of
these two of necessity, and take heeed, ye may chance to see it, except the
Lord prevent it. Either the supreme magistrate and inferior magistrates must
concur in one voice to put an end to this confusion, or the confusion (out of
doubt) shall put an end to him. I am assured one of these two must follow; for
the weight of his wrath which hangs over this land is insupportable; the
earth is not able to bear this birth of our iniquity; and if there were no
other punishment, as I have often said, the earth shall be compelled to spue
forth the inhabitants ere God want means to punish. As this is true in the
country in general, so it is as true in this City in particular; for it
never came yet (for the most part) in your hearts to thank God aright for your
delivery. Therefore the Lord is beginning to let you see that he can raise
strangers, men who have the hearts of strangers among our selves: he has
means enough in the midst of our own bowels to punish this country,
suppose he seek not strangers. But indeed in this late brag of our neighbor
Lord, he desires you to go back to the consideration of the greatness of the
last benefit: And if ye acknowledge it rightly and be thankful for it, there
is no domesticke force ye need to regard. For as to the force that can
proceed any way from that man, ye know it. And surely it would appear to me,
that that man has sold himself to iniquity; and the end will declare it,
except the Lord prevent him with his undeserved grace, which I desire most
heartily. Although in the mean time, suppose there be peace promised, yet
stand ye on your guards, and let it not come to pass by your misbehauiour and
backwardn^sse, that the glory of God and the liberty of this City be impaired
in any wise, but stand on your guardes, that as this City has been a terror
to evil men before-time, so it may terrify him also. For no question, where
God and a good quarrel concur, that side shall have the upper hand. This
only by the way. For it becomes me of my duty to maintain the good cause,
and to instruct you in this point of your duty.

The second thing that I mark: 2. Observation.
ye see the glory of God is ever conjoined with the life of his own, so that
we cannot advance Gods glo^ie, but we shall further our own salvation; and we
cannot neglect the one, but we shall neglect the other. Seeing th^n that these
two are necessarily conjoined, for Gods sake let every one remember to set
forward the glory of God in his life so far as he may, according to his
estate and calling. This life is so miserable in it self, and there is none
that sees the confusion of this country to grow so fast, that can look for
any redress of these things in his own time. So here beneath is no comfort,
all runs on to such a desolation and miserable confusion, that of all lives
of the earth our lives were most miserable, if we had not a sight of a better.
For all joy to be looked for here beneath is taken away. Well, I leave this
second part and come to the last. The third part of this song is in this 20.
verse, which is the conclusion of the whole song.

In this conclusion the King testifies, that he will not only praise God for
the present, for the benefit which he has received, but he makes a solemn
promise, that so long as he lives he will never forget this benefit, all the
days of his life he will praise him, yea praise him in his song, he shall
praise him with his instrument, and he shall praise him publicly in the house
and congregation of the Lord, because the benefit is public: he shall praise
him in his body, because he received the health thereof, and he shall praise
him in his soul, because he is restored to the wonted joys thereof. This I
think be the meaning of the last verse.

The King in thus doing shows himself to be very thankful; and if that
good servant of God show himself so thankful, how much more should we whom he
delivers, notwithstanding we cast our selves headlong into our diseases by
our own folly? But there is never a man so soon as the heavy hand of God is
off him, but he returns with the Sow to that same puddle wherein he was, and
with the dogs to that same vomit again. As to the praise I have spoken of it
before. I insist no further, but go to the last.

The last two verses are added to, and as it appears, appertain not to the
song, but to the history; howsoever they are added to I will not dispute, it
has pleased the Spirit of God so to do, and so it should please us. I have
spoken of the last verse of these two already, and will not repeat. As to the
first of the two: ye see there is an iniunction given by the Prophet to the
King, to take a lump of dry figs and make a plaster, and lay it unto the
byle, and it shall be whole: This iniunction is obeyed by the King.

Of this iniunction it would appear, that the Prophet plays the part of a
Physician, rather then of a Prophet of God. For this Simple which he bids
him apply, pertains to the Physician of the body: so that it appears, he
rather does the office of a Doctor of Physic then of a Prophet. Yet howsoever
it would appear so, it is not so: for the Prophet was occupied at this time in
uttering of his commission: in the which he does nothing whereof he has not a
warrant. Therefore in the same words he does nothing unbeseeming the part of a
true Prophet, and he has his special warrant in this doing.

Now what is the reason, Why the Lord works by means and second causes.
when as the Lord might have done this without any ordinary means, yet he
bids the Prophet apply the same plaster? He does this, no question, for
these three ends. First, to let the King see by this doing, First end.
he would not have his ordinary means nor second causes be contemned. And
suppose he may work without them, yet he has appointed secondarie causes to
bring about his effect, which he will not have contemned. The second end which
was the chief end, Second end.
he saw that the Kings faith was but weak; for the Prophet promised that
within three days he should pass up to the Temple, and the Kings sore was not
come as yet to a maturitie, but raging on him: so he thought this almost
impossible, and could scarsly apprehend the truth of this promise. Now to
support his faith he uses an external object: For the more and the more
pithie the objects be, the more our faith is stayed and confirmed. Therefore in
the Sacraments we have so many objects to our eye, to our hands, and all to
strengthen our faith. And so he gives him this means to strengthen his faith,
and to assure him that it should come to pass which the Prophet promised.

The third end is, Third end.
to teach him that the Lord is the only Physician, as well of the body as of
the soul: he has command over all remedies, and so he may stay or further the
effects thereof as he pleases, and consequently he has command over all
diseases. This is certain, and therefore except the blessing of God concur
with these seconda^ie things, there is no physic can avail or profit. And
it is so to be thought of Physicians, as of the husbandmen and their
husbandry: Ye see when the husbandmen have done their whole exact travel, so
that they have left nothing undone that in them lies; yet if the Lord give not
increase, they are disappointed of their travel. Even so, suppose Physicians
propound remedies to be applied with all diligence, yet if the Lord bless not
the work, if he abstract his effect or power from the second causes, it is not
possible that the patient can be cured. So he teaches the diseased and all
Doctors of Physic these two lessons: First, he teaches the Patient to desire
of God that he will give leave to the means to work some good effect; and let
the Doctor crave on the other side, that the Lord would bless his work, that
it may redound to Gods glory and the comfort of the Patient. And where God is
begun with, and ended with, no doubt but the work shall have a good issue.
Therefore in all troubles, let every one have recourse unto God, and in God use
his creatures, and so God shall bless you and the creatures both in his Son
Christ Jesus: To whom be all praise, honor and glory both now and ever. Amen.

THE TWELFTH SERMON, UPON THE 76. PSALM, BY M. ROBERT BRVCE, (IN THE Church of
Edinborow,) at a thanksegiuing to God for delivery from the tyranny of the
Spaniards.
The text. 1 God is known in Jury: his name is great in Israel.

2 For in Shalem is his Tabernacle: and his dwelling in Zion,

2 There brake he the arrows of the bow: the shield, and the sword, and the
battle. Selah.

4 Thou art more bright and puissant, then the mountains of prey.

5 The stout hearted are spoiled, they have stepped their sleep: and all the men
of strength have not found their hands.

6 At thy rebuke, o God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast asleep.

7 Thou, even thou art to be feared: and who shall stand in thy sight when thou
art angry?

8 Thou did cause thy judgment to be heard from heaven, therefore the earth
feared and was still.


I Have chosen this song, which is a song of praise and of thansegiuing,
(Well-beloved in Christ Jesus) as a song that is most meet for our purpose, and
that agrees best with the business and holy action that we have in hand this
day. For in this song the Psalmist praises God for his singular benefits
bestowed from time to time upon his own people: As namely, by reason he has
chosen them to be his people, The purpose of the Prophet in this psalm.
and selected them out from amongst all the Nations on the earth, to be a
peculiar inheritance and possession to himself; he has bequeathed unto them
his Oracles, which he had done to no other company under the Sun beside her;
he has made his residence with her, which he has done with no other society
of men in the earth; he has taken the defense of her against whatsoever sort
of enemies, which he has done to no other sort or condition of men: In such
sort, that she has found from time to time, experience of his mighty hand, to
her great comfort, to his glory, and to the perpetual overthrow of his and her
enemies that have assailed her. No doubt but some singular and particular
delivery has given occasion to this notable song; albeit the form of the song
is general, and may serve well to the use of the Church in all ages following
to the end of the world. For these benefits wherefore the Psalmist praises God
in this Psalm, they have been common, they are common, and shall be common
benefits to the Church so long as she is absent in the body from the Lord; For
he has given the custody of his word to no other society in the earth but to
his Church; he dwells with no other company of men but with the company of
faithful men and women; he takes the defense of no other sort of people in
the earth, but of these faithful men. These people have felt in experience his
inward and outward deliueries, both in soul and body; and the Church of this
country at this day, that she stands on foot, and that she has liberty to
assemble, and that now she has a mouth and voice to praise him, she has this
God to thank only, and not any flesh under the Sun.

Exhortation to be thankful.
Therefore I say, addres your hearts every one of you in some measure to do this;
for surely, ye had never better occasion the^ ye have at this time. All men I
know are not alike disposed and yet were never more unfit. For I know there is
a sort of men, who think themselves by this delivery disappointed, who in
their hearts are as sorrowful of ye Sparniards case, as they themselves are: of
these I look for no praying. There is another sort of men, who were never
touched with the danger, and these men cannot be moved with the delivery; for
he that saw not the peril, it is not possible that he can esteem of the
delivery. There is thirdly, another sort of men, who both saw the peril,
sighed for the peril, and desired the delivery: This sort of men will praise
God for the benefit of delivery. Surely in this, we have all occasion to thank
God, that commandment has passed from Church and King, that all knees shall
bow and do reverence to this God, whether they do it fainedly or truly, to
themselves be it said: whether they do it under pretense or sincerity, to
themselves be it said; for the weal and profit will redound to themselves
only. Although we that fear God have great occasion to praise him, that his
name is glorified this day, suppose it be feinedly.

This Psalm has three special parts. The division of the Psalm.
In the first part he propounds certain benefits, in the which, the Lord
showed himself both gracious and merciful to his Church. In the second part,
he praises God for a singular delivery, for a work more then wonderful; a
work in the which the Lord showed himself to be a mighty preserver of his
own, and a terrible revenger on his enemies: a work accomplished by his own
virtue and force only, without the support of any creature living. In the
third part he sets down an exhortation to the Church, to grow in
thankfulness toward God; to grow in thankfulness toward him, that he may
grow in mercy and savor toward her; and that he may grow in anger and hatred
toward his and her enemies. These are the parts of this Psalm.

In the first part, A mercy that God is near unto his people.
there is first propounded a chief and principal benefit, wherein still the
Lord shows himself exceeding gracious toward his people, the benefit is
this: that he has revealed himself so plainly and so familiarly to her,
besides all the rest of the world: In such sort, that he has made her
acquainted with him, and made himself well known to her. For first, the Lord
has revealed himself to his Church, by a special and particular revelation,
beside that general revelation, which is known in the whole world: for as to
this general revelation which is known to the world, it serves nothing to
our instruction, profit, nor erudition; but serves rather to our conviction,
that the Lord may have within us a testimony of our just condemnation. And
therefore beside this general revelation, whereby he has revealed himself
unto all flesh, he has manifested himself to his Church, by a special and
particular revelation; beside that common light and natural understanding, he
has opened himself to us by an heavenly light and supernatural
understanding, which heavenly light and vnd^rstanding makes us, first the
children of light and of the day; which heavenly light discerns us from the
rest of the world, who are darkness and the children of the night, (as the
Apostle calls them.) For this heaenly light and supernatural understanding,
whereby we see God, is proper only to the true members of Christ Jesus who are
his Church; none has this eye of Faith but they only. It is so proper to
them, that it seuereth them from all other societies in ye earth, whether they
take unto themselves ye name of the Church, or are altogether enemies thereunto.
This supernatural light and understanding is offered by the word, and is given
unto us by the Spirit of God: for the natural man, as long as he remains in
his natural estate, cannot perceive the things of God. For why? the greatest
light and greatest wit that is in our nature, is the greatest enemy that this
heavenly light and wit can have; as we have in the Apostle writing Romans 8. The
best wit, yea that which we call ye b^st wit that is in a natural man, it
counts the word of God foolishnes. And therefore, seeing the world by her own
wisdom, yea the greatest Philosopher in it, by his own knowledge could not
know God: this God was moved by that same light and wit, which the world
counts foolishness, to make men to know him in Christ Jesus, to their
eternal salvation. This wit, I say, is offered to us by his word, and given by
his Spirit only: For as there is no man knows what is the mind of man
toward hm, except the spirit of the man's self, or he to whom this spirit
reuealeth it: so there is none knows the wisdom of God, nor knows his
mind toward him, except the Spirit of God, and they to whom this Spirit
communicates the matter. Of this Spirit he has powered upon his own Church,
whereby he has revealed himself more plainly to her, and given her a clearer
sight of him, then all the rest of the world can have. For as to that sight
which we have of God, which is common to us with the rest of the world in the
mirror of his works, it fails us in the very entry, we lose it in the
threshold, it is choked and suffocate by the mischief of our affections within
us. Again, as to that sight which we have in his word: take once his Spirit
from the word, that this word be but a slaying letter, and not a quickening
Spirit; the mirror of the word is but a dim mirror, and a sealed letter to
all men, as Isaiah calls it: It cannot profit us.

Therefore there is no way to seek God truly, but in the mirror of his own
word and Spirit coniunctly: that is, by the word piercing the ear, and the
Spirit piercing the heart. The word to work outwardly, and to pierce the ear,
and the Spirit to work inwardly an eye in the mind, and to open adore in the
heart: Where this coniunct and joined working is, it comes to pass, that the
veil of ignorance is taken out of our minds; it comes to pass, that our
hard hearts are mollified; it comes to pass yt the filthiness of our
affections are mortified; it comes to pass, that our souls are renewed; our
conscience gets this boldness, that with joy we dare open these mouths of
ours which otherwise we durst never open, and call the Father of Jesus Christ,
Our Father.

This heavenly revelation we have by the working of the word and Spirit
coniunctly; and still the more we get of the Spirit, the more clearly we see
him, and the better know we our God. Then let us come to the matter: by this
heavenly revelation of God by his word and by his Spirit, it comes to pass
that God is well known in Judah; that is, in his Church. And of this good
knowledge, which is no other thing but faith, again it comes to pass, that
his name is great in Israel; that is, yt his name is greatly praised, highly
extolled, and his remembrance is ever continually in memory in Israel.

What is meant by the name of God in this place.
By the name of God here, God himself is understood: for in so many good
effects as God utters himself toward his Church, as many names he gives to
himself, whereby he may be praised of her. As for example when, he promises
unto his Church freely grace and mercy, his Church gives him a name, and
calls him merciful. When he keeps his promises, and utters himself a
faithful God to his Church, his Church gives him a name, and calls him a
true God. When he delivers his Church out of danger, and shows himself a
mighty God, and terrible against his enemies, the Church gives him a name, and
calls him a potent God, and so forth in the rest of his effects: So that by
the name of God, is understood here God himself; as God makes himself to be
known in his wonderful works and effects.

Then to take up the doctrine of this first benefit, we see, this heavenly and
familiar revelation of God only, and no other thing, makes this God well
known in Israel. Of this heavenly and familiar revelation springs true
knowledge, which is no other thing but our justifying faith; and of this
justifying faith and benefit of knowledge, springs a continual praising and
loving of God: for these two further others mutually: the true knowledge of
God, and the true praising of God. God is well known in Judah: Therefore his
name is greatly praised there. So that it is not possible but that man who
knows God rightly, must praise him truly.

God is not like our countrymen: For many of our men, where they are best
known, The true knowledge of God, and the true praise of God, accompany others
mutually.
they are worst loved. It is far otherwise with God, for where he is best
known, he is best loved. And this love can never be idle, but must burst forth
in praises and thanksegiuing of him whom it loves: For these two follow others
mutually: the true knowledge of God, and the true praising of God.

Now let us see, Application.
and let us turn over this argument upon our selves, and see if the
consequence be true in us. This country no ways praises God, nor magnifieth
his name: and therefore it follows, he was never well known here, his name
is not great in Scotland. Therefore it is a sure token, yt his goodness was
never well felt in Scotland. Surely, if a multitude of benefits might have
moved us to have altered our taste, we might long since have tasted the
sweetness. If a multitude of miracles and many wonders might have made him to
have been known among us: there are more showed to us, and more wonderful
then ever was showed to Pharaoh. But God knows what we have profited, both in
our knowledge, and in our feeling. For, as to our knowledge in our hearts,
whatsoever we profess in our mouths, (for all that is come and gone,) we are
for the most part asking with Pharaoh, Who is the great Jehovah, that we should
obey him? And on the other part, we doubt as much of his Son the Savior of the
world; so that we are still asking with the blindeman, John. 9. Who is the
Lord, that we should believe in him? I say, if marvelous or wondrous works
might have moved us to know and praise him, he has showed a work lately,
which even the more we hear of it, it is the more marvelous. And yet I am
assured, a great part of the circumstances that should aggrauate this matter,
are not as yet come to our knowledge. We are assembled this day for that end,
and to praise him for this benefit, that his name may be great in Edinborough.
The Lord grant that every one of you, in some measure, may burst forth in
thansgiuing: that ye may answer to our expectation, as God has given you
grace. And on the other side, accursed be he, as he is accursed from the
heaven, that presents himself here to scorn God, that comes here, and
brings not his heart and mind ready prepared in some measure to praise him.
I stand not here upon the degrees of preparation, howsoever it be, so it be
true: otherwise here I pronounce him accursed from the heaven, that comes not
here to praise God in some measure.

Since these corporal Sacrifices ceased in the which God was honored, there
is no spiritual Sacrifice more acceptable to him then the Sacrifice of
thanksgiving: For as to this Sacrifice; The profit that redoundeth to us of
giving thanks
it sanctifies not only our own persons, but the whole creatures appointed
to the use of our persons: For that which is true in meat and drink, is true
in all the rest of the creatures of God; ye see by your experience daily, that
your meat and drink is made wholesome to your nourishment by thanksgiving to
God after dinner and supper, and so often as ye refresh your bodies. This that is
true in these creatures is true in all the rest of the benefits of God: So this
proposition abides firm: Thankfulness to God sanctifies the whole benefits
of God. It is not possible but a good conscience must praise God in some
measure. A good conscience cannot cast off the memory of God and his benefits
altogether; but in some measure it must praise him: Therefore that we may
possess this great work and benefit of our delivery in the mercy and
favor of God, and with his blessing in a good conscience, let us in some
measure give him praise therefore. Surely the longer ye look in this benefit,
and the more ye weigh it, ye will find it the more worthy of praise.

I am sorry in my heart that our disposition is so evil, that we cannot praise
him as we would; yet howsoever it be that we can do it as we would, let us do
it as we may according to that measure of grace that is granted to every one
of us. And for this default that is in us, let every one of us desire pardon, A
Prayer.
following me after this manner: Lord be merciful to our unprepared hearts,
Lord behold us in the righteous merits of thy Son; and suffer not this evil
disposition of ours to be a hinderance to the second delivery, if peradventure
that Balaak with his Priest Balaam make the second assault: But Lord in thy
mercies sanctify our hearts more and more to all thy holy uses, that thy
merciful protection may cover us; and being environed therewith, we shall not
be found naked, let the fury and rage of the enemy assail when he pleases.
Let us I say after this manner be thankful to God. And surely, the thankful
memory of this benefit shall be the ready way to purchase the second
delivery, in case (as I have said) the enemies of God, being possessed with
that restless spirit of the Devil, make the second assault. Thus far
concerning the first benefit.

The second benefit whereby he shows himself gracious to his people,
follows in the second verse: to wit, Verse 2. A mercy for God to lodge with
his people.
He made his residence with them, he dwelt at Shalem, as his Tabernacle placed
in Sion does testify. He dwelt at Jerusalem which at that time was called
Shalem, where his Tabernacle was placed. This dwelling of God with his Church
is the second benefit wherein he shows himself gracious to her. For suppose
it be true that the majesty of our God replenisheth heaven and earth, and is
every where, yet it is as true that this God of ours dwells not every where,
for he dwells only in his Church and among his faithful. For the Lord is
far off continually from the hearts of the wicked (as the Apostle says.)
Therefore the Lord had made as yet his residence and dwelling to be in Sion: He
dwelt in the hearts and consciences of his own people of old, he gave them
ensigns of his visible presence, as was the Tabernacle, the Arc, as types and
ceremonies which were seats of his oracles; and gave many miracles and wonders
for the confirming of his presence. Now it has pleased the Lord to translate
his Tabernacle from the Jews to us, and to set down the ensigns of his
presence among us; such as the preaching of his word, as ye hear it this day;
the ministering of his Sacraments, as ye see this day; and the exercise of
discipline, as we have at this time. These are the visible ensigns of his
presence whereby your senses are informed that ye invisible God dwells here,
he makes his residence properly in the hearts of faithful men and women: And
the Lord dwells in his Saints two manner of ways: to wit, by faith, and by
his holy Spirit. It is by the benefit of faith and the Spirit of God, that we
become the Church of God, Temples of his holy Spirit, Citizens with the Saints,
and domestics of heaven. For by this faith our hearts (as Peter speaks, Act.
15.) are purified, whereby Christ Jesus may have residence in them, and as
Ephesians. 3.17. whereby Christ may dwell in us. By the same faith again we are
builded on the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, that we may be an
habitation to God by his holy Spirit, as in the last verse, Ephesians. 2. Then I
say, if the Lord dwells in his Saints by these two manner of ways, by faith
and by his holy Spirit. he dwells not substantially in his Saints, but he
dwells so only in his own Son: For the fullness of the Godhead dwells
in him corporally. By faith and his holy Spirit therefore he makes his
residence with you, by the ministry of his word and Sacraments he testifies
his presence here.

Application.
And surely more and greater promises Jerusalem had never then this Church of
ours has; more notable testimonies of his presence and mighty deliverances
Judah had never then we have. And God dwelt never in no nation of the earth (at
least since the Gospel began) so long in such sincerity and purity, without
error or heresy as he has done with us. So that if there be any nation under
the Sun bound to praise God, we are chiefly bound, and of all nations we must
be most ungrate if his name be not great among us. But when I look to the
horrible ingratitude answering to this obligation, I cannot promise a
continuance of this light and presence. For will ye look unto our answering in
our lives: the great men in this country are become companions to the eues and
Pirates, oppressors, and manifest blasphemers of God and man. Ye see murder,
oppression and bloodshed is the only thing that they shoot and mark at. As
to the simple sort of people, the profane multitude, they are altogether
godless, there is not such a thing in them as a natural light whereby they
may see God in his works, much less the supernatural. As to the greatest part
of our Priests, our Ministers, their mouths have lost the truth, and their
persons have lost their reverence; the Lord has made them contemptible in the
eyes of men: And by reason they have forgot to give him his due reverence, he
has taken their reverence out of the hearts of men. Well, the Lord will not
weary and trouble himself perpetually, as he has done these many years
past, in offering pearls to filthy swine, to curres and to dogs. It is not
possible that he should weary himself still; but at the last seeing there is
no estate of life that testifies any true love to his truth, therefore it is
as ye see, the most part of this country is given over already to a strange
delusion, because they would not receive his Son when he was offered:
therefore the Lord has given them over to a strange delusion. And to what I
pray you? Even to prefer the leaven of the Pharisees and dregs of Papistrie, to
the wholesome and blessed word of truth. And shall this be the end of these
plagues? No, but in respect of the contempt of the truth, their bodies shall be
plagued also in the sight of you all, whosoever they be that have made foul
defection from that blessed truth.

And upon this we have also a petition in the second place, to crave of God as
in the first place; A Prayer.
to crave that the Lord of his great mercy in time would prevent this utter
extermination, which this great confusion both in Church and policy so
terribly threatens and portendeth. For it is not possible that things can ever
stand still in this estate, but of necessity either the Magistrate and in
special the supreme Magistrate must put to his hand, and make an end of this
confusion, or else this confusion shall make an end of him. Therefore yet I
say, join your prayers with me, that the Lord would prevent this extermining
and confusion threatened, and give him grace and an inclining will to make his
soul free of the iniquities of his Nobles. Thus far concerning the second
benefit.

Now in the second part of this Psalm which begins at the third verse: he
praises God for a singular deliverance which he had granted to his Church, for
a deliverance in the which he showed himself more then wonderful: a
deliverance accomplished by his own power and force, without the help or aid
of any creature; a deliverance in the which he showed himself a mighty
preserver of his own, and a terrible Judge to the enemy. What deliverance it
was in particular he expresses not: I agree well to think it the same
deliverance which was purchased against Senacherib. I will not insist in the
particular, but if ye take it to be so, ye shall take it well.

Division.
He keeps this order in setting down this wonderful deliverance. First in
the third verse, he sets down the overthrow generally together with the
circumstance of place, where this overthrow was done. In the 4. verse he
amplifieth this deed, and by way of comparison he enlarges it. And that it may
be the more pithie, he turns his speech to God. In the 5. and 6. verses he
sets down the manner of the victory more particularly, and he lets us
see in the same verses how easily God did it: And in the 7. verse he is
ravished in admiration of the work, and he bursteth footh into that grave
sentence: Thou, even thou art terrible, etc.

To come back then to the third verse: in it there are two things. First he
sets down the overthrow generally, and he notes the place next where the
overthrow was done. As to this overthrow he says, He brake their bows and
their arrows, their shields and their battle. As if he would say in one word,
he utterly overthrew the enemies and put them to flight, he made them to leave
all their armor behind them that came to invade his dwelling place: For the
breaking of the armor had served to little purpose, except he had broken the
men also that managed the armor. And therefore by that accustomed figure he
understands by the breaking of the armor, the breaking of all them that did
bear the armor.

As to the place where this overthrow was done, he notes it in the first word
by an aduerbe of place, pointing it out, as it were by his finger. Where was it
done? It was done where God dwelt, where he made his residence at Salem, which
is Jerusalem; he testified to his own people, and bare Senacherib witness
that he dwelt there. There is no man that will suffer himself to be cast out
of his dwelling place willingly: These men, to wit, the King of Ashur and his
accomplices, came to cast out God out of his dwelling place; but he stood to the
defense of his own house, and showed them that he would not remove for their
pleasure. For the Church then, and the Church now, have found in experience,
that there is no external force in the world able to dislodge God against his
will, nor make him to change his dwelling place, if we dislodge him not our
selves; if they had not cast him out by their actions, he had never been
dislodged. So long as the Jews left him a clean footstep to remain in, so
long he dwelt and lodged with them: But from time all was defiled, therefore
(as ye have heard sometimes from this place, and may read in that 9.10. and
11. of Ezechiel) at last he is compelled to take his leave. How loath he was to
depart, his many good-nights, his many rests which are there set down do
clearly testify. I think, between the Cherubims and the mount of Olives he
made four rests, as ye have in that prophecy of Ezechiel, and all to testify
how loath he was to depart, and how ready he was to abide, if they had turned
unto him: But they turned not unto him, and therefore he departed. Thus far
concerning the text.

Now if we shall compare delivery with delivery, Application.
and compare like with like: it is commonly questioned already, and will be
questioned till the end of the world, where was yonder great overthrow given,
and in what place was yonder navy destroyed? It will be answered again; and I
am assured it is answered already; this navy was destroyed about the coasts of
the Lords own dwelling place, where he made his residence. They came to invade
his own Isle, and to cast him out of his possession. And what did he? He showed
them to their own cost, that he would not remove neither for the Pope nor
Spaniards pleasure. And surely, if we have not the fault our selves, he will
never remove. What glory, what pre-eminence, what comfort, what dignity we
have by the presence of God, I think it was never well known of us: And if
there were no more but this singular comfort which as yet appears never to
have entered into your hearts, I think the very commodity, besides the glory
which we have of the presence of God, should move us much. And yet
notwithstanding all this glory and dignity that we have by him, we will not
suffer him to remain among us.

What is it that dislodges God.
That thing which no external force was able to bring about, we by our filthy
and wicked lines are like to bring to pass. Look all the corners of the
country, is there a clean place wherein he may make his residence and his
rest, without the cries and lamentable voices of terrible murder, oppression
and blood; where shall he make his residence, where he shall not be dislodged
by blasphemy? Alas, this is over rife among men, whom we would otherwise
account good men. It is not possible for him to make his residence amongst a
people that is altogether unclean, he must have a clean chamber to rest in at
the least; if that our hearts be altogether unclean, he can have no abode here.

O then, what is the remedy of this? and how shall this matter be helped? for
if he depart we lose all. There is no other remedy but to prepare a lodging
for his remaining. And how shall this be? I will tell you. Look how much more
excellent our God and his blessed Spirit is then any Monarch or Prince in the
earth, let us be so much the more careful that our hearts and consciences may
be clean and holy for his remaining. Let not our hearts be a closet and a
dunghill of all corruption. It is not possible for him to dwell there. For the
blessed Spirit of God cannot rest but in a clean place. Then I say, look what
reverence thou bear to earthly men: for is it possible that the face and
countenance of a Prince should strike thee with such fear, that the reverence
thou bear to him will make thee not only to compose thy gesture, but so to
temper thy talk, that thy tongue utter neither evil nor filthy
communication? And has the reverence of man, (suppose he be at odds with thee)
such force? How much more should the presence of the mighty God by his holy
Spirit (not being near by thee as commonly Princes are, but within thy heart
and mind) make thee greedy and earnest to take order with thy cogitations and
affections, that the wickedness of them dislodge him not? It is not possible
that the Spirit of God can dwell where he has so great molestation; For when
the heart is continually set on mischief, what rest can there be for the good
Spirit of God?

Therefore take up thy self in time, and desire of God with me, as I am to
desire in this last point. And what is that, that I have to desire? I have to
desire that God would show himself present continually in our hearts, that the
majesty of his presence may make us to have a regard to our cogitations and
affections. I wish that his blessed Spirit would so mortify our sinful lusts
and affections, that he may rest in our souls quietly without molestation.
Every one of you all in this third point, desire for the mortifying of your
lusts and affections, that he may make his residence in you, and pray for an
eye to see his glorious presence, that the sight thereof may make you to stand
in awe. And this being done, ye shall keep God with you; otherwise if this be
not done, adieu with God. Thus far concerning our third verse.

As to the 4. verse ye see, in it he will not leave this matter yet, but he
amplifieth this matter, and sets out this great work by way and form of a
comparison. And he addresseth his speech to God, even as if he saw him before
him, and he says, Thou art more puissant, bright, and glorious, then the
mountains of prey. As if he would say, thou art more glorious and mighty then
the greatest King or Monarch of the earth: thou have not a match in majesty,
nor a fellow in dignity, thou have no match in power nor in glory.

What is meant by the mo^nt^ines of prey.
By the mountains of prey he understands here, no question, the highest
moutaines. And it is very easy for you to know what is meant by the highest
mountains: by them he understands the great^st Kings and Kingdoms in the
earth. I say, by the mountains of prey he understands the highest
mountains: And why? By reason the beasts of prey hunted by dogs, or sleight of
the hunter, they have recouse to the highest places for their safeguard. So by
reason that the ravenous beasts betake them to these high mountains and
inaccessible places, I think here by the mountains of prey, is understood the
highest mountains.

Now, what is the sense and meaning of this? There is no King nor kingdom in
the earth, that may come near in power and majesty to our great King. If this
be ^rue, that no King o^ Monarch may come near in majesty to our great God
Iehoua, this also must be true: he that has God with him has help enough.
This also must be true, if we keep God on our side, there is no counsel,
force, policy, nor endeavor, (suppose all these four excel in the enemy.)
can prevail against his Church. This Balak the King of Moab knew well, that so
long as God stood by his people, his people was invincible, and therefore as ye
have there in that history, he takes consultation with his neighbors the
Midianites, and advises with them what should be best. And surely he took a
right consultation, they concluded, that except God were corrupted, it was not
possible to get victory over them. And the^fore he compasses to get God to be
corrupted. And how? he addresseth him to corrupt Balaam, thinking that way God
should lie by also, by reason Balaam was counted to be his Prophet, and so come
to his purpose. Indeed if God had been corrupted from his people, as Balaam
was, he had attained to his purpose; but seeing God stood by his people,
alhough his Prophet disappointed them yet the people were preserved.

Lesson.
Then I say, the lesson is only this: keep God well on our side; for if we
keep God in our hearts and consciences, let the enemy assail us when he will,
he shall find ever more with us then with them. God cannot be kept, except
there be another kind of reformation then I see appearing yet. I have spoken
already enough of this. And therefore I go forward. Thus much for the 4. verse.

In the 5. and 6. verses he sets down more particularly, Verse 5.6. How this
victory was obtained.
the manner how this victory was obtained by God, after what sort, and how
easily he overcame these great enemies. As to the manner of the victory, it
stands in two sorts, according to two kinds of enemies that were in the
army. There was one sort of great and mighty men, who were Princes and rulers
of the army: there was another of inferior rank and estate, who were counted
the valiant men of courage, and strong men of the army. Against both these
sorts, he uses two sorts of means to obtain the victory; And first in the 5.
verse, he sets upon the men of courage, who were puffed up in the conceit of
their own strength and valiantness. And what does he with them? He strikes
such a fear in them whereby he spoyleth and pulls from them both wit and
strength, he spoileth them of heart and hand, in such sort, that their wit and
strength serves them to no more use, then if they had been asleep. Their
hands which they boasted of so much the night before, served them to no better
service then if they had been cut off. These men by flight escaped, they left
their armor and all behind them: and they that were swiftest, thought them to
have the greatest vantage. This work then was wrought by a terrible fear
which he struck into their hearts and consciences.

As to the other sort, they fought on horses and chariots, and these were the
great men, the princes and rulers of the army: The means that he uses against
these, is told in the end of the 6. verse: He strikes them with a deadly
sleep, with such a sleep that the rider was as dead as the Chariot. I will
not insist; the Chariot is here placed for the rider, by the same figure
whereof we spoke before. Thus far concerning the manner.

As to the other thing, how easily he brought this about, he lets us see it
in the beginning of the 6. verse, all this was done at his rebuke. All this
great overthrow cost him but a word: There was no matter to weary him here, nor
to make any trouble to him. There was was no more desired in it, but only the
word of his mouth. How the Lord is said to rebuke.
The Lord is said to rebuke, when he punishes; for the rebukes of the Lord are
continually eff^ctuall, he m^keth not a proffer against his enemies, but he
lays on also: So the word and voice of his mouth returns never again
without the errand done. Thus far concerning the paticular of the overthrow
purchased against Senacherib.

To take up this now, and apply it to this overthrow: As to the particulars of
their ouer^hrow, for the which we praise God this day, they are not all come as
yet to our knowledge, after what so^t, and in what manner the Lord has
overthrown that navy of ships. There are two things that are certain, who
has done this feate, and how easily he has done it. As to him who did work
this overthrow, I think there is no man but he sees, there is no creature on
the earth had a hand in this work, or can claim any portion in it, and so go
betwixt God and his glory. The most that ye creature can speak of is this; we
hea^e of an engyn of fire devised by the English, which scattered the ships
while they lay at anchor; but yet notwithstanding few or none perished by that
engyn. The whole slaughter and drowning of ships has followed since: at the
least the most part. So that it was the mighty hand of God from heaven, who
this way testified his anger against them. And there are none under the Sun
can come betwixt him and it. Then we see clearly, who has wrought the work,
God immediately from heaven. As to the other thing, how easily he has done it,
I think none of you can be ignorant of it. It has not taken him up 13. or.14.
years preparation. It has not cost millions of Gold, or thousands of men.
What then? It cost him but a word. And what word? He commanded the winds
only, and the winds did disperse them. Then ye see how mightily and how
easily God has done this work: And upon the sight of these particulars, ye
may take up two notable lessons.

The first lesson is this, God never armeth his creatures in vain, he never
sends them out to do his errand that they return empty: but as he directs
them, so they accomplish his direction. As this is true in God, and fails
never on his part: so we see, it fails commonly on man's part. Look to all the
expeditions, great preparations, and armies of puissant Princes these many
years bypast; every one of them has been frustrate in the end. For
notwithstanding all the ships of all the army of Spain, his leuying of men
partly in Spain, and partly in the low Countries: notwithstanding all his
great army, which was so long in setting forth, whereby he thought no doubt to
have rooted out the Church, while he is fully bent to have put in execution
that bloody decree of the council of Trent; howsoever he pretends another
purpose in the mean time; yet what comes to pass I pray you? When he was of
mind to fight with the Church, he meets with the wind, and he finds the
wind more then party, as the dead corpses of men and broken ships in all
coasts do testify.

As this lets us see, that God is never disappointed of his purpose: so it
lets us see, that men are commonly disappointed of their purpose.

The other thing is this: I say, it has been the custom of God from time to
time, Gods formal dealing with his Church.
to bring his Church into wonderful extremities, that in the judgment of man
there appears no hope of safety in them: yea, much less in the judgment of
others; in our own judgment oftentimes, there appears no escape: I say, it
is his custom to bring his Church into these extremities, that his glory may
appear so much the more in her extraordinary deliverances. For such is the
nature of proud flesh, that if he use them as instruments in his work, they
cannot content themselves with the half, or to compound with him; but they
take the whole glory to themselves. So the Lord brings his Church into such
extraordinary dangers, whereas no creature can relieve them, he delivers
them extraordinarily, that the whole glory may appertain to himself; And
praised be his name therefore.

Now what profit and commodity have the enemies of God in all these great
assaults, long preparations, wearisome travel, and great cha^g^s? wha^ profit
reap they in this? They rush their heads against a wall, and haste themselves
to an evil end. They provoke the fury of the Holy one, and make both soul
and body to perish. Is not this the profit? and yet they are so blind in this
matter, that never a one of them can teach an other.

What are the ends wherefore the Lord appointed enemies to his Church.

First end.


The Lord was not sleeping when he appointed enemies to his Church, but foresaw
and appointed their ends: and beyond these ends they might not pass. And
wherefore appointed he the enemies, what are the ends, let us see, unto the
which he appointed them? The first end, is to exercise his Church: as Spain
has put us in an exercise this twelve months bypast; that is one end. This
is very good. 2. end.
What is the next end? to bless his Church by this? Yea, he makes his very
enemies to do good to his Church, he makes them that knew him not, to grant
entertainment to his Church: And when it pleases him, he makes them to grant
her further assistance.

3. end.
The last end is when he has wrong all these good uses out of them, whereof
they have no thanks because they do it for an other end, he makes each one of
them to be hangmen to other: as ye see commonly in our Hilands; he makes each
one of them to bury others, and so punishes sin by sin in them. Then are they
not over busy in procuring such an evil end? for they cannot assail the
apple of his eye, but he must be angry against them. And so long as we remain
under his obedience, he counts us as dear to him as the apple of his eye or
the black of his eye. And so whosoever assaulteth the Church, so long as she
remains in his obedience, they shall win an evil end. Has not experience
taught this in our time? have we not seen the experience of this in the great
men of our time, who have opposed themselves unto the Church? in the Lords of
the South, and great men of the North, that have opposed themselves to the
Church? Have we not seen that stone which they have pushed at to remove, to
have bruised them? Well, there is one of them lying in prison not bruised yet;
but he shall be bruised if he take not up himself. And he in the North also
shall be bruised if he continue; for there are none yet that ever endeavored to
push at that stone, but it bruised them. It were better to stumble upon any
other stone, then upon that precious corner. For there is none that stumble
upon that stone, but he shall break the neck both of body and soul. I see
this stone placed to be a stone of offense, whereon too many of this country
(alas) break their necks. Indeed, I am sorry to see that the most part of this
country should make a stumbling stone of that precious corner. Albeit in this
point among the rest, we have this petition to seek at God, that howsoever it
be a stumbling stone unto them, it may remain a sure foundation and
ground-stone to us, on the which we being builded as lively stones, may be an
holy Temple to our Lord; and that the Lord in time would prevent this utter
extermination, which the devil in his rage and members intend. Thus far
concerning the particulars, by just proportion betwixt that singular delivery
from Senacherib, and our delivery from Spain.

Now what rests? ye see in the 7. verse, he is ravished in admiration of the
great work and of this great benefit; Verse 7. The end of his mercy is
admiration.
And what does he? he bursteth forth in ye pithy sentence: Thou, even thou art
terible; as if he would say, Thou only, even thou art terrible, and have not
any match or companion. For the proudest man in the earth, and he that is most
high in his own conceit, is not able to strike any such terror as to dash a man
or stupifie his senses. This terror is proper to God only, it is he only that
gives the heart to men, and spoyleth them of this heart when he pleases, and
casts them into a dead sleep. Therefore, this only is proper to God; And
wherefore is it that he doubleth the Pronoune, Thou, thou, but to testify that
it is he only that is terrible? He proves this in the end of the verse, and
how? By an interrogation there, saying, Who is able to stand and abide in his
presence, if once his anger begins never so little to kindle? Look to the
devil, what became of him from the time he presumed to make himself companion
to him? He was cast down out of heaven perpetually. Look to Adam, from the
time he began to follow the wit of the devil, and presumed in himself, he
was cast out of Paradise. And so, there is no creature that can abide in the
presence of God of it self. For how is it possible that we that are stubble,
can abide in the presence of a consuming fire? Is not stubble the matter of
fire? even so we that are conceived in sin, borne in sin, and are but a
mass of sins; we are no more but as stubble is to the fire, so are we in the
presence of God who is a consuming fire, except we haur a sconce, except we
have Christ Jesus to stand betwixt us and him. And therefore he is appointed to
be a mediator and intercessor, to stand betwixt us and God the Father; to make
our prayers acceptable, his merits step in betwixt the Father and us, his
justice covers our wickedness, his purity covers our impurity, that under
this couerture the Father may be well satisfied, and we may stand in his
presence, and be defended from the devil and all enemies: Otherwise, there is
no creature able to stand in the presence of God.

What teaches this us? It lets us see the great weakness and infirmity of
the creature in respect of the Creator. Is not this a great weakness, when the
blessed Angels, although they stand and shall stand by grace, yet they are not
able to behold his countenance, but must cover their faces with their wings?
how much more are other creatures unable to stand in his presence? And yet
notwithstanding all this great infirmity which is in us, which are but worms
of the earth, sinful flesh will sometime forget it self, so that in it own
conceit it will match it self with God, and in his word despite him, and
provoke him to the combat as it were, as Iulia^ did: I have heard of him yt
has provoked God to combat, and it has come to mine ears: this is blasphemy.
If it be true, that man is fallen into the hands of the living God; And suppose
he be delayed, because the Lord is long suffering to try his repentance, if he
abuse the Lords patience, that by blasphemies his wrath be nourished and his
anger as it were with coals incensed, heavy shall his end be. Well, it is an
heavy thing that he is fallen into the hands of such a God: Jest not with the
majesty of God, whateuer ye do with flesh. Indeed, it is no new thing for flesh
to misse-know it self, and specially whilst he has cast them into a
reprobate sense, and spoiled them not only of supernatural light, but of
natural also. Alas, they know not what torments abides them, nor the terrible
hell that is prepared for them, except God prevent them in his mercy. Indeed, I
wish that God may prevent them who utter these blasphemies; and if it be
possible, they may be reclaimed, that their life may testify their repentance.

And now to end this present exercise, Conclusion.
that I and so many of you as are to communicate may dress us to that Table;
let us remember that he is only terrible: and seeing he only is terrible,
because he is only Lord of body and soul, only he has power to save and
cast away. And seeing it is so, let us fear, and retire our selves to him who
is able to preserve and keep both body and soul, and sanctify them
throughout, and present them blameless at that great day of the glorious
appearing of Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all
honor, praise and glory, both now and for ever. Amen.

THE THIRTEENTH SERMON, UPON THE 76. PSALM.
8 Thou did cause thy judgment to be heard from heaven, therefore the earth
feared and was still:

When thou O God, arose to judgment, to help all the meek of the earth.
Selah.

10 Surely, the rage of man shall turn to thy praise: the remnant of the rage
shall thou restrain.

11 Vow and perform unto the Lord your God, all ye that be round about him,
let them bring presents unto him that ought to be feared.

12 He shall cut off the spirit of Princes: he is terrible to the Kings of the
earth.


WE divided (well-beloved in Christ Jesus) this Psalm in three parts.
Recapitulation.
In the first part there was propounded unto you certain benefits, wherein the
Lord shows himself exceeding merciful and gracious to his Church. The
benefits wherein he shows himself so gracious were two; namely: The first
and chief benefit wherein he shows himself exceeding merciful to his
Church was this; that he had revealed himself to her by a familiar and
heavenly revelation. For why? the Church knows not only that which may be
known of God by a general knowledge, which is common to the whole world, but
she knows that which may be known of God, by a special knowledge, heavenly
revelation and supernatural light; the which supernatural light and heavenly
revelation, makes us to be counted the children of the light, and of the day.
Which supernatural light seuereth us from the rest of the world, who are
darkness and the children of the night; supernatural light is proper to the
Church only: so that there is none that can know God rightly, but they who
have received of this light.

This spiritual light is so proper to the Church, that it discerns her from
all false Churches upon the face of the earth: for as the Apostle says; Faith
which is no other thing but this light, appertains not unto all; but this
gift of justifying faith, is nothing else but that very light which is given to
those, who before all eternity were appointed for salvation.

This special revelation is not obtained or purchased by any natural force:
for so it were common to all men. It is not purchased by natural wit or
understanding: for the wisdom of this world cannot know those things that are
of God: Yea, the wisdom of the world is the greatest enemy to the wisdom
of God, and the wit of the world esteems the wit of God to be plain
foolishness. This light is not gotten by the sight of the works of God, or by
looking upon this great Universe; we get a light indeed by looking on the works
of God, but this light conueigheth us not a far off; we lose it in the
threshold, in the very entry it is choked by our affections, and the vile
appetites that are in us do choke it. Now we get not this supernatural light
only by the outward ministry of the word; no: sever me the Spirit from the
word, the word is nothing else but a minister of death to my soul, and a
slaying letter, it serves for nothing, but to be a further testimony of my
just condemnation. Therefore this heavenly light whereby we are made heirs of
heaven, and the children of God, is purchased by the word and Spirit of God
ioynctly: By the word striking and piercing the ear outwardly, and the Spirit
penetrating the heart inwardly. So where these two are conjoined, that heavenly
light is wrought, and it is an earnest-pennie of thy everlasting salvation.

Of this light and revelation it comes to pass, that God is well known in
Judah: that is, in his own Church; and of this knowledge it comes to pass
that his Name is great in Israel: that is, his praise is highly extolled, and
his name renowned among all them that know him rightly.

By the Name of God is understood God himself, as he makes himself known in
the wonderful works which he works: as when he has mercy on his Church, he
is called a merciful God; when he keeps his promises, he is called a true
God; when he delivers her mightily, he is called a potent God. And so as many
works as he works, so many Names he has.

Now of this revelation comes the knowledge of God. For, except the Spirit of
God take away the ignorance of our hearts, it is as impossible for me to know
God rightly, as the dumb element. Except this veil of ignorance which
sticks so fast unto our hearts be taken off, that in time the mighty power of
God may be reverenced, there remains no further sight then serves unto our
eternal condemnation. Therefore the Spirit must concur mightily to take off
this veil of ignorance, that our hearts and minds being renewed, we may begin
to be new creatures in Christ Jesus. Of this knowledge it comes to pass, that
God is reverenced and his praises are sounded: for it is impossible that these
who know God aright, but they must praise him and reverence his Name. God is
not like the great men of this country: for they, where they are best known,
there are worst loved: But God by the contrary, where he is best known, he is
best loved. And this love of God can never be idle, but it must burst forth
into his praises. So these two are joined together: the Spirit of God brings
knowledge, which knowledge is helpefull to faith, and true faith ever praises
God.

Then examine your knowledge from the effect, the praise of God, and see
whether the knowledge of God be in this country or not. This conclusion must
hold fast; where God is highly praised, he is well known: and the contrary
must hold as fast, where God is no ways praised, he is not known there.
Assume now, But so it is, that he is no ways praised in this country;
Therefore he was never well known of us, his goodness and mercy was never
well tasted of us. And surely, if multitude of benefits, or multitude of
miracles might have made God known to us, we have had our large part: Yea to
omit all the rest, I think, though there were no more but this delivery past,
it is a sufficient argument to move the hearts of all creatures to praise his
name. But such is our horrible ingratitude that for lack of praise we bring
not only a curse upon the benefit, but a curse upon our own persons. And
therefore mine exhortation is now, as then, That with such hearts as the Lord
has given us, we be ready to sound his praise for this great delivery: the
thankful memory of this last benefit shall be the ready way to purchase the
next: therefore with thankful hearts let us praise him. And where they are not
so disposed, as the worthiness of the benefit requires, let us beg mercy for
our evil disposed hearts, let us desire pardon for our unprepared hearts; and
wish that it would please the Lord to sanctify them further and further to his
own praises; that being covered with his merciful protection, we may at all
times rest under his wings and sauegard, so that we shall be sure to assail
the enemy when he pleases. Thus far for the first benefit.

The second benefit wherein the Lord showed himself gracious toward his people
is this: he made his residence with this people, which he did with no other
nation of the earth; he takes his abiding at Shalem, as the tokens and
ensigns of his presence did testify. God makes his residence with no sort of
people in ye earth but with his Church: he has espied out and select to
himself a people among all the nations of the earth, and with them he has
made his residence.

It is no strange language to say, that God has chosen a people to himself,
and does make his residence with such a people. For albeit the majesty of God
fill and replenish both heaven and earth, and his power reach every where, yet
is it as true; our God dwells every where, he has selected a sort of people,
and a number of persons, with whom he makes his residence. And among all
nations he selected this nation of the Jews, unto whom he gave the visible
ensigns of his presence, and in whose hearts he dwelt. Now it has pleased him
in mercy to translate his Tabernacle, and to make his residence with us: and
he has chosen a few of the hearts of this country, where he has begun his
dwelling place: for God dwells now in the hearts and consciences of his own
by his holy Spirit: and surely, so he has dwelt with us these 30. years, and
in such purity that he has not done the like with any nation in the earth. He
has not remained with any nation without error or heresy to long as he has
done with us: So that of all nations we may be counted most unworthy, for this
entertainment which we give to God: it is not possible that he can continue his
^esidence with us if he be handled after this sort: For we all, King, Priest,
and people, have made defection from God. Well, the Lord will not weary
himself still with us, he will not vex his righteous Spirit in offering
pearls to dogs and swine, he cannot dwell here. Now ye see he is beginning to
give a great part of this nation over to a strange delusion; ye see by reason
they loved not the truth, he has made them to prefer the leaven of the
Pharisees to the truth; and this is the righteous judgment of God. And
whereunto see ye all things work, but unto an universal confusion? So we have
this petition to desire of God, That he in his mercy would prevent this utter
extermination, which the confusion both in Church and policy visibly
portendeth; and that he would put it in the hearts of the Magistrates to set to
their hand, to disburthen the earth of this horrible confusion.

Now in the second part of this Psalm he testifies, that he made his
residence at Shalem by a wonderful miracle, a work wrought by himself only.
Again, in the 4. verse we see the place noted where this overthrow was given.
As to the place, he notes it by an aduerbe of place, There he brake, pointing
it out with his finger as it were: It was done there where God dwells; there
where he has chosen a lodging to himself, there this notable overthrow was
given. Ye know this and nature has taught it; there is no man will be cast out
of his dwelling place willingly, but if they presume to cast him forth, he
will stand to the defense of his lodging. So when these men came to cast God
out of his dwelling place, he stood to the defense thereof. I compared like
with like, and I showed yt this question flies in all men's mouths: Where was
yonder great overthrow given? It is answered and will be answered, about the
coasts of the Lords dwelling place, there yonder navy perished: They came to
cast God out of his Isle, but he stood to the defense thereof, and showed he
was not ready to remove. And it is certain, there is no external force in the
earth that can cast out God, except we cast him out by our wicked lives and
devilish conuersations, he will never be cast forth. What great comfort and
commodity we have by this dwelling of God with us, judge ye. Would God he had
good neighborhood: For suppose he makes his residence with us, yet he gets
evil neighborhood: and greater unquietness is not out of hell then he
gets on all sides. Well, I tell you it is not possible that the Lord can be
dislodged by any external force, except we dislodge him by our wicked lives
and conuersations, he will never be dislodged: And how far we are gone
forward in this work, the doings of this country clearly testify. Let us
see where he may rest, where he may make his residence, where the cries of
murder and blood shall not amaze him? Where shall he sit, where the clamours
of blood, the great complaints and cries of oppression shall not astonish him?
What part is clean, let us see, without horrible blasphemies? Well, how is it
possible but this way we must lose God? and losing God we lose all.

I showed you, the ready way to entertain him, was, that seeing he has
chosen his dwelling place in the hearts and consciences of his own, it is not
possible he can be entertained, except we take up a new fashion of doing. The
manner of doing that we ought to take up is this; Look what reverence thou
bear unto any Prince or Magistrate in the earth externally, let the like
reverence be given to God inwardly: although there be no proportion between
these two. And if the external reverence which thou bear unto a man be of
such force, that it will make thee to compose thy gesture, and refrain thy
tongue, that thou burst not forth into evil speech which may offend him: How
much more ought the reverence which we bear to God, dwelling within us by his
holy Spirit, make us to refrain from evil thoughts, and from wicked and
filthy affections? For the affections of the heart are as good language to
God, as the words of the mouth are to any Prince. Then I say, should not our
third petition be this, that the Lord would rule our hearts so by his presence,
yt the cogitations thereof molest him not, nor the canker of our affections
disturb him not? If this be done, then God shall make his residence with you.

Now after he has noted the place in the 5. verse, he enlarges this work by
a notable comparison; in the which he lets us see, that there is no majesty
nor power in heaven or earth that can come near in glory, majesty, or power
to our great God: that is, there are no arms, force, counsel, nor endeavor,
that can prevail against God. So the nations that have God upon their side,
have more with them then be against them. Upon this I desired you, seeing we
have such an advantage of the dwelling of God, to prepare a clean chamber
where he may make his residence; he makes his residence only in the hearts of
his own: The heart is only made clean by faith, therefore let us beg faith,
that God may rest with us; and God being with us, the enemy shall find more
with us then with them, surprise us when they will.

In the 6. and 7. verses he sets down more particularly, the manner of this
great overthrow, after what sort, how easily he accomplished this great work:
he lets us see, all this great victory did cost him but a word, it cost him
no more travel, but he commanded the winds, and the winds did undo them: For
the Lords rebukes are ever effectual, he proffereth not against his enemies,
but he lays on. S^ this great victory cost him not 14. or 15. years
preparation; it cost him not millions of gold and leuyings of men, part in
Spain, and part in the Low Countries; it cost him but one word. So it could
not be that this work which was so mightily and easily done, could have been
done except the Lord had done it. Thus far we proceeded in our last lesson.

Now to come to our text. After that he has showed in particular the manner of
this delivery, and letten us see after what sort, and how easily God has done
this work; and after he has cried out, Thou, thou art terrible: being
ravished by the greatness of the work, and after that he has showed the
great infirmity and weakness of the creature, so often as it dare presume to
oppose it self and match it self with the great Creator: after he has done
this, he insisteth yet in setting forth of this wonderful judgment; and in
the 8. verse he lets us see, that this great and terrible judgment was
wrought by the power and force of God only; it was done extraordinarily from
the heaven by himself only. So that the whole world saw the finger and hand
of God in it.

Then in the beginning of this eight verse, I say, Division.
he makes it known that he did it only; and in the end of the verse he
lets us see what his judgments wrought in the hearts of men. In the 9.
verse, he lets us see the time when it was that it pleased him to work it,
and to what end he wrought it. In the 10. verse he lets us see whereunto the
great fury and rage of the wicked served: and in the end of that verse he
meets with an objection which the Church might have made: And in the last two
verses is contained the conclusion of the Psalm.

Then to rerurne to the 8. verse: Verse 8.
in the beginning thereof the Prophet makes it known, God only did this
great work.
that it was God only that did this work immediately, without the employment
of any creature. And therefore this manner of execution testified to the whole
world, that God only was the chief doer of it.

Then the chief reason that moved God to do this extraordinarily and
immediately with his own hand, is this: Although our God has infinite ways
and as many means in his hand, at all times ready to destroy his enemies: yet
such is the malice of man, and the envy of the Devil (that possesses man) to
the glory of God, that so long as God works his work ordinarily, and
imployeth this or that instrument in doing of his work, so long man spoyleth
God of his Glory, and spoyleth him of a part of his praise. So yt man will
sometime ascribe the glory to his own industry and wit, or to fortune, or to
one occasion or other: so that ere they suffer God to have his whole glory,
they will give a part of it to any creature of the earth. For this cause the
Lord works extraordinarily, and from heaven, that the mouths of all the
world, yea of the very enemies, may be compelled to say, (and this confession
must be wrung out of them,) that it is the finger of God that wrought this,
without the support of any creature.

After what sort he wrought this overthrow I will not dispute in particular,
whether it were by lightning, thunder, earthquake, upon this I insist not. The
general is sure and certain, that it was a work that flowed from heaven
immediately.

The effects of this great work.
Now he says in the end of the verse, that this terrible judgment brought
forth two effects in the hearts of men: First, it brought forth a wonderful
fear: and secondly, it brought forth a great silence, their tongues were taken
from them, The earth feared, and was still. By the earth, the inhabitants of
the earth is understood: or if we will hold us in our particular, the remanent
of Senacheribs army is understood, I mean the remanent of the army that were
saved from the judgment: This remanent began to fear, and be afraid with a
terrible fear, and the tongues of them that were so stout the night before,
held themselves quiet. They that lifted and hoissed their arms the night
before, and provoked God, as it were, to the combat, after the sight of this
judgment, they have their hands to seek; and they who boasted so much of
their valiantness, and filled the very earth with their blasphemies the night
before, when they saw this terrible judgment, were silent, and had not a word
to speak.

It is wonderful, the Lords manner of doing and proceeding is a hid manner of
doing against his enemies, and few perceive the fashion of the bringing about
of his judgments. For ye see, he takes his enemies in an instant at unawares:
whilst a man is in the height of his pride, he bereaueth him of his counsel,
he bereaueth him of his force, and spoyleth him both of heart and hand, in such
sort, that he has no wit to devise more then an Ass, and has not a hand to
perform any more then if he wanted hands. So he bereaueth him of his policy
and exquisite judgment. And how is this done? It is by a blind fear that he
strikes them with: he casts them into such anguish and blindness of mind,
that they neither see God who is the striker, nor, can find any way out, but
are cast into a desperate estate, and utter darkness remediless. And so it
comes to pass, that these miserable men lay violent hands on themselves,
thinking that the soul which now is in prison, as it were, will be in a better
estate, if it were out of the body: but alas, they are deceived. So I say, the
judgment of God when it lights, how long soever it be delayed, terrible
shall it be when it lights on the enemy. It is a fearful thing to cast our
selves willingly into the hands of a consuming fire.

Therefore now seeing ye have courses in hand, Use.
ye should take good heed to your courses, look well about you, and be
diligent to know whether ye be on Gods side or against him. Ye again that are
not practisers, and meddle not with high matters, take heed how ye walk in
your own calling. Look unto your trade, ye that are Merchants, look unto
your dealing, ye that are Lawyers, how crooked or how straight ye are: ye that
are Lords and Judges, with what conscience ye proceed in your vocation, and
mark this: Look to his word, look what profit ye have made of his word,
examine your calling by his word. And if ye examine your calling by his word
this way, ye shall find the fruit or loss of your calling: but if ye depend
on the testimony of your conscience, without the examination and rule of his
word, ye will be deceived: for many do this, and say, I am not troubled in
conscience, I am sure my conscience presses me not; when in the mean time
they run a wicked course, and try not their calling by the blessed word of
God: but look only to the estate of their conscience, which in such evil
affairs flatters them; they think themselves sure enough. O, but thou art
deceived, and why? Thy conscience may be deceived as well as thou. And how? Thy
conscience can give thee no better warrant of thy doing, neither to accuse nor
to excuse, but as she is informed. So that if she be rightly informed, she will
give thee a right warrant: but if she be euilly informed, she will give thee as
evil a warant and flatter thee: So that of a slight informatio^, she will give
as slight a testimony. There is no right information but that which proceeds
of the word; therefore seeing now ye have the word so clearly taught unto you,
ye should try and examine your callings by this word. See what this word
bids you do, try in particular, and say; What warrant of the word have I to
do this? what warrant have I of his mouth, for thus doing? And finding a
warrant of Gods word, and of his Spirit going together, thou art sure: But
where the conscience gives a testimony without the warrant of the word, it is
a deceiving testimony without the warrant of the word, it is a deceiving
testimony. Therefore conioyne these two: Try narrowly in your doings, if the
word and the Spirit go together. And if these two be joined, they shall stand
as two witnesses with thee.

The greatest impediment, that stays men from the conioyning of these two in
their doings, is the affection they have to their own person, the affection and
love they have to themselves hinders this trill: For we see that such is the
superiority and dominion which that affection has, that it carries reason
whither it pleases; and it is so strong that it suffers not the grace of God
to enter into us, but moves man to give obedience to the wickedness of her lust
of appetite; and to say, Ere I will want the service of my lust and pleasure of
mine appetites, I will make subject rather ye word to mine appetite, then subdue
my appetite to the word, and so to want my pleasure. (Judge ye what conscience
this is.) They make the word to serve their appetites, and never suffer the
word to mortify their appetites. And of this what comes to pass? By this
kind of dealing it comes to pass, that at last they lose their conscience, so
that it can neither accuse nor excuse, because they are cast asleep and ly in
this dead sleep till they be wakened with a terrible wakening by God, the
righteous judge from heaven. Take heed, for this is the truth. And at that
wakening, he shall make the terrors of these same sins (which, if they had
followed counsel, they might have eschued) terrribly to ouerwhelme them. Now
the conscience is at quietness and rest, and holds thee in security; But
alas, it is a festered security. The inward heart is full of filth, which
filthiness shall bring such terrors in the end with it, that it shall
multiply thy torments, and so oppress thee, except in time thou search out the
bottom of thy conscience. Therefore be not deceived; as ye are come into this
world to serve and glorify him, so every one in your own ranks and callings
be upright. Ye deal uprightly in you calling when ye have the warrant of the
word, for the warrant of the word is not changeable, it comes not under
alteration: But once have the warrant, and have it full. So whosoever obtains
the warrant of the word in this world, that blessed mouth shall be a warrant to
them in a greater place. Then take heed to this terrible judgment, look in
time, that out of time it ouert^ke thee not with a terrible wakening.

Verse 9. The time of this great judgment.
Now to come to the ninth verse. In this verse he notes the time when this
great judgment was wrought upon the enemies: and he says, it was wrought when
God arose; it was not done when God sat; for ye whole time when he sat, his
enemies were spending their time in raging, murder, oppression and blood, as
now ye may see the great men in this country raging, who are his enemies. Then
all the time that God sat, his enemies were aloft. And this long sitting of
God, what did it? whereas it should have drawn them to repentance, it confirmed
them in their pride, and increased their malice. Well, God arises at the last,
and when he arises he strikes them with a terrible judgment. He brings in
God here, after the manner of earthly Judges, after the custom of our Judges:
For first they sit down, they try, seek out, and advise; and after aduisement
they resolve, and after aduisement and resolution they rise up, given
judgment, and pronounce the sentence. Even so the Prophet brings in God
after the same manner, sitting, and after sitting arising and pronouncing the
sentence. Then the Lord ye see has his time of sitting, and his time of rising.

The time of his sitting, I call the time of his patience, the time of his long
suffering, The time of Gods sitting.
the time of his benignity, whereby he allureth, yea if it were possible, his
very enemies to turn unto him: And I call the time of his sitting, the time of
his delay of the execution of his judgment. I call the time of his rising, the
time of his execution, the time of his hot wrath, and the time of the
declaration of his righteous judgment upon flesh. The Lord has both these
times, and they who abuse the time of his sitting, shall not be able to escape
the time of his rising. Senacherib abused the patience and long suffering of
Gods sitting, but he escaped not his rising, as he did bear him witness. All
doctrine should be applied to our present estate; all men's consciences are
asleep, and except they be now wakened in time, terrible shall that wakening
be which they shall have, when the terrors thereof shall oppress them.
Therefore it is good that this matter of terror were presented in time, to
waken the conscience. For by the way, the biting conscience is not the worst of
all sort of consciences, but the biting conscience is in ye second rank: for
the conscience that biteth thee, and accuses thee, sends thee to seek
remedy. And the more that it hastes thee, the sooner thou purchasest remission
of thy sins, and peace in the body and blood of Christ Jesus. So of all
consciences the biting conscience is not the worst, but is in the second rank:
it sends thee to seek remedy. Only of this beware, that thou furnish not
matter to her biting by increasing of further corruption, but ever cast out sin
whereby God is offended, and this biting nourished; and in the end thou shall
find a true pacification, and a taste of the right peace that flows from
Christ Jesus, which peace passes all understanding.

To come to the particular: The Lord is not risen as yet in this country,
albeit he has sitten long. And why has he sitten, but to see if his enemies
will repent? And has this taken effect? No; for he has not greater enemies in
any part then the great men in this country, where his word is so clearly
preached. So that the greater the knowledge is, the greater is the contempt;
and the greater the contempt is, the heavier must the judgment be that abides
them. Now in all this time of the Lords sitting, what are they doing? They are
burning and scalding, slaying and murdering, and using all kind of
oppression, and raging so, as if there were not a King in Israel. Well, the
Lord sits not to this end, that they should abuse his patience; he sits
not that they should be confirmed in their cruelty, that they should lose their
knowledge, or think that either there were not God, or God were become like
themselves. Always I say, this is not the end wherefore he sits, but he
sits only to this end, that he may draw them by the hand to repentance. And
now seeing they have abused the time of his sitting, he is even at the rising;
And assuredly the Lord shall rise to be revenged upon the iniquities of the
great men of this Country, whose sins do so abound. And whereby know ye this?
By one argument which is infallible. Examine by your own wit and judgment
which ye have of the book of God, and by your natural judgment: Is it
possible that the ground of this country is able to bear a greater birth of
iniquity, both in Hie-land and Low-land? Is it possible that it can be heavier
laden with mischief in all corners then it is now? Yea the ground must be
disburdened of this iniquity, where the Leiutenant who^ God has placed,
ouerseeth it, and will not disburden the earth of her birth: where the
Magistrates that are inferiors neglect their duties, of necessity he must
extraordinarily from the heaven disburden the earth thereof. And surely to let
this pass, if there were no more but these horrible confusions in all parts,
which no man can overtake, it appears that the Judge of the world himself
shall come down shortly to disburden it. And why? Because I see all tokens
that go immediately before his coming, to be already passed; faith is skarslie
to be found, yea no faith in promises, much less faith in Christ Jesus. For
iniquity abounds so, and there are so many confusions left vnouertaken by the
Magistrate, that it appears clearly, ^he Judge himself must needs come,
and that the Judge of the world shall be the first yt shall redress this
confusion. And seeing it is so, it becomes not us to be idle, for surely the
time draws near. And if the time shall be shortened for the elects cause,
now I think it shall be shortened for the cries of the poor of this land.
Therefore it is no time for us to sleep. It is time for us to prepare to go and
meet yt great Judge now, whilst oil is offered abundantly: buy oil to your
lamps; for so soon as the Trumpet blows, and that he is making homeward from
the clouds to his Fathers dwelling, from whence he shall come, it is no time
to have our oil to seek. Now we have this oil of gladness freely offered:
Therefore it becomes you to prepare your selves, that when he comes, whether
it be at night or in the morning, by night or by day, he may not find you
unawares. These iniquities and wickedness of the heart of man are so deep,
that if the Ethnik might say justly, that the labyrinths and deceits of the
heart of man are infinite; how much more may we speak it, having Ierem. his
warrant, who calls it deep and inscrutable above all things? Ierem. 17. It
is time therefore, that we be busy in seeking the renewing, breaking and
humiliation of our hearts, for the outward scarre, suppose it appears to be
whole, where the inward is festered, it avails nothing, but makes it to
fester again. Therefore now it is time to study to have your hearts broken,
for once they must be broken ere they be healed. Once they must be low ere they
be high. For thine heart that was never touched with any sense of thine own
sin, and feeling of Gods judgment, knew never what the taste of mercy meant:
For there is no way to go to heaven, but by the gates of hell. Therefore it is
time to beg of God, that he would bring your hearts to that estate, that ye may
know your sin, and sorrow for it; and that he may prepare your hearts so, that
ye may look for the accomplishment of your happiness in his coming: And where
the heart is so desirous of that day, it may be welcome, come when it will. The
Lord of heaven prepare your hearts: It is not possible that this can be done, O
Lord; except thou by the mighty power of thy Spirit, humble them, and hammer
down this natural hardness that is in them, otherwise our hearts will never
give obedience to thee. Therefore, O Lord, work it.

Now in the end of the verse he lets us see, to what end the Lord rise and
executed judgment: The chief cause that moved him to rise, was the poor and
oppressed in all corners of the earth. The great complaint and cry of the
people in all countries, was the cause why God did rise. Examine then and try,
has not God good cause to rise in this country? I know well there can not be
more complaints of the poor in a country then in this: so that it is no
marvel, but he rise and that suddenly, he is like unto himself no was of
before: Then these great complaints and cries of the poor, must make him to
rise as ye have it, Psalm. 12. And if they prevent no^ his rising, terrible
shall it be to the wicked: for ever with the salvation of his own the
destruction of his enemies is joined. And out of these, both salvation and
destruction, he makes himself to be glorified. Then I would these bloody men
and oppressors (that renown themselves with shame and ignominy) knew that the
Lord will ris^ and that shortly, except they prevent him, whereof I see no
appearance.

In the tenth verse he lets us see to what purpose the great fury of these
men serves; and in the beginning he lets us see it with a constant
affirmation, Surely, surely, the rage of men shall turn to his praise: Their
greatest rage and highest fury is the highest matter of the Lords praise. That
same fury and rage whereby they think to dishonor God and ouerwhelme his
Church, he turns to the contrary, and makes out of that same fury his own
glory and the delivery of his Church to shine. The Lord is a wonderful
workman, he brings about his purpose in such sort, that he can draw out light
out of darkness, and bring forth his own praise out of their greatest rage.
Have ye not seen this from time to time? has he not made his greatest enemies
to testify it, and drawn a confession out of their own mouths? Ye read in
the history of Julian the Apostata, when he was in his greatest rage, and in
the top of his fury provoking Christ to the combat: in that high rage whilst
he draws his weapon to strike our head, he strikes himself: and after he
had given himself a deadly wound, he bursteth forth and says at the last,
Thou have won o Galilean: so out of his own mouth the Lord drew a confession
of this praise. Ye read in the 6. of Exodus of those inchanters that opposed
themselves to Moses and Aaron, and counterfeited all that they did until it
came to the plague of Lice: there they stand and say, It is the finger of the
Lord; as if they would say, This plague is done by the mighty hand and power
of God only, we are not able to counterfeit it. Here we see they are compelled
out of their own mouth to confess the praise of the Lord. Senacherib was
compelled to say, (who list to read that history) and it is said that his
grave has this superscription, that he confessed it was the great God of
heaven that fought against him. Now hear ye at the same present, what say the
Spaniards? They are compelled to say, that it was the finger of the Lord, the
mighty hand of the God of Jacob that has wrought this overthrow without the
help of any creature. So by these examples and many more ye see the verity of
this proposition: God makes the greatest rage and fury of his enemies to be
the greatest matter of his praise.

Now in ye end of the verse he meets an objection, He answered to an
objection of the Church.
which the Church might have objected. For the Church in those days (as the
Church this day) might have said, Although this victory of the Lords be strange
and wonderful, yet he has not slain all: For we understand that the Lord
shall not make all Christ's enemies his footstool until the last day. And
therefore seeing there is a remnant of them who are endued with that same
restless spirit that their fo^efathers were before, they cannot rest, but
still pursue and come against the Church of God. For the spirit of the devil
although it possess not all ye enemies in a like measure, yet they are all
possessed with one sort and kind of spirit, which possessed their elder brother
Cain; to wit, the spirit of persecution possesses the^ all where ever they be
scattered. And as Cain persecuted his brother Abel, so we must look to be
persecuted of them: as ye hear this spirit bursting forth in horrible effects
which come to your ears our of Roan, out of Paris, and out of all those parts.
Ye hear there of the great persecution and bloody rage of the enemies, which
testifies that they are possessed with that same spirit of persecution where
with their elder brother Cain was possessed. So the Church seeing that the Lord
has not slain all, but that there is a remnant left, who are endued with that
same restless spirit of their predecessors, she might have said, Who shall
restrain the remnant of the rage of the enemies? For although that here they
be called a remnant, yet in respect of us they are not a remnant, but an huge
multitude. Therefore seeing it is so that they are possessed with this spirit
that will make them to conioyne their forces, they will renew their assault,
and who shall restrain them?

Answer.
The Prophet answers clearly in the name of God, and bids the Church take no
thought of their rage: for he that had destroyed the root, would destroy the
remnant: the God of glory that overthrew the maine army, would also restrain
the remnant. The Church has no more ado but to depend upon the God of armies,
and he shall fight for her. Now ye see how clearly and easily this matter
applies it self: Ye know how it is common in the mouths of all men, that
this fleet which is perished, is counted to have come only to have scoured
the waters, and to have espied the forces of the Queen of England; there is a
greater army coming, the second assault shall be made with greater courage,
and shall have a better success. This is the common objection, and upon this
the weak ones of ye Church may ask: Who shall restrain this remnant? and who
shall oppose unto this second assault? The Prophet answers, the God of heaven
shall restrain the second assault: The mighty God of this Isle who has
showed himself wonderful from time to time in this country, howsoever we be
ingrate, he shall restrain the second as he did the first: So on our part we
have no more ado, but to hold us in the sight of God. And this is even a very
great work to hold us in his eye: for by bending up of our eye to him, we
shall draw down his merciful eye to us: and so being guarded with his eye,
and being environed with his merciful protection which is unto us a brazen
wall, the enemy shall never prevail, assail when he pleases. And this shall
be done only by holding us in the sight of Gods eye. Therefore so long as
every one of you in particular, and this country in general, is able to hold
themselves in the sight of his eye, heaven and earth and all that is therein,
is not able to overcome them. But if thou build up a parpan wall of thine own
making between thee and him, then not he only, but all his creature shall be
fearful to thee and ready to destroy thee. For, wherefore is it that some men
are commonly so exceedingly afraid, but only for want of an issue? and we have
this issue of trouble only in the sight of his eye: So that if thou keep God,
thou have ever a sure issue. O then, the care of a Christian should be this, to
repent and sorrow for his sins past, to demolish and cast down this parpan
wall of iniquity that it grow no more, but that by sobs and sighs, piece by
piece it may be demolished. No question, the more sin is removed, the more
we are in the sight of his eye; and the more we see him, the greater comfort
shall we get all manner of ways: There is no other way to be saved but by
this. Thus far concerning the second part of our division.

Now in the third part which is in the last two verses, Exhortation to
thankfulness.
he concludes with a notable exhortation, that seeing the God of heaven has
deserved so well of her, she should show her self thankful. The least thing
that she can do is to praise the Name of God, yea surely it is the least thing:
Therefore he says, Vow, and perform your vows; Vow to testify your
thankfulness: Perform your vows to testify your obedience, and how ready
ye are to serve so good a God.

By vows here he understands not these foolish vows, but the action of
praise and t^anksgiuing: for so often as the Spirit of God makes mention of
vows, so often he means of vows of thanksgiving; as ye may see clearly in
this book of the Psalms, as namely in the 50.55.60.61.65. and 66. Psalms.
And to vow to thank God, it is a part of our duty, we are bound to it, yea we
have our warrant for it. And these sorts of vows are very profitable, for we
have two great benefits by them. First they stir up and confirm our faith:
For when a man is in any great extremity, and promises to be thankful to God
if he be delivered, it strengthens his faith, and makes him to look the
more for his delivery. And again, when the delivery is past that we are
returned to our own home, if it were no more but for very shame and keeping of
the promise that we made, we cannot but be thankful. So these sorts of vows
are good, and ought to be vowed and performed: but those unlawful vows of the
Papists have no ground here. Neither ought any wicked vows ought to be kept,
vows which are rashly vowed to be wickedly performed, for in so doing they
make a double fault: First, they do a fault in vowing rashly: secondly, they
make a fault in performing their rash vow: All these vows are beside the
warrant of the word; we should promise to be thankful to God, and to perform.

Then the exhortation rises unto us after the example of the Prophet here;
that seeing in this great benefit (although we had never received more benefits)
the Lord has deserved so well of you, ye ought every one of you to frame your
hearts to grow in thankfulness to him, whereby he may grow in mercy and love
toward you, and in hatred and anger toward his enemies. And although ye be
thankful, think not that ye deserve any thing, for when ye have done this, ye
cannot add any thing to his estate, ye enrich not God one whit: It is not
possible that he who is absolutely perfect of himself can need any thing
whereby his estate may be enriched; yea suppose we add nothing to his estate,
our best thanksgiving is no ways acceptable to him but by way of grace; if
Christ Jesus step not in betwixt us and him, it is not possible that our
persons or any action that flows from our person can be acceptable unto him.
Therefore it is only by way of grace and mercy in Christ Jesus, in whom he
cannot be displeased with us, that our thankfulness is accepted by him: So it
is not for our merits, as the Papists foolishly allege, nor by way of our
deserving, that he accepts of us; it is by way of mercy and grace that he
allows of us and our thankfulness. Indeed he accepts so of our
thanksgiving, that unless we praise him nothing can please him: And therefore
seeing all our actions are acceptable to him only in his well-beloved, let us
praise him in Christ. Ye see, we will thank him for meat and drink after
dinner and supper: and why should ye not thank him for the rest of the
creatures? As for this benefit of your delivery and preservation both of
Church and country, the Lord give us hearts to thank him. Now in the end of
this verse he says, Let them bring presents to him that ought to be feared. We
have no other presents to bring, but this sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving,
which is called calves of the lips, Psalm. 51. Would God that this were truly
given, although not in such measure as is required. Always let us bring these
sacrifices, and present them to him only, who is fearful, not only to mean
men, but to the greatest Princes and Monarchs of the earth. And how proves he
this? He proves this in the last verse, where he says, He cutteth off the
spirit of Princes: that is, he spoyleth them of their wit and force: and last
of all, when it pleases him, he spoyleth them of the life it self, he takes
all from them, even from these same Princes that oppose themselves most against
him; he spoyleth them in an instant of heart and hand and all forces, and
makes them a spectacle to all nations. Well, they will not learn in time, it
is terrible for Princes to fall into his hands: For when they fall into his
hands, he is not satisfied to spoil them both of heart and hand, but after he
has spoiled them both of heart and hand, he takes the very life from them.
Senacherib found this, for his own sons laid hands on him and slew him. Our
great men think they will eschew his hands: There is no example or
proclamation of judgment that will make them leave off from burning, slaying
and murder. This is not looked to by the Council, and he who should punish
this, ouerseeth it; and they that are inferior magistrates ouersee it: so that
this land is so overwhelmed with sin, that it cannot be discharged, until
the great God himself does it. Terrible is he therefore to Kings, and look
how terrible Kings are to mean men, far more terrible is he to them. The
Kings of the earth, at least since the Gospel began, have ever conspired to
expel Christ out of the number of Kings, and so to root out his kingdom, that
he should not bear rule in the earth. And this conclusion has been laid by
them. So by Kings here to whom he is terrible, is to be understood, those
mischievous Kings that will not acknowledge Christ as King, nor submit their
scepter to his scepter: but have all conspired and assayed their forces to put
him out of their number. What profit they have gotten of this, time has tried.
Ye see what the King of Spain has gained, ye see what his predecessors
gained. And what follows? There is a second assault to be made: and it is not
possible but the second assault must be; For the devil must be ever like to
himself. So the second assault shall come, and in great rage he shall push at
that same stone, as he and his predecessors have done often before. Is it sure
that Spain shall make the second assault? It is sure, and yonder argument
lets me see it: for the spirit of the devil cannot be at rest. And what
shall come of this? The next thing that ye shall hear, God shall cut off his
life; he that has spoiled him first of his heart and hand, shall spoil him of
all: and so the second thing that ye shall hear, the great Monarch of Spain
shall die. And so he shall be disappointed in the second assault, and all the
kingdoms which are under the protection of this King shall be let loose: For
rather shall heaven and earth go together, ere God suffer his Church to be
rooted out, if we remain in any part of our obedience. O then we ought
earnestly to prepare us to reverence him who is only fearful: For if they
who have the supreme place will not reverence him, he shall take their
reverence out of the hearts of men. It is only for Gods sake that they are
reverenced: whosoever therefore honors not God, he shall not honor him. So
we ought to honor God and give him his due reverence and his own place, that
we reverence no man nor the laws of any man but God, and for Gods cause. And
so honoring God, God shall honor us and extol us, and that in the righteous
merits of his Son. To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor
and praise, both now and ever, Amen.

THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON, UPON THE 40. PSALM: PREACHED IN THE time of public
fast.
1 I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry.

2 He brought me also out of the horrible pit, out of the mirie clay, and set
my feet upon the rock: and ordered my goings.

3 And he has put in my mouth a new song of praise unto our God: many shall
see it and fear, and shall trust in the Lord.

4 Blessed is the man that makes the Lord his trust, and regards not the
proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.

5 O Lord my God, thou have made thy wonderful works so many, that none can
count in order to thee, thy thoughts toward us: I would declare and speak of
them, but they are more then I am able to express.

6 Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire: (for mine ears have thou
prepared) burnt offering and sin offering have thou not required.

7 Thou said I, Lo, I am come, for in the roll of the book it is written of
me.

8 I desired to do thy good will, O my God: yea thy law is within mine heart.

9 I have declared thy righteousness in the great Congregation: Lo, I will
not refrain my lips, O Lord, thou know.

10 I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, but I have declared thy
truth and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy mercy and thy truth from the
great Congregation.

11 Withdraw not thy tender mercy from me, O Lord: let thy mercy and thy
truth always preserve me.

12 For innumerable troubles have compassed me, my sins have taken such hold
upon me, that I am not able to look up: yea, they are more in number then the
hairs of mine head: therefore mine heart has failed me.

13 Let it please thee, O Lord to deliver me: make haste, O Lord, to help me.

14 Let them be confounded and put to shame together that seek my soul to
destroy it, let them be driven backward and put to rebuke that desire mine hurt.

15 Let them be destroyed for a reward of their shame, which say unto me, Aha,
aha.

16 Let all them that seek thee, rejoice and be glad in thee: and let them
that love thy salvation, say always, The Lord be praised.

17 Though I be poor and needy, the Lord thinks on me: thou art mine helper
and my deliverer: my God, make no tarying.


THis Psalm for the most part, tends to praise and thanksgiving: For the
Author of it (David) partly praises God from his own late experience, and
partly from the public experience of the whole Church. Therefore for this his
experience, he offers his service to God, protesting to be thankful to him,
as he had been thankful in times past. And in the end of the Psalm, he
retireth himself to prayer, and commends his estate to the protection of
God, that as he had delivered him in time past, so he would continue the same
in mercy to him in time to come. This I take to be the sum of this Psalm.

Touching the parts of it, we have three: in the first whereof we have the
praise and commendation of the mercy and kindness of God, whereby it comes
to pass, that he rejects not them that depend upon him. In the second, for
this experience that he has found, he offers his service to God; and as he
had proclaimed his justice and mercy in time past, so he protests that he is
ready to do the same in time to come. In the third, as I spoke before, he
retireth to prayer, he commends his estate to God, that as it had pleased him
to preserve him in time past, so it would please him to preserve him in time to
come. Following the literal meaning, this is the effect of the Psalm. If you
take it otherwise, there is a notable prophecy concerning the office of Christ
Jesus; concerning the abolishing of the old covenant, and establishing of the
new: and concerning the sacrifice of our high Priest, the Priest of the new
Testament, Christ Jesus.

Then to return to the first part: therein we have a singular experience set
down: Indeed, if the circumstances were well considered, his experience is
more then singular; for by the last Psalm, the estate and care wherein he was
at this time may be easily gathered. He was pursued by the treason of his own
son Absalon, he was pursued by the skornes and Jests of his own servants. In
this great extremity, he bursteth out into prayer, and beggeth of God, that he
would withdraw his hand from him for a space: and why? He was consumed with his
own iniquity, he desires, that at the last he would incline his ears to his
prayers, and keep no longer silence at his tears, in respect he knew he was
but a soiourner and a pilgrim in the earth, as the rest of his fathers were:
he says, Withdraw thine heavy hand, O Lord, and let the mercy that I looked
for, appear to me. Now, in this Psalm he lets us see, what issue and end
his long waiting obtained, to wit, a most blessed and happy end: For in this
Psalm we see, that the Lord at last inclined his ear unto him, and showed in
experience that though he answers him not at first, yet he was not deaf, but
accomplished his desire, in drawing him out of his misery in the which he lay;
which misery he describes by two proper similitudes.

The first similitude is taken from the pit. The second is taken from the mire
of clay. At the last, the Lord drew him out of this horrible pit, and placed
him upon the shore: he opposes the rock unto the pit, and the fair way to
the myrie clay, and placed him upon a plain and fair way, and directed his
journey. So his long expectation obtained a most happy issue.

In this his experience, there are three things that offer themselves to be
considered: First, what was this that he sustained in this long waiting, what
was it that made him to continue without despair. Secondly, what was David's
exercise all the time of this long waiting. Thirdly, what issue and end this
long waiting obtained. As for the waiting, there was no other thing that
sustained him, but that same which we Christians call a Christian hope, or a
Christian expectation; which hope is the work of the holy Spirit, wrought in
us by the power thereof, whereby it comes to pass, that we with great patience
abide the performance of the Lords promises.

Hope.
In this hope there are two things enclosed: There is first, the absence of the
thing hoped for, and yet notwithstanding a certain expectation of the same.
This hope of ours is different from our faith, How hope differs from faith.
though it rise and spring thereof, in two special points: For the nature of
faith, takes hold on the promise; for nothing can be believed but the promise:
promises are propounded to be believed, and commandments to be obeyed. The
nature of faith then, takes hold of the promise: The nature of hope looks
not so much to the promise, as to the thing promised. The nature of hope is to
look continually, until it possess the thing that is promised. The nature of
faith makes the thing which is absent in it self and in very deed, to be
present, as if it were extant and subsisting before thy senses: and therefore,
faith is called the ground and substance of things absent; for faith makes
them as sure by the promise as if the thing promised were in my hand. It makes
me as sure of the promise, as if the debt were already paid. Hope again,
makes not the thing promised present, but looks on still until it be
present, and wayteth on continually until it possess it; and when it is
obtained, then faith and hope cease: For what need we (says the Apostle,) to
hope for the thing we see or have in our hand? Now look how sure our faith is,
as sure, of necessity, must our hope be. A sure promise makes a sure faith: a
slack promise will never make a constant faith. The promise of God is only
sure: therefore the hope and faith that is grounded on God, is only sure. This
sure Hope lives in this world by way of patience, for impatiencie cutteth the
pillars of hope. The life of Hope.
Impatiency carries us to despair, and to lay violent hands on our selves. So
hope lives by patience, and patience by hope. Now the matter of patience is
trouble upon trouble. Affliction engenders patience (says the Apostle,) Romans
5. For a bed of ease is not a matter of patience, a prosperous course is not a
matter to assay our hope: so trouble upon trouble, is the matter and exercise
of patience; long putting off and delay of things hoped for, is ye exercise of
true patience, Now, of this deduction I gather one proposition: That is a sure,
Doctrine.
constant and Christian hope, which being exercised by trouble upon trouble, by
long process and delay of time, yet remains constant. Who ever is endued
with such an hope, he may wait on still, he has a sure and constant hope; But
so is this hope whereof we speak, the hope of the gain. Therefore he had a
Christian and sure hope. For his troubles, ye heard them the other day: he was
pursued by the treason of his son, backbited by his servants; yet he abides
patiently. Indeed sometime he bursteth forth through impatience, but in an
instant he took up himself; and to testify his long putting off and delay, he
says here, In waiting I waited. Then I say, ye have it proved, that David had
a sure, firm, and constant hope. The surer that an anchor is, and the more
deep it is fixed, it will be the worse to pluck up. Let the storm rage as it
pleases, continue as it will, the anchor that is deeply fixed will hardly be
plukt up. The anchor of our soul (says the Apostle) is Hope: Therefore the
more sure and deeply it is fixed, it will be the worse to pull up. Our whole
study, diligence and care should be, to see, when and in what place we should
cast this anchor of hope. Cast we our anchor on any man, the storm shall not
rise so soon, but it shall unloose. Cast we it upon any creature, it can be no
surer then the creature it self: Therefore when the storm comes, it will rise
up. In sum, cast we it any where below under the clouds, it must unloose in
time of storm: Then this anchor differs from other anchors, it must enter
within the veil, and reach in in Sanctasanctorum. It must take hold on Christ
sitting at the right hand of his Father. Th^re is no sure ground for our
anchor, except it enter within the veil. And if we obtain access that we
enter within the veil, there is no storm nor continuance of storm, (blow as
it pleases,) yt will raise it up, and consequently cause us to make shipwra^ke
of our souls. ^he Lord of his mercy grant unto every one of us, understanding
that we may cast the Anchor of our hope aright.

As for the second thing, concerning the exercise wherein he was exercised
enduring his waiting on, he notes in the end of the ve^se, that he was
employed in crying; and in the last Psalm, he was busied in praying, sighing
and sobbing, enduring ye time of his long waiting. This was his exercise. And
if this exercise had not continued, it had not been possible that his patience
should have continued. By this exercise he entertaineth patience, and by
patience he entertaineth hope. For as to this sighing and mourning, it is no
ways contrary to the nature of hope, Hope and mourning may stand together.
no more then joy is: for this mourning and sighing rises of the long delay,
and absence of the thing hoped for; as on the other part, the joy rises of the
approaching and drawing near in our expectations of the thing hoped for. So
this sighing, crying, and praying was his exercise, and they are the only
means to purchase strength, to stand and continue in hope.

As touching the third thing, ye hear what end and issue this long waiting of
his took, to wit; a prosperous and a happy end. The Lord inclined his ear to
him, and not only inclined he his ear, but granted him his hearts desire.
Upon this ground I mark one or two things, and so I shall go forward.

The first thing I would have you to learn, is this; learn of David, your
kind of exercise in extremity of troubles: Learn of David the right means
whereby ye may entertain patience in greatest calamity. The means that he
sets down here, are crying, sighing, lamenting and praying unto God: and in
other parts of the Psalm he adds also many other means, though these be
special. And if thou would do well in these great agonies, thou shall call
to memory, the examples of the servants of God, who have passed the like
straites. If thou do well, thou shall call to memory the testimonies of the
favor of God, showed to thy self, if thou have felt any in thy life past: If
thou do well, thou shall call to memory, that the decree of the Lords election
is unchangeable; call to memory that his power is omnipotent; call to memory
the singular works of the Lord toward his Elect. Let this be thine exercise in
trouble. If this way thou be directed, thou may be assured, thou shall
obtain that issue and end that David did. Thus for ye first lesson.

The second thing I mark here, is this; I see here, How to know when God
hears our prayer, though he grants not instantly our suite.
that the Lord, though he put off and delay the effect of his prayer, and
grants not his desire at the first, yet he hears him. I shall give you a
certain argument, whereby thou may know that the Lord hears, although he
delay the effect of thy prayers. Continuest thou in prayer? have thou this
strength given thee to persevere in suiting any thing? Thou may be assured he
hears: for this is an argument that he hears thee, for naturally our
impatiency carries us to desperation: Our lust is so great, specially in
spiritual troubles, that we cannot continue in suiting; When thou therefore
continuest in suiting, thou may be sure that this strength is furnished of
God, and comes from heaven. If thou have strength, he lets thee see yt he
hears thy prayer, though he delay the effect and force thereof, yet pray
continually.

This doctrine is so necessary for the troubled conscience, that I think it is
the meetest bridle in the Scripture to restrain our impatiencie: It is the
meetest bit to hold us in continual exercise of patience. For if the heart
understand, that the Lord has rejected our prayer altogether, it is not
possible to continue in prayer: Not^.
so when we know that the Lord hears us, suppose he delay, let us desire
patience to abide his good will.

The third thing that I mark is this, his crying and weeping obteineth a
prosperous issue: Constant mourning in trouble, assures certain deliverance.
for by his long crying he is drawn out of a terrible pit, by his long crying
he is drawn out of the mire and deep clay. There is no pit so deep, take it
as thou will, that can stay the ear of the everliving God. There is no
distance of place, nor thickness of impediments that can stay the voice of any
suppliant. Be the pit never so deep, will thou cry truly, thou shall be heard.
And it is as true on the other side, whosoever cries and showteth, if his pit
were never so deep, he is not drowned: have thou this liberty to cry, in
crying thou risest, the more thou continuest, Note.
the nearer is delivery: Therefore only he is in a miserable estate, who being
thrown down in a deep and horrible pit, knows not, notwithstanding that he
is there, nor feels not his misery. For as long as we have the knowledge and
some feeling of our misery, be the pit as ugly as it will, we are in danger,
but not lost: but where knowledge and feeling is away, there we are drowned;
there is not one of us all but so long as we are here, we are in one pit or
other. The pit of iniquity circleth us so long as we are here, there is no
means to be delivered but by feeling our misery: for feeling makes us to cry,
and by crying we are heard. Thus much for the Prophets first experience.

Upon this in the third verse he takes occasion to praise God by reason of
this his singular experience, which gave him the matter and argument of a new
song; This song is called a new song, by reason of the new occasion of the new
delivery, which occasioneth to him the matter of new praise.

In the end of the verse, he sets down two special uses of this praise
whereunto it tends. The first use is, it tends to stir up the Church to
follow his example in praising God. The second use of it tends to the
edification of every member of the Church in the fear and worshipping of God.
Of this verse I gather shortly two lessons, and so I shall go forward.

The first, who is it that puts this song of praise in our mouth, who makes
us to sing this new song in our heart? Lesson.
only God puts the song of praise in our mouth, and makes us to sing this
new song in our heart; for by nature none has knowledge to praise him, nor
will praise him. The way and manner how to praise him is, by a taste and
feeling of his sweetness. It is not possible that the heart can praise him,
except it have a taste thereof. All the benefits of the Lord whether they be
spiritual or temporal, should be as many occasions of praise; but this
silence is an argument of the hardness of our heart: for surely, if we were
touched with a feeling of this sweetness, we would burst forth in praise; but
our slothfulness shows the hardness of our heart. And where this foul
death continues, there is no reconciliation with God.

The second thing that I mark, is upon the end of this verse. It is not enough
to praise God thy self; Lesson.
it is not enough to thank him in thine own heart: But if thou be a true
member of the Church, thou must propose this benefit to the Church: for
benefits are not given as particular privileges to particular persons: but as
public testimonies of the favor of God toward his Church. Therefore every
benefit should be proposed to the Church, that the Church may have occasion to
praise God in it. Now upon this third verse, he bursteth forth into that
notable sentence which we have in the fourth verse: Blessed is the man that
makes the Lord his trust, and regards not the proud. Surely, that man is
exceedingly blessed, who is not carried with the example of the proud and vain
in the earth: for why? by nature there is never a one of us, but we are all
proud and vain. Secondly, how forcible evil example is, all men by experience
know. Thirdly, we know the multitude accounts common custom and example for
law. Therefore of necessity, that man must be exceedingly blessed, that in
such a sight of evil examples, puts his trust in God: Surely, these few in
number that depend upon God, if they be compared with the rest of the world, of
all men of the earth they will be counted most miserable and unhappy: and as
the Apostle says, they were the ofscourings and sweepings of the world. For as
long as they are here beneath in the kingdom of patience, their life is hid
with Christ, and will not appear until the Lord appear, to be marvelous in
his Saints, 2. These. 1. At the which time their bodies shall shine as the
Sun, and their souls shall shine as the Angels. In hope of this estate, the
poor members of the Church repose in the present peregrination. There are here
two ways set down; There is a broad and an open way, wherein the proud and
vain men of the earth walk. There is a narrow and a strait way, wherein the
simple and they that depend on God walk. Indeed the broad way is large, easy
and pleasant, there is no throng nor trouble in it, as would appear for a
while; but the end of it is straitness, everlasting and terrible straitness.
On the other side, the other way is strait in the entry, and many impediments
are in that way, yet the end is large and pleasant, and brings a joyful
eternity. I think that the soiourner, that is certain of a good lodging, may
well endure the difficulties of the way: And therefore, seeing we are certain
of our lodging, and that the way is short, let every one strive to enter into
it, how strait so ever it be, the end is large. The Lord of his mercy work in
every one of us, that we may both know the way, and walk in it till our lives
end.

Why the Lord delayeth to help his Servants.
The last thing that I mark upon this experience: ye see two ends why the Lord
delayeth to help his servants. The first and special end is, that he may be
the more glorified, the more that he differs: The second end is, that these
hasty men that will not abide the leisure of the Lord, may see themselves
disappointed, when they see the servants of the the Lord so mightily delivered.
For there is not one amongst a thousand, that in patience will wait upon the
deliverance of the Lord, but run to this or those means, unto unlawful
means, and ever seek help for the present, He that belieueth shall not make
have.
although it be with the hurt of conscience. And these unlawful sorts of
deliueries bring ever shame in the end: And therefore it is that the Lord
delayeth his deliverance, that partly these hasty men may be ashamed, and that
his glory might be the greater in the deliverance of his own.

In the fifth verse the Lord is praised from the public experience of the
Church; for ye number of his blessings which he bestows, and is to bestow
upon his Church, cannot be expressed. There is no heart able to conceive, nor
mouth able to express ye infinite number of his blessings. The ear has not
heard (says the Apostle,) ye eye has not seen, nor has it entered into the
heart to conceive the ten thousandth part of the joy prepared for the children
of God: for if this heart of ours were able to conceive any part of that joy,
we should possess more of it here then we do. The little sparks of that joy
and the feeling thereof, have such force in the children of God, that they
carry their hearts out of their bodies as it were, and lift them up to the
very heavens; then how great shall the full joy be, I pray you, when the whole
soul shall be possessed fully? As for the greatness and excellency of the
blessings of God, the heart of man is no way able to conceive, or the tongue to
express. Albeit how ever we are not able to conceive them, let every one
travel to make a further and a greater progress in this knowledge: for the
more we profit in this exercise, the more thankful may we be to God. Thus
much concerning the first part of the Psalm.

In the second part (I shall be short by Gods grace,) for this his experience
which he has found, he offers his service freely to God, he offers
himself most voluntarily; as one who delighted in the law of the Lord; as one
who has proclaimed his mercy and justice, and the rest of his virtues in time
past. And he confesses in the 6. verse, that this obedience flowed not out of
himself, but of the piercing of the ear of his heart. It pleases the Lord to
prepare and open the ears of his heart, that he might obey him: for as to
outward sacrifice and external worshipping, when it is disioyned from the
inward service of the heart, the Lord has no liking of it. Therefore it
pleased the Lord to pierce the ear of his heart: And of this it comes to
pass that he comes and offers his service willingly, saying: I hear thee
crying on me (Lord) in thy book. In the first word of thy book, hearken and
take heed (o David,) and here he says, I am coming. If we follow the literal
meaning of the words, this is the effect and meaning; but if we follow the
mystical sense, A mystical meaning.
there is here a clear prophecy of the Messiah: For the Apostle to the
Hebrews, Chap. 10.5. brings in Christ Jesus speaking these same words of
himself, which David here speaks in the 7.8. and 9. verses. And for the
better understanding of this prophecy, the Apostle in that place sets down
the circumstance of time when he spoke these words, to wit: when he came into
the world, when he took on our nature and was clothed with our flesh, he spoke
these words contained in the 7.8. and 9. verses. As to the words, the Apostle
applies them otherwise to Christ then David here does to himself: for in the
words which the Apostle cites, there is a clause changed: for where David
says, thou have pierced mine ear, the Apostle says, thou have given me a
body. There appears to be a great difference here, yet I say the sentence
remains one howsoever the words differ: And to let you see that the sentence
is one, The Prophet and Apostle reconciled.
this is my reason. As the boring of the ear was a sign of obedience of the
servant to the master, Exodus 21. so the taking on of our body and of our flesh
in Christ, is a perfect sign of his obedience to his Father. And look how
sure a sign of service the boring of the ear was to the master, as sure a
token is the assuming of our flesh, of the obedience of Christ to his Father.
So obedience is signified by the one, and obedience is signified by the other;
as for Christ, he took not on this servile form for his own cause; but for
our cause, and for us was his ear bored, soul and body sustaining that full
wrath which we should have endured eternally: And yet notwithstanding so
unthankful are we, that except he bore our ear after another sort; that is,
bore our hearts and souls as Lydias was, Act. 16. we can never thank him nor
know him for this benefit.

Then the effect and sum of the Prophecy may be this: Christ would testify
to us, that he is now by the benefit of the Father become our high Priest, not
to offer legal sacrifices, the blood of lambs and goats as before; but to
offer his own body which was the verity of all other sacrifices, that by
this sacrifice our conscience might be purged. We have the abolishing of the
old Testament set down in the 6. verse: the establishing of the new Testament
in the 7. verse: the office of Christ in the 8. verse.

Now as to the lessons, I mark two or three shortly, and so I shall end. The
first lesson rises out of the 6. verse; he says in the 6. verse, it is not
the worthiness of external worshipping, it is not the worthiness of legal
sacrifices, that made the prayers of the ancients to be heard: It was not the
worthiness of their ceremonies that made their delivery to be purchased: It
is not the worthiness of our merits and satisfactions that makes our prayers
to be heard; it is only the blood of the Lamb that made David to be heard at
that time, and us to be heard now, Lesson.
that purchased his deliverance then, and our deliverance now. Accursed
therefore is that religion that mixeth any other merits with the merits of
Christ; and double accursed is the religion that derogateth any thing from the
honor of this merit: This for the first lesson.

The second thing that I mark, The end why our prayers are heard.
is the end why David's prayer is heard, and our prayer is heard: The end is,
not to abuse the goodness of God to the wantonness of the flesh; not to take
occasion of the grace of God, Lesson.
to provoke him the next time to anger; but the end is, to consecrate soul and
body to his service, and to make a public protestation every one in his own
calling, to be thankful to him in all time to come. This is the end wherefore
the Lord delivers us, and hears our prayers.

Two sorts of abusing the grace of God
I grant there is none of us but in one measure or other we abuse the grace of
God, but there is an abusing with a fighting or reluctation; and there is
another with a loose reine. And whosoever abuses the grace of God with a loose
reine, he casts himself into the hands of God; and who so casts himself
often into the hands of God, at the last he shall never come out. So in time let
every one beware to abuse the grace of God this way; but beg a liberty and a
renewing of the Spirit, that that which is pleasing to him, may be also
pleasing to us: and that which is displeasing to him, may be displeasing to us.

The last thing that I mark is this, whereof comes this willingness and free
offering of our selves to the service of God? David notes it in a word: It
proceeds not of external worshipping, but of the boring of the ear; except
the Lord had prepared the ear of his heart, it was not possible for him to
have brought with him a mind or a will to serve God. Then this willingness is
wrought by the Spirit of God, and not only this willingness, but the doing
and execution of his will is wrought by the Spirit of God: For by nature we are
hard hearted; and more unfit then brute beasts to do the Lords will. And
therefore whosoever would be partaker of the grace of the new Testament, let him
look into himself how far his will is reformed: For the more we submit our
will ^o the will of God, the more we are partakers of the grace of the new
Testament. So long as we make the will of man a rule to our will, we testify
that we have not tasted of the grace of the new Testament: Only then are we
partakers of the grace of the new Testament when the Spirit of grace boweth our
will, and makes it to obey in some part the will of God. For I mean not that
our whole will can obey the will of God: It is not possible so long as we are
here, that we can run one way: if the affections could run one way, and
bend themselves wholly to God, in a manner we should possess life eternal in
this life. But so long as we are here, we are compassed with two wills, from the
which proceeds ^wo sorts of motions; affections and cogitations: In this
battle the regenerate man continues to the end. I require not a perfection of
the will, or a perfection of the heart; but I desire a delight in the law and
in the love of God: a will to love, and a preasing more and more to subdue our
will to the love of God. Where this resisting is, the battle is; Note.
and where a battle continues, there is a true Christian, who at the last
shall get the victory. Resist thy wicked will, resist the motions thereof,
resist the cogitations thereof, and sorrow for the actions thereof: if thou
resist the motions and cogitations thereof, thou art in good estate. It is
only the consenting to the actions and performance thereof that makes thee
guilty before God. Evil thought^ make us not guilty, if resisted.
Suppose thou have evil cogitations and motions, yet if so be thou resist
them, thou art not guilty before God. But if t^ou consent and perform the
appetites of sin, the action will bring guiltiness, and guiltines will
banish light; and light being banished, God is banished. The obedience of sin
banisheth a good will, and places in stead thereof an evil will: so the
perfection of a Christian in this life stands in resisting: To try night and
day that thou consent not to the actions of thy wicked will.

O then! it is a matter of great consequence to subdue and tame that great
idol of evil will. We may speak of it as we please, and say, that we are
able to do it, but of all the works of the earth it is the greatest: for such
is the stubbornness of our will, that it will do nothing but what it likes it
self. Well, the perfection of a Christian stands in striving; we must either
strive, or we shall not be crowned.

Therefore let every one beg of God, that he would work by his Spirit in this
life, that he may resist the motions and cogitations of his heart; that he
would arm him against the enticements thereof; that resisting here we may be
crowned hereafter. In the last part of the Psalm. he returns to prayer; and as
he had found the merciful delivery of God in time past, so he desires that
the Lord would continue the same mercy toward him in time to come, and
undertake his protection against the troubles that were to ensue as well as he
had done against the troubles past.

In this part he lets us see this lesson, which if it were well learned,
might stand us in great stead the whole course of our life: Lesson.
to wit, That the whole life of man in this earth (as Job says) is a
continual tentation, and the end of one misery is but an entry to a greater:
so that our whole exercise should be to praise God for favors past, and to
pray to God for times to come; that in praising and prayer our life being
continually spent, we might hold Christ Jesus, who in life and death is
exceeding advantage. To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor
and praise, world without end. So be it.

THE FIFTEENTH SERMON, UPON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE SECOND Epistle to
Timothy, beginning at the 22. verse; preached the ninth of November, 1589. at
the which time ^he Ea^le Bothwell made his public repentance in the Church of
Edinborough.
22 Flee also from the lusts of youth, and follow after righteousness, faith,
love and peace, with them that call on the Lord with pure heart.

23. And put away foolish and unlearned questions, knowing that they engender
strife.

24 But the servant of the Lord must not strive: but must be gentle toward all
men, apt to teach, suffering the evil men patiently.

25 Instructing them with meekness that are contrary minded, proouing if God
at any time will give them repentance, that they may know the truth.

26 And that they may come to amendment out of the snare of the devil, which
are taken of him at his will.


IN these two Epistles which the Apostle directs unto his Disciple Timothy,
he takes a very great care to inform Timothy, that he may behave himself
accordingly in all his proceedings; that he might behave himself as well in
his own person, as in his office toward others beside: In his own person, in
respect he was a young man, young in years, although though no other way young:
neither young in knowledge nor in manners, but somewhat young in years. In
respect of his youth, and of the imperfections that accompany youth: In
respect of the continual folly whereunto youth is drawn, he bids him
first remember, that he take heed to his youth: that he be not carried with
those vices, with those affections and lusts that use violently to carry young
men away.

As toward others, he wills him to have a discretion and foresight of their
estate, to discern the persons with whom he has to do: And first of all that
he consider, whether these persons be friends or adversaries, whether they be
of one family with himself in the family of faith, or otherwise strangers as
yet and adversaries to this faith. If they be friends and of the family of
faith, as he is, he wills him to keep Charity, to keep peace in Christ
Jesus and unity with them: that as he keeps his faith to God, so he may keep
unity in love and peace with them.

If again those men be not of the family of faith, but adversaries to this
faith; they are either obstinate with knowledge, or else ignorant, and
obstinate with ignorance. Obstinate with knowledge, such as are heretics:
Apostates that had knowledge, and have lost it. In case these men be
heretics, he teaches in the Epistle to Titus how he should behave himself
toward them. If they be Apostates, he teaches in the person of Hymenaeus and
Philetus, how he should behave himself toward them; to wit, he should first
travel to win them, if it be possible: And if thy travel succeeds not,
that thou get no gains at their hands this way, then he wills Timothy and
the Pastors in Timothy, to go another way to work; to proclaim their names;
yea at the last to give their flesh (as he speaks) to the devil, that their
soul may be safe, if it be possible in the day of the Lord: To proclaim their
names, and make their names manifest to the people, that the people may be
wary of such persons, and fear to fall into such offenses.

If the persons again be ignorant, they are either ignorant with simplicity,
or ignorant with a wilful stubbornnes. In both these cases he informs his
Disciple. If they be ignorant with simplicity, he recommendeth unto the teacher
three virtues, meekness, gentleness, and patience: Patience not of their
evil, nor of their vices; but patience toward their persons, suffering them to
come and hear. And suppose thou suffer him to come and hear, yet he wills
thee not to suffer his vices, he wills thee not to conceal his vices, nor
yet to flatter his vices. But this is his meaning; reprove his vices, advertise
him of his faults; And in thine admonition do the thing that lies in thee,
that he who is admonished, may perceive that the admonition flows from love;
and that we seek nothing less then his shame and loss: and nothing more then
his weal and honor. This ought to be the behavior of those who have to do
with simple ignorants: for if it were so that any man would bear with vices or
iniquities that he knows to be in any person; it were the ready way, not
only to lose the person with whom he bears, but to lose himself also, in
concealing that part of his office and duty which is enjoined to him. And
therefore it is not such a patience that is required in the Pastor or Minister,
that he suffers his vices, or conceal the persons vices; but only this kind
of moderate, meek and good behavior is required in him, that in his reproof
he may let the person see, ^o far as in him lies, that he desires nothing
less then his shame, and nothing more then his amendment.

In case again, the person be ignorant and wilful with ignorance; as there
are many that are obstinate in ignorance, in such sort that the person of the
Pastor is troubled and wearied with continual admonition and reproof, and
makes no speed at his hands; in such sort that at last the Pastor himself,
through the long travel that he has taken, conceiueth a despair of the
recovery of that person: The Apostle in this place admonishes the Pastor not
to faint, nor to conceive by his long travels a despair, but though he remain
stubborn, yet to abide upon him, pronounce the thre^tnings and promises of God
indifferently, to tarry upon him at list and leisure, why? Because the gift of
repentance which turns the heart of man, is not in his own hand, nor is it
in the hands of the Pastor to give it; but the gift of repentance, which
turns the heart of man, is in the hands of God; and God will bestow this gift
at such time as he pleases, and not at that time when the Pastor pleases. In
like manner the gift of repentance is not visibly wrought, it is not a
corporal gift, that it may be rceeiued by the Pastor at the first hand when it
is given and wrought in the heart of man: But it is a spiritual gift, and
inuisibly wrought in the soul of man. And often times it is wrought then, when
the Pastor least thinks, and that by the mighty and gracious providence of
our God. Therefore seeing it falls out so often times, that the Lord will
bestow this gift when the Pastor least thinks, he wills the Pastor albeit
the man be stubborn, not to despair. And when the Lord shall give him the
gift of repentance, there is no question, but many commodities shall accompany
this gift, which commodities are set down in the end of this Chapter.

By this gift, first he shall be delivered from the snare of the Devil, in the
which he was holden captive to do him service. By this gift, secondly, he shall
come to knowledge; not only to the knowledge of God in Christ, but of himself
and his own misery. Thirdly by this gift of repentance, where his soul was
sick and diseased before, his conscience terrified and exceedingly astonished;
that soul by the enjoying of this gift, shall be restored to health, he shall
come to amendment, and to a wholesome disposition of heart, mind and
conscience. This I take to be the sum of all that I have read.

The matter is large and the heads are many that might be handled upon this
text: But I purpose not to insist in every head, but to content me only with
such points as are most necessary for our edification and instruction.
Therefore, I select out of the whole, two points to speak of by the grace of God
at this time, as his Spirit shall assist me for the present. The two points
that I am to speak of, are these: The heads to be entreated of in this Sermon.
The first point, the first verse that I have read, the first part of it,
gives manifest occasion to it: to wit, what is the first and chief thing from
which young men should flee. The second point, the last verse save one of this
text gives occasion to it, and the end of that verse; and it is this, What is
the chief and principal thing that young men should follow and pursue.

The chief and principal thing that young men should flee, every youth in the
world, is the lusts and affections of the mind whereunto youth is inclined, he
should flee from the lusts of his youth; What is the chief thing that young
men should flee.
not so much from the lusts of any other man's youth, or another persons youth,
as from the lusts that are in himself, and the lusts that his young years
bring with them. And as he should flee from the lusts of his own youth, so the
chief thing that he should follow, seek and pursue, is the gift of
repentance, amendment of life, conversion unto God, taking up of a new course,
a gift which is as far out of his hands and from him by nature, as the lusts
of his youth are near him by nature. And therefore he should be so much the
more diligent and earnest in begging this gift, the nearer he knows these
lusts to be to him, and the further he knows this gift to be from him by
nature. Of these two points, as the Lord shall assist me by his holy Spirit, I
think to speak at this time.

And first concerning the lusts of youth, What is meant by the lusts of youth
I understand by them, whatsoever motions, raging flames, or vicious
affections, or whatsoever evil inclinations a young man is addicted to, from
all these lusts and enticements youth ought to flee; as there is no vice under
the Sun, unto the which youth is not too much subject. For our corruption so
long as we live in this world is never idle, but in what age that ever we be
our corruption is perpetually fertile, bringing forth evil thoughts, evil
motions, evil actions out of us: But chiefly our corruption is fertile in our
youth: in the time of our youth, chiefly and most of all is our corruption
fertile and abundant: for then the blood of man burns, then the affections
are in a rage, and he has no power of himself to controlle them: But he is
carried hither and thither, as his own appetites command him: In such sort,
that it may be counted a miracle, a special work and blessing of the Almighty
God, to see a youth pass over his young years without a notable inconvenience
either to body or soul or both, without some notable scarre, as we speak. For
there is no youth, there is none that took flesh that was begotten of man, but
in his youth he is subject to one vice or other; and there are few but they are
subject to many: but there is no youth that ever proceeded of the womb of a
woman, but in his youth before his calling, he is subject unto one vice or
other. The affection of the which vice what ever it be, whereto he is subject
and is in servitude, commands him as ordinarily, and requires obedience of
him as ordinarily, as any master requires of his servant. And the heart of
that man, the mind of that man, the body of that man, are as ready to yield
obedience to that vice and affection, as any servant or slave in the earth is
ready to yield obedience to his master.

As for example, if any man be inclined unto aspiring and addicted in his heart
to promotion, if he would be in worldly honor, in such sort that that vice
commands him; in this point ambition has as ordina^y a command of him, as
mighty and potent a command to enjoin him, as any master has over his
servant. In like manner if a man's heart be set upon the dross of this world,
upon the paltry that is in it, covetousness commands that man as ordinarily,
and more constantly then any master is able to command his servant. If a man be
addicted to the pleasure of his flesh and to defile his body, that lust
commands that man as ordinarily and more continually, then any master can do
his servant. And so fares it in all the rest of the vices: look to what vice
thou have addicted thee in service, the affection of that vice ordinarily
commands thee.

The ground of this flows from the heart of man, and from the nature of man
which is corrupted in the first Adam. For such is the condition and estate of
the heart of man, so long as we remain in our natural estate, That the heart
of every man and of every woman, that ever was begotten and borne, carries
about in it the feed of all kind of vice and impiety. That vice is not so
monstrous, nor that wickedness so ugly, which our ears or any of our senses
abhor to hear or see, but the seed of that same vice lurketh and lies
naturally in the heart. It is true indeed, that all these seeds do not budde
out, that all these seeds spring not, that men burst not forth into all high
impieties in their external and outward actions: but there comes a restraint
into the soul, whereby we are restrained from these same actions, whereunto
some men burst forth, and show what they are to the world.

This restraint whereby I abstain; and thou fallest in; Whereof comes the
restraint of sin.
I keep close, and thou burstest forth, comes no more of my nature nor of
thine that does the turn, but of the grace and providence of the mighty God.
For if God had no means to restrain the impiety that is in the heart of man,
but every man as his heart carries him, bursteth forth in every impiety; how
would it be possible that a society could be kept; how would it be possible
that a Church could be gathered; how would it be be possible, yt any man could
have company, or any conversation amongst men? Therefore the Lord, that one
society might be kept, that out of this society a Church might be gathered,
does restrain the impiety, the seeds of impiety, that lies lurking and hid
in the heart of every man.

The ways whereby he restrains impiety, Why the Lord restrains impiety.
and holds the seeds of impiety choked that they burst not out, are two; he
restrains the impiety that lurketh in the heart, either by Discipline, or by
severe punishment and good execution of laws: Or he restrains this evil
lurking in the heart, by the work of his own Spirit. The restraint that
comes by Discipline and execution of laws, does not take away the tyranny of
sin, it takes not away the absolute command and sovereignty which sin has;
it holds wicked men in aw, it makes them to keep an external society, and
holds them in some honesty and civil conversation, but it takes not away
the sovereignty and empire of the affections.

The restraint again which is made by the Spirit of God, by the Spirit of
Christ Jesus, which we call the Spirit of sanctification, the restraint that is
made by this Spirit, takes away the sovereignty and tyranny which mine
affections had before it came: it takes away the dominion and kingdom which
mine affections had before it came: In such sort, that where the worldling is
restrained from the outward impiety against his will, I, by the power of the
Spirit of Christ Jesus, abstain willingly. But take heed I pray you; the
coming of the Spirit of God into mine heart and mind, suppose it take away the
full empire and sovereignty which mine affections had in my soul before it
came; yet it takes not away the lodging and dwelling of sin in my soul. Note.
But suppose mine affections and sin dwell not as a King, dwell not as a
Prince, as an absolute commander, to command the powers of the soul, the
members of the body, to put his will in execution as he had wont to do before;
suppose he dwell not as a King, yet he lodges in the soul as a companion, he
dwells as a companion with the Spirit of God in me; to that part of my soul
which the Spirit of God has reformed in me: In such sort, that sin dwells
in me, and it has his own will, his own wit, his own counsel out of my
mind which he follows. As on the other side, the reformed part of me has
his own will, his own counsel, his own wisdom, and understanding in me,
which he follows: So that all the rest of the days of my life, there is a
continual battle betwixt these two wills, the will of sin and flesh
dwelling in my soul, and the will of the Spirit of God and of the reformed
part of my soul: sin persuading me to do evil; the Spirit of God persuading
me to do heavenly things: This part suggesting holy thoughts and motions, the
other part suggesting wicked thoughts and motions. And this is the estate of
every man in this earth, that has entered into society with the Spirit of God.

To take up this matter, that the long discourse of it carry us not from our
purpose. There is no youth, yea, more then youth, there is no age nor part of
man's life, but carries the own affections, the own vices and imperfection^
with it, unto the which affections and vices every one of us are either slaves
and servants, rather then enemies: servants without contradiction to sin,
rather then enemies unto it without battle. All the powers of the soul and
members of ye body in that man, where Christ has not begun to work, content
and agree to the evil action, run in a rage to the performance of the will
of the flesh: For thou art either an ordinary slave and servant to sin, or
else thou art a contradictor of sin. And this contradiction shows the
battle that ye have within your selves.

It is true, that in the natural man, reason and the light that is left in
nature, makes some opposition, but not long. For she is unarmed, destitute of
power, and therefore the power of darkness that is in the affection, blinds
the eye of reason incontinently. To fly from thy self, and to fly from thy
affecions, it is not possible for thee, except that grace come down out of the
heaven, except the Spirit of Christ give thee eyes to see and perceive that
these same lusts of thine, these affections of thine which thou thoughtsts in
the folly of thy youth to be no sin, except that he give thee eyes to see
that they are sin, thou will never condemn them. For this is the custom of
the natural man, if he burst not forth into the outward actions which are to
plainly damned in the Law of God, his inward lusts appear to him to be no
sins: and it is only by the light of the Spirit of Christ, by the knowledge
wrought by the Spirit of Christ, that he begins to see clearly, that all
his affections and his lusts are utterly damned in the sight of God, and are
sins. And this sight, first, makes us flee from them; for we would never
part with our lusts and affections, if the Spirit of God did not let us see the
ugliness of them. And beside this ugliness, it makes us to feel in our
hearts and to taste of the bitterness of them, where the devil and our
corruption made us to think that they were sweet often before. When the Spirit
begins to rip up our hearts and to discover the secrets of our hearts and
blindness of our minds, it makes us to feel the ugliness and bitterness that
is in them: and this is the first thing that ever makes man to repent, and
gives him a conscience of sin, and makes him to have an earnest desire to
fly from himself and the lusts of his youth.

If thou fly not in time, and take not on this flight in due season when thou
art called to fly, as now thou art called to fly by the word of God, which
gives thee a clear light and an eye to see from whence thou should fly*
If thou learn not now to fly, ^o question, thou and thine affections shall
both perish. These same affections wherein thy soul through long custom so
delighted, shall putrify thy soul and shall corrupt thy soul more and more,
shall bring thy body the tabernacle wherein thy soul lodges, to greater and
greater decay; waste thy conscience, subvert thy faith, and spoil thee of thy
white garments whereby only access is granted thee to the throne of grace:
and in the end shall bring everlasting destruction on soul and body both.
Except therefore thou learn to fly, there is no escaping from everlasting
death both in body and soul; therefore this flight is necessary. And now it is
time that every one of you beg the Spirit of God that ye may fly. For if ye
knew those terrors of conscience, the fire of Gods wrath, and the fear of hell
and damnation, whereunto the heart of every man is subject, for all the
kingdoms of the earth ye would not take in hand to offend so mighty and so
gracious a God. But such is the deceit and false pleasure of sin, and such is
the canker and venime which the devil has spewed into our hearts, that it
shuts our eyes, lets us not see the ugliness of sin, nor taste of the
bitterness thereof.

Therefore every one of you in the fear of God examine your affections,
examine your minds, and see whereunto ye are addicted: suspect ever your
affections what ever enticement they have to cloak the same with: suspect ever
the motion of them, for the devil is in them: for when they appear to be most
quiet, yea wholly rooted out and extinguished, Note.
the stumps of them stick in the soul and a very slight object or short
idleness will kindle them again. So they would ever be handled like young
Toades, for they are the worse by over great liberty. And as this should be
done in every man, especially it should be done in public men; men who are
placed in public offices, and must discharge them in some measure to the glory
of God, to the contentment of his Church and weal of his people. As we ought
to do this, so chiefly they ought ever to suspect their affections, lest giving
place to their affections, they make them to pervert justice; for what is it
that peruerteth justice but affection? So these affections in public persons
would be chiefly eschued.

Then ye see the exhortation rises clearly to you (my Lord) who are now
placed to bear a piece of charge and government in the absence of our Prince,
An exhortation to the Lord Bothwell.
that ye (my Lord) cast away your affections and bury them under your feet,
and let justice strike indifferently where it should strike. Let no community
of name, alliance, proximitie of blood, or whatsoever it be, move you to
pervert justice, but let every man be answered according to the merit of his
cause. Except these affections that accompany great men be removed, no
question, ye must pervert that place. Let not the thief pass because he is
your servant; nor the murderer because he is your kinsman; nor the oppressor
because he is your dependant: therefore in time lay them aside, and let the
execution declare that no man is spared for fear or favor. Thus far for the
first point.

The next point that we have to speak of, is, that the thing that Youth should
chiefly seek after, straightly pursue and follow, the Apostle here sets down;
to wit, they ought to seek after the gift of repentance, Wha^ things young men
should chielfly seek after.
seeing it is the Spirit that must mortify the lusts and affections of the
youth, they should seek the Spirit of repentance.

This gift of repentance here is called the gift of God: And that every one of
you may understand the better what this repentance means: For suppose this
doctrine sound in your ears daily, yet it sounds not in your hearts: there
are few that is their hearts have a feeling what the spirit of repentance
means: Heads to be entreated of repentance.
to bring you therefore to the better feeling and to the better knowledge of
it, we shall keep this order in deducing of it. Definition of repentance.
to signify a sadness for the thing done, such a dolor for the thing done, so
that it would gladly have it undone again: I call it a sadness for the thing
done, whether it be good or evil, or howsoever it be, it would have it undone
again; taking the word generally it signifies this dolor.

The Apostle, 2. Corinthians. 7. sets down two sorts of dolor, Two sorts of
repentance.
two sorts of sorrow or dolor raised in the heart of man: he calls the first
sort a worldly dolor or sadness: he calls it (no doubt) a worldly dolor and
sadness, because it is conceived for a worldly respect, because it is
conceived for a worldly and fleshly end, when a man begins to be sorrowful
for the thing that is done, not so much for Gods cause or for any reverence he
bears to the infinite majesty of God whom he has offended, as for the
present pain that is upon his body, for the present grief that is in his
conscience, or for any worldly or fleshly respect. In this case where God is
always neglected, where the sorrow is not for Gods cause, that is a worldly
and an earthly sorrow. And this kind of sorrow I can call no other thing, but a
blind terror, vexation and anguish of conscience.

I call it blind in these respects, In what respects the worldly sorrow is
called blind terror.
first by reason they see no issue, (for their estate no doubt were the more
tolerable if they saw any hope of ease, that they might have some rest and
ease in their conscience:) but they are always blind, and all sight of rest is
taken from such a conscience. It is blind also in respect

When it is increased into an high degree, desperation is the end of it, and it
makes them as Judas did, to lay hands on themselves. Sometimes again it is
not so increased, but it is mitigated that they may bear it: and then by piece
and piece it vanishes: And so soon as it departs, so soon departs their
sorrow and their tears; and at the departure of their pain, as their tears
depart, so return they to the puddle out of which they came, as the Sow does;
and to the same vomit which they spewed out, as the Dog does. So this dolor and
torment turns not the heart, it alters not the soul, but moves the soul
for the present, and that by reason of the pain: And if the pain were away,
they would return to the same sins wherein they offended God often before, as
greedily as ever they did. So that they mourn not for the sin, but for the
presence of the pain.

The example of this we have in Esau, he wept bitterly for a while, so long as
he felt any dolor: but after that the dolor was removed, he went back to his
old sins again. And what did he? he addressed himself to anger his father
worse then ever he did, and specially in choosing of his wife; which testifies
that his dolor was but for a worldly respect. So I say, this worldly dolor is
either conceived for the present pain and torment that is upon the conscience,
as we have an example in Cain; for in his repentance, wherefore sorrowed he? Not
that he had offended God, not that he had displeased so gracious a Father: but
for the greatness of his pain, and cries out, My pain is greater then I can
suffer. Mine iniquity, by the which I understand this pain; either my pain
must be made less, or I am not able to bear it. So I say, this kind of sorrow
is either conceived for the present pain, or for a worldly and civil respect.

What is the godly and right sorrow.
Beside this sorrow therefore, there is a godly sorrow which the Apostle also
sets down in that same seventh Chapter. And this godly sorrow is an earnest
sorrow, a true sorrow, not fained nor counterfeit. And as it is true and
earnest, so it is conceived, not so much for the present pain and torment that
is upon the mind and conscience, (as no doubt the pain and torment that is
upon their soul moves them to it:) but it is not so much conceived for any
present pain, as for Gods own cause, that they have offended so gracious a
God, who was so loving, so merciful, and had such pity and compassion upon
the multitude of their sins. And therefore they set aside all creatures,
forget creatures, although against them also they have offended; and they run
to God only, seek mercy for their sins at him only, and put their trust in
him only. So ye see David, Psalm 51. as if he had offended none in the world
but God only; he turns to the majesty of the living God, and says, Against
thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight. Now there
is no doubt but he had offended against the man whom he slew, against the wife
of the man whom he had defiled. Yet as if he had offended no creature, he
addresseth him to God, and craves pardon and mercy for his sins of him only.

So this is the true repentance, where men and women although they have
offended the creatures, yet they run to God only to seek remission. And
indeed this is the right way: for why? it is only God that can forgive them
their sins, although they have offended men and women: there is no man nor
woman that is able to purge the^r conscience, to take away the guiltiness of
sin in their conscience. It is only God, who by the virtue of the blood of
his Son does purge the conscience: Therefore they address them to God only.
Properly also it is him whom they have offended, for as for men and women they
may escape their eyes: but it is not possible that they can escape the
all-seeing eye of God, who sees the sins of the heart as well as the sins of
the body. Therefore in respect of his all-seeing eye, it becomes them
specially to have recourse to him, and to address them to him only. This is
called the godly sorrow.

In this part ye have only this to beware of, A caution to be observed in this
part of repentance.
for the devil is ever ready at thine hand: and this caution is not only
necessary for an hard wilful heart, but if men and women through the
weightinesse of their sins conceive ouerdeep sorrow in their hearts, in this
case they would be helped. For I say, at that time the devil is present, and so
soon as he perceives thee beaten down with the consideration of thine own
sins, that thou art as it were presently in the pit of hell, then he is busy
to make thee to doubt, to make thee to despair, and to make thee to think
that thy sins are so many, so ugly and so great, that the Lord will never
forgive them; and casts in this or that stay before thee, to terrify thee
that thou come not to seek grace at ye throne of grace. Therefore men should in
this point take heed to themselves, they should remit their cogitation, and not
hold it ever fixed upon the consideration of the ugliness of their sins and
weightinesse of their iniquities; but thou oughtst to remit these cogitations
sometime, to take thee to the consideration of the mercy of God, to hoise it up
to the consideration of the great goodness of God, to the infinite store of
mercy which he has promised to penitent sinners in Christ Jesus. So when thou
art cast down, and the devil would draw thee to desperation, withdraw rather
thine heart to the consideration of the riches of the mercy of God: And
whatsoever thou think of thy self, (and the more abject, so thou end in
humility, and not in desperation, it is the better) think nothing of God but
more then excellent, and of his mercy as a thing that passes all his works, an
infinite thing that cannot be compassed. What is the greatest sin a man may
commit.
For of all sins that can be committed, I esteem this the greatest, when a
man in his heart will match the greatness of his iniquity with the infinite
weight of the mercy of God; when the devil by his suggestion makes thee to
believe that thy sins are greater then the mercy of God, and his mercy although
it be infinite, less then thy sins. Of all sins I think this the greatest;
for in this thou spoilest God of his majesty, of his infinite power, thou
make him not a God: For if he were not infinite in all things, he were not a
God. So I say, in true dolor to prevent this thing, men must not stick
perpetually upon the consideration of their sins, but sometime it is necessary
that they withdraw their cogitation. This sorrow, where it is, appears in the
effects: For if the effects of it appear not in thy life, thy repentance is
not true.

The effects of this godly dolor.
Where this godly dolor is, first it brings forth in that person a hatred of
that which God hates, it makes that person to agree with God, in that he
hates the thing which God hates, and loves the thing which he loves. It
works then

Why this part of repentance is called mortification.
This part of repentance is called mortification, or (as the Ancients call it)
Contrition. It is called mortification, because by the power of the Spirit
which works this dolor, sin is mortified. It slays the lusts and
affections that are in me, it takes away the strength and power of sin
within me: in respect of the which slaughter it is called mortification. For
Christ not only overcame sin and death, and hell by virtue of his death
perfectly in his own person, but he spoiled sin and death of his power, and
carried such a rich and honorable triumph over them all, that sin has lost his
power, and death has lost his sting. So that whosoever can get hold of Christ
and his power, by the virtue thereof sin shall die in him, and his affections
shall be daily by little and little slain. In respect of the which effects, this
part of repentance is called mortification. Of this godly sorrow springs the
other part of repentance, whereby we turn our hearts to God and apply the
mercy of God to our selves. And this part is called by the Prophets
conversion: by the Apostle himself, Romans 2. Circumcision of the heart. And
Christ speaking of repentance, he speaks of it under the name of conversion,
as the chief part of repentance, speaking to the men of Galilee, Luke 13.
Except also ye repent, ye shall all perish also: that is, except ye turn also.
This conversion whereby our hearts are turned unto God, flows from this godly
sorrow: But take heed, this turning is not the first effect; it is not wrought
in an instant of time. It is not possible that the conscience that is only
terrified with the sight of the own sins can turn unto God. It is a great
matter to the heart that feels the wrath of God in so great measure, to
wrestle out against desperation, Note.
much more to turn unto him. It is a greater matter to the soul that is under
the fear of hell and everlasting death, to turn unto him: But so long as I
find him a fire burning me up as stubble, no question, I must fly from him. So
long as the present torment remains in mine heart, it is not possible that I
can turn to him. A feeling and hope of mercy go^th before conversion.
Therefore there goes before this turning a feeling of mercy, a feeling of
his peace, a feeling of his sweetness whereby I find his wrath pacified, I
find his fury pacified. And were not this taste of mercy, I would never turn
unto him. But from ye time that mine heart gets a taste of his mercy, a
taste of that peace yt passes all understanding, whereby I find his wrath to be
pacified, the terrors of my conscience to be quieted, and the fire of his wrath
to be quenched; then I begin to turn to him, to believe in him, and to apply
the promise of mercy in particular to my self, which I durst in no wise do so
long as I felt nothing but the fire of his wrath upon my conscience. Upon this
feeling I say, arises the application, and upon the application rises the
turning unto him. So this feeling of wrath (in order) although not in time,
goes before the turning unto God. The turning brings forth a joy and
gladness for mercy that he has gotten, and this joy brings forth a love
toward him.

As the other part brings forth an hatred of sin: so this part brings forth
a love toward God. This love again brings forth a care and study to please
him, and this care and study brings forth an appetite of revenge and
indignation against thy corruption, so that thou would be revenged upon thy
corruption which made thee to sin and offend against him.

Why this part of repentance is called vivification.
And this part of repentance, in respect of the great and manifold effects of
it, is called Vivification: As the other part is called mortification, so is
this called vivification, in respect the Spirit of God makes a new creation in
us, makes us up as new creatures of old, endeweth our hearts with new
affections, our souls with new qualities, and brings forth in us living
motions, actions and cogitations which are called living, because as they
proceed from a living Spirit, so they carry us to life everlasting. They are
called also living in respect of those dead actions which we brought forth in
former times, which were called dead, not only in respect that they flowed
from the flesh, that is, from corruption, but because they carried us unto the
death of body and soul. In this respect I call this part vivification; others
call it confession; and it gets this name in respect the soul that is
quickened, cannot but burst forth into the praise of God, and glorify him with
a confession; he cannot conceal the kindness of God done unto him, but he
will confess it before the world, and proclaim the riches of the mercy of
God, that they may glorify a common God and Father with him. And this
confession is the chiefest thing in the earth, which the devil endeavors
most diligently to stay: For, as there is nothing in the earth whereby God is
glorified more then by a sincere confession, so there is nothing in the earth
that the devil trauelleth more to stay then this confesson, There nothing that
the devil staieth more nor our confession.
in respect he sees God so far glorified by it. The Lord desires not the
death of a sinner, he seeks not the slaughter of his creature, he seeks but
the repairing of his own glory; and this he counts to be done by a sincere
confession of thy sin. Therefore it is I say, that the devil labors to
stay this confession; And to hold them from this confession, he casts in the
shame of the world, the estimation before men this inconvenience, that
inconvenience. For this ye may perceive of his craft, that where shame is and
shame should be indeed when the action is in doing, there he makes us bold and
stout: But where no shame is, and no shame can follow of it, where God should
be glorified by a confession, his Church edified, and men moved through their
example to do the like, there he casts in shame, and makes them believe, it
is the most shameful thing that ever they did; and all this, that the soul
should not be saved, but holden drowned in his snare for ever and ever.
Therefore men would be advertised of this, that they be not ashamed to glorify
God with an open confession: As they are not ashamed to sin publicly, so
they should not be ashamed to confess it as publicly, that God may be
glorified. Remember this.

This is not spoken for this Noble man's cause only: It is spoken for every one
of you that are in inferior ranks, that every one of you may confess your
own sins. And seeing this is the craft of the devil by the holding you
back, that ye may damn your souls, be ye as careful to win your souls by
confessing your sins to the world. The confession of David, Psalm. 51. serves
it to his shame, or to his honor? No; of all the deeds that ever he did, it
is counted in all ages, the most notable and honorable deed. So, let not the
devil deceive men in this point. As to the kind of repentance, which
proceeds of desperation, it is nothing wo^th, it turns not the heart nor
the mind; but this repen^ance which turns the hearts of men, proceeds of
the Spirit of Christ. So, it is the Spirit of Christ that is the worker of this
true dolor and conversion.

As to the instruments which he uses in working of it, they are two: First,
the Law: next the Gospel. He must first bring in the Law, to bring us to the
acknowledging of our sin: For, except the Law did threaten us, we would never
come to the knowledge of our sins. Then next, he brings in the Gospel, the
promises of mercy and grace freely offered in Christ and through Christ, to all
them that believe. So the Gospel comes in the second room. By the Gospel he
works faith, and after he has wrought faith, he draws out exhortations out
of the Law and out of the Gospel, that according to the Law we may conform
our lives, and obey the same in all time to come. So, the Law and the Gospel
are the means, whereby repentance is wrought in the soul of man: exhortations
out of the Law and Gospel, are the means whereby a good life and conversation
is continued among men.

As to the Author, he lets us see that this gift grows not in our own
breasts, nor it proceeds not of our selves, nor from any creature in heaven
or earth, but from God only: it is the gift of God, given freely for Christ
Jesus his sake. For ye may consider with your selves, and look how impossible
it was to make our selves the sons of men: far more impossible it is for us
to make our selves the sons of God. And by repentance we are made the children
of God, companions to the Angels, and sons of light. So, that the second
creation which is wrought in us by the Spirit of repentance, is a far more
great and excellent work, then our first creation in this world.

In this part of repentance, A caution to be observed in this part of repentance
whereby we are assured of the mercy of God, as there is a caution in the other
part to be observed, so there is a caution here to be taken heed of: for our
nature is so wicked and corrupt, that it cannot hold it self within bounds,
nor contain it self in any mediocrity. But as when we find the fire of Gods
wrath in any mesure kindled for sin, we would look back to desperation: So
if the conscience be acquainted long with the joy, with the taste of his mercy
and of his peace, the devil in this world deceives us, and draws us to
presumption. Therefore as before, being cast down with the consideration of
thine own sins, so eschew desperation, thou withdrawest thy consideration to
the mercy of God: So now, to es^hue presumption, thou must cast back thy
thoughts to the consideration of thy self, of thine own sins and
iniquities, and look what thou wast before thou wast called to repentance.
This is the way to hold thee low and humble, and to distinguish grace from
nature.

As to the sorts of repentance: Two sorts of repentance.
Of true repentance there are two sorts; an ordinary repentance, wherein every
Christian is bound to walk all the days of his life: and an extraordinary and
a special repentance. The ordinary repentance is this, when any man after he
is called to the participation of grace, falls into some special sin, the
rising from that sin I call a special repentance, as David's rising. In this
ordinary repentance we are commanded all to walk: the special repentance
should waken them, that are fallen into one special vi^e or other. From the
extraordinary, we should beseech the Lord to preserve us. Always, if we fall,
the Lord waken us. Now ye have heard the parts of repentance, according to the
order and division which I have laid.

There is nothing farther to be spoken of this head, Conclusion.
except only this: We ought to praise and thank God for the victory that we
have gotten over our selves through him: We have to consider and see, how far
we are bound unto him, that he should have had such a special regard unto us
vile finners, that he has poured out streams, heaps and conduits of his
mercy among us; which he has denied to others, who in the judgment of the
world, were in a better ease then we. The consideration of this, no doubt, will
raise a thankfulness in us, and move us to consider, how far we are bound
to so gracious a God. As for the gift it self, seeing it is not in us, we
ought ever to be instant in seeking of it. Therefore I recommend this
repentance to be sought of every one of you. And ere we go further let us pray
for it, both to out selves and others.

Then remember the things that have been spoken. What is the chief thing that
young men should fly, to wit, the lusts of the flesh: and what is the chief
thing that they should follow and strictly pursue, the gift of repentance.
Therefore from your hearts seek this gift. And ere we go forward to the rest
of our action, let us pray for it, and pray that this matter may have a good
issue and succeed well, and that for the righteous merits of Christ. To whom
with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honor, praise and glory both now
and ever.

The Sermon being ended, the Minister directs his speech to the Auditory
assembled for the time, in effect as follows.
IT is not unknown to you all (well-beloved in Christ Jesus) how many means and
sundry ways, the Lord has to waken a sleeping conscience, to bring men to the
confession of their sins, and to make them to seek grace and mercy at his
hands. And as he lacks no store of instruments and means, so it has pleased
him of his mercy, to the salvation of his soul who is penitent, and to your
good example who hear, to work this motion in the heart of this noble man: in
such sort that he is content from his heart, upon his knees to acknowledge and
confess those sins whereby he has offended the majesty of God, and given
evil example to the meanest and poorest of you. And to let you understand that
this confession is willing and from his heart. It is true, and none of you can
pretend ignorance of it, that by the liberty of the Acts of our Church and
custom received, it had been lawful for him, according to the order, in his
own Church to have made satisfaction: yet, such is the willingness of his
own heart, that for the better satisfaction of you that are indwellers in this
City, he is content in this chief part and Church of the country, and in that
same place, where he last shed innocent blood, to repair the same, and in the
presence of you all to seek mercy at the God of heaven. The Lord has put this
motion in his heart, and that not suddenly not of late; but he informed our
brother James Gibson, along time before his Majesty's departure out of this
country, and desired him to come and show unto us, yt he was willing to make
satisfactition to the Church, not only for his murder and bloodshed, but for
taking the name of God in vain; and for every thing wherein he has abused
himself; and for all his offensive and rash speeches: generally, for every
thing, wherein he has offended the least of you. Which if we had understood, we
had made more hastle to require the practice of it sooner. Always we have
every one of us to thank God, that he has so moved his heart, and to beseech
of the Lord that it may be from his hatt, and that he may declare the effects
of it in all time to come. Therefore (my Lord) ye have no further ado but fall
on your knees, and crave of God mercy and pardon for your sins whereby ye
have offended him. The Lord of his mercy grant it you.

THE WORDS WHICH THE EARL Bothuell, etc. uttered, being upon his knees:

I would God, that I could make such a Repentance as my heart desires: and I
desire you all to pray for it.

The Lord of his mercy, grant it to him, and to us all. Amen.

THE SIXTEENTH SERMON, UPON 2. TIMOTHY 2.15. IN WAY OF EXHORTAtion to the
Provincial assembly of the Presbyteries of Louthiane, holden at Edinborough
the 16. of September, 1589.
2. TIMOTHY, 2.15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman
that needs not to be ashamed, dividing the word of truth aright.


IT is not unknown unto you (Brethren) that in Timothy we have the true
pattern of a Profitable Pastor set down, how he should behave himself in all
things, what he should do, what he should leave undone; what he should follow,
what he should fly: In every thing he is forewarned, but chiefly among many,
of one thing, that he study not to please men, that he hunt not for their
praise and commendation. For why? Experience from time to time has taught, yt
these men have not only endangered their own estate, but hazarded also the
whole estate of the Church. As namely, there were two in his own time, in the
days of Timothy, who to get a name among men, that they were very curious
disputers and subtle reasoners, moved doubts upon every thing, chopped and
changed with the truth of God, as if it had been the profane word of man: and
at ye last, they began to move questions, and raise some doubts upon ye very
articles of our belief. And the spirit of the devil to carried them forward,
that from doubting, at the last, it came unto a plain defection. They denied
the article of the resurrection in particular. So they did not only lose
themselves and poisoned the Auditorie, but they perverted the truth of God, so
far as in them lay. From these men's example, the Apostle forewarned his
Disciple, and in him every Pastor, that they beware not only of this vain
iangling about words, (specially in matters of conscience,) but chiefly beware
of the root and fountain, from whence they spring, to wit, of that natural
self-love, which we nourish all in our bosoms, and are so loath to part with
in our whole life.

And we have an example before our eyes in our time, M. Patrik Adamson, late
Bishop of S. Andrews.
of a man going about to make himselfelfe great, and to get the praise of men:
who in the end, not only hazarded his own estate, but endangered the estate of
the whole Church, so far as lay in him. So, as the example of Hymenaeus was
meet to move Timothy to beware of such a vice: even so, let the example of
our Hymenaeus, which is yet in our eyes, move us, that we fall not into the
like snare, that we cast not only, not to hunt for the praise of men, but also
that we apply us to eschew the root and fountain from whence it springs; to
wit, that natural self-love, whereof every one of us has a portion. And
since we are entered into the school Christ, let us study to learn that one
lesson, to renounce our selves. The Lord give us hearts to learn it, and make
us to be borne again in this life, and to renounce our selves in this life,
which are not the works of man, but the singular works of God renewing man.

Now as he has showed him, what he shall eschew; and that this is the vice
which he should chiefly fly: so in this 15. verse, he begins to admonish
him, that the contrary of it is the chief virtue which he should embrace, and
the only thing which he should aim at, during his whole life: to wit, he
should Study to be approved of God. For seeing there is no workman, but he
wishes to suit his work to be allowed of, (this is a common instinct in us
with the rest, to seek to be approved:) therefore the Apostle informs him
and admonishes him, what sort of approbation he shall seek, at whose hands he
shall seek it, and after what manner he shall come by it.

The heads to be entreated of.
So for the present we have these three things to speak of: Of the sort of
approbation that a Pastor should seek: at whose hands he should seek it: and
how, and after what manner he shall obtain it. As to the sort of approbation,
it must be spiritual and godly, flowing from the Spirit of God, and not from
flesh and blood. And as it must flow from the Spirit of God, and not from flesh
and blood: so must he seek it at the hands of God only; and not of any
creature living. Study to be allowed of him; for why? suppose men would allow
of thee, thou art not the more approved. For if thou in stead of others
should praise thy self, thou art never one hair the better. For if a man
honor himself, (says our master John, 8.) his honor is nothing worth: and
he whom men commends, (says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 10.15.) is not approved; but
only he is approved whom God commends. Therefore, let us not seek honor
one from another, but let us seek the honor which comes from God only: let
us study to be approved of him only; for obtain we his approbation, we shall
get the other two, for there is but three in all: For if God approve us, he
shall make our own conscience approve us. And have we our own conscience and
God within our conscience to allow of us, we have two of the best; for these
two will never leave us, they will stand by us here, and when it comes before
an higher Tribunal, they will make us joyful. And as to the third sort which
is by men, where these two go before, we shall have the Church of God (no
doubt) and good men to upproue us. For where God and conscience calls a man
inwardly, this God makes his Church by their testimony to ratify his calling
outwardly. As ye see he commanded the Church to separate Paul and Barnabas, to
the work whereunto he had called them inwardly; so, obtain we his
approbation, and we shall have all the three. Therefore let us look to none
but his; we look to his approbation, when we look to our selves: then
honors he us, when we honor him. When we seek nothing but him, then
seeks he us and our weal. And it is for better for us that he seek our
good, then that we our selves seek it. For he can and may seek it best.
Therefore let us study to seek God and his honor, that God may seek us and
our honor.

And will we look who has sent us forth, who employeth us, who made us
Ambassadors in stead of Christ? we shall find that we ought to study to please
none but him. We are not subject to render account to any but to him. To him we
are subject indeed: therefore it is necessary that we study to be approved of
him. Now to come by his approbation, the Apostle shows us what way we may
proceed, and how we shall behave our selves; namely, that we do two things.
First, that we study, that is, that we have a sound care to present our selves
before him; Next, that we study to present our work of the ministry before
him; as he would say, that we study to take heed to our selves and to our
office. To our selves, that we be good Christians, to our office, that we be
good Pastor: for he will never be a goo^ Pastor that is not a good Christian:
Therefore the first thing that he must take heed to, is to his person, that he
study to present himself, get access to his countenance and stand before
him. Now there is no standing before God but in purity, and by purity of the
heart: it is the pure heart only that looks upon God and stands before him.
For Blessed are the pure in heart, (says our Master, Math. 5.) for they shall
see God. The heart again is no way purged but by faith; so it is by faith
only that we stand and present our selves unto God. The good Pastor to get
himself approved, must study for the increase of faith and sanctification.
For he shall never teach with authority and power, except he feel in himself
the thing that he would have wrought in others: how shall he prease to
sanctify others, who is not sanctified himself? how shall he teach holily who
is not holy? So we must study for our own particular sanctification, that
while as we preach salvation to others, we be not reprobates our selves.

Next we must study to present our works, and how we have traveled before
him. That is, we must study to show our selves good Pastors as well as good
Christians; and to this effect he lets us see what properties are required
in particular of us, to do the part of a Pastor. And first of all he shows
us, that we must be workmen, not idle; for the ministry is a work and no
idle business: And in respect that men may work and all out of frame and out
of order, therefore he adioyneth, we must be such sort of workmen that need
not be ashamed, that is, workmen without reproof.

The work of the ministry stands in two points, in ruling and teaching; the
third thing that he must do, as he must be a worthy workman, so he must be a
skillful workman, that can cut aright and work rightly; and in the end of the
verse he shows him whereupon he shall work, and wherein he shall travel; to
wit, upon the word of truth. And because these things cannot be done without
great travel, he bids him study for them all. So to come back, the first
thing that we must take heed to: We must take heed that we be not idle. And it
is required of us yt we be workmen, that is, the ministry as I have said, is
a work and no idle business. That it is a work, I have many places to prove
it, but there is one in special out of the 1. Thessa. 5.12. where the Apostle
says, I pray you acknowledge those that labor among you, and have them in
great estimation for their works sake. So the ministry is a work, and that
we are workmen, Acknowledge, says he, those that labor among you, and have
them in most great estimation for their works sake.

The work of the ministry stands in two points, in ruling, and in
teaching; and these are the two points: for ruling we have 1. These. 5.12. where
it is said, And rule you in the Lord. And as for teaching, the 17. verse 1.
Tim. 5. Chap. lets us see yt they must labor in the word. Now by reason that
men may work, and work out of frame; and that men may labor diligently, and
yet out of order: he adioyneth, that they must be such workmen as need not to
be ashamed; as he would say, worthy workmen and without reproof. For the
ministry is a worthy work, He that seeks the office of a Bishop, (says
the Apostle) 1. Tim. 3. does seek a worthy work. So he must be a faithful
and a worthy workman. To do the part of a faithful and worthy workman, he
must do two things; he must not only rule, but rule rightly; he must not only
teach, but teach skilfully: That he must rule rightly, we have the Apostle for
us, 1. Tim. 5.17 where he says: The Elders that rule well (and not only
simply the Elders that rule) are worthy, etc.. Now to rule rightly, it is as
the Apostle speaks, 1. These. 5. What it is to rule in the Lord.
To rule in the Lord: to rule in the Lord again, is to rule spiritually, in
spiritual affairs as the Lord did.

To rule in the Lord, is not to rule as a Lord: For we preach Christ Jesus to
be our Lord, (says the Apostle) and we are your servants for his sake. So to
rule in the Lord, is not to rule as a Lord, but under the Lord as a servant. To
rule in the Lord, is to rule as he did. Now he says of himself, Math. 18.
That he came not down to do his own will, but his Fathers will who sent him:
So as the Lord ruled not after his own will, much less must we rule after our
will: yea not after the will of the Prince. We must lay all sorts of wills
aside, and follow the will of God only. For so many conclusions and
determinations as flow from the will of man, yea although they were the will of
the Prince, beside the warrant of Gods word: they are as many nullities, and
have no power to strike upon the conscience, no more then ye Popes Bulls. So he
must lay aside all sort of will, and rule after the Lords will. For his will is
perfect, good and holy, (as the Apostle speaks. Romans 12.2.) Further, if he
will rule as the Lord did, he must rule carefully and very diligently; for as
it was his meat and drink (as he speaks himself) to do the work of his
Father, so we must be careful and prefer his work before any work of our
own, although it concern our body never so near.

To move us to diligence we should remember, that we have the City of God to
watch over, we should remember that we have the spouse of Christ to present as
a pure virgin, and we have the lambs of Christ committed to our feeding; for
that threefold repetition of our Master bidding Peter feed his lambs, what
required it but diligence? And who is able to answer to the meanest of these
things? And yet I have not spoken the half of the things that are requisite.
So that I marvel not if of old and of late also, there be many loath to enter
their shoulders under so heavy a burden. But it is a great marvel that any
should be found that can intrude himself to so weighty and hard a work. Who
ever he be that runs so unsent, he will never do good in this work.

As he must rule rightly, so he must teach skilfully; and this is set down in
the end of this verse, where he bids them divide the word and divide aright.
As to the former speech it is a borrowed kind of phrase, wherein the Apostle
alludeth to two things, first to the bread of the family, comparing ye word to
household bread, and us to stewards, who are the deuiders of yt bread. As it is
required in a steward of a great family that he be discreet: in such sort that
he have a respect to every man's age, ability and disposition, and divide to
them thereafter: So in us that are the dispensers of this blessed word, there
is a special kind of dexterity wished, that is, the gift of discretion,
whereby we may skilfully and fruitfully divide to every one. He that will do
the part of a skillful Teacher, must be a faithful interpreter, and a skillful
applyer, to interpret faithfully: he must take heed to three things chiefly:
first he must take heed to the meaning of the Author, that he take up his true
meaning so near as he can. To take up his meaning truly, he must first take
heed to the words what they signify, he must try their signification, and
after trial gather such a meaning as the words may bear, and as their
signification may agree with: for if he gather a contrary meaning, or another
then they may import, he is not an interpreter of these words, but a peruerter
of them. Next, to see if the meaning be right, he must confer the^ with other
parts and places of the Scripture: see how it agrees with the analogy of
faith. And if he find any harmony, there is no doubt but the sense is true.
The third thing that he must do, he must take heed how the words are placed, in
what order they come in, what relation they have to the things that go before,
and also how they are fastened with the things that follow. But he that would
interpret truly, must chiefly take heed to the Scriptures: for all true
interpretations must be sought out of the Scriptures: for seeing that all truth
is contained in the Scriptures, there can be no true interpretation but that
which flows from thence. Men should not be leaned to where they want
Scriptures; for no man should use a lie to interpret a truth: and the words of
men without Scripture are only lies and vanities. Also if the interpreter
would be sensible as he ought and should be, of force he must use Scripture, he
must confer place with place: and that thing which he finds obscurely
spoken in one place, he will find it more clearly spoken in another. So, many
Scriptures are necessary, and he that would interpret truly, must have many
Scriptures in his memory. Therefore we should pray for holy memories; for our
old memories will not keep these things, they must be sanctified memoryes that
shall keep holy things. As he must be a faithtull interpreter, so he must be a
skillful applier: for he must Divide the word aright. It is not enough that he
apply, except he apply it also skilfully: So application is necessary, skilful
application, I say, is necessary. As it is not possible that we can feed upon
food, except it be applied to our mouth; as little is it possible, that our
souls can feed, except the food of them be applied. Indeed things would be
applied skilfully: for as if the food be applied to any other part but the
mouth, the application serves not; even so it is in spiritual things, if they
be not applied to the right parts, and to the right diseases, the application
may do them more evil then good. Therefore it is necessary, that he who would
do the part of a skillful applyer, do know the faults and diseases of his
flock; which is not possible to be done in this Town, except it were divided
into parishes, that every one might have a reasonable number to come to him,
that he were acquainted with, and accustomed with their manners and behavior.
This application, is a chief point of the Pastors office: for there is no
edifying beside it: there is no obedience to God but by it. And therefore, as
by interpretation he informs the mind, and makes it to understand what he
should do, what he should leave undone: So by application he should subdue the
will, that it may give obedience and follow the understanding.

Then in a word, we see that the gift of government, and ye gift of
exhortation, are necessarily requisite to be in a Pastor in some measure, in
such sort, yt he cannot be a Pastor, except he have a part of both these gifts,
as I have said, in some measure: And therefore ye have to take heed to your
admission in admitting of young men, ye should see how they have profited in
both these gifts. And that act which was made in the last provincial assembly,
would be taken heed to, that none be placed in this office, except he have
learned by time the gift of government, together with the gift of teaching in
some measure. And as for application it is so necessary, if it were no more but
to turn over ye very words of the text upon the Auditory, it must not be left;
yea, and the nearer that we go to Gods word, the application is so much the
better: for his word must ever have a greater force with it then any other
word. And when the people hear that God speaks, and not man, it strikes a
great reverence in the hearts of the auditory: And so much the more, when we
consider the worthiness and dignity of the subject, whereupon we ought to take
these pains and are to entreat.

The Apostle calls it here the word of truth. The more notable that any
subject is, it would be so much the more wisely handled; And we have not such a
notable subject as this, for there is not a subject that has these epithetes,
to be called sound, wholesome, holy and true, but this. And beside this, there
is neither health, soundness, truth nor holiness: Therefore we should not
choppe nor change with the word, as if it were a vain word, but with great
humility it would be handled.

But who is able to do these things, or to answer to the meanest part of them?
These things crave an exact diligence, a singular care and a painful travel.
They are not purchased by sluggishnes, they will not give us leave to employ
our selves elsewhere, but they take the whole man, yea the whole thing that he
may do, if it were more. And therefore in respect of this, the Apostle uses
the word Study, showing us that these things are not gotten without study; that
is, without an earnest care and great diligence. All things whereunto a Pastor
should study may be taken up in two words: In faith, and in a good conscience.
Study we for these two, there is no doubt but we shall take heed both to our
selves, and to our office. And these two we cannot keep, except we study for
the third also, which is the keeper of all the rest; to wit, the holy Spirit.
We must study to entertain and nourish him, and this is done chiefly, by
praying in the holy Spirit: Therefore, we should be acquainted with prayer, and
be instant in it, that the Lord would not withdraw his holy Spirit from us; but
rather increase the power thereof from day to day, that we might find by
experience, and by a sensible feeling, the truth of his heavenly promises
within our selves, and specially of that promise of life everlasting. To the
which life, Christ Jesus, that great Pastor of the sheep, who gave his life
for his flock, bring us. To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all
honor, praise and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

