A TREATISE OF THE Perpetual Visibilitie, AND Succession of the True CHVRCH.
in all AGES.

AT LONDON, Printed by HVM^REY LOVVNES; for ROBERT MILBOVRNE. 1624.

TO THE READER.
KIng Solomon, the Mirror of wisdom, who dug deepest into the richest Mines
of divine and humane knowledge, exhorts others to search after that which
himself had found in such abundance: and he sets an edge upon our desires, by
promising, If thou seek after her as for silver, and searchest for her as
for hid treasure, then shall thou find the knowledge of God, etc. Of so
precious a Talent when we have found any parcel, we ought not to hide it in
a napkin, much less to bury it in the bowels of the earth, by concealment or
suppression: for, Veritatem celare, est aurum sepelire; L. 12. confess. c. 25.
To conceal the Truth, is to bury gold, and thereby to deprive not only
others, but our selves also, of the benefit and use thereof. Wherefore Saint
Austen sharply censureth such as would challenge a peculiar interest and
propriety in this, which is the true common treasure of Gods Church, saying,
Veritas nec mea, nec tua, nec illius est, sed omnium nostrum, quos ad eius
communionem public vocas; admonens nos, vt nolimus eam habere priuatam, ne
priuemur ea: The truth is neither mine, nor thine, nor his, but all ours in
common, whom thou (O Lord) call publicly to the communion thereof;
dreadfully admonishing us, not to desire to have it private, lest we be
deprived of it. Now, of all truth this day in controversy, there is none more
sought after by some, than the visibility of the true Church, which retained
the purity of the Apostles doctrine, unmixed with dregs of error and
superstition, especially in the gloomy and dark Ages before Luther. As for
higher times, and nearer the Apostles, such was the clarity and splendor of
the pure Church, that in a manner it obscured the Sun. But, in succeeding and
degenerating times, after the number of the name of the Beast, 666, it began
much to be obscured and clouded with ignorance and superstition: and in the
thousandth year, in which, Satan was let loose, and much more after, even till
the happy reformation in these later Ages, it was so eclipsed, especially in
the Western Parts of the world, that some confidently affirm, it was quite
extinct. The Woman, clothed with the Sun, having the Moon under her feet, was
now fled into the Wilderness, and had but a few Stars to discover her. By the
conduct and luster whereof, yet many Wisemen followed her obscure track, and
found her. Among whom, the most reverend, religious, learned, and painful
Author of this enfuing Treatise, concerning The Visibility and Succession of
the true Church, deserves to be named in the first rank; who has more
particularly and perspicuously traveled in this Argument, than any in our
English Tongue. It was the manner of the Heathen Race-runners, Erasm. Ad.
after they had finished their course, Pers. Sat. Nunc in decursu lampada
trado, etc.
to deliver a Lamp or Taper to the next Runner. Semblably whereto, this
Christian Antiquary shows unto thee, Lucret. Et quasi currentes vitalem
lampada tradunt.
how the noble Worthies of the Christian world, and Forerunners of our faith,
after they had finished their course, delivered the Lamp of their doctrine from
one to another: (...).
as (to omit other former-bearers of this Light) Bertram, to Berengarius;
Berengarious, to Petrus Bruis; Petrus Bruis, to Waldo; Waldo, to Dulcinus;
Dulcinus, to Gandune and Marsilius; they, to Wicklef; Wicklef, to Hus and
Jerome of Prague; and their scholars, the Taborites, to Luther. This Treasure
of Antiquity falling into my hands, and finding it hard to come-by, I thought
fit to publish it, and make it more common; that so, all that love the truth,
might clearly see in it the perfect Image of their Mother, the true Protestant
Church, partly blubbered with tears, partly smeared with blood, by the cruelty
of the Man of sin, and his Accomplices, in former Ages. About which doleful
Image, we may fitly write these words of the Prophet Micah, Micah 7. 8.
for a Motto: Rejoice not against me, O my enemy: when I fall, I shall rise:
when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a Light unto me. Such a Light he
has been Before, and In our days, and Henceforth will be, according to his
promise; til he shall dispell all darkness, and consume the Man of sin with the
Spirit of his mouth, 2 These. 2.
and destroy him with the brightness of his Coming. Even so come, Lord Jesus;
come quickly.

A TREATISE OF the perpetual Visibilitie and Succession of the true CHVRCH.
WE teach, Sect. 1.
that as from the beginning long before the Incarnation of Christ, God ever had
his Church, yet sometimes more visible and glorious, and sometimes more
contracted, and obscured: so since the appearance of our Savior, at all times
infallibly and without exception, there have been chosen children of God, who
have retained his faith, and calling upon his name have studied to express
their knowledge in their life, by retyring themselves both from the loose
conversation of Libertines, and the profanation of Idolatrous persons. Neither
ever was there any of our profession, which did teach or write the contrary.
But whereas the Synagogue of Rome lays it down for a fundamental Rule, that
this Church has been and must be in all ages, a visible and conspicuous
Congregation at the least, consisting of an apparent Hierarchy, so that at all
times a man may point it out, and may repair thither, as to a matter eminent;
yea, and in a sort pompous too; or to say as Stapleton speaks when he does
most extenuate it, In Antid. Matt. 24.
It is evermore visible in respect of her Governors and Sheepheards, but most
of all for the Pope, or chief Pastor thereof. To which Pope, De Romans Pontif.
4. 4.
Bellarmine assigns that he cannot err in judgment, and to the people and
Clergy of Rome (where this sensible Church must principally be) that they
cannot err with a personal error; so that all altogether err; we therein
do dissent from them, and maintain, that although when the godly are most
driven to extremities by Heresies or persecutions, they be visible each to
other, and acquainted with some other brethren, who are in like case with
themselves, yet they are not so apparent to other men, as that at all times
they know where to find Assemblies, and Congregations of them. But that the
Bishop of Rome, and his Pontifical Clergy, should have the face of the Church
tied, and inseperably joined unto them, we can in no sort yield, but do
disclaim it as a flattering tale, suggested to that Bishop by such parasites
as are about him, and from time to time do depend upon him.

And that it may be seen what reason we have of this our assertion, Sect. 2.
we first show, that the estate of the faithful was frequently so, before the
coming of Christ. For when it lay as hid in some few persons, within the
single Families of the old Patriarks, before and after the Flood, what great
boast could there be made of it? Nay, when the Commonwealth of the jews was
much settled, into what straight was it brought, when David complained, Psalm
12. 1.
Help Lord, for there is not one godly man left: for the faithful are failed
from among the children of men? This being spoken, as it is most probable, in
the days of Saul, aster the days of Samuel, and the 1 Samuel 22. 18
slaughter of the Priests, how was it even in Judah and Jerusalem, when Esaias
cried out, that Esaias 1. 5, 6.
the whole head is sick, and the whole heart is heavy, from the sole of the
foot unto the head, there is nothing whole therein? The estate of the Church
being then most miserable, and all depraved, not only in manners, but in
Religion, Idolatry being plentiful, as is manifest by the words in the same
vision, Esaias 1. 29.
For they shall be^ confounded for the Oaks which you have desired, and ye
shall be ashamed for the G^rdens you have chosen: which intends the trees
and pleasant places where they used their superstitions. Call to mind the days
of Jeremy, when he said, Ierem. 5. 1.
Run to and fro by the streets of Jerusalem, and behold now, and know, and
inquire in the open places thereof, if ye can find a man, or if there be any
that executes Judgment, and seeks the Truth, and I will spare it. And those
of Ezech^l, testifying in this sort: Ezekiel. 22. 30.
I sought for a man among them that should make up the hedge, and stand in the
gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none.
These things were spoken of Judah and Jerusalem, where alone at that time was
that Church which was; the Israelites for their grievous sins, being long
before carried away into captivity. You may add to this, if you will, the
complaint of Micah, Mich. 7. 1.
Woe is me for I am as the Summer gatherings, and as the Grapes of the
vintage: there is no cluster to eat: my soul desires the first ripe fruits.
The good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none righteous among
men: they all lie in wait for blood: every man hunteth his brother with a net.
If the Priests and people had not almost generally gone astray, and the whole
face of the visible Church had not seemed to be defaced, would these Prophets
thus have particularized, that one godly man was not left, and that one was not
to be found, who had not declined from truth?

We doubt not but in those times the Lord had many faithful ones in secret,
Sect. 3.
as he had seven thousand in Israel when 1 King 19. 18 Romans 11. 4.
Elias lived, of whom neither the enemies of the truth, nor scant that
Prophet, did take any notice. Ezekiel. 9. 4. Apoc 7. 3.
The mark in the forehead is sometime known to few, but only to him that
imprinted it there; yet this is a good hold for the Elect, 2 Timothy 2. 19
The Lord knows who are his. But upon what might those, who were Gods secret
chosen outwardly build, when diverse times the Princes and people had corrupted
their ways, and the Temple it self was polluted, and made a sink of
Idolatry? For we find that things stood upon those terms in the days of
Manasse, when in the House of the Lord, even that house, whereof the Lord had
said, 2 Kin. 21. 4, 5
In Jerusalem will I put my Name, he built profane altars: and in the two
Courts of the House of the Lord he built Altars for all the host of Heaven.
Judge where in those days was the glory of the visible Church, or where it
was a pretty while before that, when the Priest 2 Kings 16. 11.
Vriah was as ready to set up in the Temple an Altar after the fashion of that
which was in Damascus, as the King Ahaz was ready to command it. And then the
Prince and Priests conspiring, there was scant any kind of gross Idolatry,
which was not plentifully committed, Ahaz himself making his son to Verse ^.
go through the fire after the abominations of the Heathen. And least it
should be thought, that the people at least, did amend somewhat which was
amiss, in the very next chapter it is witnessed in general, 2 Kings 17. 29.
Yet Judah kept not the Commandments of the Lord their God, but walked
according to the fashion of Israel, which they used. And by most probability,
this outrage under Esaias 1. 1.
Ahaz was the time, against which Esaias so inueighed in the Vision before
remembered. These things are so plain, that the greatest pillars of the Papacy
cannot deny them; and therefore they are forced to another shift, as the
Rhemists when they say, Romans 11. 4.
That there is a great difference between the Christian Church, and the Jews,
ours resting upon better promises then theirs; which is a very poor evasion,
in as much as every Divine may know, that there be as large and many promises,
that the Church of the Jews should last until Christ's appearance in the
flesh, as there be that the Congregation of Gods Saints shall continue among
the Gentiles until the day of Judgment. And ^auing only for the time of the
Babylonish captivity, there was one set external place of Gods eminent
service, that is, the Temple at Jerusalem, supported with such words, Psalm.
13^. 14
This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, (...) and 2 Chro. 33. 4.
In Jerusalem shall my name (...) ever: the like whereof through^^ all the
continuance of the New Testament, is not warrantable o^^ of the Word for any
one place wh^^^euer. Now it cannot be so much as superficially maintained out
of the Scripture, that Rome it self has any such promise, but rather out of
the Revelation of St. John, there are many substantial matters which make to
the contrary.

But because by the strong shot of Truth they be beaten from the Bulwark of
the Jewish Synagogue, Sect. 4.
and fly to the next hold of the later Testament; let us follow them thither.
When our Savior Christ was borne, and for the most part afterward, till he
was baptized, where shall we conceive was the visible Church? The Scribes and
Pharisees possessed all the show, and they were no better then Math. 23. 24. 2
Match. 4. 8. 24. c. 11. 3.
blind leaders of the blind. The Priesthood was long before and after bought
and sold; Joseph de Bell. lud. 4. 5. and lib. 5. 9.
and in Christ's own time it is evident out of the Scripture, that the highest
spiritual dignity going John 11. 51.
by years, Annas and Caiphas, and other unworthy men of that rabble did enjoy
it. Upon the birth of Jesus, they were not glad, who should have most rejoiced
in it: but all Math. 2. ^.
Ierufalem was troubled at it. And how they persisted afterward till Christ did
manifest himself fully, may be guessed by diverse circumstances, which the
Evangelists do mention after his birth. But when he came first into the world,
of whom do we find speech made, but of some Shepherds in the field, of Simeon
an old man, of Anna a most aged woman, both ready to go into their graves, of
Joseph and Marie, Zacharias and Elizabeth, and very few others? and of these
some might be soon dead, others might live out of the way at Bethlehem, or
Nazareth, or in Egypt, and the Shepherds were in the fields about their
Trades: but where there was the appearance of a visible Congregation can hardly
be imagined. When our Savior had selected out his Apostles, they then were
termed by the name of a Flock; but yet by their Master they were called but a
Luke 12. 22 Rhem Cannot, ibidem.
little flock, where the Rhemists do confess, that in the beginning it was
little indeed. At the death of Christ, when his body hanged on the cross for
our sakes, and his Disciples were all Math 26. 56.
fled, no man daring to show himself. John 19. 25. Nich. de Clem. de Matter.
Council.
Mary and John, and a few women were all the faithful that now appeared upon
earth: and afterward while the Apostles and their followers walked very
privately, or were assembled Acts 1. 13.
in a chamber, the Priests, and Scribes, and Pharisees were they who ruffled
it in the streets, and bore the sway in the Temple; so that if a weak body had
enquired for the Church, he might rather have been directed to them, who had
the Law, and the Altars, and all sacred things in their custody, Acts 8. 2.
then to any other. When Steven had been stoned, and for fear of the
persecution which was at Jerusalem, the Disciples were all scattered; besides
the Apostles, it may well be presumed, that for a time they which remained in
the city where Steven had lost his life, did not walk very openly. Truth it
is, that after these things the Church was better settled, and the truth was
more spread; but yet never was there any such privilege bestowed upon it, but
that in the days of persecution, or some grievous apostasy, the faithful
might be brought to a small visibilitie.

Our Saviors words intend so much, Sect. 5.
when alluding to the time of his second appearance, to judge the quick and
the dead, he asks, Luke 18. 8
Nevertheless, when the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on earth? as
meaning, that very little should then be found, in comparison of the Floodes
and Ocean of iniquity which every where should abound. But God, to the end
that he might not have us ignorant but warned before hand into what straights
the Church should be brought, informs us by Saint 2 These. 2. 3.
Paul, that the Lord shall not come, except there first be an apostacy, or
revolt, or falling away, wherein Antichrist with great pride and disdain
should show himself. This is solemnly spoken of by the Apostle, and by all
both old and new, entreating of it, is observed to some matter of great note,
that is to say, some maine declining from somewhat. Many of our Papists fearing
to touch this sore, which can in no case turn them to good, would have that
interpreted, to note nothing else but the slipping of diverse regions and
countries from their subjection to the Roman Empire. But Gregory Martin, and
the other Rhemistes being overcome with the evidence of truth, are here a
little more honest then ordinary, and speak to other purpose. Indeed they
cannot tell how it will be taken at other Papists hands, that contrary to the
custom of their fellows, in a matter of such moment, they should give way
unto us; and therefore they do use these words in way of excuse, ^ Rhemes. in
2 Thessalonians. 2. ^.
Be it spoken under the correction of Gods Church, and all learned Catholics.
But to the point concerning the Apostacy, they deliver this: It is very like,
that this great defection and revolt shall not be only from the Roman
Empire, but especially from the Roman Church, and withal from most points of
Christian Religion, (in the Margent it is, and from most Articles of the
Catholic Faith.) Here they would have us take the Romish belief for the
Christian Religion, and Catholic faith: but that deserves a long pause: we
rather observe out of them, that this revolt is in matter of faith, and not
only from the Empire; then which Gloss, nothing can be truer. Well then, if
there must be so egregious an Apostacy, it will follow, that Antichrist so
domineering, as by the Apostle he is described, will not be negligent so to
repress the public service of God, that it shall not carry any lively head,
or countenance, where he has to do. So that certainly our Rhemistes
yielding to this Exposition, do in substance confess so much, as that the
apparancy of Gods Congregation, in the time of the great defection, must be
mightily ecclipsed. Now the Lord, to the end he might establish his faithful,
and arm them to expect this paucitie of believers, and inconspicuousnes of his
Church, and yet not be discouraged for that which should be past, present, or
to come. And again, that there might be no doubt in a matter of this moment,
lets us further know, that the Ap^c. 12* 6.
woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God. It
is not doubted of between the Romanists and us, but this Woman does represent
the Church, concerning whom, being in the wilderness, it does manifestly
follow, that for the time of her abode there, which the Almighty had decreed,
she should not be discerned; that is, by her enemies, who did and would chase
her: notwithstanding, it is not to be doubted, but she knew where her self
was. If the Romanist therefore, and persecuting adversary, did not ever see the
Professors of the Gospel, it was no wonder: the woman was to remain in the
Wilderness a part, and hid from them. The evidence of which matter is such,
that as In Prefat. super Apocal.
Master Fox observes, for fear of diverse things in the Revelation of Saint
John, (whereof this may worthily be one scant any Popish Writer for many years
together, durst adventure to comment any thing upon the Apocalypse, until our
Rhemistes being desirous to shame the Pope, and themselves, with all who are
wise, and adventured to set pen to paper. Having then a purpose to set forth
and corrupt the New Testament, partly by their Translation, but most of all by
their Annotations, they could not choose but say somewhat of the Revelation,
although they profess, that it is as In Argument. Apocal and in Apoc. I. 1.
sparingly as may be, and as briefly; which is not for that the Volume of the
Rhemish Testament grows great, as they would color it, but for fear least
they should too much lay open their own weakness, which while that Book is
in the Bible, will never be concealed. Howsoever therefore, through their
Volume, in many maine matters, they be very silent where they should most
speak, as of the Question of imputed righteousness, where the Romans 4. 6.
Apostle does most handle it, (a sore argument of their own conscience
distrusting their cause, and even sinking under the weight of that chapter) yet
here God ouer-ruling them, to say the truth, as he did John 11. 15.
Caiaphas, they interpret the woman to be the Apoc. 12. 6.
Church, flying from the great persecution, which shall be in the time of
Antichrist. Indeed, to keep peace with their Lord and Mastes the Pope, they
will not have this flight to be but in the very ending of the world; and so
they would fetch it with a back Racket, that the woman should continue so in
secret, but three years and a half, which (to keep all upright) they assign
to be the time of Antichrists reign, and then the Judgment must come; which
is a most fond evasion, seeing by that means men living at the appearance of
Antichrist, should be able precisely to tell when the day should be, to wit,
three years and a half after Antichrists entering. Mark. 13. 22.
But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are in
Heaven, neither the Son himself, save the Father only. It can never be made
good, that the Apoc. 11. 2, 3. and 12* 6. and 13. 5. and Dan. 7. 25
time, times, and half a time, the two and forty months, and the thousand,
two hundred and sixty days, are so literally to be taken, as that they
should contain exactly three ordinary years and a half. Your Roman Bishop
in his declination, has already been in the world much longer, and he is the
greatest Antichrist that ever yet was manifested among men, and on whom many
things in the Scripture signified, touching Antichrist, do directly and
unavoidably light.

Well, Sect. 6.
this revolt taking place, and the woman, the Church being in the wilderness,
it is not to be doubted, but here and there be diverse, which serve God aright,
the very gates Math. 16. 18.
of Hell not being able to prevail against them. And as these in general
wheresoever dispersed, do make up the universal militant Church: so where any
few of them, even in the smallest number, are assembled together, they may be
said to be a particular Congregation, or Church. Where three are, says
Tertull, exhort, ad chastit.
Tertullian, there is a Church, although they be Lay persons. It is likely,
that he alludeth to that saying of our Savior, Math. 18. 20
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst
of them. He is with them as with members of his Church, to guide them and hear
them, to bless them, and preserve them. And that such little assemblies are
not unworthy the name of the Church, is plain by S. Paul's words to Philemon,
where he sends greeting, not only to Philemon, and Appias, and Archippus, but
Phil. 2. (...)
to the Church in Philemons house: for so the Rhemistes themselves translate
it. In dangerous and Apostatating times, such petty assemblies do make up the
general, and they belong unto the same mystical body, although they not only
be not known to their persecutors, but many of them have no acquaintance with
other. They have the same Head, the same Faith, the same Charity, the same
Spirit, the same Holy Ghost is given to all Saints, joined one to the other in
love, whether they know each other corporally, or do not know them, says De
Baptism. contra Donatist. 6. 4. idem spiritus (...) ea dimit tit (i. peccata)
quod datus est (...) sanctis, etc.
Saint Austen. The want then of Acquaintance each with other, may keep the
godly asunder, as well as the rage of their persecutors; both which are to be
found in the case of Elias. But directly to follow further this Argument of the
Eclipse of the Churches glory, may it not be thought to be brought to a low
ebb, when it is said of the second Beast, That Apoc. 13. 16.
he causes all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, that he
should give them a mark in the right hand, or in their foreheads, and that no
man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the Beast,
or the number of his name. And what else is signified, when so Cap. 17. 2. and
21.
many are mentioned to have commerce with the Whore of Babylon; yea, Cap. 8. 3.
all Nations are reported to have drunken of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication. The ancient Fathers were not ignorant, that such times these might
be, when they so often compared the Church to the Moon, as Saint S. Ambr.
Epist. lib. 5. 31.
Ambrose. The Moon it self, whereby in the Oracles of the Prophets, the
countenance of the Church is figured; when at the first rising again, she is
renewed into the ages of the Month, she is hidden by the darkness of the
night, and by little and little filling her horns, or right over against the
Sun ending them, does shine with the light of clear brightness. S. August. in
Psalm. 101.
S. Austen in one place does for diverse respects liken the church unto the
moon, and expounds the moon to signify it. Sermon. 134. de Temp^re.
In another place he has the Sun is Christ, the Moon the Church; which as one
the one side it does intimate unto us, that the Moon has no light but from
the Sun; and the Church no light nor beauty, but from God: so on the other side
it does most lively put us in mind, that as the Moon continues at the same
stay, but increases and decreaseth, waxes and waneth, is ecclipsed by the
interposition of the earth between her self and the Sun, and sometimes in the
change cannot be seen, although it is never to be doubted but there is a Moon:
so the church of Christ, whilst this troublesome world does last, is now
glorious, then shadowed; in one age in beauty, in an other age kept under;
under some Princes in peace, under others in persecution; yea, sometimes so
pressed with the extremity of the malicious, as that she is glad to remain
retired into secret places, and not to appear openly to the malignant, albeit
she never is nor can be extinguished, but has a continual being. Unto which
it may be added, that since faith does much consist of Hebr. 11. 1.
things which are not seen; and we believe the holy Catholic church as an
Article of our faith, it may follow, that it need not ever be eminently
visible, and apparently sensible unto us.

For the better exemplification of this verity, Sect. 7.
it may be remembered what hauock was made by the Heathen Roman Emperors, and
their deputies, against the flock of Christ, in the ten first persecutions:
that in the Roman dominion, there was scant any to be heard of, who professed
Christianity, but he was soon cut off by the sword, or otherwise. Did they in
those times suffer any potent visibilitie of true Professors, or when they once
knew where they were, did they not forthwith labor to extirpate them? But in
the days of Constantius, when the Arrian Heresy had once gotten the head,
where in the world did there appear any sencible Congregation, maintaining the
Orthodox belief? Hieroms testimony of those days was, Hiero aduersus
Luciferi^nos.
The whole world did sigh, and wondered that it self was Arrian. The words are
but few, but they are to the purpose. So said Saint Gregorius Presbyter,
writing the life of Gregory Nazianzen, The Sect of the Arrians had almost
possessed all the coasts of the world, the power and impiety of the Emperor
ministering unto it. The words of Constantius himself in Theod. Histor. Eccles.
l. 2. 16.
Theodoret, do give testimony unto this. Neither does Liberius the Roman Bishop
say ought to the contrary. The speeches of the Arrian Emperor against him and
Athanasius are these; The whole world does think that this is well. The whole
world has given sentence of his impiety. Thou alone do embrace the
friendship of that wicked man. And a little before that: Does so great a part
of the world reside in thee Liberius, that thou alone do dare to come in aid
to that wicked man, and disturb the peace of the universal world? Whereunto
Liberius did not take exception, saying, that the visible Church stood for him,
and Athanasius, but rather gives another reason, to make good his being alone;
Be it that I am alone; notwithstanding for that the cause of the faith is not
the worse: for a great while ago^e, there were three only found, who would
resist the Kings commandment. Here the Church for any external show, was low
brought: for if any body held it up, it was Athanasius, who then played least
in sight, and durst not appear. For this Liberius, who did for a time second
him, did afterward shrink. He went at first into banishment in defense of the
truth: but after that, he was solicited, and laid at by Fontunatianus, that he
relented and condiscended to subscribe to the Arrian heresy, as In Catalog.
Scripter. Eccles.
Hierom witnesses, who lived in that age, and was long conversant in Rome, and
therefore could better report what was the issue of Liberius his constancy,
then some others who do relate it otherwise. What can be said for him,
Bellarmine has: but yet enforced by Bellar. de Pont. Romans 4. 9.
the evident testimony of Athanasius, Hillary, and Hierome, he confesses so
much as I have here set down; but cover it he would, that he only consented to
the external act of subscribing, but remained in heart Othodox. Why should it
then be a marvel, if in process of time, Antichrist growing to greater
strength, the Church should be in covert? It is no more then often fell out
under the Jewish Synagogue, and has bin exemplified to have been since among
the Christians, and was so evidently foretold before. In so much that by the
example of the Apoc. 12. 6.
woman, it can not be the true Church, unless it should be hidden in the
wilderness. Which while our Popish teachers deny to agree to their Romish
Church, but profess that it has ever been in sight, they themselves do by a
consequent proclaim, that they are not the pure and undefiled flying woman,
but another painted harlot and strumpet. The true Church is for a time out of
sight in the wilderness; but so say they, was their Church never: and therefore
will they, nill they, their Church is not the true Church.

And here, Sect. 8.
to the end that the slanderous calumniation of our adversaries may the more
be manifested to all those, who will not wilfully close their eyes against
truth, I will a little show the vanity, and yet maliciousnes of their
objection, when they say there was never any of our faith before the days of
Camp. Ref. 10. quint. Euangely Pr^sessores.
Luther, who in the year 1517, began for his part to display the kingdom of
Antichrist. Where, I pray the Reader to consider, that the most part of those
whom I shall cite, are Popish Writers, and no way partially affected toward
us. We say then, that Martine Luther was not the first brocher of those points
which he taught again't papistry; but as he did originally deduce them from the
Scriptures, and out of the works of the ancient Fathers; so he did derine them
also hereditarily from other, who immediately before him had taught the same
doctrine, and left it both in books, and the hearts of men recommended unto
him; as principal parties herein I name John Hus, and Hierome of Prage, and all
such as were their scholars, in or about Bohemia; who before Luthers time
oppugned the belief of the church of Rome, and their profession was not
extinguished until his days, howsoever it before had bin mainly assaulted. If
we could learn this no where else, yet Histor. l. 13.
Fr. Guicciardine, an Italian, and Florentin Historiographer, would inform us
of it, who writing of the year 1520, says plainly, that Luther did set abroad
the Heresies (as he terms them) of the Bohemians; and he names there Hus
and Hierome as former diuulgers of the same: and In vita VVenceslai.
Petrus Messiah a Spaniard therein agrees with him, who mentioning the
opinions of Hus and the Bohemians, says, they were the seed of those errors,
which were afterward in Germany, alluding to the doctrine of Luther. There is
no man whose testimony in this behalf may be of more worth then Ioh. Histor.
Cochlei de Hussitis.
Cochleus; First, because he wrote a large story of purpose concerning the
Hussites, and therefore by his long search, reading, and writing, in that
argument may be persumed to know as much as any. Secondly, because it may be
well imagined, that he would fain nothing to do Luther good, in as much as he
also wrote a volume purposely against that worthy servant of God, Histor. de
actis and scriptis Mar. Luther.
intending to rip up his whole life from year to year, and to censure all his
works; yet this enemy of his, in the Story of the Hussites, does plentifully
satisfy us about the matter now in question. One where he tells us, L. 2.
that Hus did slay souls for an hundred years together; neither yet does he
cease to slay them by the second death. Within an hundred years after him came
in Luther, according as the said John Hus did Iobannes Fox. in Hist. Eccles.
prophecy not long before his death. And when it is added, that yet he does
not cease to slay; it is manifest, that his Doctrine remained till the days of
Cochleus. Cochleus. l. 2.
In another place he relates, that Luther did stir up seditions in Germany,
by the Books of the Hussites. Afterward he calls those, who were in Germany
in his time, New Ibidem.
Hussites. And again, Hus did so rent the unity of the Church, that unto this
day there remains a pitiful division in Bohemia. He proceeds in the same
matter elsewhere, L. 3.
saying, That the people of Germany are now by Luther partakers of the
Heresies of Hus, and Hierome. One sort of the followers of this John Hus, did
call themselves Thaborites; and these were they, who most dissented of all from
the Doctrine of Rome: Of these he speaks thus: Cochl. lib. 8.
Unto this day remains the Sect of the Thaborites, in many places of Bohemia,
and Morauia, under the name of Picards and Waldenses. Lastly, the same L. 12.
Cochleus, in the year 1534. does wish that he may see the remainders or
leauings of the Hussites to return to the Church, and the Germans to cast out
all new Sects. What can be more evident, then that the Doctrine of John Hus
was sensibly and apparently continued somewhere, even till the days of Martin
Luther? Unto which may be added, that whereas Luther began to show himself
but in the year 1517, that very year, was Centur. 16. l. 1. 20.
ended the Council of Laterane held at Rome, and finished by Pope Leo the
tenth. And there consultation was had of reforming the manners of the Church,
and of recalling the Bohemians to the unity of the Church of Rome.

And as these Testimonies do convince, Sect. 9.
that the Christian Confession of Hus was not extinguished at the coming of
Martin Luther: so may there be good reason assigned, why it did so long
continue, in as much as it was embraced by many, and earnestly maintained even
unto the death. When Hus began first to preach the people which used Cochleus
l. 1.
handy crafts did with great desire hear his sermons, and did read the
scriptures, being turned by him into their mother tongue, so that they could
dispute with the Priests; which the very women were able to do; lbide^.
yea, and one woman did make a Book. Not long after three of the scholars of
this Preacher did affirm, that the Pope the^ living was Antichrist; who had
proclaimed a Croisado against a Christian King; that was Ladislaus, King of
Naples, then infesting the lands of the Church of Rome. These three persons
were martyred for this speech, and took their death patiently. In small
process of time, this Doctrine so multiplied, that as In Tabulo Concilii ante
Platine Hist.
Onuphrius has, the Council of Constance was called principally for two
things; the one was against the Hussites, the other to take away the Schism
between the Popes. These of liklihood grew great, that now a general Council
was called against them. Neither did the people only agree in faith with John
Hus, but the Nobles of Bohemia stood apparently for him; in so much that they
sent two Ioh. Fox. in Council Constant. Histor.
several and solemn supplications to the Council of Constance in his
behalf. And when these their request were neglected, and John Hus, and Hierom
of Prage (contrary to the Cochl. l. 4.
Emperors safe conduct given to the former of them) were burnt, the Nobles of
Bohemia did mightily murmr against the Fathers of the Council; in so much
that Sigismund the Emperor, to give them satisfaction on his behalf, did
write unto them, excusing himself touching the death of these men, and laying
the fault upon the Council. But this gave not contentment unto the Bohemians,
now robbed of their principal Pastor, but being moved at the perfidiousnesse
of those at Constance, they assembled themselves together, Ibidem.
to the number of thirty thousand; and in the fields upon three hundred Tables
erected for that purpose, they received the Eucharist in both kinds.
Afterward, they rushing into the Churches and Monasteries, Zisca ad locum quem
cruci^ appellant profectus est, ibi supra quadragint a millia vnorum ex^ere^
icis conuenere.
did break down the Images there. It was not long after, but that under
Cochleus l. 5. and Pe^us Messiah in Sigismundo.
Johannes Zisca, a Noble and victorious Warrior, these Hussites grew to be of
Soldiers forty thousand in one army, who got into their hands the Castle of
Prage, the chief City of Bohemia. Then not long after did Pope Martin the
fifth publish a Croysado against these, whom he called Heretics, promising
remission of their sins to such as could destroy them. Notwithstanding, these
hated persons did still prosper, getting many Victories under Procopius, and
other Captains, but especially under Zisca, who was of that dexterity, and
felicity in his Wars, as that L. 5. vix vlla Graeco^ um, Hebreo^^que. aut
Latin^ou^^ Historia talem ref ducem qua^^s Zisca fui^.
Cochleus almost amazed at his strange success, says, That scant any
History of the Greeks, or Hebrews, or Latins does mention such a General
as Zisca was. He built a new City, as a refuge for his men, and called it
Thabor, whereof diverse embracing the Doctrine of Hus, were afterward called
Thaborites. A L. 6.
second time did Pope Martine proclaim a Croysado against them, granting
remission of sins to all who did either fight, or contribute money against
them. Upon which, there were at one time Ibid. quis putasset quadraginta millia
aequitum Germanicae nationis tam leuiter compelli posse etc. nolo hic temere
iudicare sciens iudicia Dei esse oc. culta, etc.
forty thousand Germane Horse men gathered to destroy them: but such was the
terror of their name, that upon the approaching to them, the Horsemen of their
own accord turned their backs and fled. The Popish Author says, that there
was in this some secret Judgment of God, but he thinks the cause of their
ill success, was, that they had Bishops and Priests to their Leaders and
Captains. By this time came on the Council of Basil, which as In Tahul. ante
Platin.
Onuphrius says, was held against the Hussites. This shows that there were
many, which may also appear, in that the Fathers at Basil, did by an
Indulgence grant to the Bohemians this dispensation, That contrary to the Act
of the Council of Sess. 13.
Constance, they might receive the Eucharist both in Bread and Wine. Lib. 4.
Chronog.
Genebrard, who was ever a true servant to the Pope, confesses so much: but
adds withal, that the Cup was permitted unto them, because that always
before had been their custom so to communicate: yet says he, all was on that
condition, That they should not find fault with the contrary use, nor sever
themselves from the Catholic Church in other Rites and Doctrines. L. 7.
Cochleus names no such condition. Nay, to show that simply and directly it
was yielded unto them, he reports, that the Legates of the Council of
Basil, did thus expound that which was concluded in the Bohemians behalf. The
L. 8.
Council does permit the Eucharist under both kinds; not tollerating it
only as a thing evil, as to the Jews was permitted a Bill of Divorce; but
so, that by the authority of Christ and his Church, it is lawful and
profitable to the worthy Receivers. Where is it likely, that unless the
Bohemians now after Husses death had been a strong party, the Antichristian
rabble would have yielded to their importunity, so directly against the Canon
of the next precedent Council? Indeed the Ibidem.
Emperor Sigismund did afterward take a course to lessen their number, when he
sent many of them into Hungaria against the Turks, that there they might
either conquering win to him victories, or being conquered themselves, so be
destroyed and perish. He who list to see more concerning the multitude of these
Professors, Histor. Bohem. c. 35. and 50. (...). 130.
let him but look on diverse places in the works of Aeneas Syluius, who was
afterward Pope, by the name of Pius the second, and he shall find him
reporting of his own knowledge, as travailing himself into Bohemia, that they
were many, and very earnest also in their Religion.

If here it should be replied, that these perhaps were base people, and of
the vulgar, who thus followed John Hus; but men of learning and knowledge, or
persons of authority, they had none to join with them; the course of the
Story will easily clear the same, and show that they had both learned Pastors,
and great Magistrates, who believed as they believed, and stood wholly with
them. Of what literature Hus himself was, is evident by his works yet
remaining, and by his personal withstanding the whole Council of Constance.
And what learning, what eloquence, what memory, all admirable were in Hierom of
Prage, as also with what singular patience he took his death, is most
significantly delivered in an Epistle of Ad Leonard^^ Aretinum.
Poggius, who as an eye witness beheld him, and seemed to be much affected with
the singular parts of the man. Which noble testimony of that worthy Poggius, is
acknowledged by Morte^ ala^ri vultu vt ait Poggius, non so (...) perpeti, sed
etiam appetiuisse visus est. C^cb. lib. 3.
Cochleus. Whilst these two lived, there were diverse L. 2.
Priests, and L. 1.
Preachers, which agreed in their doctrine; and in their Sermons reproved the
Popish Clergy for their Simony, keeping of Concubines, avarice, riot, and
Secular-like pride. But after the death of those two famous servants of God,
their L. 4. Nacti Episcopum Archi^episcopi Pragensis Suff aganeu^ ordinouerum
per eum clericos, etc
followers got to them a Bishop, who was a Suffragane to the Archbishop of
Prage, and by him they put into holy Orders, as many Clerks as they would.
Which the Archbishop took so ill, that he suspended his Suffragan. But it was
not long after, that Coch. lib. 5. Council, Pragens. Hussitarum ita incipit, In
nomine Dom. Amen. Incipit sancta Syn^dus hibita and rite celebrata anno 1421.
sub Conrad. etc. Conradus Archiep. Pragensis cum Zisca and Hussitis scribit ^d
principe^, etc.
Conradus the Archbishop himself became a Hussite also, as the Author calls
him. Under this Conradus, as President of the assembly, these Hussites held a
Council at Prage, in the year 1421, and there they compiled a Confession of
their faith. This cause did the said Archbishop, and many Barons of Bohemia,
afterward stiffely maintain, and complained against the Emperor Sigismund, for
offering wrong to those of their Religion. Ibidem.
Alexander also the Duke of Lituania, did give these Hussites aid, which moved
Pope Martin the fifth to write unto him in this sort: Know, that thou could
not give thy faith to Heretics, which are the violaters of the holy faith, and
that thou do sin deadly if thou shall keep it, because there cannot be
any fellowship of a Believer with an Infidel. Thus did the virtuous Pope
write. L 8. Scholare die caesis Pragens. vtri* tam sub vna quam sub ^ traque
communi^ca^ es specie habilitate etc. pr^supposita ad s^ cross crdine^
psomoueantar and ordine^tur.
In process of time there grew a parley between Sigismund the Emperor, and
the Bohemians. There among the Compacts, this was one, That the Bishop should
promote to holy Orders the Bohemians, even the Hussites, which were of the
University of Prage. And they might well deserve to be reputed University men:
for Cochleus himself witnesses, that the Priests of the Thaborites were
skilled in arguing, and exercised in the holy Scripture. L. 10.
Kakizana, one of them did undertake to dispute with Capistranus, a great and
learned Papist. By that time that the year 1453. was come, Aeneas: Syluius
does complain, that L. 11.
the kingdom of Bohemia was wholly governed by Heretics. Now all the
Nobility, all the Comminaltie is subject to an Heretic. That was one George
of Gyrziko, Governor of the kingdom of Bohemia, under King Ladislaus. But
when Ladislaus was dead, this L. 2. Georgius Girziko de Cunstat, and Podiebrat
quem Acneas Poggi siratium v^^^re solebat, vnctus est in Regem Bohemis, etc.
post, (...) vna defi^sset labes Hussititae sect^, in^er optimo^ reges haud
immerito commemorari possit.
George himself was by the Nobles, and people chosen King of that Country:
And continuing the ancient profession of his Religion, about the year 1458.
those of Vratislauia and Silesia do refuse to obey him, as being an Heretic.
Notwithstanding Pope Pius the second then intending wars against the Turk,
did by all means persuade them, that they should yield obedience unto him.
This George, says the Author, was borne and brought up in the heresy of the
Hussites. Now when Pope Pius did interpose himself as a Mediator between the
King and his subjects, George did require of the Pope, that he might keep the
Compacts agreed upon at Basil, in behalf of the Bohemians. And when Ibidem.
Pius would not yield thereunto, the King calls together the Estates of his
kingdom, and protests that he would live and die in those Compacts, and so
did also the nobles which were Hussites. This was done at Prage in the year
1462. This resolutenesse of his caused that Pope to tolerate many things in
him. But Paul 2, who succeeded in that See of Rome, did excommunicate that
King, and set up a Croisado against him. Also he gave to Matthias the King of
Hungary, the title of King of Bohemia. Apud Plat.
Onuphrius in the life of Paul the 2. says, that the Pope did excommunicate
him, and deprive him of his kingdom. Indeed for seven years this George and
Matthias did war for it, and Matthias got from him Morauia, and Silesia, and a
good part of the kingdom of Bohemia: Vratislauia also, and some other Provinces
and Cities did put themselves in subjection to Mathias. Yet did not George
deal hardly with the Papists which were in Prage; but in his greatest
extremity did use both the advice and aid of many Nobles of the popish belief.
At length, after the continuance of war for seven years, Mathias concludes
a peace with king George, both against the will of Cochl. l. 12.
the Pope, and the Emperor. And then this King was content to ask of the Pope
an absolution from the Excommunication, some Princes being mediators for him in
that respect. But before the Agents could return from Rome, the King died, in
the year of our Lord, 1471. By this Story it is manifest, that both noble and
learned of high account, were of that Christian Belief which John Hus taught,
and were contented to adventure al things which they had in the world for the
maintenance of the same.

Perhaps here it may be asked; Sect. II.
but how shall we know that John Hus and his followers did embrace that Religion
which is now professed in England? We find in Aeneas Syluius, some opinions of
theirs, which peradventure will scant be reputed current among all English
Protestants. He rehearses these four of theirs: Hist. Bohem. c. 50.
That they would receive the Sacraments in both kinds; that civil dominion is
inhibited to Clergy men; that Preaching of the Word was permitted to al men;
that publik crimes are in no sort to be tolerated. I answer, that truth it is,
that he there mentions only those; and whether he relates them truly or
no, it may be doubted, as anon I shall show, by laying open the custom of the
enemies of the Gospel, in misreporting their doctrine. But Ep. 130.
elsewhere he delivers other opinions of theirs, as against the Supremacy of
the Pope against Purgatory, against Invocation of Saints, and such like
matters. If we return to Cochleus, who was best acquainted with their matters,
we shall find much more. As thus, Coch. Hist. lib. 1.
Hus translated all the Books of Canonical Scripture into the Bohemian tongue,
and the people did most diligently read them. They would have the holy
Scriptures to be the only Judge in Controversies. They held, that all Bishops
and Priests are the Successors of the Apostles; that, not the Pope, but Christ
is the head of the Church, neither are the Cardinals the body, but all that
believe in Christ; that, that the Pope is not a member of the Church, but of
the Devil, and his Synagogue; that one Pope was a woman: yea, Hus did preach,
that the Pope is an abomination, and Antichrist. Also he calls the L. 2.
general Council at Constance, The Synagogue of Satan. Another of his
articles was, L. 3.
The Pope is the Beast in the Apocalypse. His Scholars after his death, L. 4.
brake down the Images in Churches and Monasteries: yea, L. 5. Zisca vno
impetu^ insignes ^asilicas, and am pla monasteria quae in bonorem beat^ Maria,
etc dedicata erant, disiecit tanquom non sit fas alteri, quam soli Deo
basilicas, a^t templa consecrare.
Zisca did cast down all the churches, which were dedicated to the virgin Mary,
or to any Saint; as if it were lawful only to build a Church to Almighty God.
In his time the professors began to be distinguished in two companies; the one
of the^ did not so much dissent from the Pope as the other: Those which in
fewer matters diffred from the Bishop of Rome, retained still the name of
Hussites; they which disagreed in more, were called Thaborites, of Thabor, the
city which Zisca built for them. And these were the greater number, and the
stronger. There is in Cochleus a confession of faith made by one Iohann.
Pezibram, a Bohemian, who was but a Hussite, and not well affected to the
Thaborites, because he accounted them as a kind of Precisians, or Puritans in
comparison of himself; yet this more mild man does wish and beg of God, to see
a reformation of the Church, that Artic. 57.
there might be redressed Symonies throughout all the world, most detestable,
most wicked, setting to sale of al Sacraments, most insatiable avarice, most
impudent fornications, most putrified uncleannesses, rottennesses most
abominable, Concubines keeping most polluted, manners most dissolute, most
corrupt gestures and behauiors, harlotry every where too too much multiplied in
the Clergy, wherewith alas the whole world lies corruptly filthy. Also the
Lucifer-like pride of the Clergy is exalted above God, their dainty and daily
banquets, their abundant riches, and rich abundance, their disquietnes most
litigious being the chief root of the quarrels of the world, their curiosity
most vain, their most unseemly pomp of apparel, their conversation most
Secularlike, their most open transgression of all the Commandments of God,
their most remiss care of souls, their most negligent regard of the word of
God. This he says for himself: but concerning the Thaborites, who indeed came
nearer to the purity of the Gospel, he witnesses of them, that they held,
Artic. 55.
that material bread does remain in the Sacrament; that the Saints now
triumphant are not to be called upon; that there is no purgatory; that no
suffrages or prayers are to be made for the dead. Also they allow not of the
holy days almost of all the Saints, nor of Eve or Vigils that go before them;
nor the consecrations of visible things, as salt, oil, holy water, Bells, and
such like. They have a schismatic celebration of their Masses, that is, a
several sort of Church-seruice, and refuse the most celebrious service of the
Church, and the rites and administrations of almost all the Sacraments. Let our
Papists now speak, whether they and we do not agree in the same doctrine
altogether. For I doubt not but they who had received so much grace from God,
as to see al these things, were also partakers of farther knowledge in the
mysteries of salvation.

While I have spoken thus largely concerning Sect. 12.
these good Christians in Bohemia, let not any man imagine that Christ's
faithful flock was restrained within the compass of that country, so that
godly men were else no where to be found. For certain it is, that between the
times of Io. Hus, who was burnt in the year 1415, and the first standing up of
M. Luther, Anno 1517.
were very many other who in that darkness did see what belonged unto the light
of the Gospel. Among these may be reckoned as very memorable the Waldenses; who
about the year 1508, do make an Respons. ad Doctor^m August.
answer in defense of themselves; and therein as they testify that then they
had Priests of their own: so they speak against Purgatory, and most openly
against Transubstantiation. The same touching Transubstantiation they do in a
Confession of VValdensium confessio in fasciculo rerum expetend. and fugiend.
theirs, where also they impugn Adoration of the Eucharist. There also they
name the Prelates Vnsauor^ Salt, and avouch that the execrabl^ naughtiness,
which was in them by the instinct of the Devil, did drive them away from the
Sea of Rome. For the Papists in their Sermons did call one another
Schismatics, Heretics, Sacrilegious false Prophets, ravening Wolves, the
Beast and Whore in the Revelation, Seiden. li. 16.
of these there were many in one part of France, who time out of mind had
refused to bear the yoke of the Pope, and therefore in the days of Frauncis
1. King of France, by a bloody decree of that King, but by the execution of one
Minerius a most cruel person; Merindol and Cabriers, with some other villages
about them, were sacked and destroyed, men, women, and children, being slain;
yea, diverse of them being stripped stark naked first, and then murdered, and
forty poor women being burned in a Ba^ne. I may add unto these many worthy
men here and there dispersed, whereof all cried out against the Church of Rome,
and desired a reformation, and many of them apprehended, and delivered to other
the true means of Justification, which is the nearest point of salvation. The
Luea^ Os^ander. lib. 1. c. 8.
Author of the 16 Century names about the year 1500, and somewhat after (but
yet before Luther) Baptista Mantuanus, and Franciseus Picus, Earl of
Mirandula, both which much inueighed agaiust the Clergy and their whole
practice. Also one Doctor Keiserspergius; another called John: Hilton; a third
named Doctor Andreas Proles, and Sauanorola, all groaning under the burden of
those times. The Oration ad Leo^^^ decimum.
Oration of Picus in the Counsel of Later an is extant; where besides his most
bitter taxing of the filthy behavior of the Clergy, he uses these words:
Piety is almost sunk into superstition. How Mantuan does every where pay the
Romanists, may appear to those who read his works. Calamitatum. 3
But one place of him I will name; -- Petrique domus polluta fluente
Marcessit Luxu, (nulla hic arcana reuelo
Nonignota loquor, liceat vulgata refer:
Sic Vrbes populique ferunt, ea fama per omnem
I am vetus Europam) mores extirpat honestos:
Sanctus ager scurris, venerabilis ara cynaedis
Seruit, honorandae Divum Ganymedibus aedes.
Quid miramur opes, recidiuaque surgere tecta?
Thuris odorati globulos and cinnama vendit
Mollis Arabs, Tyr^ vestes, venalia nobis
Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae
Ignis, Thura, Preces, Coelum est venale Deusque.


Some of them I English thus. Priests land now Iesters vile does serve,
the Altars Bawds maintain;
Of holy Churches of the Gods,
lewd Ganymeds make their gain.
Why do we wonder that their wealth,
and houses fallen do rise,
Sweet Frankincense and Cinnamon
are the only Merchandise
Of the Arabians; and but Clothes
the Tyrians use to sell:
But with us Churches, Altars,
Priests, yield money well.
Things hallowed, crowns, fire, frankincense,
the Prayers which we make;
Yea Heaven, yea God, are saleable,
if money we may take.


The opinions of Sauanorola against Popery are many; Guicciar ^. lib. 3.
and for them (howsoever it be otherwise colored) he was burnt. In the matter
of free In Ps. 52.
Justification he is clear. And the same is written also of Catalog. testi^^
veritatu, lib. 19.
Trithemius, another learned man, who lived at that time. How in England Christ
had in all these times Professors of the truth, I shall have occasion to show
anon, when I come to speak of John Wiclefe.

In the mean while I shall not do amiss to mention some other whowere between
the days of Io. Hus, and M. Luther. Sect. 13.
A special oppugner of the Papacy was the learned Laurentius Valla, a Roman
Patritian, and Canon of S. John of Later an there. He wrote a Co^^^ em^^titam
donatione^ Constable.
Treatise of purpose against the forged donation of Constantine. He prouounceth
of his own experience, That the Pope himself does make war against peaceable
people, and sows discord between Cities and Princes. The Pope does both
thirst after men's riches, and swalloweth up his own. He makes gain of not
only the Common wealth, but the Estate Ecclesiastical, and the holy Ghost. The
latter Popes do seem to labor this, that look how much the ancient Popes
were wise, and holy, so much they will be wicked and foolish. He lived about
the year 1420, and for the freeness of his speech and pen, was by the Pope
driven into exile. About the same time lived Archdeacon De ann^tis non
soluendis.
Nicholaus Clemang^is, who rebuked many things in the Ecclesiastical state,
and spoke excellently in the matter of general Councels, and their
circumstances, as hereafter may be declared. De Reform. Eccles.
Petrus de Aliaco, Cardinal of Cambray, gave a Tract to the Council of
Constance, touching the reformation of the Church. There does he reprove many
notable abuses of the Romanists, and gives advise how to repress them; cap. 3.
There should not be multiplied, says he, such variety of Images and pictures
in the Churches; there should not be so many holy days; there should not be so
many new Sts canonized; Apocryphal writings should not be read in the churches
on holy days; c. 4.
such numerosity and variety of religious persons not expedient; there are so
many Orders of begging Friars, that their state is burtheusome to men, hurtful
to hospitals, and to the poor; few do now study divinity, for the abuse of
the Church of Rome, who has despised Divines; all now turn to the law, and
arts of gain. He says, that it was then a proverb, The Church is come to
that estate, that it is not worthy to be ruled, but by reprobates. He has very
much more, and in the c. 6.
end concludes, That as there were 7000, who had not bowed to Baal: so it is
to be hoped there be some, which desire the reformation of the Church.
Imagine whether this Cardinal, if he had found company to have joined with
him, would not have said much more. In Hypocritas libellus.
About that time lived Leonardus Aretinus, whose little book against Hypocrites
is worth the reading. Oration od cleru^ Coloniensem.
So is the oration of Antonius Cornelius Eynni^hanus, laying open the lewd
lubric^^e of Priests in his days. So does he detect many abuses and errors,
who wrote The ten grieuances of Germany; December grauami. na Germaniae.
but those who compiled the hundred grieuances of the German nation, do
discover many more. Finally, he who list to see further, that God even in those
dead days, had diverse servants, who by more then a glimpse did see the truth,
and desired yet to be more plentifully instructed in religion, let him read the
Catologus testium veritatis, L. 19.
lately set out, and there he shall find diverse, whom I have not named.

By this time I trust it is manifest how Sect. 14.
falls a slander that of the Papists is, that before the days of M. Luther,
there was never any man of our religion. Til the time of the Council of
Constance, this case is cleared. And beyond that, it is as easy to show, that
I. Hus, and Hierom of Prage had their imediat antecessors in witnessing the
faith of Christ For they were instructed and much helped by the Books of Io.
Wiclif an English man; and therefore says Platina, as spectators of Wiclife,
In John 24.
they were condemned in the Council of Constance. AEneas Syluius shows the
means how those Bohemians came to know the doctrine of Wiclife, Histor. Bohem.
c. 35.
he says thus, He who first raised up the opinion of the Hussites, had them
from Oxford, carrying thence into Bohemia Wiclefs books de Realibus
Vniuersalib', Coehleus, who by his good will would be taken for a great
defender of Popery, gives yet a larger testimony; for he says, Hist. de
Huss^tis, lib. 1.
That as a Bohemian brought first into Bohemia Wiclefs books de Realibus Vniuer
salibus; so there was afterward one Peter Pain, a Scholar of Wiclefs, who
after the death of his Master came also into Scripsit mihi quida^ ex Anglia
Epis^ opus esse sibi ad^uc body duo maxima volum^a VVitlefi quae mol^ sua
videantur ^quari opera beati, August.
Bohemia, and brought with him Wiclef books, which were in quantity as great
as S. Austins works: many of these books did Hus afterward translate into their
mother tongue. In plain terms, after this the Author delivers it, That the
Hussites and Thaborites were branches of Wiclefe. L. 1. Hus forni ca^us est
spiritu aliter cum ali enigenis plurimis cum VViclefistis cum Dulcinistis, etc.
L 2.
And in the same book Hus did commit spiritual fornication with many strangers,
with Wiclefist the Dulcimist, etc. And in the next he avouches, that L. 3.
Hus and Hierom took their heresies from Wiclef. And once again he terms
the Protestant Germa^s L. 6.
new Wiclefists. What an opinion of this man I. Hus had, may be fully seen by
that wish of his, wherein he prayed, L. 2.
that he might there be where the soul of Wiclef was. Miser Hus optauit animam
sua^ fore ihi est anima VViclefi.
Now what Wiclef did teach, may be easily gathered, if by nothing else, yet by
the deadly hatred which the Romanistes did carry toward him. S^ss. 8.
The Council of Constance did define him to be an Heretic long after his
death, and commanded that his bones should be taken up and burnt. Also Pope
John 23. L. 2.
in a general Council at Rome, did before that time condemn him for an
heretic; which the Hussites did but laugh at: but no man had a harder conceit
of him then Cochl. who sticks not to affirm, that he thinks that Multa
g^autora ^^diderim esse VViclefi tbrmeta, qua^ ^uit apud infero^ vel scele
ratissim^rum hominum, Iudae prod^ o^s Christi and Neronus ^^irstianorum
persecu. ^^is, etc. L. 2.
the torments of Wiclefe are greater in hell, then those of Judas, or Nero. If
God almighty had no better opinion of him, the man were in an ill case. But
the best is, this choleric Critic is not the Judge of all the world. He was
angry belike, in behalf of Transubstantiation, concerning which he cites this
article of Wiclefe: There was never a greater heresy, then that which puts
the Accident without a Subject in the Eucharist. But he might have named more
points, wherein that holy man did differ from the Church of Rome. Sess. 8.
The Council of Consta^ce picketh out 45. articles of his Positions, which the
learned Reader may find there. Yet doubtless many of them are falsely reported,
which is a matter common with enemies of the truth, to pervert and misconster,
that so they may more freely defame. There was one Wilh. Wideford, Respons ad
18. Artic. VViclefi in f^^cic rerum expe^end.
who took on him to answer 18. articles said to be Wiclefs, whence a man may
gathersome of his doctrine. But that all things there said against him were not
true, may well be obserud out of the same answer, declaring that he had many
things concerning Wiclef; but only by a In fine Artic. 10. V^rg. Aen^ad.
fame and report, and that is not the most certain relater. What positions
indeed he held, may be seen in M. Fox, reporting his life and actions, as also
in Catalogo testium veritatis. L. 18.
And those who be not learned, may esteem of the^ by the doctrine of Io Hu^
before rehearsed, who by the testimony of the Papists themselves, as I have
showed, maintained the opinions of Wiclef.

Now that this worthy Champion Sect. 15.
and Preacher of the Gospel of Jesus Christ went not alone, but had many
English men and women, who in his life time, and after his death believed as he
believed, and professed as he professed, is in the next place to be showed.
Among the chief of his fautours, were John of Gant, Apolog* Hicra^c. c. 1.
(as Parsons the Jesuit confesses) and Lord Henry Percy; the one of them Duke
of Lancaster, the other Marshall of England. M. Fox cites out a Register of
the Archb. of Canterbury, Ex Regist. G. Courtney.
a Mandate that the Conclusions of Wiclefe were preached in diverse and sundry
places of the Archbishops Province, generally, commonly, and publicly. The
same also is manifested by a letter of the Archbishop to the Bishop of London;
and in a Monition directed to Oxford, Ad Cancel. Ox.
where it is said, that certain Conclusions heretical and erroneous were
generally and commonly preached and published in diverse places of the Province
of Canterbury. There be extant also Letters of king Richard 2. Ad Arthiepi^c
Cant. and Cancel. Ox.
directly signifying so much. But there is nothing which may more amply
testify the spreading of his doctrine, then an Act of Parliament in the
beginning almost of that young Kings days, Anno. 5. Rich. 2. c. 5.
where it is related, that there were diverse Preaching daily, not only in
Churches and Church-yardes, but also in markets, faires, and other open places,
where as great congregation of people is, diverse Sermons containing heresies,
and notorious errors.

This puts me in mind of a written book which once I saw, In manu magistri
Wirley.
being a Chronicle compiled by a Monk of Leicester Abbey; who, writing of the
time of the said King, reports at large, that the people in faires and
markets, and riding by the way, and almost every where, would talk of the
Scripture, and reprove the customs of that time, as also the Priests; to the
exceeding great trouble and offense of the Clergy. This they might the rather
do out of the Word of God, because the Scriptures were then translated into
English, as may be seen by diverse Copies written and remaining unto this
day, supposed to be so turned by Wicklef. And it is very probable, that in
Leicester shire there were many of those of whom the Monk Leicestrensis spoke,
since, at Lutterworth a Town in that County, John Wicklef was beneficed. But
the greatest part of this learned man's abode was at the first in the
University of Oxford, where he was both a Doctor and Reader in Divinity; and
therefore is to be conceived to have many learned men partaking with him in
his opinions. Master Fox says (out of the Chronicle of S. Albanes), In fine R.
Richard^ 3.
that he had a Benefice in Oxford; of which he was deprived by Simon Sudbury,
Archbishop of Canterbury. It may be, this was nothing else but the Mastership
or chief Governors place in Bailioll College; which I am persuaded that he
had, since there are yet two ancient Writings in the treasury of that College
(which I have seen), In Arch uis Coll^dg. Bali^l.
which were made in the name of John Wicklef, Master of that house, and that in
the days of King Richard the Second. But while he lived, he had so many
favorers in that University, as that Master Robert Rigges ViceChancelor, Vid.
10. Fox. in vit^ Wicklef.
and the two Proctors, took part with him; as also Nicholas Herford, Philip
Repington and John Ashton, Preachers and Batchelors of Divinity, and grew into
great question for his cause: where Repington in the end being Doctor, did
slip from him. Yea, so far was his doctrine there spread, A (...). Richara^^
2.
that Pope Gregory the Eleventh, in the year 1378, did direct his B^ll to the
University of Oxford against the Doctrine and Articles of that learned man,
even Rome it self ringing of his opinions in that University. Neither did his
Followers dye when he himself died. But long after that, Sub rege Hen. 4.
Pope Gregory the twelfth did direct down another Bull to Oxford against
Wicklef; in which he used the same words which his Predecessors had, that is to
say, that Wicklef did follow the doctrine of Marsilius of Padua, and of John of
Gandune of unworthy memory: Which speech is worth the marking; to show, that
this man also had his Predecessors. The Copy of this latter Bull is to be
seen in the L. 2. in literis Reg. Henrici 4.
Book which that worthy lover of Antiquities, Master Hare, gave to our
University: where also is to be seen in the Constitution of a Provincial
Council, celebrated at Oxford, a sharp Inquisition decreed by Thomas Arundel
Archbishop of Canterbury, against all, even the heads of Colleges and Halles,
and others suspected of Lollardy and Wicleuisme. They might well suppose, that
the Students of that place were entertainers of such doctrine, since about that
very time a testimonial was given in their Congregation house under seal, in
favor of John Wicklef: where these words are among other; Anno 1406. Octobr.
5. In operib. I. Hus.
God forbid, that our Prelates should have condemned a man of such honesty for
an Heretic. And yet in the Council of Constance he was condemned for such a
one, forty years after that he was dead and buried. But all would not serve to
extirpate his Books or memory out of our University: but even in the days of
King Edward the Fourth, Anno 1476.
there were new letters directed to the Governors of that place, by the King
himself, to make search for his Books, and to burn them. I have in my
custody a fair ancient Record of that University: which, by means of a good
friend, I have gained back to this place. And therein is a solemn Letter
directed from the Convocation of Doctors and Masters, to the King; te^tifying,
that according to their Soueraigns Commandment, they had with accurate
diligence searched out the Books and Tracts of Wicklef himself, and of
Reginald Pecock, and had burnt them. So much ado was it, and that in so long a
space, to suppress the head whereunto Wicklefs doctrine was grown in the
famous University of Oxford.

How elsewhere in this Kingdom, Sect. 16.
his positions were spread, may be easily collected out of Geffry Chaucer: who,
dying about the year 1400, may rightly be supposed to have lived while Ioh.
Wicklef lived. This Chaucer, who wanted neither wit nor learning, did at in a
Ploughmans tale.
large paint-out the pride, lascivious, vicious, and intolerable behauior of
the Pope, Cardinals and Clergy, even applying the name of Antichrist diverse
times unto the Roman Bishop, and saying, that There were many in those days
of the speakers mind; yea, finding fault with their faith, as well as with
their manners. The whole tale is well worth the reading: but I will cite only a
few verses. Peter was never so great a fool, The Apostle.

To leave his which Papists say, he has of heaven gate.
Key with such a as the Pope.
lorell,
Or take such cursed such a tool,
He was advised nothing well:
I trow they have the key of hell:
Their master is of that place Marshall:
For there they dressen hem to dwell,
And with false Lucifer there to fall:
They been as proud as Lucifer,
As angry, and as envious:
From good faith they been full far,
In couetize they been curious.
To catch cattaile, as covetous
As hound, that for hunger will yall:
Ungodly and ungracious
And needily such falshod shall fool fall.


This and a hundred times as much, he expresses in a simple plough man's
person; as evidently inferring, that the husbandman and meanest country body of
that time, by the reading and hearing of the Word of God, could tell what was
right and religious, and what otherwise; yea, and complain of the blindness,
and impiety of the Romanists in that age. But if we would be advertised, what
even Laymen in those times could do, let us look into the Declarations of
Walter Brute, who was in question for his opinion, before the Bishop of
Hereford, in the year 1393, and gave up a a little book, containing those
t^^ngs which he maintained. The true copy of that treatise is yet extant, Ex
registro Episcops Herefor^
and deserves to be read. There we may find these and the like positions:
that Bread remains in the Sacraments after Consecration; that The Pope is
Antichrist; that Nothing is to be believed, but what may be confirmed out of
the Scriptures; that The Pope is the Idol of desolation, sitting in the Temple
of God; that Antichrist is not to come of the Tribe of Dan, neither only to
reign three years and a half: that The City Apoc. 17, is Rome; that Our
Justification is freely by faith alone; that The doctrine of the Pope differs
from that of Christ; that Miracles are no assurance of truth; that Men are not
rashly to be reputed Saints; that The Pope has not power beyond other
Bishops, neither is the Head of the Church; that Papists mistake the keys of
binding and loosing; that Infants dying before Baptism, are not therefore
damned; that Auricular Confession is not prescribed in the Scripture; that The
Canon Law is ill grounded; that The Pope deceives men in his pardons; that
Absolution is to be sought at the hands of God only; that The Priests use
vain prayers in the Masses; that Exorcismes and holy water are unlawful; that
Priests do sin, who bargain to sing for the souls of men departed; that
Religious men and women are deuourers of widows houses; that Selling of orders
and dirges is naught; that The Pope is the beast with the two horns like the
Lamb, while he challenges the double sword; that He seeks to be worshipped
as God; that Dux Cleri does make up the number 666; that Worshipping of Images
is idolatry; that Temporal goods may be taken from the Clergy offending.
There was a great Papist, one William Wideford, whom before I mentioned, who
gives testimony to this Treatise of Brute, whom he calls Waltherus Britta
in Latin; Contra 18. articul. Wicklef. In articul. 11. and 12.
and writing against Wicklef, makes twice mention of a book of his own, sent
to the Bishop of Hereford (Dominum Erfordensem he calls him) in confutation
of the book of Walter Brute.

While I write these things, Sect. 17.
I cannot but think upon the audacious absurdnes of an ignorant popish Doctor;
who blusheth not to utter, that it is most manifest, that All in England were
Papists, without exception, from the first christening thereof, until this age
of King Henry the Eight. He is doubtless an honest man, and worthy to be
trusted on his word. It is not only manifest, but most manifest, not that the
greatest part, but all; yea, and because it shall not be scanted, all without
exception, were Papists, etc. Were John Wicklefs bones burnt, because he was a
Papist? And were the Bulls of the pope denounced against him for that cause?
And were the Archbishop Arundels constitutions against his Followers so
severe, because they were Papists? The man is to be pitied for his simplicity.
A man may know by the Laws, Proclamations, Letters and Proceedings by the
State, against some as against Heretics, as also by the records of Bishops yet
extant; and by the manifold executions and burnings afterward, that even in
that deep time of ignorance, England did give most noble testimony of Christ's
truth against Popery; even so far, as to the fiery trial. If the Christian
Reader peruse the Ecclesiastical History of Master Fox, he shall find, A^.
1400. sub Reg. He^. 4.
how before the Council, William Sawtree a Priest was burnt, and after him John
Badby; and that because they were Wickleuists or Lollards (as they then called
them), and not because they were Papists. There are the reasons also and
asseuerations of Puruey and Thorpe against Popery, with diverse other matters.
And is it not to be thought, Sub reg. Henry. 5.
that the Heretics increased, when a Synod was assembled in S. Paul's Church
at London, into the which came twelve Inquisitors, who in a former Synod were
appointed to sift and scan the writings of Wicklef, wherein they found 246.
Conclusions; all which they supposed to be heresy? But it is plain, that in
the first year of King Henry the Fifth, diverse were put to death as Lollards.
Afterward the Lord Cobham was hanged, for a show, as if he had been a kind
of Traitor: but he was then also burnt as a reputed Heretic. So was one John
Claydon, for his Conscience, consumed to ashes. Not long after the coming of
Henry the Sixth to the Kingdom, Sub. Hen. 6.
besides diverse which were questioned and much troubled about religion, Tailor
and White, two Priests, and Houeden a Citizen of London, were burnt: and some
other followed afterward. Neither did the days of King Edward the Fourth, and
of King Henry the Seventh, escape without the Martyrdom of sundry English,
yielding up their lives for Jesus Christ his sake, and for the profession of
the truth: The particular Stories of whom may be found in the Author
aboue-named. The Clergy of those times did bear much sway with their Princes,
and left no means unsought, no stone unturned, to keep up the dignity and
preeminence of their romish Hierarchy, and the superstitious Idolatry which
then was in use. Now, if in the Reign of all these Princes, so many were
slaughtered for the testimony of a good conscience, how many weak brethren
were there, who made not open profession of their faith? and how many did there
lie hid, diverse of them in probability having confederates, and some of them
being Priests, and therefore not unlikely to have learning both to confirm
themselves in the truth, and such others as heard them? Thus have I both in
England and elsewhere brought up the doctrine of the Gospel, until the time
of John Wicklef, who flourished in the year 1371.

Here it may please the Reader to Sect. 18.
remember, that the judgment (before cited) of two Popes, was, that Wicklef
taught the doctrine of Marsilius of Padua, and of John of G^^dune. Greg. 11.
Of the later Greg. 12.
of these there yet appears no monument written; Catal. testium ^esitatis..
l. 18.
but he joined in opinion with the former. But as for Marsilius Patauinus, our
Adversaries cannot but acknowledge him to be a very learned man, after the
measure of the age wherein he lived, which was in the year 1324. He wrote a
Book against the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome; Defensor pacis.
which argument he entered into, in behalf of the Emperor Jews of Bauiere,
who was mightily layd-at by three Popes successively. There the Author
auoweth, as right and just, the supreme authority of the Emperor, displaying
the iniquity of the Popes usurpation over Christian Princes, and general
Councels: The book is worth the reading, to see Whether all in times past did
allow of the Popes doctrine and proceedings; or not: his opinions are these; I
that The Pope is not superior to other Bishops, and much less to the Emperor
and civil Magistrates; 2 that Things are to be decided by the Scripture; 3
that Learned men of the Laity have voices in Councels; 4 that The Clergy and
Pope himself are to be subject to Magistrates; 5 that The Church is the whole
company of the faithful; 6 that Christ is the foundation and Head of the
Church; and appointed no one to be his Vicar; 7 that priests may be married; 8
that Saint Peter was never at Rome; 9 that The Popish Synagogue is a den of
thieves; 10 that The Doctrine of the Pope is not to be followed, because it
leads to everlasting destruction. In the time of this Marsilius, lived the
noble Poet ^^ente, who wrote also a book against the pope, concerning the
Monarchy of the Emperor: Petrus Messiah in Ludo^^co.
but, for taking part with Jews Bauiere, he was condemned for an Heretic, and
his book as heretical. Then also wrote Occam directly to the same purpose:
Catalogus ^estium verit^^^. l. 18.
but for his labor therein, and his large reproof of the Papacy in other
points, he was excommunicated by the Roman Bishop: which he so much
contemned, that he not unwillingly dyed under that Sentence. About that time
were here and there dispersed sundry godly men, who saw more than the common
sort touching religion; Ibid. ex. Hen. de Erford.
as Hayabalus a Minorite, who frequently said in his Sermons, that The Church
of Rome was the whore of Babylon, and that the Pope and his Cardinals were
mere Antichrists: which propositions were held somewhat before also by
Gerhardus and Dulcinus, two learned men. This Dulcinus may be thought to have
many followers, since Cochleus could say, Histor. Hussit. l. 2.
that John Hus committed spiritual fornication with the Wickleuists and with
the Dulcinists. The same opinions concerning the Pope and Rome, did that rare
man, Franciscus Petrarcha, Epis. 20. et in poe^i italic^.
seem fully to embrace, as may appear to any who will read his works,
howsoever Cardinal Bellarmine labor to make the world believe otherwise, In
appendice ad libros de Romans pontifice. c. 20.
being desirous to have us think, that Petrarch spoke not against the Pope,
but some abuses in the Court of Rome. And to make it plain, that it was not a
slight conceit, or only in a few, that The Pope was Antichrist, and Rome was
Babylon, Apo. 17. God stird up yet more in that age, who proclaimed the same
matter; Genebrard, Chron. l. 4. Anno 1327.
as, Petrus Johannes Biraensis, or Piranensis, who was a Minorite; and for
teaching so, was dug up after that he was dead; and his body, after the
Sentence of Clement the Sixth, was burnt. A few years after him, Catal. ^estium
veritatis. l. 18.
did Johannes de Rupe-sciss^, a Monk, teach the same doctrine; which, as every
man may guess, does ruinate the Papacy in every respect. Academ. les. Christ.
Clas. 15
Johannes Gerson came not so far, but saw in his age many horrible abuses of
the Church of Rome, and in his writing spoke liberally of it. And it did bite
deep, when he disputed, that the Pope might be taken away safely from the
Church, De auseribilitate Pap^ ab ecclesia.
and yet no danger follow of it. But let us now go a little higher.

I mentioned before, Sect. 19.
how Cochleus says, that John. H^s took his doctrine from the Wickleuists and
the Dulcinists. Hear, I pray you, what he says: Hus did commit spiritual
fornication with many aliens; with the Wickleuists, the Dulcinists, with the
Leonists, the Waldenses, the Albingenses, and other of that sort, enemies of
the Church of Rome. These Leonists or poor-men of Lions, and Waldenses, and
Albingenses, were the same men, but diversely, on diverse occasions, termed by
the Roman Synagogue which hated them. Their opinion then did Hus maintain.
Hist. Bohem. c. 35.
AEneas Syluius does also witness the same; affirming, that the Hussites did
embrace the opinions of the Waldenses. There you may see, that their doctrine
was against the Primacy of the Pope, Purgatory, and such like matters.
Genebrard, Chron. l. 4.
who says, that these Waldenses began, Anno 1170. or, as some other will,
1218. rehearses out of Syluius these opinions of theirs; that Prayers for the
dead, and Purgatory fire, are an invention of the Priests covetousness; that
Holy Images are to be defaced; that Confirmation and Extreme Unction are no
Sacraments; that Auricular Confession is a trifling thing. He who list, may
see a great many more of their positions agreeing with the doctrine which we
teach: which may well also be gathered from the Jesuits themselves. Catal.
testium veritatis. l. 15. In Pr^sat. general. Controuers.
For, that is the cause that Bellarmine joins these together as Heretics;
the Berengarians, the Petrobrusians, the Waldenses, the Albingenses, the
Wickleuists, the Hussites, the Lutherans, etc. And Jews Richcome, another of
that Society, L. 1. c. 19.
in his defense of the Mass against the Lord Plessis, says, that The
Ministers, for the confirming of their figurative sense in This is my body,
have none for their Doctors, for their Ancients, for their Fathers, but
Berengarius, Zuinglius, Calvin, Carolastadius, Wicklef, the Albingenses, the
Waldenses. These Waldenses then and Albingenses are ours, by the confession of
our Adversaries; and of these long agone there were no small company. For, as
Du Haillan, Hist. l. 12.
in the life of Philip the Third, King of France, speaks; being driven from
Lions in France, they withdrew themselves into Lombardy: where they so
multiplied, that their doctrine began to spread through Italy, and came as
far as Sicily. As the same Author writes, L. 9.
Philippus Augustus came to his Kingdom, Anno 1180. which is now more then
four hundred years since: and in his time it was, that the Albingenses did so
increase in France, that the Pope and Princes adjoining were afraid of their
number. He who reads the Story of them, shall see that they are reported to
have held many gross, wicked, and absurd opinions mingled with their true
Doctrine. But Du Haillan the best and judicious Chronicler of France, and no
partial witness in our behalf (since his profession touching Religion, was
such, that he was employed to write that Story by King Henry the third), had
not so little wit, but that he perceived those imputations to be laid on them
in odium, and of purpose to procure their defamation. See how wisely he
speaks truth and his conscience; and yet so coucheth it, that his fellows
might not be justly offended at his words. Although, says he, L. 10.
these Albingenses had evil opinions, yet so it is, that these did not stir up
the hate of the Pope and of great Princes against them so much, as their
liberty of speech did, wherewith they used to blame the vices and
dissoluteness of the said Princes and of the Clergy, yea, to tax the vices
and actions of the Popes. This was the principal point which brought them into
universal hatred, and which charged them with more evil opinions then they
had. Now first, that they were not men infamous, either for their vile opinions
or filthy conversation; and secondly, that they were not only base and poor
people, it is evident by this, that so many noble and worthy men took part with
them, yea, to the aduenturing of their lives in their company, and for their
behalf; as the Counts or Earls of Toulouse, Ibid.
of Coninges, of Bigorr, of Carmain, yea, the King of Arragon. And when
Raymund, the Earl of Toulouse, was for his belief excommunicated by the Pope,
and a Croisado was proclaimed against him and the Albingenses, as if they had
been Saracens or Infidels, not only the Counties of Foix and Coninges came
with all their strength to assist Raymund, but Alphonsus, the King of Arragon,
came in his own person to his succor, as being his kinsman and his friend.
And when all these were met together; the report is, says Du Haillan, that the
Army of these Heretics did consist of about the number of one hundred
thousand fighting men. These things being thus discovered by men of your own
part; be ashamed, you Papists, and blush to spread among your simple and
credulous Followers, that never men did as we do, nor believed as we believe,
before Luther's time; but that all Christendom formerly liked of the
papisticall doctrine and proceedings. But because you shall hear one testimony
further touching these Albingenses and Waldenses, how honest and truly
religious they were, I will cite what one Reinerius, a man who did hate them,
and was (as it is supposed) an Inquisitor against them, reported concerning
them, now 300 years ago, or thereabout. Thus then, among much other matter, he
says of them: There were many Sects of Heretics long ago: among all which
Sects that are or were, there is not one more pernicious to the Church of God,
than that of the poor men of Lions, for three causes. First, because it is of
longer continuance: some say, that it has endured from the time of Syluester:
others say, that from the time of the Apostles. The second is, because it is
more general: for, there is almost no Land into which this Sect does not
creep. The third, that whereas all other, by the immanity of their blasphemies
against God, do make men abhor them; this of the Lyonists, having a great
show of godliness, because they do live justly before men, and do believe
all things well of God, and all the Articles which are contained in the Creed,
only the Church of Rome they do blaspheme and hate: which the multitude is
easy to believe. And as Sampson' s Foxes had their faces several ways, but
their tails tied one to another: so Heretics are diverse in Sects among
themselves, but in the impugning of the Church they are united. There can
hardly be found a more honorable testimony out of the mouth or pen of a
bitter and bloody Adversary as he was, who wrote this and much more concerning
those good servants of God. We shall not need to ascend any higher, since he
gives witness of the antiquity of their profession long before his time: which
otherwise to make plain, is as easy, as to deliver that which hitherto I have
spoken. And it is not to be conceived, Mat. Paris i^ Guliel. co^quaest.
that Petrus Waldo (of whom the Waldenses took their name at Lions) had his
doctrine from no body, but that of himself he attained to his own knowledge,
since he was not deeply learned. Berengarius indeed was only called in
question for denying Transubstantiation in the Sacrament; but it may well be
thought, that in something else he dissented from the Church of Rome: and
albeit by his own weakness, and the importunity of the Clergy, Contin. hist.
de gestis Anglor. lib. 3. cap. 7.
he yielded once or twice to recant and abjure the true doctrine which he
held, yet he had many scholars, who by his example would not be driven from
the right belief which they had apprehended. These scholars were in France in
great numbers, Malmis. l. 3.
and in diverse other lands: and Genebrard cannot conceal it, but that about
the year of our Lord 1088, Chron. l. 4.
Basilius the Monk did set on foot again the error of Berengarius. And might
not the doctrine of both these be sucked from Bertram, who wrote so learnedly
and so directly out of the Scriptures and Fathers against the real presence
and Transubstantiation, Index in Bertram resp. ad Dan. Til^s. fol. 158.
that the Index expurgatorius cannot tell what to make of him? But the Bishop of
Eureux, under the name of Henry Constable, terms him The great forerunner
of all the Sacramentaries: La. saint. Mess^ de clar. l. 2.
and Richcome the Jesuit disclaimeth him plainly as a Sacramentarie Heretic.
Then Calvin and Zuinglius were not the first who gainsaid transubstantiation.
Before our ascending thus high, we might tell you of Saint Bernard: whom
although it is likely, at the first dash, you will challenge as your own; yet,
when you have well advised on him, you may let him go again: for, albeit he
had his errors, which he sucked from the age wherein he lived, and we may not
in all things subscribe to his judgment, but say of him, as commonly it is
spoken, Bernardus non vidit omnia; yet we find in him saniorem partem, a
liberal profession of many good and sound points agreeable to the Gospel.
He, for a fashion, De consider. ad Eug^n. l. 2. 8.
acknowledges many matters to be in the Pope, and gives him greater titles
than any Papist can justify; but it is, by such insinuation, to win him more
attention from Eugenius: and then, having procured liberty, or rather taken it
to himself, he schooleth and lessoneth the Pope plainly; showing, that he liked
not of their ordinary courses, neither did he repute him to have that
preeminence or prerogative which his Parasites did allow him. But, touching the
matter of merit by good works, Ser. 61. in Cant. ep. 190. de great. and lib.
arbitrio. Ser. 1. de septem misericordi^s.
for justification alone by Christ, of free will, for certain assurance of
salvation in the death and by the strength of our Savior, and for disliking
then the vile life of the Clergy, how clear, how learned, how copious is he!
These things we teach together with him; and, notwithstanding his other slips,
we doubt not but his soul does rest with the Lord, God pardoning unto him his
errors and his ignorances; which he, being carried with the stream of that
Time; did never discuss, but took them as they were delivered to him, without
scanning or examining. And to this good hope we are firmly induced by that
Saying of Saint Paul; 1 Cor. 3. 11
Other Foundation can no man lay, but that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ: and if any man build on this Foundation, gold, silver, precious stones,
timber, hay or stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest: for, the day
shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try
every man's work of what sort it is. If any man's work that he has built-vpon,
abide, he shall receive wages: if any man's workburn, he shall lose, but he
shall be safe himself. He held the Foundation of justification only by faith
in Christ; Degrat. and libero arbit^io.
and that our best deeds are but via Regni, non causa regnandi; the way to the
Kingdom, not the cause of reigning: and for that cause, we doubt not but his
soul is safe, though his hay and stubble of praying to Saints, and such other
stuff as cannot endure the fire of the holy Ghost's trial, do burn and
consume. And this is our judgment touching many other both before and after
the time of Saint Bernard; that, holding Christ the Foundation aright, and
groaning under the heavy burden of humane traditions, satisfaction, and other
popish trash, they, by a general repentance from their errors and lapses
known and unknown, and by an assured faith in their Savior, did find favor
with the Lord. Such as these were we hold to be God's good servants, to be of
the number of the Elect; and, propter sanioren et meliorem partem, for their
sounder and better part, to be of that Church, whereof we are to be members;
of that body, whereof (by the grace of Christ) we are a portion.

And in this respect our settled and Sect. 21.
resolved judgment is, that when it is asked, Where our Church in former Ages
was; we may, besides that which we have formerly answered, truly say, that it
was in England, in France, in Spain, John ^. 8.
in Italy, yea, in Rome it self: Spiritus vbi vult spirat, the holy Ghost
breaths where it pleases: for who cannot conceive by the writings of many in
former Ages, or by such touches as others do give concerning them, that
diverse, who lived nearest the Whore of Babylon, did most detest her
abomination; and, finding that the weakness and impurity of her doctrine could
not truly satisfy the hungry and thirsty soul, did, according to that
knowledge which Christ out of his Word revealed unto them, seek some means
which was not ordinarily professed in that Time? And if it be asked, Who they
were, and how they could lie hid from the world? It may truly be answered, that
their case was like the case of them in the days of Elias, who were not known
to that State which would have persecuted 1 Kings 19. 18
them. Now, why should not we think, but as God had his secret and invisible
company at that time, in that most idolatrous Country: so, in the time of the
deepest darkness, he had those which saw light; his Christian Children, among
Antichrists Brood; such as embraced true Religion; among the superstitious? So
that Italy, and Rome, and these Western parts, had some of Gods Saints in all
Ages, who, like Seafish, most fresh in the salt water, and being removed in
their affections, though not in their persons, 2. Pet. 2. 8.
did with Lot vex their righteous souls in the midst of a spiritual Sodom,
Iam. 1. 27.
and kept themselves unspotted of the world. And yet it is not to be taken,
that we coarctate the Church within those Provinces only which looked toward
the Sea of Rome; but know, that God had thousands of his Elect elsewhere.
Christians have bin in India, Os^rius l. 3. degestis Eman^el. Li. 9. Dam* a
Goes. de mori^. Ae^^i^^um.
even by perpetual descent, from the days of the Apostles; and so in Africa
among the Abissines, in infinite and huge companies; besides such as have
continued in Armenia, Asia the lesser, Egypt, but especially in the Greek
Church, which was never so much as in show extinguished; and from whom the
Russians and Muscouites had their Faith. Our Popish Lads would gladly shut all
these out of Christ's Fold, because they acknowledge not the Bishop of Rome for
their Universal Pastor: but we should do wrong to Almighty God, to pin his
judgment upon the Popes sleeue, and to offer to pull from him so many ample
Churches; whereas charity and common sense might put us in mind, that he might
there have thousands throughout all Ages. Look to these places, ye Papists,
and imagine, that if there had been none but these; yet the words of the
Scripture, which in generality speak of a Spouse, had been true: and Christ
had there had his body on earth, and the Church had not been utterly
extinguished, if neither we nor the Synagogue of Rome had been extant.

But in as much as it cannot be denied, Sect. 22.
but that the prophesies concerning Antichrist, do most touch the Western
world, Rome being by the holy Ghost evidently designed to be the seat of the
Whore of Babylon, Apoc. 17. 18.
as also because our Romish Standard-bearers are more willing to talk of those
parts then of any other, I will once return again to the Countries near
adjoining. Then, in some parts of Christendom, how many men were there in all
ages, who loathed both the Sea of Rome, and the whole courses of it, as the
Israelites did loath the Egyptians bondage? In Hen. 3.
Matthew Paris alone gives as many notable experiments that way, as relating
the Acts of the Emperor Frederick, who put out diverse declarations in
detestation of the Pope; and adding elsewhere, further of his own, Ibidem.
that Pope Gregory did absolve from the oath of fealty, all who were bound unto
the Emperor; persuading them, that they should be faithful in unfaithfulness,
obedient in disobedience. But so much deserved the Roman Churches lewdness,
which is to be execrated of all men, that the Popes authority did merit to be
harkened unto by few or none. He reports also of a certain Carthusian Monk at
Cambridge, Ibidem.
who cried out against the Pope, and said, that He was an Heretic, and that
the Churches were profaned; and of Robert Grosthead, Bishop of Lincoln, who
was a man both holy and learned in his time. This Lincolniensis, while he
lived, had many combats with the Bishop of Rome, and openly resisted his
barbarous tyranny in domineering so far in England, as to enjoin provision
of the best Benefices to be taken up for Italian Boys; which for a Prebend in
his Church of Lincoln, he would not yield unto; and for that cause was by the
Pope excommunicated. Lincoln. Epist.
But when he was dying, Math^^ Paris in H. ^. 3.
he most bitterly inueighed against the Roman Bishop and the Ecclesiastical
persons, as the most wicked men that did live. In the same Author you may also
find the conceit which the most reverend Archbishop of York, Sewaldus, Ibidem.
had of them and their proceedings. What should I mention Ioachim, Houede^ in
part 2.
who said, that in his time Antichrist was already born, and was in the City of
Rome? or that Bishop of Florence, who lived about the year 1100, Pla^in. in
Paschael. 1.
and did use to say, that Antichrist was then in the world? Which moved Pope
Paschalis so much, as that he thought fit to enquire of him in a Council, and
did there castigate him for it. Notable in this kind are the Contentions of
Philippus Pulcher* the King of France, Pap. Mas. on in Bo^. 2.
and his whole Clergy, against Boniface the Eightth. I might add to these,
Petrus de Brus, and many other learned men, who laid the Axe to the very Root
of Popery, and some in set Treatises oppugned one of their documents, and some
assaulted other; but that the Writer of the Catalogus testium veritatis, as it
is lately enlarged, and Master Fox, and Master Bale, and diverse other, have
largely handled this* to the reading of whose Books, In Histo^. Eccle. sias.
in catal. script. Brit. L^ur. Humsr. I^suit^sm. part.
I do refer them who in particular desire to be more advertised in this
behalf. Now, if these things do appear much by their own witness, and by
the confession of Papists themselves, as also by such few Records, as (by Gods
providence so disposing) do yet remain; how many illustrious arguments might
there have been of the Confession of our faith, if the Clergy and Magistracy
of those dark times had not burned and suppressed all things which made
against them, as I showed before, touching the Books of John Wickles and
Reinald Pecock in Oxford? The Clergy in those days did almost rule all: and
they had the custody of all Libraries, to ransack at their pleasure, or to put
in and pull out: and they had power to search poor men's houses, and to destroy
what was thought fit by them to be destroyed. But God, who would not have his
truth utterly burned or buried in ashes, suffered a remnant to remain, yea, and
that in England; albeit Potydor Virgil, with an Italian trick of his own, did
here consume and destroy many worthy and ancient Monuments.

By this time, Sect. 23.
I may well suppose, that some vehement Papist is even ready to swell, with his
belly full of exceptions against these things here said. And first he will
begin and say, that we rake together, as the Ancestors and forerunners of our
faith, such as were notorious Heretics; as Wicklef, or Hus, or the Waldenses,
men condemned by Popes or general Councels: and Heretics, R^^ion. 10.
as Campian tells us, are the dregs, and the bellows, and the fuel of
hell. These, as our Papists commonly say, are already firebrarnds of hell, and
frying there in flames. It is no rare matter with the Synagogue of Rome, to
pronounce such Sentences as these are. Our Rhemists, by their Consistoriall or
Imperial Decree, have defined, that Calvin and Verone are not only Heretics,
but Reprobates, for writing so as they have done, touching the Article of
Predestination: In Romans 11. 33.
Yea, they call Master Beza, a Reprobare also, although he were then alive,
and long after too; how ^oeuer the Jesuits some few years since, Ann^ 159^.
did, by a most ridiculous pamphlet or other news, spread it in France and
Italy, Vid. Epist. Beza ad Stuckium.
that he was then dead, and that dying had recanted his Religion, and was
returned to the Romish faith; which also Geneua did by his example. It is no
news with Jesuits to lie, and therefore Master Beza must bear with them; and
so had he need to do with the Rhemists also, who got hastily into Gods
Chair, and there concluded him to be a Reprobate. But indeed these good
Christians before-named, of whom many lost their lives for the maintenance of
Gods truth, were Heretics in such a manner, as Christ was said to be a
blasphemer; who indeed was both called so, Mat. 26. 65.
and condemned to be such a one, by the counsel of the high Priests, Scribes
and Rulers of the Synagogue. We do not believe, that a^l those are Heretics,
whom your Papists will so call or account: for, you give us that name, which,
maugre your malice, you shall never be able to prove against us. They are
truly orthodox and right Catholics, who teach nothing but that whereof they
have evident warrant out of the Word of God. And this we have, as has been
often showed by men of our side, and in that question we are ready at all times
to iump with you, for any part or all the Doctrine we profess. With Saint
Paul therefore we say, Acts 24. 14*
that, After the way that you call heresy, so worship we the God of our
Fathers. The same which you maliciously and pres^mptuously term schism and
heresy, is that, whereupon, under our blessed Savior, we rest our souls;
and by the Confession thereof, we hope to be saved in the day of the general
Judgment. Do not you therefore take that for granted, which is so highly
questioned betwixt us and you; but rather, if you can prove our Prof^ssion to
be heretical, by Gods grace we shall not shrink at any of your biggest
objections.

Yea, but say you further, Sect. 24.
The Writers which make mention of these your Predecessors, do brand them with
the holding of some most gross and damnable doctrine, which you your selves
will not avouch. My answer is, that we our selves do easily believe so much:
for, did malice, I pray you, Acts 16. 20. and 17. 7. 2 Cor. 12. 16 Eus. ^ccl^.
hist. l. 4. 7.
ever say well? The Apostles were at more times, and in more places than one,
charged with many accusations; which yet, in truth, were but calumniations: The
old Christians in the Primitive Church were slandered, to use incestuous
company each with other, like Oedipus, and to eat up man's flesh at the banquet
of Thyestes; yea, their own L. 5. 1.
servants for fear were induced to lay such matters to their charge. Socrat. 1.
20. Theod. eccl. hist. l. 1. 30.
Athanasius was accused to have cut off ones hand: and a harlot to his face
would have calumniated him to have committed fornication with her. This
practice was never more liberally frequented, than by the enemies of the
Gospel in the late days of Popery. You may remember what I cited before out
of Du Haillan, concerning matters falsely objected to the Albingenses. There is
extant an excursitory Oration of the Waldenses; Infasciculo rer^ expetend.
wherein they say, that, for that their faith which they were ready to
justify, they were condemned, judged, captiuated, and afflicted; and afterward
that they were called Heretics: but in their Confession they have it directly;
Conses. Walden.
Of these criminations whereof we are blamed of tentimes, we are nothing at all
guilty. The Pope and his Chaplains were fell and furious against them, because
they did bite so near: and therefore, to disgrace them both in present and to
posterity, they held it fit, that by speech, preaching and writing, it should
be divulgated, that they taught monstrous blasphemies; that by that means the
credulous people might be preiudicate; and so not only frighted from harkening
to them, but be much the readier to join in the prosecution of them to prison
and to death. But what they indeed held, is declared before. When John Hus was
at the Council of Constance, he did openly call God to witness, that He did
neither preach nor teach those Cocleus histor. Hussit. l. 2. Cum articulos
istos nunquam tenuerim quos falsi te^^es c^^ra me (...), se^^^ont aria
tenuer^m, ^oc^erim, (...)rimque, (...) praedicau^rim, etc.
things which his Adversaries did object against him, neither that they ever
came into his mind. Neither is it to be marvelled, that they did load his
scholars with the like false accusations, when their malice was such toward
them, as that they burnt many thousands of them in Barnes: which was done by
the treachery of one Mainardus. L. 8.
In other places the Romanists have still held the same course of slandering:
which caused the Protestants to profess in the Diet at Augusta,
Sl^idencomment. l. 8.
that Diverse opinions were falsely reported up and down, which wrongfully were
fathered on them; and that those were not only estranged from the holy
Scriptures, but that they were abhorrent even from common sense. And is it not
probable, that long since, when much darkness did cover the face of the earth,
that few had grace to perceive their doings, and fewer had authority to
question their doctrine, the Pope-holy Clergy, which hated the true gospellers
with all their hearts, would pay them with vile and odious reports; when in this
Age, wherein God has affoorded more plentiful means to discover their
false-hoods, they do dare, not only in their Sermons, or in their secreter
whisperings, but in their printed books, to proclaim abroad concerning us, most
false and ungodly calumniations and imputations; as, that we do teach all
looseness of life and libertinisme by this our new Gospel; that we maintain,
that All sins are equal; that we hold it as a Maxim, that God is the Author
of sin; and whatsoever it pleases Master Campian and his Fellows to invent
and devise touching us: whereas we utterly disclaim these and the like
positions, as execrable and ungodly; yea, that Mounti-bank, which once before I
mentioned, has not blushed to asseuere, that we so teach, as that by our
doctrine the Protestants Certain Articles or forcible rea^ons at Antwerp, 1600
are bound in conscience, never to ask God forgiveness of their sins; and
that They are bound in conscience to avoid all good works; as also, that We
make God the only cause of sins; and hold, that God is worse than the devil.
So shameless was this fellow grown, that he neither knows nor cares what
he says: and yet many a poor Papist, abused and gulled by the devils
deceiving instruments, does swallow such Gudgeons, and runs away with these
things; being as verily persuaded of them, as that the gospel is true. Such a
hand the seminary Priests have over their disciples, that they may not read our
Books, to see whether these objections be true or no; neither may they hear
ought to the contrary. Now, if they thus use us, who can speak for our selves;
will any man marvel, that those who professed the Verity two or three hundred
years since, do taste of the malignant aspersions of those Times?

The Romanists, Sect. 25.
notwithstanding all this which has been said, do not yet so leave us; but
once more further add, that none of all those which hitherto have been named,
or can be named, but in some known, consessed, and undoubted opinions, did
vary from you: and therefore they and you may not be said to be all of one
Church. Our Masters of Rhemes do think, that this lies hardly upon us: and
therefore thus vauntingly they urge; In Rom 11. 4.
that They will not put the Protestants to prove, that there were 7000 of
their Sect, when their new Elias Luther began: but let them prove, that there
were seven, or any one, either then, or in all ages before him, that was in all
points of his belief. What the old Fathers taught, we may have time hereafter
to show: but for other of later time, it is most easy to manifest, that all
those whom before I have named, did generally, for all main matters, teach the
same that we now do teach. There is no Papist, who can truly, and without
calumniating them, or faining things upon them, demonstrate, that in causes
which touch the substance of faith, or the foundation of Christian Religion,
they did dissent from us. He that will try this, let him look on the
Declaration of Walther Brute, In Fox eccles. Story.
which I before mentioned; and let him read it set down by himself, and not
reported by other. And what did that learned Layman deliver there, which was
not the belief of Wicklef, and the rest of the English, professing the Gospel
in those Times? But if there be, in some petty matters, yea, questions of some
reasonable moment, difference of opinion between them and us, shall we not
therefore be of the same Church with them, or they with us? Yes verily: for,
otherwise many of the ancient Fathers should not be of the Communion of
Saints, or Catholic Congregation, with those who came after them, and amended
their errors: for, Divine. ^istitut. l. 7. c. 14. Aug. Ep^st. 48.
was not Lactantius spotted with the Millenary infection? and Cyprian with the
matter of re-baptizing? Had not Austen an opinion of the necessity of the
Eucharist to be administered to children; Ep. 106. and 28
and that infants, being dead without Baptism, were not only deprived of the
fruition of heavenly ioies, but were damned to the pit of hell, and to
everlasting torments? And what man, religiously affected, will suspect, Con^.
Carth. in Cyp. oper.
but that although S. Cyprian and the other African Bishops, assembled in a
Council, did, concerning the new baptizing of those who were already baptized
by Heretics, determine clean contrary to Cornelius and the rest of the Italian
Bishops, yet they should not be of the same faith in general, and of the same
holy Church whereof Cornelius was? Saint Austen can thus write concerning
Cyprian: Whereas that holy man Cyprian ( thinking De bapt. cont. Donatis.
otherwise of Baptism then the matter was which was afterward handled, L. 1.
and with most diligent consideration established) did remain in the Catholic
Unity; both by the plentifulnesse of his charity, a recompense was made; and by
the sickle of his suffering, L. 2.
there was a purging. In another place he says, The authority of Cyprian does
not terrify me, but the humility of Cyprian does refresh me. He means, that
if that worthy man had lived to have seen more light in that argument, or to
behold what the succeeding time had revealed and concluded in that behalf, he
would, in great humility and meeknes of heart, have conformed himself, and
yielded unto it: which may justly seem for a true defense of the Waldenses,
Io. Wicklef, John Hus, or any other servant of God, who might seem, in matters
of small moment, to vary from us.

And thus I trust, Sect. 26.
that by this time it appears to every one who will not wilfully cloze his
eyes, and stop his ears against an apparent truth, that God has at all times
had his Children holding the verity of Christian Religion, and not approouing
of the filthy Superstitions and sacrilegious Idolatries of the abominable
Antichrist of Rome: So that it is a most fond collection, that either the
Popish Convocation or Confusion are the right and undoubted Spouse of Jesus
Christ; or else, that for one thousand years together there was no Church in
the world. They dote much upon themselves, and on the opinion of their beauty,
who, in such intolerable deformities, do predicate and magnify their
Synagogue, as the unspotted wife and mystical body of our most blessed
Savior. Truth it is, that, intending to blind the ignorant, and to abuse the
simple, they labored, by all external pomp and show, to give to their
hypocrisy and outward formality a settled opinion of piety and sanctity: and
for that cause, there was no corner of the brain of man, or rather of men, in
many Ages succeeding together, unsought, to procure glory to that which in it
self was very vnglorious. Their care therefore was, to convert the eyes of all
persons on their external hue, which was maruellously adorned and garnished to
the sense with their Crosses set up or carried before some Prefat. catal.
testium veritat.
Prelates, with the triple Crown of their Popes, in the red Hats of their
Cardinals, the precious attire of some in their Churches, their prodigious
apparel abroad, the diverse color'd Couls of their Monks, such singing and
chanting with Organes, such ringing of Bells, such trimming of Images, and many
more such sensible matters, as that neither the Jews nor the Gentiles had the
like. And among all this, if true Religion in diverse were present, it is not to
be marvelled at, if she were scant seen, or if no notice were taken of her
for her poor, and untrimmed, or ungarnished hue, for her naked simplicity, and
unpainted integrity. It was the commendation given to Salomons Beloved, by whom
the Church is represented, Psalm. 45. 13.
that the Kings daughter is all glorious within; her beauty consisting of
purity in faith, verity in doctrine, seuereness in behavior, innocence,
patience, and such like spiritual complements. And these are as much contemned
in others, by the Antichristian Rabble, as they are neglected in themselves:
whereas their external pomp, on the contrary side, is as much despised by the
Lord, as it is magnified in their fleshly and carnal imaginations. The Lord
direct us in his own ways, and call home such as wilfully, or by ignorance,
have gone astray; that at length they may be reduced to the sheepfold of
Christ Jesus: to whom, with his Father and the blessed Spirit, be praise for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

