A REQVIRE OF AGREEMENT To the grounds of Divinity study: wherein great
Scholars falling, and being caught of Jews disgrace the Gospel: and trap them
to destruction.

By H. B.

1611.

THE AVCTOR. TO THE LEARNED TEACHERS of Salvation that know Great Britane speech.
Jews scattered over the world, having Satan breathing in them, the more they
are provoked to beleve, the more they offer them selves to the Serpent to be
deceived and to deceive, from that plainnes that is in Christ. Since
ambassedour Barton of Godly memory moved a principal Rabbi at Stanpol, to
write to England for Ebrew explication of our Gospel, the Jews of Prage,
Francfurt, Hanaw and others bestir them selves to search our crossing of the
holy story. They plead that as ours teach, Messiah Kindred is not in the
Godspel: how he comes from David. And infer, soundly upon our treason, that so
the Gospel should not be from God. So they say, that by ours, Matthew and Luke
be vnreconcileeble: who bring salathiel, as we say, the one from Iechonla of
Solomon, as al of truth must grant, our blindes does: the other of Neri of
Nathan Salomons brother. And they well think^ that men of grace should never be
caught in such vmpossibilities. So they say, we as they, make the Romans the
fourth Kingdom in Daniel: which was to be destroyed before Christ should come
in the flesh, and, that for ending, Moses Law, by Daniels seauens: we have
(...) many minds and heads: whereas so weighty a matter should have consent of
all Christendom. Also they object that our best spent 60. years to prove that
we have not the New Testament pure: which God had kept pure if he had geven it.
And that we have 20. Opiniones for our Principal article of Descent to Hell. To
all these I answer: and pronounce all, a the an, which after warning will trap
them to Eternal destruction. And to their modest I open our mysteries.

To the Right Worshipful, the Governor, Deputies, Assistantes, and
Generaltie, of the Famous company of Merchants ADVENTVRERS. Grace, peace, and
success in their adventures.
THE Tribes of Jacob, Right Worshipful, which were placed upon the Sea for
Merchandise, had stones in Aharons Right-care, remembrancing daily their
Navigation, to be assured of Gods protection. Isachar had the blew Saphir, the
sky colored, to trust in God: when Coelum vndique, and vndique pontus, as Maro
speaks. Zabulon had the Iahalom, the Sardonyx, named in Ebrew of beating, as
in Homer, Gallie-men beat the sea with their ores, and still yet do in
Galleys. Aser had the stone called the Sea: Tharassis, thalassa in Greek, is
the Sea: and happy Asers stone. And these Tribes have special blessing in
Moses. That they shall suck the riches of the Sea: and the hid wealth of the
Sand: and, be of force al their days. And fame of the Phoenices for navigation
in Tyrus and Sidon, among Graecians, was for these Tribes; as we may gather by
scripture. How Salomons ships went with Chyrams to Tarsis or Tartess, the Law
tells, and Aristotle harpeth upon it.. Aristotle tells that Phoenices went
to Tartesus, beyond Spain, and for their country trash had such store of
silver that they made their very ancores of silver, even to spare so much in
their freight, being full laden with silver, that if they kept their iron, so
much silver must be castaway. Aristotle seems to have mished in the word
Tariess, which means the sea: and not one soil: in Chanaan speech. And for
Cethem of Ophir, this honoreth Isreal's traveling far. I asked a simple mariner
which had been in the west Indians, what they called gold there: he said
Cethem, just the scripture term: and if Spaniards of late for some conceit
did not give gold there that name, Salomons Fleet may well seem to have gone
into those quarters, and marchantes of Israel to have showed there that they
worshipped the God of Heaven: and to have invited some home with them. And
whereas Aristotle writes of the Carthagineans, that beyond Hercules pillars
they found an happy soil: and Plato of a most large Country, as now we know,
Phoenices and Isachar with Zabul on might well give the occasion to all this.
So honorable would the Law have Merchants care, and Gods care for them that
know him. But without singular blessing of God, merchants suffer great loss:
it were to be wished that all of stately Companies should have the chief
grounds of holy learning known. Isachar is commended above all Tribes for
skill in times what Israel should do: as how the feasts of Pascha and all
appendantes by the Heavens course should be ruled. As of necessity they were
to be Mathematicianes that go to the sea: so this Tribe passed them that kept
at home. And now a days men for so much match Isachar, for Merchandise, but
not many Nations for skill of holy Law, yet in England Merchandes have been a
great help to hold the Gospel, mainteyning our best learned abroad, to restore
the truth, after our holy martyrs calling for vengeance from under the altar
rolled up the Popes heaven, as a book rolled: I will show them S. John's
Apocalypse whereof I give you the sum, by chapters, that they may see the marow
of his book. He tells that Christ showed the state to come to the end of the
world and a vision of him self: as unto Daniel, chapter 10. this does he, chapter 1.
And in singular sweetness to the seven stars in the seven Golden
Candelstickes all these parts be applied with addition against all Arianes
that the Eternal, the Son of God, the creator of the world, is he that
appeared unto Daniel. So John expounds Daniel, into salvation of al Jews of
Grace. This goes through, chapter 12. In easy facility.

Now for times to come, this appears chapter 4. God on a throne sits a Judge,
like Jasper, for Beniamins temple: and Sardius* as Ruben: to fight for the
tribes. And Christianes, in state Persons, are 24. Bishops, and besides
goodly, this in chapter 4. Then the Lamb and Lion opens the book of seven
seals, ch* 5. then he comes further, against Caess. on horse, white, with
plaguing riders, upon red, black, Pale: For the martyrs, who crave to destroy
the Empire, but are bid to expect Diocletianes Persecution. Then shall their
profane world be rolled up, chapter 6. After that, a general apostasy comes, chapter
7. How that falls out, the seventh seal does show. Christ stands at the
golden altar: to receive all prayers, and Rome bends a policy against all this.
Thereupon Christ, as in Ezekiel, casts fire into the earth: and Angels
trumpetters sound how hayle and fire is mixed with blood: by that, Popes be made
a mountain: so a mountain of fire cast into the worlds sea: to set all on
fire. when the star Bishop falls from his heavens, to turn the law waters,
into wormwood and to darken the chief sun, moan, and stars: coming up by
falling and by turning the Scriptures into gal, sone darkning the third part of
the Church: that three woes are pronu^ced chapter 8. By his keys of the pit,
whence he fetched the woorwood of his haeresies, he brings Locustes of monks
to devour all the west, and able to make wars, and becomes King of Locustes:
and makes wars: and so becomes a fyrie mountain, to make hayle and fire
mixed with blood. This was one woe. He weakened the East Empire to set up the
Saracenes: and is plagued from Emphrates: as his Idolatry and treachery
turned away the East, chapt. niene. Christ reviveth the Gospel, when men eat
the little book, teaching again, How he is the Angel of Covenant, and
mediator for the faithful, capit. 10. Martyrs bring policies to see what the
king of Locustes his city or Policy is: and he falls, and the Gospel is
restored: and he falls with worlds end, capit. xj. The same matter is
repeated for Caesar's and Pope in a Dragon of Roman arms. As it was called
Egypt, capit. xj. and Pharaoh, a Dragon, Esai 27. The upper part of the Dragon
is showed to be the Roman Empire: one compiled of the four in Daniel: and the
tail is expounded to be the beast arising from the earth, capit. xj. or King
of Locustes, capit. 9. he reviveth the former Empire, so, that none can live in
it, without his mark, capit. 13. His mark is to force Christians to
Idolatry. For which vilanie Roman Babylon is told of a fall, capi. 14. By
urging Idolatry, he drives from his Egypt, the Church through a sea of fire
and faggot, into the wilderness. Where the tabernacle built has a smoke of Gods
anger, and Angels seven plague him as he plagued all under the seven
trumpets, ch* 16. The beast reviued has no difference from the former: but in
bloody color, and the daughter Rome riding upon it, all bloody, chapter 17. Rome
shall fall as Babylon and Tyrus did, chapter 18. It shall fall when all nationes
sing Haleluiah, upon the destruction of the wicked, with understanding. Then
the Word of God will catch the beast false Prophet: the whole dragon reviued,
and cast him into a Lake burning, with fire and Brimsto^. Which is the second
death, chapter 19. But the Roman Dragon shall be tied a thousand years, before the
King of Locustes deceaueth generally. But then he makes a new Gog and Magog.
for the old Jerusalem: and thereupon shall be destroyed, as the old was, by the
first coming, so he by the second, of Christ, from a throne of Judgment: as
the old Gog and Magog was, chapter 20. As John in Patmos saw the heavenly
Jerusalem: So Patmos the church tossed with Aegean waves shall be in Gods sight
such as Esaias, Ezekiel, Aggei and Zachary spoke of. Christ saluteth us poor
heathen with his owue most gracious voice. To him that loved us, and has
washed us from our sins by his blood be all honor and glory for ever*

Amen.
NOw because I wish your right worshipful company, by this pains to be
Isachar and Zabulon, and graven in blew Saphir, and Sardonyx, that will abide
striking, in the breast of the high sacrificer in the heavens: I will briefly
touch the sum of this book. With three Jews I had spech: At Amsteldem with
Rabbi Farar a Physician: At Hanaw with the Synagoge Doctor Rabbi wolf: At
Basil, with a Rabbin most desirous of christianity. The other do mean no good.
Farar objected in a great assembly: sayng your Principal scholars make Joseph
son to Ely, and Salathiel to Iechonias, proprely both: and the fourth Kingdom
in Daniel to be the Roman: and that to this day ye cannot agree what Daniels
seauens mean: nor to defend our Greek Testament: nor to tell what our Creed
means. Beza and Calvin miss in the first three deadly: Lively and Barlo most
athean impudently in the fourth. And for the fifth Beza spent sixty years to
prove the new Testament most corrupt, and for the sixth, Geneva laid a trayn to
kill you: for denying Catelthein eis haidou in the Creed to mean suffering of
hell torment: and for saying, that by all Greeks it means a passage unto
Paradise. And at this last the Hanaw Jew fell back: that Hanaw builders
hindered great Princes promises for Ebrew drawing of both testamentes unto
Christ: because you despised Geneva: having drawn all Churches unto them: and
for Daniels (...)* Genevit Scaliger checketh all former: ending them with
Jerusalem: as we Jews do: So for all six by Geneva your Gospel should be
nothing worth: as by Oxon* where D. R. was suffered to say, the Angel meant no
certain time: but if he had said: after 80 seauens Messiah shall be slain he had
spoken proprely. They forget God, that dare teach Angels how to deliver their
Message. I granted that Geneva in all these taught poison to the Gospel: and
by blindenes would make Churches a Synagoge of Satan: and this I would make good.
That Jesus, Mary, Ely are Luc. 3. genealogied, not Joseph: that Iechonias only,
as a King a successor, begat Salathiel, that the Macedonianes were the fourth
Kingdom in Daniel: that Beroaldus in Geneva rightly limited Daniels seauens.
That Beza has altered no text: only disputed upon them: that for Luc. 3. he
refers the matter to others, and Mat. 1. and Daniels fourth Kingdom is well
handled by Genevean Iunius and Tremelius. And the senate for all, yielded unto
me: and Hanaw little ioyeth in any victory, Beza with Calvin did much good, in
their kind: But I would not have them my auctours. Thus I disputed with the
Jew. I also glaunse at the Jesuits: for Plantines Bible for fastening to the
Bible of the old Testament 1696 unjust blames: and denying the vowels to have
Gods austority: and for stealing the word Romylus from the Chaldy Es. 11. where
Jonathan namely condemns Rome, as S. Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. says. Thence the
state wholly sinful shall arise: which shall be overthrowen by lerning, and by
the spirit of Christ. With the third Jew I speak of the Apocalypse Image and
beast answearable to Daniels Image and beasts: and Satan pictured from the
Roman arms, him showed. So the seven Angels trumpeters for Romes pluguing of
the world, and seven Angels revengers in the same tenor of Phrase. In my
Latin Con. I have showed the comparison of both seven Angels I will now touch
the Phrases. The Bridgemaker to restore Kome, to be a woman riding upon the old
Empire, not reviued without blood, makes the earth plagued that suffered him:
So his gotten earth is plagued with boyles of state: when monasteries wickedness
is spied. He a mountain was cast into the sea of nationes: his nationes feal
blood, which they shed, star wormwood turned the law waters into bitterness.
His doctors fountains and rivers bitter to death, now cause him blood. He
darkened sun of Justice: sun of Justice makes his bite their tongues: that
what they speak they vnpeake. He became a King of Locustes and a beast chapter 11.
now the the one of the beast is daghkened. Euphrates was in startes loose: now
still. Martyrs earthquake shakes much and without Martyrs Baraks victory is at
Armageddon: and Iosuahs hail: to the last victory. These matters I hope and
wish to be as the Pearl Mat. 13. in all your trafiques: and I refer the
success and your selves to the tuition of him whose will the unconstant winds
do constantly perform.

Yours for all help to find the Pearl of heaven, Hugh Broughton.

A require Of consent to agreement against Jews, who by us are hardened, and
perish.
SOME of the best learned Jews have greatly desired to be taught our Gospel.
One Rabbi Elias of Germany whole 21. years: with whom in Francfurt Synagogue
1589. I drew all the law to Christ, so that he denied nothing: but still
desired to hear the matter enlarged. We disputed upon this oath, That God
should strike him presently, that spoke against conscience. So he never denied
any thing that I spoke, but requested leave to moove doubts: and departed with
desire to be taught by printing. That our Conference was reported by Jews to
Constantinople, and by further instigation thence R. Abraham Ruben sent his
Epistle to England: which when I had printed in Basil, Rabbi Elias came
thither, and was so moved by that Epistle, and long talk upon the New
Testament, that he brake into these words, saying: Oh that you would translate
the New Testament in such Hebrew as now you speak to me, ye should turn all
our Nation. On the morrow I went to Zurick, and he renewed his desire. He desired
the Consul to write to Zurick a request of returning, to teach him further:
But my occasions could not suffer. And after my return from Zurick, two
Italian Jews came thither: and seeing what I had printed, specially upon
Daniel, believed and were baptized, and came to Basil to see me. An other is in
England now, as I hear: who by my occasion took the Gospel. And in Worms a
mild and eloquent Jew told me, that if I could show that God was in Christ,
in all other poinctes, Moses should give place to the Gospel. And generally it
pleases them to speak to Princes of Germany, that the Hebrew style which
calls them to faith, comes nearer the Prophets pureness, the^ their best:
forced for the simple Jews to patch Languages. Thus far a door is opened. But
some are bent frowardly: whereof one requested disputation in a great Hall, and
had it. Others answered with blame of our disagreement for one article: our
maine* Catelthein eis hajdou. Others demand explication of Consent: where
Jews consent to all, is handled: and Epistle to the Hebrew, and Apocalypse.

The sum of Rabbi Farars disputation: in Syllogismes of this: I.
If the kindred of Christ (how he comes of David) be not in the Gospel, it
can not be from God. But the first is true. Therefore the latter also.
II.
If Iechonias of Solomon begat Iechonias Neri of Nathan, Luc. 3. cannot be his
father: But most large consent holds the first: Therefore so the later is
false.
III.
If the legs of Daniels Image figure the Romans, the true Redeemer is not
yet come. For all the Image must equally be broken to dust. But the first has
Christians infinite consent. Therefore also the second.
IV.
For Daniels seavens, whereby ye end Moses ceremonies, that hey^ are not to be
used, ye have no constant agreement. But as Barbinel says: so many opinions as
heads: so many deny, all but one, your Gospel to be from God.


But your diversity is endless. Two University Professors of your country
shall be cited: and two of Marpurge in public disputation, professors both are
famous by Epistles of students. Your two are D. John Reinolds of Oxford, and
May. Ed. Lively of Cambridge. Both their words you have printed. Reinolds
begins the time at the message of the Angel, or at the first of Cyrus, his
speech is long, but that is the sum. And for the end thus he writes:
Septuaginta septimanis completis excisus est Christus. So he must needs mean
that 490. years after the Angels Message to Daniel, Christ was killed: But, as
not holding that true, he says, the Angel meant no certain time: But, si
Angelus dixisset, post octies 70. annos excidetur Christus, praecise and
proprie locutus esset Angelus: quoniam praecise ab eo tempore intercesserunt
anni 560. This Oxford schools heard, and you cite the Page of his Lectures
written. May. Ed. Lively, and his commender whom you term Bar. Lo. denies
Messiah, Dan. 9 to mean the Redeemer, and begins the time at 137* years
after the return, and ended it as we do at Iernsalems Flames, and as we do,
so he, denies any time certain, when Messiah should come into the world, or to
teach, and to redeem: and Bar Lo is highly honored after commendation of his
doctrine. Again as we so they two, Lively and Bar Lo teach that sacrifices
were lawful in Emperor Vespasianes time. You can have no conscience in your
Religion, if you suffer men to live, that deny all your religion, or them that
sell such books as good. But Portugalles know, that Bar Lo was twice
Buy-shoppe since that time. And so you know that a Preacher Lutheran of
Francfurt said, there, was no religion in England: we Jews think there can
be none, till better doctrine here comes.

V.
If the text of the New Testament be corrupt, it can not be from God. But Th.
B. spent sixty years to prove that it is most corrupt, and has full many
long speeches to prove that, and triumphet what infinite variety of copies he
has seen, and him you hold your chief: and for him Quirites bind not the
Greek with our Ebrew, as holding Ieromes translation better. Therefore by this
doctrine your New Testament should not be from God: for God would keep that
which he gave, as our Ebrew to every Iod.
VI.
If you hold most ridiculous Fables to be part of Gods Hebrews doctrine,
where we Jews never hold, I mean the Apocrypha, all fables, or trifling
writers: how can we think yours the Prophets of God? we can never do it. But
the Apocrypha be, cheeck by cheeck with your New Testament: Therefore we are to
think your New Testament to be no better.
The sum of answer.In my book of our Lords Family, I answered to most of
these: and I make a sole treatise of the Apocrypha: what use it has, as your
Midrasoth or Fables: and Col b^^, in a treatise of sentences, Syracides is no
better.

Now I will briefly lay down a short answer to all for the simplest.

To the first. Saint Luke Chap. 3. tells, that our Lord is of Ely properly,
as Mary was his daughter: and that Joseph is not there said to be son to
any, but Jesus is son to all, there: who were the pillars of heaven, as Job
terms mountains, in their ages.

The second. All Jews of conscience might see that in Jeremy God swear
Iechonias should die childles, as theirs all there note, and that he begat
Salathiel no more then he begat his Uncle Sedekias, elder then him self: yet
by succession is his son, 1. Chron. 3. And Saint Matthew being now not a
Publican but a Doctor in Law, knew law phrases: and that all learned would
agree to his speech, where the story was known.

To the third. All of Conscience where my Commentaries upon Daniel come, which
I gave the Jew him self, will swear, that Seleucidae and Logidae be figured
by the Images legs: and my Ebrew books and many thousands in copies
besides, tell the same. What have I to do to defend men's dotage? The dead,
died in the repentance of errors: Let the living answer for themselves.

To the fourth. Oxford knows, how I forced D. R. to agree with me for the
limits of Daniels seavens. And D. Kennel can not forget that. I will record
it. D. Kennel told me in London, thus: Our D R has turned all us of all
degrees against you. Then said I: Presently will I turn you to me: speaking
so, as calling for God to strike you presently, if you speak against your
conscience. God forbid, says he, that I should deny that. Then mark, said I,
The Angel says: Seaventie seavens of years (that is 490.) are showed most
exactly: For to seal sin and bring justice by the death of Christ: when must
the time begin? said I: At the Angels hour of speech, says he. And when end?
when Christ dies, says he. Tell D Reinolds he may as well deny God as those
limits: He tells him, and D. R. so settleth them. so the strife is ended.
They who can not suffer him blamed for saying the Angel meant no certain time,
shall answer me before God. I wrote an Epistle to Oxford Doctors, that such
doctrine deserved to send Oxon to Helice and Bura. They complained to Lord
Will* Burghley, Chancellor of Cambridge. He cooled their courage, with report to
my friends, what wise men they of Oxon were, that complained to him of me. Now
let Oxon answer the Jew for D. R. And all who countenance Bar Lo* who for M.
Lively raved against that consent which GOD gave to Scripture, I did but in
part show it, should think them selves so far sons of Gehenna with him.
God will not be mocked, nor regards person, and holds thankles and godles
neighbors. The sight of Scriptures concent is more worth then all the gold in
the world. So the mocking of it is one of the highest degrees of Atheisine. And
all who revenge not that, if they can, can not escape Gods revenge. When just
complaint is made for most manifest and most weighty injury against God: all
that be slow to revenge, shall find God ready to revenge them. Though Doeg
prosper a while: he that denies consent to be in scripture, may as well deny
God to be the author of it. And none but godles will suffer that. So the
reioycers in the Libell, when it was, who suffered the other, many had quick
passage hence: not as well dying. Moo should weigh desert for fellowship with
wicked. All be Atheistes which deny concent of word to be from God.

To the fifth. of Iakim Math. There is not a letter amiss, nor contraritie in
the New Testament: The true copy says: Iechonias (not Iakim) begot Salathiel,
as Beza vnchecked his check, so the French, and English should. Of this I have
elsewhere written.

Of Barachias and Jeremy, Math. 23. and 27. In Barachias for Iohaiadah, Saint
Matthew follows the notation Bless God* for: God has the knowledge. So
Ammiel and Eliam, be one man. Iochanan and Ioachaz the King, by Kimchi: and
Ichoiadah and John, and John and Chen in Zachary, and about 60. propre names
for notatio^ diverse are in the holy margent readings among the 848. the Ebrew
double readings: whereof I have much written. Now Exalt God, and remembrance
God be of one force: as Ceplias and Peter. And so S. Matthew in a known person
eloquently and stately by imitation of the old Testament shows that he wrote
by the same Lordly spirit as penned the Law. Senses exercised, would never
stagger at that. As Ezra and Malachy are the same man by the Thalmud.

Of Rempham. And souls 75. Act. 7. Of these I have written in my Consent of
Scripture. Well I trow though vcalegon Iscariota schoph, that of Rempham. He
that teaches, Our Lord in Catacyrievo blamed Heathen Rulers of tyra^nie: where
Prove. 8. he says, Princes by him decree Justice, will little regard what to
scoph, for Gehe^na.

Of years 450. after a sort. Act. 13. This number has been blamed: And
Rhemistes in the Martialcie requested Bish. Elmer that some should reproove
them, if it could be done, for translating after the Latin, and refusing the
Greek copy: and they chose that of Act. 450. Bishop Elmer, that rarely
favored me, requested me to dispute with them. I did so, and they soon
yielded. Iscariofa libelled that I defended the 70. translation, of a copy
which I should say was found in Geneva betwixt two walls, And that all laughed
at me. I wonder what ass ever could be so unlearned, as to think that ever
any now 1300. years would defend the 70* which is no where extant, but patched
infinitely. And I marveile who should dream of any 70. found at Geneva betwixt
two walls: the father of lies Belial taught Ben Belial so to lie. I
complained, but sped no better then Abakuk. Ch 1. The blamed sped well in a
thankful people, who have his nyse learning in high esteem. Such Lactuce is
fit for such lips.

Of Boanerges.Thus the Jews dispute, if Boanerges be corrupt, Christ was not
God, who kept not the name which he gave James and John. But Geneva holds
that name corrupt: and what schools allow not the writer?

Therefore by such Christ should not be God.

Answer. Geneva was warned of this checking, to a Genevite in the way to their
town: when the Genevite bragged of deep amending the holy text. But they
could never be quiet till they wearied the warner out of town. Soon after
GOD threatened by Savoy to take their town. The answer is easy: that the
Jews to this day made Scheva O a, as Noabyim for Nebyim: so Boanerges, where
Th. B. would have Benerges, Jews generally will defend our Gospel.

Of Armageddon. Armageddon is vily vexed. Most of all by Danaeus, but I will
not cite his corruption. Our Geneva had Arma-Geddon. Th. Beza notes an huge
company of differences. That is injurious, where Gods authority is so clear
by art.

Against Harmegiddo.If Origenes Octaploun were extant, where the Ebrew is
expressed in Greek notes: the letter Eh, by a weak spirit, as in Abel,
Alleluja, Agar, Ephphata, Aman, Ararj, and Ar, in Eusebius, for oros a mountain
we might well guess by that which we have, that many thousands of examples do
cheke the blame of Ar, to turn it into Har. So For ME as better then MA. many
thousand or Examples would show that shewa is oftener A then E. as in Isaac,
and twice in Nathanael. So for little Chirik, that it is many thousand time E
short. And the whole word Mageddon with N. is in the 70. Esaias 10. and elsewhere.
So the checking of God in all the syllables of Armageddon, against so many
warrantes: to prove that we have not the New Testament that God gave: this can
but exceedingly grieve all that see Jews hence made fuel for Gehenna, and
many of our own cooled from zeal.

Of Sabbaton act. blamed by M. Scaliger. that it should be Sabbaton, in the
newter gendre. M. Scaliger greatly forgot him self for thinking that To
sabbaton onos, could agree with Greek In all the tongue, the like is not, the
text in all copies stands well.

Of the story of the adulteress, John 8. In a Latin Epistle to the Princes of
Germany, I have showed that Saint John by one Thalmudique rule shows more
learning then any forger could. I am loath to repeat it, to Anabrais. For it
would be tedious and hard for the vnebrewed.

Of Cainan. Luc. 3. For this Cainan, I have written at large upon our Lords
Family. Thence the Reader may fetch my mind, against M. Scaliger, that held
the Cainan joined to Arphaxad to be a corruption: Because in deed the man was
never in the world, and S. Luke knew that: and it would make any stagger why S.
Luke should bring, in that family, a forged name. That which I have often
handled, I think bitter in repetition.

Epiloge.
Thus I have briefly helped the unlearned to defend the truth. Touching
Persons here blamed, I will show my mind. M. Beza I hold to have deserved
rarely of the church, for rules of faith against the Pope. But as he confesses
his hebrew store was scant: so it was pity that he was not warned to keep him
at home. I hold D. R. equal to him, and sincere in all, saving his defense of
M. Scaliger against the churches: whereby he much missed, in Heathen Greeks,
not in Divinity otherwise. Of M. Lively I can not tell what to say, who still
held the Ebrew text corrupt, and so, little cared what to say, and missed, as I
have given advertisement. Bar-Lo I leave to God. I am sure, that our Melec,
whom from my heart in Geneve in extreme danger, I defended to be the only
Orthodox K. in the world, would pay him if he knew his Libell.

His learning is small for a Doctor, his wit no better: for a politician that
made wicked believe our people loved not their good: Our K. His conscience that
scoffed God the author, is worse then the rancour of any dog. His whole
course is void of grace in his Libel, and declamatio^ against Rob. Fss. as
though he had authority to censure Nobles. I never read of any so shameless to
have made a good end.

Now for the Hanaw Jews arguments.

The Hanaw Jews brake to rancour upon these Syllogismes.

First.
The stryving against an open commandment of faith, is as wicked as endeavor
to break all the world in pieces. But ye strive void of all conscience,
against this: Kiss the Son, least he be angry: happy are all that trust in
him. Therefore ye are equal to the Devils in contempt of the Son of God.
Preofe of the assumption. Ye say, Nasheku Bar is not to kiss the Son. I
replied that Nashak is never but kiss, and I made your self confess so much.
Even Rabbi Man, turning to his concordance, and that Bar is is Son, Prove. 30.
twice, and Dan. 3. teach, and your Thalmud in millions of places. And Aben
Ezra, the sharpest and best learned that ever ye bred, tells plainly, that
Messiah is there meant. And in that you print him, you make him your mouth: yet
you tell me, you will not stand to him. No judge in the world ever gave a
client leave to shrink from the pleading of his own counselor. And do you
hope to mock with the Judge of all the world, and to escape the rivers of fire
that are before his throne? You know what your Thalmud Bab in Chelek speaks of
your selves, that ye shall have the faces of dogs, before the Messiah helps
you. For that our S. Paul says concerning you, Phil. 3. 2. Look to the
dogs: should not this moove you, to quake, when ye call your selves dogs,
and the holy Ghost from your own mouth does condemn you? Moreover, Midrai
Tillin your Eldest work tells in a parable this to be spoken of a King, of
who^ vewing his subjects they would make an hymn. Then said he, make not the
hymn on me, but make it to my son. And you know this, and will ye wilfully
perish?

The second Syllogism.
If by your own consent a Golden Chain of times is made one of five from
Adams fall, unto sealing the Messiah, the holy of all Holiness, and not one
whit further, that Chain should draw you to Messiah. But the first is true:
Therefore also the second.
Proof of the Assumption. And the first Chain. From Adam to Tharaes death,
you make universally years 2083. To that death Midras Rabba joins Abraham's
calling from Charan: and Philo the true Philo, the Greek: who also tells
that none who have read the Law, can be ignorant of that. All this I have
cited in my Ebrew book to Landtgrave Maurice, from your own authors, and
that ye spent 215. years in Chanaan, and 215. in Egypt. Out of Rabba Azarias
I cited your Ebrewes for that. So from Abraham's calling from Charan, to the
Law, shall be granted years 430. and 480. to the Temple, and 36. to Salomons
death: and thence in Barbinel from Ezekiel. 4. 390. to the burning of the Temple.
Now come back 19. years to the beginning of the captivity, And ye know that
ye have a new Chain of two linkes or years. But 19. must hang down, and ye
must fasten the twentieth link to the former Chain. So fifty one years are
to the end of the captivity. And thence Aben Ezra tells by the Angel
Gabriell that 490. years are thence unto sealing the Messiah the holy of all
holiness. Now this Golden Chain is of your own making upon Gods authority.
But your* Thalmudiques made a Cobweb, full of all shamefulnes against all light
or conscience. Of that you have read my book, So the assumption tells that
your Golden Chain draws you unto Christ.

A third Syllogism, From the Jubilees.
If your selfs confess that the Jubilees draw unto Christ, and that falls
out most clearlie by your former Chain: your conscience tells, ye rebel
against the light. But the first is true: Therefore also the latter.
The proof of the proposition. In Zohar ye have this wonderful saying, upon
Levit. 25. Col. 2. 10. fol. 53. In the Iubilee the Majesty of God will be a
remission, and redemption, and ending of Sabbatisme to Israel. This is a
wonderful saying, to be spoken by your selves, and not perceyved by your
selves. So the Zobar has upon Genesis 3. The seed of the Woman, thou serpent,
shall pearce footestep, and HE shall pearce thy head: Upon HE, ye say this
Person, is Hacados Baruc Hu: The holy and blessed God: we can speak no more,
and you could speak no less. For he must be God that can destroy the works
of Satan. Moreover, Kimchi says upon Ezekiel. chap. 40. That the Messiah
redeemeth in a Iubily. Now look to the pleasant progress of times by Chalebs
age, Ios. 14. telling how it was 45. since Moses sent him to view the Land: So
in the seventh the Land was parted: then the eight is the first to the
Iubilee, so the first Iubily Chusan is tamed by Othoniel, and there begins a
blessing with your first Iubilee. in the seventh Iubilee the Arc comes into
Judah: and Ephraim his glory was transferred to the tribe of Messiah. Thence
to the captivity of Babel, are seven seaventies: it of one seaventie: and
thence a new seven seaventies. Put these together and ye have 28. Jubilees, or
1400. years. To such pleasant facility has the God of heaven distinguished
the times: and he has made al parts most famous by high dealings, to draw all
unto salvation. But your sin against the holy Ghost, which Maymonides notes
from Es. 6. and our four Eva^gelistes mark, that your sin keeps away your
hearts from understanding.

A fourth Syllogism.
If every whit that Daniel pictureth and expounds in his Images, be come to
pass, even by Heathen testimonies, before the birth of Messiah in Bethlehem,
you sin against the holy Ghost by despising the truth of God. But the first
is true, as I have showed you in my book of David's Family: Therefore you
sin against the holy Ghost in not believing. Upon these reproves, they break
to open refusal of hearing, to say: you labor in vain to turn us, while
Christians are at such strife among your selves, for your whole religion, etc.
specially for your descent to HELL: Ye have above 20. opinions ^^r that: and
forty branches growing from the Genevean. The Genevean, the Marpurgean, the
new Hanovean, has much hindered you, as we hear. And the Roman of the
Fathers being in Gehenna Isaac Ben Arama blames, fol. 205. col. 2.
Of agreement general for our grounds. This ground is general from
Athanasius and eldest time: that nothing may be holden for Divine truth, but
either graven in all hearts, or evident in the Bible. And our Apostles never
went further: and the best learned of all sides being called to these grounds,
will refuse combat against them.

Grounds of disputation.
I. The old Testament is pure, and New to every letter. II. The Apocrypha be
for use but of tolleration, and rightly damned generally even in your
Thalmudes, as not to be regarded for any sound worth: but wicked to be used at
all in any reverence, as sound sadness. Otherwise some of them be very witty to
play with heathen: and godly and learned by our K. III. In Moses all Divinity
is taught by the Angel, called Iehova the God of Bethel: how he would be
Emmanuell. The Prophets and Apostles go no further. Upon this ground I brake
your Rabbi Elias in Francfurt Synagoge: that to this day he desires
institution. IV. Your Thalmudiques for tongue are indifferent, and as good as
we can wish for the Prophets: and propriety must stand where it striveth not
with sense or common notiones. V. The New Testament was to be written all in
the tongue of Iapheth, as ye well gather from Noes allusion to his name, Genesis
9. in Thalmud Jerusalem in Megila: and thence in Midras Rabba. VI. God gave the
Graecians first a mind to adva^ce their tongue when Judah was in Babel: Then
Pisistratus brought Homer to esteem as Jews have Moses, or we the Gospel,
for daily use of speech, though they knew all to be fables, the sager sort.
Upon this beginning all kind of flourishing writers came, in 200. years. That
by Alexander Macedons time, it came to the highest perfection. And all the
learned in the West spoke it willingly. Then the Macedonians conquering South
and Indians by Millions of Soldiers: force all to know Greek, the wealthy of
Leisure. Tully pro Archia Poeta, tells that Greek by his time went over all
nations. Now all might in one tongue learn the salvation by Christ. And Christ
gives his servants the greatest sharpenes of Logike and bravenes in speech to
heathen: wherein S. Paul gives place to none that ever was in Athens. Saint
Luke in story has equal spirit. And when they speak story of Law, the
seaventie Seniors phrase is theirs, to call the old Testament still to mind.
And to Scribes they be Thalmudique: and rare Ebrew matter they express rarely
by terms Greek: but Gods wisdom is under those terms in rare sense. VII.
Saint Paul teaches nothing differing from the Scribes, but that Christ was to
suffer: and being the first from the dead, should show light unto the world.
And the same is the sum of all the New Testament. VIII. All our best learned
know by these grounds controversies be tried. And he that cannot dispute by
these grounds, should be still.
Examples of Consent. Our grounds that Scripture is pure, and only must judge,
and is perfect for to rule all our use of life: the learned of all sorts when
they are openly called to account, know they must grant: Even the Quirites. D.
John Pistorius is famouslie known for this argument. The Popes manner is to
provoke disputation before war. And as disputation proceeds, war or peace
follows. D. Pistorius of Friburge was the Popes chalenger: a great Grecian,
and Caballist. The Chalenger was written too in Greek what grounds his
Chalenger held: and that Pistorius should have fafe-conduct for an hundredth his
own friends to come with him to Basil schools: Their disputation should be
in the tongues which God uses to us, Adams tongue which continued in the house
of Hebers faithful: And in the tongue of Iapheth, which God trimmed 600.
years, and spread over the world, that all nations might learn the Gospel in
it. Wisdom requires no moo tongues for Divinity. And by this kind all
term brallings should be cut off. And his own heart knew that he must grant
my rules: and thereupon I assured my self, and told him that the chalenger
would give over his challenge. After some combat, so he did, under his own
hand in a Greek epistle: and so both sides were glad that they no further
needed preparation of war. Since, war was: and a letter of mine written
from Marpurge to Zurik stayed vndelivered two years, and then they wrote: That
stayed: Suo magno malo, To their own great harm, That they knew not I was in
the country: Let the scornful say: they know better then they, their own
case. Unless our common grounds were sure: tempests could not be so soon
calmed. Many such dealings I could bring, but the vowed to sit in the seat of
the scornful would but mock. But for you Jews I will cite Iudaique matters.
Rabbi Elias your own chosen Orator, he sees my grounds to be your grounds,
and never checked one whit of my assertiones for his use. And Rabbi Ruben of
Thrace, comes not short of him. And if your hatred to our Gospel blinds
you, doubtless ye go into the fire which ye have kindled, and ye shall lie
down in panges. Object not, o Jews, our dissent where our general consent
might save you. And thus much for your general accusation of our disagreement:
where ye are inexcusable for most gross crossing of known truth. Now I will
come to the particular difference which you object of our Creed: for
Catelthein eis haidou.

Of descent to HELL. Twenty opinions (says the Jew) ye have touching the
Descent to HELL: as your self in writing have charged our soil scholars. And
what religion can be in your New Testament, seeing articles be so uncertain. I
will touch them which are known to fight openly with you. Sebastian our
Preacher of Hanaw, told your self to your face in our town, that you were
against all Churches: And when Marpurge printed a Thesin in these words
against you: Quidem, autumat descendere ad inferos in sacro Symbolo idem esse
atque ascendere ad Coelos, quod nos non credimus. Master Isaac Genius told
that Lavater our Scholemaister said to the Grave, he also would write against
you. And John Lucas of our Hanow tells how when he brought you from the
Badens sick to Geneva, full fore against your will, because you had warning of
their bent, for defending the text of scripture to be pure: where one Beza
spent sixty years to prove it most corrupt, and to find a miraculous
difference in copies: John Lucas told often how they used you, when you first
went from your chamber to salute the Professors. A small professor said: Oh,
you are against our Calvin: you say, that, to Descend to HELL is to go up to
Heaven. And what a further coile they kept, you have printed all in Latin. John
Lucas said: The Syndique and two Senators gladly heard three whole hours,
your opinion of our Jews petition, and how by Thalmudiques you meant for him
to clear all your New Testament, and how the Syndique gave you leave with Gods
blessing, to print what you would: and how the next day 30. strange students
by the Syndiques consent, sent one D. Goldastus, to request you to profess in
Geneva, and presently to show him how without Chaldie studies the new Testament
could never be understood. But presently after you had bestowed three hours
discourse with the Doctor, the Senate sent you word what a Plot the scholars
laid to kill you, and how he offered you 300. french Crowns to go presently
away with the Scotts. Now what religion can be in men of this bent? And for
Hanaw we hear that you printed here upon Dan. 9. a double help to Calvin:
One for Beroaldus against Scaliger, the other for JESUS passage from the Cross
to Paradise, by all Greeks, that to catelthein eis haidou, means that in
speech of all godly. But when you show how Geneva refusing all armies getting a
sure victory, turn God and all men against them, then Hanovians kept a
Saracene coile: and moved the Grave not to go forward with Princes promises
for that great allowance which you expected: to teach us in Hebrew your
Gospel: we were in hope that you might have saved our whole Company: till
these strange dealings of your strife weakened us: to cast off all opinion of
Christianity.

Answer. Twenty opinions are in deed: all springing from one root of
bitterness: the Latin phrase, Descendere ad inferos, The Greek Symbolon is no
less clear then the brightness of the Sun. I will open that, and then all will
grant, that the Latin and all translations must mean as the original does:
afterward I will come to Lavater, Marpurge, Geneva, Hanaw, and show consent
of all sides to me.

Of immortality taught by the Greek article: and the ground of an happy
common weal. Iapheth taught his sons souls immortality, and that by death
they shall go hence to God, where place of joy shall ever hold the good: and
place of torment the bad. The common name to both is haides: a place unknown.
And the Heathen of most ancient time, made haides to have two parts.
Leimonas, that is flourishing places of the Godly, and Tartaron, a iayle of the
wicked: So God and all souls are in Haides. And to the holy, Haides is Heaven.
To the other HELL. Leonidas King of Spart, when with few hundreths he fought
against very many thousands of Parsians, he encouraged his Soldiers thus:
Dine with a valiant courage, O Lacedaemonians: We shall Suppe in Haides. This
he made the whetston of valor: that he who dies for his Country, should have
in Haides a sure Lodge of Heaven, as Tully translateth that word. Agreeable to
that Plato the Eloquent would have it taught as the foundation of a good common
weal, that Haides has place of Eternal joy: for the just and valiant, and
such as die for their Country: and place of Eternal woe for the evil and
cowardes, that will rather flee away then die for their City. Sophocles is
most noble in this kind, in verses cited by Justin Martyr: and by full many
after him. Him I have cited upon Job. And that all souls go to Haides from
Homers days all kinds of Greeks hold that, and many great volumes would not
conteyne all their testimonies.

And after that God had by the Macedonians conveyed the Greek tongue to the
Indianes, Strabo records that the very Indianes believed of Haides as the
Graecians did. And the Macedonian Greek usually termed Heaven Haiden: as
Portus Dictionarie tells. And our Lords Prayer from Math. cap. 6. in vulgar
Greek for the borous, says, Our Father which art in Haides. And Saint Luke
in his Attique style brings the tormented in Haides talking to Abraham:
assigning no other place for him. And no Greek ever denied Abraham to be in
Haides. And we Christians hold him wicked and godles, that would make Saint
Luke senseles. All who bring men speaking one to an other, must look that the
Reader will infer they be near: and otherwise hold the writer a lier. And
any Eloquent Heathen would swear, that Saint Luke placed Abraham in Haides,
and in joy. And he makes the word Catelthein most certain: that it means,
Permeare, to pass unto: not to go down, but as the situation of the place
may infer inferioritie. Now then by Saint Lukes Greek, Catelthein eis
Haidou must mean a passage for the holy to Heaven. So in this article we
profess against Epicures with Plato and all sage Heathen, that Souls are
immortal: and that the happy go Hence to an happy Lodge: and that all we
hold, all, every one, Platoes ground and Tullies ground of a good common
weal: that the sure recompense is in Haides: And that Kings should not
persecute such Teachers, but hold them the profitablest subjects: who teach
justice and all fortitude in high sort: that the just dying for man's good, the
soul returns to Haides to God only wise and good, to an unseen and pure
place. All that know Platoes greek would swear the Pe^ner of this article was
so far no whit Platoes inferior for use of greek. But the Latin phrase
Descendere ad inferos, sent you Jews to Hell, stumbling at the doctrine. And
Latin Chrysologus 1200* years ago, mistaking the heathen phrase, said that
Abraham was in Gehenna till Jesus went thither to redeem him out. Thereupon
your Isaac Ben Arama after others took occasion to stumble at our Gospel: who
upon Levit. 26. writes thus: Fol. 205. All the law of Christians hangs upon
this one string, that for the fall of Adam he became dead in sin: and all the
Fathers and just went into the Mahamaroth (Psalm. 140) the pits of Gehenna,
till JESUS went thither, and brought them forth: Now, that is not possible that
the holy Prophets being so familiar with God in their bodies of clay, should
not rather out of the body, bein sight of his blessed glory and in joy.

Articles against Isaac Ben Aremaes slander.
I. Our Gospel never taught any holy soul went hence to any other place then
to heaven. So Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are in the kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 8.
and all the Prophets, Luc. 13. So the thief, Luc. cap. 23. knew that Christ
should go hence to his kingdom, and that he should be pitied: and was told
that he also should go that day to Paradise. And S. Paul, Heb. xj. tells
expressly, that Abraham was here a stranger, but looked for an heavenly city,
and God prepared it. Though in form of doctrine he was not perfected: having
but the promise of Christ to come, yet he saw him by faith, as we by story:
and by that faith went hence to heaven. And often does S. Paul speak, Heb. 9.
and 10. that our Lord went from the body to heaven: Therefore ye Jews be
shameless slaunderers. II. Christ being in aeternall spirit the God of Bethel,
the Angel that has the name of Adonaj in him, Ex. 23. taught Moses all
divinity: and teaches nothing in the New Testam. but that which he taught in
Moses and the Prophets. Now HE, in Levit. 26. where the recompense of keeping
the Law is told, tells of life eternal by dwelling with God: and of death
by Gods angri face. And that you should know, that the Law was given to humble
you to receive the mercies in Christ: You are told of 28. fold punishments,
and of Babels 70 years, and that then ye will confess your sins, as Dan.
chap. 9. did. And then God will teach his covenant, which the Angel did: That
Christ in the time set, shall end sacrifice and offering: that is, alter the
laws which Moses gave. S. Steven was accused for the Angels words: and as
all the Synedrion looked upon him, they beheld his face as the face of an
Angel, Act. 7. None of you all ever durst deny the story. And when ye killed
the holy Martyr, the Angel Gabriel and all the Angels encouraged the Romans
to destroy your place. And for the Godly, S. Paul expounds Levit. 26. thus:
1. Cor. 5. We do know that if the earthly house of tabernacle be dissolved:
we have a building from God, not made with hands, everlasting in the heavens.
Here ye might have seen that your Beniamite spoke as Levi, and as nothing
inferior to Moses: For the spirit of God rules his pen, by which Moses was
wise. Again, for the place of the damned, John Apoc. 14. says: They shall be
tormented before the throne of God and the Lamb for ever and ever. So Gods
angry face shall be upon them. Thus ye may see that ye are much deceived. III.
Upon your occasion I thrice wrote in Greek to Nicolaus Serarius of Mentz. He
and many of many places requested me to write in Greek: to stir study to
the tongue. And long ago a right honorable Patron bound me in promise so to
do in honor of our Greek Testament: all written at the first in Greek. To
Nic. Ser. I wrote a demand what I should answer Jews for the Pope. He knew
well enough, that if he reconciled not the Pope to me, I would begin with him.
And he expressly answers from Thomas Aquinas, that Christ never went by Change
of Place, to Hell: but the Church believed as Athanasius, Cyrill, Theodoretus,
who expreslie tell, that all the faithful went hence to most blessed Palaces:
Upon Psalm. in Commelins fragmentes. IV. Theophylact upon Saint Luke 23.
records, that the best learned hold, all the faithful went hence to the
royal palaces. V. Chrysostom teaches upon 2. Cor. Hom. 6. that Abraham and
Lazarus were in the kingdom of heaven. So your slander is great, and worthy
of great punishment. Only the heathen Latin phrase bewitcheth the world:
Descendere ad inferos. But now some write unto me from England, that there be
none holden of any conscience, that are not of my mind. This cause has been
there so much debated: and the learned K. forces all to look about them. But
I will return to Greeks. In Photius library, a little work is cited,
fathered upon Flavius Josephus, your man: wherein haides has the Bosom of
Abraham, in light and joy: and a Prison for the wicked: which is called of the
same Josephus in your war, Dark Haides. And that other work is fathered upon
sundry moo: Ireneus, Justin Martyr, and one Caius. Such consent was to the
doctrine.
Of Justin Martyr. Justin Martyr was a great Philosopher, and ready in the best
Greeks. He Quaest. 75. distinguishes Haiden into Paradise, and
Nabuchodonosors Haiden: And for the Monarchy of the world, and Souls
immortality cites against Epicures, wise Poets for Haides, iumpe as
Christian faith is professed, by symbolon Apost. And from the phrase of this
article Justin wan his chief credit among heathen. The Latin translation would
never have done that. The Greek is holy.

Of Eusebius. Eusebius in the common mouth of Ecclesiastical story: and in
this argument he uses the phrase of the symbolon, Hist. 1. 13. and by oracles
does expound it. He says that Thaddaeus taught the L. of Edessen, that our
Lord was crucified, dead, and buried, and went to Haides: and thence he raised
up the just: which had of long time been a sleep. This in Hist. lib. 1. cap.
13. Now Apod. 3. He cites Porphyrie and Oracles, to tell whither our Lord
went: where the Oracles say, of our Lord. Apo. 3. fol. 87.

That Man's Soul was the godliest of all souls. And the Godly Soul does go
into heaven. Thus speaks the Oracle: and Porphyrie assenteth, That the Soul
was just, and went hence into heaven. So Eusebius being the common historique
for the Church, tells the common opinion for his time, how the speech of the
Symbolon was understood, that Haides of the godly is known.

Of Latins: and other translations. Soon after that Latin studies came in
credit, they bred disturbance: what Descendere and inferos should mean: and no
tongue but the Greek could well express the matter. Therefore many Symbola,
when the immortality of the soul was known, left out the article: when the
mind without the express word held the matter: and barbarous tongues could
not express the right. Two causes moved them. The one, that when souls
immortality was known, the article was cold that drew the matter into
question. The other, that translations drew hurtful expositions: being unable
to overtake the Greek eloquence. So the omission was sage, where omission was:
and was to be wished that it had been over all Barbarous Countries, unable to
express the Greeks clearenes.

But we may be sure it was in the Greek at the first, while Heathen and
Christians made equal use and friendship by the article. And the Greek Fathers
continually deal with the article, as holding it usual. And for all the
twenty opinions: I cited, this comes one check for them all: That it is in
propriety of Greek flat atheism, to deny to souls passage from the body:
To Catelthein eis haidou, a returning to God that gave them. And it is an
unspeakable shame for Doctors of Christianity, not to know the phrases of
their own abridgement of faith, and marks of profession. Now I will come to
your Hanovean Preachers, and Marpurges, and Lavater, and Geneva, and for your
stirs for Genevaes quarrel.

Of the report that I was set against all Churches.
I. This report was much faulty. It is no fault to differ from all Churches
for the good of all Churches. II. Churches carry no sway, above the word of
God: but the word of God does above all Churches. III.I have brought to light
by the help of Jews and Heathen, many things which none of any Church before
me cleared to my hand: as that the Law was aey written as now. IV. I knew not
fifteen years ago, any learned man in the world that durst mainteyn, that to
Catelthein eis haidou in the Godly, was to go up to heaven. But since, mighty
and Learned are of my mind. The Duke of Bullon being at Hanaw, was desirous to
hear my self upon this article, at a late supper. And as Master Isaac Genius
told me on the morrow, he sent to Sedan for his Professor: who came and read
what I had written, and said he was of my mind: and the Duke bade him tell
all his fellows, that they also should be or look for no pay. Isaac Genius is
mine author. Master du Boys can tell: ask him. And unless England be full
of fools or flatterers, the hearty all there, stand to me. Two Caladonians,
nine years ago, overthrew all the good that I might have done. The Bishops
cleared them selves: and told who the parties were: Two Calcedonian Lords
sorrowed that that should come from their soil: and that thereupon Ban. by
whom I would not be checked for any thing, should be great. In France the best
learned presently joined to me: and reformed Helvetia: and the LL. and
Merchants of Francfurt: and the Jesuits of Mentz: and the best of Hanaw. The
least should not chide, that I was against all Churches: when I am against them
for their special good.
At Francfurt a Preacher by occasion of speech against English Spellmen, was
answered that they were allowed in England. Then said he, There is no religion
in England. A merchant whom M. Is. Genesis described to be simply the richest in
all Francfurt, said, I would Br. heard you. He is no Turk, Jew, Romist,
Lutheran, Calvinian, yet I hold him of the best religion. In England we allow
no teacher but God. The Merchant, thought differing from me^ to be no blame, as
none that study of conscience, will make flesh their arm. I dare promise
that what so ever I defend of resolute purpose, or oppugn in schools: that
the most part of the hearers will be of my mind. I was requested at Mentz, to
dispute upon a Licentiat. I told them that I had no mind to be busy in
strange soiles. Then they urged instantly of all friendship. Thereupon I was
content, but told them, that I would overcome, by their voices, or never
dispute more. And if any think, he can do better then their aunswearer did,
let him try. The question shall be here laid down.

Romana Ecclesia est vera Christi Ecclesia.

The Church of Rome is the true Church.

Reply.You make Peter God: Therefore ye are not the true Church.

The antecedent is denied.Ye make him Rock: Therefore God.

The sequel is denied.Rock is never taken in praise of person: but only in
God. Once it is spoken of Abraham and Sara, Es. 51. For the Quarry whence
Israel was out: and for a Madianite, Number. 25. But neither place will stand so
here: Though Maymonides in Moreb, would commend Abraham and Sara here. The
continual use of Rock in the highest degree of praise tells, that the term
belongs only to God.

Answer.It is bestowed sometimes upon other men.

Reply.Eysight will judge, that, These be all the places wherein the word
comes, in commendation of a Person:

The Rock: his word is Perfect: He is the God of truth, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 4. And he
contemned the Rock of his salvation, v. 15. Thou will forget the Rock that
begat thee, v. 19. Their Rock has sold them, v. 30. Their Rock is not like
our Rock, v. 31. The Rock in whom they trusted, v. 36. And in all these places
the seventie Seniors put Theos, God.
Thus often in one chapter in Moses, the word Rock is, God: and the terms of
the Gospel must agree with them of the Law. So,

There is no Rock but our God, 1. Sam. 2. My God is the Rock in whom I will
trust, 2. Sam. 22. 3. and Psalm. 18. 3. And who is the Rock, but our God, 2.
Sam. 22. and Ps. 18 The Eternal lives, and blessed is my Rock: and exalted be
my God, the Rock of my salvation, 2. Sam. 22. The Rock of Israel spoke to me.
The Eternal is my Rock, and Redeemer, Psalm. 19. My Rock, be not silent
concerning me. Doubtless he is my Rock and my salvation, Psalm. 62. 3. and 7. He
was to me a Rock of dwelling, Psalm. 71. 3. The Rock of my heart, and my
Portion, Psalm. 73. 26. They remembered that God was their Rock. My God, and the
Rock of my salvation, Ps. 89. My God, and the Rock of my confidence, Ps. 94.
22. Let us sing to the Rock of our salvation. Ps. 95. Blessed be the Eternal
my Rock. Ps. 144.
So in Esai, the Rock of thy strength, thou have not remembered, chap. 16. 10.
So the Rock of Israel, chap. 30. I acknowledge no other, cha. 44. The holy
Ghost would not so often use the term Rock in so high Majesty, and bestow it
upon Peter, who thrice denied him. S. Peter him self in his Epistle from
Babylon to the scattered Jews somewhat near by the 70. term for Tzur (...),
2. Sam. 22. says: Let them commend their souls to the sure Rock the Creator.
Now the cause of the term Rock proceeded from the first demand, concerning
the Son of man, Dan. 7. coming with the clouds of heaven, or Angels, as
Rabbi Sadaias terms them. There, in a great Sea four beasts arise
afflicting Judah. But Deuteronomy. 32. told the Rock would help them at the worst: as
Dan. 12. tells. So against the Romans sea, Apoc. 13. The same term Rock is
a promise, against Rome, nor for Rome. And Peter was never nearer Rome then
Ioppe: Origin and Tertullian, Eusebius. auctors, after 250. years of Peter's being
in Rome, are a Egyptian Read, that will prick the hand. S. Luke that notes
less towns where S. Peter was, would never have omitted his being in Rome, if
ever he had been there. And he that expreslie tells of him self, he was in
Babylon to show the Prophecy Psalm. 87. that Babel and proud Egypt should yield
a people to God, 1. Pet. 5. and in his second Epistle pronouncing the letter A
in by an S. (which Chaldaea did: as Daniels speech teaches: and Thalmud
Ierusalemy in Megilah: and R. Azarias) in Balaams father, Bosor, for Beor at
Rome by the 70. he might have taught any maid, whence the Galilean wrote, by
his voice. So Rock is expreslie against Rome, not for it. But will try you with
a second Syllogism.

If Rome crucified Christ, it is impossible for God to bless Rome, with any
have or Perogative: long S. Paul was kept back. But the first is true, by
Balaam, Number. 24. and the four Evange listes in Pilate and the Roman Soldiers:
Therefore Rome for any prerogative, must still go on to destruction, as Balaam,
Numb. 24. and Apoc. 17. do use the phrase.
Answer. Rome, as it is the seat of the Empire, it is cursed, But as it is the
Church, it is blessed.

Reply. Your Pope is far above all Emperors as ye deem: therefore as your
church depends upon him, ye are openly cursed. Here I gave place to others,
as reason would: and the commencer gave certain Battes to the Repliers: and the
Bedell brought so to me: and they requested me not to refuse the^. This
disputation was celebrated by the very Jesuits, over the Empire: that none
could answer the arguments. And for all that I am to teach you, they confess
that all mine extant in Ebrew, Greek or Latin, they allow. And for all that,
they have more, I reject it. These be vain dreams, that one Apostle could be
above another: That Peter was at Rome: that any ca^ bind, or lose sins: but
by teaching what binds, what loses: that one man should in Divinity be
above all: that the Barbarous Latin should exclude the Hebrew law: where
thousands of names, as in the book of Numbers, have plain sentences under the^:
But in other tongues we speak them to less comfort. And so the new Testam. in
Greek has every word as a Pearl, to them that can tell from what Heathen, the
flower of Athens they be taken: or in what imitation of the 70. or Thalmudique,
for weighty common places* or which turn eloquent Greek to Beryllike or
Carbunclelike terms of the Law and Prophets. One skillful in Greek and Ebrew
shall in reading the New Testament run in memory through all Attique and
Thalmudique The Latin is to the Greek but as a stutter to eloquent. And a
Babylonian curse came to the world: when the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
the tongues of Heber and the Greek, was despised: and a latepatched barbarous
came in steed of it. The plague of Rome by Alaricus and Gensericus, and
Theodoricus, and Totilas that pilled Rome, might have warned them, of
preferring the Barbarous before the Holy. The next wickedness is this: That any
should command any of the simplest not to read the Bible: or any learned
requested by a company, not to expound it. If the Synagogue of the
Bridge-makers at Thymbris had taught Rome every day of the Lord John's
Apocalypse, they had not been now in dispute for Faith and Dominion. By the
grounds which they must grant, and I would bring to you, no one whit of Bible
will serve the Bridge-maker of Rome, as Sozimus terms him. The mainteyning of
a Barbarous School Latin, and wicked Aristotle's false grounds gives him
color of Prate: If Graecia ruled studies, as after the Apostles days it did
six hundredth years: and your Thalmudique studies were joined; to show that our
Apostles have nothing but by your grant it had been plain of old. I will anon
plead your consent with me: and now tell you that the mystery of Godliness,
that God in the flesh reconcileth the world unto himself: this, your Doctors
speak, but knew not what they spoke. In other poinctes your old Scribes
better clear our Apostles then any of our own side: by reason that their
disputations are upon Moses to their vein. hard to us, easy to you.

Then for the Churches good I need not to fear blames. In England by our
Kings commandment through the Earl of Pembrok, I gave advertisment of
strange corruption in our handling of Religion. They saw it was soundly done to
the common good: and all spoke well of it. We conspire not as your
Thalmudiques do, to be the scu^me of the world: to deny 80. years from the
Poloponnesian wars to Alexander Macedon men of all Kingdoms, Persian and
Greeks: and so over all the world ever to have been in course of nature. Such
dogs ye are: to defeet the Angel Gabriels prophecy. Now for Geneveans,
Marpurgeans, and Hanoveans none of fame cross me. So your objection is fond.
And for hindering Princes, I sought not to them: nor ever will. And I have
answered them so in a Latin Epistle. My own K. is able enough: and was willing
but for some hinderers. Now I will show Rabbi Elias your appointed Orator
toward me, his attendance to me at Basil, to our Apocalypse, and the Epistle
of S. Paul to you Ebrewes. I will now lay down the sum of both, as expounded
unto him in your vein, and by your Authors.

I will in dialogue handle a speech had with Rabby Elias at Basil. For,
Dialogue, as in Plato and Tully has shortness. Thus I began. Br. I preceave by
your eloquent speech, that you are the Rabbi which in Francfurt synagoge
disputed with me: denying nothing, that you knew true. Eli. I am the man. And
I gladly heard you draw all the Law to Messiah: and I celebrated you to all
nations: and gladly would I hear more. Br. and gladly would I teach you. And
that you may wonder at the Fishers of Galily, I will take ourlast book penned
by John the Apostle: speaking how Cittim or Italy shall afflict the true Israel
until the end of light with darkness: Balaam spoke of Assure and Cittim. By*
Assure he meant them that possessed Assyria, and dwelt in the East: as
Salmanasars house, and Chaldea, and Persia, and Macedonians. All these held
Assyria, and the Persian King, Son to Esther is called King of Assyr in Ezra:
as Cyrus King of Babel. But the Empire of Italy stayde in Italy, and by
Deputies afflicted: so it is as equally great to all the former, as if they had been so many kingdoms.

The story you know, how the Romans pretending friendship in the beginning:
at the last, by the Machabees falling out, made Judah subject to Rome, and kilde
Christ: and destroyed your City. Eli. We all know this too well. Br. Daniel
told you, that Christ the King should be killed at the holy City: to make
reconciliation for sin: and to find eternal redemption, and make the Heathen
one body with you: and should finish sacrifice and offering: and then should
destroy the holy City and Temple: as with the deluge of Noes flood. Eli. I
remember, you brought me to this exigent in Francfurt Synagogue: and I had not
one word to reply, and you ended the holy Chronicle in the death of Messiah:
and you showed by like revolutiones, that as we had 40. years in the wilderness
in rebellion before we entered into the Land, so we should have 40. for
repentance: after killing of Christ, before we should go into the wilderness of
the heathen: which before for Judah, before the first Temple was brent, Ezekiel
for Jeremy handles: and Barbinel upon him very plentifully. And we Jews
admire God in our Law for measure of times to our policy, noe less then our
Godly Astronomers do, showing how the motiones of the Heavens declare the
works of God: So when we see your new Testament join in times to ours, the
Law, for my part I speak, I think it is from God. Br. You know Daniel
begins with the first of the seventie of Babel: and then he himself was
captived, and lives seventy years in Babel: and saw the event of Ieremies
prophecy for it, for desolation: and then is taught of seaventie seavens to end
Moses, so 70. and 490. make 560. all these by scripture: add forty from like
revolution and sure by Roman Rolls then Daniel gave 600. year warning that
the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world. Eli. I remember with unspeakable
gronings, the destruction of the old world: for not regarding Lamechs speech
at the birth of Noe: how he should comfort us: after our wicked works, and
sorrows of our hands: and after the curse of the earth, from the eternal God
upon Adams rebellion: how at six hundredth years after, it came: when Noe was
six hundredth years old: then came the flood, and took all away: and our
Thalmud and Zohar tells that all their souls be in Gehenna. Now I see our
misery, and your truth: and that our City shall never be restored, nor our
nation: and that all our Thalmudiques rebel against God, teaching a restoring
of our state in the land of Canaan. Br. Where Daniel ends, John begins.
Fourteen years after the City was stoken by the Romans, as Ezekiel in like
time saw a Jerusalem. Chapter 40. John sees the History of Ezekiels Jerusalem:
that his prophecy is not to be expounded in propre sense of words: where the
man of God spoke as he was carried by the spirit. The time is gathered by
Roman Stories for the death of Domitian, soon following John's banishment into
Patmos: as Christ his eyes were a flame of fire, serching Rome dealinges: as
Paras, was revenged for hinderance of the Temple, even by glorious Cyrus
miserable death: and soon in Xerxes great army. Eli. Gods works be great,
and regarded of all that delight in them. But now speak of your revelation what
it is: what it handles: what nationes, what times: and first of all what is
the kind of the style. By that we shall know whether God pend the book. He is
perfect in wisdom and speech: no man ever was: but they in whom the Spirit of
God spoke: They only, no man, be perfect in speech

Of the revelation style. Br. The Fisher of Galilee made a Fisher for Ezekiels
waters which give live where they come, clensing hearts unto true holiness:
shows by his wisdom of speech, that God spoke in him: and by statelines of
matter: wherein man's wit could not deal: and the power of performance: which
now the event has showed. But now we will consider alone the style: in Attique
and common Greek: in the 70. Seniores Greek: in the Thalmudique Greek: and
where the Apostle is stately from God to speak in a new manner: by this rule
given to Heathen: which Horace, witty, though wicked has in Art. Poet Licuit,
semperque licebit,
Signatum praesente note traducere nomen.
He that goes further builds Babel in building a new language, Terms ought
to be known to all nations: and God gives noe rules but the plain for the
simplest to understand. And Moses bids us to leave the hid to the Eternal
our God, Deuteronomy. 29. And, as you know full well, that speech is pricked over the
head: as one of the fiften places pricked for singular rare warning. Midras
Rabbah in the Prick over Aharon, to warn that he is not in the number there
set down, handles all the fiften. God requires plain speech: and that, in
these four kinds: Rome patching a barbarous newfangled, speech deals as
Marmony praet. to Misnah, speaks of the wrightes to the Babylonian Thalmud:
That they made a speech which lived not in the world but an hundredth years.
For the Greek Emperors there taming Babel destroyed their College: and so
their invention, as the tower went not forward. But it troubled you to this
day: while ye teach your children athean traditiones from a language that
never any nation spoke: and ye are feign to make a dictiory in comment through
your six great Tomes. You invented a Gibberish speech, that christians could
not spy your vanity: and ye wrote traditiones to your nation for salvation
where Thalmud Ierusalemi an hundredth years elder dealt plainly: that we may
see what ye have good, and what ye have bad. And Maimoni made it into Ebrew:
and the other Moses in S. M. G. Sepher, Mitsvoth Gedoloth. Speeches from these
four, used while the Temple stood, will help us. And now I will handle John's
four dialectes, as art bids him to speak. It was not he that wrote, but God
that wrote by him.

Of the Attique in the Apocalypse. The Rainbow is in the 70. Toxon, bow: that
would have troubled John: who chapter 6. brings Toxon in the common sense of a
bow. Therefore he takes the term Iris: used in Homer and in all after him.
That is specially brave in Attique sense: As that term is brave in Homers
Scholars.

Of the 70. Bishops dialecte: Far the most part of the book is from the terms
of the 70. Although the Fisher of Galilee never read them, the Word taught him
their words for the use of nationes that were acquainted with the septuagint.
One speech of this sort is so rare, from the 70. upon El. 54. yea so rare: that
they who mark it not, will confound all, that touches the authority of the
twelve stones: which are twelve Exodus 28. of them be niene Ezekiel. 28. and all
twelve be Apoc. 21. in rare use.

Of laspis, put for the Carbuncle: Apoc. 21. From the 70. upon. Es. 54. Codcod
by David Kimchi the King of Grammarians is in Esai. 54. the Carbuncle: as you
know full well: o Rabbi Elias. Eli. That do I full well: and so in Thargum
Ierusalemy. The stone of Judah is Cadcedona. Br. So our John names it:
Chalcedon: avoiding the repeating of the letter Daleth. Eli. Assuredly this can
not be done without rare instinct. You bring me in great part to be a
Christian. But go on. Iaspis in the walls of Jerusalem is Codcod: and Iaspis
comes for the walls of the holy City, that they be as Iaspis
Christallizing, from Es. 54. But Iaspis in the first of the twelve foundations
is clean for an other tribe, as I will speak anon. Eli. If your translation
distinguish not these two, it does the Author great injury, for the whole
book should find disgrace, by confusion: for so rare wisdom.

Of the Thalmudique. But next your septuagint Dialect, let me see our
Thalmudique: In that we would be proud. Br. Calcedon, the last word that we
spoke off is of that sort. So Collyrion. Apoc. 3. of ten in Midras Rabba and
your Thalmuds: Known in Grecia, in you more. Jews schattered among Greeks
learned many vulgar terms, as that, and Cosmocrator: for a King: in Ierusalemy
and Midras Rabba: and many such. So, That the sacrificers were girded about the
breast, you Rabbi know who teaches. Rabbi. Eli. very well, Vzielides, upon
Ezekiel, and Mamionides in, Holy garments, and Kimchi in Miclol. And this last
is enough for the Thalmudiques. Now let me hear, what the Apostle took from
Gods authority: that will most show that God speaks in him. Br. That shall be
more largely handled.

Of the Apostique Greek dialect. For speeches and for sentences calling whole
books into clear light, I will here speak: and I will give the particulars
their titles: for rarenes of the matter.

Of Jehovah expounded. This comes first, that Iehova is expounded from Exodus
who was, whose is, who will be: and this: drawn to show the last acts looking
to the first counsels, that all may be seen to depend upon one God. Eli. Rab.
Elias. Our common prayerbooke printed here at Basil, harps at this. Br. But to
what purpose, missing of all Gods nature in the holy trinity: The Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost: and of his counsel for submitting the world to a
man, where the first man fell his first day, and then one in whom God should
dwell was promised a destroyer of Satan's works: ye speak all this but as
Parrets. Eli. God help, us: have on, the journey is long, yet you make me think
it short. So Ossenb. Jews learnd Daniel of you.

Of the seven Spirits. From Es. 11. You note that seven spirits shall rest
upon Messiah, Sanedrin Perek. 6. Fol. 43. But you understand not that the
Godhead shall rest bodily in him: which Godhead is all one in the Father, the
Son, and holy Ghost: and that is inseperable: yet there is a distinction
known to* God, and told us, and we know that God dwells in light which none
can come to: and we rest in so much as our minds can hold. And your selves
confess a mystery in Elohim Genesis 1. 1. being in form Plural, as in, Thy
Creatours, Eccl. 12. Thy Makers. Thy Lords from Es. 54. And God my makers,
Job. 35. And in Massecheth Sopherim, ye fight why Abraham should use ( Genesis
20.) a verb plural to Elohim: when They ( Elohim) caused me to wonder from my
country, (not knowing whether he went as elswere Midras expoudeth the word): at
this ye are all amassed, yet ye cannot perceave that in Aharons blessing number. 6.
for what mystery Iehova is thrice repeted, from whom grace and peace comes
to Israel. But our Fisher of Galile, teaches that the Spirit which flootered
upon the waters, flootereth upon the waters of the Law here, to give waters of
life freely, without which waters and spirit, none can be borne to the kingdom
of Heaven. This spirit is eternal God, the same Godhead with the Father, as
Iehova sent him and his spirit, to teach the Gospel of the Eternal son, whom
God made heir of all, and by whom he made the world. So he shows Jesus
Christ to be the Eternal, when he prays for grace and peace from him.

Of the Psalm 89. Where the Kingdom of David promised by Nathan is expounded:
How John expounds that to stand in Christ. Elias; I thank you heartily for
calling me to consider better the Law: I will think sadly of it. But what
poinct touching Christ, plain in prophecy does he teach. Br. All you know that
Aethan the Ezrahite, of Zera brother to Phares, handles the state of the
Kingdom which you look for. And there he prophecieth that Salomo^s house
should come to nothing, yet an Eternal throne was stablished, for one chosen,
the Bechor, first begotten, here from the dead: for which hope Joseph's bones
end the glorious book of Genesis. In Aethan, He is above the Kings of the
earth: and so in John's blessing, as eternal God.

Of Psalm. 33. For election. And John tells, what true blessing is: That Jesus
Christ does love us, and washes us from our sins. Here the eternal love of
God, that chose Abraham: yea when he had worshipped strange Gods: yet of
love, not desert, chose him: and so all blessed: who cannot chose him, but he
does chose them. Blessed be the people whom Jehovah has chosen to be their
God. He, by whose WORD the heavens were made: and all the host of them by the
SPIRIT of his mouth.

Of washing us from our sins. Esaias the Evangelist, full of gladsome tidings
in Christ, tells, that Iehova will be the brightness of glory, and the fruit of
the earth: and wash away the uncleanness of the daughters of Sion. That text
shows the marrow of all Esai: and he of all the Prophets. And John here
tells that JESUS Christ has washed us from our sins: and so shows that
all Levies doings be ended, for which the whole frame of the Law was made.

Of the Kingdom promised to David. Nathans prophecy for an eternal Throne,
ye expound to this day, to mean ease of this world, in Chanaan. And all the
world sees now 1500. years your madness. John tells that the royal mind
co^quering Chananean spirits, that they reign not in us: this makes us Kings
and Sacrificers, to sacrifice our own affections, and to serve God in holy
reverence: to praise him with all our heart: and to build a church against
tyranny and deceit: Against Babel and Egypt: and the New Gog and Magog.

What the drift of the Apocalypse is. Rab. Elias. I never heard so much for your
new Testament: Now let me hear the drift of the book, as you have told the
drift of Daniel. Br. A little more I will speak of John^ Apostolic Greek in
some particulars: and then Generally. Messiah in Daniel, has his feet like
shining brass: some brass comes near gold: such as Ezra mentions, cap.
8. 27. Mountain brass Greeks call it. John Libanus brass: as God uses
Libanus for mountains, in speech of their frame. So for Iahalom, the stone
wherein Zabulon was graven, the 70. had Iaspis: which term had caused great
disturbance. John applies Iaspis to the Hebrew Iaspeh, the stone of Benjamin:
and to Iahalom he gives Sardonix: and Chrysophrase for Nephthaly, in steed of
common Achates: a white Achat with a Golden list, and some Greenesse. So
precious is John's style. And this much particularly: Now generally, the style
is from the Prophets: showing from old matters past, how the like shall come
again: which is the surest way of teaching. And the language will be easy to
you Jews, because you know the Prophets speech: but is hard to Heathen,
because the 70. did not translate, nor ever meant, the Law plainly, because
the wicked would hold it folly. Now I will come to show the counsel of the
book. Rabbi. And upon what Prophecy does it depend? Br. Upon Es. 25. where
God promises to take away the covering that covered all Nations. The Gospel
shows how God was in Christ, to take away the covering of the Law. Now that
Temple and Nation is destroyed, and Jesus Christ himself in this book calls
all Nations to him, the term of uncovering is a fit title for that Prophecy.
Rab. Elias. This very title might show God to be the Author of the book. Br.
The drift of it is, to comfort all holy Jews, as S. Peter did from Babylon,
that the heavenly Jerusalem is not a material City, but made of men's hearts
known to God, and praying to him from good understanding, and using open sage
profession while God bridleth hinderance, and using circumspection against bad
Tyranny made strong by Satan turned into an Angel of light. It conteyneth
beside John's preface in propre speech, visions for the present institution of
the world: in cha. 1, 2, 3. And afterward for ages following. For the present
age Jesus Christ appears as he did to Daniel, chap. 10. when the Temple was
hindered from building: and applies that vision to seven churches, in most
heavenly sweatnes, and expounds all the Song of Songs by knocking at the
door, that he is the Solomon, who conforteth the daughters of Jerusalem. The
Prophecies following twice go over the state to come unto the end of the
world. The first ends with the eleventh chapter: the next with the
nineteenth: The twenty lappeth up the mischief of Satan: and the last two, the
glory of the afflicted, and obscure to the world: by pearlike speeches for the
Prophets Jerusalem.

Of the Nations, by name saluted in this book. The God of all knowledge uses
light in all his stories. The house of rich Craesus sprange from a King most
famous for riches, who ruled from many Isles of the Middle Sea, to Armenia. Esai
promised Cyrus all his wealth: in Rich Craesus that fell out, who being in
amity with Nabynetar, as Herodote harped at his name, he provoked Cyrus to
war: and of Craesus became Irus. So Persia ruled that Soil long. Now when
Ezekiel had comforted the Jews, that they should have a return as a
resurrection, he warns them, that they should look for no kingdom in this
world: but that the Land of Gog, or Gyg, and Magog, by Graecians, should
afflict them with Great helps from many countries, as you know. In the Kings
of the North and South, Dan. xj. this fell out: whereof Antiochia was near
Magog: the Town built by Antiochus the mischievous: The other Towns here
named, were the old courts of rich Gyges: The Kings of the South Ptolemei
Lagidae: And the Kings of the North Seleucidae, both held as it were, in
equal portion these soiles: and filled them with Jews forced to learn
Greek. So these being nearest to Jerusalem of Greek countries, and full of
Jews scattered, to teach the old story were fittest to be taught, first to
save the rest of Greek speech: and all they knew Daniels Prophecy of his last
kingdom boisterous in these quarters. And the God of all knowledge, began in
wicked Antioch to make a godly church: that Christians thence first bare the
name: and ends his speech to men in the other end of the legs last
dominions which they could hold: The Land of old God and Magog, under
Macedonians: and fit to look for a new Gog and Magog from further West. Rab.
Eli. I gladly hear this. Now tell at large who be the oppressors.

Of the Oppressors, in the Apocalypse. Br. You know o Rabbi, how closely Daniel
taught, who the Nations should be, who should take away the Jews kingdom. But
in the end he names them: yet so, that he wrote that part in Ebrew: the
tongue ended from the world in common usage. So here, a long while they are
closely touched as under seals: and from the last of them come seven
trumpets. Seeing John was banished into Patmos by Rome: his comfortes in
Plagues and vengeance should be against Rome: who is plagued with war,
bloody and pestilent, and with loss of state, for killing: then after the fall
of the Church, arises by color of scripture, a king of Locustes, or beast
arising out of the earth by peace: in the policy or City where Christ was
crucified. Next they are both as Pharaoh, Es. 27. set forth by a Dragon with
arms that will agree to none but Rome: and this same Dragon has two parts:
the upper part in a policy alone: the tail, the prophet that speaks lies.
Again, both be more clearelie set forth in two several parts. The upper
part of the Dragon, is compounded in a new one beast coming out of a sea:
co^pounded of the four in Daniel: with a head like the Dragons, and once made
dead: as, the state under the seals was once overthrowen. Then the tail of
the Dragon is a beast alone, coming out of the quiet earth: bearing two horns
like a Lambs: but the mouth of the former Dragon, and makes the former beast
alive again: and suffers none to use policy, but them that use the marks
of his Policy: worship of Idols, now openly told. And at the last, all is
made plain, The beast revived, has the horns of the former: and head: but
for cruelty, all bloody in color: as Pope is the greatest murderer that ever
was in the world: by wars all unjust: and challenge to kill all that will not
fall down and worship him. Now upon this red beast sits a woman drunk with
the blood of the Saints: and then all doubt is taken away. The woman is the
City which bears rule over the Kings of the earth. And this for the last
affairs of the world. Rabbi Elias. I am sure the Nation is past denial: how
so ever the particulars will fall out. Now I beseech you tell me briefly the
whole sum of John's vision. God is my judge that I never heard Christian with
so great delight: and I thought so when you reasoned with me in Francfurt
Synagogue. I never heard any Christian before you, that could speal Ebrew
readier then we Ebrewes: and made good your doctrine by our Doctors and by
Greeks, that never saw Daniel. As Abraham Ruben writes, so I think that your
Q. has rare regard of scholars. Br. I will endeavor to give you briefly the
sum of this book, from John's speech in his own native manner, and his
Visions for the time praesent and to come.

The first speech of John shows how the Son has received from the Father a
revealing of the Churches case unto the last judgment and resurrection: and
John, the Disciple whom the Lord loved, is talked with by an Angel, and spoken
too by Christ. And John exclameth what goodness comes from this revelation:
that it makes the Reader happy: and he commends the work to seven
Churches of the Land of Gog, where Jews were scattered by the Macedonians:
the farthest Westward of their dispersion, and were fit instruments to save us
poor heathen toward Sun set: as afterward he made our poor country the ends
of the earth the possession of Christ. The blessing from the holy Trinity, the
Eternal, our God, the Eternal, is most heavenly, and the acclamation of
glory to the Son, from Fs. 4. and Exodus 19. and warning of his judgment:
when the second time he comes in the clouds, as he came Dan. 7. to take
manhood: and from Zachary and his own Gospel he teaches Rome that pierced
him hands, feet and side, that they shall see a Revenger. And the Eternity of
the Son is manifest, in that he is Agr;. and o. the beginning and the end,
who is, who was, and will be the Almighty. Now he comes to tell the
opportunity of the Visions. He was banished into Patmos, a small Island near
Ephesus: recorded only but by name of Heathen, obscure for any further story.
Into this, as out of the world, John of whom the world was not worthy, was
banished: God turning Domitians tyranny into a blessing, that this desert
Island, should have the state of the whole world set open. Rabbi Elias. Certainly
this must be a strange blessing of God: I am much bent to hear your speech: and
I consider the Law-giving how it was in the wilderness, where none but Gods own
should be partakers. And as at the West of the Arc, as at Sunne-setting of
state, the Dearest and last-borne Tribes were set: Joseph and Benjamin: in
Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasses, to show that the Lord does stretch his power
to the furthest off: So I deem, that, in the furthest quarters of our
dispersion Westward, as before Ephraim, Benjamin and Manasses, GOD would
stir up his strength, and come and help us. Thus far I can go, after you
have draw me on. Br. The baseness of this Island has a further signification:
to teach, that the obscure places shall most have the glory of God. As all men
be wicked naturally, and one pricketh forward another, so a great City, such
as Aristides the Rhetor Sophister, makes Rome, will soon become a world of
wickedness. But Patmos now tells that the Church shall be in the wilderness: as
in chap. 7. it is not evident by open show, but as in Jerusalem under Sedekias,
Ezekiel. 9. when an Angel seals them which belang to God: so of us heathen, an
Angel seals them that be his, when the open face of the Church was gone:
and the Dragon, head and tail drives the Church into the wilderness: and the
beast compounded of Daniels four once dead and revived, but of purple color,
and having a Rider, a Woman, in scarlat, drunk with the blood of the Saints,
this drove the Church into the Wilderness through a fea of troubles, mixed with
fire and faggot. Rab. Eli. I admire these visiones, and cannot gainsay them. Br.
The time is more wond^^full then the place. Rab. What term have ye of the
time? Br. The Lords day. Rab. What day is that? Br. The first day of the week.
Rab. And why is the Sabbath altered? Br. I will tell you large matter briefly.
The first day, Elohim, the adviser and worker of the worlds frame made heaven
with the Angels, and Earth, and Light: and the Angels, the morning Stars, who
confirmed by fear and tremblinge their strength, which in wisdom and holiness
was not so perfect, but that they might fall: these stars showted to see the
earth hang in the mids of the air: and the Waters drawn to their channels:
and the roaring Sea, threatening to drowned the Land, returning from the
shore, as by Gods checkes, so when they saw the Clouds fastened in the sky,
and all works that way, they showted: No less at Sun, Moon and Stars,
and plants, trees and herbs: at Fowls from Eagle to Wren, and fish, from
Whale to shrimpe: and beasts with Crepers from Elephant to Antes: they
glorified God the creatours: Hearing a voice, saying, Let this be: and it
stood. Now when God the Creatours, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, was to
make Man, that should have knowledge of the Eternal Trinity, he, dwelling in
light that none can come too, speaks, Let us make man according to our
likeness: and let them be Lords over beasts, fish, and fowls: and God made
Man after his own image: and brings all beasts and fowls before Adam: and
he gives them names, expressing their nature, as wisely as Angels could. And
seeing that it was not good for Adam to be alone, he makes Eve out of his
Ribbe: and then carries both into Paradise: and gives commandment to both in
the singular number, as they were one flesh. Rab^ You in the ends of the earth
search the Law exactly. It must needs be holden that the Woman was made before
the Law was given. As she tells the meaning to be of both: ye shall eat of
all the trees of the Garden, but of the tree of knowledge of evil and good, ye
shall not eat: for the day ye eat of it, ye shall die. All this was the sixth
day. And before this commandment was given, God gave his Angels care over
man: as you hold them spirits sent forth to minister for them that shall
inherit salvation. Great armies of Spirits, not reverencing so fully as they
should Gods counsel, though when Man was made, they were very good, as all
creatures, yet great armies of millions being left unto their own sway, hated
man's superiority: and kept not their standing, but became of poysonfull hatred
against God: and by leave went into the serpent, and deceaved Eua, before she
was called Eve: and she drew the man to sin: and about time of Eating, they
ate the tree fruit (Generally all tree fruits be MELA, Apples). And at the
Evening God called them to judgment, and pronounces Eternal condemnation
against the Devils: and all the wicked that shall be borne of that poison that
the serpent breathed into Eve and not regenerated by water of Law, and spirit
moving upon it: which spirit ye truly say to be the spirit of Christ. This sad
story fell the sixth day. And then is the promise that one shall come to be a
man, according to the kind: whose footesteps and hands Satan the old serpent
shall pearce: but he shall bruise all his power, and destroy his works. The
serpent brought man to sin, Messiah shall find him justice: Satan bred
death: Messiah life. Satan brought all the world to wrack: Messiah the mighty
God will make a new world: and ye confess in tongue, that in this speech: HE
shall bruise thy head: HE is here, God to be praised for ever. And this more ye
say: He has decreed to destroy him out of the world, as it is written: Death
shall be swallowed up into victory: And I will destroy the unclean spirit from
out of the earth. This is principally in time to come, when the dead shall
arise. Again, in Zohar, Genesis col. 298. Since the time that the serpent
overruled man, he rules also over all the sons of the world, and he is busy
to deceave the world, and the world cannot escape his punishment, until Christ
the King does come, and the holy and blessed God does raise up them that
sleep in the dust, as it is written: Death is swallowed up into victory. Also
your selves say: Christ shall be killed: Thereupon is this allusion: of Booz to
Ruth: Sleep unto the morning, Zohar col. 93. The ground of your allusions must
be plain: when you can draw common matter to it. And the Angel Gabriels speech
was your first ground: and it is a wonder that you understand it not. Rab. El.
In England, Reinolds and Lively, and Bar Lo scoff your account. In Leyden
Scaliger Br. Churches ken them cold thanks, and wished the chief, rare
otherwise, for this, unborn: and Parkins for following Reinolds in 80. seavens,
rare otherwise, by one rotten fly putrified a box of precious oinctment.
Reinolds was droven to grant the Limits: from the Angels speech to the death
of Christ. And for all Greek accomptes Scaliger and he were answered by
Greeks. What whole Kingdoms hold, as Albion upon our Bible: France in
Genebrard, the Hebrew Professor at Paris: Heydelberge, under Tremelius, well
paid: Zurick in their Hen* Wolphlius: and Geneva in sage Calvin: after old and
sound Athanasius in his Questiones: which work if it be not his (for some later
matters) made by imitation of him has double authority: and Hector Pintus in
Portugal: these millions, not one, or two, flaunting with an idle opinion of
Greek, should have been regarded of you.

Of Redemption day, that it should be on Friday. Rabbi Bachay saw by the case
of Adams fall the six day, that the Redeemer should perform his work the sixth
day. Rab. All our Doctors grant that Adam fell the day of his creation. Br.
And all ours, not ridiculous: and all simply, that redemption was wrought that
day. The whole Sabbath, our Lord rested in the grave, and the first day he
arose, and brought light unto the world. Your selves in Zohar grant all this
of Messiah: all this that I speak: That Messiah is God: that this saying, Let
there be light, is an inducing to his light. And this: The Spirit floothereth
upon the waters, has inducement to his Spirit flootring upon the waters of the
Law. All this in Zohar upon Genesis fol. 21. and much more, That Messiah was in
the Garden: and Adam was drive^ from Messiah. Thus you hear the cause of our
Lords day. Rab. I never heard so much. What saw John on the Lords day? Br.
Visions of the Churches state unto the end of the world.

Of the Trumpettes voice. He heard the voice of a Trumpet behind him, when he
was in the Spirit, as was Ezekiel chap. 1. What should the Trumpet signify?
Rab. Happy are they that know the trum pets sound, Psalm. 89. Br. And speaks
not Aethan there of the kingdom of Messiah? Rab. That we hold. Brough. So
Trumpet here calls that into mind. Rab. And what sounded the voice of the
Trumpet? Br. That Messiah is Eternal God: The first and the last in Esai. And
by imitation of Thalmudique Agr; and o. Rabhi. What means Agr; and o?

Of Agr; and o. In Isaac Ben Arama, upon Levit. 26. ye say: Aharon kept the
Law from Aleph to Thau. In Greek, not Thau, but o is the last. So Agr; and o
should mean, Beginning and Ending in Greek.

Of the Greek tongue commended to all Christians use: in that the son of God
does take a name from the Letters: yea, The Letters. When the Jews went to
Babel, by Gods counsel, to teach the families that built the Tower by rebel
Nemrod, to worship stars, and not the God of heaven: whereupon 70. tongues
sprang from One of Adams: God in Athens the oldest town of Iavan, stirred up
the mind of the Tyrant there, one Pisistratus, to win fame over all of
Iavan, by braverie of language. This I have often handled, and it must be often
repeated, for the strangenes, before it will be considered thoroughly. Homer was a
Poet of miraculous eloquence. He wrote one Fable, of Troy wars for the hoar
Helena: teaching better then Chrysippus and Crantor, what is good and bad, in
the waves of foolish people, where for all kings dotage Achivi smart* Another
of a subtle King by wit, going through stitch, through infinite miseries. This
Poets sonnets were scattered before his time, But he causes them to be set
together* And both works to be parted, into twenty four parts. Rab. So we
call Law and Prophets the Four and twenty. Br. The letters in Greek be 24.
And he caused both works to be argumented by 24. verses, from Agr; to o in
order, as co^teyning all wit that Greek learning could afford. Eust. upon
Iliad. 1. notes this. Upon this beginning Graecia in 200. years, by Alexand.
Macedons time grew to a miraculous perfection: that all the West willingly
learned it: And the Macedonians, in three hundredth years Dominion, forced the
rest too it: that all Nations might understand Greek.

Of the Apostles Greek. And therefore the Apostles wrote for all Nations in
Greek, that all might understand it: and wrote in most royal Greek, to tell
that the Roy of all wisdom ruled their pen. Now, where the Son Eternal
names him self Agr; and o, all that honor him should also regard the tongue
wherein he teaches all nations, next Adams kept by Heber. And if the tongue of
Agr; and o had been kept usual, the king of Locustes could never have made
bitter the waters of the New Testament* His treachery had been espied: as all
Graecia holds him Antichrist to this day.

Of the seven golden Candlestickes. John turned him about, and saw seven
golden Ca^dlestickes, expounded to be seven Churches: now to have these last
visions, in Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and
Laodicea. Ephesus was famous for Diana, a dreamed Goddess of hunting: for whom
Kings 120. years bestowed a most costly temple: which one set on fire the night
that great Alexander was borne, to win fame: whereupon a jest came that Diana
Gods midwife was so busy about Alexanders birth, that she forgot the
tuition of her own Temple. Here holy Paul taught three years: much vexed by
Dianeans. And here he left Timothee, and abridged to him Thalmud Thora, how the
Law should be taught, in one Epistle: and of martyrdom in another, and to the
whole Church of Ephesus, he wrote a most heavenly sum of Religion. Smyrna was
an old town, famous for one of seven that claimed Homer the Poet, to have been
borne in them. These be the seven:

Smyrna, Phodos, Colophon, Salamis, Chios, Argos, Athenae. There Polycarpus was
martyred: a Lion for courage: an Ox for patience: a man in deed for wit: an
Egle for high flight, proclaiming the Gospel. Eusebius has his martyrdom.
Pergamus was the treasury of the King of the North: a strong high Fort.
Eumene the Treasurer rebelled, and turned much people to him by Romes help.
Thyatira was named by Seleucus Nicator for his daughter as Thygatira, Daughter
town: a good remembrance of Daniels last vexers. Sardis was the court of rich
Gog or Gyges, and of Craesus: who reigned to Gogarene upon Armenia.

Philadelphia, whether it was so called from Ptolom. Philadelphus: called so in
honor, for his love to his brother, or in mockage, for killing of him, both
might be: that first he loved him, but after contempt of love he killed him,
whether of him or of Attalus Philadelphus it had the name, or were built by the
first, and augmented by the second, this for the name shall be left unsearched.
Jews were there of special knowledge: and nothing blamed in their Epistle.
Laodicea seems named* by Seleucus Nicator, as the Women of his house Apamea,
and Laodieea had many Towns of their names. So God took order to force all
men to mark the fourth Kingdom in Daniel, chap. 2. and 7. and 8. and 11. God
gave them a mind to name Towns over all their Kingdoms by their houses: that
Daniel might be known how he called all the world to Christ.

Of the pride in the name Laodicea. Homer the fountain of wit, though Suidas
record he steel most from Corinnus, he fayneth three daughters to Emperor
Agamemnon whereof he offers Achilles his choice: They are named from three
parts of government which a King should have.

Chrysothemis, and Laodice, and Iphiannassa* Golden Law: Iudg-People, and
execution-might. As Laws ought to be Golden, and judgment ready: and
execution of right. Hence the Proud Macedonians would in name of Ladies promise
much, but did little, and soon smarted: But this name calls the Lydian Poet
to mind how in one verse he lappeth good policy: so not a Town is here but
of note.

Of the Vision of Christ, like that in Daniel. In the mids of the seven
Golden Candlestickes was one like the Son of Man, Dan. 7. in Aharons linen
Robe, Dan. 10. and girded with a golden Girdle, Dan. 10. about his breast: as
Aharon. By Vziefides, Maimonides, and Kimchi. So John saw truth. His head and
his hairs were as white woole and snow, Dan. 7. and his eyes a flame of fire:
and his feet like Libanus brass, shining: and his voice like the voice of
many waters, Dan. 10. Rab. Our own confession upon Daniel brings all this to
Messiah, defending his Church, and revenging the enemy, and making him self
known over the world, when the building of the Temple was hindered. Br. But
this comes proper to present occasion. He has seven stars in his hands:
and from his mouth comes a two edged sword. That is spoken of the seven
Bishops of the Churches: as Bishops be stars in Christ's hands: Buyshops,
in Satan's, stars falling from heaven: and the two edged sword from Psa. 149.
executing Justice upon Thyatiraes Iezabels. Now his face shining like the
Sun, is from Dan. 10. and Judge. 5. Rab. This vision teaches much by the like
of old, and eventes old upon it. Br. Seven Epistles are sent to seven
Churches: and these visions and express word, that he is the Son of God,
here showed, are applied to the Churches. But plain matter you may read in
Luthers Bible. The Apocalypse in Syriaque is not printed. Rab. We wish yours in
Hebrew. Br. I am in Christ his hand, to do as he will.

Of Chap. 4. Former speeches, in the seven Epistles, handled in special
purpose, the time present. The rest are for time to come, whose partition I
touched before. Seals go on to the elevenths end. Beasts, of three sorts go
thence unto the twentieth. The twentieth abridgeth the beast his tyranny: the
rest, the Christians glory: which in a fit sort is once showed, Chap. 4. and 5.

Of Christians glory. John was beholding, and he saw the heavens opened: and
the voice which he heard like a trumpet, says: come up hither, and I will
show thee what is to come, and streightway he was in the spirit. Rab. This
has The spirit of Ezekiels Visions, chap. 1. and chap. 40. and others. Aithan
the Israelite says: Happy is he that knows the voice of the trumpet: The
trumpet for true happiness by the kingdom of Christ.

Of God sitting upon a throne. Br. Behold, says John, a throne was set up in
the heavens: and one sat upon the throne, like in sight to the Jasper and
Sardine: Know you what this must mean? Rab. Elias. The people that worship God
are called heaven: a throne for them, is a defense of their cause by the
almighty God. Benjamin was graven in the Jasper: and in his Tribe the Temple
was built: So the Judge like a Jasper, shows God a builder of his Church:
Ruben was graven in the ruddy Sardius: a Frontier against Agarenes. The judge
like this stone, shows that he will bestow blood upon the offenders* of his
people. Br. So it is opened in the seals. Christ rides upon a white horse,
crowned: so he builds his Church. And has a bow: whereby his arrows be
sharp in the heart of the kings enemies. So the judge is like a Sardine: as by
the horses black, red, pale. Now what means this? A Rainbow was about the
throne, in sight Smarag^i^e. Rab. Elias. This calls Esaias chap. 54. into
mind: where the covenant after the waters of Noe made by the Rainbow, is
confirmed: and the calling of heathen (once cast off for Babel) is promised to
Iapheth. and that part of Es. 54. we read with the Parasha next after the
flood, of the Nations scattering unto Genesis cap. 12. where Abraham our Father is
separated from heathen. Now the Smaragd is Levies stone, and betokens
teaching of the Law. So God promises teaching of his will from Moses, unto
heathen. Br. Millatheca Amyra, your word is surely spoken, you have said it.
Under the sixth Seal this comes again: after the Martyrs in the fifth, have
seat under the altar. The sixth seal teaches a change by destruction of
heathen policies, whereby the heaven of the Church was seen.

Of Elders 24. Now the Martyrs that built the Church, these are represented by
24. Elders on Thrones in white with crowns. Rah. Twenty four well may show
the Tribes and Apostles scholars. The Thrones, white and Crowns, show
dignity, justice, and victory with God.

Of issue from the Throne. Br. Now, what means this: From the Throne came
lightnings and thunderings, and voices? Rab. As in Moses at the Law*giving it
showed terror to the contemners, Israel and Heathen: that six hundred
thousand died in the wilderness: and Chananeans felt what it was to fight
against Gods power: and so all Kings in the land of Assyr, or East, even to
the Macedoneans last fall: so here this must be showed that the Romans (as you
handle the story) shall perish likewise. The Dragon, head and tail: The
Cittim one sea monster, made of the Danielean four, once dead and revived by
an earthbred: horned in two horns like the Lamb, but having the mouth of the
Dragon being purple colored after the reviviving of the beasts: with a
bloudsucker woman, rider: not like the man's Image. I speak upon your former
speeches: by which you have made the visions plain: and the comparison of John
with Daniel brings light and delight unspeakable. Br. And what must this
mean: Seven Lamps of fire were burning before the throne: which are the
seven spirits of God. Rab. El. John expounding it, makes it plain: but we had
guessed of the seven spirits of Christ: by our Thalmud. Br. Ye had not missed.
The Godhead of the son has all that the holy Ghost has: and so he has seven
spirits, to work by grace in them who handle his cause against the old
serpent: stinging by Pontifices Cesares, and Pontifices Popos.

Of the Sea like to Crystal. Brough. What must this mean: Before the Throne
was a Sea like Crystal? Rabbi Elias. All things in Allegories of Visions, as
in Ezekiel, Daniel, Zachary, must touch dealinges of God with man. The wicked
are like a sea foming: that is, foming out their own shame, Es. chap. 57. And
indifferently, the Sea signifies many nations, as: The troops of the sea
shall be turned upon thee. And all the earth shall be filled with the knowledge
of God: as waters cover the Sea, Es. chap. xi. whence the speech of the seven*
Spirits be fetched: which give fire lamps, to teach us the knowledge of the
Eternal. So here a Sea clear before his Throne must be nations clear in
faith. So Rabbi Ruben writes to you: that before he knew you, he knew from
Esaie, chap. 24. From the ends of the earth the praises of GOD should be
heard. So here many Nations clear by knowledge of redemption must be meant.
Thus far the speeches be familiar to us Jews.

Of the four Wightes of six Wings, and full of eyes. Br. What should be meant
by this: Before the Throne were four Zoa, livelie bodied wightes. They are
barbarously translated, beasts. A man is Zoon and an Eagle: But not a beast.
As no reasonable bodied wight, nor foul: If we had regarded the tongue of A
and o, we had not been so barbarous. The first was like a Lion: the second like
an Ox: the third with a man's face: the fourth like a flying Eagle. All, each
one had six wings about them: and they were full of eyes. Rab. In Esaias, cha. 6.
The Seraphim, or Angels, that should burn the Temple, had six wings: two to
cover their face, because they could not behold the brightness of God: two to
cover their feet, as not being perfect in Gods eyes: and two to fly about
their duty. They be burners of the Temple in Esaias: which warn that to God
belongs all holiness: in Ezekiel, chapter 1. the Cherubim be of these sour: and
Great terrible wheels full of eyes are there. Here I request you to open the
matter. Br. After that the Lamb opens the book of Seven seals, these four
wightes praise him for redeeming of them by his blood. Therefore men must be
meant here: full of knowledge, as Argus in Aeschylus of ten thousand eyes: of
Lions courage: of Oxens patience to sacrifice: of man's quiet humanity: and of
Eagles high flight, to show in the open Church the cause of Christ. Such were
the holy Martyrs which made all the world amassed at them. And for them the
Seniours follow in praise to God. Now these Martyrs, followers of Christ, the
Lamb as kilde, are known by his description.

Chap. fifth: and in chapter sixth, under the fifth seal, they call for vengeance:
and be heard. That the sixth seal shows how all their state is shaken.

Chap. 5. The worthiness of the matter of the time to come. The story of the
time to come is represented by a book in the hand of him that sat upon the
Throne, written within and without: sealed with seven seals. Rab. That
renueth in part Ezekies visions, chap. 3. and the speech is easy to tell of
much matter and good and hid. Br. One Angel makes proclamation, Who can open
the book, and loose the s^ale: and none Angel, none living nor dead could.
Balaam, Number. 24. told how Italy should afflict Eber, and still hold on to
destruction. But told not the particular sort: Our Lord in Mat. 24. told of
Ierusalems destruction: and of deceavers to deceave, if it were possible, the
very elect. And Daniel had told of an Image and beasts: but to end by Romes
coming up. And Saint Paul told the Thessalonians, that the present hinderer
should hinder, till he should be taken away: the profane empire: and then
should come: the wicked Romylus whom Jonathan upon Esai, names: And all the
Graecians hold to this day, that the bridge-maker of Rome is there damned: And
Plantins men have stolen from the Chaldy the term Romylus: because Jonathan
and Saint Paul, and all the Graecians, plague the brigemaker exceedingly: yet
without new revelation, the high Bridgemakers the Caesar's, and Senators and
their policy, in the high bridge-makers, the Popes and Cardinales, had not
been so distinctly damned: but for this revelation. And John in his trance
wept: showing therein the profit of the book. Then a Doctor, one of the
Seniors tells him, that the Lion of Judah, that in David the noble Prophet,
figured his wars, he should be holden worthy to teach his soldiers, to open
the book, and to loose the seals. And so in this heavenly company an opener
of the book comes.

An heavenly description of Christ. There stood a Lamb, as one that had been
slain: having seven horns and seven eyes: which are the seven spirits of
God sent forth into all the earth. He is resembled by the Lamb, as answerable
to the Lamb killed in Paradise: and the Pascha and how he being our Pascha,
was sacrificed for us: and will be revenged of Rome for that: and has seven
horns of Power, to be able to tame the Dragon with seven heads and ten
horns. And for wisdom he will as in Zachary for building of his Temple, send
seven spirits over all the earth. And all the army joy: and all creatures
that now they shall obey Christ, and his servantes.

CHAP. 6. The seals being opened: six do show the Caesar's case: the seventh
and last has seven Trumpets to sound plainly a Policy altogether sinful.
The Caesares though they were wicked men, their policy was good: while they
kept their civil laws and killed not the Christians upon false accusations.

I. Christ, promoting the Gospel, with speedy syncerenes, and plaguing the
enemies, is resembled by a white horse, with a Rider having a bow, and a
Crown: a conqueror already, and to continue a conqueror. How he conquered
by the blood of his martyrs, that is told under the fifth seal. This does
appear when the first seal is opened. And present plagues in the three next
seals.

II. A red horse has a Rider with a great sword: can not you tell what that
must mean? Rab. El. That peace should b^^ taken from the earth: that men
should kill one another. (...) So plain is the vision. This came to sight from
under the ^^cond seal: showing how the Caesar's should be killed, and their
armies: and Caesar's made in camps, and soon oppressed. For 300. years, they
had a most miserable life.

III. A black horse comes, and his rider has a balance: and a voice tells
amongst the four Wightes that corn shall be dear: though by Gods mercy oil
and wine be of some store. Before in wicked Claudius days, when the Senate had
thought good to root out the Caesar's names, Claudius by soldiers was made
Emperor: void of all wit, and full of all vice. For him and his government
God plagued the world with famine. For others in time the like shall come: but
with mercy. As many Emperors after Domitian were moderate. Old Nerva, Traiane,
Adriane, and they to whom Justin Martyr flourishing at 30. without a teacher,
saving one old man, in a sudden speech, gave an Apology for Christians: and
from Homer for Monarchia, and from Sophocles, from double judgment in Haides
brake the vehemency of persecution. What the man was that told him doubting
what he should follow, and telling of holy Prophets that they only had true
happiness: that could not he tell whether he was a man or an Angel: and being
made from the seven spirits a Lion for courage, fuller of eyes then all the
Bridge-makers monaches to this day, for souls cases in Haides, stayed
persecution, and procured quiet success to Emperors and Empire. So easy has
God made the sum of salvation. Only they, whose God is their belly, of
professors, mar the truth. Rab. El. You know I never resisted you in all
your long disputation in Franc furt: because I promised under pay of eternal
death, to speak in conscience. Br. If your synedrio^n had done so, when they
condemned the son of God in the very last day of 490. years since the Angel
Gabriel told Angelike Daniel of redemption day: and if you had sacrificed
Messiah as Abraham would have sacrificed Isaac, God bidding, otherwise you
should have said we will not kill him, he is the Savior of the world, it had
been well with you to this day. But now, for missing this much, you have been
fuel for Gehenna, and shall be for ever, except some small remnant. And of us
heathen few will in wit overreach the angels that fell: That the son of
Enosh shall have all things put under his feet. Rab. El. This is our only
difference: and if your Doctors had not doted in Persons and time, as Rome
has done, true narrations had brought on us to your faith. But let me hear
the next opening of seal, the fourth. Then came forth a Pale horse: and his
rider was death: and a grave followed him. And he had authority to kill the
fourth part of the earth, by sword, hunger, and plague, and by the beasts of
the earth. Rab. El. Ezekiel spoke the like of us: for our extreme desolation.
But what seal opens the cause of all this? Br. The fifth opens. Rab. El.
What comes thence? Br. When the fifth seal was opened, John saw under the
altar the souls of them which were killed for the word of God: and for the
testimony which they had. And they cried, How long o God; the holy and just,
do thou not judge and revendge our blood, from the dwellers upon the earth!
Millions of millions dyed for the truth: and how could this be but by the
spirit of God. Wicked men repose their rest for this life: when so many
millions run to death gladlier then any to a marriage, and heathen men upon
Ebrew Prophets, how can this be, but from the plane truth of God? You have
the families of Messiah, you have the year, day and hour of his death: and
daily stories to tell you: that when these things and these come to (...) then
shall Messiah redeem. So all fell out. You shut your eyes: Emperors
persecute: Christians die for the truth: ye Jews, and profane Emperors die
miserable. Ye stirred persecutions: and ye are plagued daily and eternally.
That is here craved by the Martyrs.

They had white garments given them: that is the justice of God by Ghrist: and
they call for vengeance upon the murderers: And they are bid to have patience
a while, till more be made Martyrs with them, to draw the wicked world unto
Christ. Rah. Eli. In Aboth. and Rabbi Nathan, Moses soul, and all the Just
souls are laid under the throne, why say you, under the altar? Br. Christ
being sacrificed for us, is our altar. And under his protection the souls be
that believed in him. And that is meant by situation under the Altar. You and
we both hold truly, that all holy ever went hence to the holy mountain and
Tabernacle of God. We hold that none ever were holy, but they who looked that
God in the flesh should give them justice and life.

VI. When Martyrdom had brought Countries to affect the Gospel somewhat
plentifully, God revengeth the Empire. After Diocletians persecution, an
earthquake of States followed: the sun of Empire was as black as saccloth:
and the moon was turned to blood: and the stars of heaven fell as a fig
tree casts her figs being shaken of a great wind. And the heaven was
rouled up like a book: and every montaine* and Island was remooved from their
place. Know you what these speeches in the Prophets mean? Rab. Eli. Very
well. An whole destruction of States. In Joel and Esaias: That the Kings of the
earth, and Potentates, and the Rich, and the Coronnels, and the mighty, and
every servant, and every free man shall hide them selves in dens and in
rocks of mountains. Br. The Romans, who would rule over Judah, Gods kingdom,
in their civil wars, begone betwixt Pompei and Caesar, felt the greatest
change that ever policy had: that Nobles were sold for slaves: and slaves
were buyers of their Masters. And Jerusalem was told by our Lord that they
should be feign to speak unto the mountains: Fall upon us. And the hills:
Cover us: as in Es. 2. 19. Judah was warned for Babel: and Samaria for Assyr,
Osee 10. 8. And Babel was told that their stars of heaven, with Sun and
Moon, should have passions, Es. 13. and it, with other kingdoms, Esaias 34.
shall have all the host of heavens molten, and the heavens shall be rolled as a
book: and all their host shall fall as a leaf falls from the vine, or
fig from his tree. So here for the Martyrs blood, the Empire was strangely
shaken. Twelve Augusti and Caesares of one kindred and friendship, in steed of
taming conquered nations fall out among them selves: till all were consumed but
Constantine, the son of a Bretan Lady, Helena, rarely Godly: but as women
often are, too zealous beyond knowledge. At York in our Albion, his Father
Constantius upon his deathbed makes him King for him: and our ends of the
earth and near nations make him Emperor: and he dasheth all the rest, and at
the end comes unto the knowledge of Christ: and stablisheth Christianity
every where: that all Countries have kept it, openly many hundredth years: but
in private companies still: and now again in Kingdoms full of Power and
Learning. Rab. El. Now tell what was under the seventh Seal.

Of Apostasy. Ye Jews know how soon men fall from God. Adams house falls
to make Gods of stars at 200. years. Before sorrowful Enos was borne, to
hasten the flood to drench their bodies, and to imprison their souls. And Noes
house by Phalegs birth fell by rebel Nemrod to be Nemrodes, that is, rebels
against God. And holy Hebers house in ^ocktan, having so many holy warners,
Noe, Sem, Arphaxad, Sala, Heber, fell away: that the Indianes be of them, East
and West, divelish to this day. Israel in Egypt soon fell all. Ieroboa^ drew
ten Tribes after him: Antiochus Epiphanes made you almost all Sadduces and
Pharisees. So soon men fall. In like manner, Christians commonweals were
never all good. But as in Israel under David, the godly were few, always, so
after Christians had free policy, many were not sound. But yet, after the
manifestation of redemption, infinite many held the main soundly, the holy
Trinity, and the incarnation of the Son of God: And all the conveyance of
Gods counsel for the salvation of the world. The holy Fathers of old had a
smaller company, because they were not perfited by the open story, as we are:
when the history was plainly known, then millions believed: where few could
before by reason of the matter, aey foolishnes to the natural man: and
specially when it was taught by dark tokens only: and the fulness of time was
not yet come, to bring all into open show. But, in time, policies wolld fall.
The time of their standing, God tells not. For they needed no comfort
touching the case of quietness. But a general state of fall comes in cha. 7.
An abridgement of the Churches state unto the end of the world.

CHAP. 7. Four Angels held the four Winds of the earth, that they should
not blow upon any tree: Know you what this must mean? Rab. El. I guess
somewhat. In Cantic. 4. 16. this speech comes: Arise North Wind, come South
wind: breath on the Garden. Let the spices flow: Let my beloved come, and eat
his fruit. Brought. This speech meant the Spirit of grace to the special
souls which delight in Messiah. But after Salomons death, ten Tribes (as was
told) fell away, and the winds blew not. So here, stay of Grace of the holy
Spirit must be meant: that in all quarters a fall shall be, and from God. This
speech would be plain to all the nation of the Jews. And this argues that
Eastward Agarenes, Southward Aethiopians, Northward Tartarians and Turks,
Westwarde Hesperia should fall from God. But an Angel seals the chosen as in
Sedekias days, chap. 9. that Gods chosen should not perish: but a secret sort
he would have still: though an open Church of long time should not appear. Of
every Tribe 12000. were sealed: and of Heathen a company innumerable saved by
Martyrdom: or readiness to martyrdom, which is all one. So the seventh
Chapter abridgeth the state of the Church unto the worlds end. Romylus in the
Chaldy, Es. cap. xi. his fall: and the appearing of Chist shall be near
together. If Princes had knowledge soon found by a little study, they might
fell him in one year. But the Spirit does breath where it will: and a certain
number is sealed: and the chosen be few: yet many Princes as well as other,
specially in this present age: as learned and as well bent as their subjects.

Chapter 8. How the Bridgemaker of Rome came great. Great Constantine hate old Rome
deadly: and removed to Byzantium and enlarged it: and made it the Empire seat:
with name of new Rome, or Byzantias Rome. and did all for commodities to it,
that could be granted of a wise Emperor. Hence Rome in Italy was undone: and
often overrun* and had continued a filthy cotage of hogs but that the
Pontificatus was set up: as Steuchus the Popes own defendour confesses. But
when the Pontificalitie was set up by the decree of God, then all Nations from
East to West, worship the Pope no less then they did the old Caesar's, as
Steuchus words set forth his own master. So the Angel of the covenant with
the golden Altar and Censer to receave the holyes prayers was angered: and as in
Sedekias days, casts fire into the earth: And seven Trumpets sound the
mischiefs that wicked Rome should cause.

I. Hail of state, and fire, mixed with blood, should this Egypt cause II. It
breadeth a new mountain of fire, mixed with blood: and that mountain
bridge-maker is cast into a sea mixed with fire. III. A Star falls from
heaven, Nuntius Ecclesiae, if he had kept his place, and makes the Waters of
the Law so bitter by idolatry, as Ieroboams Calves taunted in holy Amos.
Ieroboams Calves and the Popes Mass have equal religion. And other Chiron
Eloquent Viretus shall judge: who joined the Popes Mass, and profane Poets
iestes fitly together: And our old Father Wiclif from Albion whitely taught
Prage, Wittenberghe, Zurick, Basil, Berne, and whole kingdoms, what Apollyon
was. and I hope the modern King of Albion shall teach the king of Locustes
what it is to send his Locustes with scorpions stinges to torment countries.
Albion was the last in the West that received the Bridgemaker: and Albion first
cast him off: and still had laws of treason for seeking to the Bridgemakers
superiority. And Lady Margaret my Patroness that built Christ's College, and
S. John's, in which both I had a fellowship, bred a family to his fall. IV. The
fourth Trumpetter tells of the Sun, Moan, and Stars to be stricken for
their third part. Rab. El. In Joseph's dream, Genesis 37. this speech is plain:
That special esteemed personages must be meant. Gagnaeus a Papist tells
that Popes, Bishops, and Cardinals be here meant. Chapter 9. V. The fifth Trumpeth
opens a deep, and Locust come forth able to devour all Policy: which plagued
the world continually. Chapter 10. VI. Chapter 11. The sixth loses the Agarenes from
Euphrates: to plague Idolous. and then the Gospel by Martyrdom and power of
Kingdoms reviveth. That now the K. of Locustes shall daily consume. VII. And
with the seventh Trumpet the last state shall be to show Gods mercy, to
Iocktanes sons the Indians, and to you miserable Jews: who for your zeal
Rabbi Elias, as I hope, shall find mercy. My poor will shall be ready, in your
studies of the Law: which from youngest years I have followed with great zeal
and care. Rab. El. Now you have brought me unto the worlds end. And before you
told how the Dragon head and tail has profane Caesares and Popes: and
Daniels beasts compiled into one, have an Empire once mighty but killed: and
revived by one coming from the earth: and that beast revived differs but in
scarlat color from the former: and has Woman Rome sitting upon him: cruel in
blood: sparing us Jews, but killing them that be of your faith. Br. Millions
of Rome pay be of my religion: by such as I know, principal, I judge. Of many
speeches I will tell some. The best learned Jesuits wished my poor skill in
the Thalmudique of the new Testament: saying, that so they might soon turn
the Indians: and many spoke and dealt in equal manner. And now the Jesuits
despising idler monches condemning the other Locustes begin to have some skill
in Ebrew and Greek: which tongue and writers utterly kill the Bridgemaker.
Rab. Elias. Now to conclude this: tell me the Chapt. 20. and the other two:
which you made an abridgement of Romes badnes: The twentieth: and the other, of
the Churches glory. Br. The Roman Dracon should be tied for a thousand
years, before he deceaved Generally: as Albion of a thousand little cared for
him: and soon stonge the stonger. But after a thousand years he shall deceave
the West to fight for Jerusalem: to weaken all Princes power: and then shall be
espied: and decay in an other thousand. Rabbi Elias. Before sin came to the
full in the old world, it was a thousand years before Noe was named a
redresser. And after the flood at near a thousand years, Chanaans sins were
not ripe. Nor Isreal's of a thousand years to be wasted by the Macedonians. So
the Rome Dragon of 1000. years could not deceave the whole world. But then a
new Gog and Magog troubles all: and since, six hundred years. But now
Kingdoms of right be stronger: and sophistry is nothing against sword and
spear. Now Rome shall feel as it dealt: and see that God sits on a white
Throne in justice for the latter judgment. Rab Elias. Now to conclude John,
tell me the heavenly Jerusalem, which you spoke off, ending all comfort in
this world. Br. I will show a brief: as you may thereby from the holy Prophets
fetch the amplifications.
The Heavenly Jerusalem. Chap. 21. Esaias tells of a new Heaven, and a new
Earth: Know you what that means? Rabbi Elias. Yes, the days of Messiah. Br.
And what this? The wicked shall be as a sea foming out their own shame. Rabbi
Eli. The wicked shall be so helden: to be holden no part of the Church. Br. And
what means this: The cowards who shrink from Martyrdom, and faithles, and
detestable, and fornicatours, and witches, and idol-servers, and all liers,
their portion shall be in the lake burning with fire and brimstone? Rab. Eli.
That they shall not be of the Church of God, in truth, that be of the open
show: as the world knows: But as God knows his own seal, so they will
depart from wickedness that call upon the name of the Eternal.

Now as Ezekiel chap. 40. saw a goodly City, so John saw what a goodly City
all the elect together good make: who though they be scattered, yet are in Gods
care as all together: and a city coming down from heaven: having the glory
of God: and light, as Jasper Carbuncle Chrystallizing: having a great Wall of
Gods defense: and twelve gates with the twelve Tribes names: as by their story
men here come in: and the wall had twelve foundations with the Apostles names
upon them: but in matter they were the twelve stones of the Tribes. And that in
this order. The Jasper of Be^iamin. The Saphir of Isachar: the Carbu^cle of
Judah: the Smaragd of Levi: the Sardonyx of Zabulon: the Sardius of Ruben: The
Chrysolita of Afer: The Beryl of Joseph: the To par of Symeon: The Chrysophrase
of Nephthali: The Iacynth, of Dan: The Amethyst of Gad So the foundations (...)
the Tribes stones: that is their story how Christ rules (...) as the Apostles
taught. But John's vision objected matter. Do you remember how this order of
foundation is an abridgement of all the Ebrew story, and such and God and no
man's wit would so settle? Rabbi Elias. I remember it: and wish it handled in my
nations tongue.

Br. It would be a long speech why Beniamins Jasper is fifth, and Joseph's Beryl
is cast off into the eight: and why Isachars Saphir has the second, and
Symeons Topaz is cast off to the nienth: and why Iudahs Carbuncle has the
place of Levi, and Levi his: and so for all the rest. But you heard a reason of
all. Rabbi. And very sensible: as we are acquainted with our emblemes. Br. Now
what means this, The City was square? Equal in length, breadth and height?
Rab. Eli. It follows the Davir in Salomons Temple: or the holy of holy. Br.
Now that Heaven is opened, all minds may see there the Arc and Cherubim: all
that be of this City. The City was 144000. forlong. Setting eight forlongs to
an English mile. It was almost a thousand miles square: and what should this
mean? That an infinite company should be of Christians, though Rome and
Saracenes endeavored general destruction. So the Walls were an hundred forty
four cubits. Know you what that must mean? Rab. Defense is meant by Walls,
as in Es. 54. And thence in the Septuagint Iaspis is for Carbuncle, and so
here. John Visions are from the old Testament, and not from man's fanfie. And
Iaspis in v. 18. must respect Codcod in Esai, Chalcedon or Carbuncle: and in
the first foundation Beniamins stone: else a confusion will be, which God
suffers not, but requires his to be full of eyes: and to know his word
richly. Now what means this: The twelve gates were twelve Pearls? Rab. The
doctrine of life clear and precious. Br. The Law had a covering: But in Christ
all glittereth. And what means this: The streat of the City was like pure
Gold: clear as glass? Rab. The Laws and rules of life. Br. Such be in our
New Testament: the purest rules that ever could be spoken, and the words be so
pure in the Greek: But known of few, by reason that the Bridge-maker of
Thymbris scattred Barbarous Latin for Golden Greek over the West. Men of
conscience and judgment, should study Ebrew and Greek for Divinity: not
Latin versions of man's guess: But the words that God warranteth. But my next
demand Babbi shall try your Thalmudique skill. John saw no Temple in this
City. For the Lord God of hoastes is the Temple, and the Lamb. Why? Rab: I
can not tell. Br. Rambam in Bet^^abechira dreameth as ye all, of a return to
Chanaan to build a third Temple. That hope was senseles ever since Esai told
you of a Jerusalem that should reach over the world. And expreslie told how,
Dan. 9. where your City should suffer a diluge: And the heavenly Jerusalem
should have no need of Sun and Moon from civil policy, to countenance it:
But the glory of God should shine through it, and the Lamb: by closse
protection every where. Yea and many Kings of them selves should gladly bring
their glory to it. And the gates should never be shut: But night and day, in
affliction and prosperity, men shall gladly bring their glory to it. And no
Anathema should come into it.

CHAP. 22. TO John furthermore was showed by an Angel, a River of water of
life: (as to Ezekiel 47. 2.) coming from the Throne of God and the Lamb. What
should these waters import? Rab. All we know that waters import doctrine: and
Ezekiels fishers shall arise from Galilee in Messiah days to give waters of
life: as we read in the Zohaz: Br. It is marveile, that ye should tell what
should be done: and when it is done, deny it. So ye teach in Ierusalemy in
Megila: that in Sems house in Salem the tongue of Iaphet shall be used: and when
it is told you to be done, then you despise it. Lastly, upon the brim of this
River on both sides was a tree of life: every month a fruit, and the leaves
did heal the Nations. That means, the Son of God, who was resembled in
Paradise by the tree of life and who hitherto in both Testaments teaches of
him self. These things should come to pass quickly: and were spoken of old
by the Prophets for the glory of the Gospel under Christ. And again Christ
tells that he is, A and O, the beginning and ending, the first and the last.
And concludes the new Testament in a most gracious sort: and shows that he
sent his Angel to tell this: and calls all to drink of the waters of lise
freely. Rab. El. O that you would turn your New Testament into Hebrew, as now
you speak to me you should save all our Nation: as I told you before. And now I
pray you tell me the chief heads of the Epistle to the Ebrewes.

Of the Epistle to the Ebrewes.
Br. Saint Paul in the Epistle to the Ebrewes goes through your Gamaliels
learning: still proving that all your Prophets taught but this, That GOD would
make the Son heir of (...) whom he made the world, Ps. 2. and Prove. 8. And
he makes his continual narration all from testimonies of Scripture that he is
the brightness of glory, Es. 4. The form of the Fathers person, Exodus 23.
carrying about all things with the word of his might Ps. 102 By him self has
ransomed our sins, Dan. 9. 2^ ^^^ Es. 4. and sits on the right hand of God
in the highese. Being so much above the Angels as his names shows superior
dignity. He never called any created Angel his son (...) Messiah does he
call son, Psalm 2. Thou art my son. This (...) have I begotten thee. And the
end of the Psalm tells* that he (of whom that is spoken) is fayrer then men:
by the commandment, Kiss the Son, least he be angry: happy are all they
that trust in him. And Aben Ezra and Mid^as (...) grant this spoken of
Messiah, and the high (...). Moreover you all grant, Psalm. 89. to handle
Messiah ^se^ there is, I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son* and there he
is called Bechor as the chief arising from death* never to return agiane. And
D. Kimchi grants that Psalm. ^7. (...) many last before, and four following,
to be spoken o(...) as. and there this comes: Let all the Angels of God
worship him: your own tongues shall condemn you, not I. And your own heart
will tell you, that he must be (...) of whom that should be spoken. And of
the Angels (...) says: He makes his Angels winds: and his Ministers (...)
fire. ye grant this to be spoken of the Angels, that they were created to
serve man, with all zeal and speed: and that the rebellion of the Devils came
by misliking m^^^ superiority. Rub. El. In Zohar, and commonly, we hold that
^^d all we hold, that before man's creation, no Angels ^ell* for after Man's
creation, God saw all that he made, and it was very good: and our minds can
not once think of any other subject in GOD, (who dwells in terrible light)
against which the Devil durst spurn. (...) deals he but to hurt man: as
still showing that from hatred to man was his fall. Hold not you the same? Br.
That Satan was a murderer from the beginning: and that he stood not in the
truth: which is Gods will for man's good, as Christ came to witness to the
truth: this comes to be his blame: that our sage hold. And no sage mind will
go about to find out higher. And Babell going about to dash Ierusalems hope,
is blamed as bent to set his throne above the highest: and so the Bridge-maker
of Rome is blamed of Saint Paul: as Antiochus Epiphanes in Daniel, to exalt
himself above all that is God: or is worshipped.

And our mind can not imagine how trembling Devils durst in an higher decree
then man's good, seek to check God: terrible to the very holy that are about
him. But to try man, they are made by Gods Decree the God of this world: the
army of them: that all may be condemned that will not believe the truth. So
against them the holy Angels are to serve the just. And ye say: The just man
is above the Angels. Say ye not so? Rab. El. Commonly. Br. So no prayer should
be made to them, to whom God dwelling in infinite light, gives charge, not to
teach him wisdom, whom to pity, but with fear to go about service which he
charge. Rab. Elias We are of that mind. Though in Machazor we pray to
Angels: yet our rule of faith in Maymonides, that has collected all our
Thalmudiques, holds: That service to God, is prayer: and as, Him only shall
thou serve: so the Law is: To him only shall thou pray. This holds our
Maymonides from the very ground of al our Thalmudistes. And amongst our most
common, Rabbi Menachem says: God forbid that any should pray, but unto the
Eternal our God. Br. So the Eternal Son of God says: When ye pray, pray
unto your Father which is in heaven: and we in reformed Churches hold the
tail of he Dragon in condemnation, as praying to creatures. The Jesuits in
Antwerpe, the king of Locustes, Locustes, defending their rebellion herein, be
extreemely therein godles, witles, shameless, as in this, that they brauled at
writing to them in Greek: whereas all be to honor a and o: who was, and is,
and will be: the Son, the same God with the Father: the author of all tongues.
They who will not esteem the Greek tongue and Adams infinitely better then
any for Divinity, and honor them so, be shameless atheistes: who think that
man's barbarous wit can overreach the wisdom of God. The Tongue of Adam which
continued in Hebers faithful, not in Iocktanes house, whence both Indians are:
this has admiration of height in wisdom in that closse notation or sound
bears in it the nature of the matter: so the Greek is most easy and plain
in frame: and wondered by the Latin Poets: who in Latin Letters express all the
marrow of their wit in Greek terms. And this much for Angels and Men: for
whose service they were created. Now let us return to the Son of God. This
text condemns you to be above Devils, if it were possible: speaking plainly
of the Son of God: whom in the flesh they acknowledged: But ye Jews will
not. The Psalm. 45. speaks of Messiah, as ye grant: and therein this: Thy
Throne o God is for ever and ever. The Scepter of thy kingdom is a Scepter of
righteousness: o God, thy God has anointed thee with oil of gladness above
thy fellows. When ye deny the Messiah here to be God, your badnes would
bring a leprosy upon scripture, as Barbinel elsewhere checketh you: that as ye
say the chief of Devils is Ben Tzirgha, the son of leprosy, so here your
selves be as chief Devils. Devils in operation work by timber some seven
worse then some one: But our mind holds all badder then we can speak: This
text sends your armies to Gehenna: who seeing will not see. As this: Sit on
my right hand till I make thy enemies thy foote-stole. Rabbi Sadayas upon Dan.
7. confesses this spoken of Messiah: ye are all athean godles that do not
the same.

And upon these so manifest testimonies, ye should remember Koheleth, chap.
12. Ye must give abundant heed to that which is spoken: and Pr. 3. Least they
turn away from your eyes. Saint Paul in one saying does bring two books
against you: The one, which teaches all under the Sun to be vanity: that
the kingdom of Messiah should be for the world to come: the other, which
warns Ephraim, not to fall from God: as ye have done in the highest degree,
to eternal ruin. One saying of S. Paul does call two books to teach you:
two books bent wholly to this argument. Ye admire the shortness of the
Law-speach: the Gospel is all from the same spirit. Mark then if the words
spoken by Angels, Dan. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. had full event to the overthrow of
your state, how can ye escape, despising so great a salvarion: which began by
the Lord him self: and by them which heard was confirmed unto all posterity:
by miracles: as from the creator of the world. For he did not make the world
subject to Angels* but as the eight Psalm tells to the son of Enosh:
which by suffering of death, was made a little inferior to Angels: but by
resurrection was crowned with honor and glory. So, the whole frame of the
world tells that the world was made to obey one that should not disobey God:
but perform perfect obedience* goinge through all sorrows, to show compassion
in our sorrows*

Of the sufferings of Messiah. DO not ye Jews continually celebrate cheble
Meshiach ^^^ the sufferings of Messiah that they shall be miraculous great? Rab.
Elias. Nothing is more usual: as you have marked at least so well as the best
of us: by reason that you read out Authors, will leisure, care, and Method to
examine in every word agreement or disagreement, with your new Testament. Br.
But if he were an earthly conqueror, as ye deem, what sorrows could he
have? Wise Emperors go not often into danger: as David being King, was not
suffered. Our Gsopell tells the true sorrows. Being on the earth, in our
weakness he felt bodily passions, of hunger, thirst, and wept, and showed often
compassion: and such reverence to the Godhead, that whole nights he bestowing
praying to show true humanity: and, as Moses, so he, fled from enemies. And
when his half seven of teaching was ended, the ordinary day be his Law the
fourteenth of Nisan his Pascha was killed in the Temple: the same day that
yours was: by Exodus 12. some of yours killed also, by Deutero. 16. Pascha of Ox
and Ram: as yearly, The Lamb was eaten of all the night following: that of
the Ram and Ox might endure that year all Friday and to Saturday morning, as
the Peace-offrings endures two days. Saint John mentions the Lamb, Chap.
14. the necessary Pascha: and the voluntary, Chap. 18. Rabbi El. I am glad to
hear you so to clear your Gospel, yours, teaching that Jesus prevented the
day, made us believe that your Gospel could not be from God. Because the
Pascha must be killed in the Temple: and as Rambam in Corban. Pascha tells, it
was death to alter the day or place. And if God were in Christ, he could not
break his own Law: and that for him self the Pascha. But yours would make the
day to be prevented: where we never went beyond the fourteenth of Nisan: and no
Pascha might be any day sooner: So your Doctors would make us believe that
your Gospel should not spell from God: and I am heartily glad to see this
matter cleared by you. But now go on to the suffering of Messiah. Br. When he
beheld his Lamb killed in the Temple, and the blood cast at the altars foot,
where spoutes took all blood, and the fat was brent in fire, and the skin
peld off: but no bone broken: then old sadness was to show it self in high
degree. How the next day he should die, naked on the cross, have all his blood
poured out: and be pearched with all sadness for our misery: in which case
Moses and our Paul wished them selves lost, rather then Israel: and Christ in
spirit in Noes days, said, It repented him that he made man: the frame of his
heart was so wicked all the day: this sadness would pearce above all
understanding: and his compassion passing all the mothers that ever were, would
make sweat with drops of blood: and just anger bridled for the time, yet had
his grief: So these poincts to be ruled well, passed all Angels strength
David, a thousand years before in the Psalm of aieleth Hashachar the morning
star, as Kimchi teaches from Thalmud in Ioma Perek 2. fol. 29. David in this
Psalm brings Christ crying out: My God, my God, why do thou leave me! And
showing greater injuries then ever were showed to any man: whereupon his heart
roared, since ending the Pascha to his death: How he is a worm, and no man:
the reproach of men, and the despised of the people: that the beholders mock,
and nod with the head: as upon one forsaken of God: and as you know the rest of
the Psalm. David, a thousand years before our Lord suffered: (in Hebron he
reigned 1000. just before our Lords Baptism) he taught how you should
discern the Redeemer: and in what sorrows he should be: and how ye would
pearce his footesteps, as he told Genesis 3. and so by an argument of like force,
his hands no less. Now ye are so shameless that ye would corrupt the text:
in Caaru, they pierced: But that the double Massoreth and purest copies, which
Jacob Ben Chaym the Massorite saw, and Johannes Isaac: and I my self saw one
in England, as the 70. translated, would not suffer you, without pearcing your
conscience to eternal flames to miss of the true text. So Psalm. 55. and 109.
show his heart was broken and melted: that he could not but require vengeance.
This David prophesied, and our Gospel historieth: and Saint Paul expounds,
how he was to have Manhood and to suffer: that he might more pity us: having
him self manhood, according to the kind: and entered through all sorrows, to
be our high sacrificer.

Of Moses, inferior to Messiah: not superior, as Rambam would. In Maymonydes or
Rambam, in the treatise of King, the drift and end of all your Thalmud ye say:
Messiah shall be almost as great as Moses. Rab. Elias. We do so: but not
greater: nor savior of souls: as I debated the matter in Francfurt Synagogue.
Br. Now then consider the high Sacrificer of our confessions and Moses: Moses
was faithful, but as a servant in the house of God. Now Jesus made the house,
and is Lord of all, Psalm. 102. And if your contempt of Moses did cost you
forty years anger of God in the wilderness: marveille not that upon your
rebellion, after Christ by his blood redeemed you, forty years in the Land
against all the Apostles, God has cast you off. The Psalm. 95. as Kimchi
confesses, speaks of Messiah days: that ye enter unto his rest: which
requires no day but the resurrection day drawn from your commodities and to
holy rest, nor any pain, but Baptism, for Circuncision, and bread and wine,
for all sacrifices. The Laws written in the Patriarchs hearts, 2513. years
before ye went for a separate Land, are, all, that now ye have to regard: and
herein ye have a new heaven: by the sacrificer for ever, after the order of
Melchisedek.

Of Melchisedek, Sem. Rabba the great. Whom hold you Melchisedek to be, and
whom to figure? Rab. Elas. The person is Sem doubtless: and so by our
Thalmudiques: and in description he figureth God, as King of Justice, and King
of peace: in Zohar and Menachem: and as still living: without Father, without
Mother and kindred. No man is properly without father and mother in scripture.
For Noe is father, and his wife mother to all men: But here is the description
considered: and the form of speech: as Ramban in praeface to Moses tells:
that no less, the forms of speech, then open sentences are to be weighed.
And so we hold, Sem Rabb, Sem the great to be Melchisedeck, King of Salem,
King of Justice and peace: and likened to God. Br. If you had said, Likened to
the Son of God in the flesh, you had hit the nail upon the head. Gamaliels
scholar could convince you by the depth of Thalmudiq. that your own grauntes
should still condemn you. Mark what you say in Zohar: And Melchisedeck king of
Salem) king of Salem simply. He is a King which rules in Shalamy (perfection)
simply. When is he the King of Salem? In the day of expiatio^: when all faces
be lightened. These be your own words. And S. Paul Gamaliels holy scholar
better learned then his master, disputes with you upon your own grauntes. And
as the Devils, Luc. 8. confess Christ to be the holy one of God: but to no
good for them selves: so ye confess all that we hold: but have not grace to
see what ye confess. Ye speak words of salvation, but damned of your selves,
ye turn to destruction. Rab. Elias. Ye send us forward: for all Greeks deny
Sem to be Melchisedek: and so bringing quick sands for ground of story, are
thought of us to be atheists. Br. Latins aey the best held Sem Melchisedek:
your 70. deceaved Greeks: forging, against scoffing heathen, so many hundredth
of years to the Fathers after the flood unto Tharah. Of this I have written a
long treatise, which satisfied my nation. That as ye, so we, hold Sem to be
Melchisedek. Only one Barabbas, Vicar of Smalhith and Smallheed when it was,
made a scoff of the matter, as Ieroboa^s teachers, of Iudahs faith. Not one in
all Albio^, that I could ever hear of, but that Barabbas skoffed that. Rab.
Elias. Then God will reward him according to his works: as to Ieremies
vexers, Lam. 3. Br. I am sure of that. And I have set Doeg upon the teynter
hooks: while Christ will regard the cause of Melchisedek: that mockers here,
shall be neither forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come. Rab. Elias.
You can do no less. In Divinity all things must be holden in high reverence:
specially the highest matters: that whosoever would elude them with a scoff,
should be holden the Gangraena of all mankind. We Jews reverently hear all
that can be spoken to us for Christ from the old Testament in your sad manner.
Ye Christians should more honor your Apostles disputations. Br. But now let us
come to Melchisedek: and to this: Thou art a Sacrificer for ever, after the
order of Melchisedek. Rab. El. Our That mud denies that Psalm to speak of
Messiah. Br. With athean shame. But Isaac Ben Arama upon Genesis 47. And Rab.
Sadaias, as is showed, upon Dan. 7. confess that the Psalm speaks of
Messiah. And who but he should be spoken unto, to sit upon th right hand of
God? and that he should fill all with dead carkesses for resisting his truth
of abundance of grace of the gift of justice to reign for ever? Therefore
seeing we have so great an high Sacrificer which is gone into the heavens Jesus
the Son of God, embrace with us the profession which Christ him self taught.
Rab. Elias. We say in Zohar and elsewhere, that Michael, who is called also
Jehovah, does in heaven all that Aharon did represent on earth: and so, will
when our state shall be restored. Br. Aharon figured what Michael or Iehova the
son should do in the days of his flesh. Br. But we were aey to look for
one that could have compassion with our sins. Therefore come with assurance
unto the Throne of Grace: that ye may find favor in due time. And against
your haeresie consider this: Every sacrificer must be taken from men, for
matters touching God, to offer sacrifices and gifts: being fit to have
compassion, as he was environned with infirmity. And so would God show in the
days of Noe by Sem changed in office: as one likened to the son of God: and
in Thalmudique phrase restified as still living: that the Eternal son who
should destroy the works of Satan, would in the flesh sacrifice him self for
us: and being consecrated be author of eternal salvation to all that would
obey him. So the sum of our propos is, that we have such a sacrificer which
is sat on the right hand of God: minister of the Sanctuary and true
Tabernacle: who through the veil of his flesh went into the holy. Rab. Elias.
Do ye all in England believe, that Jesus Christ his soul went from the body
to heaven? Br. Our Greek abridgement of faith says: He was crucified, dead
and buried, and went to God: where the godly have heaven, and the godles hell.
Rab. Elias. We hold so all in Gether Maleuth: that on high be chambers of joy
and light, and chambers of torment in fire and brimstone. Br. Seeing then it is
appointed for all to die: and then comes judgment: while it is said to day,
seek unto the mercy of GOD in Christ: otherwise your portion shall be in the
lake burninge with fire and brimstone. Your Law had but a shadow of things to
come: not the very image of matters. For it was impossible that the blood of
oxen and goats, should take away sin: Therefore Jesus coming unto the world
says: Sacrifice and offering thou regardest not: Behold I come to do thy will.
In the whole roll of thy book it is written: By this performance of will we
are saved. Therefore seeing we have freedom to enter into the Sanctuary by the
blood of Jesus: Let us come with a true heart and certeintie of faith into that
way which he has consecrated for us. Ye have felt nowaboue 1500. years
eternal destruction for falling into the hands of the livinge God: while ye
dream hope by the works of the Law Sabbath and Circumcision, though ye
break all the rest: when ye say: Sabbath shakul ce col hatorah: and Milah
shakul co col hatora. The Sabbath is weighed as all the Law: Circumcision is
weighed as all the Law. The keeping of either after the end of Daniels seave^,
is death to you.

Rab Elias. You have unlaced unto me two books, John's Visions, and the Epistle
to the Ebrewes: and I will confess as Abr. Ruben did at Constantinople: that I
never thought to hear so much spoken clearly from the Law for your Gospel. O
that you would write in Ebrew, as you speak to me: you should so save all our
nation. Basil gives you high report (...) hardly persuade all that Rubens
Epistle was in sadness. Therefore Christians and Jews should require sentence
against him. At Geneva one would play, and say: The old Lady is descended up
to Haides: your hope is poisoned (God forbid) Vtis was coming to Lions: But is
returned to Calice, to rule Locgriam. Then I said: If Vtis keep him self so
sure from fire and water, as all our folk will keep him from setting one foot
in Loegria, but as a prisoner, or by the Kings leave, he shall never be burnt
nor drowned, I warrant him. Tell N. N. so. Geneva shall be sunk before I suffer
my Nation to be reported so senseles as to become Neroes: and, under them, over
whom we claim rule. Our stomachs will never broke that: and not one in
Loegria dare chirpe that way, Rab. Elias. Your resolute judgment for Divinity
and humanity is alike. But hold you on your purpose for writing in Ebrew for
our use. You know what encomion Rabbi Ruben has written you: and what contempt
of others. Br. That will do me little good: Seeing the world is full of
profane scoffers and dullardes. Princes, Nobles, and all of noble minds,
regard study. But as Machmad barbarous, found more fellows in forty years:
then millions of learned found: so one Thersites will trouble the Greek Camp
more then millions sage. But to conclude, as Jacob and Moses did bless
Israel: so I groan to teach you, how all blessings were aey in Christ: and all
the Law from Aleph to Thau stands in him. I mentioned how holy Paul wished him
self cut off from God, to save you: and I, cut of my self from this worlds
preferrement, to be ready to teach you. Say not in your heart, who can go up
into heaven to bring Christ down? or who can go into the deep of the earth
to bring Christ from the dead? But believe that Jesus is the Eternal God: and
that the Godhead raised the man from death, and you shall be saved: and receave
the power of his spirit to be quickened from death to life: and by the
abundance of Grace of the gift of justice reign with Christ for ever and
ever. That there be in the holy Eternal three heads, and are brought all to
one: ye confess, in Zohar, Deuteronomy. col 559. and that the Angel Iehova, is God
of Bethell: that does Ramban upon Exodus 23. and for plurality of persons, ye
do note better then ever any other upon, Let us make man, Genesis 5 and upon Psa.
33. in Midras Tillin: and in Saned. fol. 38. and infinitely. But that God
should be in Christ that can ye not see to this day. But the very same hatred
that the Devils bare to man's glory, ye bear against the Son of man,
which abode all shame to bring us to glory. To whom be all glory for ever:
as he is in holy spirit God to be praised for ever.

To the Right Reverend Fathers the Governors of Oxford.
WHEN Mr. Scaligers book de emendatione temporum came forth, many churches
were troubled: because it brought an other length of time then their narrations
would suffer. Hereupon I took in hand to show a chain of times from Creation
to Redemption: and I showed Jubilees drawn from the partition of the Land
unto our Lords death, to give the time a double chain.

And to this I applied particular Lives in common course that there was no
iarring: but as Salomons Temple had no hammer noise, but all was made fit on
the mountain, so all seemed to have a consent. And I warned of heathen lying
works and forged: which in athean blindness should trouble the holy meaning of
the Bible. Such as make Nabopollasar, Father to Nabuchodonosor, and Emperor of
all Asia frustrate Ieremies prophecy for greatness to arise. Mr. Ios. Scaliger
should have seen this. So when he thinks that Ezekiel. 1, 1. takes his
account not from Josias Pascha, but from Nabopollasar, all should blame his
boldness. So when he would have Daniel captived not in the fourth of Ioakim,
which he writes of him self, but with Iechonias, the oversight is great: as
in denying the Kingdom of Babell parted to Medes and Persians, Dan. 5. and
specially for Olympiades: where I will lay down his words.

De initio Cyrj. Quotquot temporum rations disputarunt, vetustissimi, and
eruditissimi scriptores, nemo non little Cyrj annum primum in primum Olympiadis
55. confert: Diodorus Siculus, Thallus, Castor, Polybius, Phlegon: vt scribit
auctor Priscus, and eruditus, Tatianus. Idem testatur and Africanus apud
Eusebium. What a triffling testimony is this?

Africanus gives the Macedonians three hundredth and seaventie years. Master
Scaliger but 294. from Alexanders death to Cleopatraes when Antony killed him
self. Therefore this testimony is nothing worth. Besides Phlegon and Diodorus
differ an hundredth years for beginning Olympiades. And Pamphila differs two
hundredth years, for Chilon the Lacedemonian of Cyrus time from Sosigenes in
Laertius* Sosigenes makes Chilon to be Ephoros in Olympiade 56. Pamphila in
the sixth: So there is two hundredth years difference. And Pamphila has much
defense. For if Menelaus came to Tyrus in Chyram and Salomons days, four
hundred and five y^^^^ after that, in Diodorus beginning of Olympiades, and six
Ol^^piades more will well reach to Chilon his office, to cast it into the sixth
Olympiade. Any one would be aweary to reckon the diversities which be of
Olympiades in Greeks. Clement has this: That Ezekiel prophesied in the 48.
Olympiad. and so Aggej in the 48. And there was near 100. years betwixt their
prophecies. Endless be the differences: and from sundry games of old men
reckoned them, not reckoning the number: but when such a gamester as Diagoras
Rhodius wan the price: so Theucidides reckons them. Before Alexander Macedon
no auctour in copies vnblamed numbered an Olympiad. Hippias Elaeus might seem
to toy: But none would regard him. And in Fastis Siculis, The Olympiad of
Regifugium is not 68. as in Eusebius. But in 86. or 85. as I remember. So the
goodly tables of Eusebius and Glareanus made from Dionysius and Diodorus when
they are examined, have small authority.

Your great learned man that wrote against the Apocrypha, to dash the holy
Bibles authority: and to set up Satan's lies, should not be in that argument in
too high esteem. Galen warns upon Hippocrates, that the greatest part of
Alexandria Library was pestered with forged works. And Historiques moved
every stone to feign concent to time: But when they are traced in particulars,
agreement falls most upon the Angels account. And without man's authority
that should be holden simply. And the Jews, who reckoned hourly their
coming home from Babell: and had their seavens to help them, never disagree
in the Gospel about the time: that John was to Baptize, and Messiah to
appear. And when I drove your Doctor to this exigent, to begin the time at the
Angels message, and to say 70. septiments completis excisus est Chapter I thought
I had done enough to make any see that I had the victory: and I never thought
he should be suffered to say that the holy Angel meant no certain time. As god
will not be mocked so he would not mock: to speak of four hundred and nienetie
years, when the world should look for salvation: and not perform the work
till five hundred and sixty years. God his unchangeable truth cannot so deal
with the sons of Adam. If in his life time his Lectures had come forth I had
answered him in Latin. Now I am loath to bait the dead. Look your selves to
the dignity of your own Academic.

FINIS.

