THE FIRST PART OF THE RESOLVTION OF RELIGION, DIVIDED INTO TWO BOOKS,
Containing a Demonstration of the Necessity of a Divine and Supernatural
Worship. *

IN THE FIRST, AGAINST ALL Atheists and Epicures: In the second, that Christian
Catholic Religion is the same in particular, and more certain in every
Article thereof, then any humane or experimented knowledge, against Jews,
Mahumetans, Pagans, and other external enemies of Christ.

MANIFESTLY CONVINCING ALL their Sects and Professions, of intolerable errors,
and irreligious abuses.

PRINTED WITH LICENSE. 1603.

THE EPISTLE OF THE AVTHOR TO THE READER.
AS among all duties, and offices of Man, (dear Reader) there is none by
infinite inequality, either so excellent or deserved, as that Reverence and
Homage he owes to God, his most Soueraygne and Omnipotent Prince, in whom
all pre-eminences and dignities are contemed, and from whom all benefittes and
created prerogatives are derived: So among all other sciences and knowledges of
this world, none can be in any degree so certain and undoubted, as that
worship taught and revealed of the same infinite wisdom and goodness which
can neither be deceived in him self, or bring others into error. Yet the
corrupt malice and ingratitude of man has grown great, that at this present
our meanest Function and Obligation is not more neglected, and the very base,
and contemptible things of this life preferred before that Supreme Honor, to
which we are bound by so many Titles. And the wilful blindness of profane
people rejecting the infallible Rule of Religious causes, and measuring secret
and supernatural mysteries by their own shallow and depraved Judgments, do
esteem that most certain and unchangeable verity of divine Adoration, more
doubtful and uncertain then recanted conceits of humane affairs. Thus has
Man by negligence and malice showed undutiful disobedience to his Creator, and
abused his own understanding, and will, so excellent powers of his
intellectual and immortal Soul, feeding the first with errors, and making
unlawful appetites the object of the other: in such order that no sentence is
so certain, but one or other has called it into question, no paradoxe so
incredulous, but some embrace it, nothing so good, but it has been refused
nothing so lewd and impious but some men have approved it. The manyfold even
hundreds of false Religions, that have invaded, and now bear dominion in the
world, and the irreuerent and irreligious lives of men and practice of al
offenses, Atheism, and Epicurisme them selves will bear me witness. Some
wavering and staggering in faith, others by this number of errors uncertain
what to believe, and those which make advantage of such times, to procure
excuse to their own impieties either in opinion the duty of Religion, or in
desire wish there were none at all, no God, no Heaven, no Hell, no
Immortallitie after death, no pleasure but in filthiness. Wherefore fully to
satisfy all English Subjects, I have made demonstration, not only of the
necessity of a supernatural Religion in general, against all Atheists and
Epicures: but by diverse Arguments by which true Reverence may be proved, or
error impugned and confuted, and far both greater in number and more forcible
then can be alleged, to establish any error: that only Catholic Christian
worship is the same in particular, against all enemies as well Jews,
Mahumetanes, Pagans, and other external adversaries, which I will perform
with so much more breuitye, by how much I may hope there is less need thereof
in a Christian Nation: as also against all Heretics and internal enemies
more at large, by above an hundred unanswerable Reasons (as the present
occasion more requires, in which the former Infidels will likewise be more
plainly confuted) manifestly conuincing all their Sects and Professions of
intolerable errors and insufferable abuses, even by the light of Nature, and
without all show or apparaunce of true Reverence, having no ground either
natural, or above nature of such doctrynes, being only resolved into the
lying and manifest deceitful, and false inventions of the devil and
licentious deceauers: and contrariewise every Article of that worship I
defend, by Arguments divine and humane, supernatural and by nature,
Testymonies of God and Creatures, Attributes, Properties, Offices,
Prerogatives, Ends, Effects, Name, Nature, and signs of true Relygion, and
privileges of truth, to be the most certain knowledge in the world, August.
lib. 7. confess. c. 10.
as certain (to use S. Augustines example) or more undoubted then that a man
living is a live, or any other manifest verity in nature, and resolved unto
the most faithful and vndeceaueable truth of God, whereupon not only the
whole substance, but every private question thereof is builded. For which cause
amongst others I have named it a Resolution of Religion, because it is resolved
into that first and infallible verity, which by no possibility can be
deceived. By which proportion in natural Sciences, Philosophers affirm those
conclusions and arguments to be most true, which can be resolved to the first
principles which cannot be false. And as in practical and compounded things,
that composition and potion of Physic (to give example) which as it is
composed of diverse simples in it self, is not perfectly to be discerned, what
virtue and operation it has, but if it be resolved to those parciculer things
of which it is made, and their natures and effects declared, the operation of
the whole confection is euydentlie proved: even so it is in that great and
noble Composition of spiritual preseruatyues in Religious causes, as I have
declared. So that no particle or least question of divine worship, though
never so secrette in it felfe, can have the least suspicion of doubt, being
resolved into that infinite wisdom. And as all errors, that can be devised
concerning Religion, are defended by one of these three kinds of people,
Atheists, Epicures and Nullifidyans, which deny all worship: or by external
Infidelles, Jews Pagans, and Mahumetanes, which although they profess a
worship, yet they both disalow the true Reverence, and Christ the author
thereof; or by internal enemies and heretics, which though they acknowledge
Christ for a true Messiah, (which likewise Mahumetes did) and that he
delivered true Religion; yet they do err in the manner of worshippinge in
particular: So will I prove these three conclusions: that there is a Religion
to be used, against the first; that the Religion which Christ delivered is
true, against the second; and to the third, that Christian Catholic Religion
is the same. In proof of which Propositions not only the true worship shall
be inuinciblie proved, but all doubts, difficulties and objections of these
misbeleeuers solued and resolved: For which cause also I have entitled this
work a Resolution. And so I end humbly desirynge all Readers of these books,
which by them shall either be confirmed in truth, or reclaymed from error,
sometimes to vouthsafe to remember in their deuoutest prayers, the poor Author
hereof.

Their Catholic Countrieman. R. B.

THE FIRST BOOK, OF THE FIRST PART, OF THE RESOLVTION OF RELIGION. PROOVING
THE NECESSITY of a supernatural Worship.
OF THE NAME AND NAture of Religion. CHAP. I.
RELIGION, Isodor. lib. 10. Etimol ca. 17. Cicero de Inu. lib. 2.4.8.

August. l. ver. Relig. 10. c. 4. et l. 10. ciuit. 2. cap. 4.


among other names is so termed of the Latins, either a Relegendo, of often
reading, repeating, and rumynating things appertayning to divine Reverence: or
a Reeligendo, of choosing to please God again by submission, whom by want
thereof we had forsaken; or lastly of Religando, in that we are bound unto
him by many Obligations, both in respect of excellencies contained in
himself, as benefits bestowed upon us: And after the same proportion is
termed of the Greeks Thresthia, Jacob. cap. 1. Actor. ca. 26.
or Eusebia, a pleasing o^ God, piety, and duty unto him. And was charactered
of the Hieroglyphycall Egiptyans in the same sense, and of the true Religious
Hebrews named Zebach, Leuit. cap. 16.7. ver. 36. Exodus cap. 29. ver. 9.

Number. c. 19.


a Sacrifice, which is the supreme worship of God, or Chucath bolam, an
eternal and ever during statute, or Chucath hatorah, a statute of the law,
ordained by the law of God, and ever due to him. And by general consent and
conceit of all men, of whatsoever profession and estate, Infidels, or true
believers, Heretics, or Catholics, unlearned, or Philosophers, always used
for that honor and reverence we owe to God, our maker and preserver.

OF THE ABSOLVTE Necessity of God, and a first cause most excellent, and
deserving Worship and Religion. CHAP. II.
WHerefore using this word, Religion, in the same sense and acceptance, All
people, even Atheists themselves, in time of misery confessed a God and
Religion etc.
there never was (or can be) any nation, people, or particular person so
impious, in grateful, or irreligious, but if they acknowledged, or confessed a
God, supreme governor and cause of things, from whom they had their being
and preservation (as both Lactantius and other learned Authors witness, and
experience proves all Atheists have done when they come to die and see their
own defects) but they yielded unto him ^^e religion or other. For although
many, or most by their own demerits and wickedness, were ignorant of the true
felicity of man, what it was, (humane reason not able to clime so high) yet
knowing, which by no possibility they could not but know themselves to be
creatures, and so dependant, must of necessity acknowledge all their
perfections, how many and excellent soever, to be communicated and derived unto
them, from a former and independing cause: so that for gifts and benefits
already rece^ued, thanks and gratuity, for those that should afterward
want, submission, prayer, and obsecration, and in regard of his exceeding
dignity and prehemmence, all worship and reverence were due, The excellency
of God the first cause worthy all Reverence.
and to be rendered. For seeing he, from whom all these things were imparted
unto man, must needs be the first, original, greatest, most perfect, and
without dependence of any other, and all graces, dignities, and perfections
that be, or could be produced in all creatures, that are, have been, or by
possibility could be created (for such also should be his works) were to be
obtained of him, in him also they were to be sound in a far more eminent and
excellent degree: for nothing can give they unto an other, which it has not in
it self, either in the same, or a better manner: which must needs be most true
in the first, and principal cause; for if this should want the perfections
and excellencies which be, and were to be made by it, it could neither give
them to others, because it self should want them; neither obtain them for it
self of any other, because it is the first, and can have no former cause from
whom to receive them. Then seeing all those dignities, and prerogatives of
wisdom, bonity justice, mercy, knowledge, providence, immutability, eternity,
and the rest, for which, faith, hope, love, reverence, fear, obedience,
sacrifice, adoration, or any kind of honor and worship, is required, are
connected and united together, in that one eternal and unchangeable essence,
and not after that limited and participated manner, as they be in creatures,
but in such an infinite and incomprehensible sort, that the least perfection we
can imagine, and conceive in him, is infinitely greater then all creatures, and
their perfections, (for every thing in God that is but one most simple and
undivided essence, is also God infinite and unmeasurable) all true reverence
and religion, must needs be due and belonging unto him; though any man or
creature of understanding, could be so mad to think him self a creature, not
to be dependant of that most perfect and infinite divine nature. For excellency
of it self is cause worthy of honor, though there be no farther obligation,
or band of reverence. But let no man think, that I intend in this place, to
make a formal dispute, to prove that there is a God, of which, my confidence
is, no reasonable creature can be doubtful. For all Arguments will be
testimony, All creatures in the world, all authorities and every argument for
Religion in this work proves a God.
and the meanest of so many millions of creatures as be in the world, give
demonstration in this case, and that was ever so undoubted, and evident to all
kingdoms, countries, and particular persons, in all places, times, and
generations from the first creation, that never any nation, never any private
man, except mad, or frantic with passions, and beastly pleasures to excuse
his filthiness, in so many thousands of years hitherto, made it a question,
and whereof every Argument of this work will be a witness. But I chiefly
contend at this time, to vpbrayde the Irreligious people of these days, how
unnatural a thing it is for any reasonable creature, (such as every man by
nature is) to neglect this duty to his sovereign King and maker, which is not
only to proclaim himself an irreligious and disobedient traitor and rebbell
unto his Creator, but by the least denial thereof, falsely to affirm there
were neither Creature, or Creator, God, man, or any thing else in the world.
For since nothing can be made, but of some cause, The necessity of God, to be
the first efficient cause, and Religion due to him.
and in causes an infinite number may not be granted, either this first cause
of things, and religious duty to him must be confessed, or else we must say,
that nothing is, or can be made: when we think we see the heavens, elements,
and so many glorious creatures in this world, we are deceived, because no such
thing is, or can be framed: that we our selves which conceive such variety, are
not, neither do we imagine any such thing at all. For if we take that
reuerentiall original, and absolutely independing cause away, nothing either
already is, or by possibility can be hereafter. For although some have
defended, Magist. 4. did. 5 Duc. 2. Sent etc.
that the power of creation and producing some thing of nothing, may be
communicated of God to a secondary cause, yet they say, that in such case, this
second agent should only be an isntrumental cause, which ever remains a
principal worker, and they always suppose such an one to be communicating
that property to the other; for where a principal and communicating cause is
wanting, an isntrumental cause to which such power is deligated, cannot be,
neither by any power is imaginable. For every receauer, receaueth of some, and
there cannot be any thing produced, where there is no power deligate or
indeligate, isntrumental or principal of such production. Wherefore, seeing
there be so many millions of things, and kinds of creatures, most certainly
produced and existing in the world, as all our senses are witnesses, no man
can say these things were made of them selves, for so the same should be, and
not be together, which is a repugnancie in nature: neither of any other former
depending cause, for that likewise must have an other to produce it. Therefore,
since nothing is made of nothing by nature, which always works in a
subject and something; nothing of it self, nothing of any thing that is
depending; and yet so many things be in the world, and the first of those
created effects must be of nothing (otherwise they should have former
secondary and created causes) and between being, and not being, nothing, and
some thing, nothing, and so many things as now be, there is infinite
difference and improportion, that cause which of nothing created all things,
of necessity must be infinite, omnipotent, and illimited, containing all
goodness and perfection, and so worthy all reverence, worship, and whatsoever
homage may be conceived belonging to religion. The preservation of things by
God, binding to Religion.
And as so many millions and distinct degrees of things could not in the
beginning be created without an infinite, and omnipotent cause, so as well the
orderly productions, and generations of all creatures since then, and the
daily and howerly preservation of them, and all those excellencies wherewith
they be endued, from falling to corruption, cannot be attributed to any
inferior agent. The continuance and duration of essence and perfection, is as
much depending of an infinite and illimited agent, as their first production
was: and as in the beginning without the work of that omnipotent cause, they
could not possibly have bin made of nothing, as they were, so without the like
assistance they would in an instant be annihilate, and come to nothing again.
For though we should grant to all conceited men that ever were, or would be
accounted Philosophers, that these inferior things be compounded of
elementary causes, that they be produced by creatures of their own kinds, men,
by men, beasts, by beasts of the same nature, and so of others, that they are
assisted of the celestial bodies, and receive influence from the heavens, that
respiration is from the air, heat from the fire, and other necessaries from
other elements, yet never any Philosopher or man of judgment can be so absurd
in reasoning, but confess that al these things themselves both in production of
other creatures, as also in their own being and preseruance, depend of a
former infinite cause, and that these as they made nothing in the beginning,
but were made and had emanation for themselves of an other, so they cannot
either produce others, or themselves continue without like assistance.
Therefore in every least action, duration, or preseruance for every minute of
time, we must of necessity appeal to that first and omnipotent Creator. For no
proceeding can be infinitely without end, either in the production, emanation,
or preseruance of things: for so all causality and effecting operations should
be taken away, and no least effect could be produced. For in ordinate causes
the latter depends of the former, and all latter causes of some precedent and
first cause, but where there is no beginning, there is no first, and so no
causality, and consequently no effect, nothing is, nothing ever was, nothing
can be produced or preserved hereafter, all things are already returned to
nothing, which is evidently untrue, therefore that first cause must needs be
most honorable, and deserving all reuerentiall duty, One absolutely
necessary, and independing essence, which is god, worthy all worship.
and submission. Moreover experience teaches, that there is an infinite number
of things in the world, whose essence and being, is not of necessity, but
contingent, so that they may, and may not be: and whether they be or no, no
absurdity in nature can be concluded. For who can say that man (to give
example) or any other creature, is absolute and necessary to be, either in
respect of himself, or any other for their being, or not being? It he be
absolute necessary for the being of other creatures, of necessity those
creatures, both in being and preservation must depend of him, which is
evidently untrue: For if man were not, other things might be, as the heavens
and diverse others were before he was created, and if all men were consumed, yet
all other things might remain in safety. In respect of himself he cannot be
named absolutely and of necessity to be, for so he should be of himself, and
without dependence of any other, which is evidently false of every limited and
depending thing, such as man and all creatures are. Therefore above all
depending things, and such as be not of necessity, we must at last arrive to
one, that is of it self absolute and in depending, of which the rest must have
dependence, and to whom religion and duty is belonging, both for that
absolute and independing preeminence in himself, as also that of necessity we
depend of him.

The same reason joined with experience, teaches, The subordination of things
by God. etc.
there is a subordination in all inferior things, none of them is altogether
for it self, nothing without some order to an other. In arts and sciences
belonging to the mind and intellectual powers, there is a subalternation. In
corporal and bodily things the matter is more apparent, the heavens, their
motions and influences are not for themselves, but for others, that take
benefit of their motion, and receive influx for them; the simple and
elementary creatures are for compounded things, no compounded thing is for it
self, but is subordinat: beasts, sowles, fishes, and the rest, are referred
to man, man as he is not of himself, so much less to himself can he be
subordinat, and so of every thing that made not this subordination. Therefore
at last we must come to some excellent thing, which as he appointed this
subordination, and of himself can be subordinat to none, because he is the
first deviser of this order, so they all must needs be subordinat to him. God
the final end of all.
And when in all orders of things, always that which is the end of others is
most perfect, and no reasonable and intellectual agents, do things by
themselves without instrumental causes, or work by instruments, and secondary
helps, but to some end and purpose: Then seeing so many intellectual,
eternal, glorious, and admirable things of the world, could not possibly be
framed, ordered, or disposed of, by any thing inferior, unreasonable, and not
intellectual: of necessity as the first cause in producing and ordering so
many and marvelous degrees, and estates of creatures argues both a first
cause, and infinite and omnipotent power in him, so in ordeyning them to some
end, that end must be the most perfect thing, then seeing none could be
more greater then he, or equal to himself, for his honor and dignity they
were created, and he was, and is their end, because his infiniteness in power
excludes assistance, his only immensity in goodness and perfection,
debarreth all other last and final ends, and admits no companion in
equality of perfection. And every man and creature, is so much more indebted
and religed to him, then to any inferior agent, parent, Prince, or potentate,
to whom we yield reverence for benefits received, by how much his infinite
greatness, and perfection exceeds any limited and depending thing, and by
how much every effect is more beholding to the first and universal cause
without which absolutely it cannot be, then to any secondary and particular
worker, without which by the power of the former absolutely it may be
produced. But if sense and experience may not be admitted with these sensual
and beastly men, Supernatural miracles, which could not be produced by any
creature. etc.
if no reason can have allowance with such unreasonable minds, and all
natural arguments and demonstrations, and daily experiments must be condemned
with such unnatural monsters, if we should grant them al they can demand with
so many impossibilities in ordinary and connaturall things, that inferior
causes could work, without dependence and assistance of the superior, that no
creature is depending either in essence or opperation: that there is no first
and principal cause, that chance and fortune (which can be nothing but the
accidentary concourse or effect of inferior causes) made all things, and
whatsoever impossibility any foolish and frantic brain can imagine, to
excuse their wicked and lascivious lives, Yet thousands of effects which have
been, and could not be by the production of any created cause, must needs
condemn them. For all nations and people in the world, Christians, Jews,
Mahumetanes, Pagans, and all estates of men, have proved, and must, and do
acknowledge, that infinite, miraculous, and supernatural operations have been
wrought, which no limited power with all the conjunctions, inclinations,
aspects, constellations, either of celestial, elementary, or compounded
things, which they can devise could possibly do, having no potentiality in
them, to effect the meanest of those strange and marvelous operations, only
able to be produced by an omnipotent, and infinite agent. And further, to show
an absolute dominion over all creatures, to resist and restrain the most
usual, and natural habilities of all inferior causes, as the most mooueable
heavens, that they did not move, but stand, as it were amazed at so great a
majesty, that the greatest planets (which could be commanded of no inferior
agent) have changed their course and order. The highest, and ascending Element
of fire, has descended even to punnish the Irreligious: The Air, has denied
respiration to creatures: The Waters, in most huge quantities, have ascended
against their natural prope^sity, to dtowne both particular countries, and the
whole world in the general inundation: The whole earth has trembled, and all
the firmaments, and foundations of the world have bin moved at the pleasure of
their Creator, which no creature, nor al creatures together could effect: and
yet all countries, peoples, and estates, are witnesses to these things. The
testimony of all nations and people.
Thus we see, all testimonies cry out there is a God, infinite, omnipotent,
and independing, which has effected these things. This is the evidence of all
creatures, all nations, and kingdoms, all estates, and degrees of men,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Priests, Kings, Rulers, Princes, Philosophers,
Christians, Jews, Mahumetanes, Pagans, al Rabbynes, Doctors, Sybilles,
Flamens, Arch-flamens, Calyphes, Brachmans, all that can be cyted for authority,
agree in this, that there is a God. This is the sentence and uniform consent
of them all, that disagree so much about his nature, and religion in
particular. Al good men allow of this, this all impious and wicked have
confessed, except perhaps some few private men, in so many generations, and
times of the world, which drowned in all licentious living, have (to excuse
their impieties) rather wished it in will, then affirmed in judgment: and
those also, when they came to death and miseries, as I cited before, Lactant.
sup.
acknowledged it. And to conclude against barbarous and absurd people with
absurdities, if there is no first, omnipotent, Absurdities of denying God. etc.
and most excellent cause then no religion, which is only due to so great a
majesty is to be rendered. Then all nations, and people of the world in all
generations, and so many thowsands of years, that ever professed it were
fools: and one Lucretius, that lived, and dyed mad, or any particular and
beastly man, that (to tumble in filthiness) would wish so impossible a thing,
is only wise and holy. If there is no first, absolute, and independing cause,
no operation can be effected, nothing is now done, nothing can be brought to
pass hereafter, because depending causes cannot work without assistance: so
there neither is, or can be any change, alteration, generation, or corruption
in the world, but all things must needs return to nothing. If there is no
God, first, and illimited cause, to have created the world, there is no
science, knowledge, or facultye in the world, there neither is, was, or can be
any creature, or the least effect, because none of these limited and depending
things, could by any possibility be of it self, or any other depending
cause. And a thousand such impossible absurdities, which follow this most
blasphemous, and sacriledgeous assertion, ( there is no GOD) if any barbarous
and beastly mouth, durst be so impudent to pronounce it. But this will be
more manifest in many chapters, and the whole treatise following, to the
confusion of al enemies to true Religion. For which cause (as also that I hope
no man can be so unreasonably blasphemous to make it a doubt) I pass it over
more briefly in this place.

THE NECESSITY OF A Divine providence toward man, and other creatures ordained
for him, and his duty to render Reverence and Religion. CHAP. III.
BUT to prevent the profane, and blasphemous excuses of this impious
generation, accusing the infinite wisdom of God of folly, and challenging his
incomprehensible goodness of improuidence: If by impossibility things could be
effected and caused without any cause, The necessity of Gods providence, for
the dependence of creatures.

The uniform and orderlye course, even of insensible things that can have no
providence in themselves.


which nature generally reaches, for a most evident contradiction: yet nothing
could endure, or be preserved, without the providence and protection of an
independing cause. For duration and perseverance of second causes, is no less
depending then their first creation. Then how does that infinite number of
things, which this world possesses, endure without corruption? How can so
many and diverse creatures, not only wanting judgment, and reason, for their
rule and direction, but all sense and life, obtain their ends, and remain in
order so infallibly as they do? When by reason we know, nothing wanting
reason can make comparison, confer, past, present, and future times, and
things, judge, and discern what is danger, what is not, what evil, and to be
avoided, what good, and to be followed: or by any possibility either know,
prosecure, or embrace that order, and end, whereunto it is ordained. And yet
the certain, orderly, and indefectiue motions of Heavens, operations of
Elements, concourse of causes, and works of all inferior and compounded
creatures, sensitive, vegetiue, and such as have neither reason, sense or
vegetation, utterly unable to order and direct themselves, give testemony they
are guided by some most provident and careful workman, cause, and director of
all things, caused and directed by nothing, but always having from eternity
existence, being, and all complete and possible perfection; to whom
consequently, all worship and homage, even by that title, and for that
preeminence, is to be yielded. For, as Cicero says, Cicero l. 3. de Not. Deor.
if it be not possible for a great number of letters, and characters cast
together by chance, without any order or disposition of sillables, words, and
sentences to make the Annals of Ennius, or compound any history, or work of
learning, if no man should set them in order, how much more is it impossible
to believe this admirable, and wonderful world, to be made by accidentary
concourse, and meeting of things together: Yea such absurd and irreligious
Atheists must yield, that of necessity in either case there is one first
original, and independing, both to frame and compose, as also orderly to
digest both the one and other. For neither could those characters be made or
ordered of themselves, or those causes which by chance should constitute the
world, be, or have concurrence without a Creator, and former cause of such
agreement. For although some Philosophers with many absurdities defended the
eternity of the world, and an infinite number in successiue things: yet they
all ever granted, Arist. 2. Met. c. 2. text 5.8. Met. cap. 5. text. 41.

Auth. l. cause. c. 1. etc.


both a dependence, and emanation of them from God, and that it was impossible,
an infinite progress and proceeding, could be in essential and subordinate
causes, such as the superior and inferior, first and secondary causes are: for
where no beginning of causes could be found, there no operation could either
be effected, or begun. And if that could by any man be imagined, Providence
over creatures as much belonging to God as their creation.
yet of necessity, even in that infinite number of causes one of whom the
others should depend, must have that supreme prerogative we assign to the
first and principal cause of things, with out which, nothing could be either
governed or created. Eusebius. lib. 3. Praep. Euang.
Wherefore, as Eusebius teaches, as in artificial things, (to give example)
an house cunningly and curiously builded, and adorned with all kind of
furniture, is an infallible argument, that there was a builder and disposer
thereof; much more does the marvelous excellency, number, order, and beawty of
all natural things, in the great, and glorious habitation, and house of the
world, give evidence, that a chief Prince and artificer has made, digested,
and still rules and governs them. For, (which I proved before) as to make,
is an act of power, and to make and create, where there is infinite
improportion, is an evident argument, of an infinitely able and omnipotent
workman; so to see so many millions, and innumerable multitudes of things,
not able to rule, order, digest, and provide for themselves, yet so uniformly
without error, so generally without exception, so many thousands of years, as
since the worlds creation (and from eternity, if it should not be created in
time) without intermission, to be ordered, ruled, digested, continued,
preserved, and provided for, is a manifest demonstration, that they are thus
maintained and governed, by some most prudent, good, and indefectible cause,
which performing that providence for the use of man, man a reasonable creature
cannot be so unreasonable and forgetful of duty, but yield unto him that
honor and Religion, which so long and infinite a benefit deserves. That an
infinite number of things besides man are, No creature has or can have the
general providence of things.
and have ever in all ages, places, and degrees of things, been ordered,
ruled, and most certainly provided for, no Epicure can deny; every creature,
and every sense he has, will bring evidence it is so. That to rule, govern,
order, direct, and provide for things, and to bring them to their end is an
act and only operation of reason and understanding, no man can contradict: man
is the only reasonable and understanding creature of this inferior world, he
does not, neither can he, or any limited understanding so certainly, and
infallibly order, rule, and have providence over so many millions, infinite,
and innumerable things: none of them has reason to order themselves, and most
do want both sense and life, therefore, seeing there is neither act, power, or
potentiality in them, to order and rule themselves, and nothing else can be
assigned to exercise that universal providence, of necessity it must be done
by that chief and universal cause, their first maker, for nothing else can
perform it, and their government most properly belongs to him. No Maker of
things endued with reason, is improvident of his work.
No Prince that has won, instituted, or otherwise obtained a kingdom, will
neglect to rule it, no Sovereign may be careless of his subjects, no Parent
regardelesse of his children he has begotten, no Artificer, workman, or cause
endued with reason; can be without providence of the things and effects he has
produced, although their care and charge require labor, The infinite wisdom
and goodness of God, cannot but have providence of things.
new, and daily costs in the agent. Then that God and workman, whose
infinite wisdom cannot alter and repent any work he has effected, mislike
no end he has intended, whose goodness cannot be improvident or change to
things he loved, whose power is omnipotent, whose act is but one and eternal,
with whom it is no greater business to govern a thousand worlds, then one
and the meanest creature, whose understanding is so illimited, that nothing can
possibly be concealed from him, will not, but take providence of man, and al
creatures he has created. And as the first creation of al things from nothing,
could not possibly be effected, but by an infinite and illimited agent, so both
the duration, and being of the same creatures, which is as it were, one
continued production, cannot be maintained without the concourse of equal
virtue, Event of things cannot be imputed to the heavens and constellations
neither their actions and operations (which likewise be creatures and
dependant) possibly be effected, without the same Creator. Neither can any man
imagine, how an inferior and depending cause can begin, continue, or perfect
any operation, without this providence, and assistance of the superior and
universal Actor. And although the heavens and celestial bodies, having a
general influence to inferior things, in that respect are termed universal
and common causes, in regard of these lower agents, whose influx and actions
are more particular, yet both they are inanimate, and so unfit for government,
and if they be compared to God, the supreme universal cause, they are private
agents, and howsoever they be considered, they are secondary and depending, and
can work nothing with out assistance of their Creator, much less can the
conjunctions, aspectes, sightes, and constellations of the Planets, only
accidents, which work nothing but in virtue of their subject, be effectual
of such things. Albert. lib. 1. Phisic. ca. 19. tract. 2.
And the Stoycks themselves commonly excepted from fatality, the wills and free
actions of men, which is sufficient for this cause of Religion, which is their
homage. And concerning meaner effects of honor, riches, wealth, prosperity,
death, sickness, and the like, every day and minute of time cries out with
experience, that like constellations do not always, or ordinarily produce
like dispositions and works: to exemplyfie, was no man in England borne under
the constellation of our Kings, that none but they enjoyed the crown? Did not
all the world bring forth one man, when Clement the eight, and Radulphus were
borne, that none other is a Pope or Emperor? And if such Princes before their
powers begun, could prohibit others to be borne with them, yet we see that
many thousands daiely die with them, whether they will or no, as in so many
battles, wherein hundreds of thousands of all estates, ages, and conditions,
differing from those Nobles, have been slain with Kings. And yet by these
men's art, all those that dyed with Kings, should be Kings, all of one age,
nature, and condition. Thus many thousands to one it is in their proceedings,
(besides all other invincible reasons) that they are deceived, and God has
providence not only of humane actions, but all other things, because no other
cause can rule; then experience tells us these things are true, and their
devises false. And the same experience is a tutor to every private man, that at
all constellations he is of the same liberty of will, to do, or not to do;
and how can the heavens and bodies more spiritual substances? are they
animated that they have dominion over souls? are they omnipotent that they can
bring violence to our wills and freedom? are they exempted from a chief
governors authority and rule, that they can govern all? are they God and the
first agent, that they are independing, and all depend of them? these be the
absurdities of such people. All authority proves the providence of God.
Besides which all reason and reasonable creatures, Angels, gloryfied Saints in
heaven, and the understandings of all men of equal judgment, confirm it by
their sentence: all sencible things by their indefectiue order approve it.
All insencible creatures simple and compounded, the heavens, elements, and all
others by their inuariable courses and proceedings, ever have ratified it to be
so: the meanest creature by the wonderful composition of parts by which it is
composed, and certain direction to come to those ends and perfections, which
for want of science it cannot know, gives evidence in this cause. Example of
Gods providence to every mean creture.

Galen l. 3. de vsu part and l. 5.


This moved Galen that profane and irreligious Physician, attributing all to
nature, and nothing to the cause and ordayner of nature, at last (as himself
is witness) to acknowledge the providence of God over these inferior things,
and to make a Canticle in these words following, in honor of our Creator.
Here truly do I make a song in praise of our Creaator, for that of his own
accord, it has pleased him, to adorn and beawtisie his things, better then
by any art possible it could be imagined. Therefore, if the providence of God
is such, to his mean and basest creatures, the common objects of Physicians,
most busied in bodies and more contemptible things, what would be said if we
should go about to comprehend the least of so many ^housand gl^^^ous
creatures in the world. What ^^rticuler supernatural providence and
protection God has always used to his religious servants, as well whole
kingdoms, countries, and private persons devoted to him in religious worship,
Chap. 13.
will appear in the thirteenth chapter of this book, to the confusion of all
Infidels and misbeleeuers. Examples of Gods supernatural providence etc.
In the mean time (which I will omit that place) let us take for our example
the cry of Jerusalem, so renowned for religious observations, under the law
of Moses, and the high Apostolic See of Rome, so famous for true worship
since the time of Christ, yet both odious among misbeleeuing people, the first
to Pagans, the second both to them, incredulous Jews, and Apostating
Heretics of all ages. Concerning the first, Gods providence to Jerusalem
before the coming of Christ.

Genesis 12.15.17.18.3. Reg. 6.


let us pass over that miraculous providence God exercised toward the
Israelites his religious servants, inhabitants thereof, from the time of
Abraham, to whom he made the promise, to bless him and his posterity, and
take especial care of that nation, whereof Christ was to descend, until the
time of building the Temple by King Solomon, which was above 900. years. Gen
15. Act. 7. Exodus 12. Exodus 5.6.7.8 9.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17. etc. Porphyr. l.
4. contr. Christ. App. lib. 4. contr. Iud. Joseph. lib. 4. Antiquit. Arist.
lib. 7^. interpret.
I will not speak what blessings were bestowed upon Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and
their descent, how miraculously they were multiplied in Egypt, with what (...)
is their mighty enemies were confounded, their marvelous deliuerye thence, the
drowning of their enemies, their strange preservation, their miraculous life
and protection in the desert, the more then wonderful conquests they obtained
over so many and potent enemies, and other supernatural favors, not only
recorded in holy Scriptures, but remembered by other writers, and manifestly
known, to many and great kingdoms. But to pass these over, what could be
the fame of Jerusalem a city of Canaan, a little country, when it was divided
into so many provinces, as it was before the Israelytes inhabited it? what man
makes mention of any honor or glory it had? but after religion was settled
there, how glorious was it to all nations? it was the seat of the Kings, and
it was called the City of the King of Heaven, 3. Reg. 6. Math. c. 5.
the high Priest, with the greatest Majesty of that law were planted there,
Sacrifices were there offered, not only Jews, Act. 2.
but Proselytes, and converted Gentyles of all Nations honored it with their
access and presence, Parthians, Medes, Elamites, inhabitants of Mesopotamia,
Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, Phrigia, Pamphilia, Egypt, Libya, Cyrene, Romans,
Cretensianes, Arabianes, and others. How sumptuous and glorious was the Temple
to all Nations, where all things were almost made of Gold? Joseph. l. antiq.
Arist. l. 72. interpret.
how precious and myraculous (as many write) were the attyres of the Priests?
how honorable was their Oracle and Propitiatory most straungely gloriefied
with the Presence and Answers of God himself? with what holy Relickes of the
Arc, Manna, and others, was it sanctified? to what a mighty nation did that
people increase? what Prophets had they? how were their ennemies Antiothus and
others punished of God? Machab. 1: Esdr. 1.2.3: Arist. supr. Joseph contr.
Appion.

1. Esdr. 1 2.3.4.5 6.7. etc.


how gracious were they to the greatest Princes? how miraculouslie were they,
their holy City, and Temple, preserved a thousand years together? how were
they delivered from captiuities? how strangely did GOD move the hearts of
the mightyest rulers of the Gentiles to honor their sacryfices, and Temple?
And when the time was come, Is. 53. Hier. Sybil. apud Lact. 1.2 3.4. diu.
instit. D. Tho. 3. p. Joseph lib. 15.20.7. bell.
that their law in the Messiah should cease, and they most profanely had
denied and put him to death, not only as their own Prophets, but the Sybils
and others among the Gentyles had foretold, and they fallen to such notorious
impieties, as their own Historian Josephus is witness, that never any nation
had come to that degree of wickedness; yet God ceased not his special
providence to that people, but gave them many wonderful signs for their
conversion. Besides those which the holy Evangelists report of the miraculous
Eclips, Math 27. Joseph. lib. 7. bell. cap 12.
quaking of the earth, rending of the rocks, and tearing of the veil of the
Temple, arysing of the dead and others, Josephus gives evidence, that in their
great festiuity (before their desolution) in the night, there appeared such a
light about the Altar and Temple half an hour together, that every man
thought it was day. And at the same time, an Ox led to be sacrificed,
brought forth a calfe in the midst of the Temple, and the East door of the
inner temple made of brass, and so heavy that twenty men could scarcely shut
it, being locked with strong locks of iron, and barred with deep bars let
down into a thresholde of stone, opened of it self in the night before the
setting of the same fiery Chariots and armed battles, Tacitus hist* lib. 5.
were seen in the air about the city: and the Priests did hear a voice,
saying: Migremus hinc, Let us go from hence. And (that which is a most strange
testimomy of Gods continued providence toward them) on Ihesus son of Anani,
Joseph. lib. 7. bell. cap. 12.
four years before the war began, when the City was in great prosperity and
peace, upon the sudden in their festival day, began to cry in these words.
A voice from the East, a voice from the West, a voice from the four winds, a
voice upon Jerusalem and the Temple, a voice upon new married husbands, and
new married wives, a voice over all this people. And this day and night going
about all the streets of the city cried, and although he was chastised for
this cry, yet he neither spoke any thing for himself or against them that
punished him, but still continued crying the same words. And being led to the
ruler of the Romans to be punnished, and his flesh torn to the bones with
blows, he neither entreated favor, or once wept, but at every blow bending
down, pitifully viterred this speech: Woe, woe to Jerusalem, and never gave
over mourning for the miserable city, and still complained in these words, Woe,
woe to Jerusalem. And thus he continued seven years, and five months, but
principally upon the festival days: until at the time of the siedge going
about the wall, he cried out with his lowdest voice, Woe, woe to the City, and
Temple, and People, and at last also he added, Woe also to my self, and was
presently killed with a stone, thrown from the ennemies, hitherto be the
words of Josephus, living among them at the same time.

Gods providence to the Aposto^ique See of Rome.
And concerning Rome, where the Pope and high priest of Christians is reside^t,
how improbable was it in humane judgment before S. Peter a poor fisher came
thither, Sibil apud lact lib. diu. instit.
that the prophecy of Sibilla ( the Fishers hook should conquer the Roman
Empire) should be fullfilled. Was not Christ his master put to death by that
authority? was not he himself crucified by the same, and all his successors
unto S. Siluester, thirty in number, either actually put to death, or most
grievously persecuted? were not Christians at that time without any friend or
favorer? were not the Roman Emperors the most potent of the world, and
ruled all places? did not the persecuted Popes preach Christ crucified,
penance and great austerity to the ears of licentious Gentiles? And yet we
see that the prophecy of Sibilla was performed, and the especial providence
which Christ promised to his holy Apostle and his successors, that their faith
should not fail, that it should conquer all enemies, that the gates of hell
should not prevail against it, is miraculouslie effected, and still continued
to that holy See. Epist Apol.
I have showed in my Apologicall Epistle, how all the Pagan Princes of the
world, one time or other were opposed against it, but they were confounded.
How many Infidel and Pagan Emperors persecuted it, but they were punished, and
it prevailed: many heretical Emperors plagued it, but they were confounded,
diverse wicked Christian Emperors and Kings, both in England and other
nations afflicted it, yet it conquered them, how often it was sacked and
spoiled by Goths, Vandals, Saracens, Immbardes, and others, yet it flourished
still: that has been infested with many schysmes, Bernard. Lute. Catal.
haeret. Casp. Vlenb. 22. cause.
and assaulted by above 400. sects of heretics before Luther, and yet
condemned them, and yet at this time warreth against almost 300. known
heresies, and yet it is more glorious and renowned now, after 1500. years,
then ever it was before, and dilated farther by many degrees (daily
increasing) then ever any other regiment spiritual or temporal was, and not
subject to the least suspicion to be overthowne hereafter. And no man can make
other reason of these things, then the extraordinary providence of God, to
that holy place, the enemies it has, and ever had, be more, and more mighty,
then ever any city fought against. It uses not temporal armor against them.
The soldiers, and Captains it used, were unarmed with corporal weapons,
their conquest over their enemies was by suffering themselves to be killed.
That which they taught was unpleasing to potent Princes against whom they
warred, and carnal minds with whom they fought. That which they labored to
overthrow, and did destroy, was liberty, and things tending to delight, and yet
that has vanquished, and daily is more glorious and triumphant, the other
perish, and become more contemptible. Who will not say but these things
proceed from God, and his most holy providence and protection to that
Religious Apostolic See? Miracles.
And thus I might exemplify in other things. I will pass so many thousands
of miraculous operations, whereof the whole world can witness, and which
could not be effected by any limited or created power, I have spoken of them
already, and must entreat them as well in diverse chapters of this book, Cap.
10.11.13. infr.
as also more largely hereafter, against internal enemies and whereof every
Argument I shall allege for true Religion to God our chief governor gives
witness, Part. 2. Resol. Arg. miracl.
therefore it needs no more evidence in this place. Only I will conclude,
every creature in the world, every part, member, organe, quality, act, or
operation it has, is a demonstration in this case: God himself, ordinarily
and superordinarily does witness it, all reasonable, and unreasonable things
in their sense affirm it. The heavens, The general and uniform consent of
all countries and people.
all simple, and compounded things, give invincible proof it is so.

This is the sentence of all Nations, Countries, Schools, Cities, Towns, and
people, Catholics, Heretics, Jews, Pagans, Hist Eccl. Eus. Niceph. Bed.
etc.

Alcaron Mah. Thalmud. Iud. Petr. Maff. hist Indic. etc.


Brachmans, Mahumetanes, all Christian and Panym Philosophers, late, ancient,
of all ages and places agree in this. None but beastly men, (whose opinion is
no authority to excuse their filthiness) deny it, and they rather in voluptuous
desire wishing, then in judgment affirming it. Objections of Epicures answered.
Neither let them allege what multitudes of errors about religion in
particular, are, and have reigned in the world: for as these errors are to be
imputed to the wickedness of the authors from whom they proceed, so such
great contention for that cause is an evident argument of worship, and the
dignity of true Religion, otherwise every man would not contend and make
claim unto it, with so great danger to himself, and contempt of others. And
the causes of their complaint, that errors and sins do reign, proceed from
their own and such men's impious demerits, and are no more to be imputed to
God, which neither can, nor will deceive, or be cause of sin, then the
wilful ignorance of a perverse scholar, to a learned and painful master, or
the disobedience of a wicked child or subject to virtuous Parents and Princes.
Cap. 2.3. sup.
That God is free from inducing or leading into errors, is evident already by
that most excellent goodness, which I have showed to be in him. And that he
has delivered so certain and infallible means for every man to know the
truth, that (except wilfully) we need not err, Lib. 2. and part. 2. Resol.
I will demonstrate by invincible Arguments hereafter, as also prove in
particular against all Infidels, Jews Pagans, Mahumetans, Lib. 2. cap 6. part.
2. Resol. Arg. 5.6. etc.
and all sorts of heretics, that their errors and proceedings in them are so
manifestly false, that they cannot be excused from wilful ignorance: And that
the order of Catholics true believers is so certain, that they cannot be
deceived. And to ease this irreligious people of all complaints against the
oppressions, tribulations, and persecutions of the godly, and prosperities of
the wicked, I will show that such objections against Religion, are a manifest
conviction of a divine reverence, Cap. 12.13.14. infr.
and how the temporal favorers, and preferments of the Religious, did
always exceed the honors of the ungodly. Cap. vlt. penult. Seq.
And to give them that they seek, I will prove, if by impossibility there
should be no Religion, nor God, no immortality after death, yet that the
state of the professors of worship even in this world, is far more glorious,
honorable, and pleasant, then of Epicures, and irreligious men.

THE NECESSITY OF RELIGION, to obtain the Immortal and Supernatural end, for
the immortal Soul for man which can neither have any end in this life, or
perish possibly with death. CHAP. IIII.
Wherefore though we should become such great Politickes, and so fully
possessed with self love and delight in religious affairs, that we would use
no reverence or worship, but for our own advantage, yet we cannot but
perform this reuerentiall duty, especially when we enter into reckoning with
our selves, how many and often helps and succors we want, necessary to that
end whereto we were ordained, and that which we most desire, the better and
immortal portion of man's soul, The end and felicity of man cannot be in
this life.
not having perfection in this world, and yet must receive it from God: For no
corporal or corruptible thing of this life is able to satisfy and give rest
to the greedy understanding, or vnpleaseable appetite of our reasonable and
incorruptible part, neither was there any Philosopher, Cicero Tuscul. quest.
et paradox.
or student of nature able to find here the end and felicity thereof. For by
felicity and happiness all men, always did, and do understand such an
estate, as is deuoided of all evil, we would eschew, and abounding with all
good we would wish; for as Aristotle says, Aristot. lib. ^. ethic. cap. 1.
that is Blessedness, which all men and all things do seek, and desire.
Which estate and degree never any man yet, how much soever befrended of this
world, could taste in this life; but whatsoever they either found for
themselves, or devised for others, it was not so durable, pleasant, good, or
perfect, but it wanted one thing or other, we might wish to have: or brought
with it something unstable, variable, tedious, troublesome, painful, or
unpleasant, which a man in reason might justly crave to want; as manifestly
appears, not only in the general conditions, Arist. sup. c. 8.
which the Philosopher by light of nature requires to the blessedness of man,
but in honor, riches, knowledge, delight, or other pleasure, which any sect of
Philosophers, Accademicks, Peripatetickes, Stoickes, or Epicureans in
particular appointed for humane felicity. Wherefore seeing such a condition
and estate of happiness cannot be found in this life, and every thing one time
or other enjoys his end and felicity, of necessity this end and happiness of
man, must be obtained after death, and received of God by duty to him, as also
all necessary helps, and dispositions thereof, all reverence and religion must
needs be done unto him by man, in a more high degree then of any other
creature, not ordained to such a supernatural, and eternal end, And this no
Epicure, how much soever brutishly blinded in delight, The unreasonable,
absurdities of Epicures, and deniers of the souls immortality after death.
or malitiouslie injurious to the perfection of humane nature, can deny. For if
he allege no reason for his impious and irreligious mind, then no man can be
so foolish to believe him: If he pretend any show of reason, how weak or
feeble soever it is, thereby he overthrows that by his own reason and
understanding, which his licentious and brutish will labors to build. For
reason and judgment being operations only of the intellectual part of man's
soul, as immediate cause, and not depending of the sensible fantasy, or any
corporal, or organicall instrument, (for neither a tree, or any vegetative
thing, or a dog, or any sensible creature, can reason, argue, or dispute of
things) should be a manifest demonstration, that soul which is endued with
those habilities, to be independing of the body, spiritual and immortal,
living for ever, and so to have felicity after death, Deniers of the soul
immortality deny themselves to be men.
for attayning whereof, a Religion and worship is due to God. Therefore every
one knowing himself to be a reasonable creature, no man can possibly call the
other in question, except first he would doubt whether he be a man, whether
he has reason, judges of things past, present, and to come, compares one
thing with an other, argues, and disputes of causes and effects: for, as both
reason, and all learned Philosophers teach, Mercur. trism. in Aescul. plat.
etc. Arist lib. 1. an. text. 20. lib. 2. an. text. 22. l. 12. met. text. 17.1.
ethic c. 11. etc. The powers of the soul in satiable in this life.
that soul, which has these independing operations, must needs be separable
from the body and immortal.

Let us add the insatiableness of the same faculty, whom all the science,
and knowledge of this world cannot content; and the natural inclination it
has to know the causes of such effects, as it finds in this life, and
cannot: that unanswerable appetite, and propension of the will, which never
enjoys enough of the thing it loves, but desires more: that liberty and
freedom it has, The absolute regiment of the reasonable powers over the
sensible and inferior.
commanding all sensible powers, and faculties, either to exercise, or suspende
their operations, prescribing, doing or not doing of things, and effecting
the will, and election of itself, how urgent soever the repugnant sensible
appetites and desires be. Then how can any man imagine that power to be
dependinge of the body, which in it chiefest operations is dependinge thereof,
but euidentlye shows Superiority over all corporal and sensible passions,
and suggestions, that it can rule and bridle them as it pleases, in such
sort, that no foot can go, no eye can see, no member, organe, or sensible
power is able to execute any function, if the will forbids. Virtues and
spiritual qualities of man cannot be subjected in a Corporal and Mortal
Subject.
Or what Epicure can be so mad to affirm so many spiritual virtues as
Religion, faith, hope, reverence, fear, justice, and such others, which all
men at one time, or other in some degree find in themselves, to be subjected
in a corporal or corruptyble power? The conscience and internal experience
even of the Epicures.
Or is there any of this school of impiety, but their conscience and
understanding tells them, that sin is not to be committed, and when they
have sinned, accuses them as guilty of transgressinge the law of God, whom
they have offended, and consequently whom they are to worship, and reverence.
Of which St. Paul, in the light of nature speaks in these words, Romans cap.
2.5.14.15.
when the Gentiles which have not the law (of Moses and Christ) naturally do
those things, that are of the law, the same not having the law, themselves
are a law to themselves: who show the work of the law written in their
hearts, their conscience giving testimony to them, and among themselves their
thoughts accusing, or also defending.

The chiefest operations of the soul, independent of the body.
And although the understanding in diverse first operations, craves aid from
the imagination: yet in many other noble acts thereof, it is independing: as in
the judgment of spiritual things, and the use of free will, which no sense,
corporal organe, or faculty was ever able to produce. For between every
operation produced, the cause which produces it, and the object and matter
that is considered, there must be a due and correspondent proportion. No
vegetative power has sense, no sensitive faculty can argue, or conceive
immateriall things. And yet we see, that the understanding of man is so far
from being wholly assisted of the body in these operations, or to be hindered by
separation from it, that experience teaches, when it is united to this
corruptible body the acts of the reasonable parts of the soul be more
perfect, The principal acts of the soul more perfect, when most abstracted
from the body.
by how much they are more abstracted, and independing of the body; as is
evident in the exercises of all studyous and contemplative men, and in some
aged and decayed bodies, when the soul has less dependence, when the
vegetiue, and sensitive Organes are enfeebeled, and not able so well to
exercise their natural operations, when neither Generation, Augementation,
Heareinge, Seeing, or other such powers remain: yet often times when these
things are nearest corruption, or corrupted, the Understanding, and
Immorrtall powers of the soul are most perfect, expectinge a future end and
felicity.

So likewise it appears when we consider that exellencye of the
understanding, The reflected acts of man's soul.
above all Sensitive Creatures: how it is ennabled not only to understand
all other things, how elevated soever above sense and imagination, but to
reflecte and ponder upon it self, and the other powers of the soul, will, and
memory, and those also over themselves. For not only the understanding
understands, and knows it self to know, and understand, or that the will
does wish and desire, or the memory remembers; but the will it self is
reflected upon it self, willing it self to will, and the memory above it
self, remembering that it did remember; which is impossible for any corporal,
or sensible and corruptible power to do. The hearing, hears not it self to
hear, the foot cannot set it self, and tread upon it self, and so of
others.

The continual and contrary Combats of the reasonable soul and sensible
powers.
The continual combats and disagreements, which the reasonable part
maintains against the sensible and corporal motions, which is not in brute
and sensitive things, (For where all is like, there can be no dislike and
contention, which grows from unlikeness and contrariety) those so often and
urgent fears of spirytuall domages, belonginge to the soul, and to happen
after death, and the hope of eternal pleasures then to be enjoyed, which every
man proves to exceed his corporal fears and bodily delights, give evidence
in this case.

Then those so many and Immortal Powers of the soul must have their end: The
immortal powers of the soul, which cannot be in a Mortal Subject, demonstrate
the soul to be Immortal.
and seeing the natures of things and their powers and properties must agree,
and be of the same order, that substance of the soul which has immortal and
ever during properties and operations must be immortal: for by no possibility
where the subject or substance is mortal, the properties and qualities of that
substance can be immortal; for properties and accidents, must have some thing
wherein to be subjected and received; and those properties, that be immortal,
an immortal subject. For properties and qualities, be ever the properties of
some thing to which they are belonging: Therefore as those operations which the
soul exercises only by dependence of the body, and corporal organes, as to
eat, to walk, to grow, to hear, to smell, and such other vegetative and
sensible works, are an argument, that soul which only has these works to
perish with the body, as the lives of Plants, Herbs, Birds, Beasts, and
Fishes do, because they wholly depend of that body, which does perish: even so
the operations of the soul of man, which are independing of the bodily help,
demonstratiuelie argue, the separabilitie thereof, and so duration for ever.
For that which is intellectual, and spiritual, cannot be corrupted of any
corporal, or natural agent: Neither has it original of decay in it self,
but is altogether without contrariety, and repugnance. And beeinge one simple,
spiritual, and incompounded substance, it must needs be immortal after
death, and have an everlasting felicity. Every kind of creatures except man
has an end in this life.
For the infinite wisdom of GOD, which could not constitute the least
creature, or do any thing, but to some end, has assigned a certain state,
and place, wherein every creature finds center, and rest, where they enjoy
and preserve their perfection, as the Element of Fire above the uppermost
Region of the Air, because it is highest, the Air in his Regions, as the
Nature thereof requires, the heavier things, Water, and Earth, in their lower
elementary places, and so of all other creatures: and yet hitherto never any
man, how much soever beholdinge unto nature, could^ find in earthly things,
a center, and place of rest: for the immortal appetites, and faculties of his
soul, wherefore by no possibility, his beatitude can be in this world. For
although we admit in other creatures, that all of every kind obtain not
their end; yet to say that none of any sort do find it is euidentlye
untrue. Then to affirm that among so many millions of men, so excellent
creatures, not one should have his end and happiness, were to take all
wisdom, goodness, and providence from GOD, and argue him of ignorance, and
injustice; especially when we often see wicked men in this world, not only
to live unpunished, but to be exaulted with honor, and pass their time in
pleasures; and the most holy and virtuous, to live in misery, and to be
afflicted with all adversities; which the infinite goodness of God would not
do except after death he had appointed punishment for the one, and a
beatificall reward for the other: for of it own nature virtue is honorable,
and sin deserves punishment. For if there be no religion due to God, but the
soul of man is mortal and dies with the body, his end must be assigned in
this life, as it is in beasts, and other creatures, and must consist in
corporal and temporal delights. Then cannot humility, sobriety, temperance,
abstinence, patience, virginity, chastity, penance, prayer, contemplation,
and other confessed virtues, which be opposite enemies, and a full privation,
of bodily, and sensual pleasures, be accounted virtues, leading to a man's
felicity, when they directly deprive him of his supreme beatitude? Or how
could pride, ambition, oppression, covetousness, drunkennnesse, theft, rapine,
adultery, and all unclean wantonness of sensuality, and other voluptuous
sins be so esteemed, when they should be the only perfection, and felicity
of man? which the very heroical conceit (if there were no other argument) of
every one not drowned in beastliness will affirm. For there is not one, but
in reason would scorn to choose such things for his Summum bonum and felicity.
And yet that which is true happiness, neither is, nor can be contemned of any,
but greedely sought and deserved of all, as a most perfect state, where all
things to be wished are present, and all things to be avoided absent. To
which not only al powers, properties, acts, and operations, of the reasonable
souls of men, when they were united with their bodies, Separated souls.
but many and great numbers of souls after their separation, have testified
and given infallible evidence, to thousands of credible present witnesses. For
if the soul be not separable, it could not remain, either by it self after
separation, or be united again to that body it had first informed: because
in the separation it were to be dissolved, and perish: neither could any new
soul, be produced in those bodies, no disposition or potentiality being left
in them for such production. Take this away, and not only the nature of every
particular man is destroyed, but all Communities, Kingdoms, Commonwealths,
Societies, Towns, Cities, Families and civil estates, which ever practiced
reverence and cannot consist without Religion, are overthrown. All
Testimonies, All scriptures
and Revelations of God in holy Scriptures, are to be rejected. Those sacred
writings, approved by so many miraculous kind other Arguments, as I will
allege in my next chapter, that by no possibillitye, they could be untrue,
are not to be regarded. Then can any man become so traitorous, and
disobedient a Rebel to his Creator, so enuyous a persecutor of his own
dignitye and preferment, so malicious an enemy and opposer of himself to all
creatures, to give so great attendance and homage to short and brutishe
pleasures, to live as though there were no God, to whom he ought duty, and
religion, no felicity after death, no be atitude for man, but as beasts enjoy?
If this opinion be false (as infinite testimonies prove it to be) then he is
sure to be damned for ever, if it should be true (as GOD and all creatures
and that man himself in judgment denyerh) yet he has gained no more then
other brutish creatures have done, and that which a reasonable man would not
accept.

THE TESTIMONIES OF AL HOly Scriptures, for all things belonginge to Religion:
and their most certain and infallible Authority. CHAP. V.
WE will add to these natural Testimonies, of all reasonble creatures, the
Supernatural Witness of the Creator himself, registered in holy Scriptures,
where not only the Infinite and Omnipotent Majesty of one Immortal, and
Incomprehensible God, his providence over all creatures, extraordinary
protection to his religious servants, the Immortallitie and everlasting
blessedness of the souls of men, and their duty, and religion to God in
general are set down: but the very particular manner and means of worship,
and things belonginge to adoration are recorded for all peoples instruction.
The vndoub-Authoritie of holy Scriptures.
And let not any profane Atheist or Irreligious monster take exception against
them, or any one of those most holy and sacred writings: it is not the
condemned sentence of any Idolatrous Gentile, Antiquity.
beastly Epicure, Diagoras, or Atheist, or Apostating heretic, which all
Judgments, and Generations have disalowed, that can call those undoubted
mouments of the will of God into question. Iren. lib. 1. ca. 20.22.29. Epiphan
haer. 66. Euth part. 2. panopl. tit. 23. cap. 1. Anton. p. 4. tit. 11. cap. 7.
Be^gom. hist in Di^g. Genebr. Chr. lib. 1.
Shall the Simonians, Basilidians, Bogomites, or any heretics that lived
thousands of years after they were written, make them doubtful, because they
be contrary to his corrupted desires? when they have so many generations of
the most renowned countries and peoples against them? shall it be lawful for
Diagoras the first Athiest, which lived thousands of years after those
things which be entreated in them were effected, only reject them because
they witness a God, and worship to him, which all the world, and all
kingdoms before and after him ever believed? shall any Pagan Idolater be
received to disgrace those Sacred Testimonies, when their superstitions are so
late in respect of that worship, which they handle? Joseph. lib. 10. contr.
Appi. Lactant. lib. 1.2.3.4. diu. inst. Eus. in Chron.
for as Josephus does demonstrate against Appion the Pagan, and Lactantius,
and other a^prooued Authors are evidence: most part of the things recounted
in the old Testament were done before many of the Panime Gods were borne: and
the last writers of holy Scriptures, Esdras, Aggeus, Zachary, and Mallachie,
were before most of the heathen Historians. Euphemer. mess. in geneal. Deor.
Cicero not. Deor.

Lactant. lib. 1.2. diu. insstit.


Abraham as the Gentyles themselves acknowledge was long before any of their
gods were extant: the eldest of their poets were not before Solomon, which was
above 900. years after Abraham. And Moses himself was much more ancient
then Ceres, Vulcan, Mercury, Apollo, Aesculapius, Casior, Pollux, Hercules, and
other their feigned Gods, and both concerning those things he recorded
before, from the first creation unto his time, he proved them with so many
miracles, Actaban. hist. Iud. polyhist. hist. Eupol. etc.
that could not be untrue, that he was taken for God, and accounted a wonder
of the world. The reason why the Pagans received not those holy Scriptures,
was, because they prescribe a more severe Religion, then their licentious
minds allowed, and overthrow the corporieties, pluralities, and such
impossible mutations which they allow in divinity, which all reason knows to
be ridiculous. And yet besides the mighty Persian Emperors, Cyrus and Darius,
1. Esdr. 1 2.3.4.5.6 7. etc. Arist. lib. 72. interpret.

3 Reg 5. Sybil. apud Lactant. l. 2.3.4 5. diu. instit.

D. Tho. 3. p. Gra. de Simb. Joseph lib. 1. antiq.

Eus. lib 9. praepar. cap 4. Nicl l. fraud. Artab hist. Iud. Polyh. hist. Iud.

Arist l. de Job Thalmud. Alcoron.

Arist. l. 72. intr


King Ptolomy, Aram, and others, that honored the Israelites, their holy law,
and Testament, not only the Sybils, and other for prophecy most renowned among
those Pagans, confirm the things that be entreated in them. But many others
of the greatest account, as well among them, as in later ages: as Melo,
Eupolemus, Trismagistus, Leodemus, Aristeaeus, Artahanus, Nunenius, Pithagoras,
Alexander Polyhistor, Appion, Porphiry, Saconeathan, Berosus, Caldaeus,
Ierommus Aegiptius, Nicholaus Damascenus, Abydenus, many monuments in the late
discovered world, Mahumet, the whole Sinagogue of the later Rabbines, all
Jews, and Turks (of Christians there is no doubt) give testimony to those
things, that be recorded in those holy writings. Joseph lib. 10. cont.
Appion. App l. 4. cont Iud.

Porphyr. l. 4. cont. Christ. Joseph. lib. 1.2. antiq.

Orph. in car. Justin. Martyr Orat. ad Anton. pium. Dion hali^. lib. 4.


Of Jews and Mahumetanes there is no difficulty allowing the books of the old
Testament, which is enough for my purpose now to prove a God, and Religion,
so religigiouslie commended in that law. For the Gentile Pagans, I have cited
their most ancient, and to exemplyfie in one of their first: Orpheus had those
sacred books, and the mysteries recorded in them in highest esteem, and
plainly both affirmed that they were most ancient, and delivered by God
himself, his words (when he had cited many things from thence) are these.
Priscorum haec nos docuerunt omnia voces,
Quas binis tabulis Deus olim tradidit illis.
The voices of ancients have taught us these things, which GOD delivered to
them in two tables. Could Moses (if he were alive again) to whom these
tables were delivered, speak more plainly? And the testimony of the Sybils
were so manifest herein, that it was made death by the Pagan laws, to read
their books. And Attilius himself Duum vir, one of the two principal men, to
whom their custody was committed, only because he wrote them forth, was sewed
into a sack and cast into the Sea.

The holiness and excellency of the writers of holy Scriptures above all other
writers.
If we make comparison between the writers of holy Scriptures and Diagoras, and
such Atheists as would deny them, or the Panym Philosophers, though we single
them forth that were accounted best, there is no semblance of proportion. The
Prophets and writers of holy Scriptures, were most holy, and a spectacle of
sanctity to all generations, and many of them dyed, Hebr. 11 etc. Plato ep. 13.
ad Dionis.
for defense of those things they committed to writing. Many of the
Philosophers were of such filthy lives, that their sins are not to be named,
and their errors intolerable, and their chiefest men (as themselves
acknowledge) did not as they did believe, believing one God with Scriptures,
and serving Idols, as Plato to Dyonisius gives plain witness of himself.

Efficacy of the doctrine in holy Scriptures.
If we consider the efficacy of the doctrine of those holy writers, although
they entreated of hard, most difficulte, and unpleasing things to sensual
minds, and the Pagan Philosophers of pleasing and delightful things: yet the
austere doctrine of them has almost converted the whole world to live as
they believed, and these philosophers could never yet allure one Kingedome, or
City, even to think only as they taught. And yet (as I will prove herafter)
they have attempted it by all means they could. Lib. 2.1. pa^ Resol.

The wonderful consent in all things of al writers of holy Scriptures.




If we talk of consent, or disagreement in Wrighters: (upon which in matters
of Authority, Truth or Falsehoode, may easily be concluded:) No man is
ignorant that not only all Pagan and profane Historians disagree among
themselves, and all Philosophers of the divided Sects of Stoics,
Peripateticks, Accademicks, and Epicures, but the professors of every of these
sects were at war among themselves, and yet they entreated only of natural
things, proportionate to humane capacity: contrariewise, not only the sacred
histories of Scriptures agree, but all their Writers, Prophets, Priests,
Evangelists, and Apostles agree in one, without any least difference or
variance in doctrine, and yet they all entreat of matters Supernatural, and
above the reach of man's reason. Wherefore, I conclude in this Argument, when
so many holy writers, as moses, David, Esdras, Jeremy, Ezechiell, Dani^ll,
Zachary, Malachie, S. Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Peter, Paul, James and
others, were so divided in time, separated in place, as Egypt, Jerusalem,
Babylon, Rome and others where they wrote, so distinct in natures, and natural
conceits, and judgments, as all men are, and yet in so many books as the
Scriptures contain: and in so many supernatural mysteries agreed uniformly
together, without the least dissent or contradiction: this Direction must
needs proceed of God, The miraculous translation, and preservation of
scriptures.

Arist. lib. 72. interpret.


who penetrateth al things, and cannot lead into error. When I see so
miraculous agreement in the 72. that by the appointment of King Ptolomy of
Egypt, translated the old testament, recorded by enemies, and like assistance
in later handlers of those sacred works: and farther consider, how in so many
garboiles and troubles of Nations, many writings of the most allowed Pagans
have perished, and yet these have bin preserved in all the most famous
languages of the world. I cannot be induced but they be the evidence of God,
The great authorization of scriptures, in humane proceedings.

Thalm. Alco. azoar. 1 1. to. 1.2 Council. Bellar. Chron. Genebr. Cron


and preserved by him. Further, when I perceive the greatest humane Authority
that can be cited for any monument, used for the crediting of these religious
testaments, as for the books of the first testament all Christians, Jews,
Mahumetans, and many Gentiles consenting that they be holy, and for every
book of the new testament besides the authorities of all Schools,
Universities, and thousands of p^ouinciall Sinods, the whole Christian world
in their most learned Doctors and Fathers assembled twenty times in general
counsels, and confirminge them all by their sentence: and never so any ten
persons together iudiciallie agreeing to approve any Pagan writer in all
things: I cannot be of opinion but these books were penned by holy instinct
from God. Certain foretelling, of future contingent things.
Moreover when the light and law of nature and reason make me secure, and all
Philosophers, Christians, Pagans, and the learned of the whole world ever ageed
together in this, (and give it for a distinction between a limmited and
infinite power,) that future things which have no certainty in their causes,
cannot certainelye be known and foretoulde, but by an infinite knowledge,
penetrating things, more perfectly then they be in their causes, and whosoever
certainly prophesies of such things, must needs receive that faculty from
God, which can be ignorant of no effect: But the whole sacred Scripture is
evidence, that many things within their causes be most uncertain, as
depending of the freedom of man's will and election, and others more secret
only to be produced at the most secret will and pleasure, and by the
Omnipotent power of god himself, have bin as certainly and plainly
foretold, with their manner and circumstances, many years before they came to
pass, as if they had bin present witnesses of those things, Genesis 12.13.15.17.
Exodus 12. Genesis 49. Numer. 34.35.36. Ios. 15.16.17. Deuteronomy. 31.32. Ios. 6. ^. Reg.
12. ^. Reg. 23.
as so many Predictions of Abraham, Jacob, Moses, David, Daniell, Esaie,
Jeremy, Zacharye, Christ, his Apostles, and others and ^o^ie Scriptures of the
Regiment of Judah, the division of the Land of Canaan the perpetual desolation
of Ierico, of the birth and acts of Josias, three hundred years before he was
borne, the destruction of Babylon by king Cirus, 4. Reg. 20.
and his name foretold two hundred years before he came. And two witnesses
named of it, Is. 5.15.24.25.13.8. Hierem. 26. Zachar. 1. Hier. 37.29.38.39.25.
4. Reg. 24.25. 1. Esdr. 1. 2. Esdr. 2. Dan. 9 5. Is. 53. Dan. 10.9* Is.
42.40.50. Malach. 3. Is 1. Zach. 9. Psalm. 80. Os. 2.3.6. Dan. 2. Agg. 2.
Zachar. 11. Malach. 1. Is. 1.2.3.5.6. etc. Math. 24. Marc. 13. Luc. 21.19. etc.
Vrias and Zacharias which were not borne many years after this was
prophesied. The captivity of the Israelites in Babylon, the time of that
continuance and their delivery again in the time of Esdras. The destruction of
Balsasar king of Babylon, and the very night of his desolation* the time of
the coming of the Messiah, his life, death, resurrection, ascension, and other
mysteries, as they were effected in christ, the miracles which happened then,
the reprobation of the Jewish people, conversion of the Gentiles, destruction
of Jerusalem, the pitiful miseries it did endure, and the like which were
uncertain things, and yet were as certainly fortolde, as they were certain
when they were performed: therefore seeing these things be so undoubtedly come
to pass, we cannot make question of any other to be effected in his time
hereafter, the one being as difficult to be foreseen as the other, and
consequently much more all other matters revealed in those holy writings which
be of more easy subject, are vnfalliblie true, and so to be believed.

Miracles to prove the scriptures, that by no possibility, they can be untrue.
Lastly to put all out of doubt, that even from the first time of committinge
those mysteries to writing, by the holy pen men of Sacred Scriptures,
every man might be secure they were spoken and revealed of God, which could
neither be deceived in himself, or bring others into error: So many
miraculous works and operations, which none but a divine power, and such as
had authority from him could effect, were given unto those chosen Scribes of
this holy law, and wrought by them to confirm the truth of those mysteries
they committed to those holy books, that the whole world has wondered at
those miracles: and all Philosophers ever confessed, that such things having no
cause or power of their production in nature, could not be produced but by the
assistance of an infinite and illimited Agent: and not by him to confirm any
falsehoode or thing untrue. The number of these signs be too many to be
remembered, and not only the Scriptures be full of those strange and marvelous
works, but they be reported by heathen writers, and wrought often times in
open spectacles and places of view before whole multitudes of people, that
could not be deceived: of which I shall have opportunity of speech hereafter,
Part. 2. Resol. Aug. myracl. and cap. 10.11. seq. etc. Rich. des. vict.
and therefore pas them over in this place. Wherefore I may say in this point
as that learned Schoole-man said in the like: Domine si decepti sumus, a te
decepti sumus. O Lord if we be deceived, we are deceived by thee. For no
other power could effect these things; and not to give credit to any mystery
so confirmed, is the greatest obstinacy and incredulity can be assigned.
Therefore the holy scriptures by no possibility can be untrue: and if there
were no other Argument, either for Religion in general, or that in particular
which I will defend; it were most perverse and obdurate Infidelity to deny
it, without farther proof.

THE EXAMPLE AND EVIdence of all Nations, states of people, and particular
persons. CHAP. VI.
THVS we see, how that divine majesty which claymeth Reverence at our hands,
is infinite, and everlasting, our Lord, Creator, omnipotent to reward, if we
render worship, just and powerable to punish, if we deny it: We are his
creatures, servants, and depending of him in all we are, we have, or can
expect, whether we live or die, we are, and must be in his subjection, all
reasons divine, and humane, tell us we must render Religion to him, no excuse
can* be found in judgment, no reason will defend the contrary cause: Then
let us try if we can find any hope of comfort in company for this irreligious
people. For although no man may follow multitudes into error, neither the
testimony of any man, or number of men (if all the world would be so wicked
to become patrons of Irreligion) can give answer to that which is alleged
against it: yet to men that be reprobate in their own proceedings, and dare
not defend their condemned impieties, it is some comfort to have fellows in
damnation; and these people void of al truth and piety, will not be ashamed to
glory in any practizers of this opinion, though never so wicked and
unreasonable. Then let us move this question of worship to all Kingdoms,
Countries, Citities, Communities, and to al persons of what estate, degree, or
condition, that ever were in any authority, credit, or reputation, or worthy to
be imitated in any time, or age of the world, from the first creation,
Patriarchs, Priests, Prophets, etc. Genesis c. 3.4. Exodus Number. Leuit. Iudic. cap.
2.

Phil. Iud. hist. Joseph l. Antiq. bell.

Arist. lib. 72. interpret.


to these days, and prove what companions we can find, for these profane,
and beastly scholars of Irreligion, if any such be at this present, which I
rather fear, then affirm. If we appeal to the Patriarchs, that ruled in the
law of Nature, from Adam ^o Moses, or to Priests, Judges, Prophets, and
Kings, that ruled in Israel and Jury, from him to Christ, in all that law
there is no controversy in that generation: Cic. l. de Not. Deor. li diu. Lac
l. 1.2.3 4. etc. diu. instit. Bed hist. Ang. Al Kings, Rulers, Priests,
Oracles, Archflamens, etc. of the Gentiles.

Hermond. li. 1. discipline.

Phil Bergom. histor.

Eusebius. hist. Virg. Bucol. Just in Apol. Lact. sup. etc. Poets.


for they did not only profess a Religion, but that in particular which was the
true and lavvefull worship of GOD. If we exhibit this complaint unto all
Rulers, Kings, Emperors, Priests, Flamens, Archflamens, Oracles, or the Gods
themselves of the Gentiles, their very names, and all Histories, will tell us,
although they erred in particular what this duty was, yet they all agreed to
use Religion, and ever in their Laws, Practice, Sacrifices, and so manifold
Rites defended it. Let us enquire of such as were most learned amongst them,
their Poets, Philosophers, Prophets, and they give consent: so Linus Thebius,
that lived 1430. years before Christ, speaks even of those things, whereof
Moses entreated, Amphion, Mercurius, Liricus, Orpheus, Musaeus, Homer, and
Aesiodus, are not unlike, and all the latter profess Religion. And diverse of
their most learned, Philosophers. Infr. tract. 2 Argument. 1.
ancient, and approved Philosophers confirmed christian worship (so far they
were from denying piety) but of this hereafter. And from the first to the
last, they all with mutual agreement teach Religion is to be used. S. August.
apud Berg. hist.
So Phegous that lived so near to the deluge, so Mercurus Trismagistus,
Cadmus, Esculapius, Thales, Milesius, Chilon, Pithacus, Bias, Periander,
Pherecides, Pithagoras, Anacharsis, Alemeon, Epinenides, Xenophanes,
Democritus, Heraclitus, Themistocles, Aristides, Anaxagoras, Empedocles,
Permenides, Melesius, Hippocrates, Zeno, Socrates, Alcibiades, Isocrates,
Xenophon, Achita, Plato, Antisthenes, Spensippus, Ermias, Demosthenes,
Aristotle, Dion, Carmcides, Eschines, Xenophilus, Phedron, Xenocrates,
Hermegitius, Apuleius, Plotinus, Dema, Chalisthenes, Zenon, Chrisippus, Polemon
Crates, and Crates Licon, Tymon, Diogines, and Diogines, Onesicitus,
Aristobolus, Archimedes, Panetius, Possidomus, Cathon, Cato, and the rest
generally give us answer, taught in learning, Sybilles. Eurip. in prollam.

Chrisip. l diui. Neu. lib. bell. Punic.

Arastot in Annal.


and practiced in life, that Religion is to be used, and had in highest
estimation. If we consult with the renowned Sibils so famous in all chiefest
Nations of the world, Italy, Greece, Persia, Siria, Lactant. lib. divine.
instit. Cicero l. Not. Deor. l. divine. Bergom. hist. in Sibill etc. Lact. in
Sibil. S. Anton 1. part. hist. Infra tract. 2. Argu. 1. etc. Sages and wise men.

Philip. Bergom. hist. Cicero Eusebius etc.

Legistes and Lawemakers.


Egypt, as Sibilla, Persica, Libica, Delphica, Cumaea, Erithraea, Samia,
Cumena, Hellespontica, Phrisia, and Tiburta, or Tiburtina, they tell us in
particular of christian worship, so do others which lived after, which will be
more evident in my Arguments for Christians against external Infidels. If we
will debate this cause with those, who for their wise dome were called, and and
ever named the sage and most prudent in the world, Thales, and his companions,
they have spoken and practiced the same, and their religious wits were the
greatest cause of their so excellent cognomination. If we will propounde this
question to the most ancient Legists, and Lawe-makers, Rulers, States, and
Kingdoms of the world, they will witness it was so, from their first
foundation. Genesis
Before the deluge, there is none or little memory kept, but in holy
Scriptures, which teach the true Religion. After the deluge, Genesis cap. 9.
Noe that holy and religious Patriarch was Prince in the world, of him and his
children, proceeded all latter generations. How religious he was, it needs
no recitation, he lived after the Fludde 350. years, and, as Philo is
witness, did see 14000. men, Phil. Iud. in hist Bergom. l 2. hist fol. 4.
Joseph. lib. 1. Antiquitat.
that were descended from him, by which of spring all Nations of the world
were after inhabited, and of his children, Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, which were
borne before the Fludde, were founded 72. Nations, all the founders of these
Nations, were the grande children of that truly religious Noe, living in his
time, instructed of him, and could not either be utterly irreligious in
themselves, or institute Nations without Religion: especially when Idolatry and
false worships were not known in the world, some hundred years after these
things. Lactant. sir. l. diu. instit. Bergom. in hist. supr. Cicero lib de
Not. Deor. instit. Apol.
And their first God Lisania, surnamed Jupiter, lived in Archadia a country
obscure, and inhabited of a barbarous and savage people, which neither by
themselves, nor by any Rulers they had, could persuade other Nations, to their
so vilde example. And this superstitious impiety of idolatry, was so
contemptible to civil Nations, Diodor. Sioul. lib. 5. hist. Plin l. hist. n^^
Bergom. li. 3. hist.
that when Orpheus which was so pleasing eloquent, that he could move all
affections, went about to persuade the worship of Bacchus to the Grecians, he
was so odious to that Nation, that the women themselves killed him with
spades, and threw his body into the river Heber. And when Idolatry was settled
in the world, there never was any Kingedome, Nation. State, Province or City,
but it ever professed a Religion: and if any private man beecame so impyous
and overwhelmed in sin, that to excuse his wickedness, he wished, or
protested there was no worship to be used, he was presently exploded forth
of all places, and exiled for a monster in Nature. So Diagoras, Eus. in Chro.
Cicero l. 3. de Not. Deor. Bergom l. 5. hist. fol. 61.
which is supposed to be the first Author of this Iniquity, was noted for a
Prodigium surnamed Atheos, a denier of GOD, or Gods, and banished from men's
Society, lived and died miserably, although we may suppose that he only denied
the Pagan Gods, and worship to them as his words cited in the plural number
do signify, as also we may construe that saying of Protagoras, De Dissnon
posse statuere an sint, Bergom. hist. sup. l. 5. fol. 62.
vel non sint, That he could not determine of the Gods, whether there were
any such or no. And yet for that saying he was exiled Athens, driven into the
Islands, and his books consumed with fire. And as Lactantius witnesses, Lact.
supr.
these men at their deaths, recauted their impious opinion, and exercysing
Religion, called for help of a superior power. After these, Epicurus, that
Master, August. lib. 1^ ciuit.
and Doctor of beastiality, was so bewitched with pleasures, that he denied the
providence of GOD to man, and framing a God like to himself, affirmed, that he
which is purus actus, only act, was idle, and to make himself a beast,
teaching that only pleasure in this life was man's felicity, doubted not to
affirm the soul to be mortal, and perish with the body, and gave this
document, Surge, ede, hibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas. Rise, eat,
drink, and play, there is no pleasure after death. But he became so odious to
all people, that his very name is a cognomination to all beastly, and carnal
men, from him, Hier. de Epic. and apud Berg. sup. l 5. fol. 64 Cic l. 3. de
fin. and l. 1. and 2.
to these days: and yet Saint Hierome says, that he was a man utterly
unlearned, and could not read, others, as Cicero; excuse him from these
errors. But howsoever it be, the testimony of a beast, and voluptuous man, is
no creditte to their cause, but a condemnation. Lucretius also, drowned in the
like wickedness of life, defended the same irreligious opinions, was so
besotted in lust and lasciousnesse, that he was mad with very lecherous
passions, and killed himself with his own hands. Lodouis. Molin. in 1. part.
D. Thom. q. ^. art. 1.
Or if (as some suppose) any company of the unnatural, and more then beastly
Anthropophages of Brasilea lived without any law or religion at the time of the
coming of the Christian Portugals thither, (which is uncertain of this, and
never suspected of any other people) yet the example of such which committed
those most filthy sins of daily practiced and studied murders, which as their
name is witness: those which write of that Nation recount, Petr. Maff. hist.
ind. Osor. hist ind. Epist. Indic. Monster. in Cosmog.
and experience proves, eat, devour those they murder, and keep men and
women of fairest complexion, to bring children which they only reserve for
slaughter, and eat, even their nearest friends, and commit other offenses
not to be named; is not to be imitated, but detested for more then brutish,
and unreasonable. These be the authors, and patrons of this impiety, which
the whole world in so many thousand years, has noted for beasts, mad
men, filthy monsters, and excrements of the people, such as all practisers and
well wishers to that blasphemy, be in these our days, Thieves, Pirates,
Murderers, Adulterers, Drunkards, and men so inexcusable in all wickedness,
that they have taken their harbor in the mouth of hell, beginning to be damned
in this life. These be the fruits of division in Religion: the manifold
superstitions of the Gentyles, and the wickedness which they practiced, was
the fall of Diagoras, Protagoras, Epicurus, and Lucretius: the Heresies, and
pluralities of Religions amongst Protestants, and their impieties, have
brooded up this beastly generation, as all heretical ages have done, at which
time this school has most flourished: So that in so many generations, as have
bin, there was never so much as any private man, which in judgment affirmed
this blasphemous and rebellious wickedness, but ever when they were free from
passions, or in times of want, as sickness, death, and other calamities,
professed a Religion, and called for help, and never denied it, but when they
were, either utterly spoiled of their wits and Reason, Bergom. hist. supr.
as Lucretius, or their opinion so uncertain, that either they never thought
any such absurdity, or else it was so soon exploded that it could not be
remembered, as that of Epicurus, Laer. de Epic. Aug. l. 18. ciu.
which, as some suppose, wrote more then any of the Philosophers and yet in the
time of Cicero, which lived within 300. years, it was so doubtful what
opinion Epicurus taught, that the same Cicero affirms, he was a man of
great sobriety, and temperance, teaching Religion, the providence of God, the
immortality of the soul, Plutarch. lib. non Poss. etc.
constitutinge the felicitye of man in spiritual, and soul pleasure: and
Plutarch affirms that he sacrificed, and practiced Religion. So that it is
manifest, if ever any man defended that most filthy error, he was
condemned of GOD, and all people for that offense, and of himself when he was
of better judgment, and more to be believed. In so much that there is not the
authority of one man, speaking in judgment, as a man and reasonable creature,
that ever gave countenance to this blasphemous sentence, but the whole world
in all times, and places, have explauded it, for the most impious,
sacriledgious, damnable, and unnatural sin. Then to conclude this reason of
humane authority: Issod. lib. 5. Etymol.

Aug l. 5. ciu. cap. 20.

Christ. Cl. in Sph. sol. 229. Fernel. Ambian Cosmother. Erast. apud Macrob.
lib. 1. in Some. Scip.

Arist. lib. 2. de Cael.

Priscian. in sua Cosmogr. Phil Bergom. hist. in lul. Caes. fol. 96. lib. 7,


the world from the first creation, has now endured by the Hebrewe
accounte, above 5500. years, by the other computation, 6700. years, which if
it be compared to any age, or generation, there is no proportion. The globe of
the earth, according to the least account, contains in circuit, 19080 miles;
as Fernelius measures 24514. miles; by the sentence of Alphraganus, Almaeon,
Thebitius, and othets, 20400. by Ptolomaeus, 22500. by Eratosthenes, 31500. by
Hipparcus, 34625. by that opinion which Aristotle recites, 50000. and if we
will follow the measure which was taken by the most learned Geometricians in
thirty years labor by the appointment and charges of Julius Caesar the
Emperor, Ortel. in Cos Marst. in Cos. Pet Maff. hist. Osor. hist.
when the noste exact a measuremente was used, the habytable earth at that
time, was found to be in circuit 31500. miles, what vaste Regions, and
populous Nations have been descried since then, no man can be ignorant: the
number of the Kingdoms, Countries, Cities, Towns, Orig. in Exodus Lact. firm.
l. 1.2.3. etc. Diu. instit.

Justin. Apol. Cicero lib. de Not. Deor. Casp. Vlenb. lib. 22. Cause. Rayn.
Calu. Epiphan. lib. haeres.

August. l. haer. Ber. Lutzenb. catal. haerert.


and Provinces, is inumerable: there were before the coming of Christ infinite
Idolatries in the world, since his Incarnation besides Sects amongst the
Jews, and Mahumetanes not to be numbered among Christians, (if we join these
present heresies which now reign, almost 300.) to those 400. and more which
have bin in formerages there have bin 700. false professions in Christianity,
and the impiety of men has been such, especially in times of errors, that
there was never almost any truth so evident, but by one City, Town,
Country, company of People or other, it has been denied: only this verity
of Religion, and obligation of worship to God, has been so manifest, that in
so many thousands of years, in no one age, year, or day, in so many vaste
and populous Nations, no little Kingdom, Province, City, Town, Village, or
private person, but in such sense as I have declared, and to their own
confusion, called it into question.

TESTIMONY OF ALL Intellectual Creatures. CHAP. VII.
OR if the testimony of all inferior things, the witness of the whole
world, and all reasonable men from the first foundation, till now so learned
and wise, every particular man's practice, and experience by all senses and
powers of knowledge all reasons that can be aleadged, all proof in reason that
can be used, the vnyforme and ever agreeinge consent, and example of al
creatures will not serve to dispute this questyon, against the blind,
senseless, and vnreasonablie deluded, and wantonly bewitched appetites of some
one, or a few beastly and frantic men: let us seek for a trial to
intellectual, and spiritual creatures, which as by their perfection of
nature, they are of higher, and more infallible judgment, so in respect they
are freed, and exempted of corporal and bodylie composition, from whence this
blindness of sensuality proceeds, are like to give the truest sentence:
such be the heavenly spirits, separated souls, and the Devils themselves,
though deprived of grace, Script. Genesis Tob. Judith. Dan. Thalm. Iud. Alcoron.
Mahumet. Joseph. Phil. Aristot. Plat. Mercur. Tris. Dio. etc. Eusebius. l. hist.
Eccl. Niceph. hist. Bed. lib. 1.2.3.4. etc. hist. Angl. Gregor. lib. Dialog.
Joseph l. Antiq. Cris. Aristot. l. de cael. etc.
yet perfect in natural understanding. All Testimonies are record, all
Historians, thousands and millions of men, that have been present witnesses,
and every particular person, even of this impious school it self, has
proved by one experimental argument, or other, that there be such perfect
intellectual creatures. The rare, and wonderful effects, which be daily
wrought by such means, the apparitions of Angels, illusions of Diuelles,
their works, tempests, plagues, and other miseries they have procured their
possessinge bodies both of men, and women, and beasts, where their effects are
manifest, the appearing of souls divided, and separated from their bodies, and
still enduringe after death, some miraculouslie united again, and telling what
they endured in their separation, others not restored, reporting either the
joys they found, if they were truly religious, or the pains they endured,
if they were profane and wicked, have testified these things. The infinite
miracles, and supernatural effects, Genesis Tob. Judith.

Greg. l. Dial. Bed. hist. Eusebius. l. hist. eccles. etc.


which the Angels, and holy religious souls have wrought in their apparitions,
have evidently confirmed their sentence to be true. The unspeakable torments
of the wicked irreligious souls, damned for impiety and irreuerence, proved
by undeniable arguments, and the Devils, potent and wise, conquered and cast
out by poor religious men by nature their inferiors, and these things seen,
proved, witnessed, and written by millions of men of greatest judgment,
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Philosophers, Magitians, and of all conditions, not
only private men and in secret, but greatest assemblies in pubicke places; are
sufficient argument in this cause. But in respect these Testimonies have
chiefly bin used to prove true Religion in particular, and not the necessity
of Reverence in general, which for the evidence thereof needs no such
probation, I will pass it over to the proper place, against external Infidels
and Heretics, where it shall be handled to the manifest confusion of all
misbeleeuers, Tract. 2. infr. and 2. Part. Resol. Ar. 58.59.60.61.62.
not only Atheists, Epicures, and deniers of worship, but all enemies of
Christian Catholic Doctrine.

OF THE MYRACVLOVS AND most certain Testimony of God. CHAP. VIII.
I Will pass over in this place, the testimony of the Creator, and so many
thousands of miraculous, and most certain supernatural Arguments of God,
which can neither be deceived in himself, or be cause of erring unto others,
both in regard they are needless in this matter never called so far into
question, that it craves such extraordinary defense, as also that they have
principally been used, to propose true worship in particular to misbeleeuing
Nations, of which, never any denied a Religion in general. Tract. 2. infr.
Arg. 1.2.6. Part 2. Resol. Arg. 65.66. Ca 10.11 seq.
Therefore I am to make demonstration by that Argument hereafter, against all
professors of false worships, which in some manner, will also appear in my
Chapters following, of the extraordinary punnishment God has inflicted upon
the Irreligious, and the miraculous favors, wherewith he has honored his
holy, and true worshippers: in this place only I affirm since the first
miraculous creation of man in the beginning, Genesis 1.2.3.
and the supernatural providence of God over him, while he continued in
obedience, and strange punishing of him, for his neglecte of duty therein, he
ever observed the same order in all states and conditions. Sibil. apud Lact. l.
diu. inst apud Varr. Joseph. etc.
The punishment of Adam, drowning of the world, confusion of the Tower of
Babell, destruction of the Egiptians, Genesis 6.7.8.11.

Exodus 6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.

Joseph l. antiq Suet, in Octau. cap. 95. Mahumet. in Alcoran Rabb. lib. gener
Chr. Calcid. lib. 2. in tin.

Sibil. l. 8. orac. Plin. l. 2. hist. not. c 31. Sueton. in Tiber. cap. 48.
Dio. li 57. Plutarch. lib. defect. oracul. Dio. l. 37.


abolishinge of Idols, desolation of the Jews, and a thousand strange and
miraculous punishments, imposed upon the Irreligious, -- contrariewise as
strange and wonderful favors toward the godly, exceedinge all limits of
nature, witnessed by millions of present witnesses, Princes, and whole
Cuntries, and registered by most credible writers, both Pagan, Mahumetan,
Ieweish, and true believers are evidence.

TESTIMONY AND EXAMPLE of all creatures even insensible. CHAP. IX.
ANd this religious worship is so universally due, and to be performed, that
if the very sensible and insensible things that are not capable of
vnderstandeinge, were able to utter that by words, which they uniformly
practice in their operations, or supernaturallye declare (as often times they
have to the admiration of all, and confusion of such men) that natural
instinct and desire, which is imparted to them all, to do homage and reverence
to their Creator, they would assemble themselves in general counsel against
this impious people, and condemn them to be the most unnatural and senceles
monsters of the world. For the unviolable decree of nature is, that every
effect must yield a certain honor and reverence to the cause by which it is
produced: and exalted: so in creatures of understanding, the child honoreth
the parents by which he was begotten, brought up, and norished, the scholar his
master by whom he was i^structed, the subject his souerai^e, the servant his
master, by whom they are ruled, and every depe^ding thing, that more exellent
Regent of whom it has dependence. And al insensible things with one consent do
answer by their acts and deeds, that they owe religion unto god, are bound to
worship him, and in their kind perform it: for the heavens and celestial
spheres, so all Eleaments and inferior creatures, as well living, as wantynge
life, all remayninge in that order in which they were created, and effecting
those offices to which they were ordained, and never varying from that duty,
which is the greatest homage and religion such things can show, and that,
which the Prophets David, Psalm. 102. Dan* 3. Psalm. 18.
and Daniell, call the worship and reverence of God, because in this dutiful
obedience, their dependancy is witnessed, and the glory and honor of God,
proposed to be remembered and reuere^ced of intellectual, and reasonable me^.
And Daniel, making a recapitulation of the duty of all creatures to their
Creator, expressing that, to which they are obliged by nature, after he had
recounted the celestial, and intellectual spirits, and the duty of Israel
the chosen of God, his Priests, servants, spirits, and souls of the just,
religions men, and parriculer persons devoted to him, how they must worship,
and reverence their Creator; he inciteth all inferior creatures to the same, or
rather man so perfect and excellent a work of God, by the exemplar obedience
of inferior things. Where he numbreth the Heavens, Sun, Moon, Stars, and all
celestial bodies benedicerie, laudare, and superexaltare eum in secula, to
bless, praise, and exalte him for ever. And not only those celestial and
more perfect bodies, but inferior creatures, as the Elements, Fire, Air,
Water, Earth, Mountains, Hills, Seas, Rivers, Fishes, Fowls, Beasts, and
other mean and meteorologicall things, Rain, Dew, Frostes, Yse, Snow,
Lightnings, Thunders, Clouds, Day, Night, Light, Heat, Cold, and that which
is nothing but only a privation, as Darkness, and the like, which bless,
praise, and exalte him, without intermission, rendering reverence, and honor
unto him, as every man daily expecienceth they do, and should be as
violent, and portentious a thing for the meanest of them not to perform, as
the Sun to loose his light, the Earth to be unstable, or any other deformity
that can be in nature. Then how much more rebellious and traitorous, is the
neglecte of doing that duty in man, by so many titles more ^^debted to his
Creator, then any of those creatures, which were all provided for his use, and
necessity, to show this religious obedience (...) God (...) if he should not
only (...) to do it, but deny it to be done, as Atheists and impious
Nullifidians do.

THE EXTRAORDINARY AND strange punishements inflicted upon the Irreligious, and
rebellion of all creatures against them for that cause. CHAP. X.
YEa the Irreligion and dutilesse behauior of man is so unnaturally, that all
those creatures which were ordained to be his servants, and so unvariable
reverence their maker, that it were a prodigeous thing for them not to do it,
yet to show the greatness of Man's obligation more then theirs: how often have
they forsaken their natural institution at the disobedie^^e of Irreligious
men, to testify the g^^atnes of their iniquities, and vngratfulnes to their
Creator? proving thereby, it is more monstrous for man to deny worship, and
religion unto God, then for the earth not to suport us, the air to refresh us:
the fire to comfort us, and all other creatures to deny their natural
operations. So in the first creation, for the Irreligio^ of Adam our
progenitor, Genesis 2.3.1.2.
the earth and all creatures, over which God had given him full dominion in his
state of obedience, rebelled against him. In the days of Noe, Genesis c. 6 7.8.
when the irreligeous world would not be obedient unto God, the Element of
water miraculouslie, ascended over the whole globe of the earth, 15. cubits
higher the^ the highest mountain, least any thing should be preserved from
destruction: and only the religious family of Noe, and such creatures as he
had gathered together were miraculouslie preserved, witnessed not only in holy
Scriptures, but in diverse Pagan and other authors, Hier. aegyp. li. antiq.
Phaenic. Mnas. Damas. lib. 96.

Joseph. lib. 1. antiq. c. 3. Alex Poly. etc.


Hieronimus Aegiptius, Mnaseas, Damascenus, Josephus Alexander, Polihistor,
Melon, Eupolemus, and others, and proved by diverse effects, which could
proceed of no other cause. How stranglie did God punish the irreligious
builders of the tower of Babel, and confounded the^, Genesis c. 11.
so that no man understood what was spoken by others, which besides the holy
Scriptures Josephus, Joseph. l. antiq. Sybill. apud Iosep. and Berg. l. 2.
hist. fol. 6. L. Oracl. Sybil
Sibils, and other witness, and the diversities of tongues to this day,
otherwise without original, are evidence. At which time, and in punishment of
which irreligious offense, so many monsters in humane nature were produced, a
great scandal to this Epicurish school, when it is manifest they were brought
forth to be a memorial, and euerduring penance to mankind, for the same
iniquity and Irreligion they defend; this was the beginning of the
Monoclists, August. li. 16. ciuit. c. 8. Plin. l. 7. not. hist. Solin.
Hermophrodites, Acephalists, Pigmes, Giants, Sciopedes, Cinocephalists, and
others, whose shapes punnishments of Irreligion, are rather to be concealed
then uttered: only heareby is evident how monstrous Irreligion is, which is
repayed with so monstrous penalties. How did God, in the time of Abraham,
miraculouslie cause the fire, against the natural propensitie to descend, and
destroy all the irreligious people of Sodom, Genesis c. 19. Iosep. l. antiq.
and those Cities, preserving the house and family of religious Loath, as both
Scriptures, other writers, the Pillar of Salt into which the incredulous wife
of Loath was turned, (which Josephus had seen) and other monuments are record.
In the days of Moses, Joseph. lib. 3. antiq.
when Pharao and his irreligious Egiptians would not permit the Israelites to
worship God, and exercise Religion, the same water which miraculouslie before
had given passage to the Religious people, drowned King Pharao, and his huge
army of profane Infidels. The base, Exodus cap. 8.10.9.
and mean creatures of Frogs, Ciniphes, Flies, Locustes, and such as are
engendered of vile corruption, and the very Meteors themselves, that have no
life, as Hail, Thunder, and Lightnings, yea Darkness which of it self is
nothing, and only a privation of an accident and quality of light, so fought
against him, that he and all Egypt were enforced to yield, and acknowledge
their Irreligion, and disobedience. In the schismatic and irreligious
Rebellion, of Chore, Number. c. 26.
Dathan, and Abiron, and their confederates, the Earth, the most firm and
stable Element provided of God for man's supportation, was opened, Aug. l. 3.
ciu. cap. 13.

Oros. lib. ^. cap. 12.


and devoured them. S. Augustine and Orosius are witnesses, that in the
irreligious times of the idolatrous Italians, about 70. years before Christ,
the very domestical and tamest creatures, used for the service of men,
rebelled against them, and affirm that their very Dogs, Horses, Oxen,
Asses, and other creatures most at the command of man, suddenly became
wild, ran from their owners, wandering up and down with such fierceness
and contempt to their former Masters, and all men, that no man durst, or could
approach them without danger. Bergom. lib. 12. hist.
Such prodigious events appeared against irreligious people at other times.
What supernatural eclipse of the Sun, trembling of the Earth, and renting of
most hard and solid Rocks, Euang. Matthew. etc.

Dionis. Arcopag. ep. etc. Phleg. apud Origin. et Eusebius.

Plin natural* hist l. 2. c. 84 Sueton. in Tiber. c. 48. Dio. l. 57.


cried out against the inhumane and barbarous irreligion of the Jews, and
Gentiles at the death of Christ? The earth quaked at such extraordinarye
motion, that as the Pagan wrighters affirm, in Asia, so far distant, twelve
Cities were overthrown in such order, that Tiberius the Emperor, released
their tribute toward their buildinge again. The Rocks were torn in
pieces, not only about Jerusalem, as the Evangelists record, and Golgatha
did witness, Ciril. Hier. Catec. 13. etc. Euang Nazar. Hieron epist. 150. q. 8.
as Saint Cirill Bishop of Jerusalem reports, but in diverse other far
more remote places, as the mountain of Auernia in Hetruria, the promontarie of
Cayeta, and an Hill in Wales, and other Countries. About two hundred years
ago, at Sefeelde in Germanye, a Village between Ausburge, Regist. eccle.
Sefeeld in Ger super hist. Ger etc.
and Iusburge, the hard marble stones of the pauement of the Church, gave
place, and the ground opened to swallowe up the Lord Oswalde, a Noble man of
that Country, irreligiouslie behauing himself, in receiving the blessed
Sacrament of the body of Christ, and catching hold of the Altar of the church
made of hard stone, by which he kneeled to communicate, his hand sunk into
it, as though it had been soft clay, the print still remaining so deep as any
man may lay his whole hand there in, as I have seen, and done: and the B.
Sacrament is reserved, and remains in the proper species and form, after so
many years with watery drops of blood, in such places as were bruised with
the teeth of Baron Oswalde. All this chauncing in a most famous assembly in
the festiuitie of Easter, before so many witnesses, and are still to be seen
in the same place, as thousands can witness. How have the very Elements of
which our bodies are composed and nourished, persecuted us for this
disobedience? How many irreligious Cities, have bin sunk up by the earth,
whereon they were founded, by the shaking and opening thereof? August. l. 18.
ciuit.

Pantal. Chronol fol. 9. Oros. l. 7 hist. c. 1.

Diod. l. 2.


Bura, Helier, in Achaia, and in the time of Traian four Cities in Asia, three
in Greece, two in Galaria, How many drowned by water in the inundation of
Ogigius, ouer-flowing almost all Achaia, and the floode of Deucalion in
Thessaly? How many infections in the air, an Elament for the comfort and
preserving of life? Oros lib. 4. hist, cap. 4.
in the Consulshippe of Lucius Cecilius Metellus, and Q. Fabius Maximus
Seuerinus, all the irreligious inhabitants of Rome died of the pestilence not
one remaining: so likewise in the Consulship of L. Genneus, Oros. lib 3. hist.
cap. 4. Plat. in Tim. Oros. l. 1. hist. cap. 11.
and Q. Seruilius. How has the Sun, the very Prince of Planets, and nurse of
life, wrought the destruction of things, set them so strangely on fire and
consuming them, that some have affirmed the Elaments and almost the whole
world to have bin inflamed, and in the Island of Lippara, as it were the mouth
of hell flaming and breaking out in such outrage, that the stony rocks were
set on fire, the sea boiled, the fishes were killed, and the inhabitants
suffocated. About such time as the regiment of the irreligious Turks began,
the Sun was darkened 17. days together, and gave no light. And before, Blond.
lib. 9. Eutrop. l. 18. Fox to 1. Mon Pantal. Poly. et al in Mahu.
in the year of Christ 676. about which time, Irreligious and profane Mahumet
entered to delude the world, fire fell from heaven, a wonderful rainebowe
appeared, and such dreadful signs were seen, that me^ withered away with
fear, so excessive thunder, lightnings, and pestilence reigned, that men
thought the end of the world to have been come. Fox. tom. 2. Mon. fol 969
lo. Car. Franc Mirand.
And Fox himself affirms, that about the irreligious revolt of Luther,
there appeared in Germany upon the garments of the Clergy and others, men and
women, bloody Crosses, and signs and tokens of the nails, sponge, spear,
coat, and other things belonging to the passion of Christ. But of all other
Nations this matter is most manifest in the Jewish people, which when it was
religious unto God, was honorable through the world, and miraculouslie
preserved, but since they fell to their irreligious forsaking of Christ, the
Messiah, all creatures, both reasonable, and unreasonable, have sounded a
larumme, and proclaimed wars against them. And to conclude this matter with an
example of our own country, in the time of Paganism, 300. years before
Christ; there never was any Prince of the British line, so potent and
victorious as King Brennus, Tit. Liu. in Bren.

Po^ye. Graft. hist. fol 59. Stovve hist. sup. etc.


brother to King Beline was, who subdued the Gauls, Germans, Italians,
Grecians, and many mighty Princes, yet when in the top of his pride, he began
to make a jest of Religion, and blasphemouslie to utter as though none were to
be used, presently (not to approve any false religion of the Pagans) but to
reprove the impiety of Brennus, and to manifest the justice of God upon such
as deny him worship, the earth, as quaking to hear such blasphemous speech
trembled, part of the Hill Pernassus fell upon his soldiers, and slew them,
after hailestones most strange for number and greatness destroyed an other
part of his army, wherein he gloried so much, and so wounded that irreligious
Brennus, that he fell into despair, and slew himself with his own sword.
Epist. Apol.
The like punishments (although not always in so prodigious manner) have
fallen upon all English kings, that have been Irreligious to the Sea of (...):
that either they have been strangely punnished by GOD in their lives, or come
to miserable deaths. So likewise all the ancient Pagans, and irreligious
Emperors and Princes that were enemies to the Religion of Christ were
rewarded. Eusebius. Socrat. Sozom Theol etc. in those Emp.


THE MIRACVLOVS OBEDIENCE and submision of all creatures to the Religious.
CHAP. XI.
COntrariwise to those that have been most reverent and religious to God, the
same creatures of his have not only performed and done their ordinary service
and duty, but showed extraordinary obedience, so all sensible things as
Birds, Beasts, Fishes, and insensible have done homage not only to Adam in
his religious estate of innocence, Genesis cap. 1. Genesis cap. 7. Reg. Dan. Ioh. 2.
Tob. etc.
and after to Noe, HeliZeus, Daniell, Jonas, Tobias, and others in the law of
Moses, but in the Primitive Church of Christ thousads of martyrs and holy
Saints, as not only approved ecclesiastical writers but many thousands
of Heathens, that were present, have witnessed. Many of them chauncinge in
most public assemblies before Princes and Emperors at the very Theater of
Rome, the most famous place of spectacles and meetings in the world. So the
Lion that was appointed to devour S. Prisca a christian virgin, Ex Gest. S.
Priscill.
religious and vowed to Christ, fell down at her feet before her persecutors,
and many thousands. Ex Gest. Prim and Felician.
So the two Lions did to the two christian religious brethren Primus and
Felicianus, in the presence of 1200. Pagan witnesses, so that 500. with their
families were converted. S. Amphiloch and al in vita S. Basil.
The very seat of Valens the Arian Emperor refused to bear his master, when
he would have fit to give sentence against S. Basil that religious
Catholic Bishop, or monkishe man, as Luther calls him; Luther.
three pens one after another refused to give incke to write the Edict of his
exilement. The very cruel Dragons honored and defended Aman the Abbotte
against his enemies. Pallad. hist. in S. Am Abbot. Ex Paulin. Natal.
The venomous spiders shrouded and concealed with their webbes S. Felix from
his Irreligious Persecutors. A Raven, a raueninge and deuoureynge bird,
brought victualles threescore years together to feed Saint Paul the
Eremite, S. Hier. to 1. and in vita Paul Eremit.
in the Desarte while he lived, and when he was dead, the Lions dug a
grave where this body was entombed, Angels, Patriarchs, and Prophets
accompaning the soul to heaven, S. Athanaf. in vit. S. Anton.
as S. Anthony the great did see and witness: whose sanctity and Religion
likewise were such, that the very Diuelles themselves troubled at his very
name. What visions of Angels, lights from heaven, and miraculous apparitions
recorded in irreprooueable Authors, chauncing in the sight of whole Towns,
Greg. l. 2. Dial. cap. 5. Ambr. de Invent SS. Ger. et Protas.

Bed. hist Angl. l. 2 3 4. etc. Sur. in vit. Sanct. Lippil. et al. etc.

Ex Pontifical. et vit. S Leon.


and Countries, have approved the Religion and piety of S. Benedect, the
Abbot, Geruasius, Protasius, S. Dominicke, and thousands in sorreigne
Countries, S. Cuthbert, S. Dunston, S. Oswalde, S. Suitbert, Edithe, Ethelderd,
and others in England? The Religion of S. Leo, Pope of Rome, violented Attila,
that outrageous Infidel, surnamed the Whip of God, in his greatest fury to
recall his army from inuading Italy, to the wonder of all his soldiers. Ex
Gest S vit. Modest. et Gres^.
A vessel of boiling Lead, Rosin, and Pitch, would not hurt the bodies of S.
Vitus, Modestus, and Crescentia, and the Lion prepared to consume them, fell
down and licked their feet: whereupon Diocletian the Emperor, causing them to
be torn in pieces, the very insensible creatures wrought reuengement, for
thundrings, lightnings, and earthquakes, oppressed their ennemies, and
ouerthrewe their idolatrous Temples. At the coming of Christ, besides those
homages and offices of al creatures, both in heaven and earth, done unto him,
and recorded by the holy Evangelists, the Pagans themselves, and other writers
are witnesses, that a miraculous circle compassed the Sun in the view of all
the Romans: Suet. in Octa^ cap. 95.

Senec. lib. 1. not. q c. 2

Plin. not hist. l 2. cap. 28. Dio. hist. Rom lib. 45.

Plin not. hist. l. 2. cap. 31. Eus in Chron. Oros. hist. lib. 6. c. 19. c. 18.
Sibil. apud Lact. sir lib. diu. Inst.


and after the same appeared in 3. circles, one being environed with a fiery
Garland. Three Suns were seen to shine at one time in the firmament, and to
unite themselves together in one. The high and great trees as he travailed
from place to place, miraculouslie burned themselves to the ground, and
reverenced him. And at Rome a spring flowed with oil a whole day together,
when Christ our anointed was borne. And infinite more miracles of the
submission and obedience of his creatures unto him, are recorded both in
ecclesiastacall and profane Authors, where we may read the like allegiance
and duty performed to his holy Saints and religious servants: but these are
sufficient for this purpose, and able to give answer to the carnal
imagination of any irreligious Politic, or Epicure, which like beasts, only
moved with corporal and sensible delights, are often scandalized to see the
impious and wicked, sometimes exalted to honor, and religious innocents,
oppressed with miseries. For that honorable testimony, which God has so
often and strangely given for the glory of his Saints and religious friends,
at such times as they were most oppressed, and in reproof and condemnation of
the impious, their persecutors, so much exalts the glory and honor of the
religious oppressed, above the deceitful happiness of the other, by how much
the testemonie and glory which is given of God, is greater then the witness
which is brought, and honor that is desired of a carnal and beastly man. And
although this extraordinary glory and honor is not sensibly bestowed upon
every religious Saint, and oppressed servant of his in this life; (for so he
should be only served for honor and temporal rewards) yet in that he has
given it to so many, and for the same cause for which the others be oppressed,
no man can call into question, but honor is due and belongs unto all, and to
be rendered unto them, either in this life, or after death, as experience
shows all such religious innocents are glorious and honorable even with men,
when they are dead, and their persecutors either forgotten, or remembered with
dishonor. And yet of al temporal dignities, glory is the greatest, and that
which every man most desires.

THE AFFLICTIONS AND Adversities of the Religious and godly, for which the
Epicures deny Religion, are a manifest proof thereof. CHAP. XII.
AND to prevent the carnal obiectious of this sensual people, if adversities,
tribulations, and crosses had not chanced to the most renowned, and temporally
honored Princes, Alexanders, Cesars, Hannibals, Scipioes, and others, their
honor had never been so great: for what has nobled them so much in glory,
as their patience, fortitude, constancy, and magnanimity in suffering
distresses, and performing difficulte, and heroical attemptes? And if their
sufferinges, and valiant enterprises in temporal causes, when they were
probable to be brought to pass, have made them noble with men, what shall
invincible fortitude, and unconquerable minds of holy Saints, in causes
appertayning to God, and his greatest honor, and in performance whereof, they
were assured to loose both life, and other temporal dignities, deserve? If
this be not the meritte of honor, nothing can be named honorable, or called
glorious. And if these sufferinges should be utterly taken away from the
friends of God in this world, the greatest honor that is due to virtue
should be wanting. For take this away, and the virtues of patience,
fortitude, magnanimity, and others which be the deserving causes of glory,
cannot be excused, because they principally consist, in vndergoinge
adversities, and effectinge difficult things. And the excellency of this
virtue of fortitude, in patiently enduring adversities, and undergoing hard
and uneasy business, is so great, that in ancient times among
Philosophers, it was ever accounted one of the four cardinal virtues. And it
is convenient for true Relion, not to want this trial and state of adversity
even in the greateste and most perfect men. So that the most relgious men and
such as have been in the greatest honor and account both with God and man for
that cause, have tasted of both estates, Job.
Job sometimes most unfortunate, sometimes in highest aduancementes of
prosperity, S. Paul that was rapt into heaven, often depressed to the gteatest
miseryes, and so of others: and not only private men, but religious
Commonweales, Kingedomes, and Empires: the examples are manifest in histories.
And yet no Epicure or Machauell can say, that this is an objection against
Religion, or disgrace to the religious friends of God, which be so visited with
affliction, but the contrary, because those virtues be then exercised which
otherwise would not: And that which is the chief act of Religion, God
reverenced and honored by them in such sort, as they perhaps being in
prosperity would not so well have performed. And if honor and glory be the
great dignities of this life, the religious sufferers of affliction are so
far from misery by enduringe callamities, or afflictions, that they are
rather made trereby more honorable and glorious.

THE TEMPORAL HONORS and delights of the Religious, were often greater, and
their miseries less then of the Irreligious. CHAP. XIII.
BUT to satisfy the carnal and sensual appetites, and conceiptes of
Irreligeous and voluptuous men, to whom nothing is good but Bonum delectabile,
that which is delightful unto sense, let us pass over all demonstrations
before alleged, and for this time esteem nothing of so many unspeakable
joys, which chance to the religious even at those times, when these men
adiudge them most unfortunate in their state of affliction, the endless and
vnrecitable cares, sollicitudes, and miseries the Irreligeous undergo in
procuring pleasures, what labors and dangers in preserving them, what torments
and and anguishes in forsakinge them? what diseases, sickness violence, and
unhappiness to those senses of theirs, in which they would place their
pleasures? what immature, sudden, and untimely deaths, the full priuatio^ of
al their joys and felicities they incur, in exercising and possessing those
banquets, feastings luxuries, honors, riches, and other pleasures. Let us
forget the honor and glory of the godly by their sufferings, and the
ignominy and dishonor of the others, when they come to adversity, the
comforts of the religious through their hope in God, whom they worship, and
the desperation of the irreligious, spoiled of all consolation. Let the
euerliuinge virtues and reputation of the religious, after death and they
always during infamy of the irreligious be omitted. Let it not be remembered
that religion being a special moral virtue is to be repaied with corporal
pleasures, such as this world can give, but with eternal, supernatural, and
spiritual rewards, to obtayninge which terrestiall joys are often a let and
hinderaunce, by wedding us to this world, and the pressures of the godly by
weaning us from earthly delights, the safest means to win them. Let me make
no argument that the adversities of the just in this life, are the causes of
their greater glory after death, and that both the pleasures and adversities
of the impious not regarding, either the blessings or corrections of GOD, are
the cause of their deeper damnation in Hell. We will account it no felicity
or comfort for this time, that the virtuous in their greatest distresses are
lamented of all, and pitied with compassion; often breeding greater joy, then
their miseries bring affliction, and by how much their suffering is greater,
by so much bewailed and honored more, as the miseries and deaths of Millions
of Martyrs and afflicted Saints are witnesses, honored both of GOD, and all
creatures: and the afflictions, distresses, and unfortunate ends of the
wicked, neglected and contemned both by GOD and man, all things rejoicing in
their destruction, and unhappiness. Lastelie to please the appetites of this
people although we did grant them their own absurdity, and that which they
seek to find, that the chief and supreme felicity of man, is to be expected
and possessed in this life, and that there is no pleasure or punnishment after
death, that the body is better then the soul, the external goods which they
reckon honor, riches, pleasure, prosperity, and the like, with health, and
long life to enjoy them, are most to be esteemed, and want debasement, poverty,
adversity, affliction, and other their infelicities most to be avoided,
although as these being often the cause of our chiefest good, so the others
are often the occasion of unhappiness. Yet if we should yield unto them
these unreasonable requests, and argue with carnal men, by carnal
Arguments, whatsoever they shall appoint to be the greatest pleasure and
happiness in this world, and to continue and persevere longest (for such
things as be priuations of pleasures, and corruptions of life and health,
wherein they are to be enjoyed, they will not esteem for pleasures) as honor,
riches, health, prosperity, dignities, and such others, which is as much, as
any Epicure can demand, or a beast would ask, if it had language and leave
to utter the internal appetite. Yet notwithstanding all this, it will appear
that the prosperous estate, and happy condition of the virtuous, and professors
of Religion, has often been greater, and their miseries and afflictions less
in this life, then of the impious and irreligious, which only seek for this
preferment. And to justify my assertion, many Philosophers, Nations, and
Countries, have esteemed these temporal felicities to be a temporal reward
of Religion. It was not lawful for any amongst the ancient Egiptians to be a
King, except he were a Priest, and religious to the Gods: and Mercurius
surnamed Trismegistus, Dio. hist. Rom Clem. Alex. Cicer. lib. de Repub. Arusp.
Lact. fir. l. de diu. Inst.
thrice-greatest was so called, because he was a King, a Philosopher, and a
Priest. The old and wise Romans, had the like custom and observation, and
all their Sacrifices, Rites, and Ceremonies, some were as thanks for benefits
received, others to avoid afflictions, to ease adversities, inflicted, to
cease plagues and pestilences, to prosper attempts, heal diseases, increase
substance: and the like not only used of the Idolaters, and false worshippers,
but of the true Israelites, and instituted of God himself do witness. Leuit.
c. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7. etc.
They esteemed no happiness of this world to be without the true worship of
God, and many adversities to come for irreligion. Cicer. li. Not. Deor.

Lact fir. lib. 1.2.3. diu. inst. Bed. l. 3. hist. Arist lib. 10. Ethic. c.
lib. 7. cap. 8.9.10.


This was the common sentence of the Caldeans, Assirians, Grecians, Persians,
English, and all Nations: and to encourage all in this opinion by the general
and received Decrees of all worshippers, those that were in the greatest
degree of professing and exercising of this worship, were ever had, and
esteemed in greatest honor: so were the Patriarchs, which were Priests in the
law of Nature, Genesis c. 6. etc. Exodus 19.20. Numer. etc. Bed. hist. Angl. Fox
to. 1. mon. Pet. Maff. hist. Indic. lib. 1. fol. 24. etc. Alcharo^. Mah.
Noe, Abraham, and other the high Priests under the law of Moses among the
Israelites, the Flamens, and Archflamens among the Gentiles, Brachmans with
the Indians, Caliphes in the law of Mahumet, and among Christians, Popes, and
spiritual Prelates are reverenced with the greatest dignities. And not only
such estates whose calling was dedicated to vvorshippe, but other conditions
amongst all Nations, which were most religious, were reputed most honorable
and glorious: and not only among men, but with God himself, for by how much
any people or country came nearer to true Religion, they flourished more,
Plat. in Mem. Arist. l. 10. Eth. cap. 9. lib. 7. cap. 8.9 10. Hippoc. init.
oper.

Merc. Trismeg Dial. 9. Strab. l. 5.


and they which truly followed it in the days of their so doings were most
happy and honorable, and such as were most alienated from true reverence of
GOD, and enemies thereof, were most unfortunate and miserable, as many
persecutors of the Religious have been. To give example, in the ancient
religious Jews, so long as they continued their obedience, God promised unto
them for that cause, all prosperities and benedictions, both spiritual, Genesis
c. 12.13.14.15.18.22.28.32 35.49. Exodus c.
1.2.^.5.6.7.8.9.11.13.14.16.17.19.33.40.
and temporal. How did he honor them with visions and apparitions of Angels
from heaven? what a propitiatory and oracle did he ordain to answer to their
doubts, and relieve their wants? what Patriarchs, Leuit. c. 1. etc. Number. etc.
33.34.

Deuteronomy. c. 2. etc.


Prophets, Priests, Kings, Captains, and Judges did he give unto them? how
miraculouslie did he multiply their number and nation among their enemies? how
strangely did he punnish the Egiptians, and deliver them? how did he advance
them above mighty and potent Princes? how many did he deprive of their
ancient possessions, and made them rulers thereof? how miraculouslie did he
protecte them in their iournies, feed them in their wantes, defend them in
their wars? how often, how many, and miraculous victories did he give
them? how did he enrich them with all temporal blessings, riches, gold,
treasure, and abundance of all things which can be desired? how often did he
promise to continue his care and providence, if they remained in duty and
Religion? Deuteronomy. cap. 7. et 26. etc.
how well did he perform it, until they became irreligious and disobedient?
and at such times that they might know (as he had often admonished them
before) that their Religion was cause of their prosperity, and irreligion
would bring the contrary and unfortunate miseries, how was that people
punished? how often conquered, and subdued, spoiled of wealth, Country,
Wives, Children, Temple, Altar, Kings, Prophets and all comforts? how often
led captives, and kept vassailes, and since they fell to their last
irreligious apostasy from Christ, how long time, in how many Countries, to
how many Nations have they been, and at this time are the most miserable
people in the world? so that if a man would be so incredulous that he would
not believe the scriptures, and promises and threats of God, contained in them
toward that people, for those causes, yet when the whole world does witness
these things have been so effected in so many generations, no man can be so
impious to deny it. And this he performed, not only to that people in
general, but even to the very particular me^ of that Nation, as their Priests,
Kings, and other private persons. Who was so highly honored, and exalted of
God, as Moses their Priest and Captain? was he not borne of mean parentage
of the tribe of Levy? Exodus c. 2. c. 6.
what patrimony had he left him, 2. Par. c. 23. Exodus 2.
what title had he to be so great a man? was he not condemned to death, before
he was borne? was he not committed to the waters to be drowned? was he not
enforced to forsake his friends and renounce his country, Exodus c.
3.4.5.7.8.9.10.11.
to get his living among strangers by keeping sheep? And yet how was he
advanced, honored and exalted of God? what miraculous and wounderfull
privileges did he grant unto him? how did he appoint him Captain and
Conductor of his people? what victories and conquests did he give him oner
Pharao and his Egiptians? Exodus 7.
how did he ordain him, not only superior to deprive him of his riches,
life, and people, Exo. Number. etc.
but (to use the words of God) constituted him the God of Pharao, Constitui te
Deum Pharaonis, what mysteries and secrets did he reveal unto him? Exodus cap.
11. et 17. etc.
how did he choose and elect him alone among so many hundred thousands to
conduct his people to the land of promise? And yet notwithstanding all this,
Numer ca 20. cap. 27. Deuteronomy. c. 33.
when he showed but one act of irreligion and want of duty at the waters of
contradiction, he was for the same prevented by death, and never entered in, and
Iosue was chosen to be their guide. So it happened to Noe, to Abraham, Loath,
Jacob, Iosue, Genesis cap. 7. Iudic. cap. 8. cap. 6.13. 1. Reg. ^.7. Ios. 24.
Gedeon, Sampson, and the rest: Religion was their exaltation and honor. Thus
it was, and chanced both to rulers and subjects of that people, as to
exemplify in their Kings, whose prosperities, and hard fortunes, and the
causes of them were most known and famous. Genesis 17.22.28.35.43. Exodus 1.2.3.
etc. 7.8.9.14. Psalm. 98.

Ios. 7.9 14. Malach. cap. 2. 1. Reg. 5.17.8. 3. Reg. 11.14. 2. Reg. 15. 2.
Paral. 16.17.21.22.36. 4. Reg. 1.15. vlt. 17.

Ierem. c. vlt. lud. 1.

Ierem. 1.18.19.20.27. etc.


What comparison was there between the felicities of the religious and
irreligious Kings of Judah? how honorable and prosperous were the reigns
and regiments of their religious Kings, David, Asa, Iosaphat, Osias, Jonathan,
Ezechias, and Josias, if they be compared to the lamentable dishonors and
miseries of their irrreligious Princes, Saul, Roboam, Abias, Ochozias, Amasias,
Ozias, and the rest that were impious? How short and impotent were these
men's regiments and kingdoms? how little was their glory? how great
their ignomye and dishonor? when coutrarie, how long and ample were the
Empires? how noble, and glorious was the honor of those religious Princes?
Such like were the successes, and adventures of the irreligious Kings of
Israel, that falling from God and true Religion, fell to Schism and Idolatry;
they were but eighteen in number, and ten of them were miserably slain,
Nabath, Ela, Zamri, Achab, Ioram, Zacharias, Sellum, Phacee, Osee, and the
Scepter and Regiment was nine times translated from the families of the Kings:
No family of them continuing the kingdom above the fourth generation, that the
curse and malediction of the irreligious might be imposed upon them; Genesis cap.
15. Exodus 20. 4. Reg. 9.
and there was but one only family of all those, which enjoyed it so long,
and that was of Iehu, which drew nearest to true Religion, for he ouerthrewe
the Altars, Idols, and idolatrous places of the Idol Baall, and put his
Priests to death. And although the Kings of Israel descended of the same
Imadge of Abraham, ^. Reg. c. 11. etc.
as the Kings of Judah did, and were for number of people, far above them
being ten tribes, and the Kingdom of Judah only two; yet how were the
irreligious Kings of Israel tossed, turmoyled, and led captives more then the
other? how were they always inferior, and their kingdom of less
continuance? The enemies of Religion, Balthazar, Aman, and others, came to
unnatural ends, and were lamentably deprived of all dignities, and life it
self. 1. Macha. etc.
So in the time of the Machabees, it came to pass with the favorers of
Religion, and contrary with the irreligious enemies and persecutors thereof.
Such relation may be made of the proceedings of other children of Abraham,
Joseph. lib. 1. antiquit. c. 27. Diodor. Sicu. lib. 3.

Plin. l. 6. c. 28. Strab. l. 16. etc. Plin. l. 6. c. 38. Fazel. dec. prior.
lib. 8.

2. Paral. 8. 1. Machab. 2. Dion. lib. 1. Genesis cap. 25.


descending of Cetura, and from his son Ismael; those which were virtuous and
religious, flourished as the others did, and their persecutors were
dishonorable. And that it might be evident to all posterities, that the
promise of God is true, that he rewards the Religious, and debaseth the
Impious, the most holy and religious Patriarch Abraham, when there were many
more potent and mighty then he, yet because he was so religious above the rest,
God promised for that cause, to make him the father of many Nations; and we
see how many Kings and mighty Princes have descended from him. For not the
ancient Kings of Jury and Israel, but of Arabia, Ethiopia, Idumea, Egypt,
Colchians, that most potent christian Prince Pret Ianne of Jude, and all
Christian Kings are either his spiritual or temporal posterity. Calu. t. lib.
2. cap. 9.

Geneb. Chro. l. 1. page 56. Ortel in Theatr. etc.

Francis. Alu. medin. 1.2. q. 103. artic. 4. Postel. in co^p. Cosmograph. Maff.
hist. l. 3.


And as a memory of their descent, from Abraham and not for any religious
ceremony, the inhabitants of the Christian Empire of Pret Ianne are
circumcysed, as also diverse other people as approved writers are witness. And
who doubts but many potent infidel and irreligious Princes, as Turks, and
Arabians, although for them selves, and their own iniquities and irreligion
they neither deserve either temporal or spiritual blessings of God; Yet
because they were (as some suppose) the carnal children of Ismael and Esau the
offspring of Abraham and Isaac, Genesis cap. 21. Gal. c. 4. Romans 9. Genesis 26.27.
although in holy Scriptures they are deprived of some spiritual faucurs,
graces, and preeminences, and commanded to be cast out, and have no
inheritance, yet that they possess and enjoy there temporal felicities and
possessions from the temporal benedictions of their religious ancestors
Abraham and Isaac and the promise of God unto them; for concerning Ismael, God
said unto Abraham, Sed et filium ancillae etc. Genesis 21. c. 25
But also I will make Ismael the son of thy hand-maide a great people: which
the Angel after promised to his mother Agar in me same words; such was the
benediction of the religious Isaac to his Irreligious child Esau in temporal
things, when he was deprived of some spiritual graces, and inheritance. And
this may be a title of such Infidels to their worldly prosperity, by the
religion of their ancestors, for their own impiety neither meriteth
spiritual or temporal favor.

THE TEMPORAL HONOR and dignity of Religious Catholic Christians most
commonly greatest, and their afflictions least. CHAP. XIIII.
AND touching true believing, and Religious Catholic Christians, how much
they are blessed of God, both in heavenly and earthly benedictions: as also, to
let the glory of our Religion alone, which only shines in all the world, how
miraculouslie have we from the beginning been raised, maintained, and
advanced, maugre the might and malice of all enemies and persecutors, though
never so many, malicious, and mighty? how have they been conquered and their
pride and puissance depressed? how have we prevailed, how long, how large,
how great and wonderful have our honors, titles, prosperities, and
preeminences reigned and ruled in the world? What Empire of the Assirians,
Persians, Grecians, Pagan Romans, Turks, Tartars, or any other has so
endured? which of them all was to be compared unto it in power? And to omit
no time, although God has afflicted Christians in these latter days for their
want of duty in Religion; yet when Infidel, and Irreligious Princes at this
day are so mighty and potent, as that great Christian of Jude, Septem. Castr.
l. de morib. et Relig. turc. cap. 21.
Emperor over threescore and twelve kingdoms. And the Georgians, so called of
S. George their patron in wars, a people so potent that they are a terror to
the Turkish Empire, and admitted to perform their pilgrimage to the holy
Sepulcher in Jerusalem, in the dition of the Mahumetans, with their banners
displayed, and free from tribute. Or who will compare with the Catholic and
Religious King of Spain, whose regal revenues, much exceed all the unjust
and tyrannical Taxes, Tributes, and Impositions of the Turkish Emperor? his
Countries, and Kingdoms are greater, and exceeding the others, his subjects
more honorable, his proceedings more noble. What high Priest ever either
among the Jews, Gentiles, Mahumetanes, or any professors of Religion, so
reverenced, renouned, honored, and potent, as our Catholic Christian Popes of
Rome, so many hundred years exalted above the Emperors themselves, and
exercising Jurisdiction and authority further then ever any other Prince
spiritual or temporal did, even over al Countries in the world? How
miraculouslie have all enemies that in any time or place opposed themselves
against that sacred Jurisdiction of Rome, been ouerthrown? The Jews so
pitifully dispersed, the pagan Emperors, Eusebius. Ruff. Socrat. etc. in hist.
all that persecuted it, living and diynge in miseryes and dishonors, as the
histories of all to Constantine are witness. How did those insolent and proud
conqerours of the world, that killed and conquered whom they would, give
place to the poor Religious Successors of Saint Peeter a Fisher, as their
Prophetess Sibilla had foretoulde them? Sibil. apud Lact.

firm. de diu inst


How were they that were conqueroures of the mightyste, vanquished of the
meaneste? How have all Adversaries and persecutors spiritual or corporal,
internal, or external that ever opposed them selves against it been subdued
and overthrown? as I have cyted before, Epist. Apol.
almost an hundred true or reputed Emperors before Constantine. What
heretical Emperors of the Arrians, Eutichians, Iconoclaustes, or Image
breakers, Monotholites, Manichees, Armenians, as Constantius, Valens, Eusebius.
hist. Ruff. hist. Socrat. etc. Fox. to 1. Mon. Caesar. Bar. to. to. 2.3.4. etc.
Plat vit. Pont. S. Anton. hist. Phil. Berg. hist. Epist. Apolog. sup* etc.

Pantal. Chro^. Epist. Apolog. Bern. Lutzeus. Catal. haer. Geneb. Chro^. lib. 4.

Hos. Lind. Prateol*

Pantal. fruct. Lauta. Lypses. Caluintus l. 2. Casp. vl. lib. 22. cause.


zeno, Anastatius, Heraclius, Constance, Instiman, 2. Philipicus, Dardanes, Leo
Isauricus, Constantinus, Cropronimus, Leo Cropronimus, Leo Armenius, Michael
Dalbus, Theophilus? How have the Goths, Visegothes, Ostrogothes, Vandals,
Frankes, Angles, Mahumetanes, Turks, Tartars, invaded and persecuted it? How
many Irrelygeous Chrystyane Kings, such as I have recoumpted in England and
other places? How many Arche-heretickes Seven Hundred in number as I recited
in the same place, and yet as I have showed before, notwithstanding all these
enemies and afflictiones, the Catholic Temporal Princes thereof, are the
Mightyeste, and most Honorable in the word, and the Popes spiritual
jurisdiction three times greater, more noble and ample, then ever any was,
either among Heretics, Infidels or the Jews themselves, when they observed
true Religion: Contrariwise, let any man peruse the state and conditions of
those countries of Christendom, that are fallen to Heresy, and become
irreligious, and he shall perceive them to be in most dishonorable terms,
both for temporal, and spiritual rule; the jurisdiction of none known or
acknowledged out of one little Country or Province, and those which be the
greatest adversaries of our Religion, to be in the most pitiful, poor, and
uncertain case of the rest. Objection answered.
And least any Atheist, Epicure, or wicked Politic should say, that
although the state of the Religious is such, and so honorable as I have
described in the time of peace, and prosperity, yet in the winter storms of
adversity, and persecution, when those Popes that be now so glorious, were
so often and many in number put to death, when the whole Clergy was
persecuted, when every Religious Christian was odious, when so many thousands
of Martyrs were put to torments, when we were deprived of honors, riches,
liberties, lives, and all preferments, as we have been both by Jews, Pagans,
and Heretics, our glory was nothing at all, but we were wholly oppressed with
miseries; I have already showed, that even in such times, the honor and glory
of the Religious, which were persecuted, was far greater, then of their
persecutors, and that ever in the end, the victory and triumph was ours. And
to give examples in this case; never any thing among the enemies of Christ,
was so famous and renowned in the world, as the Empire of Rome, and their
Emperors before Constantine the christian Emperor. Yet let us but compare the
most persecuted Religious people, which were the Popes of Rome, with the
gallant flowers of fortune, and my sentence will be true. The Popes of Rome
were then esteemed of impious Polytickes, to be the most unfortunate and
depressed people, no friend, no humane force to defend them, the laws
against them, their enemies and persecutors (with whose felicity I compare
them) were the absolute commanders of the world, and contended with all force,
policy and tyranny they could, to abandon the name of Christ, and his
Religion, and all professors thereof, principally the Popes of Rome, and put
them to death; And yet do what they could, the true glory of the Roman
Popes at that time was greater then the glory of those Roman Emperors, all
Histories Martyrologies, Calenders, and Records will bear perpetual
witness, their lives and honor were thrice as long, and yet they were old
before their election, and consecration, and though the life of them all was
sought, and most of them dyed actually in Martyrdom, yet the number of their
enemies and persecuting Emperors that dyed miserably, and with reproach in the
same time, Bell. Chrona. Pantal, Chro^. Col. pontif. Ruff. hist. Eus hist.

Fox. to. 1. Mo^. Plat. de vit. Pontif. Catal.


did three to one exceed them: for from S. Peter to Saint Syluester honored
by Constantine, there were 31. Popes, and those those aged men, and yet of them
not above 25. or 26. actually put to death. And of the Emperors the lusty
Gallants of the world either truly chosen, Pontif. nup. edit.
pretended or reputed, there reigned in the same space almost an hundred Roman
Emperors, and all they, excepting eleauen or twelve at the most, were slain,
Hieron in c. 4. Zachar. Chrisost. l. 2. contr. Gentil. etc.
and miserably put to death, and the others which escaped those violent ends,
dyed in greater wretchedness then those religious Popes they persecuted. And
the names of the Popes are honorable, both in heaven and earth, and the names
of the others either dishonourablie or not remembed at all. And least any
should be so vain to suppose that the miseries were only private to the
Roman Emperors, he shall see how they were common calamities to all our
enemies: of the Jews all the world is a witness to this day, Tract. 2.
infra.
and I will declare hereafter. The Senators of Rome were next in degree to
the Emperors thereof, and second in honor and reputation to them, and those
which persecuted religion most in that time; And yet how often were they
themselves most vilie vexed and persecuted of their Emperors fourteen times at
the least in the same space, by general persecution against them, Caes. Bar.
Annal. to 1.2.3. Eusebius. histor. Ruff. histor. Bez. ruin. Genesis l. 6. etc. Oros.
lib. 7. Dio hist Rom lib. 58.

Euron. tom. 1. annal.


wherein they were violently entreats and put to death by Tiberius, Caius,
Nero, Domitian, Hadrian, Commodus, Septimus, Caracalla, Marinus, Heliogabalus,
and other Emperors, that in one day at Rome were pittfully put to death by
Claudius there own Emperor, 35. Senators, and 300. Knights. So likewise the
inferior Adversaries of our Religion, how many thousands of them executed by
most cruel and unwonted deaths, by their own idolatrous and irreligious
Emperors? some drowned, some buried alive, some mured up in walls, others
having their eyes pulled out, others pulled and cut in pieces, others cast to
beasts in spectacles, Tertul. lib. ad Scapul. and in apol.

Sueron. c. 61. Mahumet in Alcoran. c. 54. et cap. 65.66. etc. 43. etc.


and many hundred thousands violently consumed and destroyed in the same space.

And to speak of those most infensiue enemies of all Religious Christians in
these latter years, Mahumet and the successors of his impious government,
although worldly happiness, and carnal pleasure is the felicity they expect,
either in this, or in any other life, yet how strangely have they been
punished and afflicted, especially at such times as they raged most against us?
what a filthy and beastly life did their first Author Mahumet lead, even by
his own confession? with what unnatural diseases was he tormented? how
beastly and shameful was his death? how ignominious and odious was he even to
his own friends and followers long after his death? Blond. lib. 9. Plat.
Pomp. Laet. Eutrop. l. 18. Sab. etc. hist turrie.
how horrible, odious, and unnatural were the lives and deaths of all his
next and immediate successors, Alys, Enbocora, Homar, Osmenus, Mahumetes the
second, Alys, Muauias, and others, the first ordained of Mahumet himself,
violently oppressed and deposed, Eubocora poisoned to death, Homar Murdered of
his servant, Osmenus killed himself, Mahumetes violently and unnaturally
slain, Alys trayterouslye murdered, Muauias so afflicted with scismes and
sects in that profession, that hundreds of Camelles were not able to carry the
writings of such as rebelled against him. With what dishonorable and unseemly
conditions was their most potent Prince, and our greatest enemy Amuathus
enforced to conclude a truce with Justinian the second? how miserably were
200000. of them soon after killed in Siria? how shameful was the retire of
Zuleman from the Thracians, Blond. lib. 10. dec. 1.

Sab. En. 5 l. 7. Sigeb. hist. Aemil. lib. 2. Sabel. Tyr. li. 1. cap. 17.
Krants. lib. 5. cap. 14.


and Bulgarians, and Bulgarians, about the same time? were not three hundred
seauenty five thousand of their soldiers slain at once by the Spaniards and
French in one battle? what strange conquests and victories did inferior
religious christian Captains, Ogerus Duke of Denmark, Godfryde of Lorrayne,
and others, obtain against their most puissant and mighty Princes? how did
other base and contemptible men afflicte theme? was not Baiazethes the first,
their great Emperor subdued by Tamberleyne that barbarous and Rogish Scythian,
lost two hundred thousand soldiers, was taken prisoner, closed up in a Cage of
Iron, led up and down in Chains, and made a footestoole for a thief to
tread upon his back, when he went to horse? was not his wife abused before
his eyes, her clothes cut off from her back, Egnat. histor. Sabel. Pantal. in
Chron.
and her whole body left naked from the nauill to the foot, and did not he
kill him self in open spectacle? was not their Emperor Orchanes murdered by
his own Uncle? their Emperor Moses violently killed of his natural Nephewe
Mahumetes? Martin. sum. hist. hungar. lib. 7.
and Baiazethes the second poisoned of Selimus his own son, and Mustapha
the only lawefull and true heir of Solomon, most unjustly, and unnaturally
murdered by his Father, and in his presence? and so of others, besides the
ordinarye and usual murtheringe of Brothers after the Fathers death, as
Orchanes that killed his three brethren, Amurathes put his only brother to
death, Baiazethes killed his seven brethren, and so of others, and all these
of late, since, and in which times, they have persecuted our Religion most.
And if we peruse all Histories, and Antiquities, we shall evidently
perceive, that whenever those irreligious Infidelles have prevailed against
us, it was either in time of irreligious heresye, or some such negligence, and
disobedience in Religion, for which we were justly afflicted, Blond lib. 4.
Dec. 2.

Tyr. l. 8. c. 18. l. 9. c. 2. et 5. S. Brand. in Hieros.

Ph^lip. Bergo^. hist.

S. Anton. hist. Pantal. in Cro. Sab. Euuop. lib. 15.

Blond. lib. 6. Dec. 1.

Tyr. l. 1. c. 2. Sigeb. Pantal. ^hron. Sab. Eu. 8. l. 8. Phryg. in Cro. Plat.
Blond. lib. 10.

S. Brand hist. Philip Bergo^. Chron. Pantal. in Chron. Egnat. 3. S. Brand
hist. Bergom hist. Pant. in Chro^. Paul. Iou. hist. Manster in Chron.


Heraclius the Emporor became a Monothelite heretic, and Mahumet with his
Sarracens invaded Jerusalem, Damascus, Egypt, part of Affricke, Rhodes and
the Isles adjoining. Vitiza king of spain was a licentious and irreligeous
Prince, and permitted Concubines and other impious abuses, and at the same time
the same Sarracen infidels invaded that kingdom, and possessed that many
hundred years. The Emperors of the East irreligiouslye behaved themeselues to
the Sea of Rome, and Emperor Nicephorus became Tributorie to the Sarracens,
and his successor Theophilus was twice conquered, Jerusalem Candy, and part
of Asia was subdued. The Grecians feel to schism, and divided themselves from
the Roman jurisdiction, and Mahumetes the Turkish Emperor inuadeth those
countries, subdueth 12. kingdoms, 200. cities, and violently takes
Constantinople in their great festiuity of Pentecost, and coming of the holy
Ghost, about whose procession they are in error, miserably killed Constantine
their Emperor, and possess their Empire. Martin Luther begins his unhappy
heresies, Fox. to. 2. Mo^. Graff. in hist. in Henr. 8. Stowe histor. in Henr. 8.
and presently upon that irreligious reuolte, Solymanus Emperouror of Turkey
inuadeth those Countries, takes Rhodes, and Belgrade, those two propugnacles
of Christendom, inuadeth Hungary, slew Lodowicke King thereof, possessed Buda
chief city of the Kingdom, besiedged Vienna with 250000. men, and since that
irreligious apostasy and by means of it, has often and pitifully afflicted
Christians. So that the afflictions we have received from those infidels,
proceeded from impiety, and irreligion, and whenever we were religious unto
God, we prevailed against them, which is manifest in the state of christians
even in this time, for as we see those countries and kingedomes for their
irreligious heresies and schisms are become vassals and in subjection as I
recompted before in the religion of the Jews before Christ; so contrariwise
those Kings, Princes, and countries of Christendom, which have remained free
from those irreligious defectes, never flourished more. And to exemplify in
the Catholic king of Spain in all these times his Subjects and Countries
(exceping the miserable fleemish) have been free from these unhappy and
irreligious dealinges, and when was the condition thereof, so honorable? in
what age were the Spaniardes accounted such conquerours and soldiers in the
world? when was their fame and honor so great? are not his Dominions and
Kingdoms, greater, richer, more ample, and honorable, then the possessions of
any Infidel in the world? has he not in these very times when the
irreligious parts of Christendom have lost and bin infested so much, won,
and lawfully united unto him, more, mightyer, richer, greater, and more
glorious, nations, then any Infidel is owner of, or any irreligious Ptince or
state of Christians enjoys, as the Kingdoms of Castill, legion Tollet,
Hispalis, Murcia, and Luzia, and the Provinces adjoining, Burgundy, and the 15.
provinces the Canary Islands, Sardinia, Sycily, Naples, the Dukedom of Myllane,
Portugal, the Philippine Islands, so many vaste and rich cuntries of America,
the East and West India^s, obtained and wone by the 3. last catholic and
religious kings of Spain, Philip 1. Charles 5. and Philip 2. and in that time
when the irreligious places of Christians have lost so much, and yet what
other christian wars have been, which they have not defended.

And if it were lawful to make free comparisons of these latter days of
protestants, and compare the estate of the countries, where the protestants
have persecuted, and catholics have been afflicted, it would be no
difficultye to prove, that the glory, honor, and temporal felicity of the
persecuted religious Catholics, have far exceeded the pomp and prosperity of
their persecutors. But so much as I need to crave leave to do far England,
it apeareth already in my epistle. Epist. Apolog.
And I am assured there is no protestant in our nation, but (settinge the love
of his Abbey-liuynges aside) would wish the estate of his country for Honor,
Riches, Strength, Order, Friendship of Foreign Nations, love and unity of
Nobility and others, and al other honors and blessings of a Christian kingdom
were no worse now, then it was in the 22. year of king Henry the eight when
he revolted, If he either consider Clergy or layetie, nobility or commonalty,
or let us view the number of religious and catholic Priests which above 100.
in her majesty's time have suffered death for this quarrel; Look into the
lives and deaths of ministers, and for that 100 of martyrs you shall find 1000
and more ministers dying infamous miserable, and beggarly deaths, for most
wicked and unnatural offenses. Look into those ministers that have been best
of life, and in greatest favor, with Prince and subjects, and we shall find
that our banished religious catholics do surmount them, we have by foreign
Princes rewarded with honors of Cardinal, Bishop, and all inferior
dignities, we have had more public professors of divinity in other
universities, then all England has had at home, our Priests religious men,
and namely the fathers of of the society of Jesus, most odious in England, have
bin in higher reputation, with the greatest princes of the world in strange
countries; then the higheste Arche-bishop of protestants in England, has been
with his natural Sovereign. And such is the ordinary and common ignominy and
dishonor, to be reputed a Minister in the English Church, that I suppose very
few, or no Catholic Priests of that nation, would change their honor even in
England, with so base and infamous a generation. What the wealth, riches, and
other blessings be, which the Protestants have, that we want, for all this
time of persecution, and empouerishing religious Catholics, I think no man
perceaueth so manifest a distinction, and yet the charges, taxes, and
impositions, which have been imposed upon us, are 20. times greater, then
those which Protestants have tasted. And if the estate of Catholics in
England where they are persecuted is such, how glorious is it in Catholic
nations, where they are honored, if the times of persecution and Irreligion,
have done us no more dishonor? what glory will Catholic and Religious times
affoorde us? if our own contrie Protestant Historians can so little disgrace
us, as the history of Stowe and others will witness, what commendation and
credit will Catholics and Religious Cronicles, both at home, and abroad,
yield unto us? so that we see, what honor, glory dignity, or excellency
soever it is, which a man may, or can desire to have, either spiritual, or
temporal, in this, or in the life to come, if it is a pleasure, or preferment
to a reosonable creature, such as may be wished or enjoyed without sin,
Religion is the mother of all.

THOUGH THERE SHOVLDE BE no reward for Religion after death, yet the state of
the Religious is to be preferred before the Irreligious. CHAP. XV.
YEA if we should yield so much to this frantic and brutish humor of
Irreligious epicures, to say this Question of Religion is doubtful (as there
is nothing more certain, then that man owes Religion unto God) yet we shall
perceive the Religious state eue^ in worldly and temporal happiness, far to
exceed the condition of the Irreligious, and that these are drowned and
plunged in greater and deeper miseries, then the others. For what unhappiness or
infelicity can be imputed to professors of religion, if they should be in
error? all the pleasures and delights which can be conceived to belong to man,
consisting of a soul and body, must of necessity be spiritual, belonging to
the first, or temporal proportionate to the second. The spiritual delights,
must needs be the virtues and perfections of the soul, which only the
Religious enjoy, and whereof the others are deprived; thus the greatest
happiness is had of such as approve Religion, and the ennemies thereof have
lost it, as for things of delight appertayning to the body, if they be
entangled with sin, they cannot be accounted pleasure as before, but rather
a double torment to the guiltye conscience of those which for the repose and
rest of delight, offer a violence unto nature, and yet this is only that
wherein the Irreligyous can exceed, and his excesses is in his own
affliction: for I have proved before, that actuallye whether there is any
religion or no, that all other external things which may be accounted goods,
of the body, fortune, or any extrinsicall preferment, as Riches, Honors,
Peace, Rule and other prerogatives of glory, dignity, and such delights, have
ever been more peculier and proper to the Religeous, then to the Impious. And
that this Irreligious generation which only seek for ease and pleasure, and
to be free from myseries, by many decrees have ever in this life been more
afflicted then the rest. If it has ever chanced so in former times, though
we should deny the prouydence of God, to do the like in future ages, yet if
all things were ruled by fortune, and came by chance, fortune is as like to
favor professors of Relygion hereafter, as heretofore. And natural reason
teaches us that of necessity it must be so, for there never was any
Epicure, or Atheist, so impyous and profane, but by reason he should grant
the opinyon of all the world, and professors of a God and Religion, at least
to be a probable sentence, thus his own opinyon could not be void of
fear. Then let us constitute a Religyous, and Irreligeous Man, in the same
estate of Health, Sickness, Riches, Pouertye, Honor, Disgrace, Pleasure,
Myserie, and the like: he that professes there is a God, by whose prouydence
all things be ordered, which is Infinyte in Power, Unmeasureable in Goodness,
and cannot commit Injustice: If he be in Health, Riches, Honor, Pleasure,
and state of rest, his comfort, and delyghte is increased, and doubled, to
consider that as he infalliblie supposes, his GOD whom he serves, can,
and will preserve him in that estate; so likewise deliver him if he be in the
adverse calling of sickness, disgrace, pouertye, persecution, and other
miseries, and if not, yet for his patience he will reward him. Thus his
pleasure is enlarged with justly conceived trust of continuance; in miserye
his affliction healed with hope of delivery, or retribution for perseueraunce.
These comfortes and delyghtes cannot be granted to the Irreligeous, haueinge
no hope either of continuinge and encreasynge his pleasures, or abbreui^tinge
his afflictions; but he is vexed with the contrary infelicitie, always in
sear and danger to be deprived of his good, and persevere in his adversity,
which experiment although it be verified in the whole age of men, yet more
appears in the decayeinge time, when the Religeous persuades himself the
end of all his myseries is at hand, and his greateste joy is to beeginne,
when contrarie-wise the other, is invaded with a double infelicitie, one to
loose his delights, and the other to enter into greater torments: which in the
whole circuit of the Religious life brings a doubled consolation; and that
in respect of the hoped happiness after, so much greater then all pleasures and
delights which any epicure can have, by how much the infinyte goodness of
God, to be possessed of an immortal Soul for ever, exceeds the short and
temporal uncertain pleasure of the sensible man. For although these joys in
themselves should not be obtained, yet, seeinge the delight and pleasure of
the will is framed more or less, according to the Apprehension and Judgment
of the understanding, by which it is moved and takes delighte, the joy of
an uncertain felicitye and happiness conceived as certain, and so proposed
to the will, engenderethe as great a delectation, as that which is certain
does: for external objects move not the internal powers of the soul,
wherein delights are engendered, as they are in themselves, but as they are
conceived and apprehended of those faculties, and so of grief and affliction,
because being extrinsecall, and not in the understanding and will of
themselves, but by apprehension and judgment, they move not but after the same
manner, by which they are received and made present. Therefore seeing there is
no proportion between the delights of the one and the other, either in
respect of the things themselves whereof the delight must arise, or the
proportion of man, which does, and must enjoy them or the time of their
duration, whether there is any God and Religion or no, yet the condition of him
that professes Religion, even in that respect, for which the other does deny
it, (which is only to live in delight and deuoyded of affliction) is to be
preferred. And to this the experimented practice of so many Kings, Eusebius.
hist. Ruffiu. Sar. etc Theodor. hist. Bed. hist. Ang. lib. 3.4.5. Fox. to. 1.
Mo^. Hieron in vit. Greg. l. Dial. Sur in vit* Sa^ct Lyppol. etc.
Princes, and Potentates, both of England, and other Nations, which have
voluntarily forsaken their certain and greatest temporal honors, preferments,
and delights, to enjoy the consolations of the Religious, and so many
thousands which have forsaken the corporal pleasures which such Epicures
desire, and lived in deserts where they could not be possessed, but only
spiritual comfortes must be their hope, have yielded evidence, where the
comfort of gaining heaven, and avoiding hell, have turned their troubles into
joys. As contrary wise the beastly and epicureous life of profane and
irreligious men, joined always (as it can never be free from doubt) with
continual fear of so great a loss as heaven, and such dread of damnation as
is in hell, cannot be accounted a pleasant state, though every one should be
as potent to procure, and as wanton to possess himself of pleasures, as ever
any Heliogobalus was. For danger of the greater pain expels the lesser
pleasure, and fear of eternal torment, would frustrat a momentary delight. So
that howsoever the event should prove, the professor of Religion has made
the better and more pleasant choice; and in no state delight can chance to man,
if worship unto God be not regarded. And whosoever desires to live at rest and
have delight, either in this or the life to come, must not be forgetful of
that duty: Whereupon Plutarch the Philosopher not only was of this opinion,
but wrote a book entitled, Plutarch.
That no man could live a pleasant life in the opinion of Epicurus: and these
are sufficient for this purpose. For although I doubt not but in these
licentious days, many voluptuous and carnal men forgetful of the dignytie
of humane nature, both in respect of fear of punishment due for their
iniquities, as also that they might more freely without restraynte wallowe
themselves wholly in delights, wish in will and affection, there neither were
Religion due to God, or Revenge to the Irreligion of man, yet I cannot be
persuaded, that any understanding can be so sottishe in judgment to deny it.

Of the Absurdities, which the Irreligeous must grant. THE XVI. AND LAST
CHAP. and Conclusion.
FOr (to come to conclusion against this Godless Generation,) what Judgment,
or Understanding, of any private or particular voluptuous man (for no others
ever were Agents in this cause,) can dare to enter into that sentence, which
all learned and reasonable men in the world, in all ages, and places have
condemned for most impious and unreasonable, all schools, universities,
societies and companies professinge knowledge, have exploded for the greateste
detesteable wickedness? which all Patriarchs, Prophets, Priests, Judges,
Sibils, Rabbines, Legists, Flamens, Arche flamens, Caliphes, Brachmans, all
sorts of people, Christians, Jews, Pagans, Mahumetanes, Catholics,
Heretics. Philosophers, Poets, Magicians, Angels, separated Souls, Devils, al
creatures, even insensible things, by one means or other have reproved for the
most barbarous and unnatural disobedience, which can be invented. That which
in so many thousands of years, in such diversities of opinions and errors, in
so many vaste and populous nations, in which all other impieties have been
professed. Never any Kingdom, Country, State, Province, City, Town, or
Village practiced: and by probable conjectures, never one particular person,
except frantic with pleasures, and distracted in mind defended, but only a
few ignorant, barbarous and beastly men made of sin, and guilty of their
own hell, wishinge for auoydeinge punishmente. For what reason and
understanding can make denial of that, which if he denies, all authority,
experience, sense, and ground of reasoninge, and reason it self is denied?
for whose denial, not the least aparaunce of one Argument can be alleged,
for whose approbation all Testimonies of God, and all creatures are certain,
which if it be granted, and truly practiced, all truths, graces, honors,
dignities, and privileges belonging to man, natural, and supernatural,
either in this life, or after death, are so certainly obtained? if it be
denied, all honors and immenities are lost, all afflictions, temporal and
eternal are incurred, all absurdities granted, all untruths affirmed, all
veryties condemned. Sin is virtue, virtue is sin, sin must be practiced,
virtue may not be allowed, nothing is sin, nothing is virtue. Falsehoods,
and contradictions are true, all learning rejected. No community, Kingdom,
Magistracy, Discipline, no Sovereign, no Subjection, no Law must be
received, no barbarous, tyrannycall, or licentious impiety omitted. Man's soul
mortal, man a beast, many beasts better then man. And infinite more such
absurdities, which directly proceed from this blaspheamous position (
Religion is not to be used) if any man shall be so senceles to affirm it.

The end of the first Treatise.
THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE SECOND TREATISE, BRIEFLY Showing against all
external Infidels, how only that Religion, which Jesus Christ delivered to the
world, is the true Worship of God.
Having ended my first conclusion ( of the necessity of a Religion) against the
Irreligious, I am next in this time of so manifold errors, to avoid all
danger of professing false reverence, to prove what religion among so many is
only true, which I will perform in so undeniable manner, that no verity shall
be so certain, as that reverence to god which I will defend. And first against
al external enemies of Christ. My next proposition shall be ( that Religion
which he taught is only true, and all others false) which to a people of a
professed Christian Nation needs not long probation, wherefore to be brief
in this dispute, such is the undoubted certainty of this sentence, whether we
consider the excellency and dignity of the doctrine it self, of the Messiah,
and son of God which gave it unto us, or the miraculous manner, whereby it
was delivered and embraced; or the baseness, impiety, and most manifest
errors of all other professions, the wickedness of the inuentors, and
disorders in inuenting and dylating them, that a man which will give credit to
any probable Argument, cannot call it into question. And he shall see these
Testimonies not only recorded by the holy wrighters, Prophets, Apostles, and
Evangelists, immediatelye illuminated of God, but of our greateste professed
enemies: emonge whom we do not one^ie find confirmed in general the
Religion of Christ, but almost every particular article and mystery thereof
registered and allowed: as the Trinity, Incarnation, the two natures of
Divinity and Humanity in Christ, the promise of his coming, Sibil. apud
Lact. firm. lib. 2.3.4. etc. diu. instit.

Mercur. Tris. in Dial.

Plat. in tim. Porphyr. lib. de oracul. Mahumet. in Alcoran. Rabb. lib. de
Christ.

Suet. in Oct. cap. 95. Senec. l. 1. nature. q. c. 2. Plin. hist. l. 2. c. 31.
c. 28. Calcid. in tim. Plat. de Stell. Dio. lib. 47. Plin. not. hist. lib. 2.
cap. 84. Sueto^. in Tiber. cap. 48. Dio. l. 57. Plutarch l. defect. Oracul.
Suet. in Oct. c. 94. and 70.29. Sibill. Lact. lib. 1.


his miraculous conception, nativity, life, death, resurrection, ascension,
coming of the holy Ghost, conversion of the world, the end thereof, his
coming to judgment, his giuinge sentence, the final beatitude and reward
of the virtuous, worshippers of him, and eternal punishment of the wicked, and
his enemies, and other mysteries of our belief testified and ratified of all
kind of Infidels, Jews, Pagans, Mahumetanes, Brachmans, allowed by god
himself, apparitions, and witness of Angels from heaven, and all creatures
upon earth, the heavens and celestial bodies reioyceinge in his birth, the
Sun, Moon, all elements, and compounded things lamentinge his death. The
Sun against nature eclipsed, the Moon violentinge his course, the air
darkened, the earth trembleinge, rocks rendeing, the winds, tempests, Seas
contrary to their natural inclinations performinge his commandments, Oracles
ceaseinge, Idols fallinge, the devils and creatures both sensible and
insensible acknowledging and obeying him. many miracles to the same effect, and
wicked spirits professed enemies of all piety cast forth by authority, future
continge^t things most certainly foretold, incurable diseases healed, blind
restored to sight, lame to going, deaf to hearing, dumb to speaking, dead to
life, when in all humane reason and science of Philosophers, such effects are
impossible to be performed by natural means, or supernaturally to be wrought
of God, or any second^rie cause by his cooperation, to give creditte and
authority to falsehoode. The most strange and myraculous alteration in the
lives of those embraced him, the wonderful conversion of the world unto him,
the rare and extraordinary still continuing punishements upon those refused
him. And these and such witnesses not given in obscure and base places only
before simple and unlearned men, as Seducers use to deal, but in frequente
and public places, and most famous Cities, before the mightiest and most
potent Princes, Kings, Tetrarches of Jury, Syria, and other Nations, yea the
most wise Philosophers, crafty and subtille Magicyans of the world. Written
and recorded not only by the holy Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists
myraculouslie proved to have been directed and assisted, and never to have
written untruth, or the Patriarchs in their testament cited by Origin, Origin.
hom. 15. in Iosue Gaz. in ca. 38. Genesis

Rab. lon. l. col. Rabb. Abb. in thren.

Rabb. Moys. hadars in cap. 1.41. Genesis Rabb. harcad. in cap. ^.11. Rab. D^.
^^nli lib. radi^ paraphras, cold. in c. 4 Is. and Osee 1. Rabb ii. in ca. 47.
Genesis Rabb. Sim. in cap. 10. Genesis and Job. 19. Procl. lib. 2. and 3. in pari^.
Plat. Mercur. in paem. c. 1. etc


that lived within one hundred and threescore years of Christ as then extant,
and translated forth of hebrew into greek by Procopius eleauen hundred years
ago, where every one of them prophesies most plainly of Jesus Christ the
Mesias. And the general consent of the ancient Rabbines and expositors of
holy scriptures before christ, but those which ever were in highest account
and reputation among the Gentiles themselves, whether for learning and
antiquity, as Soroastres, Hermes Trismegistus their most renou^ed, or such as
god had illuminated with these mysteries, and lived as Prophets for the
instruction of that people, as so many of the Sibils as plainly foretelling
the mysteries and proceedings of christ, of his divinity, humanity, nativity,
life, death, coming to judgment, and other secrets of christian doctrine,
Lactant. firm. l. 1. instit. diu. c. 6. l. 4. c. 6. Varr. lib. de reb. divine.
Cicer. lib. 2. divine.

Virg. egl. 4. Suid. in Thul. Porph. l. oracl Plut. l. oracl. Suid. in Aug.
Adrian Imp. Epist. Marc. Aurel. epist. Pylat. epist. ad Tyber.

Eusebius. l. 2. hist. Plin. 2. epist. ad Traian. Imper.

Rabb. l. de. vit. Christ. Porphyr. lib. def. orac. Mah. Alcor. Azoar.
10.12.67.11.5. etc.


as if they had been personally present, and seen those things effected. So
did the Oracles and answers of their Gods, and were enforced so to do, as
themselves confessed, and not only to private men, but to the Emperors and
chief Princes. So do, and did the most authenticke Registers, and imperial
Records, Wrightings, and Edicts of the Gentile Emperors, as Tiberius,
Traiane, Antonius, and other princes, as Pilate and Herod in Jury, the
Senators at Rome, and others. So those which were the most noisome and
offensive enemies of Christ, the Thalmadists, Pophiry, and Mahumet, that great
Seducer, which in diverse chapters of his Alcaron confirms the Miracles, and
Religion of Christ for most true, and holy. Therefore dealing with men of a
christian country, such (as I hope) all inhabitants of England desire always
to be accounted, I might make an end of this matter: But because I have taken
in hand to prove catholic Religion to be the only true worship, and
reverence of God, not only against al divided sects of heretics, which I am
to perform in my disputation against my cuntrie Protestants, Resol. part. 2.
but also against all Infidels and other misbeleeuers, and by most certain
and lamentable experience we know that Jews, Mahumetanes, and other infidels
have lived in england, without any distinction or different sign from
christians, such as they are bound to wear in catholic countries; and
further, their wicked books, as Alcaron of Mahumet and such others, have been
used and perused of many unfit Readers and Examiners of such blasphemies, Casp.
Vlenb. lib. 22. cause. Rayn. Calvin. turcis. etc.
and diverse Protestants not only in Germany and other places, but of England
have forsaken the faith of christ and become circumcised miscreants, I will
brieflye in few reasons prove the falsehoode and error of all external
infidels. Such as suppose the probation of so manifest a verity to be
superfluos, may pass them over, and begin with my Arguments against
Protestants and other internal Enemies.

CHAP. II.
THE 1. ARGVM. For Catholic Christian Religion, against all external
Misbeleeuers, grounded upon the plain confession, of all our greatest
professed enemies, upon whose auth^riti^* all other worshippes are founded.
I Suppose all known Infidels and Misbeleeuers setting Heretics one side
(with whom I must deal in my next r^^sons) to be compr^hended under the
^^mies, Part. 2. ^^sol.
and tides either of Jews, M^h^metane^, or Idolations Pagans: for neither
Ecclesiastical Writers, Historians, or Tra^^ylors of Countries, m^ke mention
of more, neither can I p^rce^^^ in reason, how any man not professing himself
a Christian, is for^o^^en and les^ out in that division. For (...) the
diue^si^^e of mi^beleefe tow^d^. Christ, or denying him must (...) ^^tension
the di^ersitie of the manner of misbeleeuing or denying, then all Infidels
either veterlie denied Christ, both in figure and verytie as generally the
Gentiles did, neither receiving him for the Messiah, Lact s^^m. lib. diu. inst.
or expecting any other to vvorshippe, but yielding reverence to Idolles, and
feigned Gods, Thalmud. iud and Rab. Thal.
or else they confessed him in figure and expectation before he came, and in
vo^^y and at his coming denied him, and sach are Jews, Mala^met. in Alcoran.
or e^^e both confessing before his coming that he was promised to the
world, and after he is come do acknowledge his coming, but not in that
manner wherein he was promised, or in such sort as he came, or him alone,
but allowing an other, as M^humet and Mahumetanes do, confessing JESUS Christ
to be the true Messiah and Prophet, promised in the law of Moses, but denying
his divinity, and receiving Mahumet a seducer for a Prophet. So that we see all
Infidelles e^ther be Jews, Mahumetanes, or Idolatrous Pagans. Now to
conclude the only truth and verytie of Christian faith, and falsehoode of all
th^se erroneous worships by their own confession, and testimony in such sort
in one argument, that it shall not be lawful for a Jew by the very grounds
of his own Religion, or a Pagan by the rule and ground of Paganism, or a
Mahumetan by the law of Mahumet, to deny my argument, which is as much, as
any of those misbeleeuers can desire, I must suppose that (which every Jew,
Pagan, and Mahumetan will willingly grant, and all Histories, and Monuments of
antiquities affirm to be true) that in every one of those professions, there
was a certain known Rule, and proposer of Religion, of whom the rest were to
be instructed, what to believe, and do, in things appertayning to their
Religion. For if every man might have been a square, and measure to himself,
no common worship or reverence could have been exercised among them, in such
sort, as experience and sufficient testimony do prove there was. Therefore to
begin with the Religion of the Jews before Christ, when they were the people
of God, and served him in true Religion, as both the Jews which be now, and
Christians confess, and Mahumet does not deny. We all consent, that the law
which was delivered to Moses, and by Moses to the Israelites, was the true
worship and Religion of God, Exodus c. 3.4.5. etc. 12.13. etc. 19.20. Deuteronomy. 5.
Leuit. 26.
given and commanded by him by the testimony and signs of many and wonderful
miracles, and for the special protection of that people in true reverence, and
duty to him, until by their disobedient apostasy they forsook him; he did
not only give them an high Priest of whom they were to be instructed, Deuteronomy.
c. 17.
if any difficult or doubtful thing should happen: but gave them holy
Prophettes, enspired with knowledge, to direct them, and further commanded
the same Moses to make a propitiatory, or Oracle of most pure gold, Exodus
cap. 25 26.37.40. Leuit. c. 16. 2. Reg cap. 21. 3 Reg. 6.8. 2. Paral. 5.
containing two cubittes and half in length, and a cubitte and half in
breadth, with a golden Cherubine, or Angel on either side: out of which place,
he promised to give answer and direction to that people; and thither the
high Priests ressorted, to consulte with the Oracle of God, in matters of
doubt or distress. So that they which were thus taught, either by Prophets
immediately and internallie illuminated of GOD, or the high Priest instructed
likewise of him, or of GOD himself giving answers in that Oracle, could by
no means be deceived, for the Misteryes which were so revealed unto them,
must needs be true: After this manner, the Pagan Gentiles proceeded in the
same matter, for the Gods and Idolles they worshipped being Diuelles (as the
Prophet says, Psalm. 95.
and their destruction and utter ruin and other arguments have proved) which
always were enemies to God, and imitators of his honor and worship,
appointed Flamens, And Arch-flamens as high Priests to offer Sacrifice to them,
and teach Idolatry to their worshippers. This all Historians witness, and
countries can record, and England it self, where so many Arch-flamens and
Flamens were, Camb. in Brit Stowe histor. Gra^^. histor. Fox to. 1. Mo^.
as in London, Gloucester, and other places almost 30. in number. Besides which,
they appointed certain Oracles where themselves would give responce, which
were accounted for the highest sentence in the Pagan Religion, for being the
sentence of their Gods (as they called them) whom they did reverence, no
greater or more infallible judgment could be expected. Such were the Oracles
of Apollo, Jupiter, Plutarch. lib. de oracul. Porph. lib. orac.

Cicer. diu. and l. not. Deor. Bed. hist. Ang. lib. 1.2. etc. Cic. l. 2. diu.
Virg. egl. 4. Lact. firm. l. diu. instit.

Com. in Boet. Suet tra^q. c. 3. Suid. in August. etc.


and at Delphos, Memphis, Hermopolis, Rome, London, and almost of every City.
But besides these, because the true worship of God and eternal beatitude
concerned all men, and he would have no man to lie in excuseable ignorance in a
matter of so great moment, he had true Prophettes among them for their
instruction, as Job, Sibillae, Erithaea, Cumena, and the rest, and other
Prophets as their own Authors bear witness, always to have been in
greatest reputation, and their writings most religiousllie kept and believed.
Lastly, Alcor. Mahu. Andr. de laca^. hist. turric. Leonic. Chalcond. etc.
concerning the Mahumetanes, their Seducer knowing it was evident in the light
of Nature, that no true supernatural Religion could be ordained by man, a
Natural creature, feygned himself to be a Prophette, sent from God, and to
have received from him that religion, which his Alcaron conteyneth, which is
the chief rule of the Mahumetanes to this day.

How the very ground and foundation of the Pagans worship prove Christian
Religion.
Thus being manifest whereupon the religion of Jews, Pagans, and Mahumetanes
was and is founded. I will now show how they al demonstratiuely prove against
them selves, the only truth of christian doctrine, and condemn their own for
most erroneous and ridiculous. And to begin with the pagan gentiles, Suid.
in Thul. Porphyr. l. de orat.

Plutarch. l. de defect. oracul. Suid. in Aug. Nicephor. l. 1. histor. c. 17.
Porphyr. l. de laud. philos. and lib. 1. Chr. apud Eusebius. l. 5. praep. euang
luven, Satyr. 6 Laran. Strab. l. 9. georg.


but briefly, because it is handled at large in a late english treatise, did
not their highest and renounedst Oracle, answer to the Archeslamen at Delphos,
and disclose the holy mystery of the Trinity of the Father, his dear Son,
and Spirit containing all? as their own writers Suidas, Plutarch, Porphiry,
and others give evidence. And that dear son of God would be their overthrow
and destruction. Like answer was made to Augustus Caesar himself about the
divinity of Christ, and how at his coming, the gods of the Oracles should go
to hell. Porphiry that aduowed enemy of Christians is a witness, that
generally the Gods and Oracles of the Gentiles gave testimony to his
Sanctity, and that where men believed in him, the oracles were silent and gave
no answers. Such are the testimonies of Iuenall, Strabo and others. And it is
generally verified by all infallible experience, by the ceasing of all
Oracles, overthrow of Idolatry, and confession of their Gods in all countries
in the world, where Christian Religion has bin preached, either in those that
have so long believed, or the Indies and those Nations that were lately
converted: which was prophetically fore told many hundred years before by the
holy Prophets Isaias, Saphonias, Ezechiel, Isaias. c. 2.19.11.31. Sophon. c. 2.
Ezechiel c. 6. and 30.

Osee cap. 14. Zachar. c 13. Pallad. in hist. in Apollon. Eusebius. Demonst lib.
20. Athan. lib. incarn verb. Origin. hom. 3. etc.


Osee, Zacharias, and others, that in the time of the Messiah al such oracles
should have an end, Idolatry be taken away, and the name thereof forgotten as
we se it is, and presently upon the birth of Christ, began to take effect. For
as Palladius, Euagrius (which of them soever it was that wrote that History)
witnesses that according to the Prophecy of Isaias the Idolles of Egypt a
most Idolatrous Nation should then be overthrown, he himself had seen a
Temple by Hermopolis, in which when when Christ with his mother and Joseph in
his ^^ying thither in his Infancy, entered into the City, presentlye the
Ido^^^s f^ll down to the earth, which wo^^^ since has been broughts to
pass in the whole Ch^^sti^an world, some Oracles c^^sing with frien^e, and
s^ying nothing, others protesting they were comp^^^ed by Christ to depart,
others ^^k^^^ledging and confessinge him, and all one way or other affirming
and confirm^ng his Religion to be true, and their own Rites and Religion
wicked and Idolatrous, which in moral judgment is the greateste argument can
be given, for no Man a professed aduersarye to an other, (such as those Pagans
and their Oracles were to Christ, and his Religion, especially if the Quarrel
and Contention grow for honuor and worship, which all cover and desire* will
be commanded by his enemy to give place, except there be a power and
superiority in the commander to do it. And it i^ a constant Tradition that
Hieronne the Prophet prophesyed in Egypt, and foretold to their Kings that
their Idol should be overthrown when a virgin had a child, and from that
time the priests of Egypt in a secret place of their temple adored the Image of
a virgin with a child in her Arms. Sovo^. l^b. 6. (...)
And Sibilla Tiburtina showed to Augustus the Emperor a (...) before the time
of the ^^ti^ity of Christ, a most beautiful Virgin houlding a child i^ her
Arms, and said unto him, this Child is greater than thou art, worship him.
And in the time of his being an Infant an Egypt the very insensible things
acknowledged him. (...) part. 2. cap. 4. Cornel ^^ns^n concord, eua^g cap. 11.
At Hermopilis a city of Theha^ where was a tree called Persi^, whose fruit,
leaves, or bark healed all diseases, and being very great and high, so son
as Christ approached to the gate of the City, it bowed down to the ground
and adored him. Balsamum miraculouslie grew in the orcharde watered with the
well wherein his clothes were washede the stone whereon they were beaten and
dried was had in great reverence even of the Sar^cens and Mahumetans to this
time. The place of his habitatio^ always has a burning lamp by the
Mahumetanes order. Touching true Prophets that lived among them, what is more
ancient then the book of Job, Job. cap. 19.
living in the primative age of the world? and yet what more plain, then his
prophesies of Christ, uttered with such vehemensie and desire of eternal
continuance for all posterity, that he requested his words might be engraued
in the most hard and flinty stone, and the places engraued, to be filled with
plates of lead, that the letters and writing might be durable, and to be read
of all. And his words which he would have so surely registered, are these.
For I know that my Redeemer lives, and in the last day I shall rise again
with my skin, and in my flesh shall see God: whom I my self and in my
flesh shall see, and my eyes shall beehoulde. etc. in which words a whole
compendium and breuiate of Christian Religion is contained: First Christ lived
then, and so was God, and is called his Redeemer, and so the Mesias, that was
expected. He should see him when he was compassed with his skin, and with
his flesh, and his eyes should behold him, and he must be Man, and that in
the day of Judgment when he shall rise again, thereby acknowledging a
resurrection of the body, a final Judgment, and that Christ shall judge the
world. And in all his miseries he sustained, this was his hope as he
affirms. Of what authority the prophecy of the Sibilles were among them, is
it not unknown, as also how evidently they foretold the whole sum of the
mysteries of Christ, so particularly as if they had been present. As to cite
some of their words. Panta etc. Doing all things with his word, healing all
infirmities: Sibill. apud Lactant. firm. l. 4. instit cap. 16. et cap. 15.
the dead shall be raised, and the lame shall run apace, the deaf shall
hear, the blind shall see. Those which could not speak shall speak. With
five loaves and two fishes he shall feed five thousand men in the desert, and
taking up that which is left, shall fill twelve baskets, For the hope of many.
He shall command or bridle the winds, he shall go and tread upon the
rageing Sea, with his feet. He shall walk upon the waves. Resolve the
diseases of men, raise those that be dead to life, and drive griefs from
many, hither to be the words of Sibilla, their prophetess. And she
recountech so many miracles to be performed by christ that she her self did
affirm the Pagans with whom she lived, whose gods could not do miracles, and
show such effects, would mock her and say she were mad, her words are
these, Phisousi Sibillen menomemenin, they will call me a mad Prophetess, or
Sibill, and thaet I am a liar, but when al these things shall come to pass,
they shall remember me, and then no man will call me a liar any longer, but a
Prophetess of the great God. And foretells further, that at his coming the
law of Moses, Supr. cap. 17.
shall cease, in these words: When all these things shall be finished which
I have spoken of Him, then the Law shall be dissolved. Sibill. erithr. apud
Lactant. supr. l. 4. c. 6.
And Sibilla erithrea speaking of the same Jesus son of the virgin (as they
called him) how in his eternal generation he was begotten of the father, and
was true God: Says that he was given to all faithful people to be worshipped.
And an other Sibill has these words. Auton son ginosche Theon Theou ijon
ionta. Calcid. l. 2. in tim. Platon. Trismeg. lib. Logos telios. Lactant. supr.
etc. 7. and 13.
Know him to be thy God: which is the son of God. The same and like speeches
Lactantius cites out of Trismegistus or Hermes. from the Oracles of Apollo,
Esculapius and others. And touching the Passion of Christ, Sibilla utters
these words, he shall fall into the wicked hands of Infidels: and they shall
give blows unto God, with incestuous hands, and with unclean Mouth shall
spit venomous spittings. He shall give his innocent back to be beaten, and
taking blows, Lib. 4 supr. cap. 18.
shall hold his peace; for his meat they shall give him gall, and vinegar for
his thirst. And rebuking the land of Jury for such usage of their Messiah,
uses these speeches. For when thou foolish did not know thy god, dissembled
to mortal minds, thou did crown him with a crown of thorns, and mingledst
horrible gall. Cap. 19. supr.
And concerning the miracles at his Passion says that the veil of the Temple
shall be torn: and at middaie there shall be a wonderful nighty darkness
three hours together. And yet when these things were done, for all these
Celestial wonders, they would not know their wicked offense. He shall end
his death with a sleep of three days, and then arising from the dead shall
come to light, the first that shall show a beginning of resurrection to such as
be called. These be the very words of the Sibilles and prophets of the
Gentiles which prosecute the coming of Christ to judgment, the reward for the
good, punishment for the wicked, and other Mysteries of Christian Religion,
Apud Lact. lib. 7. divine. inst cap. 13.16.18.19 20.23.24. and l. opific. c.
22.23
as we believe, condemning all other worships to be false, and superstitious.
And least any man should imagine that these so manifest prophesies of Christ,
should be devised by any follower of his, after his coming, Erastothen. in
antiq. Annal. Cic li. de diu. Virgil. egl. 4. Suet. in Aug. Varr. lib. rer.
diu. ad Caesar. Crisip. l. divine. N^uius l. bell. punic. etc. Eurip. in prol.
lam. etc.
it is most manifest in the Pagan Authors themselves Erastothenes, Cicero,
Crisippus, Apollodorus, Neuius, Euripides, Heraclites, Virgill, Varro,
Suetonius, and almost all Historians of the Gentiles before Christ, that they
were both extant in the world, and famouslye known before, and most
reverently regarded and kept in their greatest places, even of the Cesars and
Emperors themselves; what was the reason that the Pagans did not understand
these things I have cited out of their own words. And such as those Sybilles
were, we cannot doubt to have been in other times and places among the
Gentiles to be witnesses of these things, as is manifest in their most
certain and undoubted prophesies, registered in irreprooueable Authors, found
and promulged in such sort as they cannot be denied. There was found in the
tomb of Plato that great Philosopher a plate or gold upon his breast, with
these words engraued. Comment. in Boet. de discipl. schol. Philip. Berg. Chron.
fol. 64
Credo in Christum nasciturum ex Virgin: passurum pro humano genere: and
tertia die resurrecturum. I believe in Christ which shall be borne of a Virgin;
shall suffer for mankind; Eusebius. in hist. Bergom. sup. in Chro^. Ang lib. 10.
ciuit. cap. 2.
and rise again the third day. Yet Plato was dead and buried 370. years
before the Incarnation of Christ. And in his works were contained these
evangelical words that follow. In the beginning was the word, and the word
was with God, and God was the word. This was in the beginning with God. All
things were made by him: and without him was made nothing. That which was made
in him, was life, and the life was the light of men: and the light shines in
darkness. Which word for word, is the beginning of the Gospel by S. John.
D. Tho. 3. part. sum. theol Berg. Cro^.
And in the time of Constantine and Hyrene there was found in the city of
Constantinople, where many Jews inhabited, an ancient tomb, and upon the
body of him that was buried therein, a plate of gold, wherein these words,
written before the coming of christ were engraued: Christus nascetur ex Virgin
Maria, and ego credo in eum, O soliterum me videbis, sub Constantino and
Hyrene. Christ shall be borne of a Virgin called Mary, and I believe in him. O
Sun thou shall see me again under Constantine and Hyrene, which was above
780. years after Christ. And in the year 1230. a natural borne Jew, Regist.
tolet. Chron. hisp. Gran. lib. de Symbol.
and professed enemy of Christian Religion, at Toletum, diging in the ground,
found a stone, wherein there was a book for time and continuance difficult to
be read, in which, among other things, these words were written. In tertio
mundo filius Deinasce^^ ex virgin Maria, and pro salute hominum p^tietur. In
the third age of the world the Son of God shall be borne of a Virgin,
named Mary, and shall suffer for the salvation of men: And moreover that the
book should be found in that very time when it was, in the days of
Feranda the Virgin of Castyll. The times, places, the finders, proposers, and
all other circumstances of which prophesies, were such, that no man can deny
them to be the effects of a true prophetical spirit. And so I might recount
of others. Whereby it is manifest, that even in the greatest swaye of the
Pagans Idolatry, there vvanted not true believers in Christ, and such as gave
testimony to his coming.

Concerning Mahumetanes, The testimony of Mahumet, his Alcaron, and
Mahumetanes. Alcoran. azoar. 67. azoar. 10. azoar. 11.12. azoar. 1.5. etc.
we have heard before, how their prophet and proposer of their law Mahumet (as
they esteem him) in his Alcaron has avouched the same, that Christ was the
Messiah and Prophet which in the law was promised to the world, borne of the
virgin Mary, she still remaining a Virgin, that he was the greatest Prophet
that ever was, or shall be, greater then Mahumet himself, the word of GOD,
Spirit of GOD, taught true Religion, Azoar. 67. azoar. 19. azoar. 12.
came to supply the defectes of the law of Moses, and the Gospel was the
perfection thereof, and perfect doctrine, Christ's miracles were true, and
given unto him for confirming his doctrine, and enforce all Jews which will
prosesse the Religion of Mahumet, Theuet l. 6. c. 5 Alcor. azoar. 2. azoar. 20.
first to acknowledge and proteste in express words, that Jesus was the
Messiah of the world, they affirm he was the word, wisdom, Spirit, and
understanding of God, a Prince to the Jews, and head of all men. Theuet.
Cosmog. l. 8, c, 2.
Whosoever among them blaspheameth either Christ or his Mother, besides a
great forfeiture of money is beaten with threescore blows, with a clubbe.
Mahumet further affirms, that the Religion of Jews and Mahumet shall utterly
perish, Alcoran etc. Bellon. lib. 3. cap. 3. cap. 7. Cusan lib. 1. cribrat.
Alcoran. c. 2. l. 2. c. 14,

Alcor azoar. 31. azoar. 5.


and only the Religion of Christ persevere to the end. The keepers thereof shall
be saved. Christ is exalted above all creatures in heaven, and shall come to
destroy Antechrist, and restore generally true Religion, and in the day of
Judgment be pronouncer of the sentence and doom of God. That his Mother was
the holiest of all women, most puer, that she was one of the miracles of the
world, saluted and certified of the conception and birth of Christ by the
Angel Gabriell, that emonge all the children of Adam, only Christ and She
were undefiled, She never committed any sin, that She was a virgin not
only before and at the time of the Nativity of Christ, Azoar. 76. Azoar. 2.9.
l. gener. Mah. p. 202.
but ever after, that She brought sorth Christ without any pain or grief:
Saint John Baptist was a most virtuous man, Saint John the Evangelist the
holiest that was, that he revived the dead, and did other miracles, was
assumpted alive to heaven, Azoar. 39.
that his Gospel is full of perfect doctrine, which they reverence, Azoar.
1.2.3.9.20.21.13.17.29.31.34.
as also that part of the Gospel of Saint Luke about the Angels salutation
with often kisses, and much devotion, and Reverence all the Evangelists, they
honor and pray to S. George and other christian Saints, reverence their
Relickes, and with especial duty the Sepulcher and other monuments of
Christ. Which is as great a Record as can be given, and such as
demonstratiuelie proves against them the Religion of Christians to be true,
and Mahumet a Seducer. For how can that Religion be imperfect which performs
all things belonging to Religion, brings me^ to heaven, and their happy
end? How can that which only remains be insufficient? When Iudaisme and
Mahumetisme and al others cease, will God be without honor? shall the world
give him no worship? or if he be the word of god, and wise dome of god, as
Mahumet confesses, then he must needs be God, which is all he denies unto
him, for that which is either the word, wisdom, or any other atribute or
property of god, must needs be god, for in him that is one incompounded
substance, no created word, wisdom, or accidental thing can be Imagined.
Neither could a true Prophet such as he confesses Jesus, be esteemed so, if
he had not been the Son of GOD, and perfect God, as he taught himself
to be.

Testimony of the Jews, and the grounds of their Religion.
Lastly to come to the Jews of these times, since Christ: I have showed before
that the chief and principal firmament and foundation of their Religion, when
they were the people of GOD, was builded upon the Revelations of such
mysteries, as were delivered from god to Moises, their high priests, and
prophets, neither ever had they title to true Religion, or any promise or
expectation of a Messiah and Redeemer either come already, or to be hoped
hereafter, but by that means, and by that they pretend their right to this
day. So that whatsoever was foretold in those holy Prophets, concerning the
Messiah, and approving Jesus Christ to be him, and christian belief to be
true, cannot be denied of any of the Ieweishe profession if he will remain a
Jew; for so he should deny himself to have any Religion at all. And yet
those holy Prophets so playnelie, particulerlye, and perfectly descrybe JESUS
to have been the same, that it is impossible their description and prophessyes
should be applied to any other. So that as if aanye Paynter should draw an
Image with an upright Body, an Head round, with Face, Nose, twoe Eyes, twoe
Ears, Arms with Fingers, tvvoe Legs, and feet with toes, and all other
members, lineaments, and proportions of a man, who except unreasonable or mad
could or would afirme it to be the similitude and representatiou of a beast,
a bird, or any other creature: even so the properties and qualities whereby
those holy prophets most cunning painters of supernatural things describe and
purtrature forth the Messiah, be so proper only to Jesus Christ, that without
obstynate madness they cannot be challenged for any others. We have heard of
his picture drawn by Job already, Job. cap. 19. Psalm. 2. Is. 9. Is. cap. 25.
that he is our God, Redeemer, and shall be our Judge. And to be brief in so
plain a matter, the rest of of the Prophets speaking of the Messiah, express
him by the tetragrammaton name of GOD, H. V. H. I.
which is never given in holy Scriptures, as the Jews acknowledge, but to the
true and eternal God, they term him by all titles beloning unto GOD. Pasm.
2. Psalm. 109. Is. 53. Psalm. 44. Is. cap. 9. Bar. cap. 3. Is. cap. 12. and cap.
25.

Ierem. cap 23. et 33.

Mich. cap. 5. Zachar. c. 2.


Calling him the son of God, begotten in eternity before the world was made.
The Lord of David. That his generation is unspeakable; that he is God, and his
throne eternal; A Councellor. Good. Strong. Father of the future world. Prince
of peace. God with us. God seen in earth. God conuersing with men. Iah. God
himself that shall come and save us. The name which they shall call him is
God, our just. A Captain whose going forth is from the days of eternity.
Psalm. 2. Is c 9.53.2.19 Mala^h. c. 1. Ezech. c. 20. Ierem. c. 3.
God that shall dwell in the midst of us. God to whom many nations shall be
converted. To whom the nations and Gentiles shall be given for his
inheritance. That shall open the eyes of the blind. The ears of the deaf, and
raise the dead. That all Angels and Nations must adore him. God altering the
law of Moses, and his sacrifices, and instituting an other Altar, and
honored with other sacrifices and oblations. That he is God, Lord of Hosts,
and the like. Whereby he is described and lineamented out by all prerogatives
and attributes proper to God, and incommunicable to any creature, as is most
evident in this description. And touching his humanity nothing of momente
ommitted that passed in the life of Christ Jesus in earth. Job. cap. 19. Bar.
cap. 3.
That though he be God yet shall be seen among us. Converse among us, in the
midst of us. Is. cap. 7. Mich. cap. 5. Ierem. cap. 31
Scene which our eyes. That he shall be conceived after a divine manner, borne
of a virgin, in Bethlehem, and city of King David. Is. cap. 1.
The Singing of the Angels. The coming of the Shepards. the Stall of the Ox
and Ass, where he was borne. Numer. c. 20.
The star that appeared. Psalm. 71.
The Iourny and worship of the Magutheir Oblations of gold frankensence and
mirh. The consultation of Herod with the Priests, where he should be borne.
The seeking of his death. Ierem 31. Malach. 3. Is. c. 21.31.45.
The murdering of so many thousand Infants. His presentation in the Temple,
flying into Egypt, going into Gallilie, dwelling in Nazareth, Zachar. c. 1. Is.
42.40.
the preaching and austere conversation and life of his precurssor S. John
Baptist, and his testimony of Christ. The beginning of Christ's preaching and
doctrine. Malach. 3. Zachar. 9.
his wonderful works, and operations, given by the Prophets for a distinctiue
sign of the Messiah, Is. 50.
to be discerned by. His disputing with the Jews. Dan cap. 10. Is cap. 1.
Psalm. 80. Osee 2.3. Is. cap. 9. Mich. cap. 2. Zachar 8. Psalm. 2. Gen cap. 48.
Psalm. 40.50.108. Is. 53.
His strange and triumphant riding upon an Ass into Jerusalem, and
circumstances thereof. His teaching in the Temple, innocence of life and
behavior. The particular injuries he sustained of the Jewish Nation, their
ingratitude, incredulity, and reprobation for not receiving him; the errors
they are since justly fallen into, their afflictions, and calamities for that
offense sustained to this day, their captivity, bondage, dispersion, want of
sacrifice, priesthood, temple, rytes, and ceremonies of Religion. The election
and calling of the Gentiles. Dan. cap. 9.
The general overthrow of Idolatry. Psalm. 21.68.
His selling and betraying by his own Disciple. The very price for which he
was fold, how it was bestowed. Zachar. 9.
The desperation of Judas the traitor, Psalm 106.15. Osee 6. Psalm. 67.
and miserable end. The death of Christ, and manner thereof, among thieves, and
malefactors, the end to redeem the world. His voluntary oblation and dying,
the giving of him gall, and vinegre to drink, dividing of his aparell, casting
lots for his Coat, his nakedness upon the Cross, the piercing of his side, the
nayling of his hands and feet. Psalm. 119. Genesis cap. 49.
His descending as a Conqueror into hell, his victorius rising from death,
tryumphant ascending to heaven, and the very time and place by marks
infallible, and other matters that passed, Dan. cap. 2. Psalm 68. and 108.
either about his nativity, life, death, or after: as the choosing of Matthias
to supply the place of Judas, Joel. c. 2.
the miraculous coming of the holy Ghost in the feast of Pentecoste, and the
rest. How all these and many others foretold by the Hebrewe Prophets so long
before of their Messiah, were verified and fulfilled in Jesus the Son of the
blessed virgne Mary, Calcic. lib. 2. in tim. plat. Joseph lib. 14. antiq. cap.
4. and l. 18. c. 6.7. Mah. in Alcor. c. 12.11.5.67. Pilat. epist. ad Tyber.
imper. apud Eus. lib. 2 histor, Plin. 2 ep. ad Traian. Imper. Adrian. Imper in
ep. Anton. Imper. ep. etc. Alco. ca. 1.4.13 Thalm. tract. anod.

Zara misdr. Coh. etc.


I need not to set down, the new Testament where they are recorded by the
Evangelists and Apostles, being in the hands of every English Reader in his
own language; and not only written by Christians, but remembered by Gentiles
in their wrightinges, recorded in Libraries, and Monumentes of Pagan Princes,
and Emperors. Confirmed by the very testymonie of Pylate himself that put
him to death. Witnessed of our greatest enemies Mahumet in his Alcaron, the
Jews in their Thalmud, and by so many Historians, both of Jews, Pagans, and
Christians, and could not possible either be devised of our friends, or
denied of our enemies, chauncing for the most part before thousands of
witnesses, in or about Jerusalem, a place so famous, where the President was
resident, and whether resorted Proselytes, and others of all known Nations in
the world. Therefore we conclude against the Jews by their own Prophets, and
foundation of their Religion, against Pagans by their Prophets, and Oracles,
and against Mahumetanes by their Mahument, and Alcaron, and all Infidelles by
the chief Rules and Proposers of their Religion, that Jesus Christ is the true
mesias and Redeemer of the world, that only the Religion of Christians is true,
haueing such a Peacemaker and Mediator between God and us, as was able to make
the atonemente beeinge both God and Man, as a Redeemer must needs be, and such
as both his own works and operations, and the predictions of those holy
Prophets foretold, and described by the attributes and properties of both
natures divine and humane. His divine nature by his Eternity, Omnipotency,
Impossibillity, Infinitnes, Power over all creatures, and to produce all
supernatural effects, to alter and establish religion, to save, to condemn,
to be honored with divine adoration, and al names and titles due and belonging
to God, as appears in their description I have recited, confirmed and be
expounded generally by the ancient Rabines before Christ. Rabb. Ionath. l.
collect. misd. tehel. in Psalm. 2. v. 7. and Ps. 20 Rabb. Abb. in thren.

Rab. mos. had. in c. 41. Genesis


As likewise his humane nature is decyphered by the same prophets by all
properties and qualities of man (sin excepted.) Therefore seeing by no
possibility the wisdom of god can be deceived, or his bonity and goodness
lead others into error, and infidelltie, and he had appointed those properties
to be the notes, signs, and tokens to know the Mesias by, and they were
performed only in Jesus our Savior, and no other, he must needs be the
Redeemer of the world, only christian Religion true, and all other Infidelles,
Jews, Pagans, and Mahumetanes seduced and deceived. For that which is only
proper to one. cannot belong unto more, for so it should not be a proper and
private but a common and vulgar thing.

THE 2. ARGVM. How all external and most notorious Notes and Signs given by
God, to know the Messiah by, were only verefied of Jesus Christ, and cannot
possibly be performed in any other.
BUT besides these personal and internal privileges and distinctions of the
Messiah; because the redemption of mankind to be effected by him concerned all
people, and nations, in that all had offended; so the infinite mercy and
goodness of God, that no man should be ignorant of that which concerned him so
much, as the receiving of the Redeemer, and working his own salvation does:
had appointed many other most known and famous extrinsecal things to be the
signs and tokens of his coming, whereof many were notorious in all the world,
and the rest at the least renowned to that nation of the Jews, (from whom he
was to descend) and other neighboring countries to the Israelites; all which
were evidently verified in Christ Jesus, and cannot be effected in any other.
For breuity I will exemplify but in few particulers, the matter being
manifest before.

First, The first external token of the Mesias, that he should come before it
was destroyed etc.
the Temple in Jerusalem was not only the most renowned thing in Jury, but
famous in all the world, by report of Proselites, and such as resorted
thither, especially when Jury was ruled by the Romans, as it was at the
coming of Christ: Therefore when God gave for a distinctiue sign to know the
Messiah by, as not only the ancient Jews and Rabbines, Agg. 2. Malach. 3.
Rab. Ios. ben. leui in Thal. tract sanh. c. helec.
but the Thalmudists themselves acknowledge, that both in the time of his life
he should to that Temple ( then shall come the desired of all nations: and I
will fill this house (or Temple) with glory says the Lord of hosts. And
straight after, shall come to his temple, the Lord or Ruler whom you seek, and
the messenger of the testament, whom you desire) as the Prophets expreslie
foretold, as Jesus often did, as the Jews and al Infidels acknowledge: And
further, that soon after his death, that Temple should be destroyed and left
desolate, never to be builded again as Daniell witnessed in these words (
Christ shall be slain, Dan. cap. 9.
and a people with their Captain to come shall destroy the City and the
Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be vastity. And after the war ended
there shall ensue the appointed Desolation.) And further express the very
time when this should be, just agreeing with the death of Christ. And it is
manifest that no other in those days and with those circumstances is honored
for the MESSIAH, either of Christyans, Jews, Joseph. bell. iud. lib. 6. Eusebius.
hist. Joseph bell. l. 7. cap. 30.
Pagans, or Mahumetans, but only Jesus Christ, and that the Temple was then
destroyed as is most euydent, and not only the temple in Jerusalem, but that
in Egypt called Onion, as Josephus records, it was he that was to be
distinguished by this sign. For no power of God can cause that any pretended
Messiah to be hereafter was he, that came to that Temple before it was
destroyed, or that the destruction of that Temple completed above 1500. years
ago, should be done after the death of him, that is not yet borne. For things
to be and not to be are impossible to be true. Therefore against all Jews and
Infidelles, only Jesus Christ was, and no other can be the Messiah by that
siigne.

Secondly (as the Jews themselves agree) the holy Prophets give for a like
distructiue sign, 2.External Note, of the Messiah that he was to discende of
the house of David, and be borne in his city of Bethelem.

Ierem. 23.30. Ezech 34. Osee 3. 3. Reg. 7. Thalm. tract. Sarch. c. mig. mar.
had.


that he was to descend of the line of Judah and king David, and to be born in
Bethlem his City. This family was the lineage of the kings, and most honorable
in Israel. And had endured in honor and government above 1000. years without
interuption: And the town of Bethlem was notable in all Jury, being the chief
city of the Tribe of Judah; but the Jews themselves confess in their Thalmud
it self, and all the world can tell, not only that christ Jesus descended of
king David's parentage, and was borne in the same city of Bethlem, Eusebius.
histor. l. 3. cap. 11.
but that above 1500. years ago, the family of king David by express command
of Vespasian, (that not one should be left alive that descended of that line)
was destroyed, because he knew the Messiah was of that lineage; and soon after
the city of Bethlem was quite desolate and ouerthrown, Oros l. 7. c. 13
Eusebius. lib. 4. histor. cap. 5. Dion. Cass. in Adrian.
in the time of Adria^ the Emperor. Therefore (as in the former reason) this
sign cannot be applied to any false or forged Messiah to come: for neither the
town unknown, nether the family either wholly rooted out, or most vncertainlie
cofounded with the rest, can be a certain sign of so sure notice, as the
Messiah was to be discerned by.

3. External sign, the ceasing of Jews Sacrifice, and law etc. Leuit. Deuteronomy.
1. Reg. 2. Reg. 3. Reg. etc.
Thirdly, the Sacrifices of the Jews offered in Jerusalem, their priesthood,
sacraments, and ceremonies of their religion there practiced, were most
honorable in that people, and not unknown to the greatest kingdoms of the
earth, and as they had been kept and celebrated there, with so great applause
and co^corse of so many nations, 1400. years together, so they could not cease
and be taken away, but with the knowledge and wonder of many peoples. The cease
of these things was a sign of the coming of the Mesias, as the prophets,
Daniel, Dan. 9. Hier. 41. Malach. 1. Osee 2.3.9. Sybill. apud Lactant. lib. 4.
diu. inst. c. 17. Is. 1.2.3.5.6.24.28.25.29.32.48.
Jeremy Malachi, Osee, Esaias and others, and the Sibils themselves among the
gentiles had most playnelie described. But soon after the coming of Christ
all these did cease, Jerusalem their city where these Sacrifices were used, the
Temple and Altar where they were offered, the Pryests which practiced these
rites and ceremonies were destroyed, banished and exiled that nation, as I have
showed before, and the whole world can witness. Therefore seeing neither Jew
Gentile nor Mahumetan worship any of that time for the Messiah, and those
signs cannot possibly be verified in any since, or to come, Mahument. in Alcor.
only Jesus christ in whom they were completed, must needs be the Messiah, as
not only christians but Mahumet and Mahumetans acknowledge. 4. External.
sign, the idolatry of the Ge^tyles then to cease, and they should be converted
to the Messiah. Lactant. lib. 1. diu. instit. Osee 1.2. Agg. 2. Zachar. 2.9.
Psalm. 66. Hier. 31. Malach. 1. Psalm. 2.8.18. Eusebius. them. l. 6. cap. 20. Athan.
l. incar. Orig hom. 3. Pallad. histor. Mahum. Alc. supr.


Fourthly, the Idolatries and Superstions of the gentiles which (only Jury
excepted) possessed the whole habitable and known world, and had practiced
those things almost three thousand years without desolation, maintained and
advanced by so many Kings and Emperors, were so familiar and experyenced to
all nations, that they could not cease without a wonderful and strange
alteration, there fore God had also assigned this for a distinctiue Badge to
begin at the time of the Messiah, and to be effected by his Religion, and
that those Gentiles and Idolaters should be converted unto Christ. There is no
other which can pretend to have been cause of these changes, Mahumet does not
challendge it, but yields it to Christ, Orig. hom. 3. Pallad histor. Mahum.
Alcor. sup.
the Jews have not done it, and yet deny Mahumet, and there be no known
professors of religion at this day, but Jews, Mahumetanes, Pagans, and
Christians, and among all these, only the remnant of Pagans be Idolaters,
the Jews deny the Messiah to be come, the Pagans never expected any: the rest
Christians and Mahumetanes allow Christ Jesus only to be the Messiah,
therefore he is to be received, and only his Religion.

5. External sign, the desolution of the lewish Nation.

Genesis Exodus etc Joseph l. antiq.


Fistly, from the time of Abraham, in whose days God took so particular care
of his posterity, the Jewish Nation until their utter destruction, in the time
of Titus and Vespatian, had passed above two thousand years; by which space,
that Nation was called the peculiar people of God, and in respect of the
privileges grannted unto them, the whole world was not to be compared; Genesis
Exodus 1.2.3.20. etc. Deuteronomy. etc. Joseph. l. antiq. Phil. Mahum. A^c. etc.

Orph. Car.


so many miraculous and unwonted favors showed unto them above all others,
recorded not only in the sacred Scriptures, and the Jewish historians, but
Pagan and Mahumetane writers are witness. Therefore that the immutable
goodness of God should so long time and extraordinarily persecute and
punnishe that people, which he had so honored before, was not only an
argument of some grievous sin in that generation, (of which I will speak
hereafter) but it would seem a most strange and wonderful thing to all
persons. Therefore this was given for a sign of the coming of the Messiah as
the Prophets, Osee, Daniell, Hieremy, Malachy, and others express in most
plain sentences, Osee 9.3. Hier. 31. Dan. 9. Mal. etc.
that they should be Vagi in nationibus, Vagabondes in all nations, Sine Rege,
sine Lege, sine Principe, sine Sacrificio: etc. Without King, without Law,
without Prince, without Sacrifice, and without Altar. etc. Which the whole
world knows, and the Jews prove by bitter experience to be effected in
them, since the time of Christ, and from the last captivity of Jerusalem now
above 1500 years, without al hope of receiving into favor with God, and to
be restored to their former favors: therefore Jesus is the Messiah.

Sixthly, 6. External sign, the translation of the Scepter and Regiment from
the house of Judah.
(because I have made mention of the Kings and Princes of Jury) as the Scepter
and kingely Regiment of the trybe of Judah was the most renowned temporal
dignity in that Nation, and had continued from king David the first king of
that tribe, until Herod the Ascolanite above a thousand years, so it was
renouned in most countries of the world (seldom any one family enjoying
princely Regiment so long) and could not be taken away without a common wonder
and note of people, 1. Reg. 2. Reg. etc. Iosep. l. antiq. Geneb. Cron. etc.
and therefore was propheticallye given by Jacob for a sign of the coming of
the Messiah above 700. years before any this tribe enjoyed the Scepter, and
above 1700. years before it was taken from it: the words of Jacob are these.
The Scepter shall not be taken from Judah, Genesis cap. 49. Tharg. 49. Genesis
and a Captain from his line, until he comes which is to be sent. and he
shall be the Expectation of the Gentyles (or Nations.) The hebrew Text reads
this. The Scepter shall not go from Judah, and a Scrybe or Lawe-maker from the
midst of his seete, until Silo or the MESSIAH comes. And he shall be the
gathering together of Peoples. And in the Thargum the Caldey reading so
honored among the Jews only the Messiah is named in that prophecy; and the
ancient Rabbines ever understood that place of the Messiah; the Jews
themselves cannot deny it. But this prophetical sign, cannot possibly be
expounded of any other then CHRIST JESUS, in whose time only, and never
before, the Scepter and Regiment (as all Historians witness) was taken from
the house of Judah. For although the Jewish nation was often persecuted, Cyril.
lib. 8. cont. Julian. Hieron. in Soph. cap. 1. and in Ezech. cap. 21. 1. Paral.
3. 3. Esdr. 5. Math. 1. Rabbin. etc. Caes. Baron. to. 1. an.
and made captive by the infidel bordering Kings, yet until then, the
government was never quite taken from the house Judah. And never any stranger
chosen King in Israel, but all that ruled even after the captivity were of the
house of Judah, until Herod the Ascolanite in the time of Jesus entered. The
Scriptures be witness hereof unto Zorababell and many his successors. After
them also without interruption, the Scepter remained in the same Tribe, by the
mothers line, by which the Assamone that governed until Herod, were descended
of the house of Judah, as the ancient Rabbines are witness, otherwise by no other
title without spot of tira^nie and usurpation they could have chalendged the
kingdom (Although as some suppose these also were by the fathers side of the
line of Judah and of Leuy by the mother, Geneb. Chro^ in Machab.
Phil. lib. de Monarch. Joseph.
) for as Philo wrighteth, entermarriage between the kingly and priestly tribes
was lawful in that people, and Herod himself claymed first the kingdom by
the title of Mariamne his wife of that lineage; and yet besides this highest
princely succession these continued in the line of Judah, the Zanedrin or Senate
of the 72. which ruled by the laws of that people were of the tribe of Judah,
Match. 2.
and as the books of the Machabees themselves ( The people that is at
Jerusalem and the Senate and Judas. etc.) had great Regiment in that Nation
in those days, and were never extincte until the time of Herod the
stranger, which both by Farher and Mother, was an Alien, and neither of the
house of Judah or any other Tribe of Israel. But at the coming of Christ,
both the King lie Scepter was quite translated, both from Judah, and all other
tribes of that people and the Zanedrin it self destroyed, Joseph. lib. 15.
antiq. c. 1.
and no Ruler left of that Nation. Dio. hist. Ro^. lib. 49. Joseph. lib. 17
antiq. cap 1. and bell l. 1. c. 18. Phil. lib. 2. de tempor. Joseph. lib. 17.
antiq. c. 3.

Eus. in Chron


For Antigonus the Jew and King of that Nation being crucified by Antonius, and
Hircanus craftily slain by King Herod, not only this Herod the King was a
Gentile and stranger, and left the kingdom to Archilaus and after to Herodes
Antipas borne of Maltha also a stranger, as Josephus witnesses, but in the
thirtith year of his reign utterly destroyed the Zanedrin of the house of
Judah, and constituted a whole Zanedrin of Proselite strangers. And not only
the temporal Regiment thus destroyed out of the line of Judah, but the most
honorable function and calling of the high Priest it self was abused, and
most profanely translated and merketed up and down by Herod for it was
utterly taken away from the Assemoneys the right Tytlers unto it, and given to
others. Joseph. lib. 15. antiq. cap. 9. and cap. 3.
And Hircanus the high Priest being killed of the same Herod, Aristobulus
without all equity and title was placed in that dignity, but he being
presently slain, Anelus a base companyon fetched from Babylon was substituted
in his room, which was appointed even in the life of Hircanus the lawful
highpriest, after deposed and yet afer chosen again. And after him others
without any respect of the law of God, he only regarding those that were most
potent in bribes, or gracious with him in favor, Joseph. li. 20. antiq. ca. 8.
Eusebius. histo. li. 1. ca. 6. Heron. inca. 9. Dan. Iosephi. li. 18. antiq. c. 6
as Josephus S. Hierome Eusebius and others ar most authentical witnesses. And
and not content with this, (that he might take al honor and dignity from all the Tribes of Israel) commanded that the Priestly Stole the most honorable
ensign of the high Priestly dignity should be kept in a most secret and a
defended place. Therefore only Jesus christ, in whose time these signs were thus
effected, is to be conceived for the Mesias. Thus I might exemplify in the
general peace under Augustus the emperor, Isi. 32. psalm. 71. Dan, 2. ctc.
and the roman Empire then begu^ given for tokens of the coming of the
Mesias, and of other most famous external notes which for brevity I pass over.

THE 3. ARGVM. That the time wherein Jesus Christ was borne, by all accounts
and reasons, was the time of the coming of the Messiah: when the law of the
Jews was to cease, and the idolatrye of the Gentiles, to be overthrown.
AND if there were no other reason then this, that the high priesthood,
Sacrifice, and Religion of the Jews was thus left desolate, and their last
King Atigonus crucified, it was time that a new Priesthood should be erected,
and that Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews should be crucified for the
Redemption of mankind, and institute an other law and sacrifice when the other
was thus defective; which will be more reasonable to grant, if with all
histories we conceive the miserable and notorious irreligious errors and abuses
the gentiles were drowned in at that time: no state, cuntry, or conditiio^ of
people, living in dutiful religion and obedience to God, but growing under so
great burdens of Iniquities, only to be taken away by the coming of the
Messiah. Secondly not only all internal and parsonall signs of the true
Redeemer, the twoe natures of God, and man, united together, his myraculous and
wonderful operations, and the whole process of his nativity, life, Arg. 1.
supr.
death, resurrection, ascension, and the rest assigned for his distinction and
foretold both by the Prophets of the Jews and Gentiles, as I have cited before
were now completed and ended, but all memorable external notes to decipher
him from others, proposed in some part in the last argument were effected, and
as they were impossible not to have been, so they could never after be used
for any other to come. But for any such no note, sign, Argument or
distinction can be devised, Argum. 1.
all beeinge already performed. Thirdly all enemies of Christian Religion not
only (as before) have in their highest Authorities confessed Christ to be the
MESSIAH, but plainly acknowledged that the time of his commin^^ (...)* in the
days of Jesus. For the Gen^^^es, the Sibilles set down the time, and one of
them showed in a vision to Augustus then Emperor, both the time and manner of
his coming to be effected under his regiment. Lactant. li. 2.3. etc. di. Inst.
The Oracles and Gods of the Gentiles agreed in the same point, as I have
described. Their Philosophers did wright of the miraculous star, the ceasing
of the Oracles, the murdering of the Infantes by Herod, Argu. 1. Sup. Calcid
in tim Plat. Plutar. li. de Orac. Porphyr. li. Oracul.
because the Messiah was borne, and other wonders chancing at the coming of
Christ. Herod the Ascalonite a King of their lynage knew and acknowledged
that the Messiah was come, when to murder him he killed so many Infantes,
destroyed the Zanedrin of the house of Judah, so used their high Priesthood,
Eusebius. chron. Joseph. li. 17. antiq. cap. 3. Euse. hist. li. 3. cap. 11.
killed his own wise and son by her, of the line of David, and his sister
Salome her husband of the same lineage. And their Emperor Vespatio^ hearing that
the Messiah of the line of King David was borne, caused all of that lynage
which he could find to be put to death. And it was the constant and common
op^^^on of the Pagans at that time, that the great Messiah was come. Oro. li.
7. c. 22.
And Augustus Caesar the Emperor the very day when Christ was borne, commanded
that no man should call him Lord, having perhaps instinct that the great Lord
was borne.

Concerning the Jews, the ancient Rabbines before christ were of that mind
that the Messiah was to come at that time, when Christ Jesus was borne, and
plainly affirm upon those prophetical words of Esaias, Is. 9. Thalm. in lib.
Sabbath and tract. Sanch. Is. cap. 7. Geneb. Chro. lib. 1.

Bened. perer. in Dan. lib. 11 q. 5.

Thalm. tract. Sanh. c. helec.


a little one is borne to us, that six hundred years after, the Messiah
should come, which being accounted, agrees with the calculation of
Christians, and falls out in the days of Christ. For Esaias lived in the time
of King Achaz about the 3440. year of the world, and Christ by common
supputatio^ was borne the year 4022. so the most part of his life agrees with
that calculatio^: And as the Thalmud it self does witness, it was an ancient
tradition among the Hebrews, that the Mesias should be borne about the fourth
thousand year of the world, which concordeth with the same account. The Jews
that lived in the time of Christ, were of the same opinion, and so informed
both Herod their stranger King, Ioh. cap. 1.
and Vespatian the Emperor, and themselves would have received S. John Baptist
the precursor of Christ, for their Messiah, had he not refused it. And it was
so famous among this people that the time of the Messiah was come, that many
false deceauers took that title upon them, and deceived many, as Judas
Galileus, Judas Ezechias, Thendas, Atouges, and others, Joseph lib. 17. c. 8.
l. 18. c. 1.2. l. 20. c; 5.6. Thalm. thact. Sanh. c. hell. Rabb. ben. maim. in
sent.
in so much that as the Thalmud confesses the Rabbines themselves 30. years
together received Baronosba^ for the Messiah, and so continued, until they
perceived he could not deliver the^ from the Romans, and so put him to death
whersore Herod inte^ding to make a claim for himself, caused his petidegree
to be forged from the ancient Kings of Judah, as Josephus witnesses, Joseph lib
14. antiq cap. 2 Matthew. c. 22. Mar. 3.12. Thalm. tract. Auodaraza. Rabb. Moys.
ben. Maim. ep ad iud. Afric.
and caled himself the Mesias Whereupon those which flateted him in these
follies are called Herodia^s in the Eua^gelists. What the consciences of the
later and present Jews esteem of this matter may be gathered of that I have
spoken of the Thalmundists opinion herein, and in that work they further
acknowledge, that it seemed to the^ in those days that diverse hundred years
had passed since by the scriptures the Messiah should apeare. And Rabbi Moises
son of Maimon, who^ the Jews hold in exceeding great reverence, caling him the
D. of Justice, which lived about the year of Christ, 1140. supposes that the
Messiah should have been borne above 1000. years before that time. Rab. Ios.
ben. leui in Thal. tract. Sanh. c. hell.
And Rabbi Iosue affirms, that the Messiah was to be borne, before the
destruction of the second Temple. So that by all computations of Christians,
Jews, Pagans, and Mahumetanes, the time of the coming of the Messiah was when
Christ Jesus was borne, and now being past 1600. years, cannot possibly be
verified of any other. Therefore he and his Religion are only to be received.
Which also the Prophet Daniell had most exactlie by prophetical calculation
set down diverse hundreds of years before. Against whose sentence no
tergiuersation of any incredulous person can be made. The prophecy of Daniels
weeks must needs be fore told of Christ
First, the signs which the Angel gives to Daniell are most famous, the
edict of the Persian Emperor for the building of Jerusalem, and delivery of
the Israelites from captivity wherein they had lived 70. years, and the time of
building the city and the Jews return thither after so many years. Therefore
the notes are manifest, the Persian Emperor then being the greatest Monarch
of the world, and the building of that City destroyed, so notorious, the
words are as manifest, which be these, Dan. cap. 9.
Know and mark from the going forth of the word (or edict) that Jerusalem
shall be builded again unto Christ (or Messiah) the Captain there shall be
seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks: and the street and walls shall
be builded again in a little time. And after threescore and two weeks the
Messiah (or Christ) shall be slain, and it shall not be his people, that will
deny him. This prophecy all agree to be a prediction and token of the time of
coming of the Messiah and the words are manifest. Then thus I demonstrate
against Jews and all misbeleeuers, that it cannot be verified of any, but
Christ Jesus. First, the holy Scriptures make mention but of two kinds of
Hebdomades or weeks, First for a week of days or seven days, Leuit. cap.
23.
as the Greek word does signify as in the numbering of weeks from Easter to
Pentecost was appointed in the law. This kind of week cannot possibly be
understood of the Prophette, the whole sum of his Hebdomades or weeks by
that reckoning being ended in one year and half and one week of days, in
which time no man challenged to be the Messiah, and no man, Christian, Jew,
Pagan, or Mahumetane, receaueth any for the Messiah that came then, or diverse
hundred years after. Secondly in holy Scriptures an Hebdomade or week is
taken for a week of years, Leuit. cap. 25.
or seven years. So in Leuiticus the observation of the year of Iubily is
commanded and set down in these words. Thou shall number seaue^ Hebdomades, or
weeks of years, which make 49. years and the fifteth year imediatly
following, is appointed for the year of Iubily. Then of necessitye the prophesy
must be performed in this meaning, which is manifestly true in Jesus Christ.
For it is evident that Daniel was a captain in Babylon in the time of Ioakim,
and that the weeks of Daniell thus expounded do expire and end in Christ,
being the number of 483. years. And Daniell the Prophette himself to give a
plain distinction, Dan. cap 10. verse. 2.3.
that there were meant weeks of years, as I have expounded it, in the next
chapter immediately following, within two verses of the former prophesy, twice
together speaking of weeks in an other sense, calls them weeks of days.
Which had been superfluous, twyce to be added in one place, except he would
give us to understand, that in the former he meant extraordinarye weeks of
years. For otherwise this word (week) without any addition does usually
signify seven days, and no other time. 4 Esdr. 7.
And this is the exposition which is given in the fourth book of Esdras where
it is said, that the Messiah shall be revealed and borne after 400. years, to
which if we add 33. years of the life of Christ, and 50. years that Esdras
was after Daniell, Iosedh. li. 6. and 7. antique. Genebr. cron.
they make the same number of 483. years which being begun to be numbered from
the first edicte of building Jerusalem again (as the circumstances) best
agree which was in the first year of Cirus, when (as the 1. chap. of Esdras
does witness) he did not only publish an edict in writing, 1. Esdr. 1. ver. 2.3,
4. Genebr. Cron
but made proclamation through all his kingdoms, for building of Jerusalem, and
the temple thereof, without any difference at al they agree both with the birth
and death of Christ as I have accounted. And howsoever we reckon, and begin the
account from any of the edicts of Cirus or Darius to build Jerusalem, 1. Esdr.
1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.
either in the first year of Cirus when he first determined the Jews
reduction, 2. Esdr. 2.3.4.
or the second year of Darius when he confirmed the same and put it in
execution, or from the 20. year of Darius when he made a new edict in favor
of Nehemias, and sent him into Jury (al which are manifest in the books of
Esdras) they will end in the reign of Herod under whom Christ was borne, or
of Tiberius under whom he was put to death. And cannot possibly be expounded
of any other person, or by any other computation. For first if we should
imagine any other kind of Hebdomade or weke, the^ I have alleged, either of
weeks months, or otherwise, it both takes away al certainty from this holy
Prophesy, of the Messiah, which being set down in scripture, must by all rules
be expounded by such co^putatio^s, as we find in Scriptures, otherwise if any
man at pleasure might Imagine other strange accomptes, never hard of before, all
things would be uncertain And yet if we should allow that wanton liberty to any
brainsick man, this prophesye could never be applied or verified of any other
which will be evident if any idle person will frame to himself a weke of weks,
or a weke of months, which were twelve times sooner expired, and hundreds of
years before Christ was borne, Med. prol. de. side.
when none claimed to be the Messiah. Therefore where some Jews are so
rediculous to make conceits of years of decads, or centures of years, that is
every weke to consist of 70. wekes or 700. wekes, as some are not ashamed to
do, they make them selves a mockery to all the world. For first the Scripture
speaks of such weeks. Secondly it overthrows al certainty in this case of
so great importance. Thal. tract. Sanh. cap. hell
Thirdly it is one impossibility in their own religion, for in their Thalmud
which whosoever with them denies (as they say denies god him self) It is
recorded not only that the Messiah should rule 2000. years, but that the world
was only to continue for 6000. years, 2000. before the law of Moses, 2000.
under the same law, and 2000. after that under the Messiah. By which account,
not only Christ is the true Messiah, coming about that time, but these weeks
of the Jews by their decads and centures cannot be completed in thowsands of
years after (by their Thalmud) the world is ended, such be the fooleries of
this people. Therefore by all reckonings and accounts only Jesus christ is the
Messiah, and Redeemer of the world, and all other Religions false and
erroneous.

THE 4. ARGVM. How all particular articles of christian Catholic Religion,
for which Jews, Mahumetanes, and Pagans deny it, are demonstrated to be true
by their own grounds and professions.
BUT because no Infidel shall deny any one point of Catholic Religion, but
by their own grounds confess every article thereof to be most true and
holy. Therefore as I have proved before by the highest authority of their own
professions, that in general, Christian catholic religion is only true: so in
this present reason I will d^monstrat out of the chiefest grounds of those
misbeleeuers, al particular articles of Catholic Christianity, namely the
mystery of the B. Trinity, the incarnation and death of Christ the Messiah, for
the redemption of the world, the continual and daily sacrifice of the Mass,
Christ's real presence therein, transubstantiation and changing of the former
elements of bread and wine, into his most holy body and blood, and the rest,
for which these Infidelles deny our faith, and which many heretics in these
and more ancient times have disallowed. The sacred mysteries of the
incarnation and death of Jesus our Savior, his divine and humane nature, and
the distinction of persons in divinity are proved already by the true Prophets
of god, which the Jews receive, by the confession of the Sybils, so reuere^ced
of the Gentiles and (excepting the death of Christ, which Mahumet for honor
unto him denies) by the lawe-maker of the Mahumetanes, as is convinced in the
1. Argument, and therefore need less probation in this Chapter. But to make
evident to al people that these most sacred doctrines are not the only
collectio^s of Christians out of those undoubted and aproued scriptures in the
law of Moses, but the same exposition which the holy Rabbis that lived
before Christ and which the Jews receive with honor, and which the Sybils and
most ancient Philosophers among the Gentiles for many things approve, I will
only use their own words for witness in this cause.

The mystery of the holy Trinity proved by the rules of all Infidels.
And to begin with that most vnscrutable secret of the nature of God, and
trinity of persons in him which we defend against all those blasphemous
Infidelles, which with one consent in impiety, make him an imperfect, mutable,
changeable, corporeous, and defective thing to which no honor or Religion can
be belonging, it is manifest that the holy Prophets, Is. cap. 34.52.48.6. Hier.
23. Zachar. 2. Mich. 5. Baruch. 3. Psalm. 138.32. Deuteron. 6.
Isayas, Hieremias, Zacharias, Baruch, Micheas, David, and others, do assign
a distinction and trinity of persons, giving al attributes and properties
belonging unto God to every one, to be omnipote^t, God by essence infinite,
illimited, without beginning or end, cause of all things, equal one with an
o^^er, and the like, in which manner as Christian Catholics expound those
sacred writings and believe of that unspeakable mystery at this day. Rabb.
Ibb. in cap. 6.
So they were ever interpreted of the ancient and learned Rabbines before
Christ. Rabbi Ibba, Rabbi Abb, Deuteronomy. Rabb. Abb. in thren. Rabb. hacch. in cap. 9

Is. Paraph. col in 45 Is.

Thar. in Ps. 2 Rabb. Sim. in Zohar. Deuteronomy. 6.


Rabbi Haccadas, Rabbi Ionathas, Abinuziel, and others, which ever agreed with
our catholic doctrine. Rabbi Ibba (as Rabbi Simeon writes) upon these words
of Deuteronomy, God our Lord is one God, uses this speech. By the first word
God or his first tetragramaton name in this sentence (our Lord) is signified
God the son, that is fountain of all sciences, and by the second
tetragramaton name of God, is signified God the holy Ghost, proceeding of them
both, to all which there is added the word (one) to signify that these 3. are
indivisible. And Rabbi Simeon himself upon these words of Esaias, (holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of Sabbath) writes thus. Esaias by repeating three times holy,
does as much as if he had said, holy Father, holy Son, and holy Spirit,
which three holies do make but one only Lord of Sabbath. Thar. in Ps
The words Rabbi Abinuziell Author of the Caldey Paraphrase known in the world
before Christ, and highly honored among the Jews, upon this prophesy of David
in his second Psalm where God the Father speaks thus to Christ ( thou art my
Son, to day I have begotten thee) are these. These Etohim (the divine persons
expressed in the plural number) the Father and the son are three in one
third person the holy Ghost and these three are one, I say one substance, one
essence, and one God. And as the same Rabbine in that place is further
witness, when he was writing this sentence, a voice spoke unto him from
heaven, saying, Who is this that dares reveal my secrets to the Gentiles? to
which Rabbi Ionathas answered, O Lord, it is I which for the reverence and
glory of thy name have presumed to do it. Orig. Hilar.
For in all religions there were some things concealed for secrets, and
thereby called mysteries, of which the ancient Rabbines acknowledge this
mystery of mysteries to be chiefest, Petr. gallat. l. 2. arcan. Rab. Sim. etc.
and that it should be plainly revealed at the coming of the Messiah, as
now it is, and not before, as Rabbi Simeon is witness, not being lawful for
the Jewish people before christ, to pronounce that tetragramaton name of god
for the Majesty and greatness of him that was ineffable, as that name only
co^pounded of quiescent and insonant letters (as Hebritians call them) do
witness. And yet this secret was not so concealed of the ancient Rabbines, but
from them it was come to the Gentiles themselves, not only the prophetical
Sibilles, Sibbill. apud. Lactant. li. 4. diui. instit. cap. 6.

Mercur. Tris. Dial. pim. etc. Plato. epim. and lib. 6.

Rap. viu. li. 10 ciuit. cap. 10. Plotin. lib. de trib, princip. hipos.


who told most plainly of this distinction of persons in God, but to others,
especially the Egiptians, and such as lived in the confined and bordering
countries to the Israelites. For breuity I will only produce the words of the
Oracle of Serapis to Thulis King of the Egiptians, and Plotinus an heathen
Philosopher. The sentence of the first is this. In the beginning God is, then
his word, and to these the spirit is added, these are equal and tending into
one. The words of the second in his book of the three principal Hypostasies,
or persons, (for so Christianlike it is entitled) are these. Before the word,
not by priority of nature, or time, but only by priority of origination, is
the fountain, and beginning of all diuinitye of this father the word is
begotten; further, every thing which begets, loves and desires that which
is begotten: but that most chiefly, when the begetter and the begotten are
alone. Against Mahumet I have proved a distinction of persons in God before
out of his own Alcaron and Sentence.

This being the greatest and chiefest Mystery I have stayed longer therein, and
will pass over the rest with more breuity. The same Mahumet affirms, that as
Jesus was the Word of God, The Incarnation and death of Christ the Mesias
proved by the Grounds of infidels.
so he was the most holy man, that Prophet and Messiah which was promised in
the law of Moises, and was sent to supply the defect thereof. The Sibills, as I
have proved before, have set down, Alcar. azoar. 67.10.12.1.5. Argum. 1. sup.
the whole life of Christ, and all the actions of his humanitye, and tell how
he should die for the world, and rise again. Other Prophesies among the
Gentiles which I have aleaged before, affirm that Filius Dei nasceturex
Virgin Maria et pro salute huminum patietur. That the Son of God should be
borne of a Virgin called Mary and should suffer for Mankind. The doctrine of
the Rabbis before Christ so authentitall among the Jews is most comfortable,
to this sentence. Rabb. Haccad li. ^al. raz. ^abb. Ionat. l. ^oliect M^^dr.
teh, in Psalm. 2.
Rabbi Haccados called for his learning and sanctity our holy master,
affirms in his book entitled a reueler of secrets, where he expounds
that the Prophetical place of Esaye touching the Messiah (Emanuell, God,
strong, Rabb. hacc. in 41. genesis li. gal raz.
Prince of peace) speaks thus. Because the Messiah shall be God and man, his
name is called Emanuell, God with us, surely in our body and in our fleashe,
as Job does witness; in my flesh I shall see God. For he did devise a
ma^ruailons counsel of delivering souls from the devil, which were damned
for the sin of Adam, neither could by any means be saved, except the king
Messiah should undergo most bitter death, and many torments, and for that
cause he is called a man. And because he has all strength, he is called God
strong. And because he is eternal, he is named the eternal father. Also
because in his days peace shall be multiplied, he is called the prince of
peace. And because he shall make haste to take away the spoils of souls,
he is called a swifte spoyler, and taker of prays. And because he shall save
them and bring them to Paradise, he is called Jesus, that is a savior.
Hitherto be the words of that most holy and learned Rabbine.

Rabbi Jonathan, Rabb. Ionath. 53. Is.
who dyed before Christ was borne, applies the long narration of Esaias the
prophet in his 53. chapter, to the murder of the Messiah by the Jews, Rabb.
Sim. Ben. John. li. de spe.
and soon after him Rabbi Simion, breaks out into these words. Woe be to
the men of Israel, for that they shall kill the Messiah. God shall send his
son in man's flesh to wash them, and they shall murder him. Rabb. Hadars.
in 9. Dan.
Rabbi Hadarsone upon the prophesy of Daniell concerning the time of the
coming and preaching of Christ, uses this speech. Three years and a half
shall the presence of God in flesh cry and preach upon the mount Oliver, and
then shall he be slain. Misdr. teh.
Which the Jews ordinarye commentarye upon the Psalms interprets of
Christ's preaching, three years and half before his passion. And the
Thalmundists themselves have set down, Thalm. tract. Sanhed. c. hell*
that the Messiah shall be put to death. The s^crifyce of mass, the ryall
presence of christ's body and blood there, and other mysteries proved by the
same authority
Concerning our most holy Sacrifyce of the body and blood of Christ, as it
is euidente before by the testimonye of the true prophets of GOD. The Sibbylles
and Mahumet him self, that in respect of the law of Christ, all their
Religions and sacryfises were imperfect, and foretold to cease in him and his
oblation. So that the Sacrifyce which should be offered in his law, was to be
his blessed body and blood under the forms of bread and wine, (as Catholic
Christians believe) is most plainly told out of those holy Scriptures, by
the ancient and approved Rabbines before CHRIST. Rabb. Iud. in 25. Exodus
The words of Rabbi Judas speakinge of the Sacrifice of the law of the
Messiah, are these. The bread which is offered upon the Altar, is changed
from the nature of bread, and made the body and substance of the Messiah. But
this body is invisible with our eyes, and free from all violence, and not to
be touched. Rabbi Symeon in his book of searching secrettes, has the same
discourse, Rabb Sim. l. inuest. secret.
speaking evidently of transsubstantiating bread and wine, into that most
sacred body and blood, and affirms it to be the Sacryfice, which shall be
used in the Kingdom and Religion of the Messiah. Rabb. Cahan. in 45. Genesis
Rabbi Cahana upon those words of Genesis, ( he shall wash his stole in
wine, and his cloak in the blood of the grape) utters this speech. The
Sacryfice which daily shall be offered of wine, shall not only be changed
into the substance of the blood of the MESSIAH, but into the substance of his
body, bread shall be changed, although externally there only appear the
color of white. Rabb. Hadras. in Psalm. 136.
Rabbi Hadarsan says, that the bread which the Messiah will give, is his
body, Rabb. Barach. super. ecl.
and there shall be a conversion of bread into his body. Rabbi Barachias
teaches, that at the coming of the Messiah, food shall come from heaven,
like a little cake. Like be the sentences of Rabbi Ionathas, Rabb. Ionath. li.
col. in ps. 72. Rabb. Selom. in psalm. 72.
and Rabbi Selomo, teaching that a round cake of wheat as broad as the palm
of an hand, shall be changed into the body of the Messiah, and used for the
sacrifice of his law, and be listed over the heads of his Priests. All
these Rabbis lived before Christ, and yet these be their expositions of the
holy Scriptures concerning that most holy Sacrifice, which Christian
Catholics use, and such other mysteries as depend from thence. Sbill. apud
Lactan. li. 7. diu. inst. Alcor. azoar. 67.19.12.
The Sibbills and Mahumet confess that Christ should and did abrogate the
law of Moses. His Gospel was the perfection of that law, that those
sacrifices should cease in him, ye he shall destroy Antechrist, Pagannisme,
Iudaysme, and Mahumetisme, and come in glory in the end of the world and be
Judge thereof, and only his religion to endure. Thus I could exemplifye in other
questions of christian doctrine, but because these are the greatest, and those
which Infidels most dislyke in our religion, I have given instance in them,
that it may be evident, how manifestlye they be confounded even by their own
grounds, and authorityes, whether we will consider Catholic worship in
general, or the particular misteryes it defends against those misbeleuers,
which may also be applied against the protestante sacramentaryes of this
time, in those points which they now maintain against those most ancient
and learned Rabbynes. But of this I must entreat heareafter.

THE 5. ARGVM. Founded upon the strange and extraordinary punnishments, imposed
upon all enemies of Christ and his Religion.
OR if extraordinary vengeance of God upon any people or person for incredulity
and sin is a certain argument of the error and sin of that people or
person, as all men acknowledge, it is evident by the punnishments of all other
professions, only Christian Religion to be true. And to pass the Mahumetanes,
Pagans, and so many hundreds of Arch-heretickes, with their accomplices and
confederates, punnished of God and extinguished by Christian Religion, Epist.
Apol. Trac. 1. 1. Par. Part. 2. Argu. 82.83 and arg. 108. etc.
as I have showed of Heretics in my Apologicall Epistle, and of the Pagan
Emperors, and Mahumetanes in my first treatise, and will be more evident
hereafter. Mahumet. in Alcaron. cap. 12.
So that now none of all these remain but only Mahumetans, and Mahumet
himself confesses that they shall utterly perish and be overthrown. Then to
exemplify in the Jews, the only enemies untouched in this point, and those
which before their rejecting of Christ were the people of God. If Christ had
not been the Messiah but a Seducer they could neither have sinned or been
punnished as offenders. but deserved well in putting him to death; so far
they should have been by that work free from so many punnishmentes, as have
been laid upon them. But now who can imagine any other cause could be
found in any people, for which that Nation which had so long continued the
peculier of GOD, of whom he had undertaken so particular and singular
protection, witnessed by so many favors and extraordinary prerogatives
granted unto them, above all other countries, should deserve so great and
during punnishment and misery: that they should loose their Temple, Altar,
Sacrifice, Prophets, and Priesthood, to have so many thousands pined with
famine, murdered by intestine sedition, killed of idolatrous enemies, led
captives and sold for slaves. And not only those of that generation which
lived in Jerusalem and Jury, but the Jewish inhabitants of Alexandria, Joseph.
li. bell. Egesipp. lib. excid. Hieros. Eusebius. etc.
Caesaria, Scythopolis, Ptolemayis, Tire, and all places, where they lived, as
Josephus their own historian and others witness. Then what sin could be so
rigorously revenged of God, rather enclyned to mercy then justice, and by no
possibility to do wrong, then that which in malice exceeds, and is greater
then all others, their most irreligious and unnatural entreating of the
Messiah, for which iniquity they are odious to all people, both Christians and
Mahumetanes to this day. Joseph. bell. l. 2. ca. 19.20 21. c. 17. and li.
antiq. 20. ca. 34. l. 18. c. 12. lib. 19. cap. 7. lib. 18. cap. 9. Philo in
flacco etc

Clem. Constable. l. 8. cap 1. Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 10.


And if any man desires to se the particular of their miseries, and in them
the Anothomy of a wicked persecuted people, and afflicted enemy of God, he may
read their own historians Josephus and Philo, and for such as have not that
opportunity briefly to recapitulat some of their most worthy punishments
Caiphas their high priest and enemy to Christ killed himself, Annas died
miserablye, Herod that deluded him was banished to Lions by the Emperor
Caius, Joseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 9. Philo. supr.
and spoiled of all he had, so Herodiadas her dancing daughter had her head
cut off with yse: In Alexandria the Jews by the permission of Flaccus
President suffered to be beaten and killed at every man's pleasure, as their
own Philo reports. Pylate that put him to death, Ado. Chron. Oros. lib. 7.
Joseph. lib. 18. antiquit. c. 12. act. 12.

Ios. sup. lib. 19. cap. 7. and lib. 20. cap. 34.


perpetually exiled to Vienna, kept close prisoner and killed himself. The
Statua of Caius by force placed in their Temple, about Seleucia 50000. of their
Jewish men killed. Their King Herodes consumed with worms. In the feast of
Pentecost no tumult raised, twenty thousands styfled to death. Forbidden by the
Samaritans to go by the^ to Jerusalem. Ananias their high priest sent
prisoner and bound like a traitor to Rome, by Quadratus the President. All
Jury full of thieves, and sorcerers. Ionathas their high priest murdered.
Murders committed even in the Temple it self, and in the greatest
festiuities. The Priests spoil one an other. And after under Florus their
President, their nobility torn in pieces and crucified. Their Sinagogue
destroyed at Cesarea. The house of Ananias their high priest burnt by rebels,
Joseph. Bell. l. 2. cap. 19.20.21.
and he murdered. And at the same instant while these things were done at
Jerusalem, the same day and hour as Josephus witnesses, above 20000. killed
at Cesarea. And wheresoever the Jews were dispersed, if the Gentyles were
stronger they were put to death, thirteen thousand by the Sythopolitans, 2500.
by the Ascalonytes. 2000. at Ptolemais. 5000. at Ioppe. 1000. at Damascus. At
Tire all killed or committed to prison. 50000, at Alexandria, and all these and
other murders procured against them by a Presidente of their own nation. And
when their city was besiedged of Cestinus President of Siria, Epiph. haeres.
29. et haer. 30 Joseph lib. 2. bell. cap. 17.
how often might he have taken it if he would, and was desired even by the
nobility of Jerusalem, promising to open the gates and refused, but it was
differred for the delivery of the Chrstians thence, and greater punishment of
the Jews. And before it was besieged of Vespetian, a hundred thousand slain,
Joseph. supr.
and sold almost 40000. and an infinite number killed of themselves. The high
priests were slain and lay naked in the streets, eaten of dogs and beasts.
The city divided into domestical sedition, Joseph. sup. li. 6. cap. 1.
two armies in the temple, one within, and the other in the court. Their
Granary where provision of victual for many years was laid up, Cap 12.8.9.7.
burnt and consumed to ashes: and that factious army that was planted in the
Temple all slain, not one escaping, those that fled the city for famine were
crucified by Titus, five hundred every day, that there was no room to put them
to death. A wall of thirty nine furlonges was made in three days space, Euan.
luc. etc.
to entrench them as Christ had prophesyed, and thirteen Castles to keep them
in, that they could not get forth to eat grass. The dead bodies in the
town stunke so that they annoyed the camp of their enemy and besiedger.
2000. of them in one night were cut in pieces of the Syryan and Arabian
soldiers to seek their gold within their bowels: and thus they were daily
used until their enemy Tytus forbadde it. From the fourteenth of April when
the siedge began until the last day of July there were carried forth of
dead bodies out of one only gate (the Porter him self Manneus being witness
unto Tytus) an hundred and fifty thousands, besides those which were buried.
And the noble men that fled to Tytus affirmed, that there were six hundred
thousands of the poorer sort, that were dead cast forth of the gates, and that
the number of the others could not be reckoned; for when they could not be
carried forth, they were thrown together on heaps. The famine was so great,
that they did eat dunge, thonges, girdles of leather, shoes, haie, and other
things not to be named, and the nobility themselves abstayned not from killing
and eating their own children. And at the time their city was taken, although
Titus had given express commandment by public edicte, that the Temple
should be preserved, and nothing therein spoiled, yet it was set on fire in
such outrageous manner, that by no possibility, Titus laboring what he
could, it could be quenched, but was consumed upon the very same day, the
tenth of August that it was burned before of the King of Babylon. Joseph. lib.
7. bell. lud. c. 11.
And six thousand Jews that were fled thither by the counsel of a false
Prophet, were utterly consumed. Joseph. supr. c. 17. c. 20.
For as the same Josephus witnesses, there were many seducers then among
them, that promised help from God utterly forbidding them to yield. Eleauen
hundred thousands dead in those few weeks of the siedge, 97. thousand taken
prisoners, some condemned for slaves and sent into Egypt. Those that were
strong kept in all countries to fight with wild beasts in theaters and
public spectacles. All women and men under 17. years of age, sold for
slaves at a most vile price, the number of those which were sold being so
great. And after, Oros. l. 7. c. 13.
in the time of Adrian the Emperor, the final desolation and exilement of
that people forth of that country was contrived: Julius Seuerus his Captain
by his commandment destroying Towns, and Villages leaving not one stone upon
an other, in all that vaste building of Jerusalem, that the prophecy of
Christ might be fulfilled. And in one day put to death 500. and fourscore
thousand not one Jew remaining in all Jury, and an imperial edict promulged
against them, that they should never return thither any more, and that they
should not remember Jerusalem, that they might not look toward the place.
What other illusions and offlictions have they had, and still endure in mind,
not only concerning horrible and filthy errors against God and nature, of
which I will mention in the Argument of the errrors of our enemies, Argum. 6.
inf.
but what illusions of Devils and wicked spirits have they suffered
especially, Gran. de simb. Eusebius. histor. eccles.

Caes. Baron. tom. 1. et. 3. Annal.


about a Messiah (for refusinge CHRIST) perswadinge them sometimes that he is
in the Caspian Hills, sometimes at Rome in Italy, where in our memory they
were so illuded, that they fully believed an Harlot of their lineage
fornicatiouslie begotten with child (as was proved) was to bring their
MESSIAH forth, until to the common laughter of all, she brought forth a
wench. Sometimes at Vlissipone in Portugal, sometimes in the wilderness,
sometimes in the Sea, sometimes and all times no where. Chrisost. hom. 2 contr.
Iud. Ruffin. lib. 1. histor.

Philipp. Bergom. hist. in Julian.


How sottishly were they seduced by the Devil, and worthily, and
miraculouslie punnished of GOD, in the time of Julian the Apostata, as Saint
Chrysostom, Ruffinus, and others are witnesses, when they went about to
build their Jerusalem and Temple again. When they had dug their trenches,
and began to lay and form their foundation, suddenly such an earthquake
chanced, that it did not only throw down the stones and buildinges which
they had begun, but other places where the Jews resorted, and as many as
were in them were slain. And in the morning following, those that had escaped
assemblinge together to draw away the dead bodies, a terrible fire suddenly
issued out, running up and down, burning and consuming as many of them as it
met, and after the same order often times issuing forth consumed that
incredulous people. Whereby those which were left alive were converted to
Christ. And that it might be evident, this punnishment to have bin inflicted
for him, the next night after, the sign of the Cross appeared in all theit
garments, and remained so firm and manifest, that with no art or cunning it
could either be hidden or taken away. Fascic. Temp. 4^0. Berg. hist.
And in the year of Christ 450. a Cretensian Jew or rather a Devil feigned
himself to be Moses and sent from heaven, to bring all the Iewishe
inhabitants of that country which were many thousands into Jury, through the
Sea, as Moses had done out of Egypt, whereupon they all presently followed
him, leaving all things, and coming to a great rock hanging over the Sea,
bad them throw themselves into the waters, and they should swim thither
like fishes, which they which went before, desperately attempted, and were
pitifully drowned in the sight of those which followed, and their Moses
vanished away appearing no more. And in this manner in all times and places
ever since the death of Christ, they have been deluded and afflicted.
Therefore no man can say that they are the true worshippers of God, except the
same blasphemor will affirm that God is unmerciful, mutable, unjust, and
irreligious to punnish sin ( vltra condignum) more then it deserves, or to
inflict punnishment and vengeance where none is due.

THE 6. ARGVM. Manifesting the Errors of all other Religions, even against the
light of nature, such as by possibility true worship cannot admit.
AND although I do not contend to prove this to be a demonstration in
natural reason, yet I do affirm for evident even in the light of nature,
that all worships and Religions in the world, which do not acknowledge the
Incarnation of God, and verity of Christian Religion, either Pagans, Jews, or
Mahumetanes, are ignorant of the divine nature, essence, and attributes of the
divine majesty, and fallen into most impious and irreligious errors concerning
him, so that by no possibility they can worship him as they should, and are
further drowned in other errors which neither any supernatural light and
revelation of GOD, or light of reason can allow, so that where the Incarnation
of GOD is not admitted, all other benefyttes whether natural, as to the Pagans
and all people, or supernatural graces and so many extraordinarye favors to
the Jews, before the coming of CHRIST, are forgotten and not of force to
procure gratitude in men, and all other effects of GOD not able to cause them
to know and honor him as they should. And this shall be an other argument
against all Infidelles, euidentlye demonstrating them to have no religion, for
super-naturall illuminations cannot be contrary to the light of Nature,
Errors of the Pagans.
neither GOD Author of them both, contrary to himself. And to begin with the
miserable estate of the Pagan gentiles, who can endure to hear for one
only eternal immorrall* immaculate, omnipotent and spitituall GOD, Creator
of all things, so many incesteous violent, lecherous, and most wicked men and
women to be so worshipped, such as were the children of men, as Sybilla
Eritherea does scorn them, in these, and baser words. Lactant. firm. lib. 1.
diu inst. cap. 8.

Cap. 9. supr. Lucil. Lucian. Tarquit. de vir. ilustr. Philipp. Bergom. in
hist. etc.


A GOD cannot be made and formed of a man and a woman. So Hercules the
Bastard of Alcmena, that poluted all places with lecherye, incest, rapine, and
oppression, was honored for an immortal and eternal GOD. So Esculapius the
Bastard of Apollo. So Iuppiter, Saturn, Mars, Apollo, and the rest. What
miserable and most wicked oblations were used in that Religion? Lactant.
supr. c. 10. c. 11. c. 12. and 21.
What innocent men murdered, and offered in Sacrifice to Iuppiter among the
Cypryans? The Thaures did offer to Diana, the strangers that came unto them.
So did the Frenchemen to Esus and Theutantes; and Italyans to Iuppiter, the
Romans and Italyans, Varro l. diu. in Saturn. Ovid. l. de fast.
both men and infantes to Saturn. So did the Carthaginians: as when they were
overcome of Agathocles King of Sicylie, thinking their GOD Saturn to be
angry with them, they offered unto him for a Sacrifyce to appease his anger,
Postenn. fest. lib. hist r.
200. children of noble men. Others cut off their shame and secrets, and
offered them in Sacryfyce. Lactant. firm. supr. cap. 21.
Among the Rhodyans, Hercules was honored with a Sacrifyce of 2. oxen, and
cursing and bannyng, and it was accounted a great iniquitye for one word of
pietye or modestye to be spoken. And this was in memory of the cursing and
banning that a ploughman of that country used against Hercules, taking two oxen
from him by violence, and so of others. But to pass over those Idolaters and
come to the Jews, Errors of the Jews. contrary to the law of nature and
repugnant to Religion.

Thalmud. ordin. 1. tract. 9. v. 49. ord. 4. tract. 4. did. 5. chart. 17. ord.
4. did. 2. ord. 4. tract. 4. did. 6. ord. 3. tract. 6.


which before Christ were the chosen people of GOD, and had the true Religion,
their errors contained in their own Thalmud and higheste Judgment they have,
shall bring witness against them. And to omytte their blasphemous errors
against Christ because they profess them selves enemies to Christians, and
speak of those which thy maintain against the most sacred divine Majesty,
whom they ackowledge for their GOD and maker of all things, that gave their
law to Moses. Thus they wright and generally believe of him, Thalm. supr.
ord. e tract. 4. did. 3.
that before he made the world, least he should fall to Idleness, he
exercised him self in framing diverse worlds, which when he had made, he
presently destroyed and renewed them again, until at length he had learned
to make this world which now we have. Ord. 2. tract. 1 did. 14.
That he spends the first three hours of the day, Ord. 5. tract. 6. did.
5.
in reading the Iewishe Law* and that Moses ascendinge to heaven, found him
wrighting accents in the holy Scripture. That on the first day of the new
Moon in the month of September, he judges the whole world, Ord. 2. trac^.
8. did. 5.
and the next ten days he applies himself to wright the just in the book
of life, and the wicked in the book of death. And many other like errors they
hold, Ord. 2. did. 5. et ord. 1. did. 7.
that God has a place in heaven separate from all company, in which at
certain times he bewayleth with many tears, and afflicts himself, that
he was angry with the Jews: ouerthrewe the Temple of Jerusalem, and
dispersed this people into captivity. Ordin. 1. tract. li. did. 1. ord. 2.
tract. 8. did. 5.
And that daily he prayed devoutly, and puts upon his head and arms,
fillettes, or thonges of leather, called Thephalin, and puts upon his body
a linen coat, named Zezith, and so attyred falls down upon his knees, and
prays: Ord. 1. tract. 1 did. 9.
that so often as he remembers the calamities which the Jews suffer of the
Gentiles, he weepeth, and lets two tears fall into the Ocean Sea, and for
very grief knocks his breast with both his hands. Ordin. 2. tract. 1. did.
14

Ord. 4. tract 8. Ord. 4. tract. 6 did. 1.


That for his recreation the three last hours of the day he used to play
with a huge great fish called Leuiathan that the commandment of the Sacrifice
of the new Moon was given to the Jews, to purge the sin which GOD
committed when he gave that light vtno the Sun, which he had unjustly taken
from the Moon, Ord. 4. tract. 3 did. 5.
and that being angry for a cause unknown with his play-fellowe Leuiathan,
he killed him, and powdered his flesh with salt, to give to the souls of
his Saints. Ord. 1. tract. 1.
That every day he is angry, and at that time the combs of Cocks wax pale
colored, and they stand upon one leg, and if any man shall curse an other
at that moment, he shall presentlye fall down dead. When certain Rabbines
disputed against Rabbi Eliezar, Ord. 4. tract. 2. did. 7.
GOD giving sentence from heaven for Rabbi Eliezar, the other Rabbynes being
offended thereat, excommunicated God, whereat he smiling said, my children
have overcome me. That God disputing with the Rabbynes upon a certain kind
of leprosy, Ord. 4. tract. 2 d. sup.
judgment between them was referred to a very learned Rabbyne. And that he
has been deceived by some Rabbynes, and the like blasphemies. Ord. 2. tra^^.
5. did. 8.
That the Angel Gabriell committed a grievous sin, for which, GOD commanded
him to be scourged with a fiery whippe. That David did not sin, Ord. 2.
tract. 1 did. 5.
either in his adulterye, with Bethsabee, or murder of her husband; and
whosoever affirms he sinned, is an Heriticke. That a man may marry his
daughter, or sister; Ord. 5. tract. 1. did* 2.
that Rabbine which hates not his enemies to death, and seeks not revenge
upon him, is not worthy the name of a Rabbine. Ord. 4. tract. 4 did. 10.
That they which contradict the words of their Scribes, are more grieuouslie to
be punnished, then they which gainesay the law of Moses, and this man may be
better absolved, but the other must be put to death. Ord. 4. chart. 17.
If the greater part shall condemn a man to death, he must die, but if all
condemn him, he must be dismissed. Ord. 4. tract. 2 and saepe alib.
That souls do pass from body to body, as Pythagoras held, only with this
limitation, that if the soul sins in the first body, it goes into a
second, if it sins in that, it flitteth into a third body, in which if it
does not cease to sin, it is thrown into Hell. And for example, the soul of
Abell did go into Seth, and from him to Moses. Ord. 3. tract. 2. cap. 3.
That in the resurrection, the souls of the unlearned shall not be united to
their bodies. Who soever shall eat thrice a day upon the Sabbath, Ord. 2.
tract. 2. did. 6.

Ord. 4. tract. 10 did. 2.


shall have everlasting life. If any man shall pass under the belly of a
Camel, or between two Camelles, or beetween two women, he shall never learn
any thing out of the Thalmud, wherein there is no end of such blasphemies,
Zist. Senen. biblioth. Sanct tit. Thalmud.
foolish, and ridiculous things, he that desires more may peruse the places
cited in the margin, Ordin. 1. tract li. did. 4.

Ordin. 4. tract. 8. ord. 4. tract. 1 distict. 4. Chart. 38. ord. 4. tract. 8.
did. 2. ordin. 4. tract. 4. did. 9. ordin. 4. tract 8.

Ordin. 2. tract. e. did 5. char. 11. et 15. ord. 2. tract. e. did 2. etc.


so that we may see the just Judgment of God executed upon that people, that
they which before the coming of Christ were the chosen of God, only serving
him in true religion, since they rejected and refused him, are fallen into so
many impious errors, that except they were recorded by themselves, and
contained in the very rule of their religion their Thalmud no man would beeleue
it, and that every man may know in what estimation the Thalmud wherein these
and other errors are contained is with that people, their own words placed
in the preface of that book as these, If any man shall deny the books of
Thalmud to be most holy he denies God himself. Lastly to come to theeuish
and laciuious Mahumet and his Mahumitans, what other thing then such as I have
recited of the Jews and Pagans, can be expected of them, Errors of the
Mahumetanes. Blond. l. 9. plat. Pomp. Eutrop. li. 8. Sab.
if we either consider the occasion of his original and beginning, or the
wicked and licentious life, either of Mahumet the scoller or his tutors and
counselors. Pantal. Chro^. Bergom. hist. in Mahumet. P^lid. de inue^. li. 7.
ca. 8. etc.
John an Heriticke of Antioch Sergius an Arrian and Apostata Monk, and a
Iewishe Astronomer or Necromancer. Or the time when he came being borne in the
yeaere of CHRIST 626, or the place and people where or whence he descended,
Genesis ca. 21.
coming of the Ismaelites, and seed of Ismaell accursed in scripture,
Alcoran. azo. 27.28.29.31.33.49.53. Mahumet. in Alcoran, azoar. 1. etc. Blond
li. 9. Poly. inuen. li. 7 ca. 8. Bern. Lutzenburg in Catal. Heretic. in Mahu^
Graft. hist. and Stowe in Mahum. Mahumet. in Alcoran li. 2. Azoar.
28.47.48.18.19 Eusebius. li. 6. his. cap. 28.
by the mouth of GOD, where he is depryued of all spiritual Inherytance, and
has no such benediction given unto him, and from the rude theeuish and
barbarous Arabyans, whose manners he exercised in all kind of iniquity. And
touching his errors, with Sabellius he denies the Trinity, with Arrius he
affirms CHRIST to be a creature. With the Maniches that Christ was not
Crucified and put to death, but an other like unto him, thinking that unworthy
so great a prophet. With the Anthropomorphites Jews and Pagans: that God has
a body, with the Elchesyte that religion may be denied in persecution. With
the Originists, that the devils shall be saved, that Lucifer and the rest of
the Angels were condemned because they would not worship Adam, as though duty
were to be done to the inferior, and less excellent, when excellency and
diginitie is the only cause of adoration and reverence. That men are to be
compelled to his religion by war and force. That God and his Angels pray for
Mahumet, when GOD supreme Lord of all, can pray to none, prayer being a
function, of an inferyour, he never distinguished the ciuyll and
ecclesiastical regiment but confounded them together in his temporal
successor, Cael. histor. Saracen. li. 2.
which his own followers condemned for absurdety and repealed. The original
Institution of that deceiuer apointing Alys an ignorant and wicked young
fellow for his successor, was not only unreasonable, but frustrat and with out
effect: for contrary to the ordinance of Mahumet, his father in law Eubocora
deposed Alys, and within three years Ebocora himself was poisoned. Homer his
next Successor was murdered by his seruante. Osmenus which next succeeded
killed himself, his son Mahumetes was violently put to death by Alys.
Bellefor. Cos. universe. to. 2. l. 6. c. 6. col 18 37. cap. 12.13. col. 1887.
etc. lib. 4. cap. 21. c. 13. Leuncl. in pa^dect. turcic. cap. 237.

Iov hist. l. 33. Bellef. Cosm. supr. leuncl. supplem. Annal. turcic. page 138.


Alys was trayterouslie slain by Muauias, in whose days so many errors were
grown in that sect, that two hundred Camelles were loaded with books which
were condemned at Damascus. And notwithstanding the capital law against
disputing of the Alcoran they ever were and now are divided into manifold
schisms into Melycs, Asaphs, Alambels, Buanists, Babilonists, Cayrists,
Caioranists, Marochists, Mustysts, Almahadists, and others not to be recounted,
and in such odious manner, that they affirm it more meritorious to kill one of
those divisions then 70. Christians. They have no means to compose these
controversies, determine questions, or to choose their Calyphes: but all doubts
are tried by the sword, and the strongest part of arms is sentenced to hold
the truest opinion. Supr. Argu. 1.
Neither did Mahumet ever ordain, or that people practice their trial. How
does he extol Christ Jesus to be the Messiah, wisdom, spirit, and word of
God, greatest of all Prophets, and institutor of the most holy law and
perfector of the law of Moses, Azoar. 2. Cusan. in cribrat. Alcor. l. 1. c.
2. l. 2. ca. 14. l. 3. c. 1. azoar. 11.
which had so long endured, and yet most impudently affirm, that presently
after the first preaching, it was corrupted ever by the Apostles to whom it
was committed, and whose Gospels himself allows. How foolish is it for him
to deny the death of Christ, witnessed by so many thousands of present
witnesses of al sorts, Christians, Jews, and Gentiles, in so public place and
universal assemblies? how could the Jews raise this slander when so many
Christians, and Pagans were present, and is written in all the Evangelists
which he approved for holy writers? How could those sacred books be
universally corrupted of the Iewesh nation, Biblia^d. in op. part. 2. in
confutat.

Alcor. pug. 13. Cuspinian. de Relig. turcic. Septemcastr. de Relig. turc. cap.
13.

Richer. lib. 2.


when they were never wholly in their hands, yea seldom any one was in their
custody? yet these Paradoxes he preposeth to be believed. How is it either
probable or possible that Mahumet and an Apostata Monk so many hundred years
after Christ, and Moses, should better know the integrity of their laws, then
the Jews and Christians which were ever in possession of those writings? how
contrary is his law of poligamy (where a King has 600. wives) the festiuity
of friday for the Sabbath, the circumcising children in the seventh or eight
year, and not day, from their nativity, and other like to the law of Moses?
how diferent is his corporiety in God, beastly paradise, multiplicity of
wives, errors about Christ's divinity, death, passion, Sacraments, and other
principal things to the doctrine of Christ, which as he teaches was most
pure, and shall continue for ever? where did ever Christ persuade the people to
worship his mother the blessed Virgin for God, or prophecy of this great
prophet Mahumet, Azoar. 13. azoar. 74.71.
as this shameless seducer affirms? or how could Christ which he
reuerenceth for the greatest Prophet, and truest lawmakers, be Author of such
Idolatry? And to be brief, as he came in a time of many Heretics and
deceauers, and to enchaunt his Readers with his beastly delights composed his
Alcaron in rythmes, Cuspinian de Relig. turc.
and meeters, so to allure company unto him by express decree, he approoueth
all errors and infidelities, so that a plurality of Gods be not admitted,
Mah. in Alc. Azoar. 37.
howsoever corporeous, infirm, and corruptible one God is believed, he never
reprehendeth, but confirms. Wherefore to omit the rest and only
exemplify, in that which most concerns man which is his eternal beatytude
and happy end, Tract. 1. sup. cap. 5.
(which as I proved no Temporal or Corporal thing can be,) he assigns
such a paradise, place, and state of Blessedness for a reasonable and
immortal soul, as is agreeable to the nature and appetite of hogs, Aver. lib.
9. Metaph. Arist lib. 10. eth.

Auicenn.


and most brutish beasts, in so much Auerroes himself sometimes a Mahumetane,
affirmed that Aristotle had devised a better happiness for Man then Mahumet
did; and Auicenna a favorer of that Sect greatly condemned Mahumet in that
point, and yet these two were the wisest that ever were in his danger to be
seduced. They enforce the eldest sons of Christians contrary to the law of
nature to profess Mahumetisme, and be Ienesaries to the Turkishe Prince, when
no man can be compelled to supernatural things, expept he has first
submitted himself. he inuadeth and usurps without all title, Azoar. 12*
the lands, teritories, and goods of others, which without manifest iniurye
and injustice cannot be done. He never pretended for title to religion either
supernatural prophesye of things to come, any one miraculous operation or
argument of reason, but forbad his followers to profess learning or dispute of
his law, least they should disclose his iniquity; and pretends his claim
and interest nothing but the sword and violence, by which kind of disputation
and reasoning Julius Caesar, Alexander, Augustus, and other damned Idolatrous
Emperors, should have had a far greater title to religion then ever Mahumet
could pretend, being greater conquerours then he or any of his profession. And
it is not only improbable but impossible that any accidentarye or temporal
thing in the power of nature should be an infallible sign and argument of
supernatural and most certain misteryes, such as true religion must have. So
that we see Mahumetisme to be nothing else but a fardell of errors, and
heresies, injustice and voluptuousnes, bound and collected together without
any ground or reason, so that had he not begun his Regiment in those rude and
beastly countries, where he did, apt and prone to all liberty and filthiness, he
never had prevailed to have the lest show of reverence and religion. For
experience teaches at this present, how in Greece and other ciuyll nations,
which God for their reuoulte and dissobedience to his Church, and See
apostolic, has delivered to the turkishe tirany, although they be infected
with the heresies of Nestorious, scisme of the Grecians, and other errors, and
thereby destitute and unfurnished of grace, rather choose to become his slaves
and vassalls, vndergoeing all oppressions, then yelding to such absurdities to
be advanced with honors, as our Apostates to that Infidelity be.

And if we will separate the present Brachmans among the Indians from the
old idolatrous Gentiles, Errors of the Brachmans.
and make their religion particular by it self, such is the absurdity of that
people, yet professors of learning, that it is unworthy to be related. But
breefely to give a note of their superstitions in believing, Petr. Maff. l. 1
histor.

lib. 1. histor. Indic. fol. 24.35. li. Cerem. Brachm. in Sermon. Lucitan. etc.


and Epicurismes in manner of living for a certain time they live at least in
external view a sober and penetentiall life, which being expired, and ended,
they are presently exalted to the greatest honors, riches, and dignities,
exempted from all laws, free from all controlement, subject to no penalty,
punishment, or reprehention, and live in all delights, sin, laciuiousnes,
and wantonness not to be recited. These he their priests and principal
professors, so highly esteemed, that their Kings are committed unto them for
education, and subject to their assignements. And their belief in worship is
not unlike to this practical profession, for although they reverence for their
principal and most ancient Gods Parrabrammas and his three sons, and in
memory of that reverence always wear a triple threade abcute their necks,
yet for pluralities of other Gods, which they worshipp with equal divine
adoration, they are not inferior to the pagan Romans, but rather exceed them
in number of Idolatries, and not content to dedicate Temples and Altars,
offering sacrifice unto men, but use and exercise the same divine Reverence to
Apes, Oxen, Elephants, and the like brute, and unreasonable creatures.

THE 7. ARGVM. Further showing the excellency of Christian Catholic Religion
above all other external professions, both in speculatiue and practical
doctrine.
WHereby it is manifest how impossible it is, that either the worships and
reuerences used by any of those Infidels, should be true, and revealed of God,
which by no power can be author of any error, or (seeing of necessity one true
Religion must be granted) that christian profession should be false, for all
others evidently convicted of palpable, gross, and inexcusable errors, and
absurdities, by necessary consequence it remains that alone and in all
things to be approved. And let any Jew, Mahumeta^* or Paga^, survey the whole
sum of Catholic Religion, (for I do not defend the conuenticles and positions
of Heretics) and prove whether he can find any one such error and
inconvenience. And to begin with the nature of God himself, which as by his
infinite and most excellent preeminences, he is the Prime and sovereign object
of true reverence, and to have this supreme homage and duty of Religion, so
if he be mistaken and any other worshipped for him, it turns to Irreligion
and Idolatry by sacriledgeous worshipping a falsely pretended GOD: All those
misbeleeuers, Jews, Mahumetanes, Pagans, and Brachmans (as is evidently
proved before) either constitute pluralities, or most horrible corruptions,
alterations, defectes, and imperfections in divinity, which altogether
destroy all worship and Religion. For such imperfections and defectes are
dishonorable, and not to be reverenced, much less with divine adoration,
contrariewise we Christians only vvorshippe one most simple, increated,
unalterable, infinite, and illimited cause, Creator, and conseruer of all
Creatures, endued with all possible perfections, and so worthy of all
worship. And for the end and happiness of man, we do not assign so
foolish, uncertain, or so corruptible, wanton, and carnal estate with
defectes, and filthiness, which cannot possibly content an immortal and
reasonable soul, in such sort as those misbeleeuers do; but such an estate
either for perfection, continuance, Math. ca. 22. Marc. cap. 12. Rom cap. 13.
etc.
and immutability, that will and only can content, and bring felicity to man.
And for the means to come to so great happiness and glory, (because there
must be a proportion between the end and such things as bring unto it.) That
external and public Sacrifice we use, is not any such profane oblation, as
the Pagans used, no such naked ceremony as the Mahumetanes practice, and
themselves confess shall be taken away, neither any of those of the law of
Moses, which already be abrogated, and which of themselves never had
validity, but as they had reference to CHRIST, but that most pure and
immaculate Sacrifice of the body and blonde of the MESSIAH, Argum. 4. sup.
so renowned and honored before the coming of Christ, as I have proved, so
miraculouslie testified of God, as all countries can witness, and of it self
able to pardon all offenses, even in rigorous satisfaction; which no other
religion can say. We do not allow in our worship any thing that may be
called sin or be interpreted either prejudicial to the honor of God, or
office to man, which Religion commands, Lactant. sup. l. diu. instit. in
Hercul. etc. Cicer. de not. Deor.
as all these Infidels practice, in approouing hatred and revenge upon others,
appointing unjust, crafty, and violent usurping, and taking away of other men's
goods, and possessions, as the Pagans did, and their Gods themselves were
honored for such impieties, and the Mahumetans and Turkish proceedings use,
Alcor. supr. Thalm. or. lin. 1. tract. 4. did. 3. ordin. 2. did 7. ord. 1.
tract. 1 did. 1. and 4. ord. 4. tract. 8. did. 2. and tract 4. and 9. etc.
and the Jews allow for lawful (to use their own words in their Thalmud)
whether it be by craft, deceit, violence, usury, theft, killing, murdering,
or any other means. Neither do we as those misbeleeuers do, affirm, that
sin is not committed but by external acts, when the malice of the sin
depends of the internal consent, but condemn even the internal thoughts,
and forbid all injuries both to friends, and enemies, commanding nothing to
be done to others, which we would not to our selves. Omitting nothing that may
be named virtue, and allowing nothing can be suspected for vice, and because
natural and moral actions of themselves cannot meritte a supernatural
beatitude, all such value we attribute to such effects, depends upon the
infinite price and dignity of our MESSIAH, which no other profession can make
claim unto. By whose meritte and oblation besides these works of grace, we
only have Sacraments, instruments to derive his benefittes, in all
necessities, to all persons, and at all times. When we are first borne,
Baptism to take away original sin; extreme unction to relieve us when
we dye, and defend us against all enemies and agonies of those conflictes.
And while we live, Eucharist, and Confirmation, to strengthen us in grace, and
penance to restore us if we fall. And concerning the particular estates and
conditions both of the clergy and married, Order to dignify the one, and
Matrimony to arm and defend the other, so that no state, time, or condition of
men, is unprovided, no sin left unpunished, no virtue omitted, but many added
which philosophers did not know, as love to enemies, humillitie and others.
Contempt of the world, and all impediments of felicitye. We exhort
perfection, containing a full abnegation of all spiritual lettes as riches,
pleasure, honor, and the like, by professing poverty, chastity, and
obedience, whereby the great enemies of heavenly things the world flesh
devil are subdued. Do we not purpose for the Intellectual and immortal
soul of man such a spiritual beatitude, as a greater and more excellent
cannot be devised, the vision and fruition of God him self, containyng all
felicity, and void of all unhappiness? How reuere^tly do we esteem of the
holy Patriarchs and Saints, of the law of Moises, of the nature of Angels
whom we affirm to be intellectual Creatures, in which and other things,
how barbarously do those Infidelles err?

THE 8. AND LAST ARGUMENT. How Catholic Christian Religion has overcome all
enemies, in all kinds of Argument and Disputation. And that it is the most
certain knowledge in the world, even in natural Judgment, and all Arguments
used against it, evidently false.
AND to give a full and final contentment to al people in this case; whenever
any matter seems doubtful, or is called into controversy, by such as
pretend Title and interest, it must needs be tried and debated with reasons,
and arguments, either in wrighitng, or publicly and by speech, by probations
natural or above nature, as the cause and Question requires, the first manner
of trial has given evident verdict for Christians, and manifestly condemned
all others of manifoulde profane, and irreligious errors, impossible to be in
true Religion. Now I will show how by the second kind of trial in conference
and places of dispute, only Christian Catholic religion has preuailled
against all others, Catholic cristian Religion, conquering Mahumetans.
and utterly condemned and convinced the^ for Infidels and misbeleeuers, both
by natural and supernatural arguments.

And to pass over Mahumetans, because as is manifest already they acknowledge
the religion of Christ to be true, Argum 1. sup.
that we shall be saved thereby, and it only endure and persevere, and forbidding
the professors of their law to disput with christians have given us the
victory in this disputation, Christians victory over all enemies.
which also has bin proved against them by many supernatural miracles and most
certain arguments. Let us come to other Infidels against whom Christ himself
most firmly founded and builded his doctrine, both against Jews and Gentiles by
unanswerable arguments, and evidences of truth, by so many humane reasons, so
many fufillinges of the prophets predictions, so many miracles, so manifest, so
public, so supernatural. By so many blind, deaf, dombe, leapers, endued
with sight, hearing, speaking, cleannes, so many dead raised, devils
dispossessed, Joseph. supr. Pilat. ep. ad Tiber.. Mahum. in Alcaron. etc.
heavens, elements, and all creatures obeying above nature in the sight of
all, recorded even by his enemies. And after his death by his apostles, and
their successors, he conquered and subdued the whole world. S. Stephen a
Deacon prevailed so with his miracles and arguments, that neither the
Sinagogue of the Libertines, Act. ca. 6.
of the Cirineans, Allexandrians, or those of Cilicia and Asia which disputed
with him, were able to make him answer. The Apostles at the feast of Penticost
amassed and confounded Parthians, Medians, Elamites, Actor. ca. 2.
inahbitants of Mesopotamia, Iewry, Chappadocia, Po^tus, Asia, Phrigia,
Pamphilia, Egypt, and the parts of Libbia, Srangers of Rome, Jews and
Prosolites, Cretentians, and Arabians at Jerusalem, all those countries
bearing witness. And S. Peeter at one sermon converted three thousand Souls,
Actor. 9.
so saint Paul first himself subdued, confounded them at Damascus, Seleutia
Ciprus, and Bariehu, Actor. ca. 13.
the false Jewish prophet at Paph^s and made him blind and converted Serguis
Paulus the proconsul. Actor. ca. 14.
So at Perge, Pamphilia, Antioch, Iconium, Listra Derbe, and whersoeuer they
were dispersed in his Peregrination. Clem. Recog lib. 1. cap. 9. et 10.

Zonar. li Annal. to. 1. Metaphr die 2. Ianuar. Glyc. in annal* Nicephor, li.
7. cap. 36. Cedren. in Camp.

Ruff. lib. 1. cap. 38. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 17.

SoZom. lib. 5. cap. vlt. Athanas. l. Imag

Be^gom hist. fol. 60.


So Gamaleel master to S. Paull and S. Stephen was converted. So Egesippus. And
so many in the time, and at the disputation between S. Silucster, and the
Jews at Rome. So in the great disputation in the year of Christ 418. a great
number of them together with their great Rabbine Theodorus were subdued, and
miraculously converted. So were the Jews about Bithinia miraculouslie
overcome, as Athanasius witnesses, by the wonderful blood that issued sorth
of a wodden Image of the Crucysixe which one of them had pierced sacriled
giouslie. So about the year of Christ seven hundred and eight, in Siria by
the like miracle as Philippus Bergomensis writes. So in all places and ages
the most learned among them have been overcome. And in the Prymatyue Church
of Christ, those which were their most learned and durst not for fear
become Christians, yet did write in commendation of Christians as Philo Iudeus,
Josephus, and others.

Thus likewise Christ proved his doctrine against the Pagan Gentiles,
Conquest over Pagans.
as appears not only in the particular Histories of the Apostles, and
others, in the Primatyue Church, but in all ages, and places, as their utter
overthrow and desolation do testify. Bed. li. cap. 25. ca. 26. etc.
So Saint Angustine the Benedictine Monk proved Catholic Religion to the
Pagans of our English Nation, and subdued them, so Catholic Christians (and
only Catholics as I will manifest hereafter) have subdued al Pagan countries,
and converted them to Christ. Conquest over Sorcerers and Magicians.
Thus all Sorcerers, Magitians, and Enchaunters were vanquished. So Simon Magus
that had seduced Samaria, and for his strange works of sorcerie named the
power of God, was subdued and baptized of S. Philip a Deacon. Actor. cap. 8.
And afterward relapsed to his witch-crafts again, because he could not buy
with money apostolical authority, Egefip. lib. 3. excid. Hieros. cap. 2.

Actor. cap. 13. Justin. Dial. cum Triph.


was overcome by S. Peter at Rome in open assembly, before that wicked enemy of
Christ, Nero the Emperor. So Elymas by S. Paul at Paphus. So Marcellus a (...)
of Simon Magus became a christian and wrote the combat between S. Peter and
his old Master Simon Magus. And Justinius the Martyr and Origin affirm, Origin
lib. 1. contr Cells.
that the Magi which travailed so far to worship Christ in his nativity, were
Magicyans, and by the apparition and miraculous conduction of the star, Ignat.
ep. ad Ephesians.
were converted. And S. Ignatius before them avouches the same, adding
further, that then all Magic, Sorcery, and enchantment began to cease. Eusebius.
histor. eccles. lib. 2. cap. 8.

Isodor. lib. de patrib. ca. 73.


So S. James the greater convinced Philetus, and Hermogenes. So Taurinus,
Bishop of Orleance confounded Cambises, Zamrim, and their Scholars. Iustina
subdued Ciprian the Sorcerer, Vincent. in specul. lib. 10. ca. 78.79. Conquest
over al Philosophers.
and made him a Christian Martyr.

So likewise the most wise and morally virtuous Philosophers of the world have
bin conquered, and converted in such order, that now neither Stoycke, Cynicke,
Perypatetycke, Epicure* or any other sect is to be found, for the light of
nature did manifestly instruct them, that their own judgments and reasons were
deceitful, and had often erred and changed, but those supernatural and other
arguments of Christians, only able to be effected by the power of God (as
nature taught those Philosophers) by no means could be untrue. Actor. ca. 17.
So Dyonisius the Areopagite and others, even in that learned and famous
university of Athens were confounded by S. Paul S. Katherine a virgin,
Metaphrast. et sur. in S. Katherin. Amphilo h. in vit. S. Basil. Eusebius in vit.
Constant.
being but eighteen years of age, subdued 50. of the wisest Philosophers,
which all the credit and command of Marentius the Emperor could assemble
together. So S. Iustine, S. Basyl, S. Augustine, and others were converted. So
in the time of Constantine the great, a solemn disputation being appointed
between the christians and them at Constantinople, they were all confounded
and converted, by Alexander Bishop of that City. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 5.

Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 17.

Ruff. l. 1. c. 3.


Likewise they were overcome and put to silence in the general council of
Nyce, (where a great number of them were gathered together, for the aid of
the Arrians) by a catholic Christian unlearned, as Socrates, Sozomenus,
Sophron. in prat. spirit. cap. 195. Sines. ep. 79. Aug. epist. 100.
and Ruffinus witness. So in the year of Christ 411. Synesius and Euagrias
great Philosophers were converted, and S. Augustine affirms the same of
Genuadius. Athanas. in vit. S. Anton.
How many of them and how often of their best learned were not able to answer
S. Anthony the Eremit, a man altogether unlearned? And all the philosophers
which ever were in the world with all their humane learning and policy, were
never able to convert one City to their opinions, although having for their
protection, and furtherance, the favor, countenance, and assistance of the
Kings, and Emperors, and yet poor fishermen by the doctrine of Christ
against the violent resistance of all enemies, have conquered the whole world
unto him. And yet at that very time, Philostrat. li. 9. Dio. Rhod. Corinch.
Borysth.
when the Apostles and disciples of Christ went about and preached christian
doctrine to the world, the Philosophers as their own writers are witnesses
(for the devil will imitate God) practiced the like in goeing about and
persuading their opinions, but prevailed nothing, August ep. 56. et. li. ver.
Relig. ca. 4.
such were Apollonius, Dio, Demetrius, Musonius, Damis the pithagorean;
Epictetus the Stoycke, Lucianas the epicure Diogines the younger and others.
And generally the Platonicks, either became Christians, such as had any
conscience of things, or Magicians, such as had none at all: and not only the
Platonicke Philosophers but all others that were of the greatest learning, and
best life among all sorts and sects, were converted. And the sect of the
Cynicks, Epicures, Origin. Contra Cells.
and Magitians that were the most vile, licentious, and wicked of all the rest,
given over to all liberty and wantonness, were the greatest enemies we had.
And those which were their greatest learned and of most civil conversation,
such as Seneca, Senec. ep.
and others, and in those times of disgraces and persecutions, durst not
profess themselves christians, yet were our greatest frinds, and writ most
reverently of our religion. And when they were converted, showed themselves
most constant and zealous Christians, and proved the greatest propugnors and
defenders of faith, in those turbulent and violent times of persecution,
against all tirants, and enemies we had. Such were Aristides of Athens,
Apollinaris, Clemens Allexandrinus, Justinius, Melciades and others. And besides
all those external Infidels and enemies, so many sorts and sects of
Heretics above 400. in number before the Apostacy of Luther, Aristid. in
apol. Tri them de script. Apollinar. Clem. Alex. Justin. apol. Melch apol. etc.

Conquest over all heretics and internal enemies.

Barnard. Luther l. catolog haer.


which in the school of Christ have made civil war and rebellion against
the catholic Church, and doctrine, have been so utterly confonnded, confuted,
and vanquished, that not so much as any memory of them is left, except among
Catholic writers, which have noted and recorded their heresies. So that what
force and validity their witness was of, they gave testimony unto us, not
only in the things wherein they discented, and were subdued by their overthrow:
but in those things wherein they agreed with us, against these present
Protistantes, and are witnesses not only for us, but against all other enemies
from which thy dissented. Hist. 3. l 3. c. 10 Platin. in Anastas. 2. Amphiloch
in S. Basil.
So was Arius confounded by Alexander Bishop of Constantinople, so Olimpus at
Carthag. So did Saint Basil miraculously conquer Valence the Arian Emperor.
So Copres the Eremit convinced the Manechees. Pallad. histor. in corpres.

De consecrat. d. 2. c. Bereng.


Thus all other heritickes were overcome, even those that had most affinity
and kindred with Protestants: Berengarius the father of the Sacramentaries was
confuted and recanted his error in open Council, Bergom. hist. fol. 182.

Tho Walde. 1. to. 2.


and acknowledged the Real Presence of CHRIST in the Sacrament. So the
Wickliffistes in England, in the same point in a frequent assembly, in the
church of Saint Paul in London, were miraculously confounded, and subdued. So
were the Henricians in France by S. Bernard, In vit. S. Bern.
both in that and other points wherein they agreed with these men. And all
opinions now defended by them one time or other were confounded and confuted in
general Councels, and the most famous and learned assemblies of the world. So
that what enemies soever they were, In fidels, or Heretics, which at any
time denied Christian Catholic faith, were thus both strangly by miracles and
by argument in reason convicted and condemned; whether they were Jews trusting
to supernatural assistance, or the Gentiles in the power and pomp of the
wolrde; or Magitians in aid of devils, and damned spirits? Philosophers in
their wit, and lerning; or any heretic and apostata in whatsoever buckler or
defense they used. And never any of them could hitherto bring either
supernatural argument, Never any miracle wrought since Christ to prove
Religion but by Catholics, and for their faith*
or sufficient natural reason against us. The Jews so famous with miracles
before Christ, since they denied him, had never any miracle among them, except
such as Christ and Christians have wrought to confound them; Joseph. li. bell.
Epiphan. de piscen.
their last Piscina Probatica that so miraculously healed diseases, (at the
discending of the Angel) then ceassing as their own writers Josephus and
others witness. For their figures ending in Christ, God the worker of
miracles would no longer give testimony unto the^. Of Mahumet and his
Mahumitanes, Mahumet. in Alcoran.
him self so acknowledged, confessing that Miracles were granted unto
Christ. What likeli-hood there is in finding any such thing among the Pagan
Idolaters, whose Gods were devils, which could work nothing supernatural,
every man knows, and (besides the very confession of all these sects) the
thing in it self is manifest: For every one of them defending so manifest
errors and blasphemies as I have proved, it is impossible that God which
cannot give testimony to untruth, should grant miracles and supernatural
works, to prove that to be true, which even in the light of reason is
evidently false. Wherefore to come to end of this dispute with external
Infidels: As I have proved in the former book against all Atheists and
Irreligious, an absolute and undeniable necessity of God, and Religion due to
him, in such order that by no possibillitie either the one or other can be
untrue: So in this it is manifest, against all misbeleeueers, that in
particular this Relgion is that holy worship which was instituted and taught
by Christ. To this all testimonies, divine and humane assent. All authority
that can be cited in such a cause ageeth, all people of renowned learning, or
equal judgment, join in this sentence: all friends allow it: the chiefest
grounds of our enemies themselves confirm it. All other worships by their own
confessions, are drowned in most profane and irreligious errors, such as
deprive the professors of all title to true Religion. One Relgion must needs be
true, all others be both palpably erroneous in themselves, and have
acknowledged not only in general the verity of this holy profession, but given
confirmation to those private Articles which be the greatest mysteries, and
most secret difficulties in that worship. All witness both of God and
creatures, al reason, natural and above nature, have so consented. To this the
grounds of all worships have given authority: The Prophets, Sybills, and
Oracles, of the pagans have yielded: The Rabbis and holy prophets before
Christ, and the Thalmud after have answered against the Jews: and Mahumet
himself for him and his has made conclusion. Christians only do remain,
and they cannot condemn Christianity. And against that which all Arguments
confirm, no Argument can be alleged. If any enemy, Jew, Pagan, or
Mahumetan, should argue against it: I make him answer first, that his
allegatio^ is to be contemned, because the rules and foundation of his own
worship give strength to that which he would weaken by his infirm assertion.
Secondly as the errors of al those worships condemn them selves to be impious,
so they disable all the Arguments they bring against us, and ratify our
religion to be most holy, by all those reasons I used against Atheists before:
because true reverence must be admitted. Thirdly the publicly approved rules
of these worships have approved before the very particular points to which
these private men appose themselves in reasoning. Fourthly the sacred mysteries
against which they dispute (as the nature of God, incarnation of Christ, the
resurrection and such) be wholly supernatural, and belonging to the
extraordinary power of God, or his own essence, which cannot be likened to
inferior and ordinary effects, and causes, from which their reasons and
propositions be abstracted, and they confound themselves: for no common notion
or position can be taken from finite and infinite things, from the nature of
God the Creator, and his creatures, from his ordinary and extraordinary power,
between which there is so great difference of degree and improportion. But the
contrary is to be concluded for us, that our verities by that Argument also are
most certain; otherwise we might blasphemously affirm that there is no
difference between God and his creatures, between his ordinary and
extraordinary, natural and supernatural works, things finite and limited, and
that which is infinite and without limitation. So that howsoever this question
be disputed, either by humane or divine reasonings, this sacred religion which
I defend is the most certain knowledge in the world, confirmed by all
arguments, and grounded upon that infallible evidence of God, which by no
possibility can be untrue: and impugned by none but weak and feeble positions
of such erroneous judgments which are manifestly already convinced to be false,
and by how much the infinite and vndeceaueable wisdom and witness of God upon
which every Article of this divine worship is builded, exceeds the deceitful
sentences of men, deduced from often illuded fantasy deceiptful speeches, and
distempered Organs; By so much the doctrine of Christian religion both in other
dignities and certainty it self excels all other science or knowledge of
things. This last depends oftentimes upon a false foundation, and ever upon
that which is deceiptfull and subject to error; that first of religious faith
is always and in all things grounded upon that which has no possibiltie to
err, and is only vnpowerable to have defect. But of this shall be more
entreated in my second part of Resolution against internal enemies.

The end of the first Part of the Resolution of Religion.
A TABLE OF SVCH THINGS as are contained in the first part of the Resolution
of Religion.
The first Chapter of the first book. Of the Name and Nature of Religyon.
Chap. 2. The absolute Necessity of God, and a first most excellent cause
deserving worship. Chap. 3. The Necessity of a divine providence toward Man,
and all Creatures for him, and his Religious duty for the same. Chap. 4.
Religion evidently needful to obtain a Supernatural and Everlasting
felicity for the immortal Soul of Man, which can neither find any end in
this life, or perish in death. Chap. 5. The testymonie of holy Scriptures,
most certainly revealed of God, and their infallible authority. Chap. 6.
The practice and euydence of all Natyons, States of people, and particular
Parsons. Chap. 7. The testimony of all intellectual creatures. Chap. 8. The
most certain and myraculous Testimony of God. Chap. 9. The testimony and
example of al creatures, even insensible rendering a kind of Reverence. Chap.
10. Extraordinarye punishments imposed upon the Irreligious for their impiety,
and rebellion of all Creatures against them for that cause. Chap. 11. The
miraculous obedyence and submission of all creatures to the Religious. Chap.
12. The afflictions and adversities of the godly and Religious, for which the
Epicures deny Religyon, are a manifest proof thereof. Chap. 13. The temporal
honors and delights of the Religious were often greater, and their myseries
less then of the Irreligious. Chap. 14. The temporal honors and dignities of
the Catholic Christians in particular greatest and their afflictions least.
Chap. 15. If by impossibility there should be no reward for Religion, or
punishment for Irreligion after death, yet the condition and estate of the
Religious is to be preferred. Chap. 16. A conclusion, of the unnatural
absurdities which the Irreligious must grant.
The first Chapter of the second book. Briefly showing against all external
Infidels, how that Religion which was taught by Christ is the true worship of
God.
Chap. 2. and first Argument. Proves the same against them by their own
confession, and grounds of all other Religions. Argum. 2. How all external
and notoryous signs given by God, to know the Messiah, were only veryfied in
Jesus Christ, and cannot possibly be performed in any other. Argum. 3. That
the time wherein Jesus was borne by all accoumpts and reasons was the time of
the coming of the Messiah. Argum. 4. How all particular articles of christian
catholic Religion, for which Jews Mahumetanes and Pagans deny it, are
proved by their own grounds. Argum. 5. The strange and extraordinarye
punyshements inflicted upon all Enemies of Christ and his Religion. Argum. 6.
The palpable and most manifest errors against the light of nature, of all
other Religions. Argum. 7. The excellency and dignity of christian Catholic
Religion above all others. Argum. 8. How this worship has overcome all
enemies, in all kinds of Arguments and disputations, and that in natural
reason it is the most certain knowledge in the world, and all Objections
alleged by Infidels against it, false, even in humane reason.

