To the right Honorable Rich. Archb. of Canterbury, H. B. wishes G.
WHen Barow and Greenwood, R.H. were to be pardoned, if they would have come to
Church: they could find no bar sound but this: That none should hold them of
good religion, which believed that our Lords soul went to Hell. Archb. Wh.
thought that the Creed was translated in English, after the most learned
Greek: but the wicked translation English differs from the Greek: as does
descending in souls, from ascending: and Heaven differs from Hell. Archb. Wh.
thought our Lord in soul descended: and into Hell. But Bishopp Elmer knew the
Greek meant a going up to heaven: and had saved Barow and Greenwood, showing
that by a friend to them: if a Chaplein a messenger, had as he promised, spoken
to the party. upon new stir, I opened the truth: and for receiving a Letter
from Master James Melvin: the unable in Divinity, meant to plague in
humanity. But this blew good corn to you, by E. E. help, and became your
making, and the death of him that preferred you. As you were making friends, I
wrote of our faith and King. For the King you brent the book, as having
treason: that I called him the King of our language. I will not deny my
meaning: I meant to keep you from bent to P^iamus happiness: you and Bar.
Abbas. After this, I write to the grave Father, Archb. Wh. a treatise that he
was deceaved. He saw it, and sent Master Geffrey K. to me, to confess error
Master Rob. Beal told Q Eliz. that Archb. Wh. was deceaved: and, I think, Q E.
bade Archb. Wh. to confess error. But witless Bar. skopheth his yielding,
and D. Bilsons, as if he were an Ape, and not a body of reason, and skopheth
the Sc. M. as having a mind to undo the soil that bredd so senseles and so
impudent a wight, and skopheth the Concent of Scripture: and skopheth the book
of Scripture concent: to grave in memory how unlearned a wight he is. To
Archb. Wh. I write an epistle of D. Bilson his yielding, for the matter in
strife: but by feigning a journey from Heaven to Hell by the Creed: to make
this pha^sie heard, our Christian Religion, he was much deceaved. you brent
these copies: and a second Impression for the King of our language. Consider
how little you feared God and the King in so doing: And to teach how slender a
Doctor you are in Divinity, I advertise of corruptions in your handling of
religion: and of betraying the Gospel to Jews, and at words you chafe: where
your libels style is my warrant. Now I wish you to be a Lucifer, and light
giver: But not a Babylonian Lucifer, to exalt your self above the Gospel, for
our Lords passage hence: and I wish you not to be a Bargulus Illyricus, to
cease upon other men's good: and an Orthodox, not as Cotton exceter, to burn
books defensive of our religion: and I send to your judgment, the book made
against you to the King, if you judge your self, the King needs not to be
troubled. And I will bury all griefs, if you find some to answer the Jew, for
the honor of all Christendom: If you can not, your judgment is heavy that
threatened to hinder others. But take a right course, and all will be well. I have
no mind to strive with you, but to leave you to Gods judgment, where I hold
your bent not good. We should hear that Saint Paul tells: It is appointed
for all men once to die: and then comes judgment. And our years tell us,
there is but a stepp betwixt us and death: that we should look shortly for
death and judgment: and not sell our Birthright in heaven, for a mess of
pottage: but look unto the blessing which God has laid up for all that love
his glorious appearance. AMEN.


