The Speeches and HONORABLE Entertainment given to the Queens MAJESTY in
Progress, at Cowdrey in Sussex, by the right Honorable the Lord Montacute.
1591.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by Thomas Scarlet, and are to be sold by William Wright,
dwelling in Paul's Churchyard near to the French School. 1591.

THE HONORABLE Entertainment given to her Majesty in Progress at Cowdray in
Sussex by the Lord Montecute Anno. 1591. August. 14.
THe Queens MAJESTY came with a great train to the right Honorable the Lord
Montacutes, upon saterdaie being the 14 day of Auguste about eight of the
clock at night. Where upon sight of her Majesty, loud music sounded, which
at her enteraunce on the bridge suddenly ceased. Then was a speech delivered by
a personage in armor, standing between two Porters, carved out of wood, he
resembling the third: holding his club in one hand, and a key of gold in the
other, as follows.

Saturday.
The Porters speech.
THe walls of Thebes were raised by Music: by music these are kept from
falling. It was a prophecy since the first stone was laid, that these walls
should shake, and the roof totter, till the wisest, the fairest and most
fortunate of all creatures, should by her first step make the foundation
staid: and by the glaunce of her eyes make the Turret steddie. I have been
here a Porter many years, many Ladies have entered passing amiable, many very
wise, none so happy. These my fellow Porters thinking there could be none
such, fell on sleep, and so incurde the second curse of the prophecy, which
is, never again to awake: Mark how they look more like posts then Porters,
reteining only their shapes, but deprived of their senses. I thought rather to
cut off my eye liddes, then to wink till I saw the end. And now it is: for
the music is at an end, this house immovable, your virtue immortal. O
miracle of time, Natures glory, Fortunes Empress, the worlds wonder! Soft,
this is the Poets part, and not the Porters. I have nothing to present but the
crest of mine office, this keie: Enter, possess all, to whom the heavens have
vouchsafed all. As for the owner of this house, mine honorable Lord, his
tongue is the keie of his heart: and his heart the lock of his soul.
Therefore what he speaks you may constantly believe: which is, that in duty
and service to your Majesty, he would be second to none: in praieng for your
happiness, equal to any.

Tuus O Regina quod optas
Explorare favor: huic iussa capescere fas est.

Mundaie.
ON Monday at 8. of the clock in the morning, her Highness took horse with all
her Train, and rode into the Park: where was a delicate Bower prepared, under
the which were placed her Highness Musicians, and this dittie following song
while her Majesty shot at the Dear.

A Dittie.
BEhold her locks like wiers of beaten gold,
her eyes like stars that twinkle in the sky,
Her heavenly face not framd of earthly molde,
Her voice that founds Apollos melody,
The miracle of time, the worlds story,
Fortunes Queen, Loves treasure, Natures glory.
No flattering hope she likes, blind Fortunes bait
nor shadows of delight, fond fancies glass,
Nor charms that do inchant, false arts deceit,
nor fading joys, which time makes swiftly pas
But chaste desires which beats all these down,
A Goddess look is worth a Monarchs crown.
Goddess and Monarch of his happy I Will,
vouchsafe this bow which is an huntresse part
Your eyes are arrows though they seem to smile
which never glanst but gald the stateliest heart,
Strike one, strike all, for none at all can fly,
They gaze you in the face although they die.
Then rode her Grace to Cowdrey to dinner, and about six of the clock in the
evening from a Turret saw sixteen Buckes (all having fair law) pulled down
with Greyhoundes in a laund.

Tewsdaie.
On Tewsdaie her Majesty went to dinner to the Priory, where my Lord himself
kept house, and there was she and her Lords most bountifully feasted.

The Pilgrims speech.
FAirest of all creatures vouchsaf to hear the prayer of a Pilgrim, which
shall be short, and the petition which is but reasonable. God grant the world
may end with your life, and your life more happy then any in the world:
that is my prayer. I have traveled many Countries, and in all Countries
desire antiquities. In this Island (but a spanne in respect of the world) and in
this Shire (but a finger in regard of your Realm) I have heard great cause of
wonder, some of complaint. Hard by, and so near as your Majesty shall almost
pass by, I saw on Oak, whose statelines nailed mine cies to the branches, and
the ornaments beguiled my thoughts with astonishment. I thought it free,
being in the field, but I found it not so. For at the very entry I met I
know not with what rough-hewed Ruffian, whose arms were carved out of knotty
box, for I could receue nothing of him but boxes, so hasty was he to strike,
he had no leisure to speak. I thought there were more ways to the wood then
one, and finding another passage, I found also a Lady very fair, but passing
froward, whose words set me in a greater heat then the blows. I asked her
name, she said it was Peace. I wondered that Peace could never hold her peace.
I cannot persuade my self since that time, but that there is a waspes nest in
mine ears. I returned discontent. But if it will please your Highness to view
it, that rude Champion at your fair feet will lay down his foul head: and
at your beck that Lady will make her mouth her tongues mue. Happily your
Majesty shall find some content: I more antiquities.

Then did the Pilgrim conduct her Highness to an Oak not far off, whereon her
Majesty's arms, and all the arms of the Noblemen, and Gentlemen of that
Shire, were hanged in Escutchions most beutifull, and a wild man cladde in
Iuie, at the sight of her Highness spoke as follows.

The wild man's speech at the tree.
Mighty Princess, whose happiness is attended by the heavens, and whose
government is wondered at upon the earth: vouchsafe to hear why this passage
is kept, and this Oak honored. The whole world is drawn in a map: the
heavens in a Globe: and this Shire shrunk in a Tree: that what your Majesty
has often heard off with some comfort, you may now behold with full content.
This Oak, from whose body so many arms do spread: and out of whose arms so
many fingers spring: resembles in part your strength and happiness. Strength,
in the number and the honor: happiness, in the truth and consent. All
hearts of Oak, then which nothing surer: nothing sounder. All wouen in one
root, then which nothing more constant, nothing more natural. The wall of
this Shire is the sea, strong, but rampired with true hearts, invincible: where
every private man's eye is a Beacon to discover: every noble man's power a
Bulwark to defend. Here they are all differing somewhat in degrees, not in
duty: the greatness of the branches, not the greenesse. Your majesty they
account the Oak, the tree of Jupiter, whose root is so deeply fastened, that
treachery, though she undermine to the center, cannot find the windings, and
whose top is so highly reared, that envy, though she shoot on copheigth,
cannot reach her, under whose arms they have both shade and shelter. Well not
they that your enemies lightnings are but flashes, and their thunder which
filles the whole world with a noise of conquest, shall end with a soft shower
of Retreat. Be then as confident in your steps, as Caesar was in his
Fortune. His proceedings but of conceit: yours of virtue. Abroad courage has
made you feared, at home honored clemency. Clemency which the owner of this
Grove has tasted: in such sort, that his thoughts are become his hearts
laberinth, surprised with joy and loialtie. Joy without measure, loyalty
without end, living in no other air, then that which breathes your Majesty's
safety.

For himself, and all these honorable Lords, and Gentlemen, whose shieldes
your Majesty does here behold, I can say this, that as the veins are
dispersed through all the body, yet when the heart feels any extreme
passion, send all their blood to the heart for comfort: so they being in
diverse places, when your Majesty shall but stand in fear of any danger,
will bring their bodies, their purses, their souls, to your Highness, being
their heart, their head, and their Sovereign. This passage is kept straight,
and the Pilgrim I fear has complained: but such a disguised world it is
that one can scarce know a Pilgrim from a Priest, a ^^^^er from a Gentleman,
nor a man from a woman Every one seeming to be that which they are not, only
do practice what they should not. The heavens guide you, your Majesty gouernes
us: though our peace be envied, by you we hope it shall be eternal.

Elizabetha Deus nobis haec otia foecit.
The Dittie.
THere is a bird that builds her neast with spice, and built, the Sun to ashes
does her burn,
Out of whose sinders does another rise. and she by scorching beams to dust
does turn:
Thus life a death, and death a life does prove,
The rarest thing on earth except my love.
My love that makes his neast with high desires, and is by beauties blaze to
ashes brought,
Out of the which do break out greater fires, they quenched by disdain consume
to naught,
And out of naught my cleerest love does rise,
True love if often slain but never dies.
True love which springs, though Fortune on it tread as camomel by pressing
down does grow
Or as the Palm that higher reares his head, when men great burrhens on the
branches throw
Love fancies birth, Fidelity the womb, the Nurse Delight, Ingratitude the
tomb.
Then upon the winding of a Corn was (...) most excellent cry of hounds,
with whom h^^ Majesty hunted and had good sport.

Wednesdaie.
On wednesdaie the Lords and Ladies dined in the walks, feasted most
sumptuously. In the evening her Majesty coming to take the pleasure of the
walks, was delighted with most delicate music, and brought to a goodly
Fishpond where was an Angler, that taking no notice of her Majesty, spoke as
follows.

The Anglers Speech.
NExt rowing in a Western barge well fare Angling, I have bin here this two
hours and cannot catch an oyster. It may he for lack of a bait, and that were
hard in this nibling world, where every man lays bait for another. In the
City merchants bait their tongues with a lie and an oath, and so make simple
men swallow deceitful wares: and fishing for commodity is grown so far,
that men are become fishes, for Land lords put such sweet baits on rackt
rents, that as good it were to be a perch in a pikes belly, as a Tenant in
their farms. All our trade is grown to treachery, for now fish are caught
with medicines: which are as vnwholsom as love procured by withchcraft
unfortunate. We Anglers make our lines of diverse colors, according to the
kinds of waters: so do men their loves, aiming at the complexion of the
faces. Thus Merchandise, Love, and Lordships suck venom out of virtue. I think
I shall fish all day and catch a frog, the cause is neither in the line, the
hook, nor the bait, but some thing there is over beautiful which stays the
very Minow (of all fish the most eager) from biting. For this we Anglers
observe, that the shadow of a man turns back the fish. What will then the
sight of a Goddess? It Is best angling in a lowering day, for here the Sun so
glisters, that the fish see my hook through my bait. But soft here be the
Netters, these be they that cannot content them with a dish of fish for their
supper, but will draw a whole pond for the market.

This said, he espied a Fisherman, drawing his nets toward where her
Majesty was. And calling alowde to him. Ho Sir (quoth the Anggler) What
shall I give thee for thy draught, If there be never a whale in it take it for
a Noble quoth the Netter.

Ang. Be there any maids there?


Net. Maids fool, they be sea fish.


Ang. Why?


Net. Venus was borne of the Sea, and it is reason she should have maids to
attend her.


Then turned he to the Queen, and after a small pawse, spoke as follows.

MADAME, it is an old saying, There is no fishing to the sea, nor service to
the King: but it holds when the sea is calm and the king virtuous. Your
virtue does make Envy blush, and Envy stands amazed at your happiness. I come
not to tell the art of fishing, nor the natures of fish, nor their daintines,
but with a poor Fisher man's wish, that all the hollow hearts to your
Majesty were in my net, and if there be more then it will hold, I would
they were in the sea till I went thither a fishing.

There be some so muddie minded, that they can not live in a clear river but
a standing poole, as camells will not drink till they have troubled the water
with their feet: so can they never stanch their thirst, till they have disturbd
the state with their trecheries. Soft, these are no fancies for fisher men. Yes
true hearts are as good as full purses, the one the sinews of war, the other
the arms. A dish of fish is an unworthy present for a prince to accept: there
be some carpes amongst them, no carpers of states, if there be, I would they
might be handled like carpes, their tongues pulled out. Some pearches there
are I am sure, and if any perch higher than in duty they ought, I would they
might suddenly pick over the perch for me. What so ever there is, if it be
good it is all yours, most excellent Lady, that are best worthy of the
greatest good.


That ended,

This Song of the Fisher man.
THE fish that seeks for food in silver stream is unawares beguiled with the
hook,
And tender hearts when lest of love they dream, do swallow beauties bait, a
lovely look.
The fish that shuns to bite, in net does hit,
The heart that scapes the eye is caught by wit.
The thing called Love, poor Fisher men do feel rich pearls are found in hard
and homely shells
Our habits base, but hearts as true as steel, sad looks deep sighs, flat
faith are all our spells,
And when to us our loves seem fair to be.
We court them thus Love me and I Will love thee.
And if they say our love is fondly made, we never leave till on their hearts
we lite,
Anglers have patience by their proper trade, and are content to tarry till
they bite,
Of all the fish that in the waters move,
We count them lumps that will not bite at love.
For the rest of the Entertainment, honorable feasting, and abundance of all
things that might manifest a liberal and loyal heart, because I was not
there, I cannot set down, thus much by report I hear, and by the words, of
those that deserve credit, that it was such as much contented her Majesty,
and made many others to wonder. And so her Majesty well pleased with her
welcome, and he thoroughly comforted with her Highness gracious acceptance,
she went from thence to Chichester.


