An answer to MaSTER CARTWRIGHT HIS LETTER FOR JOINING with the English
Churches: whereunto the true copy of his said letter is annexed.

Ye are deceived not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. Matthew. 22.
29. Search the Scriptures: for in them ye think to have eternal life, and
they are they which testify of me. John 5. 39. Let every one that calls on
the Name of Christ depart from iniquity. 2 Timothy 2. 19. And these things that I
say unto you, I say unto all men: watch. Mark 13. 37. Imprinted at LONDON.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, GRACE AND PEACE from God the Father, and from the
Lord Jesus Christ etc.
DEARLY beloved in the truth, you have in this book an answer to an answer
written unto Master Harrison at Middleborough by Master Cartwright upon
occasion of controversy between them concerning the true spouse of Christ or
his ordinary visible Churches in England, And it is thought good to put this
answer before the said answer of Master Cartwright. And although the
godlywise, and such as have only the glory of God before their eyes and his
pure Religion and service together with the salvation of their brethren, will
easily perceive the reasons, and causes: yet least any might take offense in
this offense in this behalf, it is though meet to show some. The first
reason therefore is this. Our corrupt nature is more prone and ready to
embrace the error of man then the truth of God Another cause was for that our
vntowardenesse is so great, that if an untruth be once received, it works
such a prejudice in the heads and minds of men, that they will hear neither
God his word, neither reason or argument to the contrary be it never so good
and effectual. A third cause moved to place this answer first, for that it
should be an occasion unto the Reader, to use more diligent conferring of
this answer with the other, for the better discerning and finding out of the
truth in this controversy. It is not necessary that any man interpose his
judgment at this time, but to attend by prayer the good event which God will
give for the further manifestation of his truth, and abolishing of the
contrary. Now these few lines are thought in this matter sufficient, least it
might seem to foreiudge any truth in either of these answers, or else by
accepting of persons to foster corruption, or a lie in any thing set forth in
the Name of the Lord. It is expedient therefore that the scriptures be
faithful searched by the godly Reader, to see whether these things be even so
or not. For no man that fears God is ignorant of the doctrine of our Savior
christ, that whosoever breaks the least of the commandments of God, and
teaches men so, is least in the kingdom of heaven. Neither ye^ of this
general and universal doctrine of god his word, true repentance, unfeigned
faith with amendment of life, to be necessary unto salvation. But it is said
before, these few things suffice. Therefore the faithful Reader is to be
commended to the grace of God, for his further direction in this behalf,
farewell dear brother in the Lord.

AN ANSWER TO MASTER CARTWRIGHT HIS LETTER, FOR joining with the English
Churches: Whereunto the true Copy of his said Letter is annexed.
AS there be always both friends and enemies to the Church of God, so some
do give their hands unto it as friends, and some being enemies will give it
their left hand of friendshihpe to turn it clean out of the way. How
friendly Master Cartwright is to it, let us examine by this his Letter, and by
the grace of God, let us try out the truth betwixt him and us: his letter is
in many men's hands, and was seen abroad unsealed and open, as if he cared
not who should read it, wherefore I may the more boldly answer it, and the
rather because the matter thereof is public and pertaining to the Church of
God. It came but lately to my hands, and was written as they tell me more then
five or six weeks ago, wherein if he and others that provoke him, sought not
to take us tardie in the truth and to work us trouble, we would the les^e
have regarded his letters: but seeing he will needs make us enemies to the
common and ordinary good laws of the Realm, to the Church of god in the
Realm, and to the peace and welfare of the common wealth: Let us answer his
cauilles: and for so much as we have so small respite of time, let us shortly
gather up his untruths and errors, and hurl them out by manifest and known
marks, least any man do believe them as truth.

Master Cartwright does move the first question thus: That the outward
profession made by the laws of the land, and the assemblyes of the Church
held accordingly, are condened as unlawful: this is the short (says he) of
M. Harrisons longer discourse, if he use to make such shorts, he is not meet
to deal with short or with long. Let him lap up his shortes in his budget,
and not send them abroad in stead of our lengths or larger syse. For at the
first brunt he would set against us all these enemies: 1. The laws of the
land. 2. The outward profession by the laws. 3. The apparent Churches of
Christ, 4 and the lawful assemblyes thereof. First, for the laws, he knew
well enough what Laws we mean: namely, certain Popish Cannon laws, which
though the Magistrates do tolerate for a time, yet the common good laws of
the land are wholly against them. Wherefore let him not deal doubly with us,
as having our true meaning in his heart, to fumble out of his mouth or to
shuffle up in his letter a contrary meaning: we know that the laws do punish
all outward gross wickedness, or suffer it to be punished: as namely,
Idolatry, forswearing, usurping of Lordshippe, rebellion, murder* fleshly
filthiness, theft, oppression, raylings, grievous slanders, drunkenness, etc.
and if there be any vice not punishable by the law, yet the laws do suffer
either the Church, or every householder, or governor to correct (so it be not
against law) such as are under their charge. So then the laws are a wall to
the Church round about: they stand up for it as an armed man, that it may
show it self openly without shame or fear. For when they put down all
outward gross wickedness, and will not suffer it, they do as it were
scatter and drive away darkness from the Church, that men may see it visible
and clear as the Sun. Likewise for the outward profession by the laws,
Master Cartwright would play at handie dandie with us, and yet not give us
that hand which we do choose: for there is an outward profession after the
old Popish traditions and orders, let him hold this profession in his left
hand: and there is a profession more syncerely by some, after some better
Laws and Orders, this he should houlde in his right hand: wherefore then
does he reach us that in his right hand as taking it unlawful, which we
choose as lawful. If he say that we condemn that ordinary abused and
corrupt profession of the most, I answer that the Laws do also the same:
For the common Laws are against the cannon Laws in many hundredth points, one
gives check to the other as two Dames at variance in one house, the cannon is
as fire in the house to burn it, the common is as water pouring down to
quench it. The Popish courts esteem all sorts of christians for churches
of Christ, much like those harlots, that would have many children though it
were by fornication, that they might rule over many, but the Common wealth
rejects her children, as being children of Death, even for smaller Theftes,
Felonyes, Roginges, and Wanderinges, without honest Trades and labors; as for
the right corrections of Adulteryes, those Whoorish courts have taken so much
upon them, that the Civil Magistrates could not so well see to it before this
time. But now even for this matter they have given a great check to the
cannon Officers. Also for persecuting the brethren and sundry worthy men,
their authority and cannon power has received a great blow and wound. If
there be contrary laws one against another, as through change of times,
variaunce of people, and other necessities, it may fall out, yet through favor
and help of good Magistrates, the law shall still be with the Church and not
against it: As for the Maiestracie of Bishops there is no law to warrant it,
but only her Majesty's permission: likewise for the common form of service and
prayers, there is exception by the law, and it is set down also in the book
of Common prayer, that the prayers may be changed, intermitted, and left off by
occasions: as when the Minister is to preach or apply him self to his study
for preaching. Further whereas the law does bind us to come to the church,
it does well, for no man ought to refuse the Church of God, yet if when we come
to the church, we find there an unlawful minister, and a wicked confusion of
all sorts of people, the fault is not now in the law but in the Bishops
which place such ministers, and in their spiritual courts which are authors
of such confusion: for the Law commands that the Minister should be Doctus
and Clericus, which words do require learning sufficient, and godliness
meet for a clergy man: otherwise how should he be Clericus that is one of
the Lords inheritance. But the Bishops count him learned if he can but read
only, and answer to a catechism as do children: wherefore good Magistrates
will execute the law according to the true meaning, and not according to the
extremity of the words, and if they see to it, that men shall come to Church,
they will first see that the church be better ordered that men may come with
comfort, and not with heart burning to their conscience. Also for discipline
in gathering the worthy from the unworthy, the law appoints it and gives
leave to make exception both in public judgment and in churches against
unworthy persons: as against Drunkenness, fightings, murder, adulteryes,
stealth, slanders, etc. and that before the Constables, Justices of Peace,
Judges and Justices of Assizes, and yet also do give liberty to the Church to
use their own discipline. But either the Popes cannon laws, and his officers
do quite overthrow it, or the Ministers are so servile and foolish that they
can not, or dare not execute it: It were too long to rehearse what liberty the
laws do yield to us, and what outward profession there is by the laws: but
thus we conclude, that seeing very many of the Bishops doings and their
officers are unlawful, and yet very usually and ordinarily professed, held,
and practiced, we must needs say that such an ordinary profession is unlawful.

Now follows the chiefest and greatest matter in controversy: namely,
Whether the ordinary assemblies of the professors in England be the Churches
of Christ. A part of this question he must make as he does the usual outward
profession. What Master Harrison did write in his letter, and upon what words
Master C. does gather this question, I can not tell: for I never saw Master
Harrisons letter: but I hope Master H. did not condemn any assemblyes, but
abused assemblies, neither any professors, but false professors: wherefore let
him take his right meaning, namely, The ordinary abused assemblyes of false
professors. But he will admit no such distinction: for belike he will have no
such assemblyes, yet in a time of better reformation then is now in England,
Ierem. 3. 6. 1^*
as in the days of King Josiah, the Lord witnesses, that Judah had not
returned unto him with their whole heart but faynedly. If they then were false
professors, whose hypocrisy was in their hearts, why should not they be false
professors, which do show forth in practice a false profession, and that
chiefly in their assemblyes? but whatsoever false profession they have, and
how gross soever their abuses be, Master Cartwright will prove them to be
churches of Christ. But go to, let us examine his proo^es: those assemblyes
have Christ for their head and foundation, for says he, they believe in
Christ, and have the spirit of Christ, therefore they are the churches of
Christ. Now to prove that they believe, he brings in their profession: so
that all Master Cartwrights arguments falls from one to one, till it come to
nothing at all, for from the head and foundation of the church, he descends
to the spirit and to faith, and so at last to the outward profession. Now
the outward profession must chiefly be showed and justified by the lawful
using of public assemblyes. If they then be so shamefully abused by means of
the bishops, and their officers, then his proof of the outward profession
also falls to the ground. Thus of necessity he must justify many gross
corruptions both in the assemblyes, and in sundry their practices and customs,
or else lay by his proof as untrue. But what need he have fetched about and
made such adoo, touching faith and the spirit, and the head and the
foundation of the Church, and then to have no other proof but the question to
prove the question. For the question is, whether the assemblyes be lawful
outward Churches, being held according to so corrupt profession? or whether
the outward profession of the false professors standing as it does, the
assemblyes that are according, be lawful or no? Thus he proves idem per
idem: it is so, because it is so: it shall be so, because it shall be so. But
mark his turning and shifting to and fro in this matter. For from the outward
church and the outward profession he leapeth and flees to the spirit and
faith, which are inward: and from the inward graces he returns to the
outward profession. Thus as one that is hunted with his enemy within, he
runs out, and being in danger without he runs in: for by faith which is
inward, and the spirit that is inward, he would justify an outward
church. Again, by an outward, false, and corrupt profession, he will
justify the inward spirit and faith of professors, to be sincere. Thus
with turning and returning to and fro, he would establishe his error, but he
does weary him self in vain. Now as his dealing herein is ridiculous, so
he increases it unto a shameless and blasphemous doctrine: For he says
that there being but one only true Christian in a church, or congregation, and
all the rest wicked, yea and so wicked that they have but a bare profession in
word only without any good works, they should all be counted the church of
God, for that one man's cause. I marvel how his pen could drop down
such poison, and he not smell the stinch thereof as he wrote it: For by this
doctrine every faithful christian shall be above Christ. For Master
Cartwright does give them power to loose those on earth, which God does bind
in heaven, and this power Christ never had: For if the faith of one or a few
believers in an assembly be of force to make them all the Church, though the
rest be gross offenders, Mat. 18. 18.
then need they to bind none in earth: And why should Saint Paul allege
this power of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 5. 4.
if all may be taken for the Church by the faith of some?

For Master Cartwright will give us a contrary power, namely, Ierem. 7. 9. 1*
to reckon all for the church. But will you steal, murder, commit adultery,
and swear falsely, etc. says the Lord, and come, and stand before me in
this house whereupon my Name is called, and say, We are delivered, though we
have done all these abominations? If Master Cartwright should answer this
question, we should hear those lying words (for so the Prophet terms
them) namely, Iere. 7. 4.
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, allis the Temple and Church
of god: But a den of thieues is not the house and Temple of God. And if the
faith of few will make many wretches to be the church, then the unfaithfulness
of many should be of force to make them all no Church: But as my wickedness
condemns no man but my self, except they partake with me in my wickedness, so
my faith justifies no man to be of the church, except they hold with me an
outward good profe^sion according to faith. For show me thy faith by thy works
(says S. Iam. 2) as who say, James 2.
he would not believe there were faith, if he saw not the works of faith. And
Paul joins the belief of the heart, Romans 10. 10.
and confession of the mouth both together, as needeful unto righteousness and
salvation: and by the confession of the mouth, he means al outward profession
agreeing to faith, because the profession by mouth is chiefest. He can not
turn his words, as if he spoke of one truly faithful, and all the rest secret
hypocrites, for he speaks of the outward profession, of the outward works,
and of the outward church, and grants also that there are many outward and
gross abuses: further, he names that in words only they hold the true faith,
as who say, be the deeds never so abominable, yet for that faithful man's sake,
they are al to be called one church with him. If Master Cartwright had said
clean contrary, he had spoken more truly: namely, that if among many good
livers, one wicked man were found, as a m^rtherer, an idolater, or an
adulterer, and the rest become so negligent or wilful, or are held in such
spiritual bondage, that any one such open and manifest offense is incurable,
then the covenant is broken and disanulled with them all, till they repent and
redress such wickedness. Proof there is by the 7. Josh. 7. 12.
of Joshua, the 13. Deuteronomy. 13.
of Deuteronomie, the 9. Ezra 9.
of Ezra, the 20. Judge. 20.
of Judges, the 3. Ierem. 3. 1.
of Jeremy and 1. verse. By the punishment of the whole land for Saul's
offense, 2. Samuel. 21. 2. Sam. 21.
By the ceremonies of leprosies. Of touching unclean things. By the leaven
(named of Paul) that leaueneth the whole lu^pe 1. Cor. 5. 1. Cor. 5.
and by sundry other places. Wherefore this doctrine of his, as it makes for
the Pope, that a whole wretched multitude may be the Church and depend on one
man, and clean overthrows the discipline of the church: so it is so contrary
to God and all godliness, that I wonder any man should have the face to
auouche it. If M. C. say, that he means not a profession altogether
corrupted, but a good profession in other duties, though that be naught,
which justifies such abuses in assemblies, I marvel how he dare pronounce
it an apparent sanctification, or an holy profession in other duties, where
there is so corrupt and polluted a profession in public assemblyes. Does not
the Prophet teach us, Ezech. 18. 10.
That that man can have no name of a righteous, just, and holy man, which
offends in any one gross sin. If he sin in any one of these things
(says the Prophet) though he do ^ot all these things he is a wicked man, all
the righteousness which he has done, shall not be mentioned, but his
wickedness shall be upon him. James. 1. 26.
And if it be true that James says, cap. ^. 26. that not to refrain a man's
tongue, is to prove his religion vain: then to have a filthy polluted
profession in public assemblies, is to make all other profession filthy and
polluted. And so reasons the Prophet Haggi, Hag 2. 13. 14.
That as any holy meat was made unholy and unclean, if a polluted person did
but touch it, or the skirt of a man's garment did but touch it, so much more
unclean was that people and nation, and all their holy exercises and
sacrifices, and all the works of their hands, becuase they polluted them
selves but in one thing, namely, in slacking and fearing to build the outward
Temple, which was but a figure of the outward Church of god at this day.

But we come to another of Master Cartwrights proofs, which he gives thus:
They have the couenaunts of the churches of god, namely the spirit and the
word of god put in their mouths, therefore they are the Churches of god. We
do not deny but that there are sundry churches of god: but the question is of
a corrupt profession by Popish Laws, and of unlawful assemblyes made thereby.
But whatsoever corruption there is, (as he grants diverse) yet they have the
covenant says he of the spirit, and the word of god in their mouths. So
without shame he abuses that place in Isaiah* 59 For he leaves out one part
of the covenant, Isa. 59. 20.
which is, That the Lord will come unto Zion and to those that turn from
iniquity in Jacob, and with them will he make his covenant: wherefore the
word is not the covenant to establish a Church except it reign and rule in
the Church, to subdue it in obedience to the Lord: for the Lord makes no
covenant, but with those that turn from iniquity in Jacob. Genesis 17. 1, 2.
As again it is written, Walk before me, and be thou upright, and I will make
my covenant between me and thee. As who say, one condition and part of the
covenant is our upright and good profession. Iere 11. 3, 4.
So likewise in Jeremy and Exodus, Exodus 19.
the promise of obedience in the people, is set down as one part of the
covenant, Obey my voice, and do according to all these things which I
command you, so shall you be my people and I will be your god: or else cursed
be the man that obeys not the words of this covenant. For on this condition
will the Lord receive us, 2. Cor. 6. 17, 18
as Paul reasons* if we come out from among the wicked, Isa. 52. 11.
and separate our selves: Ierem. 31. 1. ^
Then will I be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters,
says the Lord Almighty. Thus should Master Cartwright have conferred place
with place, and have known that the word is no covenant, where the practice
thereof is rejected and trodden under foot: neither can men say they have the
covenant of the spirit, when open and gross wickedness so reigns in them,
that there is no power of the spirit to redress it, but it remains
incurable. Romans 8. 14.
And so Paul reasons, that as many as are led by the spirit of god, they are
the sons of god* but he shows that they are in the state of condemnation,
and not in Christ Jesus, if they walk after the flesh, and not after the
spirit. For there is not the covenant of the spirit, where we are not turned
from iniquity as Isaiah him self witnesses, Zech. 12. 10.
and let Zecharie interpret Isaiah, whose shows what spirit God will power
upon his house and people, namely, The spirit of grace and compassion, unto
repentance and mourning for their sins. Ezec. 11. 19, 20.
Likewise Ezechiel does give the proof and trial of that new spirit and
new heart which God would put in his people, namely this, That they should
walk in his statutes, and keep his judgments, and execute them, and so
doing, they shall be his people, and he would be their god. Wherefore let not
Master Cartwright account so much of the word in their mouths, Deuteronomy. 30. 14.
except as it is written in Deuteronomy. it be in their mouths and in their hearts
for to do it. Otherwise Christ will pronounce of them, that in vain they
worship the Lord, Mat. 15. 8.
and so are they false worshippers: for god is near in their mouths, and
far from their reigns: Ierem. 1^. 2.
They draw near unto god with their mouths and honor him with their lips,
but their heart is far off from him. Surely such men are not those burning
lamps, neither the golden candlesticks he speaks of, but rather as those
that will seek me daily, says the Lord, Isa. 29. 13.
even as a nation that did righteously, Isa. 58. 2.
and had not forsaken the statutes of their god: they ask of me ordinances of
justice, they will draw near unto me. Isa. 59. 2, 20.
Yet in the next chapter the Lord witnesses, that there was a great separation
between him and them, so that he was to make a new covenant with them, and
they were to turn from their former iniquities, or else they could not be his
people and Church. And therefore when Christ appoints the Apostles to plant
churches throughout the world, Mat. 28. 19, 20*
he appoints them not, to talk of and profess the word in their mouths
only, but he gives in charge these three things, as being the chief marks of
a planted Church: namely preaching the word, ministration of the sacraments,
and reformation of life, which is the chiefest thing of all to set forth his
Church and kingdom: for he comma^deth to preach and baptize, and because
preaching and baptizing is nothing without amendme^t of life, he adds these
words, teaching the^ to observe and do all things, whatsoever I have commanded
you. Therefore as appears in the acts of the Apostles, Acts 2.
was neither the church nor the couena^ts of the Church established among any,
Acts 8.
but where their good and godly profession was showed, Acts 19. 18.
and the contrary refused. I know M. C. will gainsay that there must needs be
hypocrites in every church, and sometimes also open breach of gods
commandments. 1. Cor. 5. 11.
It is true indeed. But yet if any make an open and gross breach then Paul
has written unto us, that we company not together with such. For if any (says
he) that is called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or
a railor, or a drunkard, or an extortioner etc. with such a one eat not. The
adversaries reply to this, that in deed to eat common bread with such, or to
partake with them in the feasts of charity was forbidden, which distinction
and shift they allege out of Calvin. But who dare say that the godly wife may
not eat common bread with her excommunicate husband? or the godly children
with their wicked parents? or servants with their masters? For otherwise al
service, ministry and communion in a common wealth should be overthrown. And
so as Paul reasons the godly should not be able to live in the world. Who also
dare say that when the church held their feasts of charity they might forbid
wicked persons to partake with them in the feasts, and yet suffer them to
partake in the Lordes-table. Nay they kept their feasts and the Lords Supper
together. And hereupon Paul gave this distinction, that they should suffer none
but bre^hre^ to join with them in the holy feasts or in the assemblyes which
were for ministration of the Lords Supper: but if we will not eat and drink
with sinners in the world we must go out of the world. Wherefore there is an
eating with wretches in the world, or in worldly meetings and feastings, which
is forbidden in the Church meetings. As if a brother being separate and fallen
away, should in an Inn or vitailing house sit down at the table to eat,
after we and others were set; it were unlawful to rise from the table because
of him: yea it were both against common charity and humanity, and also
against the peace and communion of a common wealth. But of this matter it
follows to speak afterward.

We haste one to others proofs. An other proof is, as though it were granted
him, that where a preaching minister is, there is a Church: nay we know that
assemblyes of papists have preaching ministers, and yet are not the church of
God. And though they be Protestants which have a Preacher over them, yet if he
for his wickedness cease to be a brother, and they also for their wickedness
be no brethren, the preaching Minister can not cause them to be a Church of
God. This is manifest before, and shall partly also afterward be spoken of:
wherefore I let it pass. As for that he says, of some knowledge received by a
dumb ministry, and of faith received by some further Ministry, it is much
like the same tryfling proof he used before, and is answered already. For we
said, that the inward faith will not justify the outward Church, when there is
a wicked profession contrary to the doctrine of faith. Again a man may
believe, and be won to faith, by means of some godly brother, and that
before he have outwardly joined him self to the Church: so in gods secret
election he is of the church: yet because he has not the outward profession,
can not be said to be the outward Church. But here Master Cartwright though
he dare not justify the blind reading Ministers, yet he does praise them as
doing some good. But of this matter also it follows afterward to entreat,
as whether he that does so much hurt and mischief can be said to do any
good at all. Likewise it is a trifling to no purpose, that he says, the Church
cease not, when a minister fails or wants: for we know that even two or
three agreeing together in the truth, and separate from wickedness, if none
other will join with them, even they are an outward and visible Church, and
have this power of Christ, Mat. 18. 18.
even to bind men on earth, and to loose them on earth, that they may be bound
or loosed in heaven. For though by persecution they be driven into corners, yet
their good profession is outward and visible in it self, and yet hidden from
their enemies which are unworthy to see it, for the church may increase into
thousands and decrease also in this world, even to a little householde, Revel.
11. 8.
and to four or five persons. For Jerusalem fell away, and became as Sodom
and Egypt, and the Lord did blot out the whole name and church of the Jews,
and called his people by another name: as it is written Isay 65. Isa. 65. 15.
Acts 11. Act. 11. 26.
But in these latter days, it is prophesied that the Church should be small,
hidden, and driven into corners. So that as in Noas time, eight persons only
escaped, even so when the son of man shall come he shall not find faith on
the earth, Revel. 12. 13, 14.
and those days before his coming shall be so hard, that scarce any flesh
shall be saved. Mat. 24. 22.
Indeed one person will not make a church* for the Church must needs be a
number, Mat. 18. 19, 20.
but where two or three are gathered together in the name of Christ, Philem. 2.
there is he in the mids of them. Col. 4. 15.
And the household of Philemon is named a Church. Romans 16. 5.
Likewise the household of Olymphis, 1 Cor. 5. 4.
of Aquila and Priscilla, and others. For if they have the power which Paul
calls the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, and do meet together few or more
in the Name of Christ, they are surely the Church of Christ. Therefore this
doctrine is still against Master Cartwright for neither the word in the
preachers mouth, nor the Sacraments can make an outward Church, except they
have the power of Christ to separate the unworthy. For Master C. confesses
that the name of a Church shall remain, though the preacher and his preaching
do cease, and is wanting for a time. But without this power of binding, that
is, of declaring men's wickedness, and forsaking their fellowshippe to leave them
unto Satan being open and grievous offenders, there is no name, nor show of
the church of Christ remaining. If he demand proof hereof, the scriptures
are manifest. For God has given this power, not only to the preachers, but to
all the saints of god, Psalm. 14* 9. 6, 7, 8, 9.
as appears by that Psalm, namely, By the word of god in their mouths, to
bind even the Kings and nobles of the earth, and to execute upon them his
spiritual judgment, and the text follows, that this honor shall be to all
the Saints. Wherefore it is not peculiar to some one, or to ^ome few alone,
Isa. 54. 7.
but it belongs to all: yea this is the heritage of all the Lords servants,
as Isaiah testifies. In deed it is true, that we ought jointly to execute
this power: but if others will not or be in bondage that they can not join
with us therein, then they are not the Church, but the bondslaues of men. For
this power belongs to every one severally to forsake wicked fellowship, Ephe.
5. 7.
and there is a commandment given to every one, to forsake the unfruitful
works of darkness, to be no companions with such, to have no fellowshippe
with them, 2. These. 3. 6.
to withdraw our selves, from every brother that walks inordinately: yea and
to turn away from all, 2. Tim. 3. 5.
which having a show of godliness do deny the power thereof. For if we walk
in darkness, and say we have fellowship with god, 1. John 1. 6.
we lie, (says S. John) and do not truly: But if we walk in the light, we
have fellowship one with another, otherwise that fellowship holds not. And in
Hosea commandment is given unto all, Hose. 2. 2.
even to plead against the mother church, if it fall away, that as god does
forsake it so every one also should stand against it, Acts 2* 40.
if it become abominable. And so also all are commanded to save them selves
from a froward generation. But it may be here objected, how we answer to the
place in Matthew. 18 that we must complain to the Church, and then if the
offender hear not the Church, we must take him for a heathen and publican. I
grant that if the offense be private, he must be first privately dealt with.
But this proves not, that either for private or open offenses, we must wait
on them for redress, which are enemies of the Church, and which have no power
to bind and lose, as has the church. Wherefore let not Master Cartwright
account so much of the assemblyes he speaks of: for what is a Church without
this power we spoke of? yea what are those assemblies which in stead of it, do
hold that Antichristian power of the spiritual courts, or rather are held
in bondage by it? But Master Cartwright allows not only those assemblies,
but also those vile courts and officers, and Bishops set over them to be all
the Church of God. For he says afterward, namely in the sixth page, that the
calling of the dumb ministers, whichis by them, is a calling of the church and
sufficient to make them ministers: yea and he seems to allow also their
suspendings of preachers, as if it were done by the Church, so that both for
complaint and for redress of defaults, and for establishing and gathering the
churches, he allows or tollerateth those officers and courts to have the
power and authority of the church. But God has appointed no such kind of
complaints in the Church, neither such kind of redress, nor ordering of
matters. First, because they redress and order matters by money, Brybes, Fees,
Civil penaltyes etc. wherein the Church discipline ought not to meddle. For
the weapons of our warefare says Paul, 2. Cor* 10. 4.
are not carnal. He means that the Church may not deal in matters of
reformation, as does the common wealth and this present world. The Church can
deal no further then only by rebuke, warning and exhortation out of gods
word, and by forsaking and casting of fellowship in grosser sins: And
therefore rightly may the word and his Spiritual graces be called the weapons
of our warfare. Also in the church there can be no recompense made for sin
by money. Number 35. 3^. 32.
For the sinner is the murderer of his own soul. And therefore the law of god
is, that for murder or killing any, there ca^ be no recompense made, save only
by the death of the maslayer him self, or the high Priest, which figured thus
much, that except we see in any transgressour open repentance and faith in the
death of Christ, we are to judge him still dead in his sin, and that money
can not make him to live, nor redress his wickedness. And the officers that
take money in such a case, Hose. 4. 8.
do even eat up the sin of the people, as it is written and lift up their
minds in their iniquity. Also because the Judges and officers of the court
do wrest Gods Law, Deuteronomy. 16. 14.
by their Popish cannon Law, and respect persons and take reward which is
forbidden in Deuteronomie (and by their profession they must needs do so, or
else they can not hold their office,) how shall any make complaint unto them
for Church matters, which can be counted none of the church. And seeing Christ
has commanded to complain to the Church against the sinner, how shall
Christ's ordinance be broken by complaining unto such wretches. Furthermore
seeing the Scripture shows that the church has nothing to do to judge those
which are without, 1. Cor. 5. 12.
how shall any complain of such a number of wicked men, as never were worthy
to be counted the church. Again, seeing no godly man may seek judgment under
the unjust, 1. Cor. 6. 1.
as Paul shows, if he have a matter against a brother, why should we seek
unto such for judgment. Further the rebuke and reforming of a brother ought
not to be delayed, till the time of keeping their courts, 1. These. 5.
For we know perfectly (says Paul) that the day of the Lord shall come as a
thief in the night: and as he that sins ought not to delay his repentance,
Deuteronomy. 7. 10.
and promise safety to him self, Amos. 6. 3.
least sudden destruction come: so he that sees his brother sin* ought to
have his repentance and reformation, For thou shall not hate thy brother in
thine heart, Leuit. 14. 17.
(says the Scripture) but thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and not
suffer sin upon him. 1. Cor 5.
And the Corinthians are sharply rebuked of negligence, because they hasted
not to cast out of the Church the incestuous person, and likewise, because they
made too long delay in receiving him again being penitent. 2. Cor. 7. ^.
Again because those cannon officers are strangers, neither known to the
Churches, not dwelling among them, no marvel though Christ say, John. 10.
that his sheep will not follow nor seek to strangers, but will flee from
them. Moreover, Because they bring the Churches into bondage (as it is written)
because they devour, 2. Cor. 11. 20.
because they take their goods, because they exalt them selves, and as it were
smite the people on the face, and cast them them in prison, they do all these
things; besides the church government, and therefore ought to be rejected, and
in no case to be uffered. Thus it is manifest by the word of God that such
proud prelates, and Antichristian usurpers, have no authority nor power of
the church: neither is their suspendings to be counted suspensions by the
church, nor their calling of Ministers a calling by the Church. Nay surely the
least in the kingdom of God shall be able by the word of God in their mouths,
Mat. 11. 11.
to pluck up and root out such plants if none other will join with them. I
mean they shall pronounce them by the word of god to be abominable, Iere 1.
10.
and have no fellowship with the^ in the church and so to the^ they are utterly
plucked out of the Church. For they are kings and priests under Christ, Revel.
1. 6.
to execute the lords government against such: 1. Pet. 25.
and therefore they ought not to loose their right, Exodus 19.
which is even their heritage and glory, Isaiah 54. or rather the glory or
kingdom of god, even the keys of the kingdom of heaven to bind and loose,
Mat. 18. The power of Christ Jesus to deliver up the wicked to Satan, 1. Corinthians. 5. The scepter of his word for rebuke, doctrine, exhortation,
promising life, denouncing judgment. For this is a right scepter, which
subdueth the people under us, Psa. 45. 6.
and the nations under our feet Psalm 45. Psa. 47. 3.


He alleges another proof by peradventure. For he guesseth, that
peradventure we will say, it were better for an assembly to have no minister at
all, then to have a blind reading minister. And then he reasons thus, that
having none at all but yesterday they are the church, or may be the church,
then having a dumb minister to day, they are still the Church of god, and can
not so suddenly be made the synagogue of Satan. This is a slender proof, and
borrowed by imagination: for we make not the minister, whether du^be, or not
dumb to be the essence, substance, or life of the outward Church, but the
keeping of the covenant by the outward discipline and government thereof.
Zacha. 11. 10.
And the Lord call^th the keeping of the covenant by this discipline, his
staff of beauty, as appears in Zecharie, which being broken, he disanulleth
his covenant with the people, and so they become the sheep of slaughter, For
he says, I will not feed you: that that dies, let it dye, and that that
perishes, let it perish, and let the remnant eat every one the flesh of
neighbor. Likewise in Iere. and Ezekiel. as the breaking of the covenant is set
down to be the death, Iere. 11. 3 4.
and perishing of the church and people of God: Iere, 31. 32.
so the keeping thereof by better discipline and government was the life and
renewing of the Church. Ezekiel. 16. 60. 61. 62. 63.
Why then should Master Cartwright reason so fondly? H^br* 8. 8.
as though they that held the covenant to day, might not break it to morrow,
and as though any gross wickedness committed of all, were not the breaking of
the covenant by all. Did not the people plead truly against Reuben and God,
Ioshu. 22. 18.
that if they rebelled to day against the Lord, even to morrow the Lord
would be wroth with all the Congregation of Israel. And they allege further,
that for Achans sin, wrath fell on all the congregation of Israel. How
suddenly and quickly was this sin committed? Ioshu. 7. 12.
and how soon was the Lord provoked, even to forsake all the congregation,
and to be with them no more, except they destroyed the excommunicate from among
them: for so are the words of the Lord him self. Now what was that sin,
which Israel calls rebellion in Reuben and God, both against the Lord, and
against the rest of Israel? And what was the sin of Achan? Surely they
thought that the Reubenites and Gadites had broken that commandment which the
Lord had given them, Deuteronomy. 12. 11. 12. 13*
namely, that they should not offer their burnt offerings in every place which
they liked, but only in the place which the Lord had chosen to put his name
there. Now who knows not, but that that place of the name of God, figured the
visible Church of god, so that this matter touches M. C. very nearly. For if
it be true, that as all sacrifices then, so all sacraments now, are rebellion
against the Lord, being ministered without the visible Church of God, then that
sin which he calls a fault, shall be found to be more then a fault, even
rebellion and falling away from the Lord. And this is a sin of execration,
even abomination in the eyes of the Lord, to measure the visible church of god,
by a compass of ground, by a number of housholdes, by slint of tithes and
tenthes as we see in our parishes. For the place makes not the church, neither
is the church or true religion to be measured by the place, John. 4. 23.
as Christ him self teaches us, for neither in the mountain where the father
worshipped, neither yet at Ierusale the city of god, was God any more to be
worshipped, but the true worshippers shall worship the father in spirit and
truth. By which words Christ means thus much, first, that the spirit and
truth being showed by the outward good profession, declare the outward Church
of God, and not the places, neither temples, nor cities, nor parishes. For in
whom we see the spirit, that is, the graces of the spitit by their outward
good works, and the truth, that is the laws and word of Christ which is true,
to be kept and observed, them only we must call the Church of God. And
therefore in Isaiah it was showed before^ that with those only which turn from
iniquity in Jacob, Isa. 59. 20.
will the Lord make his covenant, even his spirit which is upon them, and his
words which he has put in their mouth. Secondly by those words Christ
teaches, that all the Jewish ceremonies should be abolished, because the
chiefest, even Jerusalem and the Temple should be no more. For the temple at
Jerusalem and circumcision were the chiefest. How great the city and the
Temple were, 1 King. 8. 29.
it appears by that prayer of Solomon, 1. Kings 8. 29. And by sundry other
places. Deuteronom* 12. 11. Dent 12. 11.
Ierem. 3. 17. Iere. 3. 17.
Ezekiel. 43. 7. Ezekiel. 43. 7.
etc.

And of circumcision Paul reasons with the Galatians, That if they be
circumcised, they are bound to keep the whole ceremonial law: for it being
one of the chiefest ceremonies, Gala. 5 3.
if they still observed it, they should also observe all the rest, but if they
rejected the chiefest, they should also reject all the rest. And to that end
Christ reasons, that seeing all things are now to be verified in spirit and
truth, therefore all ceremonial and superstitious worship should cease. As
also Paul reasons, Gala. 5. 18.
That if they be led by the spirit, they are not under the ceremonies of the
law. So then it appears that tithings, because they were ceremonies, belong
not to the Church. And because such abomination is committed by them, namely,
the due planting and gathering of the church is hindered, and the liberty of
the Church for removing evil ministers stopped, they are even the execrable
things which Achan did steal. For if the common wealth (as it ought) had long
ago taken from the ministry those tenthes, and Popish livings, then Jericho
being once destroyed (I mean the Antichristian churches once put down) had
not so soon been built again: but now such tythings, benefices, and
Bishoprics remaining, they have builded by them an other Jericho in stead of
the first, in deed somewhat differing from the first: but as contrary to Gods
church and holy city as was the first: yea and Master Cartwright also will
justify that execrable stealth of Achan, and call Jericho, (I mean those
woeful assemblies and Parishes) the visible church and city of God. Joshua.
6. 26.
But cursed be the man before the Lord (says Joshua) that rises up and
builds again this city Jericho: he shall lay the foundation thereof in his
eldest son and in his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it. Satan is
that envious and malicious man, which has builded again this city, his
eldest sons were the first beginners of this lamentable state, whom God did
afterward scourge, and call to repentance in the time of Queen Marie, and
brake their enterprise: and his youngest sons are these latter reformers,
whom God also will certainly plague except they repent. But to come again to
Master Cartwrights proof, let him not say that we count any assembly, whether
they have a dumb minister o^ have none to be the outward Churches of God,
except they keep the covenant by the outward discipline and government of
the Church. Further Master Cartwright says that in such assemblyes, the dumb
minister is not chief, but Christ, and that we make nothing of the dumb
minister, and yet will needs have him to be the head of those Churches.
Indeed we make nothing of him concerning any goodness that is by him, for he
helps nothing thereto, but concerning the mischief and hurt which he does,
or the sin that is by him, Iere. 10. 21.
let him not say we make nothing of it. For if they be beasts (as it is
written) so that by their want of understanding and conscience, the flocks of
the pastor be scattered and perish, shall we say it is nothing. If they be
those foolish shepheardes whom the Lord says by Zecharie, he will raise up
in judgment, to sell and to slay the sheep, Zecha. 11. 15. 16. ibid. 11. 4.
5. etc.
to eat the flesh of the fat, and to tear them in pieces, which also shall
not look for them that are lost, nor seek the tender lambs, nor heal that
is hurt, nor feed them, but rather feed them selves upon their flesh, shall
we make nothing of such ministers? But go to: he says that Christ is the head
of those assemblyes, and not the dumb ministers. That Christ is their head or
foundation, he can not prove, as was showed before, wherefore for any thing he
can prove, the dumb ministers in the absence of the Bishops and their
officers, are the chief and heads over them. That they are always chief we
said it not, for when the Bishops which are greater usurpers are present,
then they are heads, and both the dumb ministers and hireling preachers, may
serve well enough to be the tail. For Satan has all ways by such, Revel.
12. 4.
as by the tail of the dragon, drawing the third part of the stars of
heaven, and cast them to the earth. What shall we understand by heaven, but
the show of the church, as it were set in heaven, and by the stars, but the
children of the church, falling to wickedness and loosing their light. Such are
the people of those assemblies, whom Satan has cast upon the earth as stars
^out light. He brings another proof by Corah and his company. For they
(says he) were not cast forth of the lords host by Moses, therefore should
not these assemblyes also which have a dumb minister thrust upon them, be
reputed for runnegates from the Lord, well, let us see: was not in deed Corah
with those that claue to him, Number. 16.
put apart from the host of the Lord? verse. 24. 25. 26.
First, Moses commanded the congregation (and the Lord so bade him) to depart
from the tents of those wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest they
perished in their sins: was not this a putting apart, or a casting out? Again
by the word of the Lord in the mouth of Moses, the earth opened her mouth,
verse. 31.
and swallowed the^ up quick. For as soon as he had ended his words (says the
text) even the ground claue asunder that was under them: was not this also a
putting apart, or a casting out? The next day also fourteen thousand and seven
hundredth dyed by a plague for cleaving still to Corah by an aftermurmuring: was
not this a putting apart? And these judgments were both an ensample and a
figure of the spiritual judging at this day, both by excommunication, and by
rebuke, and denouncing judgment. For otherwise to what purpose is it said in
the revelation, that the witnesses at this day, meaning every faithful
preacher, Reave. 11. 4.
are as olive trees, and golden candlesticks standing before the god of the
earth: and that fire proceeds out of their mouths* and deuoureth their
enemies: and that they have power to shut heaven, and power over waters to
turn them into blood, and to smite the earth with all manner plagues, as often
as they will. verse* 12.
If he say that Corah and his company were not forthwith cast out ( though it
be evident that forthwith they did cast out themselves) he should know that
there must be a time to examine their cause, yet in that short time they had of
examining being but a day, for the next day they perished. We read that Dathan
and Abiram would not come to be examined, and so of them selves they were put
apart. As for Corah and his company two hundredth and fifty, where as they
took censers and came before the Lord in the door of the tabernacle, they did
it as usurpers: and both in the very act doing were separate by fire to
destruction, and before the act, Moses is so far from joining with them, or
from allowing or tollerating their act, that he prays against it, saying,
Lord look not unto their offering Likewise that the people joined not with them
in their censing, it is evident: for even while they were burning incense, or
before, the commandment was given* which they obe^ed, that they should get
them away from about the tabernacle of Corah, Dotha^, and Abiram, and touch
nothing of theirs. Now if any will take vantage, that yet their ce^sers were
holy, as the text says because they offered them before the Lord: and so will
impute some holiness to the ministry of dumb ministers, let us consider what
holiness this was* First, their action was altogether unholy, and none might or
did join with them therein. And therefore the censers were consecrate as a
sign and remembrance says the text, that no stranger which is not of the seed
of Aaron, verse. 39. 40.
come nere to offer incense before the Lord, that he be not like Corah and his
company. Wherefore those censers were holy, because they were made a holy sign
of judgment for warning to all posterities not to do the like: wherefore I
would say, there were holiness in the dumb ministry, if all the dumb
ministers were hanged up in the Churches and public assemblies, for a warning
and terror to the rest, that are ready to enter such a function. Then indeed
they were a holy sign and remembrance of judgment against such wretches, but
other holiness have they none in the^. Yet M. C. dare say that their
ministration of Sacraments, and reading of prayers is holy and sanctified, yea
so far sanctified that we may lawfully receive the Sacraments of them, and
join with the^ in prayers* Belike because Moses commanded Corah and his
company to come with their censers, therefore those also must come with their
service books. But did Moses call the^ for any other purpose, save only to
destroy the^? Did he mean as M C. does, to join with them, to tolerate
their ministry, to excuse their usurping, to pronounce a blessing on their
ministry. For indeed it is blessed if it be as he says, that we may lawfully
receive the Sacraments of them. Did not Moses say plainly, To morrow the
Lord will show who is his, and who is holy, and who ought to approach near
unto him? meaning that by his terrible judgment, he would show that they
were none of his, and that there was no holiness in their action of coming
near to the Lord. Surely therefore, this holiness which M. Cartwright
imputes to the dumb ministers and their assemblies, is like the holiness,
whereof Corah spoke together with his company, saying, That all the
congregation was holy, every one of them, and the Lord was among them.

An other proof Master Cartwright takes by the seals of the covenant, that
is, the Sacraments. They have the Sacraments (says he) as seals of the
covenant, therefore they are within the covenant, and so are the Churches of
god. Here the question falls out, whether the sacraments are false
sacraments, and counterset seals of the covenant: He says it is granted him,
that they are true and vncounterfaite sacraments being ministered by sufficient
ministers, for (says he) if we condemn the seals set to by dumb ministers,
then we must needs justify the Sacraments ministered by sufficient ministers:
So by his iffs and supposings he will gather against us what proofs he list.
But though they be preaching ministers, yet are they not sufficient ministers,
as we showed before. For if they go out of the way, as it is written, Mala. 2.
5. 6. 7. 8.
and cause many to dash and fall by the law, they are not sufficient
ministers, but they break the covenant of Leui, and the Lord will make them
despised and vile before the people, because they keep not his ways. If they
be never so famous in preaching, yet if they be worldly minded men, Phil. ^* 18.
and whose bellies are their gods, and glory to their shame, they are not
sufficient ministers* But why did M. C. so subtlely set contrary to dumb
ministers, sufficient ministers, and not rather preaching ministers. For the
question is of false professors, and of a false profession, and therefore also
of preachers which hold a false profession, together with their assemblies: now
such we say are not sufficient. for they are not such as Paul appoints in his
epistles to Timothy and Titus. So herein we see how Master Cartwright misseth
of his proof, Titus ^. 6, 7, 8, 9.
and in missing does take a further foil. 1. Tim. 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
for he reasons that if the Sacraments do prove a Church, then though they
have not the discipline commanded by Christ, yet they are the Church. But how
does this follow? belike he thinks that the Sacraments may be severed from
discipline, yea and the Church also, and yet be an outward and visible Church
of God. How true this is, it follows afterward to be examined. First let us
stand on his proof, that he takes by the judgment of other Churches in
Europe, all which (says he) gives the right hand of society unto our
English assemblyes* which proof he confesses not to be so strong, yet strong
enough to stay all sudden judgments, and so long to cause silence til on
either side the light of the truth do break forth. I will not hear enter
into that question, whether the Churches have power to sit in men's consciences,
and to shut up men's mouths from testifying their judgments and consciences,
for in some matters Master Cartwright does give them that power, namely for
their verdite and sentence, which be true Churches of God. What vantage the
Pope and Papists might take hereby for defense of their churches it may be
easily judged: and what a clog to men's consciences it were to justify and
join with all assemblies, till all the churches by general consent did
condemn them, let every one judge. But surely Paul witnesses, 1 Cor. 1. 2.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
that the spirit of God in his children searches out all things even the deep
things of God: yea it judges and knows all things that are of God. And
again he says, that he which is spiritual discerns all things: yet he
himself is judged of no man: meaning, that indeed worldly men can not rightly
judge of him. wherefore the godly may freely both judge and give their
judgment, even of all assemblies which they know, whether they be the true
Churches of God. Phil. 4. 7, 8, 9.
And in another place he commands not only to mind, judge and think on all
things that are true, and honest and just, and pure but also to do them.
Wherefore as we ought to love the godly and their assemblyes, Phil. 1. 9.
so our love (as Paul teaches us) ought to abound more and more in knowledge
and in all judgment, that we may discern things that differ, especially
that we may know the house of God from a den of thieues. But herein Master
Cartwright does much abuse us and also all the Churches of Europe. For neither
we, do cast out the churches of two whole. Islands as he says, neither do
they hold them all in For though the fame of the Martyrs of England came to
their ears, and also their doctrine and profession at that time, as they
themselves wrote it or testified it by mouth, was known unto them, and then in
the time of affliction they took them for brethren and churches, yet it
follows not, that now in our security, they hear of our canon laws and
popish government and of our woeful abuses thereby, or if they do hear, that
notwithstanding, they do hastily justify us. In deed they can not rashly
condemn us, because they know not our state: and rather they should take our
assemblies to be the churches of God, for the fame they have sometimes heard of
the Martyrs. But that we which thoroughly know them, should not judge truly
and do accordingly, it is both against reason and duty. Mat. 15. 13, 14.
For as every pla^nt which the heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted
up: says Christ: so in the next verse he shows the way to root them up:
namely that we put away from us their guiding and governing, being blind
guides and leaders of the blind, and let them alone* And so with Jeremy we
shall pluck up and root out, Ierem. 1.
destroy and throw down even kingdoms and nations: that is as we said
before, we shall pronounce their wickedness, and judgment against them, and
forsake their fellowshippe, and so leaving them to the judgments of God, they
shall surely be plucked up and destroyed* except they repent. Wherefore let not
Master Cartwright think much, if God do set one man, Iere. 1. 17, 18.
even against a whole country. For Jeremy in as good times as ours are, was
set against the whole land, against the Kings of Judah, and against the
princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and against the people of the
land And in another place, Iere. 9. 2.
he would utterly leave the people, and go from them, and dwell alone in the
wilderness And so well did he like their assemblyes, that he calls them all
adulterers and an assembly of rebels. And in another place he is forbidden to
have any fellowshippe with them, Ier. 16. 5, 6, 7, ^
whether pleasant or unpleasant: so that he might neither mourn with them,
neither rejoice, neither eat nor drink with them. And if it be said, that
Jeremy had a special commandment, which we have not, we know that all the
commandments of God, upon the like occasions, belong unto us. And concerning
authority and power, we proved before, that the least in the kingdom of
God, has it equal with Jeremy or any of the Prophets. Hereby is that also
answered which Master Cartwright infers, that if one man be found worthy
of excommunication, the smaller part of an assembly is not to proceed against
him, if the greater part will not. What doctrine is this? and what one word of
God does he name for proof of this and diverse other such ^ike? For though Kings
and nations and all the would, wuold take any known wretched liver to be a
brother, and communicate with him, yet neithe^r the smaller part of an
assembly, neither I alone ought to do it. For there is a flat law set down by
the Lord: Exodus 23. 2.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil: neither agree in a
controversy to decline after many, and overthrow the truth. But Master
Cartwright will say, that this Law was given for wittnessing the truth in
public judgment, and not that every one should take upon him to
excommunicate. We know that the common wealth of Israel: and their civil
judgment did figure out the Lords Spiritual judgment in his Church: ephesians.
2. 12.
and therefore it is said of Saint Paul that we are now no more aliauntes
from the common wealth of Israel; which words do show that their Common
wealth did figure out our spiritual fellowshippe. But whether it did or no,
the law is generally given both for civil judgment, and for all dealings in
controversy, that we ought to give true judgment and testimony, and not to
keep back judgment, or pervert the truth for any man's cause, yet we say not
that every one may excommunicate alone. For we ought to tell the Church, Matthew.
18.
(says Christ,) and so we should have the church to join with us in that
action. And Paul shows that his spirit and theirs being met together, 1. Cor.
5.
was joined as in one for excommunicating the incestuous person. but what if
the rest of the church will not join with us therein? Surely then, as we
proved before, we must set our selves against them all, we must not be afraid
of their faces, as the Lord commands, Ierem. 1. 17.
lest he destroy us before them. For they all, that knowing Achans sin,
refuse being warned to cut him off, Josh. 7.
are guilty with him in his sin, or if they touch or come near the tents of
Corah, Dathan and Abiram, they shall perish with them: Nomb 16.
or being in a city that is fallen away to Idolatry, if they flee not out of
it, or set not them selves against it, Deuteronomy. 13. 15.
they shall be destroyed with it. All which indgements do teach the Church at
this day, true judgment: namely, to set it self both against small and
against great companyes, if they withstand or refuse the true discipline of
the church. Iere. 15. 10.
For Jeremy says of him self, that he was as a contentious man, and a man
that did strive with the whole earth: every one did curse him, his own
familiars watched for his halting, as he says in another place, he was in
derision daily and every one mocked him: Ierem. 20. 7, 8, 9, 10.
for he called the^ al an assembly of rebels, private famillar felloshippe he
brake off with them, as was showed before, and openly he came not amongst
them, but only to proclaim their sins, and preach vengeance against them. If
it be then asked, whether Jeremy did condemn them al as none of the church
and people of God: Ierem. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
let Jeremy him self answer it, for indeed by their usual and common
profession and trade of life, they showed not them selves to be the people and
Church of god. For as it is written, both the great men and rulers, Ierem. 9.
2, 3. etc.
and also the inferior and poorer people had all together broken the yoke and
burst the bands. In the streets of Jerusalem, and in the open places there
could not a man be fonnde, that did execute judgment and sought the truth,
that the Lord might spare the city. And he says in another place, Ierem, 6.
28.
They are all rebellious traitors, they are brass and iron, they are all
destroyers, they shall call them reprobate silver, because the Lord has
rejected them. From the least of them, even to the greatest of them, every one
is given unto covetousness, and from the Prophet even unto the Priest, Ierem
23. 14.
they all deal falsely. They are all unto me (says the Lord again) as
Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as the people of Gomorrah, yet I do not
doubt, but that there was the Church, and children of God amongst them. For
Jeremy him self and Barucke was with them: Isa ^9. 14, 15.
for Isaiah witnesses that when judgment was turned backewarde, and justice
stood a far off, so that all truth and equity failed, yet (I say) there
were some that refrained from evil, and were made a pray to the rest. Isa. 51.
18.
In deed openly there was none to reform the church: of all his children
there was none that took her by the hand to bring her into the way. For the
Lord sought for a man among them that should make the hedge, Ezekiel. 22. 30.
and stand in the gappe before him for the land, that he should not destroy it
but he found none. Yet there were those that had a mark on their foreheades,
Ezekiel. 9. 4.
as mourning and crying for all the abominations that were committed. And if it
be asked, whether these were a visible church of God, it is answered by Ezekiel
in another place, that among the heathen and in the countries where the Lord
did scattere them, Ezekiel. 11. 16.
he was as a little Sanctuary unto them: whereby is meant, that though they
wanted the visible sign of the temple and Sanctuary at Jerusalem, yet their
holy conversation should show the Lord to be among them, Ezekiel. 34. 17.
and that the Lord would judge between sheep and sheep, between the rams
and the goats. It is manifest that the Synagogogues of the Jews in Antiochia
and Ephesus were the churches of God: yet when Christ was preached unto the^,
and they withstoode Paul and Barnabas, did Paul or Barnabas stay for the
consent of the most part to cast them off? Did they not forthwith separate the
disciples, Act. 13 46. 51.
and gather the church apart from the^? yea will M C. Act 19. 9.
say: for they were worthy to be cast off, seeing they refused Christ. Then
belike it is true, that one man or a few persons may cast off whole churches,
for some greater sins and offenses. How then is it true which M. C. says,
that one man being found and judged to deserve separation, should not be
separate except the most part do consent? He will say peradventure, that he
excepteth idolaters and apostates from the Lord. why then did he give a
general rule, without naming such exceptio^s? yet Christ for all disobedience
in refusing any message of God, does give commandment, Mat. 10. 14.
even to all and every one of his messengers, to cast off whole cities and
churches, Luke 9. 5.
as being in a worse case then Sodom and Gomorrha. For if they receive you
not, says he, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or that
city, shake off the dust of your feet against them. He will answer, that
their sin also of not receiving the messengers of Christ, was the sin of
Apostacy. And is not this a message from Christ, when one or a few persons
do justly rebuke the congregation for overthrowing the Lords discipline and
treading his scepter under foot? and is not his scepter cast down, and his
kingdom polluted, when he which is manifestly known and proved to deserve
separation, can not be cast out? But again he will say, that those cities and
churches were not cast off, for refusing the Lords messengers, but for
refusing such a message as they brought: namely that the Christ and Messiah was
now come in the flesh. Surely til after the death of Christ, they had no such
message. For Christ straightly charged his disciples, that they should tell no
man, Mat. 16. 20.
that he was Jesus the Christ: meaning that till his death and rising again,
it is not meet that that doctrine should be blased abroad, but it was
sufficient for that time, if they generally believed in the Messiah, as the
Jews also did, and refused him not when he should be preached more clearly
yet long before his death was the commandment given, concerning those houses
or cities, which should refuse his messengers. yet in deed it is true, that
they which refuse his discipline and government, do also refuse Christ him
self: and so it is the sin of apostacy. For so it is written, Luke 19. 27.
Those mine enemies which would not, that I should reign oner them, bring
hither and slay them before me. But hereto they will answer, that yet till
judgment was executed by the Lord him self, they were called his Citizens:
verse. 14.
for so the text says that his Citizens hated him, and sent an embassage
after him, saying, we will not have this man to reign over us. But do they not
know, that they are called his Citizens, because they should have been so, and
were not, but became his enemies. Indeed they were Citizens in name only, but
not in deed. So Jerusalem in name was called the city of God, yet in deed it
became that great City, as it is written, Revel. 11. 8.
which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord also was
crucified. The Jews were planted a noble vine as Jeremy witnesses: Isa. 5 7.
and Isaiah says, that the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts was the house of
Israel, and the men of Judah (were sometimes) his pleasant plant, but now they
are turned unto me says the Lord into the plants of a strange vine. Iere.
2. 21.
yea that we be not beguiled with the Names of Gods house, Church, and City,
he him self has given it a name, as it is written, the name of that city
shall be from that day, Ezekiel. 48. 35.
The Lord is there. And in this respect also it is called in Jeremy the throne
of his glory. As who say that among who^soeuer we see not the Lord to reign
by his government and discipline, Iere. 14. 21.
as it were in the throne of his kingdom, them we should ^^dge not to be the
city and church of God. And though the church ^o pray, Ezekiel. 43. 7.
that God would not cast down the throne of his glory, nor break the conant
with them: yet Jeremy brings in those words as a complaint of the penitent,
and not to prove that the wretched sort either held the covenant, or were the
throne of God. Isa 35. 8.
Wherefore to conclude this matter, The path and way of the Lord is holy, as
the prophet teaches, and no polluted shall pass by it: there shall be no lion,
no noisome beast shall ascend by it, neither shall they be found there.
whereby is meant that open and gross sinners shall not be suffered in the
Church. For either they shall be separate by excommunication, or else all the
godly shall withdraw them selves from them, and hold them accursed. As it is
written, If any man love not the Lord Jesus, 1. Cor. 16. 22.
let him be had in execration, yea excommunicate to death. And surely they love
not the Lord, but are his enemies, Luke 19. 2 7.
as was showed before, which refuse his government, that he can not reign over
them. And again it is written, 1 Ioh. 5. 3.
This is the love of God, 1. John. 2. 4. 5.
that we keep his commandments, and he that says I know god, or I love
god, and keep not his commaudements, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.
Not that we can keep his commandments without all breach or offense. for we
are not Donatistes as the adversaries sla^der us: that we should say, we may be
without sin, or that the church may be without public offenses, or if there
fall out some sort of grosser sins, that therefore it should cease to be the
church of God. we teach no such doctrine, but if in any Church such gross
sins be incurable, and the Church has not power to redress them, or
rebelliously refuses to redress them, then it cease to be the Church of
God, and so remains till it repent, and take better order.

And here comes in that question to be decided, whether without the
discipline commanded of Christ, any assembly or church may be called the church
of Christ, M. C. says, that for want of this discipline, we give all the
english assemblies, the black stone of condemnation. How truly he writes
this of us, his conscience is witness* for we never said that all the English
assemblyes do want discipline. Though this matter be sufficiently debated
before, yet let us weigh Master Cartwrights answer. H says that faith in
Christ is the essence, being, or life of the church: as for discipline it is
but accidental, and therefore the Church of God may have her being and life,
and be named the church of God, without discipline. what word of God does he
bring for all this? we know in deed that Christ is the life and essence of
the Church. For except as branches we abide in him, John 15. 6.
which is the true vine, we can bring forth no fruit, we are cast forth as
branches, and are to be consumed with fire. Christ is the resurrection and the
life. He is the way, the truth, and the life. So it is true, John 11. 25.
that Christ is the life of the church, John 14. 6.
as for faith it is but the hand, whereby we take hold of this life: As it is
written, he that believes in the son, has everlasting life, and he adds
upon it, as a trial of faith, John 3. 36.
even our obedience to the son, and says, he that obeys not the son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of god abides on him. Now it was proved
before, that they which are guilty of such horrible abuses, and so grossly
offend by their corrupt and false profession, have not this faith, neither do
hold Christ the foundation. But see, how fondly and blasphemously Master
Cartwright distinguiseth: He will have a dead Christ, or an Idol christ to be
the life of the church. For he will join the church to Christ, without the
discipline and government of Christ. He puts asunder the church and the
discipline of Christ, and so must ^eedes sunder Christ from his own discipline
or government Now Paul calls this discipline, 1. Cor. 5. 4.
the power of our Lord Jesus christ. So if we sever christ and his power,
what is he but a dead christ? Also by his discipline, and government he has
over us, he is our king: as again it is written, Hebr. 1. 8.
the scepter of thy kingdom is a scepter of righteousness. Psalm. 45. 6. 7.
So if we sever christ, and his discipline, rule, and government what is he
but an Idol christ? If Master Cartwright say, that by the scepter there is
meant nothing else but the power of the word of God, I grant it: as Paul
says I will know not the speech or words of these men, 1. Cor. 4. 18. 19.
but the power: For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power says he,
and in the psalm, The Lord shall send the rod of this power out of Zion.
And the weapons of our warrefare are mighty through God, as again he writes.
So then if the power of the word to bind and lose, to remit or refaine men's
sins, to promise life, and to rebuke and give over to execration be taken
from Christ or the church of Christ, what remains but an Idol or counterfeit
christ, an Idol or counterfeit church? Thus while M C. will have faith in christ
to be the life of the church without discipline, he does leave christ himself
without life, and as one that is dead, or turned into an Idol* yet further he
proceeds in his absurdities and blasphemies, and says, that faith only is
the essence, being, or life of the church, and that besides faith, nothing is
necessary to the very essence and being of the church. Thus be like children
which yet through want of discretion, can not have faith, shall be without the
essence and life of the church. How corrupt doctrine this is, I need not here
stand on it. If he say that by the faith of the parents they have life and
essence in the church, the scripture is against him. Gene. 17. 7.
For by the promise and the covenant made to the righteous and to their seed
are their children reckoned in the church and not by their faith. Therefore the
faithful are called by Paul the children of promise. Gal. 4. 18.
For we are (says he) after the manner of Isaac children of the promise, and
again to the Romans, the children of the promise are counted for the true
seed of Abraham. Romans 9. 8.
But that by any man's faith his children or others, should have life and
essence in the church, is the same false doctrine we refuted before. For the
just shall live by his faith says Habbakk If then a man shall live by his own
faith, Hab. 2. 4.
he shall not live by the faith of another. And by baptising into the faith and
profession of any, we must understand, that we are baptized to hold the same
faith and profession, when we come to discretion, and not to have our life and
salvation by an other man's faith, when as yet we have not the same faith our
selves. And if we shall live by faith, Romans 3. 22.
then faith is the means to come by that life, and is not the life it self.
Wherefore Christ is the life and essence of the Church, and not faith. Now
Christ is made as no christ unto us, except we hold him, and join with him as
our anointed King, priest and Prophet. For so the word ( Christ) does
signify. And here I demand of M. C. whether the Kingdom, Priesthood, and
Prophecy of Christ be of the essence and life of the Church. I am sure he dare
not say nay to this: and why then will he have the Lords discipline or
government, to be but an accident or hangby to the church For by Christ as
paul shows, ( that is by the graces of Christ's kingdom, priesthood ^
prophecy) all his body, Ephesians. 4. 16.
(that is all his Church) are coupled and knit together by every joint, and so
receives increase and edyfiyng in God. So take away the kingdom and
government of Christ, and there can be no joining, nor coupling together of
the church, no offices nor callings in the church, yea no face, or show, or
rather no part, sign or token of the church. For these graces do we receive of
Christ's kingdom or from his imperial Majesty. And therefore it is written,
that when he ascended up on hie, (as our triumphant King and Governor) he led
captivity captive, Ephesians. 4. 8.
and gave gifts unto men: and again, he ascended far above all heavens, Iere.
14. 21.
that he might fill all things. Ezekiel. 43.
And wherefore is the church and people of God in so many places, Mat. 13. 7.
etc.
called the throne of God and the kingdom of God, but only to show that
without the discipline and government of Christ therein, it loses eue^ her
essence, life and being in christ. And this M C. is forced to confess, For he
says that the ministry of the word is a part of this discipline, and the
obedience of the people is another: and so reasons, that, take away all
discipline and every part thereof, and there remains no church of christ.
Thus the truth has made him to yield in battle, and turned him backewarde,
and yet he will resist as it were going backward. For how backewardly does he
deal in this matter? to say that discipline is not pertaining to the essence
of the church, and now for want of discipline, to take away the essence and
name of the Church. Again to say, without discipline there may be a church,
and now to say that without discipline, there can be no church. So rather then
he will be without an enemy, he will fight with a shadow. For now full
wisely he does cut discipline into parts: namely the oversight, rule, and
government of such as have charge in the church, and the obedience of the
people thereto: which two parts indeed do contain, all the other parts,
and therefore very vainly he speaks of other parts of discipline, as if
they might be separate and secluded from these. For he can show none in the
church, but either governors, or under government: neither can he show any
duty in the church, but only the duties of government or of submission and
obedience: neither any work, matter, business, or ministry in the church,
but either of charge and oversight, or under charge or oversight. Wherefore
take away both government and oversight, and also obedience and submission,
and there can be no other part of discipline remaining. For the duties of
teaching, exhorting, improouing, rebuking etc. also all duties of examining
and deciding controversies, of reforming abuses, of relieuing and maintaining
the afflicted and poor, of separating the unworthy etc. are contained under
that part of governing. Also all duties of belief and learning the truth,
of reverence, honor, meekness and all kind of service and upright behavior
etc. are contained under that part of obedience and submission. Thus it is
manifest, that through want of discipline, there is no natural conjunction of
the parts and members of the church together, so that both the head and vital
parts are wanting, and all the other parts are wholly and thoroughly either
displaced and perverted, or utterly lost and perished. But why does he not
show what part of discipline may be wanting, yea and of those two parts,
which he says can not be wanting* yet what defect there may be. Indeed it is
commanded to forgive a brother, Luke 17. 4.
if he sin seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to us,
saying, it repents me. yea we must forgive, Matthew. 18 22.
though it were unto seventy times, seven times. But yet Christ gives no
power to forgive, if a brother remain wilful in his sin, yea if it be but a
private sin, I am to proceed against him, and am not to cease, till either I
have brought him to repentance, or have broken off all fellowshippe with him,
as with a brother. But we must take heed, that they be brethren, and not dogs
and scorners who^ we rebuke and labor to redress. Matthew. 18. 15.
For if thy brother trespass against thee, says Christ etc. then he shows
how to deal and complain for reformation of a brother. Prou. 9. 7, 8.
But concerning scorners it is written, He that reprooueth a scorner,
purchases to him self shame: and he that rebukes the wicked, gets him
self a blot: again, Rebuke not a scorner least he hate thee, but rebuke a
wise man and he will love thee. But to be short: All the discipline of the
church consists herein, first that the church be gathered of the worthy:
Matthew. 10. 11.
as it is written Enquire who is worthy: Matthew. 7. 6. ^
and again, Give ye not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before swine. And in Jeremy If thou take away the precious from the
vile, Iere. 15. 19,
then shall thou be as my mouth: let them return unto thee, but return not
thou unto them. And in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 44. 23.
They shall reach my people the difference between the holy and profane, and
cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean. Mala. 1. 13.
And in Malachie the Lord rejected their offerings, because they offered the
scrobled, and the lame and the sick and the blind, which figureth the
rejecting of our sacraments, when dogs and swyne do communicate therein.
Verse. 7.
When Papists and Atheistes, drunkardes, Maygamesters, blasphemers, raylers,
fighters and such like, are presented as sweet bread at the table of the
Lord. The second point of discipline is, that the covenant, promises, and
Gospel of Christ, and the sacraments of his kingdom, being established among
the worthy, then that they keep the covenant and sacraments unpolluted. And
for this purpose there are appointed these other parts of discipline: namely
that the Church do judge those which are within: for it has nothing to do,
1. Cor. 5. 12.
says Paul, to judge those that are without. The discipline of the church
poceedeth against the brethren, that offend, as was showed before, and not
against scorners, or careless worldlings. For the lord does now take us of the
gentiles for priests and levites* Isa. ^6. 21. (...). 44. 7.
as it is written, and as we may not bring into the lords sanctuary strangers,
and vncircamcised in heart to pollute his house, that is wicked wretches which
have not the lords couen^at, may not be received into fellowship of the church:
so those that are within being fallen to transgression, verse. 24.
they shall judge according to my judgments says the Lord, and they shall
keep my laws and my statutes in all my assemblies* For there is a particular
judging and dealing against any in the church, as by particular rebuke, and
pronouncing accu^sed him that grossly offends, and there is a general
judging of any without the church. 1. Co^. 6.
For it is written, that we shall judge the angels, And every nation that shall
rise up in judgment against the church, I^a. ^4. 17.
shall it condemn, this judging is no part of the particular judging we speak
of. And here come in, other parts of discipline to be spoken of: namely for
private rebuke of the brethren that privately offend, for open rebuke of open
sins, and for casting off and forsaking fellowship and brotherhood with gross
and open offenders. These parts of discipline, although they are proved and
made manifest before, yet because M C. says that some part of discipline may
be wanting, let us see which of them may be wanting and the church
notwithstanding have the essence and name of the church. Luke. 17. 4.
First Christ has gieun power to every christian to reteyne the sins of
every brother whom he knows to trespass against him, Mat. 18.
and not to forgive him, except he see him repe^: So that if any person want
this power, he is not to be counted a christian. And this power reaches so
far, not only for open but even for private offenses, to judge and take any man
for a heathen and a publican, if he will not be reformed. Now this liberty and
power, every christian must hold, or else he is the servant of me^, 1. Cor. 7.
23.
and not of christ. If then a particular christian cannot want it, how shall the
whole church be without it, and yet be named the church of christ* Reave. 1. 6.
Every particular christian is a king and a priest unto god, a king because he
holds the scepter of gods word, to judge the offe^ders, a priest because in
every place he offreth incense and a pure offering to the 1. Pet 2. 5. ex^dus.
19^ 6.
name of the Lord as it is Malachy. So the^ he is utterly without the kingdom
and priesthod of christ, Re^e 2. 26.
if that liberty be denied him, Mat. 1. 11.
I mean of judging and rebuking the particular offenders, and forsaking their
fellowship if they will not be reformed. How much more shall the Church be
without this kingdom, and priesthod of christ* and so without christ himself,
if it want this liberty and power. ephe. ^. 7.
Likewise as we showed before every christian has power severally to forsake
wicked fellowship, 2. Ties. 3. 6.
and not to company together with wicked brethren. 2. Tim. 3. 5.
And as by this liberty and power, 1. John. 1. 6. 7.
they uphold their kingdom in Christ, H^^e. 2. 2.
so without it, Act. 2. 40.
both they and the whole church do lose their interest in the priesthood and
kingdom of Christ, 1. Cor. 5. 11.
and so are none of his church. For they have not the keys of the kingdom of
heaven to bind and lose, to retain or remit men's sins, and therefore what
right can they have in the kingdom of christ. John. 2. (...)
If they cannot openly and particularly rebuke, how shall they openly and
particularly bind? Man 16. 1^.
and if they cannot openly and particularly cast out or excommunicate the
grosser offender, how shall they bind? For being still retained as brethren in
the church, how shall they pronounce them to be bound in heaven? How shall they
shut the gates of heaven against those, whom still they keep in the bosom of
the church? If M. C. say that a general rebuke, and judging of the wicked is a
binding, let him know that the Church has more liberty and right,
particularly to judge those which are within, then generally to judge those
that are without. And safely, if it have not power to judge those which are
within, it has no power of judging at all. So that it is manifest, that no
part of church discipline can be wanting, but the church does straightway go to
mine thereby. For a co^fused gathering of al together, was proved to be no
church of God* Likewise if the covenant of the church, and the sacraments
thereof, be broken and disanulled, Master C. grants that there is no church:
and now it is showed that without that power of rebuking and judging those
which are within, and of excomunicating those that deserve it, there can be no
church of God. As for that his fond answer, that for some default in
preaching, and some default in obedience, the discipline of the church may
fail and yet be the church, let him know that though some preacher or other
person offend, yet does not therefore the discipline of the church fail or
want, except the church be negligent, or wilfully refuse to redress such
offenses, or is brought into bondage that it can not redress them. And yet
also the question is not of some weakness and failing in discipline but a full
want and overthrow either of the whole, or of some part thereof. Wherefore
that proof they alleadgeby the Corinthians, that they wanted discipline, and
yet were the church of God, is false and very vain. For they wanted it not,
but were negligent therein. They were not under the bondage of a popish
discipline, and power, which denied and withhelde the Lords discipline. Now
negligence was a fault in them, yet not an utter overthrow and failing of
discipline. For being rebuked of Paul, they mended this negligence, 2. Cor. 7.
11.
in so much that their repentance and sorrow for their negligence wrought a
great* care in them, yea as the text says, a clearing of themlselues, an
indignation, a fear, a great desire, a zeal, a punishing of themselves.
Likewise for their abuses in the Sacrament of the Supper, Paul condemns even
the Supper, 1. Cor. 11. 20.
and says, This is not to eat the Lords Supper. And for abusing that
Sacrament, many of them were plagued of God, and dyed. So that although for a
time, they turned the Sacrament to be a judgment against the^, and the
discipline of the church did fail, yet was it not therefore quite overthrown
and debarred from the^. Also whereas some believed not the resurrection from
the dead, 1 Cor. 15. 34, 35.
it was the ignorance of those which had newely embraced the Christian
profession, and not the overthrow of the church discipline. And here is that
answered which M. C. alleges, that Paul calls the churches of God by the
title of the faithful and Saints. For though some fall away unto wickedness,
yet by the discipline of the Church the rest do remain as Saints. And that
title of Saints is against Master Cartwright. For if they be Saints and holy,
how shall they show forth a wicked and unholy profession, and still be called
the Saints and Church of God. 1. Cor. 1, 2.
Though Paul wrote his Epistle to the Church and Saints at Corinth, yet does
he not thereby call the incestuous person or other gross sinners, the members
or parts of that Church. But in the fifth Chapter he calls the incestuous
person a wicked man and not a Saint. 1. Cor. 5. 13.
As for his title of the faithful, he can not show that Paul uses it,
without addition of other words, to show the good profession of that faith:
as in that place, ( To the Saints fayeth Paul at Ephesus and to the faithful*
Ephesians. 1. 1.
And though the title of the faithful should be used alone, yet must we
understand their faith showed by an outward good profession. Here also may
that place be answered which they allege out of Paul, 1. Cor. 11. 28.
Let a man examine himself: and again to the Romans, Let us not therefore
judge one another any more* Romans 14 13.
but they abuse these places, L^ke 6. 43.
as if Paul meant, that we were not to judge men by their fruits, Mat. 12. 33.
or the Church had not power to judge those that sin in the Church: Mat. 7.
16.
for these things we have proved before, but by judging in that place, we
must understand a rash judging or condemning of any, for those deeds or
works they do, whereof they can give a good and probable reason Likewise
whereas Christ says, Judge not that ye be not judged, Mat. 7. 1.
he means that we must judge or condemn no brethren as reprobates, or
rashly condemn that in them, which is no fault at all, or judge every man to
be worse then our selves, but rather we must judge our selves to be the chief
sinners of all, 1. Tim. 1. 15.
and yet also keep the Lords discipline, of judging and rebuking the wicked,
1. Tim. 6. 14.
without spot and unblameable. Likewise to examine our selves, that is our own
hearts and consciences, belongs to our selves: but we are not thereby
forbidden to examine the outward abuses and faults of others. Heb. 10. 14.
For it is written, that we are to consider one another. Romans 16. ^7.
Also to mark others diligently, to note others, that we look not every man
on his own things, 2. These. 3. 14.
but every man also on the things of other men. Phil. 2. 4.
Here also is that question answered of the Dutch Churches in high Germany,
which hold the error of transubstantiation* For indeed I judge it to be an
error, and not an heresy, except they obstinately pursue it with other gross
absurdities, as do some heretics, or with sword and bloodshed as do the
Papists, and then without question they are not the Church of Christ, but
remain in the state of condemnation, till they repent. As for those of our
profession, which are withhelde from the use of the Lords Supper, that
question follows afterward to be answered, and does nothing at all make
against us. Likewise that matter of neglecting circumcision and the Passover
the space of forty years he shamefully abuses. For there was no negligence
but a necessity and commandment of omitting. For that service of the
passover was not to be kept after their coming out of Egypt, save at some
special charge from the Lord as Nom 9. 2. till they came into the land of
Canaan: Exodus 12. 25.
as appears in Exo 12. 25. and other places. Exodus 13. 5.
And it figured also their hasting both out of Egypt and through the
wilderness: Nom. 9. 13.
and therefore were they not to keep it ordinarily every year, till they came
to the land of their rest. And for this cause also was circumcision omited.
For being circumcised, they were fore certain days: by reason whereof, if
they had been circumcised, they could not have iourneyed after the cloud and
tabernacle. So a necessity was laid upon the^. Nom. 9. 21.
For they were to journey with the cloud and tabernacle as in Nombers, Whether
the cloud upon the tabernacle was taken up by day or by night. All their
iourn^^ing was by the commandment of the Lord.

Now let us come to other of his profes. A city says he, may be a city,
though it have not the walls of a city. And so he reasons that Jerusalem,
was the City of the great King, before Nehe^^^h had builded the walls,
whereupon he concludes that a Church may be the church of God, though it want
discipline. How greatly here again does M C. deceive him self and others.
He knows that the Temple did figure out and signify the church of God, as
well as the city Jerusalem. Now as the Temple was noe Temple of God, but a
ruinous heap, without the walls of the temple, and the foundation of the
walls: so the city Jerusalem, Neh. 2. ^.
was said to lie waste as no city of God, till the walls were builded and the
gates reared up: If he require proof of both these, Psalm. 118. 22.
we show him the Scripture. For in the Psalm, in Isaiah, Mat. 21 42
and in Matthewe, Christ is set down to be the sanctuary and head corner
stone in the building. Isa. 8. 14.
And in the Revelation, the twelve Apostles are called the twelve foundations
of the wall of the holy city, Reave. 21. 1^* verse. 12.
and the gates the twelve trybes of Israel, meaning all the number of Gods
elect. Now therefore let him judge, that seeing the Apostles, and all the
Saints of God, are builded in the walls of this city, how it can be the
city of God without the walls. Yea he neither does, nor can bring any word
of God, that the walls should signify discipline only, and not rather the
gathering and building of all the saints of god, into one spiritual house and
city of god. And therefore is there no mention made of any temple or other
houses within the city. yea the text says, that there was none such, but the
Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple thereof. Reave. 21. (...).
And in the 121. psalm that hie commendation of the building of Jerusalem,
Psalm. 121. 3.
is expounded in the 87. psalm, wherein it consisted, namely in the building
of the walls and gates and therefore he praises it, saying, God laid his
foundations among the holy mountains, Psalm. 87. 1. 2. 3.
the lord loves the gates of Zion more then all the habitations of Jacob:
glorious things are spoken of thee O city of God. Psalm. 48. 12. 13.
And in the forty and eight Psalm, Compass about Z^on, and go round about
it, and tell the towers thereof: mark well the wall thereof. Behold her
towers, Nehem. 1. 3.
that ye may tell your posterity. And in Nehemiah, the people are said to be
in great affliction, and in reproach, because the wall of Jerusalem was broken
down and the gates thereof were burnt with fire. Wherefore the city Jerusalem,
was a resemblance and figure of the spiritual Jerusalem and Church of God,
only by the walls and gates of the city and there execution of Judgment in
the gates thereof. For in these 3. things is described the joy of David in that
Psalm: (...). 1^2. 1, 2, 5.
namely That the people should go into the house of the Lord, that their feet
should stand in the gates of Jerusalem, and that there were thrones set for
judgment. Nay says Master Cartwright, the houses and fair buildings did
figure the Church of God, and the walls did figure discipline only. This is
his own dream, even an imagination of his own head. For not the houses of
the city did figure the spiritual house of God or his city, but the Temple.
Neither was the city without the walls any figure, but only by the walls.
And therefore does Nehemiah say in the second Chapter, (...). 2. 5.
That he would build the City, because he meant to build the walls of the
City. But let Master Cartwright remember himself, and show any place in the
world, that is called a city, and yet has not the walls of a City. Or an
orcharde, garden, or close so called, without a hedge, a wall, or some safe
enclosing of fensing. Are a clump of fruit trees called an orcharde, if they
stand open in the field without any fence? or is a fair piece of grass
ground named a close, if it be not enclosed. So by his own vain reason he
overthrows him self. And whereas he says that after their return from
Babylon the City is called the City of the great king, even before the walls
were builded: what proof brings he for that* It is called a city indeed by
Nehemiah, Nehem. 2. 3.
but a destroyed and waste City: he means that it had been a City, but
now is destroyed and waste, verse 5.
and he says he would build the city, (not that it was now a city, for
then it had been builded to his hand) but the use of speech is, that where a
city has been, to call the place and the ruinous heap of stones by the name
of the City* And so in Ezra, before their return from Babylon, The Heathen
King Cyrus calls the place of Jerusalem by the of Jerusalem, yet was neither
the people of God there, nor the Temple of God. Yea Zion was plowed like a
field, and Jerusalem was an heap, Ezra 1. 3.
and the mountain of the house, was as the high places of the forest. Micah 3.
12.
And being in that case it figured rather the desolation of the spiritual
Jerusalem, Ierem. 26. 18.
which in the Revelation is called Sodom and Egypt: and how then could it be
the City of God, Revel. 11. 8.
save only in Name, for that it had been so. Likewise his descantyng about a
vineyarde is against himself. For there can be no yard or court except it
have the walls or fence of a yard or count, and so where no yard is, there
may be vynes growing, but there can be no vineyarde. And so where discipline
is wanting, there may be some graces of God appearing, as knowledge, and an
outward subjection to men's laws and to Magistrates, yea there may be Gods
secret elect children, and an outward false show of religion and devotion:
and yet no true show nor face of an outward and visible Church of God.

Now Master Cartwright comes to that point, concerning the dumb minister:
of whom as he, so we also have spoken before. But here he proves the
Sacraments, ministered by such, to be Gods Sacraments, and that men may receive
them lawfully. His proofs are like wind blown out of a bladder. he might
rather laugh at them him self, then offer them to others to take view of his
folly. His first proof is, they are ministers, but no lawful ministers, and
they are ministers, though they be Idol mynisters, therefore he concludes,
that though they be Idols and unlawful ministers, yet we may hear then^,
and receive the Sacraments of them. He confesses them to be unlawful and
Idol ministers, and yet their ministration or mynisterie must be good and
lawful: This is as much, as if one should condemn a thief and justify his
theft. For if they be not messengers, nor ministers from Christ, then their
message and ministry is not from Christ, but from the devil. For these be
coniugates, an unlawful minister, and his unlawful ministry: a messenger
from the devil* and his message from the devil: a wicked man to be abhorred
and his wickedness to be abhorred. Even so it must needs follow, that a
minister being unlawful and of the devil, his action and deeds of
ministration, are unlawful and of the devil. Ier. 23 verse. 16. verse. 21.
And so the Lord reasons, that the people should not hear the prophets
that prophesied peace unto them, for he had not sent, nor commanded them: as
who say, because they were unlawful messengers, therefore their message also
was unlawful and to be refused. But Master Cartwright says that though they
be unlawful messengers and Ministers, and not of God, yet their message and
ministry is of god. For it is not a false or evil message or ministry as
was that of the false prophets, but good and necessary for the Church. For
that that is of Christ says he, is good, and by their ministry they give us
that, that is of Christ, he means the Sacraments and their reading of
Common service. And so he concludes that they are Ministers of good things.
Yea and he adds a further distinction? that to us they are ministers of god,
but to them selves or in respect of them selves, they are unlawful ministers.
Surely these are trim distinctions to carrye him blyndefolde, he can not
tell whether. For whether will he wander in his vanities? or how many
deuelish doctrines will he heap up together? First he says, they are
unlawful ministers, and yet ministers of god: then that they are ministers of
god, but not lawful ministers of god: Thirdly that they have their calling and
allowaunce by the Church and yet are thrust upon the Church: Fourthly that
either such dumb ministers, and their ministry is of GOD: or if they be of
the Devil, yet if the Bishop and his officers do authorize them, then the
Church does authorize them, and noe man ought to refuse them: Fiftely that
their reading of service, is to be heard, as being a good thing from christ:
sixthly that their sacraments are to be received as good things from Christ:
Whereby also it follows that Christ does send such dumb, or blind
reading ministers to take charge of the people: also that for a need, reading
ministers may be in the Church in stead of preaching ministers: Further that
the Bishops may thrust upon the flock, what Ministers they list, and give
them that authority and calling which God can not give them: Also that the
people shall be counted Gods people and Church, though they be under the
deuilles messenger, and subject to his guyding. How ungodly and foolish
doctrine is all this? and yet he heapeth much more unto it, Psa. 145. 17
before his letter be ended. It is written that the Lord is ryghteous in all
his ways and holy in all his works. If then any Minister be of God how
shall he be an unlawful minister? or if he be unlawful, how shall he be of
God? If he say a thing may be lawful before men, which before GOD is not so,
and therefore that men may take it as lawful before God: Let him remember
himself, that he speaks of unlawful ministers even before men, yea whom
he himself knows and calls unlawful. Mat. 15. 13. 14.
So that being unlawful ministers both before men, and before God, how shall
they be ministers of god? Wherefore they are of the Devil, and plants, which
the heavenly Father has not planted, and therefore shall he rooted up: and
christ shows the way to root them up: namely that we let them alone blind
guides, leaders of the blind, and have nothing to do with their guyding and
ministry. Luke 5. 33.
For christ did gather his disciples aparte from the Pharisees disciples, Mar.
2. 18.
so that the Pharisees were to have no charge, John 3. 25.
nor oversight on christ's disciples. John 9. 27, 28.
This appears in v^ry many places of the Evangelists. Again he distingui^eth
that he is a minister, and leaves out his words of lawful and unlawful, of
god and not of god: So he would fray us with the bare word (minister.) If
they be Satan's ministers should we receive them, because they bear the name
of ministers: There are prophets also, which come to us in sheep clothing,
Acts. 8. 21.
should we receive them, being false prophets, because they bear the name of
prophets? Mat 7. 15.
Therefore these are vile and ungodly mockeries, wherewith Master Cartwright
would delude us: ^ech. 11. 4, 5. verse 15. 16.
Further he distinguishes, that to the dumb ministers them selves their
ministry is a matter of destruction, Nom. 6. 3 9, 4^, 49.
but to the church, it is, he can not tell what good thing, or gracious
benefit from Christ. We showed before, that they do good to others, like
those foolish shepherdes named in Zechary, whom God did raise up in judgment
to sell and to slay the sheep. Also like Corah and his company, by whom so
many thousands perished. Or like the priests of Baal, Ez^^. 343.
or the Shepheardes spoken of in Ezekiel, which did eat the fat, and clothe
them selves with the wool, and slew them that were fed but fed not the
sheep: the weak they strengthened not, the sick they healed not, neither
bound up the broken, nor brought again that which was driven away, neither
sought up that which was lost: but with cruelty and violence do they rule
them, as these do by their cannon power and spiritual courts. For they,
vers^ 2^.
the Bishops, and their officers are those that thrust with side and with
shoulder, and push with their horns all the weak of the flock, till they
utterly scatter them abroad. It is a wonder, that any man should speak of any
good the blind ministers do. For through their woeful ministry, and through
that lamentable bondage of popish discipline, we may well say with Jeremy that
wickedness is gone forth into all the land. Ier. 23. 14, 15.
They strengthen also the hands of the wicked, that none can return from his
wickedness. They are all unto me says the Lord as Sodom, and the
inhabitants thereof as Gomorah But let us see, what are those things, of
Christ, which he says the dumb ministers can give us. Forsooth the Sacraments
and the reading of common service. Nom. 16.
Indeed they have gotten the censers of Corah and his company, Deuteronomy. 12.
and they are made priests of such places and churches, as the Lord as yet
does not choose to put his name there. Wherefore as as we showed before, both
their censings and their offerings, that is their prayers and sacraments are
rejected of the Lord as execrable things. Ezekiel. 44.
They are those strangers named in Ezekiel and in Nombers, which are not of the
Levites nor of the seed of Aaron, but do pollute the Lords house, and can
not offer the sweet incense and pure offerings, which Malachie speaks of.
Mal. 1. 11.
Their Sacraments are stolen and counterfeit badges, Revel. 13. 16.
and how then should we receive them as marks of the true church of God?
They offer the incense of Nadab and Abihu. Leuit. 10. 1.
For their stinted form of service, devised by the Bishops, and translated
from the Massebooke, can never be proved to be incense made by fire from the
Altar of the Lord. But yet Master Cartwright will justify their Sacraments
and reading of service. Let us therefore see to his proofs. Mat. 23. ^.
One proof is this, the Scribes and Pharisees might be heard preaching true
doctrine, therefore the dumb ministers may be heard reading service: a goodly
proof, For it was lawful for the Pharisees to be preachers of the truth,
and it was a part of their office and ministry: but it is not lawful to be
a blind reading minister, neither is it any part of the ministry, to read
over such a stinted form of service. Wherefore though I may hear and like of
that, which is truly preached, yet does it not follow, that I should hear,
like of, or join with, that which is ungodly, and blasphemously spoken,
uttered or done. Again he abuses that place in Matthew, saying, that it was
commanded by Christ to hear the Scribes. There is no commandment given to
hear, but to do as they knew the Pharisees taught truly. And though by
occasion they might hear them teaching truth, yet were they separate as was
showed before, from being their disciples: they were not under their charge and
ministry, as those are now under the dumb ministers charge, whom Master
Cartwright does justify in hearing them, and receiving the Sacraments of
them. He can not show that the Pharisees were no Levites nor Priests, and yet
offered the sacrifices as the Priests And yet these do minister the
Sacrament^^ and will be Priests over the people, being neither to be counted
brethren, nor Christyans. And though the Pharisees or Scribes had so far
usurped, yet should not the people have partaken with them in the sacrifices
no more ought the people at this day, to partake in the Sacraments with such
blind ministers. But why does not Master Cartwright perceive, that his own
proof is against him self. For if the Scribes and Pharisees were to be heard
because they preached truth, then are these dumb ministers not to be heard,
because they are no preachers. But this proof failing, Master Cartwright
prepares another, namely this. The Scribes and Pharisees, were as unfit and as
unlawful ministers, as our reading ministers, and yet might be heard,
therefore our reading minysters may be heard. How unfit ministers the
Pharisees were, it is after examined. We say not, but that the dumb ministers
may be heard. For if standing on the gallouse to be executed, they say they
would come down, I know we may hear them. But the question whether we may
be under their charge and guiding, and so daily and usually hear them, as our
spiritual guides, pastors, watchmen for our souls, and ministers in the
church. This Master Cartwright can not prove, and therefore his proof serves
for another matter, quite besides the question. Yea if he look well, this
proof serves against him. For the disciples of Christ were not to hear the
Pharisees, as being their disciples and under their charge, therefore may not
we be under the dumb ministers charge, to hear them as our teachers, and
guides in Christ. Another proof he gives thus: The dumb ministers have a
calling by the Church, as the scribes and Pharisees had: therefore we may
lawfully hear them and receive them as ministers. In this proof we have
these matters to consider whether our dumb ministers have as good a calling as
the scribes and Pharisees had. Whether the bishops and their officers that call
ministers are to be counted the Church: whether if the church should appoint
and receive a dumb minister, he had thereby any whit more authority* or were
any whit the rather to be received. Ezra 7. 6, 11.
It is certain, that Ezra was a Scribe, and a priest also of the sons of
Aaron, Nehem. 8. 1, 2. 4.
as we may read in the book of Ezra, and Nehemiah. And in other places other
Scribes also were mentioned, Luke 11. 46.
which were both writers and preachers of the Law and word of God. Ezra 8. 16.
And therefore Christ says, that they sure in Moses seat. Ierem. 8. 8.
That is, as it is in the 8. of Ezra* Nom. 3. 6.
They were chosen being men of understanding to preach, Exodus 29.
and minister to the people as their office required. Mat 32. 35.
Yea by the Priests and Elders and consent of the Congregation were they
chosen Nom. 8. 9.
But dare Master Cartwright say that our dumb ministers are thus chosen and
called? or dare he say that they sit in Moses seat? If then he bring it for a
good proof, That the Scribes and Pharisees were to be heard, because they fate
in moses seat, then it is also a good or better proof, That these dumb
ministers do not sit in moses seat, and therefore are not to be heard and
received as ministers. In the Church and assemblyes of the Jews, there could
be (...) dumb ministry suffered, as an ordinary office and calling. Deuteronomy.
33. 10.
For herein consisted their ministry, To teach Iaacob the judgments of God
and Israel his laws, to put incense before his face, and the burnt offering
upon the altar And so the dumb minister can have no office nor calling in the
Church seeing there is no such ministry, nor part of ministry, as to be a
reading minister. Furthermore if Master Cartwright say, that the Bishops and
their officers are the Church, and that therefore the dumb ministers are
called by the Church: First it is to be showed, that Master Cartwright can not
prove them to be the Church, yea it was proved before, that they are not
the Church of God.

Then also he is against him self herein, for he confessed before, That the
dumb ministers are thrust upon the Church, and how then can they be called
by the Church: Thyrdely, if they were called, and then both the manner of
calling be altogether blasphemous and wicked and the office whereto they are
called, is none of the church offices and callings of what weight or authority
shall their calling be? Shall we have strange offices and ministeries in the
Church, which God has not appointed? or shall we give any authority or
reverence unto them, because men account of them? shall the blasphemy and
wickedness of a number, though they be named the Church, make me any whit the
more, to receive a dumb minister, because they do wickedly and blasphemously
call and authorize him. Nay, I ought not to follow a multitude to do evil.
Exodus 23. 2.
For it is not as Master Cartwright would have it, that the more which sin in
a matter, the less the sin is: but rather it is the more grievous, and more
to be abhorred. And Paul gives this liberty to Tim^thie, That though other
men even the Elders and people should choose any unmeet minister, 1. Tim. 5.
22.
yet he should not partake with them in their sin. And if in the act of
choosing, the authority of the church is not to be regarded, when it shamefully
abuses her authority, then also in the wickedness and sin that is wrought
by the choice, it is less to be regarded. For the reading ministry is
abominable wickedness, and as it first ouerthrewe the Churches of God, 1. Tim.
3.
and brought in Antichrist, so it is still the door and high way to all
ignorance, dissoluteness, and all wicked practices and customs. Wherefore let
Master Cartwright lay away his fond distinction that they are ministers,
though they be unlawful ministers. For if the reading ministry be no office
nor calling appointed by christ, then is it an office of Antichrist: And why
then should he stick so much on the word minister, if they be Antichristian
and deuelish ministers? And what will he make of the Church? It is indeed the
house of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth. But Master
Cartwright will have it to presume above Christ, and so will make it an
Antichrist. For if it ordeine strange ministeries and offices in the church,
which christ and his Apostles never could do nor would do, does it not
presume above Christ? Christ and his Apostles could not thrust, Luke 9 5.
no not lawful ministers upon any congregation. Mat. 10. 13, 14.
Neither could he command any Congregation or Church to receive unlawful
ministers, and take them for their guydes. Yet by Master Cartwrightes saying,
we may receive such: and if any such be thrust upon us, we must account their
ministry to be sanctified, for the Churches sake which calls them* Surely if
the Church do usurp and challenge, such a power of ruling, and such a holiness
in sanctifying, which christ never had: it becomes the church of Antichrist,
and quite overthrows the kingdom and priesthood of christ.

But let us see further what M C. says. He pleads for the dumb ministers,
by comparing them still with the Scribes and Pharisees, also with the priests
and teachers in the old law, with the chief Priests at Christ's coming, and
with insufficient and unable Magistrates. He will have them to have as lawful a
calling and ministry as any of these. The Scribes says he, taught untruly
and were deceived in the chief grounds of religion, and yet were to be heard
of the people: therefore our dumb ministers are as lawful ministers as they.
Likewise he says of the priests and of magistrates that some of the priests
were dumbedogs, and some false teachers, and some had not so lawful calling,
also that some Magistrates are not lawful and sufficient Magistrates and yet
neither the Scribes nor the priests nor the magistrates were to be rejected as
no ministers nor Magistrates. What true or false doctrine there is in all this,
we will show by and by. But grant it true which he says of the scribes,
Priests, and Magistrates: namely that they were so evil, as he says, or
taught such false doctrine, yet he him self has given the answer before, to
condemn him self: For he said that the Scrybes were not to be heard, but in
that they taught truth: and that our dumb ministers were to be heard and
received so far, as they can give us any thing that is of Christ. Now it is
showed that a reading or dumb ministry is not of Christ, therefore we are not
to receive or hear such a ministry. Likewise the Scribes when they preached
truth, were to be heard and received, therefore these being no preachers, are
not to be heard nor received. The same may be said of Magistrates, that what
duetyes they are able and sufficient to do, therein we may receive some good
by them, therefore the dumb ministers having no ableness nor sufficiency to
that calling, are wholly to be rejected. If he say that the reading of common
service is some ableness and sufficiency of a minister, he knows well
enough that that is no part, nor duty of the ministry. For though it be
written That the Levites read in the book of the Law, Nehem. 8. 8.
and gave the sense, and cause the people to understand the reading. Acts 15.
21.
And again in the Acts that Moses was preached being read every Sabbath: yet
we must not thereby understand a bare reading only, neither a reading of a
stinted form of service. For the order was, as appears in Luke and in the
Acts chap 13. Luke 4. 17.
to read the Law and word of God and then to preach upon it. Acts 13. 15.
And therefore as appears in Nehemiah They read in the Book of the Law, and
preached the sense and understanding thereof to the people. And therefore in
Timothy, 1. Tim. 4. 13.
Reading, exhortation, and doctrine are joined together. If Master Cartwright
do further allege, that the dumb ministers have some ableness or
sufficiency to minister the Sacraments, he likewise knows that it is no
part nor duty of the ministerye, Deuteronomy. 33. 10.
to read a consecration of the Sacraments, Eccles. 4. 17.
neither to minister the sacraments, without preaching, Mat. 28. 19.
and much less without the power and ability to preach. Acts 2. 42.
This is manifest in the old Law as in Deuteromie, Ecclesiastes, and in other
places. Likewise in New Testament, as in Matthewe, Acts and sundry other
places. By all which places it is evident, That though preaching may sometimes
be without the present Act of ministering the Sacraments, yet the Sacraments
might never be ministered but of preachers and with preaching. But now mark
how fondely he compares dumb Ministers to unable or insufficient
magystrates, which should rather be compared to Traiterous and usurping
Rebels. For as any usurper were wholly to be rejected and withstoode, if he
should get from Her Majesty her royal dignity and crown, or lay claim
thereunto: So also are these minysters to be rejected, which usurp a kingdom
and government in the Church: when as they ought not to be counted brethren,
nor members in the Church. It again Master Cartwright do say, that usurping
Traitors may give us our right, and we are to take it, at their hands: We
answer, that this is the questyon, whether the readyng of service in that
manner, and their mynistring of Sacraments be right or no. First we showed
before, that such Sacraments so mynistred, and such a readyng of Service were
execrable things and also none of our right. But if they were our right, yet a
man is to take his right from vsurpyng Traytoures by force of arms, if he be
able. Or if he be not able, he should rather loose his right, then do
suite and homage to a Traitor. In deed the Lords Sacraments are our right,
and thanks be to our Lord GOD, we may have them by other means, then by
the Dumb Mynisters. And though we could not, yet we should not take our
right on a thyefe to iustyfie his theeuerye. John 10. 1.
For these hyrelynges are thieves and robbers coming in by the window, as it
is written. So we should first follow the Law on them, to thrust them out
of the sheepefolde, and then see if we can get our right For if all such
Ministers were excommunicate from among the brethren, we should know the
better, both what were our right, and how to come by it. Again Master C.
distinguishes, that to be able to teach is not of the substance of a
minister, but only of a lawful minister, also that to be able to judge true
judgment is not of the substance of a magistrate, but only of a lawful
Magistrate Such like sopperyes as these not worthy the answering, we have
answered before. But here again we answer, that the discipline of the Church
and of the common wealth are unlike in this, that ungodly men, may be
sometimes lawful officers and magistrates in a common wealth: and therefore
Heathen Kings, yea Idolatrous kings and princes are lawful Magistrates at
this day* Otherwise we should condemn our own Kings and Queens, which
heretofore have been Popish and Idolatrous, as being no lawful Magistrates:
But in the Church of God, this holds not. For if any be a wretched liver, or
an Idolater, he can neither be minister nor lawful minister in the church:
yea he is no part, nor member of the Church. Again we say, that if any be an
unlawful minister, he is a Minister quyte out of the Church, as we proved
before, and then what has the church to do with him? Master Cartwright will
needs have him to be a minister, and we are content: for he shall be a
minister, not for the Church, nor to have any meddling in the Church, but for
Satan and for the children of Satan. Further we answer according to his
manner of reasoning that to avoid Idolatrye, or to be no Idolater is not of
the substance of a mynister but of a lawful mynister: for he may be a minister
though he be an Idolatrous minister. But shall we therefore say that daily
massemongers coming openly from the mass, to mynister the Sacraments, in the
same order that our dumb mynisters do, shall be received of the brethren, or
that the brethen shall receive the Sacraments at their hands? And yet again
we answer that if a man be not a lawful minister, he has no essence nor
substance of a mynister: except we say he has the substance of a deuelish
minister. For the lawfulness of a minister, and of his ministration, is the
essence and substance of a minister, and of his ministering. Paul says, Romans 4
15.
that where no law is, there is no transgression. He means that because
there is a law, therefore the breach of that law, is the essence and
substance of sin and transgression. The law says he is it that causes
wrath: For it makes sin to be sin. Wherefore as that which is unlawful or
against the law of God, has the being and essence of sin: so it must needs
follow, that the lawfulnes of anything is the being the essence and substance of
the same and therefore also that the lawfulnes of ministers is the essence, and
substance of ministers. And so we see how vain his distinction is, that a man
may have the substance of a minister, and yet be no lawful minister. I would
not so readily use such school terms and words, as is essence, substance,
and being, if I were not forced thereto by his ungodly subtleties. And surely
except god in judgment have blinded his eyes, he may well perceive the^, not
only to be ungodly, but altogether childish and unlearned

Now we come to answer other matters, which fall out of the former proofs.
As that he says, the Scribes were altogether deceived in the Messiah. He might
rather say, they were ignorant, in some mysteries of the Messiah, then all
together deceived. And so Paul says of them, That had they known, 1. Cor. 2.
8.
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. And Peter also says That
the people did it of ignorance, Act. 3. 17.
as also did their governors. Yea the Apostles them selves were a long time
ignorant in some mysteries of the Messiah. And Christ testifies that many
Prophets and righteous men desired to see and hear those things which the
Apostles saw and heard, Mat. 13. 17.
but did not see nor hear them. Luke 10. 24.
Yea says Peter, 1. Pet 1. 12.
The Angels desire to behold these thing concerning the sussering and glory
of Christ: 1. Tim 3. 16.
And therefore Paul calls this a great mystery, that God should be
manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up in glory. The
Scribes and Pharisees knew that the Messiah should come, Mat. 22. 4^.
that he was the holy one and anointed of God, John 4 25.
as appears by their answer to Christ. The woman of Samaria knew that he
should be the anointed Prophet, and tell them all things. All the Priests
and Scribes knew that he was borne King of the Jews, Mat. 2. 6.
that he was the governor and high Shephearde of Israel that should feed the
people. They knew the prophecies that were of him, that are written in Daniel,
Dan. 7. 14.
in Micah, Mith. 4. 7.
in Isaiah, Isa 7. 14. etc.
in Jeremy and the rest. Ioh. 6. 14. 15.
Both they and the people could readily rehearse such prophecies at their
fingers end, Ioh. 12. 34.
as where he should be borne, whose son he was, what was his office, what
great works he should do, what salvation he should work to his people,
what sufferinges he should endure, and what should be his glory. But Master
Cartwright says, They knew not that Jesus was the son of God, neither how
the Godhead and manhood should be together as in one. I answer that no more
did the Apostles, for a time: neither can any man search this mystery to the
deapth. For Thomas and Philippe knew not, John 14. 5, 8.
as we may read in John, How Christ should ascend into heaven to his father,
and come again, that the Father should be in the sonue and the son in the
Father. Peter also and the rest, Iohu 16. 17.
were ignorant in such mysteries as appears in other places. Ioh. 13. 37.
Yea they dreamed of a worldly kingdom and a worldly deliuerauce, Luke 24. 21.
which should be by Christ, Acts 16.
as is manifest in the Acts and in Luke. Wherefore though they believed not
that that Jesus which was then come in the flesh, was the Son of God, yet
they believed and knew the prophecies. Namely that he was to be called
Immanuel, that is God with us. Again they knew another prophecy of Isaiah,
That he should be called by Name, Wonderful, Isa. 7. ^4.
Counselor, ^he mighty God etc. that he sho^lde sit upon the throne of David,
Isa 9. 6.
and upon his kingdom, and his government should have none end. They knew
of whom that prophecy was given in the fourscore and nynthe Psalm, Psalm 89.
26.
He shall cry unto me Psalm. 2. 7. 12.
, thou art my Father, my God, and the ro^ke of my salvation, also I will make
him my first borne, higher then the Kings of the earth. Therefore they could
not be ignorant, that the Christ was the Son of God. They knew also that
they were to trust in the Son, as it is written, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee. K^sse the Son least he be angry, and ye perish in the
way, when his wrath shall suddenly burn, Blessed are all that trust in him. So
they well knew that as his wrath was destruction, so to trust in him, was
blessing and salutio^. sTherefore it is not truly said, that they were
altogether deceived in the Messiah. Rather it is true that they were ignorant
but in these two points. First, Ioh. 6. 51.
how that particular man being so poor despised Ioh. 10. 3^.
, and afflicted, should be the Messiah, and secondly how he being man should
be God also, and come down from heaven, to be Manna for the people. So then,
so long as they held the general faith and belief, concerning the Messiah,
and were ignorant, whether that particular man was the Messiah, I say this
ignorance for the time was no open overthrow of any ground of Religion. For
the Apostles were commanded not to preach Christ particularly to be the
Messiah, Mat. 16. 20.
till after his resurrection. And the faith of the holy Fathers before time
suffised to salvation, though particularly they knew not Christ, Heb. 1^. 13.
39.
neither received the promises, as says the text, But saw them a far off,
and believed them, and received them thankefully. Whereas the words are, that
they received not the promises, and yet received them thankefully, it is meant
that they received not the particular perfourmance of those promises in Christ,
but only the bare promises that were afterward to be fulfilled. In this faith
they dyed* says the text, verse 3^.
and yet no doubt they were saved. Therefore it was not this particular
ignorance that condemned the Pharisees, but their froward refusing of a
further knowledge. If Ma-ster Cartwright say that they being so froward, yet
the faithful did join with them, it is manifest to the contrary. Acts 2. 40.
For the holy Ghost commanded them to save them selves from that froward
generation: and so they did. For they joined with the faithful only, Acts 5.
13.
and of the other sort, says the text, meaning them which believed not,
durst no man join him self to them. And the man whom the Pharisees did cast
out, John 9. 35.
or excommunicate, christ took him unto him as his disciple. Whereby it is
manifest that Christ both despised and condemned all communion in the Church,
with such of them as were persecuters.

Wheseas Master Cartwright says, that the Scribes and Pharisees taught
justification by works, he has granted before, that preaching false
doctrine, they were not to be heard: and therefore the dumb ministers, being
no preachers at all, are not to be heard. But if they taught that doctrine,
yet they taught but a true doctrine, except they taught it as our Papists do
at tthis day. For the Scripture says. That the man that shall do the works
of the law, shall live in them, Gal. 3. 12.
or have life by them. Romans 10. 5.
So then he that can keep the Law, Ezekiel. 20. 11.
without breach of the law, Deuteronomy 30. 12.
shall be justified by the Law. But Master Cartwright can not prove, that it
was a common doctrine among the Pharisees, that any man could keep the Law,
without breach thereof. Yea there is proof to the contrary. For the chief
Priest did once every year offer a sin offering, to make an atonement for
him self, for his house, Leuit. 16. 6, 21.
and for all the people. H^b. 9. ^.
Likewise were sundry other offeringes and sacrifices observed, exodus 30. 10.
both for the sins of the priests, and of the people: which does plainly
prove, that by one common doctrine they acknowledged all to be sinners, and
to have need of the grace and mercy of God. What then is to be meant By those
heavy burdens, Luke 11, 46.
which they laid on men's shoulders. Mat. 23. 4.
Master Cartwright says, They were the burdens of the moral law, that is,
the duties of righteousness, which all men perpetually ought to observe and
do. Surely this burden, both Christ him self, and all the Apostles and
prophets do lay on us more straightly then ever did the Pharisees. For what
straight commandments does Christ give, Mat. 5* ^9. etc.
Against unadvised anger, Mat. 5. 28.
reproching, offenses, against lust of the heart, wanton looks, and all
occasions of sin. Also against swearing, against revenge, against hatred,
against hypocrisy, against distrustfulnesse, and a number such like. And he
threatens in the fifth of Matthewe, That for breaking the least commandment,
Verse 19.
a man shall be thrust out of the kingdom of God. And how often is the
burden of the Lord, the burden of the Lord, repeated in the Prophets?
wherefore that burden or yoke is rather meant, which is named in the Acts,
That they tempted God to lay a yoke on the disciples necks, Acts 15. 10*
which neither they, nor their fathers were able to bear. This burden was the
ceremonies of the old Law, which were more intolerable to others, then to
the Scribes and Pharisees. For they being most of them Priests and Levites,
were not to bring their tithes, first fruits, and offringes to Jerusalem, as
did others, from all quarters round about. For they dwelt at, or about
Jerusalem, especially those whom Christ rebukes, or else came to Jerusalem to
minister in their course. And they took tithes and paid none, Leuit. 18. 29.
save only the tenth part of the tithes that were brought them. They did very
straightly look to their tenthes, and to all clensings, purifyings, vows and
offerings etc. for they were their living and maintenance. Wherefore it being a
great trouble and burden to others, to come from all places of the world, to
Jerusalem every year, as the Law then did bind them, also to pay their vows
and their tenthes and first fruits, and to observe their purifyings etc. and
no trouble at all to the Scribes which kept at Jerusalem, no marvel though
Christ say they laid heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders, but would not
touch them, them selves with the leact of their fingers. For there being an
hundredth occasions in the year, Leuit. 15. 12. 13, 14 etc.
whereby the people might become unclean, Colos 2. 21.
as by touching, Nom. 19. 11, 12, 13. etc. 16.
tasting, Leuit. 5.
handling, Romans 9. 32.
by the death of any that should dye by them by diseases, by ignorances and
escapes etc. they were to be cleansed by the sprinckeling water, and to bring
their offeringes to Jerusalem. But Master Cartwright might have alleged a
more likely proof then these, out of the Romans: namely That Israel sought
not righteousness by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law: for they
have stumbled at the stumbling stone. For answer hereto, we showed before,
that the Israelites made a profession of their faith in the Messiah, even till
the time, that he plainly showed him self: and then they rejecting him, and
yet believing that he was still to come, their faith became as no faith: they
believed in a Messiah which was to come, but they stumbled at him which was
come. And so he was unto them that stumbling stone, and rock of offense. And
so this word ( as,) or ( as it were) is well added of Paul. For he means,
that their doctrine and profession, was not openly nor directly to seek
righteousness by the bare Law, but by their rebellion against the Messiah
that was come, they did as much and as they term it, indirectly. So as it
were they sought righteousness by the Law, when they kept the ceremonial law,
without the Christ that was come, though not simply without the Christ they
looked for* yea they ^eleeued that the ceremonies did still offer and represent
Christ unto them, and so made profession that to keep the ceremonial law, was
to keep their faith and belief in Christ But they having refused Christ come
already, and christ having abolished that law, they might well be said to seek
righteousness without faith in christ. Thus it is manifest that the doctrine and
sacrifices of the Jews was to have righteousness and atonement by Christ, whom
their sacrifices did signify: but their deeds and practice in refusing Christ,
was as much, as to seek righteousness by the law. Now those which refused
christ, Acts 5. 13.
and believed not in him, Acts 2. 40.
were utterly separate as was showed before from the communion and fellowship
of the church. And therefore this matter is altogeter against him. Luke 18. 9.
As for that place of luke, he abuses it too much: for the parable of a
pharise, which speaks of matters, as though they were, when in deed they
were not, he alleges for proof of all the Pharisees doctrine. First, the
fault of one Pharise if he had been faulty, can not prove them all faulty:
then also the parable of a fault, does show it to be no fault committed, but
imagined or supposed, as if it were committed. Thirdlye Christ in that place,
minds not to rebuke any doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, but as the
text says, he spoke a parable unto certain, which trusted in them selves,
that they were just, and despised others. None are named to teeche any such
doctrine, but certain are rebuked for trusting in themselves, wherefore the
like proof to this, might I allege against him: namely that very many in
England both preachers, and others do trust in their riches, or power, or
wisdom or good works etc. Therefore the preachers in England do teach men
to trust in themselves. But as this proof is fond, so the conclusion that
follows is according* For he concludes that the dumb ministry is as
lawful and good, as the ministry of the Scribes: which taught untruly, says
he, in the chief grounds of religion. Although he cannot prove such untrue
doctrine, yet how does it follow, that their ministry, which fails in
all points, should be as good as theirs, which fails but in some points.
For the dumb ministers we proved, to have no part nor work in the
ministry, And the Scribes he confessed before to sit in Moses seat, to
teach true doctrine, to have a calling by the Church. Again they must needs
edify more, which preach much truth, then they which are no preachers at
all. But the Scripture is plain, that if any preach much truth, and yet
do preach heresies withal, they are to be avoided: as it is written, Tit. 3.
10.
Reject him that is an heretic, Mat, 18.
after once or twice admonition. And though the Church is to admonish such,
yet if it will not or can not, then any man particularly has this liberty to
admonish, except for his scornefulnesse and obstinacy he be unworthy. And
then we are forbidden to receive them to house, 2 Ioh. 10.
or to bid them God speed. Romans 16* 17.
And how then shall we take them for our guydes and pastors in the Church, or
say (Amen) to their prayers? And here follows that untruth to be refuted,
which he adds in these words, that the true Prophets are never found to
have forbidden the people to come to the sacrifice of the false prophets, Isa.
56. 10.
and of the priests that were dumb dogs, neither to bring their sacrifices
unto them. First even that place of blind watchmen and dumb dogs, which he
quoteth amiss, is against him self. Hag. 2. 13* 14.
For there was a Law, that the priests being vn^^tane, they might neither
touch nor eat of the holy things: if they did, Leuit. 22. 5, 6.
then those things were polluted. Nom. 6.
Now to drink wine or strong drink was a pollution both of the Nazarites and
Priests: Leuit. 10.
of the Priests I say, Malal. 1, 7.
when they came into the Tabernacle of the congregation to offer sacrifice. Isa
52. 11.
How then should the people partake in the Sacrifices with Priests that were
common drunkardes. Nom. 19.
For the people are commanded not to touch any unclean thing: Leuit. 22.
and therefore those sacrifices being unclean, how should the people have
any thing to do with them? Now such drunkards were those dumb dogs which
he names, as is there mentioned: they were greedy dogs, which said, Come,
I will bring wine, verse. 11. 12.
and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this
day, and much more abundant. Wherefore being such, how could they put
difference, as it is commanded in Leuiticus, Between the holy and the unholy,
and between the clean and the unclean. Leuit. 10. 10.
And how then should not all their sacrifices be polluted? There be maplaces
which show, that the priests polluted them selves, and the holy things: as
in Ezekiel, Her priests desile mine holy things, ezekiel. 22.
they put no difference between the holy and profane, neither discern
between the unclean and the clean, and in Hagga^, Hag. 2. 15.
that which they offer here is unclean: Mal. 1.
and in Malachie, Ye offer vncteane bread upon mine altar etc. Also in sundry
places, as is quoted before, commandment is given not to touch any unclean
thing: Wherefore it is a flat commandment even to all the people, not to
touch those polluted sacrifices of the Priests, not to communicate nor
partake with them therein. Therefore in his own place quoted out of Isaiah,
Isa. 56. 9.
is that terrible judgment pronounced both against priests and against
peeople, though only the sin of the priests or watchemen is named. The
words are these, All ye beasts of the field come to deuorr, even all ye
beasts of the forest. And then follow these words, their watchemen are all
blind etc. as who say, that the people, because they did partake with such
watchemen, they should also perish with them* If Ma-ster Cartwright say, the
pollutions we speak of, were by Idolatry: let him know that Malachie spoke
to those, which were no Idolaters, which also had a general reformation from
Idolatry: Likewise Haggai prophesied in a time of reformation, and spoke to
those which were no Idolaters. And Ezekiel in that Chapter, mentions no
Idolatry, but rebukes other wickedness, as it were seuering it from
Idolatry. For in the next Chapter, he touches their sin of Idolatry more
particularly. And to those that accounted so much of the Temple, and of the
sacrifices, as Master Cartwright does of his Churches and Sacraments, Isa. 66.
3.
Isaiah says thus, The heaven is my throne says the Lord, and the earth is my
footestoole, and so he proceeds to rebuke their vain brag of the Temple,
and then comes to their sacrifices, saying, He that kills a bullock, is as
if he slew a man, he that sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off a dogs
neck: he that offers an oblation, as if he offered swynes blood: he that
remembers incense, as if he blessed an Idol: by which words it is plain that
he rebukes even those, that detested Idols, and swynes blood etc. and tells
them, that their sacraments are no sacraments, they are unclean and polluted,
as the most vile filthiness, which they themselves abhorred. If he say, that
yet to the godly in those days, the sacrifices were lawful and good, I
answer that the godly had uo meddling with such wicked men, nor with their
sacrifices. For in the second verse after he speaks thus to the godly,
Verse 5.
Hear the word of the Lord, all ye that tremble at his word, your brethren
that hated you, and cast you out for my Names sake, said, let the Lord be
glorified: but he shall appear to your joy and they shall be ashamed. So
then there was a great separation between the righteous and the wicked in
those days: in so much that the righteous forsook all fellowshippe in their
sacrifices, and the wicked cast them out from among them. If Master Cartwright
say that the righteous forsook not their sacrifices, but were cast out from
them, Isa. 59. 15.
it is answered in another place That while they refrained from evil, they
made them selves a pray to the wicked. So then the cause why they were cast out
was, because they would not partake with the wicked in their wickedness. If
Master Cartwright say that that was for other wickedness, but not for their
refusing to partake in the sacrifices, It is, 1. Sam. 2 17.
said in Samuel That for the wickedness of the priests, men abhorred the
sacrifices. If he say again, that they did evil to abhor the^, he can not
prove it: and it is evident that they were of the better sort that did so.
For in Malache it is written, that they which feared the Lord, spoke every one
to his neighbor, Mal. 3. 16. 17, (...).
concerning the abuses and wickedness of those days: and the Lord shows the
badge and mark of all his flock and people, namely that they should return
and discern between the righteous and the wicked: between him that serves
God, and him that serves him not: As who say, that every one of the righteous
had liberty and were commanded, to have no communion with the wicked in the
Church: and how then should they be joined with them in the nearest
communion, (...). 3 4.
namely in the Sacraments. And in the same Chapter it is prophesied, That the
offeringes of Judah and Ieerusalem should be acceptable to the Lord, as in
the old ^yme, Mal. 1. 10.
and in the years before, Mal. 2. 8, 9, 10, 13.
and that was, when the sons of Leui (which figured all the righteous should
bring offeringes unto the Lord in righteousness. For he showed in the
Chapters before, that while open and gross wickedness was incurable among
them, both the priests and Levites brake the covenant, and also the people,
and the offerings were no more regarded, neither received acceptably at their
hands. 1. Sam. ^.
As for the sacrisices of Elkanah and his wives, they were offered by the
ministry of Eli, as appears in that place, and not by his wicked sons.
Now Elie was rather negligent, in correcting his sons, then a gross
transgressour, and therefore might Elkanah the rather partake in the sacrifices
with him. But we read in the Psalms, Psalm. 15. 4.
That a vile person is contemned in the eyes of righteous: how then shall a
ryghteous man, receive the Sacraments with such, as with brethren in the
Church? David prays that he might not commit wicked works, with men that
work iniquity, Psalm. 1 41, 4.
and that he might not eat of their delicates: and how then would he eat of
their sacrifices, which are the chiefest delicates. If he say, that David
would not eat common bread with such, it is evident that he daily did so, in
the house of Saul. And this matter is before made plain. And in the Proverbs
it is written, They that forsake the Law praise the wicked, pro. 28. 4.
but they that keep the Law set them selves against them. How shall they set
them selves against them, when they join with them as brethren in the
Sacraments. Judah was said to defile the holiness of the Lord, because some
in Judah did marrye the daughter of a strange God: yea and this was counted a
sin, transgression, Mal. 2. (...). Ezr. 9. 1. Nehem. 9.
and abomination committed by all Israel and Judah, and Jerusalem, though some
onley had married such women. Wherefore were they all guilty of transgression,
but because they did not, or would not redress such wickedness. For it had been
the duty of every one, as appears in Ezra and Haggai, to have offered no
oblatio^s, nor to have partaken with any such in the sacrisices, till such open
wickedness, had been taken away. Hag. 2. 15.
Otherwise Haggai would not have said, that all the works of their hands,
and that which they offered there was unclean: neither would Ezra have rent
his clothes, nor plucked off the hear of his head, and of his beard, nor have
said that they all were before the Lord in their trespass, and therefore
could not stand before the Lord because of it. And surely their sin of marrying
strange wives, did but figure out our sin of mingling and intermedling the
Churches: For the daughters of Antichrist, I mean those wicked prelates and
popish officers are yet married to our churches: The papists and wicked men are
thrust into our churches to receive the sacraments with us. Their discipline is
the nurture and lady mystres over our churches. If M. C. ask what proof we
have, that their marriage, I mean of the Jews, was any figure or Ceremony,
let him read that of Paul to the Ephesians, where Paul calls marriage a
secret or mystery, Ephesians. 5. 32.
and shows there, that marriage was a sign or figure of the joining together
of Christ and his Church: Song. 6 8. Revel. 21. 9.
also in the song of Solomon this is manifest, and in the Revelation and sundry
other places. David shows with whom the godly did partake in the sacrifices,
when he says, I have not haunted with vain persons, neither kept company
with the dissemblers, I have hated the assembly of the evil, and have not
co^panied with the wicked, and then follow these words, I will wash mine
hands in innocence o Lord and compass thine altar. Psalm. 26. 4.
Which words do teach us, that when we receive the sacraments, we can not
wash our hands in innocence, except we receive them apart from the wicked.
For the order of the Jews was to partake in the sacrifices, family by
family, as we may read in sundry places. And therefore they might more easily
avoid the company of the wicked. And the Jews contended against Peter, (...).
because he went in to men uncircumcised, Act. 1^ 3.
and had eaten with them, which shows how strait they were, for avoiding
all company with the wicked. It is lawful indeed to eat with Publicanes and
sinners as Christ also did, but yet to eat the Lords supper with opon
unrepentant and Mark 2. 15.
wretched persons is not lawful. For as I may not offer mine own oblation,
Mat. 5. 23.
when I remember that a brother has ought against me, Mat. 9. 13.
much less may I partake in another man's offering, Hose 6. 6.
when I have ought against him. Mat. 18. 15.
Yea mercy and pity in seeking to reform him is preferred before sacrifice.
So that, except he be obstinate and a scorner, I am gently to admonish him,
and if he be yet hardened in his sin, I am as Jude says, Jude ^3.
to save him with fear, pulling him out of the fire* what is this fear which
should save him, but to make him afraid, by sharper rebukes, and refusing to
partake with him in the Sacraments. For he will be afraid of nothing, so long
as I take him for a brother, and join with him in the sacraments. But this is
strange that Master Cartwright says, that the true prophets did not forbid
the people, to communicate with the false prophets in the sacrifices. For
commandment is given, Deuteronomy* 13. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
not only not to communicate with false prophets, Deuteronomy. 1^. 2.
but even to kill them, Luke 17. 23.
and our hands to be first against them. Zechn. 13. 3.
yea though they were onr brethren, Gal. 1. 8.
or our owue children, or the wife that lies in our bosom, or our friend,
which is as our own soul: yet our eyes may not pity him nor show mercy unto
him, says the text. If Master Cartwright say that this was commanded for
Idolatrous prophets, why then did he not make that exception. But we have
showed before, that for heresy also, the false prophets are not to be bidden
God speed, and are utterly to be avoided. yea they are to be put to death as
well as the other, Deuteronomy. 18. 20.
as again it is written in Deuterononie 18. 20. And it is testified in
Nombers, Titus 3. 10.
against the people, 2. John 10. (...).
that they should make them fringes, Romans 16. 1^.
that when they looked upon them, Nom. 15. 39.
they might remember all the commandments of the Lord and do them, and that
they sought not after their own heart, and after their own eyes, after the
which they went a whoring* which words do teach us, that all heretics and
false prophets do go a whoring after their own hearts, and are as evil,
Ierem. 23. 16.
as Idolaters. Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
And wherefore is it commanded, Gal. 1 8.
that the man which hearkeneth not to the voice of the high Priest, (which
^igureth the voice of Christ in his Church) should die? which words do
show, That false prophets that will not be reformed, are to be ^ad in
execration and avoided of men. And how then should the people partake with
them in the sacrifices. Yea the Jews had that custom, ^s it appears from
their forefathers, John 9. 22, 34, 35.
and from the former Prophets, To excommunicate the fals^ Pro^hets and those
that believed them, and therefore they did wickedly excommunicate the blind
man, that believed in christ. And the custom of punishing false prophets,
Iere 29. 26.
is alleged in Jeremy, though wickedly and by a false prophet. And whereas
it is commanded in Jeremy, Zech. 13. 6. Iere. 23. 16. Ie^^^ 27. 9. 14, 15^
16, 17, 18
That the people should not hear the words of the false prophets, is it not
also a commandment, that they should not partake with them in the sacrifices?
For the sacrifices and sacraments are but a seal to the word that is
preached. So the false prophets having a false word and a false message, if
the people should partake with them in the sacraments, they did thereby seal
unto their false message, as if it were true.

Again that any dumb dogs, which could not bark did minister the
sacrisices, Master Cartwright can not prove. Deuteronomy. 33. 10.
yea before we have proved the contrary, Eccle. 4. 17.
For the sacrifices were always ministered as is showed before, Leuit, 1. 4.
by Priests that could preach and did preach. Chap. 3. 2.
The occasion for which the sacrifice was offered, was showed before. The
sins of those that brought the sacrifice, was confessed over the head of the
Sacrifice etc. All these things are manifest in the old Law. Indeed there
were dumb dogs, among the priests (for there were diverse cities, which
belonged to the Priests only) yet none snche being able, Chap. 4 4.
nor using to minister the sacrifices, Mal. 2. 7, 8.
we speak not here of Idolatrous sacrifices) I say it is follye to imagine*
that the people did bring their sacrifices to such. But yet if they did bring,
we have proved before that they ought not to have done so.

If Master Cartwright say that the Church indeed might refuse the false
prophets and put them from the sacrifices, but not every particular man in the
Church: I answer that the question is not of forbidding and debarring from
the sacrifices, but of withdrawing our selves from wicked companions in the
sacrifices. And so it follows that if the whole Church ought not to
communicate with such in the sacrifices, then no part nor member of the Church
ought to communicate: and if the whole Church do sin and commit wickedness
by communicating with such: then if any amongst them will refuse to
communicate, they shall do well, and shall not sin thereby. That the whole
Church ought not to communicate, but to cast out such from amongst them, it
is proved before. Phil. 1. 17, 18.
But here is that place of Paul to be answered, which the adversaries lay
against us: which is that some preach Christ of envy and strife, and some
also of good will, and Paul rejoices that Christ is preached all manner ways.
By which words they would gather, that we may communicate in the Church with
false teachers, false prophets, heretics, and ungodly wretches. How
shamelessely they gather this, Phil. 3. 2*
even Paul in the same Epistle answers them: for he bids them beware of
dogs, beware of evil workers: beware of the concision. Would Paul have
dogs and evil workers to communicate in the Church? Nay does he not call
them concision from the Church: meaning that if they preached circumcision,
they must needs be cut off from the Church, and others also with them. And so
their circumcision, should rather be concision, that is a cutting and renting
of the Church in sunder. Paul is so far from rejoicing in such preachers,
Verse 18. 19.
that in the eighteenth verse he gives warning of them, with weeping tears,
and calls them enemies of the cross of Christ, belligods, proud and worldly
men, and appointed to damnation. Gal. 5. 12.
And Paul would not only not suffer the church to communicate with such, as
is largely proved before, but wishes they were even dead and destroyed which
so did disquiet the church. What is then to be meant by Paul's joy, that
Christ was preached all manner ways? Surely this, that so the church and the
discipline thereof were kept upright, we need not care for the enemies
thereof. yea and if in the church also, the doctrine of hypocrites do more
good; then their secret faults can do hurt, we are therein to rejoice. For
Paul ^peaketh of the envy and contentious mind of such preachers, and not of
any gross wickedness that brake forth by them. Further if some be deceived
in doctrine, and be otherwise minded then the truth is, Phil. 3. 15.
God shall reueile the same unto them says Paul: he means so long as they
are weakelings and not obstinate enemies. For ignonorance, so long as it is not
a sotted nor wilful ignorance, nor joined with other gross wickedness, is to
be borne with. But if any man abuse his ignorance so, M^t. 5. 19.
that he breaks but the least commandment, and teaches men so, as Christ
has told us, he shall be called the least in the kingdom* of heaven: that
is, he shall be clean cast out of the kingdom or if any man by his ignorance
or false doctrine be contentious, we have no such custom, says Paul, neither
the Churches of God. Yea the custom of the Church is* 1 Cor. 11. 16. Romans 16.
17.
as it is written again, To mark those diligently, which cause division
amongst us, contrary to the truth we have learned* and to avoid them. How
then should Paul rejoice in contentious preaching? Surely as Paul rejoiced, so
Christ desired to have contention in the world. Contention I say in the
world, Luke 12 49, 50, 51. Mat. 10. 34.
but not in the Church. For I came not says Christ to give peace on earth,
but rather debate. I am come, says he, to put fire on the earth, and what is
my desire if it were already kindled? For from henceforth there shall be five
in one house divided, three against two, and two against three. The father
against the son, and the son against the father etc. Now there is a lawful
joy in this contention, not that me^ should be so wicked, nether that such
contention should be among the true professors, but that the warfare against
wickedness is begun, and that the treuth works and prevails thereby: This
was Paul's joy, and this should be our joy, 1. Cor. 11. 20.
if me^ in the world fall out, contend, and disagree about the Gospel: for then
shall the truth be sifted and boulted out, and the Church of Christ shall be
builded, and grow the more mightily. But Paul discommendeth contention in the
Church, and says, that when they come together into one place, with such
dissension among them, this is not to eat the Lords Supper. And here also is
that place answered, that some men did build hay or stubble in the spiritual
buylding, 1. Cor. 3. 13, 14. 15.
and so their work cannot abyd the fire of Gods word, but shall burn, yet
they shall be safe themselves Paul thereby rebukes their vain eloquence and
other insirmities in preaching, as being but have and stubble that shall burn,
but they them selves being purified from such infirmities as it were by fire,
shall be safe. yea and though some be false apostles, 2. Cor. ^. ^.
yet if they work so deceitfully, and so cunningly transform them selves,
that none can prove them to be obstinate false teachers, nor charge them with
open gross wickedness, they are to be suffered as brethren in the church.
But it is be^ere sufficiently proved that if any be an obstinate heretic, or
an open wicked wretch, he is not to be suffered.

Again the adversaries do set the practice of the Apostles and brethren
against us, Act. 1. 224.
which did communicate, as they say, in the offerings and sacrifices of the
wicked Jews and persecuting priests. Mat. 8. 4.
And Master Cartwright brings in Christ, who commanded the leprous man,
purged from his leprosy, to show him self to the priest, and to offer his
oblation. To them both we answer, that neither the Apostles and brethren did
communicate with the wicked Jews and persecuting priests, neither also was
the leprous man commanded to communicate in that manner. For they were of the
brethren, as is plain in the text, with whom Paul did contribute in that
matter of purifying. And it is written, that a great company of the Priests,
were obedient to the faith. Act. 6. 7.
And therefore no doubt of it, the Apostles made choice of the priests, as
they did of those four brethren, with whom Paul did contribute and other
priests besides the high priest might accomplish the common service of the
sacrifices, Heb. 9. 6, 7.
Hebrews 9. If they say that the sacrifices and oblations were sanctified in
the name of the wicked hie priests, we deny it: For the believers did know
that Christ the high Priest was come already, and therefore in his name they
took the sacrifices to be sanctified, and not in the name of the other
priests. Moreover it is manifest, that they did not communicate, neither offer
any offering, but rather that they should have done it, and were let by the
vproare before the days of purifying were ended. Acts 18. 18.
And it seems that Paul knew by the spirit and by the prophecies that went
on them, Acts 2^. 22. 23.
that such an vproare should fall out, Acts 21. 11.
and therefore also knew that the offering should be let. If here again
they object, that the sacrifices them selves, were fulfilled in Christ, and
also abrogate, and yet for the churches sake were tolerated, I ask them what
they would gather hereby, or what vantage they would take against us? Forsooth
they would justify thereby a tollerating of our horrible abuses and disorders.
But how ca^ they, by those things which God commands, warrant those things
which God never commanded. Again they are fowly deceived, as touching the
ceremonial law. First because they think the accomplishing or fulfilling of
the ceremonial law, to be a present and utter abolishing thereof, without a
certain testimony and preaching to the people, that it is abolished. Secondly
for that they make no difference between the law disanulled: and the
forbidding thereof, being disanulled, also between the act and manner of
abrogating the law, and the law already abrogated. Also because they will have
the new law stand in force, before it can be duly proclaimed and received in
stead of the old. And so to the Hebrews it is written, that the old testament
being disanulled, Heb. 8. 13.
is ready to vanish away* whereby it is meant, that it could not at once be taken
away. It was accomplished and fulfilled in Christ, yea it was also abolished in
Christ as the head, yet by degrees and measure it was abolished and taken from
the body. wherefore it was vanishing* and yet not utterly vanished* H^b. 3. 7.
Psalm. 95. 7.
It stood in some force, because the new testament, was not yet sufficiently
proclaimed and preached to the people. And therefore it is said. Heb. 4, 7.
To day if ye will hear his voice. By these words, To day, he appointed a
certain time, says the Apostle, and so he shows that time to be appointed
for receiving the further and better promises, also a better testament and a
better profession, the^ was the former. So that we see it was lawful for the
Jews to hold still their ceremonies and sacrifices, Heb. 7. 18.
till they might surely know the first commandment to be disanulled, because
of the weakness thereof. For what faithful subject will forsake the old laws of
his prince, till he be assured that new laws are proclaimed which abrogate
the old. Heb 9. 16.
Indeed the new Testament or new Law took place and was established at the
death of Christ, as the Apostle proves. yet by degrees it took place in the
Churches, as Christ also teaches, where he says, John 12 3.
And I, if I were lift up from the earth will draw all men unto me, meaning
that at his death he established a new Law and Testament, by which men
should be drawn unto him, not that they were drawn at once in a moment and
all together. For the veil or covering of the. 2. Cor. 3. 14. 15.
old Testament was first to be taken away. By this veil no doubt Paul
means the ignorance of the Jews, whereby they did cleave so much to the old
law and ceremonies. And therefore the Lord says in another place, Isa. 25. 7.
that he will destroy in this mountain, the covering that covers all
people, and the veil that is spredde upon all nations. For the Temple that
stood on the mountain, with the ordinances thereof, was as a veil to blind
the hearts of the Jews* which dwelt among all nations. And therefore Christ
did foreshewe the destruction of the Temple, Mat. 24. 2.
which came to pass about forty years after: John 4. 21.
A great part of which time, it was still permitted to the Jews to hold the
old Ceremonies. If they object that the veil of blindness was sin, and
therefore to hold the ceremonies was sin, I answer, that it was no veil
of blindness, to those that were willing, ready, and forward to receive the
New Law and Testament when it was offered. If again they object that their
willingness and forwardness appeared not, seeing the Gentiles so quickly
rejected the old law, and they in so long time rejected it not: we answer,
that all the believing Jews did straightway reject it in part, though not
wholly: but some of them also rejected it wholly even in short time, yet they
were but few, and no marvel. For the Gentiles had never received the old
law, and therefore might the more readily embrace the ^^we. but the Jews were
always zealous of the old Law, Acts. 21. 20.
and therefore could not so suddenly be reclaimed from their former zeal.
Further that distinction or difference betwixt the act and manner of doing any
thing* Heb. 2. 8.
and the deed already done, appears by that place in the Hebrews: where it
is said, thou have put all things under his feet: in which words the act
done, is put for the doing thereof. For yet we see not, (says the Author)
all things subdued unto him. but the work was in haude, as it were, it was
doing and prospered, till all things should be subdued. Even so we may say
that the old law was abolished. or taken away, at the death of Christ: that
is, it was in abolishing, or it was ready to vanish away, and to be utterly
abolished yea in Christ the head, it was abolished, and in the members also it
was ready to be abolished. Romans 14. 1, 2, 5.
And therefore Paul gives this distinction, that some brethren are weak in
faith, and are not yet persuaded in their minds, that the ceremonial law is
abolished* Verse. 14.
others have knowledge. Now Paul reasons, Verse. 23.
that in such matters concerning the observation of such ceremonies, every man's
faith or knowledge must be his rule. For to him that judges any thing
unclean, to him it is unclean. Therefore he that does any thing in such
matters, against his knowledge or conscience, he sins. For whatsoever is not
of faith or knowledge is sin, says Paul. So then our answer is true, that
the ceremonies of the old law, were not utterly to be removed, but by faith
and knowledge of the full abrogation thereof. Otherwise Paul would not have
said, that he which observes a day, or he which eats not unclean meats,
observes the day of the Lord, or eats not the meat to the Lord. He
means, according to his own interpretation verse. 18. verse. 4. Verse 4.
that they serve Christ in these things, Verse. 18.
and are acceptable unto God, and also to be approved of men. And therefore
also they that were stronger, and had further knowledge, were to bear with the
weaker, Verse 3. 4. 13. 22.
and to apply their knowledge and judgment, 1* Cor. 8. 9.
that they put no stumbling block nor occasion to fall before their brethren.
Again we have a further answer by these words of Paul. That some things may
be done, upon just occasion, as when we are sure that we serve God therein: and
some things are simply sin, which may never be done upon any occasion. Such
are our vile abuses and ungodly disorders, which are not as the ceremonies of
the Law, that by occasion might be observed or not observed: as to make
difference of times or of meats: but they are altogether forbidden by the word
of God, and therefore not indifferent as they term them. And though some
things in them selves, Romans 14. 14.
as they are creatures, 1. Tim. 4, 4.
are rather clean, good, and lawful, then (as they term them) indifferent,
yet their use, or rather abusing in such manner and order, is not lawful and
good, neither indifferent.

And here again is another objection to be answered, because when ^ing
Hezekiah did celebrate the Passover, 2. Chron. 30. 17, 18, 19.
there were many in the congregation, that were not cleansed, and yet did eat
the Passover. And thereby they do gather, that wicked wretches may partake
with us in the sacraments. That place* plainly shows, that it was only a
ceremonial uncleanness, and no wickedness in the people. verse. 19.
For the people as the words do testify, prepared their whole heart to seek
the Lord God. again the same place answers it self: that they were not
cleansed according to the purification of the sanctuary: whereby is meant, as it
is written in Nombers, Nom 9. 10.
that they were to keep the Passover, notwithstanding such uncleanness. For
it could no way be remedyed. before the time of the Passover appointed. And
again that ceremony of uncleanness, Nom. 19. 20.
was commanded because of the sanctuary, which might not be polluted. Now
therefore they only eating the Passover in their houses or tents, and not
coming to the sanctuary, their ceremonial uncleanness was no wickedness in
them. For the Priests them selves, 2. Chron. 29. 34,
as the text declares, ^. Chro. 30. 16.
were not suffered to come into the Sanctuary or Temple, Mark 7. 15.
being not yet cleansed. And yet also there is a further answer. For that the
ceremonial uncleanness was no sin, so long as it was not by their
carelessenesse in avoiding it, or if it had been sin, yet it was to be
counted a smaller escape or an infirmity, and no grosser wickedness. And then
seeing it was openly rebuked, and openly confessed, and prayed for by the King*
and also healed in the people, (For the Lord healed the people says the
text,) I say, seeing the matter stood so, how shall any man excuse or
tolerate thereby, our intolerable disorders, which are also incurable. For if
escapes, or open infirmities are not so to be borne with, but that they must
be openly rebuked and mended, before the offenders can communicate in the
sacraments, Then much rather are open grosser sins to be first redressed,
before the sinners be suffered to partake in the sacraments. But Master
Cartwright brings a place in Jeremy, for defense of suspendings, which the
Bishops use now a days: or at least for tollerating of them that the
preachers should take and give over their callings, as the Bishops and their
officers do appoint them. Why does he, so carelessely falsify the
Scriptures. Ierem. 36. 5.
First he says that Jeremy was suspended from preaching, and then he would
prove that Jeremy obeyed that suspension, thirdly he says that Jeremy was
at liberty of his body, and fourthly that he would not preach in the Temple
for making a tumult. All which things are utterly false, and have no show of
truth in the^. For first it is plain in the chapter he quoteth, that he was
shut up: Ierem. 32. 2.
and therefore was not at liberty of his body: and the 32 chapter shows
that Jeremy was shut up in the court of the prison. Then also imprisoning of a
man does show a violent withholding of a man from preaching, and not a
suspending. Further that Jeremy would obey no suspendings, it is plain by the
charge and message he had from the Lord. Ier. 1. 10, 18.
For he was set over the nations* and over the kingdoms, (as is written) and
was made an iron pillar, and walls of brass against the king, the princes and
the priests, and was not to be afraid of their faces, least the Lord did
destroy him before the^. Indeed it is true as we have proved before, that we
are not to preach to the unworthy, Hose 4. 4.
as to scorners, and persecuters. For there is a time when the wise man shall
keep silence, when scarce any is to rebuke, or reprove another. But when
Jeremy was shut up, there were of the princes that took his part. For by
their means no doubt* did Jeremy get out of the prison Iere. 56. 19.
court, and so hid him self with Baruch. There was no such bondage of
suspendings, as Master Cartwright would tolerate: and though there were, yet
Jeremy obeyed them not, but only gave place to the tyranny of persecuters,
As for the tumult he speaks of, Acts 23. 6.
we know that Paul him self, though he sought peace, yet he cared more, for
his safetye, and to witness the truth, then he did for to raise a tumult. And
Jeremy also ceased not to preach still, notwithstanding that a tumulte, Ierem
26. ^.
and much stirring had been among the people, and priests, and princes and
Prophets, and all for his preaching.

Whereas Master Cartwright says, that Christ lived in the corruptest times of
the Church, and when things were most confused, and fewest steps of any
lawful calling to be seen, he is therein fowly ouerseene. For those were the
days, Zech. 1^. 10.
wherein the Lord did power, upon the house of David and upon the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of compassion. Zech. 13. 2*
wherein also he did cut off the names of the Idols from amongst his people,
as again it is prophesied: so that they were no more remembered. and he did
cause the false prophets, Luke 18, 9.
and the unclean spirits to depart from amongst the^. luke 2. 21.
They had the true worship of God, Mar. 1, 40.
the true safices, Act. 10. 2^.
the order of the priests and Levites, John 4 9.
and their callings according to the Law of Moses, The church was separated
from the wicked, from the sect of the Saduces, from the idolatrous Samari^ans:
There were very many good men and women, as Zachary the Father of John Baptist
and his wife, Mat. 3.
Simeon and Anna, Luke 3.
and Nathaniel and many other. all which I need not to reckon up. For there
were great multitudes that heard John Baptistes doctrine, and were baptized of
him yea among the Pharisces, there were those that touching the righteousness
which is in the law were unrebukable. Phil. 3. 6.
They were as it appears, most of them Levites, openly called and authorized
to preach by the Elders and people in the Synagognes. And surely that it is but
a vain exception, which Master Cartwright makes of the high Priest, Nom. 20.
28.
That he was made a yearly officer, and came in by Simonie into his office.
For Eleazar was made high priest, while Aaron the high Priest yet lived. 1.
King. 2. 35.
And Zadok was made high Priest, 1. King. 1. 42.
and Abiathar and his sons put from the priesthood, ^. Sam. 2. 30.
when as yet the covenant of the priesthood pertained by the law unto
Abiathar and his house. But necessities and just occasions did oftentimes make
change of the ceremonial laws, and yet no corruption nor abuse came thereby.
Wherefore for answer I say, that the priesthood was not made a yearly
office, but that by course every year two priests did execute the office. And
this seemed to be tolerable by the Law, seeing that if one priest should be
sick, or let by some greater occafions, the other might be in his stead.
As we showed before, that Eeleazar was chosen high Priest, John 18. 13.
while Aaron yet lived, and Zadok in Abiathars stead. and yet were there not
two high Priests in the office at once, but only one at once was to execute
the office. Also there seemed to be much doubt and controversy, to which of
the p^iestes, the priesthood did belong (as also we may read in Josephus.)
And therefore two chiefly standing for it, there were two chosen to it. And
because the law of God did not suffer two at once to be in the office, they
did succeed one another in the execution of the office. Again seeing they
were of the sons of Aaron, and called after the order of Aaron, Heb. 5. 4.
no doubt their calling was lawful and good, Otherwise if any at that time,
had been lawful high Priests, and yet not lawfully called as was Aaron, then
the Apostle would not have set down this for a general truth, That no man
takes this honor unto him self, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.
Neither let him here shift off our answer, by his fond distinction of the
essence of a priest, and of a lawful priest, which before is refuted. As for
Symonie wherewith he charge the high Priests, he can not prove it against
them. For if the Romans ouerruling them, did grievously exact their tributes
and paiments both of Christ himself, Mat. 17. (...).
as we may read in Matthew* and of the high priests: it was no more Symonie in
the priests, then it was in Christ to pay them their exactions. For the
priesthood was their right. seeing it pertained unto them, being the sons of
Aaron. yet can not Master Cartwright prove that they paid any money when they
took their right, or if they did, that they thereby bought their right, and
not rather paid an exaction, which the Romans demanded when they took their
right. But suppose that secretly they gave bribes to the Romans, and dealt by
Symonie, yet that being hidden and not manifest to the people, they were to be
taken of men as lawfully called to that office. For if the Law and common
tribute exacted money of them, they might pay it as well as Christ. If the
officers did exact any besides law, they did it secretly, lest they them
selves should be condemned by law: and so it is manifest that no symonie could
be laid to their charge.

And therefore no marvel though Christ bad the man show him self to the
high Priest. For before the high priests became open persecuters, there was a
lawful communion to be had with them. But this communion was afterward broken,
and made unlawful through their open wickedness. Also it is false, which
Master Cartwright says, that Christ did reverence the high Priest, John 18. 2^.
and gave him accountes of his doctrine. For he gave him no accountes, and
answered him so roundly, that one of the officers which stood by, smote him
with a rod. Also his answer is false concerning that place in Hoshea, Hose
4 6.
that the Lord would refuse the priests, for being any more his priests:
seeing they were without knowledge, of which words he says, that the prophet
rather gives a rule to be followed in their election or deposition, then how
far they may be used. Nay the Prophet there speaks nothing of electing
them, or deposing them by men* but rather of the plague or destruction that
should come upon them. yea he shows that through the ignorance of the
priests all wickedness and idolatry reigned, Verse 9.
and therefore he says that there shall be like people like Priest, meaning
that they shall have a like destruction. Now Master Cartwright dare not say,
that all abominable wickedness and Idolatry reigning, and the priests them
selves being wicked idolaters, I say, he dare not affirm, that they held the
covenant, or were the people, or church of God. For before he has said the
contrary. And how then dare he say, that such priests, were yet priests unto
God, and were not deposed from their priesthood, when as their own wickedness
and idolatry did depose them. For that whole chapter of Hoshea is altogether
against their wickedness and idolatry. And let M. C. know that our open
gross sins and abuses, being not curable by the discipline of the Church,
are as evil as Idolatry: as Samuel the Prophet does witness, 1. Sam. 15. 23.
saying, that rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and transgression (he
means tra^sgression which is stood in, and will not be mended) is wickedness
and idolatry. But this matter is made manifest before.

Now follows the last part of his letter, and the last matter in
controversy, as whether by communicating with a reading minister, we do
communicate with their impiety, and establish their ministry. M. C. herein
does more shamefully err, then if he should, with the bishops, altogether
justify such reading ministers. For he might better say, they were lawful
ministers, and that their ministry were lawful, then that he should confess
them to be unlawful ministers, and yet justify that we may receive them, as
having the essence, and substance of ministers, and partake in their wicked
ministry, without impiety or establishing their But he may plainly see
(except his eyes of understanding be utterly darkened) that if any do usurp,
as traitors, against her majesty, then they also that come under their usurped
rule and government, being once free from it, are also trayters together with
them: So likewise those men usurping a ministry, which Christ never gave them,
neither sanctified to be in his Church, both they do wickedly, and they also,
that will come under their ministry, do establish their wicked ministry, and
partake with them in their impiety. If a man of the wind, (says the prophet)
and false fellow do he saying, Micah. 2. 11.
I will prophecy unto you of wine and of strong drink; he shall even be the
prophet of this people. Yea why not, says Master Cartwright, if the Church do
call such a one, is it his sin only, says he, and not theyrs that receive
him. And the prophets, says he, do not lay it to the peoples charge, though
they communicate with such. Do they not indeed? does not this prophet Micha
lay it to their charge? Zech. 13. 3.
does not also Zecharie show how unlawful it was to communicate with false
prophets, where he says, that when any false prophet shall yet prophecy, his
father and his mother that begat him, shall say unto him, Thou shall not
live: For thou have spoken lies in the name of the Lord: and his father and
his mother that begat him, shall thrust him through, when he prophecieth. But
the truth of this matter, I have proved before. Let us further examine his
wise reasons. He confesses that if by communicating with him, we do make him
minister, then we are guilty of his wickedness. But we make him not minister
says he, though we communicate with him. But I demand, should we have such
ministers, if no parishioner, nor other did communicate with them? Would there
be any magistrates, if there were no subjects to be under their guiding, or
any master, if there were no servants? So then as the having of servants and
subjects, to communicate in the same household or kingdom, does make masters and
magistrates, so to have parishioners to communicate with such ministers, does
make them such ministers, and also establish their ministry. If Master
Cartwright were not void of common reason in this matter, he would never
affirm such absurdities. But before he granted as much in effect, that the
church which receives and calls a minister does especially make him
minister: and therefore herein he is contrary to him self. 1. Chro. 29. 22.
And therefore it is written, Ierem. 23. 21.
that the congregation of the people, made Salomo^ king, and Zadok high priest.
Indeed if the false prophets, or reading ministers do run of them selves
only, and were not called nor received of any, neither had any office nor
ministry in the Church, then the devil only, might be said to make them
ministers, but the parishioners receiving them for their ministers, and taking
them to be called to that office by the Church, as Master Cartwright teaches
us, and yielding them selves to be their flock and charge. I say, those
parishioners together with the devil and his officers do make them ministers.
As for partaking with the impiety of the minister, we have proved before,
that if any wickedness be open, and the church will not redress it, it is
guilty of the wickedness committed. neither ought it to allege, that it can
not redress it. 1. Cor 5.
For it has the power of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.
to judge those that are within, and those strong weapons of the spiritual
warrefare, which can cut off all wicked disorders in the church. Otherwise as
we have showed, it is not the church of God. Paul shows that except we purge
out the old leaven we can not be a new lump to the Lord, neither keep the
Lords feasts. he shows his meaning in that place, that they suffering such
a gross offender amongst them, were guilty of his wickedness, and could
not partake in the sacraments, but it must needs be done with the leaven of
wickedness* and not with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. M^^ 1.
13.
And therefore in the next epistle it is showed, 2* Cor. 7* 11.
that they all repented and sorrowed, as being guilty of his sin, whom they
had no sooner excommunicate.

And why was king Hezekiah afraid, 2. Chron. 30. 17, 18, 19.
and all the people, For the ceremonial uncleanness of some, but only that
they feared, least they all were polluted thereby, and the Passover not
accepted. And therefore that uncleanness, which the Law also did suffer, and
which was without sin, as we have showed, was openly confessed, and healed by
prayer: least the keeping of that feast should be wholly unclean. How much
more then shall open gross wickedness, when it breaks forth, in the Church,
make them all polluted and guilty thereof, if they refuse and will not
redress it. Finally his similitude of receiving goods or lands of a man's
father being a murderer, is vain. For the sacraments which the reading
ministers do give us, are neither his sacraments, neither the Lords, as we
proved before, but are polluted pledges of a wicked communion. Again we may
not receive gold of a thief, to justify his thieuerie. And we have showed
that such ministers are thieves and robbers, and can not as Fathers give us the
Lords holy things. Likewise is that answered of communicating with
adulterers whom we can not (as he says) avoid. For if their sin be open
and proved, then both all the Church and every one of the Church, ought and
may avoid them, I mean their fellowship in the sacraments. If their sin be
secret and not proved by witnesses, then the question is not of them.

FINIS.
An ANSWER UNTO A LETTER OF MASTER HARRISONS BY MASTER CARTwright being at
Middleborough.
GRACE and peace etc. Beloved for so much as I left you the choice for the
first conference, whether you would have it in writing or by speech of mouth; I
attended some days for your answer of that matter: which because it was not
returned, I esteemed that you held you still to the request of your letters,
which was to receive some thing from me by writing. For answer therefore, so
it is that your letters affected me diversely: For where your first page had
raised me unto some hope for the reuniting of your self, with the rest of your
company unto us, from whom you have thought good to sunder your selves. The
second page which lays forth the conditions of our peace, did cast me, and as
it were beat me from it again; howbeit the mercy of God upholding me in some
good hope of profiting you* or receiving some profit from you. I thought to
cut out this time out of my weightiest and most necessary business, wherein I
might gieue you that contentment which the Lord has inhabled my hand unto.
Unto you not unwilling to come unto us, the passage (as it seems) is stopped
in diverse respects: The short whereof, is the receiving without public
repentance of those which come from the Churches of England, where because in
the outward profession that the laws of that land do justify, there
appears unto you no lawful assemblies of the Church of Christ: your fear is
least in uniting your selves, with such you should be unequally yoked, and
made fellow members of some other body then of that whereof Christ Jesus is
the head. First therefore if it be showed that the ordinary assemblyes of
those which profess the Gospel in England be the Churches of Christ, it
seems that the way will be paued and plained for mutual intercourse
between us, thus therefore it seems it may be performed, those assemblyes
which have Christ for their head and the same also for their foundation are
Gods churches, such are the assemblyes of England, therefore etc. the
assumption is evident in that by believing that christ it our righteousness we
are made members of his body and thereby at lively stones laid upon him, as
upon a foundation, we grow into one spiritual house with him, now that they
have the like precious faith with us, is convinced not only by their own
profession, but also by the testimony of the spirit of God, who by manifold
graces powered upon the^, even unto an apparent sanctification of nombers of
the^, do bear them witness that they be members of the body of christ, Romans 8.
14.
who as the head has partaked unto them his holy spirit, Esa. 59. ^1.
they that have performed unto them the special covenant which the Lord has
made with his churches of pouring his spirit upon the^ and putting his words in
their mouths are the churches of God: but such are the assemblies in England
as touching the spirit of God it has bin said before, whereupon also it
follows that he has likewise put his word in their mouths, considering that
the spirit of God is not given but by the word, and seeing that the Lord in
mercy has set up diverse burning lamps in those assemblies whereby light is
conveyed more or less into all the parts almost of that land, it seems that
the church of England should receive injury if it should not be accounted among
the golden candlesticks which seem to keep out darkness and might from the
Lords sanctuary, until such time as the day star spring and Lucifer do rise
in our hearts. If you say all do not believe the gospel truly which profess
it, the same exception lies against all other churches how reformed soever, if
that there be fewer faithful in our churches then in others, the truth of the
chnrch stands not in the number, for if there were but in every church one
truly and vndissemblingly faithful, all the rest holding the faith of our Lord
Jesus christ in words only, yet should all those churches be unto us the
churches of God, and if you say the assemblyes, as it were all the branches or
arms of the candlestick have not lights set upon them, the greater number of
them being dumped with dumb ministry, notwithstanding by the way you
confess those assemblyes upon whom the Lord has set the lamp of a
preaching ministry are the churches of God, which seems to cast down that
hill which stands in the way against our rejoicing, wherebye you can not
afoorde us the Name of gods churches because we have not the discipline by him
appointed, now for the other, whether they have some glimpse of knowledge by
the dumb ministry or no, may afterward in another place be considered for
the present I answer, that even in those congregatio^s forasmuch as they both
have and might have by some former ministry or means which the Lord has used
toward the^ received faith standing thereby in our savior christ as in the
shaft of a candlestick they cease not to be a branch in the Lords
candlestick, and being members of the same body they may well receive some
supply of their want from the light that shines in the next branch unto them,
for if every assembly being without a lamp of the ministry should by and by be
holden to be broken from the shaft of the church candlestick, then at every
vacation of the ministry and whenever by death the Lord should put out one
of his lights, it should follow that that assembly by the fall of their
minister into the grave, should from the highest heaven fall into the grave of
hell, but you will say peradventure, that an assembly that has a dumb
minister is in worse case then that which has none at all, if that be
granted, yet follows it not therefore that the assembly which yesterday
being without a du^be minister was the church of God, should to day by having
such a one set over them be the Synagogue of Satan and here me thinks whilst
you go about to make nothing of the dumb ministry you ascribe more force to
it, then it has* for you make him not so much as a guide or an head of the
church in that those which before in all equal judgment were to be deemed
members of Christ, by hearing them should suddenly become the members of
antichrist, I do not therefore yield unto you, in that you say they are the
chief always in the synagogues, our Savior Christ in whom those companies
do believe being the chief with whom through faith they grow to be one body,
which rather then by hearing the dumb minister to be one with him, say
therefore that it is a fault in them to hear such a minister thrust upon them,
yet that it is an apostacy from God and an utter falling away from the
Gospel, I see not with what great appearance of truth it can be spoken. Moses
when diverse of the people claue unto Korah, Datham and Abiram, forsaking
willingly the lawful and ordinary ministry of the Aronites, did not therefore
cast them forth from the Lords host; and should the churches of God, for
hearing a dumb minister which is thrust upon them, forthwith be reputed for
runnagates from the Lord. Again, the Lord is in covenant with that people
to whom he gieueth the seals of his covenant; this he does to our assemblies
in England, therefore they are the Lords confederates. If you say that the
seals set to by the dumb ministry are no seals, (which afterward comes to
be examined) yet you thereby confess that those which are ministered by
sufficient ministers are the true and vncounterfaite sacraments of the church:
whereby it falls again, that you seem to hold that the churches in England
are not true churches of Christ, because they have not his commanded
discipline. Hereunto may be added the judgment of all the churches of Christ in
Europe, all which gieue the right hand of society in the house of God, unto
the assemblies which are in England. Which argument of the churches authority,
albeit it be not so strong as it will enforce, yet ought it to stay all
sudden and hasty judgments unto the contrary, and so long to cause silence
until the cause be rightly on both sides debated, and the contrary of that
which the churches hold, do through the lightness son of the truth
thereof break forth, and if it be meet to proceed softly, and as it were
with a leaden foot to the excommunication of one only member of the Church of
God, there ought verily to have bin great consultation taken, when the Churches
of two whole Islands should have been cast out, (especially when they be
holden in by voices, not of diverse persons, but of all the churches, to whom
the knowledge of their estate has come.) And if there were but one man worthy
to be excommunicate, yet if the greater part of your assembly, would not
yield consent thereunto, I hold it that the order of the discipline
requires, that the rest are to bear the person whom they can not remove.
And therefore although the assemblyes of England had deserved thorough want of
discipline, and of a teaching ministry, to be cast out from the account of
the churches of God, yet being holden in by the most voices of the Churches
them selves, they ought to have been so far borne withal, as the
communicating with them should not make them guilty of a falling away from
the Lord. Now I come to those two reasons whereby you think you may justly
hold the assemblies in England for no churches of God. And first of all to
the reason of the discipline, for the want whereof you give them all without
exception the blackestone of condemnation from being the churches of christ,
where it is to be understood that as in a man there are certain parts
essential and such as without which the man can not stand, and other some
serving either to his comeliness or to his long continuance, so it is in this
matter, there is the foundation christ, whereupon it is necessary that by faith
the assemblies be laid, which grows unto the Lords building, without the
which it can not be his church, which thing being, whatsoever is either
wanting of that which is commanded, or remaining of that which is forbidden is
not able to put that assembly which by faith is laid upon Christ, from the
right and title of being the church of Christ, for faith can admit of no such
thing, which gives an utter overthrow and turning vpside down of the truth.
By this title of the faithful, the Apostle in his epistles notes out the
Churches of God, it being all one with him to say to the faithful or to the
Saints, as to the Churches of such a place, whatsoever wants unto this, or
is more then enough, it wants or abounds to the disgrace and uncomeliness,
or to the hassarde of the continuance and not to the present overthrow of the
church and although besides faith in the Son of GOD there may be many
things necessary for every assembly, yet be they necessary to the comely and
stable being and not simplye to the being of the church: hereupon the people
of Israel which neglected for the space of forty nine years the holy
Sacrament of circumcision and the Passover also, (as it seems) one only
time excepted, seized not therefore to be the churches of God and to have the
Sanctuary amongst them. And in this respects the Dutch assemblyes whereof
the greatest part in high Germany, which besides the same Name of discipline
which is common to our churches, are grossly deceived in the matter of the
Supper are notwithstanding holden in the roll of the churches of god. In this
respect also certain assemblyes of our profession which having the use of the
discipline permitted unto them, are not suffered to have the use of the
Sacraments of the Lords Supper are no therefore when the Lords churches are
mustered and their Names written and enrouled up, cast out as unfit to remain
in any account of the Lords host without any part of that order and
discipline which the Lord has appointed. I grant there can be no church of
christ for that without some part of it there can be no faith in Jesus christ,
it is a piece of that discipline of our Savior christ that there should be
certain, which should be chosen out of the rest to preach the gospel, by
preaching whereof the churches are gathered. Where therefore there is no
ministry of the word there it is plain that there are no visible and
apparent churches. it is another part of the discipline of our Lord, that the
rest of the body of the church should obey those, that are set over them in
the Lord. Wheresoever therefore there is no obedience of the people given to
the ministers that in the Lords name preach unto them, there also can be no
church of christ, but where these two be, although other points want, yea
although there be some defect in these, that neither the ministers do in all
points preach as they ought, nor the assemblyes in all points obey unto the
wholesome doctrine of their teachers, yet do they for the reason abouesaide
retain the right of the churches of god.

This may be made by plain similitude from the body of man, A foppery.
whereunto we are already entered, for if any man should have both his hands and
his arms cut off his eyes put out etc. yet as long as the head stands and
other vital parts, he is to be accounted a man, although a maimed man: even so
it is in the assembly, as long as it holds the head, how defective it is
otherwise, yet it has the due and right of the church of god, and although a
man should have six fingers on one hand and but three one another, and
albeit they should stand where the mouth does, yet all this deformity
should not hinder from being truly holden to be a man, although it would be
great deformity in him on the other part if he had no head at all or that
there were no natural conjunction of the parts one with another; but a whole
and through displacing of every part, from his proper state then verily could
he not be deemed to have either the proportion of a man or his life, so
likewise if an assembly either hold not the head which is Christ Jesus or be
nothing else but a confused multitude without any part of that order which the
son of God has appointed, the same is justly crossed out of the account of
Gods church, was not Jerusalem after the return from Babylon the city of the
great King, until snche time as Nehemias came, and builded up the walls of
the city: to say therefore it is none of the Church of god, because it has
not received this discipline, me thinks is all one with this as if a man
would say it is no city because it has no wall, or that it is no vineyarde
because it has neither hedge nor dyke. It is not I grant so sightly a city or
vineyarde nor yet so safe against the invasion of their several enemies which
lie in wait for them, but yet are they truly both cities and vineyardes.
There remains the other point which is against those assemblies only which
have a dumb ministry, wherein that part of your conclusion that the
assemblies where they be are none of the Churches of god is before answered.
There rests that part of your conclusion, whereby you infer that the
Sacraments ministered by them are none of gods Sacraments, and therefore that
a man may not receive any of them at their hands, here first I agree with you
that their ministry is unlawful and to them selves without repentance a
certain matter of destruction, especially in those unto whom the knowledge of
this corruption is come, to the churches where they be presently hurtefull, and
in the end without remedy deadly, but that they are no ministers of god so
far as to receive the good things they offer unto us that I suppose I may not
well yield unto, the ground hereof I take from the former part of my answer
that for so much as they are allowed by the churches of god they ought until
remedy may be found of so great disorder to be heard and received so far as
they can give us any thing that is of christ, and for this cause our Savior
christ commanded that the Scribes should be heard in that they taught truly,
Mat^h. 23 2.
which honor our savior christ would never have given unto them, unless the
church calling had moved him thereunto* (...) had it been lawful for the
people otherwise to have heard them* for it is evident that their unfitness
and unlawfulness in the ministry although another way was as great, as it is
in our reading ministers they were all together deceived in the Messiah, for
neither knew they that Jesus was the christ, nor yet that the christ whom
they looked for should be the sone of god, John 9. 22.
but held him for a bare and nakedman. Mat. 22. 42.
It appears also that they taught the justification which is by the law of
works not only in the eighteenth of Luke but even the very self same place
where our Savior commands this audience unto them, for speaking of the
works of the moral Law, which they would not touch with one of their
fingers, he says that they laid them upon the peoples backs, as burdens
which could not be borne, whereby our Savior besides the Pharisticall pride
and Lordlinesse in teaching signifies that they taught them to justification,
seeing that if they had only taught them as testimonies and fruits of faith
they had not been intolerable, but as our Savior says an easy yoke, and as
Saint John says, 1. John 5.
not grievous or heavy* Now the dumb ministry is not farther off from the
institution of a lawful ministry, Matthew. 11.
then to teach untruly in the chief grounds of Religion, neither is the
edifying of the church respected in making laws for the ministry, less
hindered by a ministry teaching false things, and that in so weighty
points, as by an unpreaching minister, and according to this saying of our
Savior christ, we may see what the practice of the Prophets had been before,
who although they had oftentimes to do both with false teachers and Priests
that dumb dogs and not able to bark, Isay 58.
yet giving the people warning of their corruptions and insufficientnesse,
threatening also the casting them from the ministry in the good time when the
Lord should have pity on his Church, they are never found to have forbidden
the people to come to their sacrifices, or to bring their sacrifices commanded
by the law unto them, yea our Savior that lived in the corruptest times of
the Church, and when things were most confused and fewest steps of any
lawful calling to be seen, yet commanded the man whom he purged from his
leprosy to show him self unto the priest, where it is to be observed, Matthew.
8.
that he says to the priest generally without willing him to make choice of a
priest better instructed or affected unto the truth then the rest, but
indifferently unto the priest, the high priest albeit he was at that time
contrary to the Law made a yearly officer, although he entered in by Simonie
and reward unto the Romans, yet* notwithstanding we see our savior bare him
reverence for his office sake and as before his Judge in spiritual causes gave
an account of his doctrine, we have another example of reverence unto such
rulers even in things that were done by them wrongefully* Ierem. 36.
for Jeremy being as it appears suspended for a time from coming into the
Temple and albeit at liberty of his body would not, least as it seems be
should make a tumult enter into the temple, and therefore having written that
which he had to say, sent Baruch to read his sermon in the temple, moreover
when a magistrate is not able to do some part of his office, as for example
being able to do the duties which are to be performed in peace is
insufficient for mortal offenses, yet no man refuses to take that which he is
able to give, because he is not able to do all that is required. Even so
endeavoring to our uttermost to a sufficient ministry, I would think in the
mean season, that the good things that they are able to give us may be taken
at their hands and if any say that it is of the substance of a church minister
to be able to teach, and therefore he is no minister that has not that
ability, it may be answered that it is of the substance of a good and lawful
minister of God, but not simply of a minister, whereunto it is sufficient to
have the church calling as it is of the substance rather of a lawful
magistrate to be able to judge between his subjects then simply of a
magistrate whom the election of the people, or of other to whom his choice
belongs, makes a magistrate of the Lord although he be no lawful or
sufficient magistrate as therefore we take him for a magistrate which for the
ignorance of his charge may be called an idol magistrate. Even so it seems
that he may be holden for a minister which has the Churches calling albeit he
be not able to do the principal charge of that ministry. Neither does the
place of the Prophet (...), which says, Osee 4. 6.
because they have refused knowledge they shall be no Priests unto him stand
against this the Prophet rather giving a rule to follow in the election or
disposition of them then showing how far they may be used, finally to that
which is objected of communicating with their (...), in taking any thing at
their hands, I answer first that the same might have been laid to the
peoples charge under the Law, which is never done of the Prophets. Secondly
if by communicating with him we should make him minister, I grant that a
piece of his guilte would stick to our fingers, but when that is not, I see
not how by receiving the sacraments of him which partake more unto his
wickedness then the son is partaker of his fathers murder, because he
receives of his fathers gift, some part of his own lands and moueables and
so much there then here as the father gives his own things, where the dumb
minister does only dispense the gifts of the Lord, wherefore it may be
rather feared least in refusing the Sacraments offered by him, we put the
Lord away from us, whose they be then in taking the Sacraments at his hands
to be parteners of impiety, which is the means, and can take no hold of the
Sacraments in any sort. For even as not able to avoid him I may communicate
with a minister that is an adulterer without being partaker of his adultery.
Even so also may I communicate with a dumb minister, and yet nevertheless be
free from his impiety. Thus have you my answer written not without the fear
and trembling your self make mention of, whereby it will not be hard for you
to understand how both our holy desires of being united together may be
performed. And although I write in good assurance especially in the former
part as touching the rightful Title of the Churches of Christ to be due to
the assemblyes in England, yet remembering (besides the common frailty of our
whole race) special breaches and decays in my self I will willingly hearke^
unto any (much more unto you who^ the Lord in mercy has bestowed good graces
upon) showing better things. For which cause if further conference be
needful, I must thorough business be enforced, to reserve it to conference
by word of mouth, sometimes after dinner. And thus with my most humble prayers
unto the Lord our God for his holy spirit whereby we may be able to discern
the things that differ to our vnoffensiue walking in the sight of all men,
even unto the day of the Lord I bid you Farewell.


