BRITANNIA'S PASTORALS.

The first Book.

HORAT. Carmine Dij superi placantur, carmine Manes.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND. 1625.

TO THE NO LESS ENOBLED BY VERTVE, THEN ANCIENT IN NOBILITY, the Right
Honorable EDWARD Lord Zouch, Saint-Maure, and Cantelupe, and one of his
MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy COUNCIL.
HOnors bright Ray,
More highly crowned with Virtue the^ with years,
Pardon a Rusticke Muse that thus appears
In Shepherds gray,
Entreating your attention to a Lay
Fitting a Siluan Bower, not Courtly Trains;
Such choiser ears,
Should have Apollo's Priests, not Pans rude
But if the Music of contented Plains (Swains:
A thought vpreares
For your approuement of that part she bears,
When time (that Embrions to perfection brings)
Has taught her strains,
May better boast their being from the Spring
Where brave Heroes worths the Sisters sing:
(In Lines whose reigns
In spite of Envy and her restless pains:
Be vnconfin'd as blessed eternity:)
The Vales shall ring
Thy Honored Name; and every Song shall be
A Pyramid built to thy Memory.
Your Honors: W. BROWN.

To the Reader.
THE times are swollen so big with nicer wits,
That naught sounds good but what Opinion strikes*
Censure with Judgment seld together sits;
And now the Man more then the Matter likes.
The great Rewardresse of a Poets Pen,
Fame, is by those so clogged she seldom flies,
The Muses sitting on the graves of men,
Singing that Virtue lives and never dies,
Are chased away by the malignant Tongues
Of such, by whom Detraction is adored:
Hence grows the want of everliving Songs,
With which our I Will was whilome bravely stored.
If such a Basiliske dart down his Eye,
(Impoyson'd with the dregs of utmost hate)
To kill the first Bloomes of my Poesy,
It is his worst, and makes me fortunate.
Kind wits I veil to, but to fools precise
I am as confident as they are nice.
From the Inner Temple, June the 18. 1613. W. B.

IN Bucolica G. BROVN. Quod, per secessus Rustici otia, Licuit ad Amic. and
Bon. Lit. amantiss. ANACREONTICVM.
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
Ad Amoris Numina.
QVin vostrum Paphie, Anteros, Erosque
Vt Regnum capiat mali quid, absit!
Venus, per Syrium nimis venustum!
Amplexus teneros, pares, suaues
Psyches, per, tibi, Basiationum
Eros quantum erat! and per Anterotis
Fo^li^^s Animas! periclitanti
Ob^^stor, dubiaeque consulatis
^ei vostrae! Miserum magis fauete
^anguori, Miserum fauete Amantum,
Dini, cordolio! Quod est amatum
Ictu propitij ferite pectus!
Ictus quin sit ab aurea sagitta!
Ortas Spe placita fouete flammas!
Ortis quin Similes parate flammas!
Suas gnauiter ambiant Am^ca, Domina (nostr^ idiomate amatorio, Mistress) and
Neaera sunt vtisynonyma Prudentio, ante alios, Peri Steph. hymn. 12. and
alic^bi. v. siplacet and ^os. Scalig. ad 3. Tibul^i.
Neaeras!
Et cautim laciant suos Neaerae!
Dextras sternuit^ adprobationes!
Adsuctis detur Osculum labellis!
Et iunctis detur Osculum saliuis!
Tui Nectaris add, Diua, Horat. Carm. 1. od. ^3.
quinctam*
Conturbet tremulae libido linguae,
Ne quis Basia Ne scili^et quis pernumer^t. Finitus ^. and ^^tus numerus
^^^cino, apud Veteres, obnoxious. ^dq in Ba^ij^ obseruat^m habes ap. Catul*
^arm. 5. and 7.
fascinare possit!
Morsus mutua temperet voluptas!
Dormitis, nimiumque defuistis
Procis, atque Adamantinis Puellis.
Isthaec prospiciens tibi, Cupido,
Audax admonui. Tuas Apollo,
Deusque Arcadiae, Minerua, and Hermes
Supplantant Veneres. Murinus arcum
Tendit, quin iaculis tua pharetra
Surreptis petimur. Camena texit
Cantu daedala, blandulum Aphrodites
Cestum, and insidias plicat. Mineruae
Buxus, Mercurij Chelys, Cicuta
Fauni, dulce melos canunt. Erota
En, olim Amor a Pastore omne genus Musices olim ^doctus. B^on Idyll. 3.
docuit, plagas Eroti
Iam tendit, Iuuenis, Poeta, Pastor,
Isthac prospiciens tibi Cupido,
Audax admonui. Faue Cupido.
BY THE SAME.
SO much a Stranger my Soueror Muse
Is not to Loue-straines, or a Shepwards Reed,
But that She knows some Rites of Phoebus dues,
Of Pan, of Pallas, and her Sisters meed.
Read and Commend She durst these tuned essaies
Or Him that loves her (She has ever found
Her studies as one circle.) Next She prays
His Readers be with Rose and Myrtle crowned!
No Willow touch them! As His Bases (^aire Readers) being the materials of
Poets Girlands. (as My^tle and Roses are for en^o^ing ^ouers, and the (...)
Willow for them which your inconstancy, ^oo of, makes most unhappy) are
supposed not subject to any hurt of Jupiters thunderb^l^s, as other Trees are.
Baies are free
From wrong of Bolts, so may their Chaplets be.
I. SELDOM Iuris C.

To his Friend the AVTHOR.
Drive forth thy Flock, young Pastor, to that Plain,
Where our old Shepherds wont their flocks to feed;
To those clear walks, where many a skillful Swain
To'ards the calm eu'ning, tuned his pleasant Reed.
Those, to the Muses once so sacred, Downs,
As no rude foot might there presume to stand:
(Now made the way of the unworthiest Clownes,
Dig'd and plowed up with each unhallowed hand)
If possible thou can, redeem those places,
Where, by the brim of many a Silver Spring,
The learned Maidens, and delightful Graces
Often have sat to hear our Shepherds sing:
Where on those Pines the neighboring Groves among,
(Now utterly neglected in these days)
Our Garlands, Pipes, and Cornamutes were hung
The monuments of our deserved praise.
So may thy Sheep like, so thy Lambs increase,
And from the Wolf feed ever safe and free!
So may thou thrive, among the learned prease,
As thou young Shepherd art beloved of me!
MICHAEL DRAITON.

To his Ingenious and worthy Friend the AVTHOR.
HE that will tune his Oaten-pipe aright,
To great Apollo's Harp: he that will write
A living Poem; must have many years,
And settled judgment amongst his equal peers,
In well-rig'd Bark to steer his doubtful course;
Lest secret, rocky Envy, or the source
Of froathy, but sky-towring Arrogance;
Or fleeting, sandy vulgar-censure chance
To leave him ship-wrackt, on the desert Maine
Imploring aged Neptunes help in vain.
The younger Cygnet, even at best does tear,
With his harsh squealings, the melodious ear:
It is the old, and dying Swan that sings
Notes worthy life, worthy the Thespian Springs.
But thou art young; and yet thy voice as sweet,
Thy Verse as smooth, Composure as discreet
As any Swans, whose tunefull Notes are spent
On Thames his bancks; which makes me confident,
He knows no Music, has nor ears, nor tongue,
That not commends a voice so sweet, so young.
On him; a Pastoral ODE to his fairest Shepherdess.
Siren more then earthly fair,
Sweetly break the yielding Air:
Sing on Albions whitest Rocks:
Sing; whilst Willy to his Flocks,
Deftly tunes his various Reed.
Sing; and he, whilst younglings feed,
Answer shall thy best of singing,
With his Rural Musicke^ bringing
Equal pleasure; and requite
Musickes sweets with like delight.
What though Willyes Songs be plain?
Sweet they be: for he is a Swain
Made of purer mould then earth,
Him did Nature from his birth,
And the Muses single out,
For a second Colin Clout.
Tityri^^ ^ide him a Singer:
Pan hi^ (...) his Pipe to finger:
Numbers, curious ears to please,
Learned he of Philisides.
Kala loves him: and the Lasses
Point at him, as by he passes,
Wishing never tongue that is bad
Censure may so blithe a Lad.
Therefore well can he requite
Musicks sweets with like delight:
Sing then; break the yielding air,
Siren more then earthly fair.
EDWARD HEYVVARD, e So. Int. Templ.

To his Friend the AVTHOR upon his Poem.
THis Plant is kno^lesse that puts forth these leaves,
Upon whose Branches I his praise do sing:
Fruitful the Ground, whose verdure it receives
From fertile Nature, and the learned Spring.
In zeal to Good; known, but vnpractiz'd Ill,
Chaste in his thoughts, though in his youthful Prime,
He writes of Past'rall Love, with Nectar'd Quill,
And offers up his first Fruits unto Time.
Receive them (Time) and in thy Border place them
Among thy various Flowers of Poesy;
No Envy blast, nor Ignorance deface them,
But keep them fresh in fairest Memory!
And, when from Daphne's tree he plucks more Bait^,
His Shepherds Pipe may chant more heavenly lays.
CHRISTOPHER BROOK.

ANAGRAMMA. GVILIELMVS BROWN. Ne vulgo Librum eius.
SI vulgus gustare tuo velis apta palato;
I, pete vulgares, ac aliunde, dapes.
Nil vulgar sapit Liber hic; hinc vulgus abesto:
Non nisi delicias haec tibi mensa dabit.
FR: DYNNE, e So. Int. Templ.

To his Friend the Author*
ON (Jolly Lad) and hye thee to the Field
Among the best Swains that the Valleys yield*
Go boldly, and in presence of them all,
Proceed a Shepherd with this Pastoral.
Let Pan, and all his rural Train attending,
From stately Mountains to the Plains descending,
Salute this Pastor with their kind embrace^*
And entertain him to their holy places,
Let all the Nymphs of Hills and Dales together
Kiss him for earnest of his welcome thither:
Crown him with Garlands of the choicest flowers,
And make him ever dwell within their Bowres:
For well I wot in all the Plains around,
There are but few such Shepherds to be found,
That can such learned Lays and Ditties frame,
Or aptly fit their tunes unto the same.
And let them all (if this young Swain should die)
Tune all their Reeds to sing his Memory.
THO. GARDENER, e So. Int. Templ.

To the AVTHOR.
HAd I beheld thy Muse upon the Stage,
A Poesy in fashion with this age;
Or had I seen, when first I viewed thy task,
An active wit dance in a Satyrs Mask*
I should in th^se have praised thy Wit and Art,
But not thy ground, A Poems better part:
Which being the perfect'st Image of the Brain,
Not framed to any base end, but to gain
True approbation of the Artists worth,
When to an open view he sets it forth,
Iudiciously, he strives; no less t'adorne
By a choice Subject, then a curious Form:
Well have thou then past over all other rhyme,
And in a Pastoral spent thy leasures time:
Where fruit so fair, and field so fruitful is,
That hard it is to judge whether in This
The Substance or the fashion more excel,
So precious is the Iem, and wrought so well.
Thus rest thou praised of me, Fruit, Field, Iem, Art,
Do claim much praise to equal such Desert.
W. FERRAR, e So. Med. Templ.

To the AVTHOR.
FRiend, I Will not err in blazing of thy Worth;
This Work in truest terms will set it forth:
In these few lines the all I do intend,
Is but to show that I have such a Friend.
FR. OVLDE, e S. In. Templ.

BRITANNIAS PASTORALS.
THE FIRST SONG.
THE ARGUMENT.
Marina's Love ycleep'd the fair,
Celand's disdain, and her despair,
Are the first wings my Muse puts on
To reach the sacred Helicon.
I That whil care near Tauies straggling spring, Taule is a river, having his
head in Dertmore in Deu^n* some few miles from Mari^ Tauie, and falls Southward
into Tamer: out of the same Moore rises, running Northward, another called
Tau: which by the way the rather I speak of, because in the printed
Malmesbur^e de gest. Pon^ific. lib. 2. fol. 146. you ^eade, Est in Domn^nia
^oenobium Monachoruni iuxta Tau fluuium, quod Tauistock vocatur: whereas upon
Tau stands (here the North-side of the Shire) Taustoke ^eing no remnants of a
Monastery: so that you must there read, Iuxtae Taui Fluu^um, as in a
manuscript Copy of Malmesbury (the form of the hand assuring Malmesburie^
time) belonging to the Abbey of (...). Augustine in Canterbury* I have seen,
in the hand of my very learned Friend M. Selde^.

Unto my seely Sheep did vs^ to sing,
And played to please my self, on ^^sticke Reed,
No^ sought for Bay, (the learned Shepherds meed,)
But as a Swain vnkent fed on the plains,
And made the Echo vmpire of my strains:
Am drawn by ^ime (although the weak'st of many)
To sing those Lays as yet vnsung of any.
What need I tune the Swains of Thessaly?
Or, bootlesse, add to them of Arcadie?
No: fair Arcadia cannot be compleater,
My praise may lessen, but not make thee greater.
My Muse for lofty pitches shall not rome,
But homely pipen of her native home:
And to the Swains, Love rural Minstralsie,
Thus dear Britannia will I sing of thee.
High on the plains of that renowned I Will,
Which all men Beauties Garden-plot enstile,
A Shepherd dwelt, whom Fortune had made rich
With all the gifts that silly men bewitch.
(...) him a Shepherdess for beauties store
Vnparalell'd of any Age before.
Within those Breasts her face a flame did move,
Which never knew before what it was to love,
D^^^ling each Shepherds sight that viewd her eyes.
And as the Persians did Idolatrise
Unto the Sun: they thought that Cinthia's light
Might well be spared, where she appeared in night.
And as when many to the goal do run,
The prize is given never but to one:
So first, and only Celandine was led,
Of Destinies and Heaven much favored,
To gain this Beauty, which I here do offer
To memory: his pains (who would not proffer
Pains for such pleasures?) were not great nor much,
But that his labors recompense was such
As counteruailed all: for she whose passion,
(And passion often is love) whose inclination
Bent all her course to him-wards, let him know
He was the Elm whereby her Vine did grow:
Yea, told him, when his tongue began this task,
She knew not to deny when he would ask.
Finding his suit as quickly got as moved,
Celandine, in his thoughts not well approved
What none could disallow, his love grew fained,
And what he once affected now disdained.
But fair Marina (for so was she called)
Having in Celandine her love installed,
Affected so this faithless Shepherds Boy,
That she was rapt beyond degree of joy.
Briefly, she could not live one hour without him,
And thought no joy like theirs that lived about him.
This variable Shepherd for a while
Did Natures Jewel by his craft beguile:
And still the perfecter her love did grow,
His did appear more counterfeit in show.
Which she perceiving that his flame did slake,
And loved her only for his Trophies sake:
"For he that is stuffed with a faithless tumor,
"Loves only for his lust and for his humor:
And that he often in his merry fit
Would say, his good came, ere he hoped for it:
His thoughts for other subjects being pressed,
Esteeming that as naught which he possessed:
"For what is gotten but with little pain,
"As little grief we take to lose again:
Well-minded Marine grieuing, thought it strange
That her ungrateful Swain did seek for change.
Still by degrees her cares grew to the full,
Joys to the wane, heart-rending grief did pull
Her from her self, and she abandoned all
To cries and tears, fruits of a funeral:
Running, the mountains, fields, by watery springs,
Filling each cave with woeful ecchoings;
Making in thousand places her complaint,
And uttering to the trees what her tears meant.
"For griefs concealed (proceeding from desire)
"Consume the more, as does a close pent fire.
Whilst that the days sole Eye does guild the Seas,
In his days journey to the Antipodes:
And all the time the Ietty-Chariotere
Hurles her black mantle through our Hemisphere,
Under the covert of a sprouting Pine
She sits and grieves for faithless Celandine.
Beginning thus: Alas! and must it be
That Love which thus torments and troubles me
In settling it, so small advice has lent
To make me captive, where enfranchisement
Cannot be gotten? nor where, like a slave,
The office due to faithful Prisoners, have?
Oh cruel Celandine, why should thou hate
Her, who to love thee, was ordained by Fate!
Should I not follow thee, and sacrifice
My wretched life to thy betraying eyes?
Aye me! of all my most unhappy lot;
What others would, thou may, and yet wilt not.
Have I rejected those that me adored,
To be of him, whom I adore, abhorred?
And passed by others tears, to make election
Of one, that should so passe-by my affection?
I have: and see the heavenly powers intend,
"To punish sinners in what they offend.
May be he takes delight to see in me
The burning rage of hellish Jealousy;
T^ies if in fury any love appears;
And bathes his joy within my flood of tears.
But if he loved to soil my spotless soul,
And me amongst deceived Maids enroule,
To publish to the world my open shame:
Then heart take freedom; hence accursed flame;
And, as Queen regent, in my heart shall move
" Disdain, that only ouer-ruleth Love:
By this infranchiz'd sure my thoughts shall be,
And in the same sort love, as thou love me.
But what? or can I cancel or unbind
That which my heart has sealed and love has signed?
No, no, grief does deceive me more each hour;
"For, who so truly loves, has not that power.
I wrong to say so, since of all it is known,
"Who yields to love does leave to be her own.
But what auailes my living thus apart?
Can I forget him? or out of my heart
Can tears expulse his Image? surely no.
"We well may fly the place, but not the woe:
"Loves fire is of a nature which by turns
"Consumes in presence, and in absence burns.
And knowing this: aye me! unhappy wight!
What means is left to help me in this plight?
And from that peevish shooting, hood-winckt elfe,
To repossesse my Love, my heart, my self?
Only this help I find, which I elect:
Since what my life nor can nor will effect,
My ruin shall: and by it, I shall find,
"Death cures (when all helps fail) the grieved mind.
And welcome here, (then Love, a better guest)
That of all labors art the only rest:
Whilst thus I live, all things discomfort give,
The life is sure a death wherein I live:
Save life and death do differ in this one,
That life has ever cares, and death has none.
But if that he (disdainful Swain) should know
That for his love I wrought my overthrow;
Will he not glory in it? and from my death
Draw more delights, and give new joys their breath?
Admit he do, yet better it is that I
Render my self to Death then Misery.
I cannot live, thus barred from his sight,
Nor yet endure, in presence, any wight
Should love him but my self, O reasons eye,
How art thou blinded with vilde Jealousy*
And is it thus? Then which shall have my blood,
Or certain ruin, or uncertain good?
Why do I doubt? Are we not still aduiz'd
"That certainty in all things best is prized?
Then, if a certain end can help my moan,
"Know Death has certainty, but Life has none.
Here is a Mount, whose top seems to despise
The far inferior Vale that under lies:
Who like a great man raisd aloft by Eat,
Measures his height by others mean estate:
Near to whose foot there glides a siluer-flood,
Falling from hence, I Will climb unto my good:
And by it finish Love and Reasons strife,
And end my misery as well as life.
But as a Cowards hartener in war,
The stirring Drum, keeps lesser noise from far:
So seem the murmuring waves, tell in mine ear,
That guiltless blood was never spilled there.
Then stay a while; the Beasts that haunt those springs,
Of whom I hear the fearful bellowings,
May do that deed, (as moved by my cry)
Whereby my soul, as spotless Iuory,
May turn from whence it came, and, freed from hence,
Be unpolluted of that foul offense.
But why protract I time? Death is no stranger:
"And generous spirits never fear for danger:
"Death is a thing most natural to us,
"And Fear does only make it odious.
As when to seek her food abroad does roue
The Nuncius of peace, the seely Dove,
Two sharpe-set hawks do her on each side hem,
And she knows not which way to fly from them:
Or like a ship that tossed to and fro
With wind and tide; the wind does sternly blow,
And drives her to the Maine, the tide comes sore
And hurles her back again toward the shore.
And since her balast, and her sails do lack,
One brings her out, the other beats her back:
Till one of them increasing more his shockes,
Hurles her to shore, and rends her on the Rocks:
So stood she long, twixt Love and Reason tossed,
Until Despair (who where it comes rules most)
Won her to throw her self, to meet with Death,
From off the Rock into the flood beneath.
The waves that were above when as she fell,
For fear flew back again into their Well;
Doubting ensuing times on them would frown,
That they so rare a beauty helped to drown.
Her fall, in grief, did make the stream so rore,
That sullen murmurings filled all the shore.
A Shepherd (near this flood that fed his sheep,
Who at this chance left grazing and did weep)
Having so sad an object for his eyes,
Left Pipe and Flock, and in the water flies,
To save a Jewel, which was never sent
To be possessed by one sole Element*
But such a work Nature disposde and gave,
Where all the Elements concordance have.
He took her in his arms, for pity cride,
And brought her to the Rivers further side:
Yea, and he sought by all his Art and pain,
To bring her likewise to her self again:
While she that by her fall was senseless left,
And almost in the waves had life berest,
Lay long, as if her sweet immortal spirit
Was fled some other Palace to inherit.
But as clear Phoebus, when some foggy cloud
His brightness from the world a while does shroud,
Does by degrees begin to show his light
Unto the view: Or, as the Queen of night,
In her increasing horns, does rounder grow,
Till full and perfect she appear in show:
Such order in this Maid the Shepherd spies,
When she began to show the world her eyes.
Who (thinking now that she had past Deaths dream,
Occasioned by her fall into the stream,
And that Hells Ferriman did then deliver
Her to the other side the infernal River)
Said to the Swain: O Charon, I am bound
More to thy kindness, then all else, that round
Come thronging to thy Boat: thou have past over
The wofulst Maid that ere these shades did cover:
But prithee Ferriman direct my Spright
Where that black River runs that Lethe hight,
That I of it (as other Ghosts) may drink,
And never of the world, or Love, more think,
The Swain perceiving by her words ill sorted,
That she was wholly from her self transported:
And fearing lest those often idle fits
Might clean expel her vncollected wits:
Fair Nymph, (said he) the powers above deny
So fair a Beauty should so quickly die.
The Heavens unto the World have made a loan,
And must for you have interest, Three for One:
Call back your thoughts ore-cast with dolours night;
Do you not see the day, the heavens, the light?
Do you not know in Plutoes darksome place
The light of heaven did never show his face?
Do not your pulses beat, you are warm, have breath,
Your sense is rapt with fear, but not with death?
I am not Charon, nor of Plutoes host;
Nor is there flesh and blood found in a Ghost:
But as you see, a seely Shepherds swain,
Who though my mere revenues be the train
Of milk-white sheep, yet am I ioyd as much,
In saving you, (O, who would not save such?)
As ever was the wandering youth of Greece,
That brought, from Colchos, home, the golden Pleece.
The neuer-too-much-praised fair Marine,
Hearing those words, believed her ears and eyne:
And knew how she escaped had the flood
By means of this young Swain that near her stood.
Whereat for grief she began again to faint,
Redoubling thus her cries and sad complaint:
Alas! and is that likewise barred from me,
Which for all persons else lies ever free?
Will life, nor death, nor ought abridge my pain?
But live still dying, dye to live again?
Then most unhappy I! which find most sure,
The wound of Love neglected is past cure.
Most cruel God of Love (if such there be)
That still to my desires art contrary!
Why should I not in reason this obtain,
That as I love, I may be loved again?
Alas! with thee too, Nature plays her parts,
That framed so great a discord tweene two hearts:
One flies, and always does in hate persevere;
The other follows, and in love grows ever.
Why do thou not extinguish clean this flame,
And placed on him that best deserves the fame?
Why had not I affected some kind youth,
Whose every word had been the word of Truth?
Who might have had to love, and loved to have,
So true a Heart as I to Celand gave.
For Psyches loue^ if beauty gave thee birth,
Or if thou have attractiue power on earth,
Dame Venus sweetest Child, requite this love.
Or Fate yield means my soul may hence remove!
Once seeing in a spring her drowned eyes,
O cruel beauty, cause of this, (she cries,)
Mother of Love, (my joys most fatal knife)
That workst her death, by whom thy self have life!
The youthful Swain that heard this loving Saint
So oftentimes to pour forth such complaint,
Within his heart such true affection praised,
And did perceive kind love and pity raised
His mind to sighs; yea, beauty forced this,
That all her grief he thought was likewise his.
And having brought her what his lodge affords,
Sometime he wept with her, sometime with words
Would seek to comfort; when alas poor elfe
He needed then a comforter himself.
Daily whole troops of grief unto him came,
For her who languish'd of another flame.
If that she sighed, he thought him loved of her,
When 'twas another sail her wind did stir:
But had her sighs and tears been for this Boy,
Her sorrow had been less, and more her joy.
Long time in grief he hid his loue-made pains,
And did attend her walks in woods and plains:
Bearing a fuel, which her Sun-like eyes
Enflamed, and made his heart the sacrifice.
Yet he, sad Swain, to show it did not dare;
And she, lest he should love, nie died for fear.
She, euer-wailing, blamed the powers above,
That night nor day give any rest to Love.
He praised the Heavens in silence, often was mute,
And thought with tears and sighs to win his suit.
Once in the shade, when she by sleep reposed,
And her clear eyes twixt her fair lids enclosed;
The Shepherd Swain began to hate and curse
That day unfortunate, which was the nurse
Of all his sorrows. He had given breath
And life to her which was his cause of death.
O Aesops Snake, that thirstest for his blood,
From whom thy self receiu'dst a certain good.
Thus oftentimes unto himself alone
Would he recount his grief, utter his moan;
And after much debating, did resolve
Rather his Grandame earth should clean inuolue
His pining body, ere he would make known
To her, what Tares Love in his breast had sown.
Yea, he would say when grief for speech has cride;
"'It Is better never ask than be denide.
But as the Queen of Rivers, fairest Thames,
That for her buildings other floods enflames
With greatest envy: Or the Nymph of Kent,
That stateliest Ships to Sea has ever sent;
Some baser groom, for lucres hellish course,
Her channel having stopped, kept back her sour^e,
(Filled with disdain) does swell above her mounds,
And ouerfloweth all the neighboring grounds,
Angry she tears up all that stops her way,
And with more violence runs to the Sea:
So the kind Shepherds grief (which long vppent
Grew more in power, and longer in extent)
Forth of his heart more violently thrust,
And all his vowed intentions quickly burst.
Marina hearing sighs, to him drew near,
And did entreat his cause of grief to hear:
But had'^st known her beauty was the sting
That caused all that instant sorrowing;
Silence in bands her tongue had stronger kept,
And sh'ad not asked for what the Shepherd wept.
The Swain first, of all times, this best did think,
To show his love, whilst on the Rivers brinke
They sat alone, then thought, he next would move her
With sighs and tears, (true tokens of a Lover:)
And since she knew what help from him she found
When in the River she had else been drowned,
He thinks sure she cannot but grant this,
To give relief to him, by whom she is:
By this incited, said; Whom I adore,
Sole Mistress of my heart, I thee implore,
Do not in bondage hold my freedom long.
And since I life or death hold from your tongue,
Suffer my heart to love; yea, dare to hope
To get that good of loves intended scope.
Grant I may praise that light in you I see,
And dying to my self, may live in thee.
Fair Nymph, surcease this death-alluring languish,
So rare a beauty was not borne for anguish.
Why should thou care for him that cares not for thee?
Yea, most unworthy wight, seems to abhor thee.
And if he be as you do here pain forth him*
He thinks you best of beauties are not worth him;
That all the ioies of Love will not quite cost
For all loved freedom which by it is lost.
Within his heart such selfe-opinion dwells,
That his conceit in this he thinks excels;
Accounting women's beauties sugared baits,
That never catch, but fools, with their deceits:
"Who of himself harbors so vain a thought,
"Truly to love could never yet be brought.
Then love that heart where lies no faithless ^eed,
That never wore dissimulations weed:
Who does account all beauties of the Spring,
That iocund Summer-daies are vshering,
As foiles to yours. But if this cannot move
Your mind to pity, nor your heart to love;
Yet sweetest grant me love to quench that flame,
Which burns you now. Expel his worthless name,
Clean root him out by me, and in his place
Let him inhabit, that will run a race
More true in love. It may be for your rest.
And when he sees her, who did love him best,
Possessed by another, he will rate
The much of good he lost, when it is too late:
"For what is in our powers, we little deem,
"And things possessed by others, best esteem.
If all this gain you not a Shepherds wife,
Yet give not death to him which gave you life.
Marine the fair, hearing his wooing tale,
Perceived well what wall his thoughts did scale.
And answered thus: I pray sir Swain, what boot
Is it ^o me to pluck up by the root
My former love, and in his place to sow
As ill a seed, for any thing I know?
Rather against thee I mortal hate retain,
That seek'st to plant in me new cares, new pain:
Alas! thou have kept my soul from deaths sweet bands,
To give me over to a Tyrants hands;
Who on his racks will torture by his power,
This weakened, harmless body, every hour.
Be you the Judge, and see if reasons laws
Give recompense of favor for this cause:
You from the streams of death, brought life on shore;
Released one pain, to give me ten times more.
For loves sake, let my thoughts in this be free;
Object no more your hapless saving me:
That Obligation which you think should bind;
Does still increase more hatred in my mind;
Yea, I do think more thanks to him were due
That would bereave my life, than unto you.
The Thunder-stroken Swain leaned to a tree,
As void of sense as weeping Niobe:
Making his tears the instruments to woo her,
The Sea wherein his love should swim unto her:
And, could there flow from his two-headed font,
As great a flood as is the Hellespont;
Within that deep he would as willing wander,
To meet his Hero, as did ere Leander.
Mean while the Nymph withdrew her self aside,
And to a Grove at hand her steps applide.
With that sad sigh (O I had he never seen,
His heart in better case had ever been)
Against his heart, against the stream he went,
With this resolve, and with a full intent,
When of that stream he had discovered
The fount, the wellspring, or the bubling head,
He there would sit, and with the Well drop vie,
That it before his eyes would first run dry:
But then he thought the Diae s^n^, i. Nymphae, plerumque fontibus and fluuijs
praesunt apud po^ta^, quae Ephydriades, and Na^ades dictae: verum and nobis
tadien deum praeficere (sic Alpheum Tyberinum, and Rhenum, and id genus alios
diuos legimus) haud illicitum.
god that haunts that Lake
The spoiling of his Spring would not well take.
And therefore leaving soon the Crystal flood,
Did take his way unto the nearest Wood:
Seating himself within a darksome Cave,
(Such places heavy Saturnists do crave,)
Where yet the gladsome day was never seen,
Nor Phoebus piercing beams had ever been.
Fit for the Synod house of those fell Legions,
That walk the Mountains, and Siluanus regions.
Where Tragedy might have her full scope given,
From men aspects, and from the view of heaven.
Within the same some erannies did deliver
Into the midst thereof a pretty River*
The Nymph whereof came by out of the veins
Of our first mother, having late ^ane pains
In scouring of her channel all the way,
From where it first began to leave the Sea*
And in her labor thus far now had gone,
When coming through the Cave, she heard that one
Spoke thus: If I do in my death persevere,
Pity ^ay that effect, which Love could never.
By this she can conjecture 'twas some Swain,
Who ouerladen by a Maids disdain*
Had here (as fittest) chosen out a place,
Where he might give a period to the race
Of his loathed life: which she (for pitties sake)
Minding to hinder, diu'd into her Lake,
And hastened where the euer-reeming Earth
Unto her Current gives a wished birth*
And by her new-deliuered Rivers side,
Upon a Bank of flowers, had soon espide*
Remond, young Remond, that full well could sing,
And tune his Pipe at Pans-birth carolling:
Who for his nimble leaping, sweetest lays,
A Laurel garland wore on Holy Days;
In ^raming of whose hand Dame Nature swore
There never was his like, nor should be more:
Whose locks (in snaring nets) were like the rays,
Wherewith the Sun does diaper the Seas:
Which if they had been cut, and hung upon
The snow-white Cliffes of fertile Albion,
Would have allured more, to be, their winner,
Then all the Iulium Caesarem, ^pe Margeritaru^, Britanniam petisse, seribit
Sueton. in Iul. cap. 47. and ex isi Thoracem foctum Veneri genetrici dic^sse.
Plin Hist. Not. 9. ca. 35. De Margaritis ve^o nostris consulas Camden in Co
^ub. and Somersit.
Diamonds that are hidden in her.
Him she accosted thus: Swain of the Wreathe,
Thou art not placed, only here to breathe;
But Nature in thy framing shows to me,
Thou should to others, as she did to thee,
Do good; and surely I my self persuade,
Thou never were for evil action made.
In heavens Consistory 't was decreed,
That choysest fruit should come from choysest seed;
In baser vessels we do ever put
Basest materials, do never shut
Those Jewels most in estimation set,
But in some curious costly Cabinet.
If I may judge by the outward shape alone,
Within, all virtues have conuention:
"For It gives most luster unto Virtues feature,
"When she appears clothed in a goodly creature.
Half way the hill, near to those aged trees,
Whose insides are as Hiues for labring Bees,
(As who should say (before their roots were dead)
For good works sake and alms, they harbored
Those whom naught else did cover but the Skies:)
A path (untrodden but of Beasts) there lies,
D^recting to a Cave in yonder glade,
Where all this Forests Citizens, for shade
At noone-time come, and are the first, I think,
That (running through that Cave) my waters drink:
Within this Rock there sits a woeful wight,
As void of comfort as that Cave of light;
And as I wot, occasioned by the frowns
O^ some coy Shepherdess that haunts these Downs.
This I do know (whos'euer wrought his care)
He is a man nigh treading to despair.
Then hie thee thither, since it is charity
To save a man; leave here thy flock with me:
For whilst thou sau'st him from the Stygian Bay,
I Will keep thy Lambkins from all beasts of prey.
The neernesse of the danger (in his thought)
As it does ever, more compassion wrought:
So that with reverence to the Nymph, he went
With winged speed, and hast'ned to prevent
Th'vntimely seizure of the greedy grave:
Breathless, at last, he came into the Cave;
Where, by a sigh directed to the man,
To comfort him he in this sort began:
Shepherd all hail, what mean these plaints? this Cave
(The Image of death, true portrait of the grave)
Why do frequent? and wail thee under ground,
From whence there never yet was pity found?
Come forth, and show thy self unto the light,
Thy grief to me. If there be ought that might
Give any ease unto thy troubled mind,
We joy as much to give, as thou to find.
The Loue-sicke Swain replide: Remond, thou art
The man alone to whom I would impart
My woes, more willing then to any Swain,
That lives and feeds his sheep upon the plain.
But vain it is, and 'twould increase my woes
By their relation, or to thee or those
That cannot remedy. Let it suffice,
No fond distrust of thee makes me precise
To show my grief, Leave me then, and forgo
This Cave more sad, since I have made it so*
Here tears broke forth. And Remond began anew
With such entreaties, earnest to pursue
His former suit, that he (though hardly) wan
The Shepherd to disclose; and thus began:
Know briefly Remond then, a heavenly face,
Natures Idea, and perfections grace,
Within my breast has kindled such a fire,
That does consume all things, except desire;
Which daily does increase, though always burning,
And I want tears, but lack no cause of mourning:
"For he whom Love under his colors draws,
"May often want the effect, but never the cause.
Quoth the other, have thy stars malign been such,
That their predominations sway so much
Over the rest, that with a mild aspect
The Lives and loves of Shepherds do affect?
Then do I think there is some greater hand,
Which thy endeavors still does countermand:
Wherefore I wish thee quench the flame, thus moved,
"And never love except thou be beloved*
"For such an humor every woman seiseth,
"She loves not him that plaineth, but that pleases.
"When much thou love, most disdain coms on thee;
"And when thou think to hold her, she flies from thee:
"She followed, flies, she fled from follows post,
"And loves best where she is hated most.
"'It Is ever noted both in Maids and Wives,
"Their hearts and tongues are never Relatiues.
"Hearts full of holes, (so elder Shepherds saine)
"As apter to receive then to retain.
Whose crafts and wiles did I intend to show,
This day would not permit me time I know:
The days swift horses would their course have run,
And diu'd themselves within the Ocean,
Ere I should have performed half my task,
Striving their crafty subtilties t'vnmaske.
And gentle Swain some counsel take of me;
Love not still where thou may; love, who loves thee;
Draw to the courteous, fly thy loves abhorrer,
"And if she be not for thee, be not for her.
If that she still be wavering, will away,
Why should thou strive to hold that will not stay?
This Maxim, Reason never can confute,
"Better to live by loss then die by suit.
If to some other Love she is inclinde,
Time will at length clean root that from her mind.
Time will extinct Loves flames, his hell-like flashes,
And like a burning brand consum't to ashes.
Yet may thou still attend, but not importune:
"Who seeks often misseth, sleepers light on fortune,
Yea and on women too. "Thus doltish sots
"Have Fate and fairest women for their lots.
"Favor and pity wait on Patience:
And hatred often attends violence.
If thou will get desire, whence Love has pawned it,
Believe me, take thy time, but never demand it.
Women, as well as men, retain desire;
But can dissemble, more then men, their fire,
Be never caught with looks, nor selfe-wrought rumor;
Nor by a quaint disguise, nor singing humor.
Those outside shows are toies, which outward snare:
But virtue lodged within, is only fair.
If thou have seen the beauty of our Nation,
And find'st her have no love, have thou no passion:
But seek thou further; other places sure
May yield a face as fair, a Love more pure:
Leave (o then leave) fond Swain this idle course,
For Love's a God no mortal wight can force.
Thus Remond said, and saw the fair Marine
Placed near a Spring, whose waters Crystalline
Did in their murmurings bear a part, and plained
That one so true, so fair, should be disdained:
Whilst in her cries, that filled the vale along,
Still Celand was the burden of her song.
The stranger Shepherd left the other Swain,
To give attendance to his fleecy train;
Who in departing from him, let him know,
That yonder was his freedoms overthrow,
Who sat bewailing (as he late had done)
That love by true affection was not won.
This fully known: Remond came to the Maid
And after some few words (her tears allaid)
Began to blame her rigor, called her cruel,
To follow hate, and fly loves chiefest Jewel.
Fair, do not blame him that he thus is moved;
For women sure were made to be beloved.
If beauty wanting lovers long should stay,
It like an house vndwelt in would decay:
When in the heart if it have taken place
Time cannot blot, nor crooked age deface.
The Adamant and Beauty we discover
To be alike; for Beauty draws a Lover,
The Adamant his Iron. Do not blame
His loving then, but that which caused the same.
Who so is loved, does glory so to be:
The more your Lovers, more your victory.
Know, if you stand on faith, most women's lothing,
It Is but a word, a character of nothing.
Admit it somewhat, if what we call constance,
Within a heart has long time residence,
And in a woman, she becomes alone
Fair to her self, but foul to every one.
If in a man it once have taken place,
He is a fool, or dotes, or wants a face
To win a woman, and I think it be
No virtue, but a mere necessity.
Heavens powers deny it Swain (quoth she) have done,
Strive not to bring that in derision,
Which whosoe'er detracts in setting forth,
Does truly derogate from his own worth.
It is a thing which heaven to all has lent
To be their virtues chiefest ornament:
Which who so wants, is well compared to these
False tables, wrought by Alcibiades;
Which noted well of all, were found to have bin
Most fair without, but most deformed within.
Then Shepherd know, that I intend to be
As true to one, as he is false to me.
To one? (quoth he) why so? Maids pleasure take
To see a thousand languish for their sake:
Women desire for Lovers of each sort,
And why not you? The amorous Swain for sport;
The Lad that drives the greatest flock to field,
Will Buskins, Gloves, and other fancies yield;
The gallant Swain will save you from the jaws
Of ravenous Bears, and from the Lions paws.
Believe what I propound; do many choose,
"The least Herb in the field serves for some use.
Nothing persuaded, nor asswag'd by this,
Was fairest Marine, or her heaviness:
But prayed the Shepherd as here did hope
His silly sheep should fearelesse have the scope
Of all the shadows that the trees do lend,
From Raynards stealth, when Titan does ascend,
And run his midway course: to leave her there,
And to his bleating charge again repair.
He condescended; left her by the brook,
And to the Swain and's sheep himself betook.
He gone: she with her self thus began to feign;
Alas poor Marine, think thou to attain
His love by s^^ting here? or can the fire
Be quenched with wood? can we allay desire
By wanting what is desired? O that breath,
The cause of life, should be the cause of death!
That who is shipwrackt on loves hidden shelfe,
Does liu^ to others, dies unto her self.
Why might not I attempt by Death as yet
To gain that freedom, which I could not get,
Being hind'red heretofore, a time as free:
A place as fit offers it self to me,
Whose seed of ill is grown to such a height,
That makes the earth groan to support his weight.
Who so is lulled asleep with Mida's treasures,
And only fears by death to lose life's pleasures;
Let them fear death: but since my fault is such,
And only fault, that I have loved too much,
On joys of life, why should I stand! for those
Which I near had, I surely cannot lose.
Admit a while I to these thoughts consented,
"Death can be but deferred, not prevented.
Then raging with delay, her tears that fell
Vsher'd her way, and she into a Well
Straight-waies leapt after: "O! how desperation
"Attends upon the mind enthralled to passion!
The fall of her did make the God below,
Starting, to wonder whence that noise should grow:
Whether some ruder Clown in spite did fling
A Lamb, untimely fallen, into his Spring:
And if it were, he solemnly then swore
His Spring should flow some other way: no more
Should it in wanton manner ere be seen
To writhe in knots, or give a gown of green
Unto their Meadows, nor be seen to play,
Nor drive the Rushy-mils, that in his way
The Shepherds made: but rather for their lot,
Send them red waters that their sheep should rot.
And with such Moorish Springs embrace their field,
That it should naught but Moss and Rushes yield.
Upon each hillocke, where the merry Boy
Sits piping in the shades his Notes of joy,
He Would show his anger, by some flood at hand,
And turn the same into a running sand.
Upon the Oak, the Plumbe-tree, and the Holme,
The Stock-doue and the Blackbird should not come,
Whose muting on those trees do make to grow
Rots curing (...) scitur, (...) Plin. Hist. Not. 16. cap. 44. Hinc (...).
Hyphear, and the Misselt^^.
Nor shall this help their sheep, whose stomachs fails,
By tying knots of wool near to their tails:
But as the place next to the knot does die,
So shall it all the body mortify.
Thus spoke the God: but when as in the water
The corpse came sinking down, he spide the matter,
And catching softly in his arms the Maid,
He brought her up, and having gently laid
Her on his bank, did presently command
Those waters in her to come forth: at hand
They straight came gushing out, and did contest
Which chiefly should obey their Gods behest.
This done, her then pale lips he straight held open,
And from his silver hair let fall a drop
Into her mouth, of such an excellence,
That called back life, which grieved to part from thence,
Being for troth assured, that, then this one,
She never possessed a fairer mansion.
Then did the God her body forwards steep,
And cast her for a while into a sleep;
Sitting still by her did his full view take
Of Natures Masterpiece. Here for her sake,
My Pipe in silence as of right shall mourn,
Till from the watring we again return.
THE SECOND SONG.
THE ARGUMENT.
Obliuions Spring, and Dory's love,
With fair Marina's rape, first mo^e
Mine Oaten Pipe, which after sings
The birth of two renowned Springs.
NOw till the Sun shall leave us to our rest,
And Cynthia have her Brothers place possessed,
I shall go on: and first in diffring stripe,
The floud-Gods speech thus tune on Oaten Pipe.
Or mortal, or a power above,
I ^^rag'd by Fury, or by Love,
Or both, I know not; such a deed
Thou would effected, that I bleed
To think thereon: alas poor elfe,
What grown a traitor to thy self?
This face, this hair, this hand so pure
Were not ordained for nothing sure.
Nor was it meant so sweet a breath
Should be exposed by such a death;
But rather in some lovers breast
Be given up, the place that best
Befits a lover yield his soul.
Nor should those mortals ere control
The Gods, that in their wisdom sage
Appointed have what Pilgrimage
Each one should run: and why should men
A bridge the journey set by them?
But much I wonder any wight
If he did turn his outward sight
Into his inward, dared to act
Her death, whose body is compact
Of all the beauties ever Nature
Laid up in store for earthly creature.
No savage beast can be so cruel
To rob the earth of such a Jewel.
Rather the stately Unicorn
Would in his breast enraged scorn,
That Maids committed to his charge
By any beast in Forest large
Should so be wronged* Satyrs rude
Durst not attempt, or ere intrude
With such a mind the flowery balkes
Where harmless Virgins have their walks.
Would she be won with me to stay,
My waters should bring from the Sea
The Corrall red, as tribute due,
And roundest pearls of Orient hue:
Or in the richer veins of ground
Should seek for her the Diamond.
And whereas now unto my Spring
They nothing else but gravel bring,
They should within a Mine of Gold
^n piercing manner long time hold,
And having it to dust well wrought,
By them it hither should be brought;
With which I Will paue and ouer-spread
My bottom, where her foot shall tread.
The best of Fishes in my flood
Shall give themselves to be her food.
The Trout, the Dace, the Pike, the Br^am
The Eele, that loves the troubled stream,
The Millers thombe, the hiding Loach,
The Perch, the euer-nibling Roach,
The Shoats with whom is Tanie fraught,
The foolish Gudg^on quickly caught,
And last the little Minnow-fish,
Whose chief delight in gravel is.
In right she cannot me despise
Because so low mine Empire lies.
For I could tell how Natures store
Of Majesty appears more
In waters, then in all the rest
Of Elements. It seemed herbest
To give the waves most strength and power:
For they do swallow and devour
The earth; the waters quench and kill
The flames of fire: and mounting still
Up in the air, are seen to be,
As challenging a Seignorie
Within the heavens, and to be one
That should have like dominion.
They be a seeling and a floor
Of clouds, caused by the vapors store
Arising from them, vital spirit
By which all things their life inherit
From them is stopped, kept asunder.
And what is the reason else of Thunder,
Of lightnings flashes all about,
That with such violence break out,
Causing such troubles and such iarres,
As with it self the world had wars?
And can there any thing appear
More wonderful, then in the air
Congealed waters often to spy
Continuing pendant in the Sky?
Till falling down in hail or snow,
They make those mortal wights below
To run, and ever help desire
From his for Element the fire,
Which fearing then to come abroad,
Within doors makes his abode.
Or falling down often time in rain,
Does give green Liueries to the plain,
Make Shepherds Lambs fit for the dish,
And gives nutriment to fish.
Which nourishes all things of worth
The earth produces and brings forth;
And therefore well considering
The nature of it in each thing:
As when the teeming earth does grow
So hard, that none can plow nor ^ow,
Her breast it does so mollify,
That it not only comes to be
More easy for the share and Ox,
But that in Harvest times the shocks
Of Ceres hanging eared corn
Does fill the Houell and the Barn.
To Trees and Plants I comfort give,
By me they fructify and live:
For first ascending from beneath
Into the Sky, with lively breath,
I thence am furnished, and bestow
The same on Herbs that are below.
So that by this each one may see
I cause them spring and multiply.
Who sees this, can do no less,
Then of his own accord confess,
That notwithstanding all the strength
The earth enioyes in breadth and length,
She is beholding to each stream,
And has received all from them.
Her love to him she then must give
By whom her self does chiefly live.
This being spoken by this waters God,
He straightway in his hand did take his rod,
And stroke it on his bank, wherewith the flood
Did such a roaring make within the wood,
That straight the The watery Nymph that sp^ke to ^emond.
Nymph who then sat on her shore,
Knew there was somewhat to be (...)
And therefore hasting to her Brothers Spring
She spide what caused the waters ecchoing*
Saw where fair Marine fast asleep did lie,
Whilst that the God still viewing her sat by
Who when he saw his Sister Nymph draw near,
He thus began tune his voice unto her ear.
My fairest Sister (for we come
Both from the swelling T^e^is womb)
The reason why of late I struck
My ruling wand upon my Brook
Was for this purpose; Late this Maid
Which on my bank asleep is laid,
Was by her self or other wight,
Cast in my spring, and did affright
With her late fall, the fish that take
Their chiefest pleasure in my Lake:
Of all the Fry within my deep,
None durst out of their dwellings peep.
The Trout within the weeds did s^^d,
The Eele him hid within the mud.
Yea, from this fear I was not free:
For as I musing sat to see.
How that the pretty Pibbles round
Came with my Spring from under ground,
And how the waters issuing
Did make them dance about my Spring;
The noise thereof did me appall:
That starting upward therewithal,
I in my arms her body caught,
And both to light and life her brought*
Then cast her in a sleep you see.
But Brother, to the cause (quoth she)
Why by your raging waters wild
Am I here called ^ Thetis child,
Replide the God, for thee I sent,
That when her time of sleep is spent,
I may commit her to thy gage,
Since women best know women's rage.
Mean while, fair Nymph, accompany
My Spring with thy sweet harmony;
And we will make her soul to take*
Some pleasure, which is said to wake,
Although the body has his rest.
She gave consent, and each of them addressed
Unto their part. The watrie Nymph did sing
In manner of a pretty questioning:
The God made answer to what she propounded,
Whilst from the Spring a pleasant music sounded,
(Making each shrub in silence to adore them)
Taking their subject from what lay before them.
Nymph. What Is that, compact of earth, infused with air;
A ^ert^ine, made full with uncertainties;
Swayed by the motion of each several Sphere;
Who Is (...) with naught but infelicities;
Endures nor heat nor cold; is like a Swan,
That this hour sings, next dies?

God. It is a Man.


Nymph. What Is be, borne to be sick, so always dying,
That Is guided by inevitable Fate;
That comes in weeping, and that goes out crying;
Whose Calendar of woes is still in date;
Whose life's a bubble, (...) length a span*
A consor^ still in discorded.

God. It Is a man.


Nymph. What Is he, whose thoughts are still ^uell'd in the event,
Though (...) for lawful, by an opposite,
Has all things fleeting, nothing permanent:
And at (...) wears still a Parasite:
Has friends in wealth, or wealthy friends, who ca^
In want prove mere illusions?

God. It Is a Man.


Nymph. What Is he, that what he is not, strives to seem^
Thus (...) support an Atlas weight of care:
That of an outward good does best esteem:
And looks not within how solid they are*
That does not virtuous, but the (...)
Learning and worth by wealth

God. It is ^ Man.


Nymph. What Is that possessor* which of good makes had;
And what is worst, makes choice still for the best;
That grieueth most to think of what he had;
And of his chiefest l^sse accounts (...);
That does not what he ought, but what he can;
Whose fancio's ever boundless?

God. It Is a man.


Nymph. But what is it wherein Dame Nature wrought
The best of works, The first woman is fained to be named Pandora, 1. a
creature seamed of the concurrence of the gifts and ornaments of all the Gods.
As Hesiod, (...).
the only frame of Heaven;
And having long to find a present sought,
Wherein the worlds whole beauty might be given;
She did resolve in it all arts to summon,
To join with Natures framing?

God. It Is this Woman.


Nymph. If beauty be a thing to be admired;
And if admiring draw to it affection;
And what we do affect is most desired;
What wight is he to love denies subjection?
And can his thoughts within himself confine?

Marine that waking lay, said; Celandine.
He is the man that hates which some admire;
He is the wight that loathes whom most desire:
It Is only he to love denies subiecting,
And but himself, thinks none is worth affecting.
Unhappy me the while, accursed my Fate,
That Nature gives no love where she gave hate.
The watrie Rulers then perceived plain,
Nipt with the Winter of loves frost, Disdain;
This Non-par-el of beauty had been led
To do an act which Envy pitied:
Therefore in pity did confer together,
What Physic best might cure this burning Fever.
At last found out that in a Grove below,
Where shadowing Sicamours past number grow,
A Fountain takes his journey to the Maine,
Whose liquors nature was so sovereign,
(Like to the wondrous Well and famous Spring,
Which in Plini^ writes of two Springs rising in Boetia, the first helping
memory, called (...): The latter causing oblivion, called (...).
Boetia has his issuing)
That whosoever of it does but only taste,
All former memory from him does waste.
Not changing any other work of Nature,
But does endow the drinker with a feature
More lovely, fair Medea took from hence
Some of this water, by whose quintessence,
Aeson from age came back to youth. This known,
The God thus spoke:
Nymph, be thine own,
And after mine. This Goddess here
(For she is no less) will bring thee where
Thou shall acknowledge Springs have do
As much for thee as any one.
Which ended, and thou gotten free,
If thou will come and live with me,
No Shepherds daughter, nor his wife,
Shall boast them of a better life.
Mean while I leave thy thoughts at large,
Thy body to my sisters charge;
Whilst I into my Spring do diue,
To see that they do not deprive
The Meadows near, which much do thirst,
Thus heated by the Sun. May first
(Quoth Marine) Swains give Lambs to thee;
And may thy Flood have seignorie
Of all Floods else, and to thy fame
Mere greater Springs, yet keep thy name.
May never Eue^ no^ the Tode,
Within thy banks make their abode!
Taking thy journey from the Sea,
May thou never happen in thy way
On Niter or on Brimstone Mine,
To spoil thy taste! this Spring of thine
Let it of nothing taste but earth,
And salt conceived, in their birth
Be ever fresh! Let no man dare
To spoil thy Fish, make lock or ware,
But on thy Margent still let dwell
Those flowers which have the sweetest smell.
And let the dust upon thy strand
Become like Tagus golden sand.
Let as much good heride to thee.
As thou have favor showed to me.
Thu said, in gentle paces they remove,
And hastened onward to the shadie Grove:
Where both arrived; and having found the Rock,
Saw how this precious wa^e^ it did lock.
As he whom Avarice possesses most,
Drawn by necessity unto his ^^st,
Does drop by peece-meale down his imprisoned gold,
And seems unwilling to let go his hold:
So the strong rock the water long time stops,
And by degrees lets it fall down in drops.
Like hoording huswiues that do mold their food,
And keep from others, what does them no good.
The drops within a Cesterne fell of stone,
Which framed by Nature, Art had never one
Half part so curious. Many spells then using,
The water^ Nymph twixt Marines lips infusing
Part of this water, she might straight perceive
How soon her troubled thoughts began to lea^e
Her Loue-swolne-breast, and that her inward flame
Was clean assuaged, and tho very name
Of Celandine forgotten; did scarce know
If there were such a thing as Love or no.
And sighing, therewithal threw in the air
All former love, all sorrow, all despair,
And all the former causes of her moan
Did there with bury in obli^^on*
Then mustring up her thoughts grown vagabonds
Pressed to relieve her inward bleeding wounds,
She had as quickly all things, past forgotten,
As men do Monarchs that in earth (...)
As one newborn she seemed so al discerning
"Though things long learned are the longst vnlearning.
Then walked they to a Grove but near at hand,
Where fiery Titan had but small command,
Because the leaves conspiring kept his beams,
For fear of hurting (when he is in extremes)
The under flowers, which did enrich the ground
With sweeter sents than in Arabia found,
The earth does yield (which they through pores exhale)
Earths best of odours, th'Aromaticall:
Like to that smell which often our sense (...)
Within a field which long vnplowed ^ies
Somewhat before the setting of the Sun;
And where the Rainbow in the Horizon*
Does pitch her tips: on as when in the prime,
The earth being troubled with a drought long time,
The hand of Heaven his spungie Clouds does strain
And throws into her lap a shower of rain;
She sends up (conceived from the Sun)
A sweet perfume and exhalation.
Nor all the Ointments brought from Delos I Will;
Nor from the confines of seuen-headed Nile*
Nor that brought whence Rhaenicians have abodes,
Nor Cyprus wild Vine-flowers, nor that of Rhodes,
Nor Roses-oile from Naples, Capua,
Saf^^on consected in Gilician
No^ th^^ of Quinces, nor of Marioram,
That ever from the I Will of Coos came.
Nor these, nor any else, though never so rare,
Could with this place for sweetest smells compare.
There stood the Elm, whose shade so mildly dim
Does nourish all that grows under him*
Cypress that like Piramides run topping,
And hurt the least of any by their dropping.
The Alder, whose sat shadow nourishes,
Each Plant set near to him long flourishes.
The heauie-beaded Plane-tree, by whose shade
The grass grows thickest, men are fresher made.
The Oaks, that best endures the Thunder-shocks:
The everlasting Ebene, Cedar, Box.
The Olive that in Wamscot never cleaues.
The amorous Vine which in the Elm still weaues.
The Lotus, Juniper, where worms never enter*
The Pyne, with whom men through the Ocean venture.
The warlike Y^wgh, by which (more then the Lance)
The strong-arm'd English spi^i^s conquered France.
Amongst the r^st the Tamariske there stood,
For Huswiues bosoms only known most good.
The cold-place-louing Biroh, and Seruis tree:
The Walnut loving vales, and Mulbury.
The Maple, Ash; that do delight in Fountains,
Which have their currents by the sides of Mountains.
The La^^ell, Myrtle, ^uy, Date, which hold
Their leaves all Winter, be it never so cold.
The Fur, that oftentimes does Rosin drop:
The Beech that scales the Welkin with his top:
All these, and thousand more within this Grove,
By all the industry of Nature strou^
To frame on Harbor that might keep within it
The best of beauties that the world has in it.
Hero en^ring, at the entrance of which shroud,
The S^nne (...) angry hid him in a cloud,
As raging that a Grove should from his sight
Lock up a beauty whence himself had light.
The flowers pulled in their heads as being shamed
Their beauties by the others were defamed.
Ne^re to this Wood there lay a pleasant Mead,
Where Fairies often did their Measures tread,
Which in the Meadow made such circles geene,
As if with Garlands it had crowned been,
Or like the Circle where the Signs we tracke,
And learned Shepherds called the Zodiac:
Within one of these rounds was to be seen
A Hillocke rise, where often the Fairy-Queene
At^wy-light sat, and did command her Elues,
To pinch those Maids that had not swept their shelues:
And further if by Maidens ouer-sight,
Within doors water were not brought at night:
Or if they spread no Table, set no Bread,
They should have nips from toe unto the head:
And for the Maid that had performed each thing,
She in the Water-paile bade leave a Ring.
Upon this Hill there sat a lovely Swain,
As if that Nature thought it great disdain
That he should (so through her his Genius told him)
Take equal place with Swains, since she did hold him
Her chiefest work, and therefore thought it fit,
That with inferiors he should never fit.
Narcissus change, sure Ovid clean mistook,
He ^y'd not looking in a Crystal brook,
But (as those which in emulation gaze)
He pinde to death by looking on this face.
When he stood fishing by some Rivers brim,
The fish would leap, more for a sight of him
Then for the fly. The Eagle highest bred,
Was taking him once up for Ganimed.
The shag-haird Satyrs, and the tripping Fawnes,
With all the troop that frolic on the Lawnes,
Would come and gaze on him, as who should say
They had not seen his like this many a day.
Yea Venus knew no difference twixt th^se twain,
Save Adon was a Hunter, this a Swain.
The woods sweet Queristers from spray to spray
Would hop them nearer him, and then there stay:
Each ioying greatly from his little heart,
That they with his sweet Reed might bear a part*
This was the Boy, (the Poets did mistake)
To whom bright Cynthia so much love did make;
And promised for his love no scornful eyes
Should ever see her more in horried guize:
But she at his command would as of duty
Become as full of light as he of beauty.
Lucina at his birth for Midwife stuck:
And Citherea nurc'd and gave him suck,
Who to that end, once Doue-drawne from the Sea,
Her full Paps dropped, whence came the Milkie-way.
And as when Plato did in the Cradle thrive,
Bees to his lips brought honey from their Hiue:
So to this Boy they came, I know not whether
They brought, or from his lips did honey gather.
The Wood-Nymphs oftentimes would b^^i^d be,
And pluck for him the blushing Strawberie:
Making of them a Bracelet on a Bent,
Which for a favor to this Swain they sent.
Sitting in shades, the Sun would often by skips
Steal through the boughs, and seize upon his lips.
The chiefest cause the Sun did condescend
To Phaeton^ request, was to this end,
That whilst the other did his Horses reyne,
He might slide from his Sphere, and court this Swain*
Whose sparkling eyes vi'd luster with the Stars,
The truest Center of all Circulars.
In brief^, if any man in skill were able
To finish up Apelles half done Table,
This Boy (the man left out) were fittest sure
To be the pattern of that portraiture.
Piping he sat, as merry as his look,
And by him lay his Bottle and his Hook.
His buskins (edged with silver) were of silk,
Which held a leg more white then mornings milk.
Those Buskins he had got and brought away
For dancing best upon the Revel day:
His Oaten Reed did yield for^h such sweet Notes,
Joined in consort with the Birds shrill throtes,
That equaliz'd the Harmony of Spheres,
A Music that would ravish choicest ears.
Long looked they on (who would not long look on,
That such an object had to look upon*)
Till at the last the Nymph did Marine send,
To ask the nearest way, whereby to wend
To those fair walks where sprung Marina's ill
Whilst she would stay (...) Marine obeyed her will,
And hastened toward him (who would not do so,
That such a pretty journey had to go?)
Sweetly she came, and with a modest blush,
Gave him the day, and then accosted thus:
Fairest of men, that (whilst thy flock does feed)
Sitt'st sweetly piping on thine Oaten Reed
Upon this Little berry (some ycleep
A Hillocke) void of care, as are thy sheep
Deuoid of spots, and sure on all this green
A fairer flock as yet was never seen:
Do me this favor (men should favor Maids)
That whatsoever path directly leads,
And void of danger, thou to me do show,
That by it to the Marish I might go.
Marriage! (quoth he) mistaking what she said,
Natures perfection: thou most fairest Maid,
(If any fairer then the fairest may be)
Come sit thee down by me; know lovely Lady,
Love is the readiest way: if taken aright
You may attain thereto full long ere night.
The Maiden thinking he of Marish spoke,
And not of Marriage, straightway did inuoke,
And praid the Shepherds God might always keep
Him from all danger, and from Wolves his sheep.
Wishing withal that in the prime of Spring
Each sheep he had, two Lambs might yearly bring.
But yet (quoth she) arede good gentle Swain,
If in the Dale below, or on yond Plain;
Or is the Village situate in a Grove,
Through which my way lies, and ycleeped love?
Nor on yo^d Plain, nor in this neighboring wood;
Nor in the Dale where glides the silver flood;
But like a Beacon on a hill so hie,
That every one may see it which passes by
Is Love yplac'd: there is nothing can it hide,
Although of you as yet it is vnespide.
But on which hill (quoth she) pray tell me true?
Why here (quoth he) it sits and talks to you.
And are you Love (quoth she?) fond Swain adue,
You guide me wrong, my way lies not by you.
Though not your way, yet you may lie by me:
Nymph, with a Shepherd thou as merrily
May love and live, as with the greatest Lord.
"Greatness does never most content afford.
I love thee only, not affect worlds pelf,
"She is not loved, that is loved not for her self:
How many Shepherds daughters, who in duty
To griping fathers have inthral'd their beauty,
To wait upon the Gout, to walk when pleases
Old January halt. O that diseases
Should link with youth: She that has such a mate
Is like two twins borne both incorporate:
The One living, the other dead: the living twin
Must needs be slain through noysomnesse of him
He carries with him: such are their estates,
Who merely marry wealth and not their mates.
As ebbing waters freely slide away,
To pay their tribute to the raging Sea;
When meeting with the flood they iustle stout,
Whether the one shall in, or the other out:
Till the strong flood new power of waves does bring
And drives the River back into his Spring:
So Marine's words offering to take their course,
By Love then entering, were kept back, and force
To it, his sweet face, eyes, and tongue assigned,
And threw them back again into her mind.
"How hard it is to leave and not to do
"That which by nature we are prone unto?
"We hardly can (alas why not?) discuss,
"When Nature has decreed it must be thus.
"It is a Maxim held of all, known plain,
"Thrust Nature off with forkes, she will turn again.
Blithe Doridon (so men this Shepherd hight)
Seeing his Goddess in a silent plight,
("Love often makes the speeches organs mute,)
Began again thus to renew his suit:
If by my words your silence has been such,
Faith I am sorry I have spoke so much.
Bar I those lips? fit to be th'vttrers, when
The heavens would parley with the chief of men.
Fit to direct (a tongue all hearts conuinces)
When best of Scribes writes to the best of Princes,
Were mine like yours, of choicest words compleatest,
"I Would show how grief's a thing weighs down the greatest taint it,
"The best of forms (who knows not) grief does
"The skilfull'st Pe^cil never yet could paint it.
And reason good, since no man yet could find
What figure represents a grieved mind.
Me thinks a troubled thought is thus expressed,
To be a Chaos rude and indigest,
Where all do rule, and yet none bears chief sway:
Checked only by a power that is more then they.
This doe^ speak, since to this every lover
That thus does love, is thus still given over.
If that you say you will not, cannot love:
Oh Heavens! for what cause then do you here move?
Are you not framed of that expertest mold,
For whom all in this Round concordance hold?
Or are you framed of some other fashion,
And have a form and heart, but yet a passion?
It cannot be for then unto what end
Did the best worke-man this great work intend?
Not that by minds commerce, and joint estate,
The worlds continuers still should propagate?
Yea, if that Reason (Regent of the Senses)
Have but a part amongst your excellences,
She Will tell you what you call Virginity,
Is fitly lik'ned to a barren tree*
Which when the Gardner on it pains bestows,
To graffe an Impe thereon, in time it grows
To such perfection, that it yearly brings
As goodly fruit, as any tree that springs.
Believe me Maiden, you no chastity:
For maidens but imperfect creatures be.
Alas poor Boy (quoth Marine) have the Fates
Exempted no degrees? are no estates*
Fr^e from Loves rage? Be ruled: unhappy Swain,
Call back thy spirits, and recollect again
Thy vagrant wits. I tell thee for a truth
"Love is a Siren that does shipwreck youth.
Be well advised, thou entertainst a guest
That is the Harbinger of all unrest:
Which like the Vipers young, that lick the earth,
Eat out the breeders womb to get a birth.
Faith (quoth the Boy) I know there cannot be,
Danger in loving or inioying thee*
For what cause were things made and called good,
But to be loved? If you understood
The Birds that prattle here, you would know then,
As birds woo birds, maids should be wooed of men
But I want power to woo, since what was mine
Is fled, and lie as vassals at your shrine:
And since what is mine is yours, let that same move,
Although in me you see naught worthy Love.
Marine about to speak, forth of a sling
(Fortune to all misfortunes plyes her wing
More quick and speedy) came a sharpened flint,
Which in the fair boys neck made such a dint,
That crimson blood came streaming from the wound
And he fell down into a deadly swound.
The blood ran all along where it did fall,
And could not find a place of burial:
But where it came, it there congealed stood,
As if the Earth loathed to drink guiltless blood.
Gold-haird Apollo, Muses sacred King,
Whose praise in Delphos I Will does ever ring:
Physickes first founder, whose Arts excellence
Extracted Natures chiefest quintessence,
Unwilling that a thing of such a worth
Should so be lost* straight sent a Dragon forth
To fetch this blood, and he performed the same:
And now Apothecaries give it name,
From him that fetched it: (Doctors know it good
In Physics use) and call it Dragons bloud^
Some of the blood by chance did down-ward fall,
And by a vein go^ to a Mineral,
Whence came a Red, decayed Dames infuse it
With V^^ise ^eruse, and for painting use it.
Marine astonished (most unhappy Maid)
O'er-co^^ with fear, and at the view afraid,
Fell down into a tran^^, eyes lost their sight,
Which being open, made all darkness light*
Her blood ran to her heart, or life to f^ed,
Or lothing to behold so vile a deed.
And as when VVinter does the Earth array
In siluer-s^ite, and when the night and day
Ar^ in dissension, Night locks up the ground,
Which by the help of day is often unbound:
A shepherds boy with bow and shafts addressed,
Ranging the fields, having once pierced the breast
Of some poor foul* does with the blow straight rush
To ^atch the Bird lies panting in the Bush:
So cus^^ this striker i^, up Marine took,
And hastened with her to a neare-hand Brook. An expression of the natures of
two Ri^e^^ (...) near together, and differing in their tastes and manner of
running.

Old Shepherds saine (old shepherds sooth have saint)
Two Rivers took their issue from the Maine,
Both near together, and each bent his ^ac^,
Which of them both should first behold the face
O^ ^adiant Phoebus: One of them in gliding
Clime'd on a Vein where Nir^^ had abiding:
The other loathing that her purer Wave
Should be defiled with that the Niter gave,
Fled fast away, the other followed fast,
Till both been ^n a Rock yme^ at last*
As seemed best, the Rock did first deliver
Out of his hollow sides the purer River:
(As if it taught those men in honor clad,
To help the virtuous and suppress the bad.)
Which gotten (loose, did softly glide away.
As men from earth, to earth* from sea, to sea*
So Rivers run* and that from whence both came
Takes what she gave: Waue^ Earth* but leaves a name,
As waters have their course, and in their place
Succeeding streams will out; so is man's race:
The Name does still survive, and cannot die,
Until the Channels stop, on Spring grow day.
As I have seen upon a Bridal day
Full many Maid^ clad in their best array,
In honor of the Bride come with their Flaskets
Filled full with flowers: others in wicker-baskets
Bring from the Marish Rushes, to o'er-spread
The ground, where on to Church the Lovers tread*
Whilst that the qu^intest youth of all the Plain
Vshers their way with many a piping strain:
So, as in joy, at this fair Rivers birth,
Triton came up a Channel with his mirth,
And called the neighboring Nymphs each in her turn
To pour their pretty Riuilets from their Vrne;
To wait upon this new-deliuered Spring.
Some running through the Meadows, with them bring
Cowsl^p and Mint: and it is another lot
To light upon some Gardeners curious knot
Whence she upon her breast (loves sweet repose)
Does bring the Queen of flowers, the English Rose.
Some from the Fenne bring Reeds, Wilde-tyme from Downs*
Some from a Grove the Bay that Poets crowns;
Some from an aged Rock the Moss has torn,
And leaves him naked unto winters storm:
Another from her banks (in mere good will)
Brings nutriment for fish, the Camomill.
Thus all bring somewhat, and do ouer-spread
The way the Spring unto the Sea does tread.
This while the Flood which yet the Rock up pent,
And suffered not with iocund merriment
To tread rounds in his Spring, came rushing forth,
As angry that his waves (he thought) of worth
Should not have liberty, nor help the pryme.
And is some ruder Swain composing ryme,
Spends many a gray Goose-quill unto the handle,
Buries within his socket many a Candle;
Blot! Paper by the quire, and dries up Ink,
As Xerxes Army did whole Rivers drink,
Hoping thereby his name his work should raise
That it should live until the last of days:
Which finished, he boldly does address.
Him and his works to undergo the Press*
When lo (O Fate!) his work not seeming fit
To walk in equipage with better wit,
Is kept from light, there gnawne by Moathes and worms,
At which he frets: Right so this River storms:
But broken forth; As Tauy creepes upon
The Western vales of fertile Albion,
Here dashes roughly on an aged Rock,
That his intended passage does up lock;
There intricately among the Woods does wander,
Losing himself in many a wry Meander:
Here amorously bent, clips some fair Mead;
And then dispersed in rils, does measures tread
Upon her bosom amongst her flowery ranks:
There in another place bears down the banks*
Of some day laboring wretch: here meets a rill,
And with their forces joined cuts out a Mill
Into an Island, then in iocund guise
Suruayes his conquest, lands his enterprise:
Here digs a Cave at some high Mountains foot:
There undermines an Oak, tears up his roo^:
Thence rushing to some Country-farme at hand,
Breaks over the Yeomans mounds, sweepes from his lan^
His Harvest hope of Wheat, of Rye, or Pease:
And makes that channel which was Shepherds least
Here, as our wicked age does ^acriledge,
Helps down an Abbey, then a natural bridge
By creeping under ground he frames out,
As who should say he either went about
To right the wrong he did* or hid his face,
For having done a deed so vile and base:
So ran this River on, and did be stir
Himself, to find his fellow-Traueller.
But the other fearing least her noise might show
What path she took, which way her streams did flo^
As some wayfaring man strayes the row a wood,
Where beasts of prey thirsting for humane blood
Lurk in their dens, he softly listening goes,
Not trusting to his heels, treads on his toes:
Dreads every noise he hears, thinks each small bush
To be a beast that would upon him rush:
Fears to dye, and yet his wind does smother;
Now leaves this path, takes that, then to another:
Such was her course. This feared to be found,
The other not to find, swells over each mound,
Roares, rages, foames, against a mountain dashes,
And in recoile, makes Meadows standing plashes:
Yet finds not what he seeks in all his way,
But in despair runs headlong to the Sea.
This was the cause them by tradition taught,
Why one flood ran so fast, the other so soft,
Both from one head. Unto the rougher stream,
(Crowned by that Meadows flowery Diadem,
Where Doridon lay hurt) the cruel Swain
Hurries the Shepherdess, where having lain*
Her in a Boat like the Cannowes of Inde,
Some silly trough of wood, or some trees rind;
Puts from the shore, and leaves the weeping strand,
Intends an act by water, which the land
Ab^orr'd to boulster; yea, the guiltless earth
Loa^h'd to be Midwife to so vile a birth:
Which to relate I am enforced to wrong
The modest blushes of my Maiden-song.
Then each fair Nymph whom Nature does endow
With beauties cheek, crowned with a shamefast brow;
Whose well-tuned ears, chast-obiect-louing eyne
Never heard nor saw the works of An obscene Italian Poet.
Aretine;
Who never came on the Citherean shelfe,
But is as true as Chastity it self;
Where hated Impudence never set her seed;
Where lust lies not veiled in a virgins weed:
Le^ her withdraw. Let each young Shepherdling
Walk by, or stop his ^are, the whilst I sing.
But ye, whose blood, like Kids upon a plain,
Does skip, and dance Lauoltoes in each vein;
Whose breasts are swollen with the Venerean game,
And warm your selves at lusts alluring flame;
Who dare to act as much as men dare think,
And wallowing lie within a sensual sink;
Whose fained gestures do entrap our youth
With an apparancie of simple truth;
Insatiate gulphs, in your de^ectiue part
By Art help Nature, and by Nature, Art:
Lend me your ears, and I will touch a string
Shall lull your sense asleep the while I sing.
But stay: me thinks I hear something in me
That bids me keep the bounds of modesty;
Says, "Each man's voice to that is quickly moved
"Which of himself is best of all beloved;
"By vttring what thou know less glory's got,
"Then by concealing what thou know not.
If so, I yield to it, and set my rest
Rather to lose the bad, then wrong the best.
My Maiden-Muse flies the lascivious Swains,
And scorns to soil her lines with lustful strains*
Will ^ot dilate (nor on her forehead bear
Immodesties abhorred Character)
His shameless pryings, his indecent doings;
His curious searches, his respectlesse wooings:
How that he saw. But what? I dare not break it,
You safer may conceive the^ I dare speak it.
Yet verily had he not thought her dead,
Sh'ad lost, never to be found, her Maidenhead.
The rougher stream loathing a thing compacted
Of so great shame, should o^ his ^loud be acted;
(According to our times not well allowed
In others, what he in himself auow'd)
Bent hard his forehead* furrowed up his face,
And danger led the way the boat did trace.
And as within a Landscape that does stand
Wrought by the Pencill of some curious hand,
We may discry, here meadow, there a wood^
Here standing ponds, and there a running ^^oud:
Here on some mount a house of pleasure vanted,
Where once the roaring Cannon had been planted:
There on a hill a Swain pipes out the day,
Out-brauing all the Quiristers of May.
A Hunts-man here follows his cry of hounds,
Driu^ng the Hare along the ^allow grounds*
Whilst one at hand seeming ^he sport t'allow,
Follows the hounds, and careless leaves the Plow.
There in another place some high-rais'd land,
In pride bears out her breasts unto the strand.
Here stands a bridge, and there a condu^^ (...)*
Here round a May Pole some the measures tr^ad:
There boys the truant play and leave their book:
Here stands an Angler with a baired hook.
There for a Stagge one lurkes within a bough^
Here sits a Maiden milking of her Cow.
There on a goodly plain (by ^ime thrown down)
Lies buried in his dust some ancient Town;
Who now inuillaged, there is only seen
In his va^^e ruins what his state had been:
And all of these in shadows so expressed
Make the beholders eyes to take no rest.
So for the Swain the Flood did mean to him
To show in Nature (not by* Art to limb)
A Tempests rage, his furious waters threat,
Some on this shore, some on the other be^^*
Here stands a Mountain, where was once a Dale;
There where a Mountain stood is now a Vale.
Here flows a billow, there another m^^^s:
Each, on each side the skiffe, unkindly greets.
The waters underneath g^n upward move,
Wondering what stratage^s were wrought above:
Billows that mist the bo^t, still onward thrust,
And on the Cliffes, as swollen with anger* burst.
All these* and more, in substance so expressed,
Made the ^^holders thoughts to take no rest.
Horror in ^ll^mphrid upon the waves*
And all the Faries from their gloomy caue^
Came hou^ring over the Boat, summond each sense
Before the fearful bar of Conscience;
Were guilty all, and all condemned were
To under (...) their horrors with despair*
What Muse? what Power? or what thrice sacred Hearse,
That lives immortal in a well-tuned Verse,
Can lend me such a sight that I might see
A guilty conscience true Anatomy;
That well kept Register wherein is writ
All ils men do, all goodness they omit?
His pallid fears, his sorrows, his affrightings;
His (...) wished had-I-w^sts* remorcefull bitings:
His many tortures, his heart-renting pain:
How we^e his griefs composed in one chain,
And he by it let down into the Seas,
Or the row the Center to the Antipodes?
He might change Climates, or be barred Heavens face;
Yet ^nde no salve, nor ever change his case.
Fears, sorrows, tortures, sad affrights, nor any,
Lik^ to the Conscience sting, though thrice as many;
Yet all these torments by the Swain were borne.
Whilst Deaths grim visage lay upon the storm.
But as when some kind Nurse does long time keep
Her pretty babe at suck* whom fallen asleep
She lays down in his Cradle, stints his cry
With many a sweet and pleasing L^llaby;
Whilst the sweet child, not troubled with the shock,
As sweetly slumbers, as his Nurse does rock:
So lay the Maid, the amazed Swain* (...) weeping,
And death in her was dispossessed by sleeping.
The roa^ing voice of winds, the billows raues;
Nor all the mu^^^ing of the sullen waves
Co^ld once disquiet, or her slumber stir:
But ^ull'd her move asleep then wakened her.
Such are their states, whose souls from foult offense
Enthroned sit in spotless Innocence.
Where rest my Muse; till (jolly Shepherds Swaine^)
Next morn with Pearls of dew bedecks o^r plains
We Will fold our flocks, then in fit time go on
To tune mine Oaten pipe for Doridon.
THE THIRD SONG.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Shepherds Swain here singing on,
Tells of the cure of Doridon:
And then unto the waters falls
Chanteth the rusticke Pastorals.
NOw had the Sun, in golden chariot hurled
Twice bid good morrow to the nether world
And Cynthia, in her or ^e and perfect ^ound
Twice viewed the shadows of the upper ground.
Twice had the Day Star vsher'd forth the light;
And twice the Euening-starre proclaimed the night;
E^e once the sweet-fac'd Boy (now all forlorn)
Came with his Pipe to resalute the Morn.
When graced by time (unhappy time the while)
The cruel Swain (who ere knew Swain so vile?)
Had stroke the Lad, in came the wat^y Nymph,
To raise from sound poor Doridon (the Impe,
Whom Nature seemed to have selected forth
To be ingraffed on some stock of worth;)
And the Maids help, but since "to doomes of Fate
"Succor, though never so soon, comes still too late.
She raised the youth, then with her arms inrings him*
And so with words of hope she homewards brings him.
At door expecting him his Mother sat,
Wondering her Boy would stay from her so late;
Framing for him unto her self excuses,
And with such thoughts gladly her self abuses:
As that her son, since day grew old and weak,
Staid with the Maids to run at Ba^llbreake:
Or that he cours'd a Park with females fraught,
Which would not run except they might be caught.
O^ in the thickets laid some wily snare
To take the Rabber, or the pour blind Hare.
O^ taught his Dog to catch the climbing Kid:
Thus Shepherds do; and thus she thought he did.
"In things expected meeting with delay,
"Though there be none, we frame some cause of stay.
And so did she, (as she who does not so?)
Conjecture Time vnwing'd he came so slow.
But Doridon drew near, so did her grief:
Homer.
"Ill luck, for speed, of all things else is chief.
For as the Blinde-man sung, Time so prouides,
That Joy goes still on foot, and sorrow rides.
Now when she saw (a woeful sight) her son,
Her hopes then failed her, and her cries begun
To utter such a plaint, that scarce another,
Like this, ere came from any loue-sicke mother.
If man has done this, heaven why made tho^ men
Not to deface thee in thy children;
But by the work the Worke-man to adore;
Framing that something, which was naught before.
Aye me unhappy wretch^ if that in things
Which are as we (save title) men fear Kings,
That be their Postures to the life limbed on
Some wood as frail as they, or cut in stone,
"It Is death to stab: why then should earthly things
Dare to deface his form who formed Kings?
When the world was but in his infancy,
Revenge, Desires unjust, vile Jealousy,
Hate, Envy, Murder, all these six then reigned,
When but their half of men the world contained:
Yet but in part of these, those ruled then,
When now as many vices live as men.
Live they ^yes live I fear to kill my Son,
With whom my joys, my love, my hopes are done.
Cease, quoth the Waters Nymph, that led the Swain
Though it is each mothers cause thus to complain:
Yet "abstinence in things we must profess
"Which Nature framed for need, not for excess.
Since the least blood, drawn from the lesser part
Of any child, comes from the Mothers heart,
^e cannot chose but grieve, except that we
should be more senseless than the senseless tree,
^eply'd his Mother. Do but cut the limb
Of any Tree, the trunk will weep for him:
^end the cold Alluding to our English pronunciation, and indifferent
Orthographie.
Sicamor's thin bark in two,
^is Name and Tears, would say, So Love should do.
That Mother is all ^^int (then beasts less good)
Which drops no water when her child streams
At this the wounded boy fell on his knee,
Mother, kind Mother (said) weep not for me,
Why, I am well? Indeed I am: If you
Cease not to weep, my wound will bleed anew.
When I was promised (...) the lights fruition,
You often have told me, 'twas on this condition,
That I should hold it with like sent and pa^ne
As others do, and one time leave again.
Then dearest mother leave, oh leave to wan^,
"Time will effect, where tears can ^ought auane.
Herewith Marinda taking up her son,
Her hope, her love, her joy, her Doridon;
She thanked the Nymph, for her kind succor ^ent,
Who strait tript to her wa^ry Regiment.
Down in a (...) where in that July took his name from ^ulius Caesar.
Month whose fame
Grows greater by the man who gave it name,
Stands many a well-pil'd cock of more sweet hay
That feeds the husbands Neat each Winters day)
A mountain had his foot, and began to rise
In ^^ately height to parlee with the Skies.
And yet as blaming his own lofty gate,
Waighing the fickle props in things of state,
His head began to droope, and down-wards bendin^
Knocked on that breast* which gave it birth and endin^
And lies so with an hollow hanging vaut,
As when some boy trying the Somersaut.
Stands on his head* and feet, as he did lie
To kick against carths spangled Canopie;
When seeing that his heels are of such weight*
That he cannot obtain their purposed height,
Leaves any more to strive; and thus does say,
What now I cannot do, another day
May well effect* it cannot be denide
I showed a will to act, because I tried:
The Scornefull-hill men called him, who did scorn
So to be called, by reason he had borne
No hate to greatness, but a mind to be
The slave of greatness, through Humility:
For had his Mother Nature thought it meet
He meekly bowing would have kissed her feet.
Under the hollow hanging of this hill
There was a Cave cut out by Natures skill:
Or else it seemed the Mount did open's breast,
That all might see what thoughts he there possessed.
Whose gloomy entrance was enuiron'd round
With shrubs that cloy ill husbands Meadow-groun^
The thick-growne Ha^-thorne and the binding Br^^
The Holly that out ^ares cold Winters ire:
Who all intwinde, each limb with limb did deal^
That scarce a glympse of light could inward steal.
^n uncouth place, fit for an uncouth mind,
that is as heavy as that cave is blind:
^ere lived a man his hoary hairs called old,
upon whose front time many years had told.
^h^, since Dame Nature in him feeble grew,
and he unapt to give the world ought new,
^he secret power of Herbs that grow on mold,
^ought ought, to cherish and relieve the old.
Hither Marinda all in haste came running,
and with her tears desired the old man's cunning.
When this good man (as goodness still is pressed
^t all assayes to help a wight distressed)
^s glad and willing was to ease her son,
As she would ever joy to see it done.
And giving her a salve in leaves up bound;
and she directed how to cure the wound,
^ith thanks, made homewards, (longing still to see
^h'effect of this good Hermits Surgerie)
^here carefully, her son laid on a bed,
Enriched with the blood he on it shed*
^e washes, dresses, binds his wound (yet sore)
that grieved, it could weep blood for him no more.
Now had the glorious Sun ^ane up his June*
And all the lamps of heaven enlightened bin*
^ithin the gloomy shades of some thick Spring,
^^d Philomel began on the Haw-thorne sing,
Wh^lst every beast at rest was lowly laid)
^he outrage done upon a silly Maid.
^^l things were hushed, each bird slept on his bough;
^^d night gave rest to him, day tired at plough;
Each beast, each bird, and each day-toyling wight,
Received the comfort of the silent night:
Free from the gripes of sorrow every one,
Except poor Philomel and Doridon;
She on a Thorn sings sweet though sighing strain
He on a couch more soft, more sad complains:
Whole in-pen^ thoughts him long time having pa^
He sighing wept, and weeping thus complained,
Sweet Philomela (then he heard her sing)
I do not envy thy sweet carolling,
But do admire thee that each even and morrow,
Can carelessly thus sing away thy sorrow.
Would I could do so too ^ and ever be
In all my woes still imitating thee:
But I may not attain to that; for then
Such most unhappy, miserable men
Would (...) with Heaven, and imitate the Sunn^
Whose golden beams in exhalation,
Though drawn from Fens, or other grounds imp^
Turn all to fructifying nouriture.
When we draw nothing by our Sun like eyes,
That ever turns to mirth, but miseries
Would I had never seen, except that ^he
Who made me wish so, love to look on me*
Had Colin Clout yet (...), (but he is gone)
That best on earth could tune a lovers moan,
Whose sadder Tones enforced the Rocks to weep*
And laid the greatest griefs in quiet sleep:
Who when he sung (as I would do to mine)
His truest loves to his fair Rosal^ne,
^nti^'d each Shepherds ear to hear him play,
and rapt with wonder, thus admiring say:
Thrice happy plains (if plains thrice happy may be)
Where such a Shepherd pipes to such a Lady.
Who made the Lasses long to sit down near him;
And wooed the Rivers from their Springs to hear him.
Heaven rest thy Soul (if so a Swain may pray)
And as thy works live here, live there for aye.
Mean while (unhappy) I shall still complain
Loves cruel wounding of a seely Swain.
Two nights thus past: the Lilly-handed Morn
Saw Phoebus stealing dew from Ceres Corn.
The mounting Lark (days herald) got on wing
Bidding each bird choose out his bough and sing. A description of a Musical
Consort of Birds.

The lofty Treble sung the little Wren;
Robin the Mean, that best of all loves men;
The Nightingale the Tenor; and the Thrush
The Counter-tenor sweetly in a bush:
And that the Music might be full in parts,
Birds from the groves flew with right willing hearts
But (as it seemed) they thought (as do the Swains,
Which tune their Pipes on sacked Hibernia's plains)
There should some droaning part be, therefore willed
Some bird to fly into a neighboring field,
In Embassy unto the King of Bees,
To aid his partners on the flowers and trees:
Who condiscending gladly flew along
To bear the Base to his well-tuned song.
The Crow was willing they should be beholding
For his deep voice, but being hoarse with skolding,
He thus lends aid; upon an Oak does climb,
And nodding with his head, so keeps time.
O true delight, enharboring the breasts
Of those sweet creatures with the plumy crests.
Had Nature unto man such simplesse given,
He would like Birds befarre more near to heaven.
But Doridon well knew (who knows no less?)
"Man's compounds have over thrown his simpleness.
Noone-tide the Morn had wood, and she began yield,
When Doridon (made ready for the field)
Goes sadly forth (a woeful Shepherds Lad)
Drowned in tears, his mind with grief yclad,
To open his fold and let his Lamkins out.
(Full jolly flock they seemed, a well fleeced rout)
Which gently walked before, he sadly pacing,
Both guides and follows them toward their grazing*
When from a Grove the Wood-Nymphs held full dear
Two heavenly voices did entreat his ear,
And did compel his longing eyes to see
What happy wight enjoyed such harmony.
Which joined with five more, and so made seven,
Would parallel in mirth the Spheres of heaven.
To have a sight at first he would not press,
For fear to interrupt such happiness:
But kept aloof the thick grown shrubs among,
Yet so as he might hear this wooing Song.
F. FIe Shepherds Swain, why sitst thou all alone,
Whilst other Lads are sporting on the leyes?

R. Joy may have company, but Grief has none:
Where pleasure never came, sports cannot please.

F. Yet may you please to grace our this days sport,
Though not an actor, yet a looker on.

R. A looker on indeed, so Swains of sort,
Cast low, take joy to look whence they are thrown?

F. Seek joy and find it.


R. Grief does not mind it.


BOTH. Then both agree in one,
Sorrow does hate
To have a mate;
"True grief is still alone.

F. Sad Swain areade, (if that a Maid may ask)
What cause so great effects of grief has wrought?)

R. Alas, Love is not hid, it wears no mask;
To view it is by the face conceived and brought.

F. The cause I grant: the causer is not learned:
Your speech I do entreat about this task.

R. If that my heart were seen, 'twould be discerned;
And Fida's name found graven on the caske.

F. Has Love young Remond moved?


R. It Is Fida that is loved.


BOTH. Although it is said that no men
Will with their hearts,
Or goods chief parts
Trust either Seas or Women.

F. How may a Maiden be assured of love,
Since falsehood late in every Swain excels?

R. When protestations fail, time may approve
Where true affection lives, where falsehood dwells.

F. The truest cause elects a Judge as true:
Fie, how my sighing, my much loving tells.

R. Your love is fixed in one whose heart to you
Shall be as constancy, which never rebelleth.

F. None other shall have grace.


R. None else in my heart place.


BOTH. Go Shepherds Swains and wiue all,
For Love and Kings
Are two like things
Admitting no Corriuall.

As when some Malefactor judged to die
For his offense, his Execution nigh,
Caste^h his sight on states unlike to his,
And weighs his ill by others happiness:
So Doridon thought every stare to be
Further from him, more near felicity.
O blessed sight, where such concordance meets,
Where truth with truth, and love with liking greets.
Had (quoth the Swain) the Fates given me some measure
Of true delights inestimable treasure,
I had been fortunate: but now so weak
My bankrupt heart will be enforced to break.
Sweet Love that draws on earth a yoke so even;
Sweet life that imitates the bliss of heaven;
Sweet death they needs must have, who so unite
That two distinct make one Hermaphrodite:
Swe^t love, sweet life, sweet death, that so do meet
On earth; in death, in heaven be ever sweet!
Let all good wishes ever wait upon you,
And happiness as handmaid tending on you.
Your loves within one center meeting have!
One hour your deaths, your corpse possess one grave!
You^ names still green, (thus does a Swain implore)
Till time and memory shall be no more!
Herewith the couple hand in hand arose,
And took the way which to the sheep-walke goes.
And whilst that Doridon their gate looked on,
His dog disclosed him, rushing forth upon
A well fed Dear, that trips it over the Meade,
As nimbly as the wench did whilome tread
On Ceres dangling ears, or Shaft let go
By some fair Nymph that bears Diana's Bow.
When turning head, he not a foot would stir,
Sco^ning the barking of a Shepherds curre:
So should all Swains as little weigh their spite,
Who at their songs do bawle, but dare not bite.
Remond, that by the dog the Master knew,
Came back, and angry bade him to pursue;
Dory (quoth he) if your ill-tuter'd dog
Have naught of awe, then let him have a clogge.
Do you not know this seely timorous Dear,
(As usual to his kind) hunted whilcare,
The Sun not ten degrees got in the Signs,
Since to our Maids, here gathering Columbines,
She weeping came, and with her head low laid
In Fida's lap, did humbly beg for aid.
VVhereat unto the hounds they gave a check,
And saving her, might spy about her neck
A Collar hanging, and (as yet is seen)
These words in gold wrought on a ground of green:
Maidens: since'tis decreed a Maid shall have me,
Keep me till he shall kill me that must save me.
But whence she came, or who the words concern,
We neither know nor can of any learn.
Upon a pallat she does he at night,
Near Fida's bed, nor will she from her sight:
Upon her walks she all the day attends,
And by her side she trips where ere she wends.
Remond (replide the Swain) if I have wronged
Fida in ought which unto her belonged:
I sorrow for it, and truly do protest,
As yet I never heard speech of this Beast:
Nor was it with my will; or if it were,
Is it not lawful we should chase the Dear,
That breaking our enclosures every morn
Are found at feed upon our crop of corn?
Yet had I known this Dear* I had not wronged
Fida in ought which unto her belonged.
I think no less, quoth Remond; but I pray,
Whither walks Doridon this Holy Day?
Come drive your sheep to their appointed feeding,
And make you one at this our merry meeting.
Full many a Shepherd with his lovely Less,
Sit telling tales upon the clouer grass:
There is the merry Shepherd of the hole;
The^ot, Piers, Nilkin, Duddy, Hobbinoll,
Alexis* Siluan, Teddy of the Glen,
R^wly and Perigot here by the Fen,
With many more, I cannot reckon all
That mee^ to solemnize this festival.
I grieve not at their mirth, said Doridon:
Yet had there been of Feasts not any one
Appointed or commanded, you will say,
"Where there is Content it is ever Holy Day.
Le^ue further talk (quoth Remond) let us be gone,
I Will help you with your sheep, the time draws on.
Fida will call the Hind, and come with us.
Thus went they on, and Remond did discuss
Their cause of meeting, till they won with pacing
The circuit chosen for the Maidens tracing.
It was a Roundell seated on a plain,
Tha^ stood as Sentinel unto the Maine,
Enuiron'd round with Trees and many an Arbor,
Wherein melodious birds did nightly harbor:
And on a bough within the quickening Spring,
Would be a teaching of their young to sing;
Whose pleasing Noates the tired Swain have made
To steal a nap at noone-tide in the shade.
Nature her self did there in triumph ride,
And made that place the ground of all her pride.
Whose various flowers deceived the rasher eye
In taking them for curious Tapistrie.
A silver Spring forth of a rock did fall,
Tha^ in a drought did serve to water all.
Upon the edges of a grassie bank,
A tuf^ of Trees grew circling in a rank,
As if they seemed their sports to gaze upon,
Or stood as guard against the wind and Sun:
So fair, so fresh, so green, so sweet a ground
The piercing eyes of heaven yet never found,
Here Doridon all ready met does see,
(Oh who would not at such a meeting be?)
Where he might doubt, who gave to other grace,
Whether the place the Maids, or Maids the place.
Here began the Reed, and merry Bag-pipe play,
Shrill as a Thrush upon a Morn of May,
(A rural Music for an heavenly train)
And every Shepherdess danced with her Swain.
As when some gale of wind does nimbly take
A fair white lock of wool, and with it make
Some pretty driving; here it sweepes the plain:
There stays, here hops, there mounts, and turns again:
Yet all so quick, that none so soon can say
That now it stops, or leapes, or turns away:
So was their dancing, none looked thereupon,
But thought their several motions to be one.
A crooked measure was their first election,
Because all crooked tends to best perfection.
And as I ween this often bowing measure,
Was chiefly framed for the women's pleasure.
Though like the rib, they crooked are and bending,
Yet to the best of forms they aim their ending:
Next in an (I) their measure made a rest,
Showing when Love is plainest it is best.
Then in a (Y) which thus does Love commend,
Making of two at first, one in the end.
And lastly closing in a round do enter,
Placing the lusty Shepherds in the center:
About the Swains they dancing seemed to roll,
As other Planets round the Heavenly Pole.
Who by their sweet aspect or chiding frown,
Could raise a Sh^pherd up, or cast him down.
Thus were they circled till a Swain came near,
And sent this song unto each Shepherds ear:
The Note and voice so sweet, that for such mirth
The Gods would leave the heavens, and dwell on earth.
HAppy are you so enclosed,
May the Maids be still disposed
In their gestures and their dances,
So to grace you with intwining,
That Envy wish in such combining,
Fortunes smile with happy chances.
Here it seems as if the Graces
Measured out the Plain in traces,
In a Shepherdess disguising.
Are the Spheres so nimbly turning?
Wandering Lamps in heaven burning,
To the eye so much intising?
Yes, Heaven means to take these thither,
And add one joy to see both dance together.
Gentle Nymphs be not refusing,
Loves neglect is times abusing,
They and beauty are but lent you,
Take the one and keep the other:
Love keeps fresh, what age does smother.
Beauty gone you will repent you.
'Twill be said when ye have proved,
Never Swains more truly loved:
O then fly all nice behavior.
Pity feign would (as her duty)
Be attending st^ll on beauty,
Let her not be out of favor.
Disdain is now so much rewarded,
That Pity weeps since she is unregarded.
The measure and the Song here being ended:
Each Swain his thoughts thus to his Love commended.
The first presents his Dog, with these:
When I my flock near you do keep,
And bid my Dog go take a Sheep,
He clean mistakes what I bid do,
And bends his pace still toward you.
Poor wretch, he knows more care I keep
To get you, then a seely Sheep.
The second, his Pipe, with these:
Bid me to sing (fair Maid) my Song shall prove
There never was truer Pipe sung truer Love.
The third, a pair of Gloves, thus.
These will keep your hands from burning,
Whilst the Sun is swiftly turning:
But who can any veil devise
To shield my Heart from your fair Eyes?
The fourth, an Anagram. MAIDEN AID MEN
Maidens should be ayding Men,
And for love give love again:
Learn this lesson from your Mother,
One good wish requires another.
They deserve their names best, when
Maids most willingly aid Men.
The fifth, a Ring, with a Picture in a Jewel on it.
Nature has framed a Iemme beyond compare,
The world's the Ring, but you the Jewel are.
The sixth, a Nosegay of Roses, with a Nettle in it.
Such is the Posie, Love composes;
A stinging Nettle mixed with Roses.
The seventh, a Girdle.
This during light I give to clip your Wast,
Fair, grant mine arms that place when day is past.
The eighth, a Heart.
You have the substance, and I live
But by the shadow which you give;
Substance and shadow, both are due
And given of me to none but you.
Then whence is life but from that part
Which is possessor of the heart?
The ninth, a Shepherds Hook.
The Hook of right belongs to you, for when
I take but seely Sheep, you still take Men.
The tenth a Comb.
Lovely maiden best of any
Of our plains though thrice as many*
Veil to love, and leave denying,
Endless knots let fates be tying.
Such a face, so fine a feature
(Kindest, fairest, sweetest creature)
Never yet was found, but loving;
O then let my plaints be moving!
Trust a Shepherd though the meanest,
Truth is best when she is plaines^.
I love not with vows contesting:
Faith is faith without protesting.
Time that all things does inherit
Renders each def^rt his merit.
If that, fail in me, as no man,
Doubtless time nere won a woman
Maidens still should be relenting,
And once flinty, still repenting.
Youth with youth is best combined,
Each one with his like is twined,
Beauty should have beauteous meaning*
Ever that hope eases playning.
Unto you whom Nature dresses
Needs no comb to smooth your tresses*
This way it may do his duty
^n your locks to shade your beauty.
(...) so, and to love be turning,
Else each heart it will be burning.
The Eleauenth


The twelfth.

Lo^ Cupid leaves his Bow, his reason is
Because your eyes wound when his shafts do miss.
Whilst every one was offering at the shrine
Of such rare beauties might be styled divine:
This lamentable voice toward them flies:
O Heaven send aid, or else a Maiden dies!
Herewith some ran the way the voice them led;
Some with the Maiden staid which shook for dread;
What was the cause time serves not now to tell.
Hark; for my jolly Wether rings his bell,
And almost all our flocks have left to graze,
Shepherds it is almost night, hie home apace,
When next we meet (as we shall meet ere long)
I Will tell the rest in some ensuing Song.
THE FOVRTH SONG.
THE ARGUMENT.
Fida's distress, the Hind is slain,
Yet from her ruins lives again.
Riots description next I rhyme;
Then Aletheia, and old Time:
And lastly, from this Song I go,
Having described the Vale of Woe.
HAppy ye days of old, when every waste
Was like a SANCTVARIE to the chaste:
When Incests, Rapes, Adulteries, were not known;
All pure as blossoms, which are newly blown.
Maids were as free from spots, and soiles within,
As most unblemished in the outward skin.
Men every Plain and Cottage did afford,
As smooth in deeds, as they were fair of word.
Maidens with Men as sisters with their brothers;
And Men with Maids conuers'd as with their Mothers;
Free from suspicion, or the rage of blood.
Strife only reigned, for all strived to be good.
But then as little Wrens but newly fledge,
First, by their nests hop up and down the hedge;
Then one from bough to bough gets up a tree*
His fellow noting his agilitie,
Thinks he as well may venture as the other,
So flushing from one spray unto another,
G^ts to the top, and then enbold'ned flies,
Unto an height past ken of humane eyes:
So time brought worse, men first desired to talk;
Then came suspect; and then a private walk;
Then by consent appointed times of meeting,
Where most securely each might kiss his sweeting;
Lastly, with lusts their panting breasts so swell,
They came to. But to what I blush to tell,
And entered thus, Rapes used were of all,
Incest, Adultery, held as Venial:
The certainty in doubtful balance rests,
If beasts did learn of men, or men of beasts.
Had they not learned of man who was their King,
So to insult upon an underling,
They ciuilly had spent their lives gradation,
As meek and mild as in their first creation;
Nor had th'infections of infected minds
So altered nature, and disordered kinds,
Fida had been less wretched, I more glad,
That so true love so true a progress had.
When Remond left her ( Remond then unkind)
Fida went down the dale to seek the Hind;
And found her taking soil within a flood:
Whom when she called straight followed to the wood.
Fida then wearied, sought the cooling shade,
And found an arbor by the Shepherds made
To frolike in (when Sol did hottest shine)
With cates which were far cleanlier then fine.
For in those days men never used to feed
So much for pleasure as they did for need.
Enriching then the arbor down she sat her;
Where many a busy Be came flying at her:
Thinking when she for air her breasts discloses,
That there had grown some tuft of Damaske-Roses,
And that her azure veins which then did swell,
Were Conduit-pipes brought from a living Well.
Whose liquor might the world enjoy for money,
Bees would be bank-rupt, none would care for honey*
The Hind lay still without (poor silly creature,
How like a woman art thou framed by nature?
Timorous, apt to tears, wily in running,
Caught best when force is intermixed with cunning)
Lying thus distant, different chances meet them,
And with a fearful object Fate does greet them.
Description of R^ot.
Something appeared, which seemed far off, a man,
In stature, habit, gate, proportion:
But when their eyes their objects Masters were,
And it for stricter censure came more near,
By all his properties one well might guess,
Th^n of a man, he sure had nothing less.
For verily since old Deucalions flood
Ear^hs slime did never produce a viler brood.
Upon the various Earths embrodered gown
There is a weed upon whose head grows Down*
Son-thistle it is ycleep'd, whose downy wreath,
If any one can blow off at a breath,
We deem her for a Maid: such was his hair,
Ready to shed at any stirring air.
His ears were stricken deaf when he came nie,
To hear the Widows or the Orphans cry.
His eyes encircled with a bloody chain,
With poaring in the blood of bodies slain.
His mouth exceeding wide, from whence did fly
Vollies of execrable blasphemy;
Ba^ning the Heavens, and he that rides on them,
D^^'d vengeance to the teeth to fall upon him:
Like Scythian Wolves, or Men of Scirum shoot against the Stars.
men of wit bereauen,
Which howl and shoot against the lights of Heaven.
His hands (if hands they were) like some dead corse,
With digging up his buried ancestors;
Making his Fathers Tomb and sacred shrine
The trough wherein the Hog-heard fed his Swine.
And as that Beast has legs (which Shepherds fear,
Ycleep'd a Badger, which our Lambs does tear)
One long, the other short, that when he runs
Upon the plains, he halts; but when he wons
On craggy Rocks, or steepy stils, we see
Noneruns more swift, nor easier then he:
Such legs the Monster had, one sinew shrunk,
That in the plains he reeled, as being drunk;
And halted in the paths to Virtue tending:
And therefore never durst be that way bending:
But when he came on carved Monuments,
Spiring Colosses, and high raised rents,
He past them over, quick, as the Eastern wind
Sweepes through a Meadow; or a nimble Hind,
Or Satyr on a Lawne; or skipping Roe;
Or well-wing'd Shaft forth of a Parthian bow.
His body made (still in consumptions rife)
A miserable prison for a life.
Riot he hight; whom some cursed Fiend did raise,
When like a Chaos were the nights and days:
Got and brought up in the Cymerian Clime,
Where Sun nor Moon, nor days, nor nights do time:
As who should say, they scorned to show their faces
To such a Fiend should seek to spoil the Graces.
At sight whereof, Fida nigh drowned in fear,
Was clean dismayed when he approached near;
Nor durst she call the Dear, nor whistling wind her,
Fearing her noise might make the Monster find her;
Who slily came, for he had cunning learned him,
And seized upon the Hind, ere she discerned him.
Oh how she strived and strugled; every nerve
Is pressed at all assaies a life to serve:
Yet soon we lose, what we might longer keep
Were not Prevention commonly a sleep.
Maids, of this Monsters brood be fearful all,
What to the Hind may hap to you befall.
Who with her feet held up in stead of hands,
And tears which pity from the Rock commands,
She sighs, and shrikes, and weeps, and looks upon him:
Alas she sobs, and many a groan throws on him;
With plaints which might abate a Tyrants knife;
She begs for pardon, and entreats for life.
The hollow caves resound her moanings near it,
That heart was flint which did not grieve to hear it:
The high topt Firres which on that mountain keep,
Have ever since that time been seen to weep.
The Owl till then, it is thought full well could sing,
And tune her voice to every bubling Spring:
But when she heard those plaints, then forth she yode
Out of the covert of an Iuy rod,
And hollowing for aid, so strained her throat,
That since she clean forgot her former noat.
A little Robin sitting on a tree,
In doleful noats bewailed her Tragedy.
An Aspe, who thought him stout, could not dissemble,
But showed his fear, and yet is seen to tremble.
Yet Cruelty was deaf, and had no sight
In ought which might gainsay the appetite:
But with his teeth rending her throat asunder,
Besprinkl'd with her blood the green grass under.
And gurmundizing on her flesh and blood,
He vomiting returned to the Wood.
Riot but newly gone, as strange a vision
Though far more heavenly, came in apparition.
As that Arabian bird (whom all admire)
Her exequies prepared and funeral fire,
Burnt in a flame conceived from the Sun,
And nourished with slips of Cynamon,
Out of her ashes has a second birth,
And flies abroad, a wonderment on earth:
So from the ruins of this mangled Creature
Description of Truth.
Arose so fair and so divine a featu^e,
That Enu^ for her heart would dote upon her;
Heaven could not choose but be enamored on her:
Were I a Star, and she a second Sphere,
I Would leave the other, and be fixed there.
Had fair Arachne wrought this Maidens hair,
When she with Pallas did for skill compare,
Minerua's work had never been esteemed,
But this had been more rare and highly deemed.
Yet gladly now she would reuerse her doom,
Weauing this hair within a Spiders Loome.
Upon her forehead, as in glory sat
Mercy and Majesty, for wondering at,
As pure and simple as Albania's snow,
Or milke-white Swans which stem the streams of Poe:
Like to some goodly fore-land, bearing out
Her hair, the tufts which fringed the shore about.
And lest the man which sought those coasts might slip,
Her eyes like Stars, did serve to guide the ship.
Upon her front (heavens fairest Promontory)
Delineated was, th'Authentique Story
Of those Elect, whose sheep at first began
To nibble by the springs of Canaan:
Out of whose sacred loins (brought by the stem
Of that sweet Singer of Jerusalem)
Came the best Shepherd ever flocks did keep,
Who yielded up his life to save his sheep.
O thou Eterne! by whom all beings move,
Giving the Springs beneath, and Springs above:
Whose Finger does this Universe sustain,
Bringing the former and the latter rain:
Who do with plenty Meads and Pastures fill,
By drops distilled like dew on Hormon Hill:
Pardon a silly Swain, who (far unable
In that which is so rare, so admirable)
Dares on an Oaten-pipe, thus meanly sing
Her praise immense, worthy a silver string.
And thou which through the Desert and the Deep,
Did lead thy Chosen like a flock of sheep:
As sometime by a Star thou guidedst them,
Which fed upon the plains of Bethelem;
So by thy sacred Spirit direct my quill,
When I shall sing ought of thy Holy hill,
That times to come, when they my rymes rehearse,
May wonder at me, and admire my Verse:
For who but one rapt in Celestial fire,
Can by his Muse to such a pitch aspire;
That from aloft he might behold and tell
Her worth, whereon an iron Pen might dwell.
When she was borne, Nature in sport began,
To learn the cunning of an Artizan,
And did Vermilion with a white compose,
To mock her self, and paint a Damask Rose.
But scorning Nature unto Art should seek,
She spilt her colors on this Maidens cheek.
Her mouth the gate from whence all goodness came,
Of power to give the dead a living name.
Her words embalmed in so sweet a breath,
That made them triumph both on Time and Death,
Whose fragrant sweets, since the Camelion knew,
And tasted of, he to this humor grew:
Left other Elements, held this so rare,
That since he never feeds on ought but Air.
O had I Virgils verse, or Tullies Tongue!
Or raping numbers like the Thracian's Song,
I have a Theme would make the Rocks to dance,
And surly Beasts that through the Desert prance,
Hie from their Caves, and every gloomy den,
To wonder at the excellence of men.
Nay, they would think their states for ever raised,
But once to look on one, so highly praised.
Out of whose Maiden breasts (which sweetly rise)
The Seers sucked their hidden Prophecies:
And told that for her love in times to come,
Many should seek the Crown of Martyrdom,
By fire, by sword, by tortures, dungeons, chains,
By stripes, by famine, and a world of pains;
Yet constant still remain (to her they loved)
Like Syon Mount, that cannot be removed.
Proportion on her arms and hands recorded,
The world for her no fitter place afforded.
Praise her who list, he still shall be her debtor:
For Art never feigned, nor Nature framed a better.
As when a holy Father has began
To offer sacrifice to mighty Pan,
Does the request of every Swain assume,
To scale the Welkin in a sacred fume,
Made by a widowed Turtles loving mate,
Or Lamkin, or some Kid immaculate,
The offering heaues aloft, with both his hands;
Which all adore, that near the Altar stands:
So was her heavenly body comely raised
On two fair columns; those that Ovid praised
In Iulia's borrowed name, compared with these,
Were Crabs to Apples of the Hespherides;
Or stumpe-foot Vulcan in comparison,
With all the height of true perfection.
Nature was here so lavish of her store,
That she bestowed until she had no more.
Whose Treasure being weakened (by this Dame)
She thrusts into the world so many lame.
The highest Synod of the glorious Sky,
(I heard a VVood-Nymph sing) sent Mercury
To take a suruay of the fairest faces,
And to describe to them all women's graces;
Who long time wandering in a serious quest,
Noting what parts by Beauty were possessed:
At last he saw this Maid, then thinking fit
To end his journey, here, Nil-vltra, writ.
^ida in adoration kissed her knee,
And thus bespake; Hail glorious Deity!
(If such thou art, and who can deem you less?)
Whether thou raign'st Queen of the Wilderness,
Or art that Goddess ('it is unknown to me)
Which from the Ocean draws her pettigree:
Or one of those, who by the mossie banks
Of drisling Hellicon; in airie ranks
Tread Roundelayes upon the silver sands,
Whilst shaggy Satyrs tripping over the strands,
Stand still at gaze, and yield their senses thrals
To the sweet cadence of your Madrigals:
Or of the Faiery troop which nimbly play,
And by the Springs dance out the Summers day;
Teaching the little birds to build their nests,
And in their singing how to keepen rests:
Or one of those, who watching where a Spring
Out of our Grandame Earth has issuing,
With your attractiue Music woo the stream
(As men by Fai^ries led, fallen in a dream)
To follow you, which sweetly trilling wanders
In many Mazes, intricate Meanders;
Till at the last, no mock th'enamour'd rill,
Ye bend your traces up some shady hill;
And laugh to see the wave no further tread;
But in a chafe run soaming on his head,
Being enforced a channel new to frame,
Leaving the other destitute of name.
If thou be one of these, or all, or more,
Succor a seely Maid, that does implore
Aid, on a bended heart, unfeigned and meek,
As true as blushes of a Maiden cheek.
Maiden arise, replied the newborn Maid:
"Pure Innocence the senseless stories will aid.
Nor of the Fairie troop, nor Muses nine;
Nor am I Venus, nor of Proserpine:
But daughter to a lusty aged Swain,
That cuts the green tufts off th'enamel'd plain;
And with his Sithe has many a Summer shorn
The plow'd-lands laboring with a crop of corn;
Who from the cloud-clipt mountain by his stroke
Fels down the lofty Pine, Description of Time.
the Cedar, Oak:
He opes the floodgates as occasion is
Sometimes on that man's land, sometimes on this.
When Verolame, a stately Nymph of yore
Did use to deck her self on Isis shore,
One morn (among the rest) as there she stood,
Saw the pure Channel all besmeared with blood;
Inquiring for the cause, one did impart,
Those drops came from her holy Albans heart;
Here with in grief she began entreat my Sire,
That Isis stream, which yearly did attire
Those gallant fields in changeable array,
Might turn her course and run some other way.
Lest that her waves might wash away the guilt
From off their hands which Albans blood had spilt:
He condescended, and the nimble wave
Her Fis^ no more within that channel drove:
But as a witness left the crimson gore
To slain the earth, as they their hands before.
He had a being ere there was a birth,
And shall not cease until the Sea and Earth,
And what they both contain, shall cease to be,
Nothing confines him but Eternity.
By him the names of good men ever live,
Which short lived men unto Oblivion give:
And in forgetfulness he lets him fall,
That is no other man then natural:
It Is he alone that rightly can discover,
Who is the true, and who the fained Lover.
In Summers heat when any Swain to sleep
Does more addict himself then to his sheep;
And whilst the Leaden God sits on his eyes,
If any of his Fold or strayes or dies,
And to the waking Swain it be unknown,
Whether his sheep be dead, or straid, or stolen;
To meet my Sire he bends his course in pain,
Either where some high hill suruaies the plain;
Or takes his step toward the flowrie valleys,
Where Zephyre with the Cowslip hourly dallies;
Or to the groves, where birds from heat or weather,
Sit sweetly tuning of their noates together:
Or to a Mead a wanton River dresses
With richest Collers of her turning Esses;
Or where the Shepherds sit old stories telling,
Chronos my Sire has no set place of dwelling;
But if the Shepherd meet the aged Swain,
He tells him of his sheep, or shows them slain.
So great a gift the sacred Powers of heaven
(Above all others) to my Sire have given,
That the abhorred Stratagems of night,
Lurking in cauernes from the glorious light,
By him (perforce) are from their dungeons hurled,
And showed as monsters to the wondering World.
What Mariner is he sailing upon
The watery Desert clipping Albion,
Hears not the billows in their dances roar
Answered by Eccoes from the neighbor shore?
To whose accord the Maids trip from the Downs,
And Rivers dancing come, ycrown'd with Towns,
All s^nging forth the victories of Time,
Upon the Monsters of the Western Clime,
Whose horrid, damned, bloody, plots would bring
Confusion on the Laureate Poets King,
Whose Hell-fed hearts devised how never more
A Swan might singing sit on Isis shore:
But croaking Ravens, and the Scrich-owles cry,
The ^at Musicians for a Tragedy,
Should evermore be heard about her strand,
To f^ight all Passengers from that sad Land.
Long Summers days I on his worth might spend,
And yet begin again when I would end.
All Ages since the first age first begun,
Ere they could know his worth their age was done:
Whose absence all the Treasury of earth
Cannot buy out. From farre-fam'd Tagus birth,
Not all the golden gravel he treads over,
One minute past, that minute can recover.
I am his only Child (he has no other)
Cleep'd Aletheia, borne without a Mother.
Poor Aletheia long despised of all,
Scarce Charity would lend an Hospital
To give my Months cold watching one nights rest,
But in my room took in the Misers Chest.
In winters time when hardly fed the flocks,
And Isicles hung dangling on the Rocks;
When Hyems bound the floods in silver chains,
And hoary Frosts had candy'd all the Plains;
When every Barn rung with the threshing Flailes,
And Shepherds Boys for cold began blow their nails*
(Wearied with toil in seeking out some one
That had a spark of true devotion;)
It was my chance (chance only helps need)
To find an house y built for holy deed,
With goodly Architect, and Cloisters wide,
With groves and walks along a Rivers side;
The place it self afforded admiration,
And every spray a Theme of contemplation*
But (woe is me) when knocking at the gate,
Altheia socks relief at an Abbey, and is denide.
I began entreat an entrance thereat:
The Porter asked my name: I told; He swelled,
And bade me thence: wherewith in grief repelled,
I sought for shelter to a ruined house,
Harb'ring the Weasell, and the dust-bred Mouse;
And others none, except the two-kinde Bat,
Which all the day there melancholy sat:
Here sat I down with wind and rain ybeat;
Grief fed my mind, and did my body eat.
Yet Idleness I saw (lamed with the Gout)
Had entrance when poor Truth was kept without*
There saw I Drunkenness with Dropsies swollen;
And pampered Lust that many a night had stolen
Over the Abby-wall when Gates were locked,
To be in Venus wanton bosom rocked:
And Glut^ony that surf^^^ing had bin,
Knock at the gate and straightway taken in:
Sadly I say, and sighing grieved to see,
Their happiness, my infelicitie.
At last came En^y by, who having spide
Where I was sadly se^^ed, inward hide,
And to the (...) she cries,
Why sit you here, when with these ears and eyes
I heard and saw a strumpet dares to say,
She is the true fair A^theia,
Which you have boasted long to live among you,
Ye^ suffer more peevish Girl to wrong you*
With this prouok'd, all rose and in a (...)
Ran to the gate, strove who should first (...),
Bade me be gone, and then (in (...))
Did call me counterfeit, (...), devil*
Then like a strumpet drove me from their (...)
Wi^h (...) pans, and with the (...)
And (...)
Had heaps of firebrarnds banded at his face*
^
Enforced in fields to sleep, or wake all night;
A silly sheep seeing the (...) by,
Forsooked (...) where once she meant to lie,
As if she in her kind (vnhurting else)
Did bid me take such lodging as her self*
Gladly I took the place the sheep had given,
Vncanopy'd of any thing but heaven.
Where nigh benumbed with cold, with grief frequented,
Unto the silent night I thus lamented:
Fair Cynthia, if from thy silver Throne,
Thou ever lentst an ear to Virgins mo^d*
Or in thy Monthly course, one minute staid
Thy Palfrayes trot, to hea^^ a wretched Maid*
Pull in their reins, and lend thine ear to me,
Forlorn, forsaken, clothed in misery:
But if a woe has never wooed thine ear,
To stop those Courser^ in their still Cariere*
But as stone-hearted men, uncharitable,
Pass careless by the poor, when men less able
Hold not the needies help in long suspense,
But in their hands pour their benevolence.
O! if thou be so hard to stop thin^ ^ares*
When stars in pity drop down from their Spheres,
Yet for a while in gloomy veil of night,
In shroud the pale beams of thy borrowed light:
O! never once discourage goodness (lending
One glimpse of light) to see misfortune spending
Her utmost rage on Truth* despised, distressed,
Unhappy, vnrelieued, yet undressed*
Where is the heart at (...) suffering grieueth*
Where is (...) eye that pitying relieueth?
Where is the hand tha^ still the ^^ngry f^^deth?
Where is the cane that the (...)?
That heart, that hand, that ear, or else that eye,
Gives, relieueth, feeds, steeds misery?
O earth produce me one (of all thy store)
Enioyes; and be vaine^glorious no more
By this had Chan^ibler^, the village clock,
Bidden the good-wife for her Maids to knock*
And the swart plow man for his breakfast s^aid,
That he might till those lands were fallow laid:
The hills and valleys here and there resound
With the re-ecchoes of the deepe-mouth'd hound.
Each Shepherds daughter with her cleanly Peale,
Was come a field to m^ke the Mornings meal,
And ere the Sun had clymb'd the Eastern hills,
To guild the muttring bournes, and pretty rils,
Before the laboring Be had left the Hiue,
And nimble Fishes which in Rivers diue,
Began to leap, and catch the drowned Fly,
I rose from rest, not in felicity.
Seeking the place of Charities resort,
Unware I happened on a Princes Court;
Where meeting Greatness, I required relief,
(O ^appy vndelay'd) she said in brief,
To small effect thine oratorie tends,
How can I keep the^ and so many friends?
If of my household I should make thee one,
Farewell my servant Adulation:
I know she will not stay when thou art there:
But seek some Great man's service other-where.
Darkness and light, summer and winters weather
May be at once, ere you two live together,
Thu^ with a nod she left me clothed in woe.
Thence to the City once I thought to go,
But somewhat in my mind this thought had thrown,
It was a place wherein I was not known.
And therefore went unto these homely towns,
Sweetly enuiron'd with the Dazied Downs.
Upon a stream washing a village end
A Mill is placed, that never difference kend
Twixt days for work, and holy-tides for rest,
But always wrought and ground the neighbors grest.
Truth entreats succor from a Miller, a Tailor and a Weauer.
Before the door I saw the Miller walking,
And other two (his neighbors) with him talking:
One of them was a Weauer, and the other
The Village Tailor, and his trusty brother;
To them I came, and thus my suit began:
Content, the riches of a Countryman,
Attend your Actions, be more happy still,
Then I am hapless! and as yonder Mill,
Though in his turning it obey the stream,
Yet by the headstrong torrent from his beam
Is vnremou'd, and till the wheel be tore,
It daily toils; then rests, and works no more:
So in life's motion may you never be
(Though swayd with griefs) o'er-borne with misery
With that the Miller laughing, blushed his clothes
Then swore by Cock and other dunghill oaths,
I greatly was to blame, that durst so wade
Into the knowledge of the Wheel-wrights ^ade.
I, neighbor, quoth the Tailor (then he ben^
His pace to me, spruce like a Jack of Lent)
Your judgment is not seame-rent when you spend it,
Nor is it botching, for I can not mend it.
And Maiden, let me tell you in displeasure,
You must not press the cloth you cannot measure:
But let your steps be stitcht to wisdoms chalking,
And cast presumptuous shreds out of your walking.
The Weauer said, Fie wench, your self you wrong,
Thus to let slip the shuttle of your rong:
For mark me well, yea, mark me well, I say,
I see you work your speeches Web astray.
Sad to the Soul, over laid with idle words,
O heaven, quoth I, where is the place affords
A friend to help, or any heart that ruth
The most dejected hopes of wronged Truth!
Truth! quoth the Miller, plainly for our parts,
I and the Weauer hate thee with our hearts:
The strifes you raise I will not now discuss,
Between our honest Customers and us:
But get you gone, for sure you may despair
Of comfort here, seek it some other-where.
Maid (quoth the Tailor) we no succor owe you,
For as I guess here is none of us does know you:
Nor my remembrance any thought can seize
That I have ever seen you in my days.
Seen you? nay, therein confident I am;
Nay, till this time I never heard your name,
Excepting once, and by this token chief,
My neighbor at that instant called me thie^e,
By this you see you are unknown among us,
We cannot help you, though your stay may wrong us.
Thus went I on, and further went in woe:
For as shrill sounding Fame, that is never slow,
Grows in her going, and increases more,
Where she is now, then where she was before:
So Grief (that never healthy, ever sick,
That froward Scholar to Arethmeticke,
Who does Division and Substraction fly,
And chiefly learnes to add and multiply)
In longest iourneys has the strongest strength,
And is at hand, suppressed, vnquaild at length.
Description of a solitary Val^.
Between two hills, the highest Phoebus sees
Gallantly crowned with large Skie-kissing trees,
Under whose shade the humble valleys lay;
And Wilde-Bores from their dens their gambols play:
There lay a graueld walk ore-growne with green,
Where neither tract of man nor beast was seen.
And as the Plowman when the land he tils,
Throws up the fruitful earth in ridged hills,
Between whose Chouron form he leaves a balke;
So twixt those hills had Nature framed this walk,
Not ouer-darke, nor light, in angles bending,
And like the gliding of a Snake descending:
All hushed and silent as the mid of night:
No chattring Pie, nor Crow appeared in sight;
But further in I heard tho Turtle-Doue,
Singing sad Dirges on her lifelesse Love.
Birds that compassion from the rocks could bring,
Had only license in that place to sing:
Whose doleful noates the melancholy Cat
Close in a hollow tree sat wondering at.
And Trees that on the hill-side comely grew,
When any little blast of Aeol blew,
Did nod their curled heads, as they would be
The Judges to approve their melody.
Just half the way this solitary Grove,
A Crystal Spring from either hill-side strove,
Which of them first should woo the meeker ground,
And make the Pibbles dance unto their sound.
But as when children having leave to play,
And near their Masters eye sport out the day,
(Beyond condition) in their childish toys
Often vex their Tutor with too great a noise,
And make him send some servant out of door,
To cease their clamor, lest they play no more:
So when the pretty Rill a place espies,
Where with the Pibbles she would wantonize;
And that her upper stream so much does wrong her
To d^iue her thence, and let her play no longer;
If she with too loud mutt'ring ran away,
As being much incensed to leave her play;
A western mild, and pretty whispering gale,
Came dallying with the leaves along the dale,
And seemed as with the water it did chide,
Because it ran so long vnpacifide:
Yea, and me thought it bade her leave that coil,
Or he would choke her up with leaves and soil:
Whereat the riuelet in my mind did weep,
And hurled her head into a silent deep.
Now he that guides the Chariot of the Sun,
Upon the Eclipticke Circle had so run,
That his brasse-hoos'd fire-breathing horses wan
The stately height of the Meridian:
And the day-lab'ring man (who all the morn
Had from the quarry with his Pick-axe torn
A large well squared stone, which he would cut
To serve his style, or for some water-shut)
Seeing the (...) preparing to decline,
Took out his Bag, and sat him down to dine*
When by (...), yet not steep descent,
I gained a place, never Poet did invent
The like for sorrow: not in all this Round
A fitter seat ^or passion can be found.
As when a dainty Fount, and Crystal Spring,
Got newly from the earths imprisoning,
And ready pressed some channel clear to win,
Is round his rise by Rocks immured in,
And from the thirsty earth would be withheld,
Till to the Cesterne top the waves have swelled*
But that a careful Hind the Well has found,
As he walke^ sadly through his parched ground;
Whose patience suffering not his land to stay
Until the water over the Cesterne play,
He gets a Picke-axe and with blows so stout,
Digs on the Rock, that all the groves about
Resound his stroke, and still the rock does charge,
Till he has made a hole both long and large,
Whereby the waters from their prison run,
To close earths gaping wounds made by the Sun:
So through these high raised hills, embracing round
This shady, sad, and solitary ground,
Some power (respecting one whose heavy moan
Required a place to sit and weep alone)
Had cut a path, whereby the grieved wight
Might freely take the comfort of this Scyte.
About the edges of whose roundly form,
In order grew such Trees as do adorn
The sable hearse, and sad forsaken mate;
And Trees whose tears their loss commiserate,
Such are the Cypress, and the weeping Myrrh,
The dropping Amber, and the refined Fyrrhe,
The bleeding Vine, the watery Sicamour,
And Willough for the forlorn Paramour,
In comely distance: underneath whose shade
Most neat in rudeness Nature arbors made*
Some had a light; some so obscure a seat,
Would entertain a sufferance never so great:
Where grieved wights sat (as I after found,
Whose heavy hearts the height of sorrow crowned)
Wailing in saddest tunes the doomes of Fate
On men by virtue cleeped fortunate.
The first note that I heard I soon was won,
To think the sighs of fair Endymion;
The subject of whose mournful heavy lay
Was his declining with fair Cynthia.
Next him a great man sat, in woe no less;
Tears were but barren shadows to express
The substance of his grief, and therefore stood
Distilling from his heart red streams of blood:
He was a Swain whom all the Graces kissed,
A brave, heroicke, worthy Martialist:
Yet on the Downs he oftentimes was seen
To draw the merry Maidens of the Green
With his sweet voice: Once, as he sat alone,
He sung the outrage of the lazy Drone,
Upon the laboring Be^, in strains so rare,
That all the flitting Pinnionists of air
Attentive sat^, and in their kinds did long
To learn some Noat from his well-timed Song.
Exiled Naso (from whose golden pen
The Muses did distill delights for men)
Thus sang of Cep^^us (whose name was worn
Within the bosom of the blushing Morn:)
He had a dar^ was never set on wing,
But death flew with it: he could never fling,
But life fled from the place where stuck the head.
A Hunters frolic life in Woods he lead
In separation from his yoaked Mate,
Whose beauty, once, he valued at a rate
Beyond Aurora's cheek, when she (in pride)
Promised their offspring should be Deifide:
Procris she hight; who (seeking to restore
Her self that happiness she had before)
Unto the green wood wends, omits no pain
Might bring her to her Lords embrace again:
But Fate thus crossed her, coming where he lay
Wearied with hunting all a Summers day,
He somewhat heard within the thicket rush,
And deeming it some Beast, hid in a bush,
Raised himself, then set on wing a dart,
Which took a sad rest in the restless heart
Of his chaste wife; who with a bleeding breast
Left love and life, and slept in endless rest.
With Procris heavy Fate this Shepherds wrong
Might be compared, and ask as sad a song.
In the Autumn of his youth, and manhoods Spring,
Desert (grown now a most dejected thing)
Won him the favor of a Royal Maid,
Who with Diana's Nymphs in Forests straid,
And lived a Huntresse life exempt from fear.
She once encountered with a ^urly Bear,
Near to a Crystal Fountains flowery brinke,
Heat brought them thither both, and both would drink,
When from her golden Qui^er she ^ooke forth
A Dart, above the rest esteemed for worth,
And sent it to his side: the gaping wound
Gave purple streams to ^oole the parched ground.
Whereat he gnasht his teeth, stormed his hurt lym,
Yielded the earth what it denied him:
Yet sunk not there, but (wrapped in horror) hy'd
Unto his hellish cave, despaired and died.
After the Bears just death, the quickening Sun
Had twice six times about the Zodiac run,
And (as respectlesse) never cast an eye,
Upon the night-inuail'd Cymmerij,
Where this brave Swain (approved valorous)
In opposition, of a tyrannous
And bloody Savage being long time gone
Quelling his rage with faithless Gerion
Returned from the stratagems of wars,
(Enriched with his quail'd foes bootlesse scarres)
To see the clear eyes of his dearest Love,
And that her skill in herbs might help remove
The freshing of a wound which he had got
In he^ defense, by Enuies poisoned shot,
And coming through a Grove wherein his fair
Lay with her breasts displayed to take the air,
His rushing through the boughs made her arise,
And dreading some wild beasts rude enterprise,
Directs toward the noise a sharpened dart,
That reached the life of his undaunted heart,
Which when she knew, twice twenty Moons nie spent
In tears for him, and died in languishment.
Within an arbor shadowed with a Vine,
Mixed with Rosemary and Eglantine,
A Shepherdess was set, as fair as young,
Whose praise full many a Shepherd whilome sung,
Who on an Altar fair had to her Name,
In consecration many an Anagram:
And when with sugared strains they strove to raise
Worth, to a garland of immortal Bays;
She as the learned Maid was chose by them,
(Her flaxen hair crowned with an Anadem)
To judge who best deserved, for she could fit
The height of praise unto the height of wit.
But well-a-day those happy times were gone,
(Millions admit a small substraction.)
And as the Year has first his iocund Spring,
Wherein the Leaves, to Birds sweet carrolling,
Dance with the wind: then sees, the Summers day
Perfect the Embrion Blossom of each spray:
Next comes Autumn, when the threshed sheafe
Loses his grain, and every tree his leaf:
Lastly, cold Winters rage, with many a storm,
Threats the proud Pines which Ida's top adorn,
And makes the sap leave succourlesse the shoot,
Shrinking to comfort his decaying root.
Or as a quaint Musician being won,
To run a point of swee^ Division,
Gets by degrees unto the highest Key;
Then with like order falls in his play
Into a deeper Tone; and lastly, throws
His Period in a Diapa^on Close:
So every humane thing terrestrial,
His v^most height attained, bends to his fall.
And as a comely youth, in fairest age,
Enamored on a Maid (whose parentage
Had Fate adorned, as Nature deck ^her eye,
Might at a beck command a Monarchy)
But poor and fair could never yet bew^tch
A mis^rs mind, preferring ^oule and rich*
And therefore (as a Kings heart left behind,
When as his corpse are borne to be enshrined)
(His Parents will, a Law) like that dead corse,
Leaving his heart, is brought unto his Horse,
Carried unto a place that can impart
No secret Embassy unto his heart,
Climbes some proud hill, whose stately eminence
Vassals the fruitful vales circumference:
From whence, no sooner can his lights descry
The place enriched by his Mistress eye:
But some thick cloud his happy prospect blends,
And he in sorrow raised, in tears descends:
So this sad Nymph (whom all commiserate)
Once paced the hill of Greatness and of State,
And got the top; but when she began address
Her sight, from thence to see true happiness,
Fate interposed an envious cloud of fears,
And she withdrew into this vale of tears,
Where Sorrow so enthralled best Virtues Jewel,
Stones checked griefs hardness, called her too-^oo cruel,
A stream of tears upon her fair cheeks flows,
As morning dew upon the Damaske-Rose,
Or Crystall-glasse vailing Vermilion;
Or drops of Milk on the Carnation:
She sang and wept (o y^^ Sea-binding Cleeues,
Yield Tributary drops, for Virtue grieues^)
And to the Period of her sad sweet Key
Intwinn'd her case with chaste Penelope*
But see the dri^ling South my mournful strain
Answers, in weeping drops of quickening grain,
And since this day we can no further go,
Restless I rest within this Vale of Woe,
Until the modest morn o^ earths vast Zone,
The ever gladsome day shall re-inthrone.
THE FIFTH SONG.
THE ARGUMENT.
In N^ats that rocks to pity move,
Ioya sings her buried Love:
And from her home of plenty give*
Comfort to Truth, whom (...),
Repentance house next calls me on,
With Riots true conversion:
Leaving Amyntas Love to Truth,
To be the Theme the Muse ens^'th.
HErefull of April, veiled with sorrows wing,
For lovely Lays, I dreary Dirges sing.
Who so has seen young Lads (to sport themselves)
Run in a low ebb to the sandy shelues:
Where seriously they work in digging wels,
Or building childish sorts of Cockle-shels:
Or liquid water each to other bandy;
Or with the Pibbles play at handy-dandy,
Till unawares the Tide has closed them round,
And they must wade it through or else be drowned,
May (if unto my Pipe he listen well)
My Muse distress with theirs (...) parallel.
For where I whilome sung the loves of Swains,
And wooed the Crystal Currants of the Plains,
Teaching the Birds to love, whilst every Tree
Gave his attention to my Melody:
Fate now (as envying my too happy Theme)
Has round begirt my Song with Sorrows stream,
Which till my Muse wade through and get on (...),
My grief swollen Soul can sing of Love no more.
But turn we now (yet not without remo^se)
To heavenly Aletheius sad discourse,
That did from Fida's eyes (...) exhale,
When thus she showed the Solitary V^^e.
^ust in the midst this ioy-forsaken ground
A hillocke stood with Springs embraced round:
And with a Crystal Ring did seem to marry
Themselves, to this small I Will sad-solitarie:)
Upon whose breast (which trembled as it ran)
Rode the fair downie-siluer-coated Swan:
And on the banks each Cypress bowed his head,
To hear the Swan sing her own A Funeral song before the ^or^^ be (...).
Epiced.
As when the gallant youth which live upon
The Western Downs of lovely Albion;
Meeting, some festival to solemnize,
Choose out two, skilled in wrestling exercise,
Who strongly, at the wrist or collar cling,
Wh^lst arm in arm the people make a Ring.
So did the water round this I Will inlinke,
And so the Trees grew on the waters brinke:
Waters their streams about the Island scatter;
And Trees performed as much unto the water:
Under whose shade the Nightingale would bring
Her chirping young, and teach them how to sing.
The woods most sad, Musicians thither hie,
As it had been the Siluians Castalie,
And warbled forth such Elegyacke strains,
That struck the winds dumb; and the motly plains
We^e filled with envy, that such shady places
Held all the worlds delights in their embraces*
O how (me thinks) the impes of M^eme bring
Dewes of Invention from their sacred Spring*
He^e could I spend that spring of Poesy,
Which not twice ten Suns have bestowed on me;
And tell the world, the Muses love appears
In nonag'd youth, as in the length of years.
But ere my Muse erected have the frame;
Wherein t'enshrine an unknown Shepherds name,
She many a Grove, and other woods must tread,
More Hills, more Dales, more Founts must be displaid,
More Meadows, Rocks, and from them all elect
Ma^ter befitting such an Architect.
As Children on a play-day leave the Schools,
And gladly run unto the swimming Pooles,
Or in the thickets, all with nettles stung,
Rush to dispoile some sweet Thrush of her young;
Or with their hats (for fish) lade in a Brook
Withouten pain: but when the Morn does look
Out of the Eastern gates, a Snayle would faster
Glide to the Schools, then they unto their Master:
So when before I sung the Songs of Birds,
(Whilst every moment sweetened lines affords)
I pip'd deuoid of pain, but now I come
Unto my task, my Muse is stricken dumb.
My blubbring pen her sable tears lets fall,
In Characters right Hyrogliphicall,
And mixing with my tears are ready turning,
My late white paper to a weed of mourning;
Or Ink and Paper strive how to impart,
My words, the weeds they wore, within my heart:
Or else the blots unwilling are my rimes
And their sad cause should live till aftertimes;
Fearing if men their subject should descry,
They forthwith would dissolve in tears and die.
Upon the Islands craggy rising hill,
A Quadrant ran, wherein by Artlesse skill,
At every corner Nature did erect
A Column rude, yet void of all defect:
Whereon a Marble lay. The thick-growne Bryer,
And prickled Hawthorne (wouen all entyre)
Together clung, and barred the gladsome light
From any entrance, fitting only night.
No way to it but one, steep and obscure,
The stairs of rugged-stone, seldom in ure,
All ouer-growne with Moss, as Nature sat
To entertain Grief with a cloth of State.
Hardly unto the top I had ascended,
But that the Trees (siding the steps) befriended
My weary limbs, who bowing down their arms,
Ga^e hold unto my hands to escape from harms:
Which evermore are ready, still present
Our feet, in climbing places eminent.
Before the door (to hinder Phoebus view)
A shady Box-tree grasped with an Eugh,
As in the place behalf they menaced war
Against the radiance of each sparkling Star.
And on their barks (which Time had nigh deprau'd)
These lines (it seemed) had been of old engrau'd:
This place was framed of yore, to be possessed
By one which sometime Has Been Happiest.
Lovely Id^a the most beauteous
Of all the darlings of Occeanus,
He^peria's envy and the Western pride,
Whose party-colored garment Nature died
In more eye-pleasing hewes with richer grain,
Then Iris bow attending Aprils rain.
Whose Lilly white inshaded with the Rose
Had that man seen, who sung the Eneidos,
Dido had in oblivion slept, and she
Had given his Muse her best eternity.
Had brave Atrides (who did erst employ
His force to mix his dead with those of Troy)
Been proffered for a truce her fained piece
Helen had staid, and that had gone to Greece:
The Phrygian soil had not been drunk with blood,
Achilles longer breathed, and Troy yet stood:
The Prince of Poets had not sung his story,
My friend had lost his everliving glory.
But as a snowy Swan, who many a day
On Thamar's swelling breasts has had his play,
For further pleasure does assay to swim
My native Tauy, or the sandy Plim:
And on the panting billows bravely rides,
Whilst Country-lasses walking on the sides,
Admire her beauty, and with clapping hands,
Would force her leave the stream, and tread the sands,
When she regardlesse swims to the other edge,
Until an envious Bryer, or tangling Sedge
Dispoyles her Plumes; or else a sharpened Beam
Pierces her breast, and on the bloody stream
She pants for life: So whilome rode this Maid
On streams of worldly bliss, more rich arrayd,
With Earths delight, then thought could put in ure,
To glut the senses of an Epicure.
Whilst neighbring Kings upon their frontires stood,
And offered for her dowre huge Seas of blood:
And perjured Gerion to win her, rent
The Indian Rocks for gold, and bootlesse spent
Almost his patrimony for her sake,
Yet nothing like respected as the Drake
That skowr'd her Channels, and destroyed the weed,
Which spoyld her sisters nets, and fishes breed.
At last her truest love she threw upon
A royal Youth, whose like, whose Paragon
Heaven never lent the Earth: so great a spirit
The World could not contain, nor kingdoms merit:
And therefore Jove did with the Saints inthrone him,
And left his Lady naught but tears to moan him.
Within this place (as woeful as my Verse)
She with her Crystal founts bedewed his Hearse,
Inuailed with a sable weed she sat,
Singing this song which stones dissolved at.
WHat time the world clad in a mourning robe,
A Stage made for a woeful Tragedy:
When showers of tears from the Celestial Globe
Bewaild the fate of Sea-lou'd Britanie;
When sighs as frequent were as various sights,
When Hope lay bedridden, and all pleasures dying,
When Envy wept,
And Comfort slept:
When Cruelty it self sat almost crying,
Naught being heard but what the mind affrights,
When Autumn had disrobed the Summers pride,
Then Englands honor, Europes wonder died.
O saddest strain that ever the Muses sung!
A text of Woe for Grief to comment o^;
Tears, sighs, and sobs, give passage to my tongue,
Or I shall spend you till the last is gone.
Which done, my heart in flames of burning love
(Wanting his moisture) shall to cinders turn:
But first, by me
Bequeathed ^e
To strew the place wherein his sacred vine
Shall be enclosed, this might in many move
The like effect: (who would not do it?) when
No grave be^its him but the hearts of men.
That man whose mass of sorrows has been such,
That by their weight laid on each several part,
His fountains are so dry, he but as much
As one poor drop has left to ease his heart;
Why should he keep it? since the time does call,
That he never better can bestow it in:
If so he fears
That others tears
In greater number, greatest prizes win;
Know n^ne gives more then he which gives all.
Then he which has but one poor tear in store,
O let him spend that drop, and weep no more
Why flows not Helicon beyond her strands?
Is Henry dead, and do the Muses sleep?
Alas! I see each one amazed stands,
"Shallow foords mutter, silent are the deep:
Feign would they tell their griefs, but know not where:
All are so full, naught can augment their store:
Then how should they
Their griefs display
To men, so clo^d, they ^aine would hear no more?
Though blaming those whose plaints they cannot hear:
And with this wish their passions I allow,
May that Muse never speak that is silent now!
Is Henry dead? alas! and do I live
To sing a Scrich-owles Note that he is dead?
If any one a fitter Theme can give,
Come give it now, or never to be read.
Bu^ let him see it do of horror taste,
Anguish, destruction: could it rend in sunder
With fearful groans
The senseless stones,
Yet should we hardly be enforced to wonder,
Ou^ former griefs would so exceed their last:
Time cannot make our sorrows ought compleater;
Nor add one grief to make our mourning greater.
England was never ingirt with waves till now;
Till now it held part with the Continent:
Aye me! some one in pity show me, how
I might in doleful numbers so lament;
That any one which loved him, hated me,
Might dearly love me, for lamenting him.
Alas! my plaint
In such constraint
Breaks forth in rage* that though my passions swim,
Ye^ are they drowned ere they landed be:
Imperfect lines! O happy! were I hurld
And cut from life as England from the world.
O happier had we been! if we ^ad been
Never made happy by enjoying thee!
Where has the glorious eye of heaven seen
A spectacle of greater misery?
Time turn thy course; and bring again the Spring;
Break Natures laws; search the records of old,
If ought befell
Might parallel
Sad Britain's case: weep Rocks, and Heaven behold,
What Seas of sorrow she is plunged in.
Where storms of woe so mainly have beset her;
She has no place for worse, nor hope for better.
Britain was whilome known (by more then fame)
To be one of the Islands fortunate;
What frantic man would give her now that name,
Lying so rufull and disconsolate?
Has not her watery Zone in murmuring,
Filled every shore with Echoes of her cry*
Yes, Thetis raues,
And bids her waves
Bring all the Nymphs within her Emperie
To be assistant in her sorrowing:
See where they sadly sit on Isis shore,
And rend their hairs as they would joy no more.
Isis the glory of the Western world,
When our Hero (honored Essex) died,
Stricken with wonder, back again she hurld,
And sill'd her banckes with an unwonted Tide:
As if she stood in doubt, if it were so,
And for the certainty had turned her way.
Why do not now
Her waves reflow?
Poor Nymph, her sorrows will not let her stay;
Or fl^es to tell the world her Countries woe:
Or cares not to come back, perhaps, as showing
Our tears should make the flood, not her reflowing.
Sometimes a Tyrant held the reins of Rome,
Wishing to all the City but one head,
That all at once might undergo his doom,
And by one blow from life be severed.
Fate wished the like on England, and 'twas given:
(O miserable men, enthralled to Fate!)
Whose heavy hand
That never s^and
The misery of Kingdoms ruinate,
Mi^ding to leave her of all joys bereauen,
With one sad blow (Alas! can worser fall!)
Has given this little I Will her Funeral.
O come ye blessed Impes of Memory,
Ere^^ a new Parnassus on his grave!
There tune your voices to an Elegy,
The saddest Note that ere Apollo gave.
Let every Accent make the s^ander by
Keep time unto your Song with dropping tears.
Till drops that fell
Have made a well
To swallow him which still unmoved hears?
And though my self prove senseless of your cry,
Yet gladly should my light of life grow di^,
To be i^tomb'd in tears are wept for him.
When last he sickned, then we first began
To tread the Labyrinth of Woe about:
And by degrees we further inward ran,
Having his thread of life to guide us out.
But Destiny no sooner saw us enter
Sad Sorrows Maze, immured up in night,
(Where nothing dwells
But cries and yels
Thrown from the hearts of men deprived of light,)
When we were almost come into the Center,
Fate (cruelly) to bar our joys returning,
Cut off our Thread, and left us all in mourning.
If you have seen at foot of some brave hill,
Two Springs arise, and delicately trill,
In gentle chidings through an humble dale,
(Where tufty Daizies nod at every gale)
And on the banks a Swain (with Laurel crowned)
Marying his sweet Notes with their silver sound:
When as the spongy clouds swollen big with water,
Throw their conception on the worlds Theater:
Down from the hills the rained waters roar,
Whilst every leaf drops to augment their store:
Grumbling the stones fall over each others back,
Rending the green turfes with their A fall of waters from a very high place.
Cataract,
And through the Meadows run with such a noise,
That taking from the Swain the fountains voice,
Enforce him leave their margent, and alone
Couple his base Pipe with their baser Tone.
Aletheia to ^^da.
Know (Shepherdess) that so I lent an ear
To those sad wights whose plaints I told whileare:
But when this goodly Lady began address
Her heavenly voice to sweeten heaviness,
It drowned the rest, as torrents little Springs;
And stricken mute at her great sorrowings,
Lay still and wondered at her pitious moan,
Wept at her griefs, and did forget their own,
Whilst I attentive ^a^e, and did impart,
Tears when they wanted drops, and from a heart,
As hi^ in sorrow as ever creature wore,
Lent thrilling groans to such as had no more.
Had wise Ulysses (who regardlesse flung
Along the Ocean when the Sirens sung)
Passed by and seen her on the sea torn cleeues,
Wail her lost Love (while Neptunes watery Thieves
Durst not approach for Rocks:) to see her face
He would have hazarded his Grecian race,
Thrust head long to the shore, and to her eyes
Offered his Vessel as a Sacrifice.
Or had ^lie Sirens on a neighbor shore
Heard in what raping Notes she did deplore
Her buried Glory, they had left their shelues,
And to come near her would have drowned them
Now silence locked the organs of that voice; Aletheia comes to Idya.

Whereat each merry Syluan wont rejoice,
When with a bended knee to her I came,
And did impart my grief and hate^ name:
But first a pardon begged, i^ that my cause
So much constrained me as to break the Laws
Of her wished sequestration, or asked Bread
(To save a life) from her, whose life was dead:
But lawless famine, selfe-consuming hunger,
Alas! compelled me: had I stayed longer,
My weakened limbs had been my wants forced meed,
And I had fed, on that I could not feed.
When she (compassionate) to my sad moan
Did lend a sigh, and stole it from her own;
And (woeful Lady wrackt on hapless shelfe)
Yielded me comfort, yet had none her self:
Told how she knew me well since I had been,
As chiefest consort of the Fairy Queen;
O happy Queen! for ever* ever praise
Dwell on thy Tomb; the period of all days
Only seal up thy fame; and as thy Birth
Enriched thy Temples on the fading earth,
So have thy Virtues crowned thy blessed soul,
Where the first Mouer with his words control;
As with a girdle the huge Ocean binds;
Gathers into his fist the nimble Winds;
Stops the bright Courser in his hot careere;
Commands the Moon twelve courses in a year:
Live thou with him in endless bliss, while we
Admire all virtues in admiring thee.
Thou, thou, the fa^tresse of the learned Well;
Thou nursing Mother of Gods Israel;
Thou, for whose loving Truth, the heavens raines
Sweet Mel and Manna on our flowery plains:
Thou, by whose hand the sacred Trine did bring
Us out of bonds, from bloody Bonnering.
Ye suckling Babes, for ever bless that Name
Released your burning in your Mothers flame!
Thrice blessed Maiden, by whose hand was given
Free liberty to taste the food of Heaven.
Neue^ forget her ( Albions lovely Daughters)
Which led you to the Springs of living Waters*
And if my Muse her glory fail to sing,
May to my mouth my tongue for ever cling!
Herewith (at hand) taking her Horn of Plenti^ Idya cherishes Aletheia.

Filled with the choice of every Orchards dainty,
As Pears, Plums, Apples, the sweet Raspis-berry,
The Quince, the Apricocke, the blushing Cherry;
The Mulberry (his black from Thisbie taking)
The clustered Filberd, Grapes often merry-making.
(This fruitful Horn the immortal Ladies filled
With all the pleasures that rough Forests yield,
And gave Idya, with a further blessing,
That thence (as from a Garden) without dressing,
She t^ese should ever have; and never want
Store, from an Orchard without tree or plant.)
With a right willing hand she gave me, hence,
The Stomachs comforter, the pleasing Quince;
And ^or the chiefest cherisher she lent
The Royal Thistles milkie nourishment.
Here staid I long: but when to see Aurora
Kiss the persumed cheeks of dainty Flora.
Without the vale I trod one lovely Morn,
With true intention of a quick return,
An unexpected chance strove to defer
My going back, and all the love of her.
But Maiden see the day is waxen old,
And gins to shut in with the Marigold:
The Neat-he^ds Kine do bellow in the yard;
And Dairy Maidens for the milk prepared,
Are drawing at the Vdder, long ere now
The Plowman has vnyoak't his Teame from plow:
My transformation to a fearful Hind
Shall to unfold a fitter season find;
Mean while yond Palace, whose brave Turrets tops,
Over the stately Wood suruay the cops,
Promis'th (if sought) a wished place of rest,
Till Sol our Hemisphere have repossest.
Now must my Muse afford a strain to Riot,
Who almost killed with his luxurious diet,
Lay eating grass (as dogs) within a wood,
So to disgorge the vndisgested food:
By whom fair Aletheia past along
With Fida Queen of every shepherds song,
By them unseen (for he securely lay
Under the thick of many a leauied spray)
And through the leueld Meadows gently threw
Their neatest feet, washed with refreshing dew,
Where he durst not approach, but on the edge
Of th'hilly wood, in covert of a hedge,
Went onward with them, trod with them in paces,
And far off much admired their forms and graces.
Into the Plains at last he headlong venter'd:
But they the hill had got and palace entered.
When, like a valiant well resolved man
Seeking new paths in the pathlesse Ocean,
Unto the shores of monster breeding Nyle*
Or through the North to the unpeopled Thyle*
Where from the Equinoctial of the Spring,
To that of Autumn, Titans golden Ring
Is never off; and till the Spring again
In gloomy darkness all the shoares remain.
Or if he furrow up the brynie Sea,
To ca^t his Ancors in the frozen bay
Of woody Norway; (who has ever fed
Her people more with scaly fish then bread)
Though rattling mounts of Ice thrust at his Helm,
And by their fall still threaten to o'rewhelme
His little Vessel: and though Winter throw
(What age should on their heads) white caps of Snow*
Strives to congeale his blood; he cares not for it,
But armed in mind, gets his intended port:
So Riot, though full many doubts arise,
Whose unknown ends might graspe his enterprise,
Climbes toward the Palace, and with gate demure,
With hanging head, a voice as faining pure,
With ^orne and ragged coat, his hairy legs
Bloody, as scratched with Briars, he entrance begs.
Remembrance sat as Portresse of this gate:
A Lady always musing as she sat,
Except when sometime suddenly she rose,
And with a back-bent eye, at length, she throws
Her hands to heaven: and in a wondering guize,
Star'd on each object with her fixed eyes:
As some wayfaring man passing a wood,
(Whose wauing top has long a Sea-marke stood)
Goes iogging on, and in his mind naught has,
But how the Primrose finely strew the path,
Or sweetest Violets lay down their heads
At some trees root on mossie feather-beds,
Until his heel receives an Adders sting,
Whereat he starts, and back his head does fling.
She never marked the suit he did prefer,
But (careless) let him pass along by her.
So on he went into a spacious court,
All trodden bare with multitudes resort:
At the end whereof a second gate appears,
The Fabric showed full many thousand years:
Whose Posterne-key that time a Lady kept,
Her eyes all swollen as if she seldom slept;
And would by fits her golden tresses tear,
And strive to stop her breath with her own hair*
Her lilly hand (not to be liked by Art)
A pair of Pincers held; where with her heart
Was hardly grasped, while the piled stones
Re-eccoed her lamentable groans.
Here at this gate the custom long had bin
When any sought to be admitted in;
Remorce thus used them, ere they had the key,
And all these torments felt, passed on their way.
When Riot came, the Ladies pains nigh done,
She past the gate; and then Remorce begun
To fetter Riot in strong iron chains;
And doubting much his patience in the pains.
As when a Smith and's Man (lame Vulcans fellows)
Called from the Anuile or the puffing Bellows,
To clap a well-wrought shoe (for more then pay)
Upon a stubborn Nagge of Galloway;
Or vnback'd Ienne^, or a Flaunders Mare,
The ^t the Forge stand snuffing of the air;
The swarty Smith spi^s in his Buckhorne fist,
And bids his Man bring out the fiue-fold ^wist,
His shackles, shacklock^, hampers, gy^es and chains,
His linked boles, and (...) pains
These make him fast and least all these should faulter,
Unto a post with some fix doubled halter
He binds his head (...) all are of the least
To curb the fury of the head strong (...):
When if a Carriers (...) be brought unto him,
His Man's ^an hold his ^oor whilst (...) him:
Remorce was so enforced to bind him stronger,
Because his faults requi^^d infliction longer
Then any (...)-pressed wigh^ which many a day
Since (...) himself had past that way.
When all the cruel torment^ he had burn,
Gal^ed with chains, and on the (...) high (...)*
Pinching with glowing pincers his own heart*
All ^ame and restless, full of wound^ and smart,
He (...) Posterne (...), ^o inward hi^s,
And from the gate a twofold path describe,
One leading up a hill, Repentance way*
And (as more worthy) on the right hand lay:
The other headlong, steep, and lik'ned well
Unto the path which tends down to hell^*
All steps that thither went showed no returning,
The port to pains, and to eternal mourning;
Where certain Death lived, in an Ebon chair,
The souls black homicide meager Despair
Had his abodes there against the craggie rocks
Some dashed their (...), with relentlesse (...),
Others on trees (o most accursed elites)
Are fastening knots so to vnd^^ themselves*
Here one in sin not daring to appear
At Mercies seat with one (...) or ^eare,
Within (...) was (...) an eye,
That unto God it might for (...) cry*
There from a Rock a (...) newly fell
All torn in pieces, to go^ whole to Hell
Here with a sleepie Potion one thinks fit
To graspt with death, but (...) know (...)*
There in ^ gool^ (...) their lives (...),
And die in water to revive in fire*
Here hangs the blood upon the guiltless stones:
There worms (...)
Here lies and (...)
Without (...) her li^^s of (...)
Scattring the ground, and as (...),
As they at virtue spur^ed in the world.
Fie hapless wretch, o that (...)
Measur'st Gods mercy by thine own deserving
Which cry'st (distrustful of the power of (...))
My sins are greater then can be forgiven:
Which still are ready (...)
At every stripe of worldly misery*
O learn (thou in whose (...) the Dragon li^k^s)
Gods Mercy ((...)) is o'erall hi^ works
Know he is pitiful, apt to forgive;
Would not a sinners death, but that he live.
O ever, ever rest upon that word
Which does assure thee, though his two edged Sword
Be drawn in Justice against thy sinful soul,
To separate the rotten from the whole;
Yet if a sacrifice of prayer be sent him,
He will not strike; or if he strike repent him.
Let none despair; for cursed Judas sin
Was not so much in yielding up the King
Of life to death, as when he thereupon
Wholly dispair'd of Gods remission.
(...) long doubting stood which way were best
To lead his steps: at last preferring rest
(As foolishly he thought) before the pain
Was to be past ere he could well attain
The high-built Palace, (...) adventure on
Tha^ path, which led to (...) confusion,
When suddenly a voice as sweet as (...),
With words divine began entice his (...)
Whereat as in a rapture, on the ground
(...) lay, and all his senses (...)
A time of rest* only that faculty
Which never can be seen, nor ever dye,
That in the essence of an endless Nature
Do^ sympathize with the All-good Creator,
That only waked which cannot be in^err'd
And from a heavenly Quire this di^ty heard.
Vain man, do not mistrust
Of heaven winning;
Nor (though the most unjust)
Despair for sinning
God will be seen his sentence changing,
If he behold thee wicked ways estranging.
Climb up where pleasures dwell
In flowery Allies:
And taste the living ^ell
That decks the Valleys.
Fair Metanoia is attending
To crown thee with those joys which know (...) ending.
Herewith on leaden wings Sl^^pe from him flew,
When on his arm he rose, and sadly threw
Shrill acclamation^ while an hollow cave,
Or hanging hill, or heaven (...) answer gave.
O sacred Essence lightning me this hour*
How may I lightly stil^ thy great Power? Ecc^. Power.
Power? but of whence? under the green-wood spray.
Or live in hea^'n? say, Ecc^. In Heavens (...)
In heavens aye ^ tell, may I it obtain
By alms; by fasting, prayer, by pain. Ecch. By pain.
Show me the pain, it shall be undergone:
I to mine end will still go on Ecch. Go on.
But whither? On! Show me the place, the time*
What if the Mountain I do climb? Ecch. Do; climb.
Is that the way to joys which still endure?
O bid my soul of it be sure! Ecch. Be sure.
Then thus assured, do I climb the hill,
Heaven be my guide in this thy will. Ecch. I will.
As when a maid taught from her mother wing,
To tune her voice unto a silver string,
When she should run, she rests; rests when should run,
And ends her lesson having now begun:
Now misseth she her stop, then in her song,
And doing of her best she still is wrong,
Beg^ns again, and yet again strikes false,
Then in a chafe forsakes her Virginals,
And yet within an hour she tries anew,
That with her daily pains (Arts chiefest due)
She gains that charming skill: and can no less
Ta^e the fierce walkers of the wilderness,
Then that O^agrin Harpist, for whose lay,
Tigers with hunger pinde and left their pray.
So Riot, when he began to climb the hill,
Here makes haste and there long stands still,
Now gets up a step, then falls again,
Yet not despairing all his nerves does strain,
To clamber up a new, then slide his feet,
And down he comes; but gives not over yet,
For (with the maid) he hopes, a time will be
When merit shall be linkt with industry.
Now as an Angler melancholy standing
Upon a green bank yielding room for landing,
A wrigling yellow worm thrust on his hook,
Now in the midst he throws, then in a nooke:
Here pulls his line, there throws it in again,
M^ndeth his Cork and Bait, but all in vain,
He long stands viewing of the curled stream;
At last a hungry Pike, or well-growne Breame
Snatch at the worm, and hasting fast away,
He knowing it, a Fish of stubborn sway,
Pulls up his rod, but soft: (as having skill)
Wherewith the hook fast holds the Fishes gill,
Then all his line he freely yields him,
Whilst furiously all up and down does swim
Th'insnared Fish, here on the top does s^ud,
There underneath the banks, then in the mud;
And with his frantic fits so scares the shole,
That each one takes his hyde, or starting hole*
By this the P^ke clean wearied underneath
A Willow lies, and pants (if Fishes breath)
Wherewith the Angler gently pulls him to him,
And least his haste might happen to undo him,
Lays down his rod, then takes his line in hand,
And by degrees getting the Fish to land,
Walks to another Poole: at length is winner
Of such a dish as serves him for his dinner:
So when the Climber half the way had got*
Musing he stood, and busily began plot,
How (since the mount did always steeper tend)
He might with steps secure his journey end.
At last (as wandering Boys to gather Nuts)
A hooked Pole he from a Hasell cuts;
Now throws it here, then there to take some hold,
But bootlesse and in vain, the rockie mold,
Admits no cranny, where his Hasell-hooke
Might promise him a step, till in a nooke
Somewhat above his reach he has espide
A little Oak, and having often tried
To catch a bough with standing on his toe,
Or leaping up, yet not prevailing so;
Ho^ (...) toward the little (...),
The (...)
His ^ole unto (...) his drawing
The early rising (...),
Leaving the green ^ough, ^^yes a bo^^ the Rock,
Whilst, (...) to him flock:
And now within his (...)
With one hand on ^ly (...) he hold (...),
And with the (...) grasping first the (...),
A pretty bough he ^n his (...)
Then to his gird^^ be making (...) the hoo^^,
His other hand another bough h^t b^ooke*
His first, ^ third, and that, another giu^^,
To bring him to the place where (...)
Then, as a nimble Sq^irrill from the wood,
Ranging the hed^es for his Filberd ^ood,
Sits peartly on a bough his brown Nuts cracking,
And from the shell the sweet white kernel ^aking,
Till (with their crooke^ and bags) (...) Boys,
(To share with him) come with so (...),
That he is forced to leave a Nut nigh broke,
And for his life leap to a neighbor (...),
Thence to a Beech, thence to a row of A^hes;
Whilst the row the Q^agmires, and red water plashes*
The Boys run dabling through thick and thin,
One tears his hose, another breaks his (...),
This, torn and ^atter'd, has with (...)
Go^ by the Briars, and that has lost his shoe:
This drops his band; that headlong (...) for haste;
Another ^ries behind for being last:
With sticks and stones (...) a sounding hollow,
The little fool, with no small sport, they follow,
Whilst he, from (...) to (...), from spray to spray,
Gets to the wood, and hides him in his Dray:
Such shi^^ m^de Ry^t, ere he could get up,
And so from bough to bough he won the top,
Though hind^^^ (...), for ever coming there,
Were often ^hr^t upon him by Despair.
Now at hi^ (...) the sta^ely mountain lay,
And with a gladsome eye began suruay
What perils he had ^rod on since the time
His weary fe^^ and arms ^ss^id to climb.
When with a humble voice (withouten fear,
Though he looked wild and over grown with hair)
A gentle Nymph in russet course array,
Comes and directs him onward in his way.
First, brings she him into a goodly Hall,
Fair, Description of the house of Repentance.
yet not beautified with Mineral:
But in a careless Art, and artlesse care,
Made, loose neglect, more lovely far then rare.
Upon the floor ^ypau'd with Marble slate)
(With Sackcloth clothed) many in ashes sat:
And round about the walls for many years,
Hung Crystal Vials of repentant tears:
And Books of vows, and many a heavenly deed,
Lay ready open for each one to read,
Some were immured up in little sheads.
There to contemplate Heaven, and bid their Beads.
Others with garments thin of Cammels-haire,
With head, and arms, and legs, and feet all bare.
Were singing Hymns to the Eternal Sag^,
For sa (...) from their Pilgrimage,
Some with a whip their pampered bodies beat;
Others in fasting live, and seldom (...)
But as those Trees which do in Indi^ grow
And called of elder Swaine^ full long ago
The Sun and Moons fair Trees (full goodly deight)
And (...) challenging their height:
Having no help (to over look brave Towers)
From cool refreshing d^w, or drisling showers;
When as the Earth (as oftentimes i^ (...))
Is interposed ^wixt Sa^^ and Nights pale Queen^,
Or wh^^ the Moon ^^clipseth Titans light,
The Trees (all comfortless) robbed of their sight
Weep liquid drops, which plentifully shoo^
Along the outward ba^ke down to the root:
And by their own shed tears they ever flourish,
So their own sorrows, their own joys do nourish:
And so within this placefull many a wight,
Did make his tears his food both day and night.
And had it ganted (from The Almighty great)
To swim the row them unto his Mercy-s^^s.
Fair Meta^ai^ in a chai^e of earth,
With countenance sad, yet sadness promised mirth,
Sat veiled in coursest weeds of Cammels hair,
Enriching poverty; yet never ^aire
Wa^ like to her, nor since the world begun
A louelier Lady kissed the glorious Sun.
For her the God of Thunder, mighty, great,
Whose Footstool is the Earth, and Heaven his Sea^,
Unto a man who from hi^ crying birth
Went on still shunning what he carried, (...)
When he could walk no further for his grave,
Nor could step over, but he there must have
A seat to rest, when he would feign g^^on,
But age in every nerve, in every bone
For ^ad his passage: for her salt has heaven
Filled up the grave, and made his path so even,
That fifteen courses had the bright Steeds run,
(And he was weary) (...) his course was done.
For scorning her, the Courts of Kings which throw
A proud ra^^'d pinnacle to rest the Crow;
And on a Plain out b^aue a neighbor Rock,
In stout resistance of a Tempests shock^,)
For her contempt heaven (rei^ing his disasters)
Have made these Towers but piles to burn their masters.
To her the lowly Nymph ( Humbless^ hight)
Brought (a^ her office) this deformed wight;
To whom the Lady courteous semblance shows,
And pitying his estate in sacred thewes,
And Letters (worthily y^ le^p'd divine)
Resolved t'instruct him: but her discipline
She knew of true effect, would surely miss,
Except (...) first his Metamorphosis
Should clean exile: and knowing that his birth
Was to inherit reason, though on ear^h
Some VVitch had thus transformed him, by her skill,
Expert in changing, even the very will,
In few days labors with continual prayer,
(A sacrifice transcends the bu^ome air)
His g^isly shape, his soul deformed feature,
His h^rrid looks, worse then a savage creature,
By Metanoi^'s hand from heaven, began
Receive their sentence of divorce from man.
And as a lovely Maiden, pure and chaste,
With naked Iu^ie neck, and gown vnlac'd,
Within her chamber, when the day is fled,
Makes poor her garments to enrich her bed:
First, (...) she off her lilly silken gown,
That, ^rike^ for sorrow a^ she lays it down,
And with her arms graceth a VVast coat fine*
Embracing her as it would never untwine.
Her (...) hair in snaring beholders,
She next permits to wave about her shoulders,
And ^^ough-she cast it back, the silken slips
Still forward steal, and hang upon her lips:
VVhereat she sweetly angry, with her laces
Binds up the wanton lo^ks in curious ^races,
Whilst (twisting with her joints) each hair long lingers,
As lo^h to be inchain'd, but with her fingers.
Then on her head a dressing like a Crown;
Her breasts all bare, her Kir^le slipping down,
And all things off (which rightly ever be
Called the foule-faire marks of our misery)
Except her last, which enuiously does seize her,
Least any eye partake with it in pleasure,
Prepares for sweetest rest, while Siluans greet her,
And (longingly) the down-bed swells to meet her:
So by degrees his shape all brutish vilde,
Fell from him (as loose-skin from some young child)
In lieu whereof a man-like shape appears,
And gallant youth scarce skilled in twenty years,
So fair, so fresh, so young, so admirable
In every part, that since I am not able
In words to show his picture, gentle Swains,
Recall the praises in my former strains;
And know if they have gra^ed any lim,
I only lent it those, but stole't from him.
Had that chaste Roman Dan^^ beheld his face,
Ere the proud King possessed her Husbands place,
Her thoughts had been adulterate, and this stain
Had won her greater fame, had she been slain.
The Lark that many mornes her self makes merry
With the shrill chanting of her teery-lerry,
(Before he was transformed) would leave the skies,
And houer over him to behold his eyes.
Upon an O^en-pipe well could he play,
For when he fed his flock upon the lay
Maidens to hear him from the Plains came tripping
And Birds from bough to bough full nimbly skipping;
His flock (then happy flock) would leave to feed,
And stand amazed to listen to his Reed:
Lions and Tigers, with each beast of game,
With hearing him were many times made tame:
Brave trees and flowers would toward him be bending
And none that heard him wished his Song an ending:
Maids, Lions, birds, flocks, trees, each flower, each spring,
Were wrapped with wonder, when he used to sing
So fair a person to describe to men
Requires a curious Pencill, not a Pen.
Hi^ Metanoia clad in seemly wise
(Not after our corrupted ages guise,
Where gaudy weeds lend splendour to the lim,
While that his clothes received their grace from him*)
Then ^o a garden set with rarest flowers,
With pleasant fountains stored, and shady bowres:
She leads him by the hand, and in the groves,
Where thousand pretty Birds sung to their Loves,
And thousand thousand blossoms (from their stalk^)
Mild Z^phy^us threw down to paint the walks:
Where yet the wild Boar never durst appear:
Here Fida (ever to kind Raymond dear)
Met them, and showed where Aletheia lay,
(The ^airest Maid that ever blessed the day*)
Sweetly she lay, and cooled her lilly-hand^
Within a Spring that throw up golden sands:
As if i^ would entice her to persevere
In living there, and grace the banks for ever.
To her Amyntas ( Riot now no more)
Came, and saluted ^ neue^ man before
More blessed* nor like this kiss has been another
But when two dangling Cherries kissed each other:
Nor ever beauties, like, met at such close^*
But in the kisses of two Damaske-Roses.
O, how the flowers (pressed with their treadings on the)
S^roue to ^ast up their heads to look upon them!
How iealously the buds that so had seen them,
Sent forth the sweetest smells to step between them,
As fe^ring the perfume lodged in their powers
Once known of them, they might neglect the flowers,
How often wished Amyntas with his heart,
His ruddy lips from ^^ers might never part,
And that the heavens this gift were the (...)
To ^eed on nothing but each others breathing
A truer love the Muses (...) sung,
Nor happyer names ere graced a golden tongue
O! they are better fitting his sweet stripe,
Who on the banks of (...)
(...) for that learned Swain whose lays
Diuinest Homer crowned with deathlesse Bays*
Or any one sent from the sacred Well
Inheriting the soul of Astrophill*
These, these in golden li^es might write this Story,
And make these loud^ their (...) eternal glory:
Whilst ^ a Swain la^ weak (...) years as ^kin,
Should in the valley hear them on the hill*
Yet (when my Sheep slave to their Cesto^ ^e be one,
And I have brought them back to (...)
To miss an idle hour, and not for (...),
With choicest relish shall (...)
Record their worths: and though in a (...)
I miss the glory of a charming air,
My Muse may one day make the Courtly Swains
Enamored on the Musick^ of the Plains,
And as upon ^ hill she bravely sings,
Teach humble ^ales to weep in Crystal Springs.
The end of the first Book.
BRITANNIA'S PASTORALS.

The second Book.

HORAT. Carmine Dij superi placantur, carmine Manes.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND, 1625.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE AND LEARNED WILLIAM EARL OF PEMBROKE, LORD CHAMBERLAIN TO
HIS MAJESTY, etc.
NOT that the gift (Great Lord) deserves your hand,
(Held ever worth the rarest works of men)
Offer I this; but since in all our Land
None can more rightly claim a Poet's Pen:
That Noble Blood and Virtue truly known,
Which circular in you united run,
Makes you each good, and every good your own,
If it can hold in what my Muse has done.
But weak and lowly are these tuned Lays,
Yet though but weak to win fair Memory,
You may improve them, and your gracing raise;
For things are prized as their possessours be.
If for such favor they have worthless striuen,
Since Love the cause was, be that Love forgiven!
Your Honors, W. BROWN.

To the most ingenious Author Mr. W. BROWN.
INgenious Swain! that highly do adorn
Clear Tauy! on whose brinck we both were borne!
Just Praise in me would never be thought to mo^e
From thy sole Worth, but from my partial Love.
Wherefore I will not do thee so much wrong,
As by such mixture to allay thy Song,
But while kind strangers rightly praise each Grace
Of thy chaste Muse; I (from the happy Place
That brought thee forth, and thinks it not unfit
To boast now that it erst bred such a Wit;)
Would only have it known I much rejoice;
To hear such Matters, sung by such a Voice.
JOHN GLANVILL.

To his Friend Mr. BROWN.
ALL that do read thy Works, and see thy face,
(Where scarce a hair grows up, thy chin to grace)
Do greatly wonder how so youthful years
Could frame a Work, where so much worth appears.
To hear how thou describ'st a Tree, a Dale,
A Grove, a Green, a solitary Vale,
The Evening Showers, and the Morning Gleames,
The golden Mountains, and the silver Streams,
How smooth thy Verse is, and how sweet thy Rimes,
How sage, and yet how pleasant are thy Lines;
What more or less can there be said by men,
But, Muses rule thy Hand, and guide thy Pen.
THO WENMAN, e Societate Inter. T^^pli.

To his worthily-affected Friend Mr. VV. BROWN.
AWake sad Muse, and thou my sadder spright,
Made so by Time, but more by Fortunes spite,
Awake, and hie us to the Green,
There shall be seen
The quaintest Lad of all the time
For neater Rhyme:
Whose free and unaffected strains
Take all the Swains
That are not rude and ignorant,
Or Envy want.
And Envy lest it is hate discovered ^e
A Cour^l^ Love and Friendship offers thee:
The Shepherdesses blithe and fair
For thee despair.
And whosoever depends on Pan
Holds him a man
Beyond themselves, (if not compare,)
He is so rare,
So innocent in all his ways
As in his Lays.
He masters no low soul who hopes to please
The Nephew of the brave Philisides.
Another to the same.
WEre all men's enuies fixed in one man's looks,
That monster that would prey on safest Fame,
Durst no^ once check at thine, nor at thy Name:
So he who men can read as well as Books
Attes^ thy Lines; thus tried, they show to us
As Sc^ua's Shield, thy Self Emeritus.
W. HERBERT.

To my Brown, yet brightest Swain That woons, or haunts or Hill or Plain.
Pocta nascitur.
PIpe on, sweet Swain, till Joy, in Bliss, sleep waking;
Hermes, it seems, to thee, of all the Swains,
Has lent his Pipe and Art: For thou art making
With sweet Notes (noted) Heaven of Hills and Plains!
Nay, if as thou beginst, thou do hold on,
The total Earth thine Arcadie will be;
And Neptunes Monarchy thy Helicon:
So, all in both will make a God of thee.
To whom they will exhibit Sacrifice
Of richest Love and Praise; and envious Swains
(Charmed with thine Accents) shall thy Notes agniz^
To reach above great Pans in all thy Strains.
Then, ply this Vein: for, it may well contain
The richest Morals under poorest Shroud;
And since in thee the Past'rall spirit does reign,
On such Wits-Treasures let it sit abrood:
Till it has hatched such Numbers as may buy
The rarest Fame that e're enriched Air;
Or fanned the Way fair, to AETERNITY,
To which vnsoil'd, thy Glory shall repair!
Where (with the Gods that in fair Stars do dwell,
When thou shall, blazing, in a Star abide)
Thou shall be styled the Shepherds-Starre, to tell
Them many Mysteries; and, be their Guide.
Thus, do I spur thee on with sharpest praise,
To use thy Gifts of Nature, and of Skill,
To double-gilde Apollos Brows, and Bays,
Yet make great NATVRE Arts true Sovereign still.
So, ^ame shall ever say, to thy renown,
The Shepherds-Star, or bright'st in Sky, is Brown!
The true Lover of thine Art and Nature. JOHN DAVIES of Here Is.

AD ILLVSTRISSIMVM IVVENEM GVLIELMVM BROWN Generosum, in Operis sui Tomum
secundum Carmen gratulatorium.
SCri^ta prius vidi, legi, digitoque notaui
Carminis istius singula verba meo.
Ex scriptis sparsim quaerebam carpere dicta,
Omnia sed par est, aut ego nulla notem.
Filia si fuerit facies haec nactae sororis,
Laudator prolis solus and Author eris:
Haec nondum visi qui flagrat amore libelli
Prae^arrat scriptis omnia c^rta tuis.
CAROLV^ CROKE.

To my noble Friend the Author.
A Perfect Pen, it self will ever praise.
So pipe^ our Shepherd in his Roundelayes,
That who could judge, of Musickes sweetest strain,
Would swear thy Muse were in a heavenly vain.
A Work of worth, shows what the Worke-man is:
When as the fault, that may be found amiss,
(To such at least, as have judicious eyes)
Nor in the Work, nor yet the Worke-man lies.
Well worthy thou, to wear the Laurel wreath:
When from thy breast, these blessed thoughts do breath;
That in thy gracious Lines such grace do give,
It makes thee, everlastingly to live.
Thy words well coucht, thy sweet invention show,
A perfect Poet, that could place them so.
VNTON CROKE, e Societate Inter. Templi.

To the Author.
THat privilege which others claim,
To flatter with their Friends
With thee (Friend) shall not be mine aim,
My Verse so much pretends.
The general Vmpire of best wit
In this will speak thy fame.
The Muses Minio^s as they sit,
Will still confirm the ^ame.
Let me sing him that merits best,
Let others scrape for fashion;
Their b^z^ing prate thy worth will jest,
And slight such commendation.
ANTH. VINCENT.

To his worthy Friend Mr. W. BROWN, on his BOOK.
THat Poets are not bred so, but so borne,
Thy Muse it proves; for in her ages morn
She has stroke envy dumb, and charmed the love
Of every Muse whose birth the Skies approve.
Go on; I know thou art too good to fear.
And may thy early strains affect the ear
Of that rare Lord, who judge and guerdon can
The richer gifts which do advantage man ^
JOHN MORGAN, e Societate Inter. Templi.

To his Friend the Author.
SOmetimes (dear friend) I make thy Book my meat,
And then I judge it is Honey that I eat.
Sometimes my drink it is, and then I think
It is Apollo's Nectar, and no drink.
And being hurt in mind, I keep in store
Thy Book, a precious Balsame for the sore*
It Is Honey, Nectar, Balsame most divine:
Or one word for them all; my Friend, it is thine.
THO. HEYGATE, e Societate Inter. Templi.

To his Friend the Author.
IF antique Swains wanne such immortal praise,
Though they alone with their melodious Lays,
Did only charm the Woods and flowery Lawnes:
Satyrs, and Floods, and Stones, and hairy Fawnes:
How much brave Youth to thy due worth belongs,
That charm'st not the^ but men with thy sweet Songs?
AUGUSTUS CAESAR, e Societate Inter. Templi.

To the Author.
It Is known I scorn to flatter (or commend)
What merits not applause though in my Friend:
Which by my censure should now more appear,
Were this not full as good as thou art dear:
But since thou could not (erring) make it so,
That I might my impartial humor show
By finding fault; Nor one of th^se friends tell
How to show love so ill, that I as well
Might paint out mine: I feel an envious touch,
And tell thee Swain: that at thy fame I grutch,
Wishing the Art that makes this Poem shine,
And this thy Work (were not thou wronged) mine.
For when Detraction shall forgotten be,
This will continue to eternize thee;
And if hereafter any busy wit
Should, wronging thy conceit, miscensure it,
Though seeming learned or wise: here he shall see,
It Is praised by wiser and more learned then he.
G. WITHER*

To Mr. BROWN.
WEre there a thought so strange as to deny
That happy Bays do some men's Births adorn,
Thy work alone might serve to justify,
That Poets are not made so, but so borne.
How could thy plumes thus soon have soared thus
Had thou not Laurel in thy Cradle worn?
Thy Birth o'er-tooke thy Youth: And it does make hie
Thy youth (herein) thine elders ouer-take.
W. B.

To my truly-belou'd Friend M. Brown, on his Pastorals.
SOme men, of Books or Friends not speaking right,
May hurt them more with praise, then Foes with spite.
But I have seen thy Work, and I know thee:
And, if thou list thy self, what thou can be.
For, though but early in these paths thou tread,
I find thee write most worthy to be read.
It must be thine own judgment, yet that sends
This thy work forth; that judgment mine commends.
And, where the most read books, on Authors fames,
Or, like our Money-brokers, take up names
On credit, and are couz^n'd; see, that thou
By offering not more sureties, then enough,
Hold thine own worth unbroke: which is so good
Upon the Exchange of Letters, as I would
More of our Writers would like thee, not swell
With the how much they set forth, but the how well.
BEN. IONSON.

BRITANNIA'S PASTORALS. THE SECOND BOOK.
THE FIRST SONG.
THE ARGUMENT.
Marina's freedom now I sing,
And of her new endangering:
Of Famines Cave, and then the abuse
Toward buried Colyn and his Muse.
AS when a Mariner (accounted lost,)
Upon the watery Desert long time tossed,
In Summers parching hear, in Winters cold,
In tempests great, in dangers manifold:
Is by a fau'ring wind drawn up the Mast,
Whence he descries his native soil at last:
For whose glad sight he gets the hatches under,
And to the Ocean tells his joy in thunder,
(Shaking those Barnacles into the Sea,
At once, that in the womb and cradle lay)
When suddenly the still inconstant wind
Masters before, that did attend behind;
And grows so violent, that he is feign
Command the Pilot stand to Sea again;
Lest want of Sea-roome in a Channel straight,
Or casting Anchor might cast over his freight:
Thus gentle Muse it happens in my Song,
A journey, tedious, for a strength so young
I undertook: by siluer-seeming Floods,
Past gloomy Bottomes, and high-wauing Woods,
Climbed Mountains where the wanton Kidling dallies;
The^ with soft steps enseal'd the meekned Valleys,
In quest of memory: and had possessed
A pleasant Garden, for a welcome rest
No sooner, then a hundred Theames come on
And hale my Bark anew for Helicon,
Thrice sacred Powers! (if sacred Powers there be
Whose mild aspect engyrland Poesy)
Ye happy Sisters of the learned Spring,
Whose heavenly notes the Woods are rauishing*
Brave Thespian Maidens, at whose charming lays
Each Mosse-thrumb'd Mountain bends, each Current plays
P^erian Singers! O ye blessed Muses!
Who as a Iem too dear the world refuses!
Whose truest lovers never clip with age,
O be propitious in my Pilgrimage!
Dwell on my lines! and till the last sand fall,
Run hand in hand with my weak Pastoral!
Cause every coupling cadence flow in blisses,
And fill the world with envy of such kisses.
Make all the rarest Beauties of our Clyme,
That ^eigne a sweet look on my younger ryme,
To linger on each lines enticing graces,
As on their Lovers lips and chaste embraces!
Through rouling trenches of self-drowning waves,
Where stormy gusts throw up untimely graves,
By billows whose white some showed angry minds,
For not out-roaring all the high-rais'd winds,
Into the euer-drinking thirsty Sea
By Rocks that under water hidden lay,
To ship wrack passengers, (so in some den
Thieves bent to robbry watch wayfaring men.)
Fairest Marina, whom I whilome sung*
In all this tempest (violent though long)
With out all sense of danger lay asleep:
Till tossed where the still inconstant deep
With wide spread arms, stood ready for the tender
Of daily tribute, that the swollen floods render
Into her Chequer: (whence as worthy Kings
She helps the wants of thousands lesser Springs)
Here waxt the winds dumb (shut up in their caves)
As still as midnight were the sullen waves,
And Neptunes siluer-euer-shaking breast
As smooth as when the Hal^yon builds her nest.
None other wrinckles on his face were seen
Then on a fertile Mead, or sportiue Green,
Where never Plow-share ripped his mothers womb
To give an aged seed a living tomb,
Nor blinded Mole the bathing earth ere stirred,
Nor Boys made Pit-fals for the hungry Bird.
The whistling Reeds upon the waters side
Shot up their sharp heads in a stately pride,
And not a binding Ozyer bowed his head,
But on his root him bravely carried.
No dandling leaf played with the subtle air,
So smooth the Sea was, and the Sky so fair.
Now with his hands in stead of broad-palm'd Oars,
The Swain attempts to get the shell-strewd shores,
And with continual lading making way,
Thrust the small Boat into as fair a Bay
As ever Merchant wished might be the rode
Wherein to ease his sea-torne Vessels lode.
It was an Island (hugged in Neptunes arms,
As tendering it against all foreign harms,)
And Mona height: so amiably fair,
So rich in soil, so healthful in her air,
So quick in her increase, (each dewy night
Yielding that ground as green, as fresh of plight
As't was the day before, whereon then fed
Of gallant Steeres, full many a thousand head.)
So decked with Floods, so pleasant in her Groves,
So full of well-fleec'd Flocks and fatned Droues;
That the brave issue of the Trojan line,
(Whose worths, like Diamonds, yet in darkness shine,)
Whose deeds were sung by learned Bards as hye,
In raptures of immortal Poesy,
As any Nations, since the Grecian Lads
Were famous made by Homers Iliads.)
Those brave heroicke spirits, twixt one another
Prouerbially call Mon Mam Kumbry.
Mona Cambria's Mother.
Yet Cambria is a land from whence have come
Worthies well worth the race of Ilium.
Whose true desert of praise could my Muse touch,
I should be proud that I had done so much.
And though of mighty Brute I cannot boast,
Yet does our warlike strong Deuonian coast
Resound his worth, since on her waue-worne strand
He and his Trojans first set foot on land,
Stroo^e Sail, and Anchor cast on Petunt Classem omnibus bonu^nuslam,
prosperis ventis mare sulcantes in To^enesio lutore felic^ter applicarunt.
Galf. Monvin.
Totnes shore.
Though now no Ship can ride there any more,
In ^h'Ilands Rode the Swain now moares his Boa^
Unto a Willow (lest it outward float)
And with a rude embracement taking up
The Maid (more fair then Hebe.
She that filled the cup
Of the great Thunderer, wounding with her eyes
More hearts then all the troops of Deities.)
He wades to shore, and sets her on the sand,
That gently yielded when her foot should land.
Where bubling waters through the pibbles fleet,
As if they strove to kiss her slender feet.
Whilst like a wretch, whose cursed hand has taken
The sacred relics from a holy Phane,
Feeling the hand of heaven (enforcing wonder)
In his return, in dreadful cracks of thunder,
Within a bush his Sacrilege has left,
And thinks his punishment freed with the theft:
So fled the Swain, from one; had Neptune spide
At half an ebb; he would have forced the Tide
To swell anew; whereon his Carre should sweep,
Decked with the riches of th'vnsounded deep,
And he from thence, would with all state, on shore,
To woo this beauty, and to woo no more.
Divine Electra (of the Sisters seven
That beautify the glorious Orb of heaven)
When Iliums stately towers, served as one light
To guide the Rauisher in ugly night
Unto her virgin beds, withdrew her face,
And never would look down on humane race
Til this Maids birth; since when some power has won her
By often fits to shine, as gazing on her.
Grim Saturnes son, the dread Olimpicke Jove
That dark't three days to frolic with his Love,
Had he in Al^men's stead clipped this fair wight,
The world had slept in everlasting night.
For whose sake only (had she lived then)
Deucalious flood had never raged on men:
Nor Phaeton performed his fathers duty,
For fear to rob the world of such a beauty:
In whose due praise, a learned quill might spend
Hours, days, months, years, and never make an end.
What wretch inhumane^ or what wilder blood
(Sucked in a desert from a Tigers brood)
Could leave her so disconsolate? but one
Bred in the wastes of frost-bit Calydon;
For had his veins been heat with milder air,
He had not wronged so foul, a Maid so fair.
Sing on sweet Muse, and whilst I feed mine eyes
Upon a Jewel and vnvalued prize,
As bright a Star, a Dame, as fair, as chaste,
As eye beheld, or shall, till Natures last:
Chat me her quick senses! and with raptures sweet
Make her affection with your cadence meet!
And if her graceful tongue admire one strain,
It is the best reward my Pipe would gain.
In lieu whereof, in Laurell-worthy rimes
Her Love shall live until the end of times,
And spite of age, the last of days shall see
Her Name embalmed in sacred Poesy.
Sadly alone upon the aged rocks,
Whom Thetis graced in washing often their locks
Of branching Sampire, sat the Maid o'retaken
With sighs and tears, unfortunate, forsaken,
And with a voice that floods from rocks would borrow,
She thus both wept and sung her noates of sorrow.
I^ Heaven be deaf and will not hear my cries,
But adds new days to add new miseries*
Hear then ye troubled Waves and flitting Gales,
That cool the bosoms of the fruitful Vales!
Lend, one, a flood of tears, the other, wind,
To weep and sigh that Heaven is so unkind!
But if ye will not spare, of all your store
One tear, or sigh, unto a wretch so poor;
Yet as ye travel on this spacious Round,
Through Forests, Mountains, or the Lawny ground,
If It happ' you see a Maid weep forth her woe,
As I have done; Oh bid her as ye go
Not lavish tears! for when her own are gone,
The world is flinty and will lend her none.
If this be eke denied; O hearken then
Each hollow vaulted Rock, and crooked Den!
And if within your sides one Echo be
Let her begin to rue my destiny!
And in your cle^ts her plainings do not smother,
But let that Echo ^each it to another!
Till round the world in sounding coombe and plain,
The last of them tell it the first again:
Of my sad Fate, so shall they never lin,
But where one ends, another still begin.
Wretch that I am, my words I vainly waste,
Echo, of all woes only speak the last;
And that is enough: for should she utter all,
As at Medusa's head, each heart would fall
Into a ^linty substance, and repine
At no one grief, except as great as mine.
No careful Nurse would wet her watchful eye,
When any pang should gripe her infantry,
Nor though to Nature it obedience gave,
And kneeld, to do her Homage, in the grave,
Would she lament, her suckling from her torn:
Scaping by death those torments I have borne.
This sighed, she wept (low leaning on her hand)
Her briny tears down rayning on the sand,
Which seen by (them, that sport it in the Seas
Oh Dolphins backs) the fair Ner^ides,
They came on shore, and slily as they fell
Conuai'd each tear into an Oyster-shell,
And by some power that did affect the Girls,
Transformed those liquid drops to orient Pearls,
And strewn them on the shore: for whose rich prize
In winged Pines, the Roman Colonies
Flung through the deep Abyss to our white rocks
For Iems to deck their Ladies golden locks:
Who valew'd them as highly in their kinds
As those the Sunburned Ethiopian finds.
Long on the shore, distressed Marina lay:
For he that ope's the pleasant sweets of May
Beyond the Noon-stead so far drove his teame,
That Haruest-folkes (with curds and clouted cream,
With cheese and butter, cakes, and cates enough,
That are the Yeomans from the yoke or Cow)
On sheafes of corn were at their noonshuns close,
Whilst by them merrily the Bag-pipe goes:
Ere from her hand she lifted up her head,
Where all the Graces then inhabited.
When casting round her ouer-drowned eyes,
(So have I seen a Iem of mickle price
Roll in a Scallop-shell with water filled)
She, on a marble rock at hand behild
In Characters deep cut with Iron stroke,
A Shepherds moan, which read by her, thus spoke: Glide soft ye silver Floods,
And every Spring:
Within the shady Woods,
Let no Bird sing!
Nor from the Grove a Turtle Dove,
Be seen to couple with her love,
But silence on each Dale and Mountain dwell
Whilst WILLY bids his friend and joy Farewell.
But (of great Thetis train)
Ye Mermaids fair,
That on the shores do plain
Your Sea-greene hair,
As ye in tramels knit your locks
Weep ye; and so enforce the rocks
In heavy murmures through the broad shores tell,
How WILLY bade his friend and joy Farewell.
Cease, cease, ye murdring winds
To move a wave;
But if with troubled minds
You seek his grave;
Know it is as various as your selves,
Now in the deep, then on the shelues,
His coffin tossed by fish and surges fell,
Whilst WILLY weeps and bids all joy Farewell.
Had he Arion like
Been judged to drown,
He on his Lute could strike
So rare a sown;
A thousand Dolphins would have come
And jointly strive to bring him home.
But he on Ship-boord did, by sickness fell,
Since when his WILLY bade all joy Farewell.
Great Neptune hear a Swain!
His Coffin take,
And with a golden chain
(Por pity) make
It fast unto a rock near land!
Where every calmy morn I Will stand
And ere one sheep out of my fold I tell,
Sad WILLY'S Pipe shall bid his friend Farewell.

Ah heavy Shepherd (who so ere thou be)
Quoth fair Marina, I do pity thee:
For who by death is in a true friend crossed,
Till he be earth, he half himself has lost.
More happy deem I thee, lamented Swain,
Whose body lies among the scaly train,
Since I shall never think, that thou can dye,
Whilst WILLY lives, or any Poetry:
For well it seems in versing he has skill,
And though he (aided from the sacred Hill)
To thee with him no equal life can give,
Yet by his Pen thou may for ever live.
With this a beam of sudden brightness flies
Upon her face, so dazeling her clear eyes,
That neither flower nor grass which by her grew
She could discern clothed in their perfect hue.
For as a Wag (to sport with such as pass)
Taking the Sunbeams in a Looking-glass,
Conuayes the Ray into the eyes of one,
Who (blinded) either stumbles at a stone,
Or as he dazeled walks the peopled streets,
Is ready iustling every man he meets:
So then Apollo did in glory cast
His bright beams on a rock with gold enchast,
And thence the swift reflection of their light
Blinded those eyes: The chiefest Stars of night.
When straight a thick-swolne Cloud (as if it sought
In beauties mind to have a thankful thought)
Inuail'd the luster of great Titans Carre,
And she beheld, from whence she sat not far,
Cut on a high-brow'd Rock (in laid with gold)
This Epitaph, and read it, thus enrold.
In d^pth of waves long has ALEXIS slept,
So choicest Jewels are the closest kept;
Whose death the land had seen, but it appears
To counter^aile his loss, men wanted tears.
So here he lies, whose Dirge each Mermaid sings,
For whom the Clouds weep rain, the Earth her springs.
Her eyes these lines acquainted with her mind
Had scarcely made; when over the hill behind
She heard a woman cry; Ah well-a-day,
What shall I do? go home, or fly, or stay.
Admired Marina rose, and with a pace
As graceful as the Goddesses did trace
Over stately Ida (when fond Paris doom
Kindled the fire, should mighty Troy entombe.)
She went to aid the woman in distress,
(True beauty never was found merciless)
Yet durst she not go nigh, lest (being spide)
Some villains outrage, that might then betide
(For ought she knew) unto the crying Maid,
Might graspe with her: by thickets which arai'd
The high Sea-bounding hill, so near she went,
She saw what wight made such loud dre^iment.
Loud? yes: sung right: for since the Azure sky
Imprisoned first the world, a mortals cry
With greater clang or never pierced the air.
A wight she was so far from being fair;
None could be foul esteemed, compared with her.
Describing Foulness, pardon if I err,
Ye Shepherds Daughters, and ye gentle Swains!
My Muse would gladly chaunt more lovely strains:
Yet since on miry grounds she trod, for doubt
Of sinking, all in haste, thus wades she out.
As when great Neptune in his height of pride
The inland creeks fills with a high Spring-tyde,
Great sholes of fish, among the Oysters hye,
Which by a quick ebb, on the shores, left dry,
The fishes yawne, the Oysters gapen wide:
So broad her mouth was: As she stood and cride,
She tore her eluish knots of hair, as black
And full of dust as any Collyers sack.
Her eyes unlike, were like her body right,
Squint and misse-shapen, one dun, the other white.
As in a picture limbed unto the life,
Or carved by a curious workmans knife,
If twenty men at once should come to see
The great effects of vntirde industry,
Each seu'rally would think the pictures eye
Was fixed on him, and on no stander by:
So as she (bawling) was upon the bank,
If twice five hundred men stood on a rank,
Her ill face toward them; every one would say,
She looks on me; when she another way
Had cast her eyes, as on some rock or tree,
And on no one of all that company.
Her Nose (o crooked nose) her mouth o're-hung,
As it would be directed by her tongue:
Her Forehead such, as one might near auow
Some Plowman, there, had lately been at plow.
Her Face so scorcht was, and so vilde it shows,
As on a Peare-tree she had scared the Crows.
Within a Tanuers fat I often have eyde
(That three moons there had lain) a large Oxe-hyde
In liquor mixed with strongest bark (for gain)
Yet had not taken one half so deep a stain
As had her skin: and that, as hard well-nye
As any Brawnes, long hardened in the stye.
Her Shoulders such, as I have often seen
A silly Cottage on a Village green
Might change his corner posts, in good behoof,
For four such vnder-proppers to his roof.
Huswiues, go hire her, if you yearly gave
A Lamkin more then use, you that might save
In washing-Beetles, for her hands would pass
To serve that purpose, though you daily wash.
For other hidden parts, thus much I say;
As Ballad-mongers on a Market Day
Taking their stand, one (with as harsh a noise
As ^uer Cart-wheele made) squeakes the sad choice
Of Tom the Miller with a golden thumb,
Who crossed in love, ran mad, and deaf, and dumb,
Half part he chants, and will not sing it out,
But thus he speaks to his attentive rout:
Thus much for love I warbled from my breast,
And gentle friends, for money take the rest:
So speak I to the ouer-longing ear,
That would the rest of her description hear,
Much have I sung for love, the rest (not common)
Martial will show for coin, in's crabbed woman.
If e're you saw a Pedant gin prepare
To speak some graceful speech to Master Mayor,
And being bashful, with a quaking doubt
That in his eloquence he may be out;
He often steps forth, as often turns back again;
And long it is e're he open his learned vein:
Think so Marina stood: for now she thought
To venture forth, then some conjecture wrought
Her to be jealous, lest this ugly wight
(Since like a Witch she looked) through spells of night,
Might make her body thrall (that yet was free)
To all the foul intents of Witcherie:
This drew her back again. At last she broke
Through all fond doubts, went to her, and bespoke
In gentle manner thus: Good day, good Maid;
With that her cry she on a sudden staid,
And rubbed her squint eyes with her mighty fist.
But as a Miller having ground his grist,
Lets down his floodgates with a speedy fall,
And quarring up the passage therewithal,
The waters swell in spleen, and never stay
Till by some cleft they find another way:
So when her tears were stopped from either eye
Her singults, blubbrings, seemed to make them fly
Out at her Oyster-mouth and Nose-thrils wide.
Can there (quoth fair Marina) e're betide
(In these sweet Groves) a wench, so great a wrong,
That should enforce a cry so loud, so long?
On these delightful Plains how can there be
So much as heard the name of villainy?
Except when Shepherds in their gladsome fit
Sing Hymns to Pan that they are free from it.
But show me, what has caused thy grievous yell?
As late (quoth she) I went to yonder Well,
(You cannot see it here; that Grove does cover
With his thick boughs his little channel over.)
To fetch some water (as I use) to dress
My Masters supper (you may think of flesh;
But well I wot he tastes no such dish)
Of Rotchets, Whitings, or such common fish,
That with his net he drags into his Boat:
Among the Flags below, there stands his Coat
(A simple one) thatched over with Reed and Broom;
It has a Kitchen, and a several room
For each of us. But this is naught: you flee,
Replide Marine, I prithee answer me
To what I questioned. Do but hear me first,
Answered the Hag. He is a man so cursed,
Although I toil at home, and serve his Swine,
Yet scarce allows he me whereon to dine:
In Summer time on Black-berries I live,
On Crabs and Hawes, and what wild Forests give:
In Winters cold, barefoot, I run to seek
For Oysters, and small Winkles in each creek,
Whe^^on I feed, and on the Meager S^one.
But if he home return and find me gone,
I still am sure to feel his heavy hand.
Alas and weal away, since now I stand
In such a plight: for if I seek his door
He Will beat me ten times worse then e're before.
What have thou done? (yet asked Marina) say?
I with my pitcher lately took my way
(As late I said) to thilke same shaded Spring,
Filled it, and homewards, raised my voice to sing;
But in my back return, I (hapless) spide
A tree of Cherries wild, and them I eyde
With such a longing, that unawares my foot
Got underneath a hollow-growing root,
Carrying my pot as Maids use on their heads,
I fell with it, and broke it all to shreads.
This is my grief, this is my cause of moan.
And if some kind wight go not to atone
My surly Master with me wretched Maid,
I shall be beaten dead. Be not afraid,
Said sweet Marina, hasten thee before;
I Will come to make thy peace: for since I sore
Do hunger, and at home thou have small cheer,
(Need and supply grow far off, seldom near.)
To yonder Grove I Will go, to taste the spring,
And see what it affords for nourishing.
Thus parted they. And sad Marina blessed
The hour she met the Maid, who did invest
Her in assured hope, she once should see
Her Flock again (and drive them merrily
To their flowre-decked layre, and tread the shores
Of pleasant Albion) through the well poys'd Oars
Of the poor Fisherman that dwelt thereby.
But as a man who in a Lottery
Has ventured of his coin; ere he have ought,
Thinks this or that shall with his Prize be bought,
And so enricht, march with the better rank;
When suddenly he is called, and all is Blanke:
To chaste Marina, so does Fortune prove;
"Statesmen and she are never firm in love.
No sooner had Marina got the wood,
But as the trees she nearly searched for food,
A Villain, lean, as any rake appears,
That looked, as pinched with famine, Aegypts years,
Worn out and wasted to the pithlesse bone,
As one that had a long Consumption.
His rusty teeth (forsaken of his lips
As they had served with want two Prentiships)
Did through his pallid cheeks, and lankest skin
Bewray what number were enranckt within.
His greedy eyes deep sunk into his head,
Which with a rough hair was over covered.
How many bones made up this starued wight
Was soon perceived; a man of dimmest sight
Apparently might see them knit, and tell
How all his veins and every sinew fell.
His belly (inwards drawn) his bowels pressed,
His vnfill'd skin hung dangling on his breast,
His feeble knees with pain enough uphold
That pined carcass, casten in a mold
Cut out by Deaths grim form. If small legs wan
Ever the title of a Gentleman;
His did acquire it. In his flesh pulled down
As he had lived in a beleaguerd town,
Where Plenty had so long estranged been
That men most worthy note, in grief were seen
(Though they reioyc'd to have attained such meat)
Of Rats, and halfe-tann'd Hydes, and stomachs great,
Gladly to feed: and where a Nurse, most vilde,
Drunk her own milk, and starved her crying child.
Yet he through want of food not thus became:
But Nature first decreed, That as the flame
Is never seen to fly his nourishment,
But all consumes: and still the more is lent
The more it couets. And as all the Floods
(Down tre^ching from small groves, and greater woods)
The vast insatiate Sea does still devour,
And yet his thirst not quenched by their power:
So ever should befall this starued wight;
The more his vyands, more his appetite.
What ere the deepes bring forth, or earth, or air,
He rauine should, and want in greatest fare.
And what a City twice seven years would serve,
He should devour, and yet be like to starve.
A wretch so empty, that if e're there be
In Nature found the least vacuitie,
'Twill be in him. The grave to Ceres store;
A Caniball to lab'rers old and poor;
A Spunge-like-Dropsie, drinking till it burst;
The Sickness termed the Wolf^, vilde and accursed,
In some respects like thou art of Al^^^my
That thriues least, when it long'st does multiply:
Limos he cleeped was^ whose long-nayl'd paw
Seizing Marina, and his sharpe^sang'd ia^
(The strongest part he had) fixed in her weeds,
He forced her thence, through thickets and high Reeds,
Toward his Cave. Her fate the swift winds rue,
And round the Grove in heavy murmures ^lew.
The limbs of trees, that (as in love with either)
In close embrasements long had lived together,
Rubbed each on other, and in shre^ks did show
The winds had moved more partners of their woe.
Old and decayed stocks, that long time spent
Upon their arms, their roots chief nourishment;
And that drawn dry, as freely did impart
Their boughs a feeding on their fathers heart,
Yet by respectlesse imp^es when all was gone,
Pithlesse and saplesse, naked left alone,
Their hollow trunks, filled with their neighbors moanes,
Sent from a thousand vents, ten thousand groans.
All Birds flew from the wood, as they had been
Scared with a strong Bolt rattling among the treen.
Limos with his sweet theft full slily rushes
Through sharp-hook'd brambles, thorns, and tangling bushes,
Whose tenters sticking in her garments, sought
(Poor shrubs) to help her, but auailing naught,
As angry (best intents missed best proceeding)
They scratched his face and legs, clear water bleeding.
Not greater haste a fearful schoole-boy makes
Out of an Orchard whence by stealth he takes
A churlish Farmers Plums, sweet Pears or Grapes,
Then Limos did, as from the thick he scapes
Down to the shore. Where resting him a space,
Restless Marina began entreat for grace
Of one whose knowing it as desperate stood,
As where each day to get supply of food.
O! had she (thirsty) such entreaty made
At some high Rock, proud of his evening shade,
He would have burst in two, and from his veins
(For her avail) upon the under Plains
A hundred Springs a hundred ways should swim,
To show her tears enforced floods from him.
Had such an Oratresse been heard to plead
For ^aire Polixena, the Murthrers head
Had been her pardon, and so escaped that shocke,
Which made her lovers tomb her dying block.
Not an enraged Lion, surly, wood,
No Tiger reft her young, nor savage brood;
No, not the foaming Boar, that durst approve
Louelesse to leave the mighty Queen of Love,
But her sad plaints, their uncouth walks among
Spent, in sweet numbers from her golden tongue,
So much their great hearts would in softnes steep,
They at her foot would groueling lie, and weep.
Yet now (alas!) nor words, nor floods of tears
Did ought avail. The belly has no ears.
As I have known a man loath meet with gain
That carries in his front least show of pain,
Who for his vittailes all his raiment pledges,
Whose stackes for firing are his neighbors hedges,
From whence returning with a burden great,
Wearied, on some green bank he takes his seat,
But fearful (as still theft is in his stay)
Gets quickly up, and hastes fast away:
So Limos sooner eased then yrested
Was up, and through the Reeds (as much molested
As in the Brakes) who lovingly combine,
And for her aid together twist and twine,
Now manacling his hands, then on his legs
Like fetters hang the vnder-growing Segs:
And had his teeth not been of strongest hold,
He there had left his prey. Fates uncontrolled,
Denide so great a bliss to Plants or men,
And lent him strength to bring her to his den.
West, in Apollo's course to Tagus stream,
Crowned with a silver circling Diadem
Of wet exhaled mists, there stood a pile
Of aged Rocks (torn from the neighbor I Will
And girt with waves) against whose naked breast
The surges tilted, on his snowie crest
The towering Falcon whilome built, and Kings
Strove for that Eirie* on whose scaling wings,
Monarchs, in gold refined as much would lay
As might a month their Army Royal pay.
Brave Birds they were, whose quick-self-less-ning kin
Still won the girlonds from the A Falcon differing from the Falcon-gentle.
Beregrin.
Not Cerna^Ile in Affricks silver maine,
Nor lustfull-bloody^ Tereus Thracian strain,
Nor any other Lording of the air
Durst with this Eirie for their wing compare.
About his sides a thousand Seaguls bred,
The M^uy and the Halcyon famosed
For colors rare, and for the peaceful Seas
Round the Sicilian coast, her brooding days.
Pussins (as thick as Starlings in a Fen)
Were fetched from thence: there sat the Pewet hen,
And in the clefts the Martin built his nest.
But those by this cursed caitife dispossessed
Of roost and nest, the least; of life, the most:
All left that place, and sought a safer coast.
In stead of them the Caterpiller hants,
And Can^re-worme among the tender plants,
That here and there in nooks and corners grew*
Of Cormorants and Locusts not a few;
The cramming Raven, and a hundred more
Devouring creatures; yet when from the shore
Limos came wading (as he easily might
Except at high tides) all would take their fligh^,
Or hide themselves in some deep hole or other,
Lest one deuourer should devour another.
Near to the shore that bord'red on the Rock
No merry Swain was seen to feed his Flock,
No lusty Neat-heard thither drove his Kine,
Nor boorish Hog-heard fed his rooting Swine:
A stony ground it was, sweet Herbage failed:
Naught there but weeds, which Limos, strongly nailed,
Tore from their mothers breast, to stuff his maw.
No Crab-tree bore his load, nor Thorn his haw.
As in a Forest well complete with Dear
We see the Hollies, Ashes, every where
Robbed of their clothing by the browsing Game:
So near the Rock, all trees where e're you came,
To cold Decembers wrath stood void of bark.
Here danced no Nymph, no early-rising Lark
Sung up the Plowman and his drowsy mate:
All round the Rock barren and desolate.
The description of the Cave of Famine.
In midst of that huge pile was Limos Cave
Full large and round, wherein a Millers knave
Might for his Horse and Querne have room at will:
Where was out-drawne by some enforced skill,
What mighty conquests were atchieu'd by him.
First stood the siege of great Jerusalem,
Within whose triple wall and sacred City
(Weep ye stone-hearted men! oh read and pity!
It Is Sions cause inuokes your briny tears:
Can any dry eye be when she appears
As I must sing her? oh, if such there be:
Fly, fly th'abode of men! and hasten thee
Into the Desert, some high Mountain under,
Or at thee boys will hiss, and old men wonder.)
Here sits a mother weeping, pale and wan,
With fixed eyes, whose hopeless thoughts seemed ran
How (since for many days no food she casted,
Her Meal, her Oil consumed, all spent, all wasted)
For one poor day she might attain supply,
And desperate of ought else, sit, pine, and dye.
At last her mind meets with her tender child
That in the cradle lay (of Oziers wild)
Which taken in her arms, she gives the teat,
From whence the little wretch with labor great
Not one poor drop can suck: whereat she wood,
Cries out, o heaven ^are all the founts of food
Exhausted quite? and must my Infan^ young
Be fed with shoes? yet wanting those ere ^ong,
Feed on it self? No: first the room that gave
Him soul and life, shall be his timelesse grave:
My dugs, thy best relief, through griping hunger
Flow now no more, my babe; Then since no longer
By r^e thou can be fed, nor any other,
Be thou the Nurse, and feed thy dying Mother.
Th^n in another place she straight appears,
See^hing her suckling in her scalding tears.
From whence not far the Paint^r made her stand
Tearing his sod flesh with her cruel hand,
In gobbets which she ate. O cursed womb,
That to thy self art both the grave and tomb.
A little sweet lad (there) seems to entreat
(With held up hands) his famisht Sire for meat,
Who wanting ought to give his hoped joy
But throbs and sighs; the ouer-hungry boy,
For some poor bit, in dark nooks making quest,
His Sachell finds, which grows a gladsome feast
To him and both his Parents. Then, next day
He chewes the points wherewith he used to play:
Devouring last his Books of every kind,
They fed his body which should feed his mind:
But when his Sachell, Points, Books all were gone,
Before his Sire he droopes, and dies anon.
In height of Art then had the Workman done,
A pious, zealous, most religious son,
Who on the enemy excursion made,
And spite of danger strongly did invade
Their victuals conuoy, bringing from them home
Dried figs, Dates, Almonds, and such fruits as come
To the beleagring foe, and sate's the want
Therewith of those, who, from a tender plant
Bred him a man for arms: thus often he went,
And Storke-like sought his Parents nourishment,
Till Fates decreed, he on the Roman Spears
Should give his blood for them, who gave him theirs.
A Million of such throes did Famine bring
Upon the City of the mighty King,
Till, as her people, all her buildings rare
Consumed themselves and dimmed the lightsome air.
Near this the curious Pencell did express
A large and solitary wilderness,
Whose high well limmed Oaks in growing showed
As they would case strong At^as of his load:
Here underneath a tree in heavy plight
(Her bread and pot of water wasted quite)
Egyptian Hagar (nipt with hunger fell)
Sat robbed of hope: her Infant Ishmael
(Far from her being laid) full sadly seemed
To cry for meat, his cry she naught esteemed,
But kept her still, and turned her face away,
Knowing all means were bootlesse to assay
In such a Desert: and since now they must
Sleep their eternal sleep, and clean to dust,
She chose (apart) to graspe one death alone,
Rather then by her babe a million.
Then Eresichthons case in Ouids Song
Was portraied out; and many more along
The insides of the Cave; which were descride
By many loope-holes round on every side.
These fair Marina viewed, left all alone,
The Cave fast shut, Limos for pillage gone;
Near the washed shore mong roots and breers, and thorns,
A Bullock finds, who deluing with his horns
The hurtlesse earth (the while his tough hoof tore
The yielding turffe) in furious rage he bore
His head among the boughs that held it round,
While with his bellows all the shores resound:
Him Limos killed, and haled with no small pain
Unto the Rock; fed well; then goes again:
Which served Marina fit, for had his food
Failed him, her veins had failed their dearest blood.
Now great Hyperion left his golden throne
That on the dancing waves in glory shone,
For whose declining on the Western shore
The oriental hills black mantles wore,
And thence apace the gentle Twilight fled,
That had from hideous cauernes vshered
All-drowsie Night; who in a Carre of Iet,
By S^eeds of Iron-gray (which mainly swet
Moist drops on all the world) drawn through the sky,
The helps of darkness waited orderly.
First, thick clouds rose from all the liquid plains:
Then mists from Marshes, and grounds whose veins
Were Conduit-pipes to many a crystal spring:
From standing Pooles and Fens were following
Unhealthy fogs: each River, every Rill
Sent up their vapors to attend her will.
These, pitchie curtains drew, 'twixt earth and heaven.
And as Nights Chariot through the air was driven,
Clamor grew dumb, unheard was Shepherds song,
And silence girt the Woods; no warbling tongue
Talked to the Echo; Satyrs broke their dance,
And all the upper world lay in a trance.
Only the curled streams soft chidings kept;
And little gales that from the green leaf swept
Dry Summers dust, in fearful whisp'rings stirred,
As loath to waken any singing Bird.
Darkness no less then blind Cimmerian
Of Famines Cave the full possession wan,
Where lay the Shepherdess in wrapped with night,
(The wished garment of a mournful wight)
Here silken slumbers and refreshing sleep
Were seldom found; with quiet minds those keep,
Not with disturbed thoughts; the beds of Kings
Are never pressed by them, sweet rest inrings
The tired body of the swarty Clown,
And oftener lies on flocks then softest down.
Twice had the Cock crown, and in Cities strong
The Bel-mans doleful noise and careful song,
Told men, whose watchful eyes no slumber hent,
What store of hours theft-guilty night had spent.
Yet had not Morpheus with this Maiden been,
As fearing Limos; (whose impetuous teen
Kept gentle rest from all to whom his Cave
Yielded enclosure (deadly as the grave.)
But to all sad laments left her (forlorn)
In which three watches she had nie outworne.
Fair siluer-footed Thetis that time threw
Along the Ocean with a beauteous crew
Of her attending Sea-nymphs ( Jove's bright Lamps
Guiding from Rocks her Chariots Sea-horses.
Hippocamps.)
A journey, only made, unawares to spy
If any Mighties of her Empery
Oppressed the least, and forced the weaker sort
To their designs, by being great in Court.
O! should all Potentates whose higher birth
Enroles their titles, other Gods on earth,
Should they make private search, in veil of night,
For cruel wrongs done by each Favorite;
Here should they find a great one paling in
A mean man's land, which many years had bin
His charges life, and by the others heast,
The poor must starve to feed a scuruy beast.
If any recompense drop from his fist,
His time's his own, the money, what he list.
There should they see another that commands
His Farmers Teame from furrowing his lands,
To bring him stones to raise his building vast,
The while his Tenants sowing time is past.
Another (spending) does his rents inhance,
Or gets by tricks the poores inheritance.
But as a man whose age has dimmed his eyes,
Uses his Spectacles, and as he pryes
Through them all Characters seem wondrous fair,
Yet when his glasses quite removed are
(Though with all careful heed he nearly look)
Cannot perceive one tittle in the Book;
So if a King behold such favorites
(Whose being great, was being Parasites)
With the eyes of favor, all their actions are
To him appearing plain and regular:
But let him lay his sight of grace aside,
And see what men he has so dignifide,
They all would vanish, and not dare appear,
Who Atom-like, when their Sun shined clear,
Danced in his beam; but now his rays are gone,
Of many hundred we perceive not one.
Or as a man who standing to descry
How great floods far off run, and valleys lie,
Takes a glass prospectiue good and true,
By which things most remote are full in view:
If Monarchs, so, would take an Instrument
Of truth composed to spy their Subjects drent
In foul oppression by those high in seat
(Who care not to be good but to be great)
In full aspect the wrongs of each degree
Would lie before them; and they then would see,
The devilish Politician all conuinces,
In murdring Statesmen and in poisning Princes;
The Prelate in pluralities asleep,
Whilst that the Wolf lies preying on his sheep;
The drowsy Lawyer, and the false Atturnies
Tire poor men's purses with their life-long-iournies;
The Country Gentleman, from's neighbors hand
Forces the inheritance, ioynes land to land,
And (most insatiate) seeks under his rent
To bring the worlds most spacious continent;
The ^awning Citizen (whose love's bought dearest)
Deceiues his brother when the Sun shines clearest,
Gets, borrowes, breaks; lets in, and stops out light,
And lives a Knave to leave his son a Knight;
The griping Farmer hoords the seed of bread,
Whilst in the streets the poor lie famished:
And ^ree there is none from all this worldly strife,
Except the Shepherds heauen-blest happy life.
But stay sweet Muse! forbear this harsher strain,
Keep with the Shepherds; leave the Satyrs vein,
Coupe not with Bears, let Icarus alone
To scorch himself within the torrid Zone:
Let Phaeton run on, Ixion fall,
And with an humble styled Pastoral
Tread through the valleys, dance about the streams,
The ^owly Dales will yield us Anadems
To shade our temples, it is a worthy meed,
No better girlond seeks mine Oaten Reed;
Let others climb the hills, and to their praise
(Whilst I sit girt with Flowers) be crowned with Bays.
Show now fair Muse what afterward became
Of great Achilles Mother; She whose name
The Mermaids sing, and tell the weeping strand
A brauer Lady never tript on land,
Except the everliving Fayerie Queen,
Whose virtues by her Swain so written been,
That time shall call her high enhanced story
In his rare song, The Muses chiefest glory.
So mainly Thetis drove her silver throne,
Inlaid with pearls of price, and precious stone,
(For whose gay purchase, she did often make
The scorched Negro diue the briny Lake)
That by the swiftness of her Chariot wheels
(Scouring the Maine as well built English Keels)
She, of the newfound World all coasts had seen,
The shores of Thessaly, where she was Queen,
Her brother Pontus waves, embraced, with those
Moeotian fields and vales of Tenedos,
Streit Hellespont, whose high-brow'd cliffes yet sound
The mournful name of young Leander drowned,
Then with full speed her Horses does she guide
Through the Aegaean Sea, that takes a pride
In making difference twixt the fruitful lands
Europe and Asia almost joining hands,
But that she thrusts her billows all afront
To stop their meeting through the Hellespont.
The Midland Sea so swiftly was she scouring,
The Adriaticke gulf brave Ships devouring.
To Padus silver stream then glides she on
(Enfamoused by rekelesse Phaeton) Plin. lib. 3. cap. 16.

Padas that does beyond his limits rise,
When the hot Dog-starre raines his maladies,
And robs the high and ayre-inuading Alps
Of all their Winter-suits and snowie scalpes,
To drown the leuel'd lands along his shore,
And make him swell with pride. By whom of yore
The sacred Heliconian Damsels sat
(To whom was mighty Pindus consecrate)
And did decree (neglecting other men)
Their height of Art should flow from Maro's pen.
And prattling Eccho's evermore should long
For repetition of sweet Naso's song.
It was inacted here, in after days
What wights should have their temples crowned with Bays.
Learned Ariosto, holy Petrachs quill,
And Tasso should ascend the Muses hill.
Diuinest Bartas, whose enriched soul
Proclaimed his Makers worth, should so enroule
His happy name in brass, that Time nor Fate
Tha^ swallow all, should ever ruinate.
Delightful Salust, whose all blessed lays
The Shepherds make their Hymns on Holy Days;
And truly say thou in one week have pend
What time may ever study, never amend.
M^rot and Ronsard, Garnier's buskind Muse
Should spirit of life in very stones infuse.
And many another Swan whose powerful strain
Should raise the Golden World to life again.
But let us leave (fair Muse) the banks of Po,
Thetis forsook his brave stream long ago,
And we must after. See in haste she sweepes
Along the Celticke shores, the Armorick deepes
She now is entering: bear up then a head,
And by that time she has discovered
Our Alablaster rocks, we may descry
And ken with her, the coasts of Britany.
There will she Anchor cast, to hear the Songs
Of English Shepherds, whose all-tunefull tongues
So pleased the Nayades, they did report
Their songs perfection in great Nereus Court:
Which Thetis hearing, did appoint a day
When she would meet them in the British Sea,
And thither for each Swain a Dolphin bring
To ride with her, whilst she would hear him sing.
The time prefixed was come; and now the Star
Of blissful light appeared, when she her Carre
Staid in the narrow Seas. At Thames fair port
The Nymphs and Shepherds of the Isle resort.
And thence did put to Sea with mir^hfull rounds,
Whereat the billows dance above their bounds,
And bearded Goats, that on the clouded head
Of any sea-suruaying Mountain fed,
Leaving to crop the luy, listening stood
At those sweet airs which did intrance the flood.
In iocund sort the Goddess thus they met.
And after reu'rence done, all being set
Upon their finny Coursers, ^ound her throne,
And she prepared to cut the watery Zone
Ingirting Albion; all their pipes were still,
And Colin Clout began to tune his quill
With such deep Art, that every one was given
To think Apollo (newly slid from heaven)
Had taken a humane shape to win his love,
Or with the Western Swains for glory strove.
He sung th'heroicke Knights of Faiery land
In lines so elegant, of such command,
That had the Orpheus.
Thracian played but half so well,
He had not left Eurydice in hell.
But e're he ended his melodious song
An host of Angels flew the clouds among,
And rapt this Swan from his attentive mates,
To make him one of their associates
In heavens fair Quire: where now he sings the praise
Of him that is the first and last of days.
Diuinest Spencer heau'n-bred, happy Muse!
Would any power into my brain infuse
Thy worth, or all that Poets had before,
I could not praise till thou deseru'st no more.
A dampe of wonder and amazement struck
Thetis attendants, many a heavy look
Followed sweet Spencer, till the thickning air
Sights further passage stopped. A passionate tear
Fell from each Nymph, no Shepherds cheek was dry,
A doleful Dirge, and mournful Elegy
Flew to the shore. When mighty Nereus Queen
(In memory of what was heard and seen)
Employed a Factor (fitted well with store
Of richest Iemmes, refined Indian Ore)
To raise, in honor of his worthy name,
A Piramis, whose head (like winged Fame)
Should pierce the clouds, yea seem the stars to kiss,
And Mausolus great tomb might shroud in his.
Her will had been performance, had not Fate
(That never knew how to commiserate)
Suborned cursed Avarice to lie in weight
For that rich prey: (Gold is a taking bait)
Who closely lurking like a subtle Snake
Under the covert of a thorny brake,
Seized on the Factor by fair Thetis sent,
And robbed our Colin of his Monument.
Ye English Shepherds, sons of Memory,
For Satyrs change your pleasing melody,
Scourge, rail and curse that sacrilegious hand,
That more then Fiend of hell, that Stygian brand,
All-guilty Avarice: that worst of evil,
That gulfe-deuouring, offspring of a Devil:
Heap curse on curse so direful and so fell,
Their weight may press his damned soul to hell.
Is there a spirit so gentle can refrain
To torture such? O let a Satyrs vein
Mix with that man! to lash this hellish lym,
Or all our curses will descend on him.
For mine own part, although I now commerce
With lowly Shepherds, in as low a Verse;
If of my days I shall not see an end
Till more years press me; some few hours I Will spend
In rough-hewn Satyrs, and my busied pen
Shall ierke to death this infamy of men.
And like a Fury, glowing coulters bear,
With which? But see how yonder fondlings tear
The^r fleeces in the brakes; I must go free
Them of their bonds; Rest you here merrily
Till my return: when I will touch a string
Shall make the Rivers dance, and Valleys ring.
THE SECOND SONG.
THE ARGUMENT.
What Shepherds on the Sea were seen
To entertain the Oceans Queen,
Remond in search of Fida gone,
And for his love young Doridon,
There meeting with a woeful Swain,
Mute, and not able to complain
His metamorphos'd Mistress wrong;
Is all the subject of this Song.
THe MUSES friend (gray-eyde Aurora) yet
Held all the Meadows in a cooling sweat,
The milke-white Gossamores not upwards snow'd,
Nor was the sharp and useful steering goad
Laid on the strong-neckt Ox; no gentle bud
The Sun had dride; the cattle chewed the cud
Low leuel'd on the grass; no Flies quick sting
Enforced the Stonehorse in a furious ring
To tear the passive earth, nor lash his tail
About his buttockes broad; the slimy Snaile
Might on the wainscot (by his many mazes
Winding Meanders and selfe-knitting traces)
Be followed, where he stuck, his glittering slime
Not yet wiped off. It was so early time,
The careful Smith had in his sooty forge
Kindled no coal; nor did his hammers urge
His neighbors patience: Owls abroad did fly,
And day as then might plead his infancy.
Yet of fair Albion all the western Swains
Were long since up, attending on the Plains
When Nereus daughter with her mirthfull host
Should summon them, on their declining coast.
But since her stay was long: for fear the Sun
Should find them idle, some of them begun
To leap and wrestle, others threw the bar;
Some from the company removed are,
To meditate the songs they meant to play,
Or make a new Round for next Holiday:
Some tales of love their loue-sicke fellows told:
Others were seeking stakes to pitch their fold.
This, all alone was mending of his Pipe:
That, for his less sought fruits most sweet most ripe.
Here (from the rest) a lovely shepherds boy
Sits piping on a hill, as if his joy
Would still endure, or else that ages frost
Should never make him think what he had lost.
Yonder a shepherdess knits by the springs,
Her hands still keeping time to what she sings:
Or seeming, by her song, those fairest hands
Were comforted in working. Near the sands
Of some sweet River sits a musing lad,
That moanes the loss of what he sometime had,
His Love by death berest: when fast by him
An aged Swain takes place, as near the brim
O^'s grave as of the River; showing how
That as those floods, which pass along right now
Are followed still by others from their spring,
And in the Sea have all their burying:
Right so our times are known, our ages found,
(Nothing is permanent within this Round:)
One age is now, another that succeeds,
Extirping all things which the former breeds:
Another follows that, does new times raise,
New years, new months, new weeks, new hours, new days,
Mankind thus goes like Rivers from their spring,
And in the Earth have all their burying.
Thus sat the old man counselling the young;
Whilst, underneath a tree which ouer-hung
The silver stream (as some delight it took
To trim his thick boughs in the Crystal Brook)
Were set a iocund crew of youthful Swains,
Wooing their sweetings with delicious strains.
Sportiue Oreades the hills descended,
The Hamadryades their hunting ended,
And in the high woods left the long-liu'd Hearts
To feed in peace, free from their winged Darts;
Floods, Mountains, Valleys, Woods, each vacant lies
Of Nimphs that by them danced their Haydigyes:
For all those Powers were ready to embrace
The present means, to give our Shepherds grace.
And underneath this tree (till Thetis came)
Many resorted; where a Swain, of name
Less, then of worth: (and we do never own
Nor apprehend him best, that most is known.)
Fame is uncertain, who so swiftly flies
By th'vnregarded shed where Virtue lies:
She (ill informed of Virtues worth) pursu'th
(In haste) Opinion for the simple Truth.
True Fame is ever likened to our shade,
He soonest misseth her, that most has made
To ouer-take her; who so takes his wing,
Regardlesse of her, she will be following:
Her true propriety she thus discouers,
"Loves her contemners, and contemnes her lovers.
The Applause of common people never yet
Pursued this Swain; he knew't the counterfeit
Of settled praise, and therefore at his songs,
Though all the Shepherds and the graceful throngs
Of Semigods compared him with the best
That ever touched a Reed, or was addressed
In shepherds coat, he never would approve
Their Attributes, given in sincerest love;
Except he truly knew them as his merit.
Fa^^e gives a second life to such a spirit.
This Swain, entreated by the mirthfull rout,
That with intwined arms lay round about
The tree against which he leaned. (So have I seen
Tom Pipe^ stand upon our village green,
Backed with the May Pole, whilst a iocund crew
In gentle motion circularly threw
Themselves about him.) To his fairest Ring
Thus 'gan in numbers well according sing: VEnus by Adonis side
Crying kissed, and kissing cride*
Wrung her hands and tore her hair
For Adonis dying there.
Stay (quoth she) o stay and live!
Nature surely does not give
To the Earth her sweetest flowers
To be seen but some few hours
On his face, still as he bled
For each drop a tear she shed,
Which she kissed or wiped away,
Else had drowned him where he lay.
Fair Proserpina (quoth she)
Shall not have thee yet from me;
Nor thy soul to fly begin
While my lips can keep it in.
Here she closed again. And some
Say, Apollo would have come
To have cured his wounded lym,
But that she had smothered him.

Look as a Traveler in Summers day
Nigh choakt with dust, and molt with Titans ray,
Longs for a spring to cool his inward heat,
And to that end, with vows, does heaven entreat,
When going further, finds an Apple Tree,
(Standing as did old Hospitality,
With ready arms to succor any needs:)
Hence plucks an Apple, tastes it, and it breeds
So great a liking in him for his thirst,
That up he climbs, and gathers to the first
A second, third; nay, will not cease to pull
Till he have got his cap and pockets full.
"Things long desired so well esteemed are,
"That when they come we hold them better far.
"There is no mean 'twixt what we love and want,
" Desire, in men, is so predominant.
No ^esse did all this quaint assembly long
Then does the Traveler: this Shepherds Song
Had so ensnared each acceptable ear,
That but a second, naught could bring them clear
From an affected snare; had Orpheus been
Playing, some distance from them, he had seen
Not one to stir a foot for his rare strain,
But left the Thracian for the English Swain.
Or had suspicious Juno (when her Jove
Into a Cow transformed his fairest Io^.
Love)
Great Inachus sweet Stem in durance given
To this young Lad; the Mercury
Messenger of heaven
(Fair Maia's offspring) with the depth of Art
That ever Jove to Hermes might impart,
In fingring of a Reed, had never won
Poor Io's freedom. And though Arctors son
(Hundred-ey'd Argus) might be lulled by him,
And loose his prisoner: yet in every lym
That God of wit had felt this Shepherds skill,
And by his charms brought from the Muses hill
Enforced to sleep; then, robbed of Pipe and Rod,
And vanquished so, turn Swain, this Swain a God.
Yet to this Lad not wanted Enuies sting,
("He Is not worth ought, that is not worth envying.)
Since many at his praise were seen to grutch.
For as a Miller in his boulting hutch
Drives out the pure meal nearly (as he can)
And in his sister leaves the courser bran:
So does the canker of a Poets name
Let slip such lines as might inherit Fame,
And from a Volume c^ls some small amiss,
To fire such dogged spleenes as mate with his.
Yet, as a man that (by his Art) would bring
The ceaseless current of a Crystal Spring
To ouer-looke the lowly flowing head,
Sinkes by degrees his soder'd Pipes of Lead,
Beneath the Fount, whereby the water goes
High, as a Well that on a mountain flows:
So when Detraction and a Cynnicks tongue
Have sunk Desert unto the depth of wrong,
By that, the eye of skill, True Worth shall see
To brave the Stars, though low his passage be.
But, here I much digress, yet pardon, Swains:
For as a Maiden gathering on the Plains
A sen^full Nosegay (to set near her pap,
Or as a favor, for her Shepherds cap)
Is seen far off to stray, if she have spide
A Flower that might increase her Posies pride:
So if ^o wander I am sometimes pressed,
It Is for a strain that might adorn the rest.
Requests, that with denial could not meet,
Flew to our Shepherd, and the voices sweet
Of fairest Nymphs, entreating him to say.
What wight he loved; he thus began his lay: SHall I tell you whom I love?
Hearken then a while to me;
And if such a woman move,
As I now shall versi^ie;
Be assured, it is she, or none
That I love, and love alone.
Nature did her so much right,
As she scorns the help of Art.
In as many Virtues dight
As e're yet embraced a heart.
So much good so truly tried,
Some for less were deiside.
Wit she has without desire
To make known how much she has;
And her anger flames no higher
Then may sitly sweeten wrath.
Full of pity as may be,
Though perhaps not so to me.
Reason masters every sense,
And her virtues grace her birth:
Lovely as all excellence,
Modest in her most of mirth:
Likelihood enough to prove,
Only worth could kindle Love.
Such she is: and if you know
Such a one as I have sung;
Be she brown or fair, or so,
That she be but somewhile young;
Be assured, it is she, or none
Tha^ I love, and love alone.

(...) Pyrocis, (...), and (...) were fained to be the horses of the Sun.
^ous and his fellows in the teame,
(Who, since their watring in the Western stream,
Had run a furious journey to appease
The night-sicke eyes of our Antipodes.)
Now (sweating) were in our Horizon seen
To drink the cold dew from each flowery green:
When Tritons Trumpet (with a shrill command)
Told; siluer-footed Thetis was at hand.
As I have seen when on the breast of Thames
A heavenly beauty of sweet English Dames,
In some calm Eu'ning of delightful May,
Wit^ Music give a farewell to the day,
Or as they would (with an admired tone)
Greet Nights ascension to her Eben Throne,
Rap^ with their melody, a thousand more
Run to be wasted from the bounding shore:
So ran the Shepherds, and with hasty feet
Stro^e which should first increase that happy fleet.
The true Dolphi^s.
presagers of a coming storm
Teaching their sins, to steer them, to the form
Of Thetis will; like Boats at Anchor stood,
As ready to convey the Muses brood
Into the brackish Lake, that seemed to swell,
As proud so rich a burden on it fell.
Ere their ariuall Astrophel had done
His shepherds lay, yet equaliz'd of none.
Th'admired mirror, glory of our Isle,
Thou far-far-more then mortal man, whose style
Struck more men dumb to hearken to thy song,
Then Orph^us Harp, or Tullies golden tongue.
To him (as ^ight) for wits deep quintessence,
For honor, valor, virtue, excellence,
Be all the Garlands, crown his toombe with Bay,
Who spoke as much as ere our tongue can say.
Happy Arcadia^ while such lovely strains
Sung of thy Valleys, Rivers, Hills and Plains;
Ye^ most unhappy other joys among,
That never heard'st his Music nor his Song.
Deaf men are happy so, whose Virtues praise
(Unheard of them) are sung in tunefull lays.
And pardon me ye Sisters of the Mountain,
Who wail his loss from the Pegasian Fountain,
If (like a man for portraiture unable)
I set my Pencill to Apelles table;
Or dare to draw his Curtain, with a will
To show his true worth, when the Artists skill
Within that Curtain fully does express
His own Arts-Mastry my unableness.
He sweetly touched, what I harshly hit,
Yet thus I glory in what I have writ;
Sidney began (and if a wit so mean
May taste with him the dewes of Hippocrene)
I sung the Past'rall next; his Muse, my mouer:
And on the Plains full many a pensive lover
Shall sing us to their loves, and praising be,
My humble lines, the more, for praising thee.
Thus we shall live with them, by Rocks, by Springs,
As well as Homer by the death of Kings.
Then in a strain beyond an Oaten Q^ill
The learned M. Chapman
Shepherd of fair Hi^ching hill
Sung the heroicke deeds of Greece and Troy,
In lines, so worthy life, that I employ
My Reed in vain to overtake his fame.
All praisefull tongues do wait upon that name.
Our second Ovid, the most pleasing Muse
That heaven did e're in mortals brain infuse,
All-loued Draiton, in soule-raping strains,
A genuine no^t, of all the Nimphish trains
Began to tune; on it all ears were hung
As sometime Dido's on Aeneas tongue.
Johnson whose full of merit to rehearse
Too copious is to be confinde in verse;
Yet therein only fittest to be known,
Could any write a line which he might own.
One, so judicious; so well knowing; and
A man whose least worth is to understand;
One so exact in all he does prefer
To able censure; for the Theater
Not Seneca transcends his worth of praise;
Who writes him well shall well deserve the Bays.
Well-languag'd Danyel: Brook, whose polisht lines
Are ^ittest to accomplish high designs,
Whose pen (it seems) still young Apollo guides;
Worthy the forked Hill for ever glides
Streams from thy brain, so fair, that time shall see
Thee honored by thy Verse, and it by thee.
And when thy Temples well-deseruing Bays,
Might impe a pride in thee to reach thy praise,
As in a Crystal glass, filled to the ring
With the clear water of as clear a spring
A steady hand may very safely drop
Some quantity of gold, yet over the top
No^ force the liquor run; although before
The Glass (of water) could contain no more:
Ye^ so all-worthy Brook though all men sound
With plummets of just praise thy skill profound,
Thou in thy verse those attributes can take
And not apparent ostentation make,
That any second can thy virtues raise,
Striving as much to hide as merit praise.
Da^ies and Wither, by whose Muses power
A natural day to me seems but an hour,
And could I ever hear their learned lays,
Ages would turn to artificial days.
These sweetly chanted to the Queen of Waves,
She praised, and what she praised, no tongue depraues.
Then base contempt (unworthy our report)
Fly from the Muses and their fair resort,
And exercise thy spleen on men like thee:
Such are more fit to be contemned then we.
It Is not the rancour of a cankred heart
That can debase the excellence of Art;
Nor great in titles make our worth obey,
Since we have lines far more esteemed then they.
For there is hidden in a Poets name
A Spell that can command the wings of Fame,
And maugre all Obliuions hated birth,
Begin their immortality on earth;
When he that against a Muse with hate combines,
May raise his Tomb in vain to reach our lines.
Thus Thetis rides along the narrow ^eas
Encompast round with lovely Naides,
With gaudy Nymphs, and many a skillful Swain,
Whose equals, earth cannot produce again,
But leave the times and men that shall succeed them
Enough to praise that age which so did breed them.
Two of the quaintest Swains that yet have been
Failed their attendance on the Oceans Queen,
Remond and Doridon, whose hapless Fates
Late seuer'd them from their more happy mates.
For (gentle Swains) if you remember well
When last I sung on brim of yonder dell,
And as I guess it was that sunny morn,
When in the grove there by my sheep were shorn,
I ween I told you, while the Shepherds young
Were at their Past'rall, and their rural Song,
The shrikes of some poor Maid fallen in mischance,
Inuok't their aid, and drew them from their dance:
Each ^an a several way to help the Maid;
Some toward the Vallie, some the green wood straid:
Here one the thicket beats, and there a Swain
Enters the hidden Caves; but all in vain.
Nor could they find the wight whose shrikes and cry
Flew through the gentle air so heavily,
Nor see or man or beast, whose cruel teene
Would wrong a Maiden or in grave or green.
Back then returned they all to end their sport,
But Doridon and Remond; who resort
Back to those places which they erst had sought,
Nor could a thicket be by Nature wrought
In such a web, so intricate, and knit
So strong with Briars, but they would enter it.
Remond his Fida calls; Fida the woods
Resound again, and Fida speak the floods,
As if the Rivers and the Hills did frame
Themselves no small delight, to hear her name.
Yet she appears not. Doridon would now
Have called his Love too, but he knew not how:
Much like a man who dreaming in his sleep
That he is falling from some Mountain steep
Into a soundlesse Lake, about whose brim
A thousand Crocodiles do wait for him,
And hangs but by one bough, and should that break
His life goes with it, yet to cry or speak,
Though feign he would, can move nor voice, nor tongue:
So when he Remond heard the woods among
Call for his Fida, he would gladly too
Have called his fairest Love, but knew not who,
Or what to call; poor Lad, that can not tell,
Nor speak the name of her thou love so well.
Remond by hap near to the Arbor found
Where late the Hynd was slain, the hurtlesse ground
Besmeared with blood; to Doridon he cride,
And tearing then his hair, o hapless tide
(Quoth he) behold! some cursed hand has taken
From Fida this; o what infernal bane,
Or more then hellish fiend enforced this
Pure as the stream of aged Symois,
And as the spotless Lilly was her soul!
Ye sacred Powers that round about the Pole
Turn in your Spheres! o could you see this deed,
And keep your motion? If the eldest seed
Of chained Saturn has so often been
In Hunters and in Shepherds habit seen
To trace our Woods, and on our fertile Plains
Woo Shepherds Daughters with melodious strains,
Where was he now, or any other Power?
So many seu'rall Lambs have I each hour
And crooked horned Rams brought to your Shrines,
And with Perfumes clouded the Sun that shines,
Yet now forsaken? to an uncouth state
Must all things run, if such will be ingrate.
Cease Remond (quoth the Boy) no more complain,
Thy fairest Fida lives; nor do thou stain
With vile reproaches any power above,
They all as much as thee have been in love:
Saturn his Rhea; Jupiter had store,
As I^, Leda, Europa, and more;
Mars entered Vulcans bed, pertooke his joy;
Phoebus had Daphne, and the Hyacinth.
sweet-fac'd Boy;
Venus, Adonis; and the God of Wit
In chastest bonds was to the Muses knit,
And yet remains so, nor can any sever
His love, but brother-like affects them ever*
Pale changefull Cinthia her Endimion had,
And often on Latmus sported with that Lad:
If these were subject (as all mortal men)
Unto the golden shafts, they could not then
But by their own affections rightly guess
Her death would draw on thine; thy wretchedness
Charge them respectlesse; since no Swain then thee
Has offered more unto each Deity.
But fear not Remond, for those sacred Powers
Tre^don oblivion; no desert of ours
Can be intoomb'd in their celestial breasts;
They weigh our offerings, and our solemn feasts*
And they forget thee not: Fida (thy dear)
Treads on the earth, the blood that is sprinkled here
Never filled her veins, the Hynd possessed this gore,
See where the Coll^r lies she whilome wore;
Some Dog has slain her, or the griping Carle
That spoils our Plains in digging them for Marle.
Look as two little Brothers who addressed
To search the hedges for a Thrushes nest,
And have no sooner got the leauy Spring,
When mad in lust with fearful bellowing
A strong-neckt Bull pursues throughout the field,
One climbes a tree, and takes that for his shield,
Whence looking from one pasture to another,
What might betide to his much-loued Brother,
Further then can his ouer-drowned eyes
Aright perceive, the furious beast he spies
Toss something on his horns, he knows not what,
But one thing fears, and therefore thinks it that;
When coming nigher he does well discern
It of the wondrous-one-night-seeding Fern
Some bundle was: yet thence he home-ward goes
Pensive and sad, nor can abridge the throes
His fear began, but still his mind does move
Unto the worst: Mistrust goes still with Love.
So fared it with our Shepherd, though he saw
Not ought of Fida's raiment, which might draw
A more suspicion; though the Collar lay
There on the grass, yet goes he thence away
Full of mistrust, and vows to leave that Plain
Till he embrace his chasest Love again.
Loue-wounded Doridon entreats him then
That he might be his partner, since no men
Had cases liker; he with him would go,
Weep when he wept, and sigh when he did so:
I (quoth the Boy) will sing thee songs of love,
And as we sit in some all-shady grove,
Where Philomela and such sweetened throats,
Are for the mastry tuning various notes,
I Will strive with them, and tune so sad a Verse,
That whilst to thee my fortunes I rehearse,
No Bird but shall be mute, her note decline,
And cease her woe, to lend an ear to mine.
I Will tell thee tales of love, and show thee how
The Gods have wandered as we Shepherds now,
And when thou plain'st thy Fida's loss, will I
Echo the same, and with mine own, supply.
Know Remona I do love, but well-a-day
I know not whom; but as the gladsome May
She Is fair and lovely, as a Goddess she
(If such as hers a Goddess beauty be)
First stood before me, and inquiting was
How to the Marish she might soonest pass,
When rusht a Villain in, hell be his lot,
And drew her thence, since when I saw her not,
Nor know I where to search; but if thou please
It Is not a Forest, Mountain, Rocks, or Seas
Can in thy journey stop my going on.
Fate so may smile on hapless Doridon,
That he reblest may be with her fair sight,
Though thence his eyes possess eternal night.
Remond agreed, and many weary days
They now had spent in unfrequented ways:
About the Rivers, Valleys, Holts, and Crags,
Among the Ozyers and the wauing Flags,
They nearly pry, if any dens there be,
Where from the Sun might harbor cruelty:
Or if they could the bones of any spy,
Or torn by beasts, or humane tyranny,
They close inquiry make in cauernes blind,
Yet what they look for would be death to find.
Right as a curious man that would descrie
(Lead by the trembling hand of Jealousy)
If his fair wife have wronged his bed or no,
Meets his torment if he find her so.
One Even e're Phoebus (near the golden shore
Of Tagus stream) his journey began give over,
They had ascended up a woody hill
(Where often the Fauns with their Bugles shrill
Wakened the Echo, and with many a shout
Followed the fearful Dear the woods about,
Or through the Brakes that hide the craggy rocks,
Digd to the hole where lies the wily Fox.)
Thence they beheld an vnder-lying Vale
Where Flora set her rarest flowers at sale,
Whither the thriuing Be came often to suck them,
And fairest Nymphs to deck their hair did pluck them.
Where often the Goddesses did run at base,
And on white Hearts begun the Wilde-goose-chase:
Here various Nature seemed adorning this,
In imitation of the fields of bliss;
Or as she would entice the souls of men
To leave Elysium, and live here again.
Not Hybla mountain in the iocund prime
Upon her many bushes of sweet Thyme
Shows greater number of industrious Bees,
Then were the Birds that sung there on the trees.
Like the trim windings of a wanton Lake,
That does his passage through a Meadow make,
Ran the delightful Valley 'tweene two Hills:
From whose rare trees the precious Balm distills,
And hence Apollo had his simples good
That cured the Gods, hurt, by the Earths ill brood.
A Crystal River on her bosom slid,
And (passing) seemed in sullen muttrings chid
The artlesse Songsters, that their Music still
Should charm the sweet Dale, and the wistfull Hill,
Not suffering her shrill waters as they run
Tuned with a whistling gale in Unison
To tell as high they prized the brodred Vale,
As the quick Lenn^s or sweet Nightingale.
Down from a steep Rock came the water first,
(Where lusty Satyrs often quenched their thirst)
And with no little speed seemed all in haste
Till i^ the lovely bottom had embraced:
Then as intran^'d to hear the sweet Birds sing,
In curled whirlpooles she her course does bring,
As l^th to leave the songs that lulled the Dale,
Or waiting time when she and some soft gale
Should speak what true delight they did possess.
Among the rare flowers which the Valley dress.
But since those quaint Musicians would not stay,
Nor suffer any to be heard but they:
Much like a little ^ad who gotten new
To play his part amongst a skillful crew
Of choice Musicians, on some softer string
That is not heard; the others fingering
Drowning his Art; the boy would gladly get
Applause with others that are of his Set.
And therefore strikes a stroke loud as the best,
And often des^ants when his fellows rest;
That, to be heard* (as (...) ^ingers do)
Spoils his own Musick^ and his partners too:
So at the furt^er end the waters fell
From off an (...) bancke down a lowly Dell,
As they had vowed ere passing from that ground,
The Birds should be enforced ^o hear their sound.
No small delight the Shepherds took to see
A Valley.
coombe so dight in Flora ^iuery,
Where fair Feronia According to that of Silius lib. 13. Pu^icor. -- ^^ur in
agros Dives vbi a^t^ omnes colitur ^eronia luco.
honored in the Woods,
And all the Deities that haunt the floods,
With powrefull Nature strove to (...) a plot,
Who^^ like the sweet Arcadia yielded nor.
Down through the arched wood the Shepherds wend,
And seek all places that might help their end,
When coming near the bottom of the hill
A deep fetched sigh (which seemed of power to kill
The breast that held it) pierced the listening wood,
Whereat the ear still Swains no longer stood
Where they were looking on a tree, whose (...)
A Love knot held, which two joined hearts the wind;
But searching round, upon an aged foot
Thick linde with most, which (though to little boot)
Seemed as a shelter it had lending been
Against cold Winters storms and wreakfull teene;
Or clad the stock in Summer with that hue
His withered branches not a long time knew:
For in his hollow truncke and perished grain
The Cuckoo now had many a Winter lain,
And thriuing Pismires laid their eggs in store;
The Dormouse slept there, and a many more.
Here sat the Lad, of whom I think of old
Virgils prophetique spirit had foretold,
Who whilst Dame Nature for her cunnings sake,
A male or female doubted which to make,
And to adorn him, more then all, assaid,
This pretty youth was almost made a Maid.
Sadly he sat, (and as would grief) alone,
As if the Boy and Tree had been but one,
Whilst down near boughs did drops of Amber creep^,
As if his sorrow made the trees to weep.
If ever this were true in Ouids Verse
That tears have power an Adamant to pierce,
Or move things void of sense, 'twas here approved.
Things vegetative, once, his tears have moved.
Surely the stones might well be drawn, in pity
To burst that he should moan, as for a Ditty
To come and range themselves in order all,
And of their own accord raise Thebes a wall.
Or else his tears (as did the others song)
Might have th'attractiue power to move the throng
Of all the Forests, Citizens and Woods,
With every Denizon of Air and Floods,
To sit by him and grieve; to leave their iarres,
Their strifes, dissentions, and all civil wars;
And though else disagreeing, in this one
Mourning for him should make an Union.
For whom the heavens would wear a sable suit,
If men, beasts, fishes, birds, trees, stones were mute.
His eyes were fixed (rather fixed Stars)
With whom it seemed his tears had been in wars,
The difference this (a hard thing to descry)
Whether the drops were clearest, or his eye.
Tears fearing conquest to the eye might fall,
An inundation brought and drowned all.
Yet like true Virtue from the top of State
(Whose hopes vile Envy has seen ruinate)
Being lowly cast, her goodness does appear
(Vncloath'd of greatness) more apparent clear:
So though dejected, yet remained a feature
Made sorrow sweet placed in so sweet a creature.
"The test of misery the truest is,
"In that none has but what is surely his.
His arms a cross, his sheepe-hooke lay beside him:
Had Venus passed this way, and chanced to have spide him,
With open breast, locks on his shoulders spread,
She would have sworn (had she not seen him dead;)
It was Adonis; or if e're there was
Held transmigration by Pithagoras.
Of souls, that certain then, her lost-loues spirit
A fairer body never could inherit.
His Pipe which often wont upon the Plain
To sound the Dorian, Phrygian, Lydian strain,
Lay from his Hook and Bag clean cast apart,
And almost broken like his Masters heart.
Yet till the two kind Shepherds near him stepped,
I find he nothing spoke but that he wept.
Cease gentle Lad (quoth Remond) let no tear
Cloud those sweet beauties in thy face appear;
Why do thou call-on that which comes alone,
And will not leave thee till thy self art gone?
Thou may have grief when other things are rest thee,
All else may slide away, this still is left thee;
And when thou want other company,
Sorrow will ever be embracing thee.
But fairest Swain what cause have thou of woe?
Thou have a well-fleec'd flock seed to and fro,
(His sheep along the Valley that time fed
Not ^arre from him, although vnfollowed)
What, do thy Ewes abortiues bring? or Lambs
For want of milk seek to their fellows Dams?
No gryping Landlord has enclosed thy walks,
Nor ^oyling Plowman furrowed them in balkes.
Ver has adorned thy Pastures all in green
With Clouer-grasse as fresh as may be seen:
Clear gliding Springs refresh thy Meadows heat,
Meads promise to thy charge their winter-meat,
And yet thou grieu'st. O^ had some Swains thy store,
Their Pipes should tell the Woods they asked no more.
Or have the Parca with impartial knife
Lef^ some friends body tenantlesse of life,
And thou bemoan'st that Fate in his youths morn
Ore-cast with clouds his light but newly borne?
"Count not how many years he is bereaved,
"But those which he possessed and had received;
"If I may tread no longer on this stage,
"Though others think me young; it is mine age:
"For who so has his Fates full period told,
"He full of years departs, and dies old*
May be that Auarico thy mind has crossed,
And so thy sighs are for some trif^e lost*
Why should thou hold that dear the world throws on thee?
"Think nothing good which may be taken from thee,
Look as some pondrous weight or massy pack,
Laid to be carried on a Porters back,
Does make his strong joints crack, and forces him
(Maugre the help of every nerve and lim,)
To straggle in his gate, and goes double,
Bending to earth, such is his burdens trouble:
So any one by Auarico ingirt,
And pressed with wealth, lies groueling in the dirt.
His wretched mind bends to no point but this,
That who has most of wealth has most of bliss.
Hence comes the world to seek such traffic forth
And passage* through the congealed North,
Who when their hairs with Isicles are hung
And that their chatt'ring teeth confound their tongue,
Show them a glittering stone, will straight ways say,
If pains thus prosper, oh what fools would play?
Yet I could tell them (as I now do thee)
"In getting wealth we lose our liberty.
"Besides, it robs us of our better powers,
"And we should be our selves were these not ours.
"He is not poorest that has least in store,
"But he which has enough, ye asks more*
"No^ is he rich by whom are all possessed,
"But he which nothing has, yet asks least.
"If thou ^ life by Nature, leading pitch,
"Thou never shall be poor, nor ever rich
"Led by Opinion; for their states are such,
" Nature but little seeks, Opinion much!
Amongst the many buds proclaiming May,
(Decking the fields in holy days a^ay,
Striving who shall surpass in bravery)
Mark the ^aste blooming of the Hawthorne-tree*
Who finely clothed in a robe of white,
Feeds full the wanton eye with May's delight;
Yet for the bravery that she is in
Does neither handle Cara nor Wheel to spin,
Nor changes robes but twice, is never seen
In other colors then in white or green.
Lea^ne then content young Shepherd from this tree,
Whose greatest wealth is Natures livery,
And richest ingots never toil to find,
Nor care for poverty but of the mind.
This spoke young Remond: yet the mournful Lad
Not once replyde; But with a smile, though sad,
He shook his head then crossed his arms again,
And from his eyes did showers of salt tears rain,
Which wrought so on the (...), they could not smother
Their sighs, but spent them f^eely as the other.
Tell us (quoth Doridon) thou fairer far:
Then Hippolit^^.
he whole chastity made him a Star,
More fit to throw the wounding shafts of Love,
Then follow sheep, and pine here in a Grove.
O do not hide thy sorrows, show them brief;
"He often finds aid that does disclose his grief.
If thou would it continue, thou do wrong;
"No man can sorrow very much and long:
For thus much, loving Nature has disposed,
That amongst the woes that have us round enclosed,
This comfort's left (and we should bless her for it)
That we may make our griefs be borne, or short.
Believe me Shepherd, we are men no less
Free from the killing throes of heaviness
Then thou art here, and but this difference sure,
That use has made us apter to endure.
More he had spoke, but that a Bugle shrill
Rung through the Valley from the higher Hill,
And as they turned them toward the hartning sound,
A gallant Stag as if he scorned the ground
Came running with the wind, and bore his head
As he had been the King of forests bred.
Not swifter comes the Messenger of Heaven,
Or winged vessel with a full gale driven,
Nor the swift Swallow flying near the ground,
By which the airs distemp'rature is found:
Nor Mirrha's course, nor Daphne's speedy flight,
Shunning the daliance of the God of light,
Then seemed the Stag, that had no sooner crossed them
But in a trice their eyes as quickly lost him.
The weeping Swain never moved, but as his eyes
Were only given to show his miseries,
Attended those; and could not once be won
To leave that object whence his tears begun.
O had that (...)
man, who (by a Tyrants hand)
Seeing his childrens bodies strew the sand,
And he next morn for torments pressed to go,
Yet from his eyes let no one small tear flow,
But being asked how well he bore their loss,
Like to a man affliction could not cross,
He stoutly answered: Happier sure are they
Th^^ I shall be by space of one short day:
No more his grief wa^. But had he been here
He had been flint, had he not spent a tear.
For still that man the perfecter is known,
Who others sorrows feels more then his own.
R^mond and Doridon were turning then
Unto the most disconsolate of men,
But that a gallant Dame, fair as the morn,
Or lovely bloomes the Peach-tree that adorn,
Clad in a changing silk, whose luster shone
Like yellow flowers and grass far off, in one,
Or like the mixture Nature does display
Upon the quaint wings of the Popi^iay,
Her horn about her neck with silver tip,
Too hard a metal for so soft a lip:
Which it no oftener kissed, then Jove did frown,
And in a mortals shape would saine come down
To feed upon those dainties, had not he
Been still kept back by Juno's jealousy.
An Iuory dart she held of good command,
White was the bone, but whiter was her hand;
Of many pieces was it nearly framed,
But more the hearts were that her eyes inflamed.
Upon her head a green light silken cap,
A piece of white Lawne shadowed either pap,
Between which hillocks many Cupids lay,
Where with her neck or with her teats they play,
Whilst her quick heart will not with them dispense,
But heaues her breasts as it would beat them thence,
Who fearing much to lose so sweet repair,
Take faster hold by her dishe^ell'd hair.
Swiftly she ran; the sweet Briars to receive her
Slipped their-embracements, and (as loath to leave her)
Stretched themselves to their length: yet on she goes.
So great Diana frayes a heard of Roes
And speedy follows: Arethusa sled
So, from the Alpheus.
River, that her ravished.
When this brave Huntresse near the Shepherds drew,
Her Lilly arm in full extent she threw,
To pluck a little bough (to fan her face)
From off a thicke-leau'd Ash: (no tree did grace
The low Grove as did this, the branches spread
Like Neptune's Trident upwards from the head.)
No sooner did the grieved Shepherd see
The Nimphs white hand extended toward the tree,
But rose and to her ran, yet she had done
Ere he came near, and to the wood was gone;
Yet now approached the bough the Huntresse tore,
He suck it with his mouth, and kissed it over
A hundred times, and softly began it bind
With Dock-leaues, and a slip of Willow rind.
Then round the trunk he wreaths his weakened arms,
And with his scalding tears the smooth bark warms,
Sighing and groaning, that the Shepherds by
Forgot to help him, and lay down to cry:
"For it is impossible a man should be
"Grieved to himself, or fail of company.
Much the two Swains admired, but pitti'd more
That he no power of words had, to deplore
Or show what sad misfortune 'twas befell
To him, whom Nature (seemed) regarded well.
As thus they lay, and while the speechless Swain
His tears and sighs spent to the woods in vain,
One like a wild man ouer-growne with hair,
His nails long grown, and all his body bare,
Save that a wreath of Iuy twist did hide
Those parts which Nature would not have discride,
And ^he long hair that curled from his head
A grassie garland rudely covered.
But Shepherds I have wronged you, it is now late,
For see our Maid stands hollowing on yond gate,
It Is supper-time, withal, and we had need
Make haste away, unless we mean to speed
With those that kiss the Hares foot: Rhumes are bred,
Some say, by going supperlesse to bed,
And those I love not; therefore cease my rhyme,
And put my Pipes up till another time.
THE THIRD SONG.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Redbrest does from pining save
Marina sh^t in Famines Cave.
The Golden age described plain,
And Limos by the Shepherds slain,
Do give me leave a while to move
My Pipe of Tauy and his Love.
ALas that I have done so great a wrong
Unto the fairest Maiden of my Song,
Divine Marina, who in Limos Cave
Lies ever fearful of a living grave,
And night and day upon the hardened stones,
Rests, if a rest can be amongst the mones
Of dying wretches; where each minute all
Stand still afraid to hear the Deaths-man call.
Thrice had the golden Sun his hot Steeds washed
In the West Maine, and thrice them smartly lasht
Out of the Baul^y East, since the sweet Maid
Had in that dismal Cave been sadly laid.
Where hunger pinched her so, she need not stand
In fear of murdring by a second hand:
For through her tender sides such darts might pass
Against which strong walls of stone, thick gates of brass
Deny no entrance, nor the Camps of Kings,
Since soonest there they bend their flaggy wings.
But heaven that stands still for the best's avail,
Len^eth his hand when humane helpings fail;
For 'twere impossible that such as she
Should be forgotten of the Deity;
Since in the spacious Orb could no man find
A fairer face matched with a fairer mind.
A little Robin Red-brest one clear morn,
Sat sweetly singing on a well-leau'd Thorn:
Whereat Marina rose, and did admire
He durst approach from whence all else retire:
And pitying the sweet Bird what in her lay,
She sully strove to fright him thence away.
Poor harmless wretch (quoth she) go seek some spring,
And to her sweet fall with thy fellows sing;
Fly to the well-replenish'd Groves, and there
Do entertain each Swains harmonious ear;
Trauerse the winding branches; chant so free,
That every lover fall in love with thee;
And if thou chance to see that lovely Boy
(To look on whom the Siluans count a joy)
He whom I loved no sooner then I lost,
Whose body all the Graces has ingrost,
To him unfold (if that thou dare to be
So near a neighbor to my Tragedy)
As far as can thy voice, (in plaints so sad,
And in so many mournful accents clad,
That as thou sing'st upon a tree there by
He may some small time weep, yet know not why)
How I in death was his, though Powers divine
Will not permit that he in life be mine.
Do this thou loving Bird; and haste away
Into the woods: but if so be thou stay
To do a deed of charity on me
When my pure soul shall leave mortality,
By cou'ring this poor body with a sheet
Of green leaves, gathered from a valley sweet;
It is in vain: these harmless lims must have
Then in the Caitifes womb, no other grave.
Hence then sweet Robin; lest in staying long
At once thou chance forgo both life and song.
With this she hushed him thence, he sung no more,
But (fraid the second time) flew toward the shore.
Within as short time as the swiftest Swain
Can to our May Pole run and come again,
The little Redbrest to the prickled thorn
Returned, and sung there as he had beforne:
And fair Marina to the loope-hole went,
Pitying the pretty Bird, whose punishment
Limos would not defer if he were spide.
No sooner had the bird the Maiden eyde,
But leaping on the rock, down from a bough,
He takes a Cherry up (which he but now
Had thither brought, and in that place had laid
Till to the cleft his song had drawn the Maid)
And flying with the small stem in his bill,
(A choiser fruit, then hangs on Bacchus Citharon in Bo^^ia.
hill)
In fair Marina's bosom took his rest,
A heavenly seat fit for so sweet a guest:
Where Citherea's Doves might billing sit,
And Gods and men with Envy look on it;
Where rose two mountains, whose rare sweets to crop
Was harder then to reach Olympus top:
For those the Gods can; but to climb these hills
Their powers no other were then mortal wills.
Here left the Bird the Cherry, and anon
Forsook her bosom, and for more is gone,
Making such speedy flights into the Thick,
That she admired he went and came so quick.
Then lest his many Cherries should distaste,
Some other fruit he brings then he brought last.
Some^ime of Strawberries a little stem,
Often changing colors as he gathered them:
Some green, some white, some red on them infused,
These loved, those feared, they blushed to be so used.
The Peascod green, often with no little toil
He Would seek for in the fattest fertil'st soil,
And rend it from the stalk to bring it to her,
And in her bosom for acceptance woo her.
No Be^ry in the Grove or Forest grew,
That sit for nourishment the kind Bird knew,
Nor any powrefull herb in open field,
To serve her brood the teeming earth did yield,
But with his utmost industry he sought it,
And to the Cave for chaste Marina brought it.
So from one well-stor'd garden to another,
To gather Simples runs a careful mother,
Whose only child lies on the shaking bed
Gripped with a Fever (sometime honored
In Rome as if a Febrem ad minus nocendum templis col^bant, ait Val. Maximus.
Vid^ Tullium in te^tio de Not. Deorum, and secundo de Legibus.
God) nor is she bent
To other herbs then those for which she went.
The feathred hours five times were ouer-told,
And twice as many floods and ebbs had ^old
The small sands out and in, since fair Marine
(For whose long loss a hundred Shepherds pine)
Was by the charitable Robin fed:
For whom (had she not so been nourished)
A hundred Doves would search the Sunburned hills,
Or fruitful Valleys laced with silver rils,
To bring her Olives. The Eagle strong of sight
To Countries far remote would bend her flight,
And with unwearied wing strip through the sky
To the choice plots of Gaul and Italy,
And never lin till home-ward she escape
With the Pomgranat, Lemmon, Oringe, Grape,
Or the loved Citron, and attained the Cave.
The well-plum'd Goshawke (by the Egyptians grave
Used in their my stick Characters for speed)
Would not be wanting at so great a need,
But from the well-stor'd Orchards of the Land
Brought the sweet Pear (once by a cursed hand
At One writes that K. John was poisoned at Swinsted, with a dish of pears:
Others, there, in a cup of wine: Some, that he died at Newark of the Flux A
fourth, by the distemperature of Peaches eaten in his sit of an Ague. Among so
many doubts, I leave you to believe the Author most in credit with our best of
A^tiquaries.
Swinsted used with poison, for the fall
Of one who on these Plains ruled Lord of all.)
The sentfull Osprey by the Rock had fished
And many a pretty Shrimp in Scallops dish'd,
Some way conuay'd her; no one of the shole
That haunt the waves, but from his lurking hole
Had pulled the Cray-fish, and with much ado
Brought that the Maid, and Perywinckles too.
But these for others might their labors spare,
And not with Robin for their merits share.
Yet as a Herdesse in a Summers day,
Heat with the glorious Suns all-purging ray,
In the calm Evening (leaving her fair flock)
Betakes her self unto a froth-girt Rock,
On which the headlong Tauy throws his waves,
(And foames to see the stones neglect his braues:)
Where sitting to undo her Buskins white,
And wash her neat legs, (as her use each night)
Th'in amour'd flood before she can unlace them,
Rowles up his waves as hastening to embrace them,
And though to help them some small gale do blow,
And one of twenty can but reach her so;
Yet will a many little surges be
Flashing upon the rock full busily,
And do the best they can to kiss her feet,
But that their power and will, not equal meet:
So as she for her Nurse looked toward the land,
(And now beholds the trees that grace the strand,
Then looks upon a hill whose sliding sides.
A goodly flock (like winters cou'ring) hides,
And higher on some stone that iutteth out,
Their careful master guiding his trim rout
By sending forth his Dog, (as Shepherds do)
Or piping sat, or clo^ting of his shoe.)
Whence, nearer hand drawing her wandering sight,
(So from the earth steals the all-quickning light)
Beneath the rock, the waters, high, but late,
(I know not by what sluice or empting gate)
Were at a low ebb; on the sand she spies
A busy Bird that to and fro still flies,
Till pitching where a heatfull Oyster lay,
Opening his close jaws, (closer none then they
Unless the griping fist, or cherry lips
Of happy Lovers in their melting sips.)
Since the decreasing waves had left him there
Gaping for thirst, yet meets with naught but air,
And that so hot; ere the returning tide,
He in his shell is likely to be fride;
The wary Bird a prittie pibble takes
And claps it twixt the two pearle-hiding flakes
Of the broad yawning Oyster, and she then
Securely pickes the fish out (as some men
A trick of policy thrust, tweene two friends,
Sever their powers, and his intention ends)
The Bird thus getting that, for which she strove
Brought it to her: to whom the Queen of Love
Served as a foil, and Cupid could no other,
But fly to her mistaken for his Mother.
Marina from the kind Bird took the meat,
And (looking down) she saw a number great
Of Birds, each one a pibble in his bill,
Would do the like, but that they wanted skill:
Some threw it in too far, and some too short;
This could not bear a stone fit for such sport,
But harmless wretch putting in one too small,
The Oyster shuts and takes his head withal.
Another bringing one too smooth and round,
(Unhappy Bird that thine own death have found)
Lays it so little way in his hard lips,
That with their sudden close, the pibble slips
So strongly forth (as when your little ones
Do twixt their fingers slip their Cherry-stones)*
That it in passage meets the breast o^ head
Of the poor wretch, and lays him there for dead.
A many strived, and gladly would have done
As much or more then he which first begun,
But all in vain, scarce one of twenty could
Perform the deed, which they full gladly would.
For this not quick is to that act he go'th,
That wants skill, this cunning, and some both:
Yet none a will, for (from the cave) she sees
Not in all-louely May the industrious Bees
More busy with the flowers could be, then these
Among the shellfish of the working Seas.
Limos had all this while been wanting thence,
And but just heaven preserved pure innocence
By the two Birds; her life to air had flit
Ere the cursed Caytife should have forced it.
The first night that he left her in his den
He got to shore, and near th'abodes of men
That live as we by tending of their flocks,
To enterchange for Ceres golden locks,
Or with the Neat-herd for his milk and cream:
Things we respect more then the Diadem
His choice made-dishes; O! the golden age
Met all contentment in no surplusage
Of dainty viands, but (as we do still)
Drank the pure water of the crystal rill,
Fed on no other meats then those they fed,
Labor, the salad that their stomachs bred.
Nor sought they for the down of silver Swans,
Nor those Sow-thistle locks each small gale fans,
But hydes of Beasts, which when they lived they kept,
Served them for bed and cou'ring when they slept.
If any softer lay, 'twas (by the loss
Of some rocks warmth) on thick and spungy moss,
Or on the ground: some simple wall of clay
Parting their beds from where their cattle lay.
And on such pallats one man clipped then
More golden slumbers then this age again.
That time Physicians thriu'd not: or if any
I dare say, all: yet then were thrice as many
As now profess't, and more, for every man
Was his own Patient and Physician.
None had a body then so weak and thin,
Bankrout of natures store, to feed the sin
Of an insatiate female, in whose womb
Could nature all hers past, and all to come
Infuse, with virtue of all drugs beside,
She might be tired, but never satisfied.
To please which Orke her husbands weakened piece
Must have his Cullis mixed with Ambergris,
Phesa^t and Partridge into ^elly turned,
Grated with gold, seven times refined and burned,
With dust of Orient Pearl, richer the East
Yet never beheld: (O Epicurian feast!)
This is his breakfast; and his meal at night
Possets no less provoking appetite,
Whose dear ingredients valued are at more
Then all his Ancestors were worth before.
When such as we by poor and simple fare
More able lived, and di'd no^ without heir,
Sprung from our own loins, and a spotless bed
Of any other power vnseconded:
When the others issue (like a man fallen sick,
Or through the Fever, Gout, or Lunaticke,
Changing his Doctors often, each as his notion
Prescribes a seu'rall diet, seu'rall potion,
Meeting his friend (who meet we now adays
That has not some receipt for each disease?)
He tells him of a plaster, which he takes;
And finding after that, his torment slakes,
(Whether because the humor is out-wrought,
Or by the skill which his Physician brought,
It makes no matter:) for he surely thinks
None of their purges, nor their diet drinks
Have made him sound; but his belief is fast
That medicine was his health which he took last:
So (by a mother) being taught to call
One for his Father, though a Son to all,
His mothers often scapes (though truly known)
Cannot divert him; but will ever own
For his begetter, him, whose name and rents
He must inherit. Such are the descents
Of these men; to make up whose limber heir
As many as in him, must have a share;
When he that keeps the last yet least ado,
Fathers the peoples child, and gladly too.
Happier those times were, when the Flaxen clew
By fair Arachne's hand the Lydians knew,
And sought not to the worm for silken threads,
To roll their bodies in, or dress their heads.
When wise Minerua did the Athenians learn
To draw their milke-white fleeces into yarne;
And knowing not the mixtures which began
(Of colors) from the Babylonian,
Nor wool in Sardis did, more various known
By hues, then Iris to the world has shown:
The bowels of our mother were not ripped
For Mader-pits, nor the sweet meadows stripped
Of their choice beauties, nor for Ceres load
The fertile lands burd'ned with needless Woad.
Through the wide Seas no winged Pine did go
To Lands unknown for staining Indico;
Nor men in scorching clymates moar'd their Keele
To traffic for the costly Concheneele.
Unknown was then the Phrygian brodery,
The Tyrian purple, and the Scarlet dye,
Such as their sheep clad, such they woue and wore,
Russet or white, or those mixed, and no more:
Except sometimes (to bravery inclinde)
They did them yellow caps with Alder rind.
The Grecian mantle, Tuscan robes of state,
Tissu^, nor Cloth of gold of highest rate,
They never saw; only in pleasant woods,
Or by th'embrodered margin of the floods,
The dainty Nymphs they often did behold
Clad in their light silk robes, stitcht often with gold.
The Arras hangings round their comely Hals,
Wanted the Cerites web and minerals:
Green boughs of trees which fatning Acornes lade,
Hung full with flowers and Garlands quaintly made,
Their homely Cotes decked trim in low degree,
As now the Court with richest Tapistry.
In stead of Cushions wrought in windows lain,
They picked the Cockle from their fields of Grain,
Sleep bringing Poppy, by the Plow-men late
Not without cause to Ceres consecrate,
For being round and full at his half birth
It signified the perfect Orb of earth;
And by his inequalities when blown,
The earths low Vales and higher Hills were shown.
By multitude of grains it held within,
Of men and beasts the number noted bin;
And she since taking care all earth to please,
Had in her (...) and (...) were sacrifices peculiar to Ceres, the one for
being a Lawgiver, the other as Goddess of the grounds.
Thesmophoria offered these.
Or cause that seed our Elders used to eat,
With honey mixed (and was their after meat)
Or since her Daughter that she loved so well
By him that in the infernal shades does dwell,
And on the Srygian banks for ever reigns
(Troubled with horrid cries and noise of chains)
(Fairest Pros^rpina) was rapt away;
And she in plaints, the night; in tears, the day
Had long time spent; when no high Power could give her
Any redress; the Vide Serui^^m in Virg. Georg. 1.
Poppy did relieve her:
For eating of the seeds they sleep procured,
And so beguiled those griefs she long endured.
Or rather since her Love (then happy man)
Micon (ycleep'd) the brave Athenian,
Had been transformed into this gentle Flower,
And his protection kept from Flora's power.
The Daizy scattred on each Mead and Down,
A golden tuft within a silver Crown,
(Fair fall that dainty flower* and may there be
No Shepherd graced that does not honor thee*)
The Primrose, when with six leaves gotten grace
Maids as a True-loue in their bosoms place
The spotless Lilly, by whose pure leaves be
Noted the chaste thoughts of virginity;
Carnations sweet with color like the fire,
The fit Impresa's for imflam'd desire;
The Hare-bell for her stainlesse azur'd hue,
Claims to be worn of none but those are true;
The Rose, like ready youth enticing stands,
And would be cropped if it might choose the hands;
The yealow King-cup, Flora them assigned
To be the badges of a jealous mind;
The Oringe-tawny Marigold: the night
Hides not her color from a searching sight.
To thee then dearest Friend (my songs chief mate)
This color chiefly I appropriate,
That spite of all the mists Oblivion can
Or en^ious frettings of a guilty man,
Retain'st thy worth; nay, make it more in prise,
Like Tennis-bals thrown down hard, highest rise.
The Columbine in tawny often taken,
Is then ascribed to such as are forsaken;
Flora's choice buttons of a russet dye
Is Hope even in the depth of misery.
The ^ansie, Thistle, all with prickles set,
The Cowslip, Honisuckle, Violet,
And many hundreds more that graced the Meads,
Gardens and Groves, (where beauteous Flora treads)
Were by the Shepherds Daughters (as yet are
Used in our Cotes) brought home with special care:
For b^uising them they not alone would quell
But rot the rest, and spoil their pleasing smell.
Much like a Lad, who in his tender prime
Sent from his friends to learn the use of time,
As are his mates, or good or bad, so he
Thriues to the world, and such his actions be.
As in the Rainbowes many colored hew
Here see we watchet deepned with a blew,
There a dark tawnie with a purple mixed,
Yealow and flame, with streakes of green betwixt,
A bloody stream into a blushing run
And ends still with the color which begun,
Drawing the deeper to a lighter stain,
Bringing the lightest to the deep'st again,
With such rare Art each mingleth with his fellow,
The blew with watche^, green and red with yealow*
Like to the changes which we daily see
About the Doves neck with variety,
Where none can say (though he it strict attends)
Here one begins; and there the other ends:
So did the Maidens with their various flowers
Deck up their windows, and make neat their bowres:
Using such cunning as they did dispose
The ruddy Piny with the lighter Rose,
The Moncks-hood with the Buglosse, and intwine
The white, the blew, the flesh-like Columbine
With Pinckes, Sweet-Williams; that far off the eye
Could not the manner of their mixtures spy.
Then with those flowers they most of all did prise,
(With all their skill, and in most curious wise
On tufts of Herbs or Rushes) would they frame
A dainty border round their Shepherds name.
Or Poesies make, so quaint, so apt, so rare,
As if the Muses only lived there:
And that the after world should strive in vain
What they then did to counterfeit again.
Nor will the Needle nor the Loome e're be
So perfect in their best embroderie,
Nor such composures make of silk and gold,
As theirs, when Nature all her cunning told.
The word of Mine did no man then bewitch,
They thought none could be fortunate if rich.
And to the covetous did wish no wrong
But what himself desired: to live here long.
As of their Songs, so of their lives they deemed,
Not of the long'st, but best performed, esteemed.
They thought that heaven to him no life did give,
Who only thought upon the means to live.
Nor wished they 'twere ordained to live here ever,
But as life was ordained they might persevere.
O happy men! you ever did possess
No wisdom, but was mixed with simpleness;
So, wanting malice: and from folly free,
Since reason went with your simplicity.
You searched your selves if all within were fair,
And did not learn of others what you were.
Your lives the patterns of those virtues gave
Which adulation tells men now they have.
With poverty, in love we only close
Because our Lovers it most tru^ly shows:
When they who in that blessed age did move,
Knew neither poverty, nor want of love.
The hatred which they bore was only this,
That every one did hate to do amiss.
Their fortune still was subject to their will:
Their want (o happy!) was the want of ill.
Ye truest, fairest, louelyest Nymphs that can
Out of your eyes lend fire Promethian,
All-beautious Ladies, loue-alluring Dames,
That on the banckes of Isca, Humber, Thames,
By your encouragement can make a Swain
Climb by his Song where none but souls attain:
And by the graceful reading of our lines
Renew our heat to further brave designs:
(You, by whose means my Muse thus boldly says:
Though she do sing of Shepherds loves and lays,
And flagging weakly low gets not on wing
To second that of Hellens rauishing:
Nor has the love nor beauty of a Queen
My subject graced, as other works have been;
Yet not to do their age nor ours a wrong,
Though Queens, nay Goddesses famed Homers song)
Mine has been tuned and heard by beauties more
Then all the Poets that have lived before.
Not cause it is more worth: but it does fall
That Nature now is turned a prodigal,
And on this age so much perfection spends,
That to her last of treasure it extends;
For all the ages that are slid away
Had not so many beauties as this day.
O what a rapture have I gotten now!
That age of gold, this of the lovely brow
Have drawn me from my Song! I onward run
Clean from the end to which I first begun.
But ye the heavenly creatures of the West,
In whom the virtues and the graces rest,
Pardon! that I have run astray so long,
And grow so tedious in so rude a song,
If you your selves should come to add one grace
Unto a pleasant Grove or such like place,
Where here the curious cutting of a hedge,
There, by a pond, the trimming of the sedge;
Here the fine setting of well shading trees,
The walks there mounting up by small degrees,
The gravel and the green so equal lie,
It, with the rest, draws on your lingering eye:
Here the sweet smells that do perfume the air,
Arising from the infinite repair
Of odoriferous buds, and herbs of price,
(As if it were another Paradise)
So please the smelling sense, that you are feign
Where last you walked to turn and walk again.
There the small Birds with their harmonious notes
Sing to a Spring that smileth as she floats:
For in her face a many dimples show,
And often skips as it did dancing go:
Here further down an ouer-arched Alley
That from a hill goes winding in a valley,
You spy at end thereof a standing Lake,
Where some ingenious Artist strives to make
The water (brought in turning pipes of Lead
Through Birds of earth most lively fashioned)
To counterfeit and mock the Siluans all,
In singing well their own set Madrigall.
This with no small delight retains your ear,
And makes you think none blessed but who live there.
Then in another place the fruits that be
In gallant clusters decking each good tree
Inuit your hand to crop some from the stem,
And liking one, taste every sort of them:
Then to the arbours walk, then to the bowres,
Thence to the walks again, thence to the flowers,
Then to the Birds, and to the clear spring thence,
Now pleasing one, and then another sense:
Here one walks often, and yet anew begin'th,
As if it were some hidden Labyrinth;
So loath to part, and so content to stay,
That when the Gardner knocks for you away,
It grieves you so to leave the pleasures in it,
That you could wish that you had never seen it:
Blame me not then, if while to you I told
The happiness our fathers clipped of old,
The mere imagination of their bliss
So rapt my thoughts, and made me sing amiss.
And still the more they ran on those days worth,
The more unwilling was I to come forth.
O! if the apprehension joy us so,
What would the action in a humane show?
Such were the Shepherds (to all goodness bent)
About whose Villages.
Thorps that night cursed Limos went.
Where he had learned that next day all the Swains,
That any sheep fed on the fertile plains,
The feast of Pales Goddess of their grounds
Did mean to celebrate. Fitly this sounds
He thought, to what he formerly intended,
His stealth should by their absence be befriended:
For whilst they in their offerings busied were,
He amongst the flocks might range with lesser fear.
How to contriue his stealth he spent the night.
The Morning now in colors richly dight
Stepped over the Eastern thresholds, and no lad
That joyed to see his pastures ^reshly clad,
But for the holy rites himself addressed
With necessaries proper to that feast.
The Altars every where now smoking be
With Beane-stalkes, Sauine, Laurel, Rosemary,
Their Cakes of Grummell-seed they did prefer,
And Pailes of milk in sacrifice to her.
Then Hymns of praise they all devoutly sung
In those Palilia for increase of young.
But ere the ceremonies were half past
One of their Boys came down the hill in haste,
And told them Limos was among their sheep;
That he, his fellows, nor their dogs cloud keep
The Rau'ner from their flocks; great store were killed,
Whose blood he sucked, and yet his panch not filled.
O hasten then away! for in an hour
He will the chiefest of your fold devour.
With this most ran (leaving behind some few
To finish what was to fair Pales due)
And as they had ascended up the hill
Limos they met, with no mean pace and skill,
Following a well-fed Lamb; with many a shout
They then pursued him all the plain about.
And either with fore-laying of his way,
Or he full gorged ran not so swift as they,
Before he could recover down the strand,
No Swain but on him had a fastened hand.
Rejoicing then (the worst Wolf to their flock
Lay in their powers) they bound him to a Rock,
With chains taken from the plow, and leaving him
Returned back to their Feast His eyes late dim
Now sparkle forth in flames, he grindes his teeth,
And strives to catch at every thing he sees;
But to no purpose: all the hope of food
Was tame away; his little flesh, less blood,
He sucked and tore at last, and that denide,
With fearful shrikes most miserably did.
Unfortunate Marina thou art free
From his jaws now, though not from misery.
Within the Cave thou likely art to pine,
If (o may never) fail a help divine,
And though such aid thy wants do still supply;
Yet in a prison thou must ever lie:
But heaven that fed thee, will not long defer
To send thee thither some deliverer:
For, then to spend thy sighs there to the maine
Thou fitter were to honor Thetis train.
Who so far now with her harmonious crew
Scoured through the Seas (o who yet ever knew
So rare a consort?) she had left behind
The Kentish, Sussex shores, the Victa quam Vespasianus a Claudio missus
sub^^gauit. Vide Eed. in Hist. Ecc. lib. 1. ca. 3.
Isle assignde
To brave Vespasians conquest, and was come
Where the shrill Trumper and the rattling Drum
Made the waves tremble (ere befell this chance)
And to no softer Music used to dance.
Hail thou my native soile^ thou blessed plot
Whose equal all the world affords not
Show me who can? so many crystal Rils
Such sweet-cloath'd Valleys, or aspiring Hills,
Such Wood-grou^d, Pastures, Quarries, welthy Mines,
Such Rocks in whom the Diamond fairly shines:
And if the earth can show ^he like again;
Yet will she fail in her Sea-ruling men.
Time never can produce men to ore-take
The fames of Green^il, Dauies, Gilbert, Drake*
Or worthy Hawkins, or of thousands more
That by their power made the Deuonian shore
Mock the proud Tagus; for whose richest spoil
The boasting Spaniard left the Indian soil
Banckrupt of store, knowing it would quit cost
By winning this, though all the rest were lost.
As often the Sea-Nymphs on her strand have set
Learning of Fishermen to knit a net,
Wherein to wind up their disheuel'd hairs,
They have beheld the frolic Mariners
For exercise (got early from their beds)
Pitched bars of silver, and cast golden sleds.
At Ex, a lovely Nymph with Thetis met,
She singing came, and was all round beset
With other watery powers, which by her song
She had allured to float with her along.
The Lay she chanted she had learned of yore,
Taught by a Joseph of Excester writ a Poem of the Trojan War according to
Dar^s the Phrigians story, but falsely attributed to Cornelius Nepos, as it is
printed. He lived in the time of Hen. 2. and Rich. 1. See the Illustrations of
my most worthy friend M. Seldom upon M. Draitons Poly-olbion, page 98.
skillful Swain, who on her shore
Fed his fair flock: a work renowned as far
As His brave subject of the Trojan war.
When she had done, a pretty Shepherds boy
That from the near Downs came (though he small joy
Took in his tunefull Reed, since dire neglect
Crept to the breast of her he did affect,
And that an euer-busie-watchfull eye
Stood as a bar to his felicity,)
Being with great entreaties of the Swains,
And by the fair Queen of the liquid plains
Wooed to his Pipe, and bade to lay aside
All troubled thoughts, as others at that tide,
And that he now some merry note should raise,
To equal others which had sung their lays:
He shook his head, and knowing that his tongue
Could not belie his heart, thus sadly sung: AS newborn babes salute their
ages morn
With cries unto their woeful mother hurld:
My infant Muse that was but lately borne
Began with watery eyes to woo the world.
She knows not how to speak, and therefore weeps
Her woes excess,
And strives to move the heart that senseless sleeps,
To ^eauinesse;
Her eyes inuail'd with sorrows clouds
Scarce see the light,
Disdain has wrapped her in the shrowds
Of loathed night,
How should she move then her grief-laden wing,
Or leave my sad complaints, and Paeans sing?
Six Pleyad's live in light, in darkness one.
Sing mirthfull Swains, but let me sigh alone.
It is enough that I in silence sit,
And bend my skill to learn your lays aright;
Nor strive with you in ready strains of wit,
Nor move my bearers with so true delight.
But if for heavy plaints and notes of woe
Your ears are pressed;
No Shepherd lives that ^an my Pipe out-goe
In such unrest.
I have not known so many years
As chances wrong,
Nor have they known more floods of tears
From one so young.
Feign would I tune to please as others do,
Were not for faining Song and numbers too.
Then (since not fitting now are songs of moan)
Sing mirthfull Swains, but let me sigh alone.
The Nymphs that float upon these watery plains
Have often been drawn to listen to my Song,
And Sirens left to tune dissembling strains
In true b^wailing of my sorrows long.
Upon the waves of late a silver Swan
By me did ride,
And thrilled with my woes forthwith began
To sing, and did,
Yet where they should, they cannot move.
O hapless Verse!
That ^itter, then to win a Love,
Art for a Hearse.
Hence-forward silent be; and ye my cares
Be known but to my self; or who despaires,
Since pity now lies turned to a stone,
Sing mirthfull Swai^es; but let me sigh alone.

The fitting accent of His mournful lay
So pleased the powerful Lady of the Sea,
That she entreated him to sing again;
And he obeying tuned this second strain: BOrne to no other comfort then my
tears.
Yet robbed of them by griefs too inly deep.
I cannot rightly wail my hapless years,
Nor move a passion that for me might weep.
Nature alas too short has knit
My tongue to reach my woe:
Nor have I skill sad notes to fit
That might my sorrow show.
And to increase my torments ceasl^sse sting,
There Is no way left to show my pains,
But by my pen in mournful strains,
Which others may perhaps take joy to sing.

As (wooed by Mayes delights) I have been borne
To take the kind air of a wistfull morn
Near Tauies voicefull stream (to whom I owe
More strains then from my Pipe can ever flow)
Here have I heard a sweet Bird never lin
To chide the River for his clamorous din;
There seemed another in his song to tell,
That what the fair stream did he liked well;
And going further heard another too,
All varying still in what the others do;
A little thence, a fourth with little pain
Con'd all their lessons, and them sung again;
So numberless the Songsters are that sing
In the sweet Groves of the too-carelesse Spring,
That I no sooner could the hearing lose
Of one of them, but straight another rose,
And perching deftly on a quaking spray,
Nigh tired her self to make her hearer stay,
Whilst in a bush two Nightingales together
Showed the best skill they had to draw me thither:
So (as bright Thetis past our cleeues along)
This shepherds lay pursued the others song,
And ^carce one ended had his skillful stripe,
But s^reight another took him to his Pipe.
By that the younger Swain had fully done,
Thetis with her brave company had won
The mouth of Dert, and whilst the Tritons charm
The dancing-waues, passing the crystal Arm
Sweet Tulme and Plim; ariu'd where Thamar pays
Her daily tribute to the western Seas.
Here sent she up her Dolphins, and they plide
So busily their fares on every side,
They made a quick return, and brought her down
A many Homagers to Thamars crown,
Who in themselves were of as great command
As any meaner Rivers of the Land.
With every Nymph the Swain of most account
That fed his white sheep by her clearer fount:
And every one to Thetis sweetly sung.
Among the rest a Shepherd (though but young,
Yet h^rtned to his Pipe) with all the skill
His few years could, began to fit his quill.
By Ta^ies speedy stream he fed his flock,
Where when he sat to sport him on a rock,
The Water-nymphs would often come unto him,
And for a dance with many gay gifts woo him.
Now posies of this flower, and then of that;
Now with fine shells, then with a rushie hat,
With Corrall or red stones brought from the deep
To make him bracelets, or to mark his sheep:
WILLY he hight. Who by the Oceans Queen
More cheered to sing then such young Lads had been,
Took his best framed Pipe, and thus began move
His voice of Walla, Tauy's fairest Love.
Fair was the day, but fairer was the Maid
Who that days morn into the green-woods straid.
Sweet was the air, but sweeter was her breathing,
Such rare perfumes the Roses are bequeathing.
Bright shone the Sun, but brighter were her eyes,
Such are the Lamps that guide the Deities;
Nay such the fire is, whence the Pythian Knight
Borrowes his beams, and lends his Sister light,
Not Pelop's shoulder whiter then her hands,
Nor snowie Swans that iet on Isca's sands.
Sweet Flora as if ravished with their sight,
In emulation made all Lillies white:
For as I often have heard the Wood-nimps say,
The dancing Fairies when they left to play
Then black did pull them, and in holes of trees
Stole the sweet honey from the painful Bees,
Which in the flower to put they often were seen,
And for a banquet brought it to their Queen.
But she that is the Goddess of the flowers
(Invited to their groves and shady bowres)
Mislik'd their choice. They said that all the field
No other flower did for that purpose yield;
But quoth a nimble Fay that by did stand:
If you could giue't the color of yond hand;
( Walla by chance was in a meadow by
Learning to 'sample earths embrodery)
It were a gift would Flora well befit,
And our great Queen the more would honor it.
She gave consent; and by some other power
Made Venus Doves be equaled by the flower,
But not her hand; for Nature this prefers,
All other whites but shadowings to hers.
Her hair was rolled in many a curious fret,
Much like a rich and artfull Coronet,
Upon whose arches twenty Cupids lay,
And were or tide, or loath to fly away.
Upon her bright eyes Phoebus his inclinde,
And by their radience was the God stroke blind,
That clean awry the Ecclipticke then he stripped,
And from the milky way his horses whipped;
So that the Eastern world to fear begun
Some stranger drove the Chari^t of the Sun.
And never but that once did heavens bright eye
Bestow one look on the Cymmerij.
A green silk frock her comely shoulders clad,
And ^ooke delight that such a seat it had,
Which at her middle gathered up in pleats,
A lo^e-knot Girdle willing bondage threats.
Not Venus Ceston held a brauer piece,
Nor that which girt the fairest flower of Greece.
Down from her waste, her mantle loose did fall,
Which Zephyre (as afraid) still played withal,
And then tucked up somewhat below the knee
Showed searching eyes where Cupids columns be.
The inside lined with rich Carnation silk,
And in the midst of both, Lawne white as milk.
Which white beneath the red did seem to shroud,
As Cynthia's beauty through a blushing cloud,
About the edges curious to behold
A deep fringe hung of rich and twisted gold,
So on the green marge of a crystal brook
A thousand yealow flowers at fishes look;
And such the beams are of the glorious Sun,
That through a tuft of grass dispersed run.
Upon her leg a pair of Buskins white,
Studded with orient Pearl and Chrysolite,
And like her Mantle stircht with gold and green,
(Fairer yet never wore the Forests Queen)
Knit close with ribands of a party hue,
A knot of Crimson and a tuft of blew,
Nor can the Peacocke in his spotted train
So many pleasing colors show again;
Nor could there be a mixture with more grace,
Except the heavenly Roses in her face.
A silver Quiver at her back she wore,
With Darts and Arrows for the Stag and Boar,
But in her eyes she had such darts again
Could conquer Gods, and wound the hearts of men.
Her left hand held a knotty Brasill Bow,
Whose strength with tears she made the red Dear know.
So clad, so armed, so dressed to win her will
Diana never trod on Latmus hill.
Walla, the fairest Nymph that haunts the woods,
Walla, beloved of Shepherds, Faunes and Floods*
Walla, for whom the frolike Satyrs pine,
Walla, with whose fine foot the flowrets twine,
Walla, of whom sweet Birds their ditties move,
Walla, the earths delight, and Tauy's love.
This fairest Nymph, when Tauy first prevailed
And won affection where the Siluans ^ail'd,
Had promised (as a favor to his stream)
Each week to crown it with an Anadem:
And now Hyperion from his glittering throne
Seven times his quickening rays had bravely shown
Unto the other world, since Walla last
Had on her Tauy's head the Garland placed;
And this day (as of right) she wends abroad
To ease the Meadows of their willing load.
Flora as if to welcome her those hours
Had been most lavish of her choicest flowers,
Spreading more beauties to entice that morn
Then she had done in many days beforne.
Look as a Maiden sitting in the shade
Of some close Arbor by the Wood-binde made,
With-drawne alone where vndiscride she may
By her most curious Needle give assay
Unto some Purse (if so her fancy move)
Or other token for her truest Love,
Varie^ie of silk about her pap,
^^in a box she takes upon her lap,
Whose pleasing colors wooing her quick eye,
Now ^his she thinks the ground would beautify,
And that, to flourish with, she deemeth best;
When spying others, she is straight possessed
Those fittest are; yet from that choice does fall
And she resolves at last to use them all:
So Walla, which to gather long time stood,
Whether those of the field, or of the wood;
Or those that among the springs and marish lay;
But then the blossoms which enriched each spray
Allured her look; whose many colored graces
Did in her Garland challenge no mean places:
And therefore she (not to be poor in plenty)
From Meadows, springs, woods, spraies, culs some one dainty,
Which in a scarf she put, and onwards set
To find a place to dress her Coronet.
A little Grove is seated on the marge
Of Tauy's stream, not ouer-thicke nor large,
Where every morn a quire of Siluans sung,
And leaves to chattring winds served as a tongue,
By whom the water turns in many a ring,
As if it feign would stay to hear them sing,
And on the top a thousand young Birds fly,
To be instructed in their harmony.
Near to end of this all-ioysome Grove
A dainty circled plot seemed as it strove
To keep all Briars and bushes from inuading
Her pleasing compass by their needless shading,
Since it was not so large, but that the store
Of trees around could shade her breast and more.
In midst thereof a little swelling hill,
Gently disburd'ned of a cry stall rill
Which from the greenside of the flowrie bank
Eat down a channel; here the Wood-nymps drank,
And great Diana having slain the Dear,
Did often use to come and bathe her here.
Here ^alk'd they of their chase, and where next day
They meant to hunt; here did the shepherds play,
And ^any a gaudy Nymph was often seen
Embracing shepherds boys upon this green.
From hence the spring hasts down to Tauy's brim,
And paies a tribute of his drops to him.
Here Walla rests the rising mount upon,
That seemed to swell more since she sat thereon,
And from her scarf upon the grass shook down
The smelling flowers that should her River crown.
The Scarf (in shaking it) she brushed often,
Whereon were flowers so fresh and lively wrought,
That her own cunning was her own deceit,
Thinking those true which were but counterfeit.
Under an Aldar on his sandy marge,
Was Tauy set to view his nimble charge,
And there his Love he long time had expected:
While many a rose-cheekt Nymph no wile neglected
To woo him to embraces* which he scorned,
As valluing more the beauties which adorned
His fairest Walla, then all Natures pride
Spent on the cheeks of all her sex beside.
Now would they tempt him with their open breasts,
And swear their lips were Loves assured Tests:
That Walla sure would give him the denial
Till she had known him true by such a trial,
Then comes another, and her hand bereaues
The soone-slipt Alder of two clammy leaves,
And clapping them together, bids him see
And learn of love the hidden mystery.
Brave Flood (quoth she) that hold'st us in suspense,
And show a God-like power in abstinence,
At this thy coldness we do nothing wonder,
These leaves did so, when once they grew asunder;
But since the one did taste the others bliss,
And felt his partners kind, partake with his,
Behold how close they join, and had they power
To speak their now content, as we can our,
They would on Nature lay a heinous crime
For keeping close such sweets until this time*
Is there to such men ought of merit du^,
That do abstain from what they never knew?
No: then as well we may account him wise
For speaking naught, who wants those faculties*
Taste thou our sweets; come here and freely sip
Diuinest Nectar from my melting lip;
Gaze on mine eyes, whose life infusing beams*
Have power to melt the Icy Northern streams,
And so inf^a^^ the God^ of those bound Seas
They should vnchaine their virgin passages,
And teach our Mariners from day to day
To bring us Jewels by a nearer way.
Twine thy long fingers in my shining hair,
And think it no disgrace to hide them there;
For I could tell thee how the Paphian Queen
Met me one day upon yond pleasant Green^,
And did entreat a slip (though I was coy.)
Wherewith to fetter her lascivious Boy.
Play with my teates that swell to have impression;
And if thou please from thence to make digression,
Pass thou that milkie way where great Apollo
And higher powers then he would gladly follow.
When to the full of these thou shall attain,
It were some mastry for thee to refrain;
But since thou know not what such pleasures be
The world will not commend but laugh at thee.
But thou will say, thy Walla yields such store
Of joys, that no one Love can raise thee more*
Admit it so, as who but thinks it strange?
Yet shall thou find a pleasure more, in change*
If that thou like not gentle Flood but-heare
To prove that state the best I never fear.
Tell me wherein the state and glory is
Of thee, of Auon, or brave Thamesis?
In your own Springs? or by the flowing head
Of some such River only seconded?
Or is it through the multitude that do
Send down their waters to attend on you?
Your mixture with less Brooks adds to your fames,
So long as they in you do loose their names:
And coming to the Ocean, thou do see,
It takes in other Floods as well as thee;
It were no sport to us that hunting love
If we were still confinde to one large Grove.
The water which in one Poole has abiding
Is not so sweet as Rillets ever gliding,
Nor would the brackish waves in whom you meet
Contain that state it does, but be less sweet,
And with contagious streams all mortals smother,
But that it moves from this shore to the other.
There Is no one season such delight can bring,
As Summer, Autumn, Winter, and the Spring.
Nor the best Flower that does on earth appear
Could by it self content us all the year.
The Salmons, and some more as well as they,
Now love the fresher, and then love the Sea.
The flitting Fowls not in one coast do tarry,
But with the year their habitation vary.
What Music is there in a Shepherds quill
(Played on by him that has the greatest skill)
If but a stop or two thereon we spy?
Music is best in her variety.
So is discourse, so joys; and why not then
As well the lives and loves of Gods as men?
More she had spoke, but that the gallant Flood
Replide: ye wanton Rangers of the wood
Leave your allurements; hye ye to your chase;
See where Diana with a nimble pace
Follows a struck Dear: if you longer stay
Her frown will bend to me another day.
Hark how she winds her Horn; she some does call
Perhaps for you, to make in to the fall.
With this they left him. Now he wonders much
Why at this time his Walla's stay was such,
And could have wished the Nymphs back, but for fear
His Love might come and chance to find them there.
To pass the time at last he thus began
(Unto a Pipe joined by the art of ^an)
To praise his Love: his hasty waves among
The frothed Rocks, bearing the Vnder-song. AS careful Merchants do expecting
stand
(After long time and merry gales of wind)
Upon the place where their brave Ship must land:
So w^ite I for the vessel of my mind.
Upon a great adventure is it bound,
Whose safe return will vallu'd be at more
Then all the wealthy prizes which have crowned
The golden wishes of an age before.
Out of the East Jewels of worth she brings,
The vnualu'd Diamond of her sparkling Eye
Wants in the Treasures of all Europe's Kings,
And were it mine they nor their cownes should buy.
The Saphires ringed on her painting breast,
Run as rich veins of Ore about the mold,
And are in sickness with a pale possessed,
So true; for them I should disualue gold.
The melting Rubies on her cherry lip
Are of such power to hold; that as one day
Cupid flew thirsty by, he stooped to sip
And fast'ned there could never get away.
The sweets of Candie are no sweets to me
When hers I taste; nor the Perfumes of price
Robbed from the happy shrubs of Araby,
As her sweet breath, so powrefull to entice.
O hasten then! and if thou be not gone
Unto that wished traffic through the Maine,
My powrefull sighs shall quickly drive thee on,
And then begin to draw thee back again.
If in the mean rude waves have it oppressed,
It shall suffice I venter'd at the best.

Scarce had he given a period to his Lay
When from a Wood (wherein the Eye of day
Had long a stranger been, and Phoebe's light
Vainly contended with the shades of night.)
One of those wanton Nymphs that wooed him late
Came crying toward him; O thou most ingrate
Respectlesse Flood! can thou here idely sit,
And loose desires to looser numbers fit?
Teaching the air to court thy careless Brook,
Whil'ft thy poor Walla's cries the hills have shook
With an amazed terror: hear! o hear!
A hundred Eccho's shriking every where!
See how the frightfull Herds run from the Wood;
Walla alas, as she to crown her Flood,
Attended the composure of sweet flowers,
Was by a lust-fir'd Satyr among our bowres
Well-neere surpised, but that she him discride
Before his rude imbracement could betide.
Now but her feet no help, unless her cries
A needful aid draw from the Deities.
It needless was to bid the Flood pursue,
Anger gave wings; ways that he never knew
Till now, he treads; through dels and hidden brakes
Flies through the Meadows, each where ouertakes
Streams swiftly gliding, and them brings along
To further just revenge for so great wrong,
His current till that day was never known,
But as a Meade in July, which vnmowne
Bears in an equal height each bent and stem,
Unless some gentle gale do play with them.
Now runs it with such fury and such rage,
That mighty Rocks opposing vassalage,
Are from the firm earth rent and ouer-borne
In Fords where pibbles lay secure beforne.
Lowed Cataracts, and fearful roarings now
Affright the Passenger; upon his brow
Continual bubbles like compelled drops,
And where (as now and then) he makes short stops
In little pooles drowning his voice too hie,
It Is where hethinkes he hears his Walla cry.
Yet vain was all his haste, bending a way,
Too much declining to the Southern Sea,
Since she had turned thence, and now begun
To cross the brave path of the glorious Sun.
There lies a Vale extended to the North
Of Tauy's stream, which (prodigal) sends forth
In Autumn more rare fruits then have been spent
In any greater plot of fruitful Kent.
Two high brow'd rocks on either side begin,
As with an ar^h to close the valley in,
Upon their rugged fronts short writhen Oaks
Untouched of any fellers banefull strokes,
The Iuy twisting round their barks, has fed
Past time wild Goats which no man followed.
Low in the Valley some small Herds of Dear,
For head and footmanship withouten peer,
Fed vndisturb'd. The Swains that thereby thriu'd
By the tradition from their Sires derived,
Called it sweet Ina's Coombe: but whether she
Were of the earth or greater progeny.
Judge by her deeds; once this is truly known
She many a time has on a Bugle blown,
And through the Dale pursued the jolly Chase,
As she had bid the winged winds a base.
Pale and distracted hither Walla runs,
As closely followed as she hardly shuns;
Her mantle off, her hair now too unkind
Almost betrayed her with the wanton wind.
Breathless and faint she now some drops discloses,
As in a Limbeck the kind sweat of Roses,
Such hang upon her breast, and on her cheeks;
Or like the Pearls which the tand Aethiop seeks.
The Satyr (spurred with lust) still gets ground,
And longs to see his damned intention crowned.
As when a Greyhound (of the rightest strain)
Let slip to some poor Hare upon the plain;
He for his prey strives; the other for her life,
And one of these or none must end the strife:
Now seems the Dog by speed and good at bearing
To have her sure; the other ever fearing,
Makes a sudden turn, and does defer
The Hound a while from so near reaching her:
Yet being fetched again and almost taken
Doubting (since touched of him) she scapes her bane:
So of these two the minded races were,
For Hope the one made swift, the other Fear.
O if there be a power (quoth Walla then
Keeping her earnest course) o'reswaying men
And their desires! o let it now be shown
Upon this Satyr halfe-part earthly known.
What I have hitherto with so much care
Kept undefiled, spotless, white and fair,
What in all speech of love I still reserved,
And from it is hazard ever gladly sweru'd;
O be it now untouched! and may no force
That happy Jewel from my self deuorce!
I that have ever held all women be
Void of all worth if wanting chastity;
And who so any lets that best flower pull,
She might be fair, but never beautiful:
O let me not forgo it! strike me dead!
Let on these Rocks my limbs be scattered!
Burn me to ashes with some powrefull flame,
And in mine own dust bury mine own name,
Rather then let me live and be defiled.
Chastest Diana! in the Deserts wild,
Have I so long thy truest handmaid been?
Upon the rough rocke-ground thine arrowe^ keen,
Have I (to make thee crowns) been gathering still
Faire-cheekt Etesia's yealow Cammomill?
And sitting by thee on our flowrie beds
Knit thy torn Buck-stals with well twisted threads,
To be forsaken? O now present be,
If not to save, yet help to ruin me!
If pure Virginity have heretofore
By the Olympicke powers been honored more
Then other states; and Gods have been disposed
To make them known to us, and still disclosed
To the chaste hearing of such Nymphs as we
Many a secret and deep mystery;
If none can lead without celestial aid
Th'immaculate and pure life of a Maid,
O let not then the Powers all-good divine
Permit vile lust to soil this breast of mine!
Thus cride she as she ran: and looking back
Whether her hot pursuer did ought slack
His former speed; she spies him not at all,
And somewhat thereby cheered began to recall
Her nigh fled hopes: yet fearing he might lie
Near some cross path to work his villainy,
And being weary, knowing it was vain
To hope for safety by her feet again,
She sought about where she her self might hide.
A hollow vaulted Rock at last she spide,
About whose sides so many bushes were,
She thought securely she might rest her there.
Far under it a Cave, whose entrance straight
Closed with a stone-wrought door of no mean weight;
Yet from it self the gemels beaten so
That little strength could thrust it to and fro.
Thither she came, and being gotten in
Barred fast the dark Cave with an iron pin.
The Satyr followed, for his cause of stay,
Was not a mind to leave her, but the way
Sharp stoned and thornie, where he passed of late,
Had cut his cloven foot, and now his gate
Was not so speedy, yet by chance he sees
Through some small glade that ran between the trees
Where Walla went. And with a slower pace
Fired with hot blood, at last attained the place.
When like a fearful Hare within her Form,
Hearing the Hounds come like a threatening storm,
In full cry on the walk where last she trod,
Doubts to stay there, yet dreads to go abroad:
So Walla fared. But since he was come nie,
And by an able strength and industry,
Sought to break in; with tears anew she fell
To urge the Powers that on Olympus dwell.
And then to Ina called: O if the rooms
The Walks and Arbours in these fruitful coombes
Have famous been through all the Western Plains
In being guiltless of the lasting stains
Poured on by lust and murder: keep them free!
Turn me to stone, or to a barked tree,
Unto a Bird, or flower, or ought forlorn;
So I may die as pure as I was borne.
"Swift are the prayers and of speedy haste,
"That take their wing from hearts so pure and chaste.
"And what we ask of Heaven it still appears
"More plain to it in mirrours of our tears.
Approved in Walla. When the Satyr rude
Had broke the door in two, and began intrude
With steps profane into that sacred Cell,
Where often (as I have heard our Shepherds tell)
Fair Ina used to rest from Phoebus ray:
She or some other having heard her pray,
Into a Fountain turned her; and now rise
Such streams out of the cave, that they surprise
The Satyr with such force and so great din,
That quenching his life's flame as well as sin,
They roul'd him through the Dale with mighty rore
And made him fly that did pursue before.
Not far beneath in the Valley as she trends
Her silver stream, some Wood-nymphs and her friends
That followed to her aid, beholding how
A Brook came gliding, where they saw but now
Some Herds were feeding, wondering whence it came
Until a Nymph that did attend the game
In that sweet Valley, all the process told,
Which from a thicke-leau'd-tree she did behold:
See quoth the Nymph where the rude Satyr lies
Cast on the grass; as if she did despise
To have her pure waves soyl'd (with such as he)
Retaining still the love of purity.
To Tauy's Crystal stream her waters go,
As if some secret power ordained so,
And as a Maid she loved him, so a Brook
To his imbracements only her betook.
Where glowing on with him, attained the stare
Which none but Hymen's bonds can imitate.
On Walla's brook her sisters now bewail,
For whom the Rocks spend tears when others fail,
And all the Woods ring with their piteous mones:
Which Tauy hearing as he chid the stones,
That stopped his speedy course, raising his head
Inquired the cause, and thus was answered:
Walla is now no more. Nor from the hill
Will she more pluck for thee the Daffadill,
No^ make sweet Anadems to gird thy brow,
Yet in the Groves she runs; a River now.
Look as the feeling Sentid^.
Plant which (learned Swains
Relate to grow on the East Indian Plains)
Shrinkes up his dainty leaves, if any sand
You throw thereon, or touch it with your hand:
So with the chance the heavy Wood-nymphs told,
The River (inly touched) began to fold
His arms acrosse, and while the torrent raues)
Shrunk his grave head, beneath his silver waves.
Since when he never on his banks appears
But as one frantic: when the clouds spend tears
He thinks they of his woes compassion take,
(And not a Spring but weeps for Walla's sake)
And then he often (to bemone her lack)
Like to a mourner goes, his waters black,
And enery Brook attending in his way,
For that time meets him in the like array.
Here WILLY that time ceased; and I a while:
For yonder is Roget coming over the style,
It Is two days since I saw him (and you wonder
You Will say that we have been so long asunder)
I think the lovely Heardesse of the Dell
That to an Oaten Quill can sing so well,
Is she that is with him: I must needs go meet them,
And if some other of you rise to greet them
'Twere not amiss, the day is now so long
That I ere night may end another Song.
THE FOVRTH SONG.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Cornish Swains and British Bard
Thetis has with attention heard.
And after meets an aged man
That tells the hapless love of Pan:
And why the flocks do live so free
From Wolves within rich Britannie.
LOOK as a Lover with a lingering kiss
About to part with the best half that is his,
Feign would he stay but that he fears to do it,
And curses time for so fast hastening to it;
Now takes his leave, and yet begins anew
To make less vows then are esteemed true,
Then says he must be gone, and then does find
Something he should have spoke that is out of mind,
And whilst he stands to look for it in her eyes,
Their sad-sweet glance so tie his faculties,
To think from what he parts, that he is now
As far from leaving her, or knowing how,
As when he came; begins his former strain,
To kiss, to vow, and take his leave again,
Then turns, comes back, sighs, parts, and yet does go,
Apt to retire, and loath to leave her so:
Brave Stream, so part I from thy flowrie bank,
Where first I breathed, and (though vnworty) drank
Those sacred waters which the Muses bring
To woo Britannia to their ceaseless spring.
Now would I on, Vide de am^mitate loci. Malmesb. 2. lib. de gest. Pontif. s^.
146
but that the crystal Wels,
The fertile Meadows, and their pleasing smells,
The Woods delightful, and the scatt'red Groves,
(Where many Nymphs walk with their chaster Loves)
Soon make me stay: And think that Ordgar's Ordulphus.
son
(Admonished by a heavenly vision)
Not without cause did that apt fabric rear,
(Wherein we nothing now but Eccho's hear
That wont with heavenly Anthemes daily ring
And duest praises to the greatest King)
In this choice plot. Since he could light upon
No place so fit for contemplation.
Though I a while must leave this happy foil,
And follow Thetis in a pleasing toil,
Yet when I shall return, I Will strive to draw
The Nymphs by Thamar, Tauy, Ex and Tau,
By Turridge, Otter, Ock* by Dert and Plym,
With all the Nayades that fish and swim
In their clear streams, to these our rising Downs,
Where while they make us chaplets, wreaths and crowns*
I Will tune my Reed unto a higher key,
(And have already cond some of the La^.)
Wherein (as Mantua by her Virgils birth
And Thame^s by him that sung her Nuptial mirth)
You may be known (though not in equal pride)
As far as Tiber throws his swelling Tide.
And by a Shepherd (feeding on your plains)
In humble, lowly, plain, and ruder strains,
Hear your worths challenge other floods among,
To have a period equal with their song.
Where Plym and Thamar with embraces meet,
Thetis weighes ancor now, and all her Fleet:
Leaving that spacious (...)
Sound, within whose arms
I have those Vessels seen, whose hot alarmes
Have made Iberia tremble, and her towers
Prostrate themselves before our iron showers
While their proud builders hearts have been inclinde
To shake (as our brave Ensigns) with the wind.
For as an Eyerie from their Seeges wood
Led over the Plains and taught to get their food:
By seeing how their Breeder takes his prey
Now from an Orchard do they scare the Iey,
Then over the Corne-fields as they swiftly fly,
Where many thousand hurtful Sparrowes lie
Beat^ng the ripe grain from the bearded ^are,
At their reproach, all (ouer-gone with fear)
Seek for their safety; some into the dike;
Some in the hedges drop, and others like
The thick-growne corn, as for their hiding best,
And under turfes or grass most of the rest*
That of a flight which covered all the grain,
Not one appears, but all or hid, or slain*
So by Heroes were we led of yore,
And by our drums that thundered on each shore,
Stroke with amazement Countries far and near;
Whilst their Inhabitants like Herds of Dear,
By kingly Lions chased, fled from our Arms.
If any did oppose, instructed swarms
Of men immail'd; Fate drew them on to be
A greater Fame to our got Victory.
But now our Leaders want, those Vessels lie
Rotting, like houses through ill husbandry,
And on their Masts, where often the Ship-boy stood,
Or silver Trumpets charmed the brackish Flood,
Some wearied Crow it set; and daily seen
Their sides in stead of pitch calk'd ore with green:
Ill hap (alas) have you that once were known
By reaping what was by Iberi^a sown.
By bringing yealow sheaues from out their plain,
Making our Barnes the storehouse for their grain:
When now as if we wanted land to till,
Wherewith we might our vselesse Soldiers fill:
Upon their Hatches where halfe-pikes were borne,
In every chinke rise stems of bearded corn:
Mocking out idle times that so have wrought us,
Or putting us in mind what once they brought us.
Bear with me Shepherds if I do digress,
And speak of what our selves do not profess:
Can I behold a man that in the field,
Or at a breach has taken on his Shield
More Darts then ever M. Scena.
Roman; that has spent
Many a cold December, in no Tent
But such a^ Earth and Heaven make; that has been
Except in Iron Plates not long time s^ene;
Upon whose body may be plainly told
More wounds then his lanke purse does almes-dee^ hol:
O^ can I see this man (aduentring all)
Be only graced with some poor Hospital,
Or may be worse, entreating at his door
For some relief whom he secured before,
And yet not show my grief? First may I learn
To see, and yet forget how to discern;
My hands neglectfull be at any need,
Or to defend my body, or to feed,
Ere I respect those times that rather give him
Hundreds to punish, then one to relieve him.
As in an Evening when the gentle air
Brea^hes to the sullen night a soft repair;
I often have set on Thames sweet bank to hear
My Friend with his sweet touch to charm mine ear,
When he has played (as well he can) some strain
Tha^ likes me, straight I ask the same again,
And he as gladly granting, strikes it over
With some sweet relish was forgot before:
I would have been content if he would play,
In that one strain to pass the night away;
But fearing much to do his patience wrong,
Unwillingly have asked some other song:
So in this diffring Key* though I could well
A many hours but as few minutes tell,
Yet lest mine own delight might iniure you
(Though loath so soon) I take my Song anew.
Yet as when I with other Swains have been
Invited by the Maidens of our green
To wend to yonder Wood, in time of year
When Cherry-trees enticing burdens bear,
He that with wreathed legs does upwards go,
Pluckes not alone for those which stand below*
But now and then is seen to pick a few
To please himself as well as all his crew:
Or if from where he is he do epsy
Some Apricocke upon a bough thereby,
Which ouerhangs the tree on which he stands,
Climbs up and strives to take it with his hands:
So if to please my self I somewhat sing,
Let it not be to you less pleasuring;
No thirst of glory tempts me: for my strains
Be fit poor Shepherds on the lowly Plains;
The hope of riches cannot draw from me
One line that tends to servile flattery,
Nor shall the most in titles on the earth
Blemish my Muse with an adulterate birth,
Nor make me lay pure colors on a ground
Where naught substantial can be ever found.
No* such as sooth a base and dunghill spirit,
With attributes fit for the most of merit,
Cloud their free Muse; as when the Sun does shine
On straw and dirt mixed by the sweating Hyne,
It nothing gets from heaps so much impure
But noisome steames that do his light obscure.
My freeborn Muse will not like Danae be,
Won with base dross to clip with slavery;
Nor end her choiser Balm to worthless men,
Whose names would dye but for some hired pen*
No: ^f I praise, Virtue shall draw me to it,
And not a base procurement make me do it.
What now I sing is but to pass away
A tedious hour, as some Musicians play;
Or make another my own griefs bemone*
Or to be least alone when most alone.
In this can I as often as I will choose,
Hug sweet content by my retired Muse,
And in a study find as much to please
As others in the greatest Palaces.
Each man that lives (according to his power)
On what he loves bestows an idle hour;
In stead of Hounds that make the woodded hills
Talk in a hundred voices to the Rils,
I like the pleasing cadence of aline
Struck by the consort of the sacred Nine.
In lieu of Hawks, the raptures of my soul
Transcend their pitch and baser earths control.
For running Horses, Contemplation flies
With quickest speed to win the greatest prize.
For courtly dancing I can take more pleasure
To hear a Verse keep time and equal measure.
For winning Riches, seek the best directions
How I may well subdue mine own affections.
For raising stately piles for heirs to come,
Here in this Poem I erect my toombe.
And time may be so kind in these weak lines
To keep my Name enrolled, past his, that shines
In gilded Marble, or in brazen leaves:
Since Verse preserues, when Stone and Brass deceiues.
Or if (as worthless) Time not lets it live
To those full days which others Muses give,
Yet I am sure I shall be heard and sung
Of most seuerest eld, and kinder young
beyond my days, and maugre Enuies strife,
Add to my name some hours beyond my life.
Such of the Muses are the able powers,
And since with them I spent my vacant hours,
I find nor Hawke, nor Hound, nor other thing,
Turnies nor Revels, pleasures for a King,
Yield more delight, for I have of^ possessed
As much in this as all in all the rest,
And that without expense, when others often
With their vndoings have their pleasures bought.
On now my loved Muse, and let us bring
Thetis to hear the C^r^ist Michael sing;
And after him to see a (...) unfold
The Tragedy of DR (...) leaves of gold.
Then hear another GREENVILS name relate,
Which ^imes succeeding shall perpetuate.
And make those two the Pillars great of Fame,
Beyond whose worths shall never sound a Name.
Nor Honor in her everlasting story
More deeper grave for all ensuing glory.
New Thetis stays to hear the Shepherds tell
Where Arthur met his death, and Mordred fell.
Of holy Vrsula (that famed her age)
With other Virgins in her pilgrimage.
And as she forwards steeres is shown the Rock
Mai^e-Amber, to be shook with weakest shocke,
So equal is it poised; but to remove
All strength would fail, and but an infants prove.
Thus while to please her some new Songs devise,
And others Diamonds (shaped angle-wise,
And smoothed by Nature, as she did impart
Some willing time to trim her self by Art)
Sought to present her and her happy crew:
She of the Gulf and Syllies took a view.
And doubling then the point, made on away
Toward goodly Se^erne and the Irish Sea,
There meets a Shepherd that began sing over
The Lay which aged Robert of Gloucester.
Robert sung of yore,
In praise of England and the deeds of Swains
That whilome fed and ruled upon our plames.
The British Bards then were not long time mu^e,
But to their sweet Harps sung their famous Brute:
Stri^ing in spite of all the mists of eld,
To have his Story more authenticke held.
Why should we envy them those wreaths of Fame?
Being as proper to the Trojan name,
As are the dainty flowers which Flora spreads
Unto the Spring in the discolored Meads.
Rather afford them all the worth we may,
For what we give to them adds to our Ray.
And Brittons: think not that your glories fall,
Derived from a mean original;
Since lights that may have power to check the dark,
Can have their luster from the smallest spark.
"Not from Nobility does Virtue spring,
"But Virtue makes fit Nobles for a King.
"From highest nests are croaking Ravens borne,
"When sweetest Nightingales sit in the Thorn.
From what low Fount soever your beings are
(In softer peace and mighty brunts of war)
Your own worths challenge as triumphant Bays
As ever Trojan hand had power to raise.
And when I leave my Musiques plainer ground,
The world shall know it from Bellona's sound.
Nor shall I err from Truth; for what I write
She does peruse, and helps me to indite.
The small converse which I have had with some,
Branches, which from those gallant trees have come,
Does, what I sing, in all their acts approve,
And with more days increase a further love.
As I have seen the Lady of the May
Set in an Arbor (on a Holy Day)
Built by the May Pole, where the iocund Swains
Dance with the Maidens to the Bagpipes strains,
When envious Night commands them to be gone,
Call for the merry youngsters one by one,
And for their well performance soon disposes,
To this, a Garland inte^woue with Roses.
To that, a carved Hook, or well-wrought Scrip,
Gracing another with her cherry lip:
To ^ne her Garter, to another then
A Hand-kerchiefe cast over and over again:
And none returns empty that has spent
His pains to fill their rural merriment:
So Hereus Daughter when the Swains had done
With an vnsparing, liberal hand, begun
To give to every one that sung before,
Rich orient Pearls brought from her hidden store,
Red branching Corrall, and as precious Iems
As ever beautifide the Diadems:
That they might live what chance their sheep betide,
On her reward, yet leave their heirs beside.
Since when I think the world does nothing give them
As weening Thetis ever should relieve them.
And Poets freely spend a golden shower,
As they expected Her again each hour.
Then with her thanks and praises for their skill
In tuning numbers of the sacred Hill.
She them dismissed to their contented Coats:
And every Swain a several passage floates
Upon his Dolphin. Since whose safe repair,
Those Fishes, like, a well composed air.
And (as in love to men) are ever seen
Before a tempests rough regardlesse teene,
To swim high on the waves: as none should dare
Excepting fishes to adventure there.
When these had left her, she drove on in pride
He^ prouder Coursers through the swelling tide,
To view the Cambrian Cliffes, and had not gone
An hours full speed, but near a Rock (whereon
Congealed frost and snow in Summer lay,
Seldom dissolved by Hyperious ray)
She saw a troop of people take their seat,
Whereof some wrung their hands, and some did beat
Their troubled breasts, in sign of mickle woe,
For those are actions grief inforceth to.
Willing to know the cause, somewhat near hand
She spies an aged man sit by the strand,
Upon a green hill side (not meanly crowned
With golden flowers; as chief of all the ground)
By him a little Lad, his cunning heir,
Tracing green Rushes for a Winter Chair.
The old man while his son full neatly knits them
Unto his work begun, as trimly fits them.
Both so intending what they first propounded,
As all their thoghts by what they wrought were bou^ded.
To them She came, and kindly thus bespake:
Ye happy creatures, that your pleasures take
In what your needs enforce, and never aim
A limitlesse desire to what may maime
The settled quiet of a peaceful state,
Patience attend your labors! And when Fate
Brings on the restfull night to your long days,
Wend to the fields of bliss! Thus Thetis prays.
Fair Queen, to whom all dutious praise we owe,
Since from thy spacious Cestorne daily flow
(Replied the Swain) refreshing streams that fill
Earth's dugs (the hillocks) so preserving still
The infant grass, when else our Lambs might bleat
In vain for suke, whose Dams have naught to eat.
For these thy prayers we are doubly bound,
And that these Cleeues should know; but (o) to sound
My often mended Pipe presumption were,
Since Pan would play if thou would please to hear.
The louder blasts which I was wont to blow
Are now but faint, nor do my fingers know
To touch half part those merry tunes I had.
Yet if thou please to grace my little Lad
With thy attention, he may somewhat strike
Which thou from one so young may chance to like.
With that the little Shepherd left his task,
And with a blush (the Roses only mask)
Denied to sing. Ah father (quoth the Boy)
How can I tune a seeming note of joy?
The work which you command me, I intend
Scarce with a half ben^ mind, and therefore spend
In doing little, now, an hour or two,
Which I in lesser time could neater do.
As often as I with my more ^umble ioints
Trace the sharp Rushes ends, I mind the points
Which Philocel did give; and when I brush
The prittie tuft that grows beside the rush,
I never can forget (in yonder layre)
How Philocel was wont to stroke my hair.
No more shall I be taken unto the Wake,
Nor wend a fishing to the winding Lake,
No more shall I be taught on silver strings
To learn the measures of our banquettings.
The twisted Collers, and the ringing Bells,
The Morris Scarfes, and cleanest drinking shells
Will never be renewed by any one;
Nor shall I care for more when he is gone.
See; yonder hill where he was wont to sit,
A cloud does keep the golden Sun from it,
And for his seat (as teaching us) has made
A mourning covering with a scowling shade.
The dew on every flower, this morn, has lain
Longer then it was wont, this side the plain,
Belike they mean since my best friend must die,
To shed their silver drops as he goes by.
Not all this day here, nor in coming hither,
Heard I the sweet Birds tune their Songs together,
Except one Nightingale in yonder Dell
Sighed a sad Elegy for Philocel.
Near whom a Wood-Doue kept no small ado,
To bid me in her language Do so too,
The Weathers bell that leads our flock around
Yields as me thinks this day a deader sound.
The little Sparrowes which in hedges creep,
Ere I was up did seem to bid me weep.
If these do so, can I have feeling less,
That am more apt to take and to express?
No: let my own tunes be the Mandrakes groan
If now they tend to mirth when all have none.
My pretty Lad (quoth Thetis) thou do well
To fear the loss of thy dear Philocel.
But tell me Si^e, what may that Shepherd be?
Or if it lie in us to set him free,
Or if with you yond people touched with woe,
Under the self same load of sorrow go.
Fair Queen (replide the Swain) one is the cause
That moves our grief, and those kind shepherds draws
To yonder rock. Thy more then mortal spirit
May give a good beyond our power to merit.
And therefore please to hear while I shall tell
The hapless Fate of hopeless Philocel.
Whilome great Pan, the Father of our flocks
Loved a fair less so famous for her locks,
That in her time all women first begun
To lay their looser tresses to the Sun.
And theirs whose hew to hers was not agreeing,
Were still rolled up as hardly worth the seeing.
Fondly have some been led to think, that Man
Musiques invention first of all began
From the dull Hammers stroke; since well we know,
From sure tradition that has taught us so,
Pan sitting once to sport him with his Fair,
Marked the intention of the gentle air,
In the sweet sound her chaste words brought along;
Framed by the repercussion of her tongue:
And from that harmony begun the Art
Which others (though unjustly) do impart
To bright Apollo, from a meaner ground,
A sledge or parched nerves; mean things to found
So rare an Art on; when there might be given
All earth for matter with the gyre of heaven.
To keep her slender fingers from the Sun,
Pan through the pastures oftentimes has run
To pluck the speckled Fox-gloues from their stem,
And on those fingers neatly placed them.
The Hony-suckles would he often strip
And lay their sweetness on her sweeter lip:
And then as in reward of such his pain,
Sip from those cherries some of it again.
Some say, that Nature, while this lovely Maid
Lived on our plains, the teeming earth araid
With Damask Roses in each pleasant place,
That men might liken somewhat to her face.
Others report: Venus, afraid her son
Might love a mortal as he once had done,
Preferred an earnest suit to highest Jove,
That he which bore the winged shafts of love,
Might be debarred his sight, which suit was signed,
And ever since the God of Love is blind.
Hence is it he shoots his shafts so clean awry,
Men learn to love when they should learn to dye.
And women, which before, to love began
Man without wealth, love wealth without a man.
Great Pan of his kind Nymph had the embracing
Long, yet too short a time. For as in tracing
These pithfull Rushes, such as are aloft,
By those that raised them presently are brought
Beneath unseen: So in the love of Pan
(For Gods in love do undergo as man)
She, whose affection made him raise his song,
And (for her sport) the Satyrs rude among
Tread wilder measures, then the frolike guests,
That lift their light heels at Lyeus feasts;
She, by the light of whose quick-turning eye
He never read but of felicity.
She whose assurance made him more then Pan,
Now makes him far more wretched then a man.
For mortals in their loss have death a friend,
When gods have losses, but their loss no end.
It chanced one morn (clad in a robe of gray,
And blushing often as rising to betray)
Enticed this lovely Maiden from her bed
(So when the Roses have discovered
Their taintlesse beauties, flies the early Be
About the winding Allies merrily.)
Into the Wood, and 'twas her usual sport,
Sitting where most harmonious Birds resort,
To imitate their warbling in a quill
Wrought by the hand of ^an, which she did fill
Half full with water: and with it has made
The Nightingale (beneath a sullen shade)
To chant her utmost Lay, nay, to invent
New notes to pass the others instrument,
And (harmless soul) ere she would leave that strife.
Sung he blast song, and ended with her life.
So gladly choosing (as do other some)
Rather to dye then live and be over come.
But as in Autumn (when birds cease their noate^,
And stately Forests d'on their yealow coats,
When Ceres golden locks are nearely shorn
And mellow fruit from trees are roughly torn)
A little Lad set on a bank to shale
The ripened Nuts plucked in a woody Vale,
Is ^rigl^ed thence (of his dear life (...))
By some wild Bull loud bellowing for the heard:
So while the Nymph did earnestly contest
Whether the Birds or she recorded best,
A Ravenous Wolf, bent eager to his prey
Rushed from a theeuish brake, and making way,
The twined Thorns did crackle one by one,
As if they gave her warning to be gone.
A rougher gale bent down the lashing boughs,
To beat the beast from what his hunger vows.
When she (amazed) rose from her hapless seat
(Small is resistance where the fear is great)
And striving to be gone, with gaping ^awes
The Wolf pursue^, and as his rending paws
Were like to seize, a Holly bent between,
For which good deed his leaves are ever green.
Saw you a lusty Mastiue at the stake
Thrown from a cunning Bull, more fiercely make
A quick return; yet to prevent the goare
Or deadly bruize which he escaped before,
Wind here and there, nay creep if rightly bred,
And proffring otherwhere, fight still at head:
So though the stubborn boughs did thrust him back,
(For Nature, loath, so rate a Jewels wrack,
Seemed as she here and there had plash'd a tre^,
If possible to hinder Destiny.)
The savage Beast foaming with anger flies
More fiercely then before, and now he tries
By sleights to take the Maid; as I have seen
A nimble Tumbler on a burrow'd green,
Bend clean awry his course, ve^ give a check
And throw himself upon a Rabbets neck.
For as he ho^ly chased the Love of Pan,
A heard of Dear out of a thicket ran,
To whom he quickly turned, as if he meant
To leave the Maid, but when she swiftly bent
Her race down to the Plain, the swifter Dear
He so one forsook. And now was got so near
That (all in vain) she turned to and fro
(As well she could) but not prevailing so,
Breathless and weary calling on her Love
With fearful shrikes that all the Echoes move
(To call him to) she fell down deadly wan,
And ends her sweet life with the name of Pan.
A youthful Shepherd of the neighbor W^ld
Missing that morn a sheep out of his Fold,
Carefully seeking round to find his stray,
Came on the instant where this Damsel lay.
Anger and pity in his manly breast
Urge yet restrain his tears. Sweet Maid possessed
(Quoth he) with lasting sleep, accept from me
His end, who ended thy hard destiny!
With that his strong Dog of no dastard kind
(Swift as the Foales conceived by the wind)
He sets upon the Wolf, that now with speed
Flies to the neighbour-wood, and lest a deed
So full of ruth should unrevenged be,
The Shepherd follows too, so earnestly
Chearing his Dog, that he never turned again
Till the cursed Wolf lay strangled on the plain.
The ruined temple of her purer soul
The Shepherd buries. All the Nymphs condole
So great a loss while on a Cypress graffe
Near to her grave they hung this Epitaph: LEast loathed age might spoil the
work in whom
All earth delighted, Nature took it home.
Or angry all hers else were careless deemed,
Here did her best to have the rest esteemed.
For ^eare men might not think the Fates so cross,
But by their rigor in as great a loss;
If to the grave there ever was assigned
One like this Nymph in body and in mind.
We wish her here in balm not vainly spent,
To fit this Maiden with a Monument.
For Brass and Marble were they seated here,
Would fret or melt in tears to lie so near.

Now Pan may sit and tune his Pipe alone
Among the wished shades, since she is gone,
Whose willing care allured him more to play,
Then if to hear him should Apollo stay.
Yet happy Pan! and in thy Love more blessed,
Whom none but only death has dispossessed;
While others love as well, yet live to be
Less wronged by Fate then by inconstancy.
The sable mantle of the silent night,
Shut from the world the euer-ioy some light*
Care fled away, and so fresh slumbers please
To leave the Court for lowly Cottages.
Wild beasts forsook their dens on woody hills,
And sleightfull Otters left the purling Rils;
Rookes to their Nests in high woods now were flung
And with their spread wings shield their naked young.
When thieves from thickets to the crosse-wayes stir,
And terror frights the loanely passenger.
When naught was heard but now and then the howl
Of some vilde Curre, or whooping of the Owl;
Pan that the day before was far away
At shepherds sports, returned, and as he lay
Within the bower wherein he most delighted,
Was by a ghastly vision thus affrighted*
Heart-thrilling groans first heard he round his bower,
And then the Schrich-owle with her utmost power
Labored her loathed note, the forests bending
With winds, as Hecate had been ascending.
Her ^at his curled hayres on end do rise,
And chilly drops trill over his staring eyes;
Fai^e would he call, but knew not who, nor why,
Yet getting heart at last would up and ^ry
If any devilish Hag were come abroad
With some kind Mothers late delivered load,
A ruthlesse bloody sacrifice to make
To those infernal Powers, that by the Lake
Of mighty S^^x and black Cocytus dwell,
Aiding each Witches Charm and misticke Spell:
But as he raised himself within his best
A sudden light about his lodging spread,
And there withal his Love all ashie pale
As ^ue^ing mist from up a watery Vale,
Ap^ear'd, and weakly near his bed she pressed,
A rauell'd wound distained her purer breast.
(Breasts softer far then tufts of unwrought silk)
Whence had she lived to give an infant milk,
The virtue of that liquor (without ods)
Had made her babe immorrall as the Gods.
Pan would have spoke, but him she thus preuents:
Wonder not that the troubled Elements
Speak my approach; I draw no longer breath,
But am enforced to the shades of death.
My exequies are done, and yet before
I take my turn to be transported over
The nether floods among the shades of Dis
To end my journey in the fields of bliss:
I come to tell thee that no humane hand
Made me to seek wastage on the Stygian strand;
It was an hungry Wol^e that did im^rue
Himself in my last blood* And now I sue
In hate to all that kinds, and shepherds good
To be revenged on that cursed brood.
Pan vowed, and would have ^lip^ her, but she fled,
And as she came so quickly vanished.
Look as a well-growne stately headed B^ck^
But lately by the Wood-mans arrow struck^,
Runs gadding over the Lawnes, or nimbly straies
Among the comb^ous Brakes a thousand ways*
Now through the high-wood s^^wres, then by the brooks,
On every hill side, and each vale he looks,
If'mongst their store of simple^ may be found
An hear be to draw and heal his smarring wound,
But when he long has sought, and all in vain,
Steals to the Covert closely back again,
Where round ingirt with Fern more highly sprung,
Strives to appease the raging with his tongue,
And from the speckled Heard absents him till
He be recouer'd somewhat of his ill
So wounded Pan turns in his restless bed,
But finding thence all ease abandoned,
He rose, and through the wood distracted runs
Yet carries with him what in vain he shunt*
Now he exclaimed on (...) and wished he never
Had mortal loved, or that he mortal were.
And sitting lastly on an Oake^ bare trunk
(Where ^^^ne in Winter stood long time vnsunke)
His plaints he g^n ren^w* but then the light
That through the boughs flew from the Queen of night,
(As giving him occasion to repine)
Be^^raid an Elm embraced by a Vine*
Clipping so strictly that they seemed to be
One in their growth, one shade, one fruit, one tree.
Her boughs his arms, his leaves so mixed with hers,
That with no wind he moved but straight she sti^s.
As showing all should be, whom love combinde,
In notion one and only two in kind*
This more afflicts him while he thinks most*
Not on his loss, but on the substance lost.
O hapless Pan, had there but been one by,
To tell thee (though as poor a Swain as I)
Though (whether casual means or death do move)
"We part not without grief things held with love:
"Yet in their loss some comfort may be got
"If we do mind the time we had them not.
This might have lessened somewhat of thy pain,
O^ made thee love as thou might loose again.
If thou the best of women did forgo,
Weigh if thou foundst her, or did make her so;
If she were found so, know there is more then one;
If made, the Worke-man lives, though she be gone.
Should from mine eyes the light be (...) away.
Yet night her pleasures has as well as day.
And my desires to heaven, yield less offense,
Since blindness is a part of Innocence.
So though thy Love sleep in eternal night,
Yet there is in lo^nnesse somewhat may delight.
Instead of dalliance, partnership in woes,
It wants, the care to keep, and fear to los^.
For iealousies and fortunes baser pelf,
He rest inioyes that well inioyes himself.
Had some one told thee thus, or thou bethought thee
Of inward help, thy sorrow had not brought thee
To weigh misfortune by another good:
Nor leave thy seat to range about the wood.
Stay where thou art, turn where thou were before,
Light yields small comfort, no^ has darkness more.
A woody hill there stood, at whose low fee^
Two goodly streams in one broad channel meet,
Whose fretfull waves bea^ing against the hill,
Did all the bottom with soft muttrings fill.
Here in a nooke made by another mount,
(Whose stately Oaks are in no less account
For height or spreading, then the proudest be
That from Oeta look on Thessaly)
Rudely over hung there is a vaulted Cave,
That in the day as sullen shadows gave,
As Evening to the woods. An uncouth place,
(Where Hags and Goblins might retire a space)
And hated now of Shepherd^, since there lie^
The corpse of one (less loving Deities
Then we affected him) that never lent
Hi^ hand to ought but to our detriment.
A man that only lived to live no more,
And di'd still to be dying. Whose chief store
Of virtue, was, his hate did not pursue her,
Because he only heard of her, not knew her.
That knew no good, but only that his sight
Saw every thing had still his opposit^*
And ever this his apprehension caught,
That what he did was best, the other naught.
That always loved the man that never loved,
And hated him whose hate no death had moved.
That (politic) at fitting time and season
Could hate the Traitor, and yet love the Treason.
That many a woeful heart (ere his decease)
In pieces tore to purchase his own peace.
Who never gave his alms but in this fashion,
To salve his credit, more then for salvation.
Who on the names of good-men ever fed,
And (most accursed) sold the poor for bread.
Right like the Pitch-tree, from whose any limb
Comes never twig, shall be the seed of him.
The Muses scorned by him, laugh at his fame,
And never will vouchsafe to speak his Name.
Let no man for his loss one tear let fall,
But perish with him his memorial*
Into this (...) the God of Shepherd^ went,
The Trees in groans, the Books in t^are^ ^ament
His fatal chance, the Brooks that whilome lept
To hear him play while his fair^ Mistress slept,
Now left their (...) and such wanton moods,
And with loud clamours (...) the neighbring woods.
There spent h^ most of might* but when the day
Drew from the earth her pitchie veil away,
When all the ^^owry plains with Carols ^^ng
That by the mounting Lark were sh^illy sung,
When dusky mists ro^e from the crystal floods,
And darkness no where reigned but in the woods;
Pan left the Cave, and now intends to find
The sacred place where lay his love (...).
A plot of earth, in whose chill arms was laid
As much perfection as had ever Maid
If curious Nature had but taken care
To make more lasting, what she made so fair.
Now wanders Pan the arched Groves, and hills
Where Fa^er^es often da^^'d, and Shepherds quils
In sweet contentions passed the tedious day*
Yet (being early) in his unknown way
Met not a Shepherd, nor on all the Plain
A Flock then feeding saw, nor of his train
One jolly Satyr stirring yet abroad,
Of whom he might inquire, this to the load
Of his affliction adds; Now he inuokes
Those. Hamadriades.
Nymphs in mighty For rests, that with Oaks
Have equal Pates, each with her several Tree
Receiving birth, and ending, Destiny.
Calls on all Powers, entreats that he might have
But for his Love, the knowledge of her grave;
That since the Fates had taken the Iem away,
He might but see the Carknet where it lay;
To do fit right to such a part of mold,
Covering so rare a piece, that all the Gold
Or Diamond Earth can yield, for value, never
Shall match the treasure which was hidden there!
A hunting Nymph awakned with his moan,
(That in a bower neere-hand lay all alone,
Twining her small arms round her slender waste,
That by no others used to be embraced)
Got up, and knowing what the day before
Was guilty of; she adds not to his store
As many simply do, whose friends so crossed
They more afflict by showing what is lost:
But bad him follow her. He as she leads,
Urges her have. So a kind mother treads
Earnest, distracted, where, with blood defiled
She hears lies dead her dear and only child.
Mistrust now winged his feer, then raging ire,
"For Speed comes ever lamely to Desire.
Delays, the stones that waiting Suitors grind.
By whom at Court the poor man's cause is signed.
Who to dispatch a suit, will not defer
To take death for a joint Commissioner.
Delay, the Wooers bane, Reuenges hate,
The plague to Creditors decaid estate,
The Test of Patience, of our Hopes the Rack,
That draws them forth so long until they crack,
Virtues best benefactor in our times,
One that is set to punish great men's crimes,
She that had hindered mighty Pan a while,
Now steps aside: and as ore-flowing Nyle
Hid from Clymene's son his recking head
So from his rage all opposition fled;
Giving him way, to reach the timelesse Toombe
Of Natures glory, for whose ruthlesse doom
(When all the Graces did for mercy plead,
And Youth and Goodness both did intercede)
The Sons of Earth (if living) had been driven
To heap on hills, and war anew with heaven.
The Shepherds which he mist upon the Downs
Here meets he with: for from the neighbring Towns
Maidens and Men resorted to the grave
To see a wonder more then time e're gave.
The holy Priests had told them long agone
Amongst the learned Shepherds there was one
So given to piety, and did adore
So much the name of Pan, that when no more
He breadth'd, those that to open his heart began,
Found written there with gold the name of Pan.
Which, unbelieving man, that is not moved
To credit ought, if not by reason proved,
And ties the ouer-working power to do
Naught otherwise then Nature ceacheth to,
Held as most fabulous: Not inly seeing,
The hand by whom we live, and All have being
No work for admirable does intend,
Which Reason has the power to comprehend,
And Faith no merit has from heaven lent
Where humane reason yields experiment.
Till now they durst not trust the Legend old,
Esteeming all not true their Elders told,
And had not this last accident made good
The former, most, in unbelief had stood,
But Fame that spread the bruit of such a wonder,
Bringing the Swain of places far a sunder
To this selected plot (now famous more
Then any Grove, Mount, Plain, had bin before
By relicke, vision, burial or birth
O^ Anchoresse, or Hermit yet on earth)
Out of the Maide^s bed of endless rest
Shows them a Tree new grown, so fairly dressed
With spreading arms and curled top, that Jove
Never brauer saw in his D^d^nian Grove.
The hart-like leaves often each with other pyle,
As do the hard scales of the Crocodyle,
And none on all the tree was scene but bore
Written thereon in rich and purest Ore
The name of Pan; whose luster far beyond
Sparkl'd, as by a Torch the Dyamond.
Or those bright spangles which fair Goddess do
Shine in the hair of these which follow you.
The Shepherds by direction of great Pan,
Searched for the root, and finding it began
In her true heart, bids them again enclose
What now his eyes for ever, ever, lose.
Now in the selfsame Sphere his thoughts must move
With Xerxes.
him that did the shady Plane-tree love.
Yet though no issue from her loins shall be
To draw from Pan a noble peddigree,
And Pan shall not as other Gods have done
Glory in deeds of an heroicke Son,
Nor have his Name in Countries near and far
Proclaimed; as by his Child the Thunderer;
If Phoebus on this Tree spread warming rays,
And Northern blasts kill not her tender sprayes,
His Love shall make him famous in repute,
And still increase his Name, yet bear no fruit.
To make this sure (the God of Shepherds last)
(When other Ceremonies were over past)
And to perform what he before had vowed
To dire Revenge. Thus spoke unto the crow'd:
What I have lost kind Shepherds all you know;
And to recount it were to dwell in woe;
To show my passion in a Funeral Song,
And with my sorrow draw your sighs along,
Words, then, well placed might challenge somewhat due,
And not the cause alone, win tears from you.
This to prevent, I set Orations by
"For passion seldom loves formalitie.
What profits it a prisoner at the Bar,
To have his judgment spoken regular?
Or in the prison hear it often read,
When he at first knew what was forfeited?
Our griefs in others tears, like plates in water
Seem more in quantity. To be relator
Of my mishaps, speaks weakness, and that I
Have in my self no power of remedy.
(...) (yet that once too often) heretofore
The silver Ladon on his sandy shore
Heard my complains, and those cool groves that be
Shading the breast of lovely Arcady
Witness the tears which I for Syrinx spent.
Syrinx the fair; from whom the instrument
That fills your feasts with joy (which when I blow
Draws to the ^agging dug milk white as snow)
Had his beginning. This enough had been
To show the Fates (my Pron^p^^, in suo Pr^tocosm^.
deemed sisters) ^ene,
Here had they staid this Adage had been none
"That our disasters never come alone*
What boot is it though I am said to be
The worthy son of winged Mercury*
That I with gentle Nymphs in Forests high
^ist out the sweet time of my infancie^
And when more years had made me able grown
Was through the Mountains for their leader known?
That high-brow'd Maenalus where I was bred
And stony hills not few have honored
Me as protector, by the hands of Swains,
Whose sheep retire there from the open plains?
That Inn Shepherds cups ( Apoll^nius Smyrn^us.
rejecting gold)
Of milk and honey measures eight times told
Have offered to me; and the ruddy wine
Fresh and new pressed from the bleeding Vine?
That gleesome Hunters pleased with their sport,
With sacrifices due have thanked me for it.
That patient Anglers standing all the day
Near to some shallow stickle or deep bay.
And Fisherm^n whose nets have drawn to land
A shoale so great it well-nye hides the sand,
For such success, some Promontories head
Thrust at by waves, has known me worshipped?
But to increase my grief, what profits this?
"Since still the loss is as the looser is.
The many-kernell-bearing Pyne of late
From all trees else to me was consecrate,
But now behold a root more worth my love,
Equal to that which in an obscure Grove
Infernal (...) proper takes to her:
Whose golden slip the Trojan wanderer
(By sage Cumoean Sybil taught) did bring
(By Pates decreed) to be the warranting
Of his free passage, and a safe repair
Through dark Auernus to the upper air.
This must I succor, this must I defend
And from the wild Boares rooting ever shend,
Here shall the Wood-pecker no entrance find,
Nor Tiny's Beuers gnaw the clothing rind,
Lambeders Herds, nor Radnors goodly Dear
Shall never once be seen a browsing here.
And now ye British Swains (whose harmless sheep
Then all the worlds besides I joy to keep,
Which spread on every Plain and hilly Would
Fleeces no less esteemed then that of Gold,
For whose exchange one Indy Iems of price,
The other gives you of her choicest spice.
And well she may; but we unwise the while
Lessen the glory of our fruitful Isle:
Making those Nations think we foolish are,
For baser Drugs to vent our richer ware,
Which (save the bringer) never profit man
Except the Sexton and Physician.
And whether change of Clymes or what it be
That proves our Mariners mortality,
Such expert men are spent for such bad fares
As night have made us Lords of what is theirs.
Stay, stay at home ye Nobler spirits, and prise
Your lives more high then such base trumperies,
For bear to fetch, and they will go near to sue,
And at your own doors offer them to you;
Or have their woods and plains so over grown
With poisnous weeds, roots, gums and feed^ unknown*
That they would hire such Weeders as you be
To free their land from such fertility.
Their Spices hot their nature best indures,
But 'twill impair and much distemper yours.
What our own soil affords befits us best.
And long, and long, for ever may we rest
Needless of help! and may this Isle alone
Furnish all other Lands, and this Land none!
Excuse me Thetis, quoth the aged man,
If passion drew me from the words of Pan!
Which thus I follow: You whose flocks, quoth he,
By my protection, quit your industry,
For all the good I have and yet may give
To such as on the Plains hereafter live,
I do entreat what is not hard to grant,
That not a hand rend from this holy Plant
The smallest br^nch; and who so cutteth this
Dye for the offense; to me so heinous it is.
And by the Floods infernal here I swear,
(An oath whose breach the gre^^est Gods forbear)
Ere Phoebe thrice twelve times shall fill her homes
No furzy tuft, thick wood, nor brake of thorns
Shall harbor Wolf nor in this I Will shall breed,
Nor live one of that kind; if what is decreed
You keep inuiolate. To this they swore:
And since, those beasts have frighted us no mo^^.
But Swain (quoth Thetis) what is this you tell,
To what you fear shall ^^ll on Philo^el?
Fair Queen at end; but oh I fear, quoth he,
Ere I have ended my sad History*
Vnstaying time may bring on his last hour,
And so defraud us of thy wished power.
Yond goes a Shepherd; give me leave to run
And know the time of execution,
Mine aged limbs I can a little strain,
And quickly come (to end the rest) again.
THE FIFTH SONG.
THE ARGUMENT.
Within this Song my Muse does tell
The worthy fact of Philocel,
And how his Love and he in thrall
To death deprived of Funeral
The Queen of Waves does gladly save,
And frees Marina from the Cave.
SO soon a^ can a Martin from our Town
Fly to the River underneath the Down,
And back return with mort^^ in her hill,
Some little ^^^nny in her nest to fill*
The Shepherd came. And thus began anew:
Two hours alas, only two hours are due
From time to him, it is sentenced so of those
That here on earth as Destinies dispose
The lives and deaths of men; and that time past
He yields his judgment leave and breaths his last.
But to the cause. Great Goddess understand
In Mona-Ile thrust from the British land,
As (since it needed naught of others store)
It would entire be, and a part no more,
There lived a Maid so fair, that for her sake
Since she was borne the I Will had never Snake,
Nor were it fit a deadly sting should be
To hazard such admired Symmetrie,
So many beauties so comm^^^ in one,
That all delight were dead if she were gone,
Shepherds that in her clear eyes did delight,
Whilst they were open never held it night:
And were they shut, although the morning gray
Called up the Sun, they hardly though^ it day.
Or if they called it so, they did not pass
Withal to say that it eclipsed (...).
The Roses on her cheeks, such, as each ^urne
Phoebus might kiss, but had no power to burn.
From her sweet lips distill sweet^ sweete^ do,
Then from a Cherry half way cut in two
Whose yielding touch would a^ Promet (...)
Lumps truly senseless with a Muse inspire*
Who praising her would youth's desire ^o (...),
Each man in mind should be a rauisher.
Some say the nimble-witted Mercury
Went late disguised professing Palmistrie,
And Milk-maids fortunes told about the Land,
Only to get a touch of her soft hand.
And that a Shepherd walking on the brim
Of a clear stream where she did use to swim,
Saw her by chance, and thinking she had been
Of Chastity the pure and fairest Queen,
Stole thence dismayed, lest he by her decree
Might undergo Acteons destiny.
Did youths kind heat inflame me (but the snow
Upon my head, shows it coold long ago)
I then could give (fitting so fair a feature)
Right to her fame, and fame to such a creature.
When now much like a man the Palsy shakes,
And spectacles befriend, yet undertakes
To limne a Lady, to whose red and white
Apelles curious hand would owe some right;
His too unsteady Pencell, shadows here
Somewhat too much, and gives not over, clear;
His eye deceived mingles his colors wrong,
There strikes too little, and here stays too long,
Does and undoes, takes off, puts on (in vain)
Now too much white, then too much red again,
And thinking then to give some special grace,
He works it ill, or so mistakes the place,
That she which sits were better pay for naught,
Then have it ended, and so lamely wrought:
So do I in this weak description err;
And striving more to grace more iniure her.
For ever where true worth for praise does call,
He rightly nothing gives that gives not all.
But as a Lad who learning to divide,
By one small miss the whole has falsifide.
Caelia men called, and rightly called her so:
Whom Philocel (of all the Swains I know
Most worthy) loved: alas! that love should be
Subject to fortunes mutabilitie!
What ever learned Bards to fore have sung,
Or on the Plains Shepherds and Maidens young,
Of sad mishaps in love are set to tell,
Comes short to match the Fate of Philocel.
For as a Labourer toyling at a Bay
To force some clear stream from his wonted way,
Working on this side sees the water run
Where he wrought last, and thought it firmly done;
And that leake stopped, hears it come breaking out
Another where, in a far greater spout,
Which mended to, and with a turfe made trim
The brook is ready to overflow the brim,
Or in the bank the water having got:
Some Mole-hole, runs, where he expected not:
And when all is done, still fears, lest some great rain
Might bring a flood and throw all down again:
So in our Shepherds love; one hazard gone
Another still as bad was coming on.
This danger past another does begin,
And one mishap thrust out lets twenty in.
For he that loves, and in it has no stay,
Limits his bliss seld' past the Marriage day.
But Philocels alas and Caelia's too
Must never attain so far, as others do.
Else Fortune in them from her course should swerue
Who most afflicts those that most good deserve.
Twice had the glorious Sun run through the Signer,
And with his kindly heat improu'd the Mines,
(As such affirm with certain hopes that try
The vain and fruitless Art of Alohymie)
Since our Swain loved: and twice had Phoebus bin
In horned Aries taking up his Inn,
Ere he of Caelia's heart possession won.
And since that time all his intentions done
Nothing, to bring her thence. All eyes upon her,
Watchful, as Virtues are on truest Honor.
Kept on the I Will as carefully of some,
As by the Trojans their Palladium.
But where is the Fortress that can Love debar?
The forces to oppose when he makes war?
The Watch which he shall never find asleep?
The Spy that shall disclose his counsels deep?
That Fort, that Force, that Watch, that Spy would be
A lasting stop to a fifth Emperie.
But we as well may keep the heat from fire
As sever hearts whom love has made entire.
In lovely May when Titans golden rays
Make ods in hours between the nights and days;
And weighs almost down the once-euen Scale
Where night and day, by the Aequinoctiall
Were laid in balance, as his power he bent
To banish Cynthia from her Regiment,
To Latmus stately Hill; and with his light
To rule the upper world both day and night,
Making the poor Antipodes to fear
A like conjunction 'twixt great Jupiter
And some Alo^mena new, or that the Sun
From their Horizon did obliquely run:
This time the Swaine^ and Maidens of the I Will
The day with sportiue dances do beguile,
And every Valley ring^ with shepherds songs,
And every Echo each sweet noat prolongs,
And every River with unusual pride
And dimpled cheek rowles sleeping to the tide,
And lesser springs, which ayrie-breeding Woods,
Prefer as handmaids to the mighty floods,
Scarce fill up half their channels, making haste
(In fear, as boys) lest all the sport be past
Now was the Lord and Lady of the May
Meeting the May Pole at the break of day,
And Caelia as the fairest on the Green,
Not without some Maids envy chosen Queen,
Now was the time com'n when our gentle Swain
Must inn his harvest or lose all again.
Now must he pluck the Rose lest other hands,
Or tempests blemish what so fairly stands:
And therefore as they had before decreed
Our shepherd go^s a Boat, and with all speed
In night (that does on Lovers actions smile)
Arrived safe on Mona's fruitful I Will.
Between two ^ooks (immortal, without mother)
That stand as if one facing one another,
There ran a Creek^ up, intricate and blind,
As if the waters hid them from the wind,
Which never washed but at a higher tide
The frizled coat^ which do the Mountains hide,
Where never gale was longer known to stay
Then from the smooth wave it had swept away
The new divorced leaves, that from each side
Left the thick boughs to dance out with the tide.
At further end the Creek, a stately Wood
Gave a kind shadow (to the brackish Flood)
Made up of trees, not less kend by each skiffe
Then that sky-scaling Pike of Tenerife,
Upon whose tops the Herneshew bred her young,
And hoary moss upon their branches hung:
Whose rugged rindes sufficient were to show
Without their height, what time they began to grow.
And if dry eld by wrinckled skin appears,
None could allot them less then Nestor's years.
As under their command the thronged Creek
Ran lessened up. Here did the Shepherd seek
Where he his little Boat might safely hide,
Till it was fraught with what the world beside
Could not outvalew; nor give equal weight
Though in the time when Greece was at her height.
The ruddy Horses of the Rosy morn
Out of the Eastern gates had newly borne
Their blushing Mistress in her golden Chair,
Spreading new light throughout our Hemispheare.
When fairest Caelia with a louelier crew
Of Damsels then brave Latmus ever knew,
Came forth to meet the Youngsters; who had here
Cut down an Oak that long withouten peer
Bore his round head imperiously above
His other Mates there, consecrate to Jove.
The wished time drew on: and Caelia now
(That had the fame for her white arched brow)
While all her lovely fellows busied were
In picking off the Iems from Tellus hair,
Made toward the Creek, where Philocel vnspide,
(Of Maid or Shepherd that their May-games plide)
Received his wished for Caelia; and begun
To steer his Boat contrary to the Sun,
Who could have wished another in his place
To guide the Carre of light, or that his race
Were to have end (so he might bless his hap)
In Caelia's bosom, not in Thetis lap.
The Boat often danced for joy of what it held.
The hoyst-vp Sail, not quick but gently sweld,
And often shook, as fearing what might fall,
Ere she delivered what she went withal.
Winged The Western wind. And supposed (with the Star^es) the birth of Aurora
by A^tra^^, as Apollodor^s: (...).
Argestes fair Aurora's son,
Licensed, that day to leave his Dungeon,
Meekly attended, and did never err
Till Caelia graced our Land and our Land her.
As through the waves their loue-fraught Wherry ran
A many Cupids, each set on his Swan,
Guided with reins of gold and silver twist
The spotless Birds about them, as they list,
Which would have sung a Song (ere they were gone)
Had unkind Nature given them more then one;
Or in bestowing that, had not done wrong,
And made their sweet lives forfeit, one sad song.
Yet that their happy Voyage might not be
Without Times shortner, Heauen-taught Melody,
( Music that lent feet to the stable Woods,
And in their currents turned the mighty Floods,
Sorrows sweet Nurse, yet keeping Joy alive,
Sad discontent's most welcome Corrasiue,
The soul of Art, best loved when Love is by,
The kind inspirer of sweet Poesy,
Lest thou should wanting be, when Swans would feign
Have sung one Song, and never sung again)
The gentle Shepherd hasting to the shore
Began this Lay, and timed it with his Oar.
Never more let holy Dee
Over other Rivers brave,
Or boast bow (in his iollitie)
Kings rowed upon his wave.
But silent be, and ever know
That Neptune for my Fare would row.
Those were Captives. If he say
That now I am no other,
Yet she that bears my prisons key
Is fairer then Loves Mother;
A God took me, those one less high,
They wore their bonds, so do not I.
Swell then, gently swell ye Floods
As proud of what ye bear,
And Nymphs that in low corrall Woods
String Pearls upon your hair,
Ascend: and tell if ere this day
A fairer pri^^ was seen at Sea.
See the Salmons leap and bound
To please us as we pass,
Each Mermaid on the Rocks around,
Lets fall her brittle glass,
As they their beauties did despise,
And loved no mirror but your eyes.
Blow, but gently blow fair wind
From the forsaken shore,
And be as to the Halcyon kind,
Till we have ferr^'d over:
So may thou still have leave to blow,
And fan the way where she shall go.
Floods, and Nymphs, and Winds, and all
That see us both together,
Into a disputation fall;
And then resolve me, whether
The greatest kindness each can show,
Will quit our trust of you or no.
Thus as a merry Milke-maid neat and fine
Returning late from milking of her Kine,
Shortens the dew'd way which she treads along
With some selfe-pleasing-since-new-gotten Song,
The Shepherd did their passage well beguile.
And now the horned Flood bore to our I Will
His head more high then he had used to do,
Except by Cynthia's newness forced to.
Not Ianuaries snow dissol^'d in Floods
Makes Thamar more intrude on Blanchden Woods,
Nor the concourse of waters when they fleet
After a long Rain, and in Souerne meet,
Rais'th her enraged head to root fair Plants,
Or more affright her high inhabitants,
(When they behold the waters rusully,
And save the waters nothing else can see)
Then Neptunes subject now, more then of yore:
As loath to set his burden soon on shore.
O Neptune! had thou kept them still with thee,
Though both were lost to us, and such as we,
And with those beauteous birds which on thy breast
Get and bring up; afforded them a rest;
Delos, that long time wandering piece of earth
Had not been famed more for Diana's birth;
Then those few planks that bore them on the Seas,
By the blessed issue of two such as these.
But they were landed* so are not our woes,
Nor ever shall, whilst from an eye there flows
One drop of moisture; to these present times
We will relate, and some ^ad Shepherds ^imes
To after ages may their Fates make known,
And in their depth of sorrow drown his own.
So our Relation and his mournful Verse,
Of tears, shall force such tribute to their Hearse,
That not a private grief shall ever thrive
But in that deluge fall, yet this survive.
Two furlongs from the shore they had not gone,
When from a low-cast Valley (having on
Each hand a woody hill, whose boughs vnlopt
Have not alone at all time sadly dropped,
And turned their storms on her dejected breast,
But when the fire of heaven is ready pressed
To warm and further what it should bring forth,
(For lowly Dales mate Mountains in their worth)
The Trees (as screenlike Greatness) shades his raye,
As it should shine on none but such as they)
Came (and full sadly came) a hapless Wretch,
Whose walks and pastures once were known to stretch
From East to West so far that no dike ran
For noted bounds, but where the Ocean
His wrathful billows thrust, and grew as great
In sholes of Fish as were the others Neat.
Who now dejected and deprived of all,
Longs (and has done so long) for funeral.
For as with hanging head I have beheld
A widow Vine, stand, in a naked field,
Unhusbanded, neglected, all forlorn,
Brouz'd on by Dear, by Cattle cropped and torn,
Vnpropt, vnsuccoured by stake or tree,
From wreakfull storms impetuous tyranny,
When had a willing hand lent kind redress,
Her pregnant bunches might from out the Press
Have sent a liquour both for taste and show
No less divine then those of Malligo:
Such was this wight, and such she might have been.
She both th'extremes has felt of Fortunes teene,
For never have we heard from times of yore,
One sometime enuy'd and now pitti'd more.
Her object, as her state, is, low as earth;
Privation her companion; thoughts of mirth
^^kesome; and in one selfsame circle turning,
With sudden sports brought to a house of mourning.
Of others good her best belief is still
And constant to her own in naught but ill.
The only enemy and friend she knows
Is Death, who though defers must end her woes,
Her contemplation frightfull as the night.
She never looks on any living wight
Without comparison; and as the day
Gives us, but takes the Glowormes light away:
So the least ray of Bliss on others thrown
Depriues and blinds all knowledge of her own.
Her comfort is (if for her any be)
That none can show more cause of grief then she.
Yet somewhat she of adverse Fate has won,
Who had undone her were she not undone.
For those that on the Sea of Greatness ride
Far from the quiet shore, and where the tide
In ebbs and floods is ghess'd, not truly known;
Expert of all estates except their own;
Keeping their station at the Helm of State,
Not by their Virtues but auspicious Fate,
Subject to calmes of favor storms of rage,
Their actions noted as the common Stage,
Who, like a man borne blind that cannot be
By demonstration shown what it is to see,
Live still in Ignorance of what they want,
Till Misery become the Adamant,
And touch them for that point, to which, with speed,
None comes so sure as by the hand of Need.
A Mirror strange she in her right hand bore,
By which her friends from flatterers heretofore
She could distinguish well; and by her side,
(As in her full of happiness) untied,
Vnforc'd, and vncompell'd, did sadly go
(As if partaker of his Mistress woe)
A loving Spaniell, from whose rugged back
(The only thing (but death) she moanes to lack)
She plucks the hair, and working them in pleats
Furthers the suit which Modesty entreats.
Men call her Athliot: who cannot be
More wretched made by infelicitie,
Unless she here had an immortal breath,
Or living thus, lived timorous of death.
Out of her lowly and forsaken dell
She running came, and cried to Philocel,
Help! help! kind shepherd help! see yonder where
A lovely Lady hung up by the hair,
Struggles, but mildly struggles with the Fates,
Whose thread of life spun to a thread that mates
Dame Natures in her hair, stays them to wonder,
While too fine twisting makes it break in sunder.
So shrinkes the Rose that with the flames does meet;
So gently bows the Virgin parchment sheet,
So rowlethe waves up and fall out again,
As all her beauteous parts, and all in vain.
Far, far, above my help or hope in trying,
Unknown, and so more miserably dying,
Smothring her torments, in her panting breast,
She meekly waits the time of her long rest.
Hasten! o hasten then! kind Shepherd haste.
He went with her: And Caelia (that had graced
Him past the world besides) seeing the way
He had to go, not far, rests on the lay.
'Twas near the place where Pans transformed Love
Her gilded leaves displaid, and boldly strove
For luster with the Sun: a sacred tree
(Pal'd round) and kept from violation free:
Whose smallest spray rent off, we never prize
At less then life* Here, though her heavenly eyes
From him she loved could scarce afford a sight,
(As if for him they only had their light)
Those kind and brighter Stars were known to err
And to all misery betrayed her.
For turning them aside, she (hapless) spies
The holy Tree, and (as all novelties
In tempting women have small labor lost
Whether for value naught, or of more cost)
Led by the hand of vncontroll'd desire
She rose, and thither went. A wrested Bryre
Only kept close the gate which led into it,
(Easy for any all times to undo it,
That with a pious hand hung on the tree
Garlands or raptures of sweet Poesy)
Which by her opened, with vnweeting hand,
A little spray she plucked, whose rich leaves fan'd
And chatter'd with the air, as who should say
Do not for once, o do not this bewray!
Nor give sound to a tongue for that intent*
"Who ignorantly sins, dies innocent.
By this was Philocel returning back,
And in his hand the Lady; for whose wrack
Nature had clean forsworn to frame a wight
So wholly pure, so truly exquisite:
But more deformed, and from a rough-hewne mold,
Since what is best lives seldom to be old.
Within their sight was fairest Caelia now;
Who drawing near, the life-priz'd golden bough
Her Love beheld. And as a Mother kind
What time the new-cloath'd trees by gusts of wind
Unmoved, stand wistly listening to those lays
The feathered Quiristers upon their sprayes
Chaunt to the merry Spring, and in the Even
She with her little son for pleasure given,
To tread the fringed banks of an amorous flood,
That with her music courts a sullen wood,
Where ever talking with her only bliss
That now before and then behind her is,
She stoopes for flowers the choicest may be had,
And bringing them to please her prittie Lad,
Spies in his hand some banefull flower or weed,
Whereon he gins to smell, perhaps to feed,
With a more earnest haste she runs unto him,
And pulls that from him which might else undo him:
So to his Caelia hastened Philocel,
And raught the bough away. Hid it: and fell
To question if she broke it, or if then
An eye beheld her? Of the race of men
(Replide she) when I took it from the tree
Assure your self was none to testify,
But what has past since in your hand, behold
A fellow running yonder over the Would
I^ well informed of. Can there (Love) ensue
Tell me! oh tell me! any wrong to you,
By what my hand has ignorantly done?
(Quoth fearful Caelia) Philocel! be won
By these unfeigned tears, as I by thine,
To make thy greatest sorrows partly mine*
Clear up these showers (my Sun) quoth Philocel,
The ground it needs not. Naught is so from Well
But that reward and kind entreaties may
Make smooth the front of wrath, and this allay.
Thus wisely he suppressed his height of woe,
And did resolve, since none but they did know
Truly who rent it: And the hateful Swain
That lately past by them upon the Plain
(Whom well he knew did bear to him a hate,
(Though undeserved) so inueterate
That to his utmost power he would assay
To make his life have ended with that day.)
Except in his, had seen it in no hand,
That he against all throes of Fate would stand,
Acknowledge it his deed, and so afford
A passage to his heart for Justice sword,
Rather then by her loss the world should be
Despiz'd and scorned for loosing such as she.
Now (with a vow of secrecy from both)
Enforcing mirth, he with them homewards go'th;
And by the time the shades of mighty woods
Began to turn them to the Eastern Floods,
They thither got: where with undaunted heart
He welcomes both; and freely does impart
Such dainties as a Shepherds cottage yeeld^
Taken from the fruitful woods and fertile fields;
No way distracted nor disturbed at all.
And to prevent what likely might befall
His truest Caelia, in his apprehending
Thus to all future care gave final ending:
Into their cup (wherein for such sweet Girls
Nature would Myriades of richest Pearls
Dissolve, and by her powrefull simples strive*
To keep them still on earth, and still alive)
Our Swain infused a powder, which they drank:
And to a pleasant room (set on a bank
Near to his Coa^, where he did often use
At vacant hours to entertain his Muse.)
Brought them, and seated on a curious bed
Till what he gave in operation sped,
And robbed them of his sight, and him of theirs,
Whose new inlightning will be quenched with tears.
The Glass of Time had well nigh spent the Sand
It had to run, ere with impartial hand
Justice must to her upright Balance take him.
Which he (afraid it might too soon forsake him)
Began to use, as quickly as perceive,
And of his Love thus took his latest leave.
Caelia! thou fairest creature ever eye
Beheld, or yet put on mortality*
Caelia that have but just so much of earth,
As makes thee capable of death! Thou birth
Of every Virtue, life of every good*
Whose chastest sports, and daily taking food
Is imitation of the highest powers,
Who to the earth lend seasonable showers,
That it may bear, we to their Altars bring
Things worthy their accept, our offering.
I the most wretched creature ever eye
Beheld, or yet put on mortality,
Unhappy Philocel, that have of earth
Too much to give my sorrows endless birth,
The spring of sad misfortunes; in whom lies
No bliss that with thy worth can sympathize,
Clouded with woe that hence will never flit,
Till death eternal night grow one with it,
I as a dying Swan that sadly sings
Her moanfull Dirge unto the silver springs,
Which careless of her Song glide sleeping by
Without one murmr of kind Elegy,
Now stand by thee; and as a Turtles ma^e,
With lamentations inarticulate,
The near departure from her love bemones,
Spend these my bootlesse sighs and ^illing groans.
Here as a man (by Justice doom) exilde
To Coasts unknown, to Deserts rough and wild,
Stand I to take my latest leave of thee.
Whose happy and heauen-making company
Might I enjoy in Libia's Continent,
Were blessed fruition and not banishment.
First of those Eyes that have already taken
Their leave of me: Lamps fitting for the Phane
Of heavens most power, and which might never expire
But be as sacred as the Vestall fire.
Then of those plots, where halfe-Ros'd Lillies be,
Not one by Art but Natures industry,
From which I go as one excluded from
The taintlesse flowers of blessed Elixium.
Next from those Lips I part, and may there be
No one that shall hereafter second me*
Guiltless of any kisses but their own,
Their sweets but to themselves to all unknown:
For should our Swains diuulge what swee^^ there be
Within the Sea-clipt bounds of Britanie,
We should not from invasions be exempted;
But with that prize would all the world be tempted.
Then from her heart; o no! let that be never,
For if I part from hence I dye for ever.
Be that the Record of my love and name!
Be that to me as is the Phoenix flame!
Creating still anew what Justice doom
Must yield to dust and a forgotten toombe.
Let thy chaste love to me (as shadows run
In full extent unto the setting Sun)
Meet with my fall, and when that I am gone
Back to thy self retire, and there grow one;
If to a second light thy shadow be.
Let him still have his ray of love from me*
And if as I, that likewise do decline,
Be mine or his, or else be his and mine.
But know no other, nor again be sped,
"She dies a virgin that but knows one bed.
And now from all at once my leave I take,
With this petition, that when thou shall wake,
My tears already spent may serve for thine*
And all thy sorrows be excused by mine
^ea rather then my loss should draw on hers,
(Hear Heaven the suit which my (sad soul prefers*)
Let this her slumber like Obliuions stream,
Make her believe our love was but a dream!
Let me be dead in her as to the earth,
Ere Nature loose the grace of such a birth.
Sleep thou sweet soul from all disquiet free,
And since I now beguile thy destiny,
Let after patience in thy breast arise,
To give his name a life who for thee dies.
He dies for thee that worthy is to dye,
Since now in leaving that sweet harmony
Which Nature wrought in thee, he draws not to him
Enough of sorrow that might straight undo him.
And have for means of death his parting hence,
So keeping Justice still in Innocence.
Here staid his tongue, and tears anew began.
"Parting knows more of grief then absence can.
And with a backward pace and lingering eye
Left and for ever left their company.
By this the cursed Informer of the deed
With wings of mischief (and those have most speed)
Unto the Priests of Pan had made it known.
And (though with grief enough) were thither flown
With strict command the Officers that be
As hands of Iusti^^ in her each decree.
Those unto judgment brought him: where accused
That with unhappy hand he had abused
The holy Tree; and by the oath of him
Whose eye beheld the separated limb,
All doubts dissolved; quick judgment was ^warded,
(And but last night) that hi^her strongly guarded
This morn he should be brought; and from yond ^o^k
(Where every hour new store of mourners flock)
He should be headlong thrown (too hard a doom)
To be deprived of life; and dead, of toombe.
This is the cause fair Goddess that appears
Before you now clad in an old man's tears,
Which willingly flow out, and shall do more
Then many Winters have seen heretofore.
But Father (quoth she) let me understand
How you are sure that it was Caelia's hand
Which rent the branch; and then (if you can) tell
What Nymph it was which near the lonely Dell
Your shepherd succored* Quoth the good old man:
The last time in her Orb pale Cynthia ran,
I to the prison went, and from him knew
(Upon my vow) what now is known to you.
And that the Lady which he found distressed
Is Pida called, a Maid not meanly blessed
By heavens endowments, and. Alas ^ but see
Kind Philocel ingirt with misery,
More strong then by his bonds, is drawing nigh
The place appointed for his tragedy:
You may walk thither and behold his fall;
While I come near enough, yet not at all.
Nor shall it need I to my sorrow knit
The grief of knowing with beholding it.
The Goddess went: (but ere she came did shroud
Her self from every eye within a cloud)
Where she beheld the Shepherd on his way,
Much like a Bridegroom on his marriage-day;
Increasing not his misery with fear.
Others for him, but he shed not a tear.
His knitting sinews did not tremble ought,
Nor to unusual palpitation brought
Was or his heart or liver, nor his eye,
Nor tongue, nor color showed a dread to dye.
His resolution keeping with his spirit,
(^oth worthy him that did them both inherit)
Held in subjection every thought of fear,
Scorning so base an executioner.
Some time he spent in speech; and then began
Submissely prayer to the name of Pan,
When suddenly this cry came from the Plains:
From guiltless blood be free ye British Swains!
Mine be those bonds, and mine the death appointed!
Let me be headlong thrown, these limbs disioynted!
Or if you needs must hurl him from that brim,
Except I dye there dies but part of him.
Do then right Justice and perform your oath!
Which cannot be without the death of both.
Wonder, drew thitherward their drowned eyes,
And Sorrow Philocels. Where he espies,
What he did only fear, the beauteous Maid,
His woeful Caelia, whom (ere night arraid
Last time the world in suit of mournful black,
More dark then use, as to bemone their wrack)
He at his cottage left in sleeps soft arms,
By power of simples and the force of charms,
Which time had now dissolved, and made her know
For what intent her Love had left her so.
She staid not to awake her mate in sleep,
Nor to bemone her Fate. She scorned to weep,
Or have the passion that within her lies
So distant from her heart as in her eyes.
But rending of her hair, her throbbing breast
Beating with ruthlesse strokes, she onwards pressed
As an enraged furious Lioness,
Through uncouth ^^e^dings of the wilderness,
In hot pursuit of her late missed brood.
The name of Philocel speaks every wood,
And she begins it still, and still her pace.
Her face-deckt anger, anger deck her face.
So ran distracted He^u^a along
The streets of Troy. So did the people throng
With helpless hands and heavy hearts to see
Their woeful ruin in her progeny.
As harmless flocks of sheep that nearly fed
Upon the open plains wide scattered,
Ran all afront, and gazed with earnest eye
(Not without tears) while thus she passed by.
Springs that long time before had held no drop,
Now welled forth and ouer-went the top,
Birds left to pay the Spring their wonted vows,
And all forlome sat drooping on the boughs.
Sheep, Springs and Birds, nay trees unwonted groans
Bewailed her chance, and forced it from the stones.
Thus came she to the place (where aged men,
Maidens, and wives, and youth and childeren
That had but newly learnt their Mothers name,
Had almost spent their tears before she came.)
And those her earnest and related words
Threw from her breast; and unto them affords
These as the means to further her pretense:
Receive not on your souls, by Innocence
Wronged, lasting stains; which from a sluice the Sea
May still wash over but never wash away.
Turn all your wraths on me; for here behold
The hand that tore your sacred Tree of gold;
These are the feet that led to that intent;
Mine was the offense, be mine the punishment.
Long has he lived among you, and he knew
The danger imminent that would ensue;
His virtuous life speaks for him, hear it then
And cast not hence the miracle of men*
What now he does is through some discontent,
Mine was the fact, be mine the punishment!
What certain death could never make him do
(With Caelia's loss) her presence forced him to.
She that could clear his greatest clouds of woes,
Some part of woman made him now disclose,
And showed him all in tears: And for a while
Out of his heart unable to exile
His troubling thoughts in words to be conceived;
But weighing what the world should be bereaved,
He of his sighs and throbs some license wan,
And to the sad spectators thus began:
Hasten! o haste! the houre's already gone,
Do not defer the execution!
Nor make my patience suffer ought of wrong!
It Is naught to dye, but to be dying long!
Some fit of Frenzy has possessed the Maid,
She could not do it, though she had assaid,
No bough grows in her reach; nor has the tree
A spray so weak to yield to such as she.
To win her love I broke it, but unknown
And vndesir'd of her; Then let her own
No touch of prejudice without consent,
Mine was the fact, be mine the punishment!
O! who did ever such contention see
Where death stood for the prize of victory?
Where love and strife were firm and truly known,
And where the victor must be overthrown?
Where both pursude, and both held equal strife
That life should further death, death further life.
Amazement struck the multitude. And now
They knew not which way to perform their vow.
If only one should be deprived of breath,
They were not certain of the offenders death;
If both of them should dye for that offense,
They certainly should murder Innocence;
If none did suffer for it, then there ran
Upon their heads the wrath and curse of Pan.
This much perplexed and made them to defer
The deadly hand of the Executioner,
Till they had sent an Officer to know
The Judges will: (and those with Fates do go)
Who back returned, and thus with tears began:
The Substitutes on earth of mighty Pan,
Have thus decreed (although the one be free)
To clea^^ themselves from all impunitie,
If, who the offender is, no means procure,
The Offense is certain, be their death as sure.
This is their doom (which may all plagues prevent)
To have the guil^y kill the innocent.
Look as two little Lads (their parents treasure)
Under a Tutor strictly kept from pleasure,
While they their new-giuen lesson closely scan
Hear of a message by their fathers man,
That one of them, but which he has forgot,
Must come along and walk to some fair plot;
Both have a hope: their careful Tutor loath
To hinder either, or to license both;
Sends back the Messenger that he may know
His Masters pleasure which of them must go:
While both his Scholars stand alike in fear
Both of their freedom and abiding there,
The Servant comes and says that for that day
Their Father wills to have them both away:
Such was the fear these loving souls were in
That time the messenger had absent bin.
But far more was their joy twixt one another,
In hearing neither should out-liue the other.
Now both intwinde, because no conquest won,
Yet either ruinde: Philocel begun
To arm his Love for death: a roabe unfit
Till Hymen^s saffron'd weed had vsher'd it*
My fairest Caelia! come; let thou and I,
That long have learned to love, now learn to dye;
It is a lesson hard if we discern it,
Yet none is borne so soon as bound to learn it.
Impartial Fate lays open the Book to us,
And let us con it still embracing thus;
We may it perfect have, and go before
Those that have longer time to read it o^re;
And we had need begin and not delay,
For^tis our turn to read it first to day.
Help when I miss, and when thou art in doubt
I Will be thy prompter, and will help thee out.
But see how much I err: vain Metaphor
And elocution Destinies abhor.
Could death be staid with words, or won with tears,
Or moved with beauty, o^ with unripe years;
Sure thou could do it; this Rose, this Sun-like eye
Should not so soon be quelled, so quickly dye.
But we must dye my Love; not thou alone,
Nor only I, but both; and yet but one.
Nor let us grieve; for we are married thus,
And have by death what life denied us.
It is a comfort from him more then due;
"Death seuers many, but he couples few.
Life is a Flood that keeps us from our bliss,
The Ferriman to waft us thither, is
Death, and none else; the sooner we get over
Should we not thank the Ferriman the more?
Others entreat him for a passage hence,
And groan beneath their griefs and impotence,
Yet (merciless) he l^ts those longer stay,
And sooner takes the happy man away*
Some little happiness have thou and I,
Since we shall dye before we wish to dye.
Should we here longer live, and have our days
As full in number as the most of these,
And in them meet all pleasures may betide,
We gladly might have lined and patient did:
When now our fewer years made long by cares
(That without age can snow down silver hairs)
Make all affirm (which do our griefs discry)
We patiently did live, and gladly dye.
The difference (my Love) that does appear
Betwixt our Fates and theirs that see us here,
Is only this: the high-all-knowing power
Conceales from them, but tells us our last hour.
For which to Heaven we far-farre more are bound,
Since in the hour of death we may be found
(By its prescience) ready for the hand
That shall conduct us to the Holy Land.
When those, from whom that hour concealed is, may
Even in their height of Sin be taken away.
Besides, to us Justice a friend is known,
Which neither lets us dye nor live alone.
That we are forced to it cannot be held;
"Who fears not Death, denies to be compelled.
O that thou were no Actor in this Play,
My sweetest Caelia! or diuorc'd away
From me in this: o Nature! I confess
I cannot look upon her heaviness
Without betraying that infirmity
Which at my birth thy hand bestowed on me.
Would I had did when I received my birth!
Or known the grave before I knew the earth!
Heavens! I but one life did receive from you,
And must so short a loan be paid with two?
Cannot I dye but like that brutish stem
Which have their best beloved to dye with them?
O let her live! some blessed power hear my cry?
Let Caelia live and I contented dye.
My Philocel (quoth she) neglect these throes!
Ask not for me, nor add not to my woes!
Can there be any life when thou art gone?
Nay, can there be but desolation?
Art thou so cruel as to wish my stay,
To wait a passage at an unknown day?
Or have me dwell within this Vale of woe
Excluded from those joys which thou shall know?
Envy not me that bliss! I will assay it,
My love deserves it, and thou can not stay it.
Justice! then take thy doom; for we intend,
Except both live, no life; one love, one end.
Thus with embraces, and exhorting other,
With teare-dew'd kisses that had power to smother;
Their foft and ruddy lips close joined with either,
That in their deaths their souls might meet together.
With prayers as hopeful as sincerely good,
Expecting death they on the Cliffes edge stood;
And lastly were (by one often forcing breath)
Thrown from the Rock into the arms of death.
Fair Thetis whose command the waves obey,
Loathing the loss of so much worth as they,
Was gone before their fall; and by her power
The Billows (merciless, used to devour,
And not to save) she made to swell up high,
Even at the instant when the tragedy
Of those kind souls should end: so to receive them,
And keep what cruelty would feign bereave them.
Her hest was soon performed: and now they lay
Embracing on the surface of the Sea,
Void of all sense; a spectacle so sad
That Thetis, nor no Nymph which there she had,
Touched with their woes, could for a while refrain
But from their heavenly eyes did sadly rain
Such showers of tears (so powrefull since divine)
That ever since the Sea does taste of Bryne.
With tears, thus, to make good her first intent
She both the Lovers to her Chariot hent:
Recalling Life that had not clearly taken
Full leave of his or her more curious Phane,
And with her praise sung by these thankful pair
Steered on her Coursers (swift as fleeting air)
Toward her Palace built beneath the Seas:
Proud of her journey, but more proud of these.
By that time Night had newly spread her robe
Over our halfe-part of this massy Globe,
She won that famous I Will which Jove did please
To honor with the holy Druydes.
And as the Western side she stripped along,
Heard (and so staid to hear) this heavy Song.
O Heaven! what may I hope for in this Cave?
A Grave.
But who to me this last of helps shall retch?
A Wretch.
Shall none be by pitying so said a wight?
Yes* Night.
Small comfort can befall in heavy plight
To me poor Maid, in whose d^stresses be
Nor hope, nor help, nor one to pity me,
But a cold Grave, a Wretch, and darksome Night.
To dig that Grave what fatal thing appears?
Thy Tears.
What Bell shall ring me to that bed of ease?
Rough Seas.
And who for Mourners has my Fate assigned?
Each Wind.
Can any be debarred from such I find?
When to my last Rites Gods no other send
To make my Grave, for Knell, or mourning friend,
Then mine own Tears, rough Seas, and gusts of Wind.
Tears must my grave dig: but who brings those*
Thy Woes.
What Monument will Heaven my body spare?
The Air.
And what the Epitaph when I am gone?
Oblivion.
Most miserable I, and like me none
Both dying, and in death, to whom is lent
Nor Spade, nor Epitaph, nor Monument.
Excepting Woes, Air and Oblivion.
The end of this gave life unto a groan,
As if her life and it had been but one;
Yet she as careless of reserving either,
If possible would leave them both together.
It was the fair Marina, almost spent
With grief and fear of future famishment.
For (hapless chance) but the last rosy morn
The willing Redbrest flying through a Thorn,
Against a prickle gored his tender side,
And in an instant, so, poor creature, did.
Thetis much moved with those sad notes she heard,
He^ freeing thence to Triton soon referred;
Who found the Cave as soon as set on shore,
And by his strength removing from the door
A weighty stone, brought forth the fearful Maid,
Which kindly led where his fair Mistress staid
Was entertained as well became her sort,
And with the rest steered on to Thetis Court,
For whose release from imminent decay
My Muse a while will here keep Holy Day.
FINIS.

