THE IVDGEMENT OF THE APOSTLES.

THE IVDGEMENT OF THE APOSTLES: AND OF THOSE OF THE FIRST AGE, IN ALL POINTS of
doctrine questioned between the Catholics and Protestants of England, as they
are set down in the 39. Articles of their Religion.

By an old student in Divinity.

MORIENS REVIVISCO



AT DOWAY, By the widow of MARK WYON, at the sign of the golden Phoenix.

M.DC.XXXII.

TO HER MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY MARIE BY THE GRACE OF GOD QVEENE OF GREAT
BRITTANY, FRANCE AND IRELAND.
ALL dignities (Most Gracious Queen) have assembled themselves in your
Majesty, striving (as it were) to make you Great and Glorious: Whether we
respect that great Monarchy of France, whose Jewel and darling you are, or
that great Monarch HENRY the fourth your noble Father, surnamed GREAT for his
MARTIAL CHIVALRIE, or your Most Illustrious Mother descended of the house of
the great Duke of Florence, or your most Christian brother King of France
surnamed IVSTE, or your noble Sisters, the one married to the great and
CATHOLIC King of Spain, the other to the potent and warlike Duke of Sauoye.
And although your Majesty may seem to have left all these dignities in
leaving France, and transporting your self to England: Yet they follow you as
inseparable attendants on your royal virtues; yea now there is a new dignity
accrewed unto your Majesty greater then all the rest, to wit, Your marriage
with our great King CHARLES, his great Crown and Kingdom: because by your
former dignities, you were only daughter and Sister to Kings and Queens; by
this you art a great Queen, and Spouse to the mighty Prince and great King
of the great Brittanie: and by him, you have all the greatness also which the
Royal blood of him and his Ancestors can add unto yours. I may add to all
this another thing which does agrandize your greatness more the^ all the rest:
to wit, your Majesty's Constancy in Religion amidst so many diverse sects of
heresy, your zeal toward the Catholic cause, your compassion of your
Catholic Subjects, for whom you are often suppliant to our noble Souueraigne
in all their distresses; and lastly your many precious and rare indowmentes
of nature and grace, for which our noble King loves you dearly, your
subjects admire you, and God has blessed you with a Royal and hopeful
issue. When I cast mine eyes on the resplendent beams and luster of this your
Greatness, I confess I was daunted, and feared to approach to so Great
majesty, especially with so little a present, as I had prepared, to wit, this
little pamphlet rudely compiled, and in respect of it self and the Author,
nothing beseeming, because nothing proportionate, to your greatness. But
because great Princes, who cannot be Higher or greater in Temporal dignity,
disdain not, yea take pleasure, to bow even to their lowest Subjects, and
do willingly accept of their loyal duties and respects, be they expressed
by never so little presents, I adventured (presuming on your Majesty's great
and gracious Goodness) to dedicate this my book unto your Royal Majesty,
and my self and humble service with it: hoping that although in other
respects, it be too little a present for so great a Queen, yet in that it
contains the Judgment of the great Apostles and Apostolical Doctors of the
first age after Christ, concerning the Protestant Religion contained in the
articles authorized by Parliament, it will not be slighted nor lightly esteemed
by your most Excellent Majesty: It will rather confirm and comfort your
Majesty in the Catholic faith, when by this book you shall perceive, that
you profess the same religion which the Apostles and Apostolical Doctors
preached and delivered; which S. PETER taught in our country; which S. JOSEPH
of Arimathie (who buried CHRIST and was at his mothers death and Assumption)
taught and practiced at Glastenburie, where he and his companions fixed their
aboade, and passed their life in fastinges, watchinges and prayers, as our
Annalles do testify: Which not only the noble Kings of France, from
CLODOVEVS the first Christian King, to King LEWIS the JUST who now reigns,
embraced; but also our first Christian King LUCIUS received from that holy Pope
ELEVTHERIVS, who sent him not only preachers to instruct him and his people,
but also, as our Annals record unto us, sent unto him an hallowed crown, and
extended the limits of his Kingdom to Norwaye and Denmark: Which faith all
our first Christian Kings who were also Saints mantained by sword and
Scepter: as Saint LUCIUS our first Christian King, S. LUCIUS or LVCIAN Apostle
to the BAVARIANS, S. CONSTANTINE Emperor amongst the Grecians, S. CONSTANTINE
King, S. THEODRICKE, the two SS. ETHELBERTES, the two SS. ETHELDREDS, S.
GVNDLEVS, S. OSWALD, S. OSWIN, S. SEBBE, S. CEADWALL, S. INAS, S. SIGEBERT, S.
RICHARD, the twoe SS. ALFREDS, S. CEOLNVLPHE, S. FREMVND, S. KENELME, S.
ETHELNVPH, SS. EDGAR, S. EDMUND, the two S. EDWARDS, and S. MALCOLME, and their
holy Queens also embraced: as S. HELEN Queen and Emperesse mother to
CONSTANTINE the great, S. AVDRIE or ETHELDRED, S. CHINNEBVRGE, S. EANFLED, S.
ERMEMBVRGE, S. ETHELBVRG; S. ERMVILD, S. HERESWIDE, S. BVTHILDIS, S. SEXBVRGE,
S. WILFRED, S. EADGITH, S. ALGVIE, S. AGATHE, S. MARGARET, S. MAVDE. To which I
willingly add our holy Queen S. BERTH, as whom your Majesty so much
represents and resembles. She was daughter to a King of France, so is your
Majesty: She was married to King ETHELBERT who then was of a contrary
religion to her; so is your Majesty despoused* to our King CHARLES the GREAT,
different as yet from your Majesty in Religion: She was allowed a Bishop and
others to be about he, who were of her religion; so is your Majesty: She by
her prayers and good examples together with some religious preachers sent by S.
GREGORY the great, procured the conversion of her HUSBAND and his people unto
the Christian and Catholic* faith and religion; so we hope that your Majesty
shall by your holy prayers and examples, for which our sovereign loves you
dearly be a cause of his conversion to the Catholic Faith; at least, we hope
your Majesty shall work in him such a liking of the Catholic Faith, that he
shall never permit that faith to be persecuted, for the defense whereof
against Luther, King HENRY the eight, his great uncle, was the first who by
Pope LEO the Tenthe, was Honored with the glorious title of DEFENDOVR OF THE
FAITH, which with the crown and Kingdom is line^llie defcended unto his
Majesty. Certes, his moral life free from all note of vice, in which he
yields to no Christian* Prince in Europe, seems to promise noe less. This
our Kingdom (most noble Queen) is styled in ancient histories THE DOWRY OF
MARIE the mother of God: Which perchance is the cause why it has been so
fortunate in Queen MARY'S, as in Queen MARY'S, as in Queen MARIE who
restored the Catholic Religion after the death of her brother King EDWARD the
sixth: and in Queen MARIE our Souueraignes grandmother, who sanctified our
Land with her blood shed for defense of the Catholic Faith: and Iastlie by
your Majesty our last Queen MARIE, by whom this land is blessed by a royal
issue and as we hope shall in time be mad^ happy by restitution of the
Catholic Religion, either in your own, o^ your childrens days. And the rathe^
when England shall see by the Judgment of the Apostles, that the Catholic
religion aggreeth in all point with the religion taught and deliuere^ by the
Apostles and first Apostolical^ preachers, and that the Protestant religion is
discou^tenaunced, discarded condemned by them. This shall appear by this
book, which I, you^ Majesty's most humble subject, a^ old student in holy
learning, do i^ all dutiful manner present unto you^ wishing to your Gracious
Majesty, and to our noble Souueraigne, your dear Spouse, a long and happy
reign in our great Brittainie, and such a temporal reign amongst your
subjects, as you may both reign in heaven eternally with God, his Saints,
and Angels.

Your Majesty's most humble and devoted subject R. B.

APPROBATIO.
CVm mihi constiterit ex testimonio fide digni S. Theol. Doctoris, in hoc
libro, cui titulu^ Apostolorum iudicium etc. nihil inueniri Catholicae fidei
aut bonis moribus contrarium, sed mult^ quae ostendunt religionem Catholicorum
esse Apostolicam, haereticorum vero Apostaticam, censu^ vtiliter praelo
committi posse. Actum Duaci die 23. Iunij 1632.

GEORGIUS COLVENERIVS S. Theol. Doctor and Regius ordinariusque Professor,
Gollegiat^ Ecclesiae S. Petri Praepositus, Dua^ censis Academiae Cancellarius,
and librorum Censor.

THE FIRST CHAPTER:
CONCERNING THE FIRST 5. PROtestants Articles, not differinge from the
Apostles Religion, and the Roman Church.
BEEINGE to enter into the Examen, and comparison of the parliament protestant
Articled Religion of England, with the Religion of the present Church, of Rome,
and ^e whole Christian world, named Catholic, ^or profession whereof, the
Catholics of England, ^y the protestants thereof, have long time suff^red, and
still most constantly endure, most bitter persecutions) by the first known and
confessed ^ue Christian, Catholic, Apostolic, Religion, ^ the Apostles, and
that their happy age; we find ^t in the first five Articles of this new
Religion, ^y difference or difficulty, to be thus decided, both ^atholicks and
parlame^tary protestants agreeing, them all, and they all being ordained by
these pro^tants, against other Sectaries so soon within 4. ^ares of the
beginning of Q. Elizabeth her Reign, re^eing old condemned heresies, amongst
them, as their ^tories, and registers remember: and therefore, it will ^re
suffice, only to recite the Titles of these ar^les to give notice thereof. The
contents and title ^ the first article are. Of faith in the holy Trinity. The
second: of the word or son of God which was made veryma^. The 3. Of the going
down of Christ into hell. The 4. Of the Resurrection of Christ. The 5. Of the
Holy Ghost. The whole Article (the Title being subject to doubt) is The holy
Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the son, is of one substance, Majesty,
and glory, with the Father, and the Son, very and eternal God. Hitherto we
find nothing against the doctrine of the Catholic Church. Which no^ unlikely
these men did rather to winnesome credi^ at their entrance to be thought lovers
of truth then that they hated the enemies of these articles not yet suppressed
among them.

THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Examining their 6. Article about Scriptures and traditions, and condemning it,
by the Apostles, and Apostolic men, and doctrine of their age.
THEIR next sixth Article entitled, of the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures
for Salvation: ^ thus: holy Scripture contains all things necessary ^
salvation: So that what soever is not read therein, n^ may be proved thereby
is not to be required of any man that it should be believed as an article of
faith, or ^ thought requisite or necessary to salvation. By the na^ of holy
Scripture, we do understand those canonic^ books of the old and new
testament, of whose auth^rity was never any doubt in the Church. And from t^
number of those books which there they allow^ to be canonical, They do in
express words, a^ terms reject. The book of Tobias, the book of Iudit^ the
rest of the book of Esther, the book of wisdom^ Jesus the son of Sirach,
Baruch the Prophet, the song of the three children, the story of Susanna, of
Bell and the Dragon, the prayer of Manasses, the first and second Books of the
Machabees. Concerning the new testament thus they add: all the books of the
new testament, as they are commonly received, we do receive and account them
for canonical. This their Article is in their proceedings, as the ground
work and foundation, whereupon their Religion is wholly framed, and builded;
and yet so weak, Feeble, totteringe ruinous arid deceitefull, that not any one
true certain and infallible point of doctrine (as every Article in true
religion is) can be framed upon it, or from it so deduced, by the express
grant of this article it self, and of all English Protestants, professed, and
sworn maintainers of it.

For whereas they sentence and define: In the Art. 6. supr.
name of holy Scripture, we do understand those canonical books of the old
and new testament, of whose Field Book of the Church lib. 4. cap. 5. wotton
def. of perk. pa. 442. Couell. ag. Burg. page 60. def. of Hooker page 31. 32.
33. pro^^st. gloss on the 6. art. Tho. Rogers ibid.
authority was never any doubt in the Church: They plainly make the Judgment
of the Church, to be the highest tribunal in spiritual questions, even of the
scriptures themselves. And thus their best and chief writers, published by
authority do gloss and expound this article. And of necessity so they must
say, except at their first entrance they will plainly confess their religion,
and congregation, their Church of England (as they term it,) to be erroneous
or heretical, and to have noe power or warrant at all to doubt deny or
determine, and propose what books be, or be not Scriptures canonical, either
of the old or new testament. Or what one chapter, or sentence in them is part
or not part of such canonical and undoubted holy Scriptures: for this power
and prerogative being only committed to the true Church by their Article, and
professors before, if these men doubt, or Judge otherwise in this case, then
the true confessed Church has hitherto done, They can be noe part, or members
of that true Church. And whatsoever is read, or may be deduced from untrue or
doubted Scriptures, cannot be possibly any certain, and undoubted article of
faith, and religion. For noe conclusion can be more certain and undoubted,
then the Maxims and authorities from which it is concluded, but as the light
of nature, and common law and undeniable Maxim of true reasoning teaches all
men, and all men truly acknowledge for a verity most certain, it ever
follows the weaker part; ever erroneous, doubtful, uncertain or false, if
both, or any of the propositions from which it is deduced, be or is of that
nature. Nothing can give that to an other, which it self wants, and by noe
means has to give. A lying false or uncertain humane witness or assertion,
can by no means possible make a constant and certainly true probation in any
thing whatsoever, much less in supernatural matters, articles of faith above
man's capacity, and therefore to be proved by divine testimony, which possibly
cannot deceive us.

And in this miserable and desolate estate and condition, is the Protestant
congregation of England, in, and for every article pretended by them to be of
faith which they hold against the Roman Church at this day, and so they censure
themselves by their own definitive sentence, in this their own cheifest
Article, and publicly authorized gloss thereof, with diverse others of their
Religion, allowed and recommended writers among them, Artic. 6. supr. Confessio
Wirtemberg. cap. de Scriptura. Protest. gloss in art. 6. and p. 1. Willet
Synop. quaest. 1. of scripture. page 2. 3. ^dit. an. 1594. holnish. chron. f.
1299. Stowe hist. an. 1579. in Q. Elizabeth. Io. Bre^t. Apolog confess.
Wittemberg. histor. Dauidis Georg. Display Art. 6. Magdeburg. hist. cent. 3.
ca. 11.
In their Article receiving only for canonical books, never doubted of in
the Church, and in the others (to use their own authorizing words) perused,
and by the lawful authority of the Church of England, allowed to be public,
plainly and manifestly delivering from all kind of Authors, Greek and
Latin, old and late, Catholic and Protestant, That every book in particular,
not one excepted, which they allow for canonical Scripture, either ^n the old
or new testament, have both been ^oubted of, and by their own, men,
Protestants, de^ied for such.

Therefore it remains without question contrary to this Protestante Article,
even by them^elues and their best authority, that neither all nor any one of
those books which upon this vain ^retence they have blotted forth from the
Canon ^f holy Scripture, and the Roman Church still re^eaueth, may be denied by
that Title of sometimes ^eing doubted of: for we should have noe Scripture
^nonicall at all, all books thereof having been ^us doubted of. By that
color we might deny ^l Articles of faith, which sometimes doubted of, ^ue
been concluded and agreed upon against the ^est heretics that ever were, and
all their heresies ^th might and ought to be revived again. Saint ^ul and
Saint Thomas Apostles were thus to ^ denied Apostles, and thrust out of
heaven, be^use they had doubted; we might and ought to ^, that no converted
Christian first doubting, ^as ^rue Christian, neither our first british
Christian ^nge Saint Lucius, nor King Ethelbert among our Saxons, nor any of
their first doubting and afterward converted Subjects, and so of the whole
Christian world doubting or denying before it received the law of Christ. All
Courts, Consistories, Tribunals, and Seats of Justice and Judgment
ecclesiastical, and civil, to decide and determine must be overthrown, no
sentence or decision though of Kings, Parlaments, or any community is to b^
obeyed, no doubt, no Controversy, hitherto eue^ was, or hereafter can or may
be finally determined nothing but doubts, quarrels, Controversies, an^
contentions, as we see among Protestants, n^ peace, quiet or union must be
left unto us. Ther^ fore this Protestant paradoxe and presumption i^ rejecting
so many books of holy Scripture again both the Latin and Greek Church, only
vnde^ color of being sometime, and by some doubte^ of, being thus gross and
absurd by their ow^ Judgments, and proceedings, let us examine wh^ this first
pure and Apostolic age did Judge of the And first to begin with the scripture
it self of t^ The new testament by Protest. ^r^st. published by King ^ames
authority. Matthew. 6. 2. Cor. 9. Luc. 14. Joan 9. Hebr. 5. 1. Cor. 1. Hebr. 1.
new Testament even as our Protestants recea^ and translate it. King James his
new testament the 6. chapter of Saint Matthew his gospel, a^ the 9. chapter
2. Corinthians. cites Ecclesiasticus ^ two several places. In the 14. chapter of
Sai^ Luke the 4. chapter of Tobias is cited. And in ^ 10. chapter of Saint
Ihon the 4. chapter of the ^ book of Machabees. And in the 5. chapter to ^
Hebrews the second book. And 7. chapter the Machabees. In the 1. chapter 1. Corinthians. T^ first chapter of the book of wisdom is cited chapter to the
Hebrews cites the 7. chapter wisdom. And the 9. chapter thereof is cited Ro^
Romans 11.
cap. 11. And yet we shall scarcely find any Text of diverse books of the old
Testament, which our Protestants allow for canonical, to be cited at any time
or place of their new testament, as the 4. Book of the Kings, the 1. and 2. of
Paralip. the book of the Judges, Ruth, Esdras 1. and 2. Esther, Ecclesiastes,
Cantica canticorum, Abdias, Sophonias, Therefore we are as well warranted by
this argument of concordance of Scriptures, and that holy authority to receive
for canonical Scriptures of the old Testament, all those books which our
Protestants have excluded, as those they have received. The Canons ascribed to
the Apostles, and published by Saint Clement per me Clementem Council. gener.
6. can. 2.
Successor to S. Peter in this age, are plainly acknowledged by the sixth
general Council to have been received by the holy Fathers before them as
delivered from God, firmi stabilesque maneant, qui a sanctis patribus qui nos
praecesserunt, susceptiac confirmatisunt, atque a Deo nobis etiam traditi sunt,
sanctoctorum Apostolorum nomine 85. Canones, These do Canon. Apostolor. can.
85. vl^.
^n the last Canon expressly receive the books of ^he Machabees, Esther, and
the book of Ecclesiasticus for holy Scriptures of the old testament. Ve^erandi
ac sacri libri veteris Testamenti. In the very same manner as they do the
others which our Pro^estants allow for such. Saint Clement often ci^eth,
Clem. epist. 1. 2. Apostolic. constitut. li. 2. c. 4. cap. 21. c. 49. 51. cap.
63. l. 3. cap 3. l. 6. c. 19. 23. 29. l. 8. l. 7.
and allows for books and parts of the old Testament, Baruch,
Ecclesiasticus, Sapientia, To^ias, The prayer of Manasses, the history of
Su^anna, the book of Esther, those parts of Daniel which our Protestants
reject, the books of Ma^habees and others. Saint Ignatius receaueth the book
of Daniel which our Protestants deny, Ecclesiasticus. Saint Policarpus
approves Tobias. Ignat. epist. ad Philadelph. epist. ad maynesian epist. ad
Heron. Polycarp. epist. ad Philippen. Dionis. l. de diu. nom. cap. 4.
Ecclesiast. Hier. c. 2. de diu. nom. c. 7.
Saint Denis the Areopagite converted by Saint Paul allows the book of
wisdom, calls the part of Daniel excluded by our Protestants, divine
Scripture. Diuina scripta. These be all, or the chiefest writers especially by
Protestants allowance in this first age, and consideringe how few of their
works are preserved to posterity, and how brief they are: It is rather to be
wondered, that they should cite and allow so many of those books, of the old
testament, and parts of them, so often a^ Eleuther. ep. ad Lucium Reg. Rritan.
apud Gal. Lambrrt. l de leg. S. Eduardi Stowe hist. fore tom. 1. Godwin.
Co^uers. of Brit. Hollinsh hist. of Eng. Speed. Theat. of Bit. Matthew. park.
antiq. Britan. Matthew. park. antiq. Brit. p. 69. Io. Gosc. hist. Eccl David.
poiuel. in Annot. in l. 2. c. 1. Girald. Ca^br. I^iner. Ca^br. Bal. l. 1.
Script. Brit. cent. 1. in August. Romans l. 2. de Act. Pontif. Romans in Greg. 1.
they do, then that they should omit any.

And although we do not find any Antiquity of Britain which in this age
entreats of such things, yet the most ancient which our Protestants will
grant unto us being the Epistle o^ Pope Eleutherius to King Lucius, we
find there in, that he making mention, that Britain had received both the
Testaments of holy Scripture, although in particular he cites so few books o^
them, that out of the new testament he cites n^ more then only the 23.
chapter of S. Matthew, and from the old testament, but three texts, two of them
being out of the Psalms 45. 55. the third is the book of wisdom, disallowed
by these Protesta^n^ in this Article, but allowed by him and our primative
Christian Britans of that time, and so from ou^ first receiving of holy
Scriptures. And if I may but write what all our Protestant Antiquaries
generally affirm for a constant, and undoubted truth that our Christian
Britans did never until Sainc^ Augustines cominge hither change or alter any
o^ material point in the holy Religion which they received in the Apostles
time, I must needs auouch^ that those Scriptures of the old testament which
Godwyn Co^uers. of Brit. page 43. 44. fore page 463. edit. an. 1576. Holinsh.
hist. of Engl. cap. 21. l. 4. fulke answ. to a cou^terf. cath. page 40. harr.
descript. Brit. c. 9 Gild. ep. de excid. and conq. Britan.
this Article refuses Were received both in Britain, and in other nations, as
Italy and Rome, whence our conversion came, with other contries in that happy
Time, for Saint Gildas our most ancient, and allowed Historian, both in many
manuscripts, and books published by Protestants and their warrant, for his
wisdom Surnamed, Sapiens, the wise, does very often in one short work allow
and cite for holy Scriptures diverse of those books, especially Ecclesiasticus,
many times, and the book of wisdom vsinge the authority thereof 8. times in
one page and less. And unto what time, persons, or place soever we will
appeal for Trial, we shall in noe age, contry, council or ancient
particular writer find, any one person which agrees with this Protestant
Article in the number and books of canonical Scripture. It cites S. Hierome
but both he himself and these Protestants, King James his Protestant Bishops
in their publik dispute at Hampton Court with others, prove that Conference at
Hampton Court page 60. Couelag. Burges page 87. 8. 86. 88. 89. 90. 91.
S. Hierome spoke only against the books which these Protestants reject, not
in his own opinion, but what the Jews objected. Most of the objections made
against those books were the old cauils of the Jews, renewed by S. Hierome in
his time, who was the first that gave them that name of Apochryphe: which
opinion upon Ruffinus his challendge, he after a sort disclaymed: and the
rather because a general offense was taken at his speeches in that kind. They
are most true, and might have the reconcilement of other Scriptures. If
Ruffinus be not deceived, they were approved as parts of the old testament, by
the Apostles. S. Hierome pretends, that what he had spoken, was not his own
opinion, but what the Jews objected. And for his pains in translating the
book of Judith (which this article rejects) he gives this reason: because
we read, that the Council of Nyce did reckon it in the number of holy
Scriptures. And Saint Hierome is plain, both for this book of Judith, and
the rest, that he did not deny them; for first, of Judith he says the Nicen
Council which he and all Catholics ever honored, received it: Hunc librum
Synodus Nicaena Hieron. Tom. 3. oper. praef. in Judith. Ruffin. inuectit. 2. in
Hieronym.
in numero sanctarum Scripturarum legitur computasse. And for the other books
being chardged by Ruffinus, to speak in his own words, to be the only man,
qui praesumpserit sacras Sancti Spiritus voces and diuina volumina temerare.
Diuino muneri and Apostolorum haereditati manus Intulerit. Ausus est
Instrumentum diuinum quod Apostoli Ecclesijs tradiderunt, and depositum Sancti
Spiritus compilare. To have herein abused the words of the holy Ghost and
divine volumes. To have offered violence to the divine office and Inheritance
of the Apostles. And (to speak in Protestants Couel. sup. page 87.
translation) to have robbed the Treasure of the holy Ghost, and divine
Instrument, which the Apostles delivered to the Churches. Saint Hierome never
denies any of those things for true which Ruffinus spoke Ruffin. supr.
of the authority of those books of Scriptures, that the Apostles delivered
the^ for such to the Churches, and no learned man ever denied it, and that S.
Peter at Rome delivered them to the Church, Petrus Romanae Hier. Apol. 2.
aduers. Ruffin. Tom. 4 oper. praef. in libros Machul.
Ecclesiae per viginti and quatuor annos praefuit. Quid ergo? decepit Petrus
Apostolus Christi Ecclesiam, and libros ei falsos tradidit? But only denies
that he wrote in his own, but in our Enemies the Jews opinion: non enim quid
ipse sentirem: sed quid illi contra nos dicere soleant, explicaui. And writing
to Pope Damasus plainly testifies, that he joined with the Catholic Church
in this business: nouum and vetus testamentum recipimus, in eo librorum numero
quem sanctae Catholicae Ecclesiae tradit authoritas. And Field l. 4. of the
Church. cap. 23. page 245. Act. 6. Gloss. ordin. and Lyra. in eund. locum.
our Protestants from Antiquities acknowledge thus: The Jews at the cominge of
Christ were of two sorts, some named Hebrews commorant at Jerusalem and in the
holy land, properly named Hebrews: others named Hellenist, that is Jews of
dispersion, mingled with the Greeks, these had written certain books in
Greek, which they made use of, together with other parts of the old Testament,
which they had of the translation of the Septuagint. But the Hebrews received
only, the 22. books before mentioned. Hence it came, that the Jews delivered
a double Canon of the Scripture, to the Christian Churches. And in this second
Canon of the Jews, as these men write, were those books of the old Testament
which this article denies. And whereas some Protestants would excuse this
Article by some old Authorities, of Melito, Sardensis, Origin, the Council of
Laodicia, S. Cyrill of Jerusalem, Saint Gregory Nazianzen, and Amphilochius.
There is not any one of them which joins with this Article, but they all
differ from it in the very places which they cite. Melito Sardensis Melito Sard
apud Eusebius. hist Eccl. l. 4 cap. 25. Origin. in p 1. Eusebius. his Eccl. li. 6.
cap 24.
receaueth the book of wisdom, which this Article rejects, and omitteth
Judith. Origin only cites the books of the old testament according to the
first Canon of the Hebrews, sicut Hebraei tradunt, And yet in the end adds
the books of Machabees: praeter istos sunt libri Machabaeorum, qui Inscribuntur
Sarbet Sarbaneel. And does not agree with them in the books of the new
testament. The Council Conc. Laodic. can. 60.
of Laodicia differreth from this article, in omitting Esther in the old, and
Apocalips in the new Greg. Nazia^z. de vir. and Gorm. sacrae scrip. l. 6.
Amphil. l. ad Sele^cum. Cyrill. Hierosolim. Catech. 4. Tho. Rogers upon this 6.
Art. Confess. Gallic. c 3. 4. Confess. Belg. c. 4. 5.
Testament, otherwise then this article does. S. Gregory Nazianzen so likewise
numbreth as Amphilochius also. Saint Cyrill omitteth the Apocalips. So this
Article has no authority from any old writer, Jew or Christian, Greek or
Latin in this so great, and with them most important Question, whereupon they
ground all Religion.

And as little concordance among themselves: for among 13. or 14. Confessions
of Protestant Religion, they only cite, and have noe more then two of France
and Belgia Rebels and Traitors to their temporal Kings in civil matters, as
they are in spiritual to God and his holy Church, and these for want of other
authority found this their error, as the rest upon the heretical conceit of
internal revelation, and their spirit so tellinge them, extestimonio, and
intrinseca Spiritus Sancti reuelatione. By the one and the other: quod Spiritus
sanctus nostris conscientijs testetur illos a Deo emanasse. And by this Spirit
they are at such harmony, and agreement among themselves, as in other places,
so in England as I have related, none of them agreeinge together herein. But by
the suggestion of this false spirit, and their exploded doubt of Scriptures do
leave all Scriptures and questions of Religion to be deduced from them,
doubtful, which Bilson a Protestant ^ilso^ Survey ^ag. 664.
Bishop of winchester, one of the best learned they ever had, thus proves: The
Scriptures themselves were not fully received in all places, no not in Eusebius
time. He says the Epistle of James, of Jude, the second of Peter, he second
and third of John are contradicted. The epistle to the Hebrews was
co^tradicted: The Church of Syria did not receive the second epistle of Peter,
nor the second and third of Ihon, nor the Epistle of Jude, nor the Apocalipse:
the like might be said for the Churches of Arabie. Will you hence conclude,
that these parts of Scripture were not Apostolic, or that we need not
receive them, because they were formerly doubted of? The same reason is of all
the books of the old testament which this Article rejects upon the same
surmise ^or Eusebius ouerliuinge Constantine, and writing Eusebius. de vit.
Constable. lib. 3. hist. c. 22. l. 3. cap. 3. Council. Cart. 3. can. 47.
^is life and death, deliueringe this doubt of so many books of new Testament
lived near the ^ime of the Council Chartage of 428. Bishops in which both
these books of the new Testament contradicted in his days, but received by
our Pro^estants, and all those books of the old Testament which in this
Article they disable, are by all those Bishops in one and the same tenor of
words with ^he rest decreed to be, Canonicae scripturae canonical Scriptures.
This Canon and Catologe of Canoni^all Council. Cart. 3. supr.
books is confirmed by the Pope of Rome, ^hen being, and other Bishops absent
as appears ^y the same Council. Pope Innocentius delivers Innoe. 1. epist.
ad Exuperiu^ Tholosanum Episc. August. lib. 2. doctr. Christ. c. 8. and in
speculo.
^he same Canon of holy Scriptures Canonem sacra^um Scripturarum. S. Augustine
has the same, as ^eceaued by all Churches, Scripturae Canonicae quae ^b
omnibus accipiuntur Ecclesijs Catholicis. And says that all which fear God
receive them, in his omni^us libris timentes Deum and pietate mansueti quaerunt
^oluntatem Dei. Pope Gelasius with a Council of Gelas. Tom. Council:
^o. Bishops declares that to be the Canon which ^he holy and Catholic Roman
Church receaueth, and reuerenceth, quem Sancta and Catholica Romana Alcim.
Auit. l. ad Soror. de consol. Cassiodor. lib. 1. diu. Just. c. 13.
^uscipit and veneratur Ecclesia. So has Alcimus A^itus, Cassiodorus and
others.

And this may suffice for this place of this Question. And it further proves
how feeble and weak the rest of this Protestant Article of the sufficiency and
allowance of only Scripture and disableinge Traditions is, for if so many
Canonical books of Scripture in both testaments were doubted of, until so
great a time above 300. years in the law of Christ were passed, and Religion
generally, and in all questions necessary to salvation planted, and received,
how were or possibly could all these necessary things be read in Scripture or
proved thereby (which is the rule of this Article) when so many books were not
then received for certain and undoubted holy Scriptures* Things and evidences
doubtful and uncertain can make nothing certain in moral certainty much
less with certainty of true and infallible faith, which above all others is
and must needs be most certain. Secondly as Saint Ireneus disputes Ireneus
l. 3. cap. 4.
and proves upon his certain knowledge and experience, That many nations
which had not received the Scriptures, or any part of the^ did truly believe
in Christ, by unwritten traditions, which the Apostles doliuered to the
Churches. Quid si n^ que Apostoli scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne
oportebat ordinem sequi traditionis quam tradiderunt i^^ quibus committebant
Ecclesias? cui ordinationi assentiunt multae gentes barbarorum, eorum qui in
Christ^^ credunt sine charta and atramento, veterem traditione^ diligenter
custodientes. This he writes both of thi^ first age, and the second in which
he died by martyrdom. And it is most evident both by hol^ Scriptures and other
antiquities, that many nations not only of the barbarous, which were without
learning, but of the learned did thus believe before any Scriptures of the new
Testament, in Romans 1. 1. Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 1. Gal. 1. Ephesians. 1. Phil. 1. Colloss.
1 Thessalonians. 1. and 2. 1. Tim. 1. 2. Tim. 1. Tit. 1. Epist. ad Philem. Hebr. 1.
Jacob 1. 1. Petr. 1. 2. Pet. 2. Ioh. 1. Io. 2. and 3. Iud. 1.
which and by which Protestants necessitate us to read and prove our Religion,
were written.

This is manifestly proved by all the epistles of Saint Peter, Saint Paul,
and the rest of the Apostles written unto such places, and persons, as had
before believed, and received the Religion of Christ, as is in every of them
plainly expressed. And yet as is showed before diverse of these were doubted
of, and not generally received for holy Scripture until 300. years after they
were written. The not receauers or doubters of them being faith^ull and true
Christians in all points. S. Matthew the first of the Evangelists which wrote,
writing for ^he converted Jews in Hebrew, could not thereby ^rofit any but
Hebrews, And yet Saint Ireneus Irenaeus lib. 3. aduer. haereses cap. 1.
Hieron. catal. Script. Eccl. in S. Matthaeo. Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 21.
Iren. supr.
witnesses he did not write, until both Saint Peter and Saint Paul were
come to Rome. Matthaeus in Hebraeis ipsorum lingua scriptura tradidit
Euangelij, cum Petrus and Paulus Romae Euangelizarent, and fundarent Ecclesiam.
And only for the Jews before converted without scripture. Propter eos qui ex
cir^umcisione crediderunt. And taught them by tradition, not writing, until
he was to depart from them, to preach unto others in other places, And so was
urged by a kind of necessity, as S. John, also to write a Gospel. Ex omnibus
Domini discipulis commentarios nobis soli Matthaeus, and Ioannes reliquerunt,
quos etiam necessitate ad scribendum esse adactos ferunt; Matthaeus enim quum
primum Hebraeis praedicasset, etiam ad alios quoque transiturus esset,
Euangeliu^ suum patrio sermon literis tradidit, and quod subtracta praesentia
sua desiderabatur, illis a quibus discedebat, per liter as adimpleuit.

Saint Mark placed in order to be the secon^ Evangelist, he being none of
those Apostles and immediate Scholars of Christ, but disciple of Sainc^ Peter
the Apostle, as he could not receive his learning in Christian Religion, from
the Scripture^ but from his Master, and Tutor in Christ S. Peter noe writer of
any Gospel, but of one only shor^ epistle at that time, if the first was
then written, the last and second being written a little before his death as the
same Scripture withnesseth: certus quod velo^ 2. Petr. 1.
est depositio tabernaculi mei secundum quod and Dominus noster Jesus Christus
significauit mihi. So followinge Saint Peter, and learning his Gospel from
him, he writ it by Saint Peter's warrant, and orde^ at the entreaty of the
Christians at Rome. This for whom he wrote it being converted before without
Scripture, Marcus discipulus and Interpres Petr^iuxta quod Petrum referentem
andiuerat, Rogatus Romae Clem. lib. 6. hypo^. Hier. l. de Script. Eccl. in
Marc. Eusebius. hist. l. 3. c. 21. l. 2. cap 15 Matthew. westin. chr. an. 42. Flor.
wigorn. chr. an. 45. and 67. Marian. Scot. an. 47. Marian. Scot. an. 47.
Martin. Polon. an. 44. Hier. lib de sc. in Luc. Act. 1. Luc. c. 1.
a fratribus breue scripsit Euangelium. Quod cu^ Petrus audisset, probauit, and
Ecclesiae legendum sua authoritate edidit, sicut Clemens in six to Hypotyposeon
libro scribit.

The case of Saint Luke was the like with S* Mark, but that Saint Luke
cheifely followed S* Paul, which was not of the 12. Apostles which conuersed
with Christ, writing his Gospel, after S* Mark, and the Acts of the Apostles
being written i^ Rome, in or after the 4. year of New the 57. or 58* of
Christ, both the Books were written by traditi^ and after the faith of Christ
received, as he him self witnesses of the first: sicut tradiderunt nob^ qui
ab initio ipsi viderunt, and ministri fuerunt Scrmonis. His Acts of the
Apostles is an history of things done, and increase of Christians by tradition.

By all Antiquities S. John was the last, which wrote his Gospel, at the
entreaty of the Bishops of Asia, against Cerinthus, and other heretics, and
^heifely the Ebionites, denying the divinity of Christ: Ioannes nouissimus
omnium scripsit Euange^um, Hieron. lib. de Script. Eccl. in Ioanne Apost.
Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 3. cap. 21.
rogatus ab Asiae Episcopis, aduersus Cerinthum ^iosque haereticos, and maxim
Ebionitarum domga ^nsurgens, qui asserunt Christum ante Mariam non ^isse. And
never wrote before, but only by word ^reached unto the people, conuertinge
them by ^n written tradition. Ioannem aiunt, qui toto tempore Eusebius. supr. l.
2. and 3. hist. Hier. libr. de Scriptor. Ecc. in Ioanne.
^uangelici cursus praedicatione sine literis vsus fuerat, ^ndem ad scribendum
hisce de causis esse permotum. Whereby we also see, that his Epistles were not
written until his later time, and the two last, long ^me doubted of, as his
Apocalipse also was, and ^et neither written, nor revealed until his
bannish^ent into Pathmos in the 14. year of Domitian Athanas. Synopsi Crdren.
in nerua. Epiphan. Hier. 51. Iren l. 3. ca. 1. and apud Eus. l. 5. hist. cap.
8. flor. Wigorn. chron. an. 81. 103. Mat. westin. chron. an. 98.
^e year of Christ's Nativity 97. or 98. And the ^mmon opinion in antiquity is,
that he did not ^rite his Gospel until his return to Ephesus, ^ter the
death of Domitian. Matthew of west^ister with others says, that he first by
word con^emned those heretics Cerinthus and Ebion affir^ing the world was made
by the Angels, that Christ jesus was only man, and denying the resurrection ^f
the dead, and after by entreaty or compulsion ^ther of the Christians, wrote
his Gospel to the ^me end. Ioannes Apostolus Ephesum redijt. Et quia ^ncussam
se absente, per haereticos vidit Ecclesiae fi^em, Cerinthi and Ebionis
haeresim, ibidem damnauit. ^struunt enim mundum ab Angelis factum, and Iesum
^ominem fuisse tantum, nec resurrexisse, resurrectio^em quoque mortuorum non
credebant. Contra hanc haeresim a fratribus compulsus Apostolus Euangeliu^
scripfit, oftendens in exordio eius, in principio fuiss^ verbum, and ipsum esse
Deum, per quem omnia fact^ sunt.

Therefore it is thus made evident, that the wor^ was not converted to Christ,
nor his doctrine, an^ Religion received and established first by scriptures,
but unwritten tradition. As to exemplify ^ this our Kingdom of Britain,
whose history ^ write, one of the remotest then known nation from Jerusalem,
and apply the rest to the sam^ being in like estate with it, for these things.
It ^ proved both by old and late, Greek and Latin^ domestical and forreyne,
Catholic and Protesta^ writers, that it received the faith of Christ, long
before any part of the new testament was written And it is evident in
Antiquities that none of t^ Ghospels except that of Saint Mark, was writt^ in
this part of the world, or in any language whi^ the Britans understood. And
that was, but br^ Hier. in Marco supr. and Io. an Eusebius. li. 3. hist.
Euangelium, a short Gospel, and so short as bei^ assisted both with the
Gospel of Saint Matthe^ and Saint Luke they were not all thought able ^
condemn those named heretics, which S. Ih^ confounded. Among the Epistles
only that of ^ Paul to the Romans, was sent into these parts, ^ was in a
language we did not understand, a^ written after the faith of the Romans was
spre^ both in Britain, and all the world, as Saint P^ witnesses: fides
vestra annuntiatur in vniu^ Romans 1.
mundo. The two Epistles of Saint Peter accordi^ to antiquity were written in
Rome, and after B^taine had received the faith, especially the last; a^ the
first being long doubted of, was sent quite co^ ^rary from Britayne unto the
contries of Po^tus, Ga^atia, 2. Petr. 1.
Capadocia, Asia, and Bithynia in the eastern ^arts. We find no memory after
of Scripture re^eaued here until long time after in the second ^ge, expressed
in Pope Eleutherius his Epistle to our ^ing Lucius. And yet all our Protestant
antiquaries ^ue before assured us, that Britain had in the A^stles time and
long before any Scripture came ^ther, or probably was written, and possibly in
^orall Judgment could come hither; received the ^ith of Christ, so fully)
purely, and sincerely that it ^euer changed it in any material point, after
the ^riptures were received here, nor diverse hundreds ^ years after.

And if we will be directed by Scriptures in this ^int, those which our
Protestants allow for such, ^e testimony to unwritten Traditions in many ^ces.
To exemplify only in Saint Paul which ^ote most in the new Testament, he
charge S. 1. Tim. 6.
^mothy, and all others in him, to keep and observe ^ngs so delivered without
writing. O Timothee, 2. Tim. 2.
^ositum custodi. This in his first Epistle, not ha^ge written unto him before.
And in his second ^stle he gives him command, that the things ^ich he had
heard from Saint Paul, he should de^er unto others fit to teach them. Quae
audisti a me ^ multos testes, haec commenda fidelibus hominibus, ^idonei erunt
and alios docere. And expressly com^undeth 2. Thessal. 2.
the Thessalonians, and in them all, in ^ second epistle to them, to observe
and keep the ^aditions, which they had learned either by word ^ writing.
State and tenete traditiones, quas didici^ sieve per sermonem, sieve per
epistolam nostram. which the Fathers expound of the necessity of keepinge
unwritten traditions, as Catholics now do. Hinc est perspicuum, quod non omnia
per epistola^ Chrisost. in 2 Thessalonians. orat. 4.
tradiderunt, sed multa etiam fine scriptis: and eaquoque sunt fide digna.
Quamobrem Ecclesiae quoque traditionem censeamus esse fide dignam. Est traditio
nihil quaeras amplius. And expoundinge that of S. Paul in his first epistle to
the Corinthians, ho^ they kept his commandments by word before he wrote unto
them, sicuttradidi vobis praecepta m^tenetis, he does infer the doctrine of
Traditions ergo fine literis mult a tradid^rat, quod alibi saepe meminit. And
Saint Hierome upon the same words Hier. in eadem Verba. Tom. 9.
quasi legem praecepta meatenetis, scientes illum in ^ spiritum loqui, qui in
lege locutus est, and prophetis. The like has S. Ambrose upon the same, and S.
Epphanius: Ambros. in 1. Cor. Epiph. haeresi 69.
oportet and traditione vti non enim omnia diuina Scriptura possunt accipi:
Quapropter aliqua ^ traditione Sancti Apostoli tradiderunt: Quemadmdum dicit
Sanctus Apostolus: Sicut tradidi vobis. ^ alibi, sic doceo sic tradidi in
Ecclesijs.

Thus the best learned both Greek and Lati^ Fathers expounded these, to
infer a necessity Traditions, and their equality with Scriptu^ Which our best
Protestant writters with the common allowance thus confirm. Our aduer sar^
Field. l. 4. c. 20. page 238.
meaning Catholics, make traditions equal with words, precepts, and doctrines
of Christ, the Apost^ and Pastors of the Church, left unto us in writing,
^ther is there any reason, why they should not so do, they could prove any
such unwritten verities, for not the writing that gives things their
authority, the worth and credit of him that delivers the though by word and
lively voice only. Thus t^ confess, and the reason which they give, so
en^ceth them, the worth and credit of the reuealer and deliverer or proposer of
holy mysteries supernatural being the motive and cause of man's assent, so
firm and immovable, in articles of faith, not to be proved by humane reason,
and not the writing or not writing being fallible and subject to many
casualties, corruptions, and uncertainties, which we are sure are not to be
found in Christ the reuealer, nor his holy Church the undoubted true proposer
of his mysteries and revelations. And both these are the same, and as certain
in traditions not written, such as Catholics maintain, as in the written
Scriptures. For we do not defend any one unwritten tradition, that it should
be believed as an Article of faith, or to be thought requisite necessary to
salvation, which be the very words of this Protestant Article of Religion, but
we produce, the Artic of Protest. Relig. 20.
highest authority in their own public Judgment also in these their Articles,
the true primative Church of Christ to warrant it, The which Church has power
and authority in controversies of faith. That every tradition came from Christ
and his Apostles to be received and professed in Christian Religion.

As, to instance in some, and those which most concern, even in our
Protestants proceedings, and by their own confessions, and testimonies,
unwritten Traditions are necessary. For first in this Engl Protest. Rel. artic.
6.
very article they have given their final sentence, in the very first words
thereof that the holy Scriptures are of this nature. Holy Scripture contains
all things necessary for salvation: So that whatsoever is not read therein, nor
may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it should be
believed, as an Article of faith, or to be thought requisite necessary to
salvation. And yet in the immediately following words, they plainly declare,
and profess, that we have noe warrant in Scripture, for any book, chapter or
sentence of Scripture to be such holy Scripture but for every least percell
thereof we must resor^ to Tradition, and the Churches Judgment. In the name of
holy Scripture, we do understand those canonical books of the old, and new
testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church. Where we^ are
assured from these men, that the Church, an^ Tradition unwritten is supreme
Judge of all questions in Religion, even of the Scriptures themselves. And so
necessarily they must say, and confess or else leave no Religion, or Scripture
at all, to b^ proved, or prove unto us. For it is vnquestionabl^ that no part
of Scripture does propose unto us, an^ Catalogue or Canon of Scriptures. Which
the thus further testify in their publicly approue^ Field. l. 4. pa. 238. c.
20.
writers: much co^ntention there has been, about trad^tions, some vrginge the
necessity of them, and others r^iectinge them. For the clearinge whereof, we
must o^serue, that we reject not all: for first we receive t^ number and
names of the Authors of books divine, a^ Couell cont. Burg page 60. whitaker
ib. Wotton def. of Perk. page 442. Couell. def. of hook. page 31. 34 32. 33.
field l. 4. c. 5. page 203. Ormer. pict. Pap. page 93. Sutcliffeag. the 3. conu.
page 79.
canonical, as delivered by tradition. This tradition w^ admit. The number,
Authors, and Integrity of the part^ of these books, we receive as delivered
by tradition. T^ Church of Christ according to her authority, received ^ him,
has warrant to approve the Scriptures, to ackno^ledge, to receive, to publish,
and command unto ^ children. The Church of Rome teaches noe badde op^nion,
to affirm, that the Scriptures are holy, and diui^ in themselves, but so
esteemed by us, for the authority the Church. That the Scriptures ar true we
have it from the Church. We say that we are taught to receive ^ word of God,
from the authority of the Church: we see her Judgment, we hear her voice:
and in humility subscribe unto all this. The Church has four singular offices
toward the Scripture. First to be of them, as it were, afaithfull register.
Secondly to discern and Judge between false and adulterate, and that which is
true and perfect. The third to publish and diuulge, to proclaim as a Crier,
the true Edict of our Lord himself. The last is, to be an Interpreter: and in
that followinge the safest rule, to be a most faithful Expositor of his own
meaning. We think that particular men and Churches may err damnably: But
that the whole Church at one time cannot so err: for that the Church should
cease utterly for a time, and so not be Catholic, being not at all times: and
Christ should sometimes be without a Church. The Church is called a pillar,
because it is like unto a pillar. For as a pillar does support, and underprop
a buildinge, and makes it more stable, firm, and strong: So the Church does
sustain and supporte the truth: for the truth is no where preserved, but in
the Church. Christ's true Church is a diligent and wary keeper of doctrines
committed to her, and changes nothing, at any time, diminishes nothing,
adds nothing superfluous, loses not her own, nor usurps things
belonginge to others. And this is publicly warranted in Protest. Reli. of
Engl. Art. 19.
these their Articles and Rule of their Religion, where thus they define the
Church: The visible Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men, in the
which the pure word of God is preached. And the Sacraments be duly ministered,
according to Christ's ordinance, Art. 8. Catech. com. Book. Iniunct. Canons.
field l. 4. c. 20. page 238. 239.
in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same.

Secondly those men in their Rules of Religion, and their private writers
affirm, that the Apostles Creed, which by all Antiquity, was by them
delivered to the Church, and by these Protestants, as Rule of faith, before the
Scriptures of the new Testament were written, is an unwritten Tradition yet by
their words, a summary comprehension of the chief heads of Christian
Religion, a Rule of the Churches faith. And yet it is constantly maintaine^ by
many Protestants, that diverse articles thereon as our Ladies perpetual
virginity, natus ex Mar^ Virgin, Christ's descending into hell, descendit a^
inferos, The communion of Saints, and forgiveness of sins, Sanctorum
communionem R^missione^ peccatorum, and others by diverse others Protestant^ are
not contained in any Scripture written before or after. And this Creed
delivered by word, an^ tradition only by the Apostles before the new t^stament
written, this Scripture could not possibl^ be a rule or direction unto it, but
rather otherwis^ for every rule has priority to the thing ruled, an^ the
things ruled posterity to their rule. Matters a^ done without rule, when there
is no rule until aft^ they be acted.

These Parliament Protestants proceed furth^ Field supr. page 239.
in this question, and plainly say, with great a^lowance: The third kind of
Tradition is that sum ^ Christian doctrine, and explication of the several
part thereof, which the first Christians receauinge of the sa^ Apostles, that
delivered to them the Scriptures, commended to posterity. This may rightly be
named a trad^tion, for that we need a plain and distinct explicati^ of
things, which are somewhat obscurely contained the Scripture. The fourth kind
of tradition, is the cont^nued practice of such, as neither are contained in t^
Scripture expressly, nor the example of such practi^ expressly there
delivered of this sort is the Baptism of Infants, which is therefore named a
tradition, because it is not expressly delivered in the Scripture, that the
Apostles did baptize infants, nor any express precept there found, that they
should do it. Which their rule of Religion in these Articles thus further
justifies: The Baptism of young children is in any wise to be retained Art.
of Engl. Prote. Relig. Art. 17. Communion Book Tit. Baptism. The. Rog. in
Art. 27. Q. Elizab. and k. K. James Iniunct. and Canons.
in the Church, as most agreeable with the institution of Christ. Where they
plainly in their public rule of Religion make it a tradition, and no
Scripture article. And by the common practical of their religion, their
communion book, so they practice, baptizinge all infants, and saying, all
Christian Churches allow of the baptism of infants. And these Protestants are
only baptized when they are infants, and not after, and yet confess it is
most necessary to salvation.

And whereas they reject all other Sacraments besides Art. of Relig. art. 25.
this, and the Eucharist, or the Communion, as they term it, confessing that
these Sacraments be necessary to salvation, And yet denyinge the Eucharist to
be, as Catholics profess, the true body and blood of Christ, and sacrifice for
the lyuinge and dead, they contradict themselves, for that they confess that
in this sinse it was generally used in King James and Casanb. resp. ad Card.
per. pa. 51. 52. 20. Middle^. Papistom. 20. p. 92. 113. 49. 137. 138. 47. 45.
Field l. 3. cap 29. p. 138. Couell. Exa. page 114.
primitive Church, that the Apostles so delivered it by tradition, all Churches
so observed it, and it was heresy to deny it. Their words be: The sacrifice of
the altar, and unbloody sacrifice were used in the primitive Church. The
primative Church did offer sacrifice at the altar for the dead, sacrifice for
the dead was a tradition of the Apostles, and the ancient Fathers. Aerius
condemned the custom of the Church, in naming the dead at the altar, and
offeringe the sacrifice of Eucharist, from them: and for this his rash and
inconsiderate boldness, and presumption, in condemninge the universal Church
of Christ, he was justly condemned. Their whole congregation, King James, his
council, King James, Prot. Lords, Bish. and Doct. in Confer. at Ha^pt. Court.
p. 13. 18. 35. 36 10. 11 Couell. ag. the plea. of the Innoc. p. 104. Barlow
Sermon. before the K. Sept. 21 an. 1607. part. 3. cap. 2.
Protestant Bishops, and best learned Doctors* assembled in public conference,
have left thus concluded: The particular and personal absolution from sin
after confesson is apostolical and a very Godly ordinance. That baptism is to
be ministered by private persons in time of necessity, is an holy Tradition.
Bishops and Archbishops be divine ordinations, confirmation i^ an apostolical
tradition. And in their public Rituall their communion book, they testify
that confirmation was a Tradition of the Apostles, has an external sign
also, used by them, and gives grace which by the 25. Article of their religion
makes ^ Communion book of Engl. Protest. Titul. Confirmation.. Almighty.
Prot. of Religion art. 25.
a Sacrament. So that to insist only upon these granted Traditions, not
contained in Scripture by these Protestants, and yet so necessary to salvation
as they by their greatest allowance and authority deliver, we may not say as
this Article does Holy Scripture contains all things necessary for salvation.

These men also deliver unto us, with great approbation Articul. 6. supr.
(making the Author of that work, and for the same, a Bishop) certain sure
rules to know such true Thraditions by, in these words Rules by which we may
Judge which are true and Indubitate Field. Books of the Church l. 4. page 242.
August. l. 4. contr. Donat. c. 23.
Traditions. The first rule is delivered by Saint Augustine. Quod vniuersa
tenet Ecclesia, nec Concili^^ Institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi
authoritate apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. Whatsoever the whole
Church holds, not ordained by Councels; but being ever holden, it is most
rightly believed to have been delivered by Apostolic authority. The second
Field supr l. 4 c. 21. p. 242. c. 5. page 202. King James and Confer. at
Hampton. Couel def o^ Hooker. Ormer pict pap. p. 184 Down. l. 2. Antichr. page
105. Sutcliffe Subuers. page 57.
rule is, whatsoever all or the most famous, and renowned in all ages, have
constantly delivered, as received from them, that went before them, no man
contradictinge, or doubting of it, may be thought to be an Apostolical
Tradition. The third rule, is the constat Testimony, of the Pastors of an
Apostolic Church, successively delivered. Amongst Apostolic Churches the
Church of Rome is more specially to be obeyed, reverenced, and respected. The
Church of Rome is our mother Church, it was a rule to all both in doctrine and
ceremonies when it was in her florishinge and best estate. The Church of Rome
was the chief and only Church. It was a note of a good Christian to clean
unto the Roman Apostolical Church. Every Church ought to have respect to the
Church of Rome, for her eminent principality. And our English Protestant
antiquaries and Divines, have generally given their allowance, that the Church
of Rome both in this and the next age, when Britayne did receive the most pure
Religion of Christ, from thence, was most holy and unspotted free from all
error. Therefore whatsoever we do, or may bring in general, or particular,
for unwritten traditions, either from this so renowned Apostolic Church in
this time, from the whole Church, or the most famous and renowned in this age,
being our Protestants own allowed rules, and to be denied by none, must needs
be evidence and testimony undeniable, in this, and all others their questioned
Articles. Frst I exemplify in the Apostles Creed styled by our Protestants
before, a sundry comprehension of the chief heads of Christian Religion,
Protest. supr. Ruffin in exposit. Symboli and alij.
a rule of the Churches faith, This was delivered by the Apostles, by
tradition, not by Scripture, but before the Scriptures of the new Testament,
were written, as both they and the ancient Fathers by ^ common consent of the
whole Church of Christ are witnesses. And the same consent of Christ Church
with these our Protestants, in these their Articles so conclude, of Saint
Athanasius, and the Art. 8. of prot. Religion.
Nicen Creed, in these words: The three Creeds, Nicen Creed, Athanasius
Creed, and that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly
to b^ received and believed. And so generally they observe although the reason
which they immediately yeel^ thereof, for they may be proved by most certain
warrants of holy Scripture, is childish and impertinent^ for being confessed
that the Apostles Creed wa^ delivered only by tradition of the Apostles and
by that authority received before the Scriptures either received or written,
this Creed could not possibly be received by the written warrant of Scriptures
but unwritten tradition and warrant of the Apostles. And although the Nicen and
S. Athanasius Creeds were written long after this time, y^ they were both
written and received in the Church before the Scriptures were generally allowed
an^ received, as both the auncent Fathers, and Protestants have acknowledged
before, and it is testify by the public warranted Protestant gloss upon
Prot. Gloss by authority of Church of Engl. in Art. 8.
these their Articles, that very many both old an^ late writers, even whole
sects and profession^ namely (to use their own words, Ebionites, Tr^theits,
Antitrinitarians, Apollinarians, Arians, M^nichies, Nestorians, Origenians,
Familists, and An^baptists with others) are Adversaries unto, and deniers that
these Creeds, may be proved by hol^ Scripture. Much more do they, and many
other both Catholics and Protestants themselves deny, that all and singular
their articles necessary to salvation, may so be proved.

And to come to the holy and happy Apostolic writers, and Saints which lived,
and wrote in this first age, and first hundred of years, to wit S. Linus
Saint Clement, Saint Denis the Areopagite, S. Martial, Saint Ignatius,
Saint Policarpus, or any other of whom any work is extant: I shall make it S.
Ignat. epist. ad Smyrn. Theod. dialo. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 31. Hiera^. lib. de vir.
Illust. S. Bern. Sermon. 7. in ps. 9. Marc. Michal Carnoten. lib. de vir.
illustr. Dion. Carth. ad l. Areop. de divine. nom. Sint. Sin. lib. 2. Ignat. ep.
ad S. Ioh. 1. 2. ad B. Mar. Virg. B. Mar. epist. ad Ignat. S. Ignat. epist. ad
Smyrnen. Eusebius. hist. l. 3. ca. 33. ^. Chrisost. orat. de tra^sl. S. Ignatij.
Foelix Romans ep. ad Zenon. Imperat. synod. S. Constant. Theodoret. Immutabil.
dialog. 1.
evident that in every Article in this Protestant Religion contained in their
book of the Articles thereof, they dissented from these Protestants, and they
and the Apostolic Church then universally agreed in, and professed the same
doctrine, which the present Roman Church does at this day in all points. This
will plainly appear in every Article hereafter, and therefore in this place I
will only cite Saint Ignatius, as a sufficient pawn or pledge for the rest,
until I come to them in the Articles followinge. He had personally seen. our
Savior, was an eyewitness of his resurrection, had written unto, visited, was
instructed and confirmed in Christian Religion, both by the words and writing
of the blessed Virgin Mary Mother of Christ. He was disciple to Saint Ihon
the Evangelist, disciple and immediate Successor, of Saint Peter the Apostle
at Antioch, consecrated there Bishop by him, as Saint Chrysostom Patriarch
there, Saint Felix Pope of Rome and Theodoret testify: S. Ignatius dextera
Petri ordinatus Episcopus Ecclesiae Antiochenae, per magni Petri dexteram
Pontificatum suscepit. And so consecrated Bishop, was taught himself, and
taught others before either the Ghospels, or other parts of the new Testament
were written. He lived long Patriarch of Antioch the cheif^ and Apostolic
See of the Greek Church, he die^ a blessed Martyr at Rome, the greatest of a^
Churches, he joined in Religion with the most renowned Churches, and Prelates,
Apostles, and others of the Christian world, as the very Titles o^ his extant
epistles to the Romans, Philippians, Ephesians, Smyrnians, Philadelphians,
Magnesian^ Trallians and others. To Saint Ihon the Apostl^ Saint Policarpe,
with others most famous among^ Christians, and all ancient writers, Saint
Hierome, Eusebius, Ireneus make him a most gloriou^ learned man and Saint
Eusebius testifies that h^ Eusebius l. 3. hist. cap. 32. Eusebius. hist. l 3. c. 33.
Hieron. l. de Scriptor. in S. Ignat. Gildas epist. de excid. and conquest.
Britan.
wrote a particular work of the Apostles traditio^^ But those few and short
Epistles which he wrote and received, as all, Greeks, Latins, and among ou^
primative Britans, the most ancient historian S* Gildas is an ample witness,
will sufficiently prou^ unto us. That very many things even necessary i^
Christian Religion and to salvation in our Protestants Judgment, and in their
opinion not containe^ in Scripture, were then taught, practiced and generally
received in the Church of Christ in the Apostles time. Concerning the Church
of Rome h^ thus styles it: misericordiam in magnificentia altissim^ S.
Ignatius epist. ad Romanos in initio.
Dei Patris, and Jesus Christi vnigeniti filij, Ecclesia sanctificata and
illuminata per voluntatem Dei (qui se^^ omnia, quae p^rtinent ad fidem and
charitatem Jesus Christi Dei and Saluatoris nostri) quae and in Loco Romanae
regionis, Deo digna, decentissima, beatificanda, laudand^ digna qua quis
potiatur, castissima, and eximiae charitati^ Christi and Patris nomine fru^ns,
spiri^uque plena. The Rulinge Roman Church, sanctified, Illuminated, worth^ of
God, most decent, blessed, to be praised, worthy to b^ attained unto, most
chaste, of excellent charity enioyinge ^he name of Christ and his Father, and
full of the holy Ghost: With other Titles of dignity and privilege, more then
he gives to any, or all, those principal Churches of Greece to which he
wrote, and as great and ample as any learned Catholic now ^eeldeth to the
Church of Rome at this time, or ^eretofore, since then. He remembers the same
Ecclesiastical Orders in the Church then, which Catholics now and ever since
observe, as in the Church of Antioch founded by Saint Peter and ^ainct Paul
and their tradition there, Pauli and Petri ^istis discipuli ne perdatis
depositum. He himself was there Bishop, besides whom it had Priests,
^eacons, Subdeacons, Exorcists, Readers, Iani^rs. Saluto sanctum Presbyterorum
Collegium, saluto Epist. ad Antiochen.
^acros Diaconos. Saluto Hypodiaconos, Lectores, Ianito^s Exorcistas. And him
that was to be Bishop after ^is martyrdom, as it was revealed unto him:
opta^le illud nomen eius quem vid^o in spiritu locu^ meum ^nere, vbi Christum
nactus fuero. He gives them ^e same honor preeminence worth office and dig^ty
which the Church of Rome now yields to ^em. All must honor and obey the
Bishops. Omnes ^piscopum sequimini vt Christus Patrem. Kings and Epistol. ad
Symrnen.
^ulers must be ruled by him being greatest in the church. Honora Deum vt
omnium Authorem and Do^inum: Episcopum vero vt Principem Sacerdotum, ^iaginem
Dei reserentem: Dei quidem, propter princi^tum: Christi vero propter
Sacerdotium. Honorare ^ortet and Regem: nec enim Rege quisquam praestan^r, aut
quisquam similis ei in rebus creatis: nec Epis^o qui Deo consecratus est pro
totius mundi salute, ^icquam maius in Ecclesia. Nec inter principes quisquam
similis Regi, qui in pace and optimis legibus subditos moderatur. Qui honorat
Episcopum a Deo honorabitur: sicut qui ignominia afficit illum a Deo punietur.
S^ enim Iure censebitur paena dignus, qui aduer sus Rege^ insurgit, vt qui
violet bonas legum constitutione^ quanto put at is grauiori subiacebit
supplicio, qui sine Episcopo aliquid egerit, concordiam rumpens, and decent^
rerum ordinem confundens? Sacerdotium enim est o^nium bonorum, quae in
hominibus sunt Apex: qui a^uersus illud furit, non hominem ignominia afficit s^
Deum, and Christum Iesum primogenitum. Laici Di^ conis subijciantur, Diacom
Presbyteris, Presbyteri Epicopo, Episcopus Christo. Principes subditi estote
Caesa^milites Epist. ad Philadelphienses.
principibus, Diaconi Presbyteris, Presbyteri v^ and Diacom at que omnis clerus
simul cum omni populo militibus at que principibus sed and Cesare obediant
Epicopo, Episcopus vero Christo, sicut Patri Christus, and ^ unit as per omnia
seruatur. Where we plainly s^ there was no Princes supremacy in spiritual
thin^ in those happy times, but Princes kings and Em^rors, as those of the
clergy and all others were s^iect and ought obedience to the Bishop, and
preihood was the highest and most honorable dign^ in the world. And the honor
which was due Kings themselves was inferior to that of Bisho^ Ego dico honorate
Deum, vt authorem omnium and ^minum, Epistol. ad Smyren.
Episcopum autem tanquam Principem Sa^dotum, Imaginem Dei ferentem, principatum
qui^ secundum Deum, Sacerdotium vero secu^dum Christ^ and post hunc honorare
oport^t etiam Regem. N^mo e^potior est Deo, neque similis illi, neque Episcopo
hon^bilior, in Ecclesia Sacerdotium Deo gerenti pro mu^ salute, neque Regi quis
similis in exercitu, pacem and neuolentiam omnibus principibus cogitanti. Where
gives an unanswerable reason of the preeminence of Episcopal dignity before
the Regal, though in good King, because this rules only in martial and
temporal affairs, the Bishop in spiritual, the Church of God, his house and
Kingdom. And he ^hargeth all without exception to be subject, not ^nely to the
Bishop, but to Priests and Deacons ^uen under pain of eternal damnation.
Exitimini S. Ignatius epist. ad Ephesios.
^ubiecti esse Episcopo, and Presbyteris and Diaconis, qui ^im his obedit,
obedit Christo qui hos constituit. Qui vero his reluctatur, reluctatur Christo
Jesus: qui autem ^on obedit filio, non videbit vitam, sed ira Dei manet ^uper
eum. Praefractus enim contentiosus, and superbus ^t qui non obtemperat
praestantioribus. And by that ^eading which the Canon law uses, even Princes
and all not obeying their Bishops are excluded both from the society of the
faithful on earth and the Kingdom of heaven. Si vobis Episcopi, non obedieint
S. Ignat. citat, C. Si autem. 11. quaest. 3. Jacob. Simanchal. dedignitare
Episcopali.
omnes clerici, omnesque Principes, at que reliqui pouli, non solum infames,
sed etiam extorres a Regno ^ei, and consortio fidelium, ac a limitibus sanctae
Eccle^ae alieni erunt: eorum est enim vobis obedire, vt Deo, ^ius legatione
fungimini. And he plainly confineth bedience to temporal Princes, that it be
not with reiudice of the spiritual, and danger of the soul. ^aesari subiecti
estote in ijs in quibus subdi, nullum ani^ae S. Ignat. Epist. ad Antioc.
periculum est. And says plainly that a Bishop is ^boue all other
principality and power. Quid aliud I. Ignat. Epist. ad Trallia*
^ Episcopus, quam is qui omni Principatu and potestate ^uperior est? And to
express the lamentable estate ^f them which want true Bishops, Priests, and
^eacons, concludes, there neither is nor can be ^y true Church, nor communion
of Saints without them. Sine his Ecclesia electa non est, nulla sine his
Sanctorum congregatio, nulla Sanctorum collectio. An^ sets down their holy
functions and offices to b^ such, that noe Protestants can possibly claim t^
have either Bishop, Priest, Deaco^, or other Clearg^ man among them. Sine
Episcopo, nec Presbyter, n^ Epist. ad Magnesian. and ad Philadelph. Epist. ad
Heronem.
Diaconus, n^c Laicus quicquam facit. The Bishop^ says he, do baptize, offer
sacrifice, give orders, ^ use Imposition of hands. Baptizant, sacrifica^t,
eligu^ ordinant, manus imponunt. Nothing is to be done ^ the Church without
their allowa^ce, no Sacrame^ ministered, he is dispenser of all spiritual
business, ^ Epist. ad Smyrn.
is not lawful for the Priests without his approb^tion, to baptize, to offer,
to sacrifice, to say Mass^ Sine Episcopo nemo quicquam faciat eorum quae ad
E^clesiam spectant. Rata Eucharistia habeatur illa q^ sub Episcopo fuerit, vel
cui ipse concesserit. Non li^ sine Episcopo baptizare, neque offerre, neque
sacrificiu^ immolare, neque dochen celebrare others read, n^ que Missas
celebrare, which is sufficiently express^ and approved in offerre, and
sacrificium immola^ before. The Bishops did consecrate Virgins, an^ Marriages
made by their warrant. Si quis potest in c^stitate Epist. ad Polycarp.
permanere, ad honorem carnis Dominicae, vi^ iactantiam: and si idipsum
statuatur sine Episcopo c^ ruptum est. D^cet vero, vt and ducentes vxores, and
n^bentes, cum Episcopi arbitrio coniungantur. The Preis^ Epist. ad Smyrn. and
ad Heronem.
besides their preaching, and ministering of Sacr^ments, did offer sacrifice,
and say Mass, as is befo^ expressed. And the Deacons ministered unto the
^shops, and Priests in their holy sacrifice. Diacon^ Sacerdotum minister.
Sacerdotes sacrificant. And w^tinge to Saint Heron a Deacon of the Church ^
Antioch having immediately spoken before ho^ the Priests did offer sacrifice,
he says, that he d^ ^inister to them in the holy Sacrifice, as Saint Stephen
did to Saint James the Apostle, and Priests ^ Jerusalem, proving that they
there said Mass, ^s the Priests of Antioch and other Churches did. ^uillis
ministras, vt Sanctus ille Stephanus Iacobo and ^esbyteris qui erant
Hierosolimis. And in an other e^stle says plainly, that Deaco^s ought to do
such ^ty in those mysteries to Priests, as Saint Ste^en Epistol. ad Trallian.
did to Saint James, Saint Timothy and S. ^ucius, to Saint Paul, Saint
Anacletus and Saint ^lement, to Saint Peter. Purum and inculpatum mi^sterium
illis exhibent, vt S. Stephanus Beato Iacobo: ^motheus and Linus, Paulo*
Anacletus and Clemens ^ero. And expresses this their office in these plain
^mes. Oportet Diaconis mysterio^um Christi; per omnia ^cere; nec enim ciborum
and po^u^m ministri sunt, sed ^clesiae Dei administratores. The Geeke readinge
^eifely signifies ministering in the holy sacrifice of ^asse, and so expresses
it self in this matter. (...). He re^embreth both altar and sacrifice, (...)
in as plain terms, as any present writers of ^e Roman Church now does; and to
manifest he ^h not mean such acts as Protestants term sa^fice, and are so
many as the different kinds of ^otion, but only the external common sa^fice,
he says, there is but one sacrifice and this sa^ice the only flesh and blood
of Christ. Vna est Epistol. ad Philadelp.
^ Christi Jesus Domini nostri, vnus illius sanguis qui ^ nobis eff^sus est,
vnus panis omnibus confractus, and ^us calix, qui omnibus distributus est, vnum
altar ^^ Ecclesiae. The prayer and words of a Priests, are Epistol. ad Ephesians.
^uch force, that they place Christ among us. V^s sieve alterius precatio
ta^^^irum virium est, vt Christum^nter illos statuat. It is a preparatiue of
eterni^ a preservative against death, procuring life in G^ and a medicine
expelling all evil. Pharmacum ^ mortalitatis, mortis antidotum, vitamque in
Deo c^cilians Epis. ad Romans
per I^sum Christum, and medicamentum, o^ expellens mala. The bread or food
of God, heau^ly bread, the flesh of Christ the son of God, ^ Ignat. apud
Theodoret. Dialog. 3.
blood of Christ. Panis Dei, panis caelestis qui est ^ Christi filij Dei, and
potus sanguis illius. The Eucha^ which is the flesh of our Savior, which suff^
for our sins, which his Father raised again. ^ charistia est caro Saluatoris
quae pro peccatis n^^ passa est, quam pater sua benignitate suscitauit. T^ holy
sacrificing Bishops and Priests, and Dea^ ministering unto them, in those sacred
misteri^ they were far from the pretended Protes^ clergy, which have to
their uttermost endea^ ever afflicted such holy Functions, especiall^ England
with most bitter edicts and persecuti^ and the sacred Priests of that, and for
that only ^fession, with most barbarous and cruel d^athes* seeing by the most
constant Testimony and pra^ of this blessed Apostolic age, no true Church ^ or
could be without them, no Protestant com^ or congregation, all of them wantinge
such ^ consecrated Bishops, Priests, and Ecclesias^ persons, and Professors,
can possibly have the ^ and Title of a true Church and religion: And ^ tending
(as they do, that these sacrificing hol^ders, without which no true Church can
be, a^ contained in Scripture, They must needs ^ They were delivered unto the
Church, and ^ Church well founded in these so essential the by Tradition.
Which they must needs lik^ ^raunt of these ensuing doctrines and practices in
Religion used in the same time, and remembered ^y this and other Apostolic
writers of that first ^ge.

First whereas Protestants ascribe justification to ^nely Faith, being a chief
foundation of their new ^eligion: Saint Ignatius and this happy age knew ^o
such doctrine, but the contrary, That faith was Epistol. ad Ephesios.
^ely to begin Justification, but it was perfected by ^arity and good deeds.
Non vos laedet aliqua diabo^a cogitatio, si vt Paulus perfectam habueritis in
^ristum and fidem and charitatem, quae initium vitae and ^is est. Principium
vitae fides: finis eiusdem charitas. ^ ac autem duo quoties in vnum coeunt, Dei
hominem ^ficiunt. And again: Eleemosyna and fide expiantur Epist. ad Heronem.
Epist. ad Mar. Cassobolit. Epist. ad Tarsen. ad Romans Epist. ad Philadelphenses.
^ccata. Praesens labor modicus, multa quae hinc expe^atur merces. Nihili pendo
supplicia haec, neque tanti ^io vitam meam, vt eam plus amem quam Dominum.
^uare paratum me offero igni, feris, gladijs, cruci, dum^do Christum videam
Saluatorem and Deum meum. ^secro vos, quot quot paenitentia ductir^dierint ad
v^atem Ecclesiae, suscipite illos cum omni man suetudi^ vt per bonitatem and
patientiam resipiscentes ex dia^i laqueis, digni iam Christo facti salutem
consequan^ aternam in regno Christi. Illibatum mihi est ar^uum Crux Christi,
mors and resurrectio eius, and fides, ^ quae cupio iustificari precibus
vestris. Qui honorat Epistol. ad Smyrnenses.
^phetum in nomine Prophetae, mercedem Prophetae ac^et, nimirum qui honorat
vinctum Jesus Christi, ^rtyrum accipiet mercedem. Nihil vobis apud Deum ^ibit
eorum, quae in illos contulistis: det vobis Domi^ vt inneniatis misericordiam a
Domino in illa die. ^inam meus spiritus cum vestro commutari possit, and ^icula
haec m^a, quae non fastidistis, nec obea erubuistis. Quare nec de vobis
erubescet consummata spes ^sus Christus. Precationes vestrae appropinquarunt ^
Antiochenam Ecclesiam, and pacem habet. Deposita v^stra, Epist. ad Policarpum.
sunt opera vestra, vt quae accepistis, eadem dig^ Deo reportetis. Antiochena
Ecclesia pacem est nacta p^ orationes vestras, and ego tranquilliori animo
factus su^ in securitate Dei, si per passionem Deum assecutus fu^ dis^ipulus
inueniar per orationes vestras. Quibus ^ Epist. ad Hero^.
Deus inuenire misericordiam a Domino in illa die pr^ter of ficium and
ministerium erga nos. Orate pro m^, ^ Epistol. ad Trallianos.
in Dei misericordia charitate vestra indigeo, vt dig^fiam sort ad quam
assequendam iam destinor, ne rep^bus inueniar. Where we evidently see, by many
^stimonies, that the Imagined Protestant faith n^ther does, nor possibly can
justify any man; b^ charity, alms, penance, prayer and other h^ works, and
deeds of Christians, are meritorious ^ justify them.

And that Protestants paradoxe of the certai^ of Salvation is most certainly
false. Which ^ confirms also in other places, as where he tak^ upon him the
knowledge of the celestial spir^ their orders, and dignities, yet he plainly
mak^ himself ignorant of his own salvation, m^ Epistol. ad Tr^ll. supr.
more not certain thereof. Our Protesta^ pretend for themselves. Angelicos
ordines, Arch^ gelorum militiarumque differentias, thronorum p^ testatumque
distantias, principatuum magnific^nt^ Cherubim Seraphimque excell^ntias,
spiritus sub^^tatem and Domini regnum, and in^omparabil^m Dei ^tris
omnipotentis diuinitatem; haec ^um nouerim, ^ continuo perfectus prorsus ego
sum, multa d^sunt^ Deo d^relinquar. Where we see him further to h^ described
the heavenly hierarchy and order^ heaven as Catholics now do and Protestants
take no notice of them.

And he does not only thus describe them, but assures us, they know the
things on earth, and so by protestant allowance may be prayed unto, as
Catholics use, and they condemn. Praecipio tibi coram Epistol. ad Heron.
Deo vniuersorum, and coram Christo praesente, and Sancto Spiritu and
administratorijs Angelorum ordinibus, ^ustodi depositum meum, quod ego and
Christus tibi commendauimus. Where the holy Angels do not only know our
actions as Christ and the blessed Trinity does, but assist and minister unto
us. And is ^o far from denying this knowledge, to Saints, and Angels in
heaven, that he yields knowledge of affairs on earth namely of the Passion
of Christ even to the souls which were in Limbus patrum, or Epistol. ad
Trallian.
Purgatory at that time. Vere crucifixus and mortuus videntibus caelestibus,
terrenis and ijs qui sub terra ^detincbantur: caelestibus quidem
inspicientibus, ni^nirum incorporeis naturis: terrenis vero, vt Iudaeis and
Romany, and caeteris qui tunc temporis crucifixo Domino aderant: subterraneis
autem, ijs videlicet, qui plurimi cum Domino resurrexerunt, multa enim, ^nquit,
corpora Sanctorum, qui dormierant, cum Matthew. 27.
Domino resurrexerunt, monumentis apertis. Descendit ad infernum solus,
regressus est cum multitudi^^, and septum illud aeternum rupit, and medium
pari^^^m illius destruxit. By this we find, as Catholics hold, and
Protestants deny, a place where souls were, and whence there is delivery and
redemption, and not euerduring Torment, and desperation, of the reprobate, and
damned in their hell, and place of eternal punishment, of which there is no
end or freedom to be had, or hoped for. And therefore it is a place from whence
a Ransom will make delivery, and there is no merit or deserving after thi^
life, as our Protestants most freely grant.

This freedom of souls from that place of punishment, purgatory, or howsoever
we shall nam^ it, is principally to be procured, and effected, by the
sacrifices, prayers, alms and other meritoriou^ deeds, and works of holy
Christians still living i^ the estate and condition of deserving. Such as S*
Ignatius has before remembered. And other Apostolic writers of this age, as
Saint Denis the Areopagite, and Saint Clement Scholars of the tw^ great
Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, to b^ cited with others in this
particular question in the proper place thereof, being of the same religion i^
all points with Saint Ignatius, and the holy Church of Christ, do as plainly
express, and deliver for the constant custom practice, and doctrine of, the
time, to offer sacrifice, pray, and do other hol^ works, for faithful people
departed out of the life, as any learned writer of the present Roman Church
does in these days. And Saint Ignati^ with much honor remembers them,
especially S* Clement Scholar to Saint Peter and Paul an^ Pope of Rome Papa
beatissimus Clemens Petri ^ Pauli Auditor, and testifies, that he lived in
perp^tuall Epistol. ad Mar. Cassob.
chastity, in castitate exegi^ hanc vitam. Which he affirms of other
Apostolic Priests and Bishops of that age Saint Timothy Saint Titus ^ Epist.
ad Philadelph.
Euodius his predecessor at Antioche, and of himself in diverse places; So that
then neither the Priests ^ the Latin or Greek Church, Antioche being the
chiefest, and where the name of Christians fi^^ began, were married, but
continually lived a^ their life time in chastity, in castitate exegerunt hanc
vitam.

And therefore they were honored in those days, and the holy Maidens which had
professed virgi^ity, were compared to the Priests in this point ^f perfection,
and for it honored as they were. ^as quae in virginitate degunt in pretio
habete, velut Epistol ad Tarsens.
Christi Sacerdotes. It is manifest, their were Col^edges or Nunneries of such
vowed and professed ^irgins and Nonnes then. Saluto Collegium virgi^um.
Epistol. ad Philippen. Epistol. ad Smyrn. Epistol. ad Polycarp.
And they lived in perpetual virginity. Saluto ^as quae in perpetua degunt
virginitate. They were ^rofessed by the Bishop, whether men or women: ^i quis
potest in castitate permanere, ad honorem carms ^ominicae, sine iactantia
permaneat* si idipsum statuatur ^ne Episcopo corruptum est. And of this
profession and ^onsecration of virgins, he further puts them, and all in
memory in this manner: virgins agnos^ant, Epistol. ad Antiochen.
cui seipsas consecrarunt.

And he proves, That it is in the power and free ^ill of man, to do these,
and all holy duties in a Christian life, by the grace of Christ, and noe man
^ecessitated to sin, heaven and hell good and bad ^n the free will and
election of man. Decet non modo Epistol. ad Magnes.
vocari Christianos, sed esse, nec enim dici, sed esse, bea^os facit.
Obseruationi proponitur vita, mors inobedien^iae, and singuli, qui hoc aut
illud delegerunt, ^n eius quod ^nuenerint locum abituri sunt, fugianius mortem,
and eli^amus vitam. In hominibus enim geminas not as inue^iri dico, and hanc
esse very numismatis, illam vero advlterimi. Pius homo numisma est a Deo
excusum: im^ius ementitum, adulterimum, and illegitimum, non a ^eo, sed a
diabolo ^ffectum. Non quod velim dicere ^uas esse hominis naturas, sed vnum
esse hominem, qui iam Dei, iam diabolisit. Si quis pietati studet, Dei ho^ est;
si impie agat, diaboli est: non id factus per natural sed animi arbitrium. He
proves that concupiscen^ Epist. ad Ephesios.
without consent, condemns not nor is sin a^ protestants hold. Cum nulla in
vobis sit conscupisce^tia, quae vos inquinet, and supplicium adferat, secundu^
Deum viuite. Non vos laedet aliqua diabolica cogitati^ si vt Paulus perfectam
habueritis in Christu^, and fide^ and charitatem. He has before in one place
spoken of four Sacraments, Baptism, the Sacrament o^ Christ's blessed body and
blood, Orders, and Confirmation, by all expositors: Baptizant, Sacrifican^
Epistol. ad Heron.
Eligunt, manu^ imponunt. He has asscribed justification unto penance, and so
allowed it in that degre^, and although he has so dignified the virginal
life, and says it is better praestantius, (...)* Epist. ad Philadelph.
then wedlock, he gives so much honor vnt^ Marriage, that it was not to be
performed without the Bishops assent and allowance. Decet vero v^ Epist. ad
Polycarpum.
and ducentes vxores, and nubentes, cum Episcopi arbitrio coniugantur, vt
nuptiae iuxta Domini praeceptu^ sint, non autem ad concupiscentiam.

Our protestants generally and absolutely deny these holy Christian doctrines,
and practices, to be contained in Scriptures, or to be proved by them;
Therefore they must needs yield that that primative and Apostolic Church by so
great and living* then witness, held and professed them by tradition, and
certain it is, that many books of Scripture were neither generally received,
nor written, when the things were so generally used, and professed, not only
in the commaundinge Greek Church of Antioch, where Saint Peter, S. Paul, S.
Euodius and Saint Ignatius professed, and practiced them: Pauli and Petri
fuistis discipuli, ne perda^^s Epist. ad Antiochen.
depositum. Mementore Euodij beatissimi Pastoris ves^^i, qui primus vobis
ordinatus est ab Apostolis Antistes* Where the disciples were first called
Christians, when Saint Peter and Saint Paul came thither, and there founded
the Church: Antiochiae primum Epist. ad Magnesian.
discipuli appellati sunt Christiam cum Petrus and Paulus fundarent Ecclesiam:
But in all the renowned Churches before remembered, and in all the whole
Christian world, at that time, by the preachinge and tradition of the holy
Apostles, as the same Apostolic man thus witnesses: Scribo ad vos, moncoque
Epist. ad Philadelph.
vt vna praedicatione, vna Eucharistia vtamini. Vna enim est caro Domini nostri
Jesus Christi, vnus illius sanguis, qui pro nobis effusus est, vnus item panis
omnibus confractus, and vnus calix qui omnibus tributus est: vnum altar omni
Ecclesiae, and vnus Episcopus cum presbyterorum collegio, and diaconis.
Quandoquidem est vnus est ingenitus Deus and Pater, and vnus vnigenitus Filius
Deus, verbum and homo, vnus Paracletus Spiritus veritatis, and vna praedicatio
and fides vna, and vnum baptisma, and vna Ecclesia, quam suis sudoribus and
laboribus fundarunt Sancti Apostoli a fimbus terrae vsque ad fines, in sanguine
Christi. Vos itaque oportet vt populum peculiarem, and gentem sanctam omnia
perficere concordibus animis in Christo. And directly Epistol. ad Heron.
concludes, that whosoever shall teach otherwise, then the Traditions of the
Church be, he is to be accounted a wolf among sheep, though he be otherwise,
a man of credit, fasteth, lives chastely, does miracles, and prophecieth:
Quicumque dix^rit quippiam praeter ea quae constituta sunt, (...), tamet si
fide dignus sit, quamuis signa edat, quamuis prophetet, pro lupo illum habeas
qui subouina pelle exitium pestemque aedfert ouibus. We may add^ unto these
greatest solemnities; and festival daye^ of the Cristians, received in the
Church in the time by tradition, and not Scripture, and by the same authority
of tradition without Scripture, the feasts and highest festiuities of the Jews
even thos^ which were solemnly set down and commau^de^ in Scripture to be
religiously observed, quite eu^cuated and utterly rejected.

The Sabbath which is now our saturday, wa^ with great ceremony and solemnity
delivered i^ Scripture to be kept every week, and that which we call sunday
was commanded to be a working day. Yet all Christians in this time, by
tradition di^ celebrate that old working day next after the ol^ Sabbath, for
our Lords day, consecrated to Christ^ resurrection as the chiefest of all
days. Post Sabbatum Epistol. ad Magnesianos. and epist. ad Trallian.
omnis Christi amator Dominicum celebret diem, resurrectioni consecratam
Dominicae, Reginam and principem omnium dierum, in qua, and vita nostra exorta
est* and per Christum mors deuicta: as all Christians now also do. The feast
of Easter was also changed, with other solemnities, and they were accounted as
cursed persecutors of Christ, and his Apostles, which observed otherwise, or
kept any festiuity o^ the Jews, although before commanded in Scriptures. Si
quis cum Iudaeis celebrat Pascha, aut Symbol^ Epist. ad Philadelphenses.
festiuitatis little recipit, particeps est eorum, qui Dominum occiderunt, and
Apostolos eius. He proves plainly, that both the principal feasts and fasts
also o^ the Church, as Lent and others were then in use, by this authority of
Tradition: Festiuitates ne dehonestetis, Epistol. ad Philippen.
quadragesimale iciunium ne spernatis, contine^ enim imitationem conuersationis
Dominicae. Post Passionis Do^^^i^ae hebdomadam ieiunare quartis and sextis
(...) negligatis. Si qui^ Dominicam diem ieiunarit, ^ic Christi interfector
est. He often there remembers the perpetual virginity of the Blessed Virgin
M^ry: Mariae Virginitas and admitandu^ ille partus: Virginem esse quae parit.
The form and manner of offering the holy Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood,
of consecrating Bishops, Priests, and other Clergy men, of ministringe so many
Sacraments, as he has remembered, the public Church service, to which he
binds all, the order of receiving peni^ents, the custom and limitation of
their used f^sts, and whatsoever almost appertaining to the holy use and
exercise of Christian Religion in that Apostolic age, was known, and
practiced by this blessed disciple and all Apostolic men which was delivered
and used only by tradition, and so descended to later ages and posterities, no
Scripture prescribing Christians, any such requisite instruction, in so
necessary and essential parts of Religion* or the true practice and profession
thereof, to which all true Christians under pain, and danger of everlasting
damnation were bound.

And as Saint Ignatius, so also testify the other holy and Apostolic writers
of this age as I shall most clearly prove and cite them in every particular
article, questioned by these Teachers. For this present it will be more then
needful to remember what they write hereof in general terms. Saint Denis
the Areopagite converted by Saint Paul the Apostle, writing of Christian
necessary doctrines, says plainly that the Apostles delivered some of them by
tradition only without writing, as they did some by writing: partim scriptis
partim non scriptis suis institutionibus ex Sacrosanctis legib^ Dionysius
Areopag. l. Eccles. Hierarc. c. 1.
nobis tradiderunt. And proves that in this Apostolic time, the Christian
mysteries were neither communicated by writing nor word for their great
reverence; but to holy and perfect Christians. Vide ^^ Sancta Sanctorum
enunties; sed reuereberis ea patius* and quae occulti Dei sunt; cogniti^ne
mentis and ^nimi ^ honor habebis ac preteo: ita tamen vt ea and minus
perfectis non tradas, and cum ijs folis, qui Sancti erunt, cu^ Sancta
illustratione, pro sacrarum rerum dignitate communices. And sets down
expressly. That the Apostolic Church then did not permit Cate^h^mens,
Energumens, or penitents to be present at the the holy mysteries. Catechumen^s,
and Energ^menos, Cap. 5.
quique in poenitentia sunt, Sanctae Hiererchiae mos pa^itur quidem audire
sacram psalmorum modulationem, diuinamque sacrarum Scripturarum recitationem:
a^ sacra autem operae quae deinceps sequuntur, at que mysteria spectanda, non
eos comiocat, sed perfectos ocul^^ eorum qui digni sunt. And testifies what
great Cap.
care the Christians then had, to conceal their ceremonies.

Saint Timothy also, as this holy writer proves, Dionys. supr. c. 1. S.
Dionys. l. de divine. nomin. cap. 3. Clem. Romans ep. 1. 2. 3 4. 5. l Recog. l.
co^stitut Apost. Chris. hom. 49. in Matthew. Eusebius. histor. Eccl. Cedren.
Nicephor. Callist. hist. l. 2. Epiphan. in panar. Ruffin. praef. in Clem. Bed.
in cap. S. Luc. Freculp. Lerouien. Chron. lib. 2. Synod. Sext. in Trullo.
Ruffin. praef. and translat. oper. S. Clement. S. Proclus Patriarch. Constant.
l. de tradit. diuinae Liturg. Nichol. Episcopus Methonen. l. de vero Christi
corp. in Eucharist. Marcus Ephesians. l. de corpore and sang. Christi. Bessar. l.
de Sacr. Eucharist. Manuscript. Gallic. antiq. an. D. in S. Clem. Manuscript.
Brit. antiquis. Protest. Collectio^ of private prayers. An. 1627. p. 147. 125.
107. 87. 35. Mat. Park. antiquit. Brit. page 47.
was of this opinion and practice. S. Hieroth eus also Tutor to Saint Denis
did write a book of Christians holy traditions. Hierotheus clarissim^s
praeeeptor noster elementa Theologica magnac^m land collegerit. And this
before S. Denis write.

The Apostolic Traditions collected together, and committed to writing by
Saint Clement Successor to Saint Peter at Rome, as both he himself, with
other ancient and approved Authors, Greek and Latin and general councels
witness, are so many that a short volume contains them ^ot, yet in all
things condemn Protestant Reli^io^, not approving it in any one Article,
wherein it ^ifferreth from Catholics and the doctrine of the ^resent Roman
Church, as will be made evident ^ the particular articles hereafter, manifestly
^nowne and confessed by Ruffinus his translation and testimony, to have been
then, and from the beginning contained in his works, and aggreable ^oth with
the Apostolic doctrine of this age, and ^ther confessed unspotted times after,
as in the ^ourth hundred year of Christ, wherein Ruffinus ^ued, and the Church
of Rome at this time, wherein ^ee now live. I will only in this place
exemplify ^ the public liturgy, Mass, or Church sacrifice pu^lished by him
unto the Church of Christ. Greeks ^atines, French, and our old brittesh
antiquities and our Protestants themselves confess, That as Peter ^t Antioch,
S. Mark at Alexandria, Saint John and S. Andrew in Asia, So Saint Clement
wrote and published a form of Mass, and generally all Churches embraced it:
Omne sque vniuersae Ec^esiae vbicumque sint, per eam quam Sanctus Cle^ens
conscripsit liturgiam tradiderunt. In this so old, ^ universal, so approved,
we find protection of ^e Angels, Angelorum tutelas, honor to all Saints,
^atriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confes^ors etc. Sanctis, Patriarchis,
Prophetis, Justice, Apo^olis, Martyribus, Confessoribus. Sanctorum martyrum
^emoriam colamus. Prayer for the faithful deceased. ^roijs, qui in fide
quieuerunt, oremus. The Ecclesia^icall orders which I have before remembered
from ^ainct Ignatius. That the holy sacrifice was offered ^r all Servants of
God. Offerimus tibi pro omnibus ^ui a saeculo placuerunt tibi. We find
virgins, and livers in professed chastity. Pro virginibus and castit^
serua^tibus. The sacrifice of bread and wine made t^ body and blood of Christ.
Corpus Christi, Sang^is Ch^sti. Epifcopus det oblatione^ d^cens, corpus
Christi, and ^ men's dicat Amen. Diaconus teneat calicem, and qua^ tradit,
dicat. Sanguis Christ^, calix vitae, and bibens ^cat Amen. And this very body
and blood of Ch^ were received by the Co^municants, those kept ^ in godliness,
procured remission of their sinn^ percepto pretioso corpore, and pretioso
sanguine Chri^ gratias agamus ei, qui dignos nos reddidit precipie^ Sancta eius
mysteria, Arogemus vt non in Iudici^ sed in salutem nobis fiant in v^ilitatem
animae, and ^poris, in custodiam pietatis, in remissionem peccator^ in vitam
futuri saeculi. The Priests which s^ Mass, were adorned with a sacrificing
vestime^ signed themselves with the sign of the cross, ^ so came to the
altar. Orans pontifex vna cum Sacer^tibus; S. Procl. supr. S. Isod. l. 1. de
off. ca. 15. Albin. lib. divine. offic. c. de celebrat. Mis^ae. Egbert. Sermon. de
increment. and manif. ca^h. fidei. Steph. Edu. l. Sacr. altar. Paschas.
Ra^b^rt. l. de corpore and sang* Chr^sti. Mich. Singel. in vit. S. Dion.
Areopag. Epiph. l. de her. in Andian. and Messal. Nicephor l. ^. c. 18.
induensque vestem splendidam, and stans ad a^re, trophaeo crucis se consignans
infronte.

That the holy traditions could not but be from the Apostles, from whom Saint
Clement ^ceaued them, both Saint Proclus and other w^nesses without exception
give us able testimo^ multi diuini Pastores, qui Apostolis successerunt sa^rum
diuinae liturgiae misteriorum rationem explicant^ scriptis mandatam Ecclesiae
tradiderunt, in quibus ^^mi and clarissimi sunt S. Clemens, summi illius
Apo^^lorum discipulus, and successor, qui sacro sancta illa ^^steria, a sanctis
Apostolis sibi reuelata in lucem e^dit.

Our old british manuscript of the first instit^tion of the Ecclesiastical
office especially in Fra^ and Britain most concerning us even as our
Pr^^sta^t Antiquaries entitle it, prima Institutio and varie^^ Manuscript.
Brit. ant^q. de prima Institutione Eccl. officij.
Ecclesiastici scruitij, praecipue in Britannia and Gal^ae, does also assure
us, That S. Trophimus, Saint ^hotinus, and others, disciples of the Apostles,
which Antiquaries agree, Saint Clement sent into ^raunce and these parts) did
use this Roman form ^f Mass, digested by Saint Clement, and in the ^rench
persecution it was carried to him again at ^ome to be perused. Beatus
Trophimus Episcopus Arelatensis, and Sanctus Photinus Martyr and Episcopus
^ugdunensis, discipulus S. Petri Apostoli cursum Ro^anum in Gallijs
tradiderunt. Inde postea relatione beati ^hotini Martyris cum quadraginta and
octo Martyribus ^etrusi in ergastulum, ad beatum Clementem quartum ^ci,
successorem beati Petri Apostoli deportauerunt. Where it has the warrant and
testimony of the ^ost glorious Apostolic men and Martyrs in ^his part of the
world. All the forms and Orders ^f Mass, ascribed to the Apostles, to Saint
Basil, ^ainct Chrysostom, and whosoever Greek or ^atine, conspire and agree
with this of Saint Cle^ent in all and every tradition denied by our
Pro^estants, and used by him. Saint Denis the Areo^agite, and Saint Martial
whom with others he ^ent into France renowned among the Apostolic writers of
this time, have the same and more. I have ^lready spoken of Saint Denis, and
shall more spe^ially hereafter. Saint Martial, who says he was present at
Christ's Ascension in heaven: Testes su^us, Martial. epist. ad Burdegal. cap. 2.
Martial. supr. cap. 3.
quia eum ascendere in coelum vidimus, He testi^ieth that the Priests then
ministered life in their ^oly sacrifice, Sacerdotes Dei omnipotentis vitam
tri^uunt in calice and viuo pane. Sacrificium Deo Creatori ^ffertur in ara.
Sacrifice on the Altar. The Altar dedicated to God and Saint Stephen. Dedicata
in ^mine Domini Dei Israel and ipsius testus Stephani. T^ sacrifice was the
body and blood of Christ offe^ by the Mass: cuius (Christ) corpus and
sanguinem vitam aeternam offerimus, for obtaining life. T^ same body of Christ
which the Jews crucified ^ offered in Mass, and for to obtain eternal life,
a^ Christ so ordained and Instituted. Quod Iudaei ^ inuidiam immolaucrunt, nos
causa salutis nostrae in ^ sanctificata proponimus, scientes hoc solo remcdio
n^ vitam praestandam, and mortem effugandam. Hoc e^ ipse Dominus noster iussit
nos agere in sui commemo^tionem. He gives as much power and reuerence^ Cap. 8.
the cross of Christ, sign, and use thereof as. S. C^ment did, or any learned
Catholic now do^ Cruce Domini semper in mente, in ore, in signo ten^ Crux enim
Domini armatura vestra inuicta contra S^thanam, gal^a custodiens caput, lorica
protegens pect^ clypeus tela maligni repellens, gladius iniquitatem ^ angelicas
insidias peruersae potestatis sibi propinqu^ nullo modo Sinens. Hoc solo signo
caelestis victoria d^ est nobis; and per crucem baptisma Dei sanctificatum e^
He teaches that the Church of Christ shall ne^ Cap. 11.
fail: firma Ecclesia Dei and Christi, nec cadere, nec d^rumpi poterit vnquam.

He affirms, Christ co^stituted three degrees, t^ Martial epist. ad
Tolosanos. cap. 8. 9.
married, widowhood, better, viduitatem in pr^mio maiori, virginity the third,
most excellent, an^ angelike, tertium excellentem gradum honestatis ^
virginitate demonstrate nobis perfectum, and per oni^ simile^ angelicae
dignitati. And that it was then vowe^ even by such as were espoused, as namely
by S. V^leria Virgin and Martyr, spouse of the King the^ called Stephen by S.
Martial his preaching: Vir^ ^aleria sponsa Regis terrestris, sed melius sponsa
Re^is coelestis, quae per meam praedicationem, virginitatem ^entis and corporis
Deo deuouerat, gladio decollata. Demochar. l. 2 Petr. de Natal l 1. Bed. 16.
call. Ian. Anton. paet. 1 cap. 19. Guliel. Eisengrencent. 1. part 5. Man^. fast.
l. 8. Antonin. part. 1. Petr. de natal. l. 9 Bed. 8. call. nou. Ado. Treu. ib.
Volater. l. 3. 16.
That S. Lazarus whom Christ raised from death, ^ishop of Marsiles, said Mass
in the same manner, ^ S. Maximus also, both the French Antiquities, ^ their
sacrifying or massing vestures still reserved ^ the Cathedral Church there,
are sufficient testi^onys: in cathedrali Basilica, and caput, and vestes in
qui^s Missas celebrabat adhuc body conseruantur and mon^antur. S. Martha
Sister of S. Mary Magdalen ^ad many Virgins and Nuns with her, and S. ^onto
70. Monks in one place, in an other 300. ^o in all other Apostolic Persons in
France ag^eeing in the same only true profession of Reli^on. For Britain it
is evident before, it received ^hristianity before the Scripture of the new
Testa^ent was either received, known of, or for the ^ost part written. And yet
the Christians here ^aied unto Saints, and Angels, for the dead, reue^nced the
sign of the cross, and other holy Images, ^d sacred Reliks, said, or heard
Mass, and pra^ized other Christian rites and duties, which pro^stants deny to
be contained in, or proved by ^cripture.

Tertullian living and writing as many testify, ^en Protestants, before Pope
Eleutherius time, Tertull. l. de praescription. Magdeburg. Centu^. 3. col. 34.
c. 4. col. 240. 241. Sutcl. subu. p. 4. Whitg. def. Respon. page 96.
^d witnessing Britayne had in his days received ^e faith of Christ even in
those parts thereof whe^er the Pagan Romans could never come, loca ^omanis
inaccessa, speaks of the traditions before ^membred, as both his own works,
Catholics ^d Protestants prove in these words: Tertullianus ^ genere de
doctrina suae aetatis inquit eam consentire cum Ecclesijs Apostolicis, eamque
consensum and c^ cordiam communem esse omniu^ Ecclesiarum in Europ^ in Asia,
and in Africatestatur: That this the doctrine his time did agree with all
Apostolic Churches: tha^ was the common consent and concordance of all ^
Churches in Europe, in Asia and in Afrike. And thou^ we assign a somewhat
later time to Tertullian, others do in the later end of the second age, ^ when
he so confidently and generally assign^ this common consent of all Churches of
Britai^ France, Spain Italy all Europe Asia and Afri^ in these holy Christian
doctrines thus impugned Protestants, having therein the consent of all A^stolik
Churches, we must needs say, whether t^ were received, and professed from
Scriptures, Traditions, being long before any general Co^cels kept, by the
general confessed rule of the others and Protestants before, they must need^
delivered by authority of the Apostles: non ^ authoritate Apostolica traditum
certissime creditur^

And the first receiving of the holy Scripture^ Britayne which we find in
Antiquities, was in ^ time of Pope Eleutherius, and from the Church Rome, the
same Catalogue of Scriptures it t^ used and still uses, as we find in the
epistl^ Eleuth. Pap. epist. ad Lucium Regem Britan. Godwin. Co^uers. of Brit.
in epist. Eleuther. Stow. hist. Romans.
that holy Pope to King Lucius: suscepistis n^ miseratione diuina in Regno
Britaniae legem and fi^ Christi. Habetis penes vos in Regno vtramque pagi^ You
have there in your Kingdom both testament^ our Protestants translate it, or,
both parts of Scripture

THE THIRD CHAPTER.
The 7. 8. 9. 10. Articles examined; and wherein they differ from the present
Roman Church, condemned by this first Apostolic age.
HAVING thus absolutely, and at large confuted and overthrown by the
Apostolic ^ge, the last Article, the erroneous ground of all ^rotestant
Religion, we may be more breife in ^he rest, being all at the least generally
confuted and overthrown in their false foundation, so de^royed. And until we
come to their 11. Article ^tituled: of the Justification of man: It may be
que^ioned, whether any of them does in common, and ^robable construction, and
meaning, oppose the ^oman Church or no. And for the two next, the 7. and 8.
Articles, it is most certain and evident, the ^rst of them being entitled: of
the old testament, only ^acheth, The old Testament is not contrary to the new.
and the other styled, of the three Creeds, is in the ^me condition, only
affirming, The three Creedes, ^icene* Creed, Athanasius Creed, and t^^^ which
is ^mmonly called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly ^ be received and
believed. But the reason hereof, which thus they yield: for they may be proved
by most ^rtaine warrantes of holy Scripture, is both before ^onfuted, and very
frivolous, for neither is the Scrip^re the complete Rule of Religion, neither
was ^e Scriptures of the new testament written, when ^e Apostles delivered
their Creed, to the Church, ^or the Scriptures agreed upon, until after both
^e Creedes of the Nicene Council, and Saint Athanasius were generally
received and profess^ by all Catholics, as is already made manifest, eue^ by
Protestants themselves as well as other Autho^ of more worthy credit. The next
Article is int^tuled: of Original or birth sin. And was expresse^ concluded
by them against the Pelagians, denyi^ original sin in man, as they expound
themselu^ naming the Pelagians, and their heresy there, wi^ a confutation of
it in their proceedings, holdi^ that Original sin in those that be not
baptize^ deserves Gods wrath and damnation. Yet in the l^ and concluding words
of the Article, their phra^ of speech has perhaps given occasion to some
p^ritane Nouelists, to think they held as these m^ Calvin and such do, that
concupiscence witho^ assent is sin, The words be: Although there is ^ Artic.
9. supr.
cond^mnation for them that believe, and are baptiz^ yet the Apostle does
confess, that concupiscence and l^ Thomas Rogers in Articul. 9. Confess. Helu.
2. c 9. Saxon. ar. 2. 20.
has of it self the nature of sin.

A Puritan glosser upon this place says: Con^piscence, even in the
regenerate, is sinn^. Among fo^t^ene Protestant Confessions he cites but two
f^ his opinion by his own exposition, And so seau^ to one by his own argument
of Protestant auth^rity, he is deceived. And the Puritan Heluetian ^sembly
Protest. Engl. Art. art. 10. Calvin. lib. 1. Instit c. 5. l. 2 c. 2. and 3. and
a. lib. l 3. c. 3. Ant Wotton. against D. Bish pa. 112.
ruled by Calvin, holds this besides t^ other error, which our English
Protestants de^ in there next article, that man has not free will ^ do well,
or fly sin. And he plainly confesse^ that all the primative Fathers,
sufficient for t^ purpose, are against him, holding concupiscen^ without assent
to be no sin. Omnium sentent^^ So do our English Puritans also, which hold
the error, acknowledge, and it is apparent even ^ ^e words of this article
before related, that the En^ish Protestants do no otherwise term co^cupis^nce
sin, then materially as the Apostle does, those only authority they use in
that matter, and ^ot properly and formally, as sin is truly and ^ right
sense used, and taken, having liberty and ^nsent of mind annexed unto it;
otherwise In^nts, Idiots, frantike mad men without iudg^ent, and men
sleepinge, doing the material part ^ things sinful, should also sin: or if
the flesh of ^ self, the vegetative or sensitive power abstra^ing from reason
could sin, creatures only ha^ng being, vegetation, and sense might and
should ^nne, equally, as those that be reasonable: Beasts, ^shes, fowls,
plants, herbs and trees would be ^oth capable and guilty of sin.

And our English Protestants in their commu^on book of as great credit, and
approved by as ^reate authority with them, and their Religion, as ^ese
articles, acknowledge that the baptized are dead Communion Book Titul.
ministrat. of public Baptism. And Catechism.
^ sin. And the whole body of sin is utterly aboli^ed in them. They promise
and vow to for sake the ^uill, and all his works, the carnal desires of the
flesh, ^d not to follow, and be led by them, obediently to ^epe Gods
commandments.

Therefore I dare not say, that the Parliament ^rotestants of England do, or by
their religion ^ould profess, that condemned error, which hol^eth
concupiscence without assent to be truly ^nne. And all ancient expositors of
holy Scrip^re both of the Greek, and Latin Church, do ^pounde the Apostle in
the place insinuated in ^is Article, to speak of sin only materially, and
^ot properly when he terms concupiscence by ^at name.

This is confessed by the professors of this ^rour before, and the name of the
Fathers are nee^lesse, and too many to be cited in a confessed cau^ And we
have the Catholic doctrine in t^ point delivered and taught by Apostolic men
^ this age. Saint Ignatius proves, that concupcence without assent defiles
not: cum nulla in v^^ Ignat. epist. ad Ephesians.
sit concupiscentia, quae vos inquinet, and supplicium ^ferat, profecto
secundum Deum viuitis. And Rab^ Moses Hadarsan proves the same, for the true
b^ leeuing Jews: and quod iam scriptum est: and ad te c^cupi scentia Rabbi
Mos. Hadar. ad ca. 4. Genesis
peccati, scilicet, quod est figmentum mal^ iugiter concupiscens, and
affectans, and tu dominabe^ illius, hoc est, si volueris praeualebis aduersus
eum. A^ all the holy writers of this time affirm the sam^ when they teach,
that free will is in man, and sin^ is not contradicted without it, nor can be,
where, ^ when it does not consent. Which cannot possib^ be in the first motions
of concupiscence, by common experience, Judgment and agreement of a^ arisinge
both without and against the will and ^ berty of man.

First Saint Ignatius who has so plainly test^fied before, that
concupiscence not consented vnt^ does not defile, and so cannot be sin,
proves als^ abseruationi proponitur vita, mors obedientiae and si^guli Ignat.
epist. ^d Magnesian.
qui hoc aut illud elegerint in eius quod inu^ner^ locum abituri sunt: fugiamus
mortem, and eligamus v^tam, That to sin or not sin, to have life ^ death,
is in the power and will of Christians. A^ again, most plainly that sin is
not without fre^ will. Si quis piet ati studet, Dei homo est;, si impie ag^
diaboli est: non td factus per naturam, sed animi arb^trium. (...).

Saint Clement disciple and Successor to Saint ^eter the Apostle speaks as
plainly, or rather ^ore, both in Saint Peter's and his own words and ^pinion
and all true believers: liberi sumus arbitrij, Clem. Romans epist 3.
^uia liberum est animo, in quani velit partem declinare ^dicium suum, and quam
probauerit, eligere viam, con^at euidenter inesse hominibus arbitrij
libertatem. And Recognit. l. 3.
^ffirmeth plainly, that they which should deny ^ree-will in man, consequently
should say that God could not judge and condemn men for any ^inge termed
sins: all civil courts, laws, and justice should cease, there should be no
goodness ^o wickedness no sin, no virtue, nor God at all. Quomodo Deus
iudicat secundum veritatem vnum^uemque pro actibus suis, si agere aliquid in
potestate ^on habuit? Hoc siteneatur, conuulsa sunt omnia; fru^ra ^rit studium
sectandi meliora: sed and Iudices saeculi ^ustra legibus praesunt, and puniunt
eos qui male agunt: ^on enim in sua potestate habuerunt vt non peccarent. ^ ana
erunt and Iura populorum, quae malis actibus poenas ^atuunt: miseri erunt and
qui servant cum labor iusti^am: beati vero illi qui in delicijs positi cum
luxuria and ^celere viuentes tyrannidem tenent. Secundum haec er^o nec iustitia
erit, nec bonitas, nec vlla virtus, and, vt ^vis, nec Deus. Est ergo in
potestate vniuscuiusque, quia Lib. 4.
^beri arbitrij factus est homo, vtrum nobis velit audire ^d vita^, an
daemonibus ad interitu^. And defines free^ill to be an essential and
inseperable power of ^he soul of man, to yield to whatsoever acts it ^ill:
Arbitrij potestas est sensus animae habens Lib. 3. Dionis. Areopag. Eccles.
Hierar. cap. 2. l. de diu. nom. cap. 4.
^irtutem quam possit ad quos velit actus incli^ari.

Saint Denis the Arepagite is plain of the same ^pinion, and calls that
which we commonly term freewill, electiualibertas, elective liberty, a^ that
man has such power in himself. (...) Rab. Moses Hadars. ad c. 4. Genesis Rab.
Akiba in capitul patrum. Philo. l. quod Deus sit immutabilis. Rab. Moses Fill.
Maim. epistola adu. Astrologos. Joseph. Alb. fund. tract. 1. c. 9. Rab. Judas
in capitul. pa. Clem. Romans l. 3. Recognit. los. lib. 13. Antiq. c. 4. Epiph. l.
1. Tom. 1. cont. haer. c. 16. de pharisaeis. Plutarch. l. 1. de placitis
Philosophorum cap. 27. Clem. Alex. l. 5 stromat. part. ante f^n.
(...).

This was the constant and received opinion, ^ doctrine both of Jews and
gentiles also: for t^ first, their Rabbines, Rabbi Moses Hadarsa^ Rabbi Akiba,
Philo, Rabbi Moses ben-Maimo^ Josephus, Rabbi Judas with others do aboundan^ly
prove it. So does Saint Clement reciting the ^stimony of Simon Magus,
professor of the aduer^ error, confessing it was the received doctrine ^ the
Jews, though he singularly denied it. Sim^ Magus inquit ad P^trum: quoniam
Hebraeis ista ma^dantur, velut recte scientibus Deum, and opinantib^ quod
vnusquisque in suo arbitrio habeat agere ^ de quibus iudicandus est; mihi autem
ab illis discrep^ sententia.

Josephus, Saint Epiphanius and others pro^ the same, and put such Jews as
held otherwise i^ the number of heretics. So Plutarch, Clemens Alexandrinus and
others prove of the Gentiles test^fying how Heraclitus was singular among them*
for the contrary error, and Plato proved inuincibl^ the truth of the Christian
Catholic doctrine i^ this point, otherwise, God should because of sin which
he possibly could not be. Liberum autem arbitrium Plato per haec ostendit:
virtus autem non part alterius dominio, quam prout vnusquisque vel honorauerit,
vel despexerit, erit eius particeps. Eius qui elegerit, culpae non potest in
Deum causa conferri: Deu^ enim nunquam est causa malorum.

Thus generally and confidently the doctrine o^ free will was received and
professed in this first ag^ in the same manner as the present Roman Church ^w
does, approving and requiring also the neces^y of grace, and not excluding it,
as the Pelagian ^retiks first did, some hundreds of years after, and ^t
making men's actions meritorious, but as they ^ere assisted by grace. Nihil
meritis vestris ascriba^, Martial. Epis. ad Tolosan. cap. 22.
quasi non egentes Dei gratia: quia sine Deo nihil po^tis facere.

And in this sense the Protestant Article of free^ill receaueth this doctrine,
and their writers admit ^in these Terms: we deny not, that it is in the power
Wotton defense of Perk. pa. 67. 68. 65 88. 90. Couel. def. of Hooker. p. 35.
^ man, to make choice of life, we acknowledge, that the ^ult is in every man,
that is not saved. We say with Au^n both in words and meaning that true
Religion neither ^nies free will, either to a good or badd life. As S. Ber^ard
says, there is a threefold freedom, from necessity ^om sin, from misery.
The first of nature, the second ^ grace, the third of glory. In the first from
the bondage ^ coaction, the will is free in its own nature, and has ^wer over
it self. That freedom by which the will of ^an is named free is the first.
And thereof we dare say, ^at the wicked want not the freedom of will.

Thus they write publish and approve with their ^uthority to be the doctrine
and allowed opinion ^f English Protestants in this matter. Our prima^ue
Christian Britans of this first age could neither ^earne of their first
Apostles, and Fathers in Christ, ^or profess any other doctrine, or opinion in
this ^oint: for Saint Peter being the first founder of their Church, and
faith, could deliver no other in ^his matter to them, then he had taught at
An^ioch, and Rome, and recommended to his two ^lorious Successors S. Ignatius
and S. Clement in those two highest Apostolic Sees.

And Saint Clement either preached here in Britain, or as he expressly
delivers, by cha^ Clem. Romans epist. 1.
given, and committed to him by Saint Peter, ^ send learned Bishops into all
these western p^ where Saint Peter had not ordained such bef^ And for Saint
Joseph of Aramathia and his h^ company, who made free choice and election, ^
the love of Christ, to forsake contry, kindred ^ all temporal goods, and
travail so many th^sands of miles into the end of the known wo^ to live and
dye there, in such austerity and S^ctity of life as they practiced living here,
they m^ of necessity, be professors, as they were renow^ Examplars in this
business. And that the Brit^ Tertul. l. de anima c 20. 21. l. 2. aduers. Murc.
c. 5. 6. 8. de epiph. ortat. de constit. cap. 2.
then generally that were converted, so profess^ with the whole Christian
world, Tertullian an ^deniable teacher of this doctrine in many places,
^stifieth of it, as of others before, that all Apostoli^ Churches, Europe,
Asie, and Afrike agreed the^ in. And it so continued ever in Britain in su^
manner that afterward Pelagius the heretic ^tolled it to much, and was
therefore both by B^tans and all other Catholics condemned and d^ tested for an
heretic, for so enabling it, without ^sistance of grace. All writers,
Catholic and Pr^testants thus agreeing.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER.
The 11. Article, of the Justification of man, ex^mined, and condemned by the
Apostolic Fathers of this first age.
THEIR next 11. Article is entitled: of the i^stification of man: and
expressed in these words ^e are accounted righteous before God, only for the
^rit of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, by faith, ^d not for our own
works, or deseruings. Wherefore ^at we are justified by faith only, is a
most whole some ^ctrine, and very full of comfort, as more largely is ex^ssed
in the homily of Justification.

This is the whole article, and the doctrine there^, that we are justified by
faith only, is before ^ndemned by Saint Ignatius and the Apostolic S.
Ignatius epist. ad Ephesians.
^ctrine of this first age, affirming, that faith is ^ely the beginning of
man's perfection or justice, ^d charity does perfect it, without which a man ^
not justified. Principium vitae fides: finis eius cha^as: haec autem duo
quoties in vnum coeunt, Dei ho^nem perficiunt. He says also, that sins be
taken way by alms, and faith, and not by faith only, ^ this article speaks.
Eleemosina and fide expiantur ^ccata. And though a man be otherwise faithful,
Ignat. epist. ad Heron.
^steth, lives in virginity, works wonders, and ^ophecieth, yet if he keep
not the constitutions ^f the Church, he is to be esteemed as a wolf among
sheep. Quicunque dixerit quippiam praeter ca ^uae constituta sunt: tametsi
fide dignus sit, quamuis ^iunat, qua^uis in virginitate degat, quamuis
signaedat, ^uamuis prophetet, pro lupo illum habeas qui sub ouina ^elle exitium
pestemque adfert ouibus. All men agree, ^ainct Ignatius was a true believer,
yet writing to Ignat. epist. ad Philadelp.
^he Philadelphians, he confesses he was not there^y sure of his salvation, as
Protestants say they are, ^ut desired to be perfected by their prayers. In
Do^ino Jesus vinctus, necdum perfectus sum, sed precatio vestra ad Deum me
perficiet, vt id consequar, ad quod vocatus sum. He professes that he believed
in Christ, as he ought to do, yet desired to be justified by others prayers.
Jesus mihi pro Archiuis est; q^ nolle audire, manifesta pernicies est.
Illibatum mihi ^ archiuu^, crux eius, and mors, and resurrectio eius, and fi^
horum, per quae cupio iustificari precationibus vestris.

True it is Saint Ignatius cites and approu^ that saying of scripture, Iustus
ex fide viuit, the i^ man lives by faith, which the Protestants make^ a ground
of their error, in this question, but he ^ueth not that prerogative unto it,
which they do^ either to justify only, or at all, but to be necessa^ to
justification, as all true Catholics confess, and the no man can be justified
without it, neither does ^ mean the Protestants pretended presumption faith,
or such as is singular to any sect, but the common faith of the universal
Church of God; y^ in the same place ascribes justification to constan^ in
goodness, doing and suffering for the love ^ God, and louinge him above our
selves and a^ other things. Nihili pendo supplicia haec, neque ta^ facio vitam
meam, vt eamplus amem quam Dominu^ Quare paratum me offero igni, feris,
gladijs, cruci, du^ Epist. ad Tarsenses.
modo Christu^ videam, Saluatorem and Deum meum, q^ propter me mortuus est,
obs^cro vos ego vinctus Chr^sti state in fide; este constantes, quia iustus ex
fide vi^^ estote immobiles, quia Dominus habitare facit vn^^ moris in Domino.

That faith where there is but one preachin^ thereof, one Church founded by the
Apostles in a^ the world, where the professors live in one unity have one
altar, one sacrifice: vna praedicatio, and v^na fides, and vnum baptisma, and
vna Ecclesia qua^ Epist. ad Philadelph.
suis sudoribus and laboribus fundarunt Sancti. Aposto^ a finibus terrae vsque
ad fines in sanguine Christi: v^ oportet vt populum peculiarem and gentem
Sanctam, om^ia perficere concordibus animis in Christo. Vna est caro ^omini
nostri Jesus Christi, vnus illius sanguis, vnum ^tare omni Ecclesiae. And yet
the true universal, and ^atholike faith which all Protestants and parti^lar
sectaries do want, though it is so necessary ^ salvation, that no King,
Prince, Prelate, Poten^te or whosoever can be justified and saved without it,
yet of it self, without hope, charity, and love ^f God and our neighbor,
which brings all ^ood unto us, and the keeping of Gods commaun^ements, such
faith, neither saves, nor justifies. ^emo erret, nisi crediderit Iesum
Christum in carne ^nuersatum, and crucem illius confessus fuerit, and pas^nem
Epistol. ad Smyrnen.
and sanguinem quem effudit pro mundi salute, ^n assequetur vitam aeternam,
sieve Rex fuerit, sieve Sa^dos, sieve princeps, sieve priuatus homo, sieve Dominus,
^e seruus, sieve vir, sieve foemina. Qui capit, capiat, qui ^dit, audiat. Locus,
dignitas, diuitiae neminem efferant, ^obilitas and paupertas neminem deijciant.
Totum ^mque and praecipuum, est fides in Deum, and spes in ^ristum, and fruitio
eorum quae expectamus bonorum ^aritas in Deum and proximum. Diliges enim Domi^m
Deum tuum extoto cord tuo, and proximum tuum ^ut teipsum. Et Dominus inquit:
haec est vita aeterna, ^ cognoscant te solum verum Deum, and quem misisti ^um
Christum. Et mandatum nouum do vobis, vt di^atis vos mutuo. In his duobus
mandatis pendet tota ^ and Prophetae. Saint Clement teaches the same ^ctrine,
assuring us, that Christ was so far from ^ching, that man is to be justified
only by faith, ^he law of the gospel, that he tyeth us to more ^ct laws,
and commandments then under the ^e of Moses. Qui tunc homicidium interdixit,
nunc ^am iram t^nere concitatam: qui tunc adulterium, nunc prauam quoque
cupiditatem: l^gem natural^m ^sustulit, Clem. Romans l. 6. constit. Apost. cap.
23.
sed confirmauit. Qui dixit diliges proxi^ tuum, idem in Euangelio ait
renouandi gratia, ma^tum nouum do vobis, vt diligatis inuic^m. And ^ching the
way and means, how we should ^ made friends with God, and so be justified,
he^leth us, that this friendship is to be procured by ^uing well, and obaying
his will, which is the la^ all living men. vt tendamus ad amicitiam
Condit^amicitia Clem. Romans l. 1. recognit.
autem efficitur been viuendo, and vol^^ eius obediendo, quae voluntas omnium
viuentium ^ est.

The like has Saint Martial, utterly cond^ning all such presumption as is in
the preten^ Protestant justifying faith, teaching, and direct^ to obey the will
of God, in holy words, and g^ works. Vobis est testis scutator renum and
cordiu^ eius S. Martial. ep. ad Tolosan. cap. 17.
obedientia nihil arroganter, nihil superbe, nih^^ mere praesumere, sed tanquam
pusillus grex Dei ^ luntatem eius adimplere studete, in verbis Sancti^ operibus
honis. Where we evidently see that ^ will of God is not fulfilled, nor justice
wrough^ only faith, but holy speaking, and doing g^ works.

Saint Denis the Areopagite says, that ^ knew well, and therein agreed with
the di^ Scriptures, that every one was to be rewarded ^cording to his
worthiness, or deserving. Probe^ Dionys. Areo. Eccl. Hierar. cap. 12.
scriptis diuinis assentiens, vnumquemque prae^ accepturum pro dignitate. And
adds, that every shop or learned Priest being the Interpretor o^ nine things,
does learn from holy Scriptures, ^ everlasting life and happenesse is with
most ^ measure given unto men according to their d^^ings, and merits. Diuinus
Antistes, interpres diui^orum iudiciorum, didicit a scriptis quae diuinitus
pro^ita sunt, clarissimam diuinamque vitam pro dignitate ^c meritis,
iustissimis lancibus tribui.

Saint Polycarpe in his Epistle, which Saint Irenaeus l 3. c. 3. Eusebius. l. 3.
hist. c 36. Polycarp. epist. ad Philipp.
^eneus, Eusebius, and others cite and approve, does ^istinguish faith and
justice, in Christians, and ^heweth that holy men that are saved, obtained
^lory, by such distinct justice and sufferings for Christ. Hi omnes qui non in
vacuum cucurrerunt, sed in ^de and iustitia, and ad debitum sibi locum cum
Domino, ^ui and compassi sunt, abierunt. And this glory was ^ue unto them, for
such justice, and sufferings.

Saint Iustine in his public Apology, for all Justin. Apol. 2 pro
Christianis ad An^on. Pium Imper. post med.
Christians to the Emperor, protests, that all ^ood Christians ever from the
beginning so held, ^ued and practiced, that men were punished or re^arded,
according to the worth and dignity of their ^eeds, and the Prophets before the
Apostles so ^aught. Hoc etiam explicamus, nos supplicia and poenas, ^tque
praemia pro dignitate actionum redditum iri, a ^rophetis didicisse, idque vere
enuntiamus.

That this article of Catholic Religion was pro^essed and practiezed here
also, it is evident, being ^he universal doctrine and profession of the whole
Catholic Church, as before appears. And for that this Kingdom being so
remote a nation from Jerusalem, Rome, Antioch, and other chief ^laces, where
Christian Religion then most flori^hed, and those glories of the world whose
autho^ities I have cited, and such others as then flourished, ^ust needs receive
their faith from them, and ^hence, and be of the same mind and opinion with
them herein.

And to examplifie only in particular in the which our Protestant antiquaries
confess to h^ been Christians of or in this nation in this ag^ Saint Beatus
a noble Britan, Saint Joseph of ^romathia who buried Christ, and his holy
comp^nions, which conuersed with the Apostles, and t^ Speed Theater of great
Britain li. 6. Pantal. de vir. Illustrib. German. Antiquitat. Glast. tabulis
affir. Guliel. Makn. l. de antiq. caen. Glaston. Cupgr. in S. Joseph Arom.
Apostolic Doctors remembered they thought ^ faith only to be it by which men
were iustifi^ as these Protestants hold, but lived in most strict ^
penitential life, all their days, in watchings, f^stings and prayers, so
serving God, the bless^ Virgin Mary, with other Saints, and Angels. V^gilijs
Ieiunijs and orationibus vacantes, Deo and Be^ Virgini deuota exhibent^s
obsequia. Their reueren^ which they used to the holy reliks, which the brought
with them, spoken of before, and to t^ cross and other Christian Images, there
building ^ chapel in honor of the blessed Virgin Mary, ^ the admonishment of
S. Gabriell the Archange^ Archangeli Gabrielis admonitu, their poor, chast^
and obedient religious life, foresaking all, eu^ their wives, Saint Joseph
bringing his wise i^ Britain as these antiquities say, and leaving h^ and all
wordly comforts for the love of Christ prove sufficiently unto us, they were
not of o^ Protestant profession, that only faith did iustif^ and that there
was no Justice, merit, or reward b^ and for good works, holiness and
perfection ^ lyuinge well.

THE V. CHAPTER.
The 12. Article examined, and in whatsoever differing from the present Roman
Church, condemned by the Apostolic age. So of the 13. and 14. Articles.
AND by this, their next article also is plainly confuted: the title thereof
is: of good works: and the whole article as follows: Albeit that good works,
which are the fruits of faith, and follow after justification, cannot put away
our sins, and endure the s^uerity of Gods Judgment: yet are they pleasing and
acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring out necessarily of a true and
lively faith, in so much that by them a ^iuely faith may be as evidently
known, as a tree dis^erned by the fruit. For it is evidently proved before,
that good works done in grace, do justify, by the common doctrine and
practice of this Apostolic time, or else man could not possibly be justified
at all, but notwithstanding the incarnation, ^abours, and passion of Christ,
man should still be without justification and remain in sin, and vn^ustice:
for all have agreed, that faith alone or only, does not justify: then if we
take justification away from our holy Christian Sacraments, which be good
works, and from all other good works, as this article does, and the other
before likewise did, Christians have no means to be justified, either by good
works, or without good works. Petrus concion. apud S. Clement. l. 6. Recog.
and l. 1. Recogni^*


And besides that which is said already, in this matter, and reason conuinceth
so, Saint Peter the Apostle in his public sermon, and Saint Clement the
Register and publisher thereof, do prou^ it in his manner: confertur meritum
homini p^ bonis gestis; sed si ita gerantur, sicut Deus iubet. De^ autem iussit
omnem colentem se, baptismo consigna^ And otherwise a man cannot be saved,
neither justified, for the just shall be saved: ita peruenire poter^ and
salutem: aliter vero impossible est. Sic enim nob^ cum Sacramento, verus
Propheta testatus est dicen^ Amen dico vobis, nisi quis denuo renatus fuerit ex
^qua, non introibit in regna caelorum. Est in aquis ist^ misericordiae vis
quaedam, quae ex initio ferebatur sup^ eos, and agnoscit eos, qui baptizantur
sub appellatio^ triplicis Sacramenti, and eripuit eos de supplicijs futuri^
quasi donum quoddam offerens Deo, animas per baptis^mum consecratas. Confugit^
ad aquas istas, solae s^ enim quae possint vim futuri ignis extinguere
Baptismum per omnia necessarius est: Iniusto, vt peccatorum q^ gessit in
ignorantia remissio concedatur. Cum regenertus fueris per aquam, ex operibus
bonis ostende te in ^militudinem eius qui te genuit patris. Agnouisti eni^
Deum, honora patrem: honor autem eius est, vt ita v^uas, sicut ipse vult. Vult
autem ita viuere vt homi^dium, adulterium nescias: odium, auaritiam fugias: ir^
superbiam, iactantiam respuas, and execreris, inuidi^ caeteraque his similia,
penitus ate ducas aliena. Est s^ propria quaedam nostrae religionis
obseruantia, quae ^tam imponitur hominibus, quam proprie ab vnoquoq^ Deum
colente causa puritatis expetitur. Where w^ find that man is justified by
sacramental and oth^ good works, keeping Gods co^maundemts, auo^ding all
mortal sin, and embracing virtue, a^ this obligation is imposed upon all
Christians, a^ by them to be effected, and performed, and witho^ such
perfermance they are not justified.

And Christ will give to every one according as Clem. l. 6. constable. Apost. c. 30.
they have deserved or merited. Mortuos est excitaturus, mundo finem
impositurus, and vnicuique pro meritis tributurus.

Saint Denis the Areopagite, besides that which he has testified before,
proves the different degrees of glory in heaven, some more glorious then
others, as the Scriptures are plentiful in the same, because the good works
and merits of some, in this life are greater and more then others. Ostendit
Dionysius Areop. Eccles. Hierarch. c. 3.
cunctos in regeneratione illas consequuturos sorts, ad quas hic vitam
propriam direxerunt* puta, si deiformem quis hic and sanctissimam egerit vitam,
quantum viro possibile est Deum imitari, diuina in seculo futuro, and beata
donabitur requi^: Sin autem summa illa deformi vita inferiorem egerit, sactam
tamen, conformia and iste recipient sacra praemia. And by this their 14.
Article entitled: of works of supererogation, is also confuted; their next
and 13. Article styled, of works before Justification, being rather a question
in natural or moral Philosophy, then Theological, and to be handled in
Christian Religion, and so more fit to be omitted then handled in this treatise
of religious Controversies, though it be not wholly sound in Philosophical
proceedings. That the 14. Article is already condemned, will be plain by the
recital of it in these words: voluntary works, besides over and above Gods
commandment, which they call works of supererogation, cannot be taught
without arrogance, and impiety.

This is evidently contradicted and condemned by Saint Denis, Saint Clement,
and Saint Ignatius before, prouinge different degrees of glory in heaven,
answearing the diversities of men's merits on earth, assuring, that they which
have not liue^ in such perfection as others have, and they als^ might have
done, yet keeping the precepts, an^ doing things commanded shall be saved, and
s^ are justified, though they have not wrought su^ works of counsel only
and perfection, as many more holy have done, and therefore are rewarde^ with
greater joys and honor, as both the Scriptures and Apostolic Fathers of this
age are plain i^ many places. And the pretended reason which the^ only yield
in this article in maintenance of the^ error, is both ridiculous, and
heretical, being this for by them men do declare, that they not only rend^
unto God as much as they are bound to do, but that they do more for his sake,
then of bound duty is required whereas Christ says plainly, when you have
done ^ that are commanded to you, say, we be vnprofitabl^ servants.

This first is ridiculous, and proves nothing t^ the question of works of
perfection, not commanded, and their eminent and singular rewar^ but only of
the commandments, and things o^ duty, which Catholics say (more then
Protestant^ ordinarily do) are to be done and performed under pain of
eternal damnation. It contradicts their own doctrine, which usually
grants there ar^ both precepts, and counsels in Scripture, as o^ voluntary
poverty, chastity, obedience and such others, which no sect of Protestants
performs, and yet they speak much of their Justification o^ righteousness
in this life, and salvation after. That it is heretical and condemned the old
Apostolici, heretics, some Pelagians and others, and their condemnation for it,
will witness from the beginning, ^s both Saint Ireneus, Saint Epiphanius,
Saint Epiph. here is. 61. Augustine. haeres. 40.
^ugustine with such renowned writers and our ^rotestants themselves do prove.
Apostoli affirma^abant non posse saluari eos, qui non viu^rent in caeli^atu, ac
paupertate more Apostolorum.

The heretics called Apostoliks did affirm that those which lived not
unmarried and in poverty after the ^anner of the Apostles, could not be saved.
The Eucra^tae Irenaeus. l. 1. c. 10 Epiph. l. 1. Tom. 3. haer. in Tatian. c.
46. vlt. Epiphan. l. 2. Tom. 2. haer. cap 67. cont. Hieracit.
Scholars to Tatianus were drowned in the ^ke heresy: docuerunt omnes
Christianos debere a nup^ijs abstin^re, and caelibes viuere, and sic
continentiam ^olebant esse praecepti and non consilij. Hierax and his
Hieracitae maintained the like, excluding all mar^ied Christians from the
Kingdom of heaven. Non admittit nuptias, concessum est ait, in veteri
testa^ento, nuptias contraherc, verum a Christi aduentu, ^on amplius nuptias
admitti, neque posse ipsos possidere ^egnum caelorum. Some of the Pelagians
also held, that no man could be saved, except he sold all he ^ad, and gave it
to the poor: neminem saluum esse August. epist. 89.
^osse, nisi omnia venderet and daret pauperibus, quasi ^on consilium, sed
praeceptum hoc esset. As if this were ^ot a counsel, but a commandment.
Which the Protestants thus also plainly confess: in these Couel. def. of
Hook. p. 52.
points all have not holden the same opinions; some thought the counsail^s to
be of the same necessity with precepts: as those heretics called Apostolici.
Thus with public approbation, And yet this article in the reason it would
make, falls into the same heresy, plainly affirming that whatsoever work
of piety or perfection is, or may be wrought, or done in this life, virginity,
chastity, voluntary poverty, obedience, or what such soever, none excepted, in
this their doctrinall decree, all men are beunde to do, they be bound in duty,
they are commanded. And so ^ married men or women, none that be rich, no^ that
be in authority, and rule spiritual, or temp^rall, King, Prince, Prelate or
whosoever, t^ live not in virginity, and chastity, forsake not ^ for Christ's
sake, and follow him, as the Apostl^ and such did, or live not in professed
obedien^ which no Protestants do, or ever did, can possib^ be saved by the
express conclusion of this artic^ leaving no place or hope of salvation for
any of the religion, which has utterly to their power aba^doned all such holy
estates and conditions of perf^ction. When Christ himself and his Apostles, a^
the Apostolic writers of this age have taught ^ otherwise, that the keepinge
of the commaund^ments is sufficient to bring men to salvation, a^ there be
other perfections of counsel, and not n^cessity, bringing greater glory, and
reward ^ heaven. Si vis ad vitam ingredi serua mandata. A^ Matthew. c. 19.
illi Jesus, si vis perfectus esse, vade, vende omnia q^ habes, and da
pauperibus, and habebis the saurum in coel^ and veni s^quere me. De virginibus
praeceptum Domi^ 1. Cor. cap. 7.
non habeo, consilium autem do. Qui matrimonio iung^ Matthew. 19.
virginem suam, been facit, and qui non iungit melius f^cit. Su^t eunuchi qui
seipsos castrauerunt propter regn^^ caelorum, qui potest capere capiat

That these holy estates of perfection besides the keepinge of the
commandments, were professed* Ignat. epist. ad Philippen. ep. ad Philadelp.
epist. ad Smy. epist. ad Polycarp. Dion Areop supr. Ignatius ep. ad Heron.
exercised and honored in this age, I have proved before, by the Apostolic
writers then, Saint Ignatius, Saint Denis, and others. And in his epistle t^
Saint Hero these holy virgins are styled the precious Jewels of honor unto
Christ. Virgins serua v^ pretiosa Christi monilia. Saint James in his liturgy
^aketh honorable mention of the livers in mona^eries Dionysius Areop. Eccl.
Hierarc. c. 6.
in such condition. Proijs qui in virginitate and ^stitate in monasterijs
degunt, Dominum oremus. S. ^ionisius gives unto them the greatest titles of
honor perfection and holiness, which this life can ^ue, and next to God
himself. Ordo monachorum ^ exactissimam perfectionem diuina ratione subuehi^r.
Vnde sancti patres nostri diuinis eos appellationibus ^nt prosecuti, partim
Therapentas, id est, cultores a ^cero Dei famulatu, atque cultu: partim
monachos, ab ^diuidua and singulari vita appellantes, vt quae illos ^nctis
diuisibilium complicationibus in diuinam and ^eo gratam monadem perfectionemque
promoueat. The ^der of monks by a divine manner is exalted to the most ^act
perfection. Whereupon our holy predecessors called ^em by divine names, partly
Therapents, that is wor^ippers, for their sincere seruinge and worshippinge of
^d, partly also naming the^ monks for their individual ^d singular life,
exalting them to an h^auenly perfe^ion and acceptable unto God.

Antiquaries reckon Saint John Baptist, greater ^en whom by the testimony of
Christ himself ^e best witness, no man was who was only man, ^er natos
mulierum n^n surrexit mayor Ioanne Bap^ta, his chastity, contempt of the world,
poverty, ^d austerity of life was a profession, lesson, and pa^ne of this
perfection. We may reckon such both ^ Scriptures, and histories, all the
Apostles, which ^r the love of Christ forsook all, and followed ^m in holy
chastity, pains, penance and auste^y of life, so long as they lived. And
this was not ^gular and peculiar unto them, but a thing al^ost common to very
many Christians besides the ^postles, and properly named disclples, selling
their possessions and giving away their wealth, and Ric^ of this world, to
serve God in more perfection, a^ to be made rich in heaven, and were honored m^
for so doing, as the holy Scriptures and the m^ worthy writers prove. So at
Jerusalem: omnes ^ Act. c. 2.
eredebant, habebant omnia communia. Possessione ^ substantias vendebant, and
diuidebant illa omnib^ prout euique opus erat. Habentes gratiam ad omnem p^bem.
So at Alexandria under Saint Mark, as Ph^ then living and seeing it, Saint
Hierome and oth^ witness. Philo disertissimus Iudaeorum, videns ^lexandriae
Philo l. de vita contempl. Hieron. l. de Script. Eccl. in Marco Euangel. Clem.
l. 1. recogn. and in ep. praesertim. S. vita communi. Urban. Papa ep. decret.
Robert. Barnes. in vit. Pontif. Romans in Urban. 1. Ignat. Epistol. ad Philadelp.
primam Ecclesiam adhuc Iudaizantem, q^ in laudem gentis suae librum super
eorum conuersat^ scripsit. Et quomodo Lucas narrat Iero solymae crede^ omnia
habuisse communia: si^ and ille, quod Alexand^ sub Marco fieri Doctore
cernebat, memoriae tradidit. ^ it was also in the Church of Rome until Pope
V^banus time, as Saint Clement and Saint Vrba^ write, and after as others
prove. And our Protesta^ antiquaries consent, affirming that Pope Vrban^
concluded and decreed in his time: fundos vltro ^clesiae oblatos, accipiendos
esse: praedia debere esse com^nia, prouentus vero viritim inter clericos
distribu^ dos esse iussit. S. Ignatius speaking of the hono^ and nobleness of
chastity, and how it was kept ^ clergy men, exemplifieth in the Church of Ro^
Antioch, Ephesus, of Creete: and instanceth in the Apostolic Bishop, Saint
Timothy, Saint Tit^ Saint Euodius, and Saint Clement, joining the therefore
in dignity with Jesus the son of Na^ Melchisedech, Heliseus, Ieremias, and
Saint Ih^ Baptist the most renowned, and greatest Saint Vtinam fruae vestra
sanctimonia, vt Jesus filij N^ vt Melchi sedech, vt Helisaet, vt Ieremiae vt
Bapti^ ^nnis, vt Timothei, vt Titi, vt Euodij, vt Clemen^ qui in castitate
exegerunt hanc vitam.

That this holy chaste and religious conuersa^n was also used among the
Philadelphians to ^om he thus wrote, is plain in the first cited ^rds, vtinam
fruar vestra sanctimonia, vt Jesus filij ^ue: comparing them in this point to
those glo^us Saints of the old and new testament, among ^om S. Ihon
Chrysostom and S. Hierome style Chrysostom. in Mar. homil 1. and homil. de Joan.
Baptist. Hier. epis. 22. ad Eustach. Dion. Areop. ep. ad Gaium. Maxim. in Dion.
Great. d^st. 93. Dion. ep. 8. Vuolfg. Laz. geneal. Austriac. l. 1. Annal. Abbal.
Ebershaym. Annal. Tren. Petr. de Not. l. 9. Vincent. l. 9. Ant. part. 1. Ant.
sup. Tit. 6. Guliel. Eisen. centenar. 1. part 3. Martyrol. Romans Bed. vsuard.
Menolog. Graec. Ignat. Epist. ad Poly carp. Dion. Arcop. lib. de Eccl Hier. c. 6
^hon Baptist the most holy, monachorum principem ^ prince of monks. S. Gaius,
or Caius called also the 20. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles Der^s, was a
monk, as Saint Denis in his Epistle him, and others testify. So was Saint
Demo^ilus as the same S. Denisis witness.

The ancient and renowned monastery monaste^n nouietense, now named Ebershaime
in Ger^ny as the Antiquities of that contry prove, was ^t founded by Saint
Maternus and Saint Vale^s fent into those parts by S. Peter the Apostle. ^
likewise was the monastery at Treuers by S. Eu^rius directed thither by Saint
Peter with the ^e Saints. S. Fronto disciple of S. Peter also lived ^h. To
others religious in a most desert wilder^se. S. Amator Scholar to S. Martial
lived in a ^ke in France still called by his name. Neither ^re many holy
virgins and chaste women wan^ge in this sacred state of life in this age remem^d
in Antiquities and diverse of them set down ^ Gulielmus Eisengrenius and
others, even our ^st ancient Martyrologes.

Saint Ignatius has told us before that this sa^d state of perfection was
ever professed by the ^hops admittance and benediction. So has S. Denis:
diuina sanctio eos consecrante quadam in^tione dignata est, saying the divine
decree w^ And sets down at large the manner and O^ how they publikly
renowned the world, profe^ Georg. Buch. rer. Scoticar. l. 4. c. 35. and l. 6 c.
75. Hollin. hist. of Engl. and Scotl. in fin. com. Hect. Boeth. hist. Scot. l.
6. Antiq. Glast. Guliel. Malin. l. de antiq. caenob. Glasten. Capg. in S.
Joseph. and S.
perfection, were signed with the sign of the ^ Cross, their hair shaued,
their clothes chau^^ they communicated. This Kingdom of Bri^ was now renowned
with this holy state of p^ction, and the professors thereof here for their
cellent piety, and worship toward God call^ the old language, Culd^is, Dei
cultores, reno^ worshippers of God, as all Antiquaries even ^testants
themselves acknowledge, continuing ^ from the beginning until the year of
Chri^ they say 943. It was first founded and settled ^ by Saint Joseph of
Aramathia, who buried blessed Savior, and his holy Associats ^ in number at
Glastenbury, in the 63. yea^ Christ.

Their regular obedience is sufficiently testifie^ all antiquities making S.
Joseph their Superi^ chief or Abbot, proving a regular order and ^pline among
them; so does the manner of the^uing in separated cells, yet often every day at
pointed times assembling together in their p^ Church to perform their divine
office. In di^ locis sicut Anachoritae prim^ duodecim primit us h^runt, in
vetustam tamen Ecclesiam ad diuina obs^ deuotius complendacrebo conuenerunt
quotidie.

Their continued long life there in solitary eremiticall manner, without any
woman wit^ near them, leaving noe child or posterity, noth^ but desert and
desolate cells with signs of t^ perfect profession of Christian Religion behi^
^m is sufficient argument of their perpertuall cha^y in that place and state.

Their forsaking all they had, riches, contry, ^ds, and cominge so many
thousand miles for ^ Jove of Christ, into an outward Island of the ^rld, and
here to find no other patrimony or ^porall preferment, then a little out cast
I Will ^er before Inhabited, and having nothing fit for ^ life of man, compassed
about with woods, bu^s, and fennes, Insula syluis, rubis atque paludibu^
^undata, and their Church their greatest riches honor only builded by their
own labors, of ^ithen wands, call us sufficiently to mind how ^ate their
voluntary poverty was. And they ^ich next succeeded them in place, succeeded
^em also in the same state and condition of perfe^on and contempt of this world
by all Antiquities ^ diverse ages.

Our Protestants themselves with common con^t of all of them, which they take
to be of sound ^gment, are as they write with publik allow^ce in these words,
of this opinion: There is none of Prot. of Engl. apud Couel. def. of Hooker pa.
51. 52. 50.
^ sound Judgment, in our (Protestant) Church, ^ich does not think, that
willinge poverty, humble ^dience, and true chastity, are things very
commen^ble, and bring with them great advantage, to the ^e perfection of a
Christian life. By these we do more, ^n without these we should. Precepts
and counsels* ^aue this difference, that the one is of absolute necessity. ^e
other left unto ourfree election.

To cast away wholly the things of the world, is precept of necessity, but an
advise of greater perfe^on. He that obeys not a precept, is guilty of
descrued ^nishment: but he that fails of those counsels, only wants
without sin, that measure of perfection. ^ is not a fault, not to vow, but
to vow and perfor^ praise. He that performs the one, shall have greater g^
but he that fails of the other, (without repentance) ^ have certain
punishment. Neither is it said, says S. ^gustine, as thou shall not co^mitt
adultery, thou shall kill: So thou shall not marry, for those are exacted, ^
are offered. This if it be done, is praised: those v^ they be done, are
punished. For says S. Hierome, ^ it is but advise, there is left a fr^edome,
but where ^ is a precept, there is a necessity. Precepts are comm^ all:
counsels to the perfections of some few.

The precept being observed, has a reward, being n^ served a punishment: But
acou^saile or advise, not obs^ has no punishment; and being observed has a
great^ Theater of great Britain l. 6. 9. Beat. Rhen. hist. germ. Pantal. l. de
Vir. Illustr. Stumph. l. 7. de S. Joan. Leland. in Arthur. stowe hist. Drayton
polcolb. Georg. Buchan. rerum Scoticar. l. ^. c. 65. Holinsh. hist. of Engl.
ward, all our Protestant Antiquaries remember ^ greatest honor, all of this
nation, which prof^ the holy state of life in this age, making the^ si^larly
renowned on earth and glorious in heaven they testify of our noble Britan
Suetonius bo^ name and deed called for his extraordinary Sanc^ Beatus, blessed.

They style the remembered Eremites of G^enbury, the Saints of that place, and
the pla^ their burial in honor of them and such others ^ried there, Tumulus
Sanctorum, the grave of Sai^ and holy Church yard caemeterium Sanctum to ^ day.
So they testify of their Successors in that ^mitage, and order, and in other
places even v^ and after the time of Charles the great Empe^ one of them
Saint Albinus, or Alcuinus, his ^tor, Caroli praeceptor, a man most renowned
in ^ age. And others both for learning and sanctity ^strious: multi erant
monachi, vetere disciplina no^ ^tincta literis and pietate insignes, founders
of the ^hoole of Paris in France, and both with learning ^d piety especially
evangelical perfection, ma^ing both Britain Ireland, France and Germany
^nowned. All their writers and allowed public ^lenders keep memory of such,
for most holy ^d worthy Saints. Their perpetual and vowed ^ate in such holy
perfection, is sufficiently before ^membred by S. Ignatius, and S. Martial with
o^ers who give confirmation unto it.

But of all others that divine man S. Denis in his ^oke of the ecclesiastical
Hierarchy or holy ^der of the true Apostolic Church of Christ, ^aketh of the
worthiness and dignity thereof, ^oue all others, preistly order excepted, with
the ^emne manner of their profession: initiandorum Dion areop. l. de Eccles.
Hirarc. c. 6.
^ium excellentior ac sublimior ordo monachorum est ^cta distinctio, expiatione
omni, tota virtute, atque ^ctissima suarum operatione mundata, omnis item
^antam sibi licet imspicere) sacrae operationis spiri^liter speculatrix and
princeps facta, pontificumque ^summantibus virtutibus tradita.

This he further delivers, both by the words ^he Bishop which professes him,
and vow of ^ that is professed, with all the significatiue ce^onies in that
holy admittance. Stat Sacerdos ^ sacrum altar, monasticam imprecationem psal^,
ea finita, Sacerdos ad eum accedens interrogat ^um, an renuntiet diuisibilibus
omnibus, non solum ^ijs, verum imaginibus quoque ac phantasijs. Deinde, ^nit
illi perfectissimam vitam, illud aperte conte^s, oportere illum medio long
antecellere. Vbi vero ^sta omnia intent promiserit, consignans eum crucis ^
sacerdos, tondet, trinas diuinae beatitudinis personas inclama^s: Exutumque
vest omni, alia^ induit, and ^ sanctis alijs, qui astant, viris ipsum
salutans, di^rum mysteriorum participem efficit. And delivers ^ particular
and religious signification of every ^ of those sacred significant ceremonies,
to show ^ perfection of that holy state, their cominge to^ altar, next behind
the Bishop, and Priest, their ^fection nearest and next unto them, and above ^
others. Their vowed abrenuntiation of wo^ things, signifying, and binding them
to that p^ction, from which others without offense are ^ Their signing with the
cross, protesting morti^tion of all carnal and other not good desires. T^
Tonsure declares their most pure life. Their ^ting of their old, and putting
on a new garme^ a testimony of their passing from the middle ^ of life, though
holy, unto a more perfect. A^ white vesture in baptism was the sign of s^
Innocence. Diuisibilium non modo vitarum, v^ Imaginationum quoque abrenuntiatio
suprema^^ monachorum philosophiam indicat, dum in scienti^ratur viuentium
mandatorum. Est enim (vt dix^) ^ medij ordinis, sed omnibus celsioris Idcirco
pluri^ impune a medio geruntur ordine, monachis omni^ terdicuntur: quippe qui
vnum ipsum ambire debe^ ad sacram monadem cogi, itaque ad sacerdotalem (^tum
fas est) formari vitam, and vt in plurimis ill^ gruentem. Nullus quippe ex
ordinibus reliquis i^ pinquat magis. At vero crucis sanctae signacul^iam dictum
est, mortificationem omnium simul^lium cupiditatum signat. Porro tonsura
crinium ^ mundissimam indicat, and nulla figura fucatam, ^ nullis fictis
coloribus animi deformitatem exor^ ipsa inscipsa non humanis venustatibus, sed
sing^ ^s and vnicis ad Dei exactissimam similitudinem proeret. Prioris autem
v^stis positio, alteriusque assump^o, migrationem illam a media vita (sacra
scilicet) ad ^rfectiorem significat: sicut in diuina generatione, pro^otionem
indicabat a purgata vita ad contemplantem, ^luminantemque habitum illa vestis
candentis immu^tio. And says plainly that this profession, and ^onsecration,
gives them perfecting grace: porfi^entem eis indulsit gratiam. Which he does
not ^eane, in such manner as Sacraments do ex opere ^erato, by their own
efficacy from their divine in^itution, but rather the merit and worthiness of
^e estate so professed, and the forsaking of all ^orldly things for the love
and perfect serving of ^od, which is the greatest love we can show unto ^im in
this life, and so perfecteth man toward ^im, and consequently the grace and
love of God ^ man so duly loving and serving him is showed in ^e measure,
accordingly as is entreated of merit be^re, which good works done in grace do
carry ^ith them. As Christ himself is best witness, Matthew. ca* 19. Marc. cap.
10
^hen he says: Omnis qui reliquerit domum, vel fra^es, aut sorores, aut
patrem, aut matrem, aut vxorem, ^t filios, aut agros propter nomen meum,
centuplum ac^piet and vitam aeternam possidebit. Every one which ^r saketh
house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mo^er, or wise or children, or
possessions for my name, ^all receive an hundred fold more, and possess
eternal ^e. If such perfection and reward is due for lea^ng any of those
things for God, They which by ^s grace, vow, and perform the foresaking of
^em all, and all earthly things, for his love and ^uice, must needs be endued
with perfect grace, ^erit, and have reward accordingly.

THE VI. CHAPTER.
The 15. 16. 17. 18. Articles so examined: and wh^so^uer repugnant to the Roman
Church, likewise condemned.
THE next and 15. in number English Protest^ Article being entitled: of Christ
alone with sin, seems by their gloss upon it to have be^ agreed upon, to
condemn the old heresies of ^nichees, Catharans, Donatists, Pelagians,
Marcion^ Adamites, and Carpocratians, revived among the and especially their
new sect called the family ^ love. For to speak in their own words: S^
Protestant publ. gloss upon Articl. is Conc. Mileu. c 8. Display tit. 6. Answ
to the fam. libera. li. 3. Display. R. 6.
were of opinion, as the Pelagians, and family of l^ that they were so free
from sin, as they needed n^ say, forgive us our trespasses. Which family also
^cheth, how there be men living, as good, and as holy* ever Christ was. An
error of Christopher vitel^ chief ^ld^r in the said family: and that he wh^
a familist, is either as perfect as Christ, or else a ^ devil.

These things cannot be applied to any opi^ held by Catholics about the
immaculate in^centy and freedom of the blessed Virgin, both fr^ original and
other sin. And neither this art^ nor any other Protestant confession once
nam^ her, when they treat of this subject, but t^ plainly speak of the
ordinary sort and condit^ of people, especially living in these days, to pr^
unto us, that they herein contradicted the na^ heresies then reigning among
them, as these t^ article words be clear: All we the rest, alth^ baptized,
and borne again in Christ, yet offend in many things, and if we say, (as
those named heretics did, and do) we have no sin, we deceive ourselves and
^he truth is not in us. Where they speak plainly of the baptized; and actual
sin, and sins: whereas Catholics ascribe that purity of our lady, eue^ from
original sin, and before any were baptized, or ^he Sacrament of Baptism
instituted.

And our English Protestants by their best pub^ike Engl. Protestant communion
book Calendar. 8. December.
warrant and authority expressed and set forth ^n their communion books, do
celebrate the feast of her conception as immaculate from all co^tagion of
sin; so likewise they do concerning the na^iuity of Saint John Baptist
keeping and making Jane 24 supr* Prot. Cataloge of holy days in co^m. book
confir. by Parlam.
^t a great holy day, and the even fasted. Which ^hey could not do without
great contradictory ^bsurdity, except thereby they professed they hold that
our lady was preserved from original sin, ^ Saint Ihon sanctified before he
was borne into ^he world. For opinion of either sinful conception ^r nativity
rather requires grief and sorrow, ^hen joy and festiuity, which may not be
made ^or sin, which is to be lamented and sorrowed ^or, and far from being
rejoiced at, with any ^igne or show of gladness, much less with cele^ration
of public festiuities and such solemnities.

And in the authentical decree of their holy ^ayes, where they thus set down
for holy day the ^irth day of Saint John Baptist: The day of the nati^ity of
S. John Baptist, they diverse times call and de^are our lady in their opinion
and practice. The ^essed Virgin. Which they never so singularly ^iue to any
other man, or woman. And ever to be ^lessed, ever excludes the misery which is
in all sin, no such lamentable estate being able to consist with the least
degree of blessedness. Therefo^ if any Protestant will oppose against this her
i^ maculate perfection, we have the Angel from heaven; testifying she was
full of grace and m^ blessed of all women, gratiaplena, benedicta in ^ Ignat.
epist. ad S. Joan.
lieribus before she conceived Christ. Saint Ig^tius is witness, she was a
wonder of perfection, ^ often pilgrimage used by holy Christians to v^ and
honor her when she was yet living. Sunt ^ multae de mulieribus nostris Mariam
Jesus videre ^ pientes, and quotidie a nobis ad vos discurrere vole^ vt eam
contingant, and vbera cius tractent, quae Do^num Iesum aluerunt. Et quaedam
eius secretiora ^cunctentur ipsam Mariam Jesus. And not finding a^ like unto her
on earth for immunity from all si^ and fullness of perfection, calls her
singularly ^ lest prodigium, and sacratissimum spectaculum. ^ heavenly wonder,
and most sacred spectacle.

That she abounded with all graces full of virtues and grace. That it was the
common ^nion of credible good Christians, that the na^ of Angelical innocence
and sanctity was ioy^ to humane nature in her. Notificauere ca^ Matrem Dei
omnium gratiarum esse abundantem, ^ gratiae faecundam. A fide dignis narratur,
in Maria ^ humanae naturae, natura sanctitatis Angelicae soci^ And as she
testified of herself, that all generat^ especially of the good, should call
her blessed, ^ tam me dicent omnes generationes, so it was ^ formed in this
first generation of Christians, ab^nibus magnificatur. In the Mass ascribed to
S^ James the Apostle she is styled, Sanctissima, imm^lata, Missa S. Iacobi.
gloriosissima, Domina nostra, Matter Dei and s^ ^irgo Maria* the most holy,
Immaculate. Our most ^orious lady Mother of God, and ever a Virgin ^ary. In the
Mass of Saint Mark the Euange^t Missa S. Marci. Manuscr. antiquum Britan.
used aunciently in this Kingdom, she is called ^ll of grace, blessed among
all women, the excel^ntly most holy unspotted, our blessed lady, Mo^er of God,
and ever Virgin Mary gratia plena, be^dicta in mulieribus, in primis
sanctissima, intemera^ and benedict a Domina semper nostra Dei genetrix, and
^mper Virgo Maria.

The old tradition of the Church from the time Damasc. orat. 2. de dormitione
Deiparae. Breuiar. Romans die 18. Augusti. Dionis. Areo. ad Doroth.
^ her death as Saint Damascen and others de^er, ex antiqua accepimus
traditione. That all the ^ostles wheresoever then dispersed were mira^lously
assembled together, to worship her ^ly body, quod Deum susceperat corpus
adorare. S. ^mothy, and Saint Denis the Areopagite, with ^ers, besides the
Apostles, as he himself is a ^od witness, were then present. And by all their
^dgments, her holy body after three days of con^uall angelical music in the
place of her de^rture, out of this life, was assumpted into heaven, ^e place
where her sacred body lay, filling their ^ses with an unspeakable sweetness:
ea tantum ^enerunt in quibus fuerat compositum, and ineffabili, ^i exijs
proficiscebatur essent odore repleti.

^ee need not appeal any further to our prima^e Christians and friends: for
Mahomet and his Mahomet. in Alcoran. Azoar 5.
^rkes, and Tartars, our greatest enemies, in their ^coran the rule of their
Religion, do plainly, to ^ everlasting shame of such Protestants or others
^ich malign the Blessedness of this most blessed ^gin, confess, that our
blessed lady Mary was ^re resplendant pure and unspotted, then any other weere
earthly creature continually seruei^ God. D. Maria omnibus viris and mulieribus
sple^didi^ and mundior, at que lotior, soli Deo perseueranter st^dens. And
further add: there is none borne of t^ children of Adam, whom Satan did not
touc^ besides Mary and her son. No woman was ever perf^ Azoar. 75.
but Mary the Mother of Isa. (So they call Jesus) nu^ nascitur defilijs Adam,
quem non tangat Satan, pr^ter Mariam, and eius filium. Nulla vnquam perfect^
mulieribus, nisi Maria Matter Isa.

The Father of Protestants Religion Man Martin. Luth. in Euang. l. de Concept.
Mariae.
Luther delivered the same doctrine for all the that would be children to such
a Father: sayin^ is piously believed that the conception of M^ was without
original sin, and in the first mom^ when she began to live, she was without
all fin^ Mariae conceptio pie creditur sine originali peccato f^ esse. Atque it
a in primo momento cum viuere in^ret, omnis peccati expers erat. And says,
that e^ from her conception she was full of grace, and having no place for any
sin. Maria Virgo ^^ In Euang. de Annunt. Mar.
anima^ pl^na gratia concepta est. Gratia Deiipsam ^^ boni abundantem facit. Et
ab omni malo liberat. D^cum ea est, hoc est, omne quod facit, aut omittit,
diui^ est, and in eo a Deo perficitur: ad haec tutatur eam, and ^fendit ab
omni, quod obnoxium and incommodum esse^ Antiquitat. Glaston. manuscrip tabul.
lign. fix. Io. Capgrau. in vit. S. Iosephi ab Aramathia. Guliel. Malmesbur. l.
de an^iq. coenob. Glastonien.
test. That from her conception she was full of grace, whatsoever she did, or
omitted was holy and di^ she was free from all thing illor sinful. Her ho^
here in Britain was so great and timely, that ^^ in 31. y^ares of the passion
of Christ, and 15. of the bl^ Virgins. Assumption, anno post Passionem Domin^
cesimo primo, ab Assumptione vero Virginis glor^ quinto decimo, S. Joseph and
his holy company, by ^ monition of the holy Angel Gabriel and divine wa^ ^ilded
here a Chapel unto her honor. It is accounted ^e first Church of Britain
dedicated miraculously by christ in honor of his Mother, The Christian
builders in ^eate devotion, watching, and fastings and prayers, ^ere served
God, and the blessed Virgin, and by the ^lpe of the blessed Virgin were
releiued in their neces^ies. Praedicti sancti per Archangelum Gabrielem in
^isione admoniti sunt, Ecclesiam in honor sanctae Dei ^netricis and perpetuae
Virginis Mariae in loco caelitus ^^onstrato co^struere. Qui diuinis
admonitionibus obe^entes capellam consuminauerunt. Et cum haec in hac ^ione
prima fuerit Ecclesia, ampliori eam dignitate ^^ filius insigniuit, ipsain in
honor suae matris dedi^ndo. Duodecim sancti praedicti in eodem loco Deo and
^atae Virgini deuota exhibentes obsequia vigilijs ie^ijs and orationibus
vacantes, eiusdem Virginis, Dei ^etricis auxilio, in necessitatibus suis
refocillabantur: ^hus have our most ancient antiquities, both by ^atholiks and
Protestants testimonies.

The three next articles being thus intuled: The ^. of sin after Baptism:
the 17. of predestination, and ^ection: and 18. of obtaining eternal
salvation, only ^ the name of Christ, do not seem in equal and ^orall
construction, even as they expound them^lues, to have opposition, to any
Catholic do^rine, but to have been received by them to con^mne newly risen up
heresies among them, as li^rtines, denyers of salvation to penitent sinners,
^edestinaries not respecting to live well, upon ^icked presumption of their
predestination, and ^ch as affirmed that every man shall be saved, Jew, ^urke,
Pagan, or whatsoever Infidel, or heretic ^all be saved by the law or sect,
which he professes, that he be diligent to frame his life according to that
law, and the light of nature, as is plainly registered ^ set down in those
Articles.

THE VII. CHAPTER.
The 19. Article examined, and condemned by the same authority.
THEIR next and 19. Article entitled, of ^ Church, is this: The visible Church
of Christ, i^ congregation of faithful men, in which the pure wor^ God is
preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministr^ according to Christ's ordinance
in all those things, the nec^ssity are requisite to the same. As the Chur^
Hi^rusalem, Alexandria, and Antioche have erred: ^ also the Church of Rome has
erred, not only in the living and manner of ceremonies, but also in matters ^
faith. Hitherto this article. Whose definition ^ description of the Church, if
we should allo^ we are sufficiently instructed by that is said before, that
the Protestants new congregation c^ not be this true visible Church of Christ,
e^^ from the truth in so many necessary, and requi^ things, as has been
proved in all Articles befo^ wherein it opposes the received doctrine of t^
primative Apostolic age, and the present Chur^ of Rome as the like
demonstration shall be man against them, in all their contradictory Artic^
following, in their due place, And so is also and ^^ be most manifest, that the
present Roman Chur^ agreeing in all those Articles both already, and he^ after
to be examined, with the undoubted ^^ Church of the Apostles, and this their
age, is, ^^ must needs be the true Church of Christ: A^ ^eir assertion in the
second part of this Article, that the Church of Rome has erred not only in
their ^ing and manner of ceremonies, but also in matters of ^ith, is most
evidently false and impudently slaun^erous: And the open door to infidelity.
For if all ^e commanding Churches in the world, Hieru^lem, Nicen. Council. Can.
Parliament. ^. of Queen Eliz. Parl. ^. Jacob. and 1. Caroli.
Alexandria, Antioche and Rome, as they are ^t down in the first great
Council of Nice, and ^proued by the Parlaments and Parliament Re^gions of
Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King ^harles, have erred in matters of faith,
as this Ar^le affirms, then all other Churches, all being ^biect unto them,
have likewise erred. And this ^w Protestant pretended Church not being then
^runge up, being noe congregation of faithful ^en in that time, nor any
congregation, or men at ^, and so neither having the pure word of God ^eached,
nor Sacraments duly ministered, nor any ^e point of doctrine yet preached, or
Sacrament ^nistred, nor man to preach or minister any such, ^uld not, nor can
possibly by their own rule and ^dgment be the true visible Church, or any
^ember, piece, or part thereof. That true prima^e and Apostolic Church
teaching by all Priests ^d Clergy men, it had, both to the congregation ^
faithful men (to use these men's phrase) con^rted, and to others yet not
Christians, all those ^cessary articles, hitherto examined, contrary to
^otestant Religion, when the only want of any ^e of such necessary things, by
their own defini^e sentence before, takes away the name and ^e, to be the
true Church, at this present, any ^e past, or to come, the preaching of the
pure ^rd of God, and due ministering of the Sacraments in all things of
necessity being one and the same ^ all persons, in all times and places.

And to be of any other mind quite crosses wi^ Christ's Institution, and the
continuance, and visi^lity of his Church, which both that article of the^
Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Church, and t^ their article and
confession of an euerduring visib^ Church does prove. For if at any time after
Chri^ founding his Church, either in this Apostolic, ^ any age after, it had
generally erred, in matters ^ faith, that it retained not the name and truth of
^ true Church, there was then by this article no t^ Church in the world. For
whosoever it was wh^ we will dream to have been the first finder o^ of this
general error and supposed Aposta^ Martine Luther, John Calvin, Thomas
Cr^mar or whosoever in any time or place, a^ preacher of the contrary truth as
Protestants wo^ have it, yet this man being but one, could not mal^ a
congregation of faithful men, which must ne^ be a number, nor preach the pure
word of God, ^ ^^ongregation of faithful men, nor duly minister ^ the
Sainaments, according to Christ's ordinance, no s^ Protest. Co^f. Helu. Gallic.
Angl. Scotic. Belg. Polonu^. Argent. Augustan. Saxonic. wittemb. Palatin.
Bohemich. Parliament. Henric. 8. Edw 6 Eliz. Can Comm. books Iniunct. Canons.
faithful men or congregation yet being to prea^ and minister them unto, which
is a general a^ vnanswearable demonstration, by this Protes^ article it self,
that the Church could never so ^nerally err, nor their new pretended
congregat^ be any part, or parcel of the true Church. Wh^ is also manifest by
their fourteen fifteen or m^ several Protestant confessions and pretended
^gregations, every on of them different from ot^ and with it self also, as
here in England the ^ Church of King Henry VIII. King Ed^^. Queen Elizabeth,
King James and King ^harles at open wars with themselves, both in ^ctrine and
Sacraments, as their several approved ^wes, Parlaments, proclamations, Synods,
Ca^ns, Injunctions, Litanies, communion books, ^thorized Orders of prayer,
conferences, and de^ees are too great witnesses. And to quench the ^ey, malice
of the Protestants against the Church of ^ome our Mother Church (as lately King
James ^ed it) they saying in this article, the Church ^ Rome has erred in
matters of faith. The Apo^like men which lived this age, will teach the ^ntrary.

First whereas all agree that Saint Peter was Bi^op, lived and died there,
Saint Dionisius the A^opagite says, he was the most ancient and ^eifest
head of divines. Petrus maximum antiquissi^mque Dionis. Areopag. l. de diu.
nom. cap. 3. Eccles. Hierarch. c. 9. Ignat. ep. ad Romans in ^itul*
Theologorum columen. And testifies plaine^ that without doubt he was Prince
or chiefest of ^e Apostles. Ipse discipulorum facile princeps.

Saint Ignatius proves the Roman Church ^s the sanctified and ruling Church.
Ecclesia san^ficata quae praesidet in loco Regionis Romanorum. That was the
Church which was sanctified il^minated by the will of God who created all ^ings
which belong to the faith and love of Christ ^sus God our Savior, the Church
worthy of ^od, most decent, to be blessed, praised, worthy ^ be obtained, most
chaste, and of excellent charity ^ioying the name of Christ and his father, and
re^enished with the holy Ghost. Ecclesia sanctificata, ^ illuminata per
voluntatem Dei, qui omnia creauit, ^ae pertinent ad fidem and charitatem Jesus
Christi, Deo ^gna, decentissima, beatificanda, laudanda, digna quae quis
potiatur, castissima, and eximiae charitatis, Chr^ and patris nomine fruens,
spirituque plena. And plai^ly of the Christians of Rome, that they v^ joined in
body and soul to all the commaun^ments of Christ's, and replenished with all
gra^ Spiritu and corpore coniunctos omnibus mandatis I^ Christi, repletos omni
gratia Dei absque haesitatione, repugnatos ab omni alieno color. Without all
do^ting, freed from all error. Saint Clement is ^^nesse, Clem. Romans epist. 1.
that Saint Peter was made the foundat^ of the Church. Simon Petrus veraefidei
merito and ^tegrae praecicationis obtentu, fundamentum esse Eccl^ definitus
est. And was chiefest ruler among the ^postles. Nec inter ipsos Apostolos par
institutio f^sed vnus omnibus praefuit. And calls him the ^ther Clem. Romans
epist. 2.
of all the Apostles, and that he received t^ keys of the Kingdom of heaven.
Beatum Petr^ Apostoluni, omnium Apostolorum patrem, qui cl^ regni caelestis
accepit. And relating, how Saint Pe^ a little before his constituting him his
successour^ the presence of the whole Church, in auribus to^ Ecclesiae,
committed his chair and Apostolic supre^ power unto him alone, as it was by
Christ comm^cated and given unto him. In auribus totius Eccle^ haec protulit
verba: Clementem hunc Episcopum v^^ ordino, cui soli meae praedicationis and
doctrinae c^^^dram trado. Ipsi trado a Domino mihi traditam potes^tem ligandi
and soluendi, vt de omnibus, quibusc^^ que decreuerit in terris, hoc decretum
sit and in coelis.

And this is not denied by our Protestant An^quaries, Robert. Barnes lib. de
vit. Pontif. Romans ^^ Clement. 1.
but affirmed from the same authorit^ Clemens Romanus, a Petro apprehens a manu
instit^^ est Romanus Pontifex, si Epistolis Clementis credend^ est.
Acknowledging those epistles to be the wor^ ^ Saint Clement, which so
testify. In which and ^ers other books he gives laws for the whole church,
which he himself sufficiently often wit^sseth writing and sending his decrees
to be kept ^d observed to, and by all Bishops, Priests, all ^ergy men, and all
Princes greater or less, and ^nerally unto all believers: Clemens vrbis Romae
Clem. epist. 3. de offic. Sacerd. and Clericor.
^iscopus, omnibus Coepiscopis, Presbyteris, Diaconis ^ reliquis Clericis, and
cunctis Principibus, maioribus ^noribusue omnibus generaliter fidelibus. This
epi^e translated by Ruffinus is entitled of the office and ^d duty of Priests
and Clergy men, de officio Sacerdotis Clericorum, for the whole Church of
Christ. The ^e command and general authority of his Sea ^postolike he has
in diverse other books. Saint Anaclet. epist. 1. 2. 3.
^acletus also is so clear for this primacy, and in^libility of the Church of
Rome, that our Prote^nts confess it thus as plainly: To prove that the Ormer.
pict. Pap. p. 78. Robert. Bern. l. de vit. pont. Romans in Anacleto.
^urch of Rome has the preeminence over all Churches, ^eadgeth math. 16. verse.
18. upon this rock will I ^lde my Church, and he expounds it thus: super ^c
Petram, id est, super Ecclesiam Romanam, upon ^s rock, that is, upon the
Church of Rome, will I ^ld my Church.

Anacletus writes, that the primacy of the Church of ^me over all Churches,
and over all Christian people ^s granted by our Lord himself, because, says
he, said to Peter living at Rome, upon this rock will I ^ild my Church. Ab
ipso Domino primatum Romanae ^clesiae super omnes Ecclesias, vniuer sumque
Chri^ani nominis populum concessum esse asseruit: quia (in^it) Petro agenti and
morie^ti Romae dixit: tues Petrus, ^ super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam
meam.

Saint Euaristus writes the like, calling the Euarist. ep. 1.
Church of Rome the head, ^^put, of Churches ^lexander Alex. 1. ep. 1.
affirms that Christ committed the ^posing of the greatest causes and business
^ Churches to Saint Peter Prince of the Ap^ and to the Apostolic Roman Sea as
head of t^ Middleton. Papist. p. 200.
Cui sanctae and Apostolicae sedi summarum dispos^ causarum, and omnium negotia
Ecclesiarum ab ipso^ mino tradita sunt, quasi ad caput, ipso dicente pr^
Apostolorum Petro: Tues Petrus and super hanc P^ aedificabo Ecclesiam meam.
Saint Papias also; ^ Protestants confess (to speak in their ^ words,) taught
Peter's primacy; and Romish E^pality. Saint Martial a disciple of Saint Pete^
^sent Martial. ep. ad Burdegal. cap. 11. Hier. l. de vir. Illust. in Iren.
epist. 29. ad Theod. Tert. l. contra Valent. Martyrol. Romans die 28. Iunij.
into France by the Apostolic R^ Church, and a member thereof, teaches the
Church of Christ is firm, and can never be ^ thrown or dissolved. Firma
Ecclesia Dei and ^ nec cadere, nec disrumpi poterit vnquam.

Saint Ireneus being by Saint Hierome, the Roman Martyrologe, and others,
scholar Polycarpus and Papias, and near the Ap^ time Apostolorum temporum
vicimus, must nee^ and be learned in this age, and both know ^ follow the
approved doctrine thereof, be^ most Catholic holy learned Saint, Marty^
Doctor, yet he witnesses of the Roman C^ Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
that it has principality over all others, and ^ fore every Church and all
true believers must concordance with it, ever keeping the tru^ Christian
Religion, which the Apostles deli^ Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter potentiorem
principalit^ necesse est omnem conu^nire Ecclesiam, hoc est, e^ sunt vndique
fidel^s, in qua semper ab his, qui s^^ dique, conseruata est ca, quae est ab
Apostolis tr^ ^e says this Church is the greatest, most ancient, ^owne to
all, founded by the two most glorious ^ostles Saint Peter, and S. Paul keeping
inui^^le the faith they taught, and confounding all ^t err. Maximae and
antiquissimae, and omnibus co^itae a gloriosissimis duobus Apostolis Petro and
Paulo ^maefundatae, and constitutae Ecclesiae, eam, quam ha^ ab Apostolis
traditionem, and annunciatam homini^ fidem, per successiones Episcoporum
peruenientem ^que ad nos indicantes, confundimus omnes eos, qui ^quo modo,
velper sui placentiam malam, vel va^ gloriam, vel per caecitatem, and malam
sententiam, ^terquam oportet, colligunt. Where this Church of ^me is ever pure
and unspotted, free from error, ^ Judge and confounder of all, wheresoever or
^wsoeuer erring and falling from the true Apo^like doctrine. S. Simeon
Metaphrastes die 29. Iunij. Leland. in Arthurio. Harrison descr. of Britain
Stow hist. of Engl. Hollinsh. his. of Engl. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. Caius
antiquit. Cautab. Godwin. Co^uers of Brit. and Catal. of Bish. Io. Goscelin.
hist. Manuscript. Mat. parker. Antiquit. Brit.


And particularly concerning Britain, (So it ^s ever adjudged here) we
received our first ^h from Saint Peter and the Roman Church, ^nct Peter stayed
long in Britain, converted ^y, founded here Churches, ordained Bishops,
^ists, and Deacons: venit in Britanniam, quo in loco ^o temporefuit moratus,
verbo gratiae multos illumi^it, Ecclesias constituit, Episcoposque and
Presbyteros, ^iaconos ordinauit.

and all our Protestant Antiquaries confess, that ^ received this holy
Apostolic faith, and ^at this time, and in every age had Bishops and ^chers
sent hither from Rome, as Saint Da^nus and Faganus with others from Pope
Eleu^ius in the second age, from Pope Victor we ^ many in the third age, and
Saint Mellonius or Mello from Pope Stephen and S. Amphibalus with others from
the same Romes authority in the same age. In the fourth age one holy Emperesse
and Emperor, Queen and King, S. Helen with our whole Clergy agreed with
Saint Syluester and others Popes there, and Saint Ninian with others of ours,
which where there consecrated, and sent hither by that power Apostolic, and
many of our Bishops were then at diverse Councels as Arles in France, Sardyce
and others both joining with the Roman Church, and acknowledging the supreme
spiritual power thereof. In the next and fifth age, Pope Celestine and other
holy Popes sent hither S. Palladius, Saint Germanus, S. Lupus, Saint Seuerus,
S. Patricius, S. Dubricius. Coelius Sedulius with others renowned in all the
world.

In the sixth age the Sea of Rome sent hither and approved here, Saint Iuo,
Saint Ethelardus, S. David, Saint Kentegern, Saint Asaph, Saint Molochus,
Saint Augustine, Mellitus Iustus with all that holy company sent hither by
Saint Gregory Pope then, especially to the Pagan and no^ yet believing Saxons.
Now that our Christian Britains never forsook or changed in any on^ material
point their first received Apostolic faith* Io. Balaeus l. 2. de Act. Romans
Pontif. in Greg. 1. and l. de scrip. Centur. 1. in August. David powel.
Annotat. in l. ^. Girald. Cambren. Haier. Camb. cap. 1.
wherein they were assisted by the Popes, and Se^ of Rome, all this while to
the cominge of S. Augustine in the end of the sixth hundred of years, o^ most
esteemed Protestant Antiquaries directly t^stifie from Antiquities.

Two of them speak in these very same word^ apud Britannos vigebat veritat is
praedicatio, doctri^ sincera, and purus Dei cultus qualis ab ipsis Aposto^
mandato diuino, Christianorum Ecclesijs tradi^us (...) At the coming of
Augustine hither, here flourished among the Britans the preaching of the truth,
sincere doctrine, and the pure worship of God, which by the Apostles themselves
by Gods commandment was delivered to the Churches of Christians. One of the^
says, their doctrine was most sincere. Doctrinae sincerissima. Both of them
cite the british history, so they might have cited the old manuscript history
of Rochester with diverse others. Two other principal Protestant Antiquaries,
the one an Archbishop with them, say: Euangelium quod primis Apostolorum Mat.
Parker. Antiq. Brit. p. 68. 9 45. and alijs. ^o. Goscelin hist. Eccles.
manuscr. c. Brit^nunq. prolaff. a fide. Godwin conuers. of Brit. p. 43.
temporibus in Britannia nuntiatum non modo semper retentum firmiter, sed
singulis saeculis auctum and dilatatum creuisse. The Gospel which was
preached in Britain in the first times of the Apostles, was both ever firmly
retained, and increased in every age.

An other, a Bishop in their congregation writes: The Britans continued still
in the same tenor of pure doctrine, which they had received in the first
infancy of the Church. The doctrine and discipline of their Church they had
received from the Apostles of Christ. An other has thus: among the Britains or
welchmen Hollinsh hist. of Engl. c. 21. p. 102. Fox Act and monum. pa. 463.
edit. an 1576. Fulke Answ. to a counterf. Cathol. p. 40. Middleton.
Papistomast. p. 202. Theater of great Brit. l. 6.
Christianity as yet remained in force, which from the Apostles time had never
failed in that nation. An other has thus: The Britains after the receiving of
the Faith, never forsook it, for any manner of false preachinge of others. An
other thus witnesses: The Britains before Augustines cominge, continued in the
faith of Christ, even from the Apostles time. The like have many others, to
many to be cited, not any of them contradicting it. And by this they have
evidently proved against this their Article, that the Church of Rome, in every
age, as they have before declared assisting and directing the Christian Britans
here, and concurring and agreeing with them ineuery point and article of
Religion, neither did, nor could be said to have erred in matters of faith. And
this these Protestants expressly confess, when they generally acknowledge,
(as all Antiquities do) that there was then no material or essential
difference, in matters of faith, between the Christian Britains (except some
Pelagian heretics among them) and Saint Augustine with his company being sent
from the Church of Rome, the Pope then being a great S. Gregory the most
learned and holy Pope that ever was by these men's Testimony: Gregorius magnus
omnium Po^tificum Romanorum Balaeus l. 2. de Act. Romans Pontif. in Gregorio
M^g^^o.
doctrina and vita praestantissimus. And therefore by them and all holy writers
styled Gregory the great. And wherein soever any difference though ceremonial
observing of Easter, any ceremony about the ministering of Baptism, or giving
holy Orders, was between the Roman Church and the Britains, all writers both
Catholics and Protestants prove, the Roman Church professed the truth.

And the Britains were in the error, and so they freely and publicly in their
first meeting confessed, as Saint Bid and our Protestants themselves Bed.
hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 2.
with others acknowledge: Tum Britones confitentur quidem intellexisse se,
veram esse viam iustitiae, quam praedicaret Augustinus; and this was inuincibly
proved unto them both by vnanswearably humane arguments, and divine testimony
and miracle. And they afterward generally corrected and conformed themselves to
the Roman Church in all things formerly questioned between them, as all
Antiquaries British, English, Foreign, domestical, Catholics, and
Protestants agree, never contending about any question moved by Protestants
against the present Roman Church, but both the Roman Church then, and our
Britains, as the whole Christian world also, jointly agreing in every article
against this new Protestant Religion. And this is manifestly proved,
particularly already in all articles yet examined, and so will be in all that
follow. Therefore it is manifestly false, by all testimonies ancient, later,
foreign, domestical, Catholics and Protestants even in their public
decrees, and Confessions, that which this Article so desperately, has
delivered: The Church of Rome has erred in matters of faith: and the
contradictory, that it has not so erred, nor shall at any time so err, is
evidently true, by all witnesses. This will be yet more evidently manifested,
in the two next following examinations, and others.

THE VIII. CHAPTER.
The 20. Article thus examined, and in whatsoever contrary to the Church of
Rome, thus condemned.
THEIR 20. and next article entitled: of the authority of the Church: is this.
It is no^ lawful ^or the Church to ordain any thing contrary to Gods word
written, neither may it so expound one place of ^cripture, that it be repugnant
to another. Wherefore ^lthough the Church be a witness and a keeper of holy
^rit; yet, as it ought not to decree any thing against the ^ame, so besides the
same, ought it not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of
salvation.

In this article no thing needs other answer or confutation then is made
before in their article of Scriptures, and traditions, where the pretended sole
necessity of the written Scriptures, heretikely insinuated, is most plainly
confuted, both by the Apostolic doctrine and practice of this age, and
otherwise. And the supreme power and authority which here they give unto the
Church to be a witness and keeper of holy writ, and the chiefest expositour
thereof, and as their common gloss ^^ this article is, the Church has
authority to Judge and determine in controversies of faith, does utterly
disable and condemn those Protestants to have any color or pretense to hold
the truth in any one article they maintain, against the Roman Church either
concerning, Scriptures, Church, or an^ thing else: for the Church which only
was, and ^ visible, as they have described the true Church before, has in all
and every article condemned a^ such Protestant Innovation.

And for these men to say, as they have done, ^^ their 19. Article, that the
Church is a congregati^ of faithful men, in which the pure word of God ^
preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered, an^ to make it an article of
faith, as they do in the^ public profession of the Creed, that this Church
one holy and Catholic, does so continue for (...) without interruption, or
corruption in ministri^ Sacraments, and preaching doctrine, and the things are
in their censure should only be take from the written word and Scriptures, It
is vnpo^sible in such proceedings, that the Church sho^ ordain any thing
contrary to Gods word written or so expound on place of Scripture, that it be
repugnant to an other. For otherwise it should neither be one, holy, or
Catholic, but diverse different, unholy, particular, no pillar of truth, but a
forge of falsehood, no house of God, no spouse of Christ, no salvation to be
had, or hoped for, in any Judgment Catholic or Protestant, but in the true
Church of Christ.

To this, the Apostolic men of this age give Ignat. epist. ad Philadelp.
Ephesians. Trall. Magn. Antiochen. Ignat. ep. ad Philadelp.
evident testimony. Saint Ignatius does make the Judgment of the Church both
supreme, and certain, and receiving penitents, and says Christ has firmly
builded his Church upon a hile by spiritual building without help of man's
hands, against which the floods dashing, and winds puffing could not
overthrow it; nor any spiritual wickednesses shall ever be able to do it,
but they shall be weakened by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ. Jesus
Christus secundum propriam voluntatem suam, firmauit Ecclesiam super Petram,
adificatione spirituali, citra humanarum manuam operam, in quam collisa flumina
and venti non potuerunt eam subuertere: nec id valcant vnquam spirituales
nequitiae, sed infirmentur virtute Domini nostri Jesus Christi. And says
plainly, as there is but one flesh and blood of Christ shedd for our sins,
one Euchariste, one Altar, one Priestly order, one God the Father, one God the
son, one holy Ghost, so there is but one preaching, and one faith, and one
baptism, and one Church, which with their sweat and labors the holy Apostles
have founded in the blood of Christ, from the one end of the earch to the
other: vnapraedicatio, and fides vna, and vnum baptisma, and vna Ecclesia quam
suis sudoribus and laboribus fundarunt sancti Apostoli, a finibus terrae, vsque
ad fines* in sanguine Christi. Saint Clement C^em Romans Constable Apost. l. 1. c. 1.
says, the Catholic Church, is the plantation of God, and his chosen
vineyard, which cannot be dug up, or destroyed. Dei plantatio est Catholica
Ecclesia, and vinea eius electa. So that no other can be planted or chosen by
Christ, but this one alone.

Christ did purchase but one militant Church with his precious blood, he has
no more but one such daughter, nor true Christians more then one such mother,
which the same Saint Clement likewise proves thus; conuenite ad Ecclesiam
Domini, quam acquisiuit sanguine Christi, dilect^ primogeniti Constable. Apost. l.
2. c. 65.
omnis creaturae. Eaest enim altissimi filia, quae part^rijt nos per verbum
gratiae. He co^pareth this Church also, to one great ship. Carrying
passengers from all contryes to the desired haven and harbor, saying, that God
is always the Lord and owne^ of it, Christ the Master or Governor, the Bishop
chief ruler under him, Priests Deacons and other Clergy men ever supply their
places and offices therein. Similis est omnis status Ecclesiae magnae na^,
Clem. epist. 1.
quae per undo sum Pelagus, diuersis e locis and regionib^ viros portat, ad
vnam potentis regni vrbem proper^^ cupientes. Sit ergo nauis huius Dominus,
ipse omnip^tens Deus, gubernator vero sit Christus. Tum dem^^ proretae officium
Episcopus impleat, Presbyteri nau^^rum, Diaconi dispensatorum locum teneant, hi
qui ^^techizant nautologis conferantur. He gives also ^^ lay persons their
place in this ship, saying the world is the Sea it passes, and witnesses
that the ship, notwithstanding all storms and tempest^ persecutions,
tribulations, dangers, false Prophet^ seducers, persecuting potentates,
hypocrites, an^ whatsoever enemies, adversaries and adversities ^ ever is safe,
and never makes shipwrake, for Christ ever governs it, and the whole Church
must endeavor to serve and obey him and his commaundes. Saluator Dominus,
gubernator Ecclesiae suae Martial ep. ad Burdegal. cap. 11.
diligatur ab omnibus, and ipsius solius praeceptis ac iussis credat, and
obediat omnis Ecclesia. Thus Saint Clement from the Apostles themselves. And
Saint Martial also teaches, that the Church of Christ is so firm, it can
never fall, nor be broken. And yet in the same place he teaches that the
devil and heretics his vassals and instruments shall never cease to labor and
fight against it: Inimicus venturus est vt superseminet in populo Dei grana
errorum. Sed firma Ecclesia Dei and Christi, nec cadere, nec disrumpi poterit
vnquam. Venient praesumptores absque gratia Dei loquentes, quorum gloria
labiorum procedit ex superbia, similes illi qui superbia caelum praesumens
habitare, mox de caelo cum Angelis suis sequacibus ruit in aeternam voraginem.
Hi docebunt aliam doctrinam quae aliena est a Deo, amica autem diabolo, per
quam ipse spiritus erroris, animas post se trahere festinabit. Which cannot
more properly be applied to any sects of heresies, then the libertine
Protestants so first arising, increasing and subsisting by wanton and lewd
licentiousness.

S. Dionysius Areopagita wrote a whole book Dion. Areop. l. de Eccles.
Hierarch.
in Greek yet every where extant de Ecclesiastica Hierarchia of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, or holy order, which was in his time, and to
continue ever in the never failing or ceasing Church of Christ. All the
Apostles so firmly and uniformly believed, Clem. Romans epist 1. Ruff. in
exposit. Symbol Leo i^ mul^is locis.
and professed this doctrine, as a necessary article of faith, for all
Christians, and to obtain salvation by as the rest, and so proposed it unto
all, in their Symbolum as Saint Clement then living Ruffinus, S. Leo and all
Christians acknowlegde, Credo Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam, ever to be an
Article of faith as the others, which possible could not be true, if at any
time Christ should want a Church holy and Catholic. And our Protestants of
England in these their articles do twice in one article before, entitled of
the three Creeds, make and receive it with the other articles of their Creed,
an article of faith thoroughly to be received and believed. For So they define:
The three Creeds, Protest. artic. of Relig. art. 8.
Nicene Creed, Athanasius Creed, and that which is commonly called the
Apostles Creed ought thoroughly to be received, and believed, affirming
further, they may be proved by most certain warrants of holy Scripture. And
both in the Apostles and Nicen Creed this article is contained with the rest.

This is also confirmed in their public communion Engl. Protest. com book
^it. Catechism.
book, used in their Churches, and allowed by their Parlaments, where besides
the Article of the Apostles Creed, I bel^eue in the holy Ghost, the holy
Catholic Church, they say unto God, in the canticle Te Deum, as they translate
it: The holy Church Tit. morning prayer.
through all the world, does knowledge thee.

And in their Creed of the Nicen Council they Nicen Creed
plainly profess and believe, that from the Apostles till now, and ever
after, there is and shall be one holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church: vnam
sanctam Catholicam and Apostolicam Ecclesiam. Where the Church is ever one,
holy, Catholic, and the same in all matters of faith it was in the Apostles
time. And in this sense and no other they have in their 19. article before
described or defined the Art. 19. supr.
Church of Christ to be one congregation of faithful men, with true preaching,
and due ministration of Sacraments in all things necessary and requisite
according as Christ ordained. And their public gloss upon this 19. article
dividing it into diverse propositions, and making this the second proposition:
There is Thomas Rogers in art. 19. proposit. 2.
but one Church: When we do say that the Church is visible and that there is
a western, East, Greek Latin: English Church, we mean not that there be
diverse Churches of Christ, but that one and the same Church is diuersely taken
and understood, and also has many particular Churches, as the Sea many Rivers
and arms, branching from it. For the visible Church is not many congregations,
but one company of the faithful. For proof of this out of Scriptures, they
cite diverse texts Romans 12. 5. 1. Cor. 10. 17. 1. Corint. 12. 13. 27. Gal. 3.
28. and conclude thus: all Gods people (meaning Protestants) agree with us in
this point. And particularly cite Confess. Hel^et. 2. cap. 17. Bohe. cap. 8.
Gal. art. 26. Belg. art. 27. August. art. 27. Wittemb. art. 32. Sueu. art. 15.
and these Protestant Confessions so agree. I will only cite* two for the rest,
one of Heluetia, for the Caluinists, and for the Lutherans that of Wittemberge
where Luther lived, as Calvin in Heluetia.

The Heluetian confession says: Cum semper vnus Confessio Heluet. c. 17.
modo sit Deus, vnus mediator Dei and hominum Jesus Messiah, vnus item gregis
vniuersi Pastor, vnum huius corporis caput, vnus denique spiritus, vna salus,
vna fides, vnum testamentum vel foedus, necessario consequitur, vnam duntaxat
esse Ecclesiam: quam propterea Catholicam nuncupamus, quod sit vniuersalis, and
diffundatur per omnes mundi parts, and ad omnia se tempora extendat, nullis
vel locis inclusa vel temporibus. Seeing always there is only one God, one
mediator of God and men Jesus the Messiah, also one Shepherd of the
universal flock, one head of this body, to conclude one holy Ghost, one
salvation, one says, one testament or league, it necessarily follows, that
there only is one Church: Which therefore we name Catholic, because it is
Universal, and diffused through all parts of the world, and extends it self
to all times, not concluded within any places or times.

This holy Church of God, is called the house of the liueinge God, builded of
lively and spiritual stones, and seated upon an immovable rock, and upon a
foundation, on which no other thing can be placed, and therefore it is called
the pillar and supporter of truth. Haec Ecclesia Dei sancta, vocatur domus Dei
viuentis, extructa ex lapidibus viuis and spiritualibus, and imposita super
petra^ immota^, super fundamentu^, quo aliud loc ari no^ potest: and ideo
nuncupatur etiam colu^na and basis verit ati^. 1. Tim. 3.


The Lutheran Religion or confession of Wittemberge says: credimus and
confitemur, quod vna sit Confess. Wirtemberg. cap. de Eccl.
sancta Catholica and Apostolica Ecclesia, iuxta Symbolum Apostolorum and
Nicaenum. Quod haec Ecclesia ^ Spiritu sancto, ita gubernetur, vt conseruct eum
perpetuo, ne vel erroribus vel peccatis pereat. Quod in hac Ecclesi asit
verapeccatorum remissio. Quod haec Ecclesia habeat ius iudicandi de omnibus
doctrinis. Quod haec Ecclesia habeat ius interpret and aescripturae. Ecclesia
habet certam promissionem perpetuae praesentiae Christi; and Cap. de Concilijs.
gubernatur a Spiritu sancto.

We believe and co^fess^, that there is one holy Catholic and Apostolic
Church according to the Creed of the Apostles and Nicen Council.

That this Church is so governed by the holy Ghost, that he preserves it for
ever, that it perish not, either by errors or sins.

That in this Church there is true remission of sins, th^^ this Church has
authority to Judge of all doctrines. That this Church has authority to
interpret the Scripture. The Church has certain promise of the perpetual
presence of Christ, and is governed by the holy Ghost.

By this it is evident by all Testimonies of this Apostolic age, and these
Protestants themselves that the true Church of Christ never did, shall, or can
err in any Judgment, decree, sentence, or profession in matters of faith, but
is pure Catholic and Apostolic in all such, in all times, and places, And
this article either denying or doubting of such power, and prerogative in the
true Church, is very Idle or Antichristian, taking away all certain and holy
Religion of Christ. As also that the Church which was when these heresies
began, even Catholic and universal in all places, and had been so in all
times before, has been so ever since, and still so continues, and
florisheth, is that true holy Catholic and Apostolic Church which the holy
Scriptures, Fathers of this age, and the Article of our Creed, give testimony
unto, And the Protestant particular Confessions and congregations of Heluetia,
France, England, Scotland, Belgia, Poland, Argentine, Ausburgh, Saxony,
Wittemberge, the Palatine of Rheine, Boheme, and perhaps some others, (being
only of particular Contryes or Towns, and only of some and not all persons
of them) cannot be possibly Catholic for place, and as vnpossibly for time,
the eldest of them, by their own testimony, and confession, unknown until
the year of Christ 1530. the Confession of Ausburge first began, not printed
until the year 1540. the Confession of Boheme 1532. Heleutia 1536. Saxony
1551. England 1562. Scotland. 1581. the like of the rest. These nor any of them
by the same reason can be Apostolic, arising so many hundreds of years after
the Apostles time. None of all these can be, that one Church, which was ever,
those being diverse from that, and among themselves at wars, both for
Sacraments, discipline and doctrine. None of their co^gregations or co^fessions
yet has brought forth any one man or woman known, which in their own
Judgment or sentence is honored, or calendred for a Saint, though their
calenders, chronicles, and histories be full of Saints, which were of the Roman
Church, and Religion.

They have taken away and overthrown many thousand foundations of holiness
and piety, their own first foundation in such kind is yet to begin, this
cannot be the one, holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church of Christ, which our
Creeds do teach us; being in all respects diametrically opposite, or rather
contradictory to whatsoever is, or can be defined, or described, as they
themselves define the true Church, by those attributes, properties, or
distinctiue differences, to be one, to be holy, to be Catholic, and universal
in all times, places, and points of doctrine, and Sacraments, and to be
Apostolical, continued without intermission from the Apostles, in sound and
Apostolical Christian Religion, in all articles and matters of faith. And thus
it was confessed, and professed by our Christian Britains, from their first
couersion, in the Apostles time, as these men themselves have before delivered.

THE IX. CHAPTER.
The 21. Article so examined, and condemned.
THE Article which follows 21. in number, is entitled: of the authority of
general Councels. And in these their words. General Councels may not be
grathered to gether without the commandment and will of Princes. And when
they be gathered, for as much as they be an assembly of me^, whereof all be not
governed with the spirit, and word of God, they may err, and some time have
erred, even in things pertaining unto God. wherefore, things ordained by them
as necessary to salvation, have neither strength, nor authority, unless it may
be declared that they be taken out of holy Scripture. Hitherto this English
Protestant Article. The first part of it requiring of necessity the
commandment and will of Princes, for the validity of Councels is singular,
not only against Catholics but all Confessions of Protestants, not any one
consenting in this matter with our English Protestants, as is evident in those
confessions. Neither do the Protestants of Britain agree herein, but all
they, whom they term Puritans or Disciplinarians are quite of an other
opinion. And the Parliament Protestants themselves of best Judgment do even
with public allowance condemn it. Thus with such approbation they write of
themselves. Protestant relation of Religion. cap. 47.


The Protestants are severed bands, or rather scattered troops, each drawing
diverse ways without any means to pacify their quarrels, to take up their
controversies. No Prince with any preeminence of Jurisdiction above the rest:
no Patriarcke one or more, to have a common superintendance of care, of their
Churches, for correspondancy and unity: no ordinary way to assemble a general
Council, the only hope remaining ever to assuage their contention. The other
have the Pope as a common Father, aduiser and conductor to all, to reconcile
their Iarres, to appease their displeasures, to decide then difference, above
all things to draw their religion by consent of councels, to unity.

And this is evidently and experime^tally known to be true* by all men, no
Prince or Potentate spiritual or temporal except the Pope of Rome, either
having, or pretending to have, any such power, as is necessary to call and
assemble a general Council. And for Protestant Princes, none clayming such
prerogative, but only in his own temporal dominions, it is absolutely
impossible that any such assembly of Bishops, which could deserve the name of
one half or third or less part of a general Counsel, from all Christian
Kingdoms, and contries, should at any time, or place, be called, and gathered
together, by any such pretended power. And if we should allow mere lay and
profane men, Souldiars, The Subscriptio^s of these Protestants confessions.
Captains, Rebels, and heretics without knowledge in divinity, or humane
duty, to have decisiue voices in Ecclesiastical matters, and to offord to
every common Artizan, the place and office of holy and learned Bishops, in such
assemblies, and Judgments it were a thing most ridiculous, And further to say,
that all the Bishops and Catholic Clergy men in all those contries, where
Protestant confession have been kept were present, and consented unto them,
all those assemblies and conuenticles could not come to be the half of a
fourth part of a Council general, out of the whole Christian world.

There was not in any of foreign conuenticles and conciables, any one man
bearing the name of a Bishop, which invented them, or subscribed unto them, as
is evident in their subscriptions, neither any one such at this day among them
except in Scotland, whether some of King James his bastard Bishops have crept,
sent, or appointed by his regal supremacy from the newly hatched brood of
England, which neither now has, or had any one true and lawful Bishop, at the
enactinge and first shaping of these articles called forsooth, Anglica
confessio, the confession of England, and now scarcely a man to be found in
England, Scotland, France or other contry, where those confessions were first
vented, which consents unto them. Diverse of them of late as of Bohemia, the
Palatinate of Rhyne, and others in Germany wholly overthrown, and all returned
to the Catholic faith, and the rest so far at variance and distastes with
their confessions, as we see in England the late books of Doctor Montague,
and, him that gathered the book of prayers privileged by the present
Protestant Bishop George of London, both them justifiable by this book of
articles, their communion book, and other allowed rules of their religion, are
esteemed and accounted for strange wonders among the present called
Protestants. And to show of what validity these pretended pieces of Protestants
Councels and confessions were from the beginning in their own Judgment,
disablinge all such, as be not gathered together by the commandment and will
of Princes, except here in England, where a woman was head in al^ things both
temporal and spiritual, there was n^^ either the commandment, will, or
assent of a^^ true lawful, and chief Prince to those confession^ but the
contrary, those assemblies and Confession being gathered and concluded by
refractory, disobedient, and undutiful people, as is evident in the very
Protestant proceedings and histories of the^ all. In the confession of Ausburg
the Protestant p^blishers of it say, that Ihon Duke of Saxony E^ctour, George
Marquess of Brandeburge, Ernestus Duke of Luneburge, Philip Lansgraue ^
Subscriptio confessionis Augustanae.
Hesse, Ihon Frederike Duke of Saxony, France Duke of Luneburge, Walfangus
Prince of Anha^ the Senats of Nurnberge and Reutling subscribe^ but by their
own confession they subscribed ^ subjects to the Emperor and protesting their
fidelity unto him. Caesareae maiestatis v^strae fideles o^ subditi. And the
Emperor their Supreme Lord* and Prince, never consented unto it. No Prince ^^
Potentate Protestant that consented unto any ^ these confessions, never had, or
claymed any Iuridiction or power spiritual, or temporal over ^ other, or any
one other Prince or contry, and so no^ general Council ever was, or can be
called, b^ any right, or title claymed or pretended in their religion; all
Protestants agree the true Church e^^ had, has, and shall have true
discipline, Sac^ments, and due ministration of them, and true doctrine in all
things necessary: none of these co^fessions thus agree together, And the
Protestan^ of England with their temporal Princes spiritua^ Supremacy with two
only Sacraments, and d^uerse points of necessary doctrine differ from the^
all. Neither ever was there any Christian, temporal prince, King, or Emperor,
or ever like to be, that did or shall Reign over all provinces, and contries,
where Christians, did; do, and are to live hereafter, yet councels have been
kept, and lawfully called, even such as be named general; from the beginning,
and before any Christian King was in the world, and were lawfully kept and
called, contrary unto, and against the temporal Princes will and commandment.

The Apostles themselves kept diverse councels in such manner; The Scripture
witnesses, that S. Peter and the Apostles assembled in Council to be called
general for that time, consisting of all the Apostles, hiomnes erant
perseuerantes vnanimiter, Act. cap* 1.
and almost 120. Petrus in medio fratrum dixit, erat autem turba hominum simul
f^re c^ntum viginti, when Saint Matthias was chosen in the place of Judas.

It was a general Council also for that time Act. cap. 6.
which was called and kept by the Apostles. When Saint Stephen and the other
6. Deacons with him were chosen, remembered in the 6. chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles. For both all the Apostles, and disciples being then very many,
crescente numero Act* cap. 6*
discipulorum, were present at it, called thither by Apostolic authority, both
without and against the consent, will, or liking of any temporal Prince. It
was also a general Council, for that time, when S. Paul, S. Barnabas with
others, Paulus and Barnabas Act. cap. 18. Clem. Romans constable. Apost. l. 6. cap.
12.
and quidam alij, went a long Journey to the rest of the Apostles and disciples
at Jerusalem, about the question then moved concerning circumcision. For
these were received by the Church, Apostles and others of the Clergy there.
Suscepti sunt ab E^clesia, and ab Apostolis, and senioribus. And the Apostles
with the disciples and rulers of the representative Church gave resolution and
sentence upon that doubt. Placuit Apostolis and senioribus cum omni Ecclesia.

So we may say of the councels, wherein the Canones Apostol. Constable. Apost. l.
6. c. 12.
Canons of the Apostles, and their constitutions registered by S. Clement, and
remembered in many ancient writers Greek and Latin were made.

The like is also set down by S. Clement, when Clemens recognit. l. 1.
he relates it in the name of the Apostles, a Council which they kept at a
feast of Easter. Cum nos duodecim Apostoliad diem Paschae cum ingenti
multitudine conuenissemus, ingressi Ecclesiam fratrum, quae a nobis per loca
singula gesta sint, breuiter exponimus. So of that their holy Council, wherein
they decreed and composed the Creed, which the Church ever since professes,
and our Protestants before receive, as composed by them; the history of it is
expressly set down by Saint Clement, Ruffinus and others. Christo resurgente
and ascendente in coelum Clem. epist. 1. Ruffin. l. de expos. Symb.
misso sancto Spiritu, collata Apostolis scientia linguarum, adhuc in vno
positi, Symbolum quod fidelis nunc tenet Ecclesia, vnusquisque quod sensit,
dicendo, condiderunt, vt discedentes ab inuicem, hanc regulam per omnes gentes
praedicarent. And reciting the contents thereof, concludes, that the Apostles
penned it by instinct of the holy Ghost. Hoc praedicti sancti Apostoli inter
Clem. Constable. Apost. l. 6. c. 14. 15. 16. 17. etc.
se, per Spiritum sanctum salubriter, vt dictum est, condiderunt. Diverse other
such sacred Councels of the Apostles, and Disciples of Christ, we might recite
from approved writers, and yet none of them was by the commau^de or allowance
of any temporal Prince, or Potentate, but otherwise. And to make it manifest
to all posterity that Princes te^porall were not to have any command in such
affairs, as Protestants in this article pretend, the same holy Apostles in
their Canons, by some readings in the 36. by others, the 37. and by others 38.
do thus decree, that Bishops should twice Canon. Apo^stol. can. 36. 37. vel 38.
in the year keep councels and among themselves examine the decrees of
religion, and compose such Ecclesiastical Controversies as should arise, first
in the fourth week after Pent^cost, and the second the 12. day of October. Bis
in anno fiat Episcoporum Synodus, and inter se examinent decreta religionis,
and incidentes Ecclesiasticas controuersias componant: semel quidem quarta
hebdomade Pentecostes: iterum autem Hyperb^retaei, duodecimo.

And S. Clement from the same Apostles teaches Clem. Apost. constit. l 2. c.
30 c. 26 in all. exempl.
further, that Episcopal power and dignity was the greatest on earth, Bishops
were Mediators between God and men, in things belonging to divine worship.
The Bishop is the Master of piety and Religion, the Father of Christians under
God, their Prince, their Leader, their King, their Ruler. After God, the
earthly God who ought to enjoy honor, the Bishop must govern being adorned
with the dignity of God, whereby he has power over the Clergy, and rules all
the people. Qui Episcopus est, hic est minister verbi, scientiae custos,
Mediator inter Deum and homines, in ijs, quae ad eum colendum pertinent: hic
est magister pietatis and religionis: hic est secundum Deum pater vester: hic
Princeps, and Dux vester: hic vester Rex, and praefectus: hic post Deum terreus
Deus, qui honor v^stro frui debet. Episcopus vobis praesideat, vt dignitate
Dei cohon^status, qua clerum sub potestate sua ten^t, and toti populo p^aeest.
He tell^th us again by the same Apostolic warrant, Cap. 11.
that a Bishop represents the example of God to men, and rules all men,
Priests, Kings, Magistrates, parents, children, and all subjects. Stude
Episcope, vt mundus purusque sis, locum tuum, dignitatemque tuam actionibus
declara, vt pote qui exemplar Dei repraesentas, praesidendo omnibus hominibus,
Sacerdotibus, regibus, Magistratibus, parentibus, filijs, and pariter cunctis
Cap. 12.
subditis. And judges with power as God does: Iudica Episcope potestate
fretus, tanquam Deus.

And as Moses by God was called a God, so a Bishop Cap. 30. c. 34. 37. 13.
is to be honored as God. By how much the soul is more excellent then a
Kingdom. We must love a Bishop as a Father, fear him as a King, honor him
as Lord. It is granted only to Priests, to Judge in spiritual causes. Lay
men must obey, the Bishop is Steward and dispenser Cap. 40. 39.
of Ecclesiastical things. We must not ask an accomp^ of him, nor observe
how he performs his dispensation, when, with whom, where, well or ill or
conveniently. He has God his Judge, who has committed this dispensation into
his hands. Without a Bishop we must do Cap. 31.
nothing. If any man does any thing without the Bishop, he does it in vain. A
Bishop is the head, and must no^ Cap. 17.
obey the foot, a lay man, but only God. He must rule hi^ subjects, not obey
them. The son does not rule the Father, nor the Servant his Lord, nor the
Scholar his mastor, nor the Soldier the King, so the lay man must no^
command the Bishop. Si de parentibus secundum carnem lex diuina inquit honora
patrem tuum and matrem tuam quanto magis de spiritualibus parentibus vob^
praeceptum est, vt eos honoretis, and diligatis tanquam b^n^ficos ligatosque ad
Deum. Hos venerabiliter colite varijs honoribus. Hos Principes and Reges
vestros p^tatote, and tributa tanquam Regibus penditote. Si aliquid orationi
addendum est, plura hic Episcopus, quam ille, Rex, olim. Ille enim rem
militarem tantum administrabat, belli pacisque moderator, ad tuenda corpora,
hic vero Dei Sacerdotium administrans; corpus and animam periculis liberat.
Quanto igitur corpore est excellentior, tanto Sacerdotium Regno praestat. Ligat
enim id and soluit supplicio, vel indulgentia dignos. Ideo Episcopum diligere
debetis, vt patrem, timere vt Regem, honorare vt Dominum. Non est aequum, caput
cum sis, o Episcope, caudae obsequi, hoc est, laico homini seditioso in
alterius pernici^m, sed soli Deo. Imperare enim debes subditis non parere: nam
neque filius imperat patri secundum originis rationem, neque seruus Domino
secundum potestatis rationem, neque discipulus magistro, neque miles Regi, ita
neque laicus Episcopo.

The like he has in diverse other places, and in S. Ignat. epist. ad Smyrnen.
ample manner. S. Ignatius is as plain in this point. He tells us, that all,
without exception of any, must follow the Bishop, as Christ his Father. And
none must do any thing in matters belonging to the Church without the Bishop.
Omnes Episcopum siquimini, vt Christus patrem. Sine Episcopo nemo quicquam
faciat eorum, quae ad Ecclesiam spectant. He manifestly makes the Authority of
Bishops, greater then any regal, or other, on earth in these matters, the
Princes of Priests representing the Image of God, and next to him to be
honored and obeyed, and declares it for a greater treason and disobedience to
resist the Bishop, then the King, and the Episcopal office more honorable,
then the Regal, this consisting only in the inferior temporal affairs, the
Episcopal in superior Ecclesiastical and divine. Honora Deum vt omnium
a^thorem and Dominum, Episcopum vero vt Principem Sacerdotum, Imaginem Dei
referentem, Dei quidem propter principatum, Christi vero propter Sacerdotium.
Honorare oportet and Regem, nec enim Deo quisquam potior est, aut ei similis in
rebus omnibus creatis: nec Episcopo qui Deo consecratus est pro totius mundi
salute, quicquam maius in Ecclesia: nec inter principes quisquam similis Regi,
pacem and aequitatem subditis procuranti. Qui honorat Episcopum, a Deo
honorabitur, sicut qui ignominia afficit illum, a Deo punictur. Si enim Iure
censebitur paena dignus, qui aduersus Regem insurgit, vt qui violet bonas legum
constitutiones, quanto putatis grauiori subiacebit supplicio, qui sine Episcopo
quid volet agere, concordiam rumpens, and decentem rerum ordinem confundens?
And immediately he further adds this reason: because preisthood is the head,
and chiefest of all good things among men. And so he that opposes or rages
against it, does not offer reproach to man, but to God and Christ Jesus by
nature the high Priest of his Father. Sacerdotium Ignat. epist. ad Trallian.
enim est omnium bonorum, quae in hominibus sunt, Apex, quiaduersus illud
furit, non hominemignominia afficit, sed Deum, and Christum Iesum primigenitum,
qui natura solus est summus Sacerdos Patris. And testifies, that the Apostles
left this cu^maundement of honoring Bishops. And says, that a Bishop is above
and higher then any, or all principality and power on earth, and to be
reverenced as Christ. Reueremini Episcopum vestrum sicut Christrum, que
madmodum beat inobis praeceperunt Apostoli. Quid enim aliud est Episcopus, quam
is qui omni principatu and potestate superior est: and quoad homini licet, pro
viribus Imitator Christi Dei factus? And therefore it is needful that
whatsoever we do, we attempt nothing without the Bishop. But we must also
obey Priests as the Apostles of Christ. Episcopo subiecti estote velut Domino:
ipse enim vigilat pro animabus vestris, vt quirationem Deo redditurus sit.
Necesse est it aque quicquid facitis, vt sine Episcopo nihil tentetis. Sed and
Preshyteris subiecti estote, vt Christi Apostolis. What soever Ignat. epist. ad
Ephesians.
Bishop is placed to govern the Church of Christ, we must receive him, as him
that sent him. We must regard our Bishop as our Lord himself. Quemcunque
Episcopum paterfamilias mittit ad gubernandam familiam, huncita accipere
debetis, vt illum ipsum qui mittit. Episcopum igitur profecto aspicere oportet
vt ipsum Dominum. We must be subject both to the Bishop and Priests and
Deacons. He that obeys them, obeys Christ. He that resists them,
resists Christ Jesus. He is perverse contentions and proud, that obeys not
Superiors. Enitimini subiecti esse Episcopo, and Presbyteris and Diaconis. Qui
enim his obedit, obedit Christo, qui hos constituit. Qui vero his reluctatur,
reluctatur Christo Jesus. Praefractus, contentiosus, and superbus est, qui non
obtemperat Superioribus. Saint Euaristus Pope living in this age writes, as
Saint Ignatius also in diverse places does, which I have not cited, that
priests are legates in the Church in the place of Christ: Euarist. epist. 2.
and as the Church his spouse is joined to him: So Bishops are joined to their
Churches, by proportion. And the Church ought to obey the Bishop in all things.
Sacerdotes vico Christi legatione funguntur in Ecclesia. Et sicut ei
suaconiuncta est sponsa, id est, Ecclesia: sic Episcopi tunguntur Ecclesiae
vnicuique proportione sua. Et Ecclesia Episcopo in omnibus obedire debet. So
our Protestants Rob. Barnes l. de vit. Pontif. Romans in Euarist. Barnes sup. in
Anacleto.
also testify of him: Ecclesiam debere Episcopo suo in omnibus obedire
praecepit.

And that Saint Anacletus his predecessor decreed, that Ecclesiastical
causes should be hard only before Ecclesiastical Judges, the greater to be
brought to the primate, the lesser to the Metropolitan Bishop, and only
temporal matters to be tried before temporal Judges. In Ecclesiasticis
negotijs, grauiores causas ad primatem, leuiores ad Metropolitanum Episcopum
referendas, secularia negotia ad prophanos Iudices agenda esse iussit. And that
all might appeal to the Ecclesiastical Court Omnibus oppressis licere
appellare Ecclesiasticum forum.

That he was an enemy to Christ whosoever should call Priests before temporal
Judges. And reputed them as Murderers, which should take away the riches and
right of Christ and his Church: because, says he, the Apostles by the
command* of our Savior did command, that the privileges of the Church and
Priests should be kept inuiolate. Christo alienos esse iudicabat, qui
Sacerdotes in ius vocarent. Christi vel Ecclesiae pecunias auferentes,
homicidas iudicari debere censuit: quia inquit priuilegia Ecclesiae and
Sacerdotum, Apostoli Saluatoris iussu inviolata esse debere iusserunt. And yet
the holy Apostolic writers being thus far from allowing Kings, to have any
power to command councels of Bishops, or any one Bishop in such business, do
give us assurance, and some of them also commandment, that councels were to
be assembled, and kept, even in those times when there was no King Christian to
call, will, or command them, and in all ages to succeed without any such
command, or will of them. Which our Protestants themselves plainly
acknowledge, and first in this last mentioned Pope Saint Anacletus, who as
they confess decreed, that councels should be kept twice in the year. And
such causes as could not otherwise be determined should be decyded in Robert.
Barn. in Anacleto supr. Anacletus ep* 1. Canon. Apostol. can 36. Clem ib
council. Chalced. act. 25. can. 19.
them. Statuit congregationem virorum Ecclesiastici ordinis his in anno
habendam^ and causas quae apud primarios Ecclesiastici ordinis componi non
possent in quarto concilio finiendas esse. In the place which these men cite
that holy Pope says, that such councels were used, and ought to be kept twice
in the year. Summorum congregata congregatio per singulos annos his ficri
solet and debet. And the Apostles themselves, as Saint Clement and others
witness, made that decree, that councels of Bishops should be kept twice in
the year, to determine Controversies in religion, and Ecclesiastical
contentions, and expressly set down the times of their assembling. Bis in
anno Episcoporum celebrator Synodus, and pietatis inter se dogmata in
dispositionem vocanto, nec non in Ecclesijs incidentes contradictiones
dirimunto, semel quidem quarta feria, Pentecostes, secundo duodecima
hyperberetaei. Which is received not only in our Council. in cen. 1. cen 1.
can. ^. Council. Antioch. c. 20 Ignat. epist. Polycarp.
most ancient Popes and writers, as Saint Anacletus before, but in first and
general Councels themselves. Saint Ignatius testifies it was the order in
his time, and gives that order, that such councels should be often kept.
Crebrius celebrentur conuentus, synodique. And evident it is by all
antiquities, that many such Councels and Synods were kept, long before, and
when and where there was not any Christian Prince or King to give his will,
command; or consent unto them. Diverse such are yet extant, and Tertullian
living long before any such Christian King was either in Britain which had the
first, or else where, is an ample witness, that in diverse places, and from all
Churches councels were assembled, about affairs in religion, and with great
reverence, and such as represented all Tertullian. aduers. Psychicos cap. 13.
that were Christians. Aguntur praecepta per Graecias illas certisin locis
concilia ex vniuersis Ecclesijs, per quae and altiora quaeque in communa
tractantur, and ipsa represent atio totius nominis Christiani magna veneratione
celebratur. And if we should follow the will, and Rule of Protestants, to
account them general Conc. Arelat. to. 1. Conc. in Subscript. Io. Bal. l. de
Scriptor. Brit. cent. 1. Stowe hist. Romans. Godwine conuers. of Britain
Council. Sunessan. to. 1. Council. in. 3. examp. Act. antiq. S. Marcellin.
Robert. Barnesse l. de vit. Pontif. Romans in Marcellin.
councels, where the most Bishops and from most provinces in greatest number be
assembled, we may relate for such the Councels of Arles where our Archbishop
of London Rectitutes was present, gathered forth of above 30. Kingdoms and
contries, and that of Sunessanum having 300. Bishops present at it in such
time, when the King of the Contry and Emperor of the world Diocletian reigned
and raged, the greatest persecutour of Christians that ever was, and they
assembled themselves against his will, and to keep their meetinge unknown to
him, kept their counsel in a secret Cave of the earth, and thither entered not
above 50. at one time, it not able to receive more together, at one meetinge:
these things thus agreed upon, both by Catholic and Protestant antiquaries,
must needs make us all Catholics in this point. As also to see the first
Christian Kings and Emperors, so to have behaved themselves in this matter, as
Catholics now profess.

Britain was made happy with the first Christian King, and holy S. King
Lucius, who never took upon him any such pretended spiritual power, but so
much honored that true power in the Pope of Rome, that by all antiquities, he
sent humble Ambassadge and suppliant letters to the then Pope S. Eleutherius to
have his Kingdom converted, and Christian Religion settled here by his means,
and authority, and by him and his holy legates all such business was here
established, ratified, and confirmed, all historians foreign domestical,
Catholic and Protestant so consenting. Philipp was the first Christian
Emperor though a short time he was so far from arregating any such power to
him self, or denying it to the Pope of Rome, that as Eusebius and others
testify, he did public penance, even among the common penitents at the Popes
enioyning it unto him. De Philippo fertur, quod cum Eusebius Eccl. hist. l 6 ca.
3^. Nicephoras Callist. l 5. ca. 25.
Christianus esset, and in die qua vltimae Paschatis vigiliae seruabantur, in
precationibus multitudini Ecclesiasticae tanquam consors coniungi vellet, ab eo
qui tum Ecclesiae praeerat, admissum non esse nisi primum consiteretur, and ijs
se, qui propter peccata inquirebantur, and in poenitentiae loco constituti
erant, coniugeret. Alioqui nisi hoc faceret, nonfore ipsum admiitendum,
propterea quod in multis culpabilis esset: fertur itaque prompte obediuisse,
sincerumque ac religio sum animum erga Deum ipsis operibus declarasse.

This Pope as Nicephorus with others writes was Saint Fabian, which so
commands the first Christian Emperor, and he Christianly and dutifully
obeyed him. When the first Nicen Council against Arius, which is commonly
reputed for the first general Council, was called. That great glory of this
Kingdom, borne here, Constantine the great was Emperor, and although he was
the greatest benefactour to the Church of God, founder and dilatour of the
honor and renown thereof, that enjoyed the Empire, and having only in his
power then to permit so great assemblies of learned and holy Christians
Bishops as were present there, yet as Eusebius then living Eusebius. lib. 3. de
vit. Constantini cap. 6.
writes, he called not the Bishops together by his command, as this article
gives to Kings, but wrote honorable letters unto them to such purpose, per
literas honorifice scriptas. And as Ruffinus a Ruffin. lib. 1. hist. cap. 1.
man also of that time expounds those proceedings unto us, this was as the
Bishops willed and directed: ex Sacerdo^um sententia, apud vrbem Nicanam
Episcopale cuncilium conuocat. And S. Damasus Damasus in vit. Syluestri Papae.
an other old writer of the lives of the Popes says expressly, it was called
by the consent of Saint Syluester then Pope of Rome. Huius temporibus factum
est concilium, cum eius consensu, in Nicea Bithiniae. Besides it is evident in
the authentical subscription Subscript. in Council. Nicaeno in fine. Eusebius. l.
3. and 4. de vit. Constantini.
to that holy Council, that diverse Bishops were present and subscribed unto
it, out of Persia, and other Kingdoms and contries where Constantine had no
temporal command or dominion, and they which so then ruled in them were not
Christians at that time. So has Eusebius and others when they say, that
assembly was from all Churches in Europe, Afrike, and Asia, ex omnibus
Ecclesijs quae frequentes in tota Europa Africa and Asia extiterunt. And name
diverse in particular, where Constantine Eusebius. l. 3. de vit. Constantini. cap.
7. Socrates Ecclesiastic. hist. l. 1. c. 5. Sozomen. hist. l. 2. c. 6. 7. 8. 9.
10. 11. 12, 13. 14.
had then no power by his own relation, giving still the most he could to that
Emperor in all respects.

This is evident also, by the exceeding great desire, which all good Bishops
in all places then had, to assemble in such a council, which could not be done
at that time, persecution scarcely yet ceased by inferior rulers, and the
Bishops in great poverty, and distress, by their late persecution, without
the temporal help and allowance of the Emperor, which being had, as Eusebius
and others write, came together with greatest alacrity, and joy, as men newly
set at liberty out of prison. Vbi edictum in quaque prouincia diuulgatum crat,
omnes Eusebius. l. 3. de vit. Constant. cap. 6.
summa cum animorum alacritate tanquam e carceribus ad cur sum emissi, propere
aduolarunt.

This is proved by the great temporal provision of Horses, other beasts, and
instruments of carriage: in care peragenda multum attulit subsidij authoritas
Imperatoris, ac nutus, qui nonnullis fecit potestatem, equis public ad iter
celeriter conficiendum dispositis vtendi: alijs permagnum iumentorum
instratorum, quibus vcherentur, numerum suppeditauit. This is manifest by his
provision of the place of their assembly, with Seats, diet, all necessaries in
his own palace, and he himself would not set down unless entreated, or
urged by the Bishops: Non prius sedit, Ecseb. sup. ca. 10. Socrates l. 2. hist.
cap. 5.
quam Episcopi ad id innuissent. And to put it out of all contradiction, or
question, that he only used his temporal power in this business, referring all
spirirituall things to the Bishops, and nothing of that nature to himself, he
did in open council protest, and confess, that they had power from God to
Judge of Kings, and Emperors, and these no such power at all over Bishops.
None but God could Judge them. They by God were constituted as Gods over men,
no man could be their Judge. Ait ad Episcopos: Deus vos constituit Ruffin.
lib. 1. histor. cap. 2. Sozomen. hist. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 16.
Sacerdotes, and potestatem vobis, dedit de nobis quoque iudicandi, and ideo
nos a vobis, recte iudicamur. Vos autem non potestis ab omnibus iudicari.
Propter quod Dei so lius inter vos expectate iudicium. Vos nobis a Deo dati
estis dij, and conueniens non est vt homo iudicet Deos, sed ille solus de quo
scriptum est. Deus stetit in Synagoga deorum, in medio autem Deos discernit.
Mihi non est fas, cum homo sim, eiusmodi causarum cogniti^nem arrogare.
Theodorit says, that he would not Theodorit. l. 1. hist. Eccl. cap. 7.
sit down until he had first asked and obtained leave of the Bishops. Paruo
in soliolo posito assedit, praefatus veniam prius, and petita concessione ab
Episcopis. He did not intermeddle in defining or deecreing Ruffin. hist. Eccl.
l. 1. ca 5. Sozom. h^st. Eccl. l. 1. c. 19.
the Canons of that council, but left that to the holy Bishops. And when they
had given their sentence, and subscribed unto it, being brought to the
Emperor, he reverenced it as the sentence of God, protesting to bannish
whosoever should oppose against it, as contradicting the decrees of God.
Defertur ad Constantinum Sacerdotalis concilij sententia Ille tanquam a Deo
prolatam veneratur. Cui si quis tentasset obniti, velut contra diuina statuta
venientem, in exilium se protestatur acturum. Which he performed, to Arius and
6. others, all the rest subscribing. Sex soli cum Ario se patiuntur exp^lli:
reliqui Epist. Constable. apud Eusebius. l. 3. de vita c. 16. 17. 18. Socrat. lib 1.
c. 6 hist. Theodor. hist. lib. 1. cap. 10. Constant. ep. ad Ecclesias de Nic.
Synodo apud Eusebius. l. 3. de vit. Constant. ca. 16. and alios.
vndecim, consilio inter se habito, acquicscunt ad subscribendum manu sola, non
mente. So he himself writes in diverse epistles recorded by Eusebius,
Socrates, Theodorit, and others never taking upon him to be a Judge, or
commander in or over Ecclesiastical men and matters. But wholly leaving such
affairs to the council of Bishops, protesting that in such times of
controversies, as that was, unity of faith, sincere charity, and true worship
in Religion could not be preserved, except either all or the greatest part of
the Bishops should assemble together, and every of them give his Judgment in
things belonging to most holy Religion. Vt in Sanctissima Catholicae Ecclesiae
multitudine, vna fides, sincera charitas, and consentiens erga Deum
omnipotentem religionis cultus seruaretur: Istud haud poterat in loco tuto
firmoque collocari, nisi vel omnes Episcopi, vel maxima eorum pars in vnum
conuenisset, singulique s^^^ iudicium de rebus ad sacratissimam Religionem
perti^entibus interposuissent.

And by this it also appears to whom the title, right and authoritatiue power
of calling councels, even general, which concern the whole Catholic Church
of Christ, belongs: To no temporal King, Emperor, or Prince, as is manifest
before, and in it self evident, when hitherto no such man had, or claimed any
power spiritual, or temporal, in or over those contries and Kingdoms, from
which came to many confessed general councels, hundreds of Bishops, and so we
should deny there ever was any one lawful general council, when all agree
there have been 20. or more, and our Protestant of England by public
Parlaments, Canons, statutes, decrees and practice have received many for such.
And so the Church of God has ever from Christ been destitute of this
Sovereign help, and so is now, and ever like to be in that desolate
condition, in having no remedy to end the Controversies which now be, and
hereafter are to grow to the end of the world. For it is rash and mad
lyeing foolinesse, to affirm, or conjecture, that there either now is, or ever
shall be, such an universally ouerruling temporal Prince in the world. No
spiritual Patriarch, or potentate of Antioche, Alexandria, Jerusalem, or
Constantinople ever claymed this prerogative, and if they had, it could not
possibly be their due.

Constantinople was not builded, when this first general Council was kept,
and the Patriarchs of them all have been either quite overthrown* or very
obscure and wanting all means and power diverse hundreds of years, when many
confesse^ general Councels have been called and assembled. Mutual assent
without a Superiors commanding ability is by experience impossible, a^
ordinary or equal Bishop or Bishops could not do it, having no jurisdiction
the one over the other par in parem non habet authoritatem, much less oue^
Superiors, whose presence is more, and most requisite and needful in such
cases, places and times. Therefore we must of necessity confess this power to
be the peculiar right of the only Popes of Rom^ for the times being. They in
these and such controversies, from the days of the Apostles, and by their
order and allowance both claymed and practiced; and so we after so many
hundreds of years in times of Controversy and contention may not deny it,
especially when denying it we shall deny all hope, and means to decide and
end the most dangerous debates in Religion. Pope Julius in his epistle to
Bishops assembled at Antioche a patriarchall See; claymeth that Councels could
not be called without the Pope of Rome, that the Eccleasticall Canon was so,
and decrees otherwise made were void: Canon Ecclesiasticus vetat, ne decreta
Julius Pap. ep. ad Episcopos Antiochiae. Socrates hist. Eccl. l 2. c. 13.
Sozomen. hist. Eccl. l. 2. cap. 9.
absque sententia Episcopi Romani Ecclesijs sanciantur. Legem esse ad
Sacerdotij dignitatem specta^tem, quae pronunciat acta illa irrita esse, quae
prae^^r sententiam Episcopi Romani constituuntur. And those Bishops themselves
in their common epistle acknowledge that the Church of Rome had primacy over
all, and with all, as being the school of the Apostles and Metropolitaine City
of piety, even from the beginning. Literis suis fatebantur Ecclesiam Rom^^^^
Episcopi Antiochiae conuen. epist. ad Iulium Pap. Romans Sozomen. hist. l. 2.
cap. 7. Socrat. l. 2. c. 11. Council. Constantin. 1. can. 5. Socrat. hist. l. 5.
cap. 8.
Primas apud omnes far, vtpote quae Apostolorum schola, and pietati^
Metropolis (licet authors Religi^^^^ Christianae primum ex orient eo
venissent) iam ^^ initio fuisset. Ecclesia Romana priuilegium praeter (...)
obtinet. And after, the City of Constantinople, being made Imperial claymed
the greatest glory could be given unto it, the Church of Rome was still the
chief and primate even by the Council of Constantinople it self. Decretum
fuit, vt Episcopus Constantinopolitanus proxime and secundum Episcopum Romanum
primas propterea obtinere, quod illa ciuitas nona Roma esset appellata. Our
Protestants Rob. Barnes lib. de vit. Pontif. Romans in Marcello.
themselves acknowledge, that Saint Marcellus Pope decreed long before any
general Council, that no Council should be kept without the peculiar
authority of the Pope of Rome. Ne conciliu^ sine peculiari Pontificis
authoritate haberetur statuit.

But S. Marcellus even in the place these do cit^, deduceth this supreme
authority to the S. Marcell. ep. 1. ad Episcop. Antiochiae Prouinciae.
Church of Rome ever since Saint Peter's coming thither, so writing to the
Bishops of Antioch yielding when Saint Peter was at Antioch, the primacy was
there, but Saint Peter coming from thence to Rome by Christ's commau^de,
Iubente Domino, his See and primacy was translated thither. Eiu^ seeds Romam
translata est. And the Sea of Antioch at the first the chiefest thus yielding
to the Sea of Rome, every other must needs be subject unto it. So were the
decrees of the Apostles. Who also ordained that noe Council might be kept
without the authority of that See, nor any Bishop judged but in Council called
by that authority. Si vestra Antiochena, quae oli^ prima erat, Romanae cesset
sedi, nulla est, quaecius non subiectae fit ditioni, ad quam o^nes quasi ad
caput, iuxta Apostolorum eorumque Successoram Sanctiones Episcopi, q^i
voluerint, velquibus necesse fuerit, suffugere, eamque appellare debent, vt
inde accipiant tuitionem and liberationem. Simulque ij them inspirante Domino
constituerunt, vt nulla Synodus fieret praeter eiusdem sedis authoritatem, nec
vllus Episcopus, nisi in legitima Synodo, suo tempore Apostolica authoritate
conuocata, super quibuslibet criminibus pulsatur audiatur vel iudicetur. Quia
Episcoporum iudicia, and summarum causarum negotia, sieve cuncta dubia,
Apostolicae Sedis authoritate sunt agenda and finienda. Et omnia
comprouintialia negotia, huius sancta vniuersalis Apostolica Ecclesiae funt
retractandaiudicio, si huius Ecclesiae Pontifex praeceperit. Saint Alexander
Pope, living in this first Apostolic age, is witness, that Christ himself
gave this supreme Alexander 1. epist 1. Anaclet. epist. 1. Robert. Barn. l. de
vit. Pontif. Romans in Anacleto. Edict. Constable. to. 1 Council. Isodor. Hisp. in
hist. Isod. Iun. collect. can. Adrian. 1. epist. ad Co^st. and Iren. 20.
Abraham leuita chron. Indiar. R. Abraham Aben Esra ad cap. 11. Danielis.
Ammian. Marcellin. lib. 27.
power to that Apostolic See. Huic Sanctae and Apostolicae Sedi summarum
dispositiones causarum and omnium negotia Ecclesiarum ab ipso Domino tradita
sa^^ quasi ad caput. So has S. Anacletus before him, both Catholic and
Protestants so acknowledging. Ab ipso Domino primatum Romanae Ecclesiae super
omnes Ecclesias vniuer sumque Christiani nominis populum concessum esse
asseruit. The words of Saint Anacletus are more large and plain, then this
Protestant allowance is.

And to come again, to the first general Council held at Nyce: first the
Edict of Constantine his donation and endowing the Roman Church, and
acknowledging therein as great privileges to belong to that Apostolic See,
as any Pope, or learned Catholic now gives unto it, was passed by all writers
before Constantine his seating himself in the east, and the calling of the
Nicen Council.

This is manifest, not only by Christian antiquaries, too many to be cited,
but Jews and Pagans also. By that donation it is evident that neither the
Nicen, nor any other such Council, could be called without the allowaa^ce of
the Pope of Rome. secondly in the Council of Rome consisting of 284. Bishops
all subscribeing as Constantine himself present likewise did, by all their
hearts and hands, as great primacy is granted to that See as ever it claymed.
Nemo iudicabit primam (Romanam Council. Romans sub Syleustro* can. 20.
sedem) quoniam omnes seeds a prima sede iustitiam desiderant temperari. Neque
ab Augusto, neque abomni cler^; neque a Regibus, neque a Populo Iudex
indicabi^^r. Et Subscripserunt 284. Episcopi, and 45. Presbyteri; and 5.
Diacont and Augustus Constantinus and matter eius Helena. This was before the
Nicen Council by many arguments. Thirdly the Fathers of the Nicen Counsel
sent it in Latin to Pope Syluester. Placuit vt haec omnia mitterentur ad
Episcopum vrbis Nicen Conc. in praefat. ep. Concilij Nicaeni ad Syluestr.
Conest. Romans 3.
Romae Syluestrum, and he there in a Counsel of 275. Bishops thus confirmed
it. Syluester Episcopus Sanctae and Apostolic aesedis vrbis Romae dixit
quicquid in Ni^aea Bithinia constitutum est adrobur sanctae matris Ecclesiae
Catholicae and Apostolicae a sanctis Sacerdotibus erecentis december and octo,
nostro ore conformiter confirmamus: qui ausi fuerint dissoluere definitionem
Sancti and magni Concilij, quod apud Nicaeam congregatum est, anathemat^zanius,
and dixerunt omnes, placet. The Pope of Rome, the Imperial City of the Eusebius.
l. 3. de vit. Constant. c. 7. Socrates. hist. l. 1 cap. 5. Theodorit.
world had his Priests there which supplied his place. Vrbisillius penes quam
Imperium est, Episcopus ingrane s^ente ae^a^e praepeditus, absuit: eius tamen
presbyteri, qui ad^rant, locum eius suppleuerunt. Their Hist. l. 1. ca. 7.
Sozomen. hist. l. 1. c. 16.
names were Vitus and Vincentius, Vitus and Vi^centius eiusdem Ecclesia
Presbyteri, pro illo adfuere. What it was forthem being but only Priests, and
not Bishops, to supply the place of the Pope of Rome, and to be present for him
among so many Patriarks, Archbishops and Bishops, sufficiently declares his
dignity, and their chief authority i^ Council in that respect. Which these
ancient Authors of that time have proved before, assuring us, that no
Council might be kept or decree made without the Bishops of Rome their
allowance, and Nicaen. Conc. in Subscriptione ante nomina Episcoporum.
consent. This is proved also by the ancient copy and subscriptions of this
first general Council, where these two Priests Legates for the Pope of Rome
subscribe for him, and by his power before all others Bishops, Archbishops or
Patriarks present whatsoever Victor, or, Victus, and Vinecenti^^* Presbyteri
vrbis Romae, pro venerabili vno Papa ^ Episcopo nostro Syluestro,
subscripsimus, ita cred^^^^ ficut scriptum est.

And then after follow the subscriptions of the Bishops of Afrike, Asia, and
Europe, The Bishop^ of Europe, wherein Rome is, being the last there in
subscription, these Legates of the Pope, only Priests subscribeing first of
all Europe Asia or Afrike, when of themselves as Priests they had ^^ place at
all, without power, and authority from the Apostolic See of Rome, by which
they had, an^ thus executed the chiefest, in that first chief, an^ general
Christian Council of the world, as it i^ commonly accounted, and by that title
propose^ as an example, and president for those that followed* Which has
enforced me to continue my examination of this part of this Protestant Article
thus long, in regard this Council being so generally ^^c^^ued by all, may be^
pattern square and rule unto all in this kind of Question.

The pretended only reason, which our Protestants before have made, to prove
that which follows in this article, That general Councels may err, and
sometimes have erred, even in things pertaining unto God, being this: forasmuch
as they be an assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the spirit and
word of God, is vain, Idle, and to no purpose: for so we might discredit and
deny all those Councels of the Apostles, and Disciples of Christ before
remembered, especially all after the choosing of the seven Deacons, Saint
Stephen, and therest. For among these Nicolas author of the Nicolaite heresy,
was one, and so being so unworthy an heretic, may not be said to have been
always governed with the spirit, and word of God. And not finding any other
general Council from that time until the first of Nice, which our
Protestants with general applause receive, and all the Canons and decrees
thereof, being received by Parlaments, statutes, communion books, Canons,
articles before, and all authority they have, we may still doubt, or plainly
say rather that this erred even in things pertaining unto God, and the very
nature of God himself the blessed Trinity. And diverse others: for although, it
consisted of the chiefest Prelates of all noble Churches in all Europe, Afrike;
and Asia, ^x ^^nibus Ecclesijs quae frequentes in tota Europa, Africa Eusebius. l.
3. de vit. Constant. cap 7. Socrat. Eccl. hist. l. 1. cap. 5.
and Asia extiterunt, Dei ministri, qui facile primas far putabantur, in vnum
conuocati: all Patriarchs, either by themselves or Legates were there, and the
Emperor himself, (for such as require his consent) yet they were all but an
assembly of men, whereof Ruffin. hist. Eccl. l. 1. ca. 5. Theodorit. hist. l.
1. Sozozomen. Eccl. hist. l. 1. c. 19.
all were not governed with the spirit and word of God, our Protestants goodly
reason, for by all writers ther^ were 17. known Arian heretics among them, and
for such diverse of them with Arius condemned and exiled, at that time, and many
more were absent in great number. And if we should for this, or any other
pretended reason, doubt of the truth of this men Council, it were in vain
ever to labor our seek to have a true general, and undoubted Council, for a
greater assembly and more likely to conclude the truth, is not morally possible
to be gathered. For besides the Emperor, all the Socrates hist. Eccl. l. 1. c.
5. Eusebius. l. 3. de vit. Constant. cap. 9.
Patriarks, and above 300. Bishops, there were learned Clergy men there
without number. I^ hoc praesenti choro fuit Episcoporum multitud^ ad n^morum
(...) torum and a^plius: Presbyteror^^ a^tem, Diaconorum, acolithorum, and
aliorum q^^ istos; comitabantur, turbane munera^ quidem potest. Atque ex (...)
Dei ministris alij prudenter and discrte dicendo, alij vitae grauitate, and
constanti rerum arduarum perpessione, nonnulli quasi media inter istos
interiecta viuendiratione eximij, praeclara laudis insignia adepti sunt.

Thus Eusebius there present, and others living in that time. And if in civil
and moral bodies, such as the Church, Councels, Diets, Parlaments and such
like assemblies composed of many and diverse persons and conditions, are, we
should expect an universal and general consent of men so assembled, we shall
find there were or have been or can be very few or none such in the world.

That first Parliament of Queen Elizabeth which ouerthrewe Catholic Religion,
and set up that new profession which professes and decreed the articles, had
but 4. or 5. voices and suffrages more for their new Religion, then were for
the old, and yet she made so many new Protestant Lords for that purpose, and
used such irreligious practices to increase the number for their new erection,
as their own historians abundantly have testified. The Cambd. hist. Mar.
Regio. Scot. Stowe hist. an. 1. Elizab.
Roman and Catholic Church never proceeded with such poor shists and small
difference of consents, either in the Council of Trent against protestants, or
any other former general Council, in suppressing and condemning other
heretics and their heresies, as is evident in this first general Council of
Nice, where as before so many agreed, and so few dissented.

Constantine the great Emperor, if we would follow Protestants for Princes
Supremacy, has before made the Judgment and sentence of the Nicen Council,
the Infallible Judgment and sentence of God, and gives the same infallibility
to all such Councels. Quicquid in Sanctis Episcoporum concilijs Constant. ep.
ad Ecclesias apud Socrat. l. 1. hist. Eccl. c. 6. Ruffin. hist. l. 1. c. 10.
Episcopi Nicaeni Council. epist. ad Episcopos Aegyptum, Libyam and Pentacol.
incol Socrat. supr. l. 1. ca. 6. Theodorit. l. 1. hist. c 9.
decernitur, id vniuersum diuinae voluntati debet attribui. If we will believe
hundreds of learned Bishops there assembled, so they testify: quaerite
constituta and decreta sint, earata stabiliaque permaneant, Dei Patris
omnipotentis, and Domini nostri Jesus Christi auxilio, vna cum Spiritus sancti
gratia. And they Anathematized the resisters of their decrees: Quibus omnibus
Sa^ctum Concilium indicit Anathema. Placuit Concilio, communibus suffragijs
Anathema denuntiare. It is evident by the 6. and 7. Canon of this Nicen
Council that the Pope of Rome, Patriarch of Antioch, Alexandria, and by some
Jerusalem, had Jurisdiction over all Bishops in the world, and they all
assented, if they could have assented to error, the whole Church under them
might have erred.

Saint Syluester Pope of Rome, as before, with 275. Bishops confirmed that
Council in all points, anathematizing all gaynesayers unto it. Omnes qu^ ausi
fuerint dissoluere definitionem Sancti and mag^^ Concilij, quod apud Nicaeam
tongregatum est, anathematizamus. Et dixerint omnes, placet. Things concluded
and confirmed for the whole Church by so many and great authorities, and their
denial so severely punished, must needs be of highest and infallible truth.

The Apostles themselves in their Councels before have given undoubted
testimony to this if they Ignat. epist. ^d Polycarp. epist. ad Her.
had not by their Councels prefigured and given testimoy to the infallible
verity of the decrees of general Councels, Their so many assembles and
Councels might have been spared, for whatsoever any one of them did, or should
have decreed, was without question true in matters of faith, otherwise we
might call all their sacred writings and the whole new testament into question.

The Apostolic men of the first age have given like evidence before. And among
them S. Ignatius who would have such councels often kept: Crebrius celebrentur
Conuentus Synodique: does make their decrees, and constitutions, of so great
and unquestionable power, and authority, that he which does otherwise, although
he is in other things worthy of credit, although he fasteth, although he lives
in virginity, does miracles and prophesies is to be accounted for a wolf,
which under a sheeps skin brings destruction and bane to the sheep.
Quicunque dixerit quippi^^ praeterea quae constituta sunt: tamet si fide dignus
(...), quamuis ieiunet, quamuis in virginitate degat, q^amnis signa edat,
quamuis prophetet: pro lupo illum ^^^eas, qui sub oninae pelle exitium,
pestemque adfert ^^ib^^. So impossible he makes it, that such decrees should
be untrue. And the first Nicen Council Council. Nic. in Symbolo, apud Ruffin.
l. 1. hist. Eccl. c. ^. Socrat. l. 1. hist. c. 6.
declaring, that a general Council is the Catholic Church, and reason so
warrantinge, by error of such a Council the whole Church might err in
articles of faith. And that article of our Creed, I believe the holy Catholic
Church, ever most true, might be false at sometimes: which is a thing most
profane, and Antichristian to be affirmed. For if a general Council
representing the whole Church, ruling, governing and teaching it in the
chiefest Bishops, and Pastors there present, might err, the whole Church both
the Governors, and governed therein must needs be in the same desolate estate.
And our Protestant Bishops and Doctors Engl. Protest. in Bilson Suru. p. 82.
Morton. part. 2. Apolog. p. 340. l. 4. c. 18. field p. 228.
with their public allowance, and approbation do thus give warrant unto us.

The authority of general Councels is most wholesome in the Church. A general
Council is highest Judge. Bishops assembled in a general Council have
authority to subject every man that shall disobey such determinations, as they
consent upon, to excommunication, and censures of like nature. We must receive
and respect the authority L. 4. c. 5 page 202.
of all Catholic Doctors, whose doctrine and writings the Church allows:
we must more regard the authority of Catholic Bishops: more then these the
authority of the Apostolic Churches: amongst them more especially the Church
of Rome: of a general Council, more then all these. False it is, that we
admit no Judge, but Scriptures, Sutcliff ag. D. Kell. page 40. 42.
for we appeal still to alawfull general Council.

This being thus generally written with authority, and in the name of all
Protestants, especially in England, they must needs grant, that general
Councels be of infallible Judgment, in articles of religion, otherwise there is
no means left to find the truth, but we might and must wander from one false
and deceitful rule to an other, without end. And seeing every Court and
Consistory; from which appeals are, or may be made, is inferior, more
uncertain, and of less authority, then that Seat of Judgment to whom it is
appealed, it is most certain, by these Protestants themselves, that they which
never had, have, or, as before, can have hereafter any general Council, to
which they must appeal, as they do, cannot have any possible title to true
religion, for themselves or the least color or pretense of Justice or Religion
for such monstrous, and horrible penalties, and cruelties, as are inflicted, to
enforce the Catholics, so many general Councels, consisting of diverse hundreds
of learned and holy Bishops, or to persuade them to embrace their Protestant
professions which never had any lawful Bishop according to this fifth Council.
Illud generaliter clarum est, quod si quis praeter Council. Nic. can. 6. Ruffin.
l. 1. hist Eccl. in Council. Nicen.
sententiam Metropolitani fuerit factus Episcopus, eum magna Synodus definiuit
non esse Episcopum. That is generally manifest, that if any man is made a
Bishop against the will or likeing of the Metropolitan, this great Council,
does define that he is no Bishop. And so can make no Bishop or Priest. So by
this most holy Council, so often and authoritatiuely received by our English
Protestants, as is before declared, they neither have nor possibly hereafter by
their proceedings can have any one Archbishop, Bishop, Priest or Cl^^^gy man
among them: for if their pretended ^^^ner of constitution were true, which we
have in^^ncibly proved otherwise, yet they themselves, and all other writers
confess, they had not the assent, but uttermost dissent and disagreement of
any domestical or foreign Metropolitan for their new Religion or
consecration. But this sacred Council even in those Canons which our
Protestants Nicen. Con^. can. 14.
receive, does utterly condemn the pretended consecration, and ministry of
England erected against the Catholic sacrificing Preisthood, assuring us, that
true Priests did offer sacrifice and this Sacrifice was the body of Christ.
Presbyteri offerendi sacrificij habe^t potestatem. Offerunt corpus Christi. It
maintained the Popes Supremacy as before. It received more Scriptures then
Protestants do: librum Judith Synodus Hieron. praef. in librum Judith. Council.
Nic. can. 11. 13. 14. Can. 3.
Nicaena in numero Sanctarum scripturarum legitur computasse. It approves
Indulgences in 4. Canons: and gives authority to Bishops in such cases. It
forbids Clergy men to keep any women in their howses, but mother, Sister,
grandmother, Aunt. They declared it to be the old tradition of the Church, that
Ecclesiastical men might not marry, and so commanded. Qui in clerum ante
ascripti Socrates hist. l. 2. c. 2. Sozomen. hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 22.
erant quam duxissent, hi secundum veterem Ecclesiae traditionem, deinceps a
nuptijs se abstinerent. By which the Protestants Church is utterly disabled,
and overthrown, by their own rule, and article, before, neither having the
true word preached, Sacraments duly ministered, Church rightly governed, nor
any one man among them to perform most needful functions and duties, by their
own definitive sentence.

Their conclusion of this article, Things ordained by general Councels, as
necessary unto salvation h^^e neither strength, nor authority, unless it may
be declared, that they be taken out of holy Scriptures. This is abundantly
before confuted where I entreated of their article of Scriptures. So it is by
that is delivered in this Council, which they wholly, and without any the least
exception, admit. For in denial of marriage unto Clergy men, it has done it
by the old Apostolic tradition of the Church, Can. 6. 7.
secundum veterem Ecclesiae traditionem. So they do in the true government of
the Church by the Pope, and Patriarchs. Antiqua consuetudo. Antiqua mores. Mos
antiquus. Seruetur, Seruentur. Consuetud^ obtinuit, and antiqua traditio. Yet
true government of the Church, is with them an essential property of the true
Church, inseparable, and so necessary to salvation. So is the true Clergy and
consecration as also the holy Sacrifice and Sacrament of the altar, really
containing the body of Christ, yet by these men not to be declared by
Scriptures, they finding no such thing in them.

And these Protestants themselves with public Protest. of Engl. in field.
libr. 4. of the Church page 228.
allowance write: Bishops assembled in a general Council have authority, to
interpret Scriptures, and by their authority to suppress all them, that gain
say such interpretation. Therefore if there were question of truly
interpreting Scripture, Protestants must yield to general Councels, and not
these to them, particular Churches (if the Protestant was such) must of duty
and necessity submit themselves to the universal, and Apostlike Catholic,
such as a general Council is, as the first Nicen Council in the Creed
thereof, which Protestants receive, does declare it self, and such general
Councels to be, and so inflicteth censures. Anathematizat Ca^^olica Symb.
Nice^. Ruffin. lib. 1. hist. c. 5. Soc. l. 1. hist. c. 6.
and Apostolica Ecclesia. Therefore we are sure a general Council cannot
err in expounding Scriptures, or any decree of faith. That our Christian
Britains were of this mind, opinion and prof^ssion, their Bishops with long
and tedious labors present at the great primitive Councels of Arles, Sardice,
Ariminum, and others by all witnesses, and with our King and Emperor at Nice,
in most probable Judgment, also Rome, and the sacred Nicen Council here then
authentically received and embraced by all holy writers, give abundant
testimony.

THE X. CHAPTER.
The 22. Article thus likewise examined, and condemned.
THE next article the 22. in number is entitled: of Purgatory. And is thus.
The Romish doctrine The doctrine of Purgatory prayer, and other satisfaction
for the true faithful deceased practiced in this first ag^.
concerning Purgatory, pardons, worshipping, and adoration as well of Images, as
of relics, and also invocation of Saints, is a fond thing, vainly invented,
and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather rep^gnant to the word of
God. Much matter in few words, many things peremptorily affirmed, nothing
proved. All false, and foolish also, where as they would have all thing
grounded upon warranty of Scripture, so many times by the^ affirmed, and as
often by me before confuted.

And to take their assertions in order beginning with their first, about the
Romish (their phrase) doctrine concerning Purgatory. This is thus set down in
the Councels of Florence and Trent: If men truly ponitent depart this life, in
the love of God, before they have satisfied for their sins, their souls are
purged with the pains of Purgatory. And that they may be releiued from such
pains, the suffrages of the saithfull alive, to wit, sacrifice of Mass,
prayers and alms and other offices of piety, which by the faithful are used
for other faithful people, according to the institu^^ons Council. Flor. Council.
T^id. Sessione 4. can. 30.
of the Church, do profit them. Definimus si vere poenitentes in Dei charitate
decesserint, antequam dignis poenitentiae fructibus de commissis satisfe^eri^^
and omissis, eorum animas paenis Purgatorij purgari. Et vt a poenis huiusmodi
releuentur, prodesse his viuorum fidelium suffragia, Missarum scilicet
sacrificio orationes, and eleemosynas and pietatis officia, quae a fidelibus
proaijs fidelibus fieri consueuerunt, secundum Ecclesiae institutae.

Nor is this the Romish only but also the Greekish and Catholic doctrine of
the Church of Christ. So is affirmed by Gennadius their learned Patriarch in
his defense of the recited Council of Florence: The doctrine of Purgatory,
prayer and Sacrifice G^nad. Schol. in defens. Council. Floraent. def. ^. cap. 3.
for the dead was a tradition of the Apostles. That which the La^^nes call
purgatorium, purgatory, they of the Greek Church name catharterion, a purging
place, They were only Scismaticorum Sectatores, followers of Scismatikes,
which denied it. This is likewise confessed Relation of Relig. c. 53. 54. 55.
by our English Protestants, and known unto all trauaylers either into the
contries, or writers of the Greeks. Now let us see whether it was the doctrine
of the Apostolic age, or not.

The Greek Patriarch has before affirmed it, So will our Protestants
hereafter. And the Apostolic men of this age affirm and prove it. Saint
Clement says his Master and predecessor Saint Clem. Romans Epist. 1.
Peter among other things did teach, mortuos sepelire, and diligenter little
exequias peragere, proque eis or^^e, and eleemosynas dare. To bury the dead,
and diligently perform their funerals, and pray, and give alms for them. He
delivers further how in their public Constitut. Apost. l. 8. c. 19.
Church service, and Sacrifice of that time, among their prayers for other
necessaries, they prayed for the faithful departed out of this world. Pro ijs,
qui infide quieuerunt, oremus.

And from James Alphaeus named the Brother of our Lord, frater Domini, he
sets down the manner how the Deacon used publicly to give warning in the
time of the holy Sacrifice, to pray for the souls of the faithful deceased,
delivering the very prayer commonly used in such cases, directly proueing a
place of Purgatory, and prayer for the delivery of the faithful departed from
thence, with a remission of all punishment, they had deserved, and were to
suffer, until they were by such means freed thereof. Pro defunctis qui in
Christo requieuerunt, L. 8. supr. cap. 47. iuxt. al. 40. and 41.
postquam Diaconus edixit, orandum esse, adiunget etiam haec: oremus
profratribus nostris qui in Christo requieuerunt, vt Deus summae erga homines
charitatis, qui animam defuncti suscepit, remittat ei omne peccatum
voluntarium, and non voluntarium, and propitius illi factus, collocet eam in
regione piorum qui laxati sunt, in sinu Abrahae, Isaac, and Jacob, cum omnibus
qui a saeculo condito Deo placuerunt, vnde fugit dolor, maeror and gemitus. And
again: ipse nunc respice hunc seruum tuum, quem in aliam sortem elegisti and
assumpsisti, and condona ei, si quid tum volens, tum nolens peccauit: and
exhibe ei Angelos beneuolos, ac colloca ^um in s^^^ Patriarcharum, and
Prophetarum, at que Apostolorum. And expresses plainly, that such holy
prayers, Sacrifice, alms, and the like works of piety, did only help and
profit such, as the Catholic Councels have before delivered, and Catholics
perform such duties for, dying in state of grace, not yet having satisfied for
their sins. Sed Cap. 49.
haec depys dicimus: impios enim tametsi omnia bona externa pro eis largiaris,
nihil iunare queas. And pu^ctually remembers diverse solemn times to pray,
especially for such. The third day, neenth day, Cap. 48.
fourteth day and the years day or their deaths, then used. Exequiae
mortuorum fiant tertio die, die nono, quadragefimo, item anno exacto, ad
habend^^ memoriamipsiue defuncti, and suppeditetur ex bonis ei^^ pauperibus ad
recordationem eiusdem. The like he Cap. 50.
has in other places. Saint Denis the Aeropagite speaks as plainly in this
matter, and affirms that this manner of praying for the dead, dying in state
of grace was both an Apostolical tradition, and warranted by holy Scriptures.
Speaking of the faithful deceased, and the ceremonies of the living for them,
he says the Priests powers fourth his (...) holy prayer for him that is
departed this life. Accede^s dininus praeful, precem super to sacratissimam
fun^^^. And repeating the same again, he sets down, how all saluted the
dead, and prayed for him, or them, and their prayer was, that God would remi^
them all their sins which by humane frailty they had committed, and place
them in the light and region of the living, in the bosoms of Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, Dion. Areop. l. de Eccles. Hierarch. c. 7.
in the place from whence all grief, sadness and groneing flies away.
Accedens diuinus Antistes precem suam super mortuum peragit: postquam precem,
and ipse eum praesul salutat, and suo deinceps ordine qui (...) omnes. Precatur
oration illa, diuinam bonitatem, (...) cuncta dimittat per infirmitatem humanam
admissa peccata defuncto: eumque in luce statuat, and regione viuorum, in
sinibus Abrahae, and Isaac, and Jacob, in loco vnde aufugit dolor, and
tristitia, and gemitus. And expounds this Bosom of Abraham, whither the
faithful are translated by the prayers, and other good deeds of the living,
from the place of punishment or Purgatory, where they were beforeto the
eternal felicity in heaven, as Catholics now hold and teach. Sinus autem
beatorum Patriarcharum reli^^^rumque sanctorum omnium, vtreor, diuinissimae ac
beatissimae seeds, quae deiformes omnes suscipiunt, insenescibili, and
beatissima perfectione. And there he solueth that pretended exception, which
our Protestants make against this Apostolic doctrine, and practice, because
they suppose the souls of these faithful deceased to be without all hope, to
go to any other place, then that they are received in, when they are newly
separated from their bodies, and the center of all for ever to be after death
as their lives and actions were in this world, and he affirms that the
prayers of the just do as well help those, that are dead, being worthy of
such prayers, in the time of their life, as the living, and the true traditions
of the Scriptures so teach us. Verum, inquies fortassis, haec quidem recte a
nobis dicta esse; sed te dubitare, cur a diuinabonitate postulet Antistes
mortuo peccatorum remissionem, and parem Sanctis ac lucidissimam haereditatem.
Sienim vnusquisque praemia consequetur a diuina iustitia, eorum bonorum aut
malorum quae in hac vita gessit; perfecit autem is qui defunctus est huic vitae
consentaneas actiones: quanam A^^tistitis orationis in aliam quietis sedem
migrabit; praeter eam quaeipso digna, est, and quae vitae hi^ actae respondet?
equidem probe scio, scriptis diuints insistens, vnumquemque remuneratitiam
sortem adepturum. Conclusit enim, inquit, Dominus apud se: and referet
vnusquisque ea quae per corpus gessit, sieve bonum sieve malum. Quod autem and
iustorum preces etiam i^ hac vita, nedum post mortem, ijs solum profint, qui
digni sunt sacris precibus, Scripturarum nos edocent verae traditiones. He
teaches as Saint Clement has done before, that this manner of praying and
doing other works of piety, for the dead, was used and avail able for true
believing Christians only, which died in the state of grace. Prophanis vita
functis haec non precatur: non modo quia in hoc diuinitut acceptum desereret
ordinem, and aliquid Hierarchicum contumaciter praesumeret non motus a
caeremoniarum conditore, sed quia in execrabili oratione non exaudiretur, atque
non immerito ipse audiret oraculum illud institiae plenum: petitis, and non
accipitis, quia male petitis. Jacob. c. 4.
We read that Saint Phocas a miraculous Saint of this time, did acknowledge
two lower places, one of the damned, the other must needs be Purgatory, when
prophetically foretelling the death of Traian, by whom he was martyred, to
follow, within three days, as it did, he told him that he S. Phocus ad
Traianum. Walter. Rollwinke fascic. Tempor. in Traian.
was to go to the parts of the furthest deep place, where he should be in
perpetual darkness, and burned with cruel fire for ever. Traiane perge ad
vlterioris abissi loca, and ad praeparata tibi tormenta festina, vbi nocte
perpetua, and saeuo exurendus es incendio.

This he spoke by the spirit of God prophetically, and co^seque^tly truly: cui
spiritu prophetico dixit. This was the doctrine, and practice of the whole
Church of God expressed, and professed in the most ancient liturgies, and
public Masses, ascribed to the holy Apostles, then publicly used. In the
Mass of S. Missa S. Iacobi.
James called the lesser, Bishop of Jerusalem we find this prayer: pro
requie ante defunctorum, and Patrum, and fratrum, Dominum ^remus. Let us pray
to our Lord for the rest of them that be already departed this life, our
fathers and brothers.

That God will grant their oblation to be acceptable, for propitiation of
sins, and ignorances, and rest of the souls of them that be dead before us.
Fac vt oblatio nostra acceptabilis sit, sanctificata in Spiritu sancto, in
propitiationem nostrorum peccatorum, and ignorantiarum populi, and in requiem
animarum eorum, qui ante nos dormierunt. Memento Domine Deus spirituum and
vniuersae carnis, quorum memoriam egimus, and quorum memoriam non egimus,
orthodoxorum, ab Abeliusto vsque in hodiernum diem. Ipse ibi fac cos requie
scere in regione viuentium, in regno tuo, in delicijs Paradisi in si^^ Abrahae,
and Isaac, and Jacob, sanctorum Patrum nostrorum, vnde exulat dolor, tristitia
and gemitus, vbi lustrat lumen vultus tui, and refulget perpetuo. Pro requie
patrum, and fratrum nostrorum, qui ante nos dormierunt, dicamus omnes toto
animo, Domine miserere.

The like has the liturgy of Saint Matthew: Missa S. Matthaei.
Memento Domine omnium fidelium dormientium, and in signo rectae fidei quie
scentium, Domine Deus noster memento dormientium, and in recta fide
quiescentium. So is the Mass of Saint Mark: animabus patrum and Missa S.
Marci.
fratrum nostrorum, qui antea Christi in fide obdormierunt, dona requiem Domine
Deus noster. And relating how it was the use to read the cataloge of such
deceased, and then to pray thus for all their souls. Horum omnium animabus da
requiem, Domine Deus ^^ster, Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in c. 1. ad Philipp. Hom. ad
pop. Anthiochen. Hom. 41. in 1. Cor. cap. 15. Epiph. haer. 75. Tertull. l. de
coron. milit. c. 3. cap. 4. August. Enchirid. c. 100. de ciuit. Dei l. 21. c.
24. l. de cur. pro mart. de verbis Apostoli sermon. 32. Isod. l. 1. de offic.
Eccl. c. 18. Amal. l. 1 c. 27. Epiphan. l. de haeres. etc 53. Philastr. l. de
haer. Middlet. Papistom. pa. 49. 137. 138. 47. 64. 45. 46. 51. field l. 3. c.
29. p. 138. Couel. Exam. p. 114. Middl. supr. page 51. Morton. Apol. part. 1.
p. 329. Calvin. apud eund. ib. Perkins problemat. page 178.
in sanctis tuis tabernaculis, inregno tuo, largiens eis promissionum tuarum
bona quae oculus non vidit, and auris non audiuit, and in cor hominis non
ascenderunt, quae praeparasti Deus, dilige^tibus sanctum nomen tuum: eorum,
inquam, animabus dona requiem, easque regno caelorum dignare.

All other ancient public liturgies and Masses of all nations agree herein.
The best learned Fathers both of the Greek and Latin Church do assure us, it
was a tradition of the Apostles, and received and practiced in the whole
Church. Ab Apostolis sancitum est, vt in celebratione venerandorum mysteriorum
memoria fiat eorum qui hinc decesserunt. Qui ante nostestes fuerunt, habentes
ante nos traditionem ^^ Ecclesia, quique etiam a patribus suis traditum
acceperunt, quemadmodum etiam hi a suis patribus didicerunt. Pro peccatoribus
facimus memoriam, pro peccatoribus misericordiam Dei implorantes. Ecclesia
necessario hoc perficit traditione a patribus accepta. Quis autem poterit
statutum matris dissoluere, aut legem patris? Sacrificium pro defunctorum
fidelium requie offerre, vel pro eis orare, quia pertotum hoc orbem custoditur,
credimus quod ab ipsistraditum sit, hoc enim vbique Catholicatenet Ecclesia.

This was so generally received, and confessed doctrine, practiced in all times
and places, That until Aerius the heretic in the days of Constantine, no man
denied it, and he for his singular denial thereof, was and is condemned of
heresy, with all his followers. This is a truth so evident, that our
Protestant writers do with their public warran^ thus acknowledge it. The
primative Church did offe^ sacrifice at the altar for the dead. Sacrifice for
the dead^ was a tradition of the Apostles, and the ancient Fathere. Saint
Chrysostom taught it to be the Apostles ordinance to pray for the dead.
Aerius condemned the custom of the Church in naming the dead at the altar,
and offering the sacrifice of Eucharist for them: and for this his rash and
inconsiderate boldness, and presumption in condemning the universal Church of
Christ, he was justly condemned. In the Masses or liturgies of Basile,
Chrysostom and Epiphanius, the dead were prayed for. Ipsi veteres preces
fundebant pro defunctis. The ^^ncient Fathers powered out their prayers for the
dead. Dionysius (the Areopagite, Saint Paul's scholar) ^aught that sins
are purged in purgatory. In purgatorio expiari peccata.

The prayer made for the departed does beseech the divine Clemency, to forgive
the party deceased all sins committed by humane infirmity. Oration illa
precatur diuinam clementiam, vt cuncta dimittat per infirmitatem humanam
admissa peccata, defuncto. If we should give any respect to the Jews,
Mahometans and Coccius tom. 2. l. 7. artic. 5.
and such, to make this a received opinion of all the world, they ever held,
hold and practice prayer, and such works for the dead.

Now we need not doubt but this so public and common truth was also brought
into Britain, and here practiced and taught by our first Fathers in Religion.
Whosoever they were the Apostles or their disciples from Jerusalem, Rome or
what Apostolic place else they held professed and taught the Apostles doctrine
and tradition and used their liturgies: if from Jerusalem, that of S. James
where the dead are so often prayed for, and the sacrifice of Mass offered for
them. And where there was a particular Church, in the first days of
Christianity as S. Bid from antiquity sequens veter^^^ Bed. libel. de locis
Sanctis Arnulphus and Adama. ib. and l. 5. hist. Eccl.
monumenta, with others assures us, in quasuper altar pro defunctis
sacrificium solet fieri, positis interi^ in platea corporibus, in which Church
sacrifice was used to be offered for the dead, their bodies in the mean time
remaining in the street. But because I have inuincibly proved in my
Ecclesiastical history, and it is not to be denied but our conversion was by
S. Peter and his Church of Rome, we must Manuscript. antiq princip. stores.
needs say with our old British manuscript written in the Britains time, that
his Mass and the Mass of S. Mark his Scholar, came into these parts and
were used here. And no man, Protestant or other finding yet that the prayer in
the Roman Mass was added by any, Memento Dominc famulorum famularumque Missa
S. Petri in Canone.
tuarum qui nos praecesserunt cum sigm fid^i and dormiunt in somno pacis. Ipsis
Dominc and omnibus in Christo quiescentibus, locum refrigerij, locis and pacis,
vt indulgeas deprecamur, and the Mass of S. Mark being so manifest as before
for this religious doctrine and practice, we must needs say this was the
profession and custom, of our Christian Britans from their first instruction
in the faith of Christ. To this old monuments of our most ancient and renowned
Church of Glastenbury giueample testimony, when assuring us, that thousands of
British Christians millia dormientium were Antiquit. glast.
buried there above a thousand years since, they give these reasons of the
religious desires of good people to be buried there: quia omnibus hic sepultis
per Sanctorum inibi requiescentium preces and merita, creditur magna peccatorum
remissio a Domino concessa. Propter Missas and alias orationes quae quotidie
pro eis dicuntur, because those that were buried there had great pardon by the
merits of the Saints, and their p^^iers resting there, and the Masses and
prayers there daily offered for the dead there buried. We find in the old
antiquities of landaffe a Public Charter of King Mauricus in S. Dubrit^^^ his
time, Manuscript. antiq. de primo statu Landauen. Ecclesiae.
that it was the old custom and duty of Churches, daily to pray for the souls
of the benefactours deceased, and all the faithful departed out of this life:
oratione quotidiana and Ecclesiastico seruitio pro anima ^^^us and animabus
parentum suorum Regum and Principum Britanniae, and omnium fidelium defunctorum.

So is the charter of King Arthur to the school of Cambredge, proremedio
animarum antecessorum Chart. priuileg. Reg. Arthuri apud Caium l. 1. antiquit.
Cantabrig. page 60. 70. Caratoc. hist. M. S. de vita S. Gildel. Probus l. 2. de
vit. S. Patricij. Caius l. 1. sup. p. 147. 148. l de vit. Sa^ct. Walliae in S.
Iltuto.
vneorum Regum Britanniae. Saint Gildas our oldest writer, and great divine
did daily pray for the foul of his brother being slain. Orabat pro spiritu
fratermp quotidie. Saint Patrike prayed for the dead orauit pro anima eius. S.
Iltutus appointed 50. of his scholars to pray for the souls of the dead
continually. Constituit quinquaginta fratres, qui continuam animarum memoriam
haberent.

And as I have spoken before, how the first Christians at Jerusalem had a
particular Church founded, and employed to that holy use. So our Christians
Britans insisting in the same devotion from the beginning, had diverse such
foundations and Churches especially to offer sacrifice, and pray for the dead.
One of them was at london. Ecclesiam Galfrid. Monum. hist. Reg. Briton. l. 12
c. 13.
aedificauerunt, in quo pro ipso (Rege) and fidelibus defunctis, diuina
celebrantur obsequia. And this is sufficient for this question.

The next exception, which is taken by our Protestants The Catholic doctrine
of pardons and Indulgences.
in this article, is against the Catholic doctrine about pardons, or
Indulgences, saying, as they have done already, of Purgatory, that the Romish
doctrine concerning pardons, is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded
upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God. The
Council of Trent sets down the Catholic doctrine in this point, which
these men call the Conc. Trid. seff. 9. in decreto de Indulgentijs.
Romish doctrine, that power of granting indulgences was by Christ granted to
his Church, and the Church in the most ancient times used it, by so great
warrant, and therefore declares the use of Indulgences to be retajned in the
Church, as necessary for Christian people, and allowed by the authority of holy
Councels, anathematizing them, which affirm them to be unprofitable, or deny
there is power in the Church to grant them. Cum potestas conferendi
Indulgentias, a Christo Ecclesiae concessa sit; at que huiusmodi potestate,
diuini^^s tradita antiquissimis etiam temporibus, illa vsa fuerit: Sacrosancta
Synodus, indulgentiarum vsum Christiano populo maxim salutarem, and sacrorum
conciliorum anthoritate probatum, in Ecclesia retinendum esse docet, and
praecipit: eosque anathemate damnat, qui aut inutiles esse asserunt, veleas
concedendi, in Ecclesia potestatem esse negant.

The same holy Counsel with all good Catholics as much condemns abuses in
pardons or Indulge^ces, and as wisely preuenteth them, as any enemy of
Indulgences does, ever did, or can desire.

That there this power of granting pardons and Indulgences for remitting the
temporal punishment, due to sin, is first evident by that is said of the
pains and punishment of purgatory before. For no man will or can deny but if
the Church has power or means to remit pains, to them that be deceased, and
out of the state of meriting, in themselves, much rather it has such power and
remedies for the living which by themselves may, and do merit, and are in all
respects parts and subjects of the militant Church of Christ.

Secondly whereas this Protestant article says pardons have no warranty of
Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God. The Apostolic Fathers of
this first age have taught us otherwise before, even of the pains of
Purgatory. And the Scripture is clear both that Christ did grant this power
to his Church, and the Church practiced it in the Apostles time. Of this power
of remitting sins, and their punishment, Christ must needs mean when he said
to S. Peter, he would give Matthew. c. 16.
unto him the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever he should loose
on earth should be loosed in heaven. Tibi dabo claues regnicaelorum. Et
quodcumque solueris super terram, erit solutum and in caelis. So when he said
to all his Apostles. Whatsoever Matthew. 18.
you shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Quaecunque solueritis
super terram, erunt soluta and in Ioh. cap. 20.
coelo. And again, whose sins you forgive they are forgiven unto them.
Quorum remiseritis peccata, remitiuntur ets.

And that we may be assured, these words and warrants of Christ did carry this
construction, and give this power, and not only to the then present Apostles
but their Successors, and Rulers in his Church for ever, first Saint Paul who
was not an Apostle, Priest nor Christian then at the giving of this
cominission, nor there present, did thus expound it, and practice it. For
first excommunicating the wicked Corinthian which had committed 1. Cor. 5.
sin with his Fathers wife, his mother in law, a sin both in Catholics and
Protestants Judgment deserving great and long penance, and punishment, he
soon after wrote unto them again to give him pardon and indulge^ce for the
punishment thereof, donetis, or condonetis, cui donastis, or condonastis and
ego, and ego donaui or condonaui in persona Christi, S. Paul gave pardon in the
person of Christ, and the Church of Corinth did the same by the 2. Cor. 2.
same warrant and authority.

So the learned holy Fathers after expound it, Primasius in c. 2. epist 2. ad
Corinth. Aug. l. 2. co^tr. epist. parmen. c. 11. Chrysostom. Homil. 5. de verb.
Isaiae vidi Dom. l. 3. de Sacerdo^io. Eusebius. Emissen. hom. in dom. 19. post
Pentecost. Hilar. can. 18. in Matthew. Pacia^. epistol. 1. ad Simpronian.
Nouatian. Aug l. 50. homil. hom. 40 27. l. 20. ciuit. cap. 9. Engl. prot. Book
of Ordinat.
with the Churches approbation: cui aliquid donastis. Pro donaueritis, and ego.
Sicut vobiscum vindicaui, ita and vobiscum dono. Nam, Et ego quod donaui. Non
in mea persona, sed Christi, qui dixit, quae solueritis in terra, erunt soluta
and in coelo. Si quid donaui propter vos. N^ grauemini. In persona Christi.
Quia personam gerimus Christi. And both the Greek and Latin Church ever from
the beginning expound those words of Christ in the Gospel before cited, as I
have done. And our Protestants themselves do the like making those words of
Christ in S. Ihons Gospel to be the form and manner to make their pretended
Bishops and ministers, their pretended co^secratours, saying to all such at
their admittance, these words: Take the holy Ghost, whose sins you forgive
they are forgiven unto them, and whose you retain they are retained. And
thereby claim as ample warrant and power as any Priest, Bishop, Prelate or
Pope does or ever did, both to absolve from sins, and pardon and give
Indulgence, for all pain, and punishment in any wise due or belonging to any
sin, or sins, how many or enormeous soever they be, and by the greatest
authority in their Religion presume to practice it in such manner. For
absolution and pardoning of all sins they have the warrant of as many
Parlaments as they have kept since Queen Maryes time, all the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth: King James and Charles all their books of articles, Canons,
Injunctions, and general practice of their congregation Protestant in England
now about 70. years allowing and exercising publicly their communion book,
utterly and under great penalties forbidding all other Rituals or Church
service, in this every minister does may or is bound thus to say to men
confessing their sins unto them. Our Lord Jesus Christ has lest power to his
Protest. Communion book Titul. visitation of the Sick.
Church to absolve all sinners which truly repent and believe in him, and by
his authority committed to me, I absolve thee from all thy sins, in the name
of the Father, and of the son and of the holy Ghost, Amen.

King James Supreme head of their Church, in his Provincial Council, or
conference, with his Protestant Bishops and Doctors thus defines or
declares. The particular and personal absolution King James and Protest.
Bishops at Hampton. confer. p. 13.
from sin after confession, is Apostolical, and a very godly ordinance.
Where we see, that every Parish pretended Priest, or minister with our
Protestants (for so their directory is) may, and ought by their Religion,
attempt to give plenary pardons, and Indulgences, in as ample, or rather more
ample, and illimited manner then any Pope did. For by their religion this is to
be or may be executed by any minister to any penitent whomesoeuer without any
restriction, and from all sins and punishments due to them, which is most
manifest by their last assertion and doctrine of denying purgatory and prayer
for the dead, only constituting two places for the deceased, hell and heaven,
and teaching that every penitent so absolved, and receiving Indulgence from
them, so dying does immediately go to heaven, and so of necessity by their
doctrine and practice, they must needs hold, that they give plenary Indulgence
to every such confessing penitent. This they confirm further, prove, and
practice in all their Ecclesiastical Courts, where they inflict, and continue,
or at their pleasure forgive, pardon and give Indulgence of all punishments and
pains for sin. This they protest and declare with their public authority in
their Church service, diverse times in the year, their public direction and
command, openly in their Churches thus pronouncing: Brethren in the primative
Church Protest. Communion book Tit. a Commination against sinners.
there was a goodly discipline, that at the beginning of lent, such parsons as
were notorious sinners were put to open penna^ce, and punished in this world,
that their souls might be saved in the day of the Lord: and that other
admonished by their example, might be the more afraid to offend: it were much
to be wished, the said discipline may be restored again. And this book of
articles it Protest. artic. of Relig. art.
self in the 33. article has, how after temporal penance arbitrary by a
Judge having authority, who may assign more or less, longer or shorter, remit
and pardon some or all, the greatest sinners even excommunicated, are to have
Indulgence, pardon, and absolution. Our Protestant Parlame^ts, Parliament. 1.
Elizabeth.
and Religion do expressly receive the first Nicen Council, wherein the
doctrine of Indulgences, and Council. Nic. 1. c. 12. 11.
practice of them is as expressly approved, and calls it the ancient and
canonical law, antiqua and canonica lex seruabitur, and to be observed, and
they leave it in the power of the Bishop to be Judge, when and how they are to
be used, licebit Episcopo h^manius aliquid de ^is statuere.

And their private writers both in their public sermons, and books published
with authority, and for which some have been made Bishops among them, do thus
confirm it. As there is a death in Theoph higg. ser. 3. Mart. an. 1610.
sin, and a death to sin, so there is a double resurrection: the first a
culpa from sin: the second a poena, from the punishment which follows
thereupon. The Field books of the Church l. 1. c. 17. p. 33.
true Church admits and receaueth all, that with sorrowful repentance
return, and seek reconciliation, how great soever their offenses have been:
not forgetting to use due severity* which yet she sometime remitteth. The
ancient Bishops were w^nt to cut of great parts of enjoined penance: which
remission and relaxation was called an Indulgence.

The like have others, and among other reasons Field supr. l. 1. c. 17. 1. Cor.
2. v. 8. 9. 10.
and authorities for this old custom, and doctrine they cite and expound as
Catholics do, the practice and place of S. Paul to the Corinthians before
alleged. Therefore having so ample and evident testimony, and confession of
our Protestants in this point, we may be more breife in relating the Fathers
of this Apostolic age, the doctrine in question being by all even adversaries
thus confessed to have been delivered by Christ, Apostolical and Godly. First
to begin with the Sea of Clem. Romans epist. 1. Leo 2. in epist. decret. Marian.
Scot. l. 2. e^at. 6. Flor. Wigornie^ chron. in Siluan. and O^ho. Cons.
Rome Saint Clement and many others are worthy witnesses, that Saint Peter
the Apostle left unto him his Successor in the Roman See this power, in as
ample manner as Christ communicated it unto Saint Peter, and calls it a rule
of the Church, Ipsi trado a Domino mihi traditam potestatem ligandi and
soluendi, vt de omnibus quibuscumque decreuerit in terris, hoc decretum sit and
in coelis Ligab^ enim, quod oportet ligari, and soluet quod expedit solui,
tanquam qui ad liquidum Ecclesiae regulam nouerit.

And for all Bishops he sets down, from the Apostles order, that all
Bishops should use mercy humanity, and indulgence toward penitents. Primum
Clem. Constable. Apost. lib. 2. c. 13. 12. Cap. 18.
potestate reum iudica, deinde cum misericordia, humanitate and indulgentia eum
concilia, promittens ei salutem, si morem mutauerit, and ad paenitentiam
redierit. Oportet poenitentes libenter admittere, gaudentes illorum causa cum
misericordia, and humanitate, iudicantes eos, qui deliquerunt. He sets down
the Cap. 19.
manner how Bishops should not suffer sinners to enter into the Church, until
they had done penance as he should think fit, and then to forgive them. Cum
aliquem peccauisse cognoueris, iube cum for as eijci ingressique pro eo rogent.
Tunc iubebis illum iuuare and expendens an paeniteat, and dignus sit, qui in
Ecclesiam omnino recipiatur, afflictum illum diebus ieiuniorum pro ratione
peccati hebdomadas duas, vel tres, vel quinque, vel septem, dimitte. Where the
granting of pardon, and Indulgence, more or less is referred to the Bishops
judgment, and discretion. And Cap. 21.
further, omnium curam habeat Episcopus. Poenitentibus remissionem concedere
oportet. Recognosce o Episcope, dignitatem tuam, quod sicut ligandi potestatem
accepisti, sic etiam soluendi. Obtinens igitur soluendi potestatem, recognosce
teipsum, and secundum dignitatem loci tui, in hac vita versare, sciens quod de
pluribus rebus ratio abs te requiretur. Cui enim, inquit, depositum est Luc. 12.
multum, abundantius repetetur ab eo. Nam peccati expers reperitur nemo,
excepto eo, qui propter nos factus est homo. Quoniam scriptum est nemo mundus a
Job 25.
s^^^^bus, neque si vnum diem vixerit. Where pardons and Indulgences are
commanded, and the necessity of them among all men sinners delivered.

He teaches the like thus again, peccantem ca^^iga, Lib. 2. Constable. Apost. c.
21. Cap. 21.
and ieiunio afflictum remissione releua, and ingemiscentem recipe. And leaving
all to the Church, to impose penance, to alter change, ease or give, pardon,
release, and give Indulgence of it, he adds: nolite pro omni peccato eandem
sententiam far, Cap. 52.
sed vnicuique propriam poenam statuite, cum multa prudentia. Alios minis
subijcies, alijs subsidijs pauperum, alios ieiunijs affliges, alios segrcgabis
pro delicti magnitudine. Diuersis delictis diuersas poenas imponatis. Si
poenitentem non receperis, insidiatoribus trades, Cap. 14.
oblitus David dicentis, ne tradas bestijs animam confitentem tibi. Si quis
Episcopus aut presbyter, cum qui a Psalm. 73. Can. Apost. can. 51.
peccaco reuertitur, non recipit, sed reijcit, deponitor, eo quod Christum
offendat, qui dixit, ob vnum peccatorem qui resipiscat, gaudium oboriri in
coelo.

And Saint Ignatius earnestly urges to take Ignat. epist. ad Philadelp.
mercy of, and pardon penitent sinners, and receive them with all gentleness,
as a means to bring them from sinning to salvation. Obsecro vos, quot-quot
paenitentia ducti redierint ad vnitatem Ecclesiae, suscipite illos cum omni
mansuetudine, vt per bonitatem This doctrine of Indulge^ces used in Britain
from the first conversion thereof, to Christ. Girald. Cambren. descriptione
Cambr. cap. 18.
and patientiam vestram resipiscentes ex diaboli laqueis, digni iam Christo
facti, salutem consequantur aeternam in regno Christi. And to come home to this
our own contry of Britain, Giraldus Cambrensis an old learned Bishop, and
great antiquary entreating of the first faith, and Religion of the Britans, de
antiqua fidei fundatione, Christianitatis amore and deuotione: says they ever
continued in the same, and among other customs and obseruances kept from the
time of their first conversion, their Churche^ had far greater Immunities
privileges or Indulgences then in other places: Ecclesiae istorum long^
maiorem quam alibipacem habent.

These Indulgences here did far exceed them which the Canons grant, Long
Canonum Indulgentiam excedente. An evident argument they were more ancient
then the Canons. And being as h^ teaches without Innovation or change, eue^
from the first conversion of this Kingdom and the Apostles time. Which our
oldest antiquities warranted both by Catholic and Protestant historians, and
our Protestants themselves will thus prove unto us. They testify with
Antiquity that Io. Bal. l. 1. de vit. Pont. Roman. in Eleut. Robert. Barn. in
vit. pont. Romans in eod.
Pope Eleutherius was bonus paterfamilias, a good Steward of Gods Church. And
King Lucius entreated him to be joined to the Christian faith and Church which
was then and had been from the beginning. Lucius Britanniae Rex Christiano
ca^^i cum suis subditis adiungi a pontifice petijt, per literas. And he so
effected it, that the Brita^s were confirmed and strengthened in the doctrine
which they had received from the Apostles, and the whole Kingdom here
professed it. Eleutherius vt bonus paterfamilias effecit, vt confirmatis and
consolidatis Britan^is in suscepta prius ab Apostolis doctrina, totum illud
regnum in eius fidei verbum iuraret. And this Apostolic faith and doctrine was
the same, which this good Pope S. Eleutherius and the Romans then, Bal. lib. de
Script. Brit. centur. 1. in Eluana and Meduino. Godw. conu. of Brit.
and the Christian Britains here also professed, as these Protestants and all
Antiquaries agree, saying that the first preachers to King Lucius were
Apostolic men or instructed by them, per Apostoli^os viros in Christo renati,
and our King sent for this Apostolic faith to Pope Eleutherius at Rome:
literi^ suis Rex Lucius, apud Eleutherium Pontificem egit vt apud Romanos
Christianorum adscriberetur numero. And the Apostolic Catholic faith which
was Io. Bal. sup. Io. Leland. Assertion. Arthurij. Charta S. P^tricij. Antiq.
Glastenien. tab. lign. in membran. affix. Guliel. Malmesbur. l. de antiquitat.
Coenob. Glasten. Acta per legate. Crapgr. Catal. in S. Patricio. Io. Leland. in
Arth.
here, at Rome and from, thence sent and confirmed here, in this question of
Indulgences, was the same which the present Roman Church now professes. For
we read in the old Acts of those legates which S. Eleutherius sent hither
recommended by these Protestants for authentical, as written by themselves,
Fugatius and Damianus vt apud posteros clariora perdurarent, membranis his
ded^runt Acta per legatos, inde ad nos peruenerunt, and many other antiquities.
That th^se holy Legates procured 10. years of Indulgence for all visitours of
that sacred place of Glastenbury: Sancti Phaganus and Deruianus perquisierunt
ab Eleutherio Papa qui eos miserat december annos Indulgentiae. And these old Acts
did testify, that the same holy Legates obtained 30. years of Indulgence for
all Bishops, that should with devotion visit the chapel there builded, in
honor of S. Michael the Archangell. Dicebat eadem scriptura quod venerandi
Phaganus and Deruianus perquisierant triginta annorum Indulgentiam omnibus
Episcopis ipsum locum, ob honorem beati. Michaelis pia voluntate vis^ tantibus.
The old Manuscript antiquities of Glastenbury set down the names of almost an
hundred holy and ancient Bishops, which had given Indulgences to that holy
place. We cannot but Judge the like of other Churches, and places whose
monuments have not been so happily preserved. And this is sufficient for this
Question.

The next Protestant exception in this article is concerning Images, and is
this: The Romish doctrine The reverent use of holy Images thus proved.
concerning worship and adoration of images is a fond thing, vainly invented,
and grounded upon no warrant of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of
God. The Council of Trent for Catholics thus delivers their doctrine, and
practice in this point, which these men term the Romish doctrine. Imagines
Christi, Deiparae Virginis and aliorum Sanctorum, Council. Trid. Sess. 9.
in templis praesertim habendas and retinendas: eisque debitum honorem and
venerationem impertiendam: non quod credatur inesse aliqua in ijs diuinitas,
vel virtus propter quam sint colendae: vel quod ab eis sit aliquid petendum:
vel quod fiducia in Imaginibus sit figenda* veluti olim fiebat a gentibus, quae
in idolis spem suam collocabant: Sed quoniam honos qui eis exhibetur, refertur
ad prototypa, quae illae representant. Ita vt per imagines quas osculamur, and
coram quibus caput aperimus, and procumbimus, Christum adoremus, and Sanctos,
quorum illae similitudinem gerunt, veneremur. Id quod conciliorum, praesertim
vero, secundae Nicaenae Synodi decretis contra imaginum oppugnatores, est
sancitum. That the Images of Christ, The Mother of God and other Saints are to
be had and retained especially in Churches: and due honor and reverence is to
be done unto them: not because we may or do believe, there is any divinity or
virtue in them, for which they are to be reverenced: or that any thing is, or
may be asked of them, or trust placed in them, as it was used of the gentiles,
which placed their hope in Idols. But because the honor which is done to them
is referred to these whose Images they be, and represent. So that by the Images
which we kiss, and before which we put of our hats, and kn^ele down, we
adore Christ, and worship the Saints, whose similitude they bear. Which is
defined in the decrees of Councels, especially of the second Council of Nice
against the oppugners Council. Nic* 2.
of Images.

That Nicen general Council so defines, and testifies it to be the doctrine
of the Fathers, and tradition of the Catholic Church in all the world.
Imaginis honor in prototypu^ resultat, and qui adorat Imaginem, in ea adorat
quoque descriptum argumentum. Sic enim Sanctorum nostrorum patrum obtinet
disciplina, vel traditio Catholicae Ecclesiae, quae a finibus vsque ad fines
Euangelium suscepit. They say it was the faith of the Apostles, Fathers, and
all true believers in the world. And do anathematize all that allege the
sentences of holy Scripture against Idols, against such sacred Images, or call
them Idols, or say the Christians adore Images, as Gods, and those that
wittingly communicate with them, that hold opinion against such Images, or
abuse them. Sancta Synodus exclamauit omnes sic credimus, omnes idem sapimus,
omnes approbantes subscripsimus. Haec est fides Apostolorum, haec est fides
patrum, haec est fides orthodo^orum, haec fides orbem terrarum confirmauit.
Credentes in vnum Deum, in Trinitate laudatum, venerandas Imagines amplexamur.
Qui secus agunt, anathemate percelluntur. Quicunque sententias sacrae
Scripturae de Idolis contra venerandas Imagines adducunt, anathema. Qui
venerandas Imagines Idola appellant, Anathema. Qui dicunt quod Christiani
Imagines vt Deos adorent, anathema. Qui scientes communicant cum illis, qui
contra venerandas Imagines sentiunt, aut eas dehonestant, anathema. And this
being a general Council, as our Protestants confess, and so by their own
allowance before, the greatest authority in the Church of Christ, does
expressly confute all pretended objections out of Scripture, which Protestants
now use against holy Images being urged by the I conoclasts Image breakers,
heretics at that time, And proves that from the Apostles time, the Catholic
doctrine and use of them had ever been observed in the Church.

And for this first Apostolic age, Eusebius, Sozomen, Nicephorus and others
testify, that the woman of phoenicia cured of her infirmity by our Savior in
the Gospel, by touching the hemme of his garment, did make Images of that
miracle of Christ healing her, and herself kneeling unto him: and that at the
Image of our Savior there grew up an herb curinge all diseases, to prove the
allowance, and reverent use of such, for the Christians had that Image in
great reverence, and so it continued at Paneades in phoenicia, until Julian
Eusebius. histor. Eccl. l. 7. c. 17. Sozom. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 20. Niceph. l.
10. c. 30. Synod. Nicaen. 2.
the Apostata pulled it down, as he did other such Christian monuments, and
set up his own statua in the same place, which was miraculously broken, and
overthrown by God to make known his wickedness therein. And they were only
Pagan Idolaters which broke and profaned the Image of Christ, the Christians
gathered the pieces together, placed and reverently preserved them in the
Church. Id temporis gentiles statuam Christi tanta c^^ violentia trahebant, vt
eam confringerent. At Christiani postea cius fragmentae cum collegissent, in
Ecclesia posuerunt, vbi etiam adhuc custoditur. Nicephorus and others write.
Statuam autem Christi, Christiani tum i^ Diacocinum Ecclesiae transtulerunt;
and honoratiore loc^ positam, cultu conuenienti prosecuti sunt, locum ^^^que
eum libenter frequentantes, and Imagin^m ipsam i^spectantes, desiderium suum
and amorem ergastatuae ipsius archetypum, primariumque exemplar declararunt.
Like is the history of our Saviors holy Image, mi^^culously Tabul. and Archiu.
ciuit. Edessae apud Nicep. l. 2. ca. 7. and alios. Euagr. l. 4. c. 26 Damasc.
li. 4. de fid. orth. c. 17. Orthod. c. 17. Constable. Porph. Imperat. orat. apud
Metaphr. 10. Aug. Monol. Graecor. call. septem. Metaphrast. 15. Nouem^. and in
vit. S. Alexi^ Niceph. l. 2. c. 7. Conc. Nic. 2. Stephan. 1. Pap. apud Adrian.
Pap. ep. ad Corol. Mag. Tom. 3. Council. Tradit. Ecc^. de S. Imagine Romans Meth.
in Tyberio. Marian. Scot. in chronic. an. 39. Matthew. Westmonast. chron. an:
gra^iae 31. Ranulph. hig. Polychro^. l. 4. c. 4.
made by himself and sent to King Abg^^us, or Abagarus at Edessa, in Syria,
kept and frequented with great honor and reverence, as invincible testimonies
and authorities of antiquity prove.

Euagrius and others call it sanctissionam Imaginem diuinitus, fabricatam. The
most holy Image made by God. The Greek Church keeps a yearly feast, and
solemnity of this holy Image on the 17. of the Calends of September. The same I
say, of the holy Image of Christ made by himself in wipinge his face, going to
his passion, with a linen cloth delivered to him by S. Veronica, by some
Bereuice, as the tradition of the Church of Christ, Methodius, Marianus,
Scotus, Mattheus Westmonasteriensis and others, and the same holy Image still
with great reverence preserved at Rome inuincibly prove. How much this sacred
Image was honored presently in this age, and ever after, we may inform our
selves by that history of Tyberius the Emperor, as it is thus related by our
old historian Matthew of westminster, even as he is published by our
Protestants and others. Tyberius being troubled with a grievous leprosy, and
hearing of the miracles of Christ, at and about Jerusalem sent Volusianus
thither to entreat Christ to come to cure him, but the Jews having put him
before Volusianus coming to Jerusalem to death, he meeting with S. Veronica,
and informed by her and others that this holy Image being deuoutely used,
(huius Imaginis aspectum si Dominus tuus (...) intueatur, continuo sanitatis
beneficio potietur.) he should presently be healed. He brings S. Veronica
with the Image of Christo to Rome, and informed the Emperor of this matter,
whereupon Tyberius caused the way to be spredde with silk clothes, and the
Image to be thus presented unto him. Who presently thus beholding it, obtained
his former health.

Caesar pannis sericis viam sterni fecit, and Imaginem sibi prasentari
praecepit: Qui mox vt eam fuit intuitus, pristinam assecutus est sanitatem.
This great honor the great Emperor by the direction of Christians used, as
they likewise did, being himself Gild. l. de excid. and conq. Brit. c. 6.
Tertulsian. Apol. con^. gent. Antiq. Eccles. Tauronen. Baron. Annal. an. 34. c.
Athan. Sermon. de pass. Imag. Nicen. Conc. 2. act. ^. Mat. Westmon. an. 560.
Epiph. li. 1. Tom. 2. cont^. haeres. c. 27. Irenaeb. lib. 1. con^r. haeres. c.
24. Niceph l. 4. Eccl. hist. c. 2. Tertull. con. her. and apud Nicep. supr.
Epiph. supr. contr. Carpocrati^^s.
either actual a Christian, or so far a friend and professor of their faith
that as our oldest historian S. Gildas and others write he threatened death to
the accusers of Christ's Servants even against the will of the Senate.
Comminata, Sen^^ nolent^, a Principe morte d^latoribus militum eiusde^ Christi.
We find also that the Syndon wherein the sacred body of Christ was wrapped in
his holy sepulcher, did receive and retain the Image of him, and was preserved
with much honor, as still it is so kept in Ecclesia Tauronensi, to this day
with great reverence. So of the Image of Christ in regal attire made by
Nicodemus and still honored at Lucas in Italy. Such was the Image of Christ at
Beritum, most miraculous when it was abused by a Jew testified by S.
Athanasius, the second Nicen Council and others, and attributed to S.
Nicodemus the maker thereof.

Saint Epiphanius also makes mentions of diverse Images of Christ, some of
gold, others of silver, others of other matter preserved from the time of
Pontius Pilate before Christ's Passion. And those Images must needs be both very
ancient, and honored, for both S. Ireneus and Tertullian make mention of
Carpocrites and his followers the heretics of that name, and who began about
the year of Christ 129. whom S. Epiphanius does charge to have exceeded the
due Christian honor given to Images, and among other their errors to have
offered sacrifice, even such as the gentiles used to these and other profane
Images of Pagans. Habent Imagines per colores depictos, quidam etiam ex auro
and argento ac reliqua materia, quas sane Imagines Jesus esse dicunt: and has
Jesus Imagines sub Pontio Pilato factas esse, quando inter homines versabatur.
Insuperque philosophorum quorundam, Pythagorae, Platonis, Aristotelis, and
aliorum. Cum quibus Philosophis etiam alias Imagines Jesus collocant, collocat
asque adorant, and gentium mysteria perficiunt. Erectis enim his Imaginibus de
caetero gentium mores servant. Qui vero sunt gentium mores alij, quam
sacrificia atque alia? Nicephorus Niceph. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 7.
having related the history of Christ his Image, sent by him to King Abgarus,
whom he names Augarus, reigning vltra Euphratem, beyond Euphrates, immediately
adds, that the King of Persia also sent for, and received by a skillfull
painter both the Image of Christ and his blessed Mother: dicitur quoque
Persarum Rexmanu ingenioqu^ promptum pictorem misisse, and per hunc, feruenti
fidei desiderio, simul and ipsius Christi, and quae eum diuino modo genuit,
matris, quam celerrime Imaginem depictam accepisse. And to assure us of the
certainty of this history, he immediately adds, that it was both registered in
the public records of the then regal City Edessa, kept among their public
momuments there, contained in the history of King Abgarus, translated out of
Syriake, and so published. Atque haec quidem ex Tabularis and archiuis
ciuitatis Edess^* quae tum regia administr abatur potestate, sunt des^^pta.
Fucrant enim in publica libr^rum monumenta relata. Et libri de Augari rebus
conscripti, haec quoque complectebantur, ex Syrorum lingua translata. Quae amo
(...) recte hoc loco opinor esse exposita.

The worshipping of these holy Images, especially that which King Abgarus a
Christian received, is delivered unto us by no less then such public regal
warrant, decree and practice. For as the Emperor Constantinus porphyrogenitus,
Simon Metaphrastes and others prove unto us, King Metaphrast. die 10. Aug. and
15. Nou. Constable. Poph. supr. 10. Aug. Harr. hist. manuscript. l. c. 11. hist.
Mis. l. 17.
Abgarus being Christened by S. Thaddeus and warranted by that Apostle in his
Christian proceedings, this King receiving the Image of Christ with great Joy
and honor, whereas there was a Pagan God placed before the common gate of the
City, which every one that was to enter into the City was first to adore, and
offer unto it certain prayers, such as the Paga^s ordained for their Gods, and
then freely to pass into the City. This Idol the King took down, and set in
place thereof the Image of Christ which Saint Thaddeus had brought unto him
with these words written in letters of gold: Deus, qui in te sperat, a spe non
ex^idet. O God he that trusts in thee, shall not fail in his hope. And
withal he gave commaundment, that whosoever passed into the City by that
port, should first do reverence, and due honor to that Image. And this order
was observed of all Passengers Arcuulf. and Adaman. in relat. locorum
Sanctoru^. Beda libello de Iotis sanctis.
during the Reign of Abgarus and his son after him.

Arcuulfus an ancient Bishop of France and pylgrime to Jerusalem, quilocorum
gratia Sanctorum (...) Hierosoly^iam lustrata omni terra pro^^s^ionis,
Adamannus an holy Priest and Abbot of th^^ Britain, and S. B^de after them is
witness, that among the holy memories of Christ at and about Jerusalem, there
was kept a lynnen cloth above 8. foot long, made as was thought by the
blessed Virgin, read on the one side, and green on the other, containing the
Image of Christ and his 12. Apostles, and was there worshipped in the Church.
Aliud quoque aliquanto maius linteum in Dorothaeus Synop. de vita and morte
prophe^arum in Ierem.
Ecclesia illa veneratur, quod fertur a Sancta Maria contentum, duodecim
Apostolorum, and ipsius Domini continens Imagines, vno latere rubro, and altero
viridi. S. Dorotheus writes, that Jeremy the Prophet prophesying of the coming
of Christ, gave this for a certain token and sign, to know the time, because
all people then should worship the cross. Signum aduentus ipsius er^t ^obis,
quando vniuersae Pallad* hist. laus. in vit. Apollinis. So^. hist. Eccl. l. 5.
c. 20. Cassio. l. 6. c. 42. Niceph. l. 10. c. 31. Guliel. Eisengren. centen. 1.
part. 1. distinct. 3. Volater. c^mmen. l. 13. Pet. de Natal. l. 3. c. 228.
gentes lignum adorabunt. And gave an other sign as certain, and notorious,
as the other to the Priests of Egypt, where he prophesied, that when the
Messiah should be borne of a Virgin, and ly in a manger, all their Idols should
be broken and fall down; which the Prophet Esaias also thus foretold: mouebuntur
simulachrae Aegypti a facie eius. Which all writers Greek and Latin,
Catholics and Protestants confess and prove to have been ^ffected, when
Christ newly borne with his mother fled into Egypt, the Idols of that nation
most Idolatrous then fallinge down. And to make evident even to blinded men,
that Christian Images be not idols, or forbidden, but allowed, and to be
reverenced, at that very time when the idols were thus miraculously destroyed,
the holy Prophet both appointed the Egyptians, to make Christian Images namely
of Christ and his blessed mother, and reverence Dorothaeus supr.
them which they did. And this was both publikly, and by all practiced, and by
their King as authentically examined and approved. Ieremias signum dedit
Sacerdotibus Aegyptiacis quod oporteat simulachra eorum concuti, and decidere
per seruatorem puerum ex virgin nasciturum, and in praesepi iaciturum,
propterea etiam nunc virginem in lecto, and Infantem in praesepio collocant and
adorant. Et cum causam olim Ptolomaeus Rex percontaretur, responderunt
mysterium esse ipsis a maioribus traditum, quod illi a sancto Propheta
acceperint. Sueto^. in Aug. lactant. firm. Aug. l. de inuitat. Mart. Polon.
chron. in Augusto. Ran. Highed. hist. l. 4. c 2. 3. Her^^. Schedel. aetat. 5.
fol. 93. Speed Theater of great Brit. l. 6. Annal. Eccles. Chart. in Gallia
Francisc. Belleforest Cosmog. l. 2. p. 303. in Iud. v. druid. and alij.


This was likewise revealed to Augustus the Emperor by the apparition of a
Virgin with a child in her arms from heaven. And he fell down and worshipped
the Image or apparition. And is commended for it by all writers. Apertum est
coelum and. nimius splendour irruit supereum, and vidit in coelo pulcherrimam
virginem stantem super altar, and puerum tenentem in brachijs. Et miratus est
nimis, and vocem dicentem audiuit: Haec ara filij Dei est. Qui statim
proijciens se in terram, adorauit. This was the doctrine and practice of the
Druides of this Kingdom and France, whom our Protestants merueylouslie
commend unto us, for having a Prophecy among them, that the Savior of the
world should be borne of a virgin, they erected Churches and Images unto the^,
namely at Charters in France. Where their Prince and they both founded such a
Church with an Image of the blessed virgin with Christ in her arms, and
worshipped it, as the ancient tradition and Annals of that Church with others
prove.

The Image or sign of the Cross is not so resembling, representative of
Christ, or his Passion, as the Images of Christ and his Saints be of them,
especially that being a common Instrument of death, in the great Roman Empire
at the death of Christ.

And yet in honor of Christ suffering death and r^deeming the world by his
passion upon a Cross, The sign and Image thereof was presently after his
death even by his Apostles, disciples, and first Christians in this age, had,
and used with great reverence; and honor. I may be more breife in this matter
seeing our Protestants by their greatest even regal authority, have thus
declared: The sign King James and his B. B. confer. at Hampt. Couel. ag. Burg.
p. 139. 124. 125. Communion Book Tit. public Baptism.
of the Cross is an Apostolical constitution and Tradition. And so they use
in their public practical communion book at the baptism of every child,
thus prescribing for a rule and law: The Priest shall make a Cross, upon the
childs forchead, saying: we receive this child into the congregation of
Christ's flock, and do sign him with the sign of the Cross, in token that
hereafter ^e shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified,
and manfully to sight under his banner, against sin, the world, and the
devil, and to continue Christ's faithful servant unto his lines end. Amen.
Therefore if by so great a Protestant warrant and profession the sign of the
Cross is so honorable, that it is an Apostolical constitution, binding and
commanding all, an Apostolical tradition, to be religiously kept and observed
of all, so honorable and necessary a profession, confession and testimony of
our faith, and Religion never to be denied, that when we were infants, and
could not do this of our selves, it was, and ought to be performed by others
for us, as our whole faith was so professed for us in our baptism, much more
ought all Christians coming to years of Judgment, and discretion perform
those holy bonds and duties by themselves.

And that our Protestants need not fear they have herein done or granted too
much, they shall hear the Apostolic men of this age, from whom they have in
some sort borrowed this their doctrine, practice, and confession, deliver the
Apostolic doctrine, use and custom, far more plainly, amply, and
honorably, in this business.

The old Anonymus writer of the Apostles lives Fredic. Nausea ep. Vienn.
Prooemen. in vit. Apostol. Anonym. antiq. in vit. S. Thomae Apost. Idem in vit.
S. Bartholomaei.
published by the learned Bishop Fredericus of Vienna almost an hundred years
since, and then the exemplar exceeding old characteribus plusque vetustis
inscriptum, writes, that Saint Thaddeus cured King Abgarus with the sign of
the Cross, imposito Regi crucis signaculo, ab omni eum languore sanauit. An
holy Angel engraued in square stones four Crosses in every corner of the
Church one, per quatuor angulos circumuolans, digito s^^ in quadr^tis sax^s
sculpsit signum crucis. And gave Charge to make the sign of the Cross on
their foreheads. Quale signum ego sculpsi in his saxis, tale vos digit^ Id. in
vit. S. Joan. Apost.
vestro facite in frontibus vestris, and omnia mala ^^gient a vobis. Saint
Ihon the Apostle making the sign of the Cross over poison drunk it without
hurt. Fa^to signo Crucis venenum sine laesione bibit. S. Ephrem in his Sermon
entitled of the most holy S. Ephrem Sermon de Sanctissima Cruce Domini.
Cross of our Lord. De sanctissima Cruce Domini, speaking of the glory thereof
boldly affirms, that the holy Apostles armed therewith, draw all nations to
adore it. Hac Crucis armatura muniti sa^cti Apostoli omnem inimici potentiam,
conculcarunt, (...) gentes suis sagenis ad huius adorationem (...), and
congregarunt.

S. Basil speaking of traditions of the Apostles, Basil. l. de Spiritu sancto
c. 27. Tertull. l. de coron. mil. c. 34. Cyrill. Hierosolim. catech. 13. Basil.
de Spir. 5. c. 1. Hier. ep. 22. ad Eust. Theod. l. 3. hist. c. 3. Martial.
epist. ad Burdegal. c. 8.
names this for one. V^ signo Crucis eos, qui spem (...) in Christum,
signemus. So has Tertullian, and others, that it was a tradition to use it in
all actions. Ad omnem progressum, atque promo^um, ad ^^nem aditum and exitum,
ad vestitum and calceatum, ad ^^^^c^ra, ad mensas, ad lumina, ad cubilia, ad
sedilia, quaecumque nos conuersatio exercet, frontem Crucis signaculo terimus.
Traditio tibi praetendetur auctrix, cons^et^do confirmatrix, and fides
obseruatrix. He lived soon after this first age, and S. Martial conuersing
with Christ, and his Apostles confirms it: Crucem Domini, semper in mente, in
ore, in signo tenete. Crux enim Domini armatura vestra contra Sathanam, galea
custodiens caput, lorica protegens pectus, clypeus tela maligni repellens,
gladius iniquitatem and Angelicas insidias peruersae potestatis sibi
propinquare nullo modo sinens. Hoc solo signo coelestis victoria data est
nobis, and per Crucem baptismo Dei sanctificatum est, The Cross of Christ is
ever to be in our mind, our mo^th, and sign. It is an armor against Satan,
a Sallet defending the head, a breasteplate defending the breast, a shield
repelling the darts of the devil, a sword keeping us from his iniquity and
deceits. The sign by which celestial victory is given unto us, by the Cross
baptism is sanctified.

Saint Clement from the Apostles witnesses, that the Bishops and Priests in
the beginning of the sacrifice of Mass armed themselves with this sign on
their forehead. Episcopus splendidam vestem indutus, vna cum sacerdotibus, and
stans ad altar, and facto manu in front trophaeo Crucis, dicat. The history
ascribed to S. Linus Successor to S. Pete^ Hist. S. Petri Petri ascript. S.
Lino.
testifies, that Saint Peter standing by the Cross^ wonderfully commended and
honored it for the mysteries thereof, defending us, representing ou^
redemption unto us, used in the sacred mysteries, driving away the poison of
the serpent. S. Ignatius Ignat. epist. ad Philippen. Vincent. specul. l. 10.
vit. S. Andreae per Presbyter. and Diacon. Achaiae. Breuia. Romans in festo S.
Andr. Breu. Sarisbur. ibid. Author. l. de duplici Mart. inter opera S.
Cypriani. Metaphr. in S. Andrea. S. Iuo Carnat. sermon. de Sacram. ser. 4. Remig.
Antisiod. in psalm 21. and 4. Bern. ser. de S. Andr. Lanfran. cont. Berengar.
Miss. S Chrysostom. SS. Petri, Iacobi, Marci, and Dionil. Areop. Eccl. Hierarch.
c. 2. c. 5. part. 2. part. 3.
says it is a Trophy, or sign of victory against the devil, he trembles,
when he sees it, and fears when he hears of it. Trophaeum est contraipsius
potentiam: quod vbi viderit horret, and audiens timet.

The history of Saint Andrew that great Apostle written by the Clergy of
Achaia where he suffered martyrdom, then present or living, and both confirmed
by many other old writers, and received by the Churches authority is wonderful
for his worshipping of the Image of the Cross. Adductus Andreas ad locum
martyrij; cum Crucem vidisset, long exclamare caepit: o bona Cr^^^, quae
decorem ex membris Domini suscepisti, diu desiderata, solicit amata, sine
intercessione quaesita, and aliquando cupienti animo praeparata, accipe me ab
hominibus, and read me magistro meo. And he is accounted first composer of the
Mass now called S. Chrysostomes Mass, wherein the sign of the Cross is used
with great honor. So it is diverse times in the Masses of S. Peter, S. James,
S. Mark, and others, S. Denis the Areopagite witnesses it was honorably used
in the holy mysteries, Sacraments, and ceremonies of the Church in this age.
Pontifex trino Crucis sanctae signaculo vnctionem inchoat. Cuilibet ipsorum a
benedicente Pontifice Crucis imprimitur signum. Signi vitalis impressio omnium
simul carnalium desideriorum vacationem, vitamque ad Dei imitation^m effictam
signat. Prochorus and others write, that S. John the Apostle did diverse
miracles with this holy sign. Sanctae Crucissignaculo muniuit. Sanctae
Prochorus in S. Ioa. c. 3. c. 31. Petr. Maffaeus in S. Thoma epist. Indic.
Gulielm. Eisengren. cent. 1. part. 5. did. 7. Gul. Eiseng. supr. fol. 93. 130.
138. 139. 142. 143. 144 147. 149. 149 150. 153. 157. 163. 163. 167. 168.
Author Cosmogr. discript. gent. Edw. Grymston Book of Estates p. 261. Tradit.
de S. Cruce. Guliel. Eisengr. cent. 1. did* 1. f. 42. The first Christian
Britans of this profession. Girald. Ca^br. descr. Cambr. cap. 18.
Crucis signo dixit infirmo: in nomine Domini nostri Ies^ Christi surge, and
vade in domuni tuam sanus: and (...) surrexit aeger sanus. The like is written
of S. Thomas the Apostle, and there still remains to this day from his time,
an Image of the Cross engraued in stone upon a tomb, where he preached among
the Indians.

The recital of others in this age committed to writing by credible Authors,
would be long and tedious in so manifest a truth. Gulielmus Eisengrenius in
his fifth Ce^tenary has gathered many there to be seen. This holy use and
custom was transported even in this time by all humane Judgment, even into the
new world, as some call America, for both Catholic and Protestant Authors and
eye witnessing trauaylers assure thus: In Acuzamil an Island near unto
Iucatan, they found a Cross two fadoms high, to which they of the contry had
recourse as to acclestiall and divine thing. Which must needs be erected by
Christians there, in this primative time, this being a plain and geometrical
Image and pattern of the Cross of Christ, by tradition fifteen foot long
Crux sancta quindecim erat longa pedes.

And to come home to our Britans here, their ancient learned Bishops and
Antiquaries assure us, that from their first conversion they used devout
reverence and gave far greater honor to the Image and sign of the cross,
and such representative holy signs, then any other nation Christian did. Cruci
deuotam reuer^ntiam exhibere longeque magis quam vllam gentem honorem defer
videmus. And we find in the Antiquities of Glastenbury, Manuscr. ant.
Glasten. Eccl. tabulis lig. affix. Baron. and Spondan. Annal. an. 60. and 112.
Sever. Bin. Tom. 1. conc. annot. in Euaristum. Sozomen. hist. Eccles. l. 2. c.
1. and alij ib.
that S. Joseph of Aramathia who bury^^ Christ, and his holy companions which
with hy^ lived and dyed there, used holy Images of the cross and others, and
by these found there after in King Lucius time Damianus and Faganus knew that
to have been the living and dying place of those Saints. Figuram nostrae
redemptionis alias que figura manifestas repererunt, quibus been cognouerunt,
q^^^ Christiani prius locum inhabitauerunt. Where we see the sholy Christian
Images then to have been a certain distinctiue sign, and token, of the first
Christians from other people. For as Baronius, Spondanus, Seuerinus Binius an
others prove by many ancient old laws and other authorities, i^ was a
received custom even from the Apostles, to erect crosses in the Churches which
were founded. And Sozomen with others affirm, that the gentiles themselves did
freely confess, that this was the Sibyls verse. Ipsi gentiles ingenue
fatentur, ho^ esse Sibyllae carmen.

O lignum foelix in quo Deus ipse pependit.
O happy cross whereon God himself did hang.
And no man can deny it. Nemo pernegabit. And the Sybils did both Prophecy of
the cross and the worship thereof. Quare and lignum crucis, and ei^ veneratio
a Sibylla praefignificata est. And this he affirms from certain tradition,
and vndoubte^ true testimonies. Haec ex viris, qui illa accurate ^^runt, and ad
quos eorum cognitio a patribus ad liberi^ successione quadam deriuata peruenit,
and qui eade^ ipsa literis prodere, posterisquerelinquere studueru^ audiuimus.
And thus it was observed here in Britain the first Christianity herein every
age, by S* Joseph and his ossociats in the first age, by S. Dami^nus Phaganus
and their company in the second, and third also. In which we find it was a
custom also among Christians both to carry about with them the Image of the
cross or crucifixe, and to give honor unto it, as much as Catholichs now do.
This we prove by S. Amphibalus that blessed priest, Bishop and martyr sent
hither from Rome, and continually carryinge a crucifixe about with him in the
most bitter persecution of Dioclesian. What was the worship he and others
then did Anonym. Brit. in vit. S. Albani. manusc. ant. Io. Capgrau. Iagenuen.
and alij in eodem.
unto it, we cannot be better informed then by the president and example
which S. Albane our first glorious Martyr by common computation, left unto us
penned by a Britan then living as he testifies in his life, in the presence
and with the allowance of S. Amphibalus, thus related: saepe prosternitur ante
crucem, and quasi pendentem, Dominum Iesum in cruce cerneret, veniam precatur.
Sie pedes, sic vulneris loca assidua exosculatione demulcet, ac si adipsius
quem crucifigi viderat vestigia procumberet Redemptoris. Sanguine mixtae per
ora voluuntur lachrimae super illud venerabile lignum crucis vbertim
decidentes. He often falls down before the Cross, and as he had seen our
lord Jesus on the Cross. The blessed penitent craves pardon. So he did with
daily kissing embrace the places of his wounds, as if he had fallen down at
the feet of our redeemer, whom he saw crucified. Tears mixed with blood do
run* down his face, and plentifully fall down upon the venerable Cross.

This is as much as the present Church of Rome allows, or any good Catholic
does, or is allowed to do. And yet this great glory of Britayne, so glorious
and noble a Saint, and Martyr, giving so great honor, and reverence to the
Image of Christ crucified, does by the same Authors, as strictly and
punctually condemn the Idolatrous gentiles for their Idols, as any Christian,
Catholic or protestant can do, and with the same censors and authorities
which our protestants unlearnedly and unadvisedly use, or abuse rather against
this Catholic custom and practice, he still carried the crucifixe in his hand
to his death, kissing, reuerencing Mat. West. chron. an. 303.
and honoring it, being found prayeinge bare fooled before it. Reperiunt nudis
pedibus, ante crucem Domini, precibus incumbentem. Albanus vt se seruum crucis
ostenderet, signum dominicum in manibu^ iugiter praeferebat. Crucem Domini quam
manu tenebat, frequenter deosculans, and adorans, causam suam Domino
commendabat. And thus he perseuered until his head being stricken of, his
Cross embrued with his martirs blood fell out of his hands, and was secretly
taken up and preserved by a Christian there present, none but Ghrists enemies
disallowed these holy Christian signs persecuting him whom they represented.
Crux quam vir sanctus iugiter in manibus far consueuerat, foelici iam cruore
respersa, super herbam decidit, eamque quidam Christianus occulte rapuit, and
ignorantibus Paganis abscondit. Concerning the Images of holy Saints I have
said before for Britayne that at Glostenbury besides the Image of the Cross or
crucifixe in S. Joseph his time, there where other holy Images there, and the
Image of our lady with Christ in her arms, was the ancient arms of that most
ancient Abbey. For Jerusalem we have hard that the Images of all the
Apostles were there worshipped from their time. There was also the Image of our
lady painted by S. Luke the Evangelist, which is called by Nicephores and
others a divine Niceph. hist. Eccl. l. 14. c. 2. Theod. lect. collect l. Bar.
Annal. an. 453 vit. S. Alexij apud Sur. lippom. Bret. Romans and al. Sigebert.
chron. an 405 Matt. Westminster. an. 620. Sigechronic. an. 624.
Image. Diuinam illius Imaginem quam Lucas Apostolus in Tabula depicta
reliquit. Her Image was also kept with great honor at Edesse in Syria where
Abgarus so much honored the Image of Christ. There was also an other Image of
her miraculously made and doing miracles, which the Emperor Heraclius used in
his wars against Cosdroas, and thereby prevailed, this was with honor kept at
Constantinople Byzantium. H^raclius ferens secum sanctae Dei genitricis Iconem,
quae apud Bizantium est; non hominis manu, sed diuino miraculo pictam.
Heraclius* Iconis Dei genitricis fultus auxilio, omnes aduersarios suos in
bello peremit.

The Image of this blessed virgyn was honorable and renowned both in Britayne
and france from, or before our first Christianity as I have proved Sebast.
Manst. in Typ. orbis. Bilibald. pirckim. in Tob. nou. totius orb. in Claud.
Prol. Joan. Brun. commen. in Bened* 12. Patriarch. Anonym. ant* in vit. Apost.
Auth. of the Book of Estates in S. Tho. Grimston. p. 738.
before. Both Catholic and protestant Antiquaries writing of China where
diverse of the Apostles preached, thus testify of the people there: They have
the picture of an exceeding fair woman, holding a child in her arms, whereof
they say he was delivered a virgin. And these nations though so remote had
also the Images of the 12. Apostles, as these and other Authors thus deliver
unto us:

There be certain pictures of the fashion, and with the marks of the twelve
Apostles, and being demanded, what manner of men these twelve Apostles were,
they answer, they were great Philosophers, which lived virtuously, and
therefore they were made Angels in heaven. That God, which they do the
greatest honor unto, they paint with a body, out of whose shoulders come three
heads, which look one upon an other, which signify, as they say that all
three have but one will. Which no man can well doubt but that they are true
memoryes, though afterward misunderstood in long tract of tymc, of the holy
Trinity, and Christian Religion preached there by some of the Apostles, whose
Images be so long honored there, and that was the manner in that first
Apostolic Arnulf. and Adam. relat. de locis sanct. Beda libell. de loc.
Sanctis. Eusebius hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 17
time in all places. At Hierusalcm the Images of the 12. Apostles painted upon
the cloth made by our lady before remembered were honored in the church in
Ecclesia veneratur. For Greece, Eusebius is witness that the Images of the
Apostles namely of S. Peter and S. Paul were paynled as he had seen them
Apostolorum Imagines, Pauli videlicet and Petri in tabulis coloribus depictas
asseruari vidimus. And the Apostles by them so honored. Veteres adhunc modum
honorare soliti fuerunt. Nicephor. hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 16. l. 2. c. 43. Petr.
de Not. l. 9. c. 79.


The like or more amply has Nichephorus and others affirming that S. Luke
Evangelist painted their Images as diverse others. It is manifest in the
history of S. Syluester and Constantine, that not only the Images of S. Peter
and S. Paul which appeared unto Constantine, but of the other Apostles were
with reverence kept, and preserved at Rome among so many persecutions.

I need not to proceed to more particular places and examples, when we have
both unwritten and written tradition, that even from the time of Nicephor.
hist. l. 2. c 43.
the Apostles, and Saint Luke the Evangelist and others then makeinge and
reverently vseinge such sacred Images, the same art and use was from thence
deduced into all the world. Vnde in omnem d^inde habitabilem orbem tam
venerandum and pretiosumopus est illatum. And this Christian manner and custom
of making reuerencing and honoring holy Images in such sort as is before
defined, by the general Councels, and still used by Catholics, so ancient
from the beginning of Christianity, so general in the whole Christian world
was never disallowed or impugned by any man bearing the name of a Christian,
until about the year of Christ 494. Xenaias a profane, unbaptized and
Cedren. in compendio Hist. in Xenaia Persa.
sacrilegeous Persian usurping Ecclesiastical orders, was the first which
opposed against it, and therefore is styled in histories to be a man of an
audacious and impudent mouth and placed in the Nicephorus hist. Eccl. l. 16 c.
27. Synod. Nic. 2 Ench. haeres. in Xenaia. Baron. an. 485. 486. 487. Spond. ib.
and alij.
catalogue of damned Heretics Xenaias primus, o audacem animum, os impudens,
voeem illam euomuit, Christi and eorum qui illi placuere, Imagines venerandas
non esse. The world has scarcely seen a more desperate and wicked wretch,
then antiquities describe this man to have been, and they which have since
followed, and follow him at this time have hardly hitherto gotten much better
fame for their like proceedings, doing therein only as Jews, Turks, Tartars,
Pagans, and only heretics for that condemned among Christians have done, and
The Catholic doctrine and practice of reverence to holy Relikes.
at this time where they over rule.

The next exception of our Protestants in this Article Against the doctrine and
practice of the Church of Rome and Catholics, is to use their words concerning
their worshippinge an adoration of Relics, termed by them as the others
before, a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warrantie of
scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God.

The Council of Trent for Catholics thus defines Conc. Trid. sess. 9.
in this matter. Sanstorum Martyrum and aliorum cum Christo viuentium sancta
corpora quae viua membra fucrunt Christi; and Templum Spiritus Sancti, a
fidelibus veneranda esse. Affirinantes Sanctorum reliquijs venerationem atque
honorem non deberi, vel eas aliaque sacra monumenta a fidelibus inutiliter
honorari, omnino damnandos esse, prout iam pridem cos damnauit, and nuncetiani
damnat Ecclesia. The bodies of holy Martyrs and others that live with Christ
are to be reverenced. The Church does now condemn, as long ago it has
condemned those which affirm that reliks of Sainsts, or that they and other
sacred monuments ar unprofitably honored of the faithful.

Now let us examine what was the doctrine and practice of the Apostles, and
Apostolic men in this first age, in this question. Moses Bar-cepha a Syrian
many hundreds of years since, and Iacobus Orrohaita before him, and by him
cited, be witnesses that the body and Reliks of the first man Adam a penitent
and holy father after his fall, Moses Barcepha Sir. Episc. comm. de Paradis.
part. 1. c. 14. Jacob. Arrohaita apud eund. ib.
were honorably preserved by his posterity, and in the time of the flood to
keep it from perishing No carried it with him into the arc, and left it to
his children. Noe arcam cum esset cum liberis suis conscensurus impendente
diluuio, secum in eam intulisse ossa Adami, eaque deinde post diluuium arca
egressum, suis distribuisse. And this was the manner and custom after the
deludge unto the time of Christ among the faithful to preserve with honor
and reverence the bodies and reliks of the holy Saints of that Time. And as
the scripture 4. Reg. c. 13.
wittnesseth, of the dead body of Elisaeus restoring a man's dead body to life
by touching his bones. Quod cum tetigit ossa Elisaei, reuixit homo and ste^it
super pedes suos: So we have unquestionable authorities both of Scripture and
Fathers, for the honor, and reverence of the bodies and reliks of the rest of
the Prophets, the Jews themselves as the scripture testifies adorning and
reuerencing them. Aedificatis sepulchra Prophetarum, and ornatis Matthew. 23.
monumenta iustorum.

S. Epiphanius and other noble witnesses prove, Epiph. l. de Prophet. vi^a and
interitu. in Daniele.
that Daniel the Prophet was buried and reverenced with great honor, and his
grave so continued renowned in his time. Humatus est magnis honoribus. Extat
monumentum ipsius vsque ad hoc seculum nostrum in babylone cunctis notissimum.
The body of Idem supr. in Ezechiele.
Ezechiel was so likewise honored, and had such concourse of people resorting
one pilgrimage unto it, to pray there and worship it, that the chaldaeans in
whose contry it was, feared they would carry it away, and there upon observed
and watched them. In terra Spyrorum vir pius ille sepultus iacet. Multique ad
monumentum eius corfluunt ad precationem and obsequium, Sane quando tantae eo
frequentia vna ad monumentum eius conueniunt, formidant chaldaei ac mutuunt, ne
illum auferant, quapropter egredientem comitantur and deducunt.

The like they testify of Micheas: est monumentum In Michea Prophet. in Abac.
Proph. in Achia. in Aggaeo Reg. in ch^on an. 350. Hieron. l. aduers vigil.
Theod. lect l. 2. N^c^phor. Eccl hist. l. 10. cap. 13.
ipsius vsque ad hod^ernum tempus, nobilissimum. So of Abacuc: Magnis honoribus
sepultus est. So of Achias: postremum honorem and monumentum sortitus est.
Likewise of Aggaeus: prope Sacerdotes, cum honor and gloria conditus est. So
of Samuel the Prophet preserved with great honor and his reliks in the time
of Arcadius the Emperor. he himself with a great number of Bishops, which
put his holy reliks in silk and a vessel of gold being praesent and
translating them from Jury into Thracia with such pomp and honor, that the
train continued from palestina to Chalcedon. Omnes Episcopi in serico and vase
a^reo portauerunt. Omnium Ecclesiaru^ populi occurrenunt sanctis reliquijs, and
tanta laetiti^, quasi praesentem vinentemque Prophetam cernere^^, susceperunt:
vt de palestina vsque Chalcedonem iungerentur populorum examina.

The reliks of the Patriarks were buried and Michael Glycas part 4. Annal.
honored with those of the Apostles in our Christian altars. Istic venerabiles
Patriarcharum and Apostolorum reliquiae conditae. S. Ephrem relates the Ephrem
Sir. l. de Laudibus Joseph. Patriarchae.
great honor and worship, which the holy Patriarch Joseph, carried prisoner
away by the Ismalites, to whom his Brothers sold him, did to the grave and
Reliks of Rachel his holy mother, with the lamentable prayer he made in that
sacred place, truly translated in these words.

O Rachel, Rachel my mother behold Joseph thy son whom thou have loved, what
is befallen unto him. Behold he is ledd captyue as a Malefactor. O Rachel
receive thy son: O mother receive me: o my mother hear the mourning and
bitter scriking of my heart: my eyes can no longer sustain tears, neither my
life suffices, to such lamentations and groanings.

The honor which was due and done to her grave at her first burial the
scripture records: Erexit Jacob titulum super sepulchrum eius: hic est
titulus Genesis c. 35.
Monumenti Rachel, vsque in praesentem diem. Thus it was honored from the time
of her death to the time of Moses so long after. And with his allowance in
holy scripture. Both the old and new testament with other holy writers under
either law relate unto us the great honor and reverence were done even to
the figurative things of the law of Moses, the place of the Temple called holy
of holyes Sancta Sanctorum whether none went but only the high priest, and
only once in the year with sacrifice, the Arc of the Testament, not to be
touched but by sanctified persons.

The reliks which were in it, and made it more Hebr. c. 9.
honorable were as S. Paul sets them down, a golden pitcher with Manna, the
Rodd of Aaron, which had budded, and the Tables of the Testament, and above it
the Cherubim and Images: in qua vrna aurea habens manna, and virga Aaron quae
fronduerat, and tabulae Testamenti, superque eam erant Cherubim gloriae
abumbrantia propitiatorium. And this holy place was there upon called the
propitiatory or mercy seat or place of mercy, God often mercifully appearing,
and showing mercy there. Where these holy reliks were kept and honored, Numer.
c. 4.
all the vessels of the Sanctuary were vayled with great honor, none but the
sons of Aaron might touch, or cover them, whosoever else touched them
vntouerred, or did see them vnueyled, it was death: non tangant vasa Sanctuarij
ne moriantur. Alij nulla curiositate videant quae sunt in Sanctuario priusquam
inuoluantur, alioquin morientur.

The Apostoliks Fathers of this age did also use Clem. Apost. constable. l. 6. cap.
29.
and approve this reverence both in the Jews and Christians, as also give the
reason thereof. S. Clement gives this, because they are holy, and the souls
of the bodies honored were with God. Eorum qui apud D^um viuunt, ne reliquiae
quidem corporum sunt inhonoratae. Siquidem Elisaeus Propheta, postquam
defunctus est, mortuum sus^itauit a piratis Syriae occisum: quod nunquam
accidisset nisi Corpus Elisaei Sanctum esset. And alleges to this purpose
and sense that Joseph embraced the dead body of his Father Jacob, and Moses
and Jesus the son of Naue carried with them the Reliks of Joseph's body.
Castus Joseph Patrem iam defunctum in lecto iacentem amplexus est: Item Moses
and Jesus filius Naue Reliquas Corporis Joseph ferebant. And persuadeth all
Bishops and others to the like reverence of such holy things. And delivers it
so observed of the Christians then even going on pilgrimadge (as now it is
termed) to visit and honor Reliks, and God miraculously approved it in the
graves and Tombs of two holy Christian Saints every year miraculously
without man's help whited and adorned quite over, and so pacified the Rage of
persecutors toward their Reuerencers. Progressi Clem. l. 2. Recogn.
essemus nos ad Sepulchra duorum fratrum quorumdam quae sponte sua, per annos
singulos dealbabantur. Quo miraculo multorum aduersum nos repressus est furor,
videntes haberi nostros in memoria apud Deum.

S. Dionysius the Areopagite sets down also Dion. Areop. Eccles. Hierarch.
c. 12.
this Christian use and practice, and yields this reason, because the body
was partaker of pains and labors, together with the soul, when they were in
this life united together it is to be honored with the soul in such respects.
Si animo and corpore Deo gratam acceptamque vitam egit is qui decessit, in
honor etiam and pretio erit cum sancto animo corpus, quod sacris sudoribus cum
eo certauit and dimicauit.

The same S. Denis, S. Damascen, and others warra^ted by the received tradition
of the Church, from the Apostles time ex antiqua accepimus traditione, that
all the Apostles, then living S. Denis, S. Tymothie first Bishop of Ephesus S.
Hierotheus, and many others of Christ's Disciples, at the death and assumption
of the blessed Virgyn Mary, assembled together where she ended this life at
Jerusalem and Gethsemanie to visit and reverence her Dionis. Areopagit. l. de
divine. nom. c. 3. and apud S. Ioa, Damasc. ser. 2. de dormitione Deiparae.
Tradi^io Eccles^^ Bren. Rom 18. die Aug. d^e 4. inf. octau. assumpt. ^. Mariae.
Dam. supr. and alij.
holy body. Multi ex Sanctis fratribus nostris, corporis quod authorem vit ae
Deumque recepisset videndi causa conuenissemus, ador at autem, and Iacobus
frater Domini, and Petrus maximum antiquissimumque Theologorum columen.

The tradition of the Church plainly expounds their pilgrimage thither to
worship that sacred body, corpus quod Deum susceperat adorare. And so then
did. And an Angelical vision was seen, and an heavenly harmony continued
three days there. Visio apparuit Angelica, and audita est psa^nodia caelestium
potestatum. Where we see, that both the Apostles, and disciples of Christ
living on earth, and the Angels in heaven gave honor, and reverence to this
holy relike. Great was the Matthew. c. 14. Ruffin. l. 2. c. 28. Theod. l. 3. c
6. Niceph. l. 10. c. 13. l. 1. c. 19 Metaph. 29. August.
honor and reverence which the disciples of S. John Baptist did unto his holy
body both as the Scripture and other writers witness, when nothing respecting
the rage of his most potent persecutours, they honorably buried it, carrying it
out of Herodes jurisdiction unto Sebaste in Samaria to give it due honor more
freely: where also the reliks of Eliseas the Prophet were buried, and
reverenced, and so they continued in honor, until the time of Julian the
Apostata, when the Jews and Gentiles maligning the great honor the
Christians did unto them, took them out of their shrines, mixed the^ with the
bones of beasts burned them together, and scattered their ashes into the air,
which antiquities term the greatest and horrible wickedness. Illud omnium
maxim indignum S^bastianae in Pal^stina est admissum. Ossa namque Elisaei
Prophetae, and Ioannis Baptistae loculis suis extracta, and irrationalium
animantium ossibus, o immanem audaeciam, mista atque ignitradita, in cineres
redacta, atque in aerem disiecta sunt.

The ancient Fathers, and Antiquities say, that S. John Baptist his disciples
buried his body in a famous place, with great reverence; eum discipuli furtim
sublatum, cum solemni veneratione in celebri Metaphrast. de exportat. man. San.
Io. Bapt. extra Antiochiam. Gulielm. Eiseng. centen* 1. part. 5. did. 7.
Matthew. westminster. chron. an. 458.
quodam apud Sebasten Pal^stinae sepeliere loco. Simon Metaphrastes and others
write, that S. Luke the Evangelist with much difficulty, procured his right
hand, and carried it to Antioch his native place, and from that time until
Iulianus his persecution, it remained therein great honor, doing many
miracles. Ab illo tempore sita est manus illa apud Antiochiam in magno honor^
habita, and iugis quae in ea habitat gratiae fidem faciens miraculis, ad
Iuliani Imperatoris vsque tempora.

The ancient learned French Bishop Gregorius Turonensis writes, that a noble
matrone of that contry brought with great reverence, part of the blood of that
great Martyr, Christ yet living unto the City of Vaseus, where building a
Church in his honor, she placed it one the Altar. Concham Gregor. Tur. in
lib. in glor. plur. Mar^yr. cap. 12. Mat. West. chronic. an. 458.
argenteam praeparat, truncatique martyris cruoremin patriam detulit, and apud
vasatensem vrbem aedificata in eius honor Ecclesia, in Sancto altari
collocauit. His head though concealed and hidden by his wicked Murderesse, was
yet after found and kept with great honor. Such reverence and devotion was
used to the reliks of the Apostles, and other Saints of this age.

All hystories are full of the great honor done to the holy bodies of S.
Peter and S. Paul at Rome. And their Tombs reverenced as Trophies even in this
age presently upon their deaths as most ancient Gaius Epist-ad Proclum.
Eusebius. lib. 2. hist. c. 25.
writers are witnesses: Ego Apostolorum Trophaea ostendere possum. Etenim siad
vaticanum, vel ad viam Ostiensem abire voles, Trophaea inuenies eorum, qui
Ecclesiam hanc Romanam, fundarunt. And pilgrimadges were made thither to
reverence them, and the Reliks of other Martyrs there, from remote parts of the
world, as Persia Afrike and others in the storming times of the first
persecutions, and the pilgrims themselves, even whole families all most, as S.
Marius, and S. Martha his wife, with their two holy Sons S. Audifar and S.
Abachum were Martyred for such holy devotions. Marius Breuiar. Romans die 19.
Ianua. Martyrolog. Romans and Bed. Martyrol. 19. Ianuar. Vsuar. die 20. Ianua.
Sur. die 14. Febr. Martyr. Roman. 22. Nouemb. Vsuard. eod. die Bed. die 21.
Greg. l. 3. ep. 30. ad Constable. Aug Abdias. certam. Apostol. l. r. Marcell. Petri
discipul. in vit. Petri Linus in past. Petri. Presbyter. and Diacon. Achaiae in
Passion. S. Andreae Bed. and Ado pride. call. Dec. Anton. part. 1. Petr. de
Natal. l. 1. c. 8. Sur. and and lippel. die vlt. Nouemb. in S. Andrea. Greg.
Turon. l. in glor. mart. cap. 30. Anton. part. 1. tit. 6. Doroth. Synop.
Theodor. lect. l. 2. Bed. and. vsuar. Martyr. in S. Jacob. Anton. part. 1. Tit.
6. c. 7. Petr. de natal. l. 6 c. 133. Vincet. l. 8. c. 7. Mant. fast. l. 7.
Martyrol. Romans Callist. Pap. 2. ser. de translat. S. Iac Leo 3. de translat.
eius Trithem l. de vir. Illustrib. Hieron. l de Script. Eccl. in Io Euang.
Breuiar. Romans 27. Decembr. Martyr. Romans Bed. and Vsuar. ^od. die Men. Graec. 6.
c^l. October. Celestin. Pap^ epist. ad Syn. Ephesin. Chrysostom. hom. in laudem 12.
Apost and hom. 26. in Epist. Pauli ad Heb. Anonymus antiq. in vit. Apostolorum
in Ioanne.
persa, nobili loco natus, cum Martha coniuge pari nobilitate, and du^bus
filijs Audiface and Abachum, Romam venerunt, vt Martyrum sepulchra venerarentur.

So likewise S. Maurus out of Afrik, ex Africa veniens ad Sepulchra
Apostolorum. And the Christians in the east from whence these great Apostles
came to Rome so much honored them as the Christian Romans likewise did, that
they would with great honor to them, and danger to themselves have
translated them from Rome into the east soon after their death, but that God
miraculously decided the question for the Romans as S. Gregory and other
worthy Authors are witnesses. They were buried by the Christians with great
honor, and presently there was pilgrimadge, waching, praying and reverence at
their graves, as there now is, so much as the time of persecution would permit.

The body of S. Andrew had the honor to be buried with great reverence even
by Maximilla, wife to Aegeas the Proconsul of Achaia who put him to dearh.
Sacratissimum illius corpus ins^g^^ pudicitia and sanctitate faemina Maximilla
nomine S^natrix, suorum adiuta solatio cum omni reuerentia de cruce deposuit,
conditumque aromatibus honorifice sepeliuit. And so it continued therein great
honor with much resort of pilgrymes unto it until the quiet time of
Constantine, when it was, as many others, translated to the Imperial city of
Constantinople, some part of it into Satland and some to Rome with exceeding
glory and reverence. For the body of S. James the greater, all antiquities at
witness, how it was soon after his Martyrdom at Jerusalem translated from
them into Spain where he had preached, and there at Compostella preserved
with great honor, and frequented by devout pilgryms from all contryes to
this day. S. Iacobus Apostolus Frater Beati Iohannis Euangelist^ ab Herod
Aegryppa decollatus. Eius sacra ossa ab Hierosolymis ad Hispanias translata,
and in vltimis earum finibus apud Galliciam recondita, celeberrima illarum
gentium veneratione, and frequenti Christianorum concursu religionis and voti
causa illuc adeuntium, pie coluntur.

I cannot speak of this honor to the body of S. John the Apostle and
Evangelist in this first age, which by common consent of writers he ouerliued.
Dying in the second age: Sexagesimo octauo post Passionem Domini anno mortuus.
But as I have proved before of him with all other the Apostles, that he
honored the sacred body of the blessed Virgin, and ruling of the Churches of
Asia after the Martyrdom of the other Apostles, totas Asia fundauit rexitque
Ecclesias, where diverse of the Apostles and other Saints of this age were
martired, and their bodies honored, he ruling this Church that gave such
honor unto them, must needs also give allowance there unto and after his death
was at the place thereof honored with great concourse of pilgryms, that being
one of the most frequented in all those parts of the world.

S. Chrysostom writheth that after his death he and his holy Tomb protected
Ephesus, where it was, as he did when he lived. Post mortem tamquam vi^us
Ephesum curat. For S. Thomas we may omit all others both old and late
Antiquaries of other nations, and content our selves with our own of this
Kingdom so fare remote from the Indyes, where he was martired and his body
after ward honored with great devotion, testifying upon known experience
that the Christians of this nation went so long and dangerous pilgrimages
from hence to visit and reverence his holy body, and make oblations there. Thus
did our best and noblest kings, So our renowned Bishops, with others. So write
our renowned Historians Florentius wigorniensis, William of Malmesbury Flor.
Wigorn. Chron. an 883. Guliel. Malmesbur. l. de gest. Reg. Roger. Houeden part.
1. Mat. Westminster. chron. an. 883. Godwin. Cataloge. of BishoPs in Salesbury 11.
an. 883.
Roger houeden, and others, our Protestant Antiquaries themselves confessing
and confirming it. They exemplify in our most triumphant and holy king S.
Edgar Sigelin or Suithelmus Bishop of Shyrburne, and their retinnes.

Edgarus trans mare Romam, and ad sanctum Thomam in Indiam multa munera misit.
Legatus in hoc missus Sigelimus Scireburnensis Episcopus eum magna
prosperitate, quod quiuis hoc saculo miretur, Indiam penetrauit. Our Protestant
Antiquaries say Swithelm or Sigelm traveled into India to the place of S.
Thomas his Burial, carried thither the alms or offering of King Alfred, and
brought home many precious stons of great Flor. wigorn. supr. an. 883. Henric.
Hunting. h^st. l. 5. Mar^yrolog. Romans Bed. Vsuard. Ado and alij 3. die Iulij.
price. Florentius has the very same of king alfred.

Our Martyrologes and Antiquities set down the translation of part of his
body out of India to Edessa in Mesopotamia on the third day of July. Edessae in
Mesopotamia Transtatio S. Thomae Apostoli ex India: cuius reliquiae Ortonam
postea translatae sunt.

And Ruffinus Socrates Sozomen and others are ancient witnesses, that the
Reliks of S. Thomas Ruffin hist. Eccl l 2. c. 5 Socrat. hist. Eccl l 4. c. 14
Sozom. hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 18.
were honored therein a noble Church dedicated to him. Edessa Mesopotamiae
Vrbs fidelium populorum est Thomae Apostoli Reliquijs decorata. In ea Ciuitate
egregium and magnificum Templum est diuo Thoms Apostolo dicatum, crebraque
hominum multitudo eo propter loci sanctitatem consluit. So that wheresoever in
places never so distant, Reliks of his body were from the time of his
martyrdom, we see them preserved and honored with great devotion.

Like was the cause of S. James Bishop of Jerusalem, Hieron. lib. de Script.
Eccl. in Iacobo. Breu. Romans 1. die Maij in S. Iacobo. Epiph. her. 78. Egesipp.
l de exnid. Hierosol. Eusebius. hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap 22. Eusebius. hist. Eccl l 7.
c 18.
in this kind, his Sanctity was such, whilst he lived, that people in
multitudes contended to touch the hemme of his garment, tanta erat Iacobi vitae
Sanctitas, vt fimbriam vestimenti eius certatim homines cuperent attingere; And
being martired, he was with great honor buried by the Temple in a pillar
still standing in the time of Egesippus, and Eusebius after him as they are
witnesses: Columns eius iuxta Templum adhuc manet, We may gather what honor
was used to his sacred body, if we consider the great reverence was performed
to his very chair wherein he had sit clothed, being prescrued and honored
from his death: Sedem Iacobi. Apostoli ad hoc vsque temporis seruatam, fratres
^sti^ qui successione ordinaria subsecuti sunt, omnibus manifest monstrant,
sicut circa sanctos viros, pietatis gratia, cum veteres tum and praesentes
competeutem honorem seruarunt, and hodie qnoque servant. Thus has Eusebius.

So Theodosius Bishop of Jerusalem witnesses Theod. Episc. Hier. epist. ad S.
Ignat. Syn. 8. act. 1. Breu. Romans 1. die Maij martyrol. Romans Bed. Vsuar. cod.
die Menol. Graec. 13. call. Iul. Nice. l. 2. hist. c. 39. Continuat. Sigeb an.
1157 Sigeb. chron. an. 489. Mat. westminster. chron. an. 479. 831. Abdias certa^
Apost. lib. 8. Petr. de Not. l. 7 c. 103 Anton. part. 1. tit. 6 c. 12. Guliel.
Eisengr. cent. 1 part. 5. did 7. Martyrol. Romans die 25. Aug. Bed. Vsuard Ado
and alij die 24. Aug. Nicephorus hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 41.
of his stole, which he sent to S. Ignatius Patriarch of Constantinople for an
holy Relike with others. His body was honorably preserved by the Christians,
and after with great reverence translated to Rome, where it is buried with the
body of S. Philip the Apostle martired at Hierapolis in Phrygia, and honorably
there first buried by S. Bartholomew the Apostle with other Christians, as
Nicephorus with others witness, Bartholomeus Philippi sepulturae honor
praestito, and vrbe totaillussrata, was there prescrued with honor, until the
the honorable translation there of, and now honored at Rome with the body of
S. James in one Church, as the Church of Christ honors them with one
festival day.

The body of the same Apostle S. Bartholomew was so likewise honored. First
immediately after his martyrdom, king Polymius and the Christians of 12.
cities buried his body with great glory. 12. Ciuitatum populi qui per eum
crediderant vna cum Rege Polymi abstulerunt cum hymnis, and cum omni gloria
corpus eius. And when it was afterward translated, it was worshipped in all
places, with as great honor and reverence eius sacrum corpus primo ad liparam
Insulam, deinde Beneuentum postremo Romam ad Insulam Tiberinam translatum,
ibipia fidelium veneratione honoratur.

Nicephorus writes that the body of S. Matthew Martired in Aethiopia, was
praesently laid on a bed of gold, wrapped in precious clothes, and so placed
in the Princes palace. Cuius sacrum tabernaculum in aureo repositum lecto,
splendidisque inuolutum Martyr. Romans die 6. Maij Greg. 7. epist. ad Alfanum
Episc. Salerni. Leo Ostien. in chron. Casin. l. 3. c. 44. Anonym. ant. in vit.
Apost. in S. Symone and Judah. Abd. cer^a^ Apost. l 4 Anton. part. 1. titul. 6.
cap. 14. Petr. de Not. l 9. c. 115. Ado Treuer. Bed. and Vsuard 5. Calend. Nou.
Romans Mart. 24. Febr. Ant. part. 1. tit. 6. c. 15. Petr. de Natal. l. 3. cap.
149. Anton. supr. Annal. Eccl. Treuer. Sur. and Lippol. die 24 Febr. Petr.
Merss. Catal Episc. Treuer. Just. Martyr quaest. 28 Doroth. in Synopsi. S. Io.
Damasc. h^st Barlaam c. 12 and al^^.
vestibus, palatio Fuluianus infert. It was afterward with great honor
translated into diverse nations, and buried after with much glory at Salernum.
Salerni translatio S. Matthaei Apostoli, cuius sacrum corpus olim ex Aethiopia
ad diuersas regiones: and demum ad eam vrbem delatum, ibidem in Ecclesia eius
nomine dedicata summo honor conditum fuit. We find that S. Simon and Jude
being martyred in Persia, King Zerses, or Xerxes confiscating the Pagan Priests
goods which put them to death, did with great honor within three months
translate their bodies into his City. Rex Zerses confiscauit omnes Pontifices,
corpora autem Sanctorum Apostolorum Symonis and Iud^ ingenti honor ad suam
translulit ciuitatem. He erected a most sumptuous Church unto them, there
burying their bodies in a silver shrine. Sarcophagum corpora beatorum
Apostolorum portantem ex argento puro instituit.

S. Matthias chosen in the place of Judas was martyred in Jury, his body was
preserved with great care and reverence, and in after times honorably
translated to Rome, and Treues in Germany, and there visited with great
devotion. And not only the holy bodies of the Apostles, and other Saints in
this age were thus honored and reverenced of the Christians, but their
clothes and whatsoever touched their sacred bodies as the ancient learned
Fathers and Saints which also were worshippers of them with the whole
Christian Catholic world are witnesses. Apostolorum virtus vsque adeo emi^uit,
vt in omnem terram eorum sonus exierit. Horum non verba duntaxat, and opera,
sed ipse quoque cruor, and ossa omni sanctitate plena sunt. Daemones namque in
fugam vertunt, atque ijs, qui cum fide accedunt, incurabiles alioqui morbos
profligant. Quin vestes quoque ipsae, and si quid aliud ad pretiosa eorum
corpora proprius accessit, omnibus venerationi sunt.

Thus were the chains of S. Peter both those Bren. Romans 1 die Aug. Martyr Romans
Beda. Vsuard. Ado eod. die. Menol. Graec. 17. call. Frebr. Greg epist. l. 1.
epist. 6. lib. 6. epist. 23. Aug. Sermon. 29. de Sanctis Arator l. 1. in act.
Chrysostom. apud Metaph. Breu. Romans in octau. SS. Apost. Petri and Pauli. die
6. Iulij.
wherewith he was chained under Herod, at Jerusalem, adorned with gold, and
precious stones, auro ge^misque ornata, and wherewith he was chained at Rome
under Nero, his chair and other such reliks of him were honored by the
greatest and holiest Christians. So have the Latin, so the Greek antiquities.
Veneratio praetiosae cathenae qua beatus Apostolus Petrus, Christi causa
Herodis iussu vinctus est.

So were the nails with which S. Peter was nailed to his cross honored by
the holy Fathers: beati claui qui sancta illa membra penetrarunt. S.
Chrysostom expresses how they and the sword wherewith S. Paul was be headed
had ever been honored, when he wished that sword for his crown, and S.
Peter's nails to be set as precious stones in his diadem. Sit mihi gladius
ille pro corona, and claui Petri pro gemmis infixis in diademate.

The garment of the blessed Virgin Mary was Io. Zonoras in Leone. Mag. Matthew.
West. chron. an. 910 Zonor. de Imperio Romans pueri.
accounted precious, preserved with honor in a silver chest, translated with
great reverence, in arge^teo loculo, and the very house wherein it was kept and
reverenced, there upon called the holy Chest: quae aedes ex co sacer loculus
appellatur. Part of the garment of S. John Baptist was so kept, and reverenced:
Venerabilis vestis Ioannis Baptistae, as likewise part of his hair clotered
with blood. Parte^ Beda Arcuulfus and alij de locis Sanctis.
capillorum eiusdem sanguine concretam.

The cloth made by our lady with the pictures of Christ and his Apostles was
honored at Jerusalem. In Ecclesia vencratur. There is no end in antiquities
in such holy reverence. And not only of the Reliks of our Lady, S. John
Baptist, and The first Christians in Britain did Profess and practice this
doctrine.
the Apostles, but of all other holy Martirs, and Saints of this age, S.
Stephen, S. Luke, S. Mark, the three Princes of the East, that offered to our
Savior newborn, S. Timothy, S. Lazarus, S. Mary Magdalen, S. Martha and
others holy men and women to many to be recited.

And this Kingdom of Britain was as forward as any other in this kind of
worship as their renowned Bishop and Antiquaty relates of his Britans.
Praeomni peregrino labor, Romam peregre Girald. C^br. descr. Cambr. c. 18.
libentius eundo, deuotis mentibus Apostolorum limina propensius adorant.
Sanctorum reliquijs deuotam reuerentiam exhibere, longeque magis quam vllam
gentem honorcm defer videmus. And this he writes of them from their first
conversion, which was in this age. And does so accordingly entitle that
Chapter: De antiquafidei fundatione, christianit at is amore and deuotione.

Pope Bonifacius in an Epistle to King Edward Bonifacius Pap. epist. ad Rege^
Eduard. The Walsingham hist. Angl. in Eduard. 1.
the first, testifies, that the Further part of Britayne now named Scotland
was converted by the holy Reliks of S. Peter the Apostle. Regnum Scotraeper
Beati Petri Apostoli vonerandas Reliquias non finc superni dono muneris
conuersum extitit ad ^idei Catholicae vnitatem. S. Joseph of Aramathia coming
hither by all assent, both of Protestant and Catholic Antiquaries, with his
Religious company, was present with the Apostles at the death six: Io: Capgrau.
in S. Joseph Aramathie^.
and Assumption of our blessed lady, and so honored her sacred body with them,
spoken of before, and brought with him hither, and preserved here with great
reverence all his life two little silver vessels full of the bloody sweat of
Christ, duo vasc^la alba argentea cruore Prophetae Jesus, and sudore perimpleta.

All histories agree that the body of S. Joseph was there preserved with great
honor, and reverenced with great resort of pilgryms to that, and other
Reliks there until these times of desolation, and those holy Reliks gave that
glorious denomination to the happy place of their preserving to be styled
camiterium Sanctum, tumulus Sanctorum, Hieronyn. cont vigilant. and ep. 53. ad
Riparium, and Defider Gennad. in catalog. cap. 53. willet Antilog page 13.
Wotton des. of part. page 9. perkins probl. page 81. Iouas A^elian. l. 1.
Sedul. and alij. Hieronym. sup. and Ripar. and dehderium. lib. aduers.
v^gilant. cap. 2.
the holy Churchyard, grave of Saints, and the like. Vigilantius is remembered
in histories to have been the first man of note among Christians which denied
or impugned this doctrine, and for that, as other his singular assertions
condemned for an heretik, so our Protestants thus confess: Vigilantius was
condemned of heresy for deny all thereof. He lived in the fourth hundred of
years the Church of Christ never hearing of this heresy before; and S.
Hierome then living and writing calls him for such stramage dreams, rather
Dormitantius, a sleepy drowsy fellow, then Vigilantius, a waking watchful
man. Negat sepulchra veneranda, damnat que Sanctorum vigilias. Ex quo sit, vt
dormitantius potius, quam vigilantius, vocari debeat. He calls him an unhappy
man to be bewailed with floods of tears, a stinking mouth breather of most
silthy rotonnesse, a monster to be abandoned to the vthermost part of the
world. Os saetidum putorem spurcissimum proferens. Portentum in terras vltimas
deportandum.

The last exception which our Protestants in this Invocation and honor of
Saints.
Article make against the doctrine of the Church of Rome, is thus registered by
them. The Romish doctrine concerning inuoation of Saints, is a fond thing,
vainly invented, and grounded upon no warrantie of Scripture, but rather
repugnant to the word of God. This is confuted by that is said before of the
holy Reliks and Images of Saints: For if they, as is inuincibly proved by the
doctrine and practice of this age, may and ought to be reverenced, their happy
and blessed souls, and Angels in eternal Joy and bliss must needs
challe^dge such duty from them that live, and prayers may be offered to such
perfected in celestial knowledge, charity and Council. gangren. epist. and
can. 14. 15. 16. Socrat* Histor. l. 2. cap. 33. Sozom. Histor. Eccl. l. 3 cap.
13. Epiphan. Hier. 40. Nicephor. Hist. l. 9. cap. 16. Hieron. contra vigilant.
never changing blessedness.

The first among Christians suspected to have denied this Catholic doctrine
and practice of the church of Christ was Eustachius by some Eutactus a Bishop
in Armenia disallowing the Churches of Martyrs loca Sanctorum martyrum vel
Basilicas, as he is charged in the council of Gangra wherein he was condemned
for that, and other wicked assertions, and by other antiquities. Yet Sozomen,
Nicephorus and others write, how he sought to clear himself from accusations.
And to speak of certain things, Vigilantius was the first known and
certainly proved impugner of the Invocation of Saints, as of worship to their
reliks before spoaken of, and was condemned for such a monster as is already
declared. And Eustachius for Socrat. Supr l 2. cap. 33.
his singular boldness in such things was degraded, and his errors condemned in
publik Council. Concilium Gangris in Paphlagonia coa^lum, gradu Episcopali
dimouit, eiusque dogmata anathemate damnauit. Morton Apolog. part. 1. page 227.
228. Perk. probl. page 89. 93 Ormer pict. pap. page 26. 27. Middlet. papista.
page 129. Ephrem Syrus lib. de laudibus Joseph Patriarchae.


This is sufficiently proved by our Protestant writers themselves, openly
confessing; all antiquity taught Invocation of saints. Therefore few
testimonies of this first age will be needful in a confessed doctrine, and
practice of all ages with faithful people. Less was the knowledge of the
Saints deceased before the Passion of Christ, then after, when they were by
that happy redemption in glory. And yet S. Ephrem produces the holy Patriarch
Joseph praying to his mother Rachel deceased. O Rachel, Rachel matter mea,
exurge de pul^ere, and intuere Joseph filium tuum. Suscipe Rachel filium tuum.
Audi matter mea cordis mei gemitum, amarumque ^iulatum.

S. Ignatius in this age, is a worthy witness, that not only the living,
which were present at the Ignatius epist. ad Trallianos.
Passion of Christ, did know, behold and see it, but the Angels in heaven and
the souls of the^ that were under the earth, which arose with their bod^es at
the Resurrection of Christ, did likewise the same. Crueifixus and mortuus est,
videntibus coelestibus, terrenis, and ijs qui subterra detinebantur:
caelestibus quidem inspicientibus, nimirum incorporeis naturis: terrenis vero,
vt Iudaeis and Romany, and caeteris qui tunc temporis Crucifixo Domino
aderant: subterraneis autem ijs videlicet, qui plurimi cum Domino resurrexerunt.

If a man on earth and in body, might, though Igna^. epist. ad Trallian.
extraordinarily, know the Angels and spiritual things, with their orders in
heaven, as S. Ignatius witnesses of himself, haec no^e^im, much more do they
know the things on earth. Angelicos ordines, Archangelorum, militiarumque
coelestium discrimina, virtutum dominationumque differentias, thronorum,
potestatumque distantias, principatum magnificentias, Cherubim Seraphimque
excellentias, spiritus sublimitatem, and Domini Regnum, and incomparabilem Dei
Patris Omnipotentis diuinitatem. Haec cum nouerim.

And he plainly teaches in an other place, that Ignat. epist. ad Heronem.
the Angels in heaven, and not only God know our affairs on earth and have
regard of them, and so witnesses to S. Hieron. Praecipio tibi coram Deo, qui
est super omnia, and coram Christo praesente, and Spiritu Sancto, and coram
ministrantibus legionibus, 1. Timoth. 5.
custodi depositum meum. So S. Paul the Apostle wrote to S. Timothy: Testor
coram Deo and Christo Jesus and electis Angelis vt haec custodias. Where both
the Apostle and S. Ignatius acknowledge both knowledge and care of men's actions
on earth to be in the holy Angels, as in God himself, though with a difference
of the Creator, and excellent creatures. S. Hierotheus Master of S. Denis the
Areopagite, as he terms him testifies and he approves it that all love not
only of God, but Angels also has this nature that Superior things Dionisi
Areopag. l. diu. nom. cap. 4.
have care of the inferior, and those conform themselves to the Superior.
Amorem sieve diuinum, sieve angelicum, sieve spiritualem, sieve (vt ita dicam)
animalem, five naturalem vim quandam coniungentem miscentemque intelligamus,
quae superiora quidem impellit, vt inferioribus prospiciant vt consulant, paria
autem, vt inter se societate iungantur, inferiora vero, vt se conuertant
Dionys. l. caelest. Hier^^^h. cap. 9.
ad superiora.

And the same S. Denis says plainly, both that the Angels are Rulers of
nations even all nations, Angeli vnicuique nationi praefecti. And that God has
committed all men to his Angels, for their Salvation, and this is the
providence of God. Vna quidem de omnibus altissimi prouidentia omnes homines
cap. 3. patr. 3. ante med.
salutis causa Angelis suis ad se deducendos distribuerit. And he plainly
says that the prayers of holy people and Saints both in this world and in
heaven are profitable to them which be worthy of them. Iustorum etiam in hac
vita, ne dum post mortem, ijs dum^axat prosint, qui sacris precibus dignisint,
vere oraculorum traditiones nos edocent.

S. Clement is also witness, and cites it from S. Peter the Apostle his
mouth, that the Angels Clem. Romans l. 2. Recognit.
have the care and custody of men, and every nation has an Angel to whom it
is committed by God. Est enim vniuscuiusque gentis Angelus, cui credita est
gentis ipsius dispensatio a Deo. And proves that not only God the holy
Trinity* but all Saints and l. 8. Constitur. Apostolic. cap. 11.
administering Angels do so and behold our Actions on earth, and exemplifieth in
the election of Bishops. Coram Iudice Deo and Christo, praesente etiam Spiritu
sancto, atque omnibus Sanctis, and administratorijs l. ^. cap 8. edit. Turr.
Graec. etc. 7. Latin. l. 8. c. 33
spiritibus. And commands to honor Saints and Martirs. De Martiribus
praecipimus vobis, vt in omni honor sint apud vos. And prescribes diverse of
their festiuities to be kept holy, with honor.

The short history of S. Paul ascribed to S. Linus Successor to S. Peter,
who by all Antiquity wrote the Martyrdom of S. Paul, does testify in the
name of S. Plantilla, who ministered to S. Paul, and was present at his death,
that this glorious Apostle soon after his martyrdom appeared to that holy
woman in glory, with an Innumerable company of heavenly creatures
innumerabilium candidatorum S. Linus h^st. S. Paul^.
caterua comitatus, and said unto her, that as she had done holy offices to
him on earth, so he in heaven would remember her and shortly return to bring
her thither, and there show her the glory of God. Which was soon after
performed at her Martyrdom. Tu mihi Plautilla in terris absequium prestitisti,
ego tibi quam primum ad Regna pergenti officiofissime obsequar, in proximo
namque pro tereuer^ar, and tibi Regis inuicti gloriam demonstrabo.

This is proved by the ancient Masses ascribed to the holy Apostles, in which
there is express prayer, not only to God to be assisted and helped by the
prayers of the blessed Virgin Mary, and other Saints, libera nos qu^ f^in^s
Domine, ab omni Missa S. Petri Marci, Iacobi Minor. Mat. Missa S. Iacobi
Maioris.
malo prasente acfuturo, intercessionibus Iminacul^^ and Gloriosae Dominae
nostrae Deiparae, Semper que Virginis Mariae. But to the very Saints
themselves commemorationem agamus Sanctissima, Immaculata Gloriosissimae,
benedictae Dominae nostrae Matris Dei and semper Virginis Mariae, atque omnium
Sanctorum and Iustorum, vt precibus and intercessionibus little omnes
misericordiam consequamur. It is manifest in histories, that in all places,
where Christ was preached, Marti^l. epist. ad Burdegal. c. 3. Petr. de Not.
lib. 6. c. 151. Vinc. l 9. c. 99 and feq. Ant. part. 1. Titul. 6. c 20. Petr.
Masseus in Cat. Episcop. Colon. Annal. Colonien. Annal. Tungren in S. Materno.
Annal. Treu.
Churches, and Altars were founded and dedicated in honor of Saints which
dyed in this age. And they there ly and are honored. S. Martial then living and
writing so testifies of S. Stephen. S. Martha with allowance of S. Maximus
Bishop there builded a Church in honor of the blessed Virgin Mary between
A^les and Auinion. S. Maternus sent into Germany by S. Peter founded a Church
at Bonna in honor of S. John Baptist, and an other at Cole^ in honor of S.
Mathias the Apostle. And an other at Tungers in honor of the blessed Virgin.
S. Eucharius an other of S. Peter's disciples in this time dedicated a Church at
Tre^er^ honor of S. John the Evangelist. S. Saui^^^^^ sent by S. Peter into
France, builded there (...) Churches, one in honor of the blessed Vir^in Mary,
a second in honor of S. John Baptist, ^he third in honor of S. Stephen:
constructis tribus ^cclesijs in honorem Virginis Mariae, Iohannis Baptistae and
S. S^eph^ni. And S. Altinus one in honor of our ^ady. The Churches which were
thus founded and The first Christian Britans thus professed, and practiced.
de^i^^ted to Saints in this age in histories; are too (...) to recite,
confessed to be so in all places hathby Catholic and Protestant Antiquaries. So
it was here in Britayne as the first known Church thereof at Glastenbury
witnesses ere^^^^ and dedicated to our blessed lady both by ^e^u^^ly and
earthly warrant. The Angel of God so directed S. Joseph and his holy company:
And to make evident to all, that to dedicate Churches then to the honor of
Saints, was in them to honor Saints and pray unto them, and by them to be
protected, it is so proved of hese our primative founders in Religion; of this
first age, that they prayed unto the blessed Virgin and honored her, and
Antiquitat. glast. manuscript. Tabul. ligneis fix. Gal. Malmesb. l. de
antiquit. Caenobij glaston M. S. Capgran. catal. in 6. Joseph S. Patric in
episto! H^storia apud S. Edmundum.
she protected them, as the most ancient monuments of that place and other
Antiquities clearly prove: praedieti Sancti in eodem deserti conuer santes per
Archangelum Gabri^lem in visione admoniti sunt, Ecclesiam in honor Sanctae Dei
Genitricis and perpetuae Virginis Maria caelitus demonstrato construere,
duod^cim igitur Sancti in eodem loco Deo and Beatae Virgini deuota exbibentes
obsequia, vigilijs, Ieiunijs and orationibus vacantes; eiusdem Virginis Dei
Genitricis auxilio in necessit atibus suis refocillabantur.

These antiquities say this was the first Church which the Christians builded
in this country, and it was a great honor unto it to be dedicated b^ Christ
to his mothers honor. Et cumhaec Eccles^ in hat Regione prima fuit, ampliori
cum dig^i^ate D^ filius insigni^it, ipsum videlice^ in honor s^ae (...)
dedicando. All agree that this Church was builde^ by S. Joseph, and his
Associats.

And yet the same antiquities, and other Historians, even Protestants who
allege, the Authority of S. Augustine termed the Apostle of the English
nation, to the same purpose are witnesse^ that there was a Church miraculously
builde^ before S. Joseph and his holy companians ca^^ hither, and here founded
by them wholly finished Antiquitat. glast. tabulis fix. sup. S. Augustinus in
Ecclesia S. Edmundi. Matthew. parker. An^iquit. Britan. c. 2. p. 3. edit.
Hanouiae an. 1605.
and perfected, dedicated also to the blessed. Virgi^ Many. Primi Catholicae
legis Neophyta antiqua^ De^ dictante repererunt Ecclesiam, nulla hominion art,
v^ referunt constructam, immo ^umanae saluti a Deo p^^atam, quam postmodum ipse
caelorum fabricator m^ltis mir^culorum gestis, multisque virtutum mysterij^,
(...) Sanctaeque Dei Genitr^ci Mariae se consecrasse monstrauit. This was in
the ^1. year after the Passion of Christ, and after the assumption of our lady
15. Anno post Passionem Domini 31. post Assumptio^e^ Gloriosa Virginis 15. When
few other Saints in the law of Christ were deceased this life, and then in
heaven. Thus were our Two first Churches dedicated here by greatest warrant to
the honor of the blessed Virgin Mary Mother of God, where she assisted and
protected her Suppliant Servants and petitioners there, And S. Bid with all
Antiquaries, Catholics and Protestants consents, that the Britans kept their
first faith inuiolate and whole until the cruel persecution of Dioclesian:
Bed. histor. Eccl Angl. l. 1. cap. 4.
susceptam fidem Britanni vsque in tempora Dioclesia^ (...) inuiolatam
integramque quieta in pace serua^^^: And when this Kingdom was generally,
^^^^erted, which happend in the succeding age all ^^^ Temples before founded to
false Gods were by common and greatest authority in all opinions, (...) now
whatsoever, of the holy pope S. Eleu^^^^i^s his legates, and our holy king S.
Lu^^us, c^^^nged into Christian Churches, dedicated to God and his Saints.
Templa quae in honor plurimo^^^ Galfrid. histor. Briton. l. 4. c. 19. Matthew.
west. an. 185.
Deorum fundata fuerant, vni Deo, eiusque San^^^^ dedicanerunt. So they
dedicated Churches to ^^^ holy Angels namely S. Michael the Archangel, ^^^oured
and prayed unto him and he protected Antiquitat. glaston. manuscript. epistol.
S. Patricij Capgr. catal. in S. Patric. and Joseph. Bed. hist. l. 1. c. 7.
Matthew. westin. An. 303. Manuscript. Antiq. Jacob. gemen. in vit. S. Amphibali
Cap grau. in eod. and in S. Alban. Gradual. antiq. and miss. Sarisb. in festo
S. Albani. litan. Angl. antiq. ante bapt. and commend. anim^.
^^em.

Phaganus and Damianus Oratorium aedificauerunt in honor S. Michaelis
Archangeli quatenus ibi ab hominib^^ haberet honorem qui homines in perpetuos
honores i^^ente Deo est introducturus. So they prayed unto the Saints as is
evident in the Examples of Saint Heraclius our Martyr at the death of our fist
Martyr S. Alban praying to him and heard, and helped by him. And S. Amphibalus
that converted Saint Alban, thus prayed unto him, both to be assisted by him
and the holy Angels. Sancte Albane Deum nostrum depreceris, vt mihi Angelum
bonum obuiam mittat, ne mihi praedo truculentus obsistere, nec Iter meum pars
iniqua valeat impedire. So it was in all after times which I am not to speak
of in this place, but thus may end this tedious and confused Article stuffed
with so many fulshoods, and aunciently condemned heresies. I may be more breife
in the rest of their followeing Articles, not containing so many particulars.

THE IX. CHAPTER.
The 23. article examined.
THeir next Article, the 23. in number, is this ^ is not lawful for any man to
take upon him, ^^ office of publik preaching or ministering the Sacrame^^ in the
Congregation, before he be lawfully called, ^^ sent to execute the same. And
those we ought to Iudg^ lawfully called and sent, which be thosen and called ^
this work by men who have publik authority giu^ unto them in the
Congregation, to call and send mi^^sters in the Lords vineyard. This is the
whole Article wherein there is no controversy with, or again^ the Church of
Rome never allowing any for Priests or public ministers of the holy Sacraments
but such as are duly and truly consecrate^ in the Sacrament of holy orders,
only ministre^ by lawfully and Canonically Sacred Bishops, a^ the doctrine and
practice of this Apostolic ag^ was, as I have proved before and S. Ignatius
wit^ S. Ignatius epist. ad Smyrnen:
others thus prove unto us: Non licet sine Episcop^ baptizare neque offerre,
neque sacrificium immol^^^, neque Dochen celebrare, sed quodcumque illi vis^^
fuerit secundum beneplacitum Dei, vt tutum and ra^^^sit, saci at is. No
Sacrament could be ministered, nothing done in the Church without the Bishop^
authority, and approbation. No man could be ^ Priest, minister Sacraments, or
exercise any Ecclesiastical order, or function, but only such as were
Epistol. ad Heron.
consecrated thereunto by lawful Bishops. Nih^^sine Episcopis facito,
baptizant, sacrificant, elig^^^* manus imponunt. And these Protestants
themselue^ both in their Book of their pretended consecration Protest. Book
of consecrat. pref. and per tot. artic. 36. infra. prot. gloss upon the same.
canons, Iniunctious etc.
and their 36. Article hereafter, entitled, of Consecration of Bishops, and
Ministers, as also their publik gloss thereupon, and common practice do thus
testify: The Superiority and authority which Bishops and Archbishops do
exercise in ordering ^^d consecrating of Bishops and Ecclesiastical ministers,
i^ grounded upon the word of God. From the Apostles d^^es hither to there never
wanted a Succession of Bis^ops neither in the East, nor western Churches. And
from the first nursing of their Religion here in England, they ever by their
publik proceedings allowed that consecration, which was in the Roman Church,
and most willingly without any addition or ceremony allowed such as were so
consecrated to be Priests, Ministers, and Ecclesiastical men among them, if
they would in wordly respects, and in external show give any allowance to
their Religion. And at this day they contend to derive their own pretended
Bishops and Ministers by Consecration from our Catholic Roman Bishops.

This Article as their gloss expounds it, seems to have been made against
the Mancerians, Them: Rogers Analis. upon the b. of Articles, art. 23. allowed
by the lawf. authority of the Church of Engl.
Anabaptists, family of love, and such others risen up in their Protestant
School denying external Ordination, and calling of clergy men. But being
well examined, it does both free the Roman Church, as is proved and they
confess, and condemns all Protestants in the world. First for forreyne
Protestants none of them take or claim ordination true or pretended, from
either true or pretended Bishops, and so by that is already said, are utterly
condemned by this Article. And for our English Protestants which pretended a
calling, and ordination by Bishops, they are in the same case by their own
decree in this Article, for therein they say that men lawfully called, and
sent, be only they, which be chosen and called by men who have public
authority given unto them in the congregation (Church they mean) to call and
send ministers in the Lords vineyard: But I have proved before, in particular,
and every of their Articles more then half of them in order without excepting
any one inuincibly confuted prove the same, that these men art no part, parcel
or congregation of the true Church of Christ, and so no men among them can
pretend to have authority, public, or other to send Ministers in the Lords
vineyard being themselves no members or parsons, commaundeing or to be
commanded, consecrating or to be consecrated therein, much less to have such
public authority in it, as this Article appoints for this business. Secondly
there were no men among them at the making of these Articles, nor at the
birth of their Religion here in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, which had
or possibly in their proceedings could have any such publik authority, to call
and send Mininisters in the Lords vineyard. For their whole congregation
consisted of a woman Queen Elizabeth, their pretended clergy, and others
confessed merely temporal men.

Let us take all these either jointly together as in parliament, or by
themselves severally, and no such publik authority will be found in them. The
Queen a woman by Sex was neither men, nor man haueing such authority, and
their 37. Article denies any such prower in her, either (...) ^^^selfe or
others. All their pretended Bishops ^^^re by all Consistories Ecclesiastical
and Tempo^^ll even the parliament, and Judgments in the Temporal law,
adjudged to have no such autho^i^ie.

The first parliament of Q. Elizabeth which re^iued Stow hist. in Q. Mary an. 1.
and an. 1. of Q. Elizabeth. Parker. Ant. Brit. in Tho. Cranmar. Godwin. Catal.
of Bish. solpe. Hollin. hist. of Engl. in Q. Mary Statutes of Q* Eliz. K. James
and K. Charles make Preisthood treason.
their Religion, had not one true or pretended Bishop that had voice in
parliament that cons^nted unto it, but all the Bishops which had, and only had,
such publik authority, did disclayme and disagree to that change, the
Temporal Lords, ^^ights, and burgesses neither had nor could give which they
had not, such authority. No forreyne Pope, Patriarch, Archbishop or Bishop did
or could give it here, by their own laws. For Q. Elizabeth, King James and K.
Charles by their parlaments and Statutes have made holy preisthood Treason. And
this new Protestant Queen Elizabeth her Religion beginning here in the year
155^. and 1559. in her first parliament, never had (...) known public allowed
square, rule, form, ^^nner, Order, or fashion whatsoever, for any to have
publik authority to call, make, send or set forth any pretended Minister
until the year 1562. when their Religion was 4. years old, and these The new
Protestant book of Consec. an. 2. Eduardi 6. in Parlam. statut. an r. Mariae.
Book of ar^icles an. 1^62. art. 36.
Articles were made, and in them the book of King Edward the 6. about 10. or
11. years old, when he set it forth by parliament, was first called from
death werewith it perished in the first year of Queen Mary.

It has been pretended from a newborn Register of Matthew parker, that he
was made a Bishop by Barlowe, Scorye, and 3. others by virtue of a commission
from Queen Elizabeth, and this new work was acted on the 17. day of December,
but alas, they had then no form our order to do such a business, if they had
been such publik allowed and authorized men as this Article appoints, until
4. years after, this pretended admittance alleged to have been 17. December.
an. 1559. And their own public confession is, in the Register it self as
they have published it in Matthew parker their first pretended protestantly
made Archbishope his book and Register, That none of those pretended
Consecratours was admitted for a true or pretended Consecratour until after
this supposed consecration of Matthew parker. For they say from their pretended
Register of Matthew parker Anno 1559. Matthew. part. cant. cons. Franc. Mason l.
3. c. 4. of cons. p. 127. ex Regist. Matthew. park. to. 1. f. 2. and 10. Godw.
catal. of Bish. in Canterb. 69. Matthew. parker.
17. December. by william Barlowe, Ihon Scory, Miles Couerdale Ihon hodgeskins, by
these Matthew parker was consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, the seuententh
day of December, in the year 1559. Their Catalogue of Bishops says: he was
consecrated December. 17. 1559. by W. Barlowe, Io: Scory, and Ihon hodgeskins.
This is utterly false, and impossible, by their own testimonies, and
proceedings, to be true. For their own Register as it is published in Matthew
parker his own writings proves directly that two of these 4. pretended
Consecratouts were never allowed for such or Bishops, or any men having such
public authority in their Protestant Religion, as this their Article
requires of necessity to call and send Ministers, These were Miles Couerdale,
and Ihon Hodgeskings never having any such power in Q. Elizabeth her time. And
for the other two william Barlowe, and Ihon Scory they were not allowed by
these Protestants ^^^ Bishops or such men, until Matthew parker ^^^ as they
pretend by their Register consecrated by them william Barlowe styled before D.
of Diuinine or a priest Regular was allowed for such a man upon the 20. day of
December 1559. 3. days Register. Episcopor. Protestant. Angl. apud Matthew.
park. antiquit. Britanniae. page 39. edit. Hanouiae an. 1605.
alt^^ matthew parkers pretended ordination, by him. Will: Barlowe Th. D.
Presb. Reg. Conf. 1559. December. 20. and the other Ihon Scory then s^iled only
Bachelour of Diuiuitie and priest Reg^lar, was also first allowed the same 20.
day of December. Ioh: Scory Th. Bac. Presb. Regn. Conf. 1559. Dec. 20. And
their own catalogue of their pretended Bishops assures us further that this
Matthew parker was among them Archbishop Godwy^ Catalog. of Bishops in Durham
58. Cutbert Tunstall.
of Conterbury in the month of July before. So he could have no consecration
true or pretended, by their own proceeding. I add further concerning the
pretended Register by which they have thus vainly claymed an Inualid Title to
Ecclesiastical function, and orders, set out in the book of their first
pretended Protestant Archbishop, Matthew parker printed at Hanouia 1605. called
Antiquitates Britannicae of the Archbishops of Canterbury, there is no word
our mention at all, of any such thing, in that old manuscript copy thereof,
which I have seen and diligently examined.

And any man reading the printed book will manifestly see it is a merely
foisted and inserted, thing having no connection correspondence or affinity
either with that which goes before, or follows it. And conteyneth more
things done after Matthew parker had written that Book. But of this their new
found consecration I shall entreat, more largely hereafter in their 25. and
36. Articles, whither it more properly belongs, and there utterly disable it,
for making, or leaving among them, either true Bishop, Priest, or any other
Ecclesiastical person at all.

THE XII. CHAPTER.
The 24. article. Likewise examined and condemned by this first Apostolic age,
and writers therein.
THe 24. article is this: It is a thing plainly repugnant to the word of God,
and the custom of the primative Church, to have public prayer in the Church,
or to minister the Sacraments, in a tongue not understood of the people. What
is agreeable or repugnant to the word of God, the Church of God, as those
Protestants have confessed before, is the best witness and interpreter, and of
necessity it must needs be so in such things as be granted to be agreeable or
repugnant unto both, as this question is.

The word of God extends both to that which is written in Scriptures, and the
unwritten preserved in the Church without such canonical writing, otherwise
(which is impossible) God might be contrary to himself, and his word contrary
to his word, which is blasphemous to say or write. And in this question of the
public Church service, finding no prescript, form, order, or office, nor of
what language or tongue it is to be used, in the written word of God, we must
needs resort to unwritten tradition and the custom of the primative Church to
find it forth. And we find in all the public offices of the Church in this
age, ascribed to S. Peter, S. Andrew, S. Matthew, and S. James Apostles, to S.
Mark Evangelist, S. Clement successor to S. Peter at Rome, and whosoever in
antiquities is taken to be Author or composer of any liturgy, Mass, or
public service or form of prayers in the Church, in this time, they were all
first penned and after practiced in all places, wheresoever they were used in
the learned common languages, and no where in any barbarous, or vulgar tongue
of any particular Province or Contry. All histories, their oldest manuscripts
and generally received tradition, witness they were in the Greek or Latin
tongue. This is so manifestly Dove persuas. p. 23. 24. c. o^ prayer.
true that our Protestant writers do thus confess it: until of late (since
Protestant Religion began) through out the west part of the world public
prayers were in Latin: in the east part in Greek, even among Edw. Sands
Relation of Relig. c. 53. or 54.
those nations, to whom the languages were no mother tongues. Thus one of their
Bishops with public allowance.

Their first Protestant Archbishop Matthew Mat. Parker. Antiq. Brit. in Aug. c.
17. p. 47.
Parker writes, that the public Church service named Mass, Missa dicta, did
continue 200. years and more from Christ's institution a Christi primo
^^stituto, until Pope Zepherine the 16. Pope did change it to a better matter
and form. Donec eam Zepherinus 16. Romanus Pontifex, quorundam suasio^ibus ad
pulchriorem materiam formamque mutare vo^uit. And this Mass was the same which
saint ^ames used at Jerusalem, and saint Peter in the ^asterne Contries. And
when this man and other Protestants come to set down what change S. Zepherine
Pope made in the holy Mass, it was ^ot to change it into a Vulgar tongue, but
he a Roman Zepherinus Romanus kept it still unchanged in the Latin tongue, as
all his predecessors had Damas. Pont. in Zepherino Magdeburg. in eod Rober.
Barns in vit. Pontif. Romans in eod. Bal. l. 1. act. Pontific. Romans in Zepherino.
Robert. Barnes and alij in Alexandro Sixto and Telesphoro.
done before in the west and Latin Church, only he took away wodden chalices
used then in some places, ordaining better, and in this all writers Catholics
and Protestants agree. Vitreos calices pro ligneis ordinauit. And wheresoever
there was any thing changed or added in the Mass, it was as these men
confess, ever done in the Latin tongue. Alexander Romanus ad Adriani tempora
peruenit. I^ Missa, pridie quam pateretur, vsque ad haec verba, HOC EST CORPUS
MEVM, addidit, ad memoria^ passionis Christi inculcanda^. Sixtus Romanus, vt
SANCTVS in co^munione Eucharistiae ter caneretur, ordinauit. Telesphorus
Graecus, GLORIA IN EXCELSIS DEO esse in Missa cane^dum praecepit. These be all
the additions and changes they find in the holy Mass before S. Zepherines
time, before which S. Eleutherius Pope had publicly sent it into Britain, and
S. Lucius our King here publicly received it, and all those addition^ were
taken out of Scripture, not then translated into any vulgar unlearned language.
So they prou^ of all additions after, all ever made in the Latin tongue,
except some very few in the Hebrew an^ Greek, in the whole Latin Church. And
this i^ unquestionably convinced out of the public offices of he Church of
Christ, whether the Sacrific^ of Mass, or the rest, Matins, Lauds, hours,
even song, compline or whatsoever, to be termed public prayer of the Church,
for the far greate^ part of all these consists of the holy psalms, an^
other parts of Scripture, all books thereof publicly read every day, and the
psames every week^ yet none of these were in any vulgar tongue in the age, nor
many after this time.

The rest which is contained in the Catholic Church Creeds, Prefaces, Hymns,
Antiphons, or that else amont not unto the tenth part of what is taken from
Scriptures, and yet these were deliuer^d to the Church in learned tongues, in
them composed, and not in other. We are assured by Scriptures, and good
histories that the Apostles 72. dis^^ples and other holy Clergy men in this
first age preached in all nations, they prayed, and had public prayers, in
many contries, and in them founded Churches, and must needs leave some form,
of such public service for them they converted. But we are assured again
both by Scriptures, and such antiquities, that they all had not the gift of
tongues, numquid omnes linguis loquuntur? and saint 1. Cor. 12.
Paul reckons it for a singular guist, and privilege in himself, to speak
in all languages, gratias 1. Cor. 14. Godwin. Conuers. c. 3. p. 36. Io. Leland.
in commentar. Ant. Brit. v. Britanniae. Io. Caius hist. Cantabr. p. 19.
ago Deo, quod omnium vestrum linguis loquor. And our Protestants themselves
with other antiquaries ^onfesse, that these renowned men did preach in many
places, by interpretours, and diverse Barbarous nations where they preached, had
then no use of letters to write any thing at all in their own language, much
less forms and offices of public prayers, which were, and of necessity, to
be used in all Churches and by all Priests. And in this condition was this
Kingdom of Britain, all Gallia, now France, and other parts, where the
Druydes ruled, not using letters, and writing, because all nations were then
accounted, and called by the Romans, Barbarous, in that and such uncivil
respects. Some write the Greek letters were used in Gallia, but if it were so,
they were by the same authority, very imperfect, many added afterward to bring
that writing to perfection, and no history mentions that ever any form of
public prayer, or such office was so written or delivered among, or to that
people, in this, or any after time: but the contrary, that the first public
office and Church service they had in this age, was brought thither from Rome,
and so the Latin tongue.

This is proved by the French Annals, testifying Annal. Gallic. Matthew. westminster.
an. 94. Clem. Roman. Ep.
that the first Apostles of that nation were sent unto them by S. Peter, and
his successor S. Clement at Rome. Our old british history of the first
institution of Church service, prima institutio and varietas Ecclesiastici
Seruitij, as our Peotestant Antiquaries name it, testifies plainly that S.
Trophimus Bishop of Arles, and Saint Photinus Bishop of Lions, disciples of S.
Peter the Apostle did deliver in all Gallia, the Roman order, and form of
Church service. Beatus Trophimus Episcopus Arelatensis, Manuscript. antiq.
Britan. de prima Instit. Eccles. officij.
and Sanctus Photinus Martyr and Episcopus Lugdunensis Discipulus S. Petri
Apostoli Cursum Romanum in Gallijs tradiderunt. And it cites others, more
ancient in this sense. And adds that this Church service was after sent to
S. Clement at Rome, by the Bishops and Martyrs of Gallia, to be approved by
him, and all the Churches of Zozimus Pap. epistol. ad Episcop. Galliae de
priuileg. Eccl. Arelat. tom. 1 council. Martyrol. Roman. die 29. December. in S.
Trophinius.
France then embraced that Order, that of Arles being there the chief
Metropolitan Church, from which, and S. Trophimus, all others there as Pope
Zozimus is an able witness, received light and direction. Metropolitanae
Arelatensium vrbi vetus priuilegium minime derogandum est, ad quam primum ex
hac sede (Romana) Trophimus Summus Antistes, ex cuius font tota Gallia fidei
Riuulos accepit directus est. So has the old Roman Martyrologe, and diverse
others. And So it must needs be, by all antiquity consenting, that all Gallia
received the water of life from the same fountain, the Church of Rome, both
with their form and order of Church service and other directions in Religion,
all their first Apostles and pastors with full instruction, and power being
directed and sent from them, as saint Martial, saint Denis the Annal.
Gallican. Eccles. Martyrolog. Roman. Bed. Adon. vsuard. in his Sant. Matt.
westminster. an. 94. and mult. al. apud Guliel. Eisengren. centen. 1. part. 5. did.
3. Henric. Erford. cap. 5. Monsterus in Cosmogr. in German. Antonin. part. 1.
petr. de natal. l. 10. vincent. l. 9. Annal. Eccl. Treuer. Tungr. meten:
Martyrolog. Roman. Beda vsuard. Ado die 15. Maij. Breu. Toletan. call. maij.
Areopagite, saint Lucianus, saint Eutropius, saint Eugenius, saint Ionius,
saint Timotheus, saint Apollinaris, saint Aphrodisius, saint Sanianus,
saint Potentianus, saint Altnus, saint Totaldus, saint Iulianus, saint
Fronto, saint Taurinus, saint Paulus Narbonensis, saint Staurinnus, saint
Astremonius, saint Gratianus, saint Firmius, and others sent from Rome
thither in this age, in which time also saint Peter the Apostle sent into
Germany, saint Egistus, saint Clement uncle to saint Clement the Pope,
saint Eucharius, saint Valerius, saint Maternus, saint Mansuetus, and many
others.

The Apostles of Spain were sent thither also from Rome in this Time, namely
saint Torquatus Ctesiphon, Secundus, Indalitius, Caecilius, saint Hesychius,
saint Euphrasius and others. In Hispania Sanctorum Torquati, Clesiphontis,
Secundi, Indaletij, Caecilij, Hesichij and Euphrasij, qui Romae a Sanstis
Apostolis Episcopi ordinati, and ad praedicandum verbum Dei in Hispanias
directi sunt. And to prove that all nations in this part of the world, called
the Latin Church, received their first Bishops, priests, clergy men, with
their Church service from Rome S. Peter or his Successor in this age: S.
Clement his Successor so speaks from S. Peter's own direction and
testimonye. Episcopos per Clem. Roman. epist. 1.
singulas Civitates quibus ille (S. Petrus) non miserat, iuxta Domini
praeceptionem nobis mittere praecepit. Quod etiam facere inchoauimus, and
Domino opem ferente, facturi sumus. Aliquos vero ad Gallias, Hispaniasque
mittemus, and quosdam ad Germaniam and Italiam, atque ad reliquas gentes
dirigere cupimus. And even to such barbarous and savage contryes, as had not
use of letters and learning ferociores and rebelliores gentes.

This Kingdom of Britayne, excepting, the Scotts when they came hither, had
ever learned men, and of civility as the Druids their chiefest being here, and
others. Yet after the coming and rule of the Romans here, at and after the
birth of Christ and his Religion preached in this contry, the latin tongue was
usual to all of quality, no man might bear office but such as understood it,
all public gifts donations charters, priuiledgs and Records whatsoever, both
as old and late Catolike and Protestant Antiquaries prove, were performed and
written in the latin tongue, and only the vulgar people used thcir vulgar
language, and yet corruptly without writing. Coniectura ducor Io: Leland. in
commenrar. antiq. voc. Britan. v. Britannin. Cains histor. Cantabrig. p. 19.
eo tempore vulgus Brita^norum ineruditissimum fuisse, ac prorsus non potuisse
linguae suae voces depingere. Quamdiu Imperium Britanniae in Prouinciam
reductae penes Romanos stabat, tamdiu necesse erat Britannis Magistratum gerere
cupientibus latin loqui. Prouincialem linguam vulgus cum magna difficultate,
and id quidem corrupt discebat. Tabulae donationum omnes, and rations
alicuius momenti latin fiebant. By which it is evident, that their public
Church service, must needs also be latin, in which only as S. Bid with others
prove all people Inhabitants here, ever Bed. histor. ang. l. 1. c. 1.
studied, and read the scriptures, from which it is taken. Haec Insula quinque
gentium linguis vnam eandemque summae veritatis and verae sublimitatis
scientiam scrutatur and confitetur, Anglorum videlicet, Britonum, Scotorum
Pictorum and Latinorum, quae meditatione scripturaecaeteris omnibus est facta
communis. And as S. Gyldas writes, this Kingdom was by the reigning of the
Romans there so latinized, Gild. epistol. de excid and conquest Britan. cap. 5.
and Romanized, that it was rather to be named Romana then, Britannia: vt non
Britannia, sed Romania censeretur. And though the Romans had many Hands, yet
this in antiquities is above all, named the Roman Hand. Greek and latin
Catholic and Protestant Antiquaries agree, that S. Peter the Apostle, who
delivered that latin Church service which the Romans used, and brought into
France by his disciples as is proved before, preached in this Kingdom, stayed
here long time longo tempore moratus, founded us Churches, consecrated S.
Symeon Metaphrastes in S. Petro. Eusebius. apud eund. ib. Sur. die 29. Iuuij.
Cambden in Britannia. prot. Theater of great Brit. l. 6.
for us Bishops Priests and Deacons: Ecclesias constituit, Episcoposque and
Presbyteros and Diaconos ordinauit, could deliver unto them no other Church,
service, then that latin, which he delivered at Rome in France and other
western places.

These Bishops Priests and Deacons which were not Britans, could not use that
british tongue, in their service which they did not understand, and which
neither they nor the Britans could write for them or others to read. And
whosoever any man will say preached here first, S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Simon, S.
Joseph, or any other, they not understanding the british language, nor any man
writing, they could not possibly use or deliver the service of the Church in
that language, our old british manuscript mentioned before says the
Manuscrip. Brit. antiq. de prima Institutione Eccles. officij.
Church service which S. Mark used, was also here in use, in Scotijs ac
Britannijs. Cursum qui dicitur praesenti tempore Scotorum beatus Marcus
decantauit. It testifies further that S. Germanus, S. Lupus S. Patrik and
others used this service here both in Britayne and Scotlands, when our
Protestants confess there was no error in Religion. Ipsum cursum decant
auerunt Beatus Lupus and Beatus Germanus: and S. Patricius in Scotijs ac
Britannijs ipsum cursum decantauit. And after them S. Vuandilocus ad S.
Gomogillus who had 3000. monks in his Monastery, and S. Columban, in whose
time this Author lived, with others, sent with him into France, used every
where in Ireland and Scotland as also Britain, France, Germany and Italy the
same publik Church service in the latin tongue. Beatus Vuandilocus and Beatus
Columbanus partibus Galliarum destinati ipsum decantauerunt. And he deriueth
this Church service from S. Mark, showing where and by whom it was used. And
it was Gildas in prolog. apud Fecknam orat. public. in 1. parliamento
Elizabethae Reginae.
justified in open parliament the first of Queen Elizabeth by Abbot Fecknam out
of S. Gildas in the prologue of his book now suppressed by our Protestants,
but then extant, that the same publik Church service which was used here in
Queen Maryes time, and now in the Catholic Church, was brought hither and
publicly delivered here in the latin tongue in the general conversion of
Britain in King Lucius his time. And that Gildas Gildas l. de excid. and
conquest. Brit.
which Protestants propose unto us diverse times cites the old Church service
of Britain in the latin tongue. And the old manuscript antiquities of
Glastenbury william of Malmesbury, Capgraue Guliel. Malmesb. manuscrip. lib. de
antiquit. caenob. glaston. in collego S. Benedict. Cantabrig. Antiquitat.
glaston: tabulis. fix. Capgrau. in S. Joseph and S. patric. Galfrid. monum. l.
4. histor. Brit. cap. 20. vlt. Matthew. Westin. chron. an. 186. Matthew. Westin.
an. 187. Galfrid. l. 5. cap. 1.
and others prove as much and more then Doctor Fecknam cited from S. Gildas.
For they speaking of the Religious men which S. Damianus and S. Phaganus placed
at Glastenbury to be successors in place and profession to S. Joseph of
Aramathia, and his associates there do plainly deliver, that as in other
things these professed the same Religion, order, Church service, and manner of
life, which S. Joseph and his company did, so also as they did, they come
often every day together into the old Church, to say their divine office which
they brought from Rome, with them, and delivered here in memoriam primorum ex
suis socijs 12. elegerunt (S. Damianus and Phaganus) and in praefata Insula
Rege Lucio consentiente habitare fecerunt, qui in diuersis locis sicut
Anachoretae manserunt ibidem in eisdem lucis inquibus prima 12. primitus
habitarunt in vetustam tamen Ecclesiam ad diuina obsequia deuotius complenda
crebro conuenerunt quotidie.

And this latin publik Church service being the very same which had been used
at Rome from the Apostles time, not changed at that time, as all Catholics and
Protestants agree, was planted and delivered here, not only by these legates
of Pope Eleutherius, but by himself, with the rest which his legates did here
confirm. restauratis omnibus, redierunt Antistites Romani: and quae fecerant a
beatisssimo Papa co^firmari impetrauerunt. Confirmatione facta reuersi sunt in
Britanniam compluribus alijs comitati. And if any Protestant will have the
Kings confirmation needful, our holy King then S. Lucius likewise confirmed
this, as the rest. Glorio sus Britonum. Rex Lucius chartis and munimentis omnia
communiuit.

THE XIII. CHAPTER.
The 25. Article, entitled, of the Sacraments, thus examined, and condemned,
in all things contrary to Catholic doctrine.
THEIR next the 25. Protestant Article is entitled: of the Sacraments. And
thus begins. Sacraments ordained by Christ, be not only bages or tokens of
Christian men's profession but rather they be certain sure witnesses, and
effectual signs of grace, and Gods good will toward us, by the which he does
work inuisibly in us, and does not only quicken but also strengthen and
confirm our faith in him.

Hitherto there appears no difference between these Protestants in this
article and Catholics, for they decreeing that Sacraments be effectual signs
of grace, that is in all true proper manner of speech, signs which do effect
cause and work grace, otherwise they be not effectual signs of grace, and
that God works in us inuisibly by them, is as much as Catholics profess,
when they define a Sacrament, Sacramentum est visibile signu^ inuisibilis
gratiae. A Sacrament is a visible or external sign of invisible grace given
thereby. And these Protestants declare themselves so Protest. art. 27. 28.
infra.
far, and plainly, in both those they accept for Sacraments, Baptism, and
the Eucharist called by them, the Supper of the Lord. In the first, they
manifestly confess it, and approve and practice baptism of Infants, who borne
by them also in original sin, cannot possibly have remission thereof and
grace but by their baptism, not able to understand or have any act of faith,
or other virtue. Yet the^^ Art. 27.
decree is: The baptism of young children, is in any wise to be retained in
the Church, as most agreeable with the institution of Christ. So they do or
ought to speak of their other Sacrament, confessing it was in the primative
Church, ministered sometimes to infants.

The difference between us in this article, is in that, which thus follows.

There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is
to say, baptism, and the supper of the Lord. Those five commonly called
Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation Penance, Order, Matrimony and
extreme Unction are not to be compted for Sacraments, of the Gospel, being
such as have grown partly of the corrupt following of the Apostles, partly are
states of life allowed in the scriptures: but yet have not like nature of
Sacraments, with baptism, and the Lords supper, for that they have not any
visible sign or ceremony ordained of God. Hitherto this Protestant ^rticle
denying those five Sacraments which the Catholic Church receaueth for such
with the ^wo former, baptism and the most holy Sacrament of the altar. Now I
will prove by this Apostolic age the doctrine, and practice thereof, that
these five are, and then were used, and received for Sacraments, and first of
Confirmation the first Confirmation a true Sacrament. Clem. Romans Constitut.
Apost. l. 2. c. 36.
which these men name and deny.

S. Clement testifies this to be a Sacrament, mi^istred by Bishops with holy
oil, and giving the ^oly Ghost and grace, all that these men do, or can
^equire to a Sacrament. Quid dicemus de Episcopo? ^r quem Dominus in
ordinatione Spiritum sanctum ^obis dedit. Per quem consignati estis oleo
exultationis, ^ chrismate sapientiae: per quem filij lucis facti estis: per
quem Dominus illuminatione vestra, Episcopi manus impositionem testimonio suo
comprobans, in singulis vestrum suam sacram vocem emisit. This he further
declares (making a Sacrament needful to Christian Clem. Romans epist. ad Iuliu^
and Julian.
perfection, except necessity hinders, giving grace) that Peter and all the
Apostles so taught, and practiced, and Christ so instituted. Omnibus
festinandum est sine mora renasci Deo, and demum consignari ab Episcopo; id
est, septiformem gratiam Spiritus sancti percipere, quia incertus est
vniuscuiusque exitus vitae. Quum autem regeneratus fuerit per aquam, and
postmodum septiformi spiritus gratia ab Episcopo, (vt memoratum est)
confirmatus, quia aliter perfectus esse Christianus nequaquam poterit, nec
sedem habere inter perfectos, si non necessitate, sed incuria aut voluntate
reman serit, vt a Beato Petro accepimus, and vt caeteri Apostoli, praecipiente
Domino docu^runt.

S. Denis the Areopagite says, that they which Dion. Areop. l. Hierarch. Eccl.
cap. 4. Prope fin. In contemp.
were baptized were brought to the Bishop to be confirmed. Ducunt ad
Hierarcham, is virum vnguento quod maxim diuinos efficit, insignit. And
further thus shows the Sacramental power of this holy Unction. Vnguenti
illa, quae perficiendi vim habet, perfusio, eum qui initiatus est, suauitate
odoris fragrantem facit. And plainly calls it a Sacrament, comparing it in
that respect even with the Sacrament of the altar, assuring us, that was the
opinion and doctrine of his Masters in Religion, the Apostles. Finitimum L.
Eccl. Hietar. c. 6.
alterum Sacramentum, quod praeceptores nostri vnguenti mysterium nominant. Est
igitur ^^ In contempl.
quod dixi, mysterium quod nunc a nobis laudatur, ei^s ordinis atque potestatis
quae vim habet perficiendi ^^ quae Pontificem attingunt. Itaque ipsum diuini
praeceptores nostri, vt eiusdem and ordinis and efficacita^^^* cuius est
Synaxeos Sacramentum, ijsdem saepe figuris atque imaginibus mysticisque
descriptionibus, ac sanctis verbis descripserunt.

It is the constant opinion, and testimony of the Fathers, that the Church of
Christ received and ministered this Sacrament for a true and properly named
Sacrament, both by Scriptures, and tradition. So both the Latin and Greek
Fathers expound that passage and practice of the Apostles S. Peter and S. John
in the acts of the Apostles, giving grace to those that were baptized by
others, not Bishops, by imposition of hands. Impon^bant Act. c. 8.
manus super illos and accipiebant Spiritum sanctum. And do thereby prove that
Bishops only may minister this Sacrament. Cum Philippus Diaconus esset Ephip.
l. 1. To. 2. Contr. haer. c. 21. contra Simon. Aug. lib. 15. Trin. c. 26.
Hieron. Dial. aduers. Lucif. Tom. 2. c. 4.
non habebat potestatem imponendi manus, vt per hoc daret Spiritum sanctum. So
has S. Augustine, S. Hierome and others proving this Sacrament both by
Scripture and tradition of the universal Church from Christ's time. In actibus
Apostolorum scriptum est. Etiam si scripturae authoritas non subesset, totius
orbis in hanc partem consensus instar praecepti obtineret. Non abnuo hanc esse
Ecclesiarum consuetudinem, vt ad Ambr. c. 7. de ijs qui init. mysterijs S.
Basil. libr. de Spirit. sancto c. 27. Greg. Naz. sermon. in Sanctum lauachrum.
Ambr. in cap. 6. ad Hebr. Primas. in cap 6. ad Hebr.
eos qui long in minoribus vrbibus per Presbyteros and Diaconos baptizati
sunt, Episcopus ad inuocationem sancti Spiritus manum impositurus excurrat.
This S. Hierome writes in the name of all, both Catholics and others. S.
Ambrose, saint Basile, saint Gregory Nazianzen and others have the like. S.
Ambrose, Primasius with others expound those words in the 6. chapter to the
Hebrews, impositionis quoque manum, in the very same sense, in these words.
Impositionem manuum appellat, per quam plenissime creditur accipi donum
Spiritus sancti, quod post baptismum ad confirmationem vnitatis in Ecclesia a
Pontificibus fieri solet. S. Cyprian and his fellow Cypr. epist. 72.
Bishops in Council speaking in the name of the Church, calls it a Sacrament
as baptism is: si Sacramento vtroque nascuntur.

Tertullian also does number it with the other Sacraments, ever used in the
Church, and gives both a visible external sign holy Unction, and internal
Tertull. l. de resurrect. carnis. Et libr. de praescript. haeretic.
grace given thereby unto it. Caro abluitur, vt anima emaculetur, caro vngitur,
vt anima consecretur. Caro signatur, vt and anima muniatur, caro manus
impositione adumbratur, vt and anima spiritu illuminetur. Caro corpore and
sanguine Christi vescitur, vt and anima de Deo saginetur.

To come to our Primative Christian Britans, The Christian Britans of this
opinion and practice. Giral Cambr. descr. Cambr. c. 18. cum approb. Prot.
Dau^dis powelli, Theol. prof ib. Golfrid. monum. histor. Reg. Brit. lib. 12. c.
^8.
their learned old antiquary and Bishop writes of them, that from their first
conversion, they held this for a Sacrament, giving grace, that holy Unction by
a Bishop was used in it, and all our first Christians in Britain honored, and
affected this Sacrament, more then any other nation did. Episcopalem
confirmationem, and Chrismatis, qua gratia spiritus datur inunctionem, prae
alia gente totus populus magno pere petit. This we may easiely learn by the
example of their King Cadwalladar, which went to Rome to be confirmed by the
Pope there. Cadwalladrus abiectis mundialibue, propter Deum regnumque
perpetuum, venit Romam, and a Sergio Papa confirmatus. But we need not stand
upon particular Theod. lib. de fabul. haeret. Lindan. Dubitant. Dial. 2.
prateol Elen. l 12. in Nouatianis.
examples, when we have a general grant before, that all the Britans, totus
populus, both by old and new, Catholic and Protestant historians, were so
devoted to this holy Sacrament. And both Theodoret and others do prove that
they were only the Nouatian heretics, (which by no antiquity ever entered into
Britain) which denied holy Unction to be used in this Sacrament. Negligant
confirmationem habere olei sacri illinitionem.

And our English Protestants themselves by their own most authorized and
allowed proceedings have, and do condemn this their article doctrine in this
point. For first in the public correction of their religion at Hampton court,
King James being present Conference at Hampton. p. 10. 11.
and consenting, they thus decree: Confirmation is an Apostolical tradition.
That Confirmation delivered by the Apostles is a Sacrament is proved before.
Secondly these Protestants confess and decree, that the order of Bishops has
ever been in the Church, from the Apostles time, but these men not condemning
all forrayne Protestants and in denying to Bishops only power to make Priests
and Clergy men, leave no act of Order peculiar and proper to them, if they deny
confirmation to be a Sacrament, and by them only to be ministered, for all
others are lawfully ministered by Priests, noe Bishops. And these our English
Protestants by the greatest power they have, have set fourth, and use a public
form, and manner of ministering confirmation by them only, which they pretend
to be Bishops among them. In which they prove it in their proceedings, and by
the doctrine of this very article, for supposing their opinion though false,
that holy Unction is not necessary in this practice of Confirmation, English
Prot. Communion book. Titul. Confirmation. Et tit. Catechism.
they requiring only two things needful to a Sacrament, a visible sign, or
ceremony ordained of God, and grace given thereby thus propose and practice
both: first they say and direct. The Bishop shall lay his hand upon every
child severally. And that in their Judgment it is a sign, and ceremony,
ordained Communion Book supr.. alliuinghly.
of God, and that grace is thereby given, their pretended Bishops in ministering
this to children thus prove: we make our humble supplications for these
children, upon whom after the manner of the Apostles, we have laid our hands,
to certify them, by this sign of thy favor, and gracious goodness toward
them. Therefore being a sign used by the Apostles, giving and certifying
grace, by this very article, and their own definition of a Sacrament before,
this of Confirmation must needs by their Religion be a Sacrament in the same
degree as they allow baptism and the Eucharist to be. This their communion
book is daily practiced by them in all their Churches, used both before and
after these articles were ordained, and at this present, and supported and
warranted with the greatest allowance, their religion, or any, or point therein
by their own proceedings possibly can have, Queens and Kings supremacy,
Parlaments, Injunctions, Canons, Conuocations, public approbation, and
practice of all their pretended Bishops, or named Clergy men.

THE XII. CHAPTER.
Penance, so called in this article, and by Catholics. The Sacrament of
Penance, was so judged and vscd in this Apostolic age.
THE next Sacrament of the Catholic Church, which this Protestant Article
demeth to be such, is the Sacrament of Penance. S. Ignatius in this Apostolic
age gives power unto Penance, to bring sinners both to the unity of the
militant Church on earth, and inherit everlasting life in heaven. Obsecro vos,
quotquot poenitentia ducti redierint Ignat. epist. ad Philadelph.
ad vnitatem Ecclesiae, suscipite illos cum omni mansuetudine, vt per bonitatem
and patientiam vestram resipiscentes ex diaboli laqueis, digni iam Christo
facti, salutem consequantur aeternam in regno Christi. And writes how
Christians were then bound, to admonish and exhort sinners to penance. Oportet
eos commonefacere and ad poenitentiam cohortari, si forte manus dent,
monitisque cedant. S. Denis the Areopagite delivers the manner of penitents,
and penance to have been then, as the Catholics now use, the penitent to
kneel to the Priest, and with sorrow confess his sins, and the Priest by
absolution to forgive them, and so justify the penitent sinner, and greatly
reprehendeth one Demophilus for hindering it, saying it was the order of
discipline then. Tu, vt tuae literae indicant, procedentem Dion. epist. a^
Demophil. ante med.
Sacerdoti impium, vt ais, and peccatorem n^s^io quo pacto contra disciplinae
ordinem astans calce abiecisti. Adhuc cum ille quidem, quod oportuit, fateretur
se ad peccatorum remedium quaerendum venisse: tu non exhorruisti, sed and bonum
Sacerdotem ausus es lac^rare conuitijs miserabilem eum dicens, quod poenitentem
and impium iustificasset. S. Ignatius makes it one of the Igna^t. epist a^
Heronem.
Sacraments ministered by Priests: Baptizant, sacrificant, eligunt, manus
imponunt. S. Clement sets it down for a tradition of S. Peter and the other
Apostles to confess all sins, unto the Pastors of their souls, and to
rceaue cure and remedy from them. Si forte alicuius cor vel liuor, vel
infid^l^tas, Clem. Romans ep^st ^.
vel aliquod malum ex his quae superius memorauimus, latenter irrepserit, non
erubescat qui animae suae curam gerit, confiteri haec huic, qui praeest, vt ab
ipso per verbum Dei, and consilium salubre curetur.

And he adds afterward, from the mouth of S. Clem. Romans sup. epist. 1.
Peter: Instruebat, actus suae vitae omni hora custodire, and in omni loco Deum
respicere, firmiter scire cogitationes malas cordi suo aduenientes, mox ad
Christum allidere, and Sacerdotibus Domini manifestare. S. Peter's instruction
was diligently to take knowledge even of the evil cogitations of the heart, and
to confess them to the Priests of God. He says in an other Constitut. Apost.
l. 2. cap. 49.
place that penance is like unto baptism. Erit ei in locum lauachri impositio
manuum. He sets down the very manner of enioyning penanc, according to the
quality of the sins committed, days or weeks in fasting and penance:
Afflictum diebus Cap. 19.
Ieiuniorum pro ratione peccati bebdomadas duas, vel tres, vel quinque, vel
septem, dimitte, dicens ei quaecumque conueniunt ad peccatorem corripiendum.
And he expounds those words of Christ in the ghospel, of bynding and loosing
of this Sacrament as others after him do. Paenitentibus remissionem concedere
oportet. Cap. 21.
Recognosce o Episcope, dignitatem tuam, quod sicut ligandi potestatem
accepisti, sic etiam and soluendi. Obtinens igitur soluendi potestatem,
recognosce Pennancea Sacrament among the Britans.
t^ipsum, and secundum dignitatem loci tui, in hac vita versare. It was so
generally a received truth here in Britain, that even when our Protestant
Antiquaries confess our Christian Britans kept their first faith inuiolate,
the contrary was adjudged heresy, and a King himself frequard summoned Hector
Boeth. l 9. Scotor. Hist. fol 179. Georg. Buch. l. 5. Rer. Scotir. Reg. 52.
and proceeded against for laughing at the Baptism of Infants, and Confession
of sins to Priests. Notatus est aliquando risisse paruulorum Bap tisma,
peccatorumque ad Sacerdotis aurem confessionem. Thus it is testified both by
Catholic, and Protestant Historians.

And our most ancient British writers as S. hollinsh* hist. of Scut. l* page
112.
Gildas speaking of this Sacrament, the practice and use thereof here in
Britayne deduceth it from Christ's words, of bynding and loosteing spoken to S.
Peter and the other Apostles. Petro eiusque Successoribus Gild. l. de excid.
cap. 26.
dicit Dominus: and tibi dabo claues Regni Coelorum. Itemque omni sancto
Sacerdoti promittitur, and quaecumque solueris superterram, erunt soluta and in
caelis: and quaecumque ligaueris super terram, erunt ligata and in caelis. Our
learned Britan the old Archbishop of Orleance, Jonas Aureliensis, testifies
the ancient devotion to this Sacrament was such, that both Priests and
penitents wept in the ministering thereof, and gives instance in S. Eustachius,
Jonas aurel. in vit. S. Eustachij cap. 1.
so weeping when penitents confessed their sins unto him, that he caused them
also to weep. Quoties illi aliquis ob recipiendam paenitentiam lapsus suos
esset confessus, ita flebat, vt and illum flere compelleret. And this is so
evident a truth, that King James, King James Confer. at Hampton court.
with his Protestant Bishops and clergy in their publik examination of their
Religion, conclude this point in these words: That the particular and personal
absolution from sin after consession, is Apostolical, and a very godly
ordinance.

And this is no new thing in their Religion, but a new approbation of their
doctrine herein, against their puritans, for their communion book elder then
these Articles, and at this time the most practical and allowed Rule which
they have, does give direction both for confession of syns, and absolution from
them, in the very same words, which Catholic Priest use in this Sacrament. The
sikpersou Engl. Protest. communion Book Titul. visitation of the Sike.
shall make a special confession, if he feel his conscience troubled with any
weighty matter. After which confession the Priest shall absolve him after this
sort. Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power to his Church, to absolve all
sinners which truly repent, and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive
thee thine offenses, and by his authority committed to me, I absolve thee from
all thy syns, in the name of the father, and of the Son, and of the holy
ghost. Amen. Here is all which this Article requires to a Sacrament, a visible
or external sign or ceremony as is Manifest, and this ordained of God, both
because this communion book says, it was left by Christ the son of God, to
his Church, so to before ever, as is Church shall be ever forgiving sins and
giueing grace; which no visible or external sign or ceremony, but such as is
ordained of God, to such end and purpose can do.

This power is pretented to be given to every minister among them, when their
Protestant Bishop makes him, by laying his hands upon him, saying these words:
receive the holy ghost, whose Protest. Book of consecration. Articul. 36. inf.
sins thou forgiuest, they are forgiven, and whose sins thou do retain,
they are retained. Thus has the Protestant manner of consecration in their
book thereof, approved in these Articles, in as ample manner, as any thing in
their Religion. And if their consecration were true and lawful, if they could
not minister this as a Sacrament, they could do nothing at all, this being the
power that is pretided to be be given unto them at that time, and nothing else
in plain and express terms, at the least in so manifest true meaning and
construction.

THE XV. CHAPTER.
Holy Orders contrary to this Article, was used and held a Sacrament in this
first age.
AND by this sufficiently appears also, that both by the doctrine, practice
and authority of this Apostolic age and their own Protestant chiefest
grownds and proceedings, how untruly this Article denies in the next place,
that holy Orders is a Sacrament; for it is manifest before, that both by the
Apostostolik men of this time, and their own profession and confession, it
has all things needful to a Sacrament, a visible external sign, or
ceremony ordained by God giving grace, and extraordinary spiritual power,
and itself by that consecration also gives grace in other Sacraments, which
cannot be ministered without it, either by Catholic Religion, or our
Protestants practice and profession. Noe terrene and earthly power may or can
perform the duties and offices of that gracious and spiritual function. This
is the plain and evident testimony of the blessed Fathers of this time. S.
Clement even in the words of the Apostles makes preishood more excellent, then
the Regal power and dignity, for that he rules souls, an this the bodies.
And is so far from our Protestant courses in making holy preisthood treason,
that he makes it an offense Clem. Romans l. 2. constitut. Apostol. c. 2.
deserving greater punishment, to do wrong to Priests, then temporal Princes.
Si Reges inuadens supplicio dignus iudicatur, quamuis filius vel amicus sit,
quanto magis qui Sacerdotibus insultat? Quanto enim Sacerdotium Regno est
excellentius, cum regendarum animarum officio praefit, tanto grauiori supplicio
punitur, qui aduersus id aliquid temere fecerit quam qui aduersus Regnum.

The like, and more urgent has S. Ignatius: Ignat. epist. ad Smyrnen.
Honora Deum, vt omnium Authorem and Dominum: Episcopum vero vt Principem
Scaerdotum, Imaginem Dei referentem: Dei quidem propter Principatum: Christi
vero propter Sacerdotium. Honorare oportet and Regem: neque enim Rege quisquam
praestantior, aut quisquam similis illi in rebus omnibus creatis: neque
Episcopo qui Deo consecratus est pro totius mundi salute quicquam maius in
Ecclesia. Sacerdotium est omnium bonorum, quae in hominibus sunt apex, qui
aduersus illud facit, non hominem Ignominia afficit, sed Deum and Christum
Iesum primogenitum, qui natura solus est summus Sacerdos.

And they ascribe this extraordinary dignity and excellency of sacred
preisthood, to their supernatural change, and grace bestowed miraculously
upon them in their consecration, and by virtue of that holy Sacrament, no other
reason to be given of so wonderful an alteration and preminencie, as both the
holy Fathers in the common construction of the Church of Christ, and the light
of nature assuer us, that men so lately and ever before their consecration,
were but as other men, and now nothing externally changed, should by Gods
decree and ordinance, be elevated unto, and endowed with so incomparable
honor, power grace, and unquestionable privileges, only the Sacramental
grace performs it say these holy Fathers as it does the like in the holy
Eucharist and Baptism. Ead^m vis etiam Sacerdotem augustum and honorandum
Gregor. Nys^en. l. de
facit, nouitate benedictionis a comunitate Bapt. Gregor. Naz. Orat. de S.
Athanasio. Cyprian l. de ablut. ped. Tertullian. l. exhort. cast.
vulgi segregatum. Quam enim heri ac tempore superiori vnus e multitudine ac
plebe esset, repent redditur Praeceptor, Praeses, Doctor pietatis, mysteriorum
latentium Praesul. Eaque contingunt ei, quam nihil vel corpore velforma
mutatus, sed quod ad speciem externam attinet, ille sit qui erat, inuisibili
quadam vi ac gratia, inuisibilem animam in melius transformatam gerens. S.
Clement, S. Denis the Areopagite S. Anaclet. epist. 2.
Ignatius, S. Anacletus made Priest by S. Peter the Apostle, a quo and
praesbyter sum ordinatus, and others of this Apostolic age, being as they
confess instructed so by S. Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, vt a Beato
Petro Principe Apostolorum sumus instructi, do plainly testify and prove holy
Orders to be a holy Sacrament, both in Preistly and Episcopal consecration,
delivering both the matter and manner of them, as the Roman Church now uses. A
Bishop to be consecrated by diverse Bishops, by imposition of hands, the holy
gospel, and Inunction with holy Chrisme giving grace, and the holy ghost.
Ordinationes Episcoporum, authoritate Anaclet. supr. Tom. 1. council. epist. 2.
cited and approved. by protest Matt. parker antiq. Britan. p. 24. Io. Prisens
def. histor. Britan. p. 73. Robert. Barnes l. de vit. Pontific. in Anacleto and
Alexandro
Apostolica ab omnibus qui in eadem fuerint prouincia Episcopis sunt
celebrandae. Qui simul conuenientes, scrutinium diligenter agant, Ieiuniumque
cum omnibus celebrent precibus, and manus cum sanctis Euangelijs quae
praedicaturi sunt, imponentes, sacraque unction, exemplo Prophetarum and Regum
capita eorum, more Apostolorum and Moysis vngentes, quia omnis sanctificatio
constat in Spiritu Sancto, cuius virtus inuisibilis sacro Chrismati est
permixta. With this agree S. Clement, S. Ignatius, S. Denis, with the general
custom and practice of their Apostolic age. Not requiring a necessity of the
presence of all Bishops of the province, but seeking their Marc. Anton. l. 1.
de republike Eccl. c. 12. p. 147. Clem. l. 8. Constable. Apost. Ignat. epist.
Dionys Eccl. Hier. c. S. Clem. Romans Constable. Apost. l. 3. cap. 20. and vlt.
Dionys. Areopag. l. Eccl. Hierar. cap. 6.
consent in so great, a businnes. Quod si simul omnes conuenire minime
poterunt, assensu^ tamen suis precibus praebeant, vt ab ipsa ordinatione animo
non desint. Only they require of necessity three or two Bishops to consecrate
a Bishop, and only one for the consecration of Priests, Deacons, and inferior
Orders. Episcopum mandamus ordinari a tribus Episcopis, vel ad minus a duobus:
non licere autem ab vno vobis constitui. Presbyterum and Diaconum, and
reliquorum clerum ab vno Episcopo. S. Denis the Areopagite Scholar to S.
Paul, as he had learned of that his holy Master, and other Apostles and seen
it the general doctrine and practice of that Apostolic time, that great and
extraordinary grace and power was given by the external rite, sign and
ceremony thereof, so teaches, and sets down the Order of this
consecration, as of Priests and Deacons, every of them different and distinct
from other as their dignities and functions are with Ecclesiastical rites and
solemnities before the Dionys. Eccl. Hierarch. cap. 5.
holy altar, as Catholics use at this day: Praesul vbi sacrandus offertur,
vtroque genu posito ante altar supra caput habet a Deo tradita Euangelia
manumque Pontificis: atque hoc modo a consecrante Pontifice castissimis
imprecationibus consummatur. Sacerdos vero coram sancto altari ponens vtrumque
genu, in capite habet Pontificis dextram, and in hunc modum a sacrante Praesule
sanctissimis inuocationibus consecratur. At vero minister altero tantum coram
sanctis altaribus posito genu, sacrantis se Pontificis dexteram in capite
praefert, atque ab coperficitur precationibus ad eam rem accomodatis, cuilibet
autem ipsorum a benedicente Pontisice Crucis imprimitur signum, and perfingulos
sacra praedicatio nominis, consummansque consalutatio fit.

S. Clement also testifies, that from the first consecration of
Ecclesiastical men after Christ's ascension, when S. Stephen and others were
made Deacons, both Bishops and Priests were so consecrated by the Apostles
before the Altar, and at Mass, as Christ ordained. Nos ablato secundum Clem.
Constable. Apost. l. 8. cap. 52. vlt.
Christi ordinationem sacrificio puro, and incruento, constituimus Episcopos,
Praesbyteros and Diaconos numero septem, e quorum numero vnus erat Stephanus
Beatus Martyr. And plainly proves, that these holy Orders with their
particular offices were appointed by Christ himself the Bishops to give
Orders, the Priests to offer Sacrifice and receive grace and power so to do at
their consecration, and Deacons to Minister to them both, in their sacred
functions. Nisi propria quaedam iura essent, atque ordinum discrimina, Supr.
paul^ ante.
satis esset, vt per vnum nomen vniuersa perficerentur. Sed a Domino edocti
consequentiam rerum, Episcopis Pontificatus munera assignauimus, presbyteris
Sacerdotij, Diaconis ministeria erga vtrosque, vt quae ad Religionem pertinent,
pure perficiantur. Nam nec Diacono fas est offerre sacrisicium, vel baptizare,
aut benedictionem paruam vel magnam facere, nec Presbytero ordinationes
exercero: impium est enim ordinem peruercti.

S. Denis recompteth their grace and duties in like Dionys. Eccl. Hier. cap. 5.
manner: Antistitum ordinem perficientem esse, and perfectionis authorem:
Sacerdotum vero illuminantem, atque ad lucem promouentem: porro ministrorum,
purgantem atque discernentem. Videlicet Pontificalis ordo non perficere solum,
verum and illuminare and purgare nouit: Sacerdotum vero virtus in se cum
illuminante habet purgantem quoque scientiam. Verum quae inferioris sunt ad
praestantiora transire nequeant, proptere^ quod fas illis non est ad istiusmodi
prosilire superbiam. Porro sacratiores virtutes vna cum suis, inferiores
quoque, suaipsa perfectione scientias sacras nequaquam ignorant. S. Ignatius
also is witness, that these several Ignat. epist. ^d Ephesians.
Orders were ordained by Christ. Enitimini charissimi, subiecti esse Episcopo,
and Presbyteris, and Diaconis. Qui enim his obedit, obedit Christo, qui hoc
constituit. And delivers their offices several, and distinct, as the others
do. The Episcopal function he has before remembered. And says, all must
Epistol. ad Trallian.
obey the Bishop, as our Lord himself. Episcopo subiecti estote, velut Domino.
Episcopus omni principatu and potestate superior est. Decet obedire Episcopo,
Epistol. ad Magnes.
and in nullo illi refragari. He tells us, the function of a Priest, is, to
offer Sacrifice, and Minister other Sacraments, and Deacons are to Minister
unto them, in such holy mysteries, and so must needs have power given them
accordingly in their consecration, and this was so with the Apostles, and
Ignat. epistol. ad Heronem Diaconum.
the first Priests and Deacons. Sac^rdotes sunt, T^ vero (Diaconus) Sacerdotum
Minister. Baptizan^ sacrificant, manus imponunt, tu vero illis ministras; vt
Sanctus ille Stephanus Iacobo and presbyteris qui Epistol. ad Trallian.
erant Hierosolymis. Oportet and Diaconos mysteriorum Chtisti ministris, per
omnia placere: nec enim ciborum, and potuum ministri sunt, sed Ecclesiae Dei
administratores. Ipsi itaque tales sunt, at vos reueremini illos vt Christum
Iesum, cuius vicarij sunt, and Episcopus Typum Dei Patris omnium gerit:
presbyteri vero sunt consessus quidam and coniunctus Apostolorum chorus* Sine
his Ecclesia electa non est, nullasine his Sanctoru^ congregatio, nulla
Sanctorum electio. Quid Sacerdotium aliud est, quam sacer caetus, consiliarij
and assessore^ Episcopi? Quid vero Diaconi, quam imitatores Angelicarum
virtutum, quae purum and inculpatum ministerium illi exhibent, vt sanctus
Stephanus beato Iacobo, Timotheus and ^nius Paulo, Anacletus and Clemens Petro?
Qui igitur his non obedit sine Deo prorsus, and impurus est and Christum
contemnit, and constitutionem eius imminuit.

S. Martial delivers plainly a chief and principal cause of the honor and
excellency of this Sacrament of holy Orders, because among other eminencies
thereof, Bishops and Priests offer, and Deacon assist them therein, the most
holy sacrifice of Christ's body and blood upon an holy Altar, the very same
which the Jews did by malice offer, Martial. epist. ad Burdegal. cap. 3.
when they crucified Christ. Sacerdotes honorabatis, qui decipiebant vos
sacrificijs suis, qui mutis and surdis statuis offerebant. Nunc autem multo
magis Sacerdotes Dei omnipotentis qui vitam vobis tribuunt in calice and viuo
pane honor are debetis. Christi corpus and sanguinem in vitam aeternam
offerimus. Quod Iudaei per Inuidiam immolauerunt, putantes se nomen eius a
terra abolere, nos causa salutis nostrae in ara sanctificata proponimus,
scientes hoc solo remedio nobis vitam The Britan^ here so held.
praestandam, and mortem effugandam, hoc enim ipse Dominus noster iussit nos
agere in sui commemoratio^em.

This was also the doctrine of our first Christian Gildas l. de excid. and
conq. Britan. c. 26. manuscript. antiq. de tit. S. Patricij Capg. in cod.
Gi^ald. Ca^mb.
Britans. Their Priests were consecrated to offer the heavenly Sacrifice at the
holy Altar. They conse^rated Christ's body and blood with their mouths
^roprio ore. And of all the people in the world, as their Antiquities witness,
they most honored clear^ie men in such respects. Ecclesiasticis viris long
^agis quam vlla^ gentem honore^ deferentes. Their Bishops were consecrated,
with holy Chrisme imposition in descript. cambr. c. 18.
of hands and consecrating words: in consecratione Pontificum, capita eorum
sacri Chrismatis infusione perungere, cum Inuocatione sancti Spiritus, and
manus impositione. The hands of Priests were consecrated Gild. l. de excid.
Britan. in castigatione Cleri.
to offer and handle the blessed Sacrifice. Benedictione initiantur Sacerdotum
manus. S. Paul in diverse places proves it gives grace, so making it a true
and proper holy Sacrament. Noli negligere 1. Timoth. 4.
gratiam, quae in te est; quae data est tibi cum impositione manuum
presbyterij. And, admoneo te vt resuscites 2. Timoth. 1.
gratiam Dei, quae est in te per impositionem manuum mearum.

And Christ himself by his own example, and testimony, S. John the
Evangelist so recording affirms, that the holy ghost, and power to forgive
sins were given in this Sacramental ceremony. Io: 20.
Accipe Spiritum fanctum, quorum remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis, And it
is the witness of God, that holy Orders is the work of the holy ghost.
Dixit Spiritus sanctus: Segregate mihi Saulum Act. 13.
and Barnabam, in opus ad quod assumpsi eos. Tunc i^iunantes and orantes,
imponentesque eis manus, dimiserunt illos. It is confessed by the greatest
Protestant authority in England, of King, Protestant Bishops, K. James and his
protest. public conference at hampton court Couell def. of hooker p. 87.
and others their best scollers in their public examen of their Religion. That
this power of Orders, given as they pretend by imposition of hands. I^ diuinae
Ordinationis, and de iure diuino. The ordin^^ce of God, and by his divine law.
To these persons G^^ imparted power over his mystical body, which is ^^
society of souls, and over that natural, which is himself, Mod. ex^mina^.
page 105. 155. def. of hooker page
which antiquity does call the making of Christ body. The power of the
ministry by blessing vis^^ elements, it makes them invisible grace, and gives
87. 88. 91.
daily the holy ghost, it has to dispose of that flesh, which was given for
the life of the world: and that blood which was powered out to redeem souls.
It is a power, which neither Prince nor potentate, King nor Caesar on earth can
give. The Apostles did impart the same power, to ordain, which was given to
them.

And in their publikly authorized Rituall, and Protest. Book of Consecrat. in
Order. Bish. and Priests.
book of consecration, or making Protestant Bishops, and Priests, warranted by
their parlaments, in these very Articles, and their general practice in
ordayning all their Church men, it is diverse times and plainly confessed, both
by words and actions, that the holy ghost, grace, and power to give grace, and
forgive sins, is infallibly given Protest. confat hampton. Communion Book
Titul. visitat. of the sike.
by the external sign, or ceremony used therein. And both their public
conference and examen of their Religion, and the common book of their Church
service do prove and give warrant, from hence, from their ministers to forgive
sins, by such power committed to them from God in their ordination. Therefore
if there be any ground or warrant for the Protestant Religion of England, or
any one point, or article thereof, though but such as they pretend for the
proposers, and authorizers thereof, whether Protestant Prince, parliament,
convocation, canons, Articles the publik books, and practice thereof, or
whatsoever else they can name in this kind, holy Orders and preisthood so
vehemently persecuted by them, is by their own doctrine and Religion an holy
Sacrament, in such proper true sense and meaning as it is used in the Roman
Church, at this time, and ever was. They were the Messaliani or Massaliani,
Euchitae or Enthusiastae heretics about the Damascen. de haeresib. hist.
tripart. l. 7. Theod. l. 4 c 11. Niceph hist. Eccl. l. 11. cap. 14.
year of Christ; 80. which in antiquity are remembered first to have denied
the grace of this holy Sacrament, as they did of others, and affirmed that the
holy ghost was not received therein, and for this as other their Errors were
condemned then of heresy. Messaliani dicunt in clericorum ordinatione Spiritum
sanctum non suscipi. These Protestants Ordination will be spoken of in their.
36. Article, of that Title.

THE XVI. CHAPTER.
Matrimony thus proved a Sacrament.
THE next Sacrament which this Protestant Article excepteth against in the same
words, and phrase of speech, as against the former is that of matrimony, ever
in the Church of Christ, from his, and his Apostles time, received, and used
for an holy Sacrament. The holy scriptures say it is an honorable estate:
honorabile connubium. God Hebr. 13.
makes the union of husband and wife inseperable by man. Quod Deus coniunxit,
homo non separet. Matthew. 19.
The bond of matrimony is the greatest, greater then toward father or
mother. And a reason is because it is a Sacrament. Relinquet hom^ Ephesians. 5.
patrem and matrem suam, and adherebit vxori sua, and erunt duo in carne vna.
Sacramentum hoc magnum est: ego autem dico in Christo, and in Ecclesia.

This supernatural and Sacramental Iustitution in Christian Religion makes
the obligation inviolable, Matthew. 10.
not admitting separation, to take any other. Quicumque dimiserit vxorem suam,
and ali^^ duxerit, adulterium committit super eam. and si vxor dimiserit virum
suum and alij nupserit, maechatur. Ijs 1. Cotinth. 7.
qui matrimonio iuncti sunt, praecipio non ego sed Dominus, vxorem a viro non
discedere, quod si decesserit, manner innuptam; aut viro suo reconciliari; and
vir vxorem non dimittat. It was not so, either with the Jews or gentiles. The
Jews enen in the days of Moses had their divorces Moses mandauit dare Matthew.
19.
libellum repudij and dimittere. Moses permisit dimittere vxores. As they also
had plurality of wines then. At the cominge of Christ and after, by their
Rabbines allowance. Rabbini vestri sane ad hunc vsque Justinius dial. cum
Tryphone,
diem, and quatuor, and quinque vestrum quemque vxores habere permi^tunt. And
yet condemned them not, for other incontinencies. All which as S. Iustine
living in this age, witnesses against them, is condemned by the Christian
Sacrament of matrimony. Si quis vestrum venustam inspiciens, eam expetiuerit,
nihil iniqui agere asseuerunt, quo quidem etiam miseri and stulti sunt nomine.
Nam sicut prius dixi magnorum Sacramentorum aeconomiae and dispositiones in
quolibet eius generis facto sunt celebratae.

The gentiles though ever without title of true Religion, and therefore needles
to be remembered in this business; were not inferior to the Jews in this
disorder no more then the later Heretical Turks and Mahometans now be. Yet I
shall speak of the gentiles by accidentary occasion hereafter. S. Martial in
this age does say not only that marriage among Christians, is honest,
constituted by God, lawful, and immaculate, but has sanctification, and
honor of chastity. Coniugium Martial. epist. ad Tholosan. cap. 9.
honestum; and constitutum a Deo, l^gitimum and immaculatum, eis qui ex
sanctificatione and honor castitatis nubere volunt. And Christ our Lord
himself so approved it. Dominus and Magister meus Christus approbauit.

S. Clement from the Apostles proves, there could be no dissolubilitie in
Christian marriage, no taking a second wife, or husband, during the life of the
first. Si quis Laicus, vxorem propriam pelle^s, Clem. Can. Apost 48. Euarist
ep. 2.
alteram, vel ab alio dimissam duxerit communione priuctur. So S. Euaristus
expounds S. Paul cited before, of not parting husband, or wife. So Tertullian
proving that marriage among Christians is Tertullian. de Monogam. cap. 11. l. 4.
contra Marcion cap. 34.
only dissolved by death, and not divorce. Per mort^m, non per repudium facta
solutione, quia repudiatis non permitteret nubere Apostolus aduersus pristinum
praeceptum. Manet matrimonium quod non rite diremptum est. Manente matrimonio
nubere, adulterium est. He makes the praises of matrimony l. 2. ad vxorem
cap. 9.
all most unspeakable, the Church makes it, sacrifice confirms it, the
Angels honor it, God ratifieth it. It is a conjunction of two Faithful of one
hope, one vow, one discipline of the same service. To these God sends his
peace. V^^ sufficiam ad enarrandum faelicitatem eius matrimon^^ quod Ecclesia
counciliat, and confirmat obligatio, and ob^^gnatum Angeli renunciant, pater
rato habet? Qua^ iugum fidelium duorum vnius spei, vnius voti, vni^
disciplinae, eiusdem seruitutis? His Deus pacem su^ Tertullian. l. de Monog.
cap. 5. aduers. Valentinian. cap. 30. l. de praescript. aduers. heret. c.
Euaristus Pap. epist. 2. Ephesians. 5.
mittit. He diverse times, and in diverse places calls it a Sacrament.
Sacramentum, celebrandu^ Sacramentum, diuinum Sacramentum, even as Baptism and
confirmation. So does S. Euaristus Pop^ living in this age, and as other
Fathers both greek^ and latin, so expound S. Paul before cited, callin^ it a
great Sacrament, Sacramentum hoc magnum (...)

S. Chrysostom though liueing after this age yet giueing the custom and
practice of these and after days for his reason, besides S. Paul's authority
so expounds him saying it is a Sacrament and a great Sacrament as S. Paul
did, prouinge a Sacrament by the Sacramental grace given therein, for a man or
woman to forsake him that begotte Chrisostom. in cap. 5. ad Ephesians. Hom. 20.
them nourished and hrought them up, her which conceived them, brought them
forth with pain and affliction, who bestowed so many benefits upon them, as
parents do on children, with whom there was so long acquaintance, and
cohabitation, to adhere to him or her, that was not seen to them before, and
prefer them before all things, this is verily a Mystery. And the parents when
these things are done, are not grieved, but rather if they be not done, and
with Joy pay money, and make expenses to see them performed. Veriely this is a
great mystery, having a certain secrette wisdom, This long since S. Paul
Prophesied, saying in Christ and his Church. But this was not spoken alone for
him, but what? That the husband should cherish his wife, as his own flesh. And
as Christ does his Church. Reuera est mysterium, and magnum mysterium, eo qui
procreauit, qui genuit, qui educauit: ea, quae concepit, quae cum dolor
peperit and afflictione, quitot ac tantis affecerunt beneficijs, cum quibus
diuturnus fuit vsus, and consuetudo, relictis, ei adherere, quae ne visa quidem
fuit, and cum co nibil habere commune, and eam omnibus praeferre, reuera est
mysterium, and parents cum haec fiunt, ^on egreferunt, sed potius aegreferunt,
si non fiant, and cum impenduntur pecuniae, and fiunt sumptus, laetantur.
Reuera magnum est mysterium, arcanam quandam habens sapientiam. Hoc multis
retroactis soeculis prophetans dicit: In Christo and Ecclesia. Sed non propter
ipfum solum hoc dictum est. Sed quid? Vt ipsam tanquam propriam carnem foueat,
sicut and Christus Ecclesiam.

And to insist upon the grant of this Protestant Article. That Sacraments be
effectual signs of grace, we have the testimony of the whole Christian world
in this Apostolic time, to prove Matrimony, to be such a sign, and
Sacrament, for all the world at the coming of Christ, Jews, and gentiles were
given to Poligamie and plurality of wives, and yet not so containing
themselves* from other incontinencies, but such as received this holy Sacrament
abstayned both from the sins of Poligamie, and other vnchastities, an evident
and undeniable argument, of the power and sanctity of this Christian
Institution and holy Sacrament. I will only exemplify here in Britayne,
infected as the rest of the universal world with that general error and
sin, at that time. Julius Caesar Emperor which invaded this Kingdom and
others Iul. Caesar belli gallici l. 6. Ioh. Zonaras in Seuero. Bandica orat.
Solemni apud Joan. Xephil. in Epitom. Dionis, in Nerone. Dion. ibid Dion. Hect.
Boeth. descript. Scotiae. william Harrison descrip. of Scotl. cap. 14.
after him give such shameful testimony hereof, modesty forbids me to
write it in English: Vxores habent deni, duodenique inter se communes, and
maxim fratres cum fratribus, and parents cum liberis nudi degunt, mulieribus
promiscue vtuntur. Their Queen Bandica in her public sacrifice to the Britans
Godd^sse Andraste, or Andaste, in her solemn prayer openly pronounced of them:
Qui cum caetera omnia, tum liberos and vxores communes inter se putant. Pagans,
Catholics and Protestants write the like of the Picts, The Protestants thus
speak it in English: They live naked in Tents, their wives are common.

The Scots were more barborous in these sins, and their Kings especially
Euenus confirmed them by public laws. Leges tulit improbas omnem olentes
Leges Euan. Regis Scotorum. Hector Boeth Scot. Hist. l. 3. fol. 36. page 1.
spurcitiam, vt liceret singulis suae gentis plures vxores alijs sex, alijs
december pro opibus ducere. Nobilibus plebeorum vxores communes essent, ac
virginis nouae nuptae, loci Dominus primam libandi pudicitiam, potestatem
haberet. This was the miserable condition of this Kingdom of great Britayne,
as of other nations, before it received the law of Chist, and the holy
Sacrament of Matrimony, between one man and woman, one husband, and one wife,
to give infallible demonstration to all people, present and to come, that great
supernatural assistance, and grace was given by that external rite or
ceremony, and so consequently ordained of God, no other being able to do it
all those most horrible lascivious incontinencies generally ceased in the true
and due receauers of this Sacrament.

And for the barbarous customs and laws before, Veremund. Hect. Boeth. hist.
Scot. l. 10. fol. 202. Hollinshed hist. of Scotl. page 133. caplawes.
these were made, kept, and severely executed. Our Protestants thus translate
them. Any man's lemman or concubyne shall suffer the same pains, that he does
which offends with her. He that rauisheth a maid shall dye for it, unless
she require for safe-gard of his life, to have him to her husband. If any man
be taken with another man's wife in adultery, she consenting unto him therein,
they shall both suffer death for it. But if she consent not, but beforced
against her will, then he shall dye only for the same, and she shall be
released. In such great severity the sin of Incontinencie was punished here
after this holy Sacrament, by the grace thereof a preservative against it was
received, and few were found transgressors thereof, all though these laws
were prosecuted with such zeal and devotion, that we find, that Princes and
Kings found delinquent were neither exempted, nor spared in such cases, as we
see in the lamentable example of King Vortigerne testified both by british,
English, Catholic and Protestant historians who breakeing his Matrimonial
Nennius hist. manuscript. in Vorthigerno Rege Mat. westminster. an 450. Mat. Park.
Antiq. Britan. page 7. 8. Protest. annotat. in Mat. westminster. an. 454. Stowe and
Howes hist. in Vortigern. Hollins hist. of Engl. in eod. Protest. Communion.
book Tit. Matrimony. Dearly. 1.. O God.. Almighty God.
Faith, with his first lawful wife, and adulterously joining himself with an
other woman, Rowenna Daughter of Engist, was by S. German the Popes legate,
with the advice and consent of the british clergy, cited, Judged and
excomunicated, and by the whole Kingdom deposed. Neither can the Protestants
of England deny Matrimony to be a Sacrament. For in the manner of celebrating
thereof at every marriage, it terms it, holy matrimony, an honorable estate,
instituted of God, signifying unto us, the mystical union which is between
Christ and his Church. God instituted it, and did teach, it should never be
lawful to put a sunder those, whom he by matrimony had made one. God has
consecrated the stat of matrimony to such an excellent mystery, that in it is
signified and represented the spiritual marriage and unity betwixt Christ and
his Church. And this Rituall expresses, that God gives grace, sanctification,
and blessing at this external ceremony, so instituted and ordained by him.
Which evidently overthrows what they have said to the contrary in this
Article, and proves by their own most general and warranted use, practice,
and profession, that Matrimony is truly and properly an holy Sacrament.

THE XVII. CHAPTER.
Extreme unction thus proved, to be a Sacrament.
THE Sacrament following being the last in number, and order, which this
Protestant Article desalloweth, is extreme unction. But we are most assured,
that in this Apostolic age, and by the Apostles themselves it was taught and
practiced for an holy Sacrament, S. James the Apostle in his epistle makes it
a precept, and matter of necessity, and not arbitrary so to use it. Insirmatur
Jacob. c. 5.
quis in vobis? inducat Presbyteros Ecclesiae, and orent super eum, vngentes
eum oleo in nomine Domini. Etsi in peccatis sit, remittentur ei. Here we have
all which this Protestant Article requires to a true and properly named
Sacrament, testified by an Apostle in holy scripture and tradition of the
Church from that time, to be found in extreme unction.

That it was ordained of Christ, and an effectual sign of grace, the words
are plain, as also that the visible sign or ceremony thereof was ordained of
God, for no power limited and created can ordain, or institute a sign or
ceremony external to forgive sins: si in peccatis sit remittentur ei. The
ancient Fathers both of the greek Origin. hom. 2. in leuitic. Chrisostom. l.
3. de Sacerdotio. Cirill. Alexandr. l. 6. de adorat. in spiritu victor Antioch.
ad c. 6. marci. Ambros. in missali Hier. ad c. 14. Oseae August. Sermon. 215. de
tempor. in Tract. de rectitud. cathol. conuersat. l. 2. de visitat. Infirm. c.
4. Innocent. 1. epistol. ad Decent. Eug. cap. 8. Aug. l. de Haeres. cap. 47.
Gabriel Prat. Elench. haeresum in Hierarchitis. Epiph. haeres. 67. Extreme
unction a Sacrament with the Britans. Manuscript. Brit. Antiquissimi Authoris.
and Latin Church do thus expound this place, and derive this Sacrament from
thence, and affirm it ever to have been so received in Christ's Church and by
him instituted, proposed by S. James. sic roges dete, and pro te fieri, sicut
dixit Apostolus Iacobus, immo per Apostolum suum Dominus: ipsa videlicet olei
sacrati delibutio intelligitur Spiritus sancti typicalis vnctio.

I need not to make repetitions of their testimonies, this verity being so
generally received and practiced in the first times of Christian Religion, that
about the year of Christ 279. it was commonly adjudged heresy to deny it, and
is so censured, registered, and condemned in the exploded heresies of the
Hierarchite Heretics: dicebant extremae vnctionis Sacramentum a Deo institutum,
non esse. Which being condemned for herefie in the whole Church of Christ, must
needs be so also adjudged in this Kingdom, renowned then for true Christian
Religion, and the Catholic doctrine, yet we want not particular testimonies
hereof, for our Protestants themselves commonly teaching that the Britans never
changed any material point in Religion, produce unto us a most ancient
manuscript as they term it, written, ab authore antiquissimo, and as is
evident in the same Antiquity, when there were yet many Pagans and Idolaters
here, in which, command and direction is given that all sick persons in
danger of death should both receive the Sacrament of Christ's holy body, and
this of extreme unction, set down by S. James the Apostle and the primative
Fathers before. Quotiens aliqua Infirmitas superuenerit, corpus and sanguinem
Christi illi qui aegrotant, accipiant: oleum in nomine Domini a presbyteris
humiliter petant, and inde corpus suum vngant: vt quod scriptum est, impleatur.
Infirmatur aliquis, inducat Jacob. 5.
presbyteros Ecclesiae, and orent super cum vngentes eum oleo in nomine Domini,
and oration fidei saluabit infirmum, and alleuiabit eum Dominus, et si in
peccatis sit; dimittentur ei. Videtefratres, quia qui infirmitatem habent, ad
Ecclesiam current, corporis sanitatem re^ipere, and peccatorum Indulgentiam
merebuntur obti^ere.

The Protestants of England even the composers of these Articles, cannot by
their own Religion be of other mind, without gross Ignorance and
contradiction, for defining a Sacrament, as they have done in this Article, and
in their most Protest. commun. book Tit. catechism.
warranted communion book thus do define it: by this word Sacrament I mean an
outward and visible sign, of an Inward and spiritual grace given unto us,
ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a
pledge to assuer us thereof: They must needs grant that S. James in express
words in holy scripture, their pretended Rule, has delivered as much for this
Sacrament as they require, the outward visible sign, the Priests prayer and
unction with oil, and remission of sins, which cannot be without grace,
received by the same.

Thus I have inuincibly proved by this first Apostolic age for the doctrine
and practice of the Catholic Church and against this Protestant Article, the
whole complete number of 7. Sacraments. And yet if I had only proved three
Sacraments, or any less number then seven, and greater then two I had
sufficiently confuted this Article which only allows two, Baptism and the
Eucharist styled by them, the Supper of the Lord, for such.

THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
The rest of this Article repugnant to the Catholic faith, likewise condemned.
THE remnant of this Article they deliver in these words: The, Sacraments were
not ordained of Christ, to be gazed upon, or to be carried about but that we
should duly use them. And in such only as worthyly receive the same; they
have a wholesome ^ffect or operation: But they that receive them unworthily,
purchase to themselves damnation, as Saint Paul says.

This is the whole content of this Article, and in this last, if these
Protestants desire to speak properly, as they should, and would so be
understood: there is very little or no difference between Catholics and them.
For where they say, that Sacraments have a wholesome effect or operation in
their worthy receauers, this agrees with the Catholic doctrine, that
Sacraments give grace, and work ex opere operato, which many Protestants
deny. And concerning the unworthy receiving of them, it is not a thing
questioned. What they mean, by these words, The Sacraments were not ordained
of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried about, So speaking of Sacraments
in the plural number, is a strange speech, excepting one Species of the
Sacrament of Eucharist we reserve none, nor carry any about for any respect nor
can by their doctrine, professing they consist in their ministration and
receiving, as is evident in Baptism, Confirmation, Orders, Confession and
Absolution, Matrimony, and Extreme unction. What they mean by their words,
gazed upon, requires a better gloss, then they give to v^derstande their
meaning, for to take the word as it is commonly and properly used in our
language, earnestly* or intensiuely to behold, if they forbid such gesture at
Sacraments, they forbid publik ministration of them, which their practice
allows, warranteth and prescribes by their greatest authority.

If they would have this their termed gasing upon, or carrying about to be
understood any re^^rence or reservation the Roman Church uses ^owards the
blessed Sacrament of the Altar, the question with them properly belongs to
their ^8. Article, where they expressly speak against Transubstantiation, or
change of bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, and his true and
real presence in those most sacred mysteries, which being undeniably confuted,
as in that place it shall, this error is thereby clearly overthrown. For
wheresoever Christ is, or howsoever heis, heis to be worshipped and adored,
with as great duty and reverence as any Catholic gives unto him in this
Sacrament. In the mean time the Apostolic men of this first age do thus
testify.

S. Clement often testifying the real and true presence of Christ in this most
holy Sacrament, sets down the devotion and honor of all people then,
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Virgyns, widows, married, old and young
to be as great or greater then Catholics now commonly use unto it. When
consecration is ended, and the blessed Sacrament was showed unto the Christians
present, the Deacon used to say, let us a^tend or behold. The Bishop or Priest
offering the Sacrifice, said to the people holy things for the holy, and the
people answered one holy one Lord, one Christ in the glory of God the Father
blessed for ever Amen. Glory to God on highest, and peace to men of good will:
Osanna to the son of David. Blessed is he that comes in the name of our
Lord, God our Lord, and has appeared unto us, hosanna in the highest. Then all
communicate with great reverence, acknowledging that which they receive to be
the body, and blood of Christ. And that was left, by the Deacons was
reverently carried into, and kept in the Pastophories. Postquam omnes dixerunt
Amen. Diaconus dicat attendamus: Clem. Romans Constable. Apost. l. 8. cap. 20. l. 2.
cap. 61.
Et Episcopus alloquatur populum ijs verb^^ sancta sanctis, and populus
subiungat vnus sanctus, vnus Dominus, vnus Christus in gloria Dei Patris
benedictus in saecula Amen. Gloria in altissimis Deo, and in terra pax
hominibus bonae voluntatis. Osonna filio David. Benedictus qui venit in nomine
domini Deus Dominus and apparuit nobis. Osanna in altissimis. Post hoc sumat
Episcopus, deinde Presbiteri, and Diaconi and Hypodiaconi, and Anagnostae, and
Cantores, and Ascetae, and ex mulieribus Diaconissae. and Virgins and Viduae,
postea pueri and omnis populus cum pudore and reu^rentia. Episcopus det
oblationem dicens, Corpus Christi, and sumens dicat Amen. Postquam omnes
sumpserunt, accipiant Diaconi reliquias, and portent in pastophoria.

These Pastophories were sacred and religious Carol. Bou. Scot. in l. 2.
Clement. de Constable. Apost. cap. 61.
tabernacles in Churches, wherein the blessed Sacrament, holy and sacred
vestments and vessels were kept. And this holy Sacrament was so religiously
^^eserued, that as S. Clement witnesses, to be negligent therein in the time
of the Apostles was Clem. Romans epistol. 2.
excommunication. Presbyteri, Diaconi, and ministri c^m timore and tremore
clericorum reliquias fragmentorum corporis Domini custodire debent, ne qua
putredo in Sacrario inueniatur, ne quum negligentur agitur portioni corporis
Domini grauis inferatur iniuria. Communio enim Corporis Domini nostri Jesus
Christi si negligenter erogetur, and presbyter minora non curet admonere
officia, graui anathemate, and digna humiliationis plaga feriatur.

So great reverence, and honor was used in reserving this blessed Sacrament
in that time, that neither pall, veil, or any thing that touched it, might be
washed out of the Sacrary, so named in respect this most holy Sacrament was
therein with such devotion preserved. And the basen wherein they were washed
was accounted so holy, that nothing but such holy things might be washed in it.
Palla and vela quae in sanctuarij sordidata fuerint ministerio, Diaconi cum
humilibus ministris iuxta Sacrarium lauent, non eijcientes for as a sacrario
velamina dominicae mensae, ne forte puluis Dominici Corporis male decidat a
sindone foris abluto, and erit haec operanti peccatum, idcirco, intra sacrarium
ministris praecipimus, haec sancta cum diligentia custodire: peluis noua
comparetur, and praeter hoc nihil aliud tangat. Pallae altaris solae in ea
lauentur.

S. Ignatius proves the Eucharist to be the flesh Ignat. epist. ad Romans epist.
ad Smyrnens. apud Theod. Dial. 3. and al.
of Christ our Savior, which suffered for our sins, and which arose again,
and so must needs be honored. Panem Dei volo, panem caelestem, quae est caro
Christi filij Dei. Eucharistiam esse carnem Saluatoris nostri Jesus Christi,
quae pro peccatis nostris passa est, quam Pater suae benignitate suscitauit.
And makes them notorious heretics which denied, or called it into question:
non confiteantur, which did, not confess it.

S. Denis the Areopagite delivers to us, how Christ in this Sacrament was
honored, and prayed unto, setting down the very prayer itself, which that
Apostolic time there used unto him. O diuinum Dion. Areopag. Eccles. Hierarch.
cap. 3.
pignus sacrumque mysterium abducta tibi significantium operimenta signorum
dignant^r aperiens, nobi^ palam atque aperte lucesce nostros spirituales oculos
singa^ari and aperto tuae lucis fulgore imple. He tells also, how both the
Priest that offered this most holy Sacrifice, worshipped it, and did show it
unto the people present likewise to be worshipped of them. Pantifex sacro
sancta and augustissima mysteria Dionys. supr. cap. 3.
conficit, and quae ante laudauerat, venerandis opert^, atque abdita conspectu
agit, diuina munera reuerenter ostendens.

All things belonging to this most holy Sacrament were holy, and honored both
by the writers of this age, and our Ptotestants testimony. The Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, and others were consecrated as before. And as S. Anacletus
even by Protestant allowance says, the Priests might not be Judged by others,
they were honored ^^ Christ, and their privileges were granted the^ Robert.
Barnes l. de vit. Pontif. Romans in Anacleto. Anaclet. epist. Tom. 1. council. and
alibi. Sixtas Pap. 1. Rob. Barnes supra in eod.
by Christ's command. Anacletus Christo alie^^ esse iudicabat, qui Sacerdotes
in Ius vocarent. Qui^ inquit, qui sacerdoti detrahit, Christo detrahit*
sacerdotes omnino Christi sunt. priuilegia Ecclesiae and sacerdotum Apostoli
saluatoris iussu inuiolata esse debere iusserunt. The Altar whereon it was
sacrifised, was holy: Missam non nisi in altari celebrandam esse. The ^^^po^^ll
whereon it was laid, and the clothes ^^ the altar were holy, so were all the
vessels used about it, that none but consecrated persons might touch them.
sacra vasane qui praeter sacros mini^^ros attingerent. The Church vestures both
of the Priest, and other clergymen which assisted him in this Sacrifice, sacred
and holy. sacerdotem sacrifi^^^urum, Anaclet. epist. Rob. Barnes in vit.
Pontif. Romans in Anaclet.
ministros vestibus sacris indutos, seu testes and custodes sibi adhibere
ordinauit Anacletus. The place named there upon Sacrarium Sacrary, or holy
place, was holy, So was the Tabernacle or P^stophorium wherein it was
religiously kept. Thus testify the holy Popes which were living in this first
age, Thus testify our Protestant Antiquaries, whose very words for more
suertie I have cited.

And the larned Fathers both greek and latin Tertullian. l. 2. ad vxorem.
Ciprian. Sermon. delapsis. Basil. in Gordio mart. Chrisost. epist. ad Innocent.
to. 4. and cit. a Nicephor. l. 13. cap. 19. council. nic^n. 1. can. 14. An old
manus^ipt. British and dulch Sermon. read in our old Churche^ an. 366. Fox Act.
and monum. p. 1142.
in the next ages following testify this religious and reverent manner of
reserving this blessed Sacrament: So has the first general council of Nice,
and other authorities undeniable. And that this was the custom in Britayne is
proved before, when I cited from the antiquities thereof, that the like
received this Sacrament reserved, when extreme unction was ministered unto
them. And one of their most ancient antiquities carrying with it our
Protestants approbation, does witness that the primative Christian Britans did
publicly ^^ Every Mass worship and pray unto Christ present in this
Sacrament, this has our Protestants translation: Hereof singe Gods servants at
every Mass, Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis: That is in our
speech: Thou lamb of God; that take away the sins of the world, have mercy
upon us. And thus I end this their many braunched Article.

THE XIX. CHAPTER.
The 26. and 27. Articles examined and Protestant doctrine in or by them
condemned.
THeir next Article being the 26. by their numbering them, is thus entitled. Of
the worthi^es of the ministers, which hinder not the effect of the sacraments.
The whole Article follows in these All though in the visible Church the evil
be ever mingled with the good, and sometime the evil have chief authority in
the ministration of the word and sacraments: yet for as much as they do not the
same in their own name, but in Christ's, and do minister by his commission,
and authority, we may use their ministry, both in hearing the word of God,
and in receiving of the sacraments. Neither is the effect of Christ's ordinance
taken away by their wikednesse, nor the grace of Gods gifts diminished from
such as by faith, and rightly do receive the sacraments ministered unto them,
which be effectual, because of Christ's institution (...) promise, allthough
they be ministered by evil men. Nevertheless, it apperteyneth to the
discipline of the Church, that inquiry be made of evil ministers, and that
they be accused by those, that have knowledge of their offenses: and finally,
being found gyltie by (...) Judgment, be deposed.

Hitherto this Article, in which there it not any one proposition, or sentence,
against the doctrine of the Roman Church and Catholic Religion, but rather a
grant and confirmation thereof, (...) a renowncing of Protestant profession,
and proceedings in diverse particular points, and some most material. As
declaring that in the visible Church the evil be ever mingled with the good,
they confess the Church to be ever and inde^ectible. And so Luther, Caluyn,
Cranmar, King Henry 8. with his daughter Queen Elizabeth, or whomsoever else
they will or can make the first publisher or aduancer of their doctrine,
separating themselves, and being separated and cut of from that visible true
Church, which was then generally so held, this their Protestant congregation,
and Religion taking Original, and being from thence, cannot possibly be the
true Church and Religion of Christ.

And in making the true Church ever visible, they must needs make their
association or prerended company ever invisible, and so nothing until these
days, and condemn those their brethren Protestants, who knowing their new
fraternity was never until those late times, have mathematically framed in
their Imagination, a new straung, chimericall, Invisible, vnbeeable and
impossible Church. Again professing that Priests the Ministers of Sacraments
do Minister them in Christ's (...), by his commisson, and authority, they
sufficiently confess, that if Christ omnipotent could and did consecrate
bread and wine into his body, and blood, forgive sins and give grace in
sacraments, truly consecrated Priests have that power, and do the same. And
affirming, The sacraments to b^ effectual because of Christ's Institution and
promise, neither is the effects of Christ's ordinance taken away, nor the grace
of Gods guists diminished by the wikednesse of ministers, They prove what the
Catholics hold in these things, and Protestants cammonly deny. Their last
clause of Discipline in the Church making but one true visible Church, and
their congregation being, as before no part thereof, depriueth them of all such
discipline, as they have already spoiled themselves of the pure word of God
preached and Sacraments duly ministered inseperable signs and properties of
the true visible Church, by their 19. Article, and thereby want all things
which by their own confession are ever found in, and belong unto the Church
of Christ.

The 27. Article entitled, of baptism, has no thing contrary to Catholic
Religion: But the last clause thereof is against their 6. Article before, that
nothing is to be believed as an Article of faith or to be thought requisite
necessary to salvation, that is not read in, nor may be proved by scriptures.
And in this place thus they decree: The Baptisme-ef young Prot. Articl. 27.
children, is in any wise to be retained in the Church, as most agreeable with
the Institution of Christ. In this whole Article before they make Baptism in
all requisite necessary to Salvation, So they do i^ Protest. communion Book
Tit. Baptism. Protest. Conference at hampton Court.
their communion book in the administration thereof, and in the reuewe of
their Religion ^^ Hampton court, thus they define: That baptism to be
ministered by private parsons, in time of necessity, is an holy tradition. And
so they use in their common practice, and Baptize Infants both by their
ministers, and others men and women, especially my dwiues, instructed how to
Baptism in time of Engl. Protest. in field Books of the Church page 239. and
others.
necessity. Yet with publik consent and allowan^^ thus they write and publish:
Baptism of Infants ^^ ^^^ed a Tradition, because it is not expressly
delivered i^ stripture, that the Apostles did baptize Infants, nor (...)
express precept there found, that they should so do.

T^^t the holy Fathers of the first age held Baptism Supr. in articul. 6.
of Infants for an unwritten tradition I have spoken before. And S. Clement
does give com^^^nd, Clem. Romans l^b. 6. constit. Apostolic. cap. 15. Dionys.
Areopag. Ecclesiast. Hierarch. cap. 7. council. mileuit. cap. 2. Chrisostom.
homil. de Adam and Eua. Augustine. cont. Donat. l. 1. cap. 23. Epiphan. Aug. and
alij de haeres. Innocent. 1. epist. council. African. cap. 77. council.
Carthagin. 5. cap. 6. Hect. Boeth. Scot. h^st. l. 9. Georg. Buchan. Rer. scot.
l. 5. Reg. 52. holinsh. hist. of Scotland in F^equard. page 112.
to have it observed: Baptizate vestros pue^^^ (...). S. Denis the Areopagite
affirms it was so used: Pueri qui necdum possunt intelligere diui^^, sacri
hapti smatis participes fiant. And shew^^g^ how others answer and promise for
them, (...) pr^ ipsi^ abrenun^iant, sanctaqu^ ineunt faedera; (...) i^ an holy
tradition, sanctam traditionem; (...) S. Chrysostom and others testify
generally in the whole Catholic Church in all places, Praedi^^t Ecclesia
Catholica vbique diffusa, debere par^^^^^ Baptizari prepter original^ peccatum.
And they were Nouatian, Pelagian and such condemned H^retiks, which at any time
called this holy tradi^^on and custom into question. So it was here ^^
Britayne, which though it was Mother and Noble long time to pelagius the
Archeretike, w^o among other his damned Errors denied the Baptism of Infants,
yet it so much detested among t^^ rest this his obsurd Invention, that it
spared n^^ Princes themselves, that followed him therein, at all Antiquities
tell us, in the case of King Frequard, who being noted to have laughed at the
Baptism of Infants, and confession of sins to P^^ists, Notatus est aliquando
risisse paruulorum ^^ptis^um peccatorumque ad Sacerdotis aurem confes^^^^^, was
accused of pelagianisme, cited, condemned, imprisoned and deposed. So testify
both Catholic and Protestant Antiquaries.

THE XX. CHAPTER.
The 28. Article entitled, of the supper of the Lord, examined, and condemned.
THEIR 28. Article being entitled: of the (...) supper: is as follows. The
supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the love, that Christians ought to
have among themselves, on to an other: but rather it is a Sacrament of our
redemption, by Christ's death: in so much, that to such as rightly, worthily,
and with faith receive the same, the bread which we break is a partaking of
the body of Christ, and likewise the cup of blessing is a partaking of the
blood of Christ. Transubstantiation (the change of the substance of bread^
and wine, in the supper of the Lord, cannot be pro^ed by holy writ: it is
repugnant to the plain words of scripture, overthrows the nature of a
Sacrament, (...) has given occasion to many superstitions. The body ^^ Christ
is given, taken, and eaten in the supper, (...) after an heavenly, and
spiritual manner: And t^^ mean whereby the body of Christ is received, and
(...) in the supper, is faith.

The Sacrament of the Lords supper was not by Christ's ordinance reserved,
carried about, lifted up, or worshipped. Hitherto this 28. Protestant Article.
In the first part thereof until we come to the wo^^ Transubstantiation, or the
change of the substance, there is no apparent contradiction to the doctrine of
the Catholic Church, And if our Protestants secretly mean otherwise, their
Intention i^ plainly expressed in that which follows, i^ denying
Transubstantiation or change of the substance of bread and wine. Which I
affirm with the Catholic Church, and thus prove against this Article. First
by holy writ or scripture, allthough that is not necessary, as is often made
manifest against these men. Where soever there is a change or mutation of one
thing into an other, as in this case of bread into the body of Christ, and
this manifestly expressed and contained in holy writ and scripture, there is
transubstantiation or change of bread by scripture into Christ's body,
likewise of wine into his blood.

This is evident by their own exposition and transubstantiation, in this
place, declaring it to be a change of the substance of bread and wine. But
the holy writ and scripture in three Evangelists, and S. Paul expressly
prove, that before Christ blessed and consecrated the bread and wine, it was
noe other but bread and wine, and prove likewise even from the testimony of
Christ himself, that after his Matthew. cap. 26. Marc. cap. 14. Luc. cap. 22. 2
Chorinth. 11.
blessing and omnipotent word spoken it was now changed into his body and
blood, plainly saying this is my body, which is given, or shall be given for
you, and this is my blood which is shedd, or shall be shedd for you. Therefore
by these Protestants exposition before there was, and of necescessitie must be
transubstantiation, or change of the substance of bread and wine. Thus has
holy writ and scripture in all learned languadges Hebrew Greek and Latin
before consecration it was (...) lechem, (...) artos, panis, bread: after
consecration (...) ghenijah (...) son^a corpus. Christ's body: likewise of the
wine changed into his blood, this is the testimony of Christ, S. Matthew, S.
Mark, S. Luke, and S. Paul in holy writ and scripture, And S. John is
witness also, Io: cap. 6.
that Christ had taught and promised this before And yet any one place of
scripture in so plain words makes a matter of faith, out of doubt, and
undeniable. Nothing can be more plain, then such an affirmative proposition,
of a Subject present, in the hands of Christ the speaker, and in the sight and
presence of the greatest witnesses his Apostles, at his last supper, in the
greatest Sacrament. Christ never interpreted himself otherwise That his
Apostles so understood him, believed, practiced and left to others, is
evidently proved both by Scriptures and the antiquities of this age. First S.
John in scripture speaks in Christ's words, Io: 6.
that bread is made his body. Panis quem ego dab^, caro mea est pro mundi
vita. And were plain and often in that his 6. Chapter. And both Catholic and
Protestant Antiquaries confess, that he said Mass wherein this change and
transubstantiation is used, and confirmed, HOC EST CORPUS MEVM etc. And assuers
us that the Altar on which he said Mass many years, before the blessed
Virgyn, was preserved in a Church on mount Syon, miraculously brought thither.
Ad occidentalem Guliel. way. Etonem: presbyter l. Itinerar. cap. Ioc. Sanct.
mont. Sinay. Hakligis book of Travails in eod. Matthew. cap. 26.
partem Ecclesiae, quae est in monte Sion est lap^^ rubens prae altari, qui
lapis portatus erat de monte Sinay per manus Angelorum: super quem celebrabat
S. Ioannes Euangelista coram Beatisima Virgin Maris Missam per multos Annos
post ascensionem Domini.

Thus testify holy pilgryms eye witnesses even of this Kingdom so remote
from Jerusalem. S. Matthew in his gospel says in the words of Christ: This
is my body: HOC EST CORPUS MEVM. This is my blood HIC EST SANGVIS MEVS. In his
^^^^rgie or Mass delivered to the Church, and S. Matthew. in missa Aethiopum.
which he used, he directly teaches transubstantiation and change of bread
and wine into Christ's body and blood: o Amator hominum benedic, sanctifica,
munda and transfer panem in carnem tuam immaculatam, and vinum hoc in sanguinem
tuum pretiosum. And thus he used all his life even to his martyrdom at the
holy Altar, where he thus consecrated Christ's body by changing bread
Anonym. antiquiss. in vit. S. Matthew. edit. per Frederic. Naus. Episcopum
Viennen. Breuiar. Romans 21. Sept. 1. Corinthians. 11.
into it, as the old history of his life and death bea^^^h wittnes. Cum
misteria Domini celebrata fuissent, and missam suscepisset omnis Ecclesia,
retinuit se Sanct^^ Matthaus iuxta Altar, vbi corpus fuerat Christi ^^fectum,
and illic martyrium expectauit.

S. Paul in holy scripture says it was bread before benediction: Accepit
panem gratias agens, and after Christ's consecrating words, it was his body HOC
EST CORPUS MEVM. And promises there to deliver by tradition, what was to be
believed and practiced herein caetera cum venero disponam. Which his most
learned scholar S. Denis the Areopagite was most like to know who before has
testified it was Christ's body and to be adored. S. Mark has assured us in
his gospel in the words of Christ, that it was bread before the words of
Consecration, accepit Jesus panem: But after them, the Marc. cap. 14.
Manuscrit. antiq. de prima Instit. Ecclesiast. Seruit. S. Marcus in Missa.
body of Christ: HOC EST CORPUS MEVM. So he testifies of wine changed into
his blood. In his Order of Mass received and used here in Britayne, as our old
british writer of the first Institution of Ecclesiastical Service allowed by
our Protestant Antiquaries, proves, he calls it after consecration, the
holy, most boly unspotted body of Christ, Sanctum, Sanctissimum Intemeratum
Corpus Christi, so changed from bread: likewise of his precious blood
pretiosus sanguis Christi, from wine before.

S. Luke in his gospel is most plain: HOC Luc. cap. 22.
EST CORPUS MEVM quod pro vobis datur. And being so inseparable a companion to
S. Paul as he witnesses in many places of scripture, he could not differ from
him in this point. Neither from Luc. cap. 1.
the rest of the Apostles, from whom as he writes in the beginning of his
gospel he received what Isidor. l. 1. de offic. c. 25. de Missa and orat.
Albin. l. de divine. offic. Egbert. Stephan. Eduen. l. de Sa, Magdeburg. centur.
1. l. 2. cap. 6. col. 500. Matthew. Parker. antiquitat. Britan. cap. 17. page 47.
Paschas. Ratb. lib. de Corp. and Sang. Christi. Walfrid. Strab l. de obseruat.
cap 22. Martin. Polon. Supputat. temp. in S. Petro col. 27. Missa antiq. S.
Petri manuscript. Brit. antiq. supr. cit.
he wrote therein. Sicut tradiderunt nobis, qui ab initio ipsi viderunt, and
ministri fuerunt sermonis.

That S. Peter said mass, and delivered a form and order thereof to the
Church of Christ we have more witnesses, then can easily be cited, and their
citations more needles, seeing the principal Protestants themselves confess it
and that it remained without alteration 200. years, and more until Pope
Zepherine added some what unto it. A Christi primo instituto ducentis amplius
annis in prima Ecclesia durauit. And this as they and others teach was by S.
Peter, instituente Beato Petro. Yet therein we find most plainly delivered,
that the bread and wine were transubstantiated and changed into Christ's body
and blood. Domine Deus noster, qui te obtulisti pro huius mundi vita, respice
in nos, and super panem istum, and calicem bunc, and fac eum immaculatum tuum
corpus, and pretiosum sanguinem. And in the mass still used Corpus and sanguis
fiat dilectissimi filij tui. And often therein repeted, that after consecration
it is so changed. Our old British manuscript of the first Institution of
Church service with others prove, that S. Photinus S. Peter's disciple Bishop of
Lions, and S. Trophimus Bis(...) in France brought this Order of S. Zozimus
ep. to. 1. council. Martyrol. Roman. die 29. December. in S. Troph. Magdeburg.
cent. 1. l. 1. in Troph. Old. Engl. chron. an. domini 34. part. 4.
Peter's M^sse thither, and all France received it from them.

Our old English chronicle in our old language pl^inely says: Peter the first
Pope was a blessed man, and glorious Apostle of Christ, he was head of the
Church, he said Mass, he made our Lords body. No men can better witness*
what was the doctrine and practice of this chief Apostle, then his renown^d
disciple and Successors, S. Ignatius, and S. Element, the one at Antioche the
other at Rome, both which as I have before proved from them, and shall more
hereafter, do directly teach Christ's ^^all presence in this Sacrament, and so
transubstantiation and such change of bread and wine into Christ's body and
blood, as this Article denies, for so great mutation Alteration or whatsoever
we shall name it, cannot possibly be otherwise.

And our old british manuscript says plainly that this Mass of S. Peter
brought into France by S. Photinus and S. Trophinus was afterward car^^ed to
S. Clement at Rome to be viewed. Cursum Romanum quem Beatus Trophinus and
Sanctus Photi^^s in Gallijs tradiderunt, ad Beatum Clementem quartum loca
Successoris Beati Petri Apostol^ deportauerunt. S. Andrew the Apostle is
thought to be the Author Onissa S. Andreae Eccl. Constantin. and Chrisost.
of the Mass of the Church of Constantinople, named now S. Christostoms, in
which there is manifest transubstantiation: Emitte spiritum tuum super nos, and
super proposita dona haec, and fac panem hunc pretiosum Corpus Christi tui: and
quod est in calice ifto pretiosum saguinem Christi filij tui, transmutans
spiritu tuo sancto. Which he practiced in his life, and at his holy martyrdom
openly both before Christians and persecuting pagans he th^^ professed. Ego
Omnipotenti Deo immolo. quotidi^ i^maculatum agnum in al^ari, eius carnem
poste^quam omnis populus credentium manducauerit, agnus q^^ sacrificatus est,
integer perseuerat and vinus.

Thus testified the Priest and Deacons living ^^ Vit. S. And. per presbyter.
and Diac. Achaie Breuiar. Roman. Breuiar. Salisbur. in fest. S. Andreae l. de
duplici mart. inter opera Cypr. Anonymus. de vit. Apost. in S. Andrea.
Metaphrast. in S. Andr. Iuo carn. Sermon. de Sacram. dedicat. Sermon. 4 Bernard
apud Franc. Eenardent. in Iren. l. 4. Alger. cont. Berengar. Jacob. gemens. in
S. Andr. Clem, l. 6. Hypotepos. Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 1. Miss^ S. Iacobi.
and Eccl. Hierolomitanol.
his death, the Church of Rome, ours of England, with others in their publik
service of him, S. Cyprian or whosoever author of the book de ^^plici
martyrid among his works. The old Anonymus writer of the Apostles lines,
Symeon Metaphrastes, S. Iuo, S. Bernard, Algerus Iacobus igemensis, and others
without number. S. James brother to S. John was soon after Christ's Ascension
martyred by King Herod, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles cap. 12. by
reason whereof, much memory is not left of him in histories, but being of
Christ's three most beloved Apostles, brother to S. John, and companion to S.
Peter, the two others so inuincibly proved to have been professors and
practisers of this Catholic doctrine no man can Imagyne he could be of other
mind, especially being martyred in Jerusalem, where he, S. Peter and S. John
professing this doctrine, as before, ordained the other S. James Bishop, who in
his Order of Mass writes: Rogamus vt Spiritus sanctus adueniens sancta bona
and gloriosa sua pr^sentia sanctific^^, and eff^^iat hunc panem Corpus sanctum
Christi tui, and calicem hunc praetiosum sanguinem Christi ^ui. Where
transubstantiation, and change of bread and wine into Christ's body, and
blood in the blessed Sacrament by the omnipotent power of God is most plainly
delivered. And so must needs be (...) of this S. James as of the other, and S.
Censura Oriental. Hier. Patria^r. Constinopol. ibid. Proclus S. Michol. Methon.
Bessar. apud Gul. Eisen. centen. 1. part. 6. did. 6. council. general. 6. can.
52. Francisc. Aluar. de reb. Indic. Florin. Raem. de Orig. Haer. l. 8. c. 8.
Grym. book of estates page 1088. 1089. 201. 203. Sebast. Munster. l. 6. cap.
57. Rich. Hacklints book of Trau. in Mount Syon. Mandeu. page 36. cap. 14.
Guliel. Eisengren. centen. 1. fol. 168. and mult ib. Steph. Eduen. l. de
Sacram. Altaris. English. Prot. in Marcus Anton. l. 2. c. 4. p. 118.
Pet^^* and 8. John. And this answeareth also for S. I^m^s ^^med the brother of
our Lord, his Mass before cited, being warranted both by Fathers and councels,
greek and Latin.

S. Thomas the Apostle who preached not only to many eastern contryes of our
continent, but by many Arguments and authorities in the new world, as men call
America, was of the same faith and practice. The Annals of the Indians prove
they had a Christian Church within 10. years of Christ's Ascension, and the
Altar was made of a Stone brought from mount Syon, and thereby called the
Church of our Lady of Mount Syon. And in many places there Christian altars
are found, and as both Catholic and Protestant Antiquaries confess, the
Priests of these Indians converted by S. Thomas do in holy Mass make,
conficiunt, the body and blood of Christ and wine, behauing themselves with
greatest attention, reverence, humility, and devotion. I need not proceed to
the other Apostles, in particular, they could not believe or teach otherwise
then these I have recompted: And both Catholics and Protestants so acknowledge.
Sicut Magister docuit, Apostolise and alios communicando consecrationem
corporis and sanguinis Domini facere caeperunt and fieri per vniuersas
Ecclesias praedicando institerunt. And English Protestants with publik warrant
most plainly say that Christ both so did, and so gave power and command to
all his Apostles, and they so performed: Panis consecrationem in corpus
Christi, and vinum in sanguinem, Ipse Christus, coram Apostolis feci^: candem
ipsi quoque vt faccrent, express mandauit.

This was the faith, doctrine, and practice which Tradit. and Antiquit. Eccl.
Medol. in Italia.
all the Apostolic men of this age warranted by the example and authority of
the Apostles followed and used. S. Barnabas so near and dear to S. Peter and
S. Paul as scripture and histories assu^^ us, and he also called to be an
Apostle, with S. Paul is accounted Author of the Mass of Millane after
called S. Ambrose his Mass, famous in these western parts, where this
doctrine is plainly taught.

S. Clement, S. Peter's Successor at Rome does Clem. Constable. Apostolic. l. 7.
cap. 27. l. 8. cap. 14.
often confirm the same, calling it, the holy body precious body and
precious blood of Christ, Sanct^m Corpus Saluatoris nostri, pretio sum Corpus,
and pretios^^ sanguis Jesus Christi: And teaches in the form of Mass
delivered by him, the doctrine of transubstantiation or change of bread and
wine into Christ's body and blood: Mittas sanctum spiritum tuum super hoc l. 8.
supr. cap. 17.
sacrificum, testem Passionum Domini Jesus, vt ostendat hunc panem corpus
Christitui, and hunc calicem sanguinem Christi tui. Setting down the very
words of consecration, by which this miraculous change is made, the words of
Christ, as the Evangelists delivered before: HOC ^ST CORPUS MEVM quod pro
multis frangitur in remissionem peccatorum. HIC EST SANGVIS MEVS, quipro multis
effunditur in remissionem peccatorum. S. Alexander Pope living in this
Apostolic age, and learning his divinity the^ writes, even as Protestants
confess, that Christ did give instruction to offer this Sacrifice, which being
at the first but bread and wine, is by consecration made Christ's body, and
blood, being so Alexander Pap. 1. epist. 1. c. 4. Robert. Banes l. de vit.
Pontif. in Alexandro.
consecrated, it is the greatest sacrifice, syns are thereby forgiven, it is to
be worshipped of all: and ^^ it is more excellent then all other, so it is more
^o be worshipped and reverenced. Ipsa veritas nos (...), calicem and panem in
Sacramento offerre, quando ait: accepit Jesus panem etc. crimina atque p^^cata
oblatis his domino sacrificijs delentur. Talibus ^ostijs delectabitur and
placabitur Dominus, and peccata dimittet ingentia, Nihil enim in Sacrificijs
maius esse potest, quam Corpus and Sanguis Christi: nec vlla oblatio hac potior
est, sed haec omnes praecellit. Quae pura conscientia Domino offerenda est,
atque ab omnibus ve^eranda, and sicut potior est caeteris, ita potius excoli
and veneraridebet.

S. Ignatius S. Peter's Successor at Antioch, the Ignat. epist. ad Roman.
next and immediate by some, and by all but one S. Euodius between them says,
it is the bread of God, heavenly bread, the flesh of Christ the son of God:
Panem Dei volo, panem caelestem quae est c^^o Christi Filij Dei. It is the
flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which suffered for our syns, and was Ignat.
epist. ad Smyrnen: cit. Theodor. dialog. 3.
raised again: Carnem Saluatoris Jesus Christi, quae propeccatis nostris passa
est, quam Pater sua benignitate suscitauit.

S. Martial, who as he himself wittnesseth, had Martial epist. ad Tolosan.
cap. 3.
conuersed with Christ, and was instructed by him, and by S. Peter sent to
preach in France, says plainly that the same body of Christ which the jews
for envy did sacrifice, thinking to blott his name from earth, the Christians
then did offerit on Martial. epist. ad Burdegal. cap. 3.
the holy altar, for salvation knowing that by this remedy life is to be
given, and death avoided, and Christ himself thus commanded it to be done in
commemoration of him. Vbique offertur Deo oblatio munda, sicut testatus est
cuius corpus and sanguinem in vitam aeter^am offerimus. Ipse enim corpus
habens, and immaculatum, and sine peccato, in ara Crucis ipsum permis^^
i^molari. Quod autem Iudaeiper inuidiam immolauer^^, putantes se nomen eius a
terra abolere; nos causa s^^^tis nostrae in ara sanctificata proponimus,
scientes ^^c solo remedio nobis vitam praestandam, and mortem e^^ogaudam hoc
enim ipse Dominus noster iussit nos ag^^^ in sui commemorationem.

S. Justinius lived and learned his Religion in this age, though dying in the
next he affirms plainly, that as by the word of God Christ our Savior
became flesh, and had both flesh and blood for our salvation, even so we are
taught, that the Justin apol. ad Antonium Pinm.
foodc on which by prayers of the word which came from him, thanks be given,
is the flesh and blood of Jesus ^^carnate. Quemadmodum per verbum Dei Caro
fact^^ est Christus Seruator noster, and canem and sanguine^ salutis nostrae
causa habuit: Ad eundem modum eti^^ eam, in qua per preces verbi eius ab ipso
profecti gr^^i^ actae sunt, alimoniam, incarnati illius Jesus carnem ^^ sangiuem
esse edocti sumus. And besides tradition, and the common custom and doctrine
of the Church* he does interpret the Evangelists before cited i^ this manner,
that Christ so instituted and commanded, and this in his very next words: N^
Apostoli in commentarijs a se scriptis, quae Euang^^ vocantur, ita tradiderunt
praecepisse sibi Iesum, ^^ enim panc accepto gratias egisset, hoc facite in ^^
recordationem HOC EST CORPUS MEVM. and (...) similiter accepto, and gratijs
actis dixisse: HIC ^^ SANGVIS MEVS. And most plainly: Panem C^^stus Justin.
dial. cum Triph. post med. and in quaest. agent propos. quaest. 44.
conficiendum tradidit, vt Corpus eum factum ^^ recordaremur. And, Dominica
caro conscientiam ^^ rum qui ipsam edunt, ab omni scelere expiat. S. I^^naeus
also, by our old british manuscript, be^ (...) Bishop by S. Clement in this
first age, Bea^^^ Ire^aeum Episcopum Beatus Clemens ordinauit, ^^^ueth, that
none but such Infidels or heretics as denied Christ to be the son of God, and
so not Irenaeus contra haees. lib. 4. cap. 34.
omnipotent, did or could deny this transubstantiation or change of bread and
wine into his body and blood by his powerful words in consecration: Quomodo
constabit eis, eum panem, in quo gratiae actae s^^t, Corpus esse Domini sui,
and calicem sanguinis eius: ^^ non ipsum fabricatoris mundi silium dic^nt, id
est verbum eius, per quod lignum fructificat, and defluunt ^^^tes and terra dat
primum quidem foenum, post deinde spi^am, deinde plenum triticum in spica.

I have cited S. Denis the Areopagite to this This holy faith ever in Britain.
purpose before. And showed also for Britayne that it had and used the Mass of
S. Mark as their old maniscript proves, where this doctrine and practice is
recorded. And S. Peter preaching here his Mass brought into these parts both
by his, and S. Paul's Disciples, as I have proved with this use and doctrine,
Britain could not be ignorant thereof. And I have cited even from Protestant
Antiquaries, that our first Christian Britans both worshipped, and prayed unto
Christ present in this most holy sacrament, when it was showed unto them or
they received it, at Mass. And our Protestants of England of chief note among
them with greatest applause and approbation do deduce this Catholic doctrine
and practice in the Church Protest. of Engl. apud Sutcliffe Subuers. page 32.
Pe^k^^s probl. p^g. 15^. 154.
of Christ from this first age, and in this manner: W^e read in Ignatius this
phrase offere and Sacrificium immolare, to offer and immolate Sacrifice, and
like phrases in Irenaeus Tertullian and Martialis, who mentions also Altares.
The auntients when they speak of the supper, have many forms of speech, which
she^ a conversion. Ambrose uses the name of conversion, ^^d the name of
mutation. Cyprian says it is changed (...) in shape but in nature, Origin
says, that bread is made the body by prayer. Gaudentius says, Christ's body
is made of bread, and his blood of wine. Eusebius Emissenus says, that the
Priest by secret power does change the visible creatures into the substance
of Christ's b^die, and blood, and that the bread does pass into the nature of
our Lords body. So they deduce it to lower times, wherein they all confess,
the doctrine of transubstantiation to have been generally taught and professed.

And with special warrant and allowance of King James as they themselves
testify, they publikly justify, that it was Religio Regis the Religion
Casanbon. respon. ad C^^dinal. peron. page 50. 51. D. Androwes Prot. Bish. of
Ely. Midleton Papiston. p. 106. Copell. def. of hooker page 276. Field. of the
Church page 150. Couell. def. page 87. Couell modest examinat. page 105.
of the King and Kingdom, that it is Christ's body, the same object and thing,
which the Roman Church believes, others with public allowance also write:
though bread^ by nature be but a profane and common element, yet by grace it
pleases the Lord to make it his body. The omnipotency of Christ makes it
his body. The primative Church thought the fructified and consecrated Elements
to be the body of Christ: To their persons (Priests, God imparted power over
his mystical (...) which is society of souls, and over that natural, wh^^^
is himself for the knitting of both in one, a work which antiquity does call
the making of Christ's body. The power of the ministry by blessing visible
Elements ^^ makes the invisible grace. It gives daily the holy gho^^. It
has to dispose of that flesh which was given for t^^ life of the world: and
that blood which was powered ^^ to redeem souls. In their most warranted
public communion book in the ministration of this sa^^^^ent after their
manner, they deliver Christ's institution thereof, in such significant manner of
transubstantiation, or change, that they must needs thereby grant, and
affirm it, or deny him to have spoken truly, but to have told an untruth, ^
thing most blasphemous, and impossible, thus they set it down as Catholics
do at Mass: Jesus Protest. commun: book Tit. communion.
Christ who in the night he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given
thanks he break it, and gave it to his disciples, saying, take, eat, this is
^y body which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me. Likewise after
supper he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them,
saying, drink ye all of this, this is my blood of the new testament, which
is shed for you, and for many, for remission of s^^s: do this as often as ye
shall drink it, in remembrance of me^. Here Christ omnipotent that cannot
speak any untruth, expressly testifies, it was bread and wine before, and
by his words, his body which was given, and blood shedd for us. Therefore such
transubstantiation and change as Catholics hold. And this these Protestans
confirm in their distribution of this Sacrament to communicants, assuring
every communicant as Catholic Priests do, and in the very same words, that it
i^ the body of Christ, which they give to them, and so of his blood, in
express terms, which should be most true, if they were true Priests, as the
others be.

And that no testimony might be wanting to this Catholic truth, by
Protestants allowance, they have both published and approved with great
Francisc. Staucar. in praefat* ad Pe^r. Gallatin.
warrant, the sentence and opinion of the old Rabbines before Christ of this
mystery, and thus confess of them: They are more plain and pregnant for Prot.
Bafilien. in editione eiusd. Thom. Marton appeal page 396. 395.
transubstantiation, then are the sayeings of the transubstantiators
themselves. They make so directly for transubstantiation, that the most Romish
Doctors for the space of all most a thousand years after Christ, did not in
so express terms publish this mystery to the world.

THE XXI. CHAPTER.
Tbe 29. Article, entitled: of the wicked, which do not eat the body, and
blood of Christ in the use of the Lords supper: examined, and condemned.
THEIR next 29. Article affirming that the wicked do not eat the body of
Christ in the use of the Lords supper, is confuted in the former,
transubstantiation and change of bread and wine into the body and blood of
Christ by his omnipotent power and words being therein inuincibly proved both
by his own divine testimony, and practice, in, and by his Apostles,
Apostolic men, of that Age, and the allowance of Protestants* the ancient
Rabbines and all withnesses both Catholics and Protestants, no thing else besid^
the outward forms and species of bread and wi^^ there remaining, it is
demonstrated, that whosoever, good or bad receaueth that Sacrament, m^^ needs
receive Christ's body there. And if S. Augustine here cited, held the contrary
against ^^ great divine and humane authority, he could ^^ be S. Augustine or
to be followed, but forsaken, ^^ any Article so grounded, be true, But to
redee^ S. Augustines honor I must leave the first age, and in this come to
him. This Article is entitled: Of the wicked which do not eat the body of
Christ in t^^ use of the Lords Supper. And thus follows.

The wicked and such as be void of all lively faith. allthough they do
carnally and visibly Press with their teeth (as Saint Augustine says, the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, yet in no wise are they partakers
of Christ, but rather to their condemnation, do eat and drink the sign or
Srcrament of so great a thing. This is wholly and unquestionably condemned
before* And if they cite S. Augustine, as though he meant the wicked are not
partakers of the grace of Christ in this Sacrament, that Catholics confess and
it proves no thing against them, and Protestants making the Eucharist but a
sign, and that to godly only and true believers with a lively faith as they
speak here can neither say that the wicked and unbelievers do eat or drink
the sign or Sacrament, seeing by them it is no such sign or Sacrament to such
people.

But if they contend from S. Augustine, that he means the wicked communicants
do not receive Christ's body: it is manifestly false and contrary to Saint
Augustines doctrine, in many places. For no man could be more unworthy and
wicked, then Judas, which betrayed Christ, yet he witnesses with the holy
scriptures, and Antiquity, that Indas really and truly received Christ's body
and blood, as the other Apostles did. Tolerat Augustine. ep. 162. epist. 163.
August. Tract. 6. in Euang. Ioh. in Psalm. ^0.
ipse Dominus Iudam diabolum, furem and venditorem suum: Sinit accipere inter
Innocents discipulos, quod fideles norunt pretium nostrum. So he speaks
further both of him, and all wicked communicants that they receive the same
body of Christ: communiter omnibus dedit. And he makes his opinion and faith
free from all such Protestant construction, saying plainly, that Christ gave
to this Disciples, Augustine. Sermon. ad Neophytos apud Paschas. apist. ad
Fradegrad. Iuo epist. 264. Augustine. in Psalm. 33. conc. ^.
that body, which hanged upon the Cross, and that blood, which issued out of
his side: Hoc accipite in pane, quod pependit in Cruce: Hoc accipite in Calice
quod manauit de latere Christi. And he says Christ carried himself and his
body in his own hands, when he gave it to this Apostles: Ferebatur Ghristus
in manibus suis, quando commendans ipsum corpus suum, ait, HOC EST CORPUS MEVM.
Ferebat enim illud in manibus suis. And so gave the same his body both to
Judas, whom he calls a devil, theife and traitor before, and the rest of
his holy Apostles. And so he expounds the place of S. August. tract. 6. in
Euang. Ioh. and tract. 16.
Paul, to the Corinthians of worthy and unworthy communicants, as the other
Fathers do, that both of them received one and the same holy consecrated
body. Et sancta possunt obesse: in bonis enim sancta ad salutem insunt, in
malis ad Iudicium, cert^ ^nim fratres nouimus quid accipiamus, and vtique
sanctum quod est accipimus, and nemo dicit non est sanctum. Et quid dicit
Apostolus? qui autem manducat and bibit 1. Cor. 11. 27.
indigne iudicium sibi manducat and bibit. Non ait quia illa res mala est: sed
quia ille malus male accipie^de, ad iudicium accipit, bonum quod accipit.

He assures us plainly, that communicants August. apud P^o^per. l. ^entent.
cit. Gratian. did. 2. de consecrat.
receive the body of Christ under the form of bread, and his blood under the
form of wine. Caro Christi est quam forma panis opertam in Sacramento
accipimus: and Sanguis cius, quem sub vini spe^^^ and sapore potamus. Nos in
specie panis and vini qu^^ videmus, carn^m, and sanguinem honoramus: (...)
militer comprehendimus has duas species, quemadmodum ante consecrationem
comprehendebamus, cum fideliter fateamur ante consecrationem panem esse, and
vinum, quod natura formauit: post consecrationem vero carnem Christi and
sanguinem, quod benedictio consecrauit. The bread ceased to be by consecration:
Augustine. l. 3. Trinitat. c. 10.
Panis in accipiendo Sacramento consumitur. He affirms it was so constantly
and commonly believed of all, that Christ was truly and really present under
the forms of bread and wine, that if they had not been otherwise instructed,
and never seen those but in the holy mysteries, they would have believed
Christ had not otherwise appeared in any other shape or form to the world. si
nunqua^ discant experimento, vel suo vel aliorum, and nunquam illam speciem
rerum, videant, nisi inter celebrationes Sacramentorum, cum offertur and datur,
dicaturque illis authoritate grauissima, cuius corpus and sanguis sit, nihil
aliud credent, nisi omnino in illa specie dominum oculis hominum mortalium and
de latere tali percusso, liquorem illum omnino fluxisse. He delivers, l. 3.
Trinitat. cap. 4.
that the omnipotency of God, is the means to cause this miraculous
transubstantiation: operante inuisibiliter spiritu Dei.

And again: Ante verha Christi, quod offertur panis dicitur: vbi Christi verba
deprompta fuerint, Aug. Ser. 5. in Appendic. Tom. 10.
iam non prius dicitur, sed Corpus appellatur. So soon as the Priest has
there pronounced the words of Christ it is called Christ's body. And he says
plainly, that both Christ^ Apostles at his last supper did receive Christ's
body and blood, and Christians, in all the world did receive Christ's body
into their mouths, Aug. ep. 118. ad Ianuar c. 6. l. 2. (...). c 20. (...).
these fasting, the Apostles not fasting. Liquido apparet, quando primum
acceperunt dis^ipuli Corpus and Sanguinem Domini, non eos accepisse ieiunos.
Nunquid tamen propterea calumniandum est vniuersae Ecclesi^, quod a Ieiunijs
semper accipitur? and hoc placuit spintui sancto, vt in honorem tanti
Sacramenti, in os Christiani prius dominicum corpus intraret, quam cae^^^ cibi.
Nam ideo per vniuersum orbem mos iste ser^^tur. And in an other place, that the
Christians receive Christ's body and his blood. De Agni i^maculati corpore
partim sumere, and in poculo sang^^nem. He says that all communicants receive
by l. 2. contra Aduers. Leg. and Prophetar. cap. 9.
their mouth, the flesh of Christ: Carnem suam ^^ sumamus. Christ gave in this
Sacrament, and communicants there receive that flesh of Christ, which he took
of the flesh of his mother, that where^^ In Psalm. 98.
he walked on earth, and no man cateth that flesh, ^^ he adoreth it before.
Christus de carne Mariae carn^^ accepit, and quia in ipsa carne hic ambulauit,
and ips^^ carnem nobis manducandam ad salutem dedit: (...) autem illam carnem
manducat, nisi prius adoraue^^* He says the bread is made Christ's body by
consecration: Noster panis and calix, non quilibet, s^^ l. 20. contra. faustum.
certa consecratione mysticus, fit nobis Corpus Chris^^ He relates, how his
Mother S. Monica desire^ to be remembered after her death at Mass, at t^^ l. 9.
confess. cap. 13.
holy Altar, from which that sacrifice is dispense^ which redeemed the world.
Memoriam sui ad al^^re fi^ri d^siderauit, vndesciret, dispensari victim^^ qua
de^^tum est chirographum, quod ^rat contrar^^ nobis. He says, it is Made the
body of Christ o^ l. 4. Trinita^. cap. 4.
high Priest. Corpus effectum S^cerdotis nostri. T^^ body of Christ does enter
into the mouths ^ Christians: Ex ore Christianorum, vbi Corpus (...)
ingreditur. And in this very ^lace objected, in ^^ Protestant Article.

S. Augustine says plainly, that both the good Aug. Tract. 26. and 67. in
Johan.
and wicked do receive Christ's body, and blood, in this Sacrament: Carnem
Christi and Sanguinem Christi non edamus tantum in Sacramento, quod and multi
mali: sed vsque ad spiritus participationem manducemus and bibamus, vt in
Domini Corpore tanquam membra maneamus. And again: de mensa Dominica sumitur,
quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium: And this which both the good and
wicked there receive, is the same body of Christ, norunt fideles Corpus
Christi: where he so expounds S. Paul as others do: quam multi de altari
accipiunt and moriuntur, and accipiendo moriuntur: vnde dicit Apostolus,
Iudicium sibi manducat and bibit. And this which brings this Judgment and
condemnation to them, is Christ's body which they unworthily receive, carnem
suam dat nobis Christus manducare: and distinguished a double receiving, the
one foris external, which the wicked do as the godly, the other intus
internal also giueing grace to the worthy receauers, which is not so with the
wicked, not participating grace but Judgment and damnation so dishonouring
Christ and his holy Institution. Yet all, both the l. Sentent. prosperi
Gratian. Did. 2. de consecrat.
good and bade receive the body of Christ under the form of bread, and his
blood under the form of wine. Caro eius est, quam forma panis opertam in
Sacramento accipimus. Et Sanguis eius quem sub vini specie and sapore potamus.

And in the same, place thus profanely cited by this Article, he solueth the
objections usually made against this holy Sacrament, first how Christ could
give us his flesh to eat: Quomodo potest hic carnem suam dare nobis ad
manducandum. That by Christ's asce^sion into heaven with his immortal Aug.
supr. tract. 26.
body, we should see it could not be consumed, though received in these
mysteries, non e^ modo quo putatis, erogat corpus suum. Certe vel tunc
intelligetis, quia gratia eius non consumitur morsibus. And that, caro non
prodest quicquam, flesh profits nothing, he answeareth it was only true in
such wicked sense as the profane capharnites conceived, as of dead pieces of
flesh, and not of the flesh of Christ as he gave it, gyuing life. O Domine
Magister bone, quomodo caro non prodest quicquam cum tu dixeris, nisi quis
manducauerit carnem meam, and biberit sanguinem meum non habebit in se vitam?
an vita non prodest quicquam? quid est ergo, non prodest quicquam, sed quomodo
illi intellexerunt: carnem quippe sic intellexerunt, quomodo in cadauere
dilaniatur, aut in macello venditur, non quomodo spiritu vegetatur. Spiritus
ergo est qui viuificat, caro non prodest quicquam. Sicut illi intellexerunt
carnem, non sic ego do ad manducandum carnem meam.

And concerning their cavil that one body (naturally they should say) cannot
be at one time in diverse places, he proves directly against Jews and others,
that this one body of Christ is that sacrifice spoken of by the Prophet
Malachie to be offered in all places, in all the world. Ipse de corpore Aug. in
Psalm. 33. l. 1. cont. aduers. legis and Prophetar. c. 20. l. 16. de ciu^tat.
Dei c. 22. l. 18. ciuit. cap. 35. orat. contra Iu^^os c. 9.
and sanguine suo instituit sacrificium secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Vident
tale sacrificium nunc offerri toto orb terrarum. Sacrifi^ium quod non a
Christianis offertur toto orbeterrarum. Hoc sacrificium per Sacerdotium Christi
secundum ordinem Melchsedech in omni loco a solis ortu vsque ad occasum (...)
videamus offerri. Quid ad haec respondet is? aper^^ oculos tand^m aliquando and
videte, ab orient (...) vsque ad occidentem, non in vno, sed in omm loco
sacrificium Christianorum offerri, ei, qui ista praedixit Deo Israel.

No man can better witness, what was S. Augustines doctrine, or interpret him
in this question, then Primasius Bishop of vtica his renowned and learned
scholar, which sets down this question, and the present Catholic Religion
therein, as plainly as any present Catholic writer does. Istud Sacrificium
nostrum cum causa infirmitatis Primasius Episc. vticen: in Africa discipulus S.
Augustini in cap. 10. ad Hebr.
suae repetitur, quod nonpossit perfectam salutem confer: sed in
commemorationem Passionis Christi, sicut ipse dixit, hoc facite, inquiens, in
meam commemorationem, and vna est haec hostia, non multae, cum a multis,
diuersiis in locis, diuersisque temporibus offeratur? Aptissime ergo
aduertendum est, quia diuinitas verbi Dei quae est vna, and omnia replet, and
tota vbique est, ipsa facit vt non sint plura sacrificia, sed vnum, licet a
multis offeratur: and sit vnum Corpus Christi cum illo quod suscepit in vtero
virginali, non multa corpora: nec nunc quidem est aliud magnum, aliud minus,
aliud hodie, aliud eras offerimus, sed semper idipsum aequam magnitudinem
habens: proinde vnum est hoc sacrificium Christi, non diuersa. Nam si aliter
esset, quoniam multis in locis offertur, multi essent Christi, quod obsit. Vnus
ergo vbique est, and hic plenus existens, and illic: Plenum vnum corpus vbique
habens. Et sicut qui vbique offertur vnum corpus est, non multa corpora, it a
etiam and vnum sacrificium. I have been enforced by this Article forging S.
Augustines authority for the ground thereof, to descend thus ^owe, to defend
him, and show the feeble and false foundation of our Protestants in this point.

THE XXII. CHAPTER.
The 30. Article, entitled, of both kinds: examined and where it is contrary
to the Roman Church condemned.
THE 30. and next Article being entitled: of both Kinds: consists of these
words. The cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the lay people. For both
the parts of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's ordinance and commandment,
ought to be ministered to all Christian men alike. This is all this Article, and
it is confuted before, where I have proved, that both in, and immediately after
the Apostles time, and by their order and direction, this blessed Sacrament was
both honorably preserved only under the form of bread, and so often ministered
unto the primative Christians, which in no case, or respect might be done, if
Christ had ordained, and commanded otherwise, and the contrary as this
Protestant Article pretends. And so the Apostles themselves, and the
Apostolic Church then, the true Church of Christ without all question, both by
Catholics and Protestants, had erred in a thing of necessity requisite
according to Christ's ordinance, in so great a Sacrament, and so by these men
and their divinity in this Article, the true Church of Christ was not the true
Church, and he never had a true Church: for in their Article of the Church
before they define it to be, a congregation of faithful men, in which the
Prot. Arti^l. 19 sup. of (...) o^ the Church
pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be du^ly ministered in all
th^se things that of necessity are requisite to the same: Therefore this
Protestant Article assirming that both the parts of the Lords Sacrament by
Christ's ordinance and commandment, ought to be ministered to all Christian
men alike, is false in itself and contradictorie to their own most allowed
proceedings: for not only diverse of their private writers, but the parliament
law of all our Protestant Princes King Edward 6. Queen Elizabeth, Statute of
King Edw. 6. Titul. Sacram. in both Kinds. Stat. in parliam. 1. Elizabeth
James 1. Charles 1.
King James and King Charles their Rule and warrant for this Article, does
confess enact and decree, that in the true primative Church this Sacrament was
not always ministered in both Kinds, but some times in both, some times in
one only. Therefore by these men the true primative Church never did nor could
adiudge or hold that the ministration of this Sacrament allwaies in both Kinds
was Christ's Ordinance, and commandment, otherwise by ministering it often in
one only Kind, as this che^fe Protestant parliament, and their religion
therein, confess it had acknowledged itself to have erred from Christ's
ordinance, and commandment in a Sacrament and necessity requisite, and so by
these Articles not to have been Christ's true Church, and he had by these men
no true Church at all.

Again These Protestants standing in this Article upon the Ordinance and
commandment of Christ, confess that he instituted and ordained this
Sacrament at his last supper, and what he commanded concerning it, he then
commanded it, and they also confess the three Evangelists S. Matthew, S.
Mark and S. Luke to be the Evangelical Registers of that his holy
ordination, But all thus do plainly testify, that none but his twelve
Apostles were then present. Discumbebat Matthew. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22.
cum duodecim discipulis eius. Venit cum duodecim. Vnus ex duodecim discubuit,
and duodecim Apostoli cum eo. Et ait illis, desiderio desideraui hoc Pascha
manducare vobiscum. And our Protestants before in their most allowed public
communion book, have so delivered, saying of the Sacrament under the form of
bread, Jesus gave it to his Disciples, saying take eat, this is my body,
which is given for you. And of the other part, he gave it to them saying
drink you all of this, for this is my blood of the new testament, which is
shedd for you.

And all these witnesses the Evangelists, S. Paul, 1. Corinthians. 11.
Catholics, and Protestants do freely acknowledge, that Christ then pronounced,
and spoke these words, hoc facite in meam commemorationem, do this in
commemoration of me, unto them all. Giving them thereby power and command, to
do, what he had done in that mystery, which was, as is proved before, to
transubstantiate and change bread, and wine, into the blessed body, and
blood, given and shedd for the sins of the world, and this even our
Protestants have before acknowledged, confessing that supernatural power to
have been in Christ's Apostles then present, and Priests after them, for there
is no other place in scripture, the Rule of these men, wherein such power was
communicated unto them, or Christ a Priest after the Order of Melchisedech
exercised the office or Act of that preishood. So that none but they which were
then consecrated Priests, which ever offer this Sacrifice in both Kinds, were
present to receive this charge of them both.

And this is directly told us, not only by all Catholic writers, but
Protestants with the greatest allowance their Religion can give, the authority
of the supreme of their Church, by the greatest champion external which ever
it had, the Archbishop of Spalato which with King James Marc. Anton. l. 2. de
repub. Christian* c. 2. page 167.
and his chiefest Protestants warrant thus writes: Ad hoc Sacerdotium promoti
sunt Apostoli a Christo Domino in vltima caena, quando eis dixit: hoc facite in
meam commemorationem.

The Apostles were promoted to preisthood by Christ our Lord in his last
supper, when, he said to them: do this in my commemoration. And again: Quod
consecrantes panem, orationes fundamus, c. 4. p. 219.
eoque fideles pascamus, Christi Iussum facimus, qui id iniunxit, dicens hoc
facite in meam commemorationem, hoc ipsum quod me nunc vidistis facere and vos
facite, circa panis and vini benedictionem. Where the Apostles and Priests
received and receive power and command to consecrate bread and wine into the
body and blood of Christ, as he then did. And we must needs so say, otherwise
we have no warrant in scripture, to which only Protestants appeal in such
matters as Sacraments be, either to prove that Priests have any power at all to
consecrate, or minister this Sacrament, or that it is a Sacrament, for besides
S. Paul to the Corinthians, and in the 6. Chapter of S. John's Gospel, there
is no place in the new testament that is by any interpreted to speak of the
communion under both kinds. S. Paul plainly refers himself to Christ's
Institution set down in the Evangelists cited.

And for S. John our Protestants deny, that he speaks of the Sacramental and
actual receiving of this mystery. And yet he only has words Io: 6.
that have likelynesse of precept to communicate in both Kinds: Nisi
manducaueritis carnem filij hominis and biberitis eius sanguinem non habebitis
vitam in vobis. Except you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood you shall not have life in you. And yet this is not so of Sacramental
eating and drinking the body and blood of Christ, for the holy scriprures and
all expositours of them, Catholics and Protestants agree, that new baptized
infants, and others, martyrs all holy, and just men shall have, and have life
in them, though they never actually and Sacramentally receive Christ's flesh,
and blood, and neither Catholics nor Protestants do communicate young people,
though in danger of death, or dying. S. Paul has no semblance of a
commandment or necessity of both Kinds, to be received by all. Therefore
the precept, command and necessity only concerning Priests, at holy Mass,
then and there to consecrate and offer as Christ did, and commanded in both
Kinds, hoc facite, Catholic Priests at their sacrifice in all places most
dutifully perform it; at other times, as sickness, they communicate only in
one Kind as the lay people do.

All that is to be found in scripture of both Kinds, to be received or have
been received of all, is in S. Paul to the Christians of Corinthe, arguing
that in that Church, and likely some others, both forms were received af all:
Quicunque manduca^^rit 1 Chorinth. 11.
pan^m hunc, and biberit calicem Domini indign^, ^^us erit Corporis and
Sanguinis Domini, probet autem s^^^sum homo and sic de pane illo edat, and de
calue bibat. Qui enim manducat and bibit indigne iudicium sibi manducat and
bibit, non dijudicans corpus Domini. Yet here is no praecept. And his words,
non dijudicans corpus Domini, only speaking against the abuse toward the
body of Christ, not mentioning his blood which to dishonor was as great a
sin, may make questionable, whether he there speaks of the Sacramental
receiving of both by all persons or no. But if he so did, we find in diverse
other places of scripture, as they be expounded to us, by the holy Fathers,
that communion was then used, diverse times and in diverse places in one Kind
only.

S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine Isychius S. Bid Chris. homil. 16. oper.
imperfecti in Mat. August. l. 3. de consensu Euang. c. 25. Isych. Hierosol. l.
2. in leuit. c. 9. Bed ad c. 24. Luc. Theoph^lact. ibid. Luc. 24. Chris. homil.
17. oper imp. in Mat. Bed. ad c. 20. Act. Apost. Jonas Aurelian. lib. 3. de
Imag. Act. 2. Act. 20. Text. Syriac. Act. 2.
Theophilact and others so expound that act of Christ taking bread, blessing,
breaking and giving it to his two disciples, at Emaus, registered by S. Luke.
Accepit panem and benedixit ac fregit and porrigebat illis.

And the scripture, our Protestants Rule, mentions not the other Kind at
all. So do the same S. Chrysostom S. Bid, Jonas Aureliensis with others
expound that in the 2. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, erant autem
perseuerantes in doctrina Apostolorum, and communicatione fractionis panis and
orationibus. Where no memory is of the other Kind. So likewise that in the
20. Chapter of the Acts: cum conuenissemus ad frangendum panem: and whereas in
the 2. Chapter of the Acts the Latin translation reads, in communione and
fractione panis, the Syriak text is, infractione Eucbaristiae, in breakeing the
Eacharist.

And this was used both by the Apostles, and Apostolic Priests in this first
age to minister this blessed Sacrament to the Christians only under the form
of bread. So S. Clement writes of S. Clem. epist. de reb. gest. B. Petri.
Peter, he himself being one among many others which so communicated from S.
Peter's hands: Petrus panem acceptum actis gratijs consccrauit, fregit primoque
matri porrexit deinde nobis filijs. The approved Apostolic Relation of S.
Andrew his Presbyteri and Diac. Achaiae in vit. S. And^eae Breuiar. Romans die
30. Nouemb. Breuiar. Surisbur. and al. eodem die Metaphrast. in S. Andr.
Anonym. Antiq. in eius vita Cipr. l. de 2. Martyr. Lippom. to 1. Sur. Tom. 6.
S. Bernard Ser. de S. Andrea Ro^ig. Antisiod. in Psalm. 21. and 4. ^aufr. cont.
Bereng. Iuo Sebast. Munster Cosmogr. l. 6. c. 57. Ignat. epist. ad Ephesians.
martyrdom, written by present witnesses in this age, does witness, that
the Christians under him received the body of Christ under the form of bread,
making no mention of the other Kind. Cuius agni immaculati, carnem posteaque
omnis populus credentium manducauerit, agnus qui sacrificatus est integer
perseuerat and vnius. Here all, omnis populus, so communicated. It was thus
preached, and practiced by the Apostle or Apostles which preached to the
Abissines, as both they, and others both Catholics, and Protestants are
witnesses, and they keep this custom still from the Apostles upon the feast
of the Epiphanie. Accipiunt Corpus Domini sub exigui specie panis.

S. Ignatius in this age is a sufficient witness, in diverse places, that it
was so used in his time. Nemo erret, nisi quis intra altaris septa sit,
priuatur pane Dei. And exorteth often so to communicate. Date operam vt
crebrius congregemini ad Eucharistiam. And tells us such communion brings
immortality, is a preservative against death, gives life and expels all
evils. Frangentes panem, quod pharmacum immortalitatis est, mortis Antidotum,
vitamque in Deo concilians per Iesum Christum, and medi^amentum omnia expellens
mala.

And allthough in his epistle to the Philadelphians Ignat. epist. ad Philadelph.
he speaks, as if this bread and cup were given and distributed to all.
Vnus panis omnibus confractus, and vnus calix qui omnibus distributus est, he
speaks of the giving and distributing of them by Christ to his Apostles,
vseing the tense and time past, as in Greek is plain (...), and when he there
speaks of the present use and time, he says, there is one Eucharist, (...),
yet entreating Ignat. epist. ad Symrnen. apud Theodoreth. Dialog. 3. and alios.
of the Institution and as it is offered by Priests at Mass, he uses the
plarall number Eucharists and oblations, Eucharistias and oblationes non
admittunt, and there names the Eucharist received by all the flesh of our
Savior Jesus Christ, not speaking of the other Kind. Non confiteantur
Eucharistiam esse carnem Saluatoris nostri Jesus Christi, quae pro peccatis
nostris passa est. Calling them Heretics which denied that Eucharist which was
usually then received in the Church in his time, to be the flesh of our Savior
Jesus Christ, that flesh of his that suffered for our sins.

S. Clement, besides that he has testified before, of reserving and receiving
this blessed Sacrament only in one Kind, under the form of bread, he further
wittnesseth, and prescribes by and from the warrant of S. Peter, and gives
order that if any Priest should negligently minister and give the body of
Christ, speaking nothing of the other Clem. Romans epist. 1.
Kind, that he was grievously to be punished. Communio Corporis Domini nostri
Jesus Christi si negligenter erogetur, and presbyter minora non curet admonere
officia, graui anathemate, and digna humiliationis plaga feriatur. And in these
words immediately, that so many hosts should be prepared, as shall serve the
communicants (not speaking of the other Kind) and if any be left, they shall be
reverently received by some of the clergy. And they which receive the remnants
of the body of our Lord, which was left in the Sacrary, shall fast from eating
any thing after a good while, tanta in altaria holocausta offerantur, quanta
populo sufficere debeant. Quod si remanserint cum timore and tremore ^l^ricorum
diligentia consumantur. Qui residua corporis Domini, quae in sacrario relicta
sunt, consumunt, non statim ad communes accipiendos cibos conueniant, ne putent
sanctae portioni commiscere cibum. And he gives most strict charge, for the
reverent keeping of that Kind alone of this most blessed Sacrament, that is
left and to be reserved. Iterum Irenaeus epist. ad victor. Origin. hom. 13. in
Exodus Dionys. Alex. ep. ad Fatium Anthiochen. Basil. epist. ad Caesar. Patric.
Amphil. in vit. S. Basilij conc. Nicaen. 1. can. 63. Arabic. Terrullian. l. 2.
ad vxor. c. 5. Ciprian. l. de Iapsis. Ambros. orat. f^neo. de excess. fratris
Satyri. Hier. Apol. ad Pammach. cap. 6. Aug. homil. 26. quinquag. hom Ser. 252.
de temp. council. Carthag. 4. c. 38 Paulin. in vit. S. Ambrosij prosper Aquitan.
l. 4. c. 6. de promiss. vt praedict. council. Turonen. 2. c. 3. council.
matiscon. 2. c. 6. Basil. supr. Ioh. Maschus in prat. spirit. c. 79. Metaphr.
in martyr. SS. Indae and Domnae tem. Dioclesiani. Euagrius lib. 4. hist. Eccl.
cap. 35.
atque Iterum de fragmentis Dominici Corporis demandamus. And they which be the
most ancient writers after this age, as Irenaeus, Origin, Dionysius
Alexandrinus, S. Basile, Amphilochius among the greeks, and the first general
council of Nice. Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine,
Paulinus prosper, the 4. council of Carthage, the second of Towers and others
both councels and learned Fathers do not only testify, this custom to have
ever been continued in the Church reverently to reserve this most honorable
Sacrament, in the form of bread, and so only to communicate the lay
Christians especially pylgryms, strangers, trauailers, persecuted and livers
in deserts, but justify, allow and honor such practice and custom for holy
and religious. And assure us, as namely Tertullian, S. Ciprian and S. Basile
with others, that this reservation and communion was not only in Churches, but
in private howses, where Priests could not be had. Illud in persecutionis
temporibus necessitate cogi quempiam, non praesente Sacerdote aut Ministro,
communionem propria manu sumere, nequaquam esse grave, superuacaneum est
demonstrare, propterea quod longa consuetudine hoc ipso rerum vsu confirmatum
est: omnes enim in eremo solitariam vitam agentes, vbi non est Sacerdos,
communione domi servants a seipso communicant: in Alexandria vero and Aegypto
vnusquisque eorum qui sunt de populo, vt plurimum habet communionem in domo
sua. Semel enim Sacerdote sacrificium consecrante, and distribuente, merito
participare and suscipere credere oportet. Etenim and in Ecclesia Sacerdos dat
partem, and accipit eam, qui suscipit, cum omni liberate, and ipsam admouet
ori propria manu. Idem igitur est virtute sieve vnam partem accipiet quisquam a
Sacerdote, sieve plures parts simul.

Euagrius relates it an hold custom in his time, vetusfuit consuetudo
Constantinopoli, in the Church of Constantinople to make this reservation, and
communion in one Kind. And in all the greek Church at this day the sick do
communicate only in one Kind, as in the Latin Church. Ad aegrotos Gilbert.
Genebr. l. de g^aecor. ritibus. Ioh. Scraminius in Elucidar. erritus ru^henici
cap. 18. Hypothius Legate. Ruthenor. in fidei profess. an. 1595. Ioh. Latisciu^
ad c. 11. Theol. Mos^oiticae fol. ^15. Communion in one Kind in Britayne.
panis dumtaxat species defertur.

And the Russians when they go to war carry with them this holy Sacrament in
one only Kind, and so receive it. Consecrant pro bellantibus panem in Corpus
Christi, and laicis and bella praecedentibus tradunt in manus, qui cum sunt cum
host conflicturi, illic pane illo posito seipsos ordine communicant. And yet
they profess even in the public profession of their faith by their
Ambassadors that Christ's all and whole and the true Sacrament is, received in
one Kind. Fat^or sub altera tantu^m specie totum atque integrum Christum,
verumque Sacramentum suum. And so they reserve it consecrated both for
trauailers, and those that die. Quae super sunt consecrata, ea in vsum and
peregre euntium and morientium seruantur. No man can now question but this
Catholic doctrine and custom, so Apostolical so Universal was also
received, and used in Britayne, always joining with the Catholic Church. And
our most ancient british Authors allowed Sermo antiq. legisolit. in Eccl.
Brit. fox Act. and mon. page 1142.
by our Protestants does wittnes, that before the Christians then received,
they prayed thus to Christ in the form of bread, which they were to receive.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccaca mundi miserere nobis. O lamb of God that take
away the syns of the world have mercy upon us. And to cite it further as
Peotestants translate it. The housell is dealed into sundry parts, chewed
between teeth: how be it nevertheless after ghostly might, it is all in every
part. Many receive that holy body, and yet notwithstanding, it is so all in
every part, after ghostly mystery.

S. Gildas calling the holy Altar, where mass Gildas l. de excid. and
conquest. Brit.
was said the Seat of the heavenly sacrifice, seeds caelestis sacrificij,
sufficiently argues this part of the sacrifice was not only offered, but upon
occasion kept and reserved there, for that is properly seeds a seat, on which
a thing is seated and sometime permanent, longer then the short space between
consecration and communion at Mass. We find in the second council of Tours
where were our Bishops of little Britayne, receiving both norme and Christian
Religion, from hence, that Order was therein taken, for the reverent keeping
Council. Turouen. 2. c. 3.
this blessed Sacrament in one Kind, and so to be ministered. Vt Corpus Christi
non in armario, sed sub Crucis titulo componatur. Gregorius Turonensis
confirms, Gregor. Turon. l. de vit. patrum. cap. 3. l. 1. de glor. patr. cap.
86.
that custom with that people, and exemplifieth how the holy, Bishop S.
Gallus, three days before his death did communicate all the people in this one
Kind. Sciens S. Gallus, reuelante Domino, sepost triduum migraturum, conuocat
populum, and omnibus confracto pane communionem sancta ac pia voluntate
largitur. The like he has in other places. We read this use and custom in the
life, and in the time of S. Patrik, and among others that so communicated one
named Echen, and a King did so receive. Accepto Corpore Christi migrauit ad
Dominum.

Never any order of Religion in the Church of Christ especially in this
western part of the world was more renowned then our old british, I rish and
Scottish monks not only among the Brittons, Saxons, in Ireland Scotland,
Norway Island, but in France, Germany and Italy itself, and none more
Religious toward this Sacrament then they, yet by their Rule and vow they
were forbidden to drink wine, as we find exemplified by approved Antiquaries
in one of their chiefest monasteries, that of Lindisfarne the Nurse of so many
Saints, where King and Saint Ceolnuph entering into Religion about the year
733. license was given to that Monastery to drink wine or ale, they never
drunk any before, none but milk or water. Hoc Rege iam monacho facto
efficiente data est Lindisfarnensis Roger. Houeden. Annal. part priore. Mat.
Westminster. An. 733 continuator Bed. l. 1. cap. 9.
Ecclesiae monachis licentia bibendi vinum vel ceruisiam: antea enim non nisi
lac velaquam bibere solebant, secundum antiquam traditionem Sancti Aidani primi
eiusdem Ecclesiae Antistitis, and monachorum, qui cum illo de Scotia venerunt.
These holy men could never drink the cup of Caluyns and our parlaments
Protestants communion but being made Priests and at Mass transubstantiating
wine into Christ's blood, to receive this at that time was never denied unto
them. And this custom of communicating only in one Kind among our primative
Christian Britans, Scots and Irish, was so far from being an offense, and
against Christ's ordinance, that as their ancient learned british Bishop
testifies it was miraculously approved by him. For a Church of S. Michael the
Archangel in an Island there was every day in the hollownes of a stone near the
Church so much wine miraculously provided, as would serve all the Priests at
Mass that celebrated there. Yet no provision for any communicants spoken of.
In australi Momonia, Girald. Cambr. Topographiae Hibech c. 9.
circa parts Corcagiae, est Insulaquaedam, Ecclesiam continens Sancti
Michaelis antiquae nimis and authe^ticae religionis. vbi lapis quidamest extra
ostium Ecclesiae a dexteris, in cuius superiori partis concauitate, quotidie
mane permerita Sanctorum illius loci, tantum vini reperitur, quantum ad
missarum solemnia, iuxta numerum Sacerdotum, qui ibi eodem die, celebraturi
fuerint, conuenienter sufficere possit.

The reason of this is not only delivered by Rabbi C^hanna ad cap. 49 genes.
Catholic Christians, but the Rabbines before Christ also taught, that whole
Christ, body and blood is in either form, and so wholly received in one only
Kind, as in both. In Sacrisicio quod fiet expane, non obstante quod album sit
velut lac, conuertetur substantia in substantiam corporis Messiae; eritque in
ipso sacrificio substantia sanguinis Messiae. Erunt item in sacrificio vini
sanguis and caro Messiae, and eadem erunt in pane, quoniam Corpus Messiae non
potest diuidi: idque ratio postulat. Nam, si earo and sanguis diuisa essent.
Distinguerentur ab inuicem. Corpus ^^^em Messia non potest diuidi, sicut
scriptum est Exodi 12. Et substantiam non confringetis in eo. Praeterea caro
sine sanguine, and e conuerso, sunt res mortuae. Corpus vero Messiae post
resurrectionem quia glorificatu^ erit semper viuet.

THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
The 31. Article, being, entitled, of the one oblation of Christ finished upon
the cross, thus examined and condemned.
THE next their 31. article, being entitled of the one oblation of Christ
finished upon the cross: is this. The offering of Christ once made, is the
perfect redemption propitiation and satisfaction for all the sins of the
whole world, both original and actual, and there is noe other satisfaction
for sin, but that alone. Wherefore the sacrifices of Masses, in the which it
was commonly said that the priests did offer Christ for the quick and the the
dead, to have remission of pain, or guilt, were blasphemous fables and
dangerous deceites. Hitherto this Protestant article.

The first part being taken in that sense the words do give, making Christ's
oblation of himself upon the Cross the perfect redemption, propitiation, and
satisfaction for all the sins of the world, original, and actual, does
euacuate and take away the necessity of any Christian act internal, or
external, faith, hope, charity, repentance, Sacraments, and whatsoever
confessed by all to be necessary to salvation, Protest. artic supr. artic. 9
art. 11. 16* 2^ 27.
even by these men themselves before in diverse articles, as that of original
sin that of faith, that of good works, those of sin after baptism, of
Sacraments in general, of Baptism, of the Lords Supper, and others. And it
blasphemously contendeth, that all Infidels, Turks, Tartars, Jews, Pagans and
whatsoever misbeleeuers, and notorious sinners shall be saved by this means,
and have as true and certain Title to Salvation, as the most Catholic holy
and religious Christians have, for all sins of the world original and
actual being thus, as this article says, perfectly redeemed, propitiated and
satisfied for, no sin of heresy, Infidelity, or any wickedness is excluded,
but has thereby, as the words of this article be, perfect redemption,
propitiation and satisfaction, and consequently eternal salvation, neither
shall the devils themselves, by this article be damned but saved also, for
their sins which they have committed, and all they shall or can committ, are
comprehended within this general protestant circle and compass of all the
sins of the whole world, both original and actual. All laws, orders,
decrees, rules, government, and principality are needless, all are sure to be
saved without them, and the most wicked wretch as secure as the holiest Saint
that ever was, there is noe damnation, there is noe hell at all.

This doctrine puts down that beastely saying of Epicurus, to take all
pleasure in this life, because he thought there was none after death, for this
does Breed all wantonness, and yet promises everlasting pleasures in the
world to come. Therefore although we most freely do, and are so bound to
believe, and profess, that the passion and merits of Christ are of infinite
cure, validity, worth, and value in themselves, able to have been a perfect
redemption propitiation and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole
world, and more then ever were shall or can be committed if Christ had so
ordained, and sinners so applied them by such holy Instruments, and means, as
Sacraments and others, as he provided and Instituted, and they which are and
shall be saved, have and will use and apply to that end, and purpose, the
means yet to those that do not receive and practice, neither Christ's oblation
upon the Cross nor any thing he did or suffered can be a perfect redemption,
propitiation or satisfaction for all or any sin.

And among these necessary Instruments, means and applications of Christ's
redemption, propitiation and Satisfaction for sinners, the holy sacrifice of
Mass is one, and most excellent, eminent, and honorable, wherein the truly
and duly consecrated Priests of Christ's Church by virtue and power given them
in their consecration, do offer Christ for the quick and the dead to have
remission of pain or guilt, which this article blasphemously faith, were
blasphemous fables, and dangerous deceites.

And first our Protestants themselves even King James the head and chief
interpretour of their Religion and congregation whilst he lived, with his
approved protestante writers, Bishops, Doctors, and others publicly
privileged, and warranted, by chief authority in their proceedings, thus
confess for truth this article to be heretical. Neither is Casanbon. resp. ad
Card. Per. p. 51. 52. etc.
the King ignorant, nor denies that the Fathers of the the primative Church
did acknowledge one Sacrifice, in the Christian Religion that succeeded in the
place of the Sacrifices of Moses law. Middlet. Papistm. page 92 113. 49. 137
138. 47. 45.


The sacrifice of the Altar and unbloody sacrifice were used in the primative
Church, and the ancient Fathers called the sacrifice of the body and blood of
Christ, a sacrifice. The primative Church did offer sacrifice at the altar for
the dead, sacrifice for the dead was atradition of the Apostles, and the
ancient Fathers. Aerius Field. l. 3. page c. 29. p. 138. Couel. exam. page 114.
condemned the custom of the Church, in naming the dead at the altar and
offerring, the sacrifice of Eucharist for them: and for this his rache and
inconsiderate boldness, and presumption in condemning the universal Church of
Christ, he was justly condemned.

Here we see by our Protestants themselves, that upon a second and better
consideration they grant from our first founders in Christ, that the
Catholic doctrine and custom so basely censured in this their Article is
Orthodoxall, the Religion and tradition of the Apostles, Judgment and practice
of the universal Church of Christ, and that which this their article
concludes, was justly condemned for heresy. Therefore I may be more breife in
alleging the Apostolic writers to such propose.

Saint Paul witnesses that every high priest or Hebr. c. 8. Cap 5.
priest is ordained to offer Sacrifice to God for the people, omnis Pontifox ad
offerenduni munera, and hostias constituitur. Omnis namque Pontifex ex
hominibus assumptus, pro hominibus constituitur in ijs quae sunt ad Deum, vt
offerat dona and sacrificia pro peccatis. He also with other Scriptures says
both that Christ was a Priest after this Order of Preisthood, and Priests of
this Order should be for ever Hebr. 7. Ps. 109.
in the law of the Gospel. Tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem
Melchisedech, necessarium fuit secundum ordinem Melchisedech alium surgere
Sacerdotem. Translato Sacerdotio, necesse est, vt and legis translatio fiat
sempiternum habet Sacerdotium. But it is also evident, both by Scripture and
all Apostolic writers, that neither Christ, nor any Christian Priest of that
Order offered any other sacrifice, having resemblance to the Sacrifice of
Melchisedech in bread and wine, then when Christ at his last supper offered,
and gave his blessed body and blood under those forms, and gave then power
and command to his Apostles and other Priests to do the same, as I have
abundantly proved by the Fathers of this age, and our Protestants have so
confessed before.

It was also so certain among the old Hebrews before Christ, that Christ the
Messiah should be such a Priest, and offer such a sacrifice and his Priests
after him, and all sacrifices in the law should then cease and give place unto
it, That Theodor. Bibliandor de SS. Trinit. lib. 2. page 89. vit. l. de test.
Miss. Petr. Gallat. l. de arcan. fid. ca. Franciscus Stancar: and Prot. Rasil.
in pref. ad Petr. Gallat. de Arcan. Mort. Supr. and alij.
Protestants themselves thus confess it. Erat apud Veteres Hebraeos dogma
receptissimum, in aduentu Messiaebenedicti cessatura esse omnia legalia
sacrificia tantumque celebrandum sacrificium Thoda, and illud peragendum pane
and vino, sicut Melchizedech Rex Salem and Sacerdos Dei altissimi temporibus
Abrahami panem and vinum protulit. And the old Rabbines of the Jews before
Christ, even as they are commended unto us both by Catholic and Protestant
Antiquaries, do most plainly deliver unto us the same Catholic truth and as
has been before confessed by these Protestants, that in this holy sacrifice
offered for sins, bread and wine are miraculously changed into the body and
blood of the Messiah.

Rabbi Samuel says upon the oblation of Melchisedech Rabbi Samuel in Bereschit
Rabba ad cap. 14. Genes.
that he sacrificed, and taught that Sacrifice: Actus Sacerdotij tradidit: erat
ipse Sacrificans panem and vinum Deo sancto benedicto. So have Rabbi Moses
Hadarsan, and Rabbi Enachinam. Melchisedech proferens panem and vinum, ostendit
quod docuit eum Sacerdotij actum, quier at panem and vinum sacrificare. Et hoc
est quod habetur in Psalmis: Iurauit Dominus and non paenitebit eum; tu es
Sacerdos in aeternum secundrm ordinem Melchisedech. And Rabbi Phinees says
most evidently, that in the time of Messiah all other Sacrifices should cease,
and the Messiah being a Priest after the Order of Melchisedech should except
this alone, and this only should be used in this Religion. Tempore Messiae
omnia sacrisicia cessabunt, sed sacrificium panis and vini non cessauit sicut
dictum est Genesis 14. and Melchisedech Rex Salem protulit panem and vinum:
Melchisedech enim Rex Messiah excipiet a cessatione Sacrificiorum panis and
vini, sicut dicitur psalmo. Tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem
Melchisedech. And they as manifestly testify, that this ever continuing
Sacrifice under the forms of bread and wine should be the body and blood of
the Messiah, offered by the Priests of his law. Panis quem dat omnibus, ipse
Rabbi Moses Hadarsan com. ps. 39.
est caro eius, and dum gustatur panis conuertitur in carnem, and erit hoc
mirabile magnum.

An other says: sacrificium quod fiet ax vino solum Rabbi Cahana ad ca. 49.
Genesis
transmutabitur in substantiam sanguinis Messiae, sed etiam conuertetur in
substantiam corporis eius, in sacrificio quod fiet ex pane, non obstante quod
album sit velut lae, conuertetur substantia in substantiam corporis Messiae:
erit que in ipso sacrificio substantia sanguinis. Ernnt item in sacrificio vini
sanguis and caro Messiae, Rabbi Barac. in Ecclesiast. Rabb. Iud. ad c 28. number.
Rabbi Sim. Bor. Joan. l. Revel. Secret.
and eadem crunt in pane. Rabbi Judas says: transmutabitur ex substantia
panis, cum sacrificabitur, in substantiam corporis Messae, qui discendit de
coelis: and idem ipse erit sactificium. An other writes: Messiah erit placenta
frumenti in terra. And Rabbi Solomon witnesses that generally the Rabbinesse,
magistri nostri exposuerunt, did so expound these words in the 72. psalm.
Erit placenta frumenti interra, in vertice montium.

And that this miraculous change in this sacrifice should be made by the power
of the sacrificing Priest words by Gods extraordinary assistance. Tunc Deus
misericordia implebitur, and virtute ingenti sanctorum verborum, quae ab ore
Sacerdotium manabunt, illud Sacrificium, quod in vnoquoque altari celebrabitur,
in corpus Messiae conuertetur. And accordingly they deliver how unspotted the
lives of our Priests should be, which thus offer Christ's body, and blood in
sacrifice. Qualis debeat esse Sacerdotis Rabbi Nehumias epist. arcanor.
vita, hoc sacrificium pertractantis, Dominus ipse insinuat, cum de nostri
temporis sacrificio, and consecrantis qualitate, ita leuit. 21. capite inquit:
and sanctificabis eum, quia Carnem Dei tui ipse ^st vel erit sacrificans.

This ancient Rabbines Testimonies being so plain and pregnant for
transubstantiation of bread and wine into the body and blood of the Messiah in
this holy Sacrifice, as protestants have confessed before, and their words
themselves so evident, that no Catholic or Roman writer can set it down in
more manifest, or express terms, make also the contradictory of this Article
a clearly and undeniably true. To take exception to those authorities would be
gross and foolish rashness, for first as I have proved already, and shall
hereafter they agree with the Apostolic doctrine of this first age, and the
universal Church of Christ. Secondly if they had been counterfaite, being in
Hebrewe* and extant in the libraries of the Jews, they were most like to be
counterfaite by them, but this had been to condemn themselves. Noe Christian
could invent and place them in their libraries. There could not be the least
suspicion, of such Invention, for they were vulgarly published to the Christian
world long before the beginning of the Caluinian Sacramentarie Religion, or
other impugners of this most honorable Sacrifice, and so received, allowed and
approved both by the greatest spiritual Petr. Gallot. praefat. in l. de
Arcanis fid. cath.
and temporal authority, even of the Emperor giving both power, means and
allowance for the searching fourth, publishing and receiving those antiquities.

And Rabbi Samuel Marochianus in his book of the coming of the Messiah, de
aduentu Messiae, received Rabbi Samuel Morachian. lib. de Aduentu Messiae c. 19.
by all, and doubted of by none, does inuincibly prove and demonstrate the same
by many Scriptures, as the Jews read and allow them. He proves it from the
109. psalm and other Scriptures proving, that the sacrifice of the Messiah in
the form of bread and mine and his Preisthood after the order of Melchisedech,
being to succeed the sacrifice and Preisthood of Aaron, were promised to
endure for ever, and not to cease as those of Aaron, were to cease, and ceased
when the ever during sacrifice and Preisthood of the Messiah were instituted.
Attend quanta sit differentia inter sacrificium Psalm. 109.
Aaron and Iustiistius Domini. Dixit Dominus Domino meo, tu es Sacerdos in
aeternum, non adtempus sicut Aaron. Item sacrificium Aaron fuerunt carnes, and
sacrificium illius iusti Dominifuit panis and vinum secundum ordinem
Melchisedech. In quibus verbis Dominus per Prophetam ostendit manifest,
quoniam sacrificium Aaron finiretur, quando inciperet sacrificium in pane and
vino, aeternaliter duraturum, eum Aaron no^ sit data aeternitas in Sacerdotio,
ficuti Sacerdoti Christo. He there proves, that if that promise of eternity
in Sacrifice, and Preisthood, have been made by God to Moses, which he made
to the Messiah, or Christ, the sacrifice and Preisthood of Moses law had
been eternal, as those of Christ's be, by that promise. Si Deus dixisset
nostro Moist, sicut dixit per os David, Messiae, sieve Christo: Tu venies
Sacerdos in aeternum secu^dum legem Myosi and Aaron, staret illa lex: sed
dixit: tues Sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech.

This he proves also from Moses in the 26. chapter of Leuiticus, that the
Sacrifice of the Messiah and his Preistood after the old Order of Melchisedech
being established, and published, those of Aaron we^re to end, Ad hoc sonat
verbum Moysi, cum Leuit. ca. 26.
dixit: comedetis vetustissima veterum, per quod intelligit sacrificium
Melchisedech. Et iterum: and nobis superuenientibus, id est, nouae legis
sacrificio publicato, vetera, scilicet vestra, proijcietis. He proves it from
Rabbi Samuel supr. c. 20.
Leuiticus cap. 23. Exodus cap. 25. and numeri cap. 21. Where the sacrifice in
bread and wine is set down, and prefigured.

He proves it from Solomon his words which the Proverb. c. 9.
Apostle uses. Hoc sacrificiu^ vini cum aqua mixtum p^^cherrime and apt
describit Solomon Propheta in libro prouerbiorum cap. 9. cum dicit, Sapientia
altissima communicauit sacrificium suum, miscuit vinum suum and parauit mensam.
Quis est paruulus, veniat ad me, and insipientes comedent pan^m meum, and
bibent vinum meum temperatum aqua. Quid mensa parata sapientiae altissimi, nisi
altar? Quid panis and viuum mixtum, nisi sacrificium de pane and vino, and de
aqua quod sit in altari? not abiliter dicit. Panem suum, and vinum suum, perid
enim innuit hoc Sacrificium gratum esse Deo, and quod ad istud conuinium tam
diuinum and spirituale non vocauit patres nostros, qui erant sapientes in lege,
qui erant occupati in sacrificio legis, quod etiam carnale sacrificium Rabbi
Samuel supr. cap. 22. Prou. c. 17.
non dimisit nobis, sed priuauit nosilla.

He proves it from the 17. chapter of the same book, where the Prophet says:
melior est buccella panis cum charitate, quam vitulus saginatus cum inimicitia:
that a piece of bread, meaning the sacrifice of the Christians, is better,
then a fat calfe the sacrifice of the Jews rejected: otherwise in civil
valuation it is not so. He proves it from the Prophets Esaias, and Malachie,
expressly foretelling that God would reject, and have the sacrifices of the
Jews as abomination, and yet have an everlasting external sacrifice among the
gentiles. Completum ect, quod Deus dixit de nobis (Iudaeis) per hoc I saiae,
vbi ait: completa Isaiae 32.
est vindemia, and non est de caetero collectio. Et illud Malachiae, non est
mihi volunt as in vobis, and sacrificium non accipiam a vobis. Et illud Isaiae
c. 1. Sabbata Isa. cap. 1.
vestra, and festiuitates, and sacrificium vestrum non accipiam, quia omnes vos
estis in ira mea. Et illud Isaiae: completum est: Quid mihi multitudo
victimarum vestrarum, quid multiplicastis mihi sacrificium de arietibus, and
carnibus hircorum, arietum carnes and hircorum. Non offeretis vltra
sacrificium, quoniam incensum vestrum, and Sabbata vestra, and solemnitates
vestras non recipiam a vobis, quia odit illa anima mea. Omne sacrificium
vestrum cadauer foetidum. Ille qui mihi iugulauerit taurum, sicut qui
decollauerit hominem, and ille qui obtulerit in sacrificium hircum, sicut qui
obtulit canem, and qui obtulit vinum, sicut qui offert sanguinem porci. And
hereupon inuincibly thus concludes, that God thus rejecting, and having in
abomination the sacrifices of the Jews, it can signify nothing, else, but
that he has changed those gross and carnal sacrifices into the spiritual
and pure sacrifice of Christ. Sed abominatio de sacrificijs apud Deum nihil
aliud significat, misi mutationem sacrificij nostri (Iudaici) carnalis and
grossi, in sacrificium istius iusti Domini spirituale and subtle.

He proves it by vnanswearable reasons, from these holy Prophets and the law
of Moses, first The Sacrifices of the law were offered in Jerusalem only,
and the temple there: Sacrificium nostrum non fuit acceptum, nisi in vno loco
scilicet in domo sancta praetise But the Sacrifice of the Messiah among the
gentiles converted unto him, was by them to be offered in all nations even from
the riseing of the su^ne to the setting of the same. Valde timeo ab illo verbo
quod Deus fortis and gloriosus dixit peros Malachiae cap. 1. vbi sic tangit de
sacrificio gentium ab ortu solis vsque ad occasum, gentes offerunt sacrificium
nomini meo mundum: never any such generally offered Sacrifice to the true God
was in the world, but this blessed Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, at
Mass. offered and sacrificed as that Prophet said, in omni loco sacrificatur
and offertur, in every place, and not only temple, city, or nation. He
proves it further because the sacrifice of the gentiles converted to the
Messiah was to be received, when that of the Jews was to cease, which ceased
with them, soon after their crucifying of Christ, their city and temple
destroyed and the Jews captives above a thousand years, as this Rabbine
confesses writing 500. years cap. 20. 21.
since. Deus etiam carnale Sacrificium non dimisit nobis, sed priuauit nos
illo. Iam sunt mill anni completi, quod nobis accidit, propter illum iustum in
quem peccauimus. When the converted gentiles have noe other external sacrifice,
but this of Christ's body and blood.

He proves it, because the Prophet witnesses, the sacrifice of the converted
gentiles should be sacrificium mundum, a clean and pure sacrifice in respect
of the sacrifices of the law of Moses, being so unclean, that they were
forced to be washed, the bellyes of the beasts offered were purged, and the
places cleansed with water, when in the Sacrifice of the Messiah haueing in it
nothing but clean, pure, and unspotted things, the purest bread, wine and
water, changed into Christ's body, and blood his humanity, in a spiritual
and acceptable manner to God, it must needs be this cap. 21. 24.
sacrificium mundum pure and clean sacrifice, that was so generally to be
offered to God. Deus instituit offerre panem loco carnium, and aquam mundam
loco pinguedinis carnium, and vinum purum loco sanguinis; and homo offertur
spiritualiter and acceptabiliter D^o, non sicut animalia decollata per nos
(Iudaeos) quae per Prophetam comparantur cadaueri putrido. Synagoga indiget
lauare carnes sacrificiorum, and purgare ventres animalium, quae in sacrificio
sacrificabantur, and lauare locum de sanguine, and pinguedine sacrificiorum,
aliter esset horror tractare and videre. In sacrificio autem panis and vini and
aquae non apparet aliquid indecens, aut turpe. Timeo de verbis per Mala^hiam
Prophetam dixit Deus Synagogae: non est mihi voluntas in sacrificijs vestris:
quia abortu solis vsque ad occasum magnum est nomen meum inter gentes, quae
offerunt nomini meo sacrificium mundum. Sicut de natura sua munda sunt, aqua,
vinum, and forma pura de quibus factum est sacrificium, and non indiget
mundatione and lotione.

And if any would interpret mundum Sacrificium, the clean sacrifice of the
Prophet, to be meant as grateful and acceptable to God, allthough no thing in
sacrifice can be more acceptable to him then the body and blood of the Messiah
offered in this sacrifice, even by this and the other Rabbines, cap. 20.
yet he most clearly expounds how in this sense also the Sacrifice of
Catholic Christians is the only most pure and acceptable sacrifice, and they
justly by the warrant of God avoid the Jews now as the Jews avoided the
gentiles whilst their Sacrifice was approved by God. Apud Deum Sacrificium
gentium est mundius quam Sacrificium nostrum: and insuper, quia Deus priuauit
nos omni sacrificio mundo, and alias docens Christianos, vt ipsi vitarent nos,
(Iudaeos) ne contaminarentur sicut nos vitauimus gentes omni tempore quo
sacrificium nostrum fuit mundum apud Deum and acceptum.

This is proved by the Apostolic writers of Ignat. epist. ad Smyrned.
this first age; S. Ignatius speaks of this Sacrifice of the Christians,
offerre, sacrificium immolare, and speaking in particular what it is, says it
is the body of our Lord Jesus Christ which suffered for our Ignat. apud Theod.
Dial. 3.
sins. Caro Saluatoris nostri Jesus Christi, quae propeccatis nostris passa
est. S. Dionisius the Areopagite has told us before, of the great honor, and
adoration the Christians in that time, gave to Christ present in this holy
sacrifice, and in diverse Dionys. Areopag. Eccl. Hierarc. c. 2. c. 3 and epist.
ad Demophilum. Clem.
particulars delivers the very Order and manner thereof.

S. Clement speaks of this holy sacrifice in many places, and sets down
at large the whole order, of offering it for the living and dead, and so
expressly records the custom and use in that Apostolic time. Offerimus
tibi Regi, and Deo secundum ipsius (Christi) ordinationem panem hunc and
calic^m hunc, and mittas spiritum tuum super hoc sacrificium, testem Passionum
Domini Jesus, vt ostendas hunc panem Corpus Christi tui, and hunc calicem
Sanguinem Christi, vt qui percipiunt confirmentur in pietate, and remissionem
peccatorum consequantur, Christo tuo digni efficiantur, vitam aeternam
adipiscantur. And again: offerimus tihi pro omnibus qui a saeculo c. 18. 19.
21.
placuerunt tibi, offerimus pro populo hoc, pro virginibus, and castitatem
seruantibus, pro viduis Ecclesiae, pro copulatis honorabilibus nuptijs, pro
infantibus populi tui, vt neminem nostrum reijcias. Pro ijs qui in fide
quieuerunt rogemus. And he there recited all sorts of people for which this
most holy Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood is offered, quick or dead, and
that it is for remission of their sins and everlasting life. In salutem nobis
fiant in vtilitatem animae and corporis, in remissionem-peccatorum, in vitam
futuri saeculi.

S. Iustine and S. Irenaeus allowed to have lived Justin. Dial. cum Triph.
Irenaeus aduers. haer. l. 4. cap. 32.
in this age, do expound the prophesy of Malachy, as the Rabbines have done
before, they say Christ instituted and taught and delivered it to be used, and
the Church receiving it from the Apostles, offered it in all the world. Noui
testamenti nouam docuit oblationem, Jesus Christus fieri tradidit, Ecclesia ab
Apostolis accipiens, in vniuerso mundo offert Deo. S. Alexander an holy Pope,
learning his divinity Alexander Pp. 1. epist. 1. cap. 4.
and offering this blessed sacrifice in this age, does most clearly say, that
in this sacrifice, Christ's body and blood is consecrated of bread and wine,
mixed with water, that it is offered to God, so received from the Apostles,
sins are thereby forgiven, God is therewith pleased, and his wrath pacified,
because no sacrifice can be greater then this, which is the body and blood of
Christ, and so with greatest purity to be offered to be worshipped of all, and
above all to be reverenced and honored. Sacramentorum oblationibus, quae inter
missarum solemnia Domino offeruntur, Passio Domini miscenda est, vt eius, cuius
corpus and sanguis conficitur, passio celebretur, panis tantum and vinum aqua
permixtum in sacrificio offerantur. Non debet enim, vt apatribus accepimus, and
ipsaratio docet, in calice domini aut vinum solum, aut aqua sola offerri: sed
vtrumque permixtum: quia vtrumque exlatere eius in passione sua profluxisse
legitur. Ipsa vero veritas nos instruit, calicem and panem in Sacramento
offerre, quando ait: accepit Jesus panem etc. crimina enim atque peccata
oblatis his Domino Sacrificijs delentur* Talibus hostijs delectabitur, and
placabitur dominus, and peccata dimittet ingentia. Nihilenim in Sacrificijs
maius esse potest, quam Corpus and Sanguis Christi: Nec vlla oblatio hac potior
est, sed haec omnes praecellit. Quae pura conscientia domino offerenda est, and
pura mente sumenda, atque ab omnibus veneranda. Et sicut potior est caeteris:
ita potius excoli, and venerari debet.

This was the order, use, and custom of Gods Church in the public Masses
thereof, delivered by the Apostles unto it. In the Mass of S. Peter Missa. S.
Petri and Roman. Eccl.
and the Roman Church, thus we find it: Memento Domine seruorum tuorum, qui
offerunt hanc hostiam pro seipsis, and suis omnibus, pro redemptione animarum
and corporum, pro spe salutis and incolumitatis suae. So it was in the Mass of
S. James and the Missa S. Iacobi and Eccl.
Church of Jerusalem: Domine concessisti, vt confidentes Hierosolym.
accederemus, ad sanctum altar tuum, and offeremus tibi verendum hoc and
ineruentum sacrificium pro peccatis* nostris admit nos accedentes ad sanctum
tuum altar, vt digni simus qui offeramus tibi sacrificium pro nobis, and pro
ijs quae populus per ignorantiam admisit. Fac vt oblatio nostra gratae and
acceptabilis sit in propitiationem peccatorum nostrorum, and eorum quae populus
per ignorantiam admisit. O Deus respice in nos, and ad nostrum hoc rationale
obsequium intuere, vt de manu Apostolorum tuorum verum hunc cultum accepisti.

S. Mark and the Church of Alexandria, our Miss. S. Marci and Alexandr. Eccles.
primative Church in Britayne here, as before, vseing it with others have the
like. Purga^or nostrum vt cord puro tibi hoc Thimiamae offeramus, in
remissionem peccatorum nostrorum, and totius populi. Offerimus rationabilem and
incruentam oblationem hanc, quam offerunt tibi domine omnes gentes ab ortu
solis vsque ad occasum, a Septentrione ad meridiem: quia magnum nomen tuum in
omnibus gentibus, and in omni lo^o ince^sum offertur nomini tu^ sancto, and
sacrificium, and oblatio. So has the Mass of S. Matthew: Domine Miss. S. Mat.
and Aethiop.
Deus noster oblationem meam; and omnium famulorum famularumque tuarum,
offerentium in nomine sancto tuo, suscipe, and pro meis and eorum peccatis fiat
redemptio. So has the Mass of S. Barnabas afterward Miss. S. Barnab. Ambros.
and Eccl. Mediolanen.
called S. Ambrose his Mass at Millan long time used in many west contryes:
Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, placabilis and acceptabilis sit tibi haec oblatio,
quam ego indignus pro me misero peccatore, and pro delictis m^^s
innumerabilibus, tuae pietati offero. Off^rimus pro Ecclesia tua sancta
Catholica. In the Mass of the Church of Constantinople ascribed Miss S Andr.
C^risostomi and Eccl. Constantinop.
first to S. Andrew the Apostle, and now called S. Chrisostomes Mass, it is
offered for all: pro vniuerso populo ^^o. And it is the body and blood of
Christ therein consecrated by the Priest, Christ himself being said to be
offerer, and that is offered. Propter infinitam clementiam tuam homo factus es,
and Pontifex noster extitisti, and mysterij huius ac incruentae hostiae
Sacramentum nobis tradidisti vt omnium Deus. Fac me dignum Sacerdotij gratia
indutum consecrare sanctum corpus tuum, and pretiosum sanguinem: concede a me
peccatore offerri tibi haec Sacramenta. Tu enim es offerens and oblatus,
suscipiens and distributus, Christus Deus noster.

These be the most ancient public Church Masses or liturgies, which
Christians do, or can allege in their Religion, bearing the names of the
Apostles themselves, and yet in every one of them this most holy Sacrifice of
Christ's body and blood is, quite contrary to this article, offered both for
the quick, as is manifest, and the dead also to have remission of pain and
gilt. Fac Domine vt oblatio nostra accepta sit in propitiationem peccatorum
nostrorum, and inrequiem animarum eorum, qui ante nos dormierunt.

So S. James. Memento Domine famulorum famularumque Miss. S. Jacob.
tuarum qui nos praecesserunt cum signo fidei, and dormiunt in somno pacis.
Ipsis Domine and omnibus in Christo quiescentibus locum refrigerij and pacis
indulgeas, deprecamur. So S. Peter. Animabus patrum Miss. S. Petr.
and fratrum nostrorum qui antea in Christo fide dormierunt, dona requiem
Domine Deus noster: horum omnium animabus Domine Deus noster dona requiem in
sanctis tabernaculis tuis, in regno tuo, easque caelorum regno dignare. So S.
Mark: Memento Domine Miss. S. Marc.
omnium fidelium dormientium, and in rectae fidei quiescentium. So, and much
more S. Matthew. Memento Miss. S. Matt.
Domine, Seruorum tuorum, and quaecumque in vita deliquerunt ignosce. Offerimus
tibi rationabile h^c obseqnium pro fidelibus dormi^ntibus. So S. Andrew and S.
Chrysostom after him with the consent of the Fathers both of the greek and
Latin Church, testifying it was so decreed and left by the Apostles, and
practiced by the Church of Christ. Non Chrisostom. Hom. 69. ad populum
Antiochen.
temere ab Apostolis haec sancita fuerunt, vt in tremendis mysterijs
desunctorum agatur commemoratio. Sciunt enim illis inde multum contingere
lucrum, vtilitatem multam. Cum enim totius constiterit populus, Sacerdotalis
plenitudo, and tremendum proponatur sacrificium quomodo Deum non exorabimus pro
his deprecantes. And, neque abs re, is, qui astat altari dum venerand^ Oratione
41. in 1. Corinthians.
peraguntur mysteria, clamat: pro omnibus, qui in Christo dormierunt, and ijs,
qui pro ipsis celebrant memorias.

So in the Masses of S. Barnabas and S. Ambrose, S. Basile, the Syrians,
Mozarabes, Goths, Muscouites Armenians and all Christians before these times.
So it was in the old Mass used in France Hilduinus epist. ad Loduic Imperat.
Berno Augen. Abb. Libell. de reb. ad missa spectant. r. 2.
Bryta^ne and all this west part of the world from the first receiving of
Christianity here, as Hilduinus writing 800. years since, with others prove,
the ancient copies thereof being then so old and worn, that they were almost
consumed with age. Cui adstipulari videntur antiquissimi and nimia vetustate
pene consumpti Missales libri, continentes Missae ordinem more gallico, qui ab
initio receptae fidei vsus in hac occidentali plaga est habitus, vsque quo
tenorem, quo nunc vtitur, Romanum susceperit. These our Missals so old 800.
years since were no new Invention.

THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
The 32. Article, entitled, of the marriage of Priests thus examined and
condemned.
THeir next 23. Article, entitled, of the marriage of Priests: is thus.
Bishops, Priests, and Dcacons are not commanded by Gods law, either to vow
the estate of single life, or to abstain from marriage: Therefore it is
lawful also for them, as for all other Christian men, to marry at their own
discretion, as they shall Judge the same to serve better to godliness.

This is their whole Article, and making the only Scripture, which they mean
by Gods law, to be the rule of Religion, it is often confuted before. And most
false, profane, and in many cases even by their own laws and proceedings
rebellious, traiterous, and tumultuous, to say, or write that no thing is to
be obeyed, and performed, but what is commanded by Gods law or scripture, and
every private carnal minister may Judge herein at his own discretion. For by
this Paradoxe all temporal and civil laws of Princes not commanded in
scripture, are void, frustrate and not to be obeyed, and such men and
ministers against all public rule and government, may Judge and censure, do
and practice against all or any such laws of his true and lawful Sovereign
King, though the wisest, most Godly, and potent in the world, all commonweals
are laid open, to manifest, or rather certain danger, and destruction.

And no law of England in particular is by this article to be obeyed, except
these ministers will interpret it to be commanded by Gods laws. And so all
humane laws do cease, and only the law of God is in force and to be obeyed.

So we must say of all Ecclesiastical laws also, if they be not commanded
in the law of God. all Courts, Consistories, and Tribunals, must be taken away
with their Judges, Rulers, and Governors, both civil and Ecclesiastical,
except they can prove to these men, that all their processes and proceedings
are commanded in the law of God.

Again by their own Religion this Articles doctrine both for the reason it
makes, and the conclusion it self, is false: for first in their 6. Article
before entitled, of testimony of holy scriptures for salvation. They have
declared that things read in scriptures or to be proved thereby are articles of
faith, and requisite or necessary to salvation.

And so by these men it is allowed against this article, that although it is
not commanded by Gods laws, or the Scripture, that Bishops, Priests and
Deacons must vow the state of single life, or abstain from Marriage: yet if
this is either read in holy Scripture, or can be proved thereby, their
Marriage is unlawful by their own confession. Queen Elizabeth her
Injunctions an. 1. Regni eius.
Secondly the injunctions of Queen Elizabeth nothing inferior to these
Articles, do forbid all their ministers to marry, without their Bishops
license, and allowance. Therefore this article in their own proceedings is
untrue to say, they might lawfully marry at their own discretion, as all other
Christian men might do. And as false it is, that all other Christian men might
lawfully Marry even in these men's doctrine in this article. For if the
scripture and Gods law did not command Bishops, Priests, Deacons or any
other to vow the estate of single life, or to abstain from Marriage: yet they
which voluntarily do make such vows, are commanded by Gods law to keep
them: read altissmo vota Naum 1. psalm. 20. 60. 65. 115. Hier. 44. Psalm. 75.
Is. 19.
tua. Tihireddetur vot^m. Faciamus vota nostra quae vouimus. Voue^e and reddite
Domino, Vota vonebunt Domino and soluent. If a just promise of man to man does
so stricktly bind by all laws, how much more obligatorie and binding is the
promise and vow of man to God.

The vows of Chastity, Pou^rtie, and Obedience in religious men neither
Bishops, Priests, nor Deacons, and of women incapable of such degrees, are not
commanded in Gods law ynto them before they voluntarily vow that holy
state, Yet none but monstrous men do or can think but their vows being so
made, do bind then. Thirdly whereas the law of God, and these men in their
public practical of Religion do say that true Marriage is holy Matrimony, an
honorable estate, Protest. communion book Tit. Matrimony.. dearly etc.
instituted of God, signifying unto us the mystical union, which is between
Christ and his Church: which holy estate Christ adorned and beatisied with his
presence and first miracle. The so called Marriage of Protestant Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons was not such in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, by their
own laws, but quite contrary: the children between such men and women,
termed their wives, were not legitimate, could not inherit either lands or
honor from such a Father, the Father being a gentleman the son could not
give his Arms but with a bend Sinister a testimony of bastardie, nor inherit
any lands he had. The woman had noe dower by their laws, giving it to all
lawful wives, So that in these pretended lawful Marriages there was nothing
by their own proceedings, which belongs to the lawful, holy, and honorable
matrimony, the pretended husbands were fornicarious concubinaries, their women
harlots and concubines, all their children bastards and illegitimate, and in
this opprobrious shameful condition, though tolerated without further
punishment they continued until King James after 44. years age Statute of
King James for marriage of minist.
of their Religion, by his Parliament law made such Bargains, men women and
their children legitimate, or not unlawful among English Protestants. 4. The
Protestant laws and Religion of England have not taken away, or disabled the
Canon law, in which they freely confess the Marriage of all such men is
forbidden, and condemned, further there Stat. in Parliam. 1. Eliz. An. 1. Iacobi.
it is contrary to the law of God, as in this point it is not, but most
conformable unto us, as is evident before, and shall be made most manifest
hereafter. Therefore these Protestants supplying those places of Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons may not yet lawfully, marry, in their own Judgments,
and proceedings, nor by the law of God in holy Scriptures themselves, by
their exposition of them. For first it is evident in Scripture in many places,
that the virginal Matthew. 19. 11. 1. Corin. 7. 8. Apoc. 14. 4. 1. Reg. 21. Is.
25. 1. Cor. 7. Ieuit. 20. Luc. 1. exodus 19. Mat. S. Marc. 9. Luc. 14. etc.
Prot. art. 6.
and chaste life in respect of Religion, is to be preferred before marriage,
and clergy men by the same law being Pastors, guides, teachers, light, and
example to others, and called to the greatest perfection, it is most needful
for them, therefore if the 6. Protestant article decrees truly, that things
read in scripture or proved thereby, are articles of faith, and requisite
necessary to salvation, they may not by Scripture allow Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, or any of them to marry, either by their own discretion, which this
Article contendeth, or by their pretended Bishops allowance, by their
Iniunction, noe Protestant Article or Iniuctio^ can be of greater authority,
then the law of God, and Christ himself, our high Priest, and Sacrifice, a
most pure Virgin, and son according to his humanity of the most immaculate
Virgin, who often in holy Scripture calls upon all Priests to follow him.
And promising to hear the petition of all that duly ask, calls upon us
embrace Virginity. Sunt eunuchi, qui Matthew. 19.
seipsos castrauerunt propter regnum caelorum. Qui potest capere capiat. He
tells us by his Apostle, virginity and chastity are more pleasinge to him,
and better for them that serve him, especially in sacred functions, then the
married life. Dico non nuptis and viduis: 1. Cor. 7.
bonum est illis, si sic permaneant, sicut and ego. Qui sine vxore est,
solicitus est quae Domini sunt, quomodo placeat Deo. Qui non iungit matrimonio
virginem suam melius facit. And these virgins, be they which followed Apocal.
14.
Christ in this life and do so in heaven. Hi sunt qui cum mulieribus non sunt
coinquinati. Virgins enim sunt. Hi sequuntur agnum quocunque ierit.

This chastity could not so virginallie and perpetually be kept by the
Priests of Moses law being only of one tribe, the tribe of leui, and so
could not be without marriage to keep a succession in that tribe, yet although
their Sacrifices and serving God were then imperfect, in respect of those in
the law of Christ, and they served not continually in the temple, and at the
altar, as Christian Priests daily do, but by their turns and succeeding
times, yet when their times and turns of serving in the temple came, they left
their wives a^ Leuit. 21. 1. par. 23. Luc. 1. Exodus 19.
their contrie howses in their tribe, and they in Jerusalem during their time
of sacrifice, and seruic^ there, performed it in holy chastity, even from their
wives, And after knowledge of their wives, before they might serve at the
altar, were to be sanctified: and ne appropinquetis vxoribus, was in some cases
generally commanded. No Priest might marrya dishonest woman. Scortum and vile
prostibulum non ducet vxorem, nec eam quae repudiata est a marito, quia
consecratus est Deo suo, and panis propositionis offert: sit ergo sanctus, quia
ego sanctus sum, Dominus, qui sanctifico vos.

The high Priest might Marry none but a virgin. Virginem ducet vxorem. Neither
was it lawful^ in that imperfect, figurative, and marrying law either for
Priest or other even in need, not chaste, to eat things sacrificed, as in the
raze of David, and his company coming to Abimelech the high ^. Reg. 21.
Priest for releife and succor, who having nothing to releive the^ with, but
the sacrificed bread, would not give it unto them, but first examining them,
whether they had abstained from women, si mundi sunt pueri, maxim a
mulieribus. And David answered they were. Et respondit David Sacerdoti and
dixit ei: and quidem si de mulieribus agetur, continuimus nos ab heri and
nudius tertius, quando egrediebamur, and fuerint vasa puerorum Sancta. And the
Priests which did eat this sacrificied bread, and other oblations were absent
from their wives serving in the Tabernacle, and temple, at such ^imes in
chastity. And S. Epiphanius says, tha^ ^piphan. Haer. 79.
Moses himself the giver of that law, did ever after he was called to be a
Profete, absteyne from his wife, Postquam prophet auit moses, non amplius
co^^^^ctus est vxori, non amplius liberos genuit: habet enim vitam domino
vacantem, vacare autem domino non potest, qui marits officio fungitur.

Therefore seeing the Priests of the law though married, all ways when they
went to serve in the temple were sanctified; and lived chaste, and the
continual state of Serving God, especially in a more perfect law, does
continually require such purity, and chastity, of life, rightly does S.
Ambrose, and other holy learned Fathers, even from hence conclude by the law
of God against this Article, that Christian Priests ever conversant in and
executing their sacred offices, must live in perpetual chastity. Veteribus
idcirco concessum est Ambros. ad c. 3. ep. 1. ad Tim. Eusebius. Caesarien. l. 1.
demonstrat. Euang. c. 9. Innocent. 1. epist. 1. c. 9. Siric. ep. ad Himer.
Tar^^c. Episcop. c. 7. Hier. l. 1. contr. louinian. c. 14. 19 Apol. ad Pamach.
c. 3. 8. ad c. 1. ep. ad Tit. Paralip. cap. 23.
Leuitis and Sacerdotibus vxores ad vsum habere, quia multum tempus otio
vacabant a ministerio, aut Sacerdotio. Multitudo enim erat Sacerdotum, and
magna copia Lcuit arum, and vnusquisque certo tempore seruiebat ceremonijs,
secundum institutum David. Hic enim viginti and quatuor classes, constituit
Sacerdotum, vt vicibus deseruirent. Vnde Abia octanam classem habuit, cuius
vice Zacharias fungebatur sacerdotio, ita vt tempore quo, non illos contingebat
deseruire altari, domorum suarum agerent curam. At vbi tempus imminebat
ministerij, purificati aliquantis diebus accedebant ad templum offerre Deo. Yet
these Priests continued a year together in this serving of God, never going to
their wives, or howses: priscis temporibus de templo Dei Sacerdotes anno vieis
suae non discedebant, sicut de Zacharia leginius, nec domum suam omnino
tangebant.

And the number of them was so great that serving but in one place, it ever
had thowsands there, as the scripture witnesses, assuring there were found in
the time of David 38000. Leuits, above P^ralip. cap. 23.
the age of 30. years appointed by their turns, to serve in the temple. Numer
ati sunt Leuitae a triginta annis, and supra: and innenta sunt triginta octo
millia virorum. Ex his electi sunt, and distributi in ministerium domus Domini
viginti quatuor millia: praepositorum autem and Iudicum sex millia. Porro
quatuor millia Ianitores: and totidem psaltes canentes Domino in organis. Et
distribuit eos David per vices filiorum Leui.

This persuading these learned Fathers, that chastity was so generally
requisite, exacted by the law of God, in so many thowsands of Priests during
the execution of their offices so long time together enduring, they conclude
from hence by the law of God, that the Priests of the law of Christ fare more
perfect, and holy, and being at all times and places bound to the exercise of
their sacred functions, not to be borne of one tribe alone, nor to be either
the twelueth part of the people, as in that law, or the hundredth of true
believers should live in perpetual chastity. Quanto magis Innocent. 1. Siric.
and Ambros. supr.
his Sacerdotes and Leuitae pudicitiam ex die ordinationis suae seruare debent,
quibus vel sacerdotium vel ministerium sine successione est, nec praeterijt
dies, qua vel a sacrificijs diuinis vel a baptismatis officio vacent?

The holy Fathers conclude the same necessity of chastity in Priests, from
the words of S. Paul, how the unmarried man is free, and fit for the service
of God. Qui sine vxore est, solicitus est quae 1. Corinthians. 7.
Domini sunt, quomodo placeat Deo. But the married otherwise. Qui autem cum
vxore est, solicicus est quae sunt mundi, quomodo placeat vxori. And shows
the bond and debt between married people, to hinder their serving of God.
Nol^^e staudare inuicem, nisi forte ex consensu ad tempus, vt vacetis orationi.
Therefore they conclude that Priests always Origin. ho^. 23. in numer. hom.
4. in leuitic. l. 8. contra Celsum Eusebius. Caesar demonst. Eua^g. l. 1. c. 9.
Siric. ep. 4. ad Episc. Africae c. 9. Hier. ad c. 1. ep. ad Tit. l. 1. contr.
Iouinian. c. 19.
bound to the service of God, are always bound to chastity. Certum est
quia impeditur sacrificium indesinens ijs, qui coniugalibus necessitatibus
seruiunt. Vnde videtur mihi, quod illius est solius offerre sacrificium
indesinens, qui indesinenti and perpetuae se deuouerit castitati.

The perpetual and never ceasing Sacrifice among Christians requires
perpetual chastity in them, that offer it. And this to be so is ordained by
the law of God. Diximus nuptias concedi in in Euangelio: sed tamen easdem in
suo officio permanentes, praemia castitatis capere non posse. Quod si indigne
accipiunt mariti, non mihi irascantur, sed scripturis sanctis, imo Episcopis,
and Presbyteris and Diaconis, and vniuerso choro sacerdotali and leuitico, qui
se nouerunt hostias offerre non posse, si operi seruiant coniugali. Neither
need we the consent of Fathers, and antiquity, in this exposition of the law
of God, but only to insist upon the very words and letter of the scripture in
the new testament, it is allowed by our Protestants, and both in the Greek and
Latin text interpreted, and translated by their own Greek and Latin lexicons,
and Dictionaryes, and comparing places one with an other, being their Rules and
directions in expounding scripture, we find S. Paul to say, oportet Episcopum
epist. ad Tit.
esse, A Bishop must be among other necessary proprieties, and conditions,
continentem (...) which absteineth and keeps himself especially from
haunting women, continent, chaste. So he says in an other epistle: oportet
Episcopuni esse a ep. 1. ad Tim. c. 3.
Bishop must among other laudable qualities, be pudicum, chaste, shamefast,
honest. Thus our Protestant Lexicons and Dictionaries do transtate.

And in the same place to contradict this Article in all he says likewise of
Deacons as of Bishops and Priests Diaconos similiter pudicos, (...). Deacons
must be likewise chaste, as Bishops, and Priests. And this he wittnesseth in
both places, allthough the man now called to holy Orders was married before.
As diverse were in that time, the pagan law, in the Empire especially,
debarring the unmarried and wanting children to be heirs, being in force
until it was taken away by Constantine the great and good Eusebius. l. 4. de
vit. Constable. cap. 26.
Christian Emperor, as hard and wicked. Dura sane contra infaecundos lex: quae
illos tanquam scelus aliquod admisissent, graui supplicio afficiebat.

The Apostolical Fathers of this first age are witnesses against this Article
in the canons ascribed to the Apostles, only such as were in inferior Can.
Apost. 25.
orders were permitted to marry. Ex his, qui caelibes ad clerum peruenerunt;
Iubemus vt Lectores tantum and Cantores, si velint, nuptias contrahant. S.
Ignat. epist. ad Anthioch. ep. ad Ephesians. ep. ad Philadelphien.
Ignatius writes of, and saluteth the holy college of Priests, in this time,
in the Church of Antioch as in other places living in chastity, as also the
Deacons did. Saluto sanctum praesbyterorum collegium, and places his
predecessor S. Euodius Bishop there, among the holy Virgins.

So did the Deacons also live in perpetual chastity, epist. ad Heron*
as he exemplifieth in S. Heron, Deacon of Antioch to succed him in his
Episcopal dignity there. Teipsum castum custodi, vt Christi babitaculum,
Templum Christi es, Spiritus es instrumentum. Tu introduces and educas posthac
populum Domini qui ^st Antiochiae. Saluto sanctos Condiaconos tuos. He Epistol.
ad Smyrnens.
which teaches that preisthood is the highest dignity, Sac erdotium est
omnium bonorum quae in hominibus sunt Apex: and their Sacrifice, the sacred
body and blood of Christ, and they which offer it, and perform the other
sacred functions, are to be most perfect, in the most holy estate: and
virginity and chastity, are to be preferred before the married life vxores
maritis subditae sint in timore Dei, Epistol ad Philadelph.
Virgins Christo, in puritate, id quod praestantius est amplectentes, vt
liberius diuinam legem meditentur, virgins solum Christum in precibns vestris
ante oculos habete, and patrem illius illuminatae a spiritu, must needs so much
as he can, join them together in this most holy and sacred calling, as he
does.

S. Clement assigns such to be admitted to holy orders as are unmarried, or
if married, never kept company with their wives, and if any such shall after
his ordination have knowledge of his wife, though married before, he shall not
be admitted to execute his sacred function, but only the inferior offices, as
of the dorekeeper, and such. Ad Clem. Romans epistol. 2.
Dominica ministeria tales eligantur, qui ante ordinationem suam coniuges suas
non nouerint. Quod si post ordinationem ministro altaris contigerit proprium
vxoris cubile inuadere, sacrarij non intret limina, nec sacrificium portet, nec
altar contingat, nec ad Dominici Corporis portationem accedat, nec aquam
Sacerdotibus ad manus porrigat, nec vrceum sieve calicem ad altar ferat; sed
ostia forinsecus claudat, and minora sectatur officia. He utterly disableth, in
the name of the Apostles, that any Bishop* Priest, or Deacon unmarried at their
consecration, should marry after. Episcopum and Presbyterum ac Diaconum
dicimus Lib. constitut. Apost. c. 17.
vnius vxoris debere constitut, sieve viuant eorum vxores, sine decesserint: non
licere autem eis qui post ordinationem sine vxore fuerint, ad nuptias transire.
Where he expounds that saying of S. Paul of a Bishope or Preiste being
husband of one wife, to be understood of such, before consecration, as
Catholics now do against Protestants, as he also does before in the second
book of Apostolic Lib. 2. constable. Apost. cap. 2.
constitutions.

And to avoid all suspicion and occasion of breach of chastity in such
persons, no woman alone without an other, and she a consecrated Diaconissa was
permitted to come unto them. Sine Clem. lib. 2. constable. Apost. cap. 30.
Diaconissa nulla mulier accedat ad Diaconum vel Episcopum. And this was not
only taught by the Apostles, and Disciples of Christ, but practiced also in
themselves.

Tertullian near the Apostles time, writes, Tertull. l. de Monogomia.
that he could not find, that any of them but S. Peter only, was married.
Petrum solum inuenio maritum per socrum. Caeteros cum maritos non inuenio, aut
spadones intelligam necesse est, aut continentes. S. Igna^t. epist. ad
Philadelph.
Ignatius in some copies seems to hold that not only S. Peter, but S. Paul
also and some others of the Apostles were married men, vt Petri and Pauli and
aliorum Apostolorum, qui nuptijs operam dederunt. But in the most ancient
Manuscripts of S. Ignatius, this is not found, and by the word aliorum, he
neither does, nor can mean by any copy in his own opinion, that all the
other Apostles were married, for immediately before he proves that S. John
both the Evangelist and Baptist, were perpetual Virgins. Virgins solum
Christum prae oculis habete, sicut Ioannes Baptista, sicut dilectissimus
discipulus, qui in castitate de vita exierunt. And S. 1. Chorinth. 7.
Paul for himself has proved before, that he was either unmarried, or a
wydower then living in chastity. Dico non nuptis and viduis, bonum est illis,
si sic permanserint sicut and ego. And S. Ignatius has Ignat. epist. ad
Philadelphen. supr^.
sufficiently before proved the chastity of clergy men, after there calling,
whether Apostles, Bishops Priests, or Deacons, and in this very place
delivers in particular, that S. Euodius who succeeded S. Peter at Antioch,
and S. Clement his Successor at Rome, and S. Timothy and S. Titus to whom S.
Paul gave so strict charge before, of chaste clergy men, lived and dyed pure
Virgins. And never denies, that either S. Peter or any other Apostle supposed
by any man to have been married did forsake their wives, and lived in
chastity, after they were called to be Apostles. Which both holy scriptures
and fathers inuincibly prove unto us.

S. Peter speaks in the name of all the Apostles, that they had forsaken all
things, and followed Christ: Ecce nos reliquimus omnia and secuti sumus Matthew.
19.
te. And expected reward for so doing. Quid ergo erit nobis? Among all things
forsaken for Christ, wives the most near and dear to married men among
temporal matters, must needs be comprehended, if they or any of them were
Married. And Christ himself so expounds that speech of S. Peter, putting
wife vxorem (...) among the things which S. Peter, and the Apostles had
forsaken for his service, and were therefore to receive eternal reward.
Centuplum accipiet and vitam aeternam possidebit.

So S. Hierome and other fathers expound this Hierom. l. 1. con. Iouin.
Apolog. ad Pammach. c. 8. Chrisost. hom. 33. in Genesis hom. 2. in Job. Basil. de.
ad Amph. c. 3 Epiphan. Her. 59. Eusebius. pr^par. Euang. l. 9. c. 1. Porphir. and
Herat. ib. Enseb. l. 1. c. 9. supr. c. 8. l. 3. c. 8.
scripture, assumpti in Apostolatum, relinquunt officium coniugale. Apostoli
vel Virgins, vel post nuptias continentes. The like have the Greek Fathers S.
Chrysostom, S. Basile, S. Epiphanius, Eusebius, and others: wittnessing not
only that the Apostles lived thus in chastity, but among the Jews the Essaei
lived in chastity vxores non ducunt. And all that served in the temple
remained in chastity, vbi nocte ac die Sacerdotes cast versantur, nunquam in
templo vinum bibentes. All that write of the lives of the Apostles give
testimony to this. So it was with the 7. Deacons, except Nicolaus that fell to
wantonness. So of the Evangelists not Apostles, so of the 72. Disciples of
Christ. So with all we find in Antiquities to have been Bishops Priests or
Deacons in the universal world in this first Apostolic age, they were all
either unmarried, or absteyning from their wives which they had before their
conversion. We find the names and lives of very many such clergy men both in
Greek and Latin Authors, we find not any one but such as lived and died in
chastity, in any approved author. Their names and number are to great to be
particularly remembered. It will be sufficient for this time and place to make
mention only of them, which ruled in the cheifest Sees, and were a rule to the
rest.

To begin with Jerusalem when Christianity began Enseb. Caesar. Hist. Eccl.
l. 4. cap. 5. Epiph. Her. 66 Abd. l. 6. Irenaeus in S. Io. Eua^g. Hieron. l. de
Script. Eccl. in S. Ioanne. Philo. l. de laud su^ gent. Hieron. l. de Eccles.
Scriptor. in S. Marco Euangelista.
S. James, S. Symeon, S. Iustus, renowned for purity and chastity. And after
S. James and the Apostles death, S. John the Apostle, Evangelist and Virgin,
ruled all the Churches of Asia until the end of this age, totus Asiae fundauit
rexitque Ecclesias. The Church of Alexandria governed by S. Mark the
Evangelist directed thither by S. Peter, S. Anizanus or Anianus or by some
Ananus and Abilius in this time is renowned for chastity, and all religious
conversation both by Jews and Christians. In the commanding See of Antioch
after S. Peter, who as before forsook his wife, and all, for the love of
Christ, the pure and chaste remembered S. Euodius, and after him that great and
most continent commender and aduancer of virginity, and chastity S. Ignatius,
governed until the end of this age. Ignat. epist. ad Tarsen.
He sufficiently, besides that is cited from him before, evidently testifies
that all Priests then lived in chastity, and so were bound to do: eas quae in
virginitate degunt in pretio habete, velut Christi Sacerdotes: viduas in
pudicitia permanentes, vt altar Dei. The Sea of Rome is confessed even by
Protestants to have been the highest Rule in the whole Latin Church, and all
this west part of the world. Yet we find none but professors of chastity
there, S. Peter, S. Linus, S. Cletus and S. Clement in this time. Of S. Peter I
have said before, which will also testify for S. Linus, which was his next
Successor both in dignity, and holy chastity, as that Church, place, and
time then required, and the miraculous sanctity of his life, casting out
devils and raising the dead prove, with his consecrating of many chaste
Priests and Bishops, and decreeing, that noe woman might vnuealed Dam. Pontif.
in S. Lin. vita S. Lini in Breuiar. die 23. September. Rib. Barnes l. de vit.
^ont. Romans in Lin.
enter the Church, so honoring and maintaining chastity, as both Catholics
and Protestants confess Linus presbyteros 18. and Episcopos 11. sacris
initiauit. Mulierem nisi velato capite ingredi templum prohibuit, mortuos
suscitauit.

S. Cletus likewise after him lived in the same Damas. Rab. Barnes sup. in
Cleto vit. eius in Breuiar. April. 26.
manner, and ordained 25. Priests in such order as S. Peter had directed to be
professors of chastity, as is proved before, this both Catholics and
Protestants acknowledge. Is expraecepto Principis Apostolorum in vrbe viginti
quinque presbyteros ordinauit.

Of S. Clement his chastity I have spoken before from S. Ignatius, putting him
in his catalogue Ignat. epist. ad Trallian. epist. ad Mar. Cassobolit.
of chaste Virgins, and stiling him most blessed Clement the scholar of S.
Peter and S. Paul, Beatissimus Clemens Petri and Pauli auditor, who taught him
and all such their scholars and Disciples preistly chastity as before, and as
S. Clement himself is a witness from S. Peter's own words, the chastity of
S. Clement was one of the motives which caused S. Peter to design him to that
great Clem. epist. 1. S. Petrus ib.
pastoral dignity. Quem prae caeteris expertus sum Deum colentem, homines
diligentem, castum etc. This holy chaste Pope is further witness, that his
Master S. Peter did give him power, and charge to send such worthy Bishops,
where S. Peter had not ordained the like before. Episcopos per singulas
civitates, Clem. epist. ^. supr.
quibus ille non miserat perdoctos and prudentes sicut serpents, simplicesque
sicut columbas iuxta Domini praeceptionem mi^tere praecepit, quod facere
inchoauimus, and domino opem ferente fa^turi sumus. And expressly names
France, Spain, Germany, Italy, and sufficiently proves the same of this our
great Britayne, and other contryes in this part of the world. Aliquos ad
Gallias, Hispaniasque mittemus, and quosdam ad Germaniam and Italiam, atque ad
^eliquas gentes dirigere cupimus.

These other nations in these parts besides Italy Germany Spain and France
must needs include Britayne also. And to omit other nations here remembered,
we find both in our own and the historians and Annals of Gallia now France,
that this virginal Bishop and Pope, by direction of that his chaste Master and
predecessor S. Peter sent very many such chaste Bishops with such their
Priest, and Deacons thither. Anno gratiae 94. Clemens Mat. Westminster. chron. an.
94. Antiquit. Eccl. mult. in Gallia. Guliel. Eisengren. centen. 1. part. 4.
did. 3. Gregor. Turon. Hist. Fran little l. 1. Hincmar. ep. ad Carol. Magn.
Imper. Marty^ol. Romans vsuard. Ado. Bed and alij.
Romanae Sedis Episcopus ad locandum in Gallijs fidei fundamentum industrios ac
magnificos viros destinauit. Parisiensibus Dionysium, Siluanectensibus
Nicasium, Ebroicensibus Taurinum, Arelatensibus Trophinium, Narbonensibus
Paulum, Tholesensibus Saturninum, Aramicis Astremonium, Lemouicensibus
Martialem, Turonicis Gratianum, Cenomannicis Iulianum, Beluacensibus Lucianum,
Ambianensibus Firmium, Lugdunensibus Photinum. Per quos innumera multitudo
hominum ab Idolorum cultura recessit.

Many more holy Bishops with their Priests and Deacons are remembered in the
Annals of France to have preached therein this time. And not the least
suspicion left in any antiquity, but they all lived perpetually in chastity.
And they which have left any thing written behind them, that is still extant,
as S. Martial, and S. Diony^ius the Areopagite converted by S. Paul testify so
much for themselves and the rest both in France or wheresoever in this time.
S. Martial making the preistly Martial epist. ad Burdega^. cap. 3. Epist ad
Tolof. c. 9. c. 8.
life and state most excellent of all others, teaches us plainly that the
viduall life is better then marriage, and that of Virgins most perfect like to
that of Angels. Vltra hunc (matrimonij) gradum homini licite concessum,
viduitatem in praemio maiori constituit Dominus. Sed and t^rtium excellentem
gradum honestatisin virginitate demonstrauit nobis perfectum, and per omnia
similem angelicae dignitati. And he thought the chaste life to be so fit, and
requisite for the more perfect serving of God, that even princes then, and not
only clergy men embraced it to that holy end. So he writes of the Queen or
Princess Valeria, though espoused, how she had professed virginity by his
preaching Virgo Valeria Sponsa Regis caelestis per meam praedicationem
virginitate^ mentis and corporis Deo deuouerat. And of King or Prince Stephen:
pro suauitate praemij futuri illectus, copulam carnalium nuptiarum deuitauerit
per meam praedicationem: quatenus liberior Deo famulari possit.

S. Dionysius is most plain in this matter, and Dionys. Areopag. Eccl. Hier.
c. 6. ep. ad Gain. and alibi,
sets down the very manner how chastity was professed before the Bishops,
in that time, and how that such in respect of others were chiefly called
Therapentae, cultores, the perfect worshippers of God, even by the Apostles
themselves, Sancti praeceptores nostri diuinis eos appellationibus sunt
prosecuti. So both he and they must needs teach, that Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons ever conversant about most sacred things, were to live in chastity. So
we Sim. Metaphrast. die 29. Iunij.
must needs say of Britayne: first because we find that S. Peter admitting
only men of chastity to these holy Orders, as before, did first, consecrate
our first Bishops Priests and Deacons here, Apud Britannos Ecclesias
constituit, Episcoposque and Praesbyteros and Diaconos ordinauit. Secondly if
any were wanting after, they were, as before, supplied by S. Clement, only
allowing such to those sacred offices. Thirdly, all those whose names be
preserved to have been Bishops, in, or of this nation, as S. Aristobulus, S.
Mansuetus, S. Beatus, S. Joseph son of S. Joseph of Aramathia which buried
Christ, and some others by some writers, are so remembered by the Antiquities
where we find, that there is not the least suspicion but they continually
lived in virginal or chastelife. If this Aristobulus was the same which
Metaphrastes Metaphr^st. die 26. Iunij. Mat. 8. Marc. 1. Luc. 4. Gulielm.
Eisengren. centenar. 1. part. 1. did. 3. Petr. de Natal. l. 11. Anton. Democh.
l. 2. c^nt. Calvin. Arn. Merman. Theatr. conuers. gent. in metensib.
Martyrolog. Romans Bed. vsuard. and Molan. die 9. Maij Guliel. Eisengren. centen.
2. part. 5. Annal. Helueth. Antiquit. Eccl. Constant. Baron. an. in mart. Romans
9. Maij. Theater of great Britain l. 6. Antiquitat. Glaston. manuscript.
writes, to have been Father in law to S. Peter, the scripture wittnesseth
his wife remained in Jury so far distant from him in Britayne, if she lived
so long.

S. Mansuetus lived a collegiall life with only Priests, and clergy men, no
women with them, and was consecrated by S. Peter the Apostle, having before
forsaken contrie, kindred very noble ex nobili prognatus familia, men, women
and all for the love of Christ. S. Beatus of noble birth here in Btitayne, both
by Catholic and Protestant Antiquaries forsook all, and went to Rome and
there with an other Britan whose name is not perfectly remembered, one calls
him Achates, was consecrated, and was so chaste, that except when he preached
he seldom or never saw women one or other, living a solitary single
Eremiticall life.

Of S. Joseph son of S. Joseph said in the oldest monuments and antiquities
of that holy company to have been miraculously by Christ himself
consecrated, or at the least elected and designed a Bishop, and the rest of
that sacred company, Priests, Deacons, or whatsoever, it is most evident they
lived, and died in perpetual chastity, in the Island Aualan, all Antiquaries,
Catholics and Protestants confess, that King Aruiragus gave the place only to
those holy men, it was to them only confirmed by the two next following Kings
Marius and Goillus, celles were made only for Tab. fix. Gul. Malmesbur. l. de
Aut. Caenobij Glaston. Capgr. Catal. Sanct. in S. Joseph Aramath. and S.
Patricio. Jacob. Genuen. in ijsdem. Ioh. Bal. l. de Script. cent. 1. in S.
Joseph. Aramathien: Ioh. Leland. assertion. Arthurij. Godnyn. Theater of great
Brit. l. 6. Caius l. antiq. accadem. Cantabrigien. Stowe Hist. Romans Charta
Regis Hen. 2 and aliorum Reg. Socrat. Hist. Ec^l. l. 1. cap. 8.
them, there they lived alone, they left no children, or posterity after them,
and the place of habitation was so desert, and desolate, when S. Damianus and
Phaganus were sent hither by Pope Eleutherius in King Lucius his time the next
age, that their place of dwelling was become a den for wild beasts. Caepit
idem locus esse ferarum latibulum, qui prius fuerat habitatio Sanctorum.

Therefore we are enforced by the authorities of Scripture, tradition, the
whole Church, Geeke and Latin, the Apostolic age and writers, and all warrant
in religion, to conclude that the doctrine of this article is false: that
Bishops, Priests and Deacons may lawfully marry at their own discretion. And
very vainly our Protestants singularily allege, for their defense from
Socrates the historian, that Paphnutius dissuaded the Fathers of the first
Nicen council, not to decree that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons might not
keep company with their wives, which they had married when they were lay men:
vt qui essent sacris initiati, sicut Episcopi, Presbiteri, Diaconi, cum
vxoribus, quas cum erant Laici, in matrimonium duxissent, minime dormirent. But
it should suffice, that they which were unmarried when they were called to the
clergy, should according to the old tradition of the Church abstain afterward
from marriage: vt qui in clerum ante ascripti erant, quam duxissent vxores, hi
secundum veterem Ecclesiae traditionem, deinceps a nuptijs seabstinerent. For
here the marriage of such men, and this Article, is plainly condemned by their
own Author, and the old Apostolic tradition in the Church.

And this is confirmed by above 200. Later Bishops Episc. Gr^^. 227. in can.
Trullen. can. 6.
of the Greek Church itself, testifying it was the doctrine and tradition of
the Apostles, that among those of the clergy none but Lectours and Singers
might marry, and they accordingly decree, that no Subdeacon, Deacon or Priest
may marry, and if he should he must be deposed. Quoniam in Apostolicis
Canoibus (...) est, torum qui non ducta vxore, in clerum promouentur, solos
lectores and cantores vxorem posse ducere: and nos hoc servants, decernimus,
vt deinceps nulli penitus Hypodiacono, vel Diacono, vel Presbytero post sui
ordinationem, coningium contrahere liceat: Si autem hoc facere ausus fuerit,
deponatur. And this is their use and practice to these days.

The other clause of Paphnutius opinion, about Bishops, Priests, and Deacons
married before their consecration, not to be barred from such their former
wives, married unto them when they were lay men, by any express law to be
made by that council, if it be truly related, nothing concerns this
article, only speaking of Marriage of such men after holy Orders taken, and
not when they were lay men. Yet that citation of Sacrates in this point wants
not suspicion of untruth. For the same Socrates speaking upon his own certain
Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. cap. 21.
knowledge, affirms it was the received custom in Thessalia, Macedonia, and
other parts of the Greek Church, that if a clergy man kept company with his
wife, that he had married when he was a lay man, he was to be degraded. Ipse in
Thessalia consuetudinem iuualuisse noui, vt ibi qui clericus sit, si cum vxore,
quam eum esset Laicus ducebat, post quam clericus factus sit, dormierit,
clericatu abdieatus sit, eadem consuetudo etiam Thessalonicae, and in
^acedonia, and in Hellade seruatur. And says, that all the renowned Priests
and Bishops also in the east absteyne from such wives. Omnes illustres
presbyteri in Orient, and Episcopi etiam, ab vxoribus abstinent.

And he confesses, that the absteyning of clergy Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c.
8. supr.
men from the^^ formerly married wives, when they were lay (...) was so
religious, just, and necessary, in the Judgment of the whole general
council, that they determined to make a decree and canon thereof: visum erat
Episcopis legem in Ecclesiam introducere: vt qui essent sacris initiati, sicut
Episcopi, Presbiteri and Diaconi, cum vxoribus, quas cum erant Laici, in
matrimonium duxissent, minime dormirent. And it seems by the Arabike Council.
Ni^. can. 78. Arabico.
copy of that council* that this or the equivalent law and decree was then
made: si vxorem duxit, and adhuc vxor viuit, and cum eo habitat, debet imponi
duplex panitentia. Idem seruandum de Diacono.

And the third of those canons of this council which both Catholics and
Protestants commonly receive, forbids all Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Council.
Nic. can. 3.
and clergy men to dwell with any woman, but their mother, sister,
grandmother, or Aunt, sister to their father or mother. Nisi forte matter aut
Soror aut auia, aut amita, aut matertera sit. And the second council of Arles
held about the same time, in the days of S. Syluester Pope, and Constantine
Emperor, plainly forbids all cohabitation or meeting with wives married
before, under pain of excommunication. Si quis de clericis a gradu Council.
Arel. 2. can. 3.
Diaconatus in solatio suo mulierem praeter auiam, matrem, sororem, filiam
neptem, vel conuersam secum vxorem habere praesumpserit, a communione aliena^
habeatur. Here the wife married before except conuersa professing chastity as
the husband now does, is forbidden his company, and he from her, and most
plainly in the canon before, a married man is disabled to be a Priest, except
promising and professing chastity. Assumi ad Sacerdotium non potest, in
vinculo coniugij constitutus, nisifuerit promissa conuersio. In this council
our Archbishop Constable. Magn. epist. Eccles. Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 6.
of London Restitutus, was present, and subscribed unto it for this Kingdom,
which with France where this council was kept, Spain, Italy, and other
contries of the west presently received the Nicen council.

Eusebius Caesariensis present at the council of Eusebius. demonst. Euang. l. 1.
c. 9.
Nice, and writing after it, is plain that married men receiving holy Orders
were bound to chastity. Oportere dicit sermo diuiuus, Episcopum vnius vxoris
virum esse. Veruntamen eos, qui sacrati sint, atque in Dei ministerio cultuque
occupati; continere deinceps seipsos a commercio vxoris decet. And S.
Epiphanius also a grecian and living at that time, and writing in that age,
testifies plainly, that the holy Church of God, where the canons were
sincerely kept, did admit none to be either Bishop, Priest, Deacon or
Subdeacon but such, as absteyned from their wives if married before, or in
single and chaste life. And if it was otherwise used in any place wheresoever,
it was an abuse, this being the custom of the Church directed by the holy
ghost ever from the beginning, that Ecclesiastical men, married, or not
married should ever live in chastity. Adhuc viuentem and liberos gignentem
Epiph. Hae^. 29. and in compendiar.
vnius vxoris virum non suscipit sancta Dei Ecclesia, sed eum qui se ab vna
continuit, aut in viduitate vixit, Diaconum and Presbiterum, and Episcopum and
Hypodiaconum: maxim vbi sinceri sunt Canones Ecclesiastici. At dices mihi,
omnino in quibusdam locis adhuc liberos gignere, and Presbyteros, and Diaconos,
and Hypodiaconos. At hoc non est iuxtae Canonem, sed iuxta hominum mentem,
quaeper tempus elanguit. Nam quod decentius est, id semper Ecclesia per
spiritum sanctum been disposita videns, statuit apparare, vt cultus diuini
indistracti Deo perficerentur. And he makes this a commandment in scripture.
Si populo praecipit ^. Cor. 7.
Sanctus Apostolus, dicens, vt ad tempus vacent orationi: quanto magis
Sacerdoti idem praecipit? vt indistractus sit, inquam, ad vacandum secundum
Deum Sacerdotio, quod in spiritualibus necessitatibus ac vsibus perficitur.

But if we should allow, which these holy Fathers both of the Greek and
Latin Church would not do, that the chastity of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons
is not commanded in scriptures, but that the scriptures only commend it for
the more perfect and better duly to execute those sacred functions, as all both
Catholics and Protestants agree, it is without question, that the universal
Church of Christ has even by these Protestants most religiously decreed, and
commanded Ecclesiastical men to live in chastity. And they contradict and
condemn themselves herein, in their next article Prof. Artic. ^4.
but one in these words: whosoever through his private Judgment, willingly and
purposely does openly break the traditions and ceremonies of the Church, which
be not repugnant to the word of God, and be ordained and approved by common
authority, ought to be rebuked openly, as he that offends against the common
order ^^ the Church.

Therefore the continent and chaste life, and profession of the Clergy being
confessed by all both Catholics, and Protestants; not to be repugnant to the
word of God, but most conformable unto it: And both commanded, generally
received, approved Couel. Exam. p. 64. 65. 114. field page 138. l. 3. cap. 29.
Middleton. Papiston. p. 134.
and practiced, not only by all commanding chief Churches, but through out
the whole Catholic world; must needs be maintained. And our Protestants
confessing this, and with privilege writing, the ancient Fathers so
receiving it from the^, that went before them, taught; That vows of chastity,
and single life in Priests, is to be observed by tradition: The doctrine taught
in the article cannot be true, nor the liberty therein allowed, lawful, but
wantonly licentious, and damnable.

THE XXV. CHAPTER.
Tbe 33. 34. Articles examined, an in whatsoever repugnant to the doctrine of
the Church of Rome, thus condemned.
THeir 33. next article entitled, of excommunicate persons, how they are to be
avoided, contains nothing contrary to the doctrine or practice of the Church
of Rome, as is manifest in these the very words thereof. That person, which by
open denuntiation of the Church, is rightly cut of from the unity of the
Church, and excommunicate, ought to be taken of the whole multitude of the
faithful, as an heathen and publican, until he be openly reconciled by
penance, and received into the Church by a Judge, that has authority thereto.

Therefore I pass it over, and come to the next 34. article, entitled: Of the
traditions of the Church. and follows in these words: It is not necessary,
that traditions, and ceremonies be in all places one, or vterly like: for at
all times they have been diverse, and changed according to the diversity of
contries, times, and men's manners, So that nothing be ordained against Gods
word. Whosoever through his private Judgment, willingly and purposely does
openly break the traditions, and ceremonies of the Church, which be not
repugnant to the word of God, and be ordained and approved by common authority,
ought to be rebuked openly, that others may fear to do the like, as he that
offends against the common order of the Church, and hurts the authority of
the magistrate, and wounds the consciences of the weak brethren.

Hitherto this article seems to have little or no opposition to the Church of
Rome, but it may be passed over with silence. The rest of it immediately thus
follows. Every particular and national Church has authority to ordain,
change, and abolish ceremonies, orrites of the Church ordained only by man's
authority, So that all things be done to edifying.

This clause is evidently false and profane in itself, for making every
particular Church, many thousands such being in the world, to be supreme judge
and sentencer, not only to ordain, change, and abolish ceremonies, and rites
of the universal Catholic Church, but to have ouerruling authority to decree
and command, what is fit, or fittest for edification, takes away all possible
hope of edification, and brings most certain destruction, confusion, and
desolation, by making so many thousands of Supreme Judges in these doubts, as
there be particular Churches, which is a thing most foolish and irreligious to
affirm, and impossible to be acted. Further it is directly opposite and
repugnant to their own 19. and 20. articles before of the Church and
authority thereof. In the 19. article they teach that all particular Churches
even the chiefest have erred not only in their living and manner of
ceremonies, but also in matters of faith.

Therefore by these Protestants, we may neither admit so many, or any one such
erring, and false Judge in such things. Neither by their doctrine may we
stand, to the censure of any particular national Church, but only of the one
Catholic militant Church of Christ, which as it is ever by that article of our
Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Artic. 19.
Church, holy and unspotted from error, so by these men in the same article it
is thus assigned to be our only true Judge in these affairs. The visible
Churcb of Christ is a congregation of faithful men, in the which the pure word
of God is preached, and the Sacraments be daily ministered, according to Christ's
ordinance, in all those things, that of necessity, are requisite to the same.

And in their next article of the same one only Church, thus they decree, in
these words: of the authority of the Church. The Church has power to
decrecrites, or ceremonies, and authority in Controversies of faith. And their
best writers have published with their common and best allowance, this sentence
in this Question. The primative Councels have condemned Couell. Mod. exam. p.
65.
them as heretics, only for being stiffely obstinate in this kind, of
denying the ceremonies of the Church. They exemplify thus in Aerius: Aerius
Field l. 3. cap. 29* page 138. Couel. exam. page
condemned the custom of the Church. For this his rash and inconfiderate
boldness, in co^demnig the universal Church of Christ, was justly condemned.

The custom ceremony and tradition which this heretic denied, and was
therefore by these men, justly condemned, was as they confess, naming the
dead at the altar, and offering the sacrifice of Eucharist for them.

This is but a ceremony by them, because they contend, it is not contained is
scripture, nor may be proved thereby, as they likewise have pretended for all
other things, which their Articles before have rejected, both in Sacraments and
other doctrines, and customs, which I have proved against them, and do leave
them as alterable ceremonies, upon that feeble and vain pretense. Under this
pretense they have taken away all our Missals, or orders of holy Mass, used
in all Churches, with their religious ceremony from the Apostles time, as I
have proved before. So they have done by all rituals, and ceremonials, about
the ministering the Communion Book, and Book of Consecrat. of King Edu. 6.
Franc. Mason and the Prot. of their consecrat. in Mat. Parker. Prot. art* 36
infra. Stat. in parlamento. an. 2. Eduardi 6.
holy* Sacraments and brought in their places the childish and womanly devises
of a named communion book by young King Eduard 6. and Queen Elizabeth, and an
other named and styled by them, The form, and manner, of making and
consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, quite omitting all other orders
ever used in all Churches from Christ's time, and these fashions never used
before by their own confession by any Christian Britans, Saxons, French, or
others in this Kingdom, or all the world, but, to use their own words, in
these articles, lately set fourth in the time of Eduard the sixth, and confirmed
at the same time by authority of Parliament, the second year of the aforenamed
King Edward. He then being about eleven years old, a far to young censurer,
Judge, and condemner of all Churches with their holy, universally received
ceremonies, to bring in so strange and childish an Innovation. We are assured
by the Apostolic men of this first age, and others, that even from the
Apostles, there were many particular ceremonies delivered to be immutably used
in all Churches.

Thus S. Clement, and S. Dionisius the Areopagite, Clem. Romans Apost. constable.
lib. 8. cap. 29. Dion. Areop. Ecclesiastic. Hierarc. c. 2.
with diverse others deliver of hallowing oil and water to heal diseases,
drive away devils, and and like effects settinge down the very manner how to
sanctify them. Domine Deus Sabbath, Deus virtutum, qui dedisti aquam ad
bibendum, and oleum ad exhilarandum faciem, in exultationem laetitiae, ipse
etiam nunc sanctifica per Christum hanc aqua^, and oleum, ex nomine eius qui
obtulit, and tribue ei vim sanandi and depellendi morbum, fugandi daemones,
expellendi insidias, per Christum spem nostram. And by Apostolic Alexander
Pap. 1. epistol. omnes orth.
authority command those ceremonies especially of holy water, to be
perpetually used by Priests in all Churches, aquam sale conspersam populis
benedicimus, vt ea cuncti aspersi sanctificentur and purificentur, Quod and
omnibus Sacerdotibus faciendum esse mandamus. So ancient was this holy
ceremony of sanctifying water and salt, so continual general and inviolable,
which our Protestants themselves thus acknowledge. Alexander Romanus aquam
admixto Robert. Barn. l. de vit. Pont. Roman. in Alexandro 1.
sale precibus benedicendam, eamque and in templo, and domi ad Satanam
propellendum, and ad peccata tollenda, seruari iussit.

So it was in hallowing the water of baptism, S. Clement and others delivering
the very manner thereof* deprecetur Sacerdos instante baptismo. Et dicet:
Clem. constable. Apost. l. 7. ca. 43 and l. 8. c. 35.
Aspice e Coelo and sanctifica hanc aquam: tribue gratiam and vim, and qui
baptizatur secundum mandatum Christi, cum eo crucifixus, commortuus,
consepultus and consufutatus sit, in adoptionem, quae in eo fit, vt mortuus
quidem sit peccato, viuat autem iustitiae. There he delivers Cap. 42.
also, the form, and order, of hallowing Chrisme to anoint the baptized.
Benedicitur oleum a Sacerdote in remissionem peccatorum.

There he delivers the abrenuntiation which was made before baptism.
Abrenuntiatio sathanae Cap. 41.
and operibus eius, pompis, cultui, Angelis, and machinationibus eius, and
omnibus quae subipso sunt. He delivers Cap. 23. ep. 3. constable. Apost. l. 3. c.
16. 10. Justinius quaes. 137. Missa. S. Marci. Clem. co^st. Apost. l. 8. c. 12
Ciprianus ep. 63. Miss. S. Jacob. Alexand. 1. ep. 1. Justin. orat. ad Ant. pium
Ireneus l. 4. c. ^7. lib. 5. cap. 2 Dion Areop. l. Eccl. Hier. c. 43. Clem.
constable. Apost. l. 3. c. 6. Ignat. epist. ad Ephesians Iren. l 4 c. 20. c. 34. Euarist.
apud Burchar. l. 1. cap. 27. Pius r. apud eund l. 5. c. 47 l. 3. c. 72. Tom. 1
conc. etc. Clem. can. Apost. 72. ep. 2.
the anointing of the baptized, vnges oleo sancto caput eorum, qui
baptizantur, sieve viri sint, sieve mulieres. It was Dominica Traditio, the
Tradition even from Christ, that in the chalice water should be mixed with the
wine to be offered, ne quid aliud fiat a nobis, quam quod pro nobis Dominus
Priorfecerit, vt calix qui in commemorationem eius offertur, mixtus vino
offeratur. The Apostolic writers of this age assure us, there were altars, and
they consecrated, to consecrate and offer upon them, the blessed and perpetual
sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, and how they were consecrated as now they
are, with holy oil. Diuini altaris consecrationem sanctissimorum mysteriorum
lex sacratissimi vnguenti castissimis infusionibus perficit. And deliver the
very manner with incense and other ceremonies, Pontifex vbi orationem sanctam
super diuinum altar peregit, ex ipso incensum adolere inchoans, omnem plani
ambitum circuit. Demum ad sanctum altar iterum rediens, psalmorum incipiens
melos. Qui vero ipsius ordinis praecipui sunt, vna cum Sacerdotibus sanctum
panem and benedictionis calicem sanctis altaribus imponunt. So they write of
chalices, patens, and veales hallowed: vas aureum, vel argenteum, vel velum
sanctificatum nemo amplius in suum vsum conuertat, hoc enim fit contra ius, and
contra leges.

So of the holy vestiments of Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, and
others of the Clergy: Sacris induti vestimentis. So our Protestants
themselves Clem. ep. 2. Anac. ep. 1. Robert. Barnes l. de vit. Pontif Romans in
Anacle^o.
confess: Anacletus, Sacerdotem sacrificaturum, ministros vestibus sacris
indutos, contestes and custodes sibi adhibere ordinauit. Episcopus vero vt
plures ministros sibi in sacris faciendis adiungat. I have spoken of diverse
others before, and shall remember more in the 36. of consecration of Bishops,
and ministers, hereafter.

And our ancient monuments are witnesses, that as other nations, so all the
Churches of Britain did in the Britans time, receive and follow these
manners, and ceremonies even by authority of the Roman Church. Omnes
Britannicae Ecclesiae modum, Manuscr. ant. in vit. S. Dauidis. Capgr. Catal. in
eodem.
and regulam Romana authoritate acceperunt. Therefore most certain it is, that
every particular and national Church, has not, against this article,
authority to ordain, change and abolish such ceremonies or rites of the
Church as the Protestants of England have done.

THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
The 35. 36. articles, entitled, of homilies, and of consecration of Bishops,
and ministers, thus examined and condemned.
THeir next 35. article entitled of homilies, does only receive and allow to
be read, in their Protestant Church 2. Books of homilies, one set fourth in
the time of King Eduard the sixth, the other in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth her Reign. Of which the reader may easily give censure, according
to that is said and proved in the former articles, for wherein soever either of
those 2. books, any homily, in them, on any part point or doctrine in any
one of them all does differ from the first Apostolic Catholic true doctrine
inuinciblie proved before, those books, homilies, parcels, or assertions of
them, are utterly to be rejected and renounced. Which the very times
themselves of their publication, the condemned erroneous days of that King,
and Queen, and their Protestan^ composers, and publishers, likewise condemned
for their false teaching, and writing do manifest unto us.

Their 36. article, of Consecration of Bishops, and ministers, is thus. The
book of consecration of Archbishops, and Bishops; and ordering of Priests, and
Deacons, lately set for the in the time of Edward the sixth, and confirmed at
the same time by authority of parliament, does contain all things necessary,
to such consecration, and ordering, neither has it any thing, that of it
self is superstitious, or ungodly. And therefore whosoever are consecrated or
ordered according to the rites of that book, since the second year of the a
forenamed King Edward, unto this time, or here after shall be consecrated, or
ordered according to the same rites, we decree all such to be rightly, orderly,
and lawfully consecrated and and ordered. Hitherto this article, which in every
part thereof is fully confuted before, in my Examination of their 23. Article
entitled of ministering in the congregation. Where I have demonstratiuely
proved, that they neither have any true lawful Jurisdiction, or ordination,
among them.

But to do a work of Supererogation in this so much concerning the standing or
ouerth^owe of our Protestants whole religion quite overthrown by this one
dispute if they have no rightly, orderly and lawfully consecrated Bishops,
Priests or Deacons I further thus demonstrate. First then if the decree of this
Article, as they term it, were to be accepted, and received for a just and
lawful decree, yet the first Protestant Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in
Queen Elizabeth her time, from which all that now be in England, or have
been since then, cannot be said to be rightly orderly and lawfully
consecrated and ordered by this very Article it self. For that supposed book
of King Edward the sixth, being abrogated, and taken away by Queen Maryes
laws, and not afterward received by the Protestant laws of Queen Elizabeth,
until in these Articles in the year of Christ Book of Articl. an. 1562.
1562. as their date is, Queen Elizabeth beginning her Reign on the 17. day
of November in the year 1558. all their first pretended Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, must needs be unrightly, unorderly, and unlawfully made, though by
that book of King Eduard: because there was no Protestant Right, Order, or
law, to make or admit any into such places by that book not approved, or
allowed by any Protestant Right, Order or law, all that time. Again the first
Protestant consecration, or admittance of any, to be a Bishop by that book,
or order in Queen Elizabeth her Reign; Franc. Mason. of consecrat. Registr.
Matt. Parkeri. Butler ep. de consecrat. ministr. Su^cl. ag. D. Kell. page 5.
was on the 17. day of December, in her second year, as they pretend from
their Register of Matthew Parker. But their own both private and public
Authorities prove, that both Matthew Parker their first Protestant Archbishop,
and others were received, and allowed for Archbishops and Bishops long before
that time. Franci^ Franc. Godwin catal. of Bishops in Durham 58. Cutberth
Tunstoll.
Godwyn a Bishop among them says, Matthew Parker was Archbishop of Canterbury
in the month of July before, about 6. Months before their first pretended
consecration one the 17. of December.

Stow their historian then living and writing Stow Histor. in Queen Elizab.
an. eius 1.
testifies, that the same Matthew Parker, Barlowe, Scorie, and Grindall were
allowed and received for Bishops in the month of August the 9. day in publik
solemnities. The publik Injunctions Iniunction: Elizab. Regin. ^n. 1. Regin.
Iniunct 8. 28. 30. 51 53.
of that Queen styled, Injunctions given by the Q^eenes Majesty, Anno Domini
1559. the first of the Reign of our Sovereign lady Qu^ene Elizaheth, prove
the same in diverse Injunctions. No man can say these were only Bishops Elect,
and not perfectly allowed, or admitted for true Bishops. For by the Statut. an.
25 Henr. 8. an. 1. Elizab. c. 1.
statute of King Henry 8. an. 25. revived by Queen Elizabeth in her first
parliament anno 1. cap. 1. consecration must be within twenty days of election.
And their common consent in their great Theater of great Brit. l. 9. cap. 24.
col. 20.
Theater is, that they were compleately allowed Bishops, consecrated (as they
term that allowance many months before. D. Parker was consecrated Archbishop
of Canterbury, and of york D. Young in stead of Heath, who refused the oath,
and so of others. Then went forth commissioners to suppress those monasteryes
restored by Queen Mary and to cast out Images Hollinsh. hist. of Engl. an. 1.
Elizabeth. Iniunct. of Q. Elizab. Iniunct. 23.
set up in Cburches. So has Hollinshed, with others, So in that Queens
pulike Injunctions.

These commissions and commissioners being thus after those Protestant Bishops
made or allowed went out so soon, that as their histories confess, the
religious howses were suppressed, Protestant ministers were put into
westminster in place of monks, all Church Images were pulled Stowe and howes
histor. in an. 1. of Q. Elizab.
down and to speak in their own words, on the even of S. Bartholomew, the
day and the morrow after* were burned in Paul's Church yard, Cheap, and
diverse other places of the city of London, all the Roodes, and other Images of
the Churches, in some places the coapes, vestiments, altar clothes, books,
banners, Sepulchers, and rood lofts were burned. The very Injunctions Iniunct.
8. 30. 51.
testify, that there were compleately received for Bishops diverse months
before that 17. day of December both in the Sea of Conterburie, york and in
the other Diocesses, with ample and full Episcopal power. Therefore these
pretended Bishops could not possibly be made but only by a womanly presumed
vain, and frustrate authority, in such things. Neither could any Register
called Parkers Register be so termed, except he had been accepted and reputed
for Archbishop before.

And all the first Protestant citers of this Register, whether Matthew Parker
himself, as it is alleged in his book styled Antiquitates Britannicae
Antiquitat. Brit. Hanouiae 1605. Butler ep. de consec. minist. Sutcliffe contr.
Kell. Godw catal. of Bish. canterbur. in Mat. Parker. and alijs. Franc. Maso^
book of cons. etc.
as Doctor Butler, Doctor Sutclisse, their Bishop Godwyn, and Frauncys Mason,
do differ one from an other, in citing thereof. And whereas the printed Book
of Parkers Antiquitates Britannicae is the first that mentions any such
pretended consecration of him, and the rest, and the others seem to borrowe
this from thence: In the old manuscript of that book which I have seen and
diligently examined, there is not any mention or memory at all, of any such
Register, or consecration of either Matthew Parker or any one of those
pretended Protestant Bishops, as the obtruded Register speaks of. Neither was
there any one of the pretended consecratours of Matthew Parker, from whom all
the rest do claim ordination, a true and lawful Bishop, by Protestant
proceedings. These they name unto us: william Barlowe, Franc. Mason book of
consecrat. page 127.
John Scory, Miles Couerdale, John Hodgeskins, by these Matthew Parker was
consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury the seuententh day of December, in the
year 1559.

Two of these 4. namely Couerdale, and Hodgeskins, were never allowed for
Bishops in all Queen Elizabeth her time, as the same pretended Register, the
printed Antiquitates Britannicae, Godwyne, Mason, and others of them confess,
confessing also that the other two were but Bishops elect, Barlowe elect of
Chichester, Scory elect of Hereford. But all men grant both Catholics and
Protestants, that men only elect Bishops, not consecrated, or admitted, cannot
consecrate Bishops much less an Archbishop Metropolitan. And Scory had been
adjudged before publicly to be no Bishop. And Barlowe if he had been a true
Bishop, neither would, nor could in his own Judgment consecrate a Bishop. For
as these men acknowledge both this Barlowe and Couerdale also held this horrible
opinion against Episcopal Order.

The names of blasphemy against the Lord, and hi^ Barlowe and Couerdale apud
Bal. l. Image of both Church.
Christ. What else is Pope, Patriarch, Metropolitan, primate Archbishop,
Diocesan and such like, but very names of blasphemy? Here is not one true
consecratour. Yet these men in their pretended ordination of Bishops necessarily
require to the admitting o^ any such Bishop, especially an Archbishop, bot^ the
presence and concurrence of a lawful true Archbishop and others such Bishops
as their own pretended Prot. form and manner of making Bishops Priests and
minist. Ti^ul. consecrat. of Bishops in praefat.
Rite and book of consecrating Bishops does thus plainly express: Then the
Archbishop and Bishops sent, shall lay their hands, upon the head of the
elected Bishop, the Archbishop saying. Take the holy ghost, etc. And it proves
further in these words, It is evident unto all men diligently reading holy
scripture, and ancient Authors, that from the Apostles time, there have been
these orders of ministers in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.
Therefore to the intent these Orders should be continued, and reverently used in
the Church of England it is requisite, that no man, not being at this present,
Bishop, Priest, nor Deacon, shall execute any of them, except he be called,
tried, examined and admitted, according to the form hereafter following. Which
is that book of King Edward the sixth received in this article and approved by
their greatest warrants, parliament, Princes Supreamacie, and public practice
among them.

And therefore howsoever either with, by, or without this book, form, and
manner of King Edward, their first Protestant pretended Archbishop, Matthew
Parker, maker and allower of all such after, as they freely confess, was made,
his making, and admittance was frustrate, inualid, void and of noe force by
their own censure, and doom against themselves; and so of all others made by
him no Bishop pretending or clayming that honor, dignity and office after by
that vain, Idle, and impossible Title, to challendge to have that, or any
other thing, from him, or them, which neither had it for themselves, or to give
to others. And this I have proved before from the Apostolic men of this age
and from the Apostles themselves, that a Bishop cannot be consecrated but by
true and undoubted Bishops. Episcopum mandamus Clem. constable. Apost. l 3 c. 20.
Anacl. ep. 2. Clem. constable. Apost. l. 8. c. 33.
ordinari a tribus Episcopis, velad minus a duobus: non licere autem ab vno
vobis constitui. And again: Episcopus a tribus vel duobus Episcopis ordinetur.
Si quis ab vno ordinetur Episcopo, deponatur ipse, and qui eum ordinauit. This
is set down for an Apostolical decree. Now let us come to King Edwards
book so dignified in this article, and particularily examine and disprove the
validity, or sufficiency of that form in every point thereof.

And first whereas it makes mention only of Clem. constable. Apost. l. 3. c. 11.
l. 8. c. 21. 22. 28. ep. 2. Ignat. ep. ad Antioch. ep. ad Philadelphien. ep. ad
Philippenses Anacl. ep. 2. Synod. Romans sub Syluestr. c. 7. 11. Canis ep. ad
faelicem c. 6. Clem. constable. Apost. l. 2. c. 61. Clem. Supr. l. 8. constable. Apost.
c. 21. council. corth. 4. c. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons to have been in the Church from the Apostles
time, This holy time assures us, of all other orders now used in the
Catholic Church, to have been also in those days in use, and practice,
Subdeacons, Acolythists, Exorcists, Lectours and Ostiarij, with their
particular and several offices, duties, consecration, or admittance, to those
degrees, and that no man might be a Bishop Priest or Deacon, except he had
first received those orders, nifi prius fuisset lector, deinde exorcista, and
postea caperet onus Acolithi, vt acciperet onus Subdiaconi, and deinde ad
diaconatus honorem pertingeret. By their consecration they were ordained to
assist and minister at the holy sacrifice of Mass, a Subdeacon for the holy
vessels, calice, paten, cruetts: Tribue ei spiritum sanctum vt vasa ad
ministrandum tibi, Domine Deus, facta digne attrectet. An Acolithus to light
candels and prepare; and minister wine for the sacrifice of mass: accipiat
ceroserarum cum cereo, vt sciat s^ ad accendenda Ecclesiae luminaria mancipari:
accipiat and vrceolum vacuum, ad suggerendum vinum in Eucharistiam sanguinis
Christi. An exorcist received the book of Exorcismes, and power against
devils: accipiat de manu Episcopo libellum, in quo scripti sunt exorcismi,
dicente sibi Episcopo: accipe and commenda memoriae, and habeto potestatem
imponendi manus, super energumenos. So of Lectour and Ostiarius. All these be
wanting in this book of King Edward, and this Protestant Religion, and all is
wanting in it for which they were ordained, except devils and possessed
persons. They may well want both them No true clergy man among Protestants of
England: and first, no Deacon. The English. Prot. form of making Bish. pr. and
Deac. Titul. Deacons.
all Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, also, as they do. For first their pretended
book of consecration gives a Deacon only authority to read the gospel in
their Church, for allthough their pretended Bishop lays his hands one the
head of every such parson, at his admittance to that office; and says unto
him: Take thou authority to execute the office of a Deacon, in the Church of
God committed unto thee. Yet they presently interpret, and limitte this office,
to be only confined in reading the gospel in these words. Take thou
authority to read the gospel in the Church of God. And such is their
practice, extending a Deacons office no further.

And they obstinately deny, that he has power, or office to assist either
Bishop, or Priest in the holy Sacrifice of Christ's blessed body, and blood, as
that either Priest or Bishop may, or can consecrate and offer the same. We
find both the doctrine and practice of this first apostolic age, to have
been otherwise, and the chiefest office of a Deacon, as the very Greek name
it self still testifies to be as Catholics still use it, to minister unto,
and assist the Bishop or Priest in his holy Sacrifice.

So it is plainly witnessed in the old Masses and Miss. S. Petri, S. Iacobi,
S. Marci. Clem. Constable. Apost. l. 3. c. 20. l. 8. c 28.
Missals ascribed to S. Peter, S. James, S. Mark, and others. S. Clement from
the Apostles says: Diaconus ministret Episcopo and Presbyteris. oblatione ab
Episcopo aut Presbytero facta, ipse Diaconus dat populo, non tanquam Sacerdos,
sed tanquam qui ministrat presbyteris. And expresselie teaches, that it is the
office and function of a Deacon thus to minister unto Bishops, and Priests,
this only or principally, Diaconus L. 3. c. 20. sup.
ministret Episcopo and Presbyteris, id est, agat Diaconum, and reliqua ne
faciat. And settinge down the whole form, and Order of Mass, and sacrifice
used, and approved by the Apostles, Bishops, and Priests in his time, even from
the beginning thereof, unto the end, he brings in Deacons to perform their
holy ministration and seruinge therein. Praying to God to accept that
Sacrifice. Deaconus pronunciet. Clem. supr. l. 8. c. 19.
Rogamus Deus. Prodono oblato Domino Deo, oremu^ Vt Deus suscipiat illud in
caeleste altar suum, in odorem suauitatis. For all the people of God living,
and dead. Pro vniuerso Ecclesiae caetu. Pro ijs qui in fid^ quieuerunt.

They deliver the bread and wine to be consecrated, Cap. 1^.
to the Bishop or Priest, that said Mass Diaconi offerant dona Episcopo ad
altar. They attend that nothing falls into the chalices, ne i^ pocula
incidant. At the time of consecration, they Cap. 20.
called upon the people for attention. Diaconus dicat, attendamus.

They hold the consecrated chalice, and confess^ it to be the blood of Christ,
the cup of life. Diaconus teneat calicem, and quando tradit dicat, sang^^
Christi, calix vitae. And after all had communicated, they take that which is
left, and with reverence preserve it. Postquam omnes sump serunt, accipiant
Diaconi reliquias, and portent in pastiphoria. And they said this prayer,
testifying it was the precious body and blood of Christ, which had been there
offered and received for remission of sin and preservation in piety.
Diaconus dicat. Percepto pretioso corpore, and pretioso Cap. 20. 2^*
sanguine Christi, gratias agamus ei, qui dignos nos reddidit percipiendi
sancta eius mysteria, and rogamus vt non in iudicium sed in salutem nobis
fiant, in vtilitatem animae and corporis, in custodiam pietatis, in remissionem
peccatorum in vitam futuri saeculi. And as our Deacons now conclude and end
Mass, with. Ite Cap. 23.
Missa est. So did they then with Ite inpace. Et Diaconus dicat: Ite in pace.

Thus from S. Clement, and the Apostles, by his relation. S. Denis the
Areopagite is witness to the Dion. Areop. Eccl. Hierar. cap. 3.
like, where testifying of the most holy Sacrifice of Christ's body, and
blood, as is proved from him before, he teaches that as inferior orders
performed their duties therein, So the Deacons more high in degree, with the
Priests more nearelie assisted at the altar about this blessed sacrifice. Qui
ipsius ordinis praecipuisunt, vna cum Sacerdotibus sanctum panem, and
benedictionis calicem sacrosanctis altaribus imponunt.

So testifies S. Ignatius writing to S. Hero a Deacon, Ignat. epist. ad
Heronem Diaconum.
that such as he being Deacons, did minister unto Priests at Sacrifice, and
that so did S. Stephen to S. James, and Priests in Jerusalem. Sacerdotes Ep.
ad Trallian. and a^ Philadelph*
sunt, tu Sacerdotem minister. Sacrificant, tu vero illis ministras, vt sanctus
ille Stephanus Iacobo, and Presbyteris, qui erant Hierosolymis. So of all
Deacons in other places. Diaconi Imitatores Angelicarum virt^tum, qui purum and
inculpatum ministerium illis (Sacerdotibus) exhibent, vt S. Stephanus beato
Iacobo. And for the dignity of their ministry in so great mysteries ought to
be honored as Christ. Oportet Diaconis mysteriorum Christi ministris per omnia
placere^ nec enim ciborum and potuum ministri sunt, sed Ecclesiae Dei
administratores. Ipsi itaque tales sunt: at vos reueremini illos, vt Christum
Iesum, cuius vicarij sunt. So Epist. ad Heron.
was saint Stephen, to saint James, saint Timothy, and saint Linus, to saint
Paul, saint Anacletus, and Clemens to saint Peter. He that obeys them not, is
an enemy to God, and impure, and contemns Christ, and diminishes his
ordinance. Vt sanctus Stephanus beato Iacobo: Timotheus and Linus, Paulo:
Anacletus and Clemens Petro. Qui his (Diaconis) non obedit, sine Deo prorsus,
and impurus est, and Christum contemnit, and constitutionem eius imminuit. And
speaking of the dignity, of the altar, and Sacrifice of Christians, wherein
Deacons with Bishops, and Priests, have so excellent Ignat. epist. ^d Ephesios.
ministration, he gives charge to obey them, assuring us, he that does not so,
disobeyeth Christ, and is an abject. Enitimini subiecti esse Episcopo and
presby^eris and Diaconis. Qui enim his obedit, obedit Christo, qui hos
constituit. Qui vero his reluctatur, reluctatur Christo Jesus, qui autem non
obedit filio, non videbit vitam, sed ira Dei manet super eum. Praefractus enim,
contentiosus and superbus est, qui non obtemperat superibus.

S. Anacletus Deacon to S. Peter, as S. Ignatius before has proved, and made
Priest by the same great Apostle, as he himself confesses, and so perfectly
knowing both the doctrine, and practice of the Apostles did when he came to be
Pope ordain ^s both Catholics and Protestants acknowledge, that Deacons in
their holy vestiments should minister Anacletus ep* 1. Robert. Barn. l. de vit.
Pontif. Romans in Anacleto.
unto Priests and Bishops in the solemn sacrifices. Sacerdotem sacrificaturum,
ministros vestibus sacris indutos, adhibere ordinauit. Episcopus vero vt plures
ministros in sacris faciendis adiungat.

This is the doctrine of all holy Fathers after, and of the whole Church of
Christ, the first general Council of Nice received in this Kingdom
declares, that this was ever the rule and custom of Christ's Church, Regula
and consuetudo, that Deacons Conc. Nicen. cap. 14.
were ministers to Bishops in the holy sacrifice, and under Priests to help
them in their Sacrifice, and not to offer sacrifice, or give the body of
Christ to Priests that offer it. Peruenit ad sanctum concilium, quod in locis
quibusdam and ciuitatibus, presbyteris Sacramenta diaconi porrigant. Hoc neque
regula neque consuetudo tradidit, vt hi qui offerendi sacrificij non habent
potestatem, his qui offerunt corpus Christi porrigant. Haec amputentur and
maneant Diaconi intra propriam mensuram, scientes quia Episcoporum ministri
sunt, Presbyteris autem inferiores sunt.

This is the chief office of a Deacon, so his name ^n Hebrewe, in Greek and
Latin signify, so his duty to serve at the altar, to minister there, to the
Bishop or Priest, to prepare it, to propose bread and wine to be consecrated,
and minister in the whole sacrifice, So write our most ancient writers of
these things from the oldest monuments, and authorities. Diaconus Graece,
Hebraice l^uita, Latin assumptus Albin. flace* Alcuin. l. de divine. offic. in
Diacono.
vel minister interpretatur, assumptus quia assumitur, id est, eligitur ad
seruitium altaris: minister, quia ministrat Presbytero. Ponit linteum in
altar, ponit panem and calicem, quae nec mittendi, nec auferendi habet
potestatem Presbyter, si Diaconus adfuerit. Sicut Presbytero officium
consecrandi competit, ita Diacon^ ministrandi. Therefore, howsoever we
expound this pretended Protestant making, or admitting Deacons, that they
receive their power or office, when their pretended Bishop gives to them the
new Testament and says unto them, Take authority to read the Gospel in the
Church of God; or when he says, Take thou authority to execute the office of a
Deacon in the Church of God committed unto thee: or both together, here is no
true consecration of a Deacon in their own proceedings, nor Deacon so made, if
their pretended consecrating Bishop were a true and a lawful Bishop, for first
of giving the new testament Act. 6.
and power to read the gospel, this cannot be the full and lawful manner to
make Deacons. The first Deacons in the law of Christ being made otherwise by
the Apostles, as the Scripture witnesses, and before the new testament or any
part thereof was written, to be given to them, or for them to read the
ghospels, then unwritten, and impossible to be read, by them or any at that
time, or long after.

The other of taking authority to execute the office of a Deacon cannot be the
manner, for first no man can truly and lawfully execute that, wherein he has
no power, and here is no power of a Deacon given in all this their form, and
order. And Statut. in parliament. an. 27. Elizabethae Reg. ad. 1. Jacobo.
their own parlaments and highest authorities in their religion do not only
disable any man in England, Deacon or other to execute the office of a Deacon,
such as the Apostles and Apostolic men of this age have delivered, unto us,
but make it an offense of high treason, for any lawful Deacon, either to
execute that office in any Church, Chapel or other place, or to be in England
without executing any such office or function at all, even reading the
gospel, or any other. And so if we join this Protestant pretended power to
execute the offices of a Deacon, and read the gospel in the Church together,
there is not the least power of a true Deacon thereby either given, or
permitted by them in all England unto any such Deacon, to do, or not do such,
or any duty of that holy function. And thus much of Deacons. No true Priest
amon^ English Protestants.


Now it can be no question but the pretended Protestant Ordination of Priests
is altogether vain, Idle and frivolous; for being so iuuincibly proved, that
the chiefest and principal office and function of a Deacon is to assist and
minister unto Priests and Bishops in the holy Sacrifice of Christ's blessed body
and blood at Mass, such Sacrificing Priests, not heauing any such power before
their consecration to holy Preisthood, must needs receive it a^ that time,
otherwise they should still remain without it, as they did before. And our
Protestants utterly before denying all such sacrifice, and sacrificing power,
and in this their pretended form, and manner of consecration having no thing
at all, to receive or allow it, but the quite contrary, and by their laws so
straungely persecuting sacrificing Priests, and Preisthood, this their fashion
of making or ordering their pretended Priests, must needs be void, and
frustrate, and they still remain in that lay state, in this respect, wherein
they were before, even from their first birth into the world. Their Practice in
this pretended consecration is this.

The Bishops, the Priests present shall lay their hand^ severally upon the
head of every one, that receaueth orders: Prot. form and manner of maki^g and
consecr. Bish. Priests and Deac. Tit. form of Order of Priests.
The receauers humbly kneelinge upon their knees, and the Bishop saying.
Receive the holy ghost, whose sins thou do forgive they are are forgiven,
and whose sins thou do retain, they are retained. The Bishop shall
deliver to every one of them, the Bible in his hand saying. Take thou authority
to preach the word of God, and to minister the holy Sacraments in this
congregation, where thou shall be so appointed. Here is all their pretended
consecration of Priests, so far from all meaning, or intention to confer
any sacrificing power, or Preisthood, that before they come to this article, in
their 31. Article before they thus defined.

The Sacrifices of Masses in the which it was commonly Prot. art. 31. supr.
said, that the Priests did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have
remission of pain or guilt, were blasphemous fables, and dangerous deceites.
In that place I have inuincibly proved against them, both this Sacrifice and
sacrificing Preisthood, and Priests Institution. All his Apostles, and all
consecrated by them and their Successors were massing and sacrificing Priests,
all the Apostolic writers of this first age gave testimony to that doctrine
and practice. All Masses Missales, or public liturgies of all Churches
ascribed to the Apostles themselves, and continued by continual, never
interrupted general tradition bear witness unto it. The holy Prophets so
described the Messiah, by a perpetual holy Sacrifice to be offered in all
places in his time, that he should be a Priest after the order of Melchisedech
teach and establish that Preisthood, never to end or cease in his Church. Thus
taught the most learned rabbines among the Jews before Christ; So the Fathers
and common practice of both Greek and Latin Church with the best least
learned Protestant writers; even of England writing, and published by their
public allowance and authority, as I have undeniably proved in that article,
and there made demonstration by all authothority, that Christ at his last
Supper, when he only did execute the act and office of his Preisthood,
according to the order of Melchisedech, did ordain his Apostles sacrificing
massing Priests at that time, in express terms, set down in holy Scripture,
hoc facite in meam commemorationem.

To offer his consecrated holy body and blood in Martial. ep. ad Burdegal.
cast. 3. Clem. Coust. Apost. l. 8. c. 3. Justin. dialog. cum Triphon. Irenaeus
adu. haer. l. 4. c. ^2 Eus. l. 1 cap. 10. demon. Euang elicar. Theod. in c. 8.
ad Hebraeos. Alexa. 1. ep. 1. cap. 4. Cyprian. l 2. epist. 3. ep. 63. Ambr. in
Psalm. 38. Gandentius tractat. 2. Aug. lib. 83. q. q. 61.
Sacrifice as he had done. So the Apostolic men of this first age assure us.
Vbique offertur Deo oblatio munda, sicut testatus est: cuius corpus and
sanguinem in vitam aeternam offerimus. Quod Iudaei per inuidiam immolauerunt,
putantes se nomen eius a terra abolere: nos causa salutis nostrae in ara
sanctificata proponimus, scientes hoc solo remedio nobis vitam praestandam, and
mortem effugandam. Hoc enim ipse Dominus noster iussit nos agere in mei
commemoratione^. Domine omnipotens potestatem Apostolis dedisti offerendi tibi
sacrificium mundum and incruentum, quod per Christum constituisti, mysterium
noui testamenti. Suis discipulis dans consilium primitias Deo offerre, eum, qui
ex creatura panis est, accepit, and gratias egit dicens, hoc ^st corpus meum
and calicem similiter, qui est ex ea creatura, quae est secundum nos, suum
sanguinem confessus est, and noui Testamenti nouam docuit oblationem, quam
Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in vniuerso mundo offert Deo. This was the
opinion, profession, and practice of the whole Christian world, in that
generally confessed puer and unspotted time, both by Catholics, and
Protestants. And these men confessing that Christ did not in any other place of
scripture give this sacrificing Preistly power unto his Apostles, the chief
founders of his Church, and yet being acknowledged before to be our high
Priest, according to that Order of Melchisedech, and both to offer the
Sacrifice thereof, and establish it for his perpetual Preisthood and
sacrifice, it cannot be said by any, but his Apostles were by him ordained
sacrificing Priests at that time.

The words of the power he then gave them, hoc facite: do that which he in
that preistly act and office, did or had done, being spoken by him, which had
both ample power, and intention to give and continue that preistly order, at
and in his place and time of Sacrifice, and now no longer to continue with his
disciples, be as significant of that power, as the words of consecrating true
Priests, by true and lawful Bishops, ever used in the Church of Christ. Accipe
potestatem offerre Sacrificium Deo, Pont. Romans in ordinat. Presbyteri.
missasque celebrare, tam pro viuis, quam pro defunctis. Receive power to offer
up sacrifice to God and celebrate Mass both for the living and dead. For as
I have proved before, both Christ, and his Apostles so did, and left that
preistly power, and practice to posterity, for ever, to offer Sacrifice both
for the living, and dead. And our Protestants themselves have with public
allowance confessed it was the general custom of the primative Church so to
do, and such as impugned ordenied it, were justly condemned for so doing. And
they have with Regal Is. Casaub. resp. ad Card. peron. page 51. 52. Middleton
papist omast. page 51. 92. 113. 44. 137. 138. morton appeal l. 3. cap. 13.
sect. 1. page 394. and cap. 13.
authority, and direction from King James published, that it was the Religion
of the King, and the whole Protestant Church of England, Haec est Regis, haec
est fides Ecclesiae Anglicanae, that the fathers of the primative Church did
acknowledge one sacrifice in Christian Religion, that succeeded in place of all
the sacrifices, in the law of Moses. And the King with his Protestants agreed
with the Catholics in their opinion de duplici sacrificio, expiationis nempe,
and commemorationis sieve Religionis. Concerning two Kinds of sacrifice, the
one of expiation, for the world, the other commemoratiue or of Religion. And
this Sacrifice is the body of Christ in the Eucharist, as Catholics hold.
Nobis vobiscum de obiecto conuenit. De hoc est, fide firma tenemus quod sit.
Praesentiam credimus, praesentiam inquam, credimus, nec minus quam vos veram.

Therefore to give Priests power to offer this sacrifice, there must needs be
some consecratorie words or form to bestow it upon them, which if we recurre
to scripture, as these men must do, we can find nothing there, but those words,
of hoc facite in meam commemorationem, spoken at the sacrifice time and place
by Christ to those he then ordained sacrificing Priests. And this is most
plainly confessed by these our English Protestants with common and public
warrant, both confessing that the order of the preisthood in the law of Christ
was to offer sacrifice, this sacrifice was the body and blood of Christ, he
made his Apostles such Priests, at his last supper, when he said those words
unto them: Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Marc. Anton. lib. 2. cap. 1.
number. 3.
Do this is my commemoration. Ordinis potestatem intelligo ad conficiendam
Eucharistiam, and sacrificij in cruce per Iesum Christum peracti memoriam
celebrandam: ad quod Sacerdotium quoddam est necessarium. Ad hoc Sacerdotium
promoti sunt Apostoli a Christo Domino, in vltima caena, quando eis dixit: Hoc
facite in meam commemorationem. Quando Christus Eucharistiae conficiendae
Apostolis dabat potestatem, dixit eis: Hoc facite in meam commemorationem, cap.
3. page 193.
nimirum id quod me videtis nunc facere, and vos facite: Hoc est sumite panem,
benedicite, frangite and porrigite: similiter and vinum, and consequenter
Apostoli ex ipso facto Christi instructi, certe diuina Christi institutione
dabant Eucharistiam. And they say that Christ in those words gave power to his
Apostles to consecrate or transubstantiate bread into Christ's body, and wine
into his blood, as he himself had done. Accepto pane gratias egit, and fregit,
and dedit cap. 4. page ^18.
eis di^ens. HOC EST CORPUS MEVM, quod pro vobis datur: Hoc facite in meam
commemorationem. Panis consecrationem in Corpus Christi, and vini in sangui^em,
ipse coram Apostolis fecit: eandem ipsi quoque vt* facerent, frangerent, and
darent, express mandauit.

Thus have our Protestants published with their chief authority. Which I have
inuincibly proved before, And the Apostles themselves best witnesses of their
own consecration to preisthood, and how others are to be consecrated thereto,
so testify and direct as S. Clement their disciple thus records from their
own words: Quare vos quoque Clem. constable. Apost. l. 5. cap. 20.
suscitato Domino offerte Sacrificium vestrum, de quo vobis praecepit per nos,
dicens, hoc facite in meam commemorationem.

The like testimony is from them of themselves l. 8. constable. Apost. cap. 5.
and other Priests before: offerendo Sacrificium mundum and in^ru^ntum quod per
Christum instituisti, mysterium noui testamenti. So have others also before.
And to follow our Protestants Rule in expounding scriptures, by comparing
places, and the new testament to prefer the Greek Text, S. Paul makes it
plain unto us even in our Protestants proceedings, that those words of Christ
to his Apostles. Do this in commemoration of me, were spoken unto them only,
as Priests then consecrated. For in S. Matthew and S. Mark they are not used
Mat. 26. Ma^r. 14. Lu^. 22.
at all, and in S. Luke, they are only at the delivery of Christ's body, under
the form of bread, hoc facite in meam commemorationem, and not at the calice.

But S. Paul says plainly, that he had received from our Lord, and so
delivered unto others, before he wrote it, Ego enim accepi a Domino quod 1.
Cor. 11.
and tradidi vobis, and so writes afterward, that Christ said those words to
this Apostles twice, once at delivering his body, the other time at the
calice, yet it is evident before, and our Protestants have so granted, that
lay people have often communicated only in one Kind, which had never been
lawful if this command, and power in both had been given to them; therefore
it must needs be a power and command only to Priests at their holy
sacrifice, who only in the holy Mass have ever and in all places both
consecrated, offered, and there received in both Kinds, and no others so ever
received at all times, and places, nor the Priests themselves, as all writers
Catholics, and Protestants confess. And this our Article Protestants
themselves in their pretended book and form of consecration received in this
Article, Prot. form and Manner of Making Bish. Priests. and Deac. in praef.
and other places, do thus acknowledge: It is evident unto all men diligently
reading holy scripture and ancient Authors that from the Apostles time, there
has been these Orders of Ministers, in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, which office^ were evermore had in such reverent estimation, that no
man by his private authority might presume to execute any of them, except he
were first called, tried, examined and known to have such qualities, as were
requisite for the same, and also by public prayer, with imposition of hands,
approved, and admitted there unto. Where we find it thus plainly and
authoritatiuely with them confessed, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons were
ever in the Church, and truly and lawfully ordained by such form and Order of
consecration, as was then used, and these Priests as they have confessed in these
their Articles before in these words used the sacrifices of Masses, in which it
commonly said Pro^. Artic. 31. supr.
was, that the Priests did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have
remission of pain or gilt, they are so far from disallowing or disabling our
Catholikly consecrating Massing Priests of the Roman Church, whom they make
Traitors in England, to be truly and duly consecrated Priests, that if any
of them for fear or any other wordly respects will join with rhem in their
new Church service or profession, he is allowed a minister with them without
any further pretended order or admittance, and they dignifie their first
Catholic ordination so much, that as they have bestowed their greatest Church
living upon such, so they deduce Francis Mason book of Consecr. Man. Parker
Print. Antiq. Britan. Sutcliff and alij. Pont. Romans in ordinat. Presbyteri.
and derive their own pretended ordination only from such men, Matthew
Parker, John Scory, and Miles Couerdale, as they freely confess. And yet all
our Catholic Pontificals, or books of ordination do plainly prove, and
testify that our Priests being Deacons before, are consecrated Priests by
those words of the Bishop: Accipe potestatem offerre sacrificium. Take power to
offer sacrifice to God, and celebrate Masses both for the living and dead. And
immediately before, he calls such a parson ordinandum and quem ordinat
Episcopus, a man to be ordered, and to whom the Bishop gives preistly order,
and presently after those words names him or them that were thus ordered,
ordinati Sacerdotes, Presbiteri ordinati, Priests that be ordered. And being
thus fully ordered before any other ceremony used by Protestants or not, they
celebrate the rest of the Mass even consecrating the blessed body, and blood
of Christ, with their consecratour Bishop, and as consecrated Priests.
Presbiteri ordinati post Pontificem in terra genuflexi habeant libros coram se,
dicentes. Suscipe Sancte Pater etc. and omnia ali^ de missa, prout dicit
Pontifex: qui tamen been aduer^at, quod secretas morose dicat, and aliqaantulum
alt^, ita vt ordinati Sacerdotes possint secum omnia dicere, and praesertim
verba cons^crationis, quae dici deben^ eodem momento per ordinatos, quo
dicuntur per Pontificem.

And to put all things out of question in this matter. The scripture itself
is evident witness, that the Apostles themselves were ordered Priests by those
words of Christ unto them, Do this in my commemoration, equivalent as I have
proved to the form now used in the Roman Church recited, for all writers,
Catholics, and Protestants agree, that all the Apostles S. Thomas and the rest
were true and most properly lawful Priests, all our preisthood claimed and
deduced from them, and that they were all present at his last supper, when he
said the words, do this: unto them. Discubuit, Luc. 22. M^^. 26. M^rc. 14*
and duodecim Apostoli cum eo. Discumbebat cum duodecim discipulis suis. Dedit
eis dicens HOC EST CORPUS MEVM, quod pro vobis datur, hoc facite in meam
commemorationem. But when he said those words to his Apostles: receive the
holy ghost, whose sins you forgive, they are forgiven, and whose sins you
reteyne, they are retained. From and by which these our Protestants do claim or
pretend ordination. S. John the Evangelist then and there present does witness,
all were not there, and namely S. Thomas was absent. Thomas vnus ex duodecim
non erat cum eis, quando venit Jesus. And so could not possibly be made Priest
then with those words. Yet all agree he was a Priest as perfectly and fully as
any Apostle. Again Judas the Traitor was a Priest, present at the
consecration in the last supper, of Christ, and as S. Peter says, connumeratus
erat in nobis, and Actor. c. 1.
sortitus est sortem ministerij huius. Scriptum est in libro psalmorum: and
Episcopatum eius accipiat alter. Psalm. 68.
De loco ministerij and Apostolatus praeuaricatus est Judas. Which is more then
our Protestants pretend for their pretended Priests, or ministers. Yet he was
hanged and dead before Christ spooke the other words, and so could not
possibly be either made Priest, or be present then. And S. Paul defining a
Priest, whether of the law of Moses, or Christ, Hebr. 5.
says, every high Priest, or Priest (...) omnis Prontifex, is taken forth of
men having no such power ex hominibus assumptus, to offer sacrifice for sins.
V^offerat dona and sacrificia pro peccatis. (...). The Greek words and reading
which our Prorestants follow, are most proper for sacrifice, and sacrificing
Priests, and so both Catholic and our Protestant linguists, and lexiconaries,
confess, and translate, Mass and Mass Priest. Sacrificium (...) a sacrificio
sacrificulus Thom. Thomas and Scholae cantabrigien. dictionar. v. v.
Sacrificium. Sacrificulus and al^are Morton. Apolog. part. 2. page 82. appeal.
l. 2. sect. 1. cap. 6* page 162.
and sacrificus (...). A Priest, a Sacrificer a Mass Priest. He sets down
also the Sacrificing altar of Christians, as these our Protestants also
translate (...) altar, altar and inseperable correlatiue to (...) sacrifice as
they confess and the word proves. And the Apostle does so appropriate that
altar to our Christians at holy Mass, and the sacrifice of Christ's body,
that it can be applied to nothing else, saying none but Christians may eat of
the sacrifice offered there upon. Habemus altar de quo edere non habent
potestatem, qui tabernaculo deser^iunt. When neither Jew, nor gentile is
forbidden to believe in Christ, our Protestants eating, but called and exhorted
unto it by all means in holy scriptures. And the same Apostle directly
affirms, Hebr. 7. v. 24.
that as Christ and his Religion remain for ever, So must, this is sacrificing
preisthood be for ever (...), unchangeable, perpetual, without offense, or
exception, as these Protestant lexicons do expound that Greek adiect.

Therefore we may not give such power to a ten years old Kings book, a
woman's, Queen Elizabeth's Articles, or any power of Protestants, or other one
earth to make that mutable, arbitrary and to expire, which Christ has
instituted to be unchangeable, perpetual and never to cease. And because we
are enforced upon this Protestant exception, either to say there never was
consecration of Priests in Christ's Church until the devising of this new
Protestant form, and so these men cannot claim any from them that had it not,
for themselves, or only say these Protestants have none, and the true Catholic
Church as they have granted before, ever had true Blshops, Priests, and
Deacons we are necessitated by these men's own proceedings, and so many
vnansweareble proofs and authorities singularily to exclude these men from all
true and lawful preisthood and consecration. And these men must needs be the
preistlesse people, without Priest or sacrifice fore told and prophesied of, as
the famous ancient Fathers, Hippolitus, Methodius Method. Peter. lib. de reb.
quae ab initio mundi, and deinceps, Hyppolyt lib. de consummat. mund. and
An^ichristo.
and others have recorded. Tolletur honor a Sacerdotibus and supprimetur
mysterium Dei, and quie scet omne sacrificium ab Ecclesijs, and erunt
Sacerdotes sicut populus in eodem tempore Ecclesiarum Aedes tugurij
instarerunt, pretiosumque Corpus and Sanguis Christi non extabit in diebus
tllis.

And by this not only these Protestants form and manner of making their
pretended Priests or ministers, but their pretended Bishops also, is utterly
overthrown. For, holy Preisthood being No true Bishop among Protestants to
make Priests, Deacons or give orders, or do any Episcopal or Preistly act at
all.
given by such means, and wholly or principally to such effects, acts and ends
as I have proved, as no parsons but truly consecrated Priests can have power
to forgive sins, or minister Sacraments, except only baptism a Sacrament of
necessity, in time of necessity, and absence of Priests, and so all pretended
power of giving the holy Ghost to forgive sins, or such pretended authority
to Minister Sacraments, presumed to be conferred to any others then truly
consecrated Priests is frustrate void, and to no purpose, So a man not a
truly co^secratest Priest cannot possiblely either by Catholic doctrine, or
these our Protestants in this, and other their articles, and their pretended
book, and form of consecration, be truly and lawfully made a Bishop, these
men in these their most authorized proceeding in this matter not allowing or
permitting any man to be a pretended Priest, or minister with them, but such as
was allowed for a Deacon before, nor any to be a pretended Bishop, with them,
which was not both admitted to be both a Deacon, or Priest, at the least by
this their pretended form and fashion, so confuted in both those callings. But
forefull content I will particularly also and breifely examine and confute this
in like manner and demo^strate that it is void and inualid, although the
pretended consecratour, or consecratours were true Bishops, and the pretended
consecrated true and lawful both Deacons and Priests.

Thus it is set down in this pretended form of Prot. form and manner of
making and cons. Bish. pr. and Deacons in Bish.
consecration. The Archbishop and Bishops present, shall lay their hands upon
the head of the elected Bishop, the Archbishop saying; Take the holy Ghost, and
remember that thou stir up the grace of God which is in thee, by imposition
of hands: for God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, and
love, and sobernes. Then the Archbishop shall deliver him the Bible, saying.
Give heed unto reading, exhortation, and doctrine. think upon these things
contained in this book. And the rest of that exhortation being only a
persuasion and admonition to do well, without any pretense of giving
Episcopal order or power at all. And yet these men and this their form and
manner to make Bishops do assure us, that the party whom they pretend to make
a Bishop, is so made by that first ceremony of hands, and words then spoken, or
not at all. For, as it is cited from the^, they name and take him to be only,
elected Bishop, at their laying on of hands. And presently after that, which I
have cited is endeed, they call him, the new consecrated Bishop, in these
terms. Then the Archbishop shall proceed to the communion, with whom the new
consecrated Bishop with others, shall also communicate. But here is not any one
singular, or privileged thing, sign, ceremony, word, or act, that may by
probable or possible means give Episcopal order, though the pretended
co^secratour or consecratours were the most lawful and best Bishops in the
world; for in their own proceedings, except in number of Bishops which take
not for a matter of necessity, here is noe more done, or said, then was in
their making of pretended Priests or ministers before, for these the same were
their ceremony and words, which now. The Bishop with the Priests present shall
lay their hands severally upon the head of every one that receaueth orders, the
Bishop saying. Receive the holy Ghost.

Here is no material difference, a Bishop is pretended consecratour in both a
like, except that they appoint an Archbishop to consecrate a Bishop, and any
other Bishop to make a Priest, but this in their own proceedings is no
material point, for they grant their first pretended Archbishops Matthew
Parker was made without any, either true or pretended Archbishop. The ceremony
of laying on of hands is the same in effect, for if in the consecrating of a
Bishop, some Priest or Priests with the consecrating Bishop should lay hands on
the elect, though this were a sin in them, yet it hinders not consecration,
if all essential things be used. The words spoken do not differ in substance.
For all men know, that the words receive the holy Ghost. Spoken to their
pretended Priest, be as significant, full, and effectual, as, Take the holy
Ghost, spoken to their pretended Bishop. The words, receive, and, take, differ
not in force, and signification. The other words, the holy Ghost, and, the holy
Ghost, be the same. In both there is the same sentence, and sense in our
language in all co^struction. If we seek construction from the words, which
immediately follow in both places, we shall rather find that the words
receive the holy Ghost spoken to their pretended Priests are of greater
efficacy and meaning, being interpreted with the very same words, wherewith
Christ gave the highest power of binding and lowsing to his highest Bishops,
and Apostles. In the other pretended ordination of Bishops, there is no power
at all given, but the party only put in mind or admonished to stir up that
grace, which was in him before, as they suppose in the^ own words. Take the
holy Ghost, and remember 2. Timoth. 1.
that thou stir up the grace of God, which is in thee by impositio^ of hands:
for God has not given us the spirit of fear bu^ of power, and love and
sobernes. The very same which S. Paul absent wrote to S. Timothy, long after
he ^ad consecrated him Priest. Adm^neo te vt resuscite^ gratia^ Dei, quae est
in te per impo^^tione^ manuum mearum* non enim dedit nobis Deus spiritum
timoris, sed virtut^s, and dilectionis, and sobr^etatis.

So to him in another place: Noli negligere gratiam 1. Timoth. 4.
quae in te est, quae ^ata est tibi per propheti^m, cum impositione manuum
pesbyterij. And it must needs have this signification ad reference to grace
given before, by impositio^ of hands in a precedent consecration, for this act
^f imposition of hands being in fieri, doing, and n^ acted, cannot possibly
give grace in any opini^n though it were in lawful, and true imposition, an^
c^nsecration, until it be acted and finished, because it is not an acted and
perfect act, nor grace until then. And this act still continues after those
words, until all these for God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of
power and love and sobernes, be pronounced. And grace is supposed here to be in
that party before any mention of imposition of hands. And both the Greek,
Latin and their own English word, (...) resuscites stir up the grace, which
is in the, prove there is grace before, if at all, and not then given, for none
of those words in any language have a giving signification. So it is in the
whole sentence both in the Greek, and Latin Text, (...). I do again put
thee in mind to stir up the gift of God which is in thee. Thus the Greek.
Adomoneo te, vt resuscites gratiam Dei, quae est in te. I admonish ^e thee,
that thou stir up the grace of God which is in ^hee. Thus the Latin. Here is
no grace given at th^^ time, b^t only a putting in mind and admo^^tion to
stir up the grace which was before So in the words translated into English by
ou^ Protestants, and he^e used: remember that thou sty^^ up the grace of God
which is in thee by imposition ^^ hands.

So the^^ words immediately f^llowing: for God has not given us, the spirit of
fear, but of power, and love, and sobe^nes. All speaking of ^race and power
given before, and not at that ti^^. And there is no scripture in any language,
nor adition, no Ecclesiastical writer, no Pontifical or book or Rites, that
ever appointed these w^rds. Take the holy ghost, and those immediately io^ned in
this Protestant form of pretended conse^^ation to be united and spoken
together in such ^a^ner, nor those from S. Paul to be used, eit^^r wi^h
others, or by themselves to be powerable to give consecration, and holy
Orders, to Bishop, Priest, or Deacon. Neither possiblely can they co^ferre any
such grace or power, being words neither of giving or receiving any thing at
all from the speaker at that time. The first words, Take the holy ghost, were
not used of our Britans, neither are in the old Roman Order. Yet our Protestans
confess they both had true Bishops and consecration, and yet without them, and
the ceremony of the book one the head of the elect. And though the Roman
Order now Pontif. Romans in consecrat. Electi in Episcopum.
uses them, yet it declares that consecration is not so given, nor a Bishop
so consecrated, but after them remains only elect, without that holy Order,
as before, and so calls him, electus, and consecrandus, elect, and to be
consecrated, but not consecrated. Further these Protestants have told us before,
both in their pretended book of consecration, and these Articles, that, It is
evident unto all men, diligently reading holy scripture, and ancient Authors,
that from the Apostles time, there has been these orders, of ministers in
Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, which officers were evermore had
in reverent estimation.

Men so evidently known to be Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and evermore had
in such reverent estimation, must evermore be certain, that they are truly
and effectually admitted to those callings, and dignities, otherwise it would
not be evident, that there be, and who be such men-it would be Prot. form of
Order: in Priests. Prot. A^ticl. Articul. 19.
uncertain, and doubtful, who is a Deacon, a Priest, or Bishop, whether there
is any true preaching, ministering of Sacraments, any Sacraments, or Church at
all. For these men allow none to preach and minister Sacraments, but such, they
define Articul.
the visible Church to be a congregatien of faithful men, in the which the
pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered according
to Christ's ordinance. Sacraments be certain sure witnesses and effectual
signs of grace, and Gods good Will toward us, by which he does work inuisibly
in us. And yet making but two Sacraments, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord,
they thus declare, and decree. Those five commonly called Sacraments, that is
to say, Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction, are
not to be compted for Sacraments of the gospel, for that they have not any
visible sign, or ceremony ordained of God.

Therefore this pretended Protestant form, and manner of consecration, as also
all their pretended Bishops, Priests, and Deacons are vain and void by their
own confession, for in all these they assign laying one of hands, a known and
evident sign and ceremony, to be the certificate and assurance of such
admittance, and grace and power given as those Ecclesiastical Orders require.
But if God did not ordeine this visible sign or ceremony to such a purpose,
to make Episcopal and other holy Orders a Sacrament, which these article, and
all their Religion deny, no created or humane authority can give such power
and preeminence unto it, to be a sign or ceremony ordained of God, a certayn^
and sure witness, and effectual sign of grace. Which their Article, and
Religion allow only to two Sacraments; and in express terms utterly denies
to all Ecclesiastical Orders, either in Bishop, Priest, or Deacon. Hereby
falling into such desperate doubts, and proceedings in this case, that they are
not only condemned by private Catholic writers, but public censures,
sentences, and consistories, of the Catholic Church, and all ancient, and
publikly received forms, Pontificals, and Orders of consecrating Bishops,
Priests, and other Orders, how old, and general soever from the Apostles time,
But by our own temporal laws and public Judgments, as spiritual also, both
in in Catholic and Protestant times, registered in their own laws, and
Records in their own courts and historians to have neither Bishop, Priest,
Deacon, or any other true Ecclesiastical man among them. They write how Ridley
made Priest by Catholic Order, but Bishop by their new fashion, when he was to
be degraded by B. Brook Bishop of Gloucester, delegate thereto, in Q. Maryes
time, he did only then degrade him, concerning preisthood, being judged to be
no Bishop, Fox tom. 2. page 1604. Mason l. 2. page 92 Record. degrad. Rid.
as our Protestants and Records thereof testify in these his words to Ridley:
we must proceed according to our commission, to degrading, taking from you the
dignity of preisthood, for we take you for no Bishop.

So it was also adjudged by the common laws Brook Abridg. an. 1576. ti^ul.
leases number* 68.
of the land in that time: Bishops in the time of King Edward the sixth were not
consecrated, and therefore a lease for years, made by such, and confirmed by
the deane and chapter, shall not bind their Successors, because such were
never Bishops. Of these pretended Bishops which were thus by public Judgment in
law disabled to do te^porall offices, for want of true ordination and power,
how much more were they unable to perform any spiritual function, belonging
to that highest holy Order? yet this is published for law even in Q. Elizabeth
her time, long after these new Protestant Bishops were so allowed, and still
remains among their received and adjudged laws. And so general and
universal a consent was of all in authority, Pope, Prince, Prelates, and
whosoever, that this new Protestant form gave no consecration, that their own
Protestant applauded writers thus confess it. Touching Articles of Q. Mary to
Bish. Boner. Consecrat. l. 5. cap. 12. fox Act. and mon. vol. 2. p. 1295.
such parsons as were here to fore promoted to any Orders after the new sort
and fashion of Orders, they were not ordered in very deed.

This was the common and public sentence of Pope, Prince, and Prelates in
Queen Mary her time, of the pretended Bishops of King Edward the 6. when there
was more pretense for them, the^ these, diverse Catholikely ordained Bishops
then living, and some helping in their new ordering; now and from Q. Elizabeth
her time not one at all. And it is contained in our old laws: Iudex secularis
non potest Bracton fol. 401.
degradare clericum, magis quam ad ordines promouere. A secular Judge can no
more degrade a Priest, or Clearke, then he can promote him to orders.

And it was publikly adiudge in law: That the parliament Temp. Henrici 7. fol.
27. 28.
could not make the King being a lay parson, to have spiritual Jurisdiction.
Then much less could it give to King Edward the sixth (to speak Protestants
Stow an. 1. Edw. 6. Hist.
words) proclaimed King of England, and also of Ireland, the supreme head
immediately in earth, under God, being of the age of nine years, and to Queen
Elizabeth, a woman by Sex disabled in such things, both to have spiritual
Jurisdiction, and supreme spiritual Jurisdiction, and spiritual power
Episcopal or Pontifical to confer and give both spiritual highest order,
and Jurisdiction, to whom, and by what means it pleased them, contrary to all
Christians in the world, Catholics Protestants, and whosoeue^, none out of
England so proceeding in such affairs. And in the time of Queen Elizabeth
both particular wr^^^rs, records and her parliament publicly in the 8. year^ of
her Reign assure us, that their new Bishops making was by diverse both doubted
of, and denied to be lawful, The Protestant chief Justice of the common plees
Lord dyer sets down, that Bishop ^onner publicly pleaded they were no
Bishops, and namely Doctor Horn, so admitted, and it was adiuged by all the
Protestant Judges, that Bish^^ Bonner might so plead. And the Protestants
would never come to trial with him therein.

And the next Parliament in her 8. year cleared him and all other Catholics so
in i^pugning those Bishops offering the oath of suprema^y unto them, in these
words: Be it exacted that no person or persons Statut. in parliament. an 8.
Elizab. cap. 1.
be empeached, or molested in body, lands or good by occasion are mean of any
certificate by any Archbishop, or Bishop, heretofore made in the first session
of this parliament, touching or concerning the refusal of the oathe, set fourth
by act of parliament in the first year of Queen Elizabeth. And that all
tenders of such oath made by any Archbishop, or Bishop aforesaid, and all
refusals of the same oath, so entered by any Archbishop or Bishop, shall be
void, and of noe effect or validity in the law. And to help afterward, what
they could, thus they enact: diverse questions have lately grown, upon the
Statut. in parliam. an. 8. Eliz. supr. c. 1.
making and consecrating of Archbishops, and Bishops, within this realm,
whether the same were and be duly done according to the law, or not:
Therefore it is thought convenient, hereby partly to touch such authorities, as
does allowc and approve the making of the same Archbishops, and Bishops, to be
duly and orderly d^^e, according to the laws of this Realm, her h^^^nesse in
her letters patents under the great S^^^e of England, directed to any
Archbishop, Bis^^p, or others, for the confirming, inuesting, and co^secrating
of any parson, elected to the office or dig^^^y of an Archbishop, or Bishop,
has not only vs^^ such words, and sentences as King Henry, and King Edward
did in their letters patents, diverse other general words, and sentences whereby
her highness by her su^r^ame power, and authority, has dispensed with all
^auses, or doubts, of any imperfection, or diasbility that can, or may in any
wise be objected, against the sa^e.

These be the only authorities the statute does, or could bring, ^eing all
carnal and humane, not one divine or ^cclesiasticall, utterly unable to make a
lawful true Bishop, or confirm any for such, being b^t mere fantasies,
letters patents, the great Seal of England, of a woman, such words and
sentences as King Henry the eight, and King Eduard his child, contrary to the
universal Church of Christ used. A woman's supreme power authority and
dispensation in all causes, doubts, Imperfections, or disabilities in any wise
to be objected, and that not only their pretended Archbishops, and Bishops,
but others neither true nor pretended Archbishops or bishops did as their words
be plain, by this most strange, and infirm feminine commission, confirm,
inuest, and consecrate Archbishops, and Bishops, which as they have confessed
before, with all authorities, none but true and lawful Bishops, in approved
and received form, and manner can do.

And yet this parliament does thus approve and all such, as were thus made,
whether by the Queens letters patent, and men no Bihops true or pretended and
without King Edwards form, or any other remembered, or by King Edwards form
and fashion to be lawful Bishops in these words: All, Statut. an. 8. Eliz.
supr.
acts, and things made or done by any person, or persons in, or about any
elected to the office of any Archbishop or Bishop by virtue of the Queens
letters patents, shall be by authority of this Parliament be declared good, any
matter, or thing, that may be objected to the contrary thereof, in any wise
notwithstanding. All persons that have been, or shall be made Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, ministers after the form and Order prescribed in the order
and form, how Archbishops and should be made, by authority hereof be declared
and shall be Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Ministers, and rightly made: any
statute, law, canon, or other thing, to the contrary notwithstanding. Hitherto
this Protestant Parliament, and Queen Elizabeth taking upon them more then
omnipotent and divine power, for God himself ever omnipotent, cannot make that
a thing done, is not, or was not done, nor a thing ill done, to have been well
done, or not ill done. The light of reason, the light of grace, all
Philosophers Christians, and others agree, non est potentia ad praeteritum,
there is no power, or possibility, to make a thing that is past not to be past,
nor otherwise passed, the^ it passed. Therefore when it appears by so many
testimonies before, that men called Bishops by our Protestants, were never
truly and lawfully made Bishops, and this Protestant parliament it self
confesses, not only that diverse questions had been whether it were duly,
and orderly done according to the law or not, but declares their acts and
effects done by them, as Bishops, to be void, and of none effect, or validity
in the law: It far surpassed a woman's power, or her parliament thereby, or
any power on earth, or higher, to make and prove by authority of this
parliament (in her 8. year) such men by authority hereof be declared, and
shall be Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Ministers, and rightly made, any
statute, law, canon, or other thing to the contrary notwithstanding. Producing
no other reason, but that, her highness by her supreme power and authority
has dispensed with all causes, or doubts of any imperfection, or disabilitie,
that can or may in any wise be objected against the same.

If Queen Elizabeth and her Protestants would make Episcopal Order, and
dignity only an humane invention, she as a temporal great Prince might have
had place for her dispensation, for time to come. Though not past, in above 6.
years, when thousands, of such Bishops, and ministers were made among them;
But all Protestants of England, King, Bishops and whosoever having decreed and
delivered before, that it is diuinae ordinationis, the ordinance of God, an
Apostolical tradition manifest to all the world, a canon or constitution of
the whole Trinity, enacted for succeeding posterity: it is utterly
impossible, that any Queens, Kings or what dispensation soever on earth, can or
ever could make that which was, and is questioned, doubtful, imperfect, and
inualide, to be without question, doubt, perfect, and valide, either from the
beginning, any time past, or to come hereafter. Thus howsoever we examine the
making of these Protestant Bishops, and ministers by them, either by holy
scripture, witnessing that God placed Bishops in his Church to govern it;
attendite vobis and vniuerso gregi, in quo vos spiritus sanctus posuit
Episcopos, regere Act. c. 20. 1. Timoth. 3. 4. Tit. 1. 1. Petr. 5. 2. Timo^h. 1.
Ecclesiam Dei, quam acquisiuit sanguine suo. And not a woman or child Queen
Elizabeth and King Edward the 6. by a new devised manner: or by the Apostolic
Fathers of this first age, tradition of the Apostles, all the old Orders of
consecration in Britain, or what place soever, by all Catholic Fathers, or by
these Protestants themselves, we find nothing but a desolation and an
undoubted want of all Episcopal and Ecclesiastical holy orders among them.

But if we come to the Sacred Bishops, of the Catholic and Roman Church, the
holy preisthood and other Orders, we find by all these testimonies, all
things in Order, subordinate, required and necessary to this highest
spiritual dignity. We have with the Apostles and the Apostolic Can. Apost.
43. Clem. constable. Apost. l. 3. c. 11. l. 8. c. 21. c. 22. 28. epist. 2. Ignat.
epist. ad Antioch. ad Philadelph. Philip. Engl. Protest. in Abb. Prot. Archb.
of canterb. and Franc. Mas. Book of Consecrat. l. 5. p. 96. 97. c. 1. p. 207.
Fathers of this time S. Clement, S. Ignatius, and others, Subdeacons,
Acolythists, Exorcists, Lectours and all. We have found Deacons ministers to
Bishops and Priests in the Sacrifice of Mass, we have found true massing
Sacrificing Priests, and Protestants both by writing and practice so
confessing, as also in these words of them all by general assent: We think
that no man possibly have the Order of a Bishop, which has not the right Order
of preisthood. To the very being of a Bishop, the Order of preisthood is
essentially required.

Thus they exclude themselves from, and entitle Catholics to this greatest
Order. And plainly confess the Roman Church not only to observe, and use in
the consecration of Bishops, all things whatsoever, in any opinion, of
Catholics, or Protestants, essential and necessary, but also all ceremonies,
and ceremonialls therein used ever since, and before England was converted to
Christ, plainly confessing that their first Protestant Archbishop Abbot. and
mason. consecr. in Mat. Park.
Matthew Parker being the 70. from S. Augustine was the first of all admitted
without them, and otherwise then they were, and their public continual
practice is so, ever since that time.

The ceremonies of pastoral staff, ringe, delivery of the book of Ghospels
to the new consecrated Bishop, by the Consecratour and his Assistants, taken
from the sholders of the newly consecrated, Miter and gloves, we are assured to
be ceremonial only, all and every of them performed, and done after the new
Bishop is declared to be consecrated.

And yet these were so aunciently used by these Protestants, that all our
Bishops of England were consecrated they being used. And before S. Augustine S.
Asaphus and Capgrauius in vit. S. Kentegerni.
came hither S. Kentegern in the Britans time being consecrated without them
going to Rome, ipso multoties petente, with very often suite and desire, the
Pope then ministered them unto him. Sanctus Papa quae deerunt consecrationi eius
supplens. The Order of Consecration by which this S. Kentegern was made Bishop,
and all the Britans, Scots, and Irish used, was more old, then the canons of
the ceremonies used in consecration, and their old custom mos in Britannia
inoleuerat, when S. Kentegern about 1200. years past was consecrated, was
this: In consecratione Episcopi tantummodo capita eorum sacri chrismatis
infusione perungere. cum inuocatione Sancti Spiritus, and benedictione, and
manus impositione. In the consecration of Bishops only to anoynte their heads
with holy Chrisme, with invocation of the holy ghost, and benediction, and
imposition of hands. This Order was adjudged by the Popes of Rome, to be
auayleable. And all Protestants grant, the Britans have true consecration, and
Bishops. Here is neither the ceremony of saying, take the holy ghost, nor
delivering the bible to him that is admitted among them, being the only
signs they use except layinge hands one the head of the Elect, which sign of
itself cannot by any opinion give this great dignity and calling, and as S.
Albinus Amalarius and others witness 800. years since this ceremony of
imposition of hands was neither in the old, or new book of Ordination, or in
the Roman tradition* Non reperitur in authoritate veteri, neque noua, sed
neque in Romana traditione.

So they write of the ceremony of the book of the ghospels not used in any of
those authorities, neither remember that the ceremony of saying, take the
holy ghost, was found in any of them, and in the old Roman Order it is
wanting, as likewise in that was used in France, as in that of Britayne
Scotland, and Ireland. And yet it is acknowledged freely by all, as well
Protestants as others, that all these Kingdoms, contryes, and nations where
these traditions, Orders, and consecrations were thus used, had true and
lawful Bishops, Priests, and other clergy men, yet omitted all, and used none
of those Rites to which Protestants ascribe Episcopal consecration.

Therefore it must needs be even in their own Judgments that Protestants have
no true consecration, or persons consecrated in their congregations: But the
present Catholic and Roman Church now practicing all, and every Rite, and
ceremony, which all those Orders, and Ordinations did, in consecrating
Bishops, and other clergy men, and using, as our Protestants also confess,
true and lawful Bishops, to be consecratours, must needs have true and
undoubted consecration. The Rites be besides the remembered which it uses
herein. First the Examen of the person to be consecrated ended, which was in
all orders of this consecration, and help of the holy ghost as the Britans
Scots and Irish with others use cum inuocatione Pont. Romans in consecrat. electi
in Episcopum.
sancti Spiritus, being called upon, the consecratour tells him, the office
of a Bishop to be, to judge, interprette, consecrate, give Orders, offer
sacrifice, baptize and confirm. Episcopum oportet iudicare, interpretari,
consecrar^, ordinare, offerre, baptizare and confirmare. With this all the
cited Orders agree, and the holy Fathers of this first age before, S. Clement,
S. Ignatius S. Ignat. ep. ad Trall. Antioch. Phil. Ephesians. Smyrn. Clem. 3.
constable. c. 10. 11. ep. 4. 1. 3. constable. l. 7. 2. c. 11. 12. 3. 30. 31. 36
with others among the great duties of this highest dignity have told us:
Quid aliud est Episcopus, quam qui omni principatu and potestate superior est?
Episcopi sunt Sacerdotes, baptizant sacrificant, eligunt, manus imponunt. Nemo
Episcopo honorabilior, in Ecclesia Sacerdotium Deo gerent pro mundi salute.
Sine Episcopo nemo quicquam faciat eorum, quae ad Ecclesiam spectant, non licet
sine Episcopo baptizare, neque offerre, neque sacrificium immolare, neque
dochen celebrare. Non sibi quis sumit honorem, sed qui vocatur a Deo. Nam per
Episcopi manus datur haec dignita^.

The benediction remembered in the manner of the Britans, Scots, Irish, and
others is performed with the sign of the Cross, vt hunc praesentem electum
benedicere and sanctificare, and consecrare digneris. Producendo semper signum
Crucis super eum, thus the Elect kneeling before the altar S. Denis Dionis.
Areop. Eccl. Hierarch c. 5. Clem. Romans constable. l. 8. c. 122.
and S. Clement in this first age, together with the old Roman Order, thus
remember this Rite. Praesul sacrandus offertur, vtroque genu posito ante
altar, a consecrante Pontifice castissimis imprecationibus consumantur
cuilibet ipsorum a benedicente Pontifice crucis imponitur signum. The Rites of
laying the book of ghospels one the Elect, with the hands of the
consecratours, and the words, accipe spiritum sanctum, I have showed before,
they were not used in diverse public Orders, of consecration, which by all gave
true Ordination. And both in the Roman Pontifical, and others in which they
are used, the person to be consecrated is after they be ended, still named
only Elect, and not consesecrated, until the holy unction of him with holy
Chrisme into Episcopal Order, thus: vngatur, and consecretur caput tuum,
caelesti benedictione, in ordine Pontificali in nomine Patris and Filij and
Spiritus sancti Amen. And after this unction, immediately it is declared, both
in the Pontifical now used, and in the old Roman Order, that Episcopal power
and calling is given unto him. His hands be also anointed in two Orders. And
they call this unction the sum and complement of Ordination, and that used
the consecration is ended. Comple in Sacerdote tuo mysterij tui summam,
caelestis vnguenti flore sanctifica, and this ended, compl^ta benedictione,
they call him consecrated Bishop, consecratus, Pontifex, and Pontificatus
dignitatem sublimatus, and before only electus, and designatus, Elect and
designed.

The Order which the Britans Scots and Irish used, used only Anointing of the
head: tantummodo capitaeorum sacri Chrismatis infusione perungere. So did the
old Order which Amalarius Bishop of Treuers used: additur ad consecrationem
infusio olei super caput. So S. Augustine, so S. Gregory, S. Bid and others,
yet all agree, that Episcopal Order is hereby conferred and ended. S.
Augustine August. tract. psalm. and apud Amalar. l. 3 de offic. Eccl. c. 14.
says: vicarius Christi Pontifex efficitur: ideo in capite vngitur. Caput
nostrum Christus. Caput nostrum vnctum est oleo inuisibili: Episcopus quia
vicarius Christi est in capite vngitur: ab illo enim significatur se accipere
hanc vnctionis gratiam, qui caput est totius Corporis, imitando illum, qui
caput est totius Ecclesiae, per vnctionis gratia^ sit and ipse caput Ecclesiae,
sibi commissae. S. Gregory plainly teaches this unction Gregor. ad cap. 10.
lib. 1. Reg.
is the Sacrament here. Qui in culmine ponitur, sacramenta suscipit vnctionis.
Quia vero ipsa vnctio Sacramentum est, is qui promouetur, been foris vngitur,
sed intus virtute Sacramenti roboretur. And again: spiritus Domini post
vnctionem dirigitur: quia foris Sacramenta percipimus. Vt intus spiritus sancti
gratia repleamur. Besides our british manner of consecration before remembered,
S. Bid and Amalarius Bed. l. 3. de Tabernacul. and vas. eius. Amalar. fort. l.
3. de Eccl. offic. c. 14.
from him, and others witness, how in this Kingdom this was accounted a Rite
necessary essential and giving grace in this Sacrament: oleo vnctionis
perfunditur, vt per gratiam spiritus sancti consecratio perficiatur.

And that this was the tradition of the Church from the Apostles, we are
assured, both because the Fathers of this first age, S. Denis, S. Anacletus and
others so remember it, and the fathers before, and after to be named, even by
English public Engl. Prot. apud Marc.
Protestant consent, so prove and derive it. S. Denis Anton. l. 2. de Republ.
Eccl. ca^. 2.
is so plain, that they plainly thus confess it: Areopagitae Dionysio
tributum opusculum vnctionem ponit express. So they confess of S. Anacletus,
made Priest, by S. Peter, the Apostle: addit vnctionem capitis Anacletus, quae
est antiquissima.

The words which he uses, deducing his doctrine, Anacl. ep. 2.
and practice from the Apostles, be these: Bishops are to be made by Imposition
of hands of Bishops, with the ghospels which they are to preach, and holy
unction by the example of the Apostles, because all sanctification consists
in the holy ghost, whose invisible power is mixed with holy Chrisme, and by
this Rite solemn Ordination is to be celebrated. Where we find by this great
Apostolic authority, that the grace of this Sacrament, and power Episcopal
is given by this Rite.

And these Protestants, as by this they must, and Prot. supr. in Marc. Anton.
are enforced, confess so of the holy fathers following, both in the Greek
and Latin Church, that they were consecrated Bishops by holy unction. Gregor.
Nazianc. orat. 20. de laudib. Basil. orat. 5. ad Basil. and part. Sim. Metaph.
in vit. Crisost. Petr. Chrisolog. Ser. de S. Seuero. Isidor. l. 2. de offic.
Eccl. c. 25. S. Iuo. Ser. de reb. Eccl. Steph. Aduen. Sacr. alt. c. 9.
So of S. Basile, unction sacra adhibita est ordinatus. So of S. Gregory
Naziancen, me Pontificem vngis. So were S. John Chrysostom and S. Seuerus. Of
S. Augustine, S. Gregory with others I have spoken before; To which we may
join S. Iuo, Stephanus Aduensis and other ancient writers, and expositours of
holy mysteries, and all Orders of Consecration.

By this it is evident, how certain and undoubted a thing it is, That the
consecration used in the Roman Church, is most true, holy, and honorable,
both for Order, and Jurisdiction, ever, as is demonstrated before, both in this
and other nations, from the Apostolic Roman see, and in the old Orders of
consecration the Bishop to be consecrated protests obedience to the Popes of
Rome. And how the case stands with the Protestants both of England, and all
others, it is as lamentable to know their desolate condition.

THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
The 37. article, entitled, of the civil Magistrates, thus examined, and
whosoever against the Roman Church, condemned.
THeir 37. and next Article is entitled: of the civil Magistrates. And thus
follows. The Kings Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England,
and other his dominions, unto whom the chief government of all estates of
this Realm whether they be Ecclesiastical or civil, in all causes does
appertain, and is not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign jurisdiction.
The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The rest of this article contains an excuse of Protestants that they did not
give to their temporal Prince power to preach and minister Sacraments, as some
interpreted their opinion, and other things not questioned between Catholics
and English Protestants, but between these Protestants and some other new
sectaries, among themselves, and be these. The laws of the Realm may punish
Christian men with death, for heinous and grievous offenses. It is lawful for
Christian men, at the commandment of the Magistrate, to wear weapons, and
serve in the wars.

These positions are granted and allowed by all Catholics. The first part of
this article giving unto the King a temporal Governor, and Ruler chief
government over all estates in all causes Ecclesiastical or civil, as also
their statute and oath of Princes Supremacy in spiritual things, fights
with, and contradicted it self: for thus it adds: we give not to our Prince,
the ministering either of Gods word, or of the Sacraments: the which the
Injunctions also sometime set fourth by Elizabeth our late Queen, do most
plainly testify. Therefore seeing Kings be not Teachers, preachers, Doctors,
Pastors, and sheephards in the Church and fould of Christ, to give them some
place therein, members of it, and not to be quite excluded from the name, and
number of Christians we must needs say, they be of them which be taught
preached unto, instructed, sheep and subjects, fed, ruled and governed by
them, which have authority, and spiritual power in such things. And these our
Protestants have accordingly this defined the Church before in these their
articles. The visible Church of Christ, is a congregation of faithful men, in
the which the pure word of God is preached; Protest. art. 19. sup.
and the Sacraments be duly ministered, according to Christ's ordinance.

They to whom the word is preached, and Sacraments be ministered, and neither
have power to preach nor minister Sacraments, which this Article confesses of
their Protestant Kings, and temporal Rulers, cannot possibly in the respect be
chief Governors of the^ to whom God himself has power and preeminence. The
holy Scriptures do in many places command obedience both to temporal and
spiritual Rulers, but obedience in matters of Religion in feeding and ruling
souls the flock of Christ, governing his Church and such spiritual emnencies
is only appropriated in the^ to spiritual governors. Qui been praesunt
Presbyteri duplici honor digni sunt. Pascite qui in vobis est gregem 1. Tim.
5. 1. Petr. 5. Ioh. 21. Act. 20. Hebr. 13.
Dei, pasce agnos meos. Pasce oues meas. Attendite vobis and vniuer so gregi,
in quo vos Spiritus sanctus posuit Episcopos regere Ecclesiam Dei, quam
acquisiuit sanguine suo. Mementote praepositorum vestrorum, qui vobis locuti
sunt verbu^ Dei. Obedite praepositis vestris and subiacete. Ipsi enim
peruigilant quasi rationem pro animabus vestris reddituri. Where we see neither
king nor Prince, if he will belong to the Church of Christ, have his soul
purchased with his blood, a care had of it, and account made for it, can be
free from this obedience; much less can he claim it for himself, from them
to whom it so infallibly belongs, by the highest authority.

The Apostolic men of this first age, have testified this at large before, in
the examination Ignat. epist. and An^ioch. Ep. ad Smyrn. Epist. ad Philadelph
Magnesian. Trallian.
of the last precedent article. S. Ignatius has taught us, a Bishop is above
all principality and power. Episcopus omni Principatu and potestate superior
est. No man is more honorable then the Bishop. Nemo Episcopo honorabilior.
Priests and Deacons, all the clergy together with the people, and Souldiars,
and Princes, and the Emperor also must obey the Bishop. Cum populo, and
militibus at que Principibus, sed and Caesare obediant Episcopo. Be subject to
the Bishop, even as to our Lord, for he watches for your souls, and is to
make account for them. Therefore it is needful that you do nothing without
the Bishop. No man may do any thing that belongs to the Church without the
Bishop. Sine Epis^opo nemo quicquam faciat eorum quae ad Ecclesiam spectant.

Saint Clement testifies that Saint Peter the Apostle Clem. Romans epist. 1.
commanded praecipiebat Petrus Apostolus, that all Princes of the earth, omnes
Principes terrae, and all men should obey Bishops. And proved that all which
did contradict them were in state of damnation, and imfamy until they made
satisfaction; and commanded them to be excommunicate except they were
converted. The Bishop Clem constable. Apost lib. 2. c. 11. 12. 3. 30. 31.
rules all Lords, Priests, Kings, Princes, Regibus, Principibus, Fathers,
children Masters, and all subjects. He Judges as God with power. The Bishop is
mediator between God and men. He is the next after God our Father, Prince,
Ruler, King, Rex, Governor. A Bishop is adorned with the dignity of God, he
rules the clergy and commands all the people. Omni populo imperat. Dion.
Areop. Hier. Eccl. c. 2. par. 2. 3. c. 4. 5. Martial. ep. ad Burdegal. cap. 3.


The like have other Apostolic men of this first age. And they are so far
from giving superiority, and command to civil power over Bishops in things of
Religion, that in such affairs and causes they make inferior all temporal
people even to Priests and Deacons. Preisthood is the head or chief of all
good things in this world, says S. Ignatius. Ignat. epist. ad Smyrnen.
Sacerdotium est omnium bonorum quae in hominibus sunt, apex. He that rages
against it, does not ignominy to man, but to God. Lay men must be subject not
only to Priests but to Deacons. Laici Diaconis subditi Polycarpus epist. ad
Philippen.
sint Subiecti estote Presbyteris and Diaconis sicut Deo and Christo.

And our Protestants themselves acknowledge, Rob. Barnes l de vit. Pont* Roman.
in Anacleto. Anaclet. epist. 1.
that the holy Popes of this time, judged them no Christians that called holy
Priests to civil consistorys Anacletus Christo alienos esse indicabat qui
Sacerdotes inius vocarent. They which took away the riches of the Church were
to be adjudged homicidas, because the Apostles by our Savior his command,
gave chardge that the privileges of the Church and Priests should be kept
inuolate. Christ vel Ecclesiae pecunias auferentes, homicidas iudicari debere
censuit: quia inquit priuilegia Ecclesiae and Sacerdotum, Apostoli Saluatoris
iussu inuiolata esse debere iusserunt. In Ecclesiastical business the the
greater causes were to be referred to the primates, the lesser to the
Metropolitan Bishop, and secular causes to secular Judges. In Ecclesiasticis
negotijs, grauiores causas ad primatem, leuiores ad metropolitanum Episcopum
referendas, secularia negotia ad prophanos iudices, agenda esse iussit. All
that were oppressed might appeal to the Ecclesiastical Court.

And that such causes as could not be composed by the chiefest of the clergy,
should be ended in their counsels. Et causas quae apud primarios Ecclesiastici
ordinis componi non possent, in Concilio finiendas esse.

To that which follows in this Article: The Bishop of Rome has no
jurisdiction in this Realm of England: I have abundantly answered, and so
proved the weakness of such assertion in my Examine of their 19. Article and
that which is here said most manifestly conuinceth the same. For if as is
proved here, the Bishops in every Province have the highest and chiefest
spiritual power, over all others therein whether spiritual or temporal, he
which has the supreme power, and Jurisdiction over all, and every such
Bishops, or Bishop, cannot be deprived of that. Title, and right, though a
far greater consistory then these Articlers, or their Approuers, and
applauders should deny it unto him? He that has jurisdiction and power over
the greater, must needs have it over the lesser and Inferior in that Kind. S.
Ignatius calls the Church of Rome, the sanctified and Ruling Church being
himself Patriarch of Antioch. Ignatius Ecclesiae sanctificatae Ignat. epist.
ad Romans in inscriptione.
quae praefidet in loco Regionis Romanorum. S. Polycarp living in the same age,
went from Smyrna in the East, to Rome for decision of Questions about the day
of Easter. Propter quasdam super die paschae Hier l. de. vir. illustrib. in
Polycarpo. Dion. Aerop. c 3. de divine. no minib. Clem. Romans epist. 1. Rufino
Interpret.
quaestiones Romam venit.

S. Dionisius, says S. Peter living and dying Bishop of Rome was the supreme
glory and head of divines. Petrus supremum decus, and antiquissimum Theologorum
columen. S. Clement says, S. Peter was by Christ defined, the foundation of
the Church Simon Petrus fundamentum esse Ecclesiae definitus est. And as the
most worthy commanded by Christ to convert the western parts, and performed
that precept. Qui obscuriorem mundi plagam occidentis, velut omnium potentior
illuminare praeceptus est, quique and integre potuit implere praeceptum. He
lived much, and dyed at Rome by martyrdom, and committed his supreme
Pastoral charge, and office to S. Clement, which Christ had committed to him,
full power to bind and loose, and whatsoever he should decree on earth should
be decreed in heaven. Clementem Episcopum vobis ordino, cui soli me ae
praedicationis and doctrinae cathedram trado. Ipsi trado a Domino mihi traditam
potestatem ligandi and soluendi, vt de omnibus, quibuscumque decreuerit in
terris, hoc decretum sit and in caelis. Among other Pastoral and highest
Pontifical duties, he gave him power, and chardge to send Bishops into all
cities, whether, or where S. Peter had not sent, or ordained before. Episcopos
per singulas civitates, quibus ille non miserat nobis mittere praecepit.

And S. Clement performed it. Quod facere inchoauimus, and Domino opemferente,
facturi sumus. Aliquos ad Gallias, Hispaniasque mittimus, and quosdam ad
Germaniam, and Italiam atque ad reliquas gentes dirigere cupimus. Among these
Bishops some were primates, or Patriarks, and Archbishops, and the causes of
Bishops and greatest Ecclesiastical Questions and business of the Churches,
were to be tried and decided by the primates, and Patriarks, and the Apostles
so decreed. Petrus Episcoporum primates vel Patriarchas ordinauit, qui
reliquorum Episcoporum iudicia, and maiora, quoties necesse foret, negotia in
fide agitarent, and secundum Dei voluntatem, sicut constituerunt sancti
Apostoli, ita vt ne quis unjust periclitaretur, definirent. Archiepiscopos
institui praecepit, qui non tamen primatum, sed and Archiepiscoporum fruerentur
nomine. Episcoporum quoque iudicia, vt superius memoratum est, and maiora
Ecclesiarum negotia, si ipsi reclamauerint, aut aliquem timorem, aut istos vel
alios suspectos habucrint, ad iam dictos primates vel Patriarchas, transferri
perdocuit. And this was among the Apostles themselves, one. S. Peter, above the
rest. Quoniam nec inter Apostolos par institutio fuit Sed vnus omnibus praefuit.

This is the testimony of S. Clement, confirmed Anaclet. ep. decret. Ruffin.
interpr. epist. Clem. Leo 2. ep. decret. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. Flor.
wigorn. chronic. in Clem. Mart. Polon. Supputat. col. 33. in Lino Robert.
Barnes. l. de vit. Pont. in Lino and Anacleto. Anaclet. ep. decretal. 3. Barn.
sup. in Anaclet. Omerd pict. Pap. page 78.
by S. Anacletus then living, Ruffinus, Marrianus, Martinus Florentius
wigorniensis, Pope Leo the second, and many others both Catholic and
Protestant writers. S. Anacletus made Priest by S. Peter, and by him
instructed, even as our Protestants confess, did teach that Christ gave to the
Church of Rome, primacy over all Churches, and all Christian people, neither
King nor Caesar exempted. Anacletus ab ipso Domino primatum Romanae Ecclesiae
super omnes Ecclesias vniuersamque Christiani nominis populum concessum esse
asseruit. Thus our Protestants, and S. Anacletus is more plain that this
supreamacie of the Roman Church was not given unto it, by the Apostles but
Christ himself. Haec sacrosancta Romana and Apostolica Ecclesia non ab
Apostolis, sed ab ipso Domino Saluatore nostro primatum obtinuit, and
eminentiam potestatis, super vniuersas Ecclesias ac totum Christiani populi
gregem assecuta est. And both Christ commanded, and his Apostles decreed, that
great and difficult questions should be referred to the Apostolic Roman see,
to be decided, and that Anacl. epist. 1.
Christ builded his whole Church upon it. Apostoli hoc statuerunt, iussu
Saluatoris, vt maiores and difficiliores quaestiones semper ad sedem deferantur
Apostolicam, super quam Christus vniuersam construxit Ecclesiam.

So have also S. Euaristus and S. Alexander, Euarist. ep. 1. Alex. ep. 1.
who lived in this first age. Relatum est ad huius sanctae and Apostolicae
sedis apicem, cui summarum dispositiones causarum, and omnia negotia
Ecclesiarum ab ipso Domino tradita sunt, quasi ad caput. Our Protestants
Sutcliffe subu. page 57. Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
also acknowledge thus: Irenaeus says, that every Church ought to have
respect to the Church of Rome, for her eminent principality.

But S. Irenaeus is more clear, in this manner: ad hanc (Romanam) Ecclesiam,
propter potentiorem principalitatem, necesse est omnem conuenire Ecclesiam, hoc
est eos, qui sunt vndique fideles. There is a necessity, that every Church
and all faithful Christians, wheresoever should acknowledge the more powerable
principality of the Roman Church. No King, contrie, or nation is exempted,
from, but all are included in this necessity, of being under the Jurisdiction
of the Church of Rome. And particularly for this Kingdom of England, which
singularly this Article would thus deprive of that honor, and happiness from
being in the fold and under the chardge of the vicar and highest pastor and
shephard of Christ one earth.

To begin with a Protestant Bishops censure in Godwyn conuers. of Britayne page
6.
these words: we should account it a great glory to derive the pedigree of our
spiritual lineage, from so noble and excellent a father, as S. Peter. And yet
both Greek and Latin, domestical and forreyne, Catholic and Protestant
Antiquaries, do thus derive and prove it. Petrus venit in Britanniam, quo in
loco Sim. Metaphrast. die 19. Iunij Eusebius. and antiq. graec. apud eund. ib.
Sur. eod. die. Andr. Chesu. l. 3. histor. Angl. Bucley page 171. Cambden in
Britan. Sutcliffe Subu. page 3. Prot. Archb. whitg. answ: to admo. page 65.
sect. 1. def. of the answer page 318 Marc. Anton. de Dom. de reb. chr. l. 4.
c. 10.
cum longo temporefuisset moratus, apud Britannos verbo gratiae multos
illuminauit, and Ecclesias constituit, Episcoposque and Presbyteros and
Diaconos ordinauit. S. Peter came into Britayne, and staying there long time,
did illuminate many with the word of grace, and founded Churches, and ordered
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Which more Protestant Doctors and Bishops even
Archbishops with them thus confirm. Peter preached in no place, but he there
ordained Bishops and teachers and founded Churches.

The Apostle Peter did in every province appoint one Archbishop, whom all
other Bishops of the same province should obey. Est caput Roma, quatenus ab ea
diffusum est Euangelium in reliquas totius occidentis Ecclesias. Rome is the
head, in respect that from it, the gospel was diffused into the rest of the
Churches of the west, and into many of the east, and into barbarous nations out
of the Roman Empire. Et in multas orientis, atque in harbaras extra Romanum
Imperium nationes. Diverse of the holy Bishops and Apostolic Doroth. l de 72.
discip. in Aristob. Arnol. merm. Theatr. conu. gent. Antiq. Ecel. Tullen. Gul.
Eisengr. cent. 1. Petr. de Natal. l. 11. Pantal. de vir. Ibl. part. 1. Stumph.
l. 7. de Sanctib. Theater. of great. Brit. l. 6. Tho. Rogers Anal. in Prot.
Articl. ar. 36. whitg. supr. Clem. Sup. ep. 1. Arnol. mirm. sup. Antonin. hist.
part. 1. will. harrison. descript. Brit. page 23. Harris Theatr. l. 1. Girald.
Cambr. l. 2. de Iure Metrop. Eccl. Meneu. ad Innocent. 3. Mat. Parker. Antiq
Britan. page 24. Io. Pris. defens. hist. Britan. page 73. Nennius hist.
manuscript.
Priests, which S. Peter consecrated for, this Kingdom are remembered both by
Catholic and Protestant Historians, S. Aristobulus, S. Mansuetus, S. Beatus
and his holy companion, not named in Antiquities. Our Protestants make S.
Aristobulus Archbishop here: Britayne Aristobulus, and by their Rule before,
The Apostle Peter did in every province appoint one Archbishop, he must needs
be ordained Archbishop, by S. Peter.

S. Clement has sufficiently proved before, that he sent Bishops hither,
saying he sent to the other nations of the west, ad reliquas gentes, besides
Italy, Spain, France, and Germany. And both Catholics and Protestants from
antiquities affirm, that he sent to us S. Nicasius, who instructed the
Britons, Britones instruxit formauitque fide S. Nicasius a S. Clemente
delegatus. These Britans must needs be those of this Kingdom, they of little
Britayne in France came not thither until above 200. years after S. Clement,
and S. Nicasius time. Both British and English Catholic and Protestant
Antiquaries affirm, that the division of Primates or Patriarchs,
Metropolitans, and others with their several Jurisdictions, from the sea of
Rome, being as he ackdowledgeth the decree of his predecessor S. Clement and
the Apostles also was received in this Kingdom of Britayne, as it
comprehends England wales and Scotland. Nennius our old british historian in
his manuscript antiquities affirms that his Successor Pope and S. Euaristus
sent legates to our British King, to receive the faith of Christ, Missa
legatione a Papa Romano Euaristo. Who yet says the general conversion was not
until the year of Christ 197. Albertus Krantius well acquainted with our
British antiquities, writes the like of S. and Pope Io. Caius Antiq.
Cantabrig. l. 1. Alber. Krantzius Metropol. l. 1. c. 6.
Alexander, next Successor to Pope Euaristus, both of them living in this
first age, though dying by martyrdom in the second, that he sent diverse
Apostolic men hither, to preach the faith of Christ, and so they did.

These Popes have taught us the supreamacie of the Church of Rome over all
Churches before. So did the next holy Pope S. Sixtus, even Protestants Sixtus
1. ep. 2. Rob. Barn. l. de vit. Pont. Romans in Sixto 1. Telesph. Higin. pio
Anice^o So^ero.
so confessing. Ab Episcopo ad Romanum Pontificem appellandi ius dedit
Ecclesiasticis ministris. So they confess of all Popes Telesphorus, Higinius,
Pius anicetus and Soter, unto Pope Eleutherius, under whom and by whose means
and authority, this Kingdom was wholly converted, by all antiquities and
testimonies, and made the first Christian Kingdom in the world. This holy
Pope as Rob. Barn. sup. in Eleutherio Eleuther. ep. ad Episcop. Gall. cap. 2.
our Protestants write, did Order, and practice, and as the Apostles and their
Successors had defined as he testifies sicut ab Apostolis eorumque
Successoribus multorum consensu Episcoporum definitum ^st, that nothing should
be proceeded in, against Bishops, until it was defined by the Pope of Rome:
accusationem contra Episcopos, Episcopos audire permifit, sed vt nihil, nisi
apud Pontificem definiretur, cauet.

This highest spiritual Authority in the Pope of Damas in Eleuth. Monolog.
G^aec. in eod. Breuiar. Roman. die 26. Maij. Martyrol Roman. eod. die Bed. l.
1. ^^st. c. 4. and l. de 6. ae^a^. Ado Chron. Marian. Scot. an. 177. Martin.
Pol. Supput. an. 188. Galfrid. monum. hist. l. 4. Virun. l. 4. Radulp. de
Dicet. hist. in Lucio. Gul. Mal. l. Antiq. caenob. glaston. Math. west. chron.
an. 185. 186. 187. flor. w^gor. chron. an. 162. 184. Antiq Eccl. land. Antiq.
Eccl. wint. Cambd. Brigant. Stowe hist. hollinsh. hist. of Engl. Theatr. of
Brit. l 6 Hect. Boeth. l. 5. Parker Godwin. etc. Eleuth. ep. ad Reg. Lucium
Lambert. l. de leg. Stowe hist. Godw conu. of Brit. Mat. Parker. Antiq. Brit.
Mason. of consecr. fox tom. 1. Theat. of Brit. l. 6. Bridge. def. of the
govern. l. 16. page 1355. Jewel ag. hard. old. Book of Constable. Guil. hall. in
land. l. Antiq. Brut. Caius antiquit. Cantabrig. l. 1. leges Antiq. Reg.
Edward. cap. 17. Gul. Lambard. l. 2. de priscis Angl. legib. fol. 130. p. Hect.
Boeth. Scot. hist. l. 5. f. 83. Godw. conuers. of Brit. page 22. 23. Antiq.
Eccl. Glastonien. Galfrid monum. l. 5. hist. Reg. Brit. c. 1. Mat. west. chron.
an. 186.
Rome, was not unknown to the Christians and King Lucius in Britayne, which
moved that King as both Greek and Latin, British and Saxon, domestical and
forreyne, Catholic and Protestant Antiquaries inform, to write humble letters
supplices litteras, to that Pope, entreating him, obsecrans, that by his
commandment, he with his Kingdom might receive Christianity, vt per eius
mandatum Christianus efficeretur. The Pope most willingly assented, and sent
his legates with full power to found the Church of Britayne, to Ordeyne three
Archbishops, and 28. Bishops, with their particular Sees, power, and
Jurisdiction, who having established all things here, returned to Rome, to have
them confirmed by the Pope: the Pope confirmed that they had done, and they
with many other preachers and the Popes confirmation, returned again into
Britayne. Beati Antistites Romam redierunt, and cuncta quae fecerant, a
Pontifice confirmari impetrarunt: confirmatione facta, cum pluribus alijs
redierunt in Britanniam. Our King craved direction of that Pope also, what
laws he should use in his Kingdom, and the Pope directed him therein, as his
epistle still extant witnesses, as our Protestants write, and themselves
testify. We have seen the Bishop of Romes own letter to King Lucius. So
witness these men.

This Pope went further, in prescribing the limits, bounds, and circuites of
the Dominions of this Kingdom, and assigned unto it all the Islands to
Denmark, and Norway by his sentence: and by that definition ordonation, they
were parts of Britayne, as is contained in our old laws, many hundreds of
years since published and approved by our Protestant lawyers, and historians,
as well as others. Vniuersa terra and tota, and Insulae omnes vsque Noruegiam,
and vsque Daniam pertinent ad coronam Regni, and sunt de appendicijs, and
dignitatibus Regis, and vna est monarchia, and vnum est Regnum. Tales enim
metas, and fines constituit and imposuit coronae Regni Dominus Eleutherius Papa
sententia sua, qui primo destinauit coronam benedictam Britanniae, and
Christianitatem Deo inspirante, Lucio Regi Britonum. Here also he sent first a
crown, or hallowed crown to our King, being before, as some Catholics and
Protestants write, but a King by courtesy of the Roman Emperor, and
authority. Lucus Britonibus Caesaris beneuolentia and authoritate imperitabat.
He gave Indulgences to our Churches, namely to the old Church of Glastenbury
ten years Indulgence, as in the old antiquities of that holy place is
recorded. And by his Order and direction, King Lucius endowed the Churches of
Britayne with liberties regal, Lucius Rex Ecclesias Britanniae libertatibus
muniuit. Gloriosus Britonum Rex Lucius cum infra Regnum suum verae fidei cultum
magnificatum esse vidisset, possessiones and territoria Ecclesijs and viris
Ecclesiasticis, abundanter conferens, chartis and munimentis omnia communiuit.
Ecclesias vero cum suis caemeterijs, ita constituit esse liberas, vt quicumque
malefactor ad illa confugeret, illaesus ab omnibus remaneret.

Thus reverent and honorable was the spiritual power, and supreamacie of the
Church and Pope of Rome, in Britayne, and all places in these Apostolic days.
All those Apostolic men, Popes, or others which have thus taught us, were
glorious Saints, and King Lucius also, Saint Lucius, who with all his
Kingdom, clergy, and others so embraced it; and though neither he, nor the
Romans had then any temporal Rule or dominion in the Kingdom, now called
Scotland, yet that glorious Pope by his spiriruall supreamacie subjected that
contrie to the Archbishop of york in the land of an Enemy.

And this Papal supreamacie and Jurisdiction continued here ever after, until
It was taken away by King Henry the 8. taking first of all Kings, the title and
name of Supreme head of the Church of England, never heard of before in any
time, as his own historian Polydor virgill, and all others both Catholic, and
Protestant, English and other historians, acknowledge. Habetur concilium
Londini, Polydor. Virgil. Anglic. Hist. l. 27. p. 689. Stowe and Howes hist.
an. 1534. statut. in Parliament. an. 26. Henr. 8,
in quo Ecclesia Anglicana formam potestatis nullis ante temporibus visam
induit; Henricus enim Rex caput ipsius Ecclesiae constituitur.

And after King Henry the 8. had thus, as he endeavored, expelled the Papal
Authority spiritual out of England, and assumed it to himself, though he
punished with death, as others often since then have done, the professors
thereof, yet both he, and all or Rulers temporal since, Kings, or Queens, have
retained in their style of honor, that title, Defensor fidei, defendour of the
faith, which the Pope gave him for defending before his fall, the Catholic
faith against Martine Luther; though they all, except Queen Mary, impugned it.

And our present K. Charles. (whom together with his Queen Mary, God bless
with all good, and happiness) in his late public declaration to all his loving
Subjects, among whom his Catholics be not in the lowest place of duty, and
desert to him, though not in like degree of his favor to the^, thus, and thus
vehemently, protests: we call God to record, before whom we stand, that it
is, and always has been, our hearts desire, to be found worthy of that title,
which we account the most glorious in all our Crown, DEFENDOVR OF THE FAITH.

But to defend the faith, is not, to reprint the articles of Religion,
established in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and by a declaration before those
articles to ty, and restrain all opinions to the sense of those articles: as
he speaks immediately before, and to persecute Bishops, Priests, and
Catholics as he does.

That title was given by the Pope to King Henry, for defense of the true faith,
long before the articles of Queen Elizabeth, or she was borne. Long before,
he, K. Edward 6. Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles, persecuted
Catholics, and their faith, whereof by their style, they should be defendours,
and long before their religion, or any of them (I except King Henry the 8. to
whom it was given) received being. The true faith Catholic, and Apostolic,
which by that regal style and title they should defend, against these
articles, I have abundantly by the best testimonies proved in every point, for
the two last following articles, the 38. entitled, of Christian men's goods,
which are common, and the 39. the last, of a Christian man's oath, do not
contain any controversy with Catholics, but were ordained against new
Sectaries, among themselves. I hope no Protestant Parliament will hereafter
glory, that their religion was almost 80. years old, though it wants 10. of
that number, and so extraordinarily contend to persecute that which I have
proved to exceed it, above 1500. years in time and truth, which they ought to
embrace and honor, and not so maliciously or ignorantly, not being the most
religious, nor learned divines, to persecute it.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
Chap. 1. COncerning the first 5. Protestant Articles, not differing from the
Apostles Religion, and the Roman Church. page 1. Chap. 2. Examining their 6.
Article about scriptures and traditions, and condemning it, by the Apostles,
and Apostolic men, and doctrine of their age. p. 2. Chap. 3. The 7. 8. 9. 10.
Articles examined; and wherein they differ from the present Roman Church,
condemned by this first Apostolic age. p. 53. Chap. 4. The 11. Article, of the
Justification of man, examined, and condemned by the Apostolic Fathers of this
first age. p. 60. Chap. 5. The 12. Article examined, and in whatsoever
differing from the present Roman Church, condemned by the Apostolic age. So
of the 13. and 14. Articles. p. 67. Chap. 6. The 15. 16. 17. 18. Articles so
examined: and wheresoever repugnant to the Roman Church, likewise condemned. p.
82. Chap. 7. The 19. Article examined, and condemned by the same authority. p.
88. Chap. 8. The 20. Article thus examined, and in whatsoever contrary to the
Church of Rome, thus condemned. p. 99. Chap. 9. The 21. article so examined,
and condemned. p. 109. Chap. 10. The 22. article thus likewise examined, and
condemned. p. 141. Chap. 11. The 23. article examined. p. 207. Chap. 12. The
24. article likewise examined and condemned by this first Apostolic age, and
writers therein. p. 212. Chap. 13. The 25. article, entitled, of the
Sacraments, thus examined, and condemned, in all things contrary to Catholic
doctrine. p. 222. Chap. 14. Penance, so called in this article, and by
Catholics, The Sacrament of Penance, was so judged and used in this
Apostolic age. p. 228. Chap. 15. Holy Orders contrary to this article, was
used and held a Sacrament in this first age. p. 233. Chap. 16. Matrimony thus
proved a Sacrament. p. 242. Chap. 17. Extreme unction thus proved to be a
Sacrament. p. 249. Chap. 18. The rest of this article repugnant to the
Catholic faith likewise condemned. p. 252. Chap. 19. The 26. and 27. articles
examined and Protestant doctrine in or by them condemned. p. 258. Chap. 20. The
28. article entitled, of the supper of the Lord, examined and condemned. p.
262. Chap. 21. The 29. article, entitled: of the wicked, which do not eat the
body, and blood of Christ in the use of the Lords supper: examined and
condemned. p. 276. Chap. 22. The 30. article, entitled, of both Kinds:
examined and where it is contrary to the Roman Church condemned. p. 284.
Chap. 23. The 31. article, being, entitled, of the one oblation of Christ
finished upon the Cross, thus examined and condemned. p. 297. Chap. 24. The
32. article, entitled of the marriage of Priests thus examined and condemned.
p. 315. Chap. 25. The 33. 34. articles examined, and in whatsoever repugnant to
the doctrine of the Church of Rome, thus condemned. p. 339. Chap. 26. The 35.
36. articles entitled, of homilies, and of consecration of Bishops, and
ministe^ (...) examined and condemned. (...). Chap. 27. The 37. article,
entitled, of the ciui^^ Magistratus, thus examined, and whatsoever against the
Roman Church, condemned. p. 390.



