To the Honorable Knight, the most Judicious and learned Sir FRANCES BACON, the
Kings Attorney General.
IT was my chance (Right worthy Sir) that you were present a hearer of my first
made sermons: At Kensington in July 1607.
and if I might take their words that told me, you gave good words of me then,
and conceived good hopes of me for the time to come: on this inducement I
resolved to present you with my first published writings, but I was abashed in
my self, and ready to fall off from my purpose, remembering a passage in your
first book of The Advancement of learning, where you seem nearer to
reprehension then defense of those, that dedicate their books and writings not
to their own equals, but to men of greater rank. And had I not considered
with my self, that where there were so many good parts of nature and learning,
there could not choose but be much humanity; the greatness of your place, and
your worth surmounting greater places, then that you hold, had deterd my
meannesse and slenderness from this attempt, neither had I dared to have
offered that unto you, which I have now presumed. This I know, that for the
Argument there can be an unfitness in no book to be presented unto you, a man
so generally read and learned: and I am persuaded that he that is so
industrious as your self, and abounding with so many virtues, will even love
and cherish the least show and resemblance of the same in others. Well iacta
est alea, I am now come before you, and if you shall vouchsafe me but a kind
and cheerful aspect, it will much cheer me: but if I might understand that I
have written any thing that may be to your taste, the approbation of your
learned judgment alone shall be unto me more then the applause of a large
Theater. Howsoever it shall be, let me entreat and obtain this of your
goodness in the name of learning, though I be but the least and meanest in her
common wealth, that you would not utterly dash and put me out of countenance,
whose very wit and courage will even stand and fall with your countenance.

The man that highly loves and admires your virtues RICHARD BRVCH.

Reader
IF thou should ask me, why I would write of things so much entreated off,
why I would write in such a method, I have an answer at hand for both thy
questions, though not one and the same for both: there lay a kind of necessity
on me to write of one part of this treatise, The Lords Prayer, (that drew on
the rest) to disauow a son of the people that was fatherd on me, nothing like
me nor my children, who though they are most of them rough-hewed like their
father, yet have they all their portion of wit and common sense. For the
nouelty of the method, let this answer thee, that knowing that by many
parasanges I could not come near, nor attain unto the worthies of our Church,
as many as have written of these things a Calvin and an Vrsin, a Viret and a
Virell, a Perkins or a Granatensis, with others whose learned comments and
books of institution are in hand: I fell into this new form of method, that
thou might know though nihil est iam dictum, quod non sit dictu^ prius, and
al do sing but the very same song: yet we can in this age set out our learning
in new fashions of word, and method, as the men of the age can set themselves
forth in new fashions of clothes. Thou have the reason of these my numbers,
may thou use them to thy profit and comfort, fare thou well.

Thine R. B.

A preface or introduction to the Book, containing a reason of the Title.
I Fear me it may be justly said of many a one, that now a days makes
profession of religion, as it is said to the Angel of the Church of Sardis,
Revel. 3.1. Thou have a name that thou live, and art dead: For how great
soever the show be that they make to the world, yet if they were examined of
their faith, it would be so far, that they should be bespoken with the
Canaanitish woman, Great is your faith. Mat. 15.28. That we should rather
bespeake them as our Savior his Disciples. Mat. 16. O ye of little faith, or,
O ye of no faith rather. If their works were well seen and considered, we
would not commend them for their fruits, but speak to them in the words of
the Baptist, As trees that did not bring forth good fruit. Mat. 3.10. yea if
they would seriously consider with themselves of their key cold prayers, how
heavy, leaden, dull, and dead they were in their devotions, they would even
testify against themselves, that they had little or no feeling at all in
themselves, that they had little or no life at all of grace in them.

Of their holy and sound faith, of their godly conversation, of their devout
prayers, are men rightly termed religious, the outward shows of words, of
looks, of gestures make men no more such, then does his weed the Friar: He
that has true faith is religious. The just by his faith shall live. Abac. 2.4.
Here then is life. He that walks in the way of the commandments, in the way
of good works, which God has ordained that we should walk in them, is
religious: These are the ways of life, wherein if we keep us, we shall be
safe a ruin mortis, from the ruin of death: here is also life. Alive from the
dead says the Apostle. Romans 6.13. and dead indeed ^o sin, but alive unto God
through Jesus Christ our Lord, v. 11.

If the spirit and life of God be in a man, he shall quickly find it in his
prayers, he shall thereby quickly find, if he have any spark of grace or
religion, if he be earnest and fervent in them, if they be full of zeal: It is
a sure sign that a man's soul and heart are religious, when he can power them
out in prayer before God. There is the presenting of our bodies a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God. Romans 1^.1. And there is the presenting
of our prayers also a living sacrifice, for our souls are in them. Here then
also is life.

True faith, an holy conversation, and pure devotion do constitute a man and
absolve him for religious: in each of these there is life, in them altogether
is the life of religion.

1. The rule of things that are to be believed, Regula credendor^^n, is the
Creed; in this short exposition ^^y perchance be found some. what that may
inform a man's understanding in the knowledge of the mystery of godliness, and
to teach him also to make application of his knowledge to himself. This is
for faith.

2. The rule of a man's life are the Commandemens, of which we may say in the
words of the Prophet: This is the way walk in it. This small treatise will
afford a man some light in the way, and give him some entrance, to the
understanding of the precept, and practice of the duties that are required.
This is for conversation.

3. The rule of a man's prayers, is that prayer which the Lord himself has
taught us, somewhat for a man's learning to teach him to pray according to this
prayer, may he find in this small Book. This is for devotion.

3. The Lord of life give unto us to live in this World the life of grace, that
in the other we may live the life of glory: here to live religiously, that
there we may live blessedly, through his Son our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus. Amen.

THE LIFE of Religion.
The first Heads or Grounds of the Exposition following. The Creed.
I Believe in God,]
1. ACknowledging that he is but one.

2. Applying him to my self.

3. Relying on his help.

The Father,]
1. Of his eternal Son. 2. Of his elect Angels. 3. Of his faithful people.
Almighty,]
1. To do whatsoever he shall please. 2. To do things to us impossible with
ease. 3. To give strength to the feeble, and increase power to him that has no
strength.
Maker of Heaven and Earth,]
1. Creating of all things the kinds. 2. Establishing their order. 3. Guiding
their course.
And in Jesus; which saves us,]
1. From the guilt of sin. 2. From the punishment of sin. 3. From the power
of sin and Satan.
Christ, anointed unto us,]
1. A Prophet. 2. A Priest. 3. A King.
His only Son,]
1. Not by creation. 2. Not by adoption. 3. But by eternal generation.
Our Lord,]
1. Not by a power usurped and unjust. 2. Not by a power borrowed and limited.
3. But by a power ingenit, and lawful purchase.
Which was conceived by the Holy Ghost;]
1. After the will of God alone. 2. After a manner unspeakable. 3. After the
prophecies that went before.
Borne of the Virgin Mary,]
A thing.

1. In reason wonderful. 2. In example singular. 3. In effect desirable.
Suffered,]
1. According to the truth foretold. 2. With great fruit to us. 3 Leaving us an
example to follow his steps.
Under Pontius Pilate,]
1. Before whom he was brought bound. 2. To whom he was accused falsely. 3. By
whom he was condemned unjustly
Was Crucified,]
1. Despising the shame. 2. Enduring the torment. 3. Bearing the curse.
Dead,]
1. Verily and really. 2. Voluntarily. 3. Necessarily.
Buried,]
1. That he might show the certainty of his death. 2. That he might bury our
sins with him in the grave. 3. That pursuing death unto his farthesest hold,
he might there conquer him, and sanctify the grave.
He descended into Hell,]
1. That he might deliver us from the streights and torments of hell. 2. That
he might destroy the ^^els Kingdom. 3. That he might triumph over powers and
principalities, and make an open show of them, having disarmed them.
The third day he rose again from the dead,]
1. Which is to us a sign that he has overcome death, and fully satisfied
for all our sin. 2. Which is to us a token that we must be raised here to
newness of life. 3. Which is to us a pledge that we shall rise again to the
resurrection of life.
He ascended into Heaven,]
1. That he might prepare the way thither, and take possession thereof for us.
2. That he might give gifts unto men. 3. That he might send the comforter unto
his Church.
And sits on the right hand of God the father almighty,]
1. Partaking of endless rest and felicity. 2. Administering and governing all
things both in Heaven and in Earth. 3. Making intercession to his Father for
his people.
From thence he shall come,]
1. Visibly, 2. Gloriously. 3. Suddenly.
To judge both the quick and the dead]
1. The wicked of them with all severity. 2. The just amongst them with all
clemency. 3. All in general with all equity.
I believe in the holy Ghost,]
1. Acknowledging his Godhead. 2. Taking him to be my Sanctifier and comforter.
3. Putting all the confidence of my heart in him.
I believe the Church,]
1. The house of God. 2. The pillar and ground of the truth 3. The mother of
the faithful.
Holy,]
1. By imputation of righteousness. 2. By inchoation of righteousness. 3. By
being consecrate to an holy and divine use.
Catholic,]
1. In respect of place. 2. In respect of time. 3. In respect of men, the
members of the same.
The communion of Saints,]
which consists, 1. In the union and coherence of the faithful with Jesus
Christ. 2. In the union and fellowship of the faithful one with another while
they live together here on earth. 3. In that which these of the Church militant
partake with those of the Church triumphant.


The forgiveness of sins,]
1. The guilt of them done away. 2. The spot of them purged. 3. The punishment
remitted.
The resurrection of the body,]
1. Wherein there shall be a final destruction of the works of the devil. 2.
Wherein there shall be a full manifestation of Gods mercy on the faithful. 3.
Wherein there shall be a fearful declaration of his justice on the wicked.
And the life everlasting,]
1. Which is the gift of our God. 2. Which is the end of our hopes. 3. Which is
the complement of our happiness.
The ten Commandments.
God spoke these words,]
1 Whose is the gretest authority 2 Whose words are words of verity. 3. Who
requires our perfect obedience and the hearts sincerity.
Saying: I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out
of the house of bondage.

In the words of which preface, that we should yield more willing obedience to
the precepts following: the Lord sets out unto us three things to induce.

1. A declaration of his eternal rule and power. 2. A promise of the goodness
of his grace. 3. A remembrance of his benefits before conferd.
The first Commandment,
Thou shall have none other gods before me,]
First, The things commanded in this precept are, 1. That we know the true God
and acknowledge him. 2. That we fall down and do reverence before him. 3.
That with purpose of heart and mind we cleave fast unto him.


Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. Ignorance of God his
word and works. 2. Errors concerning God, the persons of the godhead and their
properties. 3. The affection set on any other thing but God.


The appendix of the first Commandment.

Thirdly, Promises and threatenings not expressed.

1. If herein we harken to his voice we shall be his chief treasure above all
people. Exodus 19.5. 2. If we like not to retain him in our knowledge, he will
give us over to a reprobate mind, and vile affections. Romans 1.26.28. 3. If in
our hearts we estrange our selves from him, he also will be far from us, and
from our help.
The second Commandment.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc.]
The things required in this precept are: 1. That we be religiously careful of
all the parts of Gods service. 2. That we stir up our selves thereunto by all
godly means. 3. That we stoutly oppose against all corruptions, which may
defile the pure worship of God.


The things prohibited in this precept, are 1. Idolatry. 2. Hypocrisy. 3.
Profaneness.


The Appendix of the second Commandment.

Thirdly, An exhortation to obedience set down at large, 1. Because the God
that requires the true worship, and forbids the false, is a mighty and a
jealous God. 2. Because he punishes the breach of this Commandment severely
on the wicked and their posterity. 3. Because he rewards the observance
thereof plentifully to the godly and their seed after them.


The third Commandment.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain,]
First, The things enjoined in this precept are, 1. That we swear in due and
lawful manner. 2. That we zealously confess to Gods glory the truth and will
of God that we know. 3. That we call upon the Lord, and glorify him giving
thanks unto him.


Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are: 1. That we use no
needelesse and unholy oaths. 2. That we speak not irreverently of God, his
word, his works, or titles, etc. nor abuse them. 3. That we disgrace not our
holy profession by an unholy conversation.


The Appendix.
Thirdly, Threatening from God, that he will be revenged on those, that
sacrilegiously rob him of his glory, which he will do 1. Surely. 2. Swiftly.
3. Severely.


The fourth Commandment.
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy.
First, The things commanded in this precept are, 1. That on the Lords day we
do all holy and religious works. 2. That we cease from our worldly labors, 3.
That we rest from sin and wickedness.


Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. The foreslowing of the
asse^bling of our selves in the congregation. 2. The doing of our ordinary
works. 3. The doing of the works of the flesh and of the devil.


The Appendix.
Thirdly, A reason drawn from the example of God.

1. Who rested that day. 2. Who blessed that day. 3. Who sanctified that day.
The fifth Commandment.
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days, etc,]
First, the things required in this precept are, 1. That we obey them in all
things in the Lord. 2. That we deal faithfully and thankefully with them. 3.
That we show our selves respectively kind unto them.


Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. Resisting them in their
just commands. 2. Proving unfaithful and unthankful toward them. 3. Hating of
their persons, and dealing frowardly with them.


The Appendix.
Thirdly, A promise of long life to the obseruers of this commandment:

Now they prolong our days.

1. By their fatherly care and provision. 2. By their prayers. 3. By their
blessing.
The sixth Commandment.
Thou shall not kill,]
First, The things commanded in this precept are, 1. That we be peaceable in
our whole conversation. 2. That our hearts be fraught with pity and
compassion. 3. That we defend and deliver as much as in us lies, our selves
and others from danger, violence and vexation.


Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. Wrath, and evil
conceived, and hidden inwardly in the heart. 2. All outward signs provoking or
encouraging to a mischief. 3. Hurt and damage offered to any man's body and
life in deed.


The Appendix.
Thirdly, A threatening: He that sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed. Genesis 9: or, The murderers hoar head shall not go down to the grave in
peace. 1. King. 2.6. God in his just judgment.

1. Either cutting him off by the sword of justice. 2. Or shutting up his soul
into the hand of his enemy. 3. Or making the man of blood the executioner of
himself.
The seventh Commandment.
Thou shall not commit adultery.]
First, The things required in this precept are, 1. That for the preserving of
chastity we be religiously watchful over all our members. 2. That we tame our
flesh and bring it in subjection, 3. That we use the remedy that God has
appointed against incontinency.


Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. All acts of
uncleanness. 2. All thoughts of uncleanness. 3. All things that may nourish
lust, and stir us up to uncleanness.


The Appendix.
Thirdly, A threatening of fearful judgments which overtake Adulterers, who
are punished of God 1. In their own wives, God paying them home in their own
coin. 2. In their own bastard slips. 3. In their own persons.


The eight commandment.
Thou shall not steal,]
First, The things commanded in this precept are, 1. That I labor with mine
hands the thing that is good. Ephe. 4.28. 2. That I pay to every man the thing
that I owe. 3. That I rest contented with the things that I have. 1. Tim. 6.6.


Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. That I take not any
thing from any man with a strong hand. 2. That I hurt not any man by craft, or
forged cauillation. 3. That I be no picker, purloining privily from my brother
his goods and substance.


The Appendix.
Thirdly, A threatening of Gods judgment against the thief.

1. In his bodily life. 2. In his soul. 3. In his goods and substance.
The ninth Commandment.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor,]
First, The things commanded in this precept are, 1. That we set forth that
which is good in our brother with deserved praise. 2. That we interpret that
which is doubtful in him in the better sense. 3. That we cover his infirmities
and weaknesses in love.


Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. That in any wise we
speak not that which is false of our neighbor. 2. That we speak not that
which is true of him with a false heart. 3. That we discover not his
infirmities discurteously, nor aggrauate his faults.


The Appendix.
Thirdly, A caveat to beware of the breach of this Commandment, least
transgressing it, 1. We be made like unto the Devil. 2. We be punished in the
same kind. 3. We be shut out from the presence of God.


The tenth Commandment.
Thou shall not Covet,]
First, The things required in this precept are, 1. That our hearts be full
fraught with charity. 2. That we detest all sin and iniquity. 3: That we
delight in all righteousness and equity.


Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. Evil thoughts arising
out of our own corruption. 2. Evil entertained from the devils suggestion. 3.
The least pleasure or delight in any evil motion.


The appendix of this tenth Commandment, as also of the whole decalogue.

Thirdly, An instruction to use both this and those as a looking glass therein
to behold and see our own deformity, wants and imperfections, who transgress
this and the other Commandments daily.

1. In thought. 2. In word. 3. In deed.
The Lords Prayer.
Our father,]
1. NOt in name only, but of our life and being also. 2. In affection, and 3.
In effect and deed.
Which art in heaven,]
1. Of greatest majesty. 2. Of perfect happiness. 3. Of everlasting
continuance.
Hallowed be thy name,]
1. While believing, we do after thy word and commandments. 2. While we
speak reverently of thy great name and titles. 3. While in our hearts we
religiously regard and think of thy power, wisdom, mercy, justice,
judgments, etc.
Thy kingdom come,]
1. In the preaching of thy Gospel. 2. In the power of thy Spirit. 3. In the
appearing of thy glory.
Thy will be done in earth,
1. On us, in all that thou shall think good. 2. In us, in all that shall be
good. 3. By us in all that our hand shall find to do.
As it is in heaven,]
1. By thine only Son. 2. By thy holy Angels. 3. By thy blessed Saints.
Give us this day our daily bread,]
1. For our present necessity. 2. Further commodity. 3 Future ability.
And forgive us our trespasses,]
1. Sinning of ignorance. 2. Falling of infirmity. 3. Offending of set purpose.
As we forgive them that trespass against us,]
1. Not retaining their injuries. 2. Not returning their injuries. 3. Doing
them good moreover for their injuries.
And lead us not into temptation,]
1. With drawing thy grace assisting from us. 2. Stirring up storms and war
against us. 3. Laying baits and blocks before us.
But deliver us from the evil,]
1. Of our own concupiscence. 2. Of the wicked adversary. 3. Of the examples
of this naughty age.
For thine is the
Kingdom, 1. Over all excelling.
the power, 2. All ruling and disposing.
and the glory,] 3. Always brightly shining.

For ever,]
1. In all ages past. 2. At this time present. 3. In all times to come.
Amen: So shall it be.]
1. As thou have said. 2. As we have prayed. 3. Hereupon our faith is staid, we
believe, Lord help our unbelief even so Lord Jesus, Amen, Amen.
The Resolution of the Creed.
1. THere are three maine parts of this the Apostles creed.

1. The object of our faith, God. 2. The subject of believing, the Church. 3.
The benefits that we receive of God in the Church.
2. The object of our faith, God is distinguished into three persons.

1. The Father. 2. The Son. 3. The holy Ghost.
3. The first person is set out unto us under these Appellations.

1. Father. 2. Almighty. 3. Creator of heaven and earth
4. The second person is set out unto us by his 1. Titles. 1. Jesus Christ. 2.
his Son 3. our Lord. 2. Incarnation containing his conception and birth. 3.
His double estate of humiliation and exaltation: of humiliation, he suffered
etc of exaltation he rose, etc.


5. The third person is set out unto us by his 1. Name, Spirit. 2. Attribute,
Holy. 3. The intimation of his office, under these, his name and attribute.


6. The Church is set out unto us by her qualities and description, to be 1.
Holy. 2. Catholic. 3. The communion of Saints.


7. The benefits that we receive of God in the Church are these: 1.
Forgiveness of sins. 2. Resurrection of the body. 3. Life everlasting.


THE LIFE of Religion. The Creed.
The first Article.
I Believe in God,]
1. ACknowledging that he is but one. Perkins.


2. Applying him to my self.

3. Relying on his help.

For he is 1. Alpha and Omega. Revel. 1. 2. My portion and my lot. 3. A tower
to those that put their trust in him.


Use 1. Therefore resort I to his written word therein to be instructed
concerning him, 1. That he is. 2. What he is. 3. Who he is.


That I may have a ground for this my faith

2. Therefore come I unto his fountain, thence to draw of the 1. Fulness of his
grace. 2. Sweetness of his comforts. 3. Truth of his promises.


That I may taste and see how good he is.

3. Therefore walk I without all fear, committing may way unto him, and what
belongs unto me, 1. Not trusting in my s lfe. 2. Not trusting in the son of
man. 3. Not trusting in any other creature.


That I may hold me fast by him.

The Father,]
1. Of his eternal Son. 2. Of his elect Angels. 3. Of his faithful people.
For, 1. He came out of his bosom. 2. They are called the children of God Job
1.6. 3. They are reckoned to him for a generation.


Use 1. Hereupon I utterly condemn the blasphemies of those that deny God to
have a Son; and heresy of those that deny the Son to be begotten of the
substance of the father, such as are 1. The Jews. 2. The Mahumetanes, and --
3. The Arrians.


And do believe and hold this generation.

2. Hereupon I renounce the error of the Saduces, which deny God to have any
such sons as Angels; notwithstanding, besides in the names of their nature
and office, the Scripture sets them out unto us, terming them 1. Of their
dignity, thrones, and dominions. Bucan.
2. Of the effect, Seraphim. 3. Of the form of their apparitions Cherubim.


And acknowledge that he has such offspring.

3. Hereupon I wholly build upon my God, that he will do for me, as for other
his faithful people, like a loving father 1. Chastening me in mercy. 2.
Providing for my need. 3. Turning al my sufferings into good.


And in this confidence I draw near unto him.

Almighty,]
1. To do whatsoever he shall please. 2. To do things to us impossible with
ease. 3. To give strength to the feeble and increase power to him that has no
strength.
For 1. Nothing can hinder him to execute his will. 2. He is neither faint nor
weary of his work. 3. His power is performed in the weakness of the creature.


Use. 1. I am humbled therefore in my self, thinking on such might and
strength, and do learn 1. To trust in his mercies. 2. To tremble at his
judgments. 3. To magnify his works.
Which brings such mighty things to pass.

2. I measure not his omnipotence by the scantling of my perceiuerance, when I
see him work great effects by 1. Weak means. 2. No means. 3. Yea, against
all means.


Which does that which is wonderful in our eyes.

3. I consider not my weakness in the work of his grace, being persuaded
that he will enable me in all things 1. To do. 2. To suffer, and 3. To
overcome.


Which will be glorified in his Saints, and made marvelous in all them that
believe.

Maker of Heaven and Earth,]
1. Creating of all things the kinds. 2. Establishing their order. 3. Guiding
their course.
For 1. This is the work alone of his power. 2. This is the work of his
wisdom. 3. This is the work of his providence.


Now then,

Use 1. I acknowledge none for Gods to put my trust in them, but this all
forming power, and forsake all other Idol Gods; whether they be the names of
1. Devils. 2. Men, or, 3. Fained Monsters.


For he is the true Jehovah.

2. I wonder at no wisdom but at his, which orders all things comely, in 1.
Measure. 2. Number. 3. Weight.


For he is the eternal.

3. I bow my knee to him alone, and rendering my self to him, cast all my care
upon him, 1. Giving thanks in my successes. Bas^in. Calvin.
2. Pati^nt in my sufferings. 3. Having a good hope for the time that is to come.


For he does govern all things.

The second Article.
And in Jesus; which saves vs]
1. From the guilt of sin. 2. From the punishment of sin. 3. From the power
of sin and Satan.
For 1. He was made sin for us. Gal. 3.13. 2. He was made a curse for us. Ga.
4.4. 3. He appeared to loose the works of the devil. Ioh. 16.54.


Use 1. Whereas therefore the law of God accusing me, in my self I am but a
lost creature, and can find nothing in me, but 1. A froward heart. 2. A wicked
life, and 3. A defiled conscience.


I betake me to this salvation.

2. Whereas wrath is here gone forth against me, and hell elsewhere provided,
that I may yet have hope and safety 1. In life. 2. In death. 3. In judgment.


I cleave unto this Jesus.

3. Whereas sold under sin a captive to the Devil, I have lived long in
bondage, that now I may be freed from such, 1. Bad Masters. 2. Heavy chains,
and 3. Servile labors.


I fly unto this Savior.

Christ, anointed unto vs]
1. A Prophet. 2. A Priest. 3. A King.
For he 1. Teaches his people the will of his Father. 2. Makes atonement
twixt them and their God. 3. Does mightily govern and defend his Church.


Use 1. I therefore leave all other teachers, which speak not as the word of
God, to harken to this Prophet, with whose 1. Threatenings I am terrified. 2.
Promises I am allured. 3. To whose precepts I do obey.


Because he has the words of truth and peace.

2 I come unto the father through him, offering spiritual sacrifice, trusting
to be accepted, and lay hold upon his sacrifice, which was 1. Priest. 2. Altar.
3. Sacrifice.


Because he is the high and only sacrificer.

3 I count me happy living in his government, and will show me faithful to
him, that so 1. Mightily ouer-rules and punishes his enemies. 2. Graciously
rules and protects his subjects. 3. Bountifully rewards all their services.


Because he is the King of p^ace and righteousness.

His only Son,]
1. Not by creation. 2. Not by adoption. 3. But by eternal generation.
For 1. So are other men and Angels sons of God. 2. So are sons all the
chosen people of God. 3. So is Jesus Christ himself alone.


Use 1. These other therefore men and Angels, though they are called sons of
God, as being from him in the institution of their nature, in whom 1. They
live. 2. They move. 3. They have their being.


Yet do they not partake of Gods own nature.

2. These other Saints of God and chosen people, though they have the honor to
be called the Sons of God, because they are 1. Elect of him before all
worlds. 2. Begotten of his immortal seed, the word. 3. Borne again of water
and of the spirit.


Yet do they not communicate of Gods own essence.

3 But this his Son alone, his undefiled offspring, begotten of him before
all worlds, and dear to him that did beget him, is rightly called his only
Son, being 1. The bright image of his Father. 2. Light of his light. 3.
Coaeternall to him and consubstantial.


Because he alone communicates of the divine nature and essence.

Our Lord,]
1. Potestas arrepta. Accepta.
Not by a power usurped and unjust. 2. Not by a power borrowed and limited.
I^genita de Soto.
3. But by a power ingenit, and lawful purchase.
For 1. So are Lords also the tirants of the earth 2. So are Lords also those
that reign by him. 3. So is he our Lord alone that is heir of all things.


Use 1. Hence therefore am I quickened in my service, to perform all due
obedienc^, and do willingly resign to him my body, soul and substance, whom
I serve Greg. li. 2. Moral.
1. Out of the affection of charity. 2. Out of the love of justice. 3. Free from
all servile fear and terror.


Because his government is so just and equal.

2. Hence draw I no small comfort, both for the hope of the reward of my
service, and help in need and trouble, as also from the dignity of this my
calling, that I serve a power, 1. Whose ability is not poor to reward. 2.
Whose arm is not short to help. 3. Whose will cannot be crossed by a greater
power.


Because he is chief Lord subordinate to none.

3. Hence think I of the account that I am to make of my goods and tallent,
and withal refer all that I have to his goodness, and all that I speak,
think, or do to his praise, from whom I have so much received, and whose I am
by right of 1. Creation. 2. Redemption. 3. Preservation.


Because he is my true and natural Lord. Vrfin in loco.


The third Article.
Which was conceived by the Holy Ghost,]
1. After the will of God alone. 2. After a manner unspeakable. 3. After the
prophecies that went before.
For 1. He decreed it thus to come to pass. 2. We cannot conceive nor utter
how. 3. They spoke thus of it long ago. A Virgin shall conceive.


All which was done,

Use 1. That he might be without all spot or blemish in his conception, 1. The
sourse of corruption being stopped in his mother. 2. Pureness infused into the
mass whereof he was made. 3. The humane nature united unto the godhead.


That so his integrity might cover our defects.

2. That we might know, that by the same spirit Christ may be formed in our
hearts, ^ulgent: li. de incarnatio. August in Ps. 17
by which he was conceived in the womb, if we have the virginity of the mind:
which is 1. Sound faith, 2. Solid hope. 3. Sincere charity.


That so a fit receptacle be provided for him in our souls.

3. That we might be assured that nothing shall fall to the ground which the
Lord has spoken, though it seem as impossible to us, as a Virgin to conceive:
a thing, 1. Which is beyond the course of nature. 2. Which has not entered into
the heart of man. 3. Which has not otherwise been hard of in the world.


That so our faith may be confirmed in the promises.

Borne of the Virgin Mary,]
A thing 1. In reason wonderful. 2. In example singular. 3. In effect
desirable.


For 1. Who can tell out of his generation? 2. Who can ever instance in the
like? 3. Blessed and happy is the womb that bears him.


Use 1. I acknowledge herein therefore the great work of God marvelous in our
eyes, so strangely joining these three things together, Bern. ser. in vigil
natiu.
1. God and man. 2. A mother and a maid. 3. Faith of these things and the heart
of man.


And magnify his glorious name therefore.

2. I regard herein the humility and love of my Savior, which being borne from
everlasting of the father, God rich over all, dwelling in the heavenly palaces,
came down into this earth, to be, 1. Borne of his hand-maide. 2. Wrapped in
clouts. 3. Laid in a manger.


And follow him in, and love him for, these virtues.

3. August.
I long to bear him blessedly in my heart, as the mother of God did bear him
blessedly in her belly: whom I may, 1. Conceive without sin 2. Bear without
burden. 3. Bring forth without pain.


And embrace him in mine arms with all joy.

The fourth Article.]
Suffered,]
1. According to the truth foretold. 2. With great fruit to us. 3. Leaving us
an example to follow his steps.
For 1. Thus the scripture testified of him. 2. There is de^pe matter hid
therein. 3. We also by suffering must enter into glory.


Use 1. I conf^sse therefore that it is true of Christ, which I have read and
heard of him, that he should be 1. Sold of the wicked. 2. Villainously
despighted. 3. Slain for s^nne.


Whereas there was no evil found in him.

2. I propose his passion to my self to apply it to my soul, therein
beholding both the horriblenesse of my sin, and his unspeakable love, who was
1. Sold to redeem me. 2. Despighted to honor me. 3. Slain to quicken me.


Whereas I was his enemy by kind. August. in sermon. quodam.


3. I arm me likewise with such mind, calling his passion to my mind. 1.
Pet. 4.1. 1. Greg. in Epist.
To suffer all things willingly. 2. To spend my self bearing other men's
burdens. 3. To honor and love him in the highest degree.


Whereas he suffered so great things for me.

Under Pontius Pilate,]
1. Before whom he was brought bound. 2. To whom he was accused falsely. 3. By
whom he was condemned unjustly
1. He was then deputy and judge in Jury. 2. The witnesses could not agree. 3.
He had pronounced him innocent before.
Use 1 This foreign ruler shows me that this was true Messiah, who was thus
brought bound before him, as a sacrifice tied with cords: for now, 1. The
scepter was departed from Judah. 2. The law giver from between his feet. 3.
The stock of Less was grown old and bare.


That hencforth I expect no other Christ.

2. This accusation tells me, whereby the harmless fell, and yet did hold his
peace, that I shall be absolved, and have leave to cry to God, through him that
was accused, and yet would answer nothing when it was falsely laid to his
charge, that he, 1. Seduced the people. 2. Raised sedition among the people. 3.
Went about to make himself a King.


That I should not fear what may be brought against me.

3. This condemnation of the innocent acquits me that am nocent from the just
condemning sentence 1. Of the law of God. 2. Of mine own conscience. 3. Of the
heavenly judge.


That I might be blameless whilst he bears my guilt.

Was Crucified,]
1. Despising the shame. 2. Enduring the torment. 3. Bearing the curse.
1. For it was a punishment of slaves and the last of men. 2. For it was with
incredible pain of all parts of the body. 3. For it is written, cursed is he
that hangs on the tree.
Use 1. I will here then consider of the inestimable love of Christ passing all
understanding, who humbled himself so low, as that to deliver me and other his
people from deserved shame, he undeserving underwent the shame of the cross,
where he hung six hours; 1. Naked in the sight of all m^n. 2. In the midst
between two thieues. 3. Derided and scorned of all sorts of men.


That I may love such love and never be ashamed of such a Master.

2. I will look up to his cross to see how much sins do pain him, which
have fastened him to the wood pierst his side, digd his hands and feet, and
ponder in the balance of my heart, August.
1. The wounds of him that hangs there. 2. The blood of him that dies there. 3.
The price of him that redeemes there.


That weighing his torment I may wound my soul with sorrow for my sin.

3. I will not henceforth fear the curse of the law, nor yet the wrath of God,
seeing he was made a curse, and bare the whole wrath of God in his flesh; 1. To
satisfy Gods justice for me. 2. To appease his wrath toward me. 3. To make me
partaker of the blessing.


That so I may receive the promise of the spirit through faith.

Dead,]
1. Verily and really. 2. Voluntarily. 3. Necessarily.
For 1. The ^cripture says, that he gave up the ghost. 2. He had power to die,
and not to die. 3. The justice of God, his t^ueth, and promise did so require
it.


Use 1. He did not therefore counterfeit a passion, Bast. ex August. de haeres.
as wickedly say the Manichees and Cerdonians, nor substitute a Sym^n of Cyrene
to be slain for him, as say the Basilida^ Heretics: but though he were the
Lord of life, he did indeed lay down his life, and died to quicken us, and by
the power of his death oue^ came, 1. Death. 2. Hell, and 3. Damnation.


Delivering us from the fear, and taking away from us the sting of death, and
victory of hell.

2. He willingly for us laid down his soul, an offering for sin Es. 53 10.
to deliver us from the punishment of sin. Romans 6.^3. and left us an example
that we should also willingly, Perkins.
1. Die rather then sin. 2. Die for Christ. 3. Die for the brethren.


Imitating his zeal and love that took upon him our person, and satisfied for
our transgressions.

3. He was ordained before of God and promised to be that all sufficient
sacrifice, that should take away the sins of the world, and therefore
according to the necessity of his decree and word he died, and by his death
obtained 1. Pardon of our sins. 2. Reconciliation for us with God. 3. The gift
of the holy Ghost.


Paying a sufficient ransom for us, Vrsin.
and sustaining a punishment aequiualent to the eternal, which none but he
could do.

Buried,]
1. That he might show the certainty of his death.

2. That he might bury our sins with him in the grave.

3. That pursuing death into his farthest hold, he might there conquer him, and
sanctify the grave.

For 1. They bury n^ne but those that are dead indeed. 2. He so would have our
sins hidden from the face of his father. 3. He there took away the victory
of death, and consecrated the grave filling it with his odours and sweet smells


Use 1. I will hold therefore of his burial for the assurance of my faith
concerning his death, and thinking of his burying, meditate also of the
mysteries of his sepulcher, in that he was laid, 1. In a new grave, who loves
to have his lodgeing in a new heart. Bucan.
2. In another man's grave, August.
that died and was buried for other men's salvation. 3. In a grave cut out of
the rock, which opens the stoniest hearts, and in them does make his chambers.


That I may lay these things the better to my heart.

2. I will not violate the sepulcher of my savior, raking up again the sins
which he has buried, but rather strive to have sin buried in me: neither
will I any more fear my sins, inasmuch as he has buried them that they
shall never rise up against me in judgment, 1. To accuse me before my God. 2.
To condemn me with my God. 3. To hinder from me the love and mercy of my God.


That my conscience may be quieted in this life within my breast.

3. I will not henceforth fear the power of death, nor the horror of the dust
and grave, seeing my Lord has conquered death, and sanctified the grave, to be
to the bodies of his Saints a bed to rest in ( Es. 57.2.) where they repose
them till the resurrection, 1. Having laid aside a grievous burden, the burden
of the flesh. 2. Free from the troubles and miseries of this life. August. in
Joan.
3. Kept safe to immormortality.


That I may lay me down quietly at the time of my dissolution, and also sleep
in peace. Ps. 4.8.

He descended into hell,]
1. That he might deliver us from the streights and torments of hell. 2. That
he might destroy the devils Kingdom. 3. That he might triumph over powers and
principalities, and make an open show of them, having disarmed them.
for 1. We were before in fear and danger of hell. 2. He only could overcome
the strong man, bind him, and spoil his house. Luke 11.21. Mat. 12.29. 3.
Thereby he led captivity captive, and took into his hands the keys of death
and hell.


Use 1. Whereas therefore by this descending of Christ into hell, I find my
self delivered from the danger of hell: I do consider that it is my duty,
that as my Savior has delivered me from this death, so I should endeavor
also to save others from this place of torment, where there is 1. Want of all
grace. 2. Defect of all glory. 3. Excess of all pain,


Sadness burning the minds of men, Bern. de med. geh. suppli.
and flames the bodies.

2. Whereas by this his conquest of the infernal powers, my Lord has stricken
a perpetual terror and fear into the devil, I see that I need not to stand
in fear of satan's tyranny, seeing he shall never more be able to set up his
kingdom thus destroyed, 1. Although he has great wrath. 2. Although he has
great subtlety. 3. Although he has great power.


Always envying the people of God, and fighting against the Saints.

3. Whereas my Lord rides on in his glory, with his and our enemies bound
before him, I will no longer look on the mockgames of this worlds vanities and
triumphs, but turn mine eyes from all earthly spectacles to behold this
glorious show where 1. The conqueror is the Lord of heaven. 2. The conquered
are the powers of darkness. 3. The monument of victory is the cross


A triumph excelling all other shows, and alone worth the beholding.

The fifth Article.
The third day he rose again from the dead,]
1. Which is to us a sign that he has overcome death, and fully satisfied
for all our sin. 2. Which is to us a token that we must be raised here to
newness of life. 3. Which is to us a pledge that we shall rise again to the
resurrection of life.
For 1. Else could he not have freed himself out of deaths hold, and prison of
the grave. 2. We must be made conformable, as unto the image of the death,
Phil. 3.3
so also to the resurrection of Jesus Christ. 3. As he raised himself by his
own power, so also will he quicken our mortal bodies to make them like unto
his glorious body.


Use 1. What great comfort then is this unto my soul, that I have an assurance
that my Lord by dying has not only quite abolished and done away my sin,
but also by rising again has brought unto me righteousness and life,
applying unto me by virtue of his resurrection the whole merit of his death and
passion, whereby I am, 1. Separate from sinners 2. Reconciled unto God, 3. At
peace and quietness in mine own conscience. To. 5.


Which is my chiefest joy and happiness in this world.

2. What great care and conscience should I use, seeing Christ is ris^n again
from the dead, that I no longer lie amongst the dead? how should I pray unto
him that as by the power of his godhead he raised himself from the grave, so
he would also raise me unto newness of life from this death and grave of
sin? where I ly rotting and stinking, while I 1. Delight in sin 2. Work
sin, 3. Accustom my self to s^nne.


Which is my greatest misery in this life. Aug. de ver. dom.


3. What great hope and assured confidence should I have that I shall be raised
up again to life? for if he being dead could raise himself, Vrsin. Max. in
ser. de pa.
much more being alive can he raise me: If he my head, my flesh, my blood and
my portion be risen, then shall I his member, flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone also rise, and come to an inheritance in heaven 1. Immortal, 2.
Undefiled, 3. And that fades not away.
Which will be my blessedness in the world to come.

The sixth Article.
He ascended into heaven,]
1. That he might prepare the way thither, and take possession thereof for us.
2. That he might give gifts unto men. 3. That he might send the comforter unto
his Church
For 1. He is entered before into the rest, and makes us to sit together with
him in heavenly places. 2. He did ascend that he might fulfill al things. Ephesians.
4.10. 3. He says Ioh. 16.7. If I go not away the comforter will not come unto
you.


Use 1. I will therefore leave all by paths of this world to take me to this
way, which my Lord has trod before me, and trained it with his blood: neither
will I be slothful in it, nor turn out of it, but in affection have me into
heaven, Greg.
following thither in my heart, where Christ is in his body, where I converse
already in hope and expectation, and viewing him with the eye of my faith
ascending. Aug. Epist. ad Dardan.


1. Believe on him in his absence. 2. Hope for his coming. 3. By his hidden
mercy feel his presence.
Nothing doubting, but that where my Lord is, I his servant shall be also. Ioh.
14.3.11.26.

2. I will not swell on that which I have received, nor otherways abuse my
gifts, because from him I have them received: nor scorn my brothers graces to
quench the spirit in him, but rather stir up the gift of God in me
acknowledging the giver.

1. Of whom, 2. Through whom, 3. For whom are all things. Romans 11.36.
Nothing of good giuings and perfect gifts but coming down from him the father
of lights. Iac. 1.17.

3. I will not seek for solace in the heaviness of my soul, and day of mine
affliction from any worldly comfort, but from that heavenly spirit which he
sent down ascending who in flesh departing from us, yet always remains with
us, as concerning his Aug. tra. 50. in Io.
1. Majesty, 2. Providence, 3. Unspeakable goodness.


Nothing wanting to true consolation, where he is present by his holy spirit.

And sits on the right hand of God the father almighty,]
1. Partaking of endless rest and felicity. 2. Administering and governing all
things both in heaven and in earth. 3. Making intercession to his father for
his people.
For 1. In the presence of God is fulness of joy and at his right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. Ps. 16.11. 2. He is ordained King and head over al. 3.
He is our great high Priest that is passed into the heavens. Heb. 4.14.


Use 1. As therefore I believe that he now rests in heaven in happiness and
bliss, after his so many labors, and so much suffered here; so do I also
hope that I shall rest with him there 1. Where nothing shall be wanting to me.
Cyp. de lau. Mar.
2. Where nothing shall be hurtful to me. 3. Where Christ being present shall
fill all my desire.


Though here I mourn and suffer for a season.

2. As I believe his kingdom, so do I trust in him my king, and bowing my
knee unto him, yield him reverence and obedience withal thankfulness,
Perkins.
hoping that he will graciously in his good time come and 1. Supply al my wants
2. Vanquish all mine enemies. 3. Succor and help me in all mine adversities.


Though he differ his help and coming for a while.

3. As I believe him sitting at the right hand of the throne of majesty to make
request to God, so do I go with boldness unto the throne of grace, Heb. 4 16
being very well assured that I shall receive mercy, and find grace to help
in time of need through him that makes intercession for me, 1. By the worth of
his sacrifice already offered. 2. By his own will, 3. By the consent of the
father.


Though my person be unworthy and my prayer sin. Vrsin.


The seventh Article.
From thence he shall come,]
1. Visibly, 2. Gloriously, Mat. 24.30 Vrsin.
3. Suddenly.
For 1. They shall see the son of man come in the clouds of heaven. 2. As
his first coming was in humility and weakness, so his second coming shall
be in power and majesty. 3. Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the
Angels of God in heaven.


Use 1. I believe therefore that the judgment shall be his, not only as he is
God, but also as he is man, in as much as he shall so come as he was seen to
go into heaven. Act. 1.11. returning in his body at the last day 1. A great
comfort to the godly, 2. A great terror to the wicked, 3. A great sign and
wonder in heaven.


As he shall come riding unto us upon the clouds.

2. I look not for him again in the shape of a servant in his humbleness,
but as the Lord of all things in his brightness, descending unto us, 1. 1.
These. 4 16
With a shout 2. With the voice of the Archangell, 3. With the trumpet of God.


As he shall come accompanied with the Angels of God.

3. I dispute not curiously about the time of his coming, but like a faithful
and wise servant watch that I may be ready against his coming, that he come
not to find me sleeping, in the day that I look not for him, nor in the hour
that I am not ware of, Mat. 24.50. for then his coming will be to me 1. Like
the sudden lightning. 2. Like travail upon a woman that is with child, 3.
Like a thief in the night.


As it will be to all the world on whom he shall come at unawares.

To judge both the quick and the dead,]
1. The wicked of them with all severity. 2. The just amongst them with all
clemency. 3. All in general with all equity.
For 1. He shall inflaming fire render them vengeance. 2. When they are judged
they shall not be condemned. 3. He shall give to every man according as his
works shall be. Apoc. 22.12.


Use 1. Hence conceive I of the terror of the wicked in that day, when their
own consciences accusing them, and their sins witnessing against them: they
shall say to the rocks cover v^ and to the hills fall down upon us, to hide us
from the presence of that judge, 1. Bast.
Who wisdom knows all things. 2. Whose power is almighty. 3. Whose justice
is unchangeable.


And therefore will give sentence against us for our wickedness.

2. Hence conceive I of the incredible comfort of the godly, which they have
both from the goodness of their cause, Bast. Vrsin.
and the ends of the judgment, as also from the promise and person of the
judge.

1. Who is their Prince and they his subjects. Calvin.
2. Who is their head, and they his members. 3. Who is their patron and they
his clients.
And therefore will give judgment with them to salvation.

3. Hence learn I patience in my sufferings; not to revenge my self, though
here I suffer wrong, Eccle. 4.1
and the strength be of the hand of them that oppress me, thinking of his
judgment, because it is just: hence learn I diligently to do my duty, and
to be careful to show forth good works, seeing he will judge according to
works, 1. From whom nothing secret is hidden. Ambr. I^. de offic.
2. By whom nothing uncomely i^ approved. 3. To whom all just and honest things
are a pleasure.


And therefore will judge his people according to equity.

The eight Article.
I believe in the holy Ghost,]
1. Acknowledging his Godhead. 2. Taking him to be my sanctifier and
comforter. Perkins.
3. Putting all the confidence of my heart in him.
For 1. I worship him, calling upon him, and giving thanks unto him. 2. I am
assured that he dwells in me. 3. It is good for me that I hold me fast by God.


Use 1. Bastin.
Let Seruetus therefore and his scholars say, that the holy Ghost is no
substance, but a working and a motion: Let Macedonius impiously affirm that he
is a creature, and not the creator: yet this is my faith, that he is a distinct
person in the godhead and with the father and the son, 1. Coeternall, Vrsin.
2. Coequall, 3. Consubstantiall.


Proceeding from them and the spirit of both.

2. Let mine infirmity be never so great, let ignorance, blindes, dulnes, evil
affections, lusts in my members fighting against the spirit, heaviness and
distrust of Gods gracious help and favor possess my body, soul and spirit:
yet shall he purge out of me all corruption by his fire, all darkness by his
light, all infirmity by his strength, all heaviness by his comforts, Bern. in
ser. 2. Pe^tecost.
which gives unto me 1. The strength of life, 2. The light of knowledge; 3.
The earnest of salvation.


Teaching me in these three, all things that pertain to salvation.

3. Let others trust in man, and make flesh their arm. Ier. 17.5. In lying
words. Ier. 7.4. In vanity and things of naught. Es. 59.4. as in their own
counsels, wisdom, riches, strength: yet will I trust in him the spirit of
truth: while I consider these three things, in which my hope consists, 1. The
charity of his adoption. 2. The truth of his promise, 3. The power of his
performance.


Having an anointing from him which is the oil of gladness. Bern. de frag.
sep. hom. 3.


The ninth Article.
I believe the Church,]
1. The house of God. 2. The pillar and ground of the truth. 3. The mother of
the faithful,
For Mat. Virell. Calvin li. 4. Institut. c. 1 l. 4.
1. He dwells in it to defend it and-guide it by his spirit. 2. By the
ministry thereof God preserves and propagateth his truth in the world. 3.
She brings forth sons and daughters unto God.


Use 1. Happy therefore am I living in this family, where God the father is the
House-holder, Jesus Christ the first borne, and the heir, the holy Ghost
dispencer of all graces, the Preachers of the word the Stewards, the word it
self the food and portion, the faithful the domestics, lively stones of
that building, and golden vessels of that house, which are 1. Elect of God
before all world^. 2. Separate from the rest of men. 3. Knit and united unto
Christ their head.


They bring one body and one spirit, as they are called in one hope of their
vocation. Ephe. 4.4.

2. Sure shall I be to be led into all truth, and to come to him which is way,
life, and truth, Jesus Christ the righteous, if I hold me fast by this pillar,
and be led by it as the Israelites by the pillar of cloud and fire in the
wilderness. Exodus 13.21. and seek him in this Church, and with this Church,
of which he is head, 1. In perfection. 2. In office, and 3. In efficacy.


Having in all things the praeeminence, Bucan. Col 1.18
and governing and inspiring all his members.

3 Worthy were I to perish for want of food, Calvin. li. 4. Iustitut. 1. sect.
5.
if I should refuse it given unto me from Heaven by the hand of such a mother:
worthy were I to be driven out of the tents of the godly, and to be cast out of
the sight of God my Father, if I should despise the instruction and the
government of the Church of my mother, Pro. 30.17.
known to me to be the true spouse of Christ by the 1. Profession of true
doctrine. Vrsin.
2. Right use of the Sacraments. Bucan.
3. Profession of obedience to the doctrine or Ministry.


Nourishing up children unto God by the preaching of the Gospel, and examples
of good works.

Holy,]
1. By imputation of righteousness. Vrsin.
2. By inchoation of righteousness. 3. By being consecrate to an holy and
divine use.
For 1. Christ^ hol^nesse and obedience is imputed unto ^t. 2. The regenerate
members (...) ^^e diligently apply themselves to newness of life. 3. It is
sequestered from the r^^t of the wicked, and those that are without the Church.


Use 1. Because therefore I am assured that I am a member of this Church, which
is holy by being clothed with the ro^^^ of Christ his righteousness: when I
pro^^rate my self before my heavenly Judge in the examination of mine own
conscience here, searching my heart and sifting my life; or else at the last
judgment: should I fo^le and fear 1. The imperf^ction of mine own
righteousness. 2. The multitude and grieuousnes of my sins. 3. The dread and
terror of the angry Judge.


I will hide my sin from sight, my self from wrath, under the skirt and
covering of his roabe.

2 Because I profess my self, to be one of this congregation, which is called
of God unto holiness, follows the example of the Son of God in holiness, is
guided by the spirit of holiness, is instructed in the word concerning holiness,
and daily profi^^ more and more in holiness: keeping these three things for
holiness sake Aug. li. de doc. Christiana
1. Purity and cleanness of bod^. 2. Chastity of mind, 3. Veritye of doctrine.


I will exercise my self to godliness and Holiness of ^ife. 2 Timothy ^.7

Perkins. in lec.
3. Because, I have joined my self to the people of God, and am become one of
his house, I will be no companion to Atheists, drunkards, blasphemers,
fornicators, and other godless persons, which are not of this people, neither
are they of this house: but all my delight being on the Saints in earth; and
those that excel in virtue, conuersing with them alone 1. B^^^^se they are
^ust. 2. Because I may mak^ them just. 3. Because I may be b^ttered by them my
self.


I will have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. Octau. de
trin. cap. 6.
Ephe. 5.7.

Catholic,]
1. In respect of place. 2. In respect of time. 3. In respect of men the
members of the same.
For 1. It spreads it self throughout the world. 2. It has had a being i^ all
times and ages. 3. It is gathered out of all sorts of men, states, kindreds,
and nations.


Use 1. ^^m therefore from the largenes of the Church i^ respect of the place
taught, that it can neither be shut up in one corner of the world, Calvin.
Orb^^^ in orbem.
nor the world be brought into one City, nor the Church restrained to one
schismatic congregation, though there has been; and is much and earnest
contention with the 1. Donatists. 2. Romanists. 3. Separatists.


While they would assert the Church to their quarter, City, side alone.

2. I have to answer the ad^ersarie, when he shall ask me^ of our Church,
where it was before the preaching of these men, Luther, Melanchton, Zwinglius,
and such like that neither are they the founders of our faith, neither is our
Church or yesterday, (...) would they pretend; but that it had its being in all
ages 1. Before the law. 2. Under the law. 3. In the time of grace


While we hold ^ast the foundation whereon the faithful al times have been
built.

3. I see how unjustly the Romish Priests, Perkins.
and shauelings do challenge to themselves and to their tribe alone the name
of the Church, which consists of all degrees of men, estates and callings: I
see here matter of incredible comfort ministered unto all Gods people; in that
no degree or estate of men are excluded from grace in Christ, Ambros. sup. luc.
li. 5.
and that none can take him from them, but that they may 1. Follow him. 2. Lay
hold of him. 3. Feed on him.


While they ^hut not out themselves by unbelief, Bernard in ser.
and take themselves from him.

The Communion of Saints, which consists,]
1. In the union and coherence of the faithful with Jesus Christ. 2. In the
unity and fellowship of the faithful one with another, while they live
together here on earth. 3. In that which these of the Church militant partake
with these of the Church triumphant.
For 1. He i^ their head, they are his body and members for their part. 1.
Cor. 12.27. 2. They have all things common amongst themselves. 3. These
converse with those in heaven in affection; those other pray for these ^n earth.


Now then

Use 1. If the case stand thus twixt Christ and the faithful, that they have
an union and communion between themselves, then surely he the head will inspire
them his members with vigor, feeling, moving, and spiritual life: nay he will
receive of them what is theirs: namely their sins and sorrows, and give unto
them what is his, 1. To be called the sons of God. 2. To have right to his
righteousness. 3. To have just claim and title to his fathers Kingdom.


Conuaying these his goods unto them by the preaching of the word, and
administration of the sacraments.

2. If there be such a fellowship of the Saints on earth, then every one of
them ought to be thus minded, readily and cheerfully to bestow the gifts that
he has received to the common commodity and safety, and to let religion and
charity so unite and move their hearts, 1. That they may think the same
things. 2. That they may be of like affection one unto another. 3. That they
may be ready to distribute of their substance unto every one as he has need.


Maintaining as much as in them lies, and promoting this holy fellowship.

3. If the distance betwixt this and Heaven cannot hinder the affection of the
Saints on earth, but that it will reach even the seat of the blessed: if the
security and pleasures of that Kingdom cannot make the blessed departed to
forget the sufferings of their brethren here on earth whom they do not see, but
that they mind them, pity them, and pray to God for them. How can I then
persuade my self that I am one of these Saints, if my conversation be not
already in heaven? How can I speak of this communion, if I remember not poor
Joseph, to pray for him and to pity him? whom I daily see 1. Destitute 2.
Afflicted. 3. Tormented.


My bowels yerning upon him in compassion of his misery.

The tenth Article.
The forgiveness of sinnes]
1. The guilt of them done away. 2. The spot of them purged. 3. The punishment
remitted.
For 1. They shall never be imputed unto us. 2. The blood of Jesus cleanses us
from all sin. 3. Christ has suffered whatsoever was due to our sins.


Use 1. I can therefore settle my soul in rest and quietness, having great
joy and peace in mine heart, knowing that I am the blessed of the Lord, and
that nothing can separate twixt me and my God, my sin being not, and being
not imputed, it is as if it were not: I can also have great boldn^^ in the day
of the Lord, nothing fearing the judgment, nor in the judgment the acculation
1. Of the Devil. 2. Of mine own conscience. 3. Of the Law of God.


Seeing I shall not be reputed wicked where I did amiss.

2. I will not defile my self again with my sins, returning with the dog
to his vomit, and with the sow to wallowing in the mire, but with all care and
conscience keep 1. My s^^le chaste. 2. My body undefiled. 3. My garments clean.


Seeing I have bin washed from mine iniquity, and cleansed from my sin Ps.
52.2.

3. I will not dream of satisfying for my sins by mine own doing or
suffering, neither will I fear the wrath in this world, nor the revenging
flames of purgatory after this life, to roast and broyle my soul, till they
have purged out my dross, and eat up all my corruption: Or thus Who has made
perfect satisfaction for my sin by this. 1. Most part nativity. 2. Most holy
life. 3. Most bitter pass^ion and cruel death. Seeing. etc.
but cast from me all servile fear; knowing that Gods justice cannot punish
that again in his servant, which he has already punished in his Son, 1. Who
was numbered with the transgressors. 2. Bare the sin of many. 3. Made
intercession for the trespassers. Es. 53.12.


Seeing the Lord laid on him the iniquity of us all. Es. 53.6.

The Eleauenth Article.
The resurrection of the body,]
1. Wherein there shall be a final destruction of the works of the Devil. 2.
Wherein there shall be a full manifestation of Gods mercy on the faithful. 3.
Wherein there shall be a fearful declaration of his justice on the wicked.
For 1. Then sin and death shall be utterly done away. 2. The same flesh that
was partaker of the Cross, shall be made also partaker of the glory. 3. As
their souls sinned dwelling in their bodies for their lasting, so shall they
be punished soul and body for Gods everlasting.


Use 1. I know therefore that howsoever sin has now defaced my soul and
body; howsoever death for a while may hereafter pray upon my carcass in the
grave: yet there shall be a time of restitution, and a time of refreshing from
the Lord, wherein my state shall be made far better then it was at first in
Adam, Christ becoming deaths death, and being made unto me life, by whose
voice I shall be awaked, and by whose power I shall be raised from the grave 1.
The same body. 2. Made like unto Christ's glorious body. 3. Now no more subject
unto death.


For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality 1.
Co. 15.53.

2. I believe that howsoever here the godly mourn for a season, being
afflicted and brought low, yet the time is coming when all tears shall be wipt
away from their eyes, and they made free from misery, having given unto them a
large retribution, namely at the resurrection of the just, when their souls
being joined again unto their bodies, they shall be brought to meet the Lord,
and so for ever be with the Lord: in the assurance of which comfort 1. My heart
is glad. 2. My glory reioiceth. 3. My flesh shall rest in hope. Ps. 16.9.


For I shall not dwell for ever with straitnes, nor lodge for ages in the grave.

3 I persuade me that howsoever the wicked flourish here upon earth for a
season, Et sortem, and vsuram. Greg. li. 4 Dialog.
and it goes well with them: yet the time is coming when they shall pay for
all, being therefore in the resurrection restored to their former being, that
they may for ever leese their well being, and be condemned to suffer 1. Death
without death. 2. Defect without defect. 3. End without end.


For immortal never fading, infinite shall be their death, defect, and end.

The twelfth Article.
And the life everlasting,]
1. Which is the gift of our God. 2. Which is the end of our hopes. 3. Which is
the complement of our happiness.
For 1. He bestows it upon us though Jesus Christ. 2. We can desire nothing
but this, we can expect nothing beyond this. 3. It includes the presence of
all good, and the absence of all evil.


Now therefore

Use 1. If I do owe unto God my whole self, because he has created me: If I
owe unto him more then my self because he has redeemed me: how can I speak
of that inutterable band of debt, wherein I am tied unto him, that has given
to the eternal life? the first fruits whereof I feel in this life, though the
absolute comforts thereof he reserved to that other life, in which I shall 1.
Perfectly know God. 2. Fully enjoy God. 3. Worthily praise God.


Being united unto God, and co^formed with God.

2. If that eternal life be the end of my hopes, I will learn far to
stretch them beyond this momentary life and the perishing things thereof; Gold
shall not be my hope, nor silver, nor servants, nor children, nor wealth, nor
health, nor bewty, nor honor, nor ease, nor age, but that life which is hid
with Christ in God, after which I sigh and long, as one that is from home,
while I am here in the flesh: knowing that there are prepared for me of God the
things which 1. Eye has not seen. 2. Ear has not heard. 3. Neither have
they entered into the heart of man. Es. 64.4. 1. Cor. 2.9.


Being one of those that fear God, and do reverence before him.

3 If there be nothing to be desired which is not in that life, if there be
nothing to be wished away which i^ in that life: why should I then regard this
present life of troubles, sor^ow sickness, danger, need, vexation, which gives
no satisfaction for contentment, no secu^ity for rest and safeguard to set my
love upon it? why should I not rather contemn it thinking on eternity? and in
the height of mine affection and earnest desire of this blessedness cry? Come
Lo^d Jesus, come quickly, that I may also com^.

1. To thy gladsome presence. 2. To the sweet fellowshippe of thy saints in
Heaven. 3. To the blessed company of thine Angels.
Being made partaker of the fatnes of thine house, Heb. 12.22.
and the fullness of thy pleasures.

The division of the Decalogue.
1. We may divide the Commandments thus into three, 1. A Preface of the whole.
2. The precepts of the first table. 3. The Commandments of the second.
2. In each Comman^ement is hanled, 1. The affirming part. 2. The forbidding
part 3. The Appendix.

Thereof.

3. The Appendix of each Commandment is either 1. A promise. 2. Or a
threatening. 3. Or some other reason.


Expressed in the Commandment or understood.

The ten Commandments.
God spoke these words,]
1. Whose is the greatest authority, 2. Whose words are words of verity, 3.
Who requires out perfect obedience, and the hearts sincerity.
Saying

I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage.

In the words of which preface; that we should yield more willing obedience to
the precepts following, the Lord sets out unto us three things to induce, 1. A
declaration of his eternal rule and power. 2. A promise of the goodness of
his grace. 3. A remembrance of his benefits before conferd.


For he says 1. I am the Lord Jehovah, 2. I am the Lord thy God. 3. I brought
thee out of the land of Egypt out of the house of bondage.


Use 1. A powerful argument to move us to obey, seeing he that requires our
obedience is the Lord of power, the almighty eternal, only wise God owner of
all that is in heaven and in earth, who abides the same for ever unchangeable
in his 1. Essence, 2. Will and 3. Works.


And therefore in right of his dominion and respect of his excellency requires
our service.

2. A pithy persuasion to affect our souls to yield him ready service seeing
he is no strange God that requires it, but our God; ours not only because he
has created us, does preserve and govern us, as he has and does also all
the rest of his creatu^es: but because he does singularly participate and
manifest himself unto us loving and favoring us before all others in as much
as he has 1. Chosen us for his own inheritance. 2. Called us to the knowledge
of himself in his son. 3. Inspired us with his grace and holy spirit.


And therefore with the remembrance of this his goodness would win our hearts.

3. A forcible reason to stir up our minds readily to receive, and ha^^en to
his words, seeing he that sp^akes them has before delivered us, as Israel from
Egypt and the house of servants, so our souls and bodies from the 1. Devil,
2. Sin, and 3. Death.


And therefore in regard of so great purchase and deliverance expects our
thankfulness.

The first Commandment.
Thou shall have none other gods before me.]
1. The affirming part of this precept,

Jehovah must be our God.

The things commanded in this precept are 1. THat we know the true God and
acknowledge him. 2. That we fall down and do reverence before him, 3. That
with purpose of heart and mind we cleave fast unto him,


For 1. Otherwise he cannot be our God, neither can we be his people. Ier.
24.7. 2. Otherwise we cannot glorify him as God, nor be thankful. Romans 1.21.
3. Otherwise we cannot taste and see how good and gracious the Lord is Ps. 34.8.


Use 1. As therefore we desire that when God writes up his people he should not
pass by us, so should we endeavor also to know him for our God, as he has
revealed himself unto us in his word and works; and knowing to acknowledge
him 1. With our hearts, 2. With our mouths, 3. With our works,


As it becomes those that call upon his name.

2. As obedient children to the fathers of their bodies are in their inward
well affected, and with their whole mind, will and heart do honor and
respect them: so should we much more God, which is the father of spirits,
rendering unto him from our souls 1. Honor, 2. Obedience, 3. Thankfulness.
As it belongs to such glory, power, goodness.

3. As we would have the Lord to be with us in all our troubles and
adversities, standing on our side against all that rise up against us, as we
would have him to lift up the light of his countenance upon us, to cheer and
to refresh us, as we would hear his voice which is sweet, and see his
countenance which is comely: so let us cleave to God, Cant. 2.14.
and make the Lord our stay, Ier. 17.7
knit unto him alone, in 1. Affiance, 2. Love and 3. Fear.


As it beseems well his Saints, and is agreeable to his holy will. Perkins.


2. The forbidding parts of the first commandment.

We must prefer no other thing above the head of our joy.

The things defended in this precept are 1. Ignorance of God, his word and
works. 2. Errors concerning God, the persons of the godhead and their
properties. 3. The affection set on any other thing but God.


For 1. How can we embrace and worship the things we do not know. Act. 2. How
can we be saved if we err concerning the truth. 2. These. 2.10. 3. How should
we not desire the chiefest and greatest good.


Aug. l. de not. and gra. Chrysostom.
Use 1. Although therefore there are some things, which are better for us not to
know then to know, although we may be ignorant of some things without sin:
yet can there be nothing worse then either the natural or affected ignorance
of God: for knowledge must needs go, before the embracing of virtue, and no
man can faithfully desire that which he does not know: wherefore they are
justly here condemned, whosoever are ignorant of God, because they are 1.
Careless of knowing him, 2. Sloathfull in learning of him. 3. Ashamed to
inquire after him.


Whereas both by the benefit of our creation, Bern.
and his gracious manifestation we ought to know him.

2. Although as in many things we offend all, so in many things we err all,
yet beware we, Iam. 3.2.
that we do not err concerning God; for as the least error in the beginning
is made greatest in the end, so the least error concerning him was in the
beginning if it be not corrected, may make us concerning all truth to err in
the end, growing to this impiety, 1. To suppose that there is no God, 2. To
imagine that there are more gods 3. To set up in our hearts and thoughts an
idol and false God in stead of the true.


Whereas such Atheism and Idolatry is forbidden in this law.

3. Although there are many things in this world of which we may have a liking,
and that without sin: although naturally we may desire and affect some things
without offense, a^ wives, children, parents, brethren, friends, etc. yet let
this be our care, that our life be not bound up in the love of them, as old
Isreal's life in the life of his son Joseph: Genesis 44 30.
that we love them not inordinately and in excess least our heart be thereby
withdrawn from God, so that as much or more then in the creator 1. We affie
in the creature, 2. We affect the creature, 3. We fear the creature.


Whereas God should be honored with the be^^ of our affectio^^

3. The appendix of the first Commandment.
Promises and threatenings not expressed.

1. If herein we harken to his voice we shall be his chief tre^sure above all
people. Exodus 19.^. 2. If we like not to retain him in our knowledge, he will
give us over to a reprobate mind and vile affections. Romans 1.26.28. 3. If in
our hearts we estrange our selves from him, he also will be far from us, and
from our help.
For 1. Thus does God honor those that honor him. 2. Thus does God testify
his wrath in this world against unbelievers and wicked men. Romans 1.26. 3. Thus
is it just with God to punish those that forsake him and contemn his majesty.


Use 1. Seems it a small thing in our eyes to be the people of the Lord to be
the men that God will honor, to be those upon whom he will show forth his
goodness? and all for the observance of this commandment, 1. In temporal
blessings, 2. In spiritual graces, 3. In the everlasting rewards.
What then will seem great or worthy in our eyes?

2. Think we it not a grievous punishment for the breach of this commandment
to be forsaken and left of God, and given up unto our own lusts? so that being
past the feeling of sin, and remorse of conscience, the fear of Gods
judgment clean extinct in our souls, and his cords cast away from us, Ps.
2.3.
1. We should even give our selves over to wickedness, 2. We should make a
trade of sin, 3. We should commit uncleanness even with greediness.


What will we then think great of wrath or evil.

3. Judge we if we have lifted up our hands to any strange god, and our heart
departed from him, that it shall not be just with God to withdraw himself from
us, though in our adversities we make long prayers and stretch out our hands
unto him, when we shall be 1. In misery waking. 2. In misery sleeping. 3. In
misery whethersoeuer we turn our selves.


What then will be just and equal in our sight? Greg. in ser.


The second Commandment.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc.]
1. The affirming part of this Commandment.
We must worship God according to his will revealed in his word.

Or we must worship God as he has appointed by his word.

The things required in this precept are 1. That we be religiously careful of
all the parts of Gods service. 2. That we stir up our selue thereunto by all
godly means. 3. That we stoutly oppose against all corruptions, which may
defile the pure worship of God.


For 1. Thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. 2. Thus it
behooves us to quicken and confirm our selves in the work of the Lord. 3.
Thus it befitteth us to strive for the maintenance of the faith. Iud. 3.


Use 1. This therefore should stir us up to the diligent reading, hearing and
meditating on the word, and to the reverent use of the sacraments and prayer,
and teach us to bewail our former negligence herein: this should make us sorry
for occasions lost, wherein by godly conference and instruction we might have
bettered others, and been betterd by them our selves, and to lay hold
hereafter on all occasions offered of the like, that so we may thereby be 1. To
the praise of God, 2. To the benefit of our brethren, 3. To the singular
comfort of our souls.


In things belonging to the worship of God.

2. This should make us to vow unto the Lord his worship, and keep it, to purge
our minds by fasting, and thereby also to raise up our understanding, Aug. in
ser.
to bring the flesh in subjection to the spirit, to make our heart contrite and
humble: but above all to keep a fast in our souls from sin and from our own
ways, that thereby we may the the rather serve God in holiness, whom we
worship as in soul, so also in body with 1. Bar^ heads, Virell.
2. Bowed knees, 3. Lifted up hands and eyes.


In all humility seeking his face in his temple.

3. This should cause us to take heed of adulterating Gods service with any
our own will worships, or any heathenish or papisticke rites and ceremonies,
or of giving the best approbation or allowance thereunto to, but to keep our
selves within the listes and tarriers that God has set down unto us for his
worship in the word, this should make us also to beware of all confederates and
leagues with unbelievers, and society with heretics, least we learn of
their ways and fall into their terrors, who 1. Are reprobate concerning the
truth. 2. Beget of themselves new and false opinions of worship. 3. Follow also
other men's idle fancies.


In matters concerning the faith and true religion.

The forbidding part of the second commandment.

2. We must not profane the lawful worship of God with supersticious rites.

The things prohibited in this precept are 1. Idolatry, 2. Hypocrysie, 3.
Profaneness.


1. We must worship God in spirit. Io. 4. 2. We must worship God in truth.
Io. 4 24. 3. The holy God requires holy worship.
Use 1. Here then is a reproof for the heathen falling down before their
stocks and stones, and looking up to the host of heaven: this meets with the
Papists and their images, which they have set up to themselves to worship,
unlawful representations of the godhead, service and reverence done to such
idols, and other shapes of the creatures, their crosses, their he Saints and
their she Saints: all which as idolatrous and occasions of idolatry the Saints
of God have justly 1. Cast out of their minds, 2. Cast out of their Churches,
3. Cast out of their houses.


That so Gods worship might not be defiled.

2. Here is that condemns all outward shows of Gods worship, when the heart
is not inwardly affected with his love and fear: all negligence in Gods
service: all serving of the intentions of the world by the causes of God: Greg.
lib. 21. Mor. Mat. 23.23.
the tithing of mint, anniseed and cummin, and letting pass the waightier
matters of the law, such as are 1. Judgment, 2. Mercy, 3. Fidelity.


That so Gods service might not be forshew

3. Here is that condemns the contempt of religion, and the omission of the
worship of God, whether inward or outward, or any part thereof: when men account
of this service but us a needelesse matter, and of the duties here required
but as frivolous, and things of no esteem 1. Vilifying them in their thoughts.
2. Jesting at them in their speeches, 3. Slighting them in their gesture and
behavior.


That so these duties might be disesteemd.

3. The Appendix of the second Commmandement.
An exhortation to obedience set down at large 1. Because the God that
requires the true worship, and forbids the false is a mighty and a jealous God.
2. Because he punishes the breach of this Commandment so truly on the wicked
and their posterity. 3. Because he rewards the observance thereof
plentifully to the godly, and their seed after them.


For 1. He cannot endure that any part of of the worship due to him, should
either be with holden, depraved, or given to any other. 2. He visits the
iniquities of the fathers upon the children, upon the third, etc. 3. He shows
mercy to thousands of them that love him.


Use 1. Although therefore we may flatter our selves in the breach of this
precept, and cry peace, peace, and all shall be well, and the Lord will not
regard to punish it; although we can make a deminitiue of this as of other
sins: yet let us know for certain that God accounts it it heinous seeing he
does thus intermine, and threaten the trespassors, showing them that he wants
1. Noe cause. 2. Not will. 3. Nor power.


To plague and punish such as break this law.

2 Although a man commits many sins against his own soul only, according to
that of the Prophet, that Soul that sins shall die, Ezech. 18.4. yet
against him that sets up his Idols in his heart, and puts the stumbling
block of his iniquity before his face, the Lord will do somewhat more, Ezech.
18.7, 8. for the Lord will not only set his face against that man, and make him
a sign and a proverb, and cut him off from the midst of his people if he do
not repent him; bus he will also plegde his seed, 1. Leaving them in their
natural corruption. 2. Leading them forth in the steps of their parents. 3.
Giving them up to the hardness of their heart, and wilful blindness.


To make up the measure of their fathers sins.

3 Although Gods wrath and jealousy burn like a fire which will consume the
adversaries: although the vengeance be great that visits to the third and
fourth generation, and able to affright us: yet must we here observe how God
sets but his goodness to inuit us to obedience, amplifying his mercies, and
promising it to thousands, the rather 1. By the greatness of his goodness. 2. By
the desire of our own good and safety. 3. And the good and safety of o^r
children.


To win us to the observance of this his law.

The third Commandment.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain,]
1. The affirming part of this precept.

We must have the name of God in singular reverence,

The things inioined in this precept are 1: That we swear in due and lawful
manner. 2. That we zealously confess to Gods glory the truth and will of God
that we know. 3. That we call upon the Lord and glorify him, giving thanks
unto him.


For 1. It is written. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall fear thy Lord God, serve him,
and swear by his name. 2. We must as well confess with the mouth to
salvation, as believe with the heart. Romans 10.10. 3. We must sanctify the Lord
God as in our hearts, so also in our words, and works. 1. Pet. 3.15.


Use 1. Howsoever therefore the Anabaptist condemn all oaths, De ser. dom. in
monte.
and swearing, yet dare say with Augustine; Thou do not ill, that use an
oath well, that is, which swearest to the glory of God, thine own, and thy
neighbors good 1. In truth. 2. In judgment, and 3. In righteousness.


When thou art lawfully and earnestly required thereunto.

2 Howsoever all truths at al times are not to be spoken, and that of the words
which are good, and things we know for certain, there is as well a time to
keep silence, as a time to speak. Eccl. 3.7. yet should it ever be unto we as
to the Prophet David, pain and grief to abstain from good words, so to hide
any thing within us that may tend to Gods glory, whose truth we must confess
with boldness, and not shrink from the same, for fear either of the faces of
men, or any worldly losses, whether it be of 1. Friends. 2. Good name and
reputation. 3. The means of liuelihood, or life it self.


When it concerns the maintenance of his glory, and the advancement of his
kingdom.

Sup. mat. cap. 24.
3 Howsoever some as, Chrysostom says, worship Saints, yet scorn sanctify:
what manner of holiness call ye this? ye must we know for surety that we
cannot be to the praise and glory of God, as is required of his Saints, unless
we have as an holy confession and remembrance of his name in our mouths; so
also an holy expression and resemblance of his virtues in our manners: unless
whatsoever we do or say, we do it to his honor, which we must always seek,
1. Declaring his word and Gospel to our brethren. 2. Imploring his aid and
succor in our needs and troubles. 3. Magnifying his mercies in our successes
and deliverances.


When at any time occasion shall be offered of these things.

2. The Negative. We must do or speak nothing tending to the profaning of
the name of God.
The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. That we use no needless and
unholy oaths. 2. That we speak not irreverently of God, his word, his works,
or titles, etc. nor abuse them. 3. That we disgrace not our holy profession by
an unholy conversation.


For 1. We must not swear by heaven or earth, or any other oath. Mat. 5.34.
Iam. 5.12. 2. We must fear this glorious and fearful name, the Lord our God.
Deuteronomy. 28.58. 3. We must not take the name of God in our mouths, Psalm. 50.16.
if we hate to be reformed, and have cast his words behind us.


Use 1. Come hither therefore all you wicked, and men of impure lips, you that
are so far from making conscience of idle and wicked words, that you make no
conscience of foul and blasphemous oaths: see here condemned your profane
and rash swearing, your blasphemies, your cursings, and your periuries,
wherewith you have grieved the excellency of Heaven, and withal procured 1.
Hurt to our own souls. 2. Hinderance of Gods glory. 3. Offense and grief of
heart to the Christian hearers.


And let this teach you to forsake this sin

2. Come hither you wilful scorners, profane deriders, and horrible abusers
of Gods holiness, you that have used the name of God, his word and titles with
no fit respect, speaking of them contemptibly and without due regard, as of
vile and common things: see here condemned your prophanenes and abominable
impiety; who have spoiled the Lord of his honor, whereas his name and
Scriptures by you 1. Have been iested at. 2. Have been wrested. 3. Have been
abused to enchantment.


And let this make you tremble at his word

3. Come hither you that draw near unto the Lord, and honor him with your
lips, and in yoor hearts and ways depart far from him: you that make
profession of religion, yet live in all prophanenes, 2. Sam. 12.14. Aug. in Ps.
23.
giving thereby great occasion to the enemies of the Lord for to blaspheme: see
he^e condemned your halting and your double iniquity: who calling your selves
the servants of the Lord; yet live like the sons of Belial, and thereby are a
c^use of 1. Great grief to the godly. 2. Great scandal to weak. 3. Great
hardening to the wicked.


And let this cause you leave your croaked ways.

3. The Appendix.
A threatening from God that he will be revenged of those that sacrilegiously
rob him of his glory

Which he will do 1. Surely. 2. Swiftly. 3. Severely.


For 1. The mouth of the Lord has spoken it. 2. He will be a swift witness
against all such impiety. 3. He will not spare in the day of vengeance.


Use 1. Albeit therefore the breakers of this precept, may in this case despise
the laws and wrath of men, who have but sillily provided against this
transgression, and do very slowly punish it, and are often times very little or
nothing offended, when Gods name is abused and his holiness profaned: or if
they take it to heart, it is not so much to them as if their own credit were
called in question: yet when the Lion has roared, who will not fear? Amos
3.8. when the Lord has spoken and threatened sure vengeance, who will not be
terrifi^d from this sin? which has in it neither 1. Pleasure, nor 2. Profit,
nor 3. Show of any good.


Which might induce men to incur this wrath.

2 Albeit in other sins wicked and ungodly men grow bold on Gods sufferance,
and their heart is fully set in them to do evil, because sentence against an
evil work is not executed speedily, Eccle. 8.11. yet let all men take heed
of provoking in this kind: for their judgment sleeps not that offend on
this fashion, and vengeance is against them on the way, the zeal of the Lord
will hasten it, and bring this thing to pass, 1. That the mouth of all
wickedness may be stopped. 2. That others may fear because of the judgment. 3.
That honor may be given unto God.


Which should deter us from this heinous sin.

3. Albeit as the law takes no notice of the least things, so God takes not
present vengeance of every small sin, because he will not always be chiding:
yet will he make his plagues wonderful against this sin, for his curse shall
come into the house of the offender to consume it, Zach. 5. his curse shall
overtake the swearers and blasphemers in their souls and in their bodies, when
he begins with them in vengeance, he will not spare, when he begins he will
also make an end, and he will do a thing unto them at which both the ears of
them that hear it, shall tingle. 1. Sam. 3.11.12. as it appears unto us 1. In
many examples in the word. 2. In many examples in other writings. 3. In many
examples in the world.


Which should assure us that he will not spare.

The fourth Commandment.
Remember the Sabboath day to keep it holy: Six days shall thou labor and do
all that thou have to do: But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God: in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, thy man servant, nor thy maidseruant, nor thy cattle, nor thy
stranger that is within thy gates: For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth the Sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore
the Lord blessed the Seventh day, and hallowed it.]
1. The affirming part of this commandment.
We must keep this an holy rest unto the Lord.

The things commanded in this precept are 1. That on the Lords day we do al
holy and religious works. 2. That we cease from our worldy labors. 3. That
we rest from sin and wickedness.


For 1. They suite well with the season, in holy day holy works. 2. In it we
must do no manner of work. 3. So the Lord by his spirit shall work in us his
good work.


Use 1. Hereby therefore am I taught and showed, that as I should at all times
as much as my vocation and necessity will permit, be careful to visit Gods
temple, to hear and read his word and meditate thereon, to call upon the Lord
by prayer, to do the work of piety and charity, and as much as in me lies,
to stir up others also thereunto: so should I especially on this day do the
works of the day, that is 1. Make prayers and sing praises unto God. 2. Gather
instruction to mine own soul, meditating on Gods holy word and works. 3.
Exercises the works of mercy to my brethren.


As he has commanded that is the Lord of the day.

2. Here I perceive that as to live idely on the other days is damnable, so to
be troubled with Martha about the many things of this life, and of this world
on this day is abominable wherein is commanded a remission of all servile
labors and the works of our callings, that we may serve God more freely in
our places, whom we are this day especially to honor with our 1. Bodies, 2.
Souls and 3. Substance. Prou. 3.9.


As he has required that appointed this rest.

3. Hereby I am instructed, that I must not rest this the Lords day, as the
people of Israel did fast in their day. Es. 58.4. for strife and debate and to
smite with the fifth of wickedness: but all through my whole life I am to keep
a perpetual sabbath unto the Lord from sin, loosing the bands of
wickedness, and applying my self wholly to holiness, so more especially and
strictly on this day: wherein, that I may observe it according to the word I
may not 1. Do mine own ways, 2. Find mine own pleasures, 3. Speak mine
own words. Es. 58.13.


As he has ordained that instituted the sabbath.

2. The forbidding part.
We must take heed of profaning the Sabbath.

The things forbidden in this precept are 1. The foreslowing of the asse^bling
of our selves in the congregation. 2. The doing of our ordinary works. 3. The
doing of the works of the flesh and of the devil.


For 1. This day is an holy co^uocation that we should humble our selves. Number.
10.7. Melius est arare, quam sal tare in sabbatho.
2. Are there not six days to labor? 3. It is better to plough, then to play
on the sabbath.


Use 1. Let such men therefore here advise themselves, that never take care to
set their feet within the court of the Lords house, to come into his presence,
nor to visit his holy temple, how they will one day answer their negligence to
this law giver, who has given so strickt a charge with a memorandum that we
should singularly reard and reverence, 1. The day of his worship to hallow it,
2. The place of his worship to come unto it, 3. The parts of his worship to
perform it.


That they from henceforth fail not in these duties.

2. Let such men here consider how unthankfully, how unjustly they deal with
God, who as he is the Lord of flesh, so also is the Lord of al days, that of
seven days which the Lord has made, cannot be content with six that are
given unto them to bestow them on themselves, but they must needs also
incroach on that one which the Lord has chosen and set apart for himself: and
like the vxorious David in the plurality of his wives, not satisfied with his
own store, taking unto him by violence Vriahs own little lamb 2. Sam. 12.2.
the only wife of his bosom: so use this as their own which the Lord has
called his, having therein 1. Their hearts full of the cares of this life. 2.
Their mouths of the talk of earthly matters. 3. Their hands of the affairs
and businesses of this world.


That henceforth they pollute not the Lords sabbath

3. Let such men here bethink themselves of their profaneness, whether it be
not damnable, who being enjoined all their life time to keep a continual
sabbath or rest from sin, will not even on this day break off their sin:
but as it were to despite the almighty by so much the more run riot on this
day; by how much the Lord of the day has the more diligently forbidden the
profaning of the day: more eagerly on this day then at other times pursuing
and seeking after 1. Wicked societies, 2. Vain delights and 3. Fleshly
pleasures.


That he^ceforth they make not this the Lords day a day of sin

3. The Appendix.
A reason drawn from the example of God, 1. Who rested that day, 2. Who
blessed that day, 3. Who sanctified that day.


For 1. He made no more new kind of creatures after the sixth. 2. He has
appointed it a means of blessing to them that religiously keep it. 3. He has
set it apart to an holy and religious use.


Use 1. If examples be of greater force then exhortations, and a thing be
taught more fully in the work, then in the word: Leo papae in ser. de Ieinnio.
see then here to the precept put the pattern of his rest, that commands the
rest, to which if we conforms our selves and actions we shall not do amiss,
because, 1. His place is most high, 2. His example most perfect, 3. His actions
most renowned.


And therefore worthy is he of our chief respect.

2. If he that instituted this sabbath, has blessed this sabbath, then will
he undoubtedly also bless us, if we keep this sabbath: for ordering it aright
unto its ends, and applying our selves to that which is required on that day,
we shall surely find from the Lord thereon, 1. A blessing on our hearing, 2. A
blessing on our power, 3. A b esing on the breaking of the bread.


And therefore good it is that we make it our delight.

3. If Peter, Act. 11.9. might not call that common, which the Lord had
cleansed, how much less may we make that common, which the Lord has hallowed
and set apart? abusing it to labor, idleness, or profaneness, when he
appointed it unto these ends, 1. That it might be the solemn time of his
worship, 2. That it might shadow out unto us the everlasting rest, 3. That it
might serve for a remission of labor to us, our servants, cattle, etc.


And therefore it is requisite that we so observe it.

The fifth Commandment.
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the Land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee.]
1. The affirming part of this precept.
We must give to our superiors all due respects.

The things required in this precept are 1. That we obey them in all things in
the Lord. 2. That we deal faithfully and thankfully with them. 2. That we
show our selves respective and kind unto them.


For 1. This is right. Ephesians. 6.1. and well pleasing unto the Lord. Col: 3.20. 2.
This is an honest thing and acceptable before God. 1 Timothy 54. 3. This will be
as refreshing unto them from the face of the most high.


Now then

Use 1. As the inferior is here taught his duty to obey them that are set over
him of the Lord in all things in the Lord: so is the superior also showed his,
which is that he command and govern only in the Lord: for although it be
simply evil not to obey the precept, yet it is not always evil; namely when
the ruler commands those things which are contrary to God, for then it is
better to obey God then men, and to say with Augustine, give leave O Caesar,
give leave O Father, Ruler, and such like.

1. Thou thr^atenest thine indignation and displeasure, God his wrath. 2. Thou
threatenest loss of goods and substance, God of all good things. 3. Thou
threatenest band and prison and God hell.
Whether is now more to be feared say you, God, or man?

2 As faithfulness and thankfulness is here required of children, so are the
Parents also minded of their care, that in the education, government and
provision for those of their charge, they do that which is thankworthy: for
although it be required of inferiors that they do their duties no what the
less, though their Superiors be froward and unworthy, yet if he that is in
place of excellency do first neglect his duty, and then he that is under
government do come likewise short of his 1. Not assisting him with his
prayers. 2. Not serving him with his substance. 3. Not ministering unto him in
his person.


Whether is more to be blamed think you this, or that?

3 As respect and kindness is required of the children, so is the same
affection also of the Parents: for if love and kindness do not first descend,
how should they ascend? we love God, because he loved us first, where the
Parent is an Ostrich if the child do prove a viper it is but a just plague:
where the Ruler esteems his people but as sheep and oxen, and beasts of the
field, if the people be rebellious and lifting up the heel do do kick
against authority, it is but like for like. If those in authority neglect and
contenme their charge, if those under authority despise their government, not
respecting the worthiness of their persons, which stands, 1. In the dignity of
their places. 2. In the excellency of their gifts. 3. In the length of their
days.


Whether is the greater defaulter, judge you, the one or the other?

2. The negative of this Conmaundement.
We may not derogate any thing from the dignity of our Parents.

The things forbidden in this precept, 1. Resisting of them in their just
commands. 2. Proving unfaithful and unthankful toward them. 3. Hating of
their persons, and dealing frowardlie with them.


For 1. Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft. 1. Sam. 15.23. 2. He that
forsakes his father is a blasphemer. Eccle. 3.16. 3. To whom will a man be kind
and loving, if he be wicked and churlish unto them?


Use 1. Hearken therefore O you sons and daughters of disobedience, you wives
of undutifulness, you Subjects of rebellion, you servants of stubbornness,
stiffenecked and perverse: you that would so feign cast of the yoke, loose the
cords, and break the bonds in sunder. Here is the reproof of your ungodliness,
lay it to your hearts: but above all you children hear and fear, listen and
learn, consent and obey 1. To do reverence to your parents. 2. To follow
their admonitions. 3. To bear their chasticements.


Lest he severely punished your undutifulness that comma^ds this duty.

2 Here ^ou children of Beliall untoward and ungrateful, take the confusion of
your sin upon you; is this the requital of the love and kindness of your
parents, which gave you life, and with great care and cost have nourished and
brought you up? that you should withdraw your selves from their help, that
you should spoil and rob them, render them evil for good and suffer their eyes
to fail? look to the stock from whence you were hewn, and to the pit from
whence your are dug, I mean to the father that begat you, and to the mother
that bare you in her body, and brought you up upon her knees, that ye pay unto
them the things that ye owe, 1. Love for their love. 2. Help for their help.
3. Prayers for them for their good wishes for you.


Lest God at the hearing of their sighs and sight of their tears be moved to
wrath against you.

3 Hearken O you scorner the abomination of the Lord. Pro. 3. Is it a small
thing for you to detract your due obedience, and to leave undone that which
just authority has imposed, but that you will also hate and despite the
parsons of your parents, masters, rulers? lay you hand on your heart, correct
the thoughts of your hearts, that your sin may be forgiven you, put on the
charity of those that are set over you in the Lord, and show your selves no
more vnreuerent in your 1. Bitter speeches. 2. Froward looks. 3. Unseemly
gestures.


Least there be laid upon you from the Lord, judgments prepared for scorners,
and stripes for the backs of fools. Pro. 19.29.

3. The Appendix.
A promise of long life to the obseruers of this Commandment, now they prolong
our days.

1. By their fatherly care and provision, 2. By their prayers, and 3. By their
blessing. Eccl. 3.9

For 1. Hereby it gives well with us. Ephe. 6.2. 2. Hereby they procure this
blessing from God upon us. 3. Hereby the houses of the children are established.


Use 1. Is it not great reason think you, that we should have a care of them
to love, honor and obey them all our life, who have provided for us from the
womb, and from the cradle, and ministered unto us for the necessity and
commodity of our life? by whom we have this that we do not only live, but
also live more happily, being furnished by their care 1. With food and raiment
for our bodies. 2. With good instructions for our souls 3. With honest arts
and trades of living.


So wanting nothing that is good and needful.

2 Is it not better and more profitable to have them pray to God for us, then
to sigh to God against us? whereas God will give us sorrow for their sighs,
and blessings for their prayers, the blessing of long life: for which that they
may be earnest suitors unto God, the father of heaven, let us do all suites
and service unto them our fathers here on earth, and perform out duties to
them 1. Constantly. 2. Willingly. 3. Cheerfully.


So failing in no point of the honor that we owe them.

3 It is not a thing to be wished for of us, that each care that hears us,
then might bless us, and each eye that sees us might give witness unto us? Job
29.11. then was Job deceived, who reckoned this among other as his chief
crown and glory, and a witness of the vprightnes and integrity of his life. But
if this be to be desired from any man, much more from these by whom we are men,
and so much the more to be desired because their blessing will establish, their
curse will root out the foundation: the Lord blessing when they bless, and
hearing when they curse us in the bitterness of their souls, and bringing the
disobedient 1. To shame and rebuke. 2. To a morsel of bread. 3. To an evil
end.


So pouring out his vengeance and wrath upon them.

The sixth Commandment.
Thou shall not kill,]
1. The affirming part of this precept.
We must make much account of the life of man.

The thing commanded in this precept are 1. That we be peaceable in our whole
conversation, 2. That our hearts be fraught with pity and compassion, 3. That
we defend and deliver as much as in us lies, our selves and others from danger,
violence and vexation.


For 1. If it be possible, as much as in us lies, we must live peaceable with
all men. Romans 12.18. 2. We must be merciful, even as our father also is
merciful. Luke 6.36. 3. If we shall not save and succor when we may, we do
kill, and murder.


Use 1. Let them come hither now that are the sons of wrath and trespass ready
to offer to their brethren all indignities and wrongs, impatient of the least;
yea but supposed crosses and offenses from others, and learn to do away the
fierceness of their natures, the roughness of their manners, the iniquity of
their conditions, as occasions and things inclining to strife and bloodshed:
that the peace be not disturbed and broken by them, when for the peace and
quietness sake they should have, 1. Discretion to pass by offenses, 2. Care
to give no occasion of offense, 3. Wariness to reconcile offenses.


Which all men well advised have and show.

2. Let them come hither whose inwards are of flint, their bres^^ of iron,
their hearts of stone, whose bowels never yet yearned over their brethren in
affliction: whose eye never yet spent tear when they saw the extreme
necessity of their friend and neighbor, who never yet knew what it was to
suffer with those that suffer, and grieve with those that mourn: and learn to
do in the distress and calamity of others, as Jesus did when he saw the
Jews and Marie weeping. Ioh. 11.23.35. who 1. Grieved in the spirit, 2.
Troubled himself and 3. Wept.


Which all will do, of tender hearts and bowels.

3. Let them come hither that are negligent of the safety of their own, or
other men's souls and bodies: which for themselves tempt God, thrusting
themselves into danger, as the horse rusheth into the battle: for others care
not what become of them but with the evil shepherd say, let that which will
perish; perish, having the question of Cain in their hearts. Genesis 4.9. Am I my
brothers keeper? Let them come hither I my and learn to be more regardfull of
themselves and others.

1. Least their own blood be upon their own heads. 2. Least the blood of
their brethren be required of them. 3. Least they perish exposing themselves to
needless danger.
Which men of any conscience will beware.

2. The Negative.
We m^st by no means endanger or hurt our own or another man's life.

The things forbidden in this precept are 1. Wrath and evil conceived and
hidden inwardly in the heart. 2. All outward signs provoking or encouraging to
a mischief. 3. Hurt and damage offered to any man's body and life indeed. Mat.
vi. rel.



For 1. Whosoever hates his brother is a manslaier. 1 Io. 3.15. 2. He loves
transgression, that loves and stirs up strife. Pro. 17.1^. 3. Hereby Gods
image which he has engraven in man, is wronged and abused.


Use 1. An evil guest surely is wrath hid in the heart, that will make place
for the devil, resist it therefore if thou can give place, if thou can
not. Ambros.
If anger has prevented and fore possessed thy mind, and rises up against
thee, leave not thy place, thy place is thy patience: least thou take upon thee
instead of God to revenge thy self, who says of himself vengeance is mine:
least thou grow from wrath to slaughter, of which thou may be guilty, and
have thine hands therewith defiled, though thou lay not thine hand on thy
brother; but do either, 1. Secretly consent to, 2. Wickedly counsel, or 3.
Unjustly command and will.


The thing for which the earth will cry for vengeance.

2 An horrible crime it is to be tainted with blood, a grievous imputation to
be called the man of blood, a man may not think himself free of these, the
crime and imputation, for that he has not given the deadly blow or poison, for
that with his own hands, he has not taken away the life of his brother:
remember David slew Vrias by the hand of the children of Ammon. A man may be
written up before God in the list of murderers and man-killers, that never drew
sword in wrath but yet has animated others to wrong and violence, 1. By his
words, 2. By his looks, 3. By his gesture.


The thing for which the land it self does mourn.

3. An heavy account they have to make to God, that uncharitably have withheld
their hand from their brothers help: how will they answer then that have
smitten with the fifth of wickedness? An hard judgment shall they find that
have not maintained life: Go from me ye cursed, when I was hungry, etc. Mat.
what shall their judgment be that have spilt both limb and life, surely most
grievous, and eternal torments in that place, 1. Where death kills and does not
extinguish, Greg. l. 9. moral.
2. Where grief torments but does no whit drive away fear, 3. Where the flame
burns but does not expel darkness.


The thing to be considered of the men of blood.

3. The Appendix.
A threatening, he that sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Genesis
9.

Or the murderers hoare head shall not go down to the grave in peace. 1. Reg.
2.6. God in his just judgment 1. Either cutting him off by the sword of
justice, 2. Or shutting up his soul into the hand of his brother enemy, 3. Or
making the man of blood the executioner of himself.


For 1. The magistrate bears not the sword in vain. Romans 13.4. 2. Ere the
murderer shall go unpunished, the man that finds him shall slay him Genesis
4.14. 3. Of how many have we read that have turned their murdering weapons
into their own breasts.


Use 1. Consider this you murderers and manquellers, when you have spoiled
others, shall you not be spoiled your selves? when you have spilt innocent
blood with the hand of violence, shall not the hand of justice cut you off?
yea, though you fly to lay hold of the altar, yet will he slay you there, that
is appointed of God the auenger of blood, to cut off from the earth all 1.
Ioabs, 2. Athaliahs, 3. Theudasses.


And others of that crimsen-handed crew.

2. Consider this, ye men of blood that have hurt and yet are hidden, that have
slain, and no man pursues you: think not that your judgment sleeps: nay
vengeance dogs you at the heels, for an evil and unnatural death shall find
you.

1. Either in the wood with Abshalom. 2. Or in the field with Achab. 3. Or in
the deep as it did Pharaoh and the Egyptians.
And others of that list in other places.

3. Consider this, you sanguinaries, that are imbrued with gore, yet no man
dares say unto you, why do ye so? that make it a sport to kill, and spill the
blood of the innocent like water upon the ground: think you to escape untouched
because the son of man rises not up again^ you, because an evil beast out
of the forest does not read you? God can use your own hands against your own
lives ere you shall go unpunished, and go down to your graves by a dry
death, as he did 1. Abimeleches, 2. Saul's, and 3. Zimries.


And others guilty of like crimes as these

The seventh Commandment.
Thou shall not commit adultery.]
1. The affirming part of this Commandment.
We must govern all the parts of our life chastely and continently.

The things required in this precept are, 1. That for the preserving of
chastity, we be religiously watchful ouerall our member. 2. That we came our
flesh and bring it in subjection. 3. That we use the remedy that God has
appointed against incontinency.


For 1. Chas^^^^ is of times wounded by the eyes, often times by the ear.
Cassian. de instit. monarcho. li. 6.
2. Thereby dwelling in the body, we shall in a sort go out of the flesh. 3.
Marriage is honorable amongst etc. and it is better to marry then to burn.


Use 1. Where are they now that are so confident of themselves, that they dare
touch pitch and think not to be defiled, that dare take fire into their
bosoms, and think not to be scorcht? what has separated you from others, and
the fear of their danger? did David's eye wound his soul with Bathsheba? and
think thou whosoever thou art to escape without a wound and dishonor that
suffer not only thine eye to wander, but also thine heart and tongue to
speak lewd things? could others the Saints of God hardly escape the danger?
though with Job they made a covenant with their eyes though they kept their
immunity, watched the way, made their loins strong, and fortified their power?
and think thou to be safe from fear and gunshot, that never shunnest the
opportunity of 1. Person. 2. Place, and 3. Time.


In each of which the tempter has secret y laid his snare.

2. Where are they that cry out of the fire, and yet go about to put out the
burning with more wood? soft clothing, dainty diet, full feeding, and much
ease nourish luxuriousness, and increase this flame: all which we must forsake
if we will do a greater miracle, then cast the unclean spirit out of other
men's bodies, that is, cast the spirit of uncleanness out of our own flesh,
which kind as our savior speaks of that unclean spirit in the gospel,
goes not out but by 1. Prayer, 2. Labor and 3. Much abstinence.


In each of which there is an especial virtue against uncleanness.

Mat. 19.11.
3. Where are our votaries and single livers, that vow that which is not in
their own power. Every man cannot receive this saying, says our Savior
Christ; save they to whom it is given: yet will these contemn the ordinance
and forsake the remedy, when in the mean time they burn with strange and
unnatural lusts, defiling their bodies, 1. Privately and alone in wantonness.
2. Cleaving to harlots. 3. Men with men working that which is unseemly. Romans
1.27.


In each of which there is an horrible and odious crime.

2. The forbidding part of this commandment.
We must not defile our selves with any inward or outward filthiness.

The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. All acts of uncleanness, 2. All
thoughts of uncleanness, 3. All things that may nourish lust, and stir us up
to uncleanness.


For 1. Iud. 23.
We must even hate the garment spotted by the flesh. 2. These also do defile
the man. 3. He that will avoid sin, must avoid also all occasions of sin.


Use 1. What an abuse is this of the body which is the Lords? the vessel which
according to the Apostles rule. 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. Every one should possess in
holiness and in honor, to prostitute it to uncleanness, abusing any member, or
all the members thereof to fleshly filthiness, and to give our selves over to
lasciuiousnes, to work all uncleanness with greedines, Ephe, 4.19. having 1.
Our eyes full of adultery. 2. Our mouths of rotten talk. 3. Our whole
behavior of wanton and lustful manners.


When we should so much abhor the flesh and filth thereof.

2 What profits it to chastity, though we look not on the bewty and shape
of weomen abroad, to be caught with their eyelids, and in the tresses of their
hair: if in the mean time our thoughts be foul at home, shaping out unto us
in private all figures of fleshlines, and making the shadows of uncleanness to
dance before us in imagination on our beds, as that damsel before Herod in the
banquet? nay, if we will be chaste in deed, we may not so much as think of the
thing 1. Which may bite our conscience. 2. Which may make us blush. 3. Wherein
our reason will say unto us there is filthiness.


When the very thought it self suffices to make soul.

3 What will be of power to preserve us against this sin, and to keep us
undefiled of the flesh, if we nourish against our selves our own enemy by
idleness, by fulness of bread? Ezech. 16.45. How shall we possibly avoid this
sin, Perk.
if we like and embrace the things that lead us thereunto? lascivious company,
lascivious books, lascivious attire, lascivious representations of love
matters, lascivious dancing, lasciui^us pictures, lasciuiou^ talk: each of
which as a spark of hell, falling on the ti^^er of our corruption will
conceive a flame and set on fire the whole frame of our nature 1. While in the
flesh we live fleshly. 2. While we fight not dailte with our selves. 3. While
we observe not the enemy within us with a curious eye.


When the lost provocation of these things may be occasion of great sin and
mischief.

3. The Appendix.
A threatening of fearful judgments which overtake adulterers, who are
punished of God.

1. In their own wives, God paying them home in their own coin. Wis. 4.4.
2. In their own bastard slips, and 3. In their own persons.
For 1. His wife shall grind unto another that has defiled his neighbors
bed. Job. 31.10. 2. They shall take no deep rooting, nor lay any fast
foundation. 3. God will wound the hairy scalpe of him that goes on still in
his wickedness. Psalm.


Use 1. Harken now to thy judgment thou son of uncleanness! shall not she
that thou have taken to be the companion of thy life, be as false to thee, as
thou bast been faulty to others? shall not she forget the covenant of her God
with thee, as thou have transgressed the word of his mouth with others? Ezech.
the pouring forth of thy wives adulteries, Ier.
the opening of her feet to every one that passes by, and multiplying of her
whoredoms, are a just punishment of thy transgression, who neighing after thy
neighbors wife 1. Have laid wait at his door. 2. Have climbed up into his bed.
3. Have discovered his shame and nakedness.


Thus will the Lord visit for these things, and be avenged of this wickedness.

2 Harken now to your confusion you dissolute generation! thou adulterer, which
have ploughed, but it has been with another man's heifer; which have sown thy
seed, but it has been in another man's ground: thou adultresse which admittest
of many lovers, and delighting in the sweetness of stolen waters, and
pleasantnes of hidden bread, have filled thy belly with strange seed: shall the
children of your wandering lusts be the delight and light of your eyes grow up
before you, and prosper? nay; Wisdom 4.
1. They shall be witnesses of wickedness against you in their trial. 2. They
shall be suddenly cut off. 3. They shall wither in their branches.


Thus will the Lord make a consummatio^ in the houses of adultery.

2 Hearken in the last place to the sentence that is gone forth against your
own souls, the plagues that God will bring upon your persons, you children
that transgress in lust: you have tasted of the pleasures of sin in the
forbidden fruit, you have sou^^d your selves in the delights of fleshlines, and
have wallowed ther^in in as the sow in the mire: know you not that all these
pleasures will be bitterness in the end? when for all your sweetnesses you shall
receive a reward.

1. Of the evil savor of infamy in your names. 2. Of foul diseases in your
bodies. 3. Of eternal damnation of soul and body without you repent.
Thus will God pour forth his wrath upon you for your filthiness.

The eight commandment.
Thou shall not steal,]
1. The affirming part of this precept.
We must show to all men all justice and equity.

The things required in this precept are 1. That I labor with mine hands the
thing that is good. Ephe. 4.28. 2. That I pay to every man the thing that I
owe. Romans 3. That I rest contented with the things that I have. 1. Tim. 6.6.


For 1. By the Apostles rule he that will not labor must not eat. 2. This is
just and honest both in the sight of God and men. 3. They that will be rich
fall into temptation and a snare. 1. Tim. 6.9.


Use 1. This then does reprove the inordinate that live without a calling, 1 Thessalonians. 2.11. This reproues the slothful that live negligently in their
calling: let every man bestow himself honestly in some lawful way, and then
none shall need to invade their neighbors goods: for what has brought forth
unto us so many thieues, but idleness the fosterer of the sons of Beliall,
when the mouth requiring, and they having not to supply their wants, fall to
this abhorred trade for their bellies, and to fulfill their lusts: whereas they
might have both for their own necessities, and wherewith also to be helpful
unto others, by 1. Their industry. 2. Their frugality, and 3. The blessing of
God upon their labors.


If they would employ themselves in an honest calling.

2. This meeres with those that care not how far they thrust themselves into
other men's debt and danger, nor yet how little they discharge and pay: all is
lawful purchase that comes within their net; and whatsoever they withold and
eat of other men's, has with it a sweet and pleasant taste: but let them know
that this bread of injustice shall turn to gravel in their teeth, they that
will not pay and make testitution on earth, shall pay the utmost farthing in
hell: but above all an heavy judgment lies against those men, that cruelly
withold and keep to themselves 1. The poor man's pledge. 2. The hire of the
labourer. Iam. 5.4. 3. The goods of the fatherless and widows


If restitution be not made in time.

3. This che^ks all covetous persons, and the swelling spirits of
coffeehouse, that are not content with the things that they have. Heb. 13.5.
that will not learn to frame their minds to their means. It is a blessed
contentation, when a man having but food and raiment, can therewith be content.
1. Tim. 6.6. when a man has learned with the Apostle, Phil. 4.11. in what
estate soever he is, therewith to be content. We should not hear as we do of
the grinding of the faces of the poor, nor of the selling and perverting of
justice, nor of the compassing of the brethren by craft nor of bribes, nor of
violence, nor of the greater and lesser thieves, nor of any injustice
whatsoever, but we should live in peace and quietness.

1. Far from transgressing against others. 2. Without fear of others
transgressing against us. 3. Exercising all justice one unto another.
If this virtue were surely settled in our souls.

2. The Negative.
We must not hurt our neighbor in his temporal goods.

The things forbi^den in this precept are, 1. That I take not any thing from
any man with a strong hand. 2. That I hurt not any Man by craft or forged
cauillation. 3. that I be no picker, purloining privily from my brother his
goods and substance.


For 1. God is an auenger of all such things: 1 Thessalonians. 4 6. 2. The Lord will
also visit for these things. Ier. 5.29. 3. No man can have an unjust gain
without just loss: gain in his chest, and loss in his conscience. Aug. in
ser. de december plagis. Aug. in ser. de december plagis.



Use 1. Let me here therefore call upon thee, O Nimrod, and thy brethren in
violence and oppression: you have robbed, and no man has resisted you, you
have with Benjamin Genesis 49.27. rauind as a wolf in the morning, devoured the
pray, and at ^^ght d^uided the spoil, what though you account all that likes
you l^^full, and all that you have extor^^^ as just prize: what though the
strength be of the hand of you that oppress, and there be none to help and
comfort the oppressed. Eccl. 4.1. yet know you for certain that rapine is 1.
Hateful to God. Es. 61.8. 2. Detestable to man 3. Damnable to your selves.


Howsoever you rejoice in such like spoils

2. Let me speak a word unto thee thou Publican, that pretendest the law and
justice for all thine exactions, that compassest thy brother with a net, and
laiest fast hold upon him with a claw of cavil: will thou clear up thy
brows and stand upon thine honesty, because the law of man lays not hold of
thy deceipts thou must even stand here in the list of thieves, and I will rank
thee with others the children of craft, those that go beyond their brethren in
covenant, in buying and in selling, either adulterating their wares, or doing
unjustly, in 1. Meat-yard, 2. Weight, or 3. Measure. Leu. 19.35.


Howsoever these deceipts be oftimes hid.

3. Let me commune with thee O Achan of thy wedge of gold and Babylonish
garment. Ios. 7.10. Let me talk with thee O Iscariot of thy bag. Ioh. 12.6.
Thou have got a good booty Achan in the overthrow of the city, and thou O
Judah have provided for one out of the common purse: now if you could hide your
thefts it were some what, and yet your consciences would bite you sore: but now
with him that digs through the wall in the dark, with him that remoues the
ancient land marks. Deuteronomy. 27.17. with him that pilfereth his neighbors goods
1. You are discovered to your shame, 2. You have lost that you took by stealth
3. You have also lost and forfeited your selves.


Howsoever you had hope to be helped by this trade.

3. The appendix.
A threatening of Gods judgment against the thief.

1. In his bodily life, 2. In his soul and 3. In his goods and substance.
For 1. God will cut him off from among his people. 2. He shall be filled with
confusion here, and without repentance everlastingly confounded. 3. Gods curse
shall remain in his house to consume it with the timber thereof and the stones
thereof. Zach. 5.4.


Use 1. Is it now a great advantage that you have purchased to your selves, you
thieves and robbers? you stretch your conscience in stretching out your hand to
take that to your selves, which is not your own, for maintenance of your
lives, and lo hereby you cut off your lives: as 1. The word of the Lord has
spoken. Pro. 21.7. Pro. 1.19. 2. The law of man has decreed. 3. Examples are
to frequent to be seen.


Such is the issue of your wicked ways.

2. Is it not a goodly gain that you have gotten by your falsehood, to win
dross and to leese your souls? or think you that you shall not pay for it so
great a prise? Aug. de ver. dom. c. 20.
consider with your selves, and reason from the lesser: If he shall be cast
into the fire that has not given of his own, where think you shall he be cast
that has invaded another man's? If he shall burn with the devil, that has
not clothed the naked, where think ye shall he burn that has spoiled him of
his raiment? hear therefore you thieues and deceivers, and fear the horror of
that place where there is 1. No ease of torments. 2. No drop of consolation. 3.
No hope of release.


Such are the punishm^nts that abide you there.

3. H^^
Is not this a goodly covetousness that you h^^^ coueted to your houses, you
that would grow rich by theft and rapine? you have added the riches of
unrighteousness to the rest of your store, and that like a fire will eat up
all your substance, when you brought your robberies into your dwellings, you
brought in with them also a curse, 1. That will cleave like the leprosy to
your walls, 2. That will undermine the foundation, 2. That will make your hoasts
to spue out your generation.
Such is the reward of your unrighteous dealing.

The ninth Commandment.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.]
1. The affirming part of this precept.
We must defend our neighbors credit reporting the truth of him.

The things commanded in this precept are 1. That we set forth that which is
good in our brother with deserved praise. 2. That we interpret that which is
doubtful in him in the better sense. 3. That we cover his infirmities and
weaknesses in love,


For 1. It is an especial benefit to be praised in honest things. Nazianzen.
2. Charily that thinks no evil is inclined to believe and judge the best. 1.
Cor. 13. 3. Thus we shall show the affection of the members of the same body
one unto another.


Now then

Use 1. If as the savor of a sweet ointment, so is the blessing, and benefit
of a good name, wherein can we recompense our neighbor better to refreshment,
then remembering his good things, which will be unto him a spur in the way, to
others an incitement to like things: for 1. Praise brings forth emulation, 2.
Emulation brings forth virtue, 3. Virtue brings forth felicity.


Which is the end of all that is desired, Na^ianzen.
and whereto all the motion of a good man is referred.

2. If we would have our brethren to abstain from al hard censures and
sinister judgments of us, then must we do the same also by them, looking with
a favorable eye on all their actions, speaking favorably in all their
courses, if their matters be not so exorbitant, that they will admit of no
excuse: for we must still remember, 1. That the same coin shall be paid to
us, 2. That the same judgment shall be made of us, 3. That the same measure
shall be met to us.
Which we have made to be paid of, and met to others. Mat. 7.12

3. If we would not that others should blase forth our slips, our foolish
speaking and indiscreet behauior, when we chance to be transported with the
passions of anger, grief and joy: if we would not have other men's eyes too
curious in observing us, their mouths to open in laying us open where we are
most weak: let us remember that we do not so by them; but rather salve the
sor^, that there may be an healing, then discover the greatness of the wound
to make for a reproach: for it is a part of our wisdom, and love to the
brethren 1. To pass by their offenses toward us. 2. To excuse their errors
toward others. 3. To hold them up, where they are ready to fall.


Which is the garment of charity that covers all their nakedness. Genesis 9.23.

2. The forbidding part.
We must lay nothing wrongfully to our neighbors charge.

The things forbidden in this precept are 1. That in any wise we speak not
that which is false of our neighbor. 2. That we speak not that which is true
of him with a false heart. 3. That we discover not his infirmities
discurteously, nor aggrauate his faults,


For 1. We must put away lying. Ephesians. 4.25. 2. God loves and requires the
truth from the heart. 3. As we would that other men should do to us, so must
we do also unto them. Mat.


Use 1. Mark this therefore you that say and think as it is in the 12.
Psalm: our lips are our own, that take unto your selves liberty to speak
what you list: your flatteries and backbitings, your officious and pernicious
lyings are notorious: besides your private and secret transgression with your
tongues, you have also publicly faulted with this member in fa^e witnessing
and false sentencing, and when you should have stood for the truth you have
been silent, whereby 1. God has been much offended, 2. Your neighbor
greatly injured, 3. Your conscience sorely hurt.


So heinous is the breaking of this precept.

3. Consider this you that will report men's words and not their meanings to
bring them into hate and danger: you that can make the worst of bad in your
brethren, dissembling that in them which you know to be good: you that can so
well act the part of the devil, who when he speaks not falsum an untruth,
speaks the truth adfalsum, that he may deceive: what avails it to the
keeping of this commandment, though your tongues cannot be convict of
falsehood, when your hearts are full of fraud and iniquity? a man in the
judgment of God is a lier and slanderer, though he speak nothing but true of
his brother, if he speak true of him with a false heart, which he may do.

1. Accusing him to get him blame. 2. Praising him to procure him envy. 3.
Flattering him to make him sail into his net.
So open and odious are these sleights to God

3. Harken to this all ye that can so slip over al your brethrens good parts
and virtues as if you did not see them, to insist on their infirmities, pry
into their faults, and blaze them in their frailties, you that can so soon
epsy an hole in your brothers coat and make it wider, or else deal with
their untouched fame, as Ashijah the shilonite did with Ieroboams new garment.
1. Reg. 11.30. rent it in twelve pieces: Is your brothers reputation and credit
no more precious in your eyes? but that in every light offense you are ready to
accuse him and make his trespass great? See what God has here defended, 1.
That we should not easily suspect or judge evil of others 2. That we should
not easily report evil of others. 3: That we should not easily receive an
evil report against others.
So t^^der is he of men's fame and credit.

3. The Appendix.
A caveat to beware of the breach of this commandment, least transgressing it.

1. We be made like unto the devil, 2. We be punished in the same kind. 3.
We be shut out from the presence of God.
For 1. He was a lier from the beginning, and an accuser of the brethren. John
8.44. Apoc. 12.9.10. 2. How should not other men speak cursedly of us, when
our heart does know that we have slandered others. Eccl. 3. He that tells
lies shall not tarry in his fight. Ps. 101.7.


Now then

Use 1. You may glory in the pattern whereto you have conformed your selves
you slanderers and backbiters: other sins make men like unto beasts; as his
lechery the lascivious person to a goat or dog; his wrath, the foolish person
to a she bear robbed of her whelps; Pr^.
his drunkenness, the intemperate person to a swine; and so in other sins,
and other persons: but your sin with the branches and circumstances thereof
makes you like to the devil.

1. Whose dialect of lying is in your tongues, 2. Whose mark of impudency is
in your foreheads, 3. Whose image and superscription of falsehood is in all your
thoughts.
As all your words and gestures plainly show.

2. You may boast of the gain that you have purchased by your lying, when you
have cast up your accou^ts, you false and lying tongues: you have traduced and
defamed others, and borne down your brethren by false witness; you have loved
to speak all words that might do hurt: Ps.
but when you look to the reckoning you shall find your selves no gainers,
unless it be gain, as you have spoken evil of others, so to hear and bear
your own reproach, oppressed with slanders and accusations 1. In the same, 2.
In the like or 3. In worse things.
As it is just with God to give your deseruings Quintil.


3. You may rejoice in that which you have gotten you false, excreable and
accursed speakers: your flatteries, and false witness sings, lyings and
slanderings have perhaps given you favor with some men that you have gratified
thereby, or that are like unto your selves, but they have quite cast you out of
favor with God, who has in his word.

1. Condemned every one that loves or makes lies. Reu. 2. Threatened to
destroy him that privily slandereth his neighbor. Ps. 3. Promised to be a
swift witness against all false witnesses.
As we may read in diverse passages thereof

The tenth Commandment.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his man-seruant, nor his maid servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is thy neighbors,]
1. The affirming part of this precept.
We must be wholly possessed with the affection of love.

The things commanded in this precept are 1. That our heart be full fraught
with charity. 2. That we detest all sin and iniquity. 3. That we delight in
all righteousness and equity.


For 1. Love is the fulfilling of the law. 2. He that commits sin is of the
devil. Ioh. 3.8. 3. So the Lord will delight in us, and make us partakers of
his heavenly pleasures.
Now then

Aug. de laud charit.
Use 1. If as Saint Augustine speaks, he that has charity in his manners,
has that which is laid open, and that also which is hid in the book of God:
If the end of this Commandment, the Commandment be love out of a pure heart,
1. Tim. 1 5.
a good conscience, and faith unfeigned; let us all strive to be rooted and
grounded in love, to be fulfilled with this charity, which will so guide the
motions of our hearts 1. That we shall affect the things that we ought. Vrsin.
2. That we shall affect them in such sort as we ought. 3. That we shall affect
them to that end that we ought.


The appetites of our nature being ordered aright.

2. If sin be deadly not only in the birth and growth thereof, but also in
the conception: If we bear the image and superscription of the devil not
only in our words and actions, proceeding from our corruption, but also in our
very thoughts and motions of our hearts we must if we will hate sin with a
perfect hatred, not only abhor and condemn the enormity of evil words and
actions, but also the irregularity of our thoughts, as a transgression of this
precept, and contrary to original justice and righteousness, which is, 1. The
true light of knowledge in our spirit. 2. A perfect desire, inclination, and
power to good things in our souls. 3. A ready disposition of all the parts of
the body to obey Gods known will.


The whole frame of our nature being disposed aright

3 If to delight in good things be the way to attain to Gods refreshing, if
God require our heart, and to give our heart to God, be to set our delight on
the things that are his liking, righteousness, peace, goodness, and the fruits
thereof? why do we not with Moses having respect unto the recompense of the
reward. Heb. 11.16. Renounce all the pleasures of sin, even that of the
thought, and so embrace all righteousness, that it, and nothing but it?

1. Be the song of our ears. 2. Be the honey of our mouths. 3. Be the jubilee
of our hearts.
The desire of our affections being se^ and ordered aright.

2. The Negative.
We may not concern any thing in our minds tending to our Neighbors hurt.

The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. Evil thoughts arising out of our
own corruption. 2. Evil entertained from the devils suggestion. 3. The least
pleasure or delight in any evil motion.


For 1. As God forbids and hates the bitter fruits of wickedness, so does he
the first root, spring, and blossoms thereof. 3. If we give place to the
devil. Ephe. 4 27. he will fill our hearts. Act 9.3 and incline them unto
wickedness. 3. This delight will draw on the consent, consent the action.


Use 1. Here therefore are we taught the perfection of this doctrine, above
all doctrines of men, of this law above all humane laws; men teach that the
passions are evil, this doctrine says, that the propassions are also evil:
men's laws require only an outward discipline and order; this, that we set our
thoughts in order: they meet with sinful and wicked actions when they are
committed: this cuts the throat of vices in the mind, Ps 137.9 Fulgent. de
orat. and com. cordis ad Probam Hieroni. epist. ad Demetri
and takes and dasheth the little ones of Babylon against the rock, in which
the foote-steps of the serpent are not seen, that we should learn thereby an
holy cruelty to kill sin and wickedness in the womb: which cruelty is the
only kind of piety 1. Acceptable to God. 2. Profitable to our selves. 3.
Offensive to the Devil.
Because it pulls up evil by the roots.

2. Here is a reproof of our carelessness in respect of our souls and selves;
we are advised to whom we open when our doors are shut, and what guests we
suffer to tread over our threshold, and sit down with us in the house: but we
are careless of our souls to keep the doors and passages, while we admit
of evil guests, flying thoughts, glances, and fancies, which are of the devils
sending, who if he get within us, will soon make sure his standing he surely
will suggest, but we should not consent; he will thrust violently to come in,
but we must shut the door against him, and resist him in the strength of God,
who 1. Visits us that we may fight. 2. Helps us that we may overcome. 3.
Confirms us that we may not faint.


Because his power should be perfected in our weakness.

3 How are we to be admonished, that when the world of evil is given either
out of our own corruption or otherwise, that we incline not our ears and
hearts unto it, to take pleasure in it; for evil knows no rest: but like a
stone that is roled from the top of a steep hill, finds not where, nor how to
stay his course till it come into the lowest valley: and as fire beginning at
the ground, and catching in the timber of the wall, cease not till it clime
up to the roof, and flame above it, and at last consume and bring all the
house into ashes: so is evil and our corruption, if it be once set a work, it
never cease stirring, till it tumbles us into the lowest hell: so is the fire
of our corruption, if it be not carefully watched and covered, it will easily
set the whole frame of our nature in so great a combustion, that much water
will not quench it, and there is no escaping of this flame, unless 1. We
abstain from things forbidden. 2. We delight in things lawful. 3. Give our
consent alone to godliness.


Because the sire is so violent and our nature so combustible

3. The appendix of this tenth Commandment, as also of the whole decalogue.
An instruction to use both this, and those as a looking glass, therein to
behold and see our own deformity, wants and imperfections, who transgress
this and the other Commandments daily.

1. In thought. 2. In word, and 3. In deed.
For 1. Every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart is only evil
continually. Genesis 65.
Genesis 6.5. 2. Nothing but corrupt communication proceeds out of our mouths.
Ephesians. 4.29. 3. Our whole lives are nothing else but a walk of wickedness, and
common trade of impiety.


Now then O Lord

Use 1. How should this humble and cast v^ down in respect of our thoughts?
how regular would tho^ have them? but oh what a disorder do we espy amongst
them? what holiness and sanctification do thou require in them? but how
unclean and wicked do we find them: how do we find our selves in them
captiued and sold under sin? for we daily and hourly 1. Conceive that which
is evil. 2. Incline to that which is evil. 3. Consent to that is evil.
Help Lord and free us from this woeful bondage.

2. How should this humble and cast us down in respect of our words? O Lord,
thou have given us tongues and utterance to speak to thy praise, but therewith
we blaspheme and pollute thy holy name: thou have given us ability of speech,
that therewith we might edify our brethren, but we pervert them with our
leasings and boastings, and with our false tongues we hurt and slander our own
mothers sons: thou have created the fruit of the lips, peace: but we have
dipped our tongues in the poison of Aspes, and in the gall of Dragons, and made
them sharper to wound then any two edged sword. O Lord this is our infirmity,
this is our death that where evermore we should be giving of thanks, there is
always in our mouths the rottennes of 1. Of bitter speaking. 2. Filthy
communication. 3. Foolish talking. Ephe. 5.4.
Help Lord and heal us of this evil sickness.

3. How should this humble and cast us down in respect of our works? thou
have given us thy word and these commandments as a rule, thereby to square our
lives, thou have opened our eyes, and set us in a good path, and said unto us,
this is the way walk in it: and if this were not sufficient, to thy rule thou
have added thine example, to thine own precept, thine own pattern: but we
will neither hearken to thy voice in thy word, nor conform us to thine
example, but have set up thine arch enemy in our hearts, to resemble him in all
his parts, as all our deeds and a^^^ons do well witness, which are 1. Pleasing
to the devil: 2. Displeasing to thee. 3. Hurtful to our neighbors, and our
selves.
Help Lord and pardon all these our misdoings.

The division of the Lords Prayer.
The Lords Prayer is thus to be divided, 1. The proeme, Our Father. 2. The
petitions, Hallowed, etc. 3. The thanksgiving, For thine is.


An exposition on the Lords Prayer.
Our Father,]
1. NOt in name only, but of our life, Act. 17.28
and being also Gr^^aten in^r^dom.
2. In affection, and 3. In effect and deed.
For thou have 1. Created us, 2. Adopted us, and 3. Ministrest all good things
unto us.


The use 1. How should we not wholly bestow our lives in serving thee, which
have this; that we are, breath, and live from thee?

Who 1. Fashonedst us beneath in the earth. 2. Breathedst the breath of life
into us. 3. Broughtest us alive and safe out of the womb.


Such is thy power and might in the works of thy hands.

2. How should we not love the brethren to live with them in the bond of peace
and unity? how should we not love thy love again, being taught and showed such
love of thee?

Who 1. Louedst us to choose us to thy self before all worlds. 2. Louedst us,
when we were yet thine enemies. 3. Louedst us redeeming us unto thy self,
calling us to thy grace, and conserning us in thy grace.


Such is the favor that thou did bear unto us.

3. How should we not rely upon thee with full trust, and praise thee for the
good things, that thou have given us with all thankfulness? which make all
thy creatures to serve us

For our Bradford Martyr.
1. Necessity, 2. Commodity, and 3. Admonition.


Such is thy providence and care toward us.

Which art in heaven,]
1. Of greatest majesty. 2. Of perfect happiness. 3. Of everlasting
continuance.
For 1. Thou art higher then the highest. 2. In thy presence is the fulness of
joy. 3. Thy years shall not fail.


Use 1. Therefore do we come unto thee in all humility, with full confidence
that thou will 1. Grant that we pray for, 2. Deliver us from that we pray
against, 3. Accept the calves of our lips,
Because thou art as gracious as we esteem thee great.

2. Therefore do we despise the shame of the world, and endure with all
patience the 1. The scorns, injuries and violences of the sons of men. 2. The
crosses, and losses of this present life. 3. The miseries and infirmities of
our souls and bodies.


Because thou have set such joy before us.

3. Therefore do we desire nothing in the earth of this worlds fading 1.
Pleasures, 2. Honors, 3. Riches.
Because we are heirs of thy kingdom, our inheritance is in heaven.

Hallowed be thy name,]
1. While believing we do after thy word and commandments. 2. While we
speak reverently of thy great name and titles. 3. While in our hearts we
religiously regard and think of thy power wisdom, mercy, justice, judgments,
etc.
For so 1. Shall we glorify thy name by our works. 2. Shall we praise it in
our words. 3. Shall we hallow it in our thoughts, and
To this end grant most holy God.

Use 1. That keeping the faith and a good conscience, we may here lead an
vncorrupt and holy life, in all 1. Righteousness, 2. Soberness and 3.
Godliness.
So shall not thy name be evil spoken off amongst those that are without
through us.

2. Keep us that we do no way profane a thing so holy. by 1. Speakeing
inconsiderately or contemptuously of thee. 2. Wresting or making a scoff of
thy word. 3. Swearing vainly or falsely by thee.
So shall we be innocent of the great offense.

3. Kindle in our hearts a zeal of thy glory, that we may 1. Stand for the
maintenance of thy truth 2. Attribute nothing to our selves of the things that
thou have brought to pass on us or others. 3. Mourn for the sins of the
people whereby thou art dishonored.
So honoring thee thou will also honor us.

Thy kingdom come,]
1. In the preaching of thy Gospel. 2. In the power of thy Spirit. 3. In the
appearing of thy glory.
For it 1. Will inform us in thy truth. 2. Will subdue us to thy scepter. 3.
Will bless us with thy sight, for which things gracious Lord.


Use 1. Thrust forth faithful laborers into thy harvest; which may give
attendance 1. To reading. 2. To exhortation, and 3. To doctrine.
That we may be taught the knowledge of thy ways.

2. Deliver us from the tyranny of our infestest enemies 1. The Devil. 2. The
world, and 3. The flesh.


That we may serve thee without fear.

3. Make an end of these evil days on earth, and bring us to thy palaces
where dwells All 1. Pleasure. 2. Tranquillity. 3. Security.
That we may live with thee in glory.

Thy will be done in earth,]
1. On us, in all that thou shall think good. 2. In us, in all that shall be
good. 3. By us, in all that our hand shall find to do.
For 1. All that comes from thee works together for the best to thy children.
Romans 8.28. 2. This is thy will even our sanctification. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. Thus it
behooves us to conform all our actions to thy rule.
Wherefore O heavenly wisdom,

Use 1. Make us in all our purposes to submit our selves, unto thy 1. Seasons.
2. Means, and 3. Ends.
Well pleased with thy good pleasure.

2 Give us thine holy spirit, to sanctify our 1. Bodies. 2. Souls, and 3.
Spirits.


That in us thou may take pleasure

3. Strengthen us unto all good works, that in thee we may 1. Begin. 2.
Continue. 3. E^d.
Doing thy will and pleasure.

As it is in heaven,]
1. By thine only son. Vrsin.
2. By thy holy Angels. 3. By thy blessed saints.
For 1. He does all thy will. 2. They obey the voice of thy word. 3. They walk
in thy sight.


Now then

Use 1. Prosper de vit. contem. l. 3.
After thy sons pattern we strive unto perfection 1. Preferring profitable
things before those that are pleasant. 2. Honest things before those that are
profitable. 3. Holy things before those that are honest.


That we may be to thy praise.

2. After the example of thine Angels with do thee service, obeying thee 1.
Willingly. Perkins.
2. Speedily. 3. Faithfully.
That we may keep thy sayings.

3. After the manner of thy Saints, we walk in the way, that is Chrysostom.
1. On high. 2. Direct, and 3. Narrow.


That we may attain unto thy rest.

Give us this day our daily bread,]
1. For our present necessity. 2. Further commodity. 3. Future ability.
For so 1. We shall be kept in life. 2. We shall have all needful comforts
for our life. 3. We may also be helpefull unto others.


Use 1. Then shall we learn (most bountiful God) still resorting unto thee
alone for maintenance, not to do amiss, 1. Asking it of Saints 2. Seeking it
from devils. 3. Getting it by evil means.
If thou vouchsase unto us food and clothing.

2. Then shall we praise thee for our plenty, acknowledging thy providence over
us, and confess that 1. We cannot subsist except thou give us bread. 2. We
are unable to get our bread. 3. We are unworthy of our bread.
If thy bounty be so great unto us.

3. Then shall we also strive to do good to others, in their wants: 1.
Feeding the hungry. 2. Clothing the naked. 3. Generally helping the
necessitous.


If thou cut out our commons so large unto us.

And forgive us our trespasses,]
1. Sinning of ignorance. 2. Falling of infirmity. 3. Offending of see purpose.
For 1. We know not good from evil. 2. We are unapt to good, and prove to
evil. 3. Our hearts are often times hardened in evil.
Wherefore most kind and merciful Lord

Use 1. Give us a sight and feeling of our sinful wretchedness, to perceive and
see 1. Our own natural corruption. 2. What we have done against thy law. 3.
What we have left undone commanded in thy law.
That we may know and acknowledge the debt of our sin.

2. Grant us true sorrow and contrition for our trespasses, out of the sense
and feeling of our 1. Inabilities and ill deserts for sin. 2. Thy justice and
heavy displeasure against sin. 3. Our own harms and dangers by sin.


That we may loath and leave our sin.

3. Remember not how we have broken out in disobedience, notwithstanding our
knowledge, so many means and mercies to withold us, 1. To the great hurt of
our selves. 2. To the grievous offense of our neighbors. 3. To the high
contempt of thee.


That thou may blot out, and do away our sin.

As we forgive them that trespass against us,]
1. Not ret^ining their injuries. 2. Not returning their injuries. 3. Doing
then good moreover for their injuries.
Though 1. Enuiously they hur^ us. 2. Maliciously they have us, 3. Extremely
they do mischief and endanger us.


1. But put out of o^r minds offenses for thy love 1. Quickly, 2. Wholly, 3.
Freely.


Because thou have forgiven us so great a de^t.

2. But spare them passing by offenses for thy sake, out of our 1. Pity, 2.
Courage, 3. Wisdom.


Because their trespasses are nothing to our debt.

3. But recompense them good things for thine honor, notwithstanding their
offenses, wronging us in our 1. Persons, 2. Goods and 3. Fame.


Because thou art so good unto us, notwithstanding all our debt.

And lead us not into temptati^n,]
1. Perkins.
Withdrawing thy grace assisting from us. 2. Stirring up storms and war
against us. 3. Laying baits and blocks before us.
For 1. Thereby we shall unguarded. 2. Therewith we may be ouer-whelmed. 3.
Thereat we may offend.


Use 1. And then thy grace which did prevent us that we might arise, failing us
now standing, we shall fall again, returning 1. To the vomit of our former
evil opinions. 2. To wallow in the mire of our former evil manners. 3. To run
yet further into farther mischief.
Our latte^ end being worse then our beginning.

2. And then our house smitten on the corners with the wind will be shaken 1.
The roof of our patience. 2. The walls of our hope. 3. The foundation of our
faith.


Our hearts melting away for very fear and dying within us.

3. And then the deceiueablenes of sin will bewitch us, and pervert our
simple minds, making us 1. To taste the forbidden fruit. 2. To eat of wicked
men's delicates. 3. To swallow the hook with the bait.
Our souls inclining to wickedness, and turning away after evil counsels.

But deliver us from the evil,]
1. Of our own concupiscence. 2. Of that wicked adversary. 3. Of the examples
of this naughty age.
For otherwise 1. We shall serve sin in the lusts thereof. 2. We shall be led
captive of the devil after his will. 3. We shall be carried away with the
current of the times corruptions.


1. Aug: con. Julian.
So shall that which cannot utterly be consumed in us in this life, be daily
more and more abated, 1. Wrath out of our hearts. 2. Malice out of our flesh:
3. Evil desires out of our souls.
Til we at length altogether be freed from these works of brick and clay.

2. So shall Satan's work be hindered and overthrown, which labors daily to
subvert us, 1. Fighting violently and incessantly against us. 2. Taking al
advantages of times, Leo pap. ser. 8. natiuitatis.
means and places to annoy us. 3. Sifting all our customs, cares and
affections to pervert us and do us harm.
Till we have at last escaped from this Pharaoh.

3. So shall we be saved from this evil generation, and from this present
world, without being 1. Defiled with the pitch of it. Bern. in ser.
2. Inwrapped in the bird-lime of it. 3. Entangled with the snares of it:


Till we be at last delivered out of Sodom.

For thine is the
Kingdom, the power, and the glory,]
1. Over all excelling.

2. All ruling and disposing.

3. Always brightly shining.

1. Whereto none may be compared. 2. Which cannot be withstood. 3. Which shall
not be obscured.
Use 1. Therefore do we thy subjects make request unto thee, in 1. Prayer, 2.
Supplication with 3. Thanksgiving.


Because thou art our King.

2. Therefore are we persuaded of thy present help and succor in all our 1.
Dangers, 2. Necessities, and 3. Tribulations,


Because thou art so mighty.

3. Therefore do we ascribe all praise and honor to the 1. Father, 2. Son,
3. Holy Ghost.


Because it is thine of right and duty.

For ever,]
1. In all ages past, 2. At this time present, 3. In all times to come.
Amen: So shall it be.]
^ As thou have said, 2. As we have prayed, 3. Hereupon our faith is staid. We
believe, Lord help our unbelief: even so Lord Jesus, Amen, Amen.
FINIS.
A short and plain treatise of our fit preparation to the Supper of the Lord,
and wholesome participation thereof.
1. COR. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread,
and drink of that Cup.


AS Jacob blessing Asher. Genesis 49.20. said his bred shall be fat, and he shall
yield royal dainties, or give pleasures for a king; So may I say, speaking of
the fat things of this Table, a little inuerting the words: the King here gives
us his pleasures, and feeds us with his best things and royal dainties. Who
am I (says David unto Saul. 1. Sam. 18.18) that I should be son in law unto
a King? and to Saul's servants in the 23. verse, Seems it a light thing unto
you to be a Kings son in law? like question may we all make unto our souls
concerning this table and banquet? who are we? or seems it a light thing unto
us that we are the invited of a King? If some great man should inuit us to his
Table, how would we study to compose our selves, our apparel, our behavior,
that there might be nothing in us that might offend so great a presence? how
much more ought we thus to do coming to the Lords Table, where we are to sit
and eat of better food then that of Angels, and that also in the presence not
of any earthly greatness, but of the heavenly majesty?

That therefore we may come as fit and worthy guests, we must before hand
prepare our selves: For if the Virgins Hester 1. coming to King Ahashuerosh
were to be purified six months, and the people coming to receive the Law of
God, three days, Exodus 19. how much more we coming to this Table, where the
flesh of God is taken and eaten, ought to be purged and purified in our hearts
from dead works, and to be prepared as fit guests for so heavenly a banquet?
This above al things every one of us that will come to this Table well
prepared, must desire of God with ardent and ea^nest prayers, that he would
purge the chamber of our heart, in which Christ will eat his Passover with us.

Now that we might fitly prepare, and wholsomely participate of the Table of
the Lord, the Apostle has set down two things: first what we must do before
we come there; namely examine, etc. 2. What we must do when we are there:
namely eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.

If it be asked who must examine, or who must be examined, the Apostle resolves
a man; Who examine, who examined.
or as Beza, Quisque: Every man, the examiner, his own soul and conscience,
his own self; for so says the Apostle: Let a man examine himself.

The touchstone is for the metals, this trial is for our selves. Every man
here is of the Inquisition, to examine whether his own heart be holy or
hollow, his love false, or unfeigned, his wares, his works good, or
adulterated, his coin base or current: which that a man be able to do, it is
necessary as Saint Peter requires, that he be ready to render a reason of the
faith and hope that is in him: and how can he be ready to render a reason of
his faith, etc. when he knows not a reason of his faith? how is it possible
that a man should examine himself, when he knows not upon what
interrogatories he should examine himself? The heart of man is deceitful
above all things, how shall he be able to find out the corruptions thereof,
that is not taught out of the word, to know when his heart is upright, and when
it is corrupt? How shall he be able to try or examine his faith, that knows
not of what faith he is? led in blindness, misled in superstition, and can
say no more of what he belieues, but that he belieues as the Church belieues.

Herein the blind guides of the Church of Rome have much abused the Church,
and simple ones of the church: herein the doctrine of the church of Rome is
contrary to the Apostles doctrine; for if every man be to examine himself, it is
manifest that no man that comes to this Sacrament must be so ignorant, as not
to know what is required to be in himself, what he is to search for in
himself? which he can never do, which can say no more for his faith, then
that he belieues as the Church belieues, not knowing what the Church belieues.

If a man can examine himself and do not, his neglect is heinous, his danger is
more great; if we will not search our selves, he that has fiery eyes will
search us: Let no man think to lie hid in the multitude, and say; if God have a
list, Omnes punire nocentes quando ad m^ veniet? to punish all offenders, when
will he come to me? When the King came in the Gospel to see his guests, he
espied one that had not on a wedding garment, and he bid take that one, and
bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness: there was but one
Judas at the Supper with our Savior, and the devil entered into him. This is a
duty required, the neglect of it is not without danger, for that besides it may
bring on us the everlasting punishments, a thing greatly to be feared, it
makes us also in peril of temporal punishments; for so says the Apostle in
the words that follow, for this cause many are weak and sickely amongst you,
and many sleep.

As every one of us therefore would be careful to avoid both the temporal
and eternal punishments, so let us come to this table prepared, having before
examined.

Every man then must examine, Examine himself.
but whom? himself: so says the Apostle. Let a man examine himself. This may
serve for a reproof of the curiosity of many men, who when they are as, Canes
venatici, to enquire and find out in other men's faith and manners, are as
blind bats and beetles in their own: what have thou, may I say to such a one,
to judge of thy brother? he stands or falls to his own master: Enquire into
thy self, and why iudgest thou of thy brother? know thou what tears he
has shed before God in secret for his sin? know thou what ardent sighs
and violent prayers he has powered out before God, that there might be an
healing of his infirmity, and doing away of his sin? Judge thy self, so
shall thou not be judged: look into thy self; and look not thus about thee.
Correct thine own life and manners, enquire not into thy Neighbors.

Hear what one says well, Grave curiositatis vitium, etc. Grievous is the
vice of curiosity, because while it leads a man out of himself to enquire
into the life of his Neighbor, it does always hide from him his own hidden
things, that knowing other men's affairs, he may be ignorant of himself: For
it cannot be that he that attendes thus to others, should be careful of
himself; and therefore Augustine says well: Curiosi ad inuestigandum vitam
alienam, desidiosi ad corrigendam suam: They that are curious to look into
other men's lives, are very sloathfull to amend their own: But our Apostle
requires of every one that will be a fit guest to come to this Table; that he
leave off to meddle of other Men's lives, and enquire into them, that he come
home by himself, and to himself, and set in order the things of his own
house, descending into himself, sounding his own heart, judging of his own
faith, trying his own works, examining his own love. And when he has so
done, then may he approach and draw near unto this Table, else may the devil
enter into him as into Judas with the soppe, else as the sons of the Prophets
said Mors in olla, there is death in the pot: so may he chance to find that
there is also Mors in calice, death in the cup.

Yet this is not so stricktly to be understood, Who are also to examine others.
as if no man were to be watchful over others, and careful and diligent to
examine others: the minister, the father of a family, are besides themselves to
examine their flock, their children, servants: I and my house says Joshua
will serve the Lord; so these are to be careful of others, as the minister of
the Lords house, the father of the family in his own house, that those
belonging to their charge be well instructed in the way of God. Of my hand said
Judah to his father Jacob concerning his brother Benjamin. Genesis 43.9. shall
thou require him, and if I bring him not back unto thee, I will bear the
blame for him for ever: so may we say concerning those that are set over others
of the Lord, that God will require them at their hands, and if through their
default they perish, they shall bear the blame of them for ever.

This every Minister and Master of a family must consider, that in the Church
of Christ he bears two persons; the first, as he is a Christian; the second,
as he is a governor: as he is a Christian, he is to examine himself: as he is
a governor he is also to examine others.

If a man should ask me now of this examination after what manner it is to be
done, The manner of examining our selves
I shall answer him, not slightly, perfunctorily, and for fashion only, as the
formalists of the world do all the works of religion; but seriously, exactly,
and uprightly, ripping up our hearts, and descending into our thoughts,
carefully and diligently viewing what image and superscription they bear upon
them considering directly our own infirmities what sins we are most inclined
and subject unto, Bernh.
that we may be heartily contrite and sorry for them, and labor to amend them:
what defect of knowledge, zeal and love there is in us, that we may labor to
reform it.

If there be any sore or ulcer in our soul, whether it be of wrath, or envy,
or luxuriousness, or worldliness, we must not deal with it as the sores of
our bodies, afraid to touch them: but we must descend into it, find it out,
search into the corruption thereof, confess it, and leave it.

It is not a general confession that will serve our turns to say in the words
of the Publican; Lord be merciful unto me a sinner: but we must bring forth
our particular and beloved sins, Agag, and the best of best of the cattle,
that which we have kept to sacrifice not unto God, 1. Sam. 15 8.32.
but to the devil, and cut them in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal.

If we examine not our selves after this manner, the Lord that searches
Jerusalem with candles. Zeph. 1.12. will take the work into his own hands,
he that has fiery eyes will look into the dark and filthy corners of our
hearts, if we confess not he will not forgive, if we cover and hide our sin,
he will discover it and set it before us to the confusion of our faces.

the things whereof we are to examine our selves
Now after the manner, if I should be asked of the matter of our examination, or
the things whereof we are to examine our selves, I shall answer that first in
particular we are to examine our selves concerning this sacrament: first, with
what intention: secondly, with what devotion we come unto it: secondly, more in
general we are to examine our repentance, faith and love.

1. We are to examine our selves with what intention we come to this table;
whether for custom, of fashion, for fellowship, Bonauentura de processu
religionis cap. 22.
for fear of punishment, for respect of outward profit, or any other worldly
respect: or whether the love of God does draw us thither, and the sight of our
own infirmity, the conscience of our sins, the desire of grace from God, and
of given thanks to God, renewing the memory of his passion, and thinking on
the inestimable benefit of our redemption.

2. We are to examine our devotion, whether we come unto this table rashly, not
discerning the Lords body; or whether we come unto it with fear and reverence:
whether we come unto it with a loathing stomach, that despises the honey
comb; or whether we come unto it with a longing appetite that desires to be
fed and filled with these dainties.

More general we must examine our repentance, faith and love.

1 We must try our selves in the matter of repentance, whether we have sifted
the corners of our hearts, whether we have been sorry for our sin, whether we
have made confession thereof to God, whether loathing our sins and our selves
also for our sins, we have a settled purpose hereafter to forsake all our
evil ways, and in new obedience to walk before God to the glorifying of his
holy name.

2. We are to examine our faith, which consists of two parts; the first a
certain knowledge of the whole mystery of salvation: the second, an
application of this knowledge to our selves. A man therefore coming to this
sacrament must examine himself, whether he have such knowledge as is required
in particular of the number and nature of the sacraments, in general of the
principles and parts of religion, the principles, first God: secondly, the word
of God: the parts first man's mystery falling and fallen from that which he
was in his natures institution; secondly the grace of God in the great mercy
that was showed upon him in his restitution.

2. The explication of this knowledge is in bringing of it home into our own
souls, and concerning this we must examine our selves, whether we have
contented our selves with the bare knowledge and theory of the things in this
word, or whether we can make use of our knowledge to our information,
consolation, and can say with Thomas. John 21.28. my Lord and my God.

3. If we will come as worthy communicants to this table, we must examine our
selves concerning our love first, whether our hearts be upright toward our
brethren, as we would that theirs should be toward us: secondly whether we can
be content to remit and pass by their offenses toward us, as we would that
they should pass by ours toward them: thirdly, whether, where we have given
each offense, or done any wrong and injury in word and deed, we be ready to
confess it, and to make amends.

If we can find in our selves such intention, such devotion, such repentance,
such faith, such love, we may be bold to draw near unto this Table, not
doubting but that the Lord will accept our offering.



Let not this deter nor drive thee back; thou can do no more in this
examination, then thou can in other religious duties, that is as much, as
humane frailty can attain unto: and God in this, as in other things, will use
his clemency; for he knows our corruptions and defects, he knows whereof
we are made, he considers that we are but men. Psalm. 103.14. Thou find not
such an appetite in thee as is required; desire God and he will stir it up
in thee. Thou find not in thy self such earnest sorrow for sin: desire of
God and he will give it thee: Be sorry because thou can be no more sorry.
Thou art laden with the burden of thy sins, come unto God and he will ease
thee. Thou find in thy self a manifest defect of good works, and a
languishing faith: Come unto this Table, it is a medicine: Come unto Christ,
he is the Physician, and he will heal thee. Thou think with thy self, I
am not worthy: our best worthiness is to confess our unworthiness; confess
with the Church, and say, I am not worthy to lick up the crummes, etc. Thou
art not able of thy self to do any of these things required, yet in Christ
thou art able to do all things: comfort thy self therefore, and let not this
deter thee; come unto Christ that calls thee, accept his offer that
inuiteth thee.

Only let me admonish thee, that there be not in thee a show and negligent
mind coming to this table, but that thou stir up thy self to attend to
what thou do, and if thou feel any want in thy self, confess the same to
God, and say: I know O Lord, that thou requirest of thy guests a conscience
pure from sin, good intention, a good devotion, faith, repentance, etc. Now,
O Lord, although my preparation be but lame, yet vouchsafe to accept it, my
desire is in all things to please thee, but mine infirmity is great; O Lord of
health, heal all mine infirmities; if we have such thoughts in our hearts,
such prayers in our mouths coming to this table, he that will not break a
bruised read, nor quench the smoking flax, will not reject nor put us back,
although our infirmity be great upon us.

Now from that which we are to do before we come to the Lords table, What we
should do at the Lords table.
let us come to that which we are to do at the Lords table: so let him eat of
that bread and drink of that cup: when a man has examined and prepared, it is
not left at his discretion whether he will communicate or no, but he must first
examine, and then eat: for whereas the sacraments are badges by which we
Christians are known from unbelievers and idolaters in the use of them, we
must needs communicate, unless we will show our selves ashamed of the
profession of our faith.

This sacrament is a seal to confirm our faith; therefore as we desire to
have an assurance of Gods promises sealed up unto us let us come unto this
table. By this we are united unto Christ; therefore as we desire to be one with
Christ, so let us communicate. The Lords supper is a link of unity, that
knitteth us one unto another: therefore as we desire love and brotherly
kindness, so let us frequent this table.

What though Augustine say? Creed and manducasti, Believe and thou have eaten,
yet let no man think that is sufficient to believe and not to eat: for
although there is no wholesome eating without faith, yet at the Lords table we
are helped, furthered and confirmed in our faith by our outward senses.

When we hear it said, this is my body, etc. (faith you know is by hearing,)
we are stirred up to lay strong hold on the promises of God, when we hear this
word, do this in remembrance of me. We are assured that this is Christ's
commandment, when we see the bread broken, and the wine powered out, we are
given to consider of his passion, that was broken for our sins, and think of
his blood that washes us from all sin when the Minister offers unto us, and
we receive the sacrament, we think of that thing which God offers unto us, and
we receive by the hand of faith.

Great therefore is the use and necessity of this Sacrament, and let no man
slack his coming unto it, that is invited; there are that are content to come
and hear, but refuse this table: what do they think themselves unworthy of
it? who can be worthy: or do they contemn God is his ordinance? Let them
look to it, there is a judgment for such men: those that refuse to come
(says Christ) shall not taste of my banquet. As God herein has tendered our
infirmities, so let us tenderly respect the good of our own souls, not
withs^^^^^^g our selves withsome, nor neglecting with others, but let us eat.
What we must eat


Let a man eat of this bread, etc. Quisque probet, etc. Let a man, or let
every man examine, eat and drink (says Paul) not so says the Church of
Rome. Let the Laity, not examine, but be confessed; let them eat if they will
all, but they shall not drink all; we have kept say the priests the chalice for
our selves, and they shall be content with it under one kind. I will not say
it is the licorishnesse of wine in men given to the appetite, or a desire of
innouating and changing this institution, or their high presumption that their
Church cannot err though they decree against Christ, that makes them thus
sacrilegiously to abrogate the ordinance of Christ. This I know he that gave
himself for all; said to his, drink of this all. But the Church of Rome will
give Christ the check; not all says she, but some of all, my shauelings, my
dear sons: for the rest though Christ command it, though Paul preach it, yet
shall they but have it under one kind. Sic volo, sic iubeo. See the impious
boldness of men, whose consciences are seared with an hot iron, and out of
this judge of the rest. Quid non audebunt? what will they not dare to do?

I could but that I will not long withold my reader, speak here to the
reproof of the same men, for keeping the host in a box, when they are bid to
eat the bread, but I desire not to insist long on that which is to be eaten,
only here I cannot pass over that question which has exagitated the Church
so many years, namely what is that which is eaten? for what for
transubstantiation on the one side, what for consubstantiation on the other
side, the Church is so divided that it ^nowes not readily what to believe and
hold concerning this Sacrament. But because these are the things which are
every where spoken off, and spoken against, I will move no longer question of
it, but endeavor out of these words, other scriptures, reasons and fathers
briefly to show, that we must understand in the Lords supper no Capernaiticall
creophagie, or carnal eating, but that which is spiritual, and by faith. This
will appear unto us, if we consider well this place in which the Apostle
says, eat that bread; if it be bread when it is to be eaten, then it is not
the very flesh of Christ presently after the words of consecration; and again
the same Apostle: Panem quem frangimus, The bread which we break. And is it
bread when it is broken? then it is not the body of Christ presently after the
consecration: and if we will believe Christ. John 6.35. he will tell us that
to come to him, and to believe is to eat, and drink him the bread and water
of life: his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed. ver. 55.
but it is the spirit that quickens; the flesh profits nothing. verse 63.
see here how our Savior would have us to understand a spiritual eating.



Now hear the Fathers. Fathers.
Number (...), mysterium nostrum pronuncias, and irreligiose ad crassas
cogitationes vrges fidelium mentes? and humanis cogitationibus attentas ea
tractare, quia sola pura et exquisita fide accipiuntur. Cirill: ad Eutropium?
What do thou call our mystery, an eating of man's flesh? and do thou
irreligiously urge the minds of the faithful to gross thoughts? and do
thou attempt to handle those things with humane thoughts, which are received by
pure and exquisite faith alone?

Christus assumpto pane, qui cor hominis confortat, veritatem corporis sui
repraesentauit, says Jerome. Christ having taken the bread, which comfort
the heart of man, has represented the truth of his body. A representation is a
sign or remembrance of a thing, it is not the thing it self: Augustine what
do thou prepare thy tooth and thy belly? believe and thou have eaten.
Cyprian, we sharpen not our teeth to bite, but with sincere faith we break
and divide that holy bread. Bernard. Christus tange potest sed affectu, Ser.
20. in Cant.
non manu, veto non oculo, fide non sensibus: tanges manu fidei, desiderij
digito, devotionis amplexu tanges oculo mentis: Christ may be touched but with
affection, not with the hand, with the desire, not with the eye, with faith,
not with the senses. Thou shall touch him with the hand of faith, with the
finger of desire, with the embracing of devotion, thou shall touch him with the
eye of the mind. Credere inuenisse est, says one, to believe is to have
found. Et credere edisse est, say I, to believe is to have eaten?

Norunt fideles (says another) Christum habitare per fidem in cordibus suis;
quid proprius est? The faithful know that Christ dwells by faith in their
hearts, what can be nearer.

All these speak of a spiritual eating and no other, an eating that is of
faith: should I then tear him again with my teeth, that was once pitifully
torn for me with nails, thorns, spear, upon the Cross? should I dream
that my stinking carkase should be a Sepulcher to bury my Savior, descending
into the cauernes of my belly? I will bury thee oh my Savior in the new
sepulcher of my soul, where never yet any man lay.

Thus of examining our selves before we eat, of the manner of examining of our
selves, of the things whereof we are to examine our selves, against the
doubtings of our unfitness and unworthiness, of eating, and of what we receive,
the conclusion is that having received Christ into the chamber of our heart, we
be thankful to him for his coming, we desire him to stay and lodge with us
all night, we so demean our selves toward him, that we grieve not his spirit,
and make him to leave his lodging, which if we do, our soul that was his
lodging, will become a cage of unclean birds and our latter end will be worse
then our beginning.

A prayer before the Communion.
What shall I do (O Lord) drawing near to this thy table, but confess
against my self mine own unworthiness? thou requirest that thy guests have on
the wedding garment, and behold I am covered as yet with the rags of mine own
filthiness, and with the confusion of my sin. The corruption of my nature,
the iniquity of my life, the unprofitableness of my best works, the
abomination of my worst, the despite that I do to thee, the evil example
that I have given to men, the shame and horror that I have brought upon mine
own face and conscience, my want of faith knowledge, love, and sorrow for sin,
mine indeuotion to thy service, my serving of mine own intentions, out of the
causes of thee (my GOD) and the causes of religion, the whole band of mine
other iniquities, my secret, and to my self unknown sins, stand up against
me to accuse me and cast me in the teeth. I am in a straight with David,
neither know I what to do, or what to choose: whether to draw near to this
thy Table, or to withdraw and turn my self away. If I withdraw my self, I
forsake thy comforts and refreshing: if I draw near I am in danger of my sin.
But I will draw near unto thee, trusting in the multitude of thy mercies; O my
Lord Christ, I come laden with an heavy burden, thou will ease my shoulder: I
come in my defects, thou will cover them with thy perfection. I come in the
confession, use my sin, with thee is forgiveness, thou will do away my
sin. I come in the feeling of my wants, thou art God all sufficient, thou will supply all my wants. I come in the acknowledgement of mine unworthiness,
thou will accept me, make me worthy, and refresh me here with the comforts in
thy word, with thy body and thy blood at thy Table, elsewhere thou will make
me drink of the river of thy pleasures, in the kingdom of thy father, where
thou raignest everlastingly, one God with him and the Holy Ghost: To thee be
ascribed all praise and glory, world without end, Amen.

A Prayer at the receiving of the bread and wine.
O Lord Christ and blessed Savior, which have given me thy body to be my
meat, thy blood to be my drink, thy soul to be my redemption: enter now the
chamber of my heart, with all thy virtues, graces, and spiritual benedictions:
adorn it and make it beautiful, and dwell in it for ever, and grant that the
memory of thy most bitter passion, and of all other thy wonders and benefits
may never slip out of my mind, but that I may always think on thy love,
meditate on thy mercies, and thank thee for thy goodness, which have done so
great things for thy Church thy chosen, and for my soul, Amen.

A Prayer after the receiving of the Communion.
AWay from me all ye works and workers of iniquity, out of mine heart all
evil thoughts, out of my mouth all evil words, from mine hands all evil
deeds, for I have made a covenant with my God to serve him with all my
strength, with all my soul, and with all my members, and he is come to dwell
in mine heart. Oh (my GOD) and oh my mercy! how can I give thee worthy thanks,
which being King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, have not scorned to visit my
soul, and to come under the roof of my poor dwelling? Teach me (O LORD) to
love thy love, and for thy love to deny all ungodliness and wordly lusts:
teach me to leave this world for thee, which for my sake leftest Heaven to
come down to me, and gave thy self unto me, being made my brother in thy
birth, mine example in thy life, the price of my redemption in thy death, my
food and nourishment at thy Table, my reward in the Kingdom, mine wholly and
whatsoever thou art I cannot utter the joy of mine heart: I cannot conceive
words to express my thankfulness: If I had the tongues of men and Angels I
cannot speak sufficiently to thy praise. Grant (O Lord) that I which have
received so much from thee, of thine, thee thy self, may in all things
endeavor to be to thine honor and praise. Amen.

My Thanksgiving after GOD had raised me up from the bed of my sickness.
I Have a song of praise to sing to the Lord, O LORD thou have helped me, and
comforted me: when I had received the sentence of death in my self, thou
said unto me Live? when my life drew near unto the pit, and to the buriers,
thou said unto me, Return. I had now almost imb^^ced the dust, and claimed
my kindred in the grave, saying to corruption, thou art my father, and to the
worms ye are my mother, and my sister: I had given over all hope of life, and
said in my weakness, I am cut off, I shall no more return to see the sun:
yet thou gave life, which art my light and comfort, thou gave strength; and
made me again to rejoice with my friends, and to visit my dwelling. Though
thou brakest me with breach upon breach in the day of my distress, though thou
powredst out my gall upon the ground, though thou tookest me by the neck, and
shakedst me in pieces, and settedst me up as a mark for all thine Archers: yet
had thou mercy on me, to spare one, that thou would not put out all the
light of my children in one day; and take both their parents from of their
heads at once. I should have desired, as did old Simeon, when thou had set me
on the way, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace: I should have
earnestly begged of God, that in death we might not have been divided, whom no
affliction, nor sorrow, nor want, nor euill-deuised counsel of evil men could
divide in our lives: I should have reioiced as if I had found a treasure, when
I had found the grave, and reckoned it a great success and benefit to have bid
goodnight to this world, and to have gone to sleep together in the dust; but
that my bowels were moved within me, in compassion of my children: Alas,
(quoth I) in the weakness of my body, in the weakness of my mind, and
heaviness of my soul, shall all these young ones now be orphans? (yet thou O
God art the father of orphans,) and shall the eye of mine enemy see in me and
them? O take me not therefore away in the midst of mine age, spare my life, O
Lord of thy goodness, help and heal thy servant in remembrance of thy
mercies, visit thy sick and prisoner, to give me health, and set my feet at
liberty: so did thou hear and heal me, and have done this great thing for
me, whereof I rejoice. And now Lord what is that which I ask at thine hands?
namely this, comfort me for the time, wherein thou have afflicted me, and for
the years wherein I have suffered adversity: Put to rebuke the men of mine
hatred, recompense their good to their souls that have done me good: bind up
now the bones which thou have broken in me, O Lord send me now prosperity: make
me to walk worthy of my calling, to walk worthy of thee, expressing my
thankfulness unto thee, not in my tongue only, but in my life and
conversation also. Give me thy fear to wound my flesh, thy comforts to
sustain my heart, thy mercies to prevent me, accompany me, and follow me while
here I live; and after this life translate me to that place, where all tears
shall be wipt from mine eyes, where there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain, there in the
company of all Saints and congregation of the first borne that are written in
he^^^^, ^^^^^y thy bright and blessed-mak^ng ^ig^t, and to reign with thee for
all ^ge^ through thy son Jesus Christ.

FINIS. Triunni Deo Gloria.
Errata.
Page 54. l^^^ 7. dele of. p. 58. l. 3. put in, for. p 60. l. 17. r. my sins
p. 85. l. 1. for bring r. being. p. 97 in margin l. 8. r his. l. 10. r. pure.
p. 112 l. 15. r. inwards. p. 123. l. 22. r. him that was. p. 13^. l. 21 r.
least approbation p. 133. l. 2 r. confederacies. l. 6. r. errors. p. 136. l. 9.
for so truly. r. seuer^ly. p. 141. l. 12 r yet dowe say. p. 153. l. 12. r. as
through p. 155. l. 2. r for ^ea^d r. regard. l. 15. r of all flesh. p. 158. l.
20. for power r. praying. p. 164. l 22. r. as a blasphemer. p. 166. l. 25. r.
your hand p. 172. l. 7. in some, dele and have power, and l. 21. in some for
shall. r. should. p. 177. l. 2 in some, for unchangeably. r. uncharitably. p.
178. l 11. d^le brother p. 182. l. 25. for immunity. r. munition. p. 184. l. 9.
in some for know. r. burn. p. 198. l. 7. r. Judas. p. 199 l. 16. r. Is it not
now. p. 201 l. 23. for hoasts r. houses. p. 217 l. 8. for concern. r. conce^^.
p. 220. l. 17. r. here are we etc. l. 8. r word of evil. p. 245. l. 10. r.
shall he. p. 254. l. 3. r. the examined. p 264. l. 25. for mystery. r. misery.
p. 265. l. 3. r. application. p. 268. l. 14. for show. r. s^ow. p. 271. l 25.
r. not withdrawing.


