THE VIRTUOUS DAVGHTER.

A Sermon Preached at Saint Mary's in Warwick at the Funeral of the most
virtuous and truly religious young Gentlewoman, Mistress Cicely Puckering,
Daughter and Co-heire to the right Worshipful, Sir Thomas Puckering, Knight
and Baronet, the fourteenth day of April, 1636.

BY JOHN BRYAN, Parson of Barford.

PSALM. 8.2. Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings have thou ordained
strength.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Lawrence Chapman, and are to be sold at
his shop in Holborne, at Chancery lane end. 1636.

To the right Worshipful, Sir THOMAS PVCKERING, Knight and Baronet, and to his
virtuous and religious Lady, increase of all saving graces here, and
everlasting peace and rest in heaven.
THis Sermon preached at the funeral of your dearest child, (who was a
gracious Saint on earth, and is now a glorious one in heaven) I do humbly
dedicate to you both; it being yours by all manner of right, and the best
Present J am able to present your Worships with. My poor pains taken herein,
J heartily acknowledge to deserve neither yours, nor the acceptance of any
that are judicious; but the speeches which proceeded from the heavenly mouth of
your blessed Daughter, which are here related, deserve in the judgment of wise
and good men, to be written in letters of Gold, and to be known and read of all
men, being full of life and power to quicken the dullest soul to a love and
liking of the ways of godliness.

The desire to hear this Sermon preached, was great, and general, as appeared
by the great confluence of people out of Town and Country; neither is it
doubted, but that some good was then wrought upon many souls

And the desire to have it published, is greater and more general, there being
hope conceived that much glory may be brought to God, and much edification to
men, by considering the work of God upon so tender years.

Your Worships have much honored God and your selves, by bearing so great a
trial with such admirable patience and comfort. What remains, but that you
always set before your eyes this matchless pattern which proceeded from your
own bowels, for your imitation; that as you were instruments to give her a
temporal life, so she (though dead, yet speaking) may be an happy instrument,
though not to give, yet to increase and maintain the life of grace and
consolation in your souls.

You have begun to cleave to Christ with firm decree and ^ull purpose of
heart; and the world observes, that you are already rich gainers by this great
loss. Go on I beseech you, and grow daily in the exemplary practice of a
really religious life, being fully assured, that he whose glory you seek, and
whose yoke you bear, will in due time make up this breach, and recompense this
loss, if not in the same kind, (which I pray and hope) yet in some other,
which shall be most for his glory, and your comfort in the end.

Neither is there cause that you should overmuch lament the loss of this one
child, seeing God has blessed you with many children, though but one living,
(upon whom, God Almighty double his blessings) For (to omit many, whose parents
in effect you are) may I not call those six poor children in Warwick for
whom you have provided honest and profitable trades and callings, every seven
years successively to the worlds end. (of whose death there is no fear while
the common wealth and laws continue in life) your children?

But fearing, lest J should exceed the bounds of an Epistle desiring your
favorable acceptance of this poor expression of my thankful mind for your
many favors, J humbly take my leave, and rest

Your Worshi^s much obliged, and in the Lord ever to be commanded, John Bryan.

The Virtuous DAVGHTER.
PRO. 31.29. Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.


THis Chapter spends it self for the most part in the description and
commendation of a virtuous woman. The exordium or beginning of the encomium, is
in the tenth verse; Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far
above rubies. The conclusion of it is in the four last verses, whereof my Text
is one.

Wherein the holy Ghost gives her (as we see) a most ample testimony and
commendation by way of comparison, for he compares her not with a vicious one
(whom it is no great grace to surpass) but with the virtuous, nor with one
only, but with many: all which (he witnesses) she does not only equallize,
but far excel. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them
all.

The maine lesson which the Spirit of God intends to teach us in this
context, and especially in these words, is this, That such as do virtuously,
may and should be praised: yea, the more virtuously any do, the more praise
and commendation is due to them. This good woman described in this chapter, is
(as you see) not only positively, but superl^tively praised.

For the explication of this point, Explication.
nothing needs opening, save what is meant by doing virtuously.

What it is to do virtuously.
Moral Philosophers define virtue thus. It is (say they) an habit of the mind,
acquired and confirmed by custom, use and practice, enabling a man to rule his
appetite, and to discharge the duties of his calling in a laudable manner.

In fewer words thus; It is an elective habit, inclining the will to well-doing.

Now to well-doing, they teach (...). Aristot. eth. lib. 2. cap. 4.
four things to be requisite.

1 That the thing or subject matter of the action, be in it self lawful and
good; even such as is approved and warranted by the judgment of wise men: for
this they make the rule of virtue. (...). lib. 2. cap. 6.


2 That the agent both know and purpose the doing of it: for he that does a
good action ignorantly or rashly, cannot be said to do well, seeing science
and counsel are the foundation of every good work: for as to him that knows
to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin: so to him that does good, and
knows it not, or purposes it not, it is sin also.

3 That his end be right: for he that does a good work for some by-respect,
and not out of love to goodness, and for it own sake, he may do something
which may be materially good, but it is, at the best, far from being well done.

4 That he continue and hold out unto the end in his purpose and endeavor of
doing well: for perseverance is the complement and crown of virtue.

Divinity defines it thus. It is a gift of Gods Spirit, and a part of
regeneration, whereby a man is made apt and able to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world. And to do thus, is to do virtuously.

holy Ghost for doing virtuously.

Jael the wife of Heber the Ken^^e, Judge. 5.24.25.26. 1 Samuel 25.
is much commended by the Prophetess for her courage in killing Sisera.

Abigal, the wife of Nabal the Carmelite, is praised for her discretion, and is
said to be a woman of good understanding: and David blesses her and her
advise, whereby she preserved her whole family from ruin.

The virtues of Ruth, Ruth 3.11.
Naomies daughter in law, were generally taken notice of, and she therefore
honored of all the people.

The holy women in old time are commended for trusting in God, adorning
themselves modestly, 1 Pet. 3.5.
and for subjection to their husbands.

Our Savior does largely commend the sinful penitent woman in the seventh of
Saint Lukes Gospel, Luke 7.44.45 46.47. Chap. 8.3.
and in the next chapter, Mary Magdalen, Ioanna and Susanna, are noted and
commended for their liberality toward Christ: They ministered to him of their
own substance.

And what shall I say more? for the time would fail me to tell of Rebekah,
Deborah, Hannah, Lydia, Priscilla, Doreas, Tryphena, and Tryphosa; and above
all, the blessed Virgin Mary, our Lords Mother.

The like instances may be given of men also: Neh. 7.^.
as of Hananiah, of whom it is said, That he feared God above many.

And of Josiah it is recorded, That like unto him, 2 King. 23.25
there was no King before him, neither arose there after him, any like unto him.

Or Job, God himself speaks thus to Satan. Job 1.8.
Have thou considered my servant Job, how there is none like him in all the
earth?

The second proof of the point is from Gods Promises: Her children rise up,
and call her blessed, Pro. 31.22.
her husband also and he shall praise her: 30.
and the verse after my text, A woman that fears the Lord, she shall be
praised.

Pro. 11.16.10 7. Psalm. 112.6.
So also he says elsewhere, A gracious woman retains honor: and again, The
memory of the just is blessed; and the Prophet David likewise says, The
righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

3 Co^firm.
Thirdly, God has given commandment to commend and praise those that live
virtuously. Pro. 3^.31.
Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her works praise her in the gates,
(says the holy Ghost in the last verse of this Chapter) that is, praise her
for her works publicly.

Romans 13 7.
See a general command given by Paul, Render to all their dues, tribute to whom
tribute, honor to whom honor.

Now that honor is the due reward of virtue.

(...). and lib. 4. cap. 3. (...), etc.

Thus Deis, laus vero bonis v^ris tributuda est. Recte facta l^uda e honestum
est. Phil. 4.8.


First, heathen men saw and taught. Aristotle in the second book of his
Ethickes, teaches, that praise is due to virtue. He says also else where,
that though a wise man should not desire praise, yet praise ought to be given
to them that live according to the rules of virtue. Again, another says,
Incense is due to the gods, and so is praise to good men: yea, they esteemed
this a point of honesty. It is an honest thing (says one of them) to commend
well-doing: now honesty stands (you know) in giving every man his own. But to
let heathens pass.

Secondly, the holy Ghost has tied praise to virtue. The Apostle Paul says,
If there be any virtue, if there be any praise: implying, that where there is
virtue, there must be also praise. I will conclude this proof with that
notable place in the 26. of Matthew, where Christ gives command, Math. 26.13.
that wheresoever the Gospel should be preached, there should also that, that
the woman had done to him, be told for a memorial of her.



First, to the praisers themselves. One says, Bonum laudare non laudato sed
laudantibus prodest. Aug.
To praise the good, profits not the praised, but the praisers: for who will
not be moved to labor for that good in themselves, which they commend in
others?

Secondly, to such as hear them praised: for they by this means will be
stirred up.

1 To Thanksgiving to God, for giving such grace unto men. We give thanks
(says Saint Paul) to God, Colos. 2.3.4.
and the Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, since we heard of your
faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which ye have to all the Saints. And
this effect we find also of the liberality of the Corinthians; 2 Cor. 9.12.13.
For the administration of the service of theirs not only supplied the want of
the Saints, but was abundant also by many thankesgivings to God: while by the
experiment of that ministration, others glorified God for their professed
subjection to the Gospel of Christ, etc. Ad ipsum (...) dabilium un^ versorum
ungorem.
Thus praise comes to be referred to the Author of all things praiseworthy.

2 To imitate what they hear praised: your zeal, (says Saint Paul to the
Corinthians) has provoked very many: 2 Cor. 9.^,
for as fire when it is ^raked into, sends forth greater heat, and light to
them that sit about it: and as precious ointment, if it be stirred or poured
fourth, does cast a sweeter smell to all those that are near it: even so the
praises of virtuous and godly persons, being mentioned, will yield no small
edification to those that hear them.

Before I come to application, I will briefly answer this question: namely,



Answ. We have Christ's example for both, and therefore both are undoubtedly
lawful, Matthew. 8.10. we find him praising the living. Math. 8.10.
I have not found (says he, speaking of the Cenmrion) so great faith, no not
in Jsrael, Joh. 5.35. he gives an illustrious encomium of the dead: Job. 5.35.
for speaking there of John, whom Herod had beheaded, he says, He was a
burning and a shining light

But of the two it is safer, and less subject to exception and danger, to
praise the dead, and more profitable for two reasons, Nec laudantem adulatio
movet, nec audatum elatio tentat, in not. S. Eusebius. Lauda navigantis
felicitatem, sed eum pervenerit ad po^tum, lauda du^is virtutem, sed cum
perductus est ad triumphum. id. ibid.
( Ambrose gives them) because then (says he) fla^tery will not move the
praiser, nor vaineglory tempt the praised. Therefore Ecclesiasticus advises us
to judge none blessed before their death. We may best commend the Sailors
happiness, when he is arrived at the haven: and the Soldiers valor when he
has won the field.

This doctrine is pregnant, of profitable uses. It may serve by way of
inference to inform our judgments.

Jf ye know these things, Job. 13.17 Luke 11.2^.
happy are ye if ye do them. Again he says, Blessed are they that hear the
word of God and keep it: implying, that the knowledge of Gods word, and bare
understanding of the mysteries of salvation, makes no man happy: but who so
looks into the perfect law of liberty, James 1.25.
and continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the
work, this m^n shall be blessed in his deed. Read Matthew. 7.24. to the end.

(...). Epict^tus.
They say and do not, Matthew. 23.3. (...), etc. Arl. Eth. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Too many in our days are like those Scribes and Pharisees; for though their
tongues be steept in religion, yet their lives are stained with foul
abominations, to the great scandal of their glorious profession. Let not
these men think that God is any whit at all pleased to hear them speak
piously of him, and his kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, while they
refuse to admit his kingdom into their hearts, and to express the power of it
in their lives. Nay, he is greatly herewith offended. (...). Agell. lib. 17.
cap. 19. Deuteronomy. 5.28 29. Tit 1.16.
What have thou (says he) to do, to take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing
thou hate instruction, and casts my words behind thee, and live unjustly
and unchastly? The Israelites spoke well to Moses by Gods own testimony. They
have well said in all that they have spoken; but he wishes, Oh that there were
such an heart in them, that they would fear me and keep my Commandments.
They proved afterward such as Paul speaks of, who professed they knew God, but
in their works they denied him, being abominable, disobedient, and to every
good work reprobate.



First therefore they must proceed from a good root and fountain, even a
principle of regeneration within. A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit.
And to them that are defiled and unbeleeving, is nothing pure, but their best
works are defiled in Gods eyes. Math. 7.18. Tit. 1.15.


Secondly, they must be done in obedience to Gods command. Respect to his will
must be the ground and motive of our working.

Thirdly, Gods glory must be our utmost end: 1 Cor. 10.31. 1 Pet. 4.11.
Whatsoever we do, we must do all to his glory. Jf any man speak, let him
speak as the Oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do it as of the
ability which God has given him, that God in all things may be glorified.

Fourthly, we must be abundant always in good works, unwearied in well-doing.
And finally, when we have done all that we can, we must say we are unprofitable
servants, we have done but that which was our duty to do.

1 Cor. 14.12. Ephesians 5 ^5. (...). Mat^h. 5.47.
Seek that ye may excel. And again, See that ye walk exactly or precisely,
not as the ordinary sort of Professors walk. Our Savior says, That if ye
salute your brethren only, what do you more than others? implying, that we
must exceed others in weldoing, Math 5.48.
setting God himself before us as our pattern: Be ye perfect, even as your
Father which is in heaven is perfect.

1 Cor. 11.22.
Shall I praise you in this? I praise you not. As who should say, I have no
warrant to commend such as walk disorderly. Pro. 2^ 4.
Solomon says, That they that forsake the law, praise the wicked; branding
them with a mark of Apostasy from Gods law, that speak well of evil men.

Pro. 5.20.
Against these the Prophet pronounces a woe. Woe (says he) to them that call
good evil, and evil good. These do what in them lies, to make Gods
commination of none effect. Pro 10 7.
For he has threatened, that the name of the wicked shall rot and stink. Let
not therefore ungodly ones, who have neither the habit nor the exercise of any
grace or virtue in them, whose souls serve for no other use, then the souls
of swine; to keep their bodies from putrefying (as if they were borne for no
other end than to consume Gods good creatures) expect any praise either in life
or death, Fruges consumer^ na^i.
except it be from flatterers: for as to them who continue patiently in
weldoing, shall be glory and honor: so to them who obey not the truth, but
obey unrighteousness, shall be shame and confusion of face, both here and
hereafter. Read Ierem. 22.17.18.19.

Job expostulates thus with his friends, Job 13.7.
Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? If we may
not speak falsely to glorify God, much less may we to glorify men. Thus
should we justify the wicked, and so make our selves abomination unto God.
Nay, it is dangerous for men to affect and receive praise and glory, when they
deserve it not. Read Acts 12.22.23.



First of God, who has promised, that although the credit of his servants may
for a season be covered with a cloud of reproach (as Joseph's was) yet he will
bring forth their righteousness as the light, and their judgment as the noone
day. The Apostle Paul says, Romans 2.29.
he that is a Jew inwardly, (that is really religious, who has the inward
power of godliness, as well as the outward form) shall have praise of God.
And this indeed is the true praise. 2 Cor. 10.18.
For not he that commends himself (says Saint Paul) is approved, but whom
the Lord commends.

Secondly, of men. Men will praise thee, Psalm. 49.18.
(says the Psalmist when thou do well to thy self. Now a man then does good
to himself when he does virtuously.

And not only the common sort of men, but also Magistrates and men in high
place will commend and encourage us. The Apostle Paul says that Rulers are not
a terror to good works, but to evil: Romans 13.^.
will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou
shall have praise for the same.

To come to the occasion in hand, for I must wave all other general uses for
want of time) by this that has been said, it may appear, that I have warrant
sufficient, signed with Gods own hand, to speak in the praise and
commendation of this young Gentlewoman, whose funeral rites we now celebrate;
forasmuch as she has deserved praise, having not only done virtuously, but
excelled all others of her sex and age (take them both together) that I ever
heard or knew of: for when she dyed, she was little more then twelve years
of age.

And besides, all that has been spoken for the lawfulness and conveniencie
of this practice of praising the dead, I have for my pattern and precedents
herein, not only many late divines, who have in those funeral Sermons which
they preached at the burials of godly persons, been exceeding large in their
commendations, and were never yet excepted against for flattery. But also many
ancient Fathers, who not only in their consolatory Letters written to them
which lost their friends, have inserted large praises of them: but also in
their Sermons at their funerals have done the like. Among others, Jerome is
most noted, who although he call flatterers sparkles of the devil, Scin^llo^
Diaboli.
yet none ever more exceeded in the commendation of any, then he of that
virtuous and godly Matron Paula, both in his Sermon which he preached at her
burial in Bethlehem, in a very great assembly of sundry nations, and also in
his Epistle written ad Eustochium, which he entituleth, the Epitaph of Paula.

Aquin. 2.2^. qu. 132.
True it is (as they teach in Schools) that to praise a man for that which is
not praise worthy, or more then is meet, or not for a right end, is sinful and
cannot be justified: but with due cautions to commend, cannot be justly
censured.

I will not therefore put on that resolution which Cicero once did; I will not,
said he, be a prais^r, Nol^ esse laudator, ne videar adulator.
lest I should seem a flatterer; for so I should not only wrong the dead, (in
robbing her of her due honor, although she being received into the society of
Saints in heaven, needs not our praises, more than our prayers,) but I should
also deal perfidiously both with God and you.

First, with God, Mat. 5.15.
in hiding a glorious candle under a bushel which he lighted for others to see
and work by; and whose command to his Apostles I have just cause in this case
to apply to my self. Mat. 10.^7.
What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light, and what ye hear in
the ear, that preach upon the houses.

Secondly, with you, in keeping from you that precious treasure which may happily
enrich you for ever. One compares the words of Saints to pure silver; the more
you have of them, the wealthier you are. Mat. 7.6. Pro. 25.11.
Our Savior calls them pearls: and Solomon says they are like apples of gold
in pictures of silver.

Sure I am, all that heard this child speak often in her health, but especially
the day before, and that they shod died, (as the sun shines most gloriously at
his sorting) did wonder at her gracious words, and might well say, never child
spoke like this child: so that we who heard her utter such divine saying^, so
roundly, and in such an emphaticall manner, were forced to cry c^^^; Doubtless
we have heard strange things to day. Neither can it ^e doubted, but that the
promise which Christ made to his Apostles, was in a degree made good unto her,
It shall be given you what ye shall speak^: Man. 13.11.
for it is not you that speak, but the holy Ghost.

You know our Saviors saying to the Pharise^: teaching us thereby to judge of
the heart by the mouth, i^ ^he life give not the tongue the lie* Mat. 11.34.35.
Out of the abundance of the heart the (...) speaks. A good man out of the
good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things. The good things which
this dear Handmaid of the Lord brought out of the treasure of her heart,
argued it to be truly good.

2 Pet. 1.5 6.7.
The chain of Christian graces spoken of by Peter, did adorn and beautify her
sweet spirit: neither was any one link of that golden chain wanting in her,
as might easily be evinced by demonstrative evidences. But my purpose is only
to instance in three of those graces: whereof when ye have heard undoubted
proof, ye may then do like him, who by the length and bigness of Hercules his
foot, Agellius. l. 1. c. 1.
gathered the proportion of his whole body.

The graces or virtues I shall instance in, are knowledge, piety, and patience:
they are the Cardinal graces on which all others hang and turn, and these
were very evidently discernable in her, even to such as had but half an eye.

And first to give some evidences of her knowledge, the Apostle taxes certain
women in his time, who were always learning, 2 Timothy 3.7.
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, whom he therefore
calls silly women. She was none of those women, but might truly say with
David; J have more understanding than all my teachers, Psalm. 119.99 100.
J understand more then the Ancients. And the truth of this appears by the
confession of her best teachers, that they never received so much edification
by any of her years, as by her words: as also of the Doctor that was with
her, who professed that he never heard any child speak with more judgment
in all his life.

She did indeed desire to be instructed by me, her words were these. J pray
you tell me what course I shall take to live this short time that I have to
live, as I ought? Dear soul, I needed to receive instruction of thee. God saw
my need, and therefore sent me seasonably unto thee: and I have learned of
thee, better then ever I did before, both how to live, and dye happily.

The Apostle exhorts us to be children in malice; 1 Cor. 14.20.
not so in understanding. But oh that we were all like this child in
understanding! For such was her knowledge, far beyond her years, not
confused, but distinct; not swelling, but humbling; not like the light of the
Moon, but of the Sun: a favorie affecting and hearing knowledge: it warmed
her own heart, and ours also.

Take one proof of her knowledge in religion, long before her sickness. When
the Nurses child in the house was drowned, and the Mother mourned sore for it,
she gave her this grave counsel: Seeing Gods will is done in taking away your
child, take heed of offending God by murmuring: do we not daily pray that
Gods will may be done? and therefore wh^^ it is done, we should be content.

Hear also some passages in her sickness, which prove that she was indeed
endued with sound knowledge and judgment.

Being asked occasionally whether Christ would heal her of her sickness,
seeing he never refused to heal any; She answered, J believe that he can do
it, but J cannot believe that he will heal the sickness of my body, but by
death.

Again, being asked whether she thought God afflicted her in anger, or in
love; She answered, Truly J cannot tell, but J know he has cause to do it in
anger.

Again, telling us how Satan had long tempted her to doubt of her salvation,
She said, her hope was that she did belong to God, because Satan was so busy
with her.

The second grace or virtue that evidenced it self in her, and wherein we
should all labor to imitate her, was piety or godliness, 1 Timothy 4.8.
which ^^th the promise of this life, and that which is to come. And it
consists of three parts, or there are three graces required to make one truly
pious: viz. 1 Selfe-denyall. 2 Sanctification. 3 Devotion.

1 Self-denial, the necessity whereof appears by these speeches of our
Savior: Luke 9.23. Luke 14.26.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself; and again, if any man
come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and
Brethren and Sisters; yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.

That this grace was not only in truth, but in a great measure in her, will
appear if we consider five sorts of things wherein she had denied her self.

1 All earthly profits and contentments. It was my first question to her; are
you willing to leave the world? her answer was, yea truly, for I see nothing
in this world that should move me to desire to live.

2 Bodily ease and freedom from pain: for being almost tired with a lingering
sickness, and this question put to her; Whether had you rather continue in
this misery still, or commit a sin to be released of it? She answered
cheerfully, J had rather continue thou sick as J am, then commit any sin to
^e well.

3 Her Parents: for being asked whether she were willing to leave her Parents,
and go to Christ, She answered, I love my Father and my Mother dearly, but J
love them lower then Christ.

4 Her own merits and righteousness: for when I demanded of her what ground
of hope she had to go to heaven, her answer was, My hope is in the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ. But have you nothing on your self, said I, to
take comfort in? No truly, said she, I find no good at all in my self, but
a great deal of evil.

5 Her life. She never smiled but twice in her sickness, (that I took notice
of) and both those smiles were at the mention of her death. Once when I told
her, that death would cure her of al her infirmities: oh I, said she, and
smiled, and my desire is to dye, which is far better than to live. Again, I
asked her, whether had you rather (if you might have your choice) recover, and
be matched to the greatest Noble man in the world, or dye and be matched with
Christ? She smiled again, and said, I had rather dye, for there is no
difference between them; you mean, no comparison, said I: yea, said she,
There is no comparison between the greatest Lord, and Jesus Christ; I meaned
there is great difference.

The second part or branch of piety, is Sanctification or regeneration, which
is nothing else, but a stamping of the Image of God upon the soul, 2 Pet. 1.4.
and the writing of his law in the heart; a partaking of the divine nature: a
spiritual principle or divine instinct, inclining the soul upward unto God.

That she was partaker of this new birth, and had an heart thoroughly
sanctified, will appear by two things.

1 She was thoroughly humbled for her sins: for She complained that she had
forsaken God, and broken that covenant which she made with him in Baptism, and
therefore deserved no comfort thence.

She feared that though she mourned for sin, yet God would not accept it,
because she was not grieved enough.

She said, moreover, that she was weary and laden with sin, more than with
sickness.

Finally, being exhorted to call to mind for her comfort, the promises of the
Gospel, she answered with grief, and iterated it; Truly I have been much
too blame in neglecting to read the Scriptures.

These and many more signs she had of a soul savingly humbled for her sins.

2 There appeared diverse expressions of divine and gracious impressions in her,
which were infallible characters of sanctification: as namely,

1 Poverty of spirit: she complained of her want of grace, saying; she had very
little grace, or rather none at all in her.

2 Her hungring and thirsting after grace: Oh, I would give, said she, any
thing for grace.

3 Her hatred of sin, and love of Christ, evidenced in some former answers.

4 Her humility mixed with faith; for hearing me say, that her heavenly husband
had prepared a place in heaven for her, Psalm. 84 10.
whither she was hasting; Oh, said she, Let me have the lowest place there, and
I shall think my self happy.

Acts 10 2.
The third thing requisite to make one godly, is Devotion. It is said of
Cornelius, that he was a devout man, and so it may be said truly of this
child, that she was a devout child: for she held in her judgment, and
professed with her mouth, the true religion of God; which gives all to Gods
free grace, and leaves man none occasion of boasting in himself. You heard
before how freely she renounced all worth in herself, and sought for all her
comfort out of her self, only in Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 3.15.


Again, she made conscience of the duties of religion: was fearful of an
oath: strict in sanctifying the Lords day. She was frequent in reading the
Scriptures, and desirous to hear them read, when she could not read her
self, (because of the soreness of her eyes) and yet she thought her self too
blame, because she read no more (as ye heard even now.) She would press nigh,
and hearken diligently when any good conference was in hand where she was. She
was frequent in prayer, and fervent: and when it was painful for her to
speak, she would ask, may J not pray in spirit? and answer being made that
she might, she did accordingly. She would also praise God for his mercies to
her: and in particular for the spiritual comforts which he was pleased to
afford unto her. And thus she held on till death deprived her of ability.

The third and last grace wherein she excelled) I had almost said all other
daughters) was Patience: and whether this grace had not it perfect work in
her, I leave you to judge, when you have heard th^se four evidences.

1 She was sensible of Gods correcting hand, Ioh 1.20. Ier. 5.3.
and affected with the smart of his rod, as appeared by this speech, J am
almost even tired with my sickness, but my hope is J am going to a better
place, as for this world, it is full of misery.

2 She was silent and free from murmuring and ^^owardnesse. I heard them about
her say, Lev. 3.10. Io^ ^^.2.40.4^5
that notwithstanding the long continuance of her sickness, and the pain she
suffered by purging and letting blood, yet she was never seen to open her
mouth in discontent (...) to be angry or pettish with any that were about her.

3 She did justify God, Psalm. 119.75. Lam. 1.12.18. Eze. 9.^ 3. Micha 7.9.
and clear him in his dealing with her: for being asked, Do you not think
God deals very hardly and severely with you in afflicting you so sorely? No
truly do I not, said she, but I think he deals with me very well, because I
have been so wretched a sinner.

4 She did submit willingly and obediently to Gods will and pleasure, as
appeared by these words of hers: Lev^^. ^6.41. (...).
J am very willing, said she, either to live or dye; for if J live, I hope J
shall live a more godly life, and commit less sin of I dye, I shall be freed
from all sin and ^^sery, whereof this world is very full: And so she ^^ose
(...) had the better part. And God was pleased to give her full assurance
before her death: for hearing mention of the happiness of heaven, she spoke
thus, I know that I shall very shortly see and enjoy it: which she did.

Sic mihi contingat vivere, sicque mori. I thought it my duty to mention these
virtues and graces of this sweet child of God, my Text calling upon me so to
do.

As for her birth, Verse 30.
and favor, and beauty, and riches, (the holy Ghost telling us they are
deceitful and vain) I thought them not worthy so much as of mention.

Let that which has been said in her commendation, first, cause us all
(especially those who are of more years, and far longer standing in the
School of Christianity) to blush and be ashamed and confounded in our selves,
that we should be thus outstript in knowledge, selfe-denyall, sanctification,
devotion, and patience by such a babe in Christ, such a child in years.

2 Let it stir us up and provoke us to imitation: we read that our Savior
took a child, and set him in the midst of his Disciples, Math. 18.2.3.
and said unto them: Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

I have after our Saviors example set a child in the midst of you, and do
assure you, that except ye become like it in those graces and virtues formerly
mentioned, ye shall in no wise be saved: yea, this child shall rise up in
judgment against you at the last day, and so shall all her gracious speeches,
which I have uttered from her mouth.

I will shut up all with a few words of exhortation, unto the worthy Parents of
this virtuous child.

Four things I have (right Worshipful) to exhort you unto.

Lam. 3.39.40.
Wherefore (says the Church) does the living m^n complain, a man for the
punishment of his sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to
the Lord. Desire of God, Job 10.2.
as Job did, to show you wherefore he contended with you.

It may be the sin was overloving of your child; for that is an ordinary
fault even in the best Parent* we see it in David, how exceedingly did he love
a naughty son, as appears by his excessive grief at his death? And the
king was much moved, 2 Samuel 18.33.
and went up to the Chamber over the gate and wept: and (...) he went thus, he
said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would God I had dyed for
thee; O Absalom, my son, my son. It may be you had a male love to your
child, and offered a female to the Lord.

Paul exhorts us, in all things to give thanks, 1 These. 5.1^. Phil. 4.6. Job
1.2^.
and to make our requests known unto God by prayer and supplication with
thankesgiving. Jobs example is most worthy of your imitation, who at the loss
of his Cattle, Servants, and Children, said, The Lord gave, and the Lord has
taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.

More especially let me exhort you to thankesgiving to God for these three
b^^ries.

(...). Romans 7.4.
1 For making you instruments of bringing forth such a child (...) has been
described. I may say to you, as Saint Paul in another case did to the Romans,
Ye have brought forth fruit unto God.

2 For arming you with such courage and patience, in bearing so great a loss
so quietly and obediently, and that you are come to see her committed to the
ground, with as much cheerfulness, as the Husbandman sees his precious seed
cast into the earth, and covered with cloddes: which he values at as high a
rate, as that which he reserves at home: as knowing that though her body lie a
while in the grave, yet it shall shortly rise a glorious body, as the Apostle
teaches, Phil. 3.21. Phil. 3.21.
Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like his glorious
body: and shall shine forth as the Sun, Math. 13.43.
in the kingdom of her Father.

3 For giving you such cause of patience, and ground of comfort.

1 In that he has removed that thing from you, which might have stolen your
hearts from him.

2 In that he gave you such assured evidences of grace in her, before her
death; and her assurance of salvation.

3 In taking her away so swee^ly, without the least pain or struggling.

4 In infusing such comforts into your souls, even in the time of her
dissolution, that you m^^^ rejoiced for her gain, then sorrowed for your own
loss.

find the comfort of your child in God, who will be better to you then ten
daugthers: y^^, he will recompense your losses to you, if not in the same, 1
(...) 1.1^
yet in some other kind, as he shall see it best^^ his own glory, and your
comfort.

David's resolution. While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept, 2 Samuel
12.22.23.
for I said, who can tell whether God will be gracious unto me, that the child
may live? But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back
again? Go hence with as much comfort, as if you had matched her to the
greatest prince on earth. Do as the wise man counsels, Go thy way, eat
thy bread with joy, Eccles. 9.^8.
and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God accepts thy works. Let thy
garments always be white, and let thy head lack no oil.

You rejoiced on the day of her birth: why then rejoice now; for the day of
death is the souls birthday. And the Preacher tells us (speaking only of
such as she was) That the day of their death is better then the day of their
birth. Eccles. 7.1.


I will conclude all with that advise of Nehemiah: Nehem. 8, 10.
Go your way, mourn not, neither be sorry: for the joy of the Lord is your
strength.

FINIS.
Her Epitaph by the Author.
BIrth, breeding, beauty, grace, and carriage sweet
In thee dear Saint, did all together meet:
The Sun never saw a lovelier face than thine,
Nor heaven received a spirit more divine.
Thrice happy Parents such a child to breed,
Begot again of Gods immortal seed.
Cease sorrowing then, since Saints and Angels sing
To see her matched with an eternal King.

