An INTRODVCTION TO PIETY AND HVmanitie: containing, First, A SHORT CATECHISM
for understanding the grounds of Religion: Secondly, CERTAIN BRIEF AND
Effectual rules for life and conversation.

PENNED SPECIALLY FOR the use of the poor children of Christ's Hospital in
London: But generally may serve for any other that would be instructed therein.

By GREGORY BROWN.

Psalm 19, The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, etc.

Psalm 119. The entrance into thy word shows light, and gives wisdom to
the simple.

AT LONDON Printed by E. A. for Ed^und Weauer dwelling at the great North-dore
of Paul^s. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL GENTLEMEN, Lovers of learning, Piety and Charity, the
Governors of Christ's Hospital in London, foster fathers of the poor Orphans,
and helpless Children there relieved; Grace and Peace be multiplied.
THe giver of all goodness, Right worshipful, having, promised that the best
good things, being first sought and preferred, the second Luke 12.
necessary for life shall never fail; I have accordingly endeavored to my poor
talent, and leisure, together with others, to wish the special good of these
poor Children, which by God his providence are cast upon your loving care and
fatherly protection: desiring that in private even from their infancy, they
might be seasoned with some taste of piety and humanity, which might make for
their better good when they are in public to be further trained up in the
practice of Religion and Arts: for man new born is like a wild Asses coult; and
folly is naturally in the heart of a child, until by education and discipline
it be made fit to bear and bring forth better fruit. If any good shall come
hereof to that end; I have my desire, as the chiefest good which I know is here
intended in their fostering and educating in this Christian government; which
has and shall cause many prayers and praises to God for your worships, that
you may be had in an everlasting remembrance, and the whole benefit in the end
to redound unto you and others, who have ruled with faithfulness, and
distributed with cheerefulnes; when God shall have the glory, Religion the
credit, our King the honor, the City and whole State the profit, and your
selves comfort of conscience, and blessing of peace and plenty, which the God
of peace and love grant unto you all, Amen.

Your Worships in all Christian duty, G. B.

TO THE CHRISTIan Reader.
MY chief desire and endeavor in this (like the poor Be that gathers of
diverse plants, and borrows of sundry men's labors, to contriue a work
profitable for orhers) has been to benefit my self and family, but chiefly
these poor children with whom I am conversant in my poor calling. If God the
giver of all goodness, vouchsafe his blessing to it, for private or public
good, I have my desire; and with my further endeavor and prayer to God, will
not cease to seek and wish the same still; so far as the quality of a
Christian calling, health, and poor ability will permit.

Thine in prayer. G. B.

PLACES OF SCRIPTVRE showing the Antiquity, and necessity of teaching and
catechizing of youth and families; both private and public, even from the
example of the Fathers of the first ages of the world, unto the times of the
Primi^iue state of the Church.
AND in process of time it came to pass, that Kaine brought an oblation to
the ^enesi^ 4, 3,
Lord of the fruit of the ground. And Habel also himself brought of the first
fruit of his sheep, and of the fat of them: and the Lord had respect unto
Habel and to his offering: For ^eb. 11. 4.
by faith he offered a greater sacrifice then Kain.

And Henoch walked with God after he begat ^enesis 5, 22
Methushelah 300. years, and begat sons and daughters. So all the days of
Henoch were 365. years. And God took him away because he walked with God, and
had pleased him; but without faith it is impossible to Heb, 11, 5,
please him.

And Lamech lived 182. years, and begat a son, and called his name Noah,
saying, this Genesis, 5, 28
same shall comfort us concerning our works, and sorrow of our hands, as
touching the earth which the Lord has cursed. But Noath found G^nes 6. 8.
grace in the eyes of God, being a just man and upright in his time, walking
with God: and was made heir of the righteousness which is by faith. And the
Lord said unto Noah, enter Heb. 11. 7.
thou and all thy house into the arc: for thee have Genes. 7. 1.
I found righteous before me in this age etc.

For I know that Abraham will command his sons and his household after him,
that they Genesis 18. 19.
may keep the way of the Lord, to do righteousness Heb. 11. 9.
and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that which he has spoken
unto him. Then said Jacob to his household, and to all that were with him; put
away the strange Gods Genes. 35. 2.
that are among you, and cleanse your selves, and Heb. 11. 21.
change your garments, for we will rise and go to Bethel, to sacrifice unto
God, who heard me in my tribulation; and they did so: etc.

And when your children ask you what service Exodus 12. 26.
is this you keep; then you shall say, it is the sacrifice of the Lords
Passover etc. And thou shall show thy Son in that day saying, this is done
because of that which the Lord did unto Exodus 13. 8.
me, when I came out of Egypt.

And these words which I command thee Deuteronomy. 6. 6.
this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou shall Deuteronomy. 4. 9.
rehearse them continually unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou
tariest in Deuteronomy. 11. 19. 20. 21.
thine house, and as thou walk by the way; and when thou lie down, and
when thou risest up. etc.

And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye
will serve: but I and my house will serve the Lord. Iosu. 24. 15.


The continuance of this in the ages ensuing, is verified in the practice of
Samuel, the 19. chapter, the 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. and 24. verses. 1. Sam. 19 18
As also 140. years after this time in the times of Elias, and Elisha, most
troublesome 2. Kings 1. 1. 3. 4. 5. ^. 7. 8.
times, yet was this practiced then in a most heavenly and prophetical manner.
[I will open my mouth in a Parable: I will declare high sentences of olde]
which we have heard and known, and Psalm. 78. 2.
our fathers have told us; we will not hide them from their children, but
declare them to the generations to come.

And thou Solomon my son, know the God of thy father, and serve him with a
perfect heart, 1. Chro. 21. 9.
and with a willing mind.

For I was my fathers son, tender and dear Prou. 4. 3.
in the sight of my mother; when he taught me and said unto me, let thine
heart hold fast my words: etc.

The Prophecy which his mother also taught Prou. 31. 1.
him: What my son, and what the son of my womb, etc. give not thy strength
unto women; nor thy ways, etc.

Teach a child in the trade of his ways, and Prou. 2^. 6.
when he is old he shall not depart from it.

Precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line unto line, here a
little and there Esaias. 28. 10
a little, as the Prophet speaks in another kind. Luke. 2. 42. and 22. 23.
Mark. 10. 15. 16, Psalm, 78. Matthew. 16. 15. 16.


The example of our blessed Savior throughout the Evangelists, is most
pregnant and profitable to be considered in this kind, opening his mouth in
parables, and declaring hid sentences of old.

And Philip ran thither, and heard him read the Prophet Esaias, and said, but
understand Act. 8. 30.
thou what thou read? And he said, how can I, except I had a guide? And he
expounded, etc.

And you fathers provoke not your children Ephesians. 6. 4.
to wrath, but bring them up in instruction and information of the Lord.

For it shall be in the last times, says God, I Joel. 2. 28. Act. 2. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.
will power out of my spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters
shall prophecy.

Quench not the spirit, despise not prophesying (preaching and teaching.)

Therefore leaving the doctrines of the beginnings Hebr. 5. 12. Hebr. 6. 3. 1.
Cor. 3. 1. 2.
of Christ: let us be led forward unto perfection, not laying again the
foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, of the
doctrine of Baptism, and laying on of hands, and of the resurrection from the
dead, and of eternal judgment.

Let him that is instructed in the word, make Gal. 6. 6.
him that has instructed him partaker of all his goods.

The instructers of young Christians in the Primitive Church, were called
Catechists; and those instructed, Catechumenine, and hearers, or young hearers;
and their teachers, teachers of the hearers. These appear to be in the times
of the holy Fathers, shortly after the Apostles age; as Tertullian, Cyprian,
Austin, Jerome, etc.

God Almighty the giver of every good and perfect gift, reuine and continue it
in this declining age, to his glory, Amen.

A PRAYER TO BE SAID before Catechizing, as follows.
O Lord, which openest and none shuts, open our eyes, and touch our hearts,
that we may see and perceive the wonderful things of thy Law, that our minds
being enlightened with true knowledge, and our hearts confirmed with unfeigned
faith we may more and more be conformed to the Image of thy Son again, to
serve thee in holiness and righteousness, keeping faith and a good
conscience, until we attain to the end of our faith, even the salvation of
our souls, through Christ our Lord and only Savior*

Amen.
A SHORT CATECHISM FOR THE Elder sort of the Children of Christ's Hospital in
London.
To be used of them after the small Catechism which is to be taught and
learned of every Child, as is appointed by authority.
Quest. SEEING we are yet to speak of God the Sovereign good; and of his word
our guide to true happiness; declare unto us what God is?
Ans. God is an eternal Spirit, almighty, holy, Just and merciful, being an
infinite perfection; whose being is of himself, giving being to all, without
beginning of time or end of days, one in essence, and three distinct persons,
one mighty nature be they; the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Quest. Who is the Creator and governor of the world?
Ans. This one almighty God, the Father, Genesis 1. 1. Ioh. 1. 3. Psalm. 136, 5,
Son, and holy Ghost.

Quest. Why were the Heavens, Angels, and celestial bodies made?
Ans. For the glory of God, and service of man: as the Psalmist says, the
heavens declare the glory of God: and the Apostle Psalm. 8.
says, the Angels are all ministering spirits Heb. 2.
for their sakes that shall be heirs of Salua^ion.

Quest. But some Angels are tempters and hurters of mankind.
Ans. Those are Angels which kept not their first estate of truth and
holiness, but through pride against God and malice to men, fell as stars
from Heaven: being s^aunderers of God, and enemies to men, called the devil
and his Angels, reserved 2. Pet. 2. 4. Jude 6.
in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of the great day.

Quest. Amongst all the creatures, which is the chiefest then?
Ans. Man being considered in Christ Genesis 1. 26. Psalm. 8. 5.
restored to grace.

Quest. Why so?
Ans. Because God has endued him Genesis 2. 7. Psalm. 51. 6.
with knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness, and given him reason to
discern between good and evil.

Quest. What is the chiefest end of man's creation?
Ans. To serve and glorify God their Esaias. 43. 7. Tit. 2. 11. 12.
Creator.

Quest. What rule has God left unto us, how he would be served?
Ans. His holy Law, first written in the Of the law. Exodus 20. Psalm. 19. 7.
heart and given by God, consisting of ten Commandments in two Tables.

Quest. Divide them.
Ans. In the first four, which is the D^ut. 6. 45. Matthew. 22 37.
first Table, is taught our duty toward God. In the latter six, which is the
second Table, is contained our duty to our Matthew. 22. 39 Leuit. 19. 18.
neighbor.

Quest. Rehearse them.
Ans. I am the Lord thy God, which brought ^hee out of the Land of Egypt, out
of the house of bondage, thou shall have none other Gods but me. Thou shall not
make to thy self etc.

Quest. Show me the sense of every Commandment, particularly.
Ans. 1 In the first Commandment is set down whom we should worship, that is,
God only and alone. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Mat. 4. 10.


2 In the second, how we should worship him: namely according to his word in
Math, 15. 9, Deuteronomy, 4, 15, Act, 7, 29,
spirit and truth: without representations.

3 In the third, ye end wherefore we ought to worship him, that his name may be
hallowed, his kingdom enlarged, and his blessed will accomplished in all, and
over Leuit, 9, 12. Esaias, 65, 16,
all by his word.

4 In the fourth, The time and means which the Lord has appointed for his
Exodus, 31, 1, Cor, 16, 2
worship and service, being the Sabbath day, The Preaching of the Word,
administration of the Sacraments, prayers, and praises. Which four precepts
are the first Table, containing our duty toward God in hallowing his name, In
seeking his kingdom, and learning his will.

5 In the fifth, which is the first of the second Table, containing our duties
toward our neighbors, God takes order for the duties of Inferiors toward
their Superiors and Elders, and of the Superiors Leuit, 20, 9, Rom, 13, 1. 2,
to their Inferiors.

6 In the sixth, of the safety of our brothers life; that civil society and
peace may be maintained among men. Deuteronomy. 32. 3 Ioh. 3. 15. Leuit. 20. 2 Hebr.
13. 4.


7 In the seventh, of his wife, that chaste wedlock and holy conversation might
be preserved, and a holy seed continued.

8 In the eight, of his goods, that true dealing, faithful labor in our
calling, Leuit. 19. 3^ 1 Thessalonians. 4, 6.
contented minds with our portion, thankfulness to God, and helpefull
furtherance to our brethren may be practiced.

9 In the ninth, of his good name, that truth in word, in witness, in report,
may be Leuit. 19. 16 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22
exercised among men, for the preserving of their good names and estimation.

10 In the tenth, is forbidden the least degree of sin against any o^ these
Commandments; Psalm. 19. 13. Romans 7. 23.
namely the lust and motion to sin, as well as the consent and deed.

Quest. Is there prescribed in the Law a perfect rule of righteousness?
Ans. Yea verily, though there be in us Romans 7. 12. 14
no ability to perform the same.

Quest. How comes that to pass, seeing man was created perfect?
Ans. Through the sin and transgression Genesis 3. Romans 5. 17.
of our first Parents.

Quest. Did not that sin rest in A^am alone?
Ans. No, but it did flow from him unto all mankind. ^m. 5. 14. 18.


Quest. What fruits does it bring forth in us?
Ans. Nothing but sin, in thought, word and deed.

Quest. What punishment is due to sin?
Ans. Eternal death and damnation. ^om. 6. 12.


Quest. How come we to the knowledge of sin?
Ans. By the law. Romans 3. 20.


Quest. Whereunto serves this knowledge?
Ans. To humble us and cast us down Act. 2. 37.
in the sight and acknowledgement of our own misery: and to bring us to
Christ.

Quest. How is it possible for man to be saved in this misery?
Ans. By faith in Christ Jesus, the Son Genesis 3. Act. 4. 12.
of God, the promised seed of the woman.

Quest. Where is this saving knowledge of Christ Jesus briefly set down for
us?
Ans. In the Articles of the Creed, being Of faith
twelve in number

Quest. Repeat them with the sense of every one.
Ans. 1 I believe in God, the Father almighty, Deuteronomy. 5. 6. Ephesians. 4. 5. 6. Genesis
1. 1. 2.
maker of Heaven and Earth, the first person in Trinity, maker and governor of
all things in Heaven and in Earth, visible and invisible.

2 And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, the second person in Trinity,
who is our King, to govern and defend us, our Priest and Prophet, to offer for
us, to teach us his Psalm. 110. 4 Hebr. 7. 17.
fathers will.

3 Which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary: showing the
manner Mat. 1. 19. Gal. 4. 4.
of his pure conception and blessed birth taking our nature upon him without
sin, by faith in whom our nature i^ sanctified.

4 He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, etc. which
shows Esaias. 53. 4. 5 Mark. 14. 3 Gal. 3. 13.
his painful passion, infinite suffering, and bitter death, for our sins,
performing most absolute obedience to God for us.

5 The third day he rose again from the dead; Hos. 13. 14. Romans 4. 25.
which shows his victory after death, rising again for our justification to
life.

6 He ascended into heaven, and sits at the Luke. 24. 5 Mark. 16. 1
right hand of God the Father almighty; which shows of his ascension and
exaltation in glory, having all power in Heaven and in Earth given him of his
father.

7 From thence he shall come to judge the quick 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. Mat. 25. 31.
and the dead; which shows of his second glorious appearing in Judgment, and
restoring of all things. ^hess. 4. 1. ^, 25. 31.


8 I believe in the holy Ghost, the third Person in Trinity; God equal with
the Father ^^h. 28. 19 Cor. 6. 11.
and Son, sanctifier of all the elect people of God.

9 The holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, which do communicate
with ^es. 2. 20. Cor. 1. 19.
Christ, and one with another in the fellowship of faith and bond of love.

10 The forgiveness of sins, belonging to all ^. 31. 34. ^oh. 1. 9.
the true members of the Church, who only have peace with God.

11 The resurrection of the body, from death ^. 1^. ^5. 26 ^n. 12. 2. ^uel. 20.
12.
and corruption, to immortality, both of good and bad.

12 The life everlasting, for the godly, replenished with all fulness of joy and
blessedness Cor 5. 1, ^os. 3. 4. Th^ss. 19. ^atth. 25. ^uel. 14. 10. ^.
with God and his holy Angels: and of everlasting woe and torments for the
wicked before the throne of God, for ever and ever.

Quest. How many principal parts are these Articles of the faith to be drawn
to?
Ans. Unto four principal heads.

Quest. Which be they?
Ans. First, our faith in God the Father, the Creator.

Secondly, in God the Son, the Redeemer.

Thirdly, in God the holy Ghost, the Sanctifier.

Fourthly, of the Church, the communion of Saints, to whom forgiveness of sins,
Ioh. 3. 36.
blessed resurrection, and everlasting life and glory appertain.

Quest. Why say you, I believe in God, and not rather, in Gods, seeing you make
mention of three; the Father, Son, and Spirit?
Ans. Because there is but one true and everliving God, revealed unto us in
three 1. Ioh. 5. 7.
persons, in whom my faith is stayed.

Quest. Why do you say, I believe in God, and not rather, I believe a God?
Ans. To declare that I put my trust and confidence in him, for the Devils and
wicked Iam. 2. 19.
believe there is a God, but do not put their trust and confidence in him.

Quest. Why say you, I believe, and not rather, we believe?
Ans. Because I must be saved by mine Romans 5. 2. Hab. 2. 4.
own faith, and not by the faith of others.

Quest. What is true faith which saves us?
Ans. It is a firm persuasion of the mercies of God purchased by our Lord Heb.
11. 1. Romans 8. 38. 3
Jesus Christ being the foundation of our hope and sight of things invisible:

Quest. How must we attain to this true faith, and how is it increased?
Ans. By the spirit of God, persuading our hearts by the hearing and reading ^.
Cor. 5. ^om. 10. 4. ^om. 1. 3.
of Gods Word, receiving the Sacraments and prayer, assuring us that we are
within the Covenant of grace revealed by the Gospel.

Quest. Now you have showed that the Word of God, the Sacraments and prayer,
strengthen faith: show what is Prayer.
Ans. Prayer is a lifting up of the mind, Of prayer.
and pouring out of the heart before God, by the motion of his Spirit, in the
name of Luke. 18. 1. Ioh. 14. 13. James. 4. 3.
Jesus Christ his son, craving things needful, and giving thanks for benefits
received.

Quest. Is there any prescript form of Prayer left us in the holy Scriptures?
Ans. Yes, that which our Lord Jesus Christ has taught, and is called the
Lords prayer, containing all heavenly wisdom in Matthew. 6. 9. Luke 11. 2.
that kind, consisting of six petitions, and a conclusion, as follows, Our
Father which art in heaven, etc.

Quest. To whom must we pray, and in whose name?
Ans. To God only, the Father, Son, ^ohn 16. 23.
and holy Ghost, in the name of Christ Jesus.

Quest. Why do we then name the Father only?
Ans. The word Father, in this place is not taken personally, but essentially,
for Jude. 20. Romans 8. 34.
in the action of true prayer, the holy Ghost is the first Mouer, the Son the
Mediator, the Father graciously hearing, returns Psalm. 22. 24.
an answer in due time.

Quest. Why must we pray to the Father in the name of his Son Mediator?
Ans. Because God being displeased for John 14. 6. Romans 5. 10.
sin, we can have no access unto him, but by the means of Christ our
Advocate, in whom he is well pleased.

Quest. Why must we pray by the working of the holy Ghost?
Ans. Because the holy Ghost assures Romans 8. 26. Ephesians. 6. 18.
us that God is our Father, and also teaches us how to pray, and what to pray
for.

Quest. What things are to be observed of us in prayer?
First, before the action of prayer; 1. We 1. Pet. 1. 17.
must truly repent us of our sins, and heartily purpose to amend.

2 In the action of prayer, 1. We must Matthew. 21, 2^
have faith in God through Christ. ^mes 1, 6, ^arke, 11, 24 ^atth, 5. 44. ^d 6,
14. 15,


3 Love to our brethren, yea toward our enemies, and zeal of affection to
persevere.

And after prayer, 1. We must be ^sal, 18, 21,
thankful for grace.

Watchful over our affections to better ^pes, 6. 18, ^om, 8, 25,
our obedience after, and patiently to tarry the Lords leisure.

Quest. These being observed before, in and after prayer: tell me how many
parts be there of prayer?
Ans. Three parts: Confession of sin, Petition for mercy and grace,
thanksgiving for blessings received.

Quest. How many parts be there of the Lords prayer?
Ans. Two parts; first of those which concern Gods glory, secondly of things
concerning our selves.

Quest. Which be those that concern God?
Ans. The Preface, and the three first Petitions, saying, Our Father which art
in Heaven, hallowed by the name, thy kingdom come. Thy will be done. etc.

Concluding with Kingdom, Power, and Glory.

Quest. What understand you by the Preface, Our Father which art in Heaven?
Ans. That Jehovah our God, Jehovah the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, is Deuteronomy.
6. 4. Mark 1^. 29.
one, and become our Father by the death and mediation of Christ his Son, in
whose name, if we approach unto him with faith John 20. 7 and 16. 27.
and reverence, he will make manifest that he is both willing and able to hear
and help us.

Quest. What more?
Ans. That being in Heaven, he requires of us heavenly minds and affections,
to worship him in spirit and truth, without any superstition, of
representation, Math. 6. 5. Ioh. 4. 24. 25.
or will worship according to carnal reason, as it is forbidden in the first and
second Commandments of the first Table.

Quest. What understand you by the first Petition, Hallowed be thy name?
Ans. That the glorious names and attributes of God; his wisdom, power,
Psalm 99. 3. Exodus, 34. 6. Psalm 138. Psalm 145. ^.
word, mercy, justice, and works, may be honored and sanctified of us in our
thoughts, words and works, which is the end of our creation and redemption:
the contrary whereof is forbidden in the third commandment of the first Table:
thou shall not take the name of thy God in vain.

2 Q. What by the second, Thy kingdom come?
A. That righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, may be increased in us
by Dan, 7. 14. Luke 1. 33. Psalm 145. 11, 12, 13.
the regiment of his Word and Spirit, that Christ may reign and dwell in our
hearts by faith driving out all adversary power of sin and darkness, that
being his obedient subjects in the kingdom of grace, we may speed^ly be fitted
and suited with all his Elect in the kingdom of glory.

3 Q. What by the third, Thy will be done?
A. That God would subdue in us by his grace, all things repugnant to his word
and 1 Thessa. 4. 3. Romans 12. 2.
will; that with all holy desire, diligence and integrity (resembling his holy
angels in heaven) we may do his will, as in his word he has manifested it unto
us, being the perfect rule of faith and obedience: for the Colos. 1. 9. 10. 1
P^ter 4. 2.
honor and hollowing of his name, the power, increase, and accomplishment of
his kingdom, are united to the doing of his will according to his word.

Q. By this we may see that these three Petitions answer to the four first
Commandments of the first Table,
A. Yea, for in them we learn our duty to God, as concerning his worship,
faith, fear and love, which in this we pray fer grace to practice.

4 Q. What understand you by the second parts of this prayer, and namely the
fourth Petition, Give us this day our daily bread?
A. That God would vouchsafe to give us all such things as are needful for us,
and the place where we live, that we may live without destresse of mind and
pride of heart, that honoring our Superiors and Parents, we may live a
peaceable life in all godlynes and honesty, abandoning all excessive care for
earthly things, being content Math. 6. 24. 25. Philip. 4. 6. 1 Timothy 6. 8.
with sufficient, obtained by our lawful labors; that so it may go well with
us as it is promised in the first Commandment of the second Table, where it
is said, Honor thy father and thy mother, that it may go well with thee.

5 Q. What by the fifth Petition in the second part of this prayer; Forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us?
A. That confession of s^nnes must go Prou. 28. 13*
before remission, because they separate us from God* till they have found free
pardon through faith in the merits of Christ the Mediator of the new Covenant,
who has made reconciliation for sin, and purchased Dan. 9. 24.
everlasting righteousness: therefore for his sake we desire mercy for our
sins, and the punishments due to be removed, because Exodus 34. 6. 7.
they are pledges of Gods favor, declaring himself to be our God and Father.

Q. Why is this reason added, As we do forgive others that trespass against
us?
A. Lest we should presume to ask forgiveness of God, except we be free from
hatred Matthew. 6. 14. 15. Mark 11. 25 26.
and malice, as it is said, If ye forgive others, God will forgive you:
therefore we pray that God who is infinite in mercies, would pardon us, for we
being* wretched sinners, having not one drop of grace, yet through his grace
are willing to forgive others that Prou^^b.
offend us: For if it be the glory of a man to pass by infirmities, much more
of God.

Q. What learn you by the last Petition, And lead us not into temptation?
A. In the former Petition we desired pardon for sins past, and here we
pray for grace to resist sin in time to come, that we may be supported and
preserved in that ^. Pet. 2. 9. Mat. 26. 41.
state of grace, whereunto we are restored and called by Christ. Therefore we
pray that we be not hardened with the deceitful^es Luke 22. 40. Esaias. 1. 16.
of sin, nor lead into ouer-hard tri^ls, against which our weakness is not
able to resist. but that with the temptation 1 Cor 10. 13.
^he would give the issue, for his glory, and our good.

Q. What understand you by this, But deliver us from evil?
A. That is from the devil the author of al 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
^uill, for we pray not simply against temptation but against the evil of
temptation, that we may have grace and strength to tread Satan, sin, and
all adversary power Mat. 4. 3, 4. Ioh. 17. 15.
opposing it self to our salvation under feet, through our Lord Jesus, the
seed of the woman, who has already triumphed over them, and by whom we hope
and assure our selves we shall be perfect in his heavenly kingdom.

Q. What understand you by the conclusion, For thine is the Kingdom, the Power
and Glory for ever and ever.
A. The sum of all contained in the 1. Tim. 1. 17.
rest: because he is the immortal King invisible and Almighty, God only wise;
we 1. Kingdom.
pray to serve him as his subjects in this 1. Pe^. 1. 5.
life (for the sovereignty of heaven and earth is his) and to be preserved by
his power 2. Power.
through faith unto the life to come, for he is all sufficient to perform:
that he would glorify his great name by all these means* for all glory,
honor, and praise is due t^ 3. Glory. Psalm 145. 11. 12.
him in Christ Jesus for evermore.

Q. Then the beginning and end of ou^ prayers ought to be the praise and glory
o^ God?
A. Yes, for he is not worthy to receiu^ new benefits, who will not be
thankful Psalm. 103. 2.
for former received.

Q. Why conclude you with Amen?
A. To show our earnest desire and assured hope to obtain our lawful request^
through Christ the faithful and true wi^nes, Revel. 3. 14.
in whom all the promises of God a^ yea and Amen.

Q. Then belike these three last Petition^ answer to the six last precepts of
the te^ Commandments of the second Table of the Law.
A. Yea verily, for in them we learn ou^ duty toward men: and here we pray
for Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 13.
grace to practice them that we may live ^ peaceable life in all godliness and
honesti^ till we be fitted and ready for the life ^ come in heaven.

Q. Are we sure to be heard, praying according to these rules?
A. Yes certainly, as the Scriptures of Psalm. 138. 3. and 145. 18. 19
God do abundantly teach us.

Q. But we see God does not always grant the Petitions of his children.
A. That is, because God has otherwise Ezekiel. 14. 14. 1. Psalm. 135. 6. James 3.
2. 2 3 4
first decreed with him self; secondly because they ask amiss; thirdly
because in his profound wisdom he sees it not good for them, fourthly because
he tries their faith, love, patience, and constancy.

Q. Tell me now what is a Sacrament? psalm. 33. 10. 2. Cor. 12. 9. Luke 19. 7.
Iam. 3. 8. Of the Sacraments.

A. A seal of that righteousness which is given by faith in ye merits of Christ
Jesus.

Q. How many seals or Sacraments of that kind has God left unto his Church?
A. But two Sacraments of the new Genesis 17. 11. Romans 4. 11. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2 3.
Covenant, as there were but two in the old, figuring righteousness given by
faith.

Q. Which be they?
A. Baptism, and the Lords Supper. answerable to Circumcision, and the
Passover, 1. Cor. 12. 13. 1. Cor. 10, 16.
and succeeding in their places.

Q. How many parts be there of a Sacrament?
A. Two, the outward sign, and the inward 1 ^et. 3. 21.
grace signified. ^. Pet. 3. 21.


Q. What is the outward sign in Baptism?
A. Water, accompanied with the Word Math. 28. 19.


Q. What the inward grace signified?
A. The washing away of sin by faith in the blood of Christ: and the reviving
and sanctifying unto true righteousness by his Act^ 22. 16. Titus 3. 5.
spirit, sealing unto the heart the assurance of fra forgiveness of sins by
Christ Jesus.

Q. What further use and end has Baptism?
A. To express that we are admitted and incorporated into the house of God
his Acts 15. 9. 1. pet. 3. 20, 21. Genis. 17. 1^.
Church, whereof the Arc was a figure, and received into the Covenant of
grace, heretofore figured in the seal of Circumcision.

Q. What does God promise unto us in this Covenant of Baptism?
A. Christ Jesus with all the benefits of his death, burial, resurrection and
ascension, Romans 6. 1. pe^. 3. 21.
to the full assurance of the free forgiveness of sins, to justification and
life eternal

Q. What is the condition that the party baptized is to keep and perform?
A. To repent and believe, that is, to renounce and forsake sin, Satan, the
world Mark 1. 4. 1. Io^. 1. 7.
and all the works of the flesh, and to live in holiness and righteousness
according to the Spirit, beginning his new birth and life in God, to die to
sin, and rise up unto Romans 6. 3. 4. ^
righteousness of conversation.

Q. Why are Infants baptized, which can make no confession of faith and
repentance?
A. Because they are the seed of the faithful, and within the outward
covenant, unto whom belong the promises of grace: and Romans 4. 12. 26. Mark 10.
14.
of such is the kingdom of heaven, though not of all; but we must leave the
hidden things to God, the revealed are for us and our children to do them.
Deuteronomy. 29. 29*


Q. What be the outward signs in the Lords Supper?
A. Bread and wine, according to our Saviors institution.

Q Which be the inward graces signified and sealed unto us by them?
A. The body and blood of Christ Jesus, our Paschall Lamb without blemish
offered Mat. 26. 26. 1. Cor. 10. 16. 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19. Romans 4. 25.
for us, working full redemption and justification for all true believers,
sealing unto them his righteousness to be theirs by free imputation.

Q. What further use has the Lords Supsper?
A. To teach us that our Covenant in Baptism may be renewed, and our faith,
Cor. 11. 26
hope and love, may be strengthened and increased by keeping a continual
remembrance of his blessed passion and death, until his glorious coming
again to judgment.

Q, Who ought to receive them, and how should they be prepared thereunto?
A. The faithful repentant believers, who only are circumcised in heart,
judging and duly examining themselves, whether 1. Cor 11. 28
they have faith unfeigned, true repentance, 2. Cor. 13. 5.
sincere love and thankful hearts for all Gods blessings, especially for these
inestimable Matthew. 5. 23. psalm. 103. 1. 2.
mercies in Christ, the root of all the rest.

Q To what end serves this knowledge of God, whereof we have so briefly
entreated out of the law, faith, prayers and Sacraments?
A. To bring us to the sovereign good and end of our faith, hope and wished
destres; even the salvation of our souls and bodies through Jesus Christ.

Q. What is that sovereign good and salvation you mean?
A. God the author and fountain of all goodness: Creator, Governor, Redeemer,
2. pet. 3. 3. 4.
Iustifier, Sanctifier and Savior of man, who in this life has not only given
us life, moving and being, but grace through faith, working by love to partake
of his divine nature, and begin the life of God here, which in the life to
come shall be perfect Romans 6. 11.
with him in glory for ever.

Q. What shall be the state of those which have known and believed unfeignedly
in the Lord?
A. They shall first have their lot in the blessed resurrection, to meet the
Lord in 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16
glory, and to enjoy his blessed presence, and fulness of joy, and perfect
blessedness which no eye has seen ear has heard, or heart Corinth.
can conceive.

Q. What shall the state of the wicked and ignorant unbelievers be in the
world to come?
2 A. They shall also be raised up to shame Deuteronomy. ^2. 2. 2 Thessalonians ^. 7. 8. 9.
2. ^et. 3. 7. Revel. ^4. 1^. 11.
and everlasting wofulnes, punished with everlasting perdition and pain
unspeakable, in fire unquenchable before the throne of God, whom they shall
never (...) with comfort, nor the glory of his power with joy.

Q. Shall this weak, mortal, and corruptable body of Gods Saints, be partaker
with the immortal Soul, of everlasting lif^ and glory?
A. Yea, for this mortal shall put on immortality, incorruption, power and
spiritual 1. Cor. 15.
glory, like unto the glorious body of Christ, to see him as he is, and for
ever and ever to be with him in glory in his kingdom, where we shall in
perfect holiness 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17
worship him all in all, to whom the holy Angels do ever give due worship:
saying, Amen, Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Revel. 7. 12.
Thanks, and Honor, and Power, and Might, be unto our God for evermore, Amen.
Finis.

ANOTHER PRAYER TO BE used after Catech^sing the Children.
O Gracious God, we bless and praise thy holy name for all thy mercies: and
namely for the use of thy Word, now and always heretofore; beseeching thee, O
Lord, to pardon our sins and ^efects, in speaking and hearing thereof, and to
grant thy blessing unto us, that as we hear to learn: so we may learn to
believe, and practice that which we believe, to thy glory, to the further
conforming and confirming of us unto thee, in that assured hope of that glory,
which thou have prepared for all thine elect and faithful children in the
world to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior, Amen.

TO THE GODLY PARENTS, Masters and overseers for Education of youth.
NAture is best adorned with Religion and nurture: for as religion informs
the mind; so narture reformeth the manners. And as the fertillest soil
without manuring will soon ouergrow with weeds, so the aptest wits without
education, will soon corrupt in manners. An vnmanaged Colt will be wild, and
a child left at liberty will grow wilful. And as the occasions in children
and youth, unto vice and evil are many; so the care and endeavor in elders to
restrain and amend them should abound: Parents by nature should, Masters by
charge ought, Magistrates by law, neighbors of love and courtesy, and all men
of common humanity, for maintaining Christian love and piety, civil society,
and godly policy: that the wickedness of youth be not imputed to the remisnes
of the aged, and both punished with old Elies corrections. From which the Lord
keep us, and give us all grace and knowledge in all things.

Teach a child in the trade of his ways, and when he is old he will keep it.
Prou. 22.

CERTAIN BRIEF AND effectual Rules for life and Conversation* and first of
behavior in the morning.
FIrst in the morning think upon God, and remember thy Creator in thy youth,
in the prime of thy days, and in the spring of the morning; and know that he
has said; My son give me thy heart; let him have the first place, in thy
thoughts, words and actions, lifting up thy heart and hands with humble mind
and voice unto him.

And if time permit, let some good prayer be said of thee, or some other;
craving pardon for thy sins in the name of Jesus Christ, and for his sake,
praying for all things needful for thee, for the state and place thou live
in: with the parties from whom thou receiuest mainteinance, education and
comfort: and if thou have not leisure to pray thus, yet let the Lords prayer
feelingly and with devout reverence be said of thee; letting thy mind and
voice join and consent together, thinking on him only unto whom thou do
pray.

See thou remember to use and frequent these exercises of prayer, at morning
and evening; at meat time and other appointed; so shall the continual use put
thee in mind that thou forget it not.

Remember that the ten Commandments of God be repeated and said of thee, once
in the day at the least, that so the continual use thereof, may put thee in
mind of thy duty toward God, and lead thee to Christ for grace.

Also the Articles of faith, see thou use reverently to repeat; praying for
grace, to believe with the heart, that which thou confessest with thy mouth,
that thou may increase in faith, hope and love, without which thou can not
be saved.

With prayer to God do thou begin:
That he may keep thee from all sin.
WHFN THOU APPARrellest thy self.
1 SEE that thy clothes and apparel be clean from head to foot; decently
and comely put on, tied, pointed, and pinned about thee.

2 Delight in decent cleanlynes, neatnes and comlines in the body and garments;
so shall it make thee grateful in company, and loved of the best; if
otherwise, loathed and not regarded: for by the fashion and wearing of the
apparel, may be judged the quality of the mind.

3 Thy head, see thou comb and rub, at the least thrice in the week,
keeping it clean, from that which may annoy or discredit thee.

4 Thy hands and face wash also, for that is both wholesome and hansome.

5 Thy bed see thou decently turn up until thou be ready to make it, which
see it be well and hansomely done, for therein thou show thy self to differ
from a beast.

Neat and cleanly see thou be;
As is befitting thy degree.
OF BEHAVIOVR TO Schoole-ward.
BEing apparrelled and thy prayers said, and other things performed
accordingly, repair without delay or loytering, unto the school, or other
business appointed or belonging unto thee, using all diligence, and faithfulness
therein.

By the way go soberly, orderly, and mannerly: salute thy elders and betters
with reverent regard, and good words of the time of the day; and thy familiars
and fellows friendly with such diversity of reverence and courteous behavior,
as is befitting to the dignity and condition of the persons: for nothing
gains so much with so little cost, as humility and courtesy does.

Humility and courtesy,
Are signs of grace and piety.
Remembrances.
FOrget not thy books, pennor, inckehorne, pens, paper, and all other things
fit; keep them safe, clean and plain from tearing, losing, blotting or
soyling, etc.

OF BEHAVIOR AT School.
BEing in School play not, laugh not, use no uncomely gesture, nor indecent
behavior in speech or sign; but humbly and carefully submit thy self to
obey, and learn those good letters and sciences, there endeavored to be taught
thee, that learning to obey in youth, thou may know how to teach and
govern in age; and remember that a diligent youth makes a learned age; a
joyful life, and blessed death; for there is no gain without pain, no
treasure without travel, nor learning without labor: therefore show thy self
to thy Master diligent and careful to learn, coveting the fellowship of such
as are better learned then thy self: contend with none but for learning,
learn diligently and retain faithfully, practice painefully, and be ashamed
to be vanquished, but strive to get before others: be not dogged and sullen
when thou art corrected, rejoice when thou art praised, promise to thy self
great things by thy pains, and fear correction.

Pains in youth brings honor in age:
But idleness does evil presage.
OF BEHAVIOVR HOMEward.
REturning from School, let thy behavior be such as may give grace and
countenance, to the place from whence thou came, and credit to the persons,
which have the teaching and educating of thee.

If any meet thee that are thy betters or elders, give them the wall, and
upper hand, vailing thy bonnet reuere^tly; for the tongue is the interpreter of
the mind, and manners the image of mankind; therefore if any question be
demanded of thee, answer with the like modesty with thy head bare, and thy
countenance sad, not sour and sullain, iearing and laughing, but with a modest
and cheerful countenance standing upright and looking them in the face
soberly; not turning and winding like a fool, not trifeling and fumbling with
the fingers like an Ape, nor lifting up the leg like a goose; remembering that
humility and lowlines of mind obtains the favor of God, and gentle speech
and courteous behavior wins the hearts of men.

Duty, meekenes, thanks and love,
Are virtues sprung from God above.
OF BEHAVIOVR AT home, at the Table.
BEing come home, use all reverent duty and obedience to thy parents and
elders, as becomes thee; and se thou come not into the hall, or in their
sight, indecently and unmannerly, with thy hose vngartered, thy shoes foul,
broken or untied; thy coat vnbuttoned, vnpointed, torn, or unclean; thy
hands and face unwashed, and filthy: but comely and reverently, see thou
approach into their sight, as in the presence of God, whose instruments for thy
good they are, and whose blessings thou come now to receive, for the
sustentation of thy natural life; and forget not to pray unto, and praise the
Lord of life, by whom we live, move and have our being.

Be not like the filthy swine,
But pray to God before thou dine.
OF BEHAVIOVR WHEN ANY part of Scripture is read.
IF there be any exercise of reading and hearing Gods word and prayer, before
mcale or after, or at the time of refection, see that with all meekenes and
reverence, with devout attention and love, thou mark the sense and matter of
that which is read, as well as the words, so shall thou enrich thy mind and
wit with true wisdom, and thy tongue with gracious words.

See that with like devotion and reverence thou behave thy self, in time of
prayer and grace, lifting up thy heart and hands to God, during the time,
thinking upon him in heaven, upon whom thou do call here on earth; and know
that he is a consuming fire, and will not be mocked.

Being at exercise divine,
Use reverence in such a time.
Of behavior at meal time.
1 When thou feedest, use mannerly modesty and modest sobriety; moderately
and temperately eating and drinking that which is appointed for thee, without
greediness and excess, that after thy meat, thy wit and mind may be fresher
and not duller, and thy body more lively, and not heavier and unapt to study,
etc.

Many thousands their death do eat:
When few have died for lack of meat.
2. Let thy talk be little and sparing, except when just occasion be offered,
or question asked, and then speak or answer aptly and distinctly; think
before thou speak, and speak soberly and truly; if thy betters ask thee a
question, answer them reverently; and thy fellows and equalles courteously,
without biting taunts or loud vnreuerent words. Take thy meat without
snatching, for that is dog-like; and do not murmr or grudge, for that is
swine-like: be not the first in the dish, nor the last sufficed; for that is a
token of a greedy and insatiable deuourer, especially eschew excess in
drinking.

More with drink their bellies burst
Then ever yet have died of thurst.
With thankful mind and contented heart, receive that which is prepared for
thee, and reverently rise as thou satest down with giving of thanks to God.

Be not like a foolish Ass,
But give God thanks before thou pass.
OF BEHAVIOVR ON THE Sabbath day.
THink on the Lords day the day before, and make an end if possible thou may
of all such things and businesses as should any way hinder that days exercise,
of hearing, reading, speaking or meditating of Gods Word and works.

1. Of Preparation.
In the morning early prepare thee to rise up in mind and body, to serve God
the Creator, and the Son our Savior, through the grace of the sanctifying
spirit of grace, shunning and hating all sin and evil, in thoughts, words,
and deeds, as thou art commanded to sanctify and keep holy the Sabbath day;
not doing thine own will, not speaking vain words, nor thinking evil
thoughts; but let thy will be led to do the will of God here in earth as it is
in heaven; and let thy mind carry up thy thoughts to meditate on the creation
of all by almighty God, of the redemption of all by our blessed Savior, who is
our sanctification, righteousness and eternal rest.

2. In the Church.
And when thou come into the Church or congregation assembled in the name of
God to hear his word, and to pray and call upon his name; know that thou art in
the presence of the eternal God and his holy Angels, who not only sees thee
and thy behavior, but also understands thy thoughts and secret motions; see
therefore thy gesture be comely.

3. Of Hearing.
And thy behavior reverent, giving due regard with meekenes unto the word of
God, that the sense and substance thereof may enter into thy mind, as the sound
does pierce thy ear; for it is the power of God, to save thy soul, if thou so
hear and retain it; or else it is the savor of death unto death, unto thy
eternal damnation, with the Devil and his Angels, if thou do carelessely
neglect, contemn and despise it: but if thou be careful to mark what sin
is reproved, and fly the same; and what virtue is commended, and embrace the
same, it shall then amend thy memory, and manners to grow in knowledge, to
learn to live and die as a Christian.

4. Of Praying.
In the time of prayer, thy body must be humble and cast down upon thy knees,
meekly and reverently lifting up thy hands and heart unto God in heaven;
joining with them that speak in prayer, to say with them as occasion is, or to
lift up thy mind with audible and good voice and hearty affection, saying Amen.

And remember that it is said, Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord, and
departs from iniquity shall be saved: but whosoever does not, it is an
evident token of a wicked and ungodly mind, as it is said The wicked call not
upon the Lord, and therefore there is no faith, no hope, no salvation, for them.

5. Of the articles of the faith.
When the Articles of faith be repeated, thou must with like reverence and
affection, either standing or kneeling, pronounce it audibly and distinctly;
for as thou beleeuest with thy heart, so must thou confess with thy mouth unto
salvation, remembering always to join with the rest, in saying Amen.

6. Of the ten Commandments.
When the ten Commandments are repeated and said, hear them with great
reverence and fear, considering in every one thy sin and defects, praying for
mercy and grace, through Christ Jesus, to endeavor all thy heart to keep them;
and then that which thou can not do, he will perform.

7. Of singing Psalms.
Likewise when Psalms and praises to God are singing, use all care and
reverence in singing with a grace and affectionate heart, keeping tune and time
orderly, to the praise of the God of order.

8. Not to go away.
Remember thou gad not in and out of the Church and Congregation, at thy
pleasure; for that is ungodly, unseemly, and very offensive.

9. Not to prate.
Neither use to prattle, or privately to read or think of matters, not
pertaining to the place and work in hand; for that is to offer the sacrifice
of fools. Tarry until all the service of God be performed, and the blessing
pronounced, lest thou show thy self a contemner of holy things, and one
unworthy to be partaker thereof; as Judas was, who made more have then good
speed, and sped accordingly.

10. Practice.
Returning out, use like reverent behavior, and think often upon that which
out of Gods word thou have heard; to practice it in thy behavior; and know,
that practice (...) and of faith and knowledge* For not the hearers of the
word, but the doers of the will of God shall be saved.

The Sabbath see thou sanctify,
Avoiding all impiety.
OF BEHAVIOVR IN TIME of recreation and play.
USE such exercises of body as are without offense and peril either to thy
self or others, either in bones or joints, name or estimation; that it may be
such as fit best for thy mind to increase in good learning, and for thy
body, for health and strength: remembering there is a time of pastime and mirth,
(as the wise man says) but take heed it be done in due time and measure: as he
also counsels, saying, If thou find honey, eat thereof; but eat not too
much; for the excess of every thing is sin, therefore exceed not in loss of
time, but see thou redeem it with the loss of pleasure, and thou shall find
increase of greater profit.

Use pastime and pleasure,
In due time and measure.
OF BEHAVIOVR AT night.
1 AT night when all the duties of the day are ended, and that the time of rest
is come, approach quietly and orderly into thy ward and place of rest
appointed; and then with due reverence address thee, to the reverent hearing
and reading of the word of God, according as the nightly exercises require; if
it be in singing of Psalms, see that it be done also reverently with due
regard of the matter as well as the method, and melody, which must also be
regarded, as we are by God commanded to sing with feeling and a grace in the
heart, with understanding and skill in due marking and keeping the time and
tune, for the God of order delights in concord and harmony, and hates
confusion and discord, especially in his special services. Therefore sing
reverently, orderly and devoutly, keeping time and tune; so shall it please
God, and be commended of men.

2 These ended, commit thy self into the tuition of God by prayer, remembering
wherein thou have faulted or failed of thy duty, to call for mercy, and wherein
through grace thou have performed or desired any good, to be thankful unto
him that is the fountain and giver of all goodness.

3 See thy hose and shoes be clean, and thy clothes decently laid up,
readily of thee to be found in the morning when thou shall rise to put them on.

To bed see that thou go in time,
And rise likewise, the gain is thine.
OF BEHAVIOVR ABROAD in service.
WHEN thou art abroad in service remember and practice diligently the counsel
of God, which says, Servants, Col. 3. 22.
be obedient and subject unto them that are your masters, and please them in
all things good and lawful (for otherwise, better it is to obey God then man)
not with eie-seruice, as men pleasers, but in singlenes of heart fearing God;
and whatsoever you do, do it heartily as to the Lord, and not unto men; knowing
that of the Lord you shall receive the reward.

Therefore, says he, be not answerers again, T^^. 2. 9.
nor saucy, be not pickers nor purloyners, but show all good faithfulness, and
faithful diligence as unto thy father, yea as unto the Lord himself, who
served for us, a servant to all, that he might wi^ne all from slavery, and
service of sin and Satan. Remember among many, the duties of thy calling, as
thou art a servant; these four especially are required of thee. First,
faithfulness void of fraud, and filthy flattery; Secondly, diligence void of
sloth and grudging; Thirdly, to seek and procure their profit and good, before
thine own profit or pleasure; Fourthly, to be silent and secret, not answering
again rudely and saucily, nor revealing their secrets abroad; therefore it is
wittily said by one, that a good servant should have the back of an Ass to
bear patiently; the snout of a Swine to feed homely; the tongue of a sheep to
keep silence gently. Or thus, To have large ears to hear readily, a short
tongue, speaking seldom; and truly light feet, swift in service and message;
and clean hands void of pilfering and cousenage.

Take pains in youth while strength do last,
Then rest in age when health is past.
Be loath to offen, be diligent to please,
Be willing to amend, of sufferance comes ease.
Good paine^ breeds honor, true ^ertue gets fame,
Sloth brings misery, and vice ^ternall shame.
A youth void of industry,
An age void of honesty.
Where vice in youth does bear the sway,
There virtues will in age decay.
A youth well instructed,
Makes an age wel^ disposed.
H^ that in youth, by reas^^ guides his days,
In age shall keep his footsteps from decays.
SHORT SAYINGS FOR FVRther instruction of duty toward God and man.
1. Toward God.
Learn to know God in his word. Believe in God and his promises. Fear God in
his judgments. Love God in his mercies. Pray to him for grace. Praise him for
his goodness. Read and hear his Word diligently. Love and reverence his
Ministers. Frequent the places of prayer. Be careful often to hear the word
preached Quench not the spirit despise not prophesing Fear God and keep his
Commandments.
2. Toward our Superiors.
Honor the King. Obey good laws. Love reverence, and pray for the Magistrates,
Pay all duties to thy power. Speak well of them in authority. If they be
good, thank God for them. If they be evil, pray for their amendment. Princes
are as the glass, the school the book, where subjects eyes, do read, do
learn, do look Kings on earth are Images of God in heaven,
3. Toward our Parents.
Honor thy Parents. Reverence their good counsel. Obey their good
Commandments. Be subject to their corrections. Be humble, reverent, and
dutiful to them. By good behavior make them glad. By ill demeanor make them
not sad. Deserve and seek for their blessing. Deserve not their curse. Pray
daily for them. Relieve them if they be in want.
4. Toward the aged.
Reverence the aged. Be dutiful to thy betters. Be humble and lowly to them.
Be kind and courteous to all.
5. Of familiarity.
Be friendly and familiar with the good. Keep no company with the evil. Try
before thou trust. Hinder no man's good name. Rejoice not in another cross.
Bear with others infirmities, that others may bear with thee. Rejoice with
those that rejoice. Mourn with them that mourn. Be gentle and courteous to al,
offensive to none.
Of Anger.
Be angry against sin, but sin not. Appease debate, abstain from hate. If
anger arise, let not sin surprise. Be not hard to be appeased. Be merciful and
pitiful. Be gentle and courteous.
6. Of Speech.
Be slow to speak, especially evil. Be swift to hear good things. Think
before thou speak. Speak advisedly and truly. Speak not vainly and
skurrillously. Answer aptly and mannerly. Keep counsel committed unto thee.
Reveal not thy masters secrets. Reveal not thine own to every friend.
Promise advisedly. pay thy debts truly. Perform constantly. Be not rash and
foole-hardie. Be not wise in thine own conceit. Be not arrogant. Strive not
with thy ouer-match. Be at peace with virtue, and war with vice.
7. Of learning and knowledge.
Love virtue and knowledge. Hate vice and ignorance. Haunt wise men's company.
Shun foolish society. Prayer, hearing, and reading, increase knowledge,
without knowledge the mind is not good.
8. Of thine estate.
Maintain thy self justly. Live in order. Live within thy compass. Be
content with thine estate. Poverty is no hinderance to virtue. Contented mean
is greatest wealth.
9. Of Apparel.
Be comely and clean in thine apparel. Be not proud and curious. Be not
slouenlike and rude. Be sober in gesture and gate. Be not idle and vain.
10. Of Diet.
Take heed of all excess, for that is sin. Be temperat in diet. Drink
moderatly, and eat soberly. Surfeting and drunkenness is a deadly sin.
Abstinence is good for soul and body.
11. Of Recreation.
Use moderate exercises. Play not in any thing exceeding modesty and measure.
Redeem the time and leese it not. No greater loss then time, and nothing
less accounted of. Neglected time, is follies chiefest sign.
12. Of the end.
The true and best end of all is the fear of God. When virtuous days do end
they are not done: But live two lives, where others have but one. In all
beginnings remember the end. For to begin well is good, but to end well is
better. Lewd life is loss, good death felicity, The chiefest gain, the end of
misery. For that is not death to change the life and die: But that is death,
which does all joys deny. Then happy he, who does in time prepare To die, to
live, the end of worldly care.
The end of all things is at hand; be sober therefore and watch unto prayer.

A PRAYER TO BE SAID Every morning and evening by the Chil dren in their
several Wards.
And first remember that.
Without knowledge the mind is not good. Without faith no pleasing of God.
Without nurture, no attaining to virtue. Without prayer, no hope of grace.
Therefore,
Every one that is godly will pray in time convenient. ^sal. 34. 14. 6. ^sal.
31. 7. 8. ^sal. 14. 9. ^0. ^sal. 145. 18 ^sal. 138. 6.
But the wicked call not upon God. The Lord is nigh all them that call upon him
in truth, and faithfully. For though the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto
the lowly: As for the proud he beholds them a far off.
O Eternal God and merciful Father in Christ Jesus, we humbly beseech thee
to have mercy upon us thy poor children, and pardon all our sins committed
against thy Divine Majesty at any time of our life heretofore, either in
omitting or committing any thing against thy blessed word and holy will; and
grant us thy grace, O Lord, that we may be truly repentant for them and
heartily thankful unto thee for all thy undeserved mercies and favors bestowed
upon us, and the state and place wherein we live, beseeching thee for Christ
his sake to continue and increase them ever hereafter both in soul and body
unto us, and also to receive us all into thy blessed protection, that neither
sin, nor Satan assail or prevail against us, to hurt the peace of our
souls, or health of our bodies, but that being blessed and protected by thee,
O Lord, we may be better able and more careful, to serve thee in our several
places and callings, to become thy faithful servants, and instruments of thy
glory, for the good of thy Church, and Commonweal of our country wherein we
live. O Lord bless and defend our Sovereign King, the Queen, and the Prince
their Son, with the rest of their Royal Progeny; bless his Majesty's
honorable Counselors and Nobles, and direct them, and all in office in the
Church and State under him, especially to advance true religion and virtue, and
to punish sin and impiety. Continue thy mercy and protection O Lord toward
these his Majesty's Dominions of great Britain, and countries annexed, and thy
people and Churches in them: increase the number of faithful and painful
Preachers amongst them, that so thy most holy name may be hallowed, thy
kingdom enlarged, and thy blessed will accomplished in faith and love, in
verity and unity. O Lord bless and defend this City, with the Governors and
government thereof, together with this house and whole society, and all those
from whom we receive this comfortable maintenance, relief and godly education;
increase thy spiritual graces in them, and multiply thy temporal blessings
upon them, O Lord, that they never want will and means to go forward in
performing the good works thou have begun for the advancement of thy glory,
the comfort of us and others thy poor distressed ones, and the increase of
their own comfort in the assurance of thy mercy in Christ Jesus. These mercies
and all other blessings needful, O blessed God of grace and mercy, we pray
thee to grant unto us, and the rest of thy Church, even for Christ (...)


