The Grand Idol Iagernat.


News from the East Indies: Or, A Voyage to Bengalla, one of the greatest
Kingdoms under the High and Mighty Prince Pedesha Shassalem, usually called
the Great Mogull. With the state and magnificence of the Court of Malcandy,
kept by the Nabob Viceroy, or vice-King under the aforesaid Monarch: Also their
detestable Religion, mad and foppish rites, and Ceremonies, and wicked
Sacrifices and impious Customs used in those parts.

Written by William Bruton, now resident in the Parish of S. Saviors
Southwark, who was an eye and ear witness of these following Descriptions;
and published as he collected them being resident there diverse years: and now
lately come home in the good Ship called the Hopewel of London, with diverse
Merchants of good account which are able to testify the same for truth.

Imprinted at London by I. Oaks, and are to be sold by Humphery Blunden at his
shop in Corne-hill at the sign of the Castle near the Royal Exchange. 1638.

A Rare and most Strange Relation from Bengalla in the East Indies, being one
of the greatest Kingdoms under the Great Mogull, and of their Laws, Manners,
and Customs, etc.
ALthough diverse learned, painful, and skillful Mathematicians and
Geographers have with great Industry spent much profitable Time, in finding out
the Circumference of the Terrestrial Globe, in describing Empires, Kingdoms,
Principalities, Lordships, Regions, Provinces, Territories, Variations of
Climates and Scituations, with the diversities of Dispositions, of Tongues,
Religions, Habits, Manners, Laws, and Customs of sundry Nations: Though much
labor, peril, and Cost has been worthily employed by Pliny the second,
Ortellius, Iodoco Hondius; or (to come nearer) to our English Worthies, such as
are described in the Book of Hacklewicks Voyages, namely, Windam, Chancelour,
Grinvill Willoughby, Drake, Cavendish, Gilbert, Chidly, Frobusher, Clifford,
Sidney, Deuoreux, Wingfield: as also the exceeding pains taken by Mr. Samuel
Purchase, and the Learned and Renowned Knight Sir Walter Rawleigh in their
Descriptions of the whole World, nor forgetting the perils that Mr. Sands
passed in his tedious Travells, with his exact Relations and Descriptions: With
Atlas newly Imprinted, (a rare Work) and lastly, William Lithgow deserves a
kind Remembrance of his Nineteen years sore and dangerous Travells of his
Feet and Pen, worthy your Observation and Reading.

But all these Authors and Actors both of History and Travel, did never
discover all, but still (out of their plentiful Harvests of Observations) they
left some Gleanings for those that came after them to gather. For the
manifestation whereof in this following Discourse, I have tied and bound my
self to speak only Truth, though it seem incredulous or Hyperbolicall; and
if I should any way sway or stray from the Truth, there are living men of good
Fame, Worth, and Estimation, who are able and ready to disprove me.

Therefore briefly to the matter in hand: I William Bruton was shipped as a
Quartermaster, from the Port of London, to serve in the good Ship called the
Hope-well, of the Burden of 240 Tons. To relate our long and tedious passage
by Sea, and our Arivall at every Port and Haven, were but little to the
purpose, and would more tire than delight my Reader: Therefore to begin, that
after my Arivall in those parts, and in my services and passages there for the
space of 7. years, I observed many things, and put them in Writing; but
afterward I came to know that the same things had been discovered and
described formerly by more sufficient and able men of Capacity than my self, I
thought good to keep them to my self, and discover nothing but that which
before was not so fully or scarce known as I shall now decypher them.

The 22. of March, 1632. I being in the Country of Cormadell with six English
men more at a place called Massalupatam, (a great Town of Merchandise) Master
John Noris, the Agent there, was resolved to send two Merchants into Bengalla,
for the settling of a Factory there, and these six English men (of the which I
was one) were to go with the Merchants, and withal to carry a Present from
the Agent to the Nabob, (or King) of that Country, to obtain the promises
that formerly he had granted to the English for Traffic, and to be
Custome-free in those of his Dominions and Ports. Wherefore a Junke was hired
at Massalupatam to be our Convoy; the said Junke did belong unto those parts,
and the Names of the English men that were appointed for that voyage, were Mr.
Ralph Cartwright Merchant, Mr. Thomas Colley second, William Bruton, John
Dobson, Edward Peteford, John Bassley, John Ward, and William Withal.

Though we hired the aforesaid Junke, March 22. yet it was the 6. of April
following before we could be fitted to depart from Massalupatam, and in much
various Weather, with many difficulties and dangers, (which to relate here,
would be tedious and impertinent to my intended Discourse) the 21. of April,
being then Easter Day, we were at Anchor in a Bay before a Town called
Harssapoore: It is a place of good strength, with whom our Merchants do hold
Commerce with correspondency. This 21. day in the Morning, Mr. Ralph Cartwright
sent the Moneys a shore to the Governor of Harssapoore, to take it into his
safe-keeping and protection till such time as he came a shore himself. So
presently there came a Portugal Friggat fiercely in hostility toward us, but
we made ready for their entertainment, and fitted our selves and the Vessel
for our best defenses: but at last they steered off from us, and upon our
command she came to an Anchor somewhat near us, and the Master of her came
aboard of us, who being examined whence he came, and whither he was bound, to
which demands he answered nothing worthy of belief, as the sequel showed; for
he seemed a friendly Trader, but was indeed a false Invader, (where
opportunity and power might help and prevail) for on the 22. day Mr.
Cartwright went a shore to the Governor of Harssapoore, and on the 24. day the
said Master of the Frigate (with the Assistance of some of the ribble rabble
Rascals of the Town) did set upon Mr. Cartwright and Mr. Colley, where our
men (being oprest by multitudes) had like to have been all slain or spoyld,
but that ( Lucklip) the Rogger (or Vice King there) rescued them with 200 men.

In this fray Mr. Thomas Colley was sore hurt in one of his hands, and one of
our men much wounded in the leg and head; their Nockado or India Pilot was
stabbed in the Groyne twice, and much mischief was done, and more pretended,
but by Gods help all was pacified.

The 27 of April we three took leave of the Governor, and Town of
Hassarpoore, (I mean three of us) namely, Mr. Cartwright, William Bruton, and
John Dobson; leaving Mr. Colley and the other four men with him, till news
could be sent back to them from the Nabobs Court, at Cutteke or Malcander, of
our success and proceedings there with our other goods, for he is no wise
Merchant, that ventures too much in one bottom, or that is too credulous to
trust Mahometanes or Infidels.

And having laden our small Boats with the goods, (which were Gold, Silver,
Cloth, and Spices, (of which spices those parts of India are wanting, and they
almost are as dearethere as in England) we passed some two Leagues and half by
Water, and after that, the said goods was carried by land in Carts, till we
came to a great Town called Balkkada, but it was more than three hours after
Sunne-setting, or late before we came thither.

The 28 of April in the Morning, the Governor of this Town came and saluted
our Merchant, and promised him that whatsoever was in his power to do him any
friendly courtesy, he should command it; and indeed he was every way as good
as his word; for he lent us Horses to ride on, and Cowlers (which are Porters)
to carry our goods (for at this Town the Carts did leave us, and our goods
were carried on men's shoulders: then we set forwards, being accompanied with
the Governor, with his Music, which were Shalmes, and Pipes of sundry
forms, much after the forms of Waits or Hoboyes, on which they play most
delicately out of Tune, Time, and Measure. In this manner the Governor, with a
great number of people did bring us about half an English Mile out of the
Town, where he courteously took his leave of us, but yet he sent his servants
with us as guides, and that they might bring his Horses back to him, that he
lent unto us.

This town of Balkkada, is a strong and spacious thing, very populous: There
are many Weavers in it, and it yields much of that Country fashion Cloth.
This day, about the hours of between eleven and twelve of the Clock it was
so extreme hot that we could not travel, and the wind did blow with such a
soultering scalding heat, as if it had come forth of an Oven or Furnace, such a
suffocating fume, did I never feel before or since; and here we were forced to
stay near three hours, till the Sun was declined, we having happily got
under the shadow of the branches of a great Tree all that time. Then we set
forward for the Town of Harharrapoore: which in the space of two hours, or a
little more, we drew near unto: so we stayed a while till our carriages were
come up together unto us; which done, there met us a man, who told us that his
Master staid our coming, then we speedily prepared our selves for the meeting
of so high esteemed a person: and when we came to the Towns end, there did
meet us at a great Pogodo or Pagod, which is a famous and sumptuous Temple (or
Church) for their Idolatrous service and worship there used, and just against
that stately and magnificent building, we were entertained and welcomed by one
of the Kings greatest Noblemen, and his most dear and chiefest favorite, who
had a Letter from the King his Master, and was sent from him to meet us, and
conduct us to his Court. The Noble man's name was Mersymomeine. He did receive
us very kindly, and made us a very great feast or costly colation before
supper; which being done we departed for our Sirray, (or Inn) where we lay all
night with our goods: but Mersymomeine staid with his followers and servants in
his and their Tents at the Pagod.

The 29 day of April we staid at Harharrapoore, and visited this great man,
but the greatest cause of our staying, was by reason that the Nockada (or
Pilot) of the Frigget, whose men did affront and hurt some of our men at
Harssapoore, for which cause the Frigget was staid there, and the Pilot of her
came to this great man, thinking by gifts to win him to clear his Vessel,
(the which he thought to make prise of) but he would not be allured by such
rewards or promises; but told him that he must appear before the Nabob, and
seek to clear himself there.

The 30 of April we set forward in the Morning for the City of Coteke (it is a
City of seven Miles in compass, and it stands a mile from Malcandy, where
the Court is kept) but Master Cartwright staid behind, and came after us,
accompanied with the said Noble man: We went all the day on our journey till
the Sun went down, and then we staid for our Merchant, being eight English
Miles from Coteke, and about twelve or one of clock at night they came where
we were: so we hasted, and suddenly got all our things in readiness, and
went along with them, and about the time of three or four of Clock in the
Morning we came to the house of this Mersymomeine at Coteke, being May day.

Here we were very well entertained, and had great variety of sundry sorts of
meats, drinks, and fruits, such as the Country yields, even what we could or
would desire fitting for our use. About eight of the Clock Mersymomeine went
to the Court, and made known to the King, that the English Merchant was come
to his house: then the King caused a great banquet to be speedily prepared, and
to be sent to the house of Mersymomeine, which banquet was very good and
costly. Then, about three or four of the clock in the afternoon, we were
sent for to the Court of Malcandy, which is not half a mile from Coteke. The
magnificence of which Court, with the stately Structure and situation of the
place, as well as my weak Apprehension can enable, I describe as follows.

The Court of MALCANDI in BENGALLA.
GOING from the house of Mersymomeine, we passed over a long stone Cawsey, of
some two foot in breadth, and at the end thereof we entered in at a great gate,
and being conducted along further we came into a Bussar, or very fair Market
place, where was sold a great number of all sorts of Fruits, Herbs, Flesh,
Fish, Foul, Rice, and such like needful commodities and necessaries as the
Country yielded. (which is very fertile) Having passed this place, we did
enter in at a second gate, where was a guard of some fifty armed men, and so we
came into a place all paved with great stones, or as it may fitter be called, a
fair and spacious street, where Merchants seated on both sides the way, were
buying and selling all kind of their own and foreign wares and merchandises
that was very rich and costly.

Passing this place we entered in at a third Gate, where was another Guard of
one hundred Men Armed: by this Gate was a great Pogodo or Pagod, which joined
to the Southermost part of the Kings house. In this Street there were houses
but one side of the way, for on that side that the Kings house was on there was
no other House but that. Then we came to a fourth Gate, which was very spacious
and high, and had two lofty stories one above the other, and upheld by mighty
Pillars of gray Marble, most curiously Carved and Polished: At this Gate was a
great Guard of 150 Men or more, all armed.

Going through this Gate, we entered into very great broad place or street,
(much of the breadth of the street between Charing Cross and White Hall, or
broader, and no dwelling in it; here we passed the wall of the Kings House, or
Palace, till we came to the Court Gate.

In this broad street are every day 1000 Horses in readiness for the Kings
use; (for he has always 3000 at an hours warning, in the two Towns of
Coteke and Malcandy; whereof 1000 always waits at the Kings Gate, and so by
turns do all the rest attend as their places and services require.

Over against the Gate of the House is a very great house of Timber, whose
Chambers are made with Galleries, built and supported with great Arches to
uphold the Roof: In these Galleries there were men that played on all kind of
loud Instruments, every morning they began to play at four of the Clock, and
gave over at eight.

On the North side of the Gate is a small Tower builded with two hollow Arches,
wherein are placed two mighty Images of stone, with great Pipes of Iron placed
in their breasts, and by devices in the lower rooms, they do make fire and
water to flash and spout out of those Pipes on Festival days. On the South
side of the Gate there stands a great Elephant, artificially wrought of gray
Marble, but for what use I know not.

At the entrance into the Palace Gate, we passed through a Guard of 150 men
armed, the Pillars within were all of gray Marble, carved three Stories one
above the other. The outward Court was paved all with rough hewne Marble. On
the South side of the Palace were houses wherein were men, cunning workers in
rich works, employed only for the Kings use and service.

On the North side (in the Palace) a fair fabric builded, wherein was
erected two stately Tombs, who were founded by one Backarcaune, -- he was
Nabob, and predecessor to this Nabob now governing: and at the East end of the
Palace there was a fair place made and paved with broad gray Marble, and
curiously railed about, the Rayles being four foot and half high from the
ground, and a very fair Tanke, which is a square pit paved with gray Marble,
with a Pipe in the mid^st of it, whose water descended between two Walls, with
the forms of Fishes of sundry sorts, carved in stone very artificially, as if
they had been swimming or gliding up the Wall against the stream.

At this East end there was also a second Gate, where was a Guard of 100 men
armed; here stood also men that did keep the time of the day by observations
of measures of Water, in this manner following: First, they take a great pot of
Water of the quantity of three Gallons, and putting therein a little pot of
somewhat more than half a pint (this lesser pot having a small hole in the
bottom of it) the water issuing into it, having filled it, then they strike on a
great plate of brass, or very fine metal, which stroke makes a very great
sound, this stroke, or parcel of time they call a Goome, the small pot being
full they call a Gree, 8 Grees makes a Par, which Par is three hours by our
account.

They likewise do begin the day at the hour of six in the morning, and it is
ended with them at six at night: here we entered into the second Palace, which
had in the midst thereof a fair and sumptuous Theater built, and about it was
made small banks, whereon were planted great varieties of fruits and flowers,
very sweet to the sent, and pleasing to the sight; this place was also
curiously railed in round: Then we entered into a narrow passage between two
high stone Walls, where there was another Guard of 250 men armed: This passage
brought us to a third Gate, wherein we entered into a third Palace or pleasant
prospect, for in the midst of it there was a very fair pavement of Marble, --
square, of the largeness of -- yardes every way, and railed some three foot
and a half higher than the ground, that was on the outsides of it: it was
likewise delicately rayled about, and in the midst of it there was a fair
arched place roofed, into whose entrance was an ascent of four steps high, and
all the rooms in it were spread or over-laid on the floor with rich Carpets
exceeding costly.

The space between the outward Railes and these Rooms, was about 30. Foot,
and the length 80. foot on the one side, but on the other side was a fair
Tanke of water.

This place they called the Derbar (or place of Council, where Law and Justice
was administered according to the Custom of the Country, and it was likewise
adorned and beautified with very pleasant Trees and Flowers, and Banks about
them with Gutters between the Banks, in which Gutters water passed for the
cooling and watering of them, and the water proceeded from the Tanke
aforementioned. Here we stayed the space of some two hours (or there abouts)
looking up and down, and being looked upon by Soldiers, and such fashioned
Gentlemen as the Court yielded; (for there were more than 100. men armed, which
were of the Nabobs, or Kings Privy Guard) At last the word came forth that the
King was coming: then they hasted and over-laid the great large pavement with
rich Carpets, and placed in the midst against the Railes, one fairer and richer
Carpet than the rest, wrought in Bengalla-worke: They likewise placed a great
round pillow of red Velvet on this Carpet; they placed also six small Pillars
of Gold on the ends and sides of the rich Carpet, to hold it fast, or press it
to the ground, lest it should be raised with the Wind. They also placed upon
the Railes a Pannell of Velvet to lean on: At the last his Majesty came
accompanied with the number of 40. or 50. of his Courtiers, the most part of
them were very grave men to see to: Also the Nabobs own Brother (a comely
Personage) did bear the Sword before him. Then the Nobleman ( Mersimomein)
presented our Merchant (Mr. Ralph Cartwright) to the King, who did obedience to
him, and the King very affably bended forward (in manner of a Curtsie or
Respect) and withal leaned his Arms on two men's shoulders, and slipped off
his Sandall from his foot (for he was bare-legged) and presented his Foot to
our Merchant to kiss, which he twice did refuse to do, but at the last he
was feign to do it: then the King sat down, and caused our Merchant to be
placed by his Brother: His Counsel sat all along by the foot-pace of the
Rooms beforementioned, his Brother and his Favorites sat thwart the place or
Pavement, every one sitting in the fashion of a Tailor crosse-legg'd.

The Assembly being set, our Present was presented to the King, which was some
Twenty pounds of Cloves, Twenty pounds of Mace, Twenty pounds of Nutmegs, two
Bolts of Damask, half a Bale, or fourteen yards of Stammell-cloath, one
fair Looking-glass, whose frame was gilded, one Fowling-piece, with two
Locks, and one double Pistol; this was the Present which the King received
with much acceptance and content, and withal demanded the cause of our
Coming and our Request: To whom our Merchant answered, that he was come to
desire his Majesty's Favor and License for free Trade in his Country, and not
to pay any Junkan -- (or Custom) At this request he seemed to make a stand,
(and pausing a little) he conferred privately with his Council, but gave us no
Answer.

Our Merchant likewise requested that the English Merchants Trading for the
East Indies, might have free License to come with their shipping small or
great, into the Roads and Harbors of his Sea-port-Townes, or to any Havens or
Navigable Rivers, or any such place or places as shall be found sitting for the
safeguard, building, or repairing of the said Vessels belonging to the
honorable Company. And likewise to transport their goods either off or on the
shore, without the let or hinderance of the Natives of the Country: Likewise
to have his License to quoyne Moneys, Gold or Silver, Countrey-money, and such
as is current with the Merchant.

By this Time that our Merchant had ended the Relation of his Suits, and cause
of his coming, the Kings Minister with a loud voice called to prayer. Then the
King speedily arose from his Seat, and all his Company went with him, and we
were dismissed till prayer was ended. When the Minister came, there was a large
covering spread over the rich Carpets; the covering was of black and white
clothes, on this they all stood, and when they kneeled, they did kneel with
their faces toward the going down of the Sun, (which is to the West.) Prayer
being ended, the Assembly sat again concerning our Propositions, all other
businesses were laid aside; being now the shutting in of the Evening, there
came a very brave show of lights in before the King. The fore-most that came,
were six Silver Lanthornes, ushered in by a very grave man, having in his hand
a Staff over-laid with Silver, and when he came to the steps of the Pavement,
he put off his shoes, and came to the Carpets, making obedience: so likewise
did those that bore the six Lanthornes; but all the other lights, being one
hundred and thirty, stood round about the Railes. Then the Usher took the
Lantern that had two lights in it, and (making obedience) lifted his arms
aloft, and made an ample Oration, which being ended, they gave all a great
Salame, or kind of Reverence with a loud voice, and departed every one, and
placed the lights according as the several offices and places did require.
Here we stayed till it was between Eight and Nine of the Clock at Night, but
nothing accomplished; only we had some fair promises of furtherance by some
of the Courtiers: Thus we were dismissed for that time, and we returned for our
Lodging at Mersimomeins house at Coteke, accompanied with a great multitude of
people, and many Lights, who much admired our kind of habit and fashion.

The second day, we came in the Afternoon again to the Court before the
Nabob, which being set, there met us at the Derbar (or Councell-house) our
old Enemy the Nockada of the Frigget, who made a great complaint against us,
that we had sought to make prize of his Vessel, and to take his goods by
force: he had likewise given a great gift to a Nobleman to stand his friend,
and speak in his behalf.

Our Merchant pleaded likewise, that all such Vessels as did Trade on the
Coast, and had not a Pass either from the English, Danes, or Dutch, was
lawful Prise. He answered, that he had a Pass; our Merchant bid him produce
the same before the Nabob, and he would clear him: to which the Nabob and the
whole Council agreed: but he could show no Pass from any of the aforementioned
3. Nations, but he showed two Passes from (or of) the Portugals, which they
call by the name of Fringes, and thus was he cast, and we had the better of him
before the King and Council.

But then stood up the Nobleman to whom he had given a Reward, (who had also a
little knowledge or insight in Sea-affaires) and said, what Stranger seeking a
free Trade, could make prize of any Vessel within any of the Sounds, Seas,
Roads, or Harbors of his Majesty's Dominions? This he spoke not so much for
the good of the King, but thinking and hoping that the Vessel by his means
should have been cleared with all her goods, and the Nockado (or Pilot)
aquitted, that so by those means he might have gained the more and greater
Rewards; but he was quite deceived in his vain expectation. For the Nabob
perceiving that she belonged to Pyplye, a Port-Towne of the Portugals, whom
the Nabob affects not, where the Portugals were resident, and that she was not
bound for any of his Ports, he made short work with the matter, and put us
all out of strife presently, for he confiscated both vessel and goods all to
himself. Whereby the Nobleman was put by his hopes, who was indeed a
Governor of a great Sea-towne, whereto much Shipping did belong, and many
Ships and other Vessels were builded. Our Merchant seeing that he could not
make prize of the Vessel or the goods, nor have any satisfaction for the
wrongs which he and our men had received, he rose up in great anger, and
departed, saying, that if he could not have Right here, he would have it in
another place, and so went his way, not taking his leave of the Nabob, nor of
any other, at which abrupt departure they all admired.

The third day in the Morning the King sent for our Merchant by the Lord
Comptroller of his Court, who went with him accompanied with Mersimomein and
others to the Derbar, where there was a very grave Assembly set: Then came the
King, who being set, he smiled upon our Merchant, and (by an Interpreter)
demanded the cause why he went away the last Evening (or overnight) in such
an anger? To whom he answered boldly and with a stern undaunted countenance,
that he had done his Masters of the Honorable Company wrong, and (by his might
and power) had taken their Rights from them, which would not be so endured or
put up. The King hearing this, demanded of the Assembly, which were as well
Merchants as Nobles, (in the Persian Tongue) of what strength and force our
shipping were, their Number, Burden, and Force, where our chief place of
Residence was for Trading: He likewise sent for Persian Merchants, and did
diligently enquire of them the same demands and questions: who answered, that
we had great Trading on the Coast of Cormadell, India, and Persia; and likewise
in the South-Seas, as Bantam, Japaro, Janbee, and Macossor: They further told
the Nabob, that our Shipping were great, and of great force withal, and
likewise if his pleasure was such as to be at ods with us, there neither could,
would, or should any Vessel, great or small, that did belong to these parts,
stir out of any Havens, Ports, or Harbors of his Majesty's Dominions, but
they would take them, and make prize of them, for they were not able to
withstand their force. At these words the King said but little, but what he
thought, is beyond my knowledge to tell you.

Then the King turned to our Merchant, and told him in Moors Language (the
which he could very well understand) that he would grant the English free
Trade upon these Conditions following.

That if the English Ship or Ships should at any time see any Ship or Ships,
Junke or Junks, or any other Vessel of the Nabobs, or any of his Subjects in
distress either by foul Weather, or in danger of Enemies, or in any other
extremity, that we (the English) should help, aid, and assist them to our
powers; or if it happened they were in want of Cables, Anchors, Water,
Victuals, or any other necessaries whatsoever that did belong to them, that we
the said English should help them as we were able. Likewise that we the said
English should not make prize of any Vessel belonging to any of the Dominions
of the said Nabob, and that we the said English should not make prize of any
Ship, Vessel, or Vessels, within the Ports, Rivers, Roads, or Havens of the
Nabob, though they were our Enemies; but at the Sea we might make prize of
them if we could: to this all our Merchants agreed. Then the King caused
Articles on his part to be drawn, and published in this manner following.

Here I the said Nabob, Vice-King and Governor of the Country of Woodia,
under the great and mighty Prince Pe Desha Shassallem, do give and grant free
License to the aforesaid Ralph Cartwright Merchant, to trade, buy, sell,
export and transport by Shipping, either off or upon the shore, not paying any
Junkeon or Custom, nor any under me to cause them to pay any: Likewise, that
if they do convay Goods by shore between Factory and Factory, or any other
place for their better advantage of gain within these his Dominions, I
straightly charge and command that no Governor, Custome-gatherer, or other
Officer whatsoever, shall make or cause them to pay any Junken or Customs; but
shall suffer them to pass free, without let, hinderance, molestation, or
interruption of stayage, but shall (I say) help and further them in any thing
that shall be the furtherance of their business. Moreover, I do grant to the
English Merchants to take ground, and to build Houses fitting for their
Employments, and where they shall see convenient for their best utility and
profits, without let or hinderance of any of my loving Subjects.

And further I do give and grant to the English Merchants free License, to
build Shipping, small or great, or any other Vessel which they shall think
best and fittest for their occasions and uses; they paying no more than the
Custom of the Country to the Workmen; and likewise to repair shipping if any
such occasion be to require it.

Likewise ^ the Nabob do command, that no Governor or Officer whatsoever
under me, shall do the English any wrong, or cause any to be done unto them,
as they shall answer it at their perils, wheresoever they are resident:
Neither shall any wrong be done to any servant of theirs, that does belong unto
them.

And again, if any Controversy should be betwixt the English, and the people
of the Country, if the matter be of any moment, then the said Cause shall be
brought before me the Nabob at the Court at Malcandy, and at the Derbar I will
decide the matter, because the English may (...) no wrong, (behaving themselves
as Merchants ought to do.)

This License formed and given at the Royal Court of Malcandy, the third day
of May 1633, but not sealed till the fifth day of May following at night.

The fourth day of May the King sent a great Banquet to the House of
Marsymomeine, to our Merchants and there came to this Feast the great man that
did speak on the Nockado's side against us, at the Darbar, about the Frigget
aforesaid: He brought with him to our Merchant for a present a Bale of Sugar, a
Bottle of Wine, and some sweet meats, saying, he was sorry for the things
before done and past, but if any thing lay in him to do the Company and him
any good, he and they should be sure of it. This man was Governor of a Town
called Bollasarye, a Sea Town where shipping was built; (as is before said) his
name was Mercossom, and understanding that the Merchant was minded to travail
that way, he promised him to do him all the courtesies that could be.

The fifth day of May in the afternoon we were before the King again at the
Darbar, at our coming he called for our Perwan, (which was our Warrant or
License) and then he added to it the free leave of coining of Moneys, and
sealed it with his own Signet himself, and so all things was strongly
confirmed and ratified for our free trade in his Territories and Dominions.

The sixth day of May the King made a great Feast at the Court where were
assembled the most and chiefest of all his Nobles and Governors that were
under his command, and being set, he sent the Lord Comptroller of his house for
the English Merchant Master Ralph Cartwright to come unto him, who came with
all speed, and when he was in the presence of the King, he caused him to sit
down by him, and take part of the Feast, (for the King was exceeding merry and
pleasant) then the King caused a Vest or Robe to be brought, and with his own
hands did put it upon our Merchant; and thus was he invested and entertained in
the presence of this Royal, Noble, and great assembly.

This day the King was in Magnificent State and Majesty, on rich Persian
Carpets: (as is before mentioned) But over this great Company was a large
Canopy of branched Velvet of four colors, and in the seames between the
joynings of it was yellow Taffata, which hung down like unto the Vallence of a
bed, it was 80 foot in length, and 40 foot in breadth, and it was upheld with
four small Pillars, overlayd with Silver, whose height was twelve foot, and
in thickness one foot. Here we staid till about the hour of five in the
afternoon, and then we took our leaves of the King, and the rest, and
departed to Coteke to the house of Mersymomeine.

Thus have I plainly and truly related the occurrences that happened at the
Court of Malcandy, but although the Palace of the Nabob be so large in Extent,
and so magnificent in Structure, yet he himself will not lodge in it, but
every night he lodges in Tents with his most trusty servants and Guards about
him, for it is an abomination to the Moguls (which are white men) to rest or
sleep under the roof of a house that another man has builded for his own
honor. And therefore he was building a Palace, which he purposed should be a
Fabric of a Rest, and future Remembrance of his renown: He likewise keeps
three hundred Women, who are all of them the daughters of the best and ablest
subjects that he has.

The seventh day of May we went up and down in the Town of Coteke; it is very
populous of people, and has daily a great Market in it of all sorts of
necessaries which the Country affords, it is seven Miles in compass, and
has but two great Gates belonging to it; it is three Miles between the one
Gate and the other.

Upon the eighth day of May we went to the Court at Malcandy again to desire
of the King a Warrant, or free Pass, for safe convoy of Letters, or any other
such occasion through his Countries.

Here we found his Majesty sitting in the outward Palace of the Court on the
Pavement, by the Tanke before named, with a very fair Canopy over him, made of
Damask, and upheld by four small Pillars overlayd with Silver, with his
Nobles by him for this effect and purpose following.

He was by the great Mogul commanded to wage War with all expedition against
the King of Culcandouch, (a great Prince neighboring upon his Confines) which
had wrongfully with hostility entered on the Southwest part of his Country, and
had made some spoil and havoc on the same. The King, I say, had here called
all his Commanders, Leaders, and Captains together, giving them a great charge
concerning the good usage of his men, and their best endeavors in the
management and performance of their services in those Wars. He likewise gave
gifts to the Leaders, and money to the Soldiers to encourage courage them. The
Army consisted of 30000 men, which was 10000 Horse, and 20000 foot, armed for
the most part with Bows and Arrows; and some again with Darts, like our
Javelins, but far more sharp; and some again with a kind of Falchon,
Semiter, or like a bended sword by their side: some of which weapons have cut
in sunder two malefactors, which have been condemned to dye, being bound back
to back, at one blow given backwards by the Executioner. But our Commission
being granted, and our business ended finally, our Merchant (reverently) took
his leave of the King; and the King (with his Nobles) did the same to him,
wishing him him all good success in his affairs in his Country; and so we
departed.

The ninth of May we gathered together all our things, and at night we
departed from Coteke.

The tenth, at the hour of two in the Afternoon, we came to the Town of
Harharrapoore, and hosted in the house of our Interpreter.

The eleventh day we went to the Governor of the Town, and showed him our
Fermand, or Commission from the King; the Governor made a great Salame, or
courtsie in reverence unto it, and promised his best assistance and help in
any thing that he could do, and there the said Governor had a small Present
given to him.

The twelfth day of May Master Thomas Colley came to us at Harharrapoore, and
the rest of the English men with him, with all the goods; then we hired a
house for the present, till such time as ours might be builded, for our further
occasions to the Companies use.

This Town of Harharrapoore is very full of people, and it is in bounds six
or seven Miles in compass; there are many Merchants in it, and great plenty of
all things, here is also cloth of all sorts great store, for there does belong
to this Town at the least 3000 Weavers that are house keepers, besides all
other that do work, being bound or hired.

The foureteenth day the two Merchants went abroad, and found out a plat of
ground fitting to build upon; then they laid the Kings Deroy on it, and seaz'd
upon it for the Companies use, and there was no man that did, or durst
gainsay them for doing the same.

The fifteenth day they hired workmen and laborers to measure the Ground, and
to square out the foundation of the House, and likewise for the Wall, which was
one hundred Conets square, which is fifty yards, every Conet being half a
yard, or a foot and half: and it behoved us to make haste, for the time of
the great Raines was at hand.

The sixteenth day they laid the foundation of the Walls, being nine foot
thick, much haste was made, and many workmen about it; but this our first
work was but labor lost and cast away, for it came to nothing.

For on the eighteenth day the Raines began with such force and violence, that
it beat down all our Work to the ground, and washed it away, as if there had
not been any thing done; this Storm continued without ceasing, (day and
night) more or less three weeks complete.

The sixteenth day of June Master Ralph Cartwright took his journey for
Ballazary, and two English men with him, who were Edward Peteford, and William
Withal, and from thence he was minded to travail further into the Country of
Bengalla; and the eighth of July following we received a Letter from Master
Cartwright, concerning his proceedings and troublesome passage; for he found
not the Country according as was reported, by reason of the time of the great
Raines that fell, yet he was safely arived in Pipely.

The three and twentieth day of July in the Morning, we had news that there
was an English Ship arived at Hassarpoore, and had shot of three pieces of
Ordnance, and stayed all night, and the next day in the morning, she having not
a Boat to come from her, she weighed Anchor, and set sail for Ballazary.

The 25 of August, in the morning, Master Thomas Colley dyed of a violent Fever
at Harharrapoore.

The seventh day of September I received Letters from Master Cartwright from
Ballazary, and withal he sent me the name of the Ship, to wit, the good Ship
Swan, and Master Edward Austin (or Ostin) commander.

The nineteenth day of September there came two Merchants from Ballazaray to
Harharrapoore, the one of them his name was Master Robert Littler, the other
Master John Powlle, Purser of the Ship Swan.

The fourth day of October our Merchant Master Robert Littler, took a journey
for Iaggernat, and he returned the sixteenth day to the Factory at
Harharrapoore.

A brief Relation of the great City of Jaggarnat.
THe fifth day of November I was sent about the Companies business to the
great City of Iaggarnat, and I travailed this day to a Town called Madew, and
I lodged all night in a Pagod, or Pogoda.

The sixth day I William Bruton travailed eight Course, which is thirty two
Miles English, and came to a Town named Amudpoore, where I found met together,
of men, women, and children, more than 3000; and all of them were Travelers
and Raungers of the Country, having no residence, but are called Ashmen;
(because they do cast ashes upon themselves) also they are called Fuckeires,
which are Religious names given to them for their supposed holiness, but
indeed they are very Rogues, such as our Gypsies be here in England, when they
see their time and opportunity to put Rogery and Villainy in practice: at this
Town I made no great stay, for I had a good charge about me of the Companies.

The seventh day of November in the Morning about two of the Clock, I hasted
from Amudpoore, over a passage, and so for Iaggarnat, which was ten Course
between, that is forty Miles English, so about the hour of four in the
afternoon, I drew near to this great City of Iaggarnet, to which I passed
over a great stone Causy, on either side whereof was a very goodly Tanke to
wash in; this Causey was about half a mile in length; then as I came to the
West end of this City, I entered into a very fair place for Situation,
furnished with exceeding store of pleasant Trees and Groves, and on either side
of the way Tankes of Water and Pagodoes in the midst of them. From thence I
passed up into the High-streete, where I was entertained by a Brammine, (which
is one of their Religious men, or Idolatrous Priests) but let his Religion be
what it would, into his House I went, and there I lodged all the time of my
stay there.

The Eighth day of November, in the Morning, after I had gone about the
affairs that I was sent to do, I went to view the City in some part, but
especially that mighty Pagodo or Pagod, the Mirror of all wickedness and
Idolatry: Unto this Pagod, or house of Satan (as it may rightly be called) do
belong 9000. Brammines or Priests, which do daily offer Sacrifices unto their
great God Jagarnat, from which Idol the City is so called; and when he is but
named, then all the people in the Town and Country do bow and bend their
knees to the ground, as the Moabites did to their Idol Baal-Peor: Here they
do also offer their Children to this Idol, and make them to pass through the
Fire; and also they have an abominable custom to cause or make them pass
through the Water as Sacrifices unto the said ungodly God.

This Idol is in shape like a great Serpent, with seven Heads, and on the
cheeks of each Head it has the form of a Wing upon each cheek, which wings
do open and shut, and flappe, as it is carried in a stately Chariot, and the
Idol in the amidst of it: and one of the Moguls sitting behind it in the
Chariot upon a convenient place with a Canopy, to keep the Sun from injuring
of it.

When I (with horror) beheld these strange things, I called to mind the 13.
Chap. of the Revel. and 1. Verse, and likewise the 16. and 17. Verses of the
said Chapter, in which places there is a Beast, and such Idolatrous worship
mentioned, and those sayings in that Text are herein truly accomplished in the
16. Verse: for the Brammines are all marked in the forehead, and likewise all
that come to worship the Idol, are marked also in their foreheads; but those
that do buy and sell, are all marked in the left shoulder; and all such as do
dare or presume to buy and sell, (not being marked) are most severely and
grievously punished.

They have builded a great Chariot that goes on 16. Wheels of a side, and
every Wheel is five foot in height, and the Chariot it self is about Thirty
foot high. In this Chariot (on their great Festival days at night) they do
place their wicked God Jagarnat, and all the Bramines (being in number 9000.)
do then attend this great Idol, besides of Ashmen and Fuckeirs some
Thousands, (or more than a good many) The Chariot is most richly adorned with
most rich and costly Ornaments, and the aforesaid wheels are placed very
complete in a round Circuit so Artificially, that every wheel does do his
proper office without any impediment: For the Chariot is aloft, and in the
Center betwixt the Wheels; they have also more than 2000. Lights with them:
And this Chariot with the Idol is also drawn with the greatest and bestmen of
the Town, and they are so eager and greedy to draw it, that whosoever by
shouldering, crowding, shoving, heaving, thrusting, or any violent way can but
come to lay a hand upon the Ropes, they think themselves blessed and happy.
And when it is going along the City, there are many that will offer themselves
a Sacrifice to this Idol, and desperately lie down on the ground, that the
Chariot-wheeles may run over them, whereby they are killed outright; some get
broken arms, some broken legs, so that many of them are so destroyed, and by
this means they think to merit Heaven.

There is also another Chariot which has but 12. wheels, and that is for an
Idol or a Devil of an inferior rank, or lower degree; and he does not go
abroad or in progress, but when the Bramines do please. This Pagodo is
situated by the Seaside, and is to be seen into the Sea at the least 10. or
12. Leagues; (for the Air and Sky is clear and pure in those parts, that it
may be seen far) It is enclosed with a Wall of Stone, much about 22. foot in
height, and the enclosure is foure-square, and every square is 150.
Geometrical paces; so the four squares in the Total are 600 paces or yards
about: it stands due East, West, North, and South; and every square has a
great gate for the entrance into it, but the South and West-gates are barred up
till the Festival times, and none commonly used but the North and East-gates,
but especially the North-gate; for it has all its prospect into the high or
chief street of this City.

Now in some other parts of this Country the people do adore and worship
other creatures for their Gods: some worship the Celestial, as the Sun,
Moon, and Stars: some again Terrestrial, and they of the Mountains,
Valleys, and Woods: some Aquaticall, and those of the Seas, Rivers, and
Fountains: some running after a beast like an Ox, the Dog, and the Cat; some
after the Hawke, some after the sheep, and some so foolish, that they doted
upon the very Herbs and Flowers in their Gardens. For indeed they have very
rare Flowers for color, such as I never saw in England, or elsewhere. Some of
this Nation have erected to themselves a God, in the likeness of Jupiter, and
do chain him by the leg in their Pagod, to the intent that he might not
leave them, nor forsake them; and keep continual watch and Guard njght and
day, lest any of their Enemies should come and entice him away by bribery, and
so to prevail with him to come forth of it, and by that means their City come
to ruin and destruction: so much for their Idolatry.

This City of Bengalla is very great and populous, it has many Merchants in
it, and yields very rich Commodities, as good Cloth in abundance, Sugars,
Silks, Taffataes, Stuffes, Wax, Gumlacke, Butter, Oil, Rice, and Wheat,
with many other good commodities vendable. It is likewise famous for its
multitude of Rhinoceroes; it has a Beast much like unto a Unicorne, and
because it has but one Horn, some do believe and take it for the Unicornes
Horn for the virtue it has in it. This City was once free from Taxations,
till Ehebar the great Mogull caused it to be united to his Empire. The chiefest
Cities which join nearest to it, are Catigan and Satagan on the Banks of
Ganges Eastward: It was once the Seat of the great Bengalian King Malchiram,
as Mr. Purchase relates in his Pilgrimage. This City lies Westward toward Pega,
and near to Coswin and (...), two famous Cities for Traffic and Situation;
lying upon the River, and within some few Leagues of the Gulf called the
Bengallian gulf, which is a very dangerous one; for at some certain times of
the year it is very hazardable for Vessels to pass without shipwreck: There
be many other Lakes and Rivers which I could mention, but for Brevity sake I
omit them. But there is no strong drink suffered to be drank within the City,
except a Stranger do bring it in privately, and so it is not known: and thus
much shall suffice for the impious Religion of Jaggarnat, and the stately Court
of Malcandy.

The most of these people have no Learning, but do all things by memory: They
wear commonly long hair, and are very strict in their time of Fasting; but
afterward, when the Ceremony is over, then they freely commit all kind of
wickedness again. In some places they have their Edicts or Laws written, and
in other places unwritten: They know not what belongs to Bonds or Bills, and
they lend without Witnesses, or any sealing of Writings, even upon their own
Words: And he that his found to deny his promise, has the tops of his Fingers
cut off. Their habit is various and different; some of them do go in Linen
or Woollen; some are clothed with Beasts skins, or Birds feathers; others go
naked, and do cover only their secret parts: Their Bodies are for the most
part black, which is not accidental, but naturally arising from the quality
of the seed they are begotten: Most of them are of a large stature; they have
many Wives which they purchase and buy of their Parents: some they keep to be
their Vassals to do their drudgery; others, which are handsomer, for issue
sake and pleasure.

Here are greater store of Beasts than in any other part of the Indies: as
Oxen, Camells, Lions, Dogs, Elephants: they have Dogs which are as fierce
as Lions, with which they usually hunt and pursue those wild beasts as we do
our Bucks, for their delight and pleasure. They ride on goodly Horses booted
and spurred; so likewise do their Women.

These people are notable ingenious men; let it be in what Art or Science
soever, and will imitate any workmanship that shall be brought before them: for
the most part of them hate idleness, and those that do not study in some Art
or other, are counted droanes, and stand for Ciphers, and dead men amongst the
best and chiefest sort of people: They have a Custom, that always before
dinner they do call their Children and young people in their houses together,
and do examine how they had spent their time from the Sunne-rising, and if
they could not give a good account of it, they were not to be admitted to the
Table; and so every day, and if they did not the next time improve themselves
in some knowledge of laudable things, they are most severely punished and
chastised.

These Barbarous and Idolatrous people, although they be so ignorant in the
true worship of God, cannot endure a perjured person, nor a common swearer, nor
a common drunkard, but will punish them very severely by stripes, or else by
forfeiture of their Commodities: A perjured person, say they, is an arch enemy
to their God and them: and it is so hateful, that if it be committed by their
Father, Brother, or kindred, they do presently condemn him, according to the
nature of the offense: for though they love the perjury, by reason of the
benefit that comes unto them by it, yet they hate the person even to death:
for, say they, he which was sometimes perjured in their behalf, may undo
what he has done, and speak the truth when time serves: They instance a story
of Soleman the great Turk, who loathed and abhorred the Traitor that betrayed
Rhodes unto him, and in stead of his daughter, whom he expected to be given him
in Marriage for a reward, he caused him to be flayed and salted, and told him
in derision, that it was not fit for a Christian to marry with a Turk, unless
he put off his old skin: likewise they instance Charles the fourth, who
rewarded the soldiers (that betrayed their Lord and Master Krantius) with
counterfeit coin; and being desired to deliver them current money, answered,
that counterfeit Coin was the proper wages for counterfeit service: Thus a
liar or perjured person amongst these Idolatrous people they will not believe,
though he had spoken of sworn the truth: for he that has been once false, is
ever to be suspected in the same kind of falsehood: wherefore just and upright
dealing is aptly compared to a glass, which being once broken, can never be
repaired; or to opportunity, which once omitted, can never be recovered. And so
I conclude this relation, wishing all men to prefer knowledge and honesty
before wealth and riches; the one soon fades, the other abides for ever: for
amongst all the goods of this life, only wisdom is immortal.

FINIS.

