A NARRATION, BRIEFLY CONTAINING the History of the French Massacre,
especially that horrible one at Paris, which happened in the year 1572.

In the passage of which, are handled certain Questions both Politic and
Ethike, properly fit for Courtiers and Statesmen.

The condition also of this present time is discovered, by comparing it with
the state of those lamentable times.

Which in true love and sincerity are by Gods grace set down, to be publicly
read, and examined, by the Nobility and Gentry of England, France, Germany, and
the Low Countries.

PROVE. SALOM. 24. They that say to the wicked man thou art just, the people
shall curse them, and the companies shall hate them: They which rebuke him
shall be praised, and upon them shall come a blessing. Ibid. Cap. ^9. A
righteous King raises the earth, and righteous men abhorr^ the ungodly man.
LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham. 1618.

To the RIGHT REVEREND Father in God, and most worthy Prelate, Doctor N. F. the
famous Patron of Learning, and learned men, I do humbly give and dedicate (as
a Monument and small Pledge of my great love and duty) this little History,
touching the lamentable slaughter of godly men, throughout the Kingdom of
FRANCE, which happened in the year 1572. on the Feast day of S. Bartholmew,
and the next days following. *

A NARRATION, CONTAINING THE History of the French Massacre, especially that
horrible one at PARIS, which happened in the year 1572.
Right Reverend; I Think that no man is ignorant, unless he be altogether a
stranger to worldly affairs, that many have written many things touching the
famous persons in Learning, or War, whom this our Age has brought forth, as
also touching the sundry occurrences befallen in this blessed Kingdom of
England, as also in France, Italy, and the higher and lower Germany: But in so
great a number of ancient and Modern Writers, I do wonder there has been
none, that as yet has particularly set sorth that cruel butchery of good men,
made in the Kingdom of France, in the year 1572. on Bartholmew day. Truly,
if I knew it had been done by any (though it were but by snatches, or in
parts, and pieces) I had rather be silent, after the passage of so many years,
then bring forth any thing unseasonably, that might either breed offense to
your Lordship, or the Reader. But (as I have formerly said) seeing I am fully
persuaded, there is none that already has purposely dealt in this Argument, I
deemed it as free, and as lawful for me as for others, to run in this race,
and in this Field to make trial of my slender ability.

Let it please you therefore (my good Lord) at this time, when others out of a
plentiful and rich harvest have brought to this Bartholmew Fair abundance and
store enough of fruit; That I, out of my little, barren, and poor Garden, may
with a pure heart and hand offer a few leaves to your liking. And I beseech you
vouch safe to assist and further me with your honorable good will, and favor,
in the discourse and discovery of this business, according to your accustomed
piety, and your remarkable virtue and Learning so famoused both in your own
Country, as also in foreign.

Since then the whole matter is so plain and evident to all good men, and of
upright judgment, it shall not be amiss, if in the beginning we seek out
the cause from whence so heinous and barbarous an Act proceeded. It is certain
(if we may believe Caesar in his Commentaries) that the French Nation was of
old so fierce and cruel, that they did be-smeare even their Altars with humane
blood, they would hale and tear innocent and harmless men to be sacrificed:
Nay more, that robberies and outrages, done out of the Walls and borders of
their City, they did not account dishonest, or to be blamed. But from the
time that it was once reformed by laws, and worthy discipline, and that it
learned to obey one King, it presently fell from that rude and barbarous kind
of life to humanity, and Ciuility; So as at this instant we may truly, and not
unfitly term France, the Mother of Ciutill courtesy, and that from our
selves, by our own experience. But before I wade further into other things, me
thinks this one cause should be first chiefly examined, namely, from whence
that Nation (once so cruel and savage, and now styled with the praise of
Courtesy and Ciuility) should draw the matter and groundwork of this wicked
and perfidious deed we now speak of? And more; what should move Charles their
King, then of green and tender years, (from whom nothing but Acts of glory and
Nobility were expected, both in regard of his excellent forwardness, as of his
most Royal disposition both in body and mind,) that he should so favor these
men, which under the pretext and counterfeit zeal of ancient Religion, bring
about and compass any thing with the simple people? From hence it is that
these griefs arise; by this only bait was King Charles caught; by these
circumstances and by-ways was that Prince led and misse-led, being in his
first years Noble, mild, and gentle; That he (with grief I speak it) in
whom (as Buchanan the Prince of Poets in our age, says godly and truly) the
Image of the most high God ought to be, and shine, should abandon himself to
wickedness and villainy, and all manner of impudency and perjury. But that
Christ (the mouth of Truth) has foretold it should be so, that Religion,
which should be the bond of Peace and Society, yet often through the subtilty
of Satan, and malice of men, proves the occasion and matter of vproares,
debate, and tumults. And verily, he that writ this, writ not vainly, neither
did he write toys or fables when he said, --

Quod saepius lim Relligio peperit scelerosa atque impia facta.
That Religion of yore has brought.
Forth, deeds vile, wicked and naught.
And in another place;

Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum.
Religion has the skill
To persuade to much ill.
But that we may come to the purpose, and our speech may return from whence it
has digressed, he is far out of the way that persuades himself, or
imagines, that this deed so detestable was bred or forged in any other place,
then in the shop of the Bishop of Rome, the Anuile of all wickedness.
Nevertheless, it is not to be thought that this Pylote sat alone at the Helm
in this Ship, (so fully fraught with all impiety) but that he had Mariners,
and Seafaring fellows enough of that sort, carefully trained up in any villainy.
For first, what parts in this Act and deed may not the Conspiracy of the
Council of Trent challenge to it self? What Company in this Army does not the
encouragement of the Cardinals and Spaniards lead? What has not the fury and
rage of the cutthroat Jesuits attempted in these Tents and fields of
ungodliness? who make their daily vows and prayers to spill the life and
blood of godly Kings and Princes, especially of those, which either in words or
deeds deny to yield any duty or homage to this ravenous Wolf of Rome. And that
nothing (forsooth) might be wanting, there was added to this Council, (and so
holy Congregation) the Council devised and advised by that Family which long
since has so greedily thirsted after the blood of good and godly men, which
when I name to be the family of Guyse, I do even in one breath shut up the
many, yea the infinite miseries and calamities of France: This is that family
that instructed the King in all the wicked principles of Craft and Deceit, and
egged him on to that foul and most abominable deed. This is that, which had
rather have all France utterly to sink and perish, then see (much less
endure) any great man to reside in the Kings Court, who has been either noted
to be of Religion reformed, or accounted famous for learning and virtue. Of
this family (so praiseworthy) not any unprofitable or base and unworthy Member
but the very Head was that notable and Memorable Cardinal, whom whosoever it
was that matched with a certain Counselor of the Emperor Decius, did him
right, of whom the Ecclesiastical History writes, that he was called The
Minister of the Devil, because (far worse, and more mischienous then the
Emperor himself) he stirred up and incensed as many as he could against the
Christians. This is that scarlet Cardinal, whom one termed (not unfitly) The
Cateline of our time, that by fraud or treacheries, by right or wrong, omitted
not to invent a thousand means of doing mischief.

He would rejoice and take a great delight,
If he could once draw Brethren even to fight.
All his felicity was to fill households full of batred and enmity, that purpled
hindge and proppe of the Roman Bishop, left nothing undone that might cut
asunder the conditions of Peace, and might nourish the seeds of war, and
discords, or give fuel to the fire of factions, vproares, and murders. To
conclude, in that very deed, that vassaile of Antichrist might show there is no
mischief or attempt so foul or hateful, which has not issued from out the
Popes roof. There is nothing in this Clergy sound or unspotted; Nothing so
holy or sanctified, which perfidious people use not to break and blemish with
their periuries. Witnesses hereof are innumerable Popes, many Cardinals, and he
Principal, of whom (even now) we made mention, not to his praise or good
report, but as he deserved, for his cruelty and inhumane dealings, committed
against good and learned men; yea, against his own Country, to his perpetual
shame and infamy. This mark has that man (in life and conversation so impure
and impudent) branded himself withal, and it will never be wiped away, or
blotted out of remembrance, so long as there remains in France any relic of
Virtue or Learning; Nay, the (...) impostures, and wicked practices of this
Scarlet-Prelate, shall live to the memory of Posterity, so long as the
Christian world endures. This Man forsooth, and Men of the same coat (whose
hearts harbor nothing but wicked thoughts and purposes) will be the light of
the world, and not the spite; the band, and not the firebrand; the best, and
not the beasts; These (I say) will be the Salt of the earth, who not only have
that little they have unsavory, and unfit for use, but as Salust says of
Cateline, which is worse, are of an evil and perverse disposition, impudent,
undermining, and changeable: These (to be short) are those good Shepherds
which endeavor not to teach and feed their flock, but are no sooner entered into
holy Orders, but are given to civil wars, murders and rapines, learn to
devour their sheep, and (as I may speak with Homer) to weaue deceipts; or as
Plautus says, neatly to frame tales and entrappings for them. And this (I
warrant you) gets them great praise. Let men of upright judgment censure these
things, and if they be silent and will not, the very stones will speak in many
Prouninces of France especially, as also in the greatest part of Italy, and
throughout all Spain, where the Popes crafts are not yet discovered, but by
the just judgment of God, lie still lurking, and unrevealed: Which
notwithstanding, that in their due time they may be brought to light, in spite
of Satan and the wicked-minded, Time, nay, God himself will bring about.
Howsoever let this be thoroughly imprinted in all men's minds, that there is
never any thing more cruel, or more working, then is Idolatry, or the false
worship of God, which as often as it is void of Reason and Truth, seeks to
maintain it self by force, fire, and sword, and by all means to bereave the
true worshippers of God, of the goods and wealth they possess; of the life and
breath they draw; of the light they enjoy. Neither let any wonder here, or be
dismayed, that this both is and was from time to time, and is like to be still,
the lot of the Church, which, as the kingly Prophet witnesses, has from her
Youth upwards been afflicted with many distresses, vexed with injuries and
revilements, and tossed with many storms and tempests: Yet let not any man be
in this heresy, that he judge the true Religion, which we learn out of the
Old and New Testament, to be the cause of wars, vproares, and seditions, nor
that these things are to be ascribed to true -Religion, which by accident
proceed against the Truth, through the malice of men, and of the Devil, God
forbid. Neither, when I write this, do I write contrarieties; for here I mean
the true and right Religion, peaceable and quiet, not that which out of
Lucretius we have noted to be wicked, turbulent, and quarelsome, nor that
Religion so stained and disfigured with Popish infections, and with the
Jesuitical itch of lying and scandalizing. Let them (whosoever they be) that
live in the Popish blindness deny if they can, with a safe and sure conscience,
whither, since through the goodness of God, the light of the Gospel, and true
Religion has clearly shined, the rage and outrage of the Popish kingdom has
not increased? whether out of the same storehouse have not come innumerable
lies, menaces, and hatreds against the Churches of the Gospel? yet it was so.
For (to confirm this our observation) as soon as (King Henry being dead) the
Churches in France, which were neglected afflicted, and oppressed, and lay in
obscurity, began to peer out, and rise; behold that Arch-worke-master of all
deceit and wickedness, that Factor for the Roman Bishop, the Cardinal of
Lorraine, (whom a while since we have somewhat deciphered) that he might make
all possible way to his impious deeds and Tyranny, and might purchase Power
over the life and goods of such as were good men, began to drive all those from
the Kings Court, whom he thought able to cross his faction, or withstand his
godless and wicked attempts, and behaved himself with such malice and
insolence against the Peers, and other Nobles of France, that they consulted
together how they might suppress the immeasurable ambition of this Man, and of
his whole family; whereupon did arise many grievous and deadly ryots and
insurrections, as well at Amboyse, as elsewhere in France. Then did he
hereupon scandalize the Churches, and the chief Men and Rulers of the true
Religion, with inspeakeable calumniations. Then did he burden them with lies,
slanders and deceipts; nay, that this desperate miscreant and out-cast-wretch,
might not ouerslip any nefarious enterprise, he did then charge them with many
feigned and devised offenses. It is surely a thing worth the telling, to show
with what wiles and tricks this Cardinal could lead and misse-leade a number
of people: For even as once the Jews were, in scorn, called of the Gentiles,
the Sabbotheans; and the Christians, of Julian the Apostata, the Galileans:
Even so then, they which embraced the true Doctrine, that they might be accused
as of strange errors before the Solemnity of the Cardinals holy days, were
begun to be called Hugenets; which in-auspitious name, first found and invented
by an unfortunate and accursed Man, stick in the memory of the people of
France; Fie upon both the manner and matter of a wicked deed, and wicked seed:
Nevertheless, let us see upon what groundwork this ridiculous devise is
founded, and that the Cardinal, and his Associates, are busied rather in any
other thing, than in reading and meditating the holy Scriptures. Thus therefore
it is that this honest man would have them named Hugonets, of a certain
vision, which about that time in the night near unto the Town of Tisrwin, the
common people (that beast of many heads) believed to wander up and down: And
now my friends can you forbear laughing? It was thought to be the Ghost of a
certain Monk called Hugh, lately deceased, and because in those times the
Christians, through persecutions, were compelled to keep their meetings in the
night, he caused them to be named Hugonets. Whilst these things were in
doing, and that not one in the whole kingdom was found that durst take in hand
the cause godly men, and of the afflicted Church, our Lord God even beyond all
hope and expectation endewed that most honorable and valiant Nobleman Caspar
Caligni, high Admiral of France, with the spirit of fortitude and incredible
zeal, so as with an undaunted courage, in the very midst of the tumults and
vproares, he presented a Confession of their faith to the King himself,
Francis the second, in the name of the reformed Churches in France, and
pleaded their cause with wonderful wisdom and stoutnesse, at the Kings
Privy Council Table, in the Tower called Callirrhoe. This deed of his, how
much hatred and envy it purchased unto him, (though otherwise a man in high
favor with the King) cannot easily be expressed. After this, all the rowte and
crew of the Popelings made him their only mark to shoot at: He was the man
whom they assalted with all their weapons: He the Prince on whom those wicked
and loathed society cast all their reproaches and contumelies: Above the rest
the family of the Guyses were never wearied with rolling this stone, and
advancing this abominable and prodigious design, that it might glut it self
with the French blood, for which it thirsted, and might alone govern all the
affairs of the Kingdom. They have in very deed approved that Verse of Lucan
to be no toye or idle tale, Nulla fides regni sociis omnisque potestas,
Impatiens consortis erit.
There is no trust in fellow-Kings,
Rule, with a Rival, envy brings.


A great power being levied and gathered at Orleance, where they ruled K.
Francis as they listed, this ungodly family held a Counsel concerning the
Prince of Condee, whom they had imprisoned, and concerning many other
honorable Personages, either to behead them, or to punish them with the
amercement of some great fine to be imposed upon them: Or if they dealt more
mildly with any, to banish and out-lawe them. Who may not here cry out?

Quid non impietas designat? Oh what will not sin and vice attempt?
Item.

O furor, o nimium dominandi innata cupido!
Oh rage, oh too much inbred thirst of rule!
Mean while, he that by his providence, as out of a Watchtower, beholds all
things did break asunder these cruel complots, and commanded King Francis,
breathing out fearful slaughters, to yield and surrender his last breath* But
what of that? Do you think that this wicked generation was any thing moved
at the judgments of God, or at this example, so fresh and evident? No, nothing
at all: But as the Prophet says, The brutish generation of the wicked, is
stark blind in the judgments of God, and has their breast ouercast and
clowded with a thick mist of ignorance: And a factious company, devoted and
given over to sin, rejoice with triumph in their sin, and say in their
hearts, God does not look upon these things.

Therefore these blind men, and leaders of the blind, these enemies of Truth,
were not beaten back from their wicked hopes and sinful practices against
Christ, no, not then, when (young King Francis being dead) whom they had abused
to the destruction of good and godly men, the Churches began every where to
take breath, and sprowt out; but even presently they renewed their
consultations, and went about to entangle some with pleasure and cunning
devises, as Anthony King of Nanarre; some to affright with murders, and all
sorts of cruelty, the foundation of which they lay in the Town of Vassien, and
thrust the miserable Realm into three most bitter civil wars, for the space
of ten whole years. It were a hard thing (or rather impossible for me to
reckon up all their kinds of cruelty by which the Popelings in France have
outstripped the very Tigers and Lions themselves; Yet can I not wink at, or
ouer-skip the horrible deeds of the men of Orleance: These men in the year
69. in one day putting fire underneath, burnt in diverse prisons above two
hundred men of all degrees. Who so understands not, that from them, that
savage and barbarous hatred against the Admiral, and the French Churches,
took beginning, and increase, him I judge to see nothing in a most clear
light.

Let us in the mean while consider what we may learn from that selfsame
hateful peace, which once was restored and set on foot in France. And first
this that the Lord does grant certain truces for a time, lest with the
continuance of mischiefs, the godly should altogether faint and grow feeble,
next, in the uncertainty of that Peace, and the great alteration of things
which for full ten years was in France, we may observe that no true Peace can
be between the World and the true Church: which let the Low Countries and
Christian Princes mark, that we may wholly rely on that peace which God
affords us, and always take heed to our selves of the world, which hates
the light, and the Sons of light, and has this resolution, if it can, to blot
and raze out the very name of Truth, and the Gospel.

But now to the purpose: When as the enemies in two sull years could not by
skirmishes overthrow the forces of the reformed, who wearied, did often refresh
themselves; nor were able either with poison, which they often attempted, to
make away, or in battle to overcome and get the victory, the Admiral being
General of the host, a man for pains vntyred, for dangers valerous, for
practice skillful, for advice discreet and wise, they determined to try it
another way; seeing by open fight they could profit nothing, that by subtilties
and deceit, in which the ungodly are most experienced, and by putting on the
false name of Peace, they might get the upper hand: So, when they knew the
reverence of the reformed Princes, of the Admiral, and of the whole Nobility,
to be great toward the King, and that little credit would be given to them if
they should treat of Peace, which they had so many times broken and infringed,
they make the King himself to personate and be actor of their Tragedy, who to
that purpose auowed he would have nothing more holily and more religiously
observed then the Peace, and thereupon in countenance and speech yielded the
greatest intimation he could of rendering and wishing well to the Nobility of
the Gospel, and entertained Teligni, the Son in law of the Admiral, to many
his secret counsels. He did moreover by all means set forward that marriage of
the King of Navarre with his Sister, as the most holy bond and pledge of Peace,
and made often motion that it might be hastened. What did he more? He fained
he was far at odds with the Pope himself, and took it exceeding ill at his
hands, that he should warn him by his Legate not to marry his Sister to an
Heretic Prince. But oh accursed and unlucky Nupitails. Oh dismal and
unhallowed Bridal. A Bridal they call it: That name they do paint on their
Sin, for that was the dismal day, the first of annoy, not of joy, and the
first sowrce and spring of all mischief.

And although that marriage might then seem to the French Nobility full of
honor and concord, there were notwithstanding some politic persons, and of
greater judgment then others, who thought otherwise, and were not beside the
matter; for by this it came to pass that the King very earnestly sent for the
Peers and Nobles of the Reformed Religion, out of all his kingdom, not so
much to a Bridal, as to a Burial: At which time, had not their minds been
very careless, or rather had it not been the Christians destiny (if I may so
speak) that their hour of death and extreme calamity was come, many
fore-tokens and unhappy signs might have forewarned that mischance, as the
sudden and vnthought-of decease of the Queen of Nauarr: the bitter menaces of
the Popelings throughout all the Realm, who vaunted that Peace would be slight
and short; the secret conference of the Cardinal Lorraine with the Duke of
Alba; his going to Rome about a Sinode; great troops of Soldiers placed in
Roane field, under this pretense, that a Navy must be rigged out against the
Duke of Alba, and many like matters.

But yet when the Princes of the reformed Religion had wholly prepared
themselves, at their great charges, to this wedding, (as the Sons of God are
more simple and less apprehensiue then the sons of this world, and light
beleofe is rather an oversight, then a fault) as to mirth, and the delight of
the King, and that the King did daily either enrich them with gifts, or bewitch
them with flatteries, who would not have thought here had been sure trust?
But, good God, how easily does the countenance deceive us; when as the
selfsame King did so entertain the Admiral himself, as if he had been
the most inward partaker of his deepest secrets?

But alas, alas, on the fourth day after this Wedding, came that last day and
inevitable fate: For as that most valiant Prince, the Admiral, at dinnertime
returned homewards from the Court, he was shot through both his hands with a
bullet out of a Pistol: And (oh grief) what hands? Let him hear, and all
France remember, even those hands which had been borne, made, and vowed for
recovering the liberty and Peace of France. But when as, after this wound
received, he presently fell not dead, and that the bullet had pierced his hands
only, and not his heart, as that impious faction and crew had well hoped, the
Conspiratours and bloud-suckers thought fit, with their wondrous dissimulation,
to draw our men on still, and to conceal their treason: The King upon that
report, bends his eyes and countenance to sorrow, and commands that the party
guilty of that act should be enquired out, promising and proclayming rewards to
him or them which should apprehend him; sends Letters by Posthorses into all
the Provinces of France; in which he protests that this heavy mischance of the
Admiral grieves him to the heart, and that he will revenge this deed by some
notable exemplary punishment.

To conclude, that the Nobility of the true Religion, which was grievously
troubled with so heinous an act, might be secure, and all suspicion taken away,
that they might at unawares and vnpronided be surprised; the King himself,
accompanied with his Mother, and Brethren, repaires to visit the Admiral,
laid on his bed, speaks to him very kindly, and encourages him to be of good
cheer, assuring him certainly that he will thoroughly revenge so vilde an
offense. That virtuous Nobleman then turning himself to the King, I am not
(says he, my Sovereign Liege) careful about this my wound, nor about the
punishment of the Author of this deed, for that I refer, as this my life, so
all my revenge unto God, to whom I wholly make my complaint, and whose sight in
Heaven will be the end of my labors, which I had been to undergo in this
life, and the full fruition of my true happiness: But if it shall please my
gracious and great God to call me from this my worldly station, these three
things (my dread Sovereign) do I most humbly crave and entreat of your
Highness;

First, That you never will suffer the Peace now settled in your Realm to be
broken.

Next, That you fully persuade your self, that it concerns the renown,
glory, and safety of your state, to give aid and assistance to the people of
the Low Countries, most upright men, and most unworthily oppressed, against
that cruel and barbarous Tyrant the Duke of Alba.

Lastly, Let this be steadfastly believed of you, that in all my actions I
accounted nothing more worthy, or more to be regarded, then to defend the
authority of your Majesty's commands against men turbulent, enemies of their
Countries liberty, and endeavoring nothing but the overthrow of their King,
and the laws of God: And this assure your self, that I always have, and will
be ready for the good and safeguard of your Realm, to expose my life and blood
to all kinds of danger.

These, and such like speeches did that worthy Nobleman, full of courage and
magnanimity, though at that time faint and feeble of body, pronounce constantly
and sincerely. The King gone from thence, to free the Admiral and the other
Peers of all fear and suspicion, commands some select Soldiers of his
Guard, such as the Admiral himself would appoint, to be placed in that
street, who should take care lest either the people of Paris, or any others
should assault the Admirals house: The King likewise commands, that for many
of the Peers and Religions Nobles, addicted to the Admiral, which were here
and there diversely dispersed through the City, there should be lodgings
provided in the self same street, that so joined together they might be the
safer, or rather, that coupled together in one heap, as sheep appointed for
the slaughter, they might at one blow be butchered. Who then will doubt, that
there are many regions between the tongue and the thoughts, many cranies and
blind corners in the minds of men? who waighing these things, may doubt the
speech of Truth to be simple, but faynings, craft, and lies to be full of
intricate inuolutions, and to stand in need of many shadows, and pretenses?
There cannot assuredly any more plain or foul example be given of a
dissembling and deceiptfull mind.

Oh good God, that such things should enter into the heart of a Christian, yea,
into the mind of any man, were he never so vile, much less into the heart of
a most Christian king, the Majesty and dignity of whose name only, unless it
withhold us, what shall we here find either kingly or commendable? But I pray
you: To be changeable, subtle, thirsting after the blood of the Nobles, to be
a fainer and dissembler, may you say these are virtues beseeming a Prince, and
Christian king? God forbid. Let us therefore learn by this that we are
oftentimes, most simple in those things wherein we should be most wise, That
the favor of Court is as brittle as Glass. And let all Courtiers learn here
that be honest men, and such as best desetue at their Princes hands. That it
can hardly be they should escape ENVY, HATRED, DESTRUCTION, imprisonments and
other calamities. Let them besides mark advisedly. how changeable the course
of things is in Court. I will, though I digress a little, briefly and closely
express what I mean. I omit ancient matters. But is there any that knows not
the example of a lamentable case which we have in Papinian, in Peter de
Vineis, Moore Aluar de Luna, James Cord, and Columbus, who was most shamefully
and unworthily overthrown by Bombadilla; in Cominaus also, Bussonus,
Consaluns, and infinite others? Nor are there examples old, and new wanting of
this, in the Courts of the Germane Princes. What if we think of that so late,
and fresh in memory, which fell out in this your blessed Realm of England, and
in the Realm of France? Does not this Italian, so quickly raised out of the
dust, without any desert of his, to such great wealth and honors, give us an
apparent example hereof? unless they be stark blind, all men see it plainly.
Therefore if we have any wit, let us be taught by the example of others, and
not slightly pass over the remembrance of what happened to the Admiral, a
most valerous Peer of happy memory. For (Oh good God) how soon, how easily,
was King Charles carried from his accustomed courtesy, and mildness toward
the Admiral and his followers, unto an incredible distaste, and bitterness; so
as himself procured the chief Nobles of the reformed Religion, and amongst
therest that most valiant worthy, and the very Atlas of all France, to be
murdered in the Court and entrance of his Palace, and out of his windows
(with shame enough) called upon his guard, and animated them on to do those
villainies? yet could they scarce satisfy his desire therein, it was so great,
and greedy. On the same day therefore which was the four and twentieth of
August, about four of the clock in the morning, when those Noblemen were all
of them sound asleep, and the Admiral himself had prepared himself ready
for rest: Behold, at unawares, there was a great hurly-burly in the same
street, a huge noise, and at the very same instant Ryots and Assaults on every
house. What do they then think you? The savage and unruly Soldiers break
down the doors, hurry and ouerturne all things. Then, I beseech you, of what
mind shall we think that godly and sore-wounded Peer was? Surely, not
forgetting his woonted constancy when he saw his death, yea most cruel death,
instantly to approach, he willed a Minister of Gods Word, whom he had about
him in his Chamber to say prayers, and wholly gave himself to godly and devout
meditations: Afterward sending away his Servants, that every one as well as he
could might shift for himself, weakly raising himself out of his bed, he sat
down on a stool, that he might, as it were, go meet death, which he knew,
and did foresee would be happy for him in the Lord: And what he had formerly
presaged in his mind, fell out afterward so indeed; for without any stop or
stay, a damned villain, chosen out of the whole rabble, a shameless cutter
and cutthroat of the train of the Duke of Guyse, after he had made himself
way with his sword to the Admirals Chamber (oh deed most wicked and accursed)
driving his Lance with all his maine force, he pearc't through his sides and
intrailes. Then came another ympe of Satan, who with gashes bemangled his
Heroical and Peerless face. Oh desperate villains, oh Devils incarnate, oh
monsters and prodigious men! Could not the revenging hand of the most powerful
God (oh wicked and detestable Soldier) restrain and astonish thee? Could not
the Chambers threashold, the very walls, nor the countenance of so great a
Peer (whose name had always been dreadful to all wicked and hateful
persons) affright or amaze thee? Could not the words of this great and godly
Captain move thee to pity; who with a loud voice admonished that first
cutthroat rushing into his Chamber, that he should spare him, a man now of
great years, and sore wounded? Nay, which is more, this Peer more then half
dead, was then thrown headlong out of his Chamber window, that the eyes of the
Dukes of Annale, of Guyse, and his other enemies, who in the backeside of the
house stood longing for that sight, might be glutted and satisfied; and that
(as the Grecians did in times past to dead Hector) they might insult and
triumph over him.

O savage and barbarous men, who breaking all the bars of shame and of Nature
her self, that one unpardonable sin might be heaped upon the neck of another,
do furiously assault all the other Peers and Nobles; Men of all degrees are
massacred; all the household of the King of Navarre, and Prince of Condee are
slain; they of most name amongst the other Nobles, the Earl of Rupefueldanus,
and Tel^gni, the Admirals Son in Law, whom the King before seemed to hold so
dear, that he could not be without them, were all put to the sword.

Oh damnable and inexorable Man-killers, for whom it was not enough to
slaughter and mangle their bodies, but that they run also upon their goods,
which were then laid open to the will and prey of these cutthroats, who in
their own estates before, having been most needy, base, and ragged, are now
with other men's goods profuse and riotous: Neither had any good man any thing
in his house of any ancient Monument from his Ancestors; any thing (I say)
never so dear, or well-esteemed, that could escape the clutches of these
rapinous thieves and burglarers. The carcass of the Admiral was haled into
the streets, and abused with infinite reproaches by the rash, base, and
ignoble vulgar, and a long time tumbled up and down in the kennels and dirt:
At last, the head being cut off (which some say was sent to Rome was most
despightfully hanged up on a public gallows without the City. Oh unworthy
deed! oh madness! oh barbarous fury, and most estranged from all sense or
feeling of humanity! Did it become your envy and treachery to dragge a man to
an ignominious execution of Natures frame, almost divine, and of a mind
altogether good and great; a man fit to have been kept for the doubtfullest
and hardest times of the Commonwealth, whom his most famous deseruings toward
his Country, his many noble acts, and the glory of his virtue had raised up to
Heaven? And yet for all this he had nothing left him, which the rage and fury
of the Soldiers could deprine him of. But what could not be taken from a
valiant and godly man, a steadfast faith in God, an immortal memory of his name
and reputation; those, neither wounds, nor words, nor bloody cut-throates could
bereave from him.

Whilst these things are thus done at Paris, and that the King had willed the
Captain of these men to stay the sight, whilst the body of the Admiral was
abused in the streets with all manner of injuries; then after this began the
seditious Citizens to run in heaps into the streets to assail people of every
Sex, and degree, and to rush every where in the dark, making confusion of all
things, as if an eternal night had ouerspred the kingdom: What say you to
this? That very many, even well affected to the Popsh Religion were slain, and
extremity shown even to the very Counselors of the Parliament, if any
amongst them were of a milder temper then they. Be this known to all good men,
that no light or fluency of Eloquence can be such; no man can be stored with
such abundance, and facility of speech, that he may be able to deliver the
deadly spoils and deaths of that day: For what degree of mischief can be
added to the unbridled, and untamed lycentiousnesse of these conspirators,
seeing there is nothing so common as breath to the living, earth to the dead?
These men after they had taken away life, did either cast the very carkases to
be torn and rent of dogs, or threw them into the rivers: so was a Woman, for
virtue and lynage most noble, and excellently learned above her Sex, the Lady
of Iuern, with her daughters: so were two sisters, women of Orleance, thrown
into the River of Soame, because they refused to hear their sacrilegious
Mass; and had rather shed their life and blood, then that they would forsake
the true, and sincere Religion. After these sins so horrible, and
abominable; What think you was done next? Any breast, in which there is the
least drop of remorse, may hear it, and lament. The Parisians rejoice, with
all merriments; they triumph openly with joy; they go on Procession, to give
thanks to their Saints and Idols, as for a thing done bravely. Oh blind, and
impious thoughts of men, oh trunkes, oh stocks and stones! Good God, can these
things enter into the hearts of Christians? But let us proceed, and with
grief we shall see, that no sort of wickedness was omitted in this
enterprise. They fained, that God by a new miracle, did approve and allow of
these murders, and that in the great Churchyard of Saint Innocents, as they
term it, a certain Hawthorne-bush, that never before had budded, did on the
sudden, in that accursed day, bud and flourish; which bush, the Duke of Aniow
the Kings brother, with a great train of them of Paris and Orleance, would
needs see, kiss, and adore. What impiety, (I pray you) what barbarousnesse
can be greater then this? or what more frantic part is there, then that these
men should invent such a m^racle, to witness their frenzy, and make their
madness more manifest to the world?

Then forsooth did bushes flourish; it was not the bush, but deceit that
flourished, wickedness flourished; and for a time the ungodly flourished, but
they shall wither at the last, and be adjudged to everlasting fire; as straw,
or stubble, they shall be consumed. Neither yet, after that dismal day, did
the cruelty of these robbers and Assassines cease or give over; for there were
then sent, even when there was weeping and wailing through the whole city, and
that in all the streets thereof many were cruelly slain; either of the
Nobility, or of the Counselors and Advocates, or of the most notable
Professors of the University, or of the Merchants: Some (I say) were sent,
even of the King (oh deed nothing kingly!) which in every house, and inward
room of the house should make diligent search, if any hidden by chance, had
escaped the hands of these murderers. Hereupon a most huge slaughter is made
again; neigther (as I may speak with the Poet) was then, the Host from
Guest, or Guest from Host was safe. Many persons, of great and high name and
estimation, were committed to the Goales; if any of them refused to hear their
execrable Mass, they had straight their throats cut, and tumbled headlong
into the River. For the vpshot, that all in general might taste of their rage
and cruelty, and that all things in the whole kingdom might be turned
topsi-turuie, with Letters sent by Posts, and with what means they can, they
persuade the Governors of Provinces, and the Cities of the Kingdom, by their
example, utterly, and without exception, to make away and root out all those
that were of the reformed Religion. Nevertheless there wanted not some, even
the most heavy enemies of Religion, that refused to obey these Edicts; and
amongst the rest, the Governor of Burgundy, who plainly disallowed of the
Kings proceedings; yet to them of Orleance, and the seditious people of Lions,
this message was most welcome above all things, where beyond measure they
exercised cruelty; and where Butchers were hired, as in the time of Licinius
the Emperor, to bowell up the Christians; nay more (which is an horrible thing
to speak) to buy the far and grease of them, which were fattest. This likewise
is a doleful and lamentable case, that very few Cities at all in the Kingdom,
very few Towns, very few Villages, and Rivers there are, which have not been
filled with the goare of the godly Martyrs. This is more, that their inhumane
cruelty was so great, as in so grievous an affliction it was not lawful for
Widows to bewail their Husbands, nor Orphans their Parents; but that, at
Paris, little ones and infants were found, who when they did see themselves
haled from their Mothers breasts, their Mothers hurried to execution, did not
forbear to cry out, till themselves likewise had their tender bloodshed: Oh
more then Scythian barbarousnesse! for what Tyrant did ever do this in any
part of Scythia? not to suffer them to mourn, to whom he gave cause of
mourning. Rightly did thou, most grave Orator and Philosopher, that did not
well endure, nor could abide to behold men so barbarous and mischievous.

There remains nothing, that these combined enemies of the Truth have,
wherewith to maintain themselves, either before God, or nature it self, or
any Christian; but that they may be confounded of the very Ethnicks themselves,
which neither endued with the knowledge of the true God, nor instructed with
holy-writ, nor puffed up with that great and glistering name of Roman Catholic,
do gather these things even by the very law, and light of Nature it self, by
which they are a shame to you Scribes and Pharisees. Do therefore the Law, and
Prophets, (in GODS name) depend upon you? upon your counsels and traditions?
upon the Cupborde of the Pope (father of mischief)? and upon his Messengers
and Assassines? Blush you Thieves and Pirates, woe to you Hipocrites, which
attribute to your selves the Supremacy of the Church, under a false and forged
title; You (I say) conscript and sworn Fathers, who have forsworn Piety, and
the knowledge of good things, and a sound Conscience.

But lest any man should think we grow teastie without cause, and speak
preiudicially, which uses to take away right judgment; Let us hear, and go
forward with the rest, and that by the tops and chief points of the matters,
lest our discourse grow to be infinite. The things already spoken of, though
they were cruel and abominable, yet did they not fully satisfy the desires
of these bloody butchers. They go on therefore, and at Paris in the midst of
the Marketplace, they cause to be hanged up Brickmald, a most renowned man,
and most skillful in warlike affairs, being almost of the age of threescore
and ten years, who by chance had hid himself in the house of the English
Ambassador; as also one Cauagne, a man of great wisdom, and Chancellor to
the Princes both of Naturre and of Condee; then made they a laughing-stocke of
the Picture and coat of Arms of the Admiral, which through the streets they
ignominiously abused: and every day they were altogether busy in this, either
how they might kill, or by fearful threatenings enforce to their impious and
forbidden superstition, the professors of the true and reformed Religion, By
this it appears more clear, even then noonday, that the cruelty of these
men was in the highest degree, their Nature fierce, and savage, themselves
nesarious bloud-suckers, and that never any Pyrate was more barbarous.

Antiochus was cruel, but an open enemy of the Church, and an Heathen. Nero
was cruel, but for full five years most merciful, and afterward openly
evil. Domitian was cruel, but when he understood that the Kingdom of Christ
was Heavenly, not earthly, he left off to persecute the Christians. In the
Reign of Charles the sixth, King of France, he being young, foolish, and
witless, (as the Chronicles report) France was grievously distressed: But
there can nothing be repeated out of all the records of Antiquity, which comes
near unto the cruelties we have rehearsed, if we well weigh the circumstances.
And although these things be thus true, apparent, and approved; yet dare they
charge these godly Noblemen with an idle accusation, and an imputation of
forged conspiracy; when amongst them all, not one (though provoked) did
vnsheath his sword; when those pitiless cutthroats did likewise put to death
Women and Children; when their very cousin Germans, and amongst them, some
Earls, Barons, and Nobles, did not escape from them without great danger; when
they banished from the Court, and kept prisoner Michaell Hospitalis, the high
Chancellor of France, and a most honorable person, for this cause only, That
he withstood their wicked Counsels; when they enforced no small number by
violence and threatenings, to their idolatrous Masses; lastly, when Christopher
Thouanus the first President in the Parliament, gratulating to the King that
(forsooth) his famous victory, did openly amongst other things, repeat that
saying of Lewis the eleauenth, Who knows not how to dissemble, knows not how
to rule.

But I detain your Lordship with an Oration ouer-long; lest therefore I should
abuse your Lordships patience, I will make short of what remains. Let us then
but look into this one thing, whether these matters which we have already
uttered, do not so palpably show forth the impious combination of the
Popelings, that it may be viewed even with our eyes. From hence let all
Christian Kings and Princes that are wise, see, and understand this betimes,
that this French calamity cannot be disioyned from theirs, when the Religion
common to either is assailed, and the Tyrants invred to so many mischiefs, and
greedy of good men's blood, cannot so rest and content themselves.

Oh most renowned Princes, do you still remain in doubt? Do not so: but mark
and note what (after these times which we have recounted) at another time, and
not five years since, befelt that great and most Christian King Henry the
fourth? Consider with how many ambushes, frauds, and deceipts they belayed the
most famous Queen of England, ELIZABETH of happy and blessed memory. Call to
mind with how many engines they battered the poor wretches of the
Low-Countreyes, both publicly and privately, for the space of these forty
years and upwards. Remember all you of the English Nobility, that horrible
Gunne-powder Treason, which enterprized at one stroke to destroy and blow up
your most mighty KING, your noble QVEENE, together with their Royal Progeny,
and the flower of all the Nobility of England.

This is worth the labor to know, with how plausible and goodly a name these
glozing Parazites, and Pillars of the Romish Religion, do entitle such like
abominable misdeeds; marry, A stroke given from Heaven.

Oh vows, oh words, and men of Hell! Do you, you hell hounds, bring down
from Heaven the forge and fountain of your sinful actions? I speak truth
(oh Christians) and your selves know it to be so, that had not the Lord of
Heaven and Earth hindered this stroke, England had not for one year only been
miserable, and tormented, but stabbed and mangled with infinite wounds,
injuries, violences, murders, and rapines should hardly have drawn their
begged breath amidst her deadly enemies. Wherefore I pray and beseech you, you
Princes and Noblemen, that the painted show of Christian Religion, and the name
(Catholic) deceive you not; let this rather be your resolutions, That force by
force, is to be beaten back from your bodies and lives. For this defense,
Reason to the Learned, Necessity to the barbarous, Custom to all Nations, and
Nature it self, has prescribed to the brute beasts. What need I speak more;
let us have no league with this brood of Antichrist, but war rather. Let us
bethink our selves, all and every one of us, who have any care and liking of
Religion, or of the safety, renown, and liberty of their Country, that we
ought to beware of the Popish trains and entrappings: For sooner or later,
whatsoever they now intend and cover, will they at their time effect, and bring
to pass; Whosoever thinks they have given over, thinks far amiss, seeing
that rule so old, true, and religious, does never fail, There is no peace with
the ungodly. Therefore let it be so far from us, to hold consederacies with
these Iesuited Traitors, that we rather account them conspiracies, which
although they lie hid perhaps for a time, yet at last they appear, and are as
easily discerned by their actions, as the Lion by his claws. What? Is there
for us greater security now, then was in those French vproares, when these
Jesuits, these plagues of men, have lowly insinuated themselves into very many
Provinces, Cities, Towns, Castles; yea, and into the Courts of Princes, and
their familiarity; for so exceedingly well do these runnagate common Barretors
know at first how to humilitate themselves, as also to faigne Poverty, and
above all things, to seem godly; that these coyne-mongers have not only by
their forged name gotten incredible wealth, and opinion of true Religion, but
like Bloud-bounds, of better scenting then ever Verres had any, they have also
cunningly smelt out the purposes of Princes, and their secresies and mysteries
of State.

All which, as soon as afterward they have in particular been related to
their fellows, and by common advise handled and discussed; then presently are
sent into sundry Provinces, such men, as some call the Kings, some the Popes
Legates, others the Apostolical Nuntioes, and others call them with other
Titles; but as for me, by what name I may call them, I know not, unless
peradventure in that they tempt and solicit some by rewards and briberies,
some by hope and promises, some by fear and threatenings; they may rightly be
called Traitors, and betrayers of their Country: who if in the beginning, the
consines and entrance of Kingdoms and Regions had been forbidden them, and
commandment to abstain hereafter, they had been delivered by the consent of
all the States, either these Mountebanckes had not at all brought their poison
into diverse Provinces, or else they had received condign payment for their
pains: But after it was lawful for them to betray Kings and Princes, to effect
their business either by gold or silver, to send intelligencers abroad, to
retain Pentioners, and to turn and return at their pleasure, to what place
soever, infinite mischiefs did presently ensue thereupon, and do daily; Let
even Spain her self, the chief nurse of these Waspes and Locusts, bear
witness; be Italy also witness; let France speak, and the (not mean) Cities
of Germany, and Low Countries: from my very soul I rejoice that the Island of
England is blessed, and free from these Flies and Locusts, (unless some that
perchance lurk, and lie close in corners) and I pray God it may so remain
everlastingly. Mean while, most noble (King James,) most mighty, valiant, and
constant defendour, and revenger of the faith, go on to chase out thy kingdom
this Vipers-brood, men, mockers and contemners of God (from whose only power,
all man's power is derived) which go about under the pretext of Religion,
utterly to root out all just and lawful dominion. Your Majesty, according to
your singular wisdom, does see what that wicked desire of the Pope went about
to do with your self, your children, your posterity, and your subjects: Has
not that Roman gulf long since devoured all the wealth, blood, and life of
England? Are not these holy men, the fathers of the Society? such as strive to
enter not only upon our goods, chests, and money; but upon the liberty also,
and safety, and as it were, the very bones and marrow of us all? Are not these
the men, that were accustomed, not only to set upon, but to sell our lives and
souls, and heaven it self at a price? To these men then must we listen, of
these and none other are Kings, and Princes to be judged; if they refuse, and
do not of their own accord, accept of any most unequal condition, they
strait cry out, that they are to be pursued and persecuted to death. Are not
these those companions, that euery-where labor with tooth and nail to bring
in that Spanish Inquisition? which at first was practiced only against the
Sarazens, and Infidels? and I pray you, what good comes of it? of what use is
it? Truly none, unless, as miserable wretches, we shall be constrained to
look for murder upon murder, and most cruel slaughters. But God forbid,
most gracious King, and you all, virtuous and great Princes, that we, who by so
long and large distance of ground severed from Spain, have no community at
all with the Religion, manners, and custom of that Nation, live in a well
governed Kingdom and Commonwealth, should bear the same yoke, as this people
does; or that the same evil should be put upon us, or any good people, which
has in it all evils, The Spanish Inquisition. For this is that (if any man
knows it not already) which not only by poisoning takes away the lives of
famous men, the Countries best commoners, tears in pieces the civil laws of
Commonwealths, but also breaks in sunder the very laws of nature and Nations.
Listen further, and understand ye Princes; could ever yet, even Spain her
self, and Arragon; could they of Granato, the Castellans, the Neapolitans, the
Italians, the Frenchmen, and amongst all, the most miserable men of the
Low Countries, nourish that direful and ugly monster with so many sheddings of
their blood: so cruel a wild beast, so untamed, and so insatiable is that
Spanish-Romane beast; which cannot (I say) be fattened, nor so much as have her
paunch filled up with Christians blood. And to this Beast, so wild and savage,
will the courteous Frenchmen, the wise men of the Low Countries, and the
Gentles, and Nobles of England, refuse to yield obedience? with good reason.
Set before your eyes examples, which for the most part do chiefly move;
consider them, call to remembrance the late and fresh memory of the French,
Germans, and Low-Country-men, and you shall have cause great enough (oh
Princes) to defend your right, your privileges, and especially Christian
Religion, purged from the Popish dregs and filth: All which truly, according
to your faith and duty, wish to be protected by your providence, and cannot be
forsaken of you, without the manifest destruction of all that is Gods, or man's:
Neither is it likely that, that Stoicall numbnesse, is so ingrafted and
imprinted in your minds, that the many wishes, prayers, yea, and just
complaints of good men, may find in you no sense of humanity, no protection
for their innocence: I beseech you (most noble Princes and Peers) that you
thus fully persuade your selves; if there be any of all men living, who ought
to have care of such, and so great a cause; that you especially are they, and
that to you above the rest, this cause belongs, whom the most mighty good God,
has in this rotten and festered age, placed here, the Champions of his
restored Religion and salvation; that each of you, to the uttermost of his
power, so far with your wisdom, temperance, faith, labor, vigilance, and
(in one word) with that ancient and inborne English valor, whose glory with
all Nations is immortal, do so much study to provide and advise for your
Contrymen, as that our God, according to his mercy will, no doubt, aid your
endeauours; and as good men, not only desire, but will also celebrate, to the
memory of Posterity. But that in this one only thing, of all the most
honorable, there needs agreement, both of minds and counsels, I think no
man is ignorant, unless of what belongs unto man he be ignorant; for this
alone is it which affordes us good counsel in dangers, Constancy and valor in
mischances, moderation in Prosperity, and in every fortune that gift of
Discretion, without which nothing can be well thought, nothing well done: This
one, and alone Concord is it (I say) which safe-guards that straight knot of
Charity, that yielding neither privately to Envy, nor publicly to Ambition,
vpholds the Tower of your happiness, which if it remain strengthened, and
confirmed amongst us. There shall not be (as I hope, nay confidently trust) any
cause why we should any longer doubt either of the safety of the
Commonwealth, or of our reformed, and restored truely-Catholike and Apostolic
Religion.

ALmighty and most high God, which gouernest the Heavens, Seas, Earth, Wars
and Peace, which put Laws, and Statutes on Kings, Princes, and the
universal people of the World, which orderest and decreest victories, Triumphs
and Trophies, which with-holdest and put back afflictions, dangers,
injuries, make firm to us, and confirm this Concord, this Religion, in this
blessed Realm of England, that is at this time the largest Theater, and very
eye of the whole earths compass. Arise (great God) and raise thy self against
the enemy of all Justice and Peace, the enemy of thy praises, and glory: With
thy divine providence guide the ways, and prolong the days of our Sovereign
King JAMES, renowned for godliness, learning, justice, wisdom and clemency,
deliver him and us thy people from the out-roades and in-roades of our most
cruel foes, from those sacrilegious conspiratours, and wicked Idolaters, which
will not endure that we worship thy most holy name with godliness, and true
religion; and who, as in that lamentable and miserable Massacre of France, took
life from good thousands of thy dear servants, and still endeavor to take
from us both life and liberty, to write and speak freely: Lastly, who hold it
not lawful for any man living to discourse out of the Council, either
touching the Articles of Faith, or any controversy of Religion. Restrain (oh
Lord) the vpbraidings and attempts of such kind of men, who leave to us (being
Men that only argue for our right and the Truth) neither free tongue, nor free
mind. Bless the Reverend, godly, and learned Bishops of the Church of
England, and the professors of Divinity in the Universities: Let those most
bitter times warn them, and every Christian man, that setting apart the
unseasonable contentions, invectiues, and preiudices of many Divines in the
Low Countries, Germany, and elsewhere, they would rather apply their minds to
the establishing and confirming of true Peace and Concord, (as once when Valens
the Emperor persecuted the true Christians, Basil, and Eusebius of Caesarea
did) then in wrath and spleen to seek out new matters of strife. If we have
a purpose to strive and contend, let it be with mutual duties and godly
emulation in the race of piety. If we have a desire to fight, go to it in
Gods name, let us skirmish against Pride, Covetousness, Ambition, and against
our naughty and froward affections. Let us with our tears, and devout prayers,
quench the fire of Gods anger, which is kindled for our sins. Let us possess
our Souls with Patience, Silence, and Hope. And mean while, howsoever it be,
let us take courage, and sustain our selves on this hope, that the end of
Homicides, and Iesuited Traitors has always been most miserable, being such
whom daily and domesticke furies do torment, an ill conscience does affright,
and sudden destruction does follow: And as Iuuenall says in his 13. Satyr.

-- Diri conscia facti
Men's habet attonites, and surdo verbere caedit,
Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum
Paena autem vehemens, and multo saeuior illis,
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem.
Hi sunt qui trepidant, and ad omnia fulgura pallent.
A guilty mind, whom cruel blood be-smeares,
Still beats it self with deaf and unseen fears,
The hidden scourge with dread still shakes their souls,
And with a sharper pain the mind controules,
To bear a selfe-accusing Conscience day and night;
These thunder-feares, and lightnings do affright.
Verily it is so indeed, and (Iuuenall) thou have (as they say) hit the nail
on the head. And even Caligula, Domitian, Nero, and in our memory the Duke of
Alba, and such like Monsters, would approve what thou have affirmed, if they
might return from hell again. Of these things, and such like, let good men
meditate and comfort themselves, chiefly those Frenchmen, which once snatched
out of those French flames, and forsaking that unhappy Kingdom, forsaking
those fierce and ravenous Wolves, have arrived into this Realm of England,
(that is) into the lap of Peace; not as into a banishment, or any vulgar or
common Inn, but as into certain blessed and fortunate Islands. And for us
Low-Countrymen, if we be not unthankful, there is one most just and weighty
cause why we should acknowledge the great blessing of God bestowed upon us,
namely, the courtesy and hospitality of the English Nation, for (with grief I
speak it) when with wringed hands, and wronged hearts we were constrained to
behold the funerals, and woeful burialls of out Country; when the cruel did
rend and tear, and like a greedy beast did devour the body of our
Commonwealth, and we (our laws, privileges, and all liberty bereft us) did
as slaves, hold our lives and all our goods by entreaty: this kingdom, this
Realm of England, which we may freely write, and dispute against the Popish
Tyranny, crafts and superstitions, with the good leave of the most gracious
Queen Elizabeth, (whose name and memory be always blessed even in that
respect) was to a great many of us a safe refuge, a sure haven and a secure
Sanctuary. This leave and singular favor from thence has continued, and yet
hitherto does most graciously continue toward us, by the most mighty King of
Great Britain: To whom likewise, and his Royal Progeny, for that cause be God
propitious and favorable. As for us, we confess our selves most highly bound
and beholding to his Majesty.

With a cheerful heart (most worthy Lord) pardon my passion, which now I
stay, and cease to say any more of these Thieves and Murderers, whom
nevertheless I have but rather shadowed out, then expressed, for, how far
should I then pass? what end would there be of my speech, if I had a purpose
to rehearse all the misdeeds, of Popes, Jesuits, Priests, and Shauelings, clad
in the religious habit? If I should utter their pestilent and deadly commands,
which not being able to maintain by humane Justice, they use to defend by the
painted show of Christian Religion, and Catholic name; if I should prove and
set forth which is the greatest argument of all their wickedness, that they
canonize thieves and cutthroats into their Beadroll of Saints, and advance to
titles and Cardinall-honours their Allies and kinsmen, taken from the dust and
dunghill? Oh sins, oh plague, oh pestilence! O God! if this be not madness
and frenzy, what is?

I cannot for anger, any more; only one thing I add, cry out, and so make an
end of my speech; O excellent Interpreters of Divinity, increasers of
iniquity, Correcters and reformers of Religion, and Gods word, O excellent
Bishop, a keeper of Sheep, as (they say) is the Wolf.

I beseech the most great, most good God, (worthy Bishop) that he will long
prosper you, sitting at the stern of the Church of England, together with the
rest of the Lords Bishops, and Reverend Fathers in Christ, and guard you safe
from all evil; no otherwise then the white of his eye; and at the last, that
he will receive you (most worthy Lord, after that godly, good, and learned
combat, which you sight, and have sought) out of this unclean world, out of
this mist, or misery, and grief, into his heavenly and everlasting Kingdom,
flowing with brightness and blessedness, and eternal joy without any sorrow.

Of the Feast day of Saint BARTHOLOMEW.
BArtholmew, why does France each year to thee
Make Holy that bad day? which should not be
The cause of mischief much, was that one day,
That only day did many good men slay:
The good to good, the bad to bad incline,
Then this day none more good, or bad did shine:
Trust Popelings all, and trust you Shaued rout,
God will at last your wicked deeds bring out.
FINIS.

