A brief treatise concerning the burning of Bucer and Phagius, at Cambrydge,
in the time of Queen Mary, with their restitution in the time of our most
gracious sovereign Lady that now is. Wherein is expressed the fantastical and
tirannous dealings of the Romish Church, together with the godly and modest
regiment of the true Christian Church, most slaunderouslye diffamed in those
days of heresye.

Translated into English by Arthur Goldyng. Anno. 1562.

Read and judge indifferently according to the rule of Gods word.

Imprinted at London in Flete-strete nere to saynct Dunslons Church by Thomas
Marshe.

IF causeles any yet do doubt, whether the wilye Papists be the long foretold
and looked for Antechristes: to their often con^uted doctrine, let him join the
judgment of their damned deeds. And discern that their faith, (whose
justification they justly fly) by the filthiness of their fruits. Which reason,
was whilom among them of such force, that instead of disprouing doctrine, they
curiously searched others innocent lives, as blameless them selves. Not
fearing (as the abominable harlotte, who vpbrayded her chaste neighbor with
her own shame) most impudently to appeache others of dishonest life, where the^
selves are so staynd with all kind of uncleanness, as but for that shameless
dissemblinge, which serves the^ to so many mischieues, their conscyences would
even in their blushyng faces, cry y^ contrary to their shameless words.
Neither mind I by a few to defame them all, or by a rascal noumber to stayne
the best, but even with historical sincerity, to propose the pattern of the
perfectst, that as the judgment is like of things alike, so much more
plainelye may thou d^me, what the rascal rabble be, when the best be such. So
wilye in worldly affairs, arguinge their ignorance in spiritual: So
disse^bling in all their dealing, cloking (not cancelling their crimes: So
cruel under color of disguised mercy: So farced with fables sor fatherlye
doctrine, Such deluders even of the learned university, as though forgetting
him who^ no man may deceive, and measuri^g religion by worldly estimation, they
had madlye proposed dissembling deceyt the end of their lewd profession. if
they the^ whom the simple sort had vainly in such admiration, so deluded our
expectacion, even in that time, when both their wits and learnings chiefelye
flourished, and power wanted not to assist their words: if the^ I say those
yielded such rotten fruits of their great conceived hope, alas what is to be
looked for, either of the same yet living, (crueltye the mightiest bulwark of
their doctrine wanting:) or of the rest, who^ neither wit nor worthiness has
raised either to so learned judgment, or to so grave report For to ouerpasse
the rest, (against who^, their causeles pitied state bids sparelye to speak,)
who worshipped Ormanet any less the^ a liui^g saint* who esteemed him otherwise
than the angel that should disclose the secrets lodged in the cardinals
brest^, whom they knew to be enspired with that romish owlishe dove? So has
honor and reverence, long since swerued from that vprightnes of life, whereto
Philosophye at the first linked it: and waxd contented to be the mate of power,
and the meede of the monstrous beast of many heads. But shall our good
opinion of them grow with their just deserved woe? Or shall we conceive more
of the^ unarmed, whom the dreadfulst torments of fire and famine could not
prove sou^dly learned? Or shall we deem, that rusty corners yet shroude others,
that could speak much more? O let us not be more wittye, to prove them either
learned or godly then them selves are able. And thou O Reader, as the readyng
of this little treatise shall often move the to rue the miserye of the times,
wherein they were rufull: so if prosperity have not wholye blunted the pricks
of virtue in thee, they shall stir the alyke, to the consideracion of these
^appy years, wherein, they are not only lothed, sorowed, and mourned, but
even hated, detested, and condemned. Wherein so appears the filthe of those
wicked Tirauntes, as yet even after tomb, and fire, flouryshe the ashes and
feign of their weak foes: Their beggary now appearyng so beastly, by their
fall, as wonted is the death of the deceyuinge detter to descrie his many
deceytes, to the great loss and wrack of his creditours. If you think it
deserves not the name of an historye, for that pertiallye (perhaps in thy
opinion) the guiltye are touched: consider to whom it was forbidden to write
ought untruly, from him was not ^rempted the causes and reasons of things
disclosed, to nippe the evil and praise the good. Unless thou will forbid him
to think of either part what it deserves, or what he thinks to speak. The
first of the which as thou can not forclose me, so the other the benefit of
the time grants me. In the which to cover my just affection, what impiety
were it? Wherefore wishing the favorably to weygh my friendly meaning in all
points (sith what so ener I did, I was enforced in respect of common
commoditye to do) I remyt the to the perusinge of my doings, with such
favorable judgment, as is due to well meaning, though it want expressing.

Cardinal Poole, three years after his return into England, having somewhat
wythdrawen his mind from other affairs of the realm, and having in all
points established the Romish religion (the which a certain years past,
during the time of king Edward the.vi. was clearly abolished, and worn out of
custom) began to have an eye to the university of Cambrydge, the which it
self inespecially seemed to have need of reformation out of hand. For he
thought it should be to no purpose, to bestow his travail in purginge the
residewe of the body, if he left that part still infected with maladies and
diseases, from whence al other members should fetch their strength and
nourisheme^t. To perform this charge, were chosen Cuthbert Scot,
Thenquisitours.
not long before consecrated bishop of Westchester, Nicolas Ormanet, an
Italian, Archepryeste of the people of Bodolon, in the dyocesse of Uexon,
professed in both the laws: Thomas Watson, elected bishop of Lincoln: John
Christoferson, elected bishop of Chychester: and Henrye Cole Prouoste of the
College of Eton. There was good cause why the matter was inespecially
committed to these persons. For as touching Ormanet, it is well known, that
he was a man of much estimation with Julius the third at that time bishop of
Rome, whose business they did sit upon in this Commission, and that for the
same purpose he was appointed to come into England with Cardinal Poole,
because that without his knowledge, (as in who^ he put his chyefe trust and
confidence) the bishop would have nothing done, that was of any importance or
weight.

The residewe were sent thither either for experience in matters of
thuniuersitye, or else they seemed of all others most meet to be put in trust
with thandlynge of that case, because they were taken for most stout
Champions, and earnest defenders of the Romyshe relygion, and of things
appertaynynge to the establyshemente of the same.

Some were of opinion that Scot, Watson, and Chrystophorsonne, (because there
was grudge between the^ and diverse of thuniuersitie, at whose hands they
thought them selves latelye before to have received displeasure, and that now
time and occasion served to be reue^ged upon them as they listed them selves)
busilye procured this journey of their own heads.

These persons thus appointed, A Citacion sent before.
(in the mean while that they were addressing them selves to their journey,)
sent their letters before to Andrewe Perne, Uicechauncellor of thuniuersitye
for that year. Commaundyng him to warn all the Graduates of thuniuersity in
their name, to be present the.xi. day of Ianuarye betwixt eight and ten of
the clock, in the church of Saynct Marie the virgin. (The same is the place of
resort, when there is any common assembly or meting of thuniuersitie, being
not far distante from the market place of the said town of Cambridge,
whither al men are sommoned, if at any time there be any common prayer, or
Suffrages to be made, or if there be any man that has ought to say in open
audience.) Willing him inespecially to be there him self in a readiness, and
moreover to admonish all the residewe to whose charge it belonged, that they
should search out all Statutes, books, Privileges, and monumentes,
appertaynyng to thuniuersitye, or to any of the Colleges, or finallye to any
of them selves: and there to present the same before them at the day appointed,
and every man to appear there personally. For they would not fail, but be
thereat y^ same time, to lay before the^ such things as should seem necessary
to this charge of reforming the university, and further to give charge of al
such things as should seem most for the profit and behoof of the same,
together with such things as were to be done on their part, according as should
seem most agreeable to the decrees of the Cano^ law. These letters the
Uicechauncellor caused to be set up in places convenient. This reformation was
looked for certain months before.

But now when it was once certainly known yt it should be in deed, The
disquietnesse of thuniuersitie upon the tidinges of the reformacion.
every man's mind was maruelouslye moved. Some greatly rejoiced that the
time was come, wherein they thought they might freely not only speak but also do
what they listed against their adversaries, which before times had rejected the
bables of ye romish bishop. Other some perceiving in what peril they stood,
looked narowlye about them, how to wind them selves out of the briers. Many
sought the good will and friendship of such as were known to be in favor with
the terrible commisioners. Other certain made the^ selves guilty, and desired
forgiveness of them, at whose hands they the^ selves had taken wrong before.
There were also diverse to be found, which in time past counterfeited to be
very earnest embracers of the true doctrine, but in their living and
conversation had greatly defaced it, applyinge to their own fleshelye lusts,
the liberty that appertains of right to the spirit, so that they thought
it lawful to do what they listed.

These men supposed there was no way but one to purge them selves of their
misbehauiour, namely if they became accusers of those whose frendshippe they
had erewhiles embraced, And to thentent to make men believe that they professed
the Romish religion from the bottom of their hearts, and to currye favor with
the Commissioners, they promised to take upon them the order of priesthod
without delay. For they knew the Commissioners would like that very well, which
already were in such wise minded, that as they would withholde no man from
that order, that would offer him self thereunto: so would they by all means
endeavor to bring every man thereto, that was any thing wittye or learned.

We said at the first, The cause why the reformation was taken in hand.
that the Cardinal thought the Uniuersitye to have need of reformation. The
reason why he should think so was this: either because the same of long
conti^uaunce since any man could remember, had cast of the yoke of the bishop
of Rome, and cleaued to the wholesome doctrine of the Gospel, which is falsely
diffamed of heresye: or else by reason that both for the late schism not yet
worn out of memory, and for the doctrine of Martin Bucer who not long before
openly in the said Uniuersitye interpreted holy scripture, they saw so many
so sore corrupted and spotted with this infection, that (even as when a fire is
spredde into a town onles spedie remedy were adhibited out of hand) (it were
not possible by all lykelihod) to quench it many years after. And it was to be
feared (if it were not looked to in time) least (as it commonly comes to
pass in bodies diseased) this mischief should take root, and by little and
little infect all the members next unto it which yet were whole and sound.

This was the year of our lord. 1556. To thente^t therefore to make a salve
for this sore, The coming of the Inquisitoures, and of their enterteinme^t.
the Commisioners of who^ we spoke before, came unto Cambrydge the ninth day
of January. As they were yet on their iourneye not far from the town, diverse
of the masters and Presidentes of the Colleges, met them and brought them
courteouslye, first into the town, and after to their lodging. They were
enterteined in Trinity college by John Christoforson master of the same
house, and lately before elected bishop of Chichester. Some were desired to one
place, and some to an other, as there was occasion, either to do their duties,
or to show their good wills. Cole to the kings College, and Watson to.S.
John's. But whether it were for thacquaintaunce of Christophorso^, or for y^
largenes of ye house, (which forasmuch as it was able to receive the^ al, seemed
therefore most mete and convenient to take their conferens in, and stood well
for all co^mers to have access unto the^) they al took up their lodginges
there. An oracion gratulatory at their coming thither.
At their coming thither an oracion was made by a fellow of the house, who in
the name of all the rest with long protestation declared yt they were most heartily
welcome thither: and that he and his fellows gave them great thanks, that it
had pleased their lordshippes to have so good opinion of the^, as to chose
their house inespecially to lodge in, whereby they had both encouraged them to
stand in hope of some further benevolence toward them, and also done great
worship to their College by their being there: Wherefore they should look at
their hand again for as much duetye and reverence, as lay in their power to
perform. Watson made answer, that this forward and earnest good wills and
mind of theirs in doing such curtesye, was right thankefullye taken, both
of him and his, exhorting them to continue stedfastlye in the same, and to
proceed also when need should require: For it was so far from any of their
thoughts, to stop them in this their race, yt they would rather haste the^
forward to run through more spedily, being not without good cause persuaded
to conceive good hope of their beneuole^ce toward the^: in as much as they
would do for them, whatsoever might turn to their profit and commoditye.

This day, forasmuch as it was toward evening ere they came, and the sun
was going down, was nothing else done. The next day being the tenth of
Ianuarye, they bestowed in recreating them selves after their iourneye, and in
settinge other things at a stay. Nevertheless to thentent the same should
not escape altogether without doing of somewhat, they interdited the two
Churches, Saint Mary's and S. Michaels enterdited.
namely S. Mary's where Martyn Bucer, and S. Michaels where Paulus Phagius lay
buried.

These men were dead a good while before. Paulus Phagius had scarce yet showed
the proof of his wit and learning when he departed to God. Bucer lived a few
years after. Duri^g which time somewhat by writing, but chiefly by reading and
preachinge openly (wherein thold man being painful in y^ word of God, never
spared hi^ self nor regarded his health) he brought all me^ in such admiration
of him, yt neither his friends could sufficiently praise him, neither his
enemies in any point find fault with his singular life and sincere doctrine. A
most certain token whereof may be his su^ptuous burial sole^nized with so great
assiste^ce and gladness, of all y^ degrees of thuniuersitie, that it was not
possible to devise more to the setting out and amplifyinge of the same. The
whole manner and order of the doing whereof, being written by Nicolas Carre a
learned man, in a little treatise to the right worshipful sir John Cheke knight,
with an epistle full of co^solatio^ as concerning his departure added thereunto,
was sent unto y^ renoumed clerk Peter Martyr the^ abiding at Oxford. From the
burial of Bucer and Phagius unto y^ coming of these commisioners were passed
about.iii. or.iiii. years more or less. And from the time yt that blessed
king, king Edward ye sixte deceased, unto that day, the priests never ceased
to celebrate their Masses, and all other kind of Ceremonies in those places,
and that without scruple of conscience, as far as men could perceive. But
after the time that these commisioners came thither, those things that before
were accounted for sacred and holy, began to be denounced for profane and
unholy.

For they co^maundedy^ all those assemblies that should hereafter be made for
thexecutinge of holy Ceremonies, should be removed to the kings Chapel,
which is a place far more stately the^ all the other.

Now was come the.xi. day, in the which the Uicechauncelour of the
University, with the masters and Preside^tes of the Colleges, and al other
the graduates of every house, were commanded to appear before the said
Commissioners. They assembled in great number to Trinity College: where (as
we told you before) they were all lodged, geuinge attendaunce to bring them
whether so ever it should please them to go, according as it became them to do.

There John Stokes common Orator of thuniuersitye, one of the popish
supersticio^ (for none other but such in those days might be promoted to any
worship) made an oration in the name of all the rest. And whereas he had
certain articles to entreat upon appoyncted to him before by the bishop of
Westchester, and thothers, he talked much of thuniuersitye, much as touching
them, and many things also of the religion in times past, which had been
almost every man's matter to entreat of, in every oracio^, and in every
sermon.

First of all he said that thuniuersitie, which in lookinge for their coming
had been a while disquieted, being now by their presence greatly refreshed, was
very glad to behold their countenance. In token whereof, the whole
university, with all her stude^tes was come out by heaps to welcome the^: and
all the houses in Cambrydge with their students of all degrees were assembled
together in that place. For whose certain and tried good wills in that
behalf, he durst take upon him as in the name of the^ all, to warrant their
honors, that every one of them severally and al in one accord generally, did
with earnest desire and willinge hearts, greatly rejoice at their coming
thither. For they were all fullye persuaded, that the business which they
went in hand with, should be profitable to the redress of the university,
and that in a matter so necessary to the salvation of all men, no travail nor
paynetakynge should on their part be forslowed. To the confyrmation of which
opinion, he said he was able to allege many proofs, howebeit he would let
pass all others, and touch none but those things that were so annexed to the
matter that they had in hand, as by no means they might be well wtdrawen or
separated from it: y^ which things were in noumber certain and determinable,
but in effect and working infinite: insomuch that it passed any man's power
to entreat of them at the full. Nevertheless, he desired them to give him the
hearing patiently, whiles he made a brief dyscourse of the same. Hereupon
taking a new occasion to talk, he began first with Cardynall Poole, saying,
that he had restored the religion trodden underfoot, he had vndershored the
common wealth ready to fall down, he had brought again (as it were out of
exyle) the decrees and laws of our forefathers, well nigh abolyshed and worn
out of memory. This Poole, this worthy Englysheman, our true Moses, was the
author of this commission, from whose most excellent highness as from a most
plentiful welspring of all virtues, innumerable commodities had flowed into
all parts of this his natyue country. For the which one bond of alyance,
albeit the University had sufficient cause to conceive good opinion of him,
forasmuch as he was of the body of the same publyke weal: yet was there an
other more inward bond, whereby his grace and they were most streytly linked
together. For the last year past he had taken the same most gently into his
graces protection assuringe by his letters, yt as he had taken upon him freely
to keep it, so also would he mainteyne and defend the same in such sort that
not only thincommodities (if there were any that might hinder their studyes)
should be removed, but also would further them in all things, that might
redound to the garnishing of the university, or whereby the dignity and
estimacio^ of the same might most be advanced or increased The which thing had
both here tofore established their hope, and now also brought the^ into that
belief, yt they must needs think all his graces ge^tlenes, to be conveyed
together into this one visitacion: In the which they looked for all such things
at their hands, as the tender love of their most godly Chancellor, passing
far beyond the common charity, had peculiarlye promised to thuniuersitie as
his ward and fatherles Orphan. He wished that the Cardinal him self had been
there at the same instant, if it might so have come to pass, without
hinderance to the commonwealth: to thentente y^ with his own beams, and with
y^ clear light of true religion, he might have illumined his university now
putting up her head out of the deep night of darkness.

Against the which wyshe forasmuch as the common vtility did repugne, by the
which the most holy legate of the sea apostolic was let from being
present himself, he had wisely appointed the^ his deputies, whose natures for
their wisdom, whose persons for their worthiness, whose wills by reason
of their education, he thought most metest for this purpose. Wherefore, he said
he was able to auouche this one thing, according to the truth, and according to
y^ thoughts of all that were there present, they were even ye very same men,
whose religion they all loved, whose virtues they honored, whose good will,
faith, and advice, they all called upon to the common sauegard of them all. For
after the time that through the singular and most excellent virtue of the
Cardinal Poole, we had ones in the commonwealth begone out of the misty
darkness of the times past, to behold the clear light again, therwithal
began we to feel also the most grievous evils of our age: with the which, being
undoubtedly both infinite and most miserable, although we were before times
overwhelmed, yet thignoraunce of our calamitye, was far greater calamity tha^
the calamity it self. To the augmentacion whereof we were in his judgment to
be compted so much y^ more miserable, in that being tossed in so troublesome a
tempest, we perceived not that we were ones moved, and that being oppressed
with so grievous a malady of the conscience and of heresye, we felt not our
minds one why^ diseased.

For needs must that disease be very dangerous, which without feling of pain
wastes and consumes nature, and oftentimes brings men to their graves ere
they think the^ selves sick. With such a kind of disease the university
was stricken.

For whereas to other affairs and businesses, it was percha^ce pollitique and
witty enough: yet in this case of Religion (by reason the head of the church,
from whence al power of feling comes, was maimed) it was become dull and
without perseuera^ce: until that about three years past, the Godly clemency of
our most holy father Iulye the third, having compassion upon England
almost stark dead, had engraffed us again into the Church, and restored
unto us both life and feelynge: By whose help Britayne growing strong and
lustye again, does now easily understand, how it has escaped the
unavoidable peril of hell fire. The which the Uniuersitye does now also
clearly see, assuredlye beleuinge that there was never plague that lyghted
upon any place, with the which this realm in this spoil of religion and
schism, has not been most miserablye punyshed and afflycted.

For it were a long matter to rehearce, what a noumber of Monasteryes had been
rased, what a sort of Gods houses had been spoiled, what pryestes had been
murdered, what noble men had been put to death, what commotions and tumultes
had been raised by the Comminaltye, and how sore the whole realm had been
empouerished: the which although they might happen upon some other occasion,
yet notwythstandynge for as much as they were so grievous that they were able
to oppress, it was to be thought they were cast upon evil persons and
offenders, rather as a punyshement and vengeance, than as a trial.

But by the way, if these things were granted to be the dalyance of fortune,
they had abiden more grievous hurts both of religion and conscience: as namelye
that the fear of god and reverence of his saints together with their altars,
were utterly banished, the virginal vow of priests broken into lust and
lechery, the minds of me^ cast i^to such a dead sleep, that no Ceremonies
were able to wake them again, the hearts of me^ (through variety of opinions)
so diversely drawn, and so disagreable with the^ selves, that they were wrapped
in innumerable errors. Among the which there were chiefelye two welspringes,
of whose streams the university confessed it self to have tasted somewhat
more then enough, and with the taste thereof to be well nigh dronken. Whereof
the first took his beginning of the violent withdrawing of our selves from the
unity of the catholycke church, a matter not unlike the battle of the members
of a man's body that meneuius Agrippa rehearced in ataine civil dissension of
Citizens: The latter, of thunmeasurable lake and filthye puddle of Wickleue,
the which the notable or rather the miserable disputacion among them
touching the sacrament of the Altar, opened and brought to light. As
concerning the truth whereof many being wise in their own conceytes, had
determined every man according to his own ymaginacion: Who folowinge the
philosophers, (but not of the best sort) thought them selves to have brought
no small matter out of the schools of Epicures, to the light of the Gospel.

For those words that Christ had spoken preciselye, and without any
exception, as co^cerninge the true and continual presence of his body: the
very same they wrested, yt they judged Christ's words to be maimed and not of
his own speaking, if this word (as it were) being proper and peculyar to
Epicures, were not added thereunto. And whereas Christen men should say plainly
the body and blood, they being now Epicures, must say figuratiuelye as it were
the body, and as it were the blood. Yet notwithstanding, forasmuch as it was
no time as then to make many words of things paste, he wished they might
ones be condemned to eternal forgetfulness, to the^tent that such as should
come after, might not be infected with that contagious maladye, Howbeit they
were to be touched lightly, generallye because that confession was wholesome to
such as had erred: perticulerly because the university being thus wounded by
the power and authority of the master of manners, desired by the salues of the
said master of manners to be brought unto health again: promisynge for her
self and for hers to be ruled by discrescion.

For she had by daily preaching already so reduced her Students to
repentance, that their honors should have right good cause to think that
they had without dissimulacio^ returned to the wholesome religion, and that
therein by the diligent conversation of their life present, they would make
amends for their former misbehauiour. For both such as were first in this
race proceeded most ernestlye in the same thing that they took upon them with
so good wills, and also such as setting forth later, came to this gaming as
it were in the after noon, did show such infallible tokens of thalteracion of
their minds, that eue^ as they rashely and like unskillful young men fell from
the true religion: even so they may seem not to have retired out of heresye,
without ripeness of years, and without stayed judgment: all of them
delyghtyng more in the religion newly restored, and so much longed for, than if
they had continuallye had the use of yt and that it had not ben darkened for a
time. Wherefore the university humblye and upon her knees first and formest
besoughte God of forgiveness, desiring him to grant yt that day might to be
y^ preseruacio^ of the health of the sowles of all her inhabytantes, and to
thestablishment of her public weal: And secondly she made this peticio^ to
their honors for her self, for hers, for all in general, and every one
several, yt upon the vnfaimed amendme^t of their lives they would vouchsaufe to
pardone thoffences of times past committed through error and ignorance. And
that as concerning al other matters, they would of their high wisdoms and
singular good will toward her so determine yt either their Justice might find
their causes good, or else their cleme^cy make them good. In both which
doings, the benefit should be alike, whether they judged thuniuersitye
according to the right and equity of her case, or for thabundance of love
absoyled it as innocent. In recompense whereof, all that were present, promised
to use as much modestye as might be in holy matters, to apply their learning
diligently, continually to embrace and favor the true religion, and never to
put out of mind the remembrance of that good turn.

When he had made an end of speaking, Thanswer of the Bishop of Westchester to
thoracion of John Stokes.
the bishop of Westchester answered thereunto, that they took in good part,
that thuniuersitye had made so open a declaration of her good will toward
them: for the which h^ ^ost hearty thanks, desiryng her (...) perform in
deed and in her ^orkes, the things that she ^ad so largelye promised of her
^^lfe in words and communica^^on: As concerning their good ^^ils, there was
no cause to mis^^ust. For their coming thither (...) as not to deal any
thing ^ughly with such as fell to ame^d^ent: but both the Cardinal him ^^^fe,
and they also, were fully min^d to show favor, devising how (...) bring al
things to peace and tra^^ilitie, desiryng nothing more ^^nestly, than that
they which ^^e erred and gone astray, should ^^ourne into the right pathe a^ne.
The right reverend fa^r the Lord Cardinal^ (whom ^yshed to have been present)
^^shed the self same thing (...), desiring nothing so much as he with his
own hand to sustain and hold up now read^ to fall, or rather to raise up
alrea^dye fallen to the ground thun^^uisitie his ward, for he glad^ takes
upon him the name an^^ Duty of her Gardeyn, who^ it greatly grieved yt
thinfection^ of y^ times past had spread abr^ so grievous diseases, that eu^
thuniuersity it self was touch^^ with the contagious aer ther^ For he would
gladlier have co^ thither to visyte and to salute^ the^ to correct it, if the
weigh^^ affairs of y^ Realm would ha^ permitted it. But now seeing (...) could
not so do, he had appo^^ted this Commission, in the wh^^he had assigned them to
be (...) Deputyes, which (for byca^^^ they knew him to set much (...) by
thuniuersitie) should exte^^ more favor to it and (forbycause ^hey them selves
had been there ^rought up) would the more ear^estly embrace it. The chief mat^er
that they came for, tended to ^his end, that such as had erred ^^huld confess
their faults and ^eturne into y^ right way ageine ^or they were in good
forward^esse of healing, that acknowe^edged the^ selves to have offen^ed. And
therefore yt was wisely ^ropounded on his part that he would not altogether
excuse the ^aultes of thuniuersitie, nor of other men, but confess and
acknow^edge the crime, as yt there were ^any things had need to be corrected
and amended. The cause why they were sent thither was to raise up the^ that were
fallen, and to receive into favor such as were sorry and would amend, wherein
(if contrary to their expectacion) they should not be able to do so much with
some men as they would: yet notwithstan^dinge according to their duetye they
would show the^ selves so di^lige^t for their part, as yt no lack might be
found in the^. For it was more openly known tha^ that it could be denied, that
many men did diverse things of a froward wilfulness, and took stoutly upon
the^ wherwt as they were greatly moved and agreued (as reason was) so they
coueted to remedy the mischief. Against whom, if any thing should seem
hereafter to be straightly determined, it was to be imputed to their own
deser^es, and not to the wills of the^. Neither ought such as are hole and
sound to be moved with all, at the chasticement of others: Forasmuch as it
perteined not only to the wiping out of (...) foul blot which now sticked in
thuniuersitie, but also to the health of many others, that had taken much hurt
by thinfectio^ of the^. For their own parts, they more inclined to mercy tha^
to rigor. Howbeit considering yt so great diseases could not by gentle
medicines be healed, they were driven of necessity to use stronger. And yet if
they would be content to be brought again to their right minds, which
thing they chiefly couete^ (for they wished yt al should amend and be led by
wholesome counsel) and would yet at length wax weary of their errors, and in stead
of the^ frequent again y^ ancient customs of the^ selves and of their
forefathers, they might boldly look for all kind of humanity and gentleness at
their hands, in all this their business of reformacion, which they had now
entered and bego^, requesting no more of the university but to do as became
them: which being parformed, he promised that their beneuolens, neither in any
public nor in any private parsones case should in any wise be behynd hand.

These things being finisshed they were brought to the kings A mass a^ the
Kings College
College by all the Graduates of Thuniuersitie, where as was song a mass of
the holy Ghost with great solemmitie, nothing wanting in that behalf yt might
make to the setting forth of the same. In this place it was marked, that
Nicolas Ormanet (commonly surnamed Datarie) who (albeit he were inferior in
eestate to westchester being a Bishop, yet was superior to the^ al in
Authority) while the mass was a celebrating, eft standing eft sytting, and
sometime kneling on his knees, observed certain Ceremonies, which afterward
should be taken up of al others: in the which as then he showed example how all
others should doo^, But of these things we will entreat more largely herafter
in place convenient. From thens they attended all upon the lords legates to
S. Marie Church, which we declared before to have been interdited. In the which
place, for as much as it was suspended, although no mass might be soonge, yet
there was a Sermon made in open Pecocke preaches at s. Mary's
audiens by Pecocke in the latin tongue. The which being ended the
Uicechauncellour with the masters of the Colleges, every The Citacion of the
masters of the Colleges.
one in his order, were cited by order. There Robert Bressie master of the
kings College, a worthy old man, both for his wisdom and his hoar hears,
hearing his own name recited next after the Uicechauncellors, said he was
there present as all the other were, nevertheless for as much as the
reformacion of his house, was wholly reserved to the discrescion of the bishop
of Lincoln, not only by the kings Letters patentes, but also by grant of
confyrmacion from the bishop of Rome him self, Robert Bressyes exception.
under a penalty if he should suffer any strangers to intermedle, he openly
protested in discharge of his duetye, that oneles their Commission gave them
authority and jurisdiction upon that College, either by express words or
manifest sense, he utterly exempted him self from being present. This his
exception they took all in great displeasure: alleging that they were fully
authorysed for thorder of that matter by the Cardinal, out of whose
jurisdiction, no place nor person was exempted: Wherefore he had done euel to
call into Question their authority ^o well known to all men. Westchester seemed
to be more moved at the matter then all the other. And that was because Bressye
had a little before obtained the worship of that room, even utterly against
his will, and maugre his head, do the worst he could against him. The rest of
the masters being cited, every man for a while deperted home to his own house
with commau^deme^t to be Inquisition at the common schools.
at the common Schools of the said university atone of y^ clock of the same
day. When ye degrees of thuniuersitie commonly called Regentes and not Regentes
were assembled thither, they spent the rest of the day in reading over of
Charters granted to thuniuersitie by Kings and Princes, in serching out of
Bulls and pardons from the pope, and in perusing of other monumentes
parteininge to thuniuersitie.

The next day following being the.xii. of January they resorted to the kings
College to Inquisition at y^ kings College.
make Inquisition, either because the same for ye worthiness thereof, is chief
and Sovereign of all the residewe, or else because that that house inespecially
before all others, had been counted time out of mind, never to be without an
heretic (as they term them) or twain. And at that present time, The manner
of receiving thinquisitours when they went to make inquisition.
albeit yt many now alate, had withdrawn them selves from thens, yet they
judged that there were some remaining still. The order and manner how they would be
enterteined of every College when they should come to make Inquisition they
themselves appointed, which was in this sort. They commanded the master of
every house together with the residew, as well fellows as scholars apparelled
in priestlike garments (which they call habites) to mete them at the utter
most gate of their house toward the town. The master him self to be dressed
in like apparel as the priest when he rauisheth him self to mass, saving
that he should put on uppermost his, habit as the rest did. Thorder of their
goinge they apppoyncted to be in this wise. The master of the house to go
foremost, next unto him every man in his order, as he was of degree, senioritye,
or of years. Before the master should be carried a cross and holy water to
sprynckle the Commissioners wythall. And in their meetynge after the mumblinge
of a few deuocio^s, they determined with this pomp and solemnity to be
brought to the Chapel. Many thought they took more honor upon the^ than
belo^ged to thestate of man. Othersome (forasmuch as at that time they not
only pretended the jurisdiction of the The Commissioners ^epresent ^he Pope.
Cardinal, but also represented the power and authority of the bishop of Rome
him self, who was accounted to be more than a mortal man) said it was far
less than of duetye apperteyned to his holiness, in that thonour that was
done to his legates, was not done to them but to his highness. Now was the
hour at which they appointed to come and being entered ye kings college gate,
where they looked for the master and fellows of ye house, seeing no man come to
mete them, they proceeded forth to the church door where they stayed. There
perceiving how the master and the rest of the house were dressing them selves
as fast as they could in such order as we told you was appointed before, they
came in suddenly upon the^ before they had set any foot out of their plates.
Then y^ master first excused him self that he was ready no sooner,
acknowledginge that it had been his duty to have been in a readynesse. Secondly,
he said he was very glad of their coming, promising first in his own name,
and after in the name of all the rest, as much reuerens as might be, in all
matters concerning their common utility, ye which he douted not but should
be parformed at their hands according to his expectacion. Robert Bressye makes
exception again.
But like as he had done the other day in S. mary Church, the same exception he
made to them now also: the which his doing he besought them, not to be offended
with all For saying he did it only for the discharge of his duty he had the
iuster cause to beheld excused. He had scarsly yet finished his tale, but y^
Bishop of westchester with a frowninge look and an angrye countenance,
interrupted him of his talk: saying, he neded not to repete the things he
had protested before, nor they to make answer any more to those things,
wherein they had sufficientlye enfourmed him before. He rather feared that
their quarrel was to good, that they made such a do about it, and sought such
starting holes. For so were diseased persons oftentimes wont to do, when for
the pain and grief they are not able to a^ide a strong medecin. As though
that any man were able to grant so strong a privilege, as to withstand the
Popes authority. As for the bishops letters, he said must needs make on his
side and with such as were with him, and could not in any wise be alleged
against him. Therefore he admonished him to desyst from his unprofitable
altercatio^, and to conform him self and his to such things as then were in
doing. After this they went to mass, the which finished with great
solemnitye, first they went to the high Altar of the Church, and having
there saluted their God, and searched whether al were well about him or no, they
walked through all the inner Chappelles of ye church The Church goods, the
crosses the Chalyces, the mass books, the Uestmentes, and whatsoever
ornaments were besides, they were commanded to be brought out unto them. When
they had sufficientlye vewed all things, and had called forth by name every
fellow and scholar of the house, they went to y^ masters lodging, where first
and formest swering the^ upon a book to answer to al such interrogatories as
should be propounded unto the^ as far as they knew) they examined first the
master him self and afterward al y^ residue every man in his turn. But there
were some yt refused to take this oath, both because they had given their faith
to ye College before, and also because they thought it against al right and
reason to swear against the^ selfs. For it was contrary to all law, yt a man
should be compelled to bewray himself, and not to be suffered to keep his
conscience free, when there is no manifest proof to be laid to his charge But
much more unjust is, it yt a man should be constrained perforce to accuse him
self* Nevertheless those persons, also after much altercation, at length
(condicionally that their faith given before to the College were not empeached
thereby) were contented to be sworn. Three days long lasted the inquisition
there.

This was now the third day of their coming, The consultacion of the masters
upon the taking up of Bucer.
and it was thought that the case of Bucer and Phagius was delayed longer than
neded. For they looked to have had much altercation and business about the
matter. Now forasmuch as the present estate of the case required good
deliberation, and aduiseme^t, the Uicechauncellour and the masters of the
Colleges assembled at the common schools, where every man gave his verdite
what he thought meet to be done. Aftermuch debating they agreed al together
in this determinacion. That forasmuch as Martine Bucer, whiles he lived had
not only sowed pernicious and erroneus doctrine among the^ but also had him
self been a sectarie and famous heretic, erring from the Catholic church,
and geuinge others occasion to fall from the same likewise: I supplication
should be made to the L. Commissioners in the name of the whole University,
yt his dead carcas might forthwith be dug up, (for so it was needful to be
done) to thentente that inquisition might be made as touching his doctrine,
the which being brought in examination, if it were not found to be good and
wholesome, the law might proceed against him: For it was against the rule of
the holy Canons yt his body should be buried in Christen buryall.

Yea, and besides that, it was to the open derogation of Gods honor, and the
violating of his holy laws, with the great peril of many men's souls, and
thoffence of the faithful, inespecially in so difficult and contagious a time
as that was. Wherefore it was not to be suffered, that they which utterly
dissented from all other men in their trade of living, laws, and customs,
should have any part with them in thonour of burial. And therefore, the
glory of God inespecially and before al things ought to be defended, the
infamye (which through this thing rises on them) with all speed put away, no
room at all to rest in left unto those persons, who even in the same places
where they lay were injurious and noisome to the very elements: But the place
ought to be pourged, and all things so ordered as might be to the satisfyeng
of the consciences of the weak. In executinge whereof, so notable an example
ought to be given to al men, yt no man hereafter shouldr be so bold to attempt
the like.

They gave y^ same verdit by common Andrewe Perne vicechauncellor is made
factour for thuniuersitie in the case of Bucer and Phagius.
assent upon Phagius also.

Unto this writing they annexed another, by the which they lawfully authorized
Andrew Perne the Uicecha^cellour to be y^ common factour for thuniuersity. He
was a man metest for yt purpose, both for thoffice that he bare,
Christoforsons testimon^e of Perne.
and also because yt by the testimony of Christophorso^ he was demed to be
most catholic of al others This Supplication confyrmed by the consent of all
the degrees of thuniuersity, A Supplication put up to thinquisitours by
thuniuersitye.
and signed with their common seal, the next day which was the.xiii. of
January the Uicechauncellour put up to the commissioners. Se what a feate
conueyaunce this was, to suborne this man under a colorable pretense to desire
this thing of them by way of peticion, as who should say, if he had not done
so, they would never have gone about it of them selves. But this gloss was
soon found out. For the Commissioners had given him instructions in writing
before. But peradventure they thought by this means to remove thenuye of this
act from them selves. The vicechauncellor came to the Commissioners, according
to appoint me^t made the day before, about seven of the clock in the morning.
He had scarce declared the cause of his coming, but that he had not only
obtained his suit, but also even at the very same time, received the sentence
of condemnacion and taking up of Bucer and Phagius, The sentence of
condemnation copied out by Datarie
fair copyed out by Ormanet Datarye him self. This was to be confirmed by the
consent of the degrees of thuniuersitye. Whereupon a congregation was called
for the same purpose to be at nine of the clock: when the graduates were come
together, the demand was propounded as concerning the condemnacion of Bucer
and Phagius, causes were openly alleged, the very same which even now we
declared to have been alleged by the masters of the houses, in their
consultacion the day before: The degrees laid their heads together, and in
giving of their voices ratified the said sentence. The which being red over,
request was made again, that the same might be signed with their common Seal.
The which request was very lightlye and easily obtained. And it was no
maruayle. For now after the death of king Edward, since the time that the
gouernemente of the realm came to the hand of Queen Mary, all such persons
being driven away as had rejected the romish religion (in who^ well nigh
alonlye rested whatsoever wit and learning was in the whole Uniuersitye
besides) such a sort of rascalles were put in their rooms, that all places
now swarmed with unlearned and unnurtured chaplains. To who^, nothing was
greater pleasure, then to cause al men speak slander and reproach of Bucer.
There were diverse yet lest among them, that spoke against their demaundes. But
they (because as it commonly comes to pass, that might ouercomm^th right)
could nothing avail. For this is a common custom in all such matters and
ordinances, that look what the greater number decrees, is publyshed in the
name of them al: and that which the more part disaloweth, seems as though
noma^ allowed it at all.

The next day, Bacon master of Gonwell hall, bade the Uicechauncellour, D.
Young, D. Haruie, Swineborne, Max^ide with others home to diner.

These men immediately after diner, The sentence is signed with the common Seal
of Thuniuersitye.
caused the common Seal of thuniuersitye to be put to the foresaid instrument
of condemnacion, according as was determined the day before by the general
consent of the Graduates of thuniuersitye. And by and by after, they carried the
same to the Commisioners to their lodginge. The which when they had received,
forasmuch as after more diligent perusing thereof, it liked them not in all
poynctes, some things they rased out, some they enterlined, The sentence is
engrosed new again.
other some they changed, so that in fine they were fain to take the pain to
engroce it new again.

About this time almost, one of the Kings College, of the number of them that
chanced to be there at such time as the Commissioners took a view of
thornamentes of the Church, and of other things that the Pryestes occupy in
their ceremonies, hearing Ormanet call for the Oil wherwyth sick folk are
wont to be annealed, (the which as it should seem he had never seen before)
after his departure, being desirous to see what gere it was, came to the
place: but it was kept under lock and key. The^ he enquired where it stood,
and when he saw where, he demanded to have a sight of the thick milk
wherwithall and a little Oil men were wont to be annealed. When it was brought
before him, and that he had well considered it, it was so rank of savor, yt
he was feign to turn away his nose, bidding them make ye milk into chese
betimes or else it would stink so that no man should be able to abide it.

But ere it was long after he bought that word dearly. For there never yet
wanted some Doeg of Edom or other, to bear word of such things to Saul. For
they had their spies in every corner which ever crepte in among company.

S. Marie Church was not yet reconciled, An anniuersarye kept at the Kings
College.
nor the place pourged from the dead bones and wythered Carcas of Martine
Bucer, by means whereof, the Trentalles, Obites, and anniuersaries that were
customablye wont to be done for sir R. Read knight, were appointed to be done
at the Kings College, the Commissioners being* present at the same.

The Bishop of Westchester, or ever Service was fully done goinge out,
called to him one of them that were there, whom he began to undermine with
such kind of talk. It is not unknown to thee (quod he) that the time draws
nyghe, when Bucers carcas (according to the decrees of the Canon law) must be
dug up: and that which remains of him (to thentent all men may take
ensample thereby,) be put to fire (for so the holy Canons have enacted) and
the memorial of him be utterly condemned to oblivion for ever. Now forasmuch
as he was buried with great pomp and solemnitye, we think it necessary, that
his burninge be executed with no less solemnity and furniture.

This assuredly is our meaning and this touches all the degrees of
thuniuersitie. For it is a foul shame and not to be borne with, that so great
reverence should be done unto heretics. Wherefore it behooves every man by all
means, to show evident tokens of thalteracion of his mind.

And it ought not to be thought a strange matter, that this inquisition is
exte^ded upon a dead man. For if so be it that in cases of high treason, it be
lawful to atteynt a person that is dead, it stands with reason, that these
persons being more pestiferous and hurtful than those that are giltye of
treason, should abide like judgment. When they were buried, orations were made
before the degrees of thuniuersity, and sermons preached to the people: the
like thing now also when they shall be burned, do we purpose to have. Now for
because I understand that thou art an expert orator, and can handle thy
self well in that feat, I would chose thee before all others, to do the thing,
the which (forasmuch as it shall be greatly to thy praise and commendacion) I
know thou will not refuse to take upon the. And for my part I assure the, I
have the gladlyer called the hereunto, because I covet they preferment.

There is but one in all the Uniuersity, that when he was a yo^g man was my
pupil, Nic. Carre by name, whom for the good will I bear him in that respect)
I will join ^ellowe with thee in this matter, to thentente thou may well
perceive thereby, that I commit this charge unto thee to do the honor. The man
having this his Oracio^ in mistrust answered in this wise. He wyshed with all his
heart, that ye judgment as concerning this case, should be reserved to his
betters, saying that he was not desirous of that honor: for men would not give
credit to his words, neither was he able to deuyse what to say against so
worthy a person, (inespecially that might seem to have any likelyhod) in yt
behalf. For he knew not the man's living and conversation. But as far as he
could gather by other men's talk, he was a man of such integrity and pureness
of living, that not even his enemies could find any thing blame worthy in
him. As for his doctrine, it passed his power to judge of it, howsoever he were
demed to be of a corrupt religion, whereof he was not able to determine,
considering it was a doubtful Question among so great learned clerks. But
this was manifestlye apparante, that Bucer undoubtedly was a man of singular
knoweledge and dexteritye of wit: The which for him to abase, he thought it
an intolerable unshamefastness.

Finallye, for thestimacion of so weyghty a matter it was requisite to put some
meeter persons to the defense of it. For neither in years was he grave and
ancient enough, neither in wit prompte nor ready enough, neither in
eloquence sufficientlye furnished to take that matter upon him. And if so be
it, that he were able to do any good he might serve their turn in an other
matter. The bishop was still more earnest upon him, and when he saw it auailed
not to use this kind of persuasion with him, he fell into a rage, and at
length bewrayed him self and all his pretense. For all this earnest
entreataunce was not to have had him say somewhat against Buc^r, (albeit it
was part of his desire as occasion should serve) but to thentent, that such as
he suspected for re^igion, should speak against them selves. And therefore he
added moreover, saying: thou at his burial did blaze and set him out
marvelously with epitaphes and sententious meters, wherefore now also thou
shalt neither will nor chose, but speak in the contrary part: and this to
do, I streyghtlye charge thee in mine own name, and in the name of my fellow
Commissioners. After many words, the other answered, that no man was able to
show any thing of his doing, and if any could be brought before him, he
would condescend to satisfye their pleasure: Otherwise he would not by any
means be induced to speak against him. At length when none of his writings
could be showed, the bishop desysted from his purpose.

By this time, the sentence of condemnation was engroced again, to the
signinge whereof a congregation was eftsoon called of all the Graduates of
thuniuersitie against the.xv. of January. After it had been read over, the
matter was moved for setting to of the seal again (as we said before) the
which was by and by obtained. Then the Graduates were dismissed with
commandment to resort forth with to S. Mary church, whether the
commissioners also repaired. Haruye represents a mandatum from the Cardinal.
When they had take their places, Doc. Haruie presented to the^ before all the
company, a commission to make enquest upon heresy, then newly sent from the
lord Cardinal, the which Uincent of Noally, (Ormanets secretarye) red with a
loud voice, yt all men might hear it. This done Andr. Perne (who we told you
before was authorized to be factour for Perne makes peticion that bucer and
Phagius may be cited to the court.
thuniuersitie exhibited to the commisioners in the name of the University,
the sentence of condemnacion. The which being openly read, he desired to send
out process to cite Bucer and Phagius to appear, or any other y^ would take
upon them to plead their case, and to stand to thorder of the court the third
day after: to thentente that when they had exhibited them selves, the Court
might the better determyne what ought to be done to them by thorder of the
law. The sentence by the common advice and consent of the degrees, he affyrmed
him self to have pronounced in the open assemblye as the order of law
required.

The Commissioners condiscended to his request, and the next day process
went out to cite thoffendours. This Cytacion, The first Citacion.
Uincent of Noally their common Notary (having first read it over, before
certain witnesses appointed for the same purpose) caused to be stucked up in
places conueniente, that is to wete, upon S. Marie Church door, the door of
the common Schools, and the cross in the marketsted of the same town. In
this was specified that who so ever would mayntaine Bucer and Phagius, or stand
in defense of their doctrine, should at the xviii. day of the same monethe
stand forth before the.L. Commissioners in S. Mary church, which was appointed
the place of judgment, and there every man should be sufficiently heard what
he could say. This commandment was set out with many words. Shortly after
the matter drew toward judgment. Therefore the day before the day limited
(which was the xvii. of January) the Uicechauncellour called to him to
Peter-house (of the which he was master) D. Young, D. Segiswyke, Witnesses
sworn a^gainst Bucer.
and with them Bullock, Tailor, Parker, and Readman, (not they which at the
buryal of Bucer, preached honorably of him, but far other men) Whitlocke
My^che, and certain others.

These men cast their heads together, how they might bear witness against
Bucer and Phagius, to convince them of heresye. For saying the matter was
brought in face of open Court, and it might so come to pass they might find
Patrones of their case, they thought it needful to have witnesses to depose
of their doctrine: What came of this their consultacion, it is not perfectly
known.

The Commissioners (for they were maruaylous conscionable me^ in all their
doings) had great regard The regard that the inquisitours had of the charges
of the Colleges.
of thexpenses of every College where they should make inquisition. Wherefore
to the intent that none of them should stretche their liberalitye beyond
measure, or above their power, they gave charge at the beginning, that there
should not in any place be prepared for their repast above three kinds of
meat at the most. The like order the cardinal him self, in a certain
provincial Synod appointed in his dyetes a little before to all his pryestes
and Chaplaynes.

Therefore, when they came to the Kings College the.xviii. day to sit upon
enquirye, and that one Capon chanced to be served to the Table more tha^ was
prescribed by thorder taken, they thrust it away in great displea-sure. These
thriuinge men that were so sore moved for the preparyng of one Capon, within
little more then one month, beside their private refections, wasted in their
daily diet well nigh an hundred pounds of the common charges of the Colleges.
So that the Uniuersitye may worthily allege against them this saying of our
savior. Woe unto you that streine out a Gnat, and swalowe up a Camel.

The very same day the Uicechauncellour going to the inquisitours (they were
as I told you at the Kings College) did put them in remembrance, that the
same was the day in which by their process sent forth the xvi. day, they
had commanded to appear in S. Mary Church, such as would take upon them to
defend Bucer and Phagius, in the law. He desired therefore that they would
vouchsafe to sit there, if perchance any man would try thaduenture of the
law. They lightlye condiscended thereunto. When the Uycechauncellour
according to his duty had brought them thither, he exhibited unto them the
process of Citacion that he had received of them to publyshe a litell before:
saying that he had diligently executed what soever the contents of the same
required. After that they had taken their places, Other witnesses sworn
against Bucer.
and that no man put forth him self to answer for thoffendours, the judges
called aside D. Young, D. Segyswyke, Bullock, Tailor, Maptide, Hunter, Parker,
Readman who^ we named before, Brown Gogman, Rudde, Johnson, Mytche, Raven, and
Carre, the very same man that had before written out the burial of Bucer, with
a singular commendacion of him, and sent it to the right worshipful sir John
C^eke knight. These men (taking first their oath upon a book) were commanded
to bear witness against the heresies and doctrine of Bucer and Phagius.
The.xxii. day of the same month was limited to this Iurye to bring in their
verdit.

In the mean while Ormanet and Watson, abode at home in their lodginge, to
take the depositions of the^, whom we showed you before, to have been called to
Peterhouse, and to have communicated with the Uycechauncellour as concerning
that matter. whose depositions (as I told you) never came to light. The bishop
of Westchester, and Cole, this day visited them of Catherin hall, where (as
far as I could learn) nothing was done worthy of rehersall.

As Ormanet was sittinge at Trinity College, A relic given by Ormanet to
Trinity College.
John Dale, one of y^ Queens college came to him, whom he had commanded
before, to bring with him the pixe, wherein ye bishop of Romes god of bread is
wont to be enclosed. For Ormanet told the^ he had a precious Jewel, (the same
was a linne^ clout that the Pope had consecrated with his own hands) which he
promised to bestow up on the^ for a gift. But Dale mysvndersta^ding Ormanet,
instead of ye Pixe, brought a chalyce and a singi^g cake (called the host)
the which he had wrapped up and put in his bosom. When he was come, Ormanet
spoke him courteouslye, demaundinge if he had brought him the thing he sent
him for: to who^ he answered he had brought it: the^ give it me (quod he) Dale
pulled out the chalyce and the singing cake. When Ormanet saw that, he stepped
somewhat back as it had been in a wonder, calling him blockhead, and litel
better the^ a mad man, demanding what he meant by those things, saying, he
willed hi^ to bring none of that gere, and that he was unworthy to enjoy so
high a benefit, yet notwithstanding forasmuch as he had promised before to
give it them he would perform his promise. Whereupon, with great reverence
and Ceremonye, he pulled out the the linen clothe and laid it in the
chalyce, and the bread with it: commanding them both for theholinesse of the
thing, and also for thautour of it, to keep it among them with such due
reverence as belonged to so holy a rellique.

About this time almost, the Commissioners gave commandment to the masters
of the Colleges, A commandment for bringing in of heretical Books.
yt every man should put in writing what books he had, with the authors
names. And to thentent that every man should execute it without deceit, they
took a corporal oath of them. For they said it was not lawefull for any man
to have, read, or copye out those ungodly books of wicked heretics, written
against the reverent sect of the catholics, and the decrees of the most holy
Canons. Therefore they should diligently search them out, to thentent they might
be openly burnt. They said they gave them warninge of these things, which
they ought not to look for: for these things ought rather to have been done of
their own free will, then extorted by force. The which thing, not only the
Canons commanded, but also the most noble and worthy Emperors Theodosius and
Ualentinian, made in certain places decrees as concerning the wrytinges of
heretics, and especially against the books of Nestorius. This
commandment some executed exactlye and diligently, othersome, forasmuch as
they demed it wrongefull, executed it slackly enough.

We declared before, that the xviii. day was the day of judgment. When the
day came, and that neither they which were cited, appeared in the Court, nor
that any put forth him self to defend them, yet the Commissioners would not
proceed to judgment, which nevertheless, for their contumacye in absentynge
them selves they might have done, (...)
considering how that day was peremptory. The second Citacion.
But these men being bente altogyther to equity and mercy, had rather show
some favor, then to do thuttermost they might by the law.

Whereupon Uincent published the second process, and set it up in the same
places, that the former was. The meaning thereof varied not much from the
first, but that it put of the judgment day unto the.xxvi. of the same
month. The which day they sent for the Uicechauncellour to their lodging, and
there agreed with him as concerning thorder of publishing the sentence: whom
(for because there should want no solemnity in the matter) they commanded to
warn the Mayor of the town to be there at the day appointed with all his
burgesses, the which thing the Uicechauncellour did with al speed.

While these things were a working against Bucer and Phagius* in the mean
while they forslowed not to make Inquisition in some places as the matter
required. Therefore, Inquisition at Clare hall.
when as almost the same time they came into Clare hall, and entered into the
Chapel, (which was their ordinary custom to do first of all whersoeuer they
became) they perceived there was no sacrament (as they call it) hanging over the
altar. The which thing being taken in great displeasure, Ormanet calling to him
the master of the house, told him what a great wickedness he had by so
doing, brought upon him self and all his house. For although he were so unwise
to think it no shame at all, yet unto them it seemed an inexpiable offense.

The old man being amassed, and lookinge about him how he might answer the
matter, while he went about to pourge him self thereof, made the fault
double: He said it was a profane place, never as yet hallowed nor consecrated
with any Ceremonies, At that word, the Commissioners were yet more astonished,
demanding whether he him self or any other had used to sing mass there or
no.

When he had confessed that both he him self, and others also, h^d oftentimes
said mass there:

O thou wretched old man (quod Ormanet) thou haste cast both thy self and
them in danger of the grievous sentence of Excommunication. Ormanet, being sore
moved at the beginning, serched the man narowly: how many benefices he had,
where they lay, by whose favor or license he held so many at ones, what
excuse he had to be so far, and so long from them* for as it should seem he
spente the most part of the year in thuniuersitie, far from the charge that
he had taken upon him. Swineborne was so sore astonished at this so sudden
disquietenesse of Ormanet, that being more disquieted him self, he was not
able to answer one word, neither to these things, nor to any other things
appertayning to thestate of his house. Wherefore one of the fellows of the
house, that was senior to all y^ rest, was feign to take upon him the masters
turn in y^ business.

This was now the.xxii. day, which I told you was limited to the jury, The
witnesses are sworn not to publyshe their depositions.
Young, Segiswyke* etc to give up their verdit. Who nevertheless during the
time that thinquisitours sat in S. Marie church, neither appeared that day
nor put up any thing openly against them that were accused. Whether they
objected any thing secretly against them or no* I am not able to say. For by
like oath they were exhibited to publishe their depositions, as they were bound
to bear witness.

In this Session nothing was done, saving that the Uicechancellour restored
again the process for appearance, that he had received of them two days
agone: The tenor whereof, he said he had published upon the contumacie of the^
that were cited, according as they had commanded him. Whereupon he requested
them to appoint the.iiii. day next folowinge to pronounce the sentence of
condemnation: the which without any difficultye he obtained. The judgment
day i^ appointed.
For I showed you before, that so it was agreed among them selves. And yet
these bluddy butchers would for all that seem m^ke and merciful men.

Insomuche that they would seem to determine nothing of their own heads,
before that this most filthye executioner of other men's wicked lusts, had
earnestly sewed to them for the same. As though no man had been able to espy
out their colorable conueyance, or as if we had cast from us both our minds
and eyes, that we should neither understand, nor see their craftye packyng.
Even so, they setting a fair gloss upon al their doings, sought to bring
them selves in credit with men, to thentent that when oportunitye should
serve, they might to their own most advantage, deceive men unawares. Surely,
they might not in any wise seem to do those things, which they were most
chiefelye bente upon and therefore they sought al means possible to bieare men's
eyes, that they should not see them, but they could not so escape vnespyed.

About this time they sent out a commandment that the master of every
College by thaduice of his house, A commandment for making of an Inuentorye
of the goods of every College, as well mouable as immovable.
should cause to be put in writing, how much every house had of ready money,
how much of yearly reuenewe, how much thereof had been bestowed about
necessary uses of the College, how much went to the stipendes of the
fellows, and the daily diet of the house, how much was allowed for other
extraordinary expenses, how much remained from year to year, what was done
with y^ overplus, with a due account of all things belonginge to that purpose.
The which thing (because that for the strangeness and noueltye thereof, it
should not make men to muse and break their branes about it) they said, that
before them the Colleges of Eton and Winchester had done the like. The cause
why they coueted to be certifyed here in, was for none other purpose, but to
thentent that they them selves might see, whether that they, to whose charge
the custodye and administration of those goods was committed, had behaved
them selves so truly and faythfullye, as by their oath they were bound to
do. This pretense made these diligent and curyous stewardes of other men's
goods. But it was known well enough, that this was rather a feigned
allegacion, than a true tale. For it was their mind, to search what power the
Clergy was of, the which, forasmuch as they made an assured account of, to
have willing to take their parts which were the chief heads of this
business, they coueted to know before hand, and to put them in a readiness,
against all hasardes and adventures of Fortune.

And no man ought to surmyse, that this conjecture is vain, or that it
depends upon a light ground, considering what a dele of armoure, what a dele
of artillerye and furniture for the wars, the whole body of the Clergy, but
inespecially the prelates, (who at that time bare all the sway) had laid up in
store at home in their own houses, or else put in custodye of their
confederates.

The which, forasmuch as they could be construed to tend to none other
purpose then to open force (inespecially in so cankerd a time as that was) is
it not a good likelihode that to the same enten^e and purpose, inquisition
should be made of the strength of thuniuersitye, which it self to
thuttermoste of her power, was ready to sustain any danger or burden, for
the maintenance of that filthy supersticion? But God has looked mercifully
upon us, and pulled their swords from our necks. But now let us return to
Bucer, and Pha^gius.

Now was come the day of judgment, The day of the judgment
and all the degrees of thuniuersitye were assembled to se this pageant.
Thither came also the Mayor and his townsmen, and all met together in S. Marie
Church to behold and learn what should be determined upon these men by the
Commissioners. After long attendaunce of the multitude, at length the
Commissioners came forth, and went up to a scaffolde that was somewhat higher
then the residue, prepared for ye same purpose. When they had taken their
places, there Perne the Uicechauncellour, the player of this interlude,
fashioninge his countenance with great grauitye, reached to them the process
that was lastly publyshed to cite the^: saying these words. I bring forth
again (quod he) to you right reverend fathers and Commissioners of the most
reverend my L. Cardinal Poole (payntinge out the rest of his style) this
Citacion executed according to the purporte and effect of the same: Omittyng
nothing for his part that might make to the commendacion of this matter. When
he had thus fynyshed his tale, by and by the bishop of Westchester, after he
had a little viewed the people, began in manner in this wise.

Ye see (quod he) how sore thuniuersitye preaseth upon us, how earnest
intercession it makes unto us, Westchesters oracio^ before the pronounci^g of
the sentence of condemnacion.
not only to denounce Bucer and Phagius (which these certain years past,
have spread most pernicious doctrine among you) Heretics, as they be indede:
but also that we will command their dead Carcases, (which unto this day
have obtained honorable buryall among you) to be dygged up and (as it is
excellentlye ordained by the Canon law) to be cast into fire, or what soever
is more grievous then fire if any can be.

For the degrees of thuniuersitye deal not slyghtlye nor slackelye with us in
this case, but do so prease upon us, and follow the suit so earnestly, that
they scarce give us any respyte of delay.

And I assure ye, albeit this case of it self be such, as that even
thunworthinesse of those persons (though there were no further cause) ought
to induce us to the doing thereof, much the rather (moved with these so
wholesome peticions) it is meet and convenient we should grant it. For
howsoever we of our selves are inclined to mercy in our hearts, (then the which
we protest there is nothing under the son to us more dear and acceptable)
yet notwithstanding, the very law rises up to reuengeme^t, so that the common
salvation of you al ( which ye law provides for) must be preferred before the
private charity of our minds. And it is not to be committed, that being
scarce yet escaped out of ye shipwreck of our former fault and calamitye, we
should suffer this vnexpiable mischief, to disquiet any longer the consciences
of the weak. Moreover, it is but reason that we should do somewhat at so
earnest entreatance and suit of thuniuersitye. It needs not speak much of our
selves. For if we had been desirous to enterprise this matter, it had been
lawful after the first Citacion, to have proceeded to judgment: But for
because we were willing that their defendours should be heard, and that the
matter should be tried by law, we sent out the second process. If we had
desired reuengemente, we might have showed cruelty upon them that are alive:
of the which (alas the more pitye) there are to many that embrace this
doctrine. If we thirsted for blood, it was not to be sought i^ withered
carcases and dry bones. Therefore ye may well perceive, it was no part of our
wills that we now came hither: but partlye induced at thentreata^ce of
thuniuersity, partly moved with thunworthinesse of the case it self, but
inespecially for the care and regard we have of your health and salvation, the
which we covet by all means to preserve whole and sound. For you your selves
are the cause of this business: you gave occasion of this confession, among
whom this day ought to be a notable example, to remain as a memoryall to them
that shall come after: as in the which ye may learn, not only to shake of
the fylth which ye have taken of these persons, but also to beware hereafter,
that ye fall no more so shamefully as ye have done: But I trust God will
defend you, and give ye minds to keep your selves from it. as concerning
them, whose case now hangs in law, they bare about the name of the
gospel, whereas in deed they wrought nothing else than theuery and deceyt.

And so much the wickeder were they, in that they sought to cover so shameful
acts, with the cloak of so fair and holy a name Wherefore it is not to be
doubted but that God will punyshe this despyght of it self wicked, to you
pernicious, by thautours thereof shameful and abominable. But if God (as he
is slow to wrath and vengeance) will wynke at it for a time: yet
notwithstanding, if we (upon who^ the charge of the Lords ^locke leans)
should permit so execrable crimes escape unpunished, we should not live in
quiet one hour.

When he had thus spoken, he recited the sentence out of a scroll, and
condemned Bucer and Phagius of heresye, the cond^^^nacion of Bucer and Phagius*
he commanded their bodies to be dug out of their graves, and being
disgraded from holy orders, deliue red them into the hands of the secular
power. For it was not lawful for such innocent persons as they were, abhorring
from al bloodshed, and detesting all desire of murder, to put any man to
death. Th^ntha^k^ulnesse of thuniuersitye.
O unworthy and abominable act: for which thuniuersitye shall never be able
to make satisfaction. Now unworthy a thing was it, to do all the spyghte that
might be to him being dead, to who^ being alive she exhibited al thonour and
reverence she could devise. Now intolerable a thing was it, to detest and
abhor him as a wicked deceyuer and leader out of the right way being dead,
whom in his life time she had followed and reverenced with all humility and
obeysau^ce, as her master and chyefe guide of her life? What a monstrous
thing is it not to spare him when he was dead? who during his life being aged
and always sickelye, yet never spared him self, to thentent he might profit
them?

Nothing grieved him more, all the time he lay sick and bedered, than that he
was unprofitable both to them and to the church of God: and yet when he was
deceased, he neither found obedience among his disciples, nor burial among
Christen men. If manhood and reason could not have obtained so much at our
hands, as to spare his memorial, or to reverence his ashes, yet nature and
the common law of all nations (by the which upon promise made by the body of
the realm he came hither) ought to have withheld this so great cruelty and
extreme barbarousnesse or savageness from his bones. Notwithstanding this
infamye of the university so openly gotten, Pernes sermon against Bucer.
Andrewe Perne the Uycechauncelloure with his slanderous talk more increased.
For after that Scotte had pronounced the sentence, he made a Sermon before the
people, taking that place of the, 132. Psalm, Behold, how good and
pleasant a thing it i^. etc. For his theme to enreate upon: where beginning
with the commendacion of concord, and of the mutual kni^tinge together of the
minds, he alleged that it was not possible to hold together, onelesse the
concord were derived out of the head, (the which he made to be the Bishop
of Rome) and that it also rested in the same. When he had made a long
protestacion upon this place, he passed from it to Bucer, upon who^ he made
such a shameful raylinge, that it is not possible to diffame a man more tha^
he did: saying, yt his doctrine gave occasion of division in the commonwealth,
and that there was not so grievous a mischief, which by his means had not,
been brought into ye realm. Although all men might perceive by such books as
he had co^pyled, what manner of doctrine it was: Yet notwithsta^nding he said he
knew it more perfectly him self tha^ any did, What things Perne accused Bucer
of.
and that he had learned it a part at thautours hand himself For at such time
as they had communication secretelye among them selves, he said that Bucer
would oftentimes wyshe he might be called by some other name, than by the
name he had: the which he did for this purpose, as though, knowinge him self
guilty of so grievous a crime, he might by this means escape unknown to the
world, and avoid the talk that went among men of him. Moreover among other
things, he told how Bucer held opinion, (which thing he should confess to
him his own self) that God was the author and welspring, not only of good,
but also of evil: and that whatsoever was of that sort, flowed from him as
from the head spryng and maker there of. The which doctrine he vphelde to be
sincere: how be it for offendinge diverse* men's consciences, he durst not put
it into men's heads. Many other things he patched together, of like purport
and effect, as of the supremacy of ye bishop of Rome, of the marriage of
pryestes, of diuorcementes, and of shameful usury also, as though he had
demed them lawful to be used among Christen people, with diverse other of the
same sort. In all which his allegations, consideringe how lewdly without all
shame he lied upon Bucer, (as his writings evidently declare) he did not so
much hinder his name with railing upon him, as win unto him self an
inexpiable infamy, by forgynge so shameful leasinges upon so worthy a man.
But what needs witness to prove him a liar? Pernes opinion of Bucer
according to his conscience
his own conscience shall make as much against him as a number of men. It was
reported for a truth, (and his own familyar friends were the bringers up
thereof) that he him self (either immediately after his sermon, or else
somewhat before he went to it) striking himself on the breast, and in manner
wepinge, wished at home at his house with all his heart, that God would
grant his soul might even then presentlye depart and remain with Bucers.
For he knew well enough that his life was such, that if any man's soul
were worthy of heaven he thought his inespecially to be most worthy. Whiles
he was thus talking to the people, in the mean time the leaves of the church
doors were covered over with verses: in the which the young men to show their
folly: Uerses against Bucer and Phaigus.
(which scarce knew him by sight) blazed Bucers name with most shameful and
reprochefull terms. Diverse also yt were somewhat more grown in years, and yet
more fools the^ the young me^: No fool to the old* fool.
like eger curres (who had been well served if their legs had been broken for
their labor) barked all that they could against him. And to thentent it
might seem to be done by a great number, (wherein the papists greatly vaunt
them selves) they enticed vnth y^ same business, many that by all means
favored Bucer, and that reverenced his name, as it became them. Who
notwithstanding to thentent that under this pretext they might escape their
crueltye, full sore against their wills, fayntly and slenderly pricked at him.

These things being dispatched Perne (as though he had sped his matters
marvelously well) the sentence of condemnation sent to london with the
Commissioners letters.
was for his labor of courtesye bidden to diner to Trinity College by the
Commissioners.

Where, after the Table was taken up, they caused the sentence of condemnation
to be copy^d out with all speed, the which sygned with the bishop of
Westchesters seal, the next day following, they sent to London with diverse of
those verses and slanderous libels, for so a man may call them. Besides these,
they sent also their own letters, in the which, they both advertised the
Cardinal how far they had proceeded in that matter, and also desired his
grace yt he would ca^se to be sent out of hand to Smith the Mayor of the
town the commandment that is of ordinary by the law, a writ for burning of
heretigues*
commonly called a Writ for the burning of Heretics. For onelesse he had
the Queen's warrante to save him harmless, he would not have to do in the
matter.

And that which remained to be done in that case, could not be dispatched till
yt warrant came. While this pursiuant went on his journey, they willed to be
brought unto them the books that they commanded before to be serched out.
For they determined to throw them into the fire with Bucer and Phagius.

About the same time, Watson taking occasion upon the day, because it was a
high feast, in the which was wont to be celebrated Watson^ sermon upon
Candelmas day.
the memorial of the purificatio^ of our lady the Uirgin, made a sermon to the
people upon that Psalm. We have received thy mercy O lord, in the midst of
thy temple. etc. In the which Sermon he spoke much reproach of Bucer and
Phagius, and of their doctrine. He said that these men and all the heretics
of our time that were of the same opinion (the which for the most part he
said had budded out of Germany) among other things which they had
perniciouslye put into men's heads, taught to cast away all ceremonies. Whereas
notwithstanding thappostle him self commanded all things to be done in due
order. And upon that deed of the blessed virgin and Joseph which was done by
the^ as upon that day it was manifestly apparent, that they with our savior
being then a little babe, observed these rites and Ceremonies, for catholic me^
to teach. For he said that they came to the Temple the same time with wax
ca^dels in their hands, after the manner of procession (as they term it) in
good order with much reverence and devotion: and yet we were not ashamed to
laugh and mock at these things with the heretics and Schismatikes. As he was
telling his tale of Christ, Marye, and Joseph, one of them that heard him, a
pleasaaut and merry conceyted fellow, turning him self to him that stood next
him, and if it be true (quod he) yt this man preaches which of the^ I pray you
(if a man might be so bold to spur him y^ question) bare the cross before ye
residew? For that might not be missinge in such solemn Ceremonies. Not only
this man ^ested at the preachers folly, but diverse others also laughed at his
manifest unshamefastness, in preaching these so vain and foolish
superstitions. While he was thus talkinge to his audyence, the sudden swound
of Christoforson.
John Christophorson elected bishop of Chichester, being stricken with a
sudden sycknesse fell down in a swound among the prease: and with much a do,
being scarce able a good while to come to him self again, in the mean time
babled many things unadvisedly, and as though he had been out of his wits.
Some thought it came upon this occasion, that because he had been greatly
accused before the Commissioners for mispending and misordring the goods of the
college, he was so grieved with the matter, inasmuche as he knew they were
displeased with him, by that that Ormanet had cancelled before his face a lease
of his by the which he had let to ferme to his brother in law a certane manor
of y^ College because the couenaunts seemed unreasonable.

By this time was returned again the Pursiuant, The taking ^p of Bucer and
Phagius.
who (as we ^olde you before) was sent to London a few days before with the
Commisioners letters: and brought with him a warrant for the burning of these
me^. Upon the receyte whereof they appointed the.vi. day of February for
thaccomplysheme^t of the matter. For it had hanged already a great while in
hand. Therefore when the said day was come the Commissioners sent for the
Uicechauncellour, demanding of him in what case things stood whether all
things were in a readiness, for thaccomplyshme^t of this business or no?
Understanding by him that al things were ready, they commanded the matter to
be brought out of hand. (...)
The Uicechauncellour therefore taking with him Marshall the common notarye,
went strayte to S. Michaels church, w^ere we showed you that Phagius was
buried. There he called forth Andrewe Smith, Henrye Sawyer, and Henry Adams men
of the same parish, and bound them with an oath to dygge up Phagius bones and
to bring the^ to the place of execution. Marshall took their oaths. Receiving
the like of Roger Smith, and william (...) the town ^erg^ants, and of John
^^^per warden of the same church for doing the like with Bucer* Smith the
Mayor of ye town which should be their executioner (for it was not lawful for
them to entermedle in cases of blood) commanded certain of his townsmen to
wait upon him in harness, by whom the dead bodies were guarded, and being bound
with ropes, and laid upon men's shoulders (for they were enclosed in chestes.
Bucer in the same that he was buried, and Phagius in a new) were borne into
the mids of y^ market sted with a great train of people following them.

This place was prepared before The burning of Bucer and Phagius.
and a great post was set fast in the ground to bind the carcases to, and
a great heap of wood was laid ready to burn them wythal. When they came
thither, the chestes were set up on end with ye dead b^dyes in them, and
fastened on both sides with stakes, and bound to the post with a long iron
chain, as if they had been alive. Fire being forthwith put to, as soon as it
began to flame round about, a great sort of books that were condemned with
them, were cast into the same. There was that day gathered into the town,
The talk of the countr^ifolk^ of the burning of Bucer and Phagius.
a great multitude of countreyfolke (for it was market day) who saying men
borne to execution, and learning by inquiry that they were dead before, partly
detested and abhorr^d thextreme crueltye of the Commissioners toward the rotten
carcases, and partly laughed at their folly in making such preparature. For
what needs any weapon (said they) as though they were afraid that the dead
bodies which felt the^ not, would do the^ some harm? Or to what purpose serves
that chain wherewith they are tied? sythens they might be burnt loose without
peril, for it was not to be feared that they would run away.

Thus every body that stood by, found fault with the cruelnesse of the deed,
either sharply or else lightly as every man's mind gave him. There were very
few (and those not of the ^ound and wholesome religion) that lyked their doing
herein. In the mean time that they were a rostinge in the fire, Watson went
into the pulpyt in S. Marye church, Watsons sermon at the bur^nyng of Bucer and
Phagius*
and there before his audience rayled upon their doctrine as wicked and
erron^ous: saying that it was the ground of al mischief that had happened of ^
long time in the common weal. For behold (says he) as well the prosperitye, as
thaduersitye of these years that have ensewed: Ye shall find that all things
have chanced vnluckelye, to them that have followed this new found faith, and
al things have happened for^unatelye to them that have eschewed it.

What robbing and polling (quod he) have we seen in this realm, as though in
those days had been raised no subsidies at al besides privy s^ales anon after.
as long as religion was defaced with Sects, the common threasure (gathered
for the main tenaunce of the whole publyke weal) and the goods of the realm
shamefully spent in waste for the maintenance of a few folks lusts: all
good order broken: all discipline cast aside: holidays appointed to the
solemnisinge of ceremonies neglected: and that more is, the places them selves
beaten down. Flesh and other kind of prohibited sustenaunce eaten every
where upon days forbidden, without remorce of conscience: the priests had in
derision: the Mass rayled upon: no honor done to the Sacraments of the
church. Al estates and degrees given to such a licencious liberty without
check, that all things may seem to draw to their utter ruin and decay.
And yet in the mean time, the name of the Gospel was pretended outwardlye,
as though that for it, men ought of duty to give credit to their erroneous
opinions: whereas in deed there is nothing more discrepant, or more to the
slander of Gods word then it. For what other thing taught they to remain
in that most blessed people, many of them that had written verses before,
did set up other new, in the which like a sort of water frogs, they spewed
out their venomous malice against Bucer and Phagius. This was the last of this
interlude, and yet there remained a few things to be done, among the which
was the reconciling of the two churches of our lady, the reconciling of y^
churches y^ were interdited.
and of S. Michaell, which we declared to have been enterdited. The which was
done ye next day following by Westchester, with as much ceremony as the law
required.

But that impanate God who^ Bucers Carcass had chased from thence, was not yet
returned thither again: Neither was it lawful for hi^ to come there any more,
but if he were brought thither with great solemnitye. As I suppose duringe all
the time he was away, he was enterteined by the Commissioners at Trinitye
College, and there continued as a soiourner. For thither came all the
Graduates of thuniuersitye, a solemn procession of thuniuersity and of the
townesme^.
the eyghte day of Februarye, of gentleness and courtesye to bring him home
again. Amongst the which number, Westchester (worthy for his estate to come
nearest to him, because he was a bishop) took and carried him cladde in a long
Rochet, and a large typpet of sarcenet about his neck, wherein he wrapped his
Idol also, Ormanet Datarye had given the same a little before to thuniuersitye
^or the same and such like purposes. When this Idol should return home, he
went^ not the straitest and nearest way as other folk are wont to go, but he
fetched a windelasse about the most part of ye town: and romed through so many
of the streets, that it was a large hour and more, ere he could find the
way into his Church again. I believe thauncient Romans observed a custom not
much unlike this in their procession, when they made supplycations at the
shrynes of al their Gods. Thorder whereof was this: The masters, Regentes,
went before singing with a loud voice, Salve festa dies. etc. Next them
followed Westchester, about him went Ormanet and his fellow Commisioners,
with the Masters of the Colleges bearing every man a long taper light in his
hand. After whom, a little space of, followed the other degrees of thuniuersity.
Last behind came the Mayor and his townsmen. Before them all went the Bedels,
cryeng to such as they met^e, that they shoul^e bow them selves humbly before
the host. If any refused so to do they thretned to send him forthwith to the
tolbooth. Their god being led with this pomp, and pacified with great hosts
of Bucer and Phagius, at length settled him self again in his accustomed
room. Scot of Westchester prayed with many words, yt that day might be luckye
and fortunate to himself, and to all that were present, and that from that day
forward (now that Gods wrath was appeased, and all other things set in good
order) all men would make the^ selves conformable to peace and quietenesse,
inespecially that appertayned to religion. After this, Certain of the
university amerced and punished.
they bestowed a few days in punishing and amercing such as they thought had
deserved it Some they suspended from geuinge voices either to their own
prefermente, or to the preferment of any other. Some they forbade to have the
charge of pupilles, least they should in^ect the tender youth, (being pliable
to take what prynte so ever is laid upon them) with corrupt doctrine and
heresye. Others they chasticed wrongfully without any desert.: and many a one
they punyshed contrary to all right and reason. Last of al they set forth
certain statutes, by the which they would have thuniuersitye hereafter
ordered.

Wherein they enacted many things as concerning the election of their
officers of thuniuer sitye, of keeping and administryng the goods of
thuniuersitye, and of many other things. But in^specially they handled the
matter very circumspectlye for relygion. In the which they were so scrupu^ous,
yt they replenished all things, The decrees of thinquisitours.
either with open blasphemye or with ridiculous superstition. For they
prescribed at how many masses eueri man should be day by day, and how many
masses every man should say when he should enter into the church, and in his
entrance after what sort he should bow him self to the altar: and how to y^
master of ye house: what he should do there, and how long he should tarry, how
many and what prayers he should say: what and how he should sing, what
meditacions other should use while the priest is in his Memento mu^bling
secretly to him self: what time of the Mass a man should stand, and when he
should sit down: when he should make courtesy, when exclusiuelye, when
inclusiuely, and many other supersticious toys they decreed, that it was a
good ^port to behold the^. Moreover, these Masters of good order, for fashion
sake, ordained that every man should put on a Surplyce, not torn nor worn,
but clean, forbidding them in any wise to wype their noses thereon. And these
are the things which we told you before, that some noted in Ormanet how
deuoutlye he observed them in the kings chapel. All the which (under a great
penalty to such as omitted the^) were enjoined commonly to all men alike.

All things being thus set at a stay, when they were now ready to go their
ways, thuniuersitye for so great benefytes (which she could not suffer to fall
out of remembrance many years after) (...)
coveting to show some token of courtesy toward the^ again, commenced
Ormanet and Cole doctors (for all the residue saving Christophorso^, Ormanet
and Cole pro^ede Doctors.
who now by reason he was elected bishop, had prevented that degree, were
chose^ into that order before) the which they showed them selves to receive
thankefully at their hands, thinkinge much gentleness in so doing. Thus at
length were sent away these peacemakers that came to pacifye strifes and
quarelles, who through provoking every man to accuse one another, the
departure of thin quisitours.
left such gappes and breaches in men's hearts at their departure y^ to this
day they could never be closed and joined again together.

These Commissioners, before they departed out of thuniuersity, gave
commandment, that the masters of every house should copy out their
statutes, ye which beside common ordinances, contained in certain rules, the
private ordering of every house perticulerly. Swinebornes saying as concerning
the decrees of thinquisitours.
Swineborne (who as I said was master of Clare hall) being demanded whether
he would have those things engroced in parchme^t or in paper, answered, that
it made no matter wherein they were written. For the paper or a slighter thing
that were of less continuance than paper, would serve the turn well enough: For
he said a slenderer thing tha^ that, would last a great deal longer then those
decrees should stand in force: (...)
Neither was the man deceived in his conjecture. For within two years after,
The death of Queen Mary.
God beholdinge us with mercy, called Queen Mary (the which princess the
cardinal and the rest of the bishops of England, miserablye abused to thutter
destruc^io^ of Christ's church) out of this life the.xvii. day of November,
Queen elizabeth succedeth.
in the year of our Lord. 1558. Unto whom her sister Elizabeth succeding in
the kingedome (the like of which princess a man shall not lightlye find in
perusing the chronicles to have reigned in many hundred years before,) raised
sed to life again, The true religion is restored.
the true religion being not only sore apalled and commanded to seek her a
new dwelling place, but in manner burnte up and consumed to ashes. The which
after the time it ones began to recover strength again, and by little and little
to lift up her head, the filthy dregs of ye Romyshe iugling castes began
forthwith to melt away. Whereupon the Church of God began to be edifyed again
in England, the buylding whereof the Sanaballites and Tobies did not only as
then hinder and waste, but even at this day also (as Satan is a most subtle
slau^derer) work all the pollicyes they can deuyse, that the truth (which is
not dark unless men will be blinded wilfullye) should not come abroad and ^e
seen in the light. While the broken and decayed places of this work were in
repayring, it came to remembrance, how the right reverend father and sometime
our schoolemayster Martin Bucer with Paulus Phagius, The res^itucion of Bucer
and Phagius.
being taken with the violent tempest of the former times, were thrown down
out of their standing which they had in the wall of this building. Who^ the
most reverend fathers in Christ Mathewe Parker, now archebyshop of
Cantorburye, and Primate of all England, which before at his buryall preached
honorablye of him, and Edmonde Gryndall bishop of London, who (among the
rest that did him that service) did help to bear him in his coffin to burial
on h^s shoulders, and other both honorable and worshipful persons, among who^
was Walter Haddo^ master of ye requests to the Queens highness, who made a
funeral Oration of the death of Bucer, being him self haife dead, having
received commission of the queen's majesty to make a reformation of religion in
thuniuersitye of Cambridge and other parts of the realm, decreed that they
should be set in their places again: For ye performance whereof, the foresaid
right reverend fathers adressed their letters to the Uicechauncellor and the
Graduates of thuniuersity. Andrewe Perne bare still yt letters directed for the
restitution of Bucer and Phagius.
office (who by his good will) could not abide to hear one word spoken as
touching the full restitution of Bucer and Phagius. when he had persued these
letters, he pou^ded the matter to y^ degrees of thuniuersitie, whether it
pleasen them, that the degrees and titles of honor taken away from Martin
Bucer and Paulus Phagius, by ye verdit of the whole university should by the
same be fullye restored again: and that al acts done against them and their
doctrine should be repealed and disanulled. The which demaundes were openly
consented unto by all the Graduates of thuniuersitye. This was about the.xxii.
day of July, in the year of our lord. 1560. Albeit that this had been
sufficient to restore them lawfully again: Nevertheless, forasmuch as it
seemed not enough in consideracion of the dignitye of so worthy men, and in
satysfaction of the duty of the Uniuersitye* they that were the chief doers
in this matter, called a congregation in S Mary Church, at the last day of
the same month saving one. In the which place consultacion was had
concerning Bucer and Phagius, not with so great furniture and gloriousness
(which things the truth seeks not gredely for) but with honest comeliness to
thentent to reconcile men's hearts again. An oration was made by Acworth the
common Orator of thuniuersity, The oration of Acworth orator of thuniuersitye
at the restitution of Bucer and Phagius.
whose words I will rehearce in order as he spoke them.

I am in doubt whether I may entreat of the praise and commendacion of so
great a clerk (for the celebrating whereof this assemblye and concourse of
youres is made this day) or of the vices and calamityes, out of the which we
be newely delivered: or of them both: consydering the one can not be mentioned
without the other. In the which times ye felt so much anguishe and sorrow (my
right dear brethren) that if I should repeat them and bring them to
remembrance again, I fear me, I should not so much work a just hatred in us
toward them, for thiniuryes received in them, as renew our old sorrow and
heaviness. Again, men must needs account me unadvised and foolish in my
doing, if I should think my self able, to make him which has lived
before your eyes in praise and estimation, more famous and notable by my
Oration, which he by his liuing^ and conversation has oftentimes polished. But
the wickedness of ye times which ende^ored to wipe clean out of the
remembrance of men, the name yt was so famous and renoumed in every man's
mouth, did much profit hi^. In so much that both in his life time all thing
redounded to his continual renown, and inespecially after his decease nothing
could be devised more honorable, then with so solemn furniture and ceremonies
to have gone about, to have hurt ye memorial of such a worthy man, and yet
could not bring to pass the thing that was ^o sore coueted: but rather
brought that thing to pass, which was chiefelye sought to be avoided. For
the desire that men have of the dead, has purchased to many meneuerlasting
fame, and has not taken away immortalitye, but rather amplifyed and increased
the same. By means whereof it comes to pass, that he yt will entreat of those
things, that pertayne to the praise of Bucer after his death: can not choose
but speak of the crabbednesse of the times past, upon the which ryseth a
great increase and augmentation of his praise. But his ^yfe is so excellently
set forth, not only by the writings of the learned clerks Cheke and Carre,
and by the liuelye voice of the right famous. D. Haddon uttered in this place
to the great admiration of all the hearers, when his body should be laid into
his grave to be buried, and after his buryall by the godly and most holy
preachynges of the right reverend father in Christ Tharchbyshop of
Caunterbury that now is, and of D. Readman: the which for ye worthiness and
excellency of them, ought to stick longer in our minds unwritten, then many
things that are penned and put in prynt: but also by the great assemble of all
the degrees of thuniuersitye the same day: in bringing him to his grave, and
the next day after by thindustrye of every man that was endewed with any
knoweledge in the Greek or Latin tounges: of the which, there was no man,
but that set up some Uerses, as witnesses of his just and unfeigned sorrow, upon
the walls of the church: That neither at that time any reverence or duetye
which is due to the dead departinge out of this life, was then duers^ipped, or
now remains undone that may seem to partayne either to the celebratyng of
the memorial of so holy or famous a person, or to the consecratinge of him to
everlasting memory. We at that time saw with our eyes this Uniuersitye
flouryshinge by his institucions: the love of sincere religion not only
engendered, but also confirmed and strengthened through his continual and
daily preachinge. In so much that at such time as he was suddenly taken from
us, there was scarce any man that for sorrow could find in his heart to
bear with the present estate of this life, but that either he wyshed with all
his heart to depart out of this life with Bucer into another, and by dieng to
follow him into to immortalitye, or else endeavored him self with wepinge and
sighing to call him again, being dispatched of all troubles into ye prison of
this body, out of the which he is escaped: lest he should leave us as it were
standinge in battle ray without a captain, and he hi^ self as one casshed
depart with his wages, or as one dyscharged out of ye camp, wtdraw him self
to the everlasting quietness and tranquillity of the soul Therefore al men
evidently declared at that time both how sore they took his death to heart,
and also, how hardly they could away with the misture of such a man. As long as
the ardent love of his religion (wherwt we were inflamed) flourished, it wrought
in our hearts an incredible desire of his presence amorvs.

But after the time yt the godly man ceased to be any more in our sight and in
our eyes, ye ardent and burning love of religion by little and little waxed cold
in our minds and according to the times yt came after (which were both
miserable and to our utter undoing) it began not by little and little to be
darkened, but it altogether vanished away and turned into nothing. For we fell
again into the troublesomnesse of the popish doctrine: the old rites and
customs of the romish church were restored again, not the garnishment and
beatifiyng of the Christen religion (as they surmised) but to thutter defacing,
violating, and defiling of the same: Death was set before the eyes of such
as perseuered in the christian doctrine that they had learned before:

They were banished the relame that could not apply them selves to the time,
and do as other men did: such as remained, were enforced either to dissemble,
or to hide them selves and crepe into corners, or else by drinkinge as it were
of ye charmed cup of Circes, to be turned and altered, not only from the
nature of man into the nature of brute beasts, but (that far worse and much
more monstrous is) from the likeness of God and his Angels into the
likeness of deuels. And all England was infected with this maladye. But I would
to God the corruption of those times which overwhelmed all the whole realm,
had not at least wise yet perced every part and member thereof. Of the which
there was not one but that (besides the grief that it felt with the residew
of the body, by reason of the sickness and contagion spread into the whole)
had some sorrow and calamitye peculiarly by it self. And to omit the rest (of
the which to entreat this place is not appointed, nor the time requires ought
to be spoken) this dwellinge place of the Muses (which we call thuniuersity) may
be a sufficient witness, what we may judge of all the rest of the body. For
certesse my brethren, the thing is not to be dissembled that can not be
hidden. We applying our selves to those most filthy times, have most
shamefullye yielded like fayntharted cowardes, which had not the stomachs to
susteyn thaduersities of poverty, banishment, and death: Which in our living
and conversation, kept neither the constancy taught us us by Philosophye, nor
yet the patience taught us by holy scripture: which have done all things at
the commandment of others. And therefore that which the Poet (although in
another sense) has trimly spoken may well de thought to have been truly
prophesied upon us.

The times and seasons changed be
And changed in the same are we.
Diverse of them that were of a pure and sincere judgment as concerning
religion being driven from hence and distroubled, the rest that remained tasted
and felt of the inhumanitie of them in whose hands thautoritie of doing
things here consisted. Although to say ye truth, I have used a ge^tler term
tha^ behooved. For it is not to be accounted inhumanitye, but rather immanitie
and beastly crueltye: the which, when they had spent al kinds of torments and
punishementes upon the quyck: when they had cruelly taken from such as
constantly perseuered, life, from others riches, honors, and all hope of
promotion, yet could not be so satisfied, but that incensed and stirred with a
greater fury, it began to outrage even against the dead. Therefore whereas in
every singular place, was executed a singular kind of cruelty: insomuch that
there was no kind of cruelnesse that could be devised, but it was put in ure
in one place or other) This was proper and peculiar to Cambridge, to exercise
the crueltye upon the dead, which in other places was extended but to the
quick. Oxford burnt up the right reverend fathers Cranmer, Ridley, and
Latimer, the noble witnesses of the clear light of the ghospel. Moreover at
London peryshed these two la^ternes of light, Rogers and Bradford: In who^ it
is hard to say whether there were more force of eloquence and utterance in
preachinge, or more holiness of life and conuersacio^. Many other without
noumber both here and in other places were consumed to ashes for bearing
record of the truth. For what city is there that has not flamed, I say not
with burning of houses and buyldinges, but with burning of holy bodies?

But Cambridge, after there were no mo left alive upon who^ they might spue out
their bitter poison, playde the mad bedlem against the dead. The dead me^,
whose living no man was able to find fault with, whose doctrine no man was
able to reprove, were by false and slau^derous accusers indicted, contrary to the
laws of God and man sewed in the law, condemned, their sepulchers violated and
broken up, their car^ases pulled out and burnt with fire. A thing surely
incredible if we had not seen it with our eyes, and a thing that has not
lyghtlye been heard of. But the haynousnesse of this wicked act, was spredde
abroad as a common talk in every man's mouth, and was blown and disp^rsed
through all christendom. Bucer by thexcelle^cye of his wit and doctrine known
to al men of our countrymen in manner craved, of many others entreated and
sent for, to thentent he might instruct our Cambrydge men in the sincere
doctrine of the Christen religion, being spent with age, and his strength
utterly decayed, forsook his own countreye, refused not the tedyousnesse of
the long journey, was not afraid to adventure him self upon the sea, but had
more regard of the dilating and amplifyeng of the church of Christ, than of
all other things. So in conclusion he came, every man received and welcomed
him, afterward he lived in such wise, as it might appear he came not hither
for his own sake, but for ours. For he sought not to drive away the
syckenesse that he had taken by the troublesome travail of his long journey,
and albeit his strength were weakened and apalled, yet he regarded not the
recouerye of his health, but put him self to immoderate labor and
intolerable pain only to teach and instruct us. And yet toward this so
noble and worthy a person while he lived were showed all the tokens of
humanity and gentleness reverence and courtesy, y^ could be, and when he
was dead, the most horrible cruelty and spite that might be ymagined. For
what can be so common, as to grant unto the living house and abidinge place,
and to the dead burial? Or what is he that will find in his heart to give
enterteinment and to cherishe that person in his house with all kind of
gentleness that he ^an devise, upon whom he could not vouchesafe ^o to
bestow buryall when he is dead? Again, what an inconstancye is it, with great
solemnity, and with much advancement and commendacion of his virtues, to
burye a man honorablye, and anon after to break up his tomb and pull him out
spitefully? and wrongfullye to slander him being dead, who during his life
time always deserved praise? Al these things have happened unto Bucer, who
whiles he lived had free access into the most gorgeous buyldings and stately
palaces of the greatest Princes, and when he was dead could not be suffered to
enjoy so much as his poor grave. Who being laid into the ground noblye to
his eternal fame, was afterward to his utter defacing, spitefully taken up and
burned. The which things albeit they did no harm to the dead (for the dead
carcases feel no pain, neither does the fame of godly persons depend upon
the report of vulgar people, and the light rumors of men, but upon the
ryghtefull censure and just judgment of God) yet it reproves an extreme
crue^nesse and insatiable desire of reue^gement, in them which offer such
utter wrong to the dead. These persons therefore, who^ they have pulled out of
their graves and burned, I believe (if they had been alive) they would have cast
out of house and home, they would have driven out of al men's company, and in
the end with most cruel torments have torn them in pieces, being
nevertheless alientes, being strangers, and being fetched hither by us, out
of such a country, wherethey not only neded not to fear any punishment,
but contrary wise were always had in much reputacion, as well among the noble
and honorable, as also among the vulgar and common people. But yet how much
more gentle than these men, was Bishop Gardener? otherwise an earnest defendour
of the popyshe doctrine? Who against his own countrymen let pass no
crueltye, whereby he might extinguyshe with fire and sword the light of the
Gospel: and yet he spared forreyners, because the right of them is so
holy, that there was never nation so barbarous, that would violate the same.
For when he had in his power the renoumed clerk Peter Martyr, then teaching
at Oxforde, he would not keep him to punish him, but (as I have heard
reported) when he should go his way, he gave him wherewith to bear his
charges. So that the thing which he thought he might of right do to his own
countrymen, he judged unlawful to do to strangers. And whom the law of God
could not withhold from the wicked murtheringe of his own countrymen, him did
the law of man bridle from killynge of strangers: the which has ever
appeased all barbarous beastlynesse, and mitigated al crueltye. For it is a
point of humanitye for man and man to mete together and one to come to another
though they be never so far separated and set a su^der both by sea and by land,
without the which access there can be no intercourse of merchaundy se, there
can be no conference of wits, which first of all engendered learning, nor
any commoditye of society long to continue. To repulse the^ that come to us,
and to prohibit the^ our countries, is a point of inhumanitie: Now, to
entreat the^ evil, that by our sufferance dwell amongst us, and have increase
of household and household stuff, it is a point of wickedness.

Wherefore this crueltye has far surmounted the cruelty of all others, the
which, to satisfye the insatiable greediness thereof, drew to execution, not
only strangers brought hither at our entreatance and se^ding for, but even
the wythered and rotten carcases dug out of their graves: to thentente that
thun measurable thurst which could not be quenched with sheading the blood of
them that were alive, might at the least be satisfied in burning of dead
men's bones. These (my brethren) these I say, are the just causes which have
so sore provoked the wrath of God against us. Because that in doing extreme
injury to the dead, we have been prone and ready: but in puttinge the same
away, we have been slow and slack. For verelye I believe (if I may have
liberty to say freely what I think) ye shall bear with me (if I chauce to cast
forth any thing unadvisedly in the heat and hasty discourse of my oration)
that even this place, in the which we have so oftentimes assembled, being
defiled with that new kind of wickedness such as man never heard of before,
is a let and hinderaunce unto us, when we call for the help of god, by means
whereof our prayers are not accepted, which we make to appease the godhead, and
to win him to be favorable to us again. The blood of Abell shed by Cain,
calls and cries from yt earth yt sucked it up: likewise, thundeserued
burninge of these bodies, calls upon God almighty to punish us, and cries
that not only thautoures of so great a wickedness, but also the ministers
thereof are vnpure, the places defiled in which these things were perpetrated,
thaire infected which we take into our bodies, to thentent that by sundry
diseases and sickness we may receive punishment for so execrable
wickedness. Look well about ye (my dear brethren) and consider with your
selves the euelles that are past: and ye shall se how they took their
beginning at Bucers death, following one in another neck eue^ unto this day.
First and foremost when we were even in the chiefest of our morni^g, and
scarcely yet recomforted of our sorrow for his death, the sweatinge sickness
lyghted upon us, the which passing swiftly through al England, and as it were in
have dispatched an innumerable company of me^ secondlye, thuntimelye death of
our most noble king Edward the syxth, (whose life in virtue surmounted
thopinion of al men and seemed worthy of immortality) happened contrary to men's
expectacion in that age, in the unless violence be used, few do dye. The
conversion of religion, or rather the euersion and turning thereof into
papistrie. The incursion and domination of strangers, under whose yoke our
necks were almost subdued. The importunate crueltye of the bishops against
the Christians which executed that wickedness for making satisfaction whereof, we are gathered together this day. These are the things that ensued after his
death: but after his burninge ensewed yet greuouser things. Namelye new kind
of plagues, and contagious diseases, unknown to the very Physicians, whereby
either every man's health was appayred, or else they were brought to their
graves, or else very hardly recovered: blouddy battles with out victory,
whereof the profit redounded to the enemy, and to us ye slaughter with great
loss. The which things do euidentlye declare, that God is turned from us,
and angrye with us, and that he gives no ear to our prayers, and that he is
not moved with our cries and sighs, but that he looks, that this our meting
and assembly should be to this end: that forasmuch as we have violated their
coarses, we should do the^ right again: so that the memorial of these most
holy men, may be commended to posterity vnhurted and vndiffamed. Wherefore
amend yet at length (my brethren) which hitherto by reason of the
variableness and vnconstancye of the times, have been wavering and unsteadfast
in your hearts: show your selves cheerful and forward in making
satysfaction for thiniurye you have done to the dead, whom with so great
wickedness of late ye endomaged and defiled: not by sensinge the^ with the
parfumes of those odours and spices now worn out of ure and put to flight but
with a true and unfeigned repentance of the heart and with prayer: to thentent
that the heavenly godhead, provoked by our doings to be our enemy, may by our
humble submission be entreated to be favorable and agreeable to all our other
requests.

When Acworth had made an and of his Oration, M. James Pilkington The sermon of
D. James Pilkingto^
the Queen's reader of the diuinitye lecture, going up into the pulpit, made a
Sermon upon ye.C.xi. Psalm, the beginning whereof is. Blessed is the man that
fears the lord. etc Where intending to prove that the remembrance of the
just man shall not peryshe, and that Bucer is blessed, and that the ungodly
shall freat at the syghte thereof, but yet that all their attemptes shall be to
no purpose, to thentent this saying may be verified: I will curse your
blessings, and bless your cursings, he took his beginning of his own
person, that albeit he were both ready and willinge to take that matter in hand,
partlye for the worthiness of the matter it self, and inespecially for
certain singular virtues, of those persons, for whom that congregation was
called, yet notwithstanding he said he was nothing meet to take that charge
upon him.

For it were more reason that he which before had done Bucer wrong, should
now make him amends for the displeasure.

As for his own part, he was so far from workynge any evil against
Bucer, either in word or deed, that for their singular knowledge almost in
all kind of learning, he embraced both him and Phagius with all his heart.
But yet he somewhat more favored Bucer, as with whom he had more familiarity
and acquaintance. In consideracion whereof, although that it was scarce
conueniente, that he at that time should speak, yet notwithstanding he was
contented for frendeshippe and courtesye sake, not to ^ayle them in this their
business. Having made this preface he entered into the pith of the matter,
wherein he blamed greatly that barbarous crueltye of the Court of Rome, so
fierslye extended against the dead. He said it was a more heinous matter the^
was to be borne with, to have showed such extreme cruelnesse to them that were
alive, but for any man to misbehaue him self in such wise toward the dead,
was such a thing as had not lightly been heard of. Saving that he affirmed
this custom of excommunicating and cursynge of dead folks, to have come first
from Rome. For Euagrius reports in his writings, that Eutichius was of the
same opinion, induced by thexample of Josias, who slew the priests of Baall,
and burnte up the bones of them that were dead, even upon thaltars. Whereas,
before the time of Eutichius this kind of punishment was well nere unknown,
neither afterward usurped of any man (that ever he heard of) until a nine
hundred years after Christ.

In the latter times (the which how much the further they were from that golden
age of thapostels, so much the more they were corrupted) this kind of
cruelnesse began to creep further. For it is manifestlye known, that
Stephen the sixth Pope of Rome, dug up Formosus his last predecessor in
that sea, and spoiling him of his Popes apparayle, buried him again in lay
man's apparayle (as they call it) having first cut of and thrown into
Tyber, his two fyngers, with which (according to their accustomed manner) he
was wont to bless and consecrate. The which his unspeakable tyranny used
against Formosus, within six years after, Sergius the third encresed also
against the same Formosus. For taking up his dead body and setting it in a
Popes chair, he caused his head to be smiten of, and his other three fingers
to be cut from his hand, and his body to be cast into the river of Tiber,
abrogating and disanulling all (...) decrees, which thing was never done by
any man before yt day. The cause why so great cruelty was exercised (by the
report of Nauclerus) was this: because that Formosus had been an aduersarye
(...) Stephen and Sergius when they sued to be made bishops.

This kind of crueltye unheard of before, the Popes a while exercised one
against another.

But now, or ever they had sufficientlye felt the smart thereof the^ selves,
they had ^ourned the same upon our necks. Wherefore it is to be wished, that
saying it began among them, it might have remained still with thautours thereof,
and not have been spread over thence unto us. But such was the nature of all
evil, that it quickly passes into example, for others to do the like.

For about the year of our Lord 1400. John Wicklyfe was in like manner dug
up, and burnte into ashes, and thrown into a brook that runs by ye town
where he was buried. Of the which self same sauce tasted also William Tracye
of Gloucester, a man a of worshipful house because he had written in his last
will that he should be saved only by faith in Jesus Christ, and that there
neded not the help of any man thereto, whether he were in heaven or in earth,
and therefore bequeathed no legacye to that purpose as all other men were
accustomed to do. This deed was done since we may remember about the.xxii.
year of the raygne of Henry the.viii. the year of our Lord. 1530.

Now seeing they extended such cruelty to the dead, he said it was an easy
matter to conjecture what they would do to the living. Whereof we had sufficient
trial by the examples of our own men, these few years past. And if we
would take the pains to peruse things done somewhat longer ago, we might
find notable matters out of our own Chronicles. Howbeit, it was sufficient
for the manifest demonstration of that matter, to declare the beastlye
butcherye of the French king, executed upon the Waldenses, at Cabryer, and the
places nere thereabout, by his captain Miner, about the year of our lord
1545. than the which there was never thing read of more cruellye done, no not
even of the barbarous Paganes. And yet for all that when diverse had showed
their uttermost cruelty: both against these and many others, they were so
far from their purpose in extinguishynge the light of the gospel, which
they endeavored to suppress, that it increased daily more and more. The which
thing Charles the.v (than whom all christendom had not a more prudent prince,
nor the church of Christ almost a sorer enemy) easily parceiued, and therefore
when he had in his hand Luther dead, and Mela^ctho^ and Pomeran, with certain
other preachers of the Gospel alive, he not only determined not any thing
extremely against them, nor violated their graves, but also entreatinge them
gently sent them away, not so much as ones forbidding the^ to publishe openly
ye doctrine yt they professed. For it is the nature of Christ's Church, that
the more that Tyrauntes spurn against it, the more it increases and
flourysheth. A notable proof assuredly, of the providence and pleasure of God
in sowynge the the Gospel, was that coming of the Bohemians unto us, to
thentente to hear Wycklyfe, of whom we spoke before, who at that time read
openly at Oxforde: and also the going of our men to the said Bohemians, when
persecution was raised against us. But much more notable was it, that we had
seen come to pass in these our days: that the Spaniardes sent for in to this
realm of purpose to suppress the Gospel, as soon as they were returned
home, replenyshed many parts of their Countreye, with the same truth of
religion, to the which before, they were utter enemies. By the which examples,
it might evidently be perceived, that the Princes of this world labor in
vain to overthrow it, consideringe how the mercy of God has sown it
abroad, not only in those countries yt we spoke of, but also in France,
Poole, Scotland, and almost all the rest of Europe. For it is said, that
some parts of Italye, (although it be under the Popes nose) yet do they of
late enclyne to the knowledge of the heavenly truth: Wherefore sufficient
argument and proof might be taken by the success and encreasement thereof, to
make us believe that this doctrine is sent us from heaven, unless we will
wilfully be blinded. And if there were any that desired to be persuaded more
at large in the matter, he might advisedly consider the viage that the emperor
and the Pope with both their powers together, made jointly against that was
reported of their captain zisca: who when he should die, willed his body to be
flaine, and of his skin to make a parch meant to cover the heads of a drom. For
it should come to pass, that when his ennemies heard the sound of it, they
should not be able to stand against them.

The like counsel (he said) he him self now gave them as concerning Bucer.
That like as the Bohemians did with y^ skin of zisca, the same should they do
with the arguments and doctrine of Bucer. For as soon as the Papists should
hear the noise of him, their gewgawes should forth with decay. For sauinge
that they used violence to such as withstoode them, their doctrine contained
nothing that might seem to any man (having but mean understanding in holy
scripture) to be grounded upon any reason. As for those things yt were done
by them against such as could not play the madme^ as well as they, some of them
favored of open force, and some of ridiculous foolishenes. For what was this
first of all? was it not frivolous? that by ye space of three years together,
mass should be song in those places where Bucer and Phagius rested in the
lord without any offense at al? and as soon as they took it to be an offense,
straight way to be an offense if any were heard ther^ or that it should not be
as good the^ as it was before? as if y^ then upon y^ sudden it had been a
heinous matter to celebrate it in that place and that the fault that was past,
should be counted the gr^^ouser because it was done of longer time before.
Morouer, this was a matter of none effect, that Bucer and Phagius only should
be dug up, as who should say, that they alonly had embraced the religion
which they call heresy It was well known how one of the Burgesses of the town
had been minded toward ye popish religion. Who when he should dye, Fan
sometime Mayor of the town.
willed neither ringinge of Belles* Diriges, nor any other such kind of
trifles to be done for him in his anniuersarye as they term it, but rather yt
they should go with instruments of musyke before the Mayor and counsel of the
City, to celebrate his memorial, and also that yearly a sermon should be
made to the people, bequeathinge a piece of money to the preacher for his
labor. Neither might he omit in that place to speak of Ward the peinter, who
albeit he were a man of no reputacio^, yet was he not to be despised for the
religion sake which he diligently followed.

Neither were diverse other mo to be passed over with silence, who were known of
a certaintye to have continued in the same sect, and to rest in other
churcheyardes in Cambridge, and rather through the whole realm, and yet
defiled not their masses at al. Al y^ which persons* (forasmuch as they were
al of one opinion) ought al to have been taken up, or else all to have been let
lie with the same religion: onles a man would grant y^ it lies in their power
to make what they list lawful and unlaw- at their own pleasure. In the
condemnacion of Bucer and Phagius (to say the truth) they used to much
crueltye and to much violence. For howesoeuer it went with the doctrine of
Bucer, certainlye they could find nothing whereof to accuse Phagius, in as
much as he wrate nothing yt came abroode saving a few things that he had
translated out of the Hebrewe and Chaldye tounges, into Latin. After his
coming into the realm, he never read, he never disputed, he never preached,
he never teached. For he deceased so sone after, yt he could in that time give
no occasion for his adversaries to take hold on, whereby to accuse him whom
they never heard speak. In that they hated Bucer so deadly, for thallowable
marriage of the clergy, it was their own malice conceived against him, and a
very slander raised by the^ selves. For he had for his defense in that matter,
(over and besides other helps) the testimony of Pope Pius the second, who in
a certain place says, yt upon weighty consideratio^s priests wives were
taken from them, but for more weyghtye causes were to be restored again. And
also the statute of the Emperor, they call it the Interim, by the which it is
enacted, that such of ye clergy as were married should not be divorced from
their wives. Thus turning his style from this matter, to thuniuersitie, he
reproved in few words their unfaithfulness toward these me^. For if the
lord suffered not the bones of y^ king of Edom, being a wicked man, to be
taken up and brent without reue^geme^t (as says Amos) Amos ca. 2
let us assure our selves he will not suffer so notable a wrong done to his
godly preachers, unrevenged. Afterward when he came to ye condemnacio^ (which
we told you in ye former actio^ was pronounced by Perne the Uicechancellor in
the name of the^ al) being somewhat more moved at the matter, he admonished
them how much it stood the^ in hand, to use great circumspectnesse, what they
decreed upon any man by their voices in admitting or rejecting any man to the
promotions and degrees of thuniuersity. For yt which should take his authority
from the^ should be a great prejudice to al the other multitude, which (for
thopinion y^ it had of their doctrine, judgment, allowance, and knowledge) did
think nothing but well of them. For it wuld come to pass, that if they would
bestow their promocions upon none but meet persons, and let the unmeet go as
they come, both the commonwealth should receive much commodity and profit by
them, and besides that they should highlye please God. But if they persisted to
be negligent in doing thereof, they should greuouslye endomage the common weal,
and worthily work their own shame and reproach: over and besides that they
should greatly offend the majesty of God, whose commandment not to bear
false witness, they should in so doing break and violate.

In the mean while that he was speaking these and many other things before his
audience, many of thuniuersitye to set out and defend Bucer withal, beset the
walls of the Church and Churchporche on both sides with verses, some in Latin,
some in Gra^ke, and some in English, in the which they m^de a manifest
declaration how they were minded both toward Bucer and Phagius. Finally when
his sermon was ended they made common supplication and prayers. After thanks
rendered to god for many other things, but inespecially for restoring of the
true and sincere religion every man departed his way.


