A CONFVTATION Of the Popes Bull which was published more then two years ago
against Elizabeth the most gracious Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
and against the noble Realm of England: together with a defense of the said
true Christian Queen, and of the whole Realm of England.

By Henry Bullinger the Elder.

AT LONDON. Printed by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate. AN. 1572.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis per Decennium.

To the right honorable and his singular good Lord Robert Dudley Earl of
Leicester, Baron of Denbigh, Knight of the honorable order of the Garter, one
of the Queens Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel. etc. Arthur Golding
wishes health, prosperity, and abundaunce of Gods grace.
WHat mischief has of late years been attempted against this Realm, and how
great a flame has been kindled against the walls of the Church, through the
great Treasons that have been practiced to confound the whole state, by reason
of the Popes most pestilent Bull: your Lordship right well knows: yea and it
is even yet still so apparent (or rather present) in all men's eyes, as there is
no wise man but he trembles at the dreadful remembrance, nor simple and
godly minded man, but he wondreth at the marvelous disappointing of the
dangers, which were sundry times ready to have overwhelmed us, even in one
moment, had not God reached out his merciful hand from heaven in the open face
of the world to defend us. For it can not be denied, but that thereby, open
defiance has been made to faythfulnesse and allegiance: honesty and virtue
were shamefully defaced: Religion and Justice were openly assaulted: neiborod
and charity were trecherously despised: God and godliness were wickedly
impugned: our most virtuous and renoumed Princes Majesty was traitorously
impeached; her rightful pre-eminence diversely assailed, her unblameable
doings causeless diffamed, her gracious clemency scornfully abused, her
noble person privily pricked at, the welfare of the whole Realm daungerously
hazarded, and the state thereof either entitled to inward Competitors, or
proffered as a pray to foreign enemies. Is it not a strange case, that a
Romish Bull (or to speak more rightly, a childishe babble) should be able to
work such inconveniences, even where the Gospel shines most lightsomely? And
yet we see, that not only some of the rude and witless sort, but also many of
the greater sort, which thought: them selves no small fools, ne were in deed
no young babes, were contented to become such Calves, as to run out of Gods
blissing, into the warm Sun, and to turn their weapons into their own
bowels, at the bellowing of an outlandishe Bull, which notwithstanding was but
a Leaden Bull, a paper Bull, a painted Bull, and had neither breath, moving,
nor voice of it own, till the Calves them selves had breathed into it. But
righteous art thou O Lord God, and rightful are thy judgments. They dug a
pit for others, and are fallen into it them selves. They laid a snare for thine
elected, and their own feet be snarled in it. Yea thou have turned their
purposed mischief upon their own heads. Let the Papists still feel, and let
all the world still see, how it is thou only that fightest for us O Lord God
of Hosts. Now albeit that the brunt of that abominable Bull, were bent
directly at our most gracious sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, and at her
Majesty's Realm and faithful subjects: yet notwithstanding forasmuch as the
matter does implyingly concern the whole state of Christ's Church, which the
Romish Antichrist labors to draw away from the obedience and love of her
true husband Christ, to the adulterous embracing of Satan: Henry Bullinger the
Elder, that godly and painful minister of Christ's Gospel in the Church of
Zurike, being by nation a mere stranger, but by Christen Religion a dear
brother unto us, has (as it appears by his own Epistle) written this
present confutation thereof in Latin, at the request or motion of certain of
our right reverend and godly Bishops. By means whereof, the case which
otherwise had been more peculiar to our selves, is now become common to all the
true worshippers of Christ. For such is the nature and bond of holy Religion,
that whatsoever happens to any several member of Christ's Church, the
feeling thereof disperseth it self into the whole body, so as they joy together
and sorrow together, and also lay all their forces together, to withstand their
common enemy, and to put him to flight by the power of the word, and of the
spirit, wherewith they be led and governed. Therefore to the end that such as
have any where ben bewitched by the sorceries of the Romish Circe and her
Idolatrous hypocrites, may return to their right wits, and cease to be
deceived: and that the simple and ignorant may not be seduced by such fond
toys hereafter: He learnedly, pithely, and breefly confuteth the dishonest and
shameful slanders of that railing and reproachful libell, defends the
innocence of our most virtuous sovereign Lady, maintains the Religion now
stablished by public authority of this Realm, disproueth the false usurped
supremacy of the Roman Prelates, shows the right use of the keys which
Christ has committed to his Church, bewrays the weakness of the Romish
Jupiters thu^dercracks, and discovers the horrible cruelty and outrage of
the Popes, in maintaining their wrongful and unmeasurable power. And
heerwithall, his desire is, that the same his doing may turn to the profit and
commodity of as many as may be. For the acco^plishment whereof, and that our
nation (in whose behalf it was chiefly written) may the more largely and
plenteously enjoy the benefit, whereof the first cause has sprung from
themselves: I have turned the said book into our own mother tongue: a work
right necessary and profitable for all such as mind to keep them selves true
servants to God, and faithful subjects to their prince, or can find in
their hearts to look upon the light of the truth to their own benefit and
incomparable comfort. For doubtless, if there be any whom the present
experience of our own times can not move: they shall see it evidently proved
by this book, that the fruit which the crediting or receiving of Popish
Bulls, and such other pedlary trash of Rome yields, is nothing else but
horrible murder, Rebellion, slaughter, Treason, and all manner of devilish and
mischievous wickedness, matched with most extreme calamity, hartgreef, and
misery: and in the end (unless Gods wrath be pacified by timely repentance)
accompanied with vneschewable loss both of body and of soul. Wherefore, as
well in consideration of the premises, as also presuming upon the apparent
signs of your Lordships former favor and great good will toward me: but
specially forasmuch as you are of that most honorable number, upon whose
wisdom, foresight, trustiness, policy, and stoutnes, God has ordained the
security of our most gracious sovereign Lady, and of her Majesty's Realm and
subjects, and (which more is) of his own Religion and holy word to rest and
depend: I have taken boldness to dedicate this my travel unto you, assuring my
self that your good liking and well accepting of the same, shall cause it to
be the more readily received, and willingly embraced of all others, which thing
I most humbly and heartily desire. And thus I commit your good Lordship to the
continual protection of almighty God.

Dated at London the x. of January. 1571.
De Sereniss. Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regina Elizabetha. etc. Et Bulla
impij Pij Pontificis Romani in illam edita.
TErrifico nuper crepitantem fulmine Bullam
Expuit irato feruidus ore Papa.
Perculit insolitus quorundam pectora bombus,
Ast horum fortis risit Elisa metum.
Atque ait: ah miseros, crepitus quos terret aselli:
Haec ex Tarpeio culmine Bulla venit.
Scilicet hoc os est, quo vana tonitrua ructat
Bestia, quae in terris creditur esse Deus.
Ex opere artifices, mea tu nunc Anglia, disce
Latrones, fures, sacrilegosque Papas.
Aethereo hanc Christus difflabit flamine Bullam.
Stultus, qui bullas pondus habere putat.
In Bullas Pontificum.
DVm vendit terras, Coelum, Coelique potentem
Roma, diu emptores lusit auara suos.
Iam deerant merces, cum mox diuendere bullas
Coepit, and his fumos miscuit ipsa suos.
Cur igitur Romae Coelum Coelique potentem
Quaeris adhuc? alijs vendidit ista prius.
Mordaces praeter fumos, bullasque tumentes,
Nunc nil, quod posthac vendere possit, habet,
Si quis emis bullas, bulla tu vanior omni es:
Sin fumos: oculis, vae male sane tuis.
In Bullas and Venias Papisticas.
NVgis fictitijs, and Bullis Roma superbit,
Nugas and Bullas vendere Roma solet,
Bullatas nugas, nugales improba Bullas
Non vereor Venias dicere, Roma, tuas.
Nomina conueniunt rebus, cum vanius illis
Nil sit, cum nil sit prorsus inutilius.
Ast vt aquis bullae cito nascuntur, pereuntque.
Sic pereant Bullae, Roma superba, tuae.
To the most reverend, godly, and vigilant Bishops of the noble Realm of
England, L. Edmund Grindall Archb. of York, L. Richard Coxe Bishop of Elye,
and L. John Jewel Bishop of Salisbury, my right honorable Lords and most
dear brethren in Christ, the Praeface of Henry Bullinger, Elder.
RIght reverend fathers in Christ, my right honorable lords and most dear
brethren, I acknowledge my self greatly bound unto your goodness, that whereas
we be set so far a sunder, you dwelling beyond the sea in England, and I
living here in Swicerland not far from the Alps: yet nevertheless you of
your goodness do by your often writing earnestly maintain, preserve, yea and by
daily increasing, more and more advance the friendship and brotherhood long
ago begone betwixt us. In respect whereof I ought of right to show my self by
all means thankful and serviceable unto you. And whereas now of late, by
sending to me the Bull of Pius the fifth, bishop of Rome (which I had not seen
nor heard of before) you have ministered occasion unto me, to do, or at least
wise to attempt somewhat for the glory of Christ our only redemer, and for the
welfare of his Church which is among you in England, against the Romish
Antichrist: behold, I dedicate unto your Lordships this confutation of mine set
against the Bull: submitting the same to your most exact judgments, wholly to
stand or fall according to your good pleasure. Nevertheless I beseech you to
accept in good worth this endeavor and good will of mine, most desirous both to
further so good a case, and also to pleasure your Lordships. Otherwise I freely
confess mine own ability to be very small, and your learning to be right
great, so as ye could have handled this matter far better than I, if it had
pleased you. Notwithstanding forasmuch as I have perceived, that by this my
simple travel I shall pleasure your Lordships: I would not that you should
find any want in me. Christ our Lord grant that my treating thereof may be
abunda^tly fruitful unto many. I beseech you vouchsaue to salute my right
reverend Lords and most dear beloved brethren L. Rob. Horn Bishop of
Winchester: L. Edwin Sands Bish. of London: L. John Parkhurst Bish. of
Norwich: L. James Pilckinton Bish. of Durham: and also M. John Aelmer, M.
Sampson, M. Humfrey, M. Lever, M. Fox, and the residue, sometime companions of
your exile in Swicerland and Germany: to the prayers of all whom I commend my
self. And all the Ministers and brethren that be here, wish all prosperity to
you all, in our Lord Jesus Christ. The Lord Jesus bliss the Ministry of your
good Lordships, and preserve you from all evil.

From Zuricke in the month of February, the year of our salvation. 1571.
The sum of the Romish Bull published against the most virtuous Queen of
England, and the whole noble Realm of England.
FIrst and formest it seems requisite to hear the very effect of the Romish
Bull. For the Bull it self is not worthy to be recited at large, and in form
of words as they term it. Wherein notwithstanding we will ouerslip nothing that
is to any purpose, and which may seem worth the confuting. In the entrance of
it, the Pope in most ample words blazeth and boasts that unmeasurable power
of his, which he terms the fullness of power, received (as he would bear men
in hand) from the governor of all things our Lord Jesus Christ, which
committed the catholic and Apostolic Church to one alone upon earth, even
to Peter the prince of the Apostles, and to Peter's successor the Bishop of
Rome, with fullness of power to govern it, ordeining him alone to be souerein
over all nations and all kingdoms, to pluck up, throw down, disperse and
destroy: and again to plant, and build up, that he might hold the Christian
people together in unity of the spirit, and yield them up safe and sound to
their Savior.

Out of this fullness of power, mounting up into his high throne, which he
terms the souerein seat of justice: and taking upon him to be both judge and
accuser, he thunderingly reads forth from thence the articles of his
accusation which he has to allege against the most virtuous Queen of
England, whom even at the first chop with a slau^derous mouth (utterly proper
to him self) he terms a bondslaue of most heinous evil doings, which has
brought back into miserable destruction, the Realm of England, sometime
turned away from the Church of Rome by that prince of blessed memory Henry the
8. (whom the Bull terms a revolted runneaway) and now of late brought again
to the Catholic faith by Queen Mary: and to be short, he says she is become
the refuge of all runnegates and naughtipackes: who also wills her self to
be taken for only souerein Lady in all cases both temporal and spiritual,
monstruously usurping the place of supreme head: and finally which has
presumed to dispose of Bishops, parsons of Churches, and other Catholic
priests, and to determine of ecclesiastical cases, deposing and oppressing
the catholic Bishops, and aduauncing and putting in their rooms leawd
preachers, and ministers of ungodliness. Moreover (says the Bull) she has
abolished the sacrifice of the Mass, prayers, fasting, choice of meats,
single life, and all catholic rites, and commanded books that contain open
heresy, to be set forth to the whole Realm, and wicked mysteries and
ordinances received and observed by her self according to the appointment of
Calvin, to be also observed of her subjects. She has forbidden the Clergy
and laity to acknowledge the Roman Church, or to obey the commandments
thereof: yea and she has compelled them to renounce by oath the authority and
obedience of the Bishop of Rome: She has laid penalties and punishments upon
such as shall disobey, and has executed the same upon such as have continued
in the unity of faith and obedience aforesaid: and therwithall also she has
cast the catholic bishops in prison, where they have ended their days
miserably, pyned in much and long languishing and daily sorrow. All which
things are so notorious, as there is no room left for any excuse, defense, or
shift to serve in the matter.

Wherefore rising now out of ye throne of his with sword drawn, and pronouncing
the extremest sentence against the most virtuous Queen, yea and against all
her accomplices through the whole Realm: he denounces and declares her an
heretic, and a favorer of heretics, and therefore most proudly determines
her to be stricke^ through with his curse, and cut of from the unity of
Christ's body, and moreover to be deprived of her kingdom, and of all right of
her crown, and of all manner of other pre-eminence, dignity, and privilege.
And not content with this, he proceeds yet further, and gives charge to all
and singular the Queens Nobility, and other her subjects, that under pain
of the said curse they obey not hereafter the laws and commandments of
their pretensed or supposed Queen, as he terms her. Yea and in what sort
soever they were sworn unto the Queen, he assoileth them all of such oath,
and utterly discharges them of all duty of subjection, fealty, and
allegiance.

Upon all which things it follows most manifestly, that by setting that most
virtuous Queen and the noble Realm of England and other nations at odds
among the^ selves, he does most cruelly and wickedly put her in hazard both of
her foes, and of her friends: yea and (which is horrible to be heard) of her
own subjects to be traitorously torn in pieces through civil wars and
most outrageous seditions, if there were any so mad, and so void of all
godliness and manhood, as to suffer such (that is to wit, so deuilishe and
hellish) fury to be so inspired into them by the inchauntmentes of this
venomous beast.

Hitherto I have declared what things are contained and set forth in that
wicked, slanderous, seditious, and bloody Bull. Of which things, if any man
be desirous to have a more compendious abridgment, and yet nevertheless as
fully presumptuous and shameless as that which has been showed already: let
him hear what manner of title the Bull has set before it to the face of the
world. The sentence declaratorie of our most holy father Pope Pius the fifth,
against Elizabeth the pretensed Queen of England, and the heretics that
cleave unto her. Whereby also all her subjects are declared assoiled of their
oath of allegiance, and of all other duties whatsoever, and those that obey her
hereafter are wrapped in the same curse.

That the foresaid unmeasurable power of the Romish Bishop, is not proved by
these words of the Lord unto Peter: Peter love thou me? feed my sheep.
HItherto you have patiently heard the Popes sentence or declaration by his
Bull, against the most virtuous Queen of England. etc. and now I pray you be
so good as gently to hear me also. I will breefly and plainly show, how there
is no truth, substance, or soundness in this Bull, and that the cause which
the Hope maintains and pleads against the most noble Queen, is evil and
unjust: but the case on the Queens side very good and rightful. And I will
begin at that unmeasurable power of the Pope, which he boasts of, and by
force whereof he takes upon him to be judge in this case. For that being once
overthrown: all the whole Bull falls to the ground, together with the
judgment builded upon this ruinous foundation, and so shall ye Pope sit in
that seat of his, not a terrible or just judge, but an Idol, to be despised,
yea and to be spit at of all good men, and his sentences shall be no more the
thunderboltes of Jupiter, but counterfeit flashes glistering out of a basen, in
no wise worthy to be regarded. What ye Popes bear men in hand concerning their
infinite power.
Then let that most holy or rather most profane father tell us, where or by
what words, our Lord delivered unto Peter alone, and unto Peter's successor the
Bishop of Rome, that his fullness of power: that is to say, his supreme and
most absolute power, as well in spiritual as in temporal matters. Let him
tell us where or by what words, the Lord created the Bishop of Rome prince
over all nations and over all kingdoms. I am not ignorant of your stinking
and unsavory fables in this behalf. I am not ignorant what Decretalls have
been put forth by Gregory the ix. Boniface the viij. Innocent the 4. Clement
the v. John the xxij. and such other like to these, co^spirators and Catilines
companions. As for me, I will not hear those decrees or Decretalls, which ye
famous Lawyer Marsilius of Padwa, no less aptly than truly said to be neither
Gods laws nor man's laws, but proclamations of plain universal souereintie.
You say that without any parable at all, Christ our Lord gave the fullness of
power which ye brag of, to Peter, and to Peter's successor the Pope. Bring forth
therefore some evident record of this your allegation, out of the new Testament.
Truly ye be not able to bring forth one tittle, or one jot of this your
allegation. And therefore with most wicked lies, and forgeries have both you and
your predecessors now certain hundred years, scared and seduced good men,
that leaned too much unto you through too light belief, and overmuch
fearfulness.

For where as they have alleged the words which our Lord after his
Resurrection did thrice repeat and urge upon Peter, namely, Peter love thou
me? feed my sheep: Certes I wonder that both they, and you are so past all
shame, that ye dare bring these things for the stablishing of your kingdom,
or rather your tyranny. As who would say, we be all of us blind, or blocks,
void of common reason, and not able to perceive how those words perteine not
to souereintie, but to service. Peter was by this mean to be comforted by the
Lord, and to be restored to the name and office of Apostle, which he seemed to
have lost at the Lords passion, chiefly in this respect, because he had a
fowler fall then the rest of the Apostles, insomuch as he had three times
denied, yea and also forsworn his Lord and Master. Therefore least by his
thrice denying he might seem put out of his office of Apostleship: the Lord on
the other side by his thrice confessing of his love, and enioyning him his
charge, receaueth him again and admits him to the office of Apostleship, to
feed the Lords flock together with the rest of the Lords Apostles. For who
can say, that the feeding of the Lords sheep was committed to Peter only,
and not to the other Apostles also?

An objection.
But Peter was inflamed with singular love, both toward the Lord, and toward his
Church. The same love does the Lord require of every shepherd of the flock.
The answer.
But what (I pray you) pertains that to the Bishop of Rome, who (to speak no
worse of him) burns in desire of dominion, riches, and voluptuousness? The
Lord bad Peter feed the Lords flock. He has also committed the charge of
his flock, to all faithful ministers that love him unfeignedly.

Again, what makes this to the ratifying of the tyranny of the Romish Bishop?
To feed, is not to advance man's self above all power, to make kings and
princes subject to him, and to usurp fullness of power over all me^ and all
things: but to feed, To feed.
is to teach, to exhort, to rebuke, to comfort, and to govern Christ's flock
according to Gods word. Shepeheards, Pastors, or Feeders.
Shepeheardes therefore are the teachers in the Church, which feed the Lords
flock by preaching the Gospel. For the food of Christ's sheep is his word.
Food.
And the sheep, are Christ's chosen, and the people of God. Hereof the
shepeheardes are ministers and not lords, Sheep.
subject to the chief shepeheard Jesus Christ, whose only is, and continues
all souereintie, all power, and all glory: as the Lord him self expounds
this matter of the flock, or of the sheep, and of the shepeheardes, and the
manner of feeding, in the x. chapt. of John: and as Peter him self also
accords, saying: 1. Pet. 5.
I which am also an elder and a witness of Christ's afflictions, and also a
partener of the glory that shall be revealed, beseech the elders that are among
you, Harken to this ye Romish Monarkes.
feed Christ's flock as much as in you is, playing the Bishops, or taking
care of it, not constrainedly, but willingly, not seeking filthely after gain,
but of an earnestly affected mind: not as though ye were Lords over the
parishes, but so as ye may be patterns to the flock.

Lift up your ears here ye Romish Monarkes, harken, and mark what your own
Peter says. He names not him self Lord, head, or prince, but fellow elder:
yea and as for the Lordlinesse and other foul vices wherewith you be so
bespotted, or rather allberayed: he forbids the desire of them. And Christ
he has set forth the high shepeheard in singular humility, and faith to be
looked at, and him to be served. etc.

After the same manner speaks also the Apostle Paul in the Acts of the
Apostles, to the shepeheardes that were assembled in the Synod of Miletum, Act.
20.
saying: Take heed to your selves, and to the whole flock wherein the holy
Ghost has made you Bishops (whom Luke a little before called priests or
elders) to feed the congregation of God, which he has purchased with his
blood. Again, the same Paul a little before in the same oration of his,
declares after what sort he him self had hitherto in that vocation of his fed
the Lords flock committed unto him, and says: I have shunned none of those
things that were for your profit, but have preached unto you, and taught you
openly and privately, witnessing both to the Jews and to the Greeks, the
repentance toward God, and the faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. It
appears then by this plain exposition of the Apostle, What ye sheep or
flock be.
more clearly then the light, that (according as I have said a little erst, and
now again am glad in repeating the same do gather it out of the Apostles
words, to the end I may the better beat the truth into all men's heads,
against most shameful leasinges) the flock or sheep are the Lords people or
Church. For the Apostle said: Take heed to your selves, and to the whole
flock, wherein the holy Ghost has made you Bishops, to feed the Church of
God. And so the shepeheardes are the teachers, Teachers.
ministers that feed the flock by teaching and preaching openly and
privately. And so the food is rightly said to be doctrine: Doctrine.
and yet not every doctrine, but the doctrine which (as Paul says) teaches
repentance to Godward, and belief in Jesus Christ.

This I say is the sound, simple, and not any strange, racked, or wrested
exposition of Christ's words [ feed my sheep:] but taken out of the very own
words of the Lord him self and of his Apostles, and therefore to be preferred
before all other interpretations, and none other that disagreeth with this
(what interpreter soever be the author thereof, be he old or be he new) is to
be admitted or received. Therefore no man need now to dout that it is out of
all dout, that by these the Lords words, feed my sheep, there is not
granted neither to Peter, nor to the Bishop of Rome, that fullness of power
which these men boast of, and which they bear the world in hand to be given by
those words.

I could also allege other testimonies for our side concerning this manner of
feeding out of the Prophets, as out of the iii. chapt. of Jeremy, and the
xxxiiii. of Ezechiell, but that I labor to be short. The manner of the Bishop
of Romes feeding.
Yet, because I will not dissemblingly skippe over any thing in this matter, I
confess that the Romish Bishop has also very evident witness in the Prophets
of his government, and of his manner of feeding. For Zachary protests and
says: Zach. 11.
The Lord said unto me, yet take unto thee the tools of a foolish shepeheard.
For behold I raise up a shepeheard upon the earth, which shall not visit the
thing that is cut up, nor seek the thing that is youthful or foolish, nor
heal the thing that is broozed, nor feed the thing that stands: and shall
eat the flesh of the fatter sort, and break of their hoofes. Woe be to the
idol shepeheard, and which forsakes his flock: and so forth as follows in
the xi. chapt. of Zachary. Here have ye a looking glass ye Roman Bishops,
wherein ye may behold and discern your own phisnomie.

That the Bishops favorers, neither by these words of Christ, I have prayed
for thee Peter: nor yet by these words, Behold here be two swords: can
sufficiently prove, that that power is given them which they vaunt of.
Never a whit the more do these me^ further or beautify their case, when
again in defense of themselves and their sovereignty, they allege our
sauioures words at such time as he said unto Peter: Luke 22.
Simo^, behold Satan has craved you, that he might winow you as it were
wheat. But I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith may not fail, etc.
For, too what purpose this sentence pertayneth, the Lord himself declares
immediately by the words which he adds, saying: And when thou art turned
again, strengthen thy brethren. Stark mad and given up into a wilful wicked
mind must he needs be, that wresteth these sayings to the maintenance of the
Popes most wrongful power: which are most manifestly apparent to be spoken to
the admonishment and comfort of such as are fallen. For that place, by warning
us before hand, does simply teach us the same thing which Peter him self has
taught us afterward, saying: your adversary the devil walks about like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour (which thing our Lord expressed by
saying, He has craved you to winowe you, whom withstand you watching by
faith. For the Lord in those his words unto Peter, teaches us not only that
thing, but also this: namely, that our standing out in temptations, is not by
our own strength, but by the defense, help, and benefit of Christ our Lord,
who doubtless gives, increases, and maintayneth faith in us, 1. John. 5.
which John in his Epistle calls the victory that overcomes the world.
Furthermore it teaches us, that neither the offenses which we have committed,
nor the incessant and importunate travails of Satan against us, must in any
wise make us despair, when we be exercised with temptations, yea or also fallen
in our encounters: considering how Peter the denier, yea and forswearer of
Christ, obtained forgiveness at Christ's hands: which was done for an
everlasting assurance and witness, that all sinners although they be beguiled
by Satan, shall nevertheless be gently received into favor, if they return
to the Lord. For this is it that Peter (being himself winowed by Satan, but
yet gathered up again, and set upon his feet and preserved by the protection
of Christ) should strengthen his brethren. And what I pray you do these things
make for the stablishing of the unmeasurable and most licentious power of
Popes? It never came in the mind of Christ nor yet of Peter, to think any
thing thereof. Full of sacrilege therefore is these most corrupt men's
exposition, which they force upon us, utterly against our Lords words.

The faith of the Church of Rome never failed.
But what should it make to the proof of their souereintie, though it were
never so true which they say, that the faith of the Romain church never failed?
Yet find we not that the Lord spoke any such thing here. I have prayed for
thee Peter, (says he) that thy faith may not fail. And although Peter's faith
which he had given him, which also he preached, yea and (add further) which he
preached at Rome, be continual, and such as never fails as truly, through
Gods grace, it florisheth in places innumerable at this day through the whole
world, and like as also it was never utterly quenched at any time): what
pertayneth yt to the Romish Church in these days, and to ye most arrogant
supremacy of ye same? But it is much more easily spoken then proved, that the
faith of the Roman church never failed, if by her faith, ye mean that simple
and uncorrupted faith which Peter had and taught. Comparison between Peter's
faith and the Romish faith.
For to avoid multiplieng of words, go to: let indifferent comparison be
made, what manner of doctrine and faith Peter's was in old time, and what manner
of doctrine and faith the Roman churches is at this day, under the Roman
bishops. Go too, let comparison also be made between the manners and whole life
of Peter, and the manners and lives of the Romish bishops, which will needs be
Peter's successors. And thereupon let judgment be given.

When the Lord after supper, as he was going to the garden of mount Oliuet, bad
his disciples sell even their garments and get them swords: Christ's bidding
of his disciples buy the^ swords.
and upon the answer of his disciples how they had two in readiness, said they
were enowe: he did not then deliver both the swords as well spiritual as
temporal, to be used in the Church unto Peter, to whom only and peculiarly
he did not then speak. For by and by he adds the cause of this his
commandment, saying: I say unto you, yet must this Scripture be fulfilled in
me, and he was reckoned among offenders, verily meaning thereby, that he
should upon mount Oliuet be bound and led away as a transgressor, and that
his disciples also should be put in extreme hazard of their lives: from which
notwithstanding he would deliver them, not by the terror of any sword, but by
his own only voice or power. The Lord then meant another thing, yea and a far
other thing, than to yield the use of the temporal sword, and this endless
authority either to Peter, or to any other man. Nay rather when his disciples
were ready armed to fight, he meant too set before their eyes, eue^ upon mount
Oliuet, that in the persecutions which should come upon the^ for his sake, they
should not be delivered by the help of temporal swords, but by the aid and
word of their master Christ, saying: if ye seek me, let these go their
ways. And to this end did the Lord suffer Peter to draw his sword, and to
make assault upon Malchus the bishops servant. But what prevailed Peter by
that? So little did he with that sword of his deliver himself or his
fellowdisciples, (and much less his master) from the present dangers: that
he had rather turned the bloody weapons of his enemies upon himself, if his
master had not said, let these go their ways. Then was it Christ's
protection, and not the sword, that saved the disciples: and even at this day
also, as many as be saved in persecution, are saved by the same defense. Which
thing he meant to show to the eye by those swords, both to them and to us:
warning us covertly by the way, that in persecution we must turn unto Christ
and crave his help, who is able even with a word to assuage any manner of
tempests, be they never so outrageous. And to this purpose served the swords,
at leastwise which were brought at this time and to this end to mount Oliuete
at the commandment of Christ.

Besides this, the Lord expounding his own words, turns him unto Peter and
says: Matthew. 26.
put up thy sword into the sheathe, for all they that take the sword, shall
perish with the sword. Think you not that I can presently pray to my father,
and he will give me mo then xij. legions of angels. But how then shall the
scriptures be fulfilled? for so must it be. Seeing therefore that the Lord
commands Peter earnestly to put up his sword into the scaberd: who sees
not, yt the Lords bidding of his disciples to carry out swords with them, was
to the end that now by this sight, he might openly and effectually and without
all couerture, restrain the use of the sword, both from Peter, and from all
ministers, yea and to pluck it out of their hands when they had taken it
already? Considering then how the Lord pulled that temporal sword out of the
hands of Peter: what wicked feend wills you Bishops to draw the sword
again out of the scaberd, contrary to the Lords commandment, and to shake
it, and to misuse it at your own pleasure? Does it not irke you and shame you
to say, that by these words of of the Lords, is sufficiently given unto you
the power of both swords, when as he has given you so little or nothing at
all thereof hitherto, that he has even openly stricken the temporal sword out
of your hands? Now let the whole world judge whether those Romish gripes have
proved by the foresaid textes of Scripture, that Christ has given unto them
the very full power of both the swords. Certesse the testimonies which they
have hitherto alleged out of the Scriptures, have not only not given any
thing too them: but also taken from them all the things which they claim to
themselves against all right and reason.

Here are expounded these words of our Savior, Thou art Peter, and upon this
rock, etc. and it is showed that in the^ there is nothing spoken of the Popes
fullness of power: and that the church of Christ is not builded upon Peter or
the Pope.
THat sword of theirs whereof they made their vaunte being stricken out of their
hand, by and by they make have to the rock whereupon the Church is founded, and
consequently unto Peter and his keys. For in these and by him, they avouch
themselves to have received power and most full sovereignty, both of heaven
and earth. And there they blaze out wonders of the building of the Church upon
Peter, and of the keys and wonderful working power of them, alleging for
themselves the words of our savior which are written in the xvi. chap. of the
gospel of S. Matthew. But these men with their sacrilege, they are never able
to clear themselves, or make amends therefore do corrupt this most holy place
replenished with healthful doctrine and consolation. Which thing by gods help
I will evidently show to the godly readers by ye things that ensew. The Lord in
that place demands of his disciples, whom men take him to be. His disciples
answer, how there be diverse judgments and opinions of him among the people:
some saying him to be Helias, some Jeremy, etc. And by that question it was the
Lords will to do them to wit, how there have always been, and always shall be
diversity of opinions in the world concerning religion: how be it, that no man
ought to be offended at that diversity: for we read also the Lords Apostle
has said there must needs be heresies, 1. Cor. 11.
to the end, that such as be tried among you, may be made manifest. And unto
the former question, the Lord adds forthwith an other, namely, what the
disciples who had heard Christ now a long while, and therefore doutlesse were
better seen in matters of Religion the^ the common sort were, I say what
opinion they themselves had of Christ. And by this other question of his he
showed, that the sure and true confession in matters of Religion is to be asked
at the hand of the children of God: for they must not waver as the children of
this world do, and be sure of nothing, nor apply themselves to every kind of
opinion after the liking and course of this world. Truly in many other places
of the scripture also, is required a singular and true confession of faith, at
the hands of every one of gods children. To this question Saint Peter, not so
much in his own name, as in the name of all the other disciples, utters a
singular confession, saying: Thou art Christ ye son of the living God, very
God (I say) and very man, even that same anointed, namely, the Messiah or
Christ that was to come into the world. The king I say, and priest, the
mediator, pacifier, redeemer, and salvation of the whole world. And that this
confession is the true and sincere confession, Paul also the apostle of
Christ, shows in the third, fourth and tenth chapters to the Romans, and in
many other places.

The Lord liking well of this confession, says unto Peter, Blessed art thou
Simon the son of Jonas: giving to understand in these short words, what and
how great the force of true faith in Christ is: namely, even to justify and
make blessed, that is to say, to make pertakers of eternal life, which thing
the apostle shows in large words in his Epistles to the Romans,
Galathians, Ephesians, and in other places. Furthermore the Lord immediately
adds from whence comes that same so excellent faith, saying: flesh and
blood has not opened it unto thee, but my father which is in heaven. Faith
then has not his original in us or of us, but is given us from heaven by the
father of light, according as the Apostle witnesses in many places, and the
Lord himself says in John: John. 6.
No man comes unto me, except my father draw him.

Moreover this faith grafteth us in Christ, and makes us Christians, for there
follows in the Lords words, And thou art Peter, namely, for confessing of
the rock. Petra, now what a rock is, there is no man but he knows. And in
the scriptures it is every where Metaphorically applied unto God, because he is
the strength, the stedinesse, the refuge, and the foundation of the faithful,
wheruppon they rest, and in whom only they be preserved. Of this (Petra) rock,
was Simon the son of Jonas called Peter, which name implies as much as if a
man should say, grounded upon the rock God, and grafted into Christ the son
of God: steadfast, and so consequently a Christian, for the doctors and
interpreters of holy scripture do term Christians, Peter's also, because that
being settled by faith upon the rock Christ, they draw stedinesse, strength,
and life out of him, so as through the operacion of Christ, they be all their
life long steadfast in faith, and honor Christ with all kind of virtues. And
Peter himself also expounding this mystery unto us, 1. Pet. 2.
says: Christ (the rock) is the living stone, forsaken in deed of men, but
chosen and precious unto God, upon whom we also as lively stones are builded,
that we may be a spiritual house, offering spiritual sacrifices, acceptable
to God through Jesus Christ. Whosoever are not such Peter's or stones, there is
no cause that they should glory at all of the name of Peter or Christians: for
they continue that which they be, even the children of this world.

There follows yet further in ye Lords words, And upon this Rock will I
build my Church. By which words Christ ascending from the particular to the
general, and delivering an universal lesson to his Church, declares most
manifestly, that these things belong not to Peter alone, or to his disciples
only: but to the Catholic, that is, to the universal church, whereof the
foundation, Rock, and head, is Christ, upon whom being builded by faith, she
shall obtain salvation. As if the Lord had said, not only Peter is so called,
of me the Rock, but also as many as shall hereafter by Peter's example, confess
me to be Christ the son of the living God, and by this true faith settle
themselves upon me the only foundation: all them will I take and acknowledge
for my household, that is to say for my church And this (that is to say) Christ
the Rock shall be the only foundation of Gods church in earth: and all they
shall be members and citizens of this holy church, even as many as believe as
Peter did, and settle themselves upon this foundation of soul health by the
same faith. And this is it, that the Lord meant by saying: And upon this Rock
will I build my Church.

And least any man may doubt of this simple and true exposition of the Lords
words, considering how diverse wrest them, and draw them some one way and some
another: Behold, I will by other places of scripture also, confirm and
enlighten this exposition above recited. Surely, the scripture does every where
agreeably witness, that by faith only in Christ, we be justified and grafted
into Christ, and made members of Christ and his church, which is the communion
of all saints, that is to say of the faithful, resting upon Christ: and that
no creature (no not eue^ Peter himself, and much less the bishop of Rome) ca^
be the Rock, the head, and the foundation of the Catholic church. And least
any man may think this thing hard and varying from the truth: forasmuch as it
is directly against the decrees of the Romish church: Lo, I in this case bring
in the clear and undoubted records of the holy Ghost himself speaking by the
prophets and Apostles. David in the 18. psalm cries out, Esaias. 28.
saying: Who is God besides the Lord, and who is the Rock besides our God? And
God himself in Esaias says: Behold, I lay a corner stone in Sion, a chosen one,
a precious one: he that believes in him and rests upon him, shall not be
ashamed. Moreover also the Apostle Paul says: 1. Cor. 10.
The Rock was Christ. 1. Cor. 3.
And again, Other foundation can none be laid then is laid already, which is
Jesus Christ. Which thing he expounds yet more fully in his Epistle to the
Ephesians. Ephesians. 2.
Whereunto in all points agrees the witness of S. Peter, 1. Petr. 2.
who shows out of David, that Jesus is that stone or Rock, whereupon it
behooves them to be builded by faith, which will become the house of God, or be
made pertakers of the church of Christ. Which things being undoubtedly so:
These words of the Lord, Upon this Rock will I build my Church, must of
necessity be understood of Christ alone, as who reigns from heaven in his
saints, as the head does in the members, and from whom as the lively head,
they be watered with the spirit, and suck life out of him, and through him do
live a life beseeming him. And to be a head (as it is most manifestly gathered
by the doctrine of the Apostles) is to be a Lord and Savior, and to inspire
life into the members that be subject to the head. Neither may the head at any
time be from the body without the destruction of the body. Seeing then that
Christ is the only head of the Church, it behooves him to be always with his
Church. By reason whereof she has no need of any deputy or vicegerent upon
earth. For a deputy or vicegerent is the deputy or vicegerent of him that is
absent. But Christ is evermore present with his Church: For he says in the
Gospel: I will be with you even to the uttermost end of the world, and will
never leave you comfortless. Our religion therefore wills us, and the
uniform doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles wills us to expound these
things, not of Peter or of the Bishop of Rome, but of Christ only. Therefore if
ye meet with any interpreters, be they old or new, that interpret the
foresaid words of our Lord to be meant of Peter and the Pope: the authority of
the Prophets and Apostles, yea and of this selfsame Peter too, ought to bear
more sway with you, than the authority of any men else, whatsoever they be in
the world. For Christ abides everlastingly the foundation of his Church: and
as for Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, and the ministers that have come in
their rooms, they remain as workmaisters of this building, which build, not
upon them selves being me^, but upon this only and everlasting foundation,
according as the Apostle teaches plainly in the third chapt. of the first
Epistle to the Corinth. And let this be our brazen wall.

Neither fights it against this, that in the Apocalips the City of God is
said to have twelve foundations, and the names of the twelve Apostles written
in them. For (says Paul) there can none other foundation be laid then is laid
already: notwithstanding, forasmuch as in the laying of this foundation, that
is to say, in ye preaching of Christ, the Apostles were Gods workfellowes and
bestowed their travel faithfully theraboutes: therefore that City is said to
have twelve foundations. For otherwise, the Apostle in his 2. chapt. to the
Ephesians says: You are fellow citizens with the saints, and Gods household
meyny, builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, whereof the
corner stone is Christ Jesus him self, in whom the whole buildyng being
semented together, grows to a temple in the Lord, upon who^ you also are
builded, to be a dwelling place for God through his spirit. And what man that
has his right wits, will, after these things, seek for manifester? Wherefore
let all of us beware of that rotten and tottering foundation which the Court of
Rome strives to set under us.

We will yet heerunto add the words of our Lord that follow after, least any
thing of this place may remain undiscussed. And the gates of hell (says
Christ) shall not prevail against it. By which words is declared the power
and victoriousnesse of Christ, and of his Church, and of faith. The gates of
hell are all kind of powers that are against it, yea even the power of Satan,
which of all other is the strongest and noysomnest to the faithful. And
therefore it is said, that no force be it never so mighty, whether it be of
Satan him self, or of the world, or of any other adversary power under heaven
or in hell, shall prevail against Christ the Rock, and the Church that is
builded upon the rock, which howsoever it be tempted and persecuted, must
notwithstanding at length overcome in Christ, through faith. John. 12.
For the Lord him self has said: The prince of this world is already
condemned and cast out. John. 16.
And again, Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world. And John the
Apostle: 1. John. 5.
All that is borue of God (says he) overcomes the world: and the victory
that overcomes the world is this, even your faith. Also, who is he that
overcomes the world, but he which believes that Jesus is the son of God? So
I say, this place is opened plainly enough by laying together of the
Scriptures. Now if I listed to play the Rhetoricien here, I could with many
words declare, that hell gates do not only prevail against the Romish
Bishops and their Court, the filthiest that ever was: but also that the very
prince of feendes him self obteineth full and only souereintie in them. Which
thing I could without trouble show and prove both by the witness and by the
complaints of the Bishops them selves. But let us ouerpasse that abominable
filthiness, and make have to the opening of the residue of this place. For
there is no man so blockishe, that has not now of late even felt with his
hands, that in these words of the Lord there is nothing spoken of the
unmeasurable power of the Pope, but that there be set out unto us far more
heavenly and healthfuller things. Praise and thanks be given unto God.

That not even by the gift of the keys unto Peter, there is any fullness of
power delivered by the Lord, either unto Peter, or unto the Pope, for that the
keys are a far other thing, yea and a thing of much greater holiness then
is the said fullness of the popish power.
THe Lord adds unto the premises: And I will give thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou byndest upon earth shall be bound in
heaven, and whatsoever thou loosest upon earth shall be loosed in heaven. By
which words ye Lord shows again, that this charge concerning blessedness
and eternal life, which he has hitherto laid forth, pertains not only to
Peter or the rest of the Apostles, but also unto all men through the whole
world. Moreover he shows the mean and manner how men are brought into the
Church, that is to say, how they be builded upon the Rock and made members of
Christ and the Church, and so enter into the kingdom of heaven. You Apostles
(says the Lord) shall open the way, and as it were by reaching out your hands
bring men into the company of me and of my Saints, and consequently into the
kingdom of heaven: and that shall be done by the preaching of the Gospel. For
by faith we be graffed into Christ and his Church. But faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the preaching of the Gospel. And therefore (says ye
Lord) I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, that is, I will
commit unto you the charge of preaching the Gospel, to this end, that you
shall go out into the whole world, and by declaring unto all men the remission
of sins through me, set the^ loose that be fettered in ye chains of their
sins, and open the kingdom of heaven to them that believe: and on the other
side bind those that shake of the preaching of the Gospel, that is to say,
declare and witness unto them that they be subject to eternal damnation. And
this your declaration and witnessing shall be so ratified and assured, that
whomsoever ye loose or bind by my word upon earth, them will I also account
as loosened or bound in heaven. And this is the simple meaning of Christ's
words, flowing out of the words them selves, without any racking of the
words at all. Which meaning I will more clearly enlighten and more assuredly
confirm by that which ensues.

The word Keys, are not uttered always in one signification in the
Scripture: For otherwise there is no man but he knows what they be in their
proper signification: that is to wit, tools wherwithall the locks of doors,
chestes, and such other things are opened or shut. And they be conveyed over
from bodily things to spiritual things, from earthly things to heavenly
things: and sometime they be taken for souerein and full power, like as when
we read in the Apocalips that Christ has the keys of David, of death, and of
hell. For by that phrase of speech is betokened that Christ has the souerein
and most absolute power or authority to govern the kingdom of David, and
also full power over death it self, and over hell, and that he is able to
deliver from death, or to thrust down into hell whomsoever he lists. These
Keys, that is to say, this power, belongs only unto Christ, and no creature
is partaker of it. Whereupon also in the Apocalips the Lord says with a
vehemency, I have the Keys: and he says not, I have had, but I have, I say I
have them yet still, and will have them ever, and I resign them to no man.

There is also the Key of knowledge, and the Key of the kingdom of heaven,
whereof we entreat at this present. The Key of knowledge is instruction,
whereby a man's understanding is opened, and his want of skill amended. And the
Key of the kingdom of heaven is a plain or lightsome declaration or laying
forth of things, whereby men are taught, what way they may go into heaven, or
how they may be saved. I feign nothing of mine own head in this behalf, in
these things I follow the Scripture, and for mine exposition I allege the
very word of Christ saying in the Gospel after S. Luke: Luke. 11.
Woe be to you Lawyers, which have taken away the key of knowledge: ye entered
not in your selves, and them that came in, ye forbad. Which words of the Lord,
Matthew utters in this wise: Woe be to you Scrybes and Pharyseys, for ye shut
up the kingdom of heaven before men: ye your selves go not in, neither suffer
ye them that come, to enter in. Behold, look what Luke called the taking away
of the key of knowledge, Math. 23.
that does Matthew call the shuttyng up of the kingdom of heaven. And
therefore what else I pray you is it to bring forth the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, then to bring forth ye keys of knowledge, that is to say, the doctrine
which concerns the kingdom of heaven, through the instruction whereof we may
know how to become partakers of the everlasting salvation? Again, to take away
the keys of knowledge or of the kingdom of heaven, is nothing else but to
withstand the doctrine of the Gospel concerning the kingdom of God, or to
assault it, or to give commandment that it be not preached. You therefore
enter not in (says the Lord) I mean by harkening to my doctrine: ye believe
not, that ye might be saved: neither suffer ye them to enter which come and are
desirous of my doctrine concerning the kingdom of God, that is to say, which
would feign hear and believe my doctrine, that by faith they might be made
heirs of Gods kingdom, while you slander my doctrine and my works, as
though they proceeded from Satan, and therefore were to be abhorred and
eschewed of good men. And by these words of the Lord it appears most
manifestly, that the keys whereof he speaks here in S. Matthew, saying, and
to thee will I give the keyee of the kingdom of heaven, are not any other
thing then the charge of preaching the Gospel, committed by the Lord to the
ministers of his Church, that by the said publishing of the Gospel, they might
open the kingdom of heaven to the beleuers, and shut it against the unbelievers.

But if these things which notwithstanding (if I be not deceived) I take to be
evident and strong enough) do not yet satisfy you: behold I will unfold this
whole matter of the keys yet an other way, though nothing differing from the
interpretation which I have set down already, as in respect of the pith of the
matter. The word keys are also used in the Scripture, for the care and
ordering of an householde. For the servants whom the master of any house
sets in office, have keys delivered unto the^, wherewith to open and shut,
and to order all the house: which thing is wont to be done by the Stewardes or
Comptrollers, that have the cheef charge of the house. By means whereof the
keys also are taken for the very charge, the ordering, or the governing of the
house. Here again I feign nothing of my self, Esaias. 22.
I follow the holy Scriptures. For in Esaias the Lord says: I will lay the key
of the house of David upon the shoulder of Eliachim, which shall open and no
man shall shut, and shall shut and no man shall open. And what else is this,
then if he had said without figure, I will put Sobna out of office, and make
Eliachim Lord Treasurer, and commit the government of the Realm or of king
Ezechias palace, which charge he shall perform with so great faithfulness and
authority, that whatsoever he ordains, shall stand sure and inviolable, and
whatsoever he disanulleth, no man shall attempt to ratify. In like respect are
the keys of the kingdom of heaven said to be given to the Apostles and other
ministers, I mean the governing or housholdly ordering of the Church, thereby
to bring me^ to the kingdom of heaven, or to shut them out of the partnership
thereof. Which surely can be none other, then that which it accou^teth as the
cheef, namely, the message of Gods word, I mean the preaching of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, concerning the remission of sins, and everlasting life. The
which truly is so certain and sure, that look whom the ministers absolve
from their sins by it, they are also assuredly acquit before God, and whom
the ministers condemn by the word for their vnbeleefes sake, those remain
also condemned to destruction before God.

And as for these things which I have laid forth concerning the ordering of a
household by Stewardes, that is to say, concerning the ordering of the Church
by the ministers, they are not differing from the word of God. For the Lord in
his Gospel rehearses a parable of a man that went from home and committed the
charge of his house to his servants which should be as Stewardes to order his
house. Which Parable certesse is applied to the Church the house of God, and to
the ministers placed in the same, that in governing it they may chiefly
beautify it with the preaching of the Gospel. For in the same Gospel the
Lord says again: Who (think thou) is that faithful and wise servant,
whom his Lord has set over his household to give them meat in due season? But
who knows not what the meat of the Church is? Truly Paul writing to a
Bishop, that is to say, to an ouerseer or steward of the Church, says:
Endeavor to yield thy self an allowable workman unto God, not to be ashamed
of, and rightly distributing the word of truth. And the same Apostle speaking
yet more manifestly of the ministers and the household order of the Church,
says: Let a man so esteem you as the ministers of Christ, and household
guides or stewardes of the mysteries of God. Then the which, I pray you what
can be spoken more fully and plainly in this our case? Christ our Lord ordained
in his Church, ministers and not Lords, ministers or servants I say to be
stewardes or dealers forth of Gods mysteries in the Church, that is to say, of
the Gospel, and of the things that are annexed to the Gospel. For so does
the Lord him self expound the word Mystery in the xiii. chapt. of Matthew:
and so does Paul also in the third to the Ephesians. These keys, that is to
say, this charge and household order of governing the Church, which is executed
according to the appointment of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, did the Apostles
receive, and after them all ministers of Churches that be lawfully called to
the same office.

What is meant in the Gospel by loosing and binding: and how Christ's Apostles
did loose and bind.
NOw although our Lord said, I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, and that by ye way he made no mention in the process following, of
opening and shutting, which are the properties of keys: yet did he set down
other terms in their stead, that is to wit, to loose and to bind, by which
doutlesse he meant to show the power of the keys, and after what manner the
Apostles do either open or shut heaven with the keys. They open when they
unbind or let loose (for both those things come to one point) and they shut
when they bind. To let loose therefore is to open: and to shut is to bind.
Otherwise to bind is a word of known signification. For the officer binds,
which at the commandment of his lord casts a man in prison, or by some
other way hampereth him in bonds. And he loses, which discharges a man from
bonds or brings him out of prison. This thing is conveyed over from the body
to the mind. For bonds in the Scripture betoken as well spiritual as bodily
imprisonment. To loose therefore is to open the prison of sins by preaching
forgiveness of sins, through Christ, who only releaseth sins and brings
out of prison. Which thing shall be the rightlyer understood, if we vewe and
consider more nearly this saying of the Prophet which the Lord Jesus him self
expounds in the Synagog of Nazareth in S. Luke, Luke. 4.
saying: The spirit of the Lord is upon me (meaning upon Christ) because he
has anointed me, and has sent me to bring glad tidings to the poor, to
heal them that be heart broken, to preach release to the prisoners, and
recovery of sight to the blind, and to set the broosed at liberty. Heerunto
add also that which the same Lord said in John: Joan. 20.
Like as the father has sent me, so send I you: Whose sins soever you
release, they are released unto them, and whose sins soever you retain, they
be retained. The son of God then sent out his disciples after the same manner
that he him self was sent out by the father. But the son of God (according as
the Prophet has avouched) was sent to bring glad tidinges to the poor, and to
preach deliverance to prisoners: Ergo, the Apostles also were sent forth to
show glad tidinges, and to preach deliverance to prisoners. Which thing when
they do, then open they heaven by the keys, and let loose them that were tide
in the bonds of sin, releasing them their sins, that is to say, witnessing
by the Gospel, that their sins are released by faith through Christ. For the
Apostles release not sin otherwise then by the warrant of the Gospel, which
avouches unto them that only Christ by his own merit forgeueth sins. For
like as the Apostles are not sent to offer them selves in sacrifice for the
clensing of the whole world as Christ was, the sacrifice of whom alone cleanses
away the sins of the whole world: eue^ so doutlesse the Apostles were not
sent to forgive sins by their own authority as Christ did, but to witness
unto men that they be forgiven by faith through Christ. For we must in these
cases advisedly and with a conscience observe the matching of ye superior with
the inferior, so as we may yield to each party that which is his own, and not
wickedly attribute that glory unto servants, which is due to the only son
of God. Certesse Austine behauing him self reverently in these matters, says
peremptorily, that Christ works these things by power, and that the
disciples do the things which they do, by service or seruauntly. Whereof more
shall follow anon. Also Mark and Luke handling the same story which John has
touched in his xx. chapt. do witness that in the talk which Christ has in
the day of his resurrection, there is nothing else betaken to the Disciples, but
the office of preaching the Gospel. For in Mark the Lord says: Mark. 16.
Go into the whole world and preach the Gospel. Luke. 24.
And in Luke he says: So behooved it Christ to suffer, and to rise again from
the dead the third day, and repentance and forgiveness of sins to be
preached to all nations in his name. And therefore by laying all these places
of Scripture together, it is made most manifest and undoubted, that the keys
which were given to Peter and the other Apostles, is nothing else but the
ministration of preaching the Gospel, whereby the way is opened for the world
into heaven, and whereby (to be short) is declared most assured release and
forgiveness of sins through faith in Christ, to such as believe. Whereunto
also seems to perteine this most elegant and fit sentence of the Lord
speaking with Paul: I will make thee a witness and messenger (mark how he
says, a witness and messenger) and will send thee unto nations and realms,
to open their eyes, that they may be turned from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan unto God, so as they may receive forgiveness of sins,
and lot among those that be sanctified by the faith which is to meward. You
have in these words a most exact description of the keys of the kingdom of
heaven. Whereunto to add any more, I think it but superfluous.

Now if unto all these things, ye will add the practice of the Apostles (as
they term it) and diligently search out how they have used the keys that were
delivered to them, and after what sort they have opened or shut the kingdom of
heaven unto men, and also in what wise they have either bound them or loosed
them: ye shall no where in all the new Testament find them to have exercised
the Popish practice, that is to wit, that the Apostles have set the^ selves
down in the places where they came to preach the kingdom of God and
salvation, and commanded me^ to come unto them, and there to crouch or to
kneel after the manner of worshippers, and to shriue them selves, that is to
say, to pour out all their thoughts, words, and deeds, with all the
circumstances of them into the ear or lap of the confessor as he sits, and to
crave of him the absolution of their sins, with enioynance of satisfaction:
and that he on the other side laying his hands upon the head of the shriftman,
whispered an absolution of sins over him in an ordinary form of words, and
enjoined him a certain satisfaction by the works of penance. Much less shall
ye find that the Apostles installed them selves in thrones, and thrust down
sinners into hell by sentence of excommunication. etc. What then? Look upon
the Acts of the Apostles, or rather go through that book, wherein Luke has
most diligently written the notable sayings and doings of the Apostles (and
specially of Paul) without ouerslipping of any thing which tended to soul
health, or was necessary to be known, and therwithall has in xxviii. chapters
set forth as many years, that is to wit, the things that the Apostles did by
the space of xxviii. years together in the matter of salvation: and thou shall
not find in all that great work, that all and every of the Apostles did any
thing else then agreably and constantly in all places and in every place preach
the Gospel, and promise remission of sins and everlasting life to such as
believed in Christ: and on the contrary part, threaten endless and most assured
damnation to them that believed not. Thus (I say) did the Apostles use the keys
which they received of the Lord. Thus did they bind and loose. If they would
have had any other thing, or any thing more to have been done in the Church by
their successors, they would not have dissembled it by the space of xxviii.
years preaching, in all their doings which Luke has most faithfully written.
And among other places of the Acts of the Apostles, let the godly read the
second, x.xiii.xvi. and xviii. chapters, and they will bear witness that the
things which I have spoken here are most true, yea and also think them
selves satisfied in this case. I speak of such as are not contentious, for
such no man can well satisfy. And at this present I say to them also as Paul
said: 1. Cor. 11.
If any man seem to be full of contention, we have no such custom, neither
the Churches of God.

And whereas the adversaries urge this singular speech: I will give the keys
of the kingdom of heaven unto thee, I say, unto thee Peter, unto thee,
singularly, and not unto you, plurally: and in their urging do cry out that I
have openly corrupted this place of the Gospel, by communicating unto the rest
of the Apostles and to all their successors being ministers of the word, the
keys that were given to Peter only: they bewray their own gross
foolishness, together with their invincible malice, considering how they can
not deny but that such synecdoches or figures of putting one for a number, and
specially in such cases, are very usual in the Scriptures. Again, seeing it is
sufficiently known what the keys be, and that the rest of the Apostles
received them as well as Peter: I pray you what will they prove by their
singular number? But let them ask their own fathers, why the Lord whereas he
gave equal or one manner of power to them all: did nevertheless say severally
unto Peter, I will give thee: and they shall perceive that thereby is betokened
and expressed the unity of the Church. Surely Austine in his 118. treatise
upon John, says thus: Whereas they were all asked the question, Peter alone
answered, Thou art Christ the son of the living God: and it is said unto him:
Unto thee will I give the keys, as though he alone had received the power to
bind and loose: when [notwithstanding] he both spoke it alone for them all,
and received them with them all, as bearing the person of unity: and one [did]
therefore [both speak and receaue] because there is unity in all. The same
words repeateth he again in his 124. treatise upon John. And in his* 50.
treatise, he says: when Peter received the keys, he represented the holy
Church. The same things avouches the blessed Martyr Cyprian in his little
work concerning the simplicity of Clerks. Furthermore if we should grant
any thing to be given here singularly unto Peter, what is that to the Pope of
Rome? He has not yet proved him self to be Peter's heir and successor. In his
own Decrees, in the sentences of Hierom and Chrysostom, in the xl.
distinction, he shall find that which will put him to his trumpe, wring him by
the ear, and cut his comb. Neither does he which says that in Peter the
keys were given to the whole Church, approve the Romish toys.

Here is expounded the mystery of the Arms and cognisances of the Roman
Bishops bearing bravely in their scutchions a triple crown with a pair of
Keys.
BEfore I depart from hence, I will glauncingly and breefly set forth the
things which seem to perteine peculiarly to the keys, not of the kingdom of
heaven, but the keys which the Bishops of Rome take to them selves, and which
they blaze abroad in their Arms, that is to wit, by painting and stamping them
commonly in a scutchion and under an helmet, yea and by fastening them unto all
their Bulls. For under those arms and cognisances of theirs, after the manner
and fashion of scutchions and helmets, do they shadow the fullness of their
power, and blaze it abroad to the knowledge of all men. For the scutchion it
self bears the arms of the house of the Bishop that sits in the Sea. And
over the scutchion stand two keys a cross, so set, that in stead of an helmet
or crest, they bear up, or have set upon the sheeld and keys a triple crown
or cap of mainteinance, which (according to the interpretation of Austin
Steuchus) they them selves call their Royalty. The cap of mainteinance it
self sheddeth out little Labells such as are hanging at Bishops Miters. And
all these things, which were utterly unknown to the Apostles and the first
Bishops of the Roman Sea, are according to the art of Haraldrie, made
significatiue to show forth the puissance or power of this king and kingdom of
all other the greatest.

The sheeld it self which bears the arms of the Bishops lineage, shows
that the kingdom, and the power of the kingdom belongs to him whose arms
those be, and which presently sits in that Sea. And the two keys set cross
aloft upon the sheeld (like as also their two swords) do (according to their
holy and mystical divinity) betoken that unmeasurable power of theirs which
extends it self foreward and backward through the whole earth, and
aduaunceth it self also above the very clouds even into heaven. In the mean
while, it was Gods good will to teach wise men by such fatal badges, who and
what manner a one this prince is, verily even the same of whom S. John has
written in his Apocalips, saying: And I saw an other beast coming out of the
earth, and having two horns, like unto the Lambs. But those two horns are
Preesthood and Princehood: and both of them belong to Christ the Lord, who is,
continues alone both King and Priest for ever. For he is that La^be of God.
Therefore it is piththely said that those horns which the beast takes unto
him, are not the Lambs horns (for the Lamb keeps his still, and lends
them to no man) but like the Lambs horns. For the Bishop will have all men
believe, that by Peter, Christ has given them equal power with him self, that
is to wit, Preesthood and Princehood, and so prate they in those tyrannical
Decretalls of theirs, which thing for all that, is but of their own making,
neither have they received any such thing of Christ or yet of Peter.

Furthermore their Royalty or Crown has Labells hanging at it, yea even
bishoply labells flaring about, and wrythed with the keys to the sides of the
crown, meaning thereby that this prince is no common prince, but both a prince
and a priest. Yea and the crown which this preestly king, prince, and Emperor
bears, is not single and one, but triple, such as never any Monarkes wore,
that men can read of, were they never so puissant: neither are there any
princes living at this day, that wear the like. And who (I pray you) would
dout that there were a great mystery in these things, if it were not such a
one as knows not that the matters of these men are stuffed with mysteries
like the holy letters of the Egyptians? This triple crown therefore signifies,
that he which bears it is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, or rather that
he is the only prince upon earth, which has power in earth, in heaven, and in
purgatory under the earth, or more verily which is king of heaven, of the
earth, and of the unfortunate Islands, or of the new found land Purgatory. And
this crown is not of less value then the crowns of other kings, but much
statelyer, wrought with wonderful cunning, and garnished and beset with jewels
and things of great price, that at least wise even thereby they might do men to
understand that that power of theirs has not his match in all the world, but
in all points surmou^teth all others. Again, it is come to pass by the
goodness of God, that none of all the princes in the world wears such a
crown, but only the Bishop of Rome. For so was it Gods will to show openly by
this peculiar mark, that this prince thus capped with a triple crown, is the
very same whom Daniell in his vij. chapter terms the little horn. For the
little horn in deed is the bishop and shepeheard which is bedecked with
humility, and whom God has forbidden to reign as a Lord. This little pretty
horn springs up among the ten horns. For when the Roman Monarchy which
is the old beast, was divided and decayed, there appeared up a little slender
horn, and a despised one among the rest, and swept away three of the other
horns. By doing whereof he purchased him self power. For the Bishops of Rome,
at the beginning of their creeping up, dispatched three princes. First Gregory
the second of that name, plucked up Leo the third Emperor of Constantinople one
of these three horns, by procuring his Exarke to be slain in a hurlyburly at
Rauenna, and dispatching the Emperor quite out of Italy. Afterward Pope Zachary
drove Childericke king of France to decay, by counselling to depose
Childericke, and to advance Pippin to the kingdom. And so was an other horn
overthrown by the little horn. The third horn (which was the kings of
Lombardie) was brought low at the incensing of the Popes, and finally also
utterly wiped away by Pippin and Charles kings of France. But by the undoing
and oppressing of these kings, the wealth of the Bishops of Rome increased,
and their power waxed strong, whom Gods will was to show by this triple crown,
as it were with the fingar, to be very Antichrists. Thus much concerning the
Keys, Arms, and Cognisances of the Roman Bishops. Now come to my way again.

Of the words, power, and ministry, and so is the disputation of the keys
knit up.
I Know well enough it offends many even in this discourse, that I use the
term power so seldom, and the word ministry or ministration so often, when
notwithstanding the Scripture does openly give power to the ministers, and it
is commonly called the power of the keys. But how small a thing is that I
beseech you, if it be compared with the fullness of power which these men
challenge to them selves openly? I grant in deed that the administration of
the Church, or (if ye like it better) of the keys, is called power. For the
Lord says in the Gospel: Like as a man that at his going into a strange
country, left his house and gave his servants power. etc. But who knows
not that the power which is spoken of here, is none other but to do service or
to minister: specially seeing that in an other Evangelist, it is more
effectually opened what manner of power the same is, in these words: to give
his honsholde meat in due season, says the Lord. Which thing no man will
wrest to the fullness of power, but he that is past all shame. For the Lord
speaks manifestly of the preaching of the Gospel, whereby meat is set
before the household, I mean before the Church of God. And when Paul to the
Corinthians had termed the preaching of the Gospel the word of atonement: 2.
Cor. 5.
by and by expou^ding him self he adds, that the office or ministration of
preaching the atonement was given unto him: behold, here he calls that
thing a ministration, which he had even now called the word. And he adds
again, that Christ by the ministers exhorts men to be at one with God. What
power (I pray you) shall the faithful minister claim by this geere? Rightly
therefore do some men give warning, that the power by law is one thing, and
the power by ministration is an other. The power by law is that whereby each man
as an owner has power over the things that are his own, subject to his own
commandment and not to an other man's. After this sort the Lord has power
over the Church, Math. 28.
who says in the Gospel: All power is given to me in heaven and in earth. So
is it said before, that Christ has the key of David, of death, and of hell.
This power is communicated to no creature, but remains to God alone.
Therefore except they will be false ministers, they will never take this power
upon the^. But the power of ministration or office, is that which the Lord has
committed to the ministers, with a certain limitation and not absolutely. For
these do, not what they list them selves, nor as owners of things, but as
their Lord and master has commanded them, and only in the same manner that he
by his certain determination has appointed them to be done: and if they do it
not, or do it otherwise then their master has commanded them, they shall be
but untrusty servants. And so undoubtedly the minister of Christ has the
ministering power of the keys in ye Church, to preach the Gospel to the
Church, and to preach it in such wise as the Lord has commanded him to
preach: and certainly he shall be a false and unfaithful servant to his
master, if he take upon him any other power and specially fullness of power,
and preach not the Gospel at all, or preach it otherwise then is appointed him.

Besides this, I am not ignorant, that Christ gave the Apostles great power,
howbeit with limitation, and but for the beginning and for a certain time,
according as Matthew witnesses, saying: And he gave his twelve Disciples power
against unclean spirits, to cast them out and to heal all manner of diseases
and infirmities. For I think not that any man will affirm the same power to
be given to all ministers of the Church, together with the keys, considering
that we know, how that (the Gospel being sufficiently confirmed already by
such signs) they be now no longer common and usual in the rest of the Church,
no more then the ableness and use of sundry tounges. But howsoever the case
stand with that wonderful power, it is most certain that the Apostle Paul
said of all manner of power given unto him by the Lord, that the same was given
him to edify withal, and not to destroy. Which thing unless every minister
wey very advisedly with him self: not only in vain, but also to his own
great harm shall he dispute of the power that is given him, and much more
daungerously shall he take it upon him.

Hitherto I have made discourse of the keys with as much breefnesse and
plainness as I could. Whereby I trust that such as shut not their eyes of
malice, may perceive that the keys are for an other thing, then the Papists
face us withal, doutlesse not an absolute over things in earth and in heaven,
but an healthful ministry of Gods word, or of the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
and the charge and good ordering of the very Church of God: And therefore that
when the Lord said, I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, he
gave not Peter and the Roman Idol an infinite power which they call the
fullness of power. For when the Lord promised and gave the keys, he gave not
the keys of an earthly kingdom, but of the kingdom of heaven. Which thing is
chiefly to be marked in this discourse. And in this kingdom and in this his
Church Christ is the souerein Lord, and abides King, Bishop, and supreme
head: yea and that alone without any copartener or deputy. But his messengers
or Ambassadors sent to his Church, are the Elders, rulers, and ministers of the
congregations. As for all power it is only Christ's the King, Priest, and
Head, and is not surrendered to any other. For he him self caryeth yet still,
and unto the very end will carry upon his shoulders the key of David: and he
will open and no man shall shut, and shut and no man shall open, and he alone
both loses and binds. But his Ambassadors or preachers that are sent and
ordained to gather his Church, do preach this Christ the Lord, assuring men by
the preaching of the Gospel, that Christ forgeueth the sins of such as
believe certainly and bestows eternal life upon them, and that he condemns
those to eternal death, which believe not, or which gainstand the Gospel. The
self same Ministers do feed with Gods word the Church that is gathered unto
Christ, comfortyng the weakeharted, quickenyng and thrusting foreward the
slothful, confirming the wauerers, exhortyng all men evermore unto continual
prayers, to the lawful using of the Sacraments, too the duties of godly
conversation, and most of all to charity and mercy, and in all things and by
all means with singular faythfulnesse and diligence endeuering to bring and
preserve the Church safe and sound unto Christ: which doutlesse is the very
true and wholesome use of the keys of Gods kingdom, even the native and holy
stewardshyp, charge, and well orderyng of Gods Church.

Here is expounded that place of Jeremy, I have set thee over kings and
kingdoms etc. and it is showed how the same makes nothing to the proof of
the Bishop of Romes tyranny which he exercises against kings and kingdoms.
LEt us proceed further, that we may also espy, how truly the Pope of Rome
vaunteth himself alone to be ordained prince over all nations and all
kingdoms. Here again I am not ignorant what the decrees and decretalles
chiefly of those Bishops whose names I have cyted before, do crake and belk out
with open mouth concerning this matter. But we will have no toys, we will have
them show us by Christ's express words, that the Bishops of Rome are lawfully
ordained Princes over all nations and all Realms, by the ordinance of Christ
our Lord, not by the ordinance of any men.

A few years past, Austin Steuchus of Eugubie the Librarikeeper of the sea of
Rome, and besides that, a Bishop also, a man otherwise that had read much, but
yet for all that, smally seen in the holy Scriptures, and moreover a most
filthy flatterer of the Romish Bishops, did put forth a book against Laurence
Valla, in the defense of Constantines Donation, worthy to be spitted at of all
godly men, and meet to be trampled in the mire with dirtie feet. In this
book, among other things, in the xv. Division. First of all (says he) it
stands you in hand to know, that Constantine did not give by name those few
Towns, and those few Cities which are called the patrimony of the Church,
but he gave the whole West part of the world, and so departing from the City,
did as it were give place to a greater Prince then him self (that is to wit to
the Pope) assuryng him self that Rome it self was the head and dwelling place
of godliness, wherein it were unlawful for any man to reign, besides the
souereine of Religion for any two men to reign in that one City to which he
knew Peter the Prince of the Apostles and head of Religion to be come, he
counted it a heinous matter, specially if the earthly Prince should bear the
cheefsway in the City. And in his xvi. Division, It could not be says he)
that two princes should reign in one City, specially in this respect, that
worldly matters would have ouermated holy matters. Namely it would have
happened, as it is in the Proverb, that rivers should have run against their
streams. Also in the 90. Division: This is the Majesty and prerogative which
Peter gave unto Rome, that like as she was Lady of all lands, so she should
reign over all Religion, and all things should be ruled at her beck. Again
in his 94. Division, he reckeneth up all the myghtyest kingdoms of the West,
as France, Spain, England, Denmark, Portingale, and all the residue, all
which are subject to their holy and universal mother (for so speaks he) the
Church of Rome. And least he might ouerslyp any thing, at length in his 103.
Division he adds: But what should I allege any more to prove by this kind
of Arguments, the most ancient and welnere almighty power of the Church of
Rome over all kingdoms and kings, and the most ancient possession of the
same. Considering that the ancient monume^tes of all the Bishops are full of
the high power wherewith they ruled the whole world at their commandment,
holdyng the souereintie of all Realms etc. These things whereby he has put
all the kingdoms of the world under the Pope and Church of Rome, could not
satisfy and content that lying and blasphemous clawbacke, but he must also
with extreme shamelessenesse and horrible wickedness make a God of that wicked
wight the Bishop of Rome. For in his 26. Division he says, that the
faithful worship the son of God him self in the Pope, and that they honor,
not so much him as a mortal man, as in him even God him self who has made
him his deputy upon earth. Again, in the 67. Division, 141. leaf. Thou
hear (says he) how the high Bishop which is called God, was by Constantine
esteemed as God. And ye must understand that this was then done, when he endowed
him with that noble grant, for even then did he worship him as God, then did
he (as much as lay in him) bestow godly honor upon him as Christ's vicare
and Peter's successor, and then did he reverence him as the lively image of
Christ. Thus says he. And such blasphemous and wicked writings does Rome yield
unto us. Which things I have hitherto mentioned, to the end I might disclose
unto all men, the extreme and unrecoverable madness of the Pope him self and
of his household together with their wickedness, where through, they being most
heathenish and shameless men, are not afraid even in the sight of the whole
world as well of Angels as men, to usurp unto them selves the very Godhead it
self and all the kingdoms of the world, and to spit out whatsoever comes at
their tounges end.

This Steuchus was also a Bishop, and yet he was not ashamed to offer so
blasphemous writings to the Church, yea and to dedicate them to S. Peter. But
let them bring us some one sentence, or at least wise some one word of Christ
or his Apostles, whereby they may show and avouch unto us, that Christ
authorized the Pope to be souereine of all kings and kingdoms. No, they cannot
bring me oneiote out of all the new Testament. And therefore they flee unto
Jeremy for succor. But eue^ this man's holy writyngs also do they defile:
beeray, and corrupt with their poison. For the Prophet speaks of the
ministration of the word, and not of any Lordyng of his own. For the Lord
calls, authorizeth, and sends Jeremy to the charge of preaching. For he
says to him by express words: Before thou came out of thy mothers womb, I
sanctified thee, and appointed thee to be a Prophet unto nations. Afterward
when Jeremy excused him self by his tender years and vnenured childhode: the
Lord harteneth and comfort him, promising to be present with him, and to
speak by his mouth. For in the Lords words it follows, behold I have put my
words in thy mouth. Exodus 4.
For so read we also that the Lord spoke after the same manner in old time unto
Moses, when he drew back and would have shunned the Lords calling. But in
those words there is no speaking at all of souereintie, but of the charge of
preaching. Whereupon it ensues that Jeremy is instructed how to teach, and
not how to reign. And there follows in the Lords words: behold, this day
have I set the over nations and kingdoms, to pluck up, root out, destroy,
and overthrow: to build up: and to plant. By which words the Lord shows unto
Jeremy, to whom he sends him, what his office should be, or what should be,
end of his ambassade.

He is sent unto nations and kingdoms as a preacher of Gods word, and not set
over them as a prince or a king. For there follows to pluck up etc. Which is
the office of a teacher, and the end of the Lords ambassade. And a Prophet
plucketh up, overthrows builds up and planteth, two ways. First when by
Gods word he declares to people, nations, and kingdoms, that the Lord which
has planted the nations and kingdoms, will root out the same for their
outrageous sins, unless they amend. For Jeremy of himself did not overthrow
or build up kingdoms, but the Lord alone did it. But Jeremy being Gods
minister and messenger, told them out of the Lords mouth or by his word, that
the Lord would do it. And this sense is ministered and furthered by the things
that follow in the 45. chapter, where the Lord says: behold, I pull down the
things that I have builded, and I pluck up the things that I have planted.
And again in the 42. chapter, I will build you up and not pull you down, I
will plant you and not pluck you up. Besides this, to pluck up and to plant
are terms of husbandry, like as to build and to pull down are terms of
masonry and carpentry. Hereupon now the Prophet is by an allegorical speech
informed, what he must do and whereunto his commission extends. Like as
husbandme^ and builders do first prepare their ground and cut it up with the
plough, and afterward sow it with seed, or first pull down the decayed
buildings and cleanse the floor, and then afterward build upon it: So is it
the dewtie of a Prophet or preacher, first and formest to confute by Gods word
to pull down and pluck up wicked opinions, Idolatry, and whatsoever things
else are raised up against God: and afterward in place of the things that be
rooted out, to plant again sound doctrine, the true worshyppyng of God, and
all manner of godliness, and finally to keep the Lords field in tilth and to
deck Gods house with all diligence. These things will be the more enlightened,
if ye compare them with the Lords own words in the 13. and 15. of Matthew,
and with the words of the Apostle Paul in the third chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthia^s, and in the tenth chapter of the second Epistle.
Once again therefore by the clear, natural, and right construed interpretation
of this place of Ieremye, we have won, that the Pope by that Bull of his,
has wickedly and traitorously to the Lord Godward, corrupted and inuerted his
words, and wrested them to his own souereintie or rather to his own tyranny,
which the Lord has not ordained or defended by his word, neither here nor in
any place else.

And if they be not yet ashamed of their wicked wrestyng and corruptyng of this
place of the Prophets: Let them tell us what manner of souereintie Jeremy bare
in Jerusalem the chief City of Iewry, or over what nation or kingdom he
reigned? From the death of king Josias, he lived under the wicked kings
Ioachaz, Ioachim, Iechonias, and Zedechias. The horrible deeds of these
princes are described both in the holy stories of the Bible, and also in the
same Ieremyes book, let them tell us then in what wise Jeremy by the virtue of
these the Lords words, I have set thee this day over nations and kingdoms.
etc. did root out or plant, and which of those ungodly kings he plucked up
and excommunicated? or where he taught that because of the wickedness of these
kings, their people ought to yield no obedience unto them? Let them tell us
where or when he discharged the noblemen and commons of the Realm of their
oath made unto the said kings, yea or unto Nabuchodonosor which was a heathen
king? Or which of the kings Jeremy cast down from his throne, and afterward
advanced another to it at his own pleasure? Tell me, tell me I say. Why are
ye thus dumine. Because ye be never able to prove by any Scriptures, the thing
that you take upon ye. For the truth witnesses manifestly that Jeremy was the
humble servant of the Lord God, a poor Minister, and therewithal a faithful
Prophet of the Lord God, and that he was pitiful vexed, imprisoned, and
persecuted by those kings: against whom for all that, he meant so little to draw
any sword at all: that in all civil cases he willyngly obeyed them, and taught
all the people yea the nobility also to obey them, and finally acknowledged
and reuere^ced them as his sovereign Lords. In deed he did sharply rebuke the
wicked offenses of these kings, and preached Gods grievous judgments, not so
much to them as to the Priests and to the whole people, utterly after the same
manner that the Lord had commanded him to do it. But in the mean while he made
no commotions in the Realm, but rather patiently suffered persecution at their
hands, and prayed earnestly for their welfare. Yea and this self same Prophet
did diligently and carefully teach the very people of God to obey even the
kings of Babylon, Nabuchodonosor, Euilmerodach, and Baltazar. Like as Ezechiel
also blames Zedechias very sore, for falsifying his oath and breakyng his
faith given unto Nabuchodonosor. Therefore there is no reason why the Bishop of
Rome should cloak his tyranny with Ieremyes words, considering that Ieremyes
words fight against him, and that he in no point resembles Ieremyes pattern.

That the Bishop of Romes vsurpyng of supremacy over kings and nations, is
against the open example and express commandment of our Lord Christ.
NAy rather to the intent the matter may appear yet more evidently unto all
men: so little did our Lord Jesus Christ mind to ordeine either Peter or any
other of his Apostles, souereines over kings and kingdoms in the Church: that
I am able presently to set the evident example of the Lord him self, and his
doctrine or express commandment against the tyranny and wrongful dealyng of
the Pope, and as it were to show with my finger, that his usurping of
soueraintie over kings and kingdoms in the Church, is extreme injury and
ungodliness. This matter is of it self right plentiful in the holy Scriptures,
but I will (as much as may be) comprehend the^ in a brief. Therefore although
our Lord Jesus Christ, was by his almighty father ordained both king and
priest in his kingdom, and that he manifestly avouched himself to be a king:
yet notwithstanding he laid aside the government of temporal and worldly
things, and took him self to the charge only of spiritual things. By
reason whereof when Pylate asked him whether he were the king of Israel or no?
He denied not him self to be a king, but he adds an exposition and meekely
answered, my kingdom is not of this world. Whereupon in another place of the
Gospel he said, he came not to be served (that is to wit as a worldly prince)
but to serve or to do service him self, and to give his life for the ransom
of the whole multitude. For that cause, Luke. 12.
he utterly refused the iudgyng or diuidyng of the heritage that was desired at
his hand, and put it over from himself to the lawful judges, not without
displeasure saying: man, who has made me a judge or vmper between you? John. 6.
And therefore when the people were purposed to have made him a temporal king,
he fled, and by that flight of his showed that those his ministers must not
seek for worldly souereintie in the Church, and much less possess it or by
any means claim it, no nor receive it or take it upon them if it be offered.
Matthew. 22.
Besides this, he not only commanded to give unto Caesar that which is
Caesar's: but also furthermore when the tribute that was wont to be paid to the
Magistrate was demanded of him, he commanded a penny that was taken out of a
fishes mouth, Math. 17
to be paid for him, least he might be an offense unto others. Finally by the
space of whole iij. years together, in which he most faithfully went through
with the charge that his heavenly father had put him in trust with, and
accomplished all things enjoined him to the full, he never gave any inclyng (no
not the least that could be) of any souereintie or worldly dominion. Unto this
holy and most humble example of the Lord, there is also further added his most
modest doctrine. For when he perceived that his disciples being caught and led
away with ambition, burned altogether with desire of souereintie, and strive
among themselves for supremacy or prerogative or (as the Roman Bishops term
it) for greaternesse (as surely this malady sticks fast to the ribs of
them that are atteinted never so little with ambitiousnesse, which thing
appears by the Romish sort them selves:) he gave them a very sore check, and
withdrew them from that desire of souereintie, beating lowliness into them,
and therwithall also mainteinyng the right of the Magistrate ordained of God,
and finally committyng the ministration of the word to his disciples, without
any hope or mention of souereintie at all.

Therefore when in the xvii. of Matthew, Peter had paid a piece of twenty pence
for the Lord and himself, to those that demanded but ten pence, and that
thereby he had put the rest of the disciples in suspicion, as though Peter
should be advanced above all the rest of them: or be made primate among them
in the kingdom of heaven, or in the government of the Church: they began to
dispute of the matter among them selves: and each of them according to man's
infirmity gaped after that highest degree of souereintie. But what said the
Lord, and what did he in that debate of his disciples? He took a child unto
him and setting him in the mids of them, said: Uerely I say unto you, except
ye turn and become like children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Therefore whosoever humbles himself as this child he is greatest in
the kingdom of heaven. Which is all one as if the Lord had said unto them, ye
strive for pre-eminence, which of you should be greeted as greatest of all. But
I tell you for a certeintie, except ye turn your minds from such ambitious
disputations that savor of nothing but pride and pomp, and turn your selves
in lowliness unto me and my example, yea and unto the simpleness of this
little boy whom you see here: ye shall be so far from greatness and
gloriousnes in that kingdom of mine, that I will not so much as take you for
my Disciples. Uery truly says S. Chrysostom in his 59. Homely upon Matthew,
little children know not how to envy, nor how to gape for vaineglorie, nor how
to desire pre-eminence of dignity, neither are they any whit the statelyer if
ye praise them or honor them. What then answers the Lord to the question of
his Disciples? Who soever (says he) becomes like a child by puttyng away
naughty affections, but chiefly ambition and desirousnesse to bear rule:
truly the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Upon which place
Chrysostom says again. Thou see how he has taught that pre-eminence of
dignity is not to be coueted in any case. And so forth.

Again in the 20. chapter of Matthew, when the mother of Zebedies children came
unto the Lord with her sons James and John, and made suit for them that they
might have the highest room and chief authority about him in his kingdom, so
as he should place them next him self: the one on his right hand, and the
other on his left, (for look who they be that are next about a king, and guard
his person in sittyng on either side of him, those are counted chief men in the
Realm, like as at this day those be called Legates a latere or from the Popes
side, who^ the Bishop sends from Rome with full power and authority.) The
Disciples having forgotten the things which the Lord had taught them before,
mistrusted eftsoone that those two brothers should be preferred before them
all. By reason whereof, envying them, they began to take pritch at it, and to
contend again among themselves for the prehemine^ce. The Lord therefore calling
them to him, said: ye know that the kings of nations reign over them: and
they that be great exercise authority upon them. It shall not be so among you:
but he that will be great among you, let him become your servant: and he that
will be chief among you, let him be your vnderlyng: like as the son of man is
come, not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life for the redemption
of many. Most trimly and effectually has the Lord herein severed the
Ecclesiastical ministry, from the civil authority. And justly does he
challendge and yield to the Magistrate, that which belongs to the Magistrate,
without derogatyng or taking any thing from him, and conueying it to him self
and his: and likewise show the ministers what they also ought to do. Ye know
(says he) that there be Princes or Magistrates ordained among people, and
among the Gentiles, so as there is no need that you also should be made rulers
over nations. I mind not to make wars with the Romans, and to put down
their presidentes and Tetrarkes, to set you up in their rooms, (which thing,
notwithstanding the Jews believed that Christ should have done, and therefore
when he answered not their expectation, they acknowledged him not to be the
Messiah.) Princes have their power given them of God. Whereby you understand,
that there is no cause why you should strive among your selves for souereintie.
For you see that those which are in office already, shall continue still in
their charge. Thus much said the Lord concerning civil government. Now
follows also concerning the ministry of the Church. It shall not be so among
you. For I have not chosen you to make you princes of lands, but rather
servants of the Churches, not Lords I say, but preachers to publish the word
of glad tydinges, and to shine before the people in example of holy life.
Therefore I will not have you once think of bearing rule, or wish to reign
like princes of this world: it shall not be so among you. Howbeit for as much as
ambitious pride had brought the Disciples this far, here also like as before
he commends lowliness unto them, saying: whosoever will be great among you
etc. Neither is there any cause why the Romish sort should now a days blere
our eyes with their style of Servant of the servants of God, which the Pope
uses. For that style is a forged style, and the lowliness of these men is but
a counterfeit or hipocritly lowliness. For the very experience of many hundred
years witnesses, that in all the whole world there are none that can worse
away with doing service, than this kind of men. Nay rather they will be
worshipped for soueraines and kings of kings. Or if they be the servants of
Gods servants in deed; why offer they their feet to be kissed even of Gods
princes? And the Lord to move them the more evidently, adds his own example
to his foresaid commandment, saying. Like as the son of man is not come to
be served etc. This is a notable saying: for it is as much as if he had said,
If I which am your Lord and master, and the living son of the living God to,
and king of kings, sue not for, ne chalendge not to my self any worldly
prehemine^ce upon earth, as who am come into the earth, to serve all men's
turns even with the loss of my life: truly you ought to be ashamed of it,
that you which are but wretched men and no better then thralles, are
notwithstanding not afraid to gape after souereintie. These things, these
things I say as dreadful thunderboltes, not only shake, but also turn vpside
down that seat of the Romish Bishops, which they have most boldly and
shamelessely exalted above the thrones of all kings, under pretense of Peter
and of the granted souereintie and unmeasurable power which [they say] they
received of Christ. And whereas the Lord uttered these things to his Disciples
once or twice very earnestly, and so forcibly as they could not be uttered more
forcibly: yet had ambition and desire of prerogative taken so deep roots in
the minds of the Disciples according to the corruption of ma^s nature, that at
the Lords last Supper, when they understood he should depart out of this
world, they fell again to striuyng for the supremacy and prerogative then
most of all, Luke. 22.
that is to wit, who should be chief upon earth and preferred before all others
in the Church, when the Lord was gone away and received up into heaven? But the
Lord inueyeth not sharply against his Disciples ne casts them of as they had
deserved, for renewing their former error now the third time and for by
inforcyng it by harping still upon it after he had so evident instruction and
disprofe of their souereintie: but salueth the disease of both them and of all
other in the church that are atteynted with the same vice. And first of all he
repeteth the same argument, which he had objected against them in the 20. of
Matthew, saying. There is no reason why you should strive for superiority. For
the Princes that reign at this time in the world, neither are now nor shall
hereafter be put down for me. For the Magistrate continues still in his former
state and dignity. He shall reign, but so shall not you reign. By the way
also and as it were glauncingly, he shadoweth out the office of princes,
saying: And they which have power over them are called Good and Gracious: that
is to say, they be ordained of God to the end they should do good to their
subjects. Romans 13.
For the Apostle says: The Magistrate is Gods minister, for thy welfare. For
Princes are not a terror to such as do well, but to such as do ill. And what
could be said more piththily and strongly in this case, that which is said
already, or rather now twice repeted, but so shall not you? By and by he adds
an ordinance after what sort the Ministers must behave themselves in their
Ecclesiastical charge, saying: He that is an elder among you, let him become
fellow to the younger. That is to say, he that has gotten a greater room in the
Church, and is endewed both with sundry gifts and also with singular
authority in respect of his old age and his experience in matters, let him not
vaunt himself for those singular gifts, but let him be wise after a lowly
manner, as if he were some young man without experience, and as yet raw in so
great a charge. Also, he that is a Prince. ((...)) that is, a Captain, Ruler,
or Gouerner, let him assure himself that he has not gotten a souereintie, but
a ministry: and therefore let him behave himself as a Minister.

Unto these he adds also other reasons, whereby to lay forth to the eye, that
Apostolic men are called, not to reign but to serve. Greater (says he) is
the prerogative of him that sits at the table, then of him that serves him
which sits. But the Church being called by the Lord to a spiritual feast,
sits down: And you serve the Church of that spiritual food: Ergo, the
Church is as your Lady and mistress, and you are the servants of this
mistress, but not her masters and much less her souereines. Hereunto again
he joins his own example: I am (says he) as a servant among you. Seeing
then that I which am your Lord, do nevertheless serve you: it is a shame for
you which be but servants, to think of Lordyng it in the Church, considering
how my most humble example is daily before your eyes utterly abhorryng from all
desire of souereintie. Furthermore he adds this also: Surely it is strange
that you should strive among your selves for superiority: considering how that
I have hitherto ben subject to many and sundry afflictions. Whereof you your
self can bear witness, unto whom some part of my temptations and afflictions
has redounded. Wherefore ye might rightlyer confer among your selves, of
bearing the cross and of patience, than of Lordshyp and superiority.
Notwithstanding he annexeth here again a comfort, least their hearts might
fail them at the mention of afflictions. And therefore he knitteth unto it a
declaration of heavenly rewards that shall be liberally given unto those in the
everlasting country, which get the upper hand in persecutions: aduauncyng his
manner of speech from bodily and earthly things, to spiritual and heavenly
things.

Yet notwithstanding, after all these things, (which surely may seem a wonder
to the whole world) yea even after thrice most earnest warning and evident
instruction, the Disciples dare byanby upon Christ's Resurrection, and at the
very instant of his Ascension into heaven, make mention yet again of
reigning, yea and to cloy the Lord again with their desirousnesse of
superiority, saying: Will thou at this time, that is to say before thou depart
from us into heaven) restore the kingdom unto Israel? Unto which question the
merciful Lord bearing with the weakness of his Disciples, answers,
meekely again, and bids them refer the seasonable doing of it unto God.
In the mean while he repeteth and beats into them again, what they should
do and what he requires at their hands, saying: After that the holy Ghost is
come down into you, you shall receive power, and you shall bear witness of
me, not only at Jerusalem, but even to the uttermost costs of the earth
also. And what else is this, then if he had said, The holy Ghost shall teach
you to understand, what manner of kingdom mine shall be, doutlesse spiritual,
and not worldly, wherein I shall sit and reign the chief and only souerein.
And in this my kingdom, that is to wit, in ye very Church of the saints, you
shall be witnesses and not kings, preachers and not princes. For by preaching of
the Gospel you shall gather me a Church out of the whole world.

This I say is Christ's doctrine concerning supremacy and reigning, and
concerning the ministry of Christ in the Church, more lightsome the^ the
sun. Whereby also it appears, more clearly then the day light, that the
Bishop of Romes usurping of souereintie in the Church, and his bosting of
himself to be ordained head over all kings and Realms, contrary to Christ's
example and doctrine, is not by the lowly spirit of Christ, but by the proud
spirit of Lucifer?

Nor that the Apostles of Christ took upon them any souereintie in Christ's
Church, but only the ministry.
ANd when the Apostles had received the holy Ghost, they utterly displaced all
ambition and desire of souereintie out of their hearts, perceiuyng now, that no
such thing as they and the Jews had hitherto surmised, was to be sought or
looked for in the kingdom and Church of Christ, but far greater and diuiner
things, namely spiritual things. And therefore according to their Lord and
masters commandment, traueling over the whole world, they so behaved them
selves, that in all things they were sound to be the very Disciples and
folowers of their master: endewed with lowliness, and not with Lordlinesse,
and renowned for their faithful service, and not for stately superiority. For
they not only preached the Gospel purely without men's forgeries and
traditions: but also were wont to reverence kings as next unto God in earth
and chief of all men, and to call them their Lords, and to pay them tribute,
and to obey them faithfully, and to pray for their welfare without ceasing, yea
and to threaten Gods vengeance to such as refused obedience to the Magistrate
commanding no wickedness. They no where intermedled them selves in worldly
affairs, in so much as they cast eue^ the care of the poor (which otherwise is
most holy,) upon the shoulders of the Deacons, verily to the end they might the
earnestlyer apply them selves to the preaching of the word. They no where
usurped to them selves the benches of judges or the thrones of princes, and
much less did they depose any king or prince from his kingdom, were he never
so wicked, (and yet there is no man ignorant what the Roman presidentes were
that lived in the time of the Apostles, full of couetousenesse, lechery, and
pride: and the posterity of Herod even venemouse slippes: yea and the
Emperors them selves most filthy and ungracious persons as the Tyberiusses,
the Caligulaze, the Claudiusses and the Neroes) or discharge his people of
their allegea^ce, or contend with any prince for the souereintie, and much
less did they ever purpose or practice to place and exalt them selves above
him. Nay rather they suffered sore persecution, the which they overcame by
patience, and not by violent withstanding, nor by practices and policies of
malicious wiliness: and gathered very great Churches unto Christ out of the
whole world by preaching the Gospel over all the earth. S. Luke the Evangelist
describes these things diligently and plenteously in his book of the Acts
of the Apostles, wherein although he pursue their doings by the space of
xxviii. years together, Yet does he no where give any little incling of that
supremacy and fullness of power, which they at this day do boast of, that call
them selves Apostolic, and crake of the fullness of their power.

But if any man desire to here some singular thing of S. Peter: he is always
set first in the register of the holy Apostles. But all men know that this
formershyp of Peter's, is not in over ruling, but in order: for according to the
doctrine of the Gospel, all the Apostles were indewed with like dignity and
power, and the Churches were governed by their travel in common. In the mean
while it was requisite that there should be order both in speaking and doing
for the auoydance of disordered confusion: and they that had obtained greater
gifts were more honored and had in more estimation and authority than the
residew. Like as Paul speaking of James, Gal. 2.
Peter, and John, says that they seemed to be pillars in the Church. Not for
that they were preferred before all the rest, or had obtained a larger
Commission: but because that having obtained greater gifts, they did more
luckely and easly go through with all points of their charge (wherein
otherwise, the residew had as good part as they) and therefore were had in
greater price and estimation among the faithful. So also were the Apostolic
Churches which were first founded by the Apostles, worthily had in great price
and estimation in old time. For their authority was of great credit with other
Churches: not that they were believed to have superiority over them, but
because that being the first that were converted to the faith, they kept still
vnappaired, the faith which they had once learned of the Apostles, and gave
light to other Churches, by their pureness and consta^cie. These things are
set forth more at large by a very ancient writer called Tertullian in the
prescriptions of heretics. In which place also he not only calls Rome an
Apostolic Church, but Ephesus also, and Corinth, and Thessalonica, and other
Churches founded by the Apostles. And it is not to be douted but that the men
of old time called Peter and Paul the princes of the Apostles: not that they
were secular or worldly princes, or that they had dominion over the rest, or
that they had obtained a larger commission: but because that being endewed by
God with most excellent gifts, both in their sayings and doings, yea and
finally in their writings and vertewes they shyned as most bright Cressets
among the rest of the Stars.

For S. Peter never chalendged to him self any superiority no not even over
the basest sort of men, and much less over princes: he never advanced his
throne (which he had not) above all kings and all kingdoms. Cornelius the
Centurion a knight of Rome fell down at his feet, and it was no small cause
that made him so to do. For the angel of the Lord had set a great
commendation upon this Peter unto him, whereupon he fell down before Peter. But
Peter liftes him up again, and humbly says that he him self is a man also.
So also when he had lifted up the lame man and made him whole and sound, at the
temple of Jerusalem, and that the people stood wondering and worshipping of
him, he gave all the glory unto Christ, and told them that he him self was
but a Minister. Neither does he in his Epistles advance him self with any
prelacie, but simply calls him self an Apostle and felowelder, forbidding the
elders to usurp any Lordship over the Clergy. 1. Pet. 5.
Neither sits he still in his chair at Jerusalem and sendes abroad his
Legates a latere: but he is contented to let the congregation send him with
John into Samaria. Act. 8.
Yea and in the Counsel of Jerusalem, he chalendgeth no pre-eminence to him
self. All things were done in that Counsel by common advise and consent. And
the Apostle Paul, who in all things even of the smallest sort was a most
diligent obseruer of the ordinances of his master Christ, no where
acknowledges S. Peter as preferred before all other men by any prerogative,
neither would he in any wise have neglected it, if he had ever thought him to
have been preferred before the rest by the Lord. Nay rather he freely reproved
Peter in the Church of Antioche, according as he himself declares, in the 2.
to the Galathians. In the same place in deed, he calls Peter a Pillar, but
not Peter above, and therefore much less the pillar of all pillars, greatest
and most excellent. For with Peter he matcheth two other Apostles, whom he
terms pillars as well as him, even James and John: yea and he puts James
before Peter. He had said heretofore, that the same were had in reputation, to
the end we might know wherefore he called them pillars. Meaning that they were
in authority, as men that by their common and faithful travel seemed as it
were to uphold the Church, which else was like to fall, if it had not ben
underpropped and stayed up through the grace of God in their faithful
teaching. And yet Paul affirms that those pillars added nothing unto him.
But rather comparing him self with Peter, The same (says he) which was mighty
in Peter in the Apostleship over the Circumcision, was mighty in me also among
the Gentiles. 2. Cor. 11.
And the same Paul speaking of the plural number, says he was nothing
inferior to the chief Apostles. And in the 3. chapter of his first Epistle to
the Corinthians, what is Paul (says he,) what is Apollo, (and in this place
is Peter or Cephas to be employed also, as of who^ he had made mention in the
first chapter, using the same manner of speaking. Neither is there any reason
why the opinion of those should hold us in a mamering, which surmise that here
is not meant Peter, but some other disciple whom Paul calls by the name of
Cephas. For the truth of the Gospel cries out against them in the first of
John, and so does Paul's own declaration in the second to the Galathians.)
What are they (says he) but only ministers by whom you have believed, even as
the Lord gave unto every man? I have planted, Apollo has watered, but God gave
the increase. Therefore, neither is he any thing which planteth nor he which
waters, but God which gives the increase. And anon after, speaking of all
the Apostles, yea and even of Peter or Cephas to, 1. Cor. 4.
Let a man (says he) in such wise esteem us as the Ministers of Christ, and
the disposers of the secrets of God.

These lightsome and evident textes of Scripture, are sufficient for men that
be curable, (as for incurable and quareling men, we leave them to God the just
judge) and do witness manifestly enough that neither Christ's Apostles no nor
the Apostle Peter him self usurped so much as one jot of souereintie in the
Church, but only took upon them ministration of the glad tydinges of
salvation, and of Christ's holy Church, all their life long even unto the last
gasp of their lives. And therefore there is no reason why the Bishop of Rome
should hereafter in maintenance of himself and his supremacy, allege any
more the supremacy of Peter, which is now sufficiently apparent to be utterly
none, and always to have been none at all in deed.

That the first Bishops of Rome usurped not any souereintie at all in the
church, but were lowly shepeheardes, teachers and ministers of the Church of
Rome: yea and besides that, also Martyrs of Christ.
I Will not now dispute whether Peter came at Rome or no. Whereof I see learned
men to dout, not without cause. Surely it may be proved by substantial
arguments, that Peter sat not in that seat, at that time and so long a time
as he is commonly said to have sit continually together. If he came to Rome at
all, certes it was late ere he came, and peradventure not long before his death.
For all the old writers, even those that were near the Apostles time, do
agreably and steadfastly affirm, that Peter was crucified at Rome under the
Emperor Nero for preaching Christ and his Gospel, the same time that Paul was
beheaded. Which thing I can easly grant. But from this Peter unto Siluester
there be registered 33. Bishops or pastors of Rome. Of whom notwithstanding none
took upon him any souereintie either over the City it self, or over the
Church of Rome, and therefore much less aduau^ced they them selves over kings
and kingdoms. Yet am I not afraid to say thus much more of them, that if they
might be found to have attempted any whit of this pre-eminence, or to have
sewed for souereintie, it is certain that they started aside from the way of
their predecessors, yea and from their master Christ, and grew out of kind
from their own Peter. Wherefore their sayings and doings being against the
express testimonies of Christ and the Apostles above rehearsed, could prove
nothing.

Howbeit, like as in other Churches, as of Antioche, Alexandria, Corinth,
Philippos, Ephesus, Cesarea, and the rest, there were pastors or teachers which
were called Bishops, set over the Church of God, which by their holy ministry
served severally their own sheep that were committed to them, and not other
men's sheep, or in many places at once: (for at the beginning, every pastor had
his slocke appointed and committed unto him.) So also was done in the Church of
Rome, which is named Apostolic Sea or Chair. I would not have any man amassed
at the terms of Sea and Chair, and surmyse and imagine any Popishnesse by
them. Men in old time gave the terms of Sea and Chair, not only to the
Church of Rome, but to any of the notable Churches, I mean which the Apostles
them selves founded, and in which the traditions or the doctrine of the
Apostles and of the Gospel sounded or was preached and flourished still
uncorrupted. For Tertullian in his prescriptions of heretics, says: Peruse
the Apostolik Churches, among which the very chayres of the Apostles are yet
still sytin in their places, and among which their authentical letters are
still read, resounding the voice and resembling the face of every of them. If
Achaya be next thee, thou have Corinth: if thou be not far from Macedonie,
thou have Philippos, and thou have Thessalonice. If thou list to go into Asia,
thou have Ephesus. And if thou border upon Italy, thou have Rome, from whence
also we have authority at hand. O happy Church whereupon the Apostles bestowed
their whole doctrine together with their blood, where Peter was matched with
his Lord in passion, where Paul was crowned with the end of John Baptist, and
where the Apostle John, after he had been plundged in scalding oil and felt no
harm at all, was banished into the I Will of Patmos. Thus says he. Otherwise the
Chair is properly a high place in the Church furnished for the ministers to
teach out of the more commodiously, as from whence they may the better be seen
and heard of their audience that is assembled in the Church. Such as the men of
old time are known to have had, as appears by the doings of Achaz king of
Judah, and by the viij. chapter of Nehemias. It is commonly called a Pulpit or
preaching stool. It is not a cloth of estate, or a Salomons throne, or a
kings chair of estate. Neither did men in old time by the Apostolic chair
or sea, mean reigning or souereintie and I wot not what greater thing, as
they mean at this day. But rather the chair is taken for the very Apostolic
doctrine, which was preached out of those chayres or pulpites, and to fit in
the Apostolic sea is to preach the Apostolic doctrine. For it is well known
to all men what the Lord meant by the chair of Moses in the Gospel, when he
said, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair. What soever they bid you
observe, that observe and do ye. For what else is it to sit in Moses chair,
than to profess Moses, and to teach the things that Moses taught? If any had
taught any thing besides that or contrary to that, they had been of never the
more authority for the chair, like as at this day also, they that preach not
Apostolical doctrine, have none authority by the Apostolic chair or sea of
Rome, of Antioche, or of Philippos, neither are they in any wise to be
regarded, although they sit in the same seas. Uery well known is this Canon
reported in the 40. Distinction of the Decrees, out of the writings of Jerome,
It is hard to stand in the room of Peter and Paul, and to keep the chair of
those that reign with Christ. For hereupon it is said, They are not the
Saints children, which possess the Saints places, but they that fulfill the
works of the Saints.

They the^ which had the charge of the Roman Church after that Peter was put
to death, were ministers, pastors, and teachers or preachers, and not princes
or Lords. Irenaeus places Linus immediately after Peter. Tertullian places
Clement. Eusebius puts Anacletus in the mids betwixt Linus and Clement. Some
register one Cletus betwixt Clement and Anacletus, which Cletus is
notwithstanding quite ouerskipped and omitted by diverse. Others also dispose
the succession or Register of the first Bishops of the Roman Church, some
after one sort and some after another so as it may seem strange that
antiquity varieth so in the succession of them, and has almost nothing
certain and assured in that behalf. But howsoever the case stands, this is
most certain that such as held the Apostolik sea of Rome after Clement, were
utterly ignorant of that supreme power and the authority of both the swords
which those men presumptuously boast of, that think themselves possess the
same seat at this day. They were lowely and poor ministers of the Church, and
preached the Gospel and the doctrine of the Apostles to the Church, whereof
they had the charge, and therewithal ministered Christ's Sacraments to the
Church, and beautified their doctrine with example of life, and in the end
sealed it up with Martyrdom, For all those Bishops or pastors of Rome, became
Christ's Martyrs, and were put to death for mainteynyng the pure faith and
doctrine, and for preaching against Idolatry and the unclean conversation of
the heathen.

And whereas in other Churches there spring up sundry heresies and grievous
debates: The Roman Church above the rest, did faithfully at that time and in
the beginning keep still the pureness of doctrine, and the consent and
agreement of faith. And this was the cause why the men of old time did worthily
make so great account of the succession of those men in the Church and of their
consent in the faith: who otherwise would undoubtedly have made no reckening at
all of the succession in the Sea, unless the pastors and the Church of Rome
had continued in pure doctrine and vnappayred faith.

Truly there arose dissension even in this Church also, betwixt Anicetus Bishop
of Rome, and Polycarpus the minister of the Church of Smyrna the Disciple of
John the Apostle: howbeit not for any Articles of faith, but for keeping of the
Easter day. Nevertheless the contention endured not long. For they agreed well
and brotherly again, and willed that every man should observe and keep still
his own custom that was admitted in his own Church: that the concord of the
Churches might not be broken for the diversity of ceremonies. But yet again
Victor the Bishop of the Roman Church taking more upon him than became him,
and stepping aside from the modesty and simplicity of his predecessors,
adventured to break the agreement that was begone between Anicetus and
Polycarpus, and excommunicated the Eastern people that kept the Easter day
upon the xiiii. day of the month. Yet for all that, the pastors of the residew
of the Churches acknowledged not Victor for a commander of the Churches, or
for such a one as by right might take upon him authority over other Churches.
For his ouerbold and rash enterprise was reproved by the Bishops as well of the
East as of ye West, that is to wit by the holiest and best learned and by such
as were had in chief estimation in that age, namely by Polycrates Bishop of
Ephesus, and by Irenaeus Bishop of Lions. And so was Victor brought again into
the right way. Which thing Eusebius declares at large in his history of the
Church matters.

And truly in process of time the vices that had every where occupied and
corrupted other Churches, began also to enter into the Church of Rome, for
there arose a great schism in the Church of Rome, some chosing S. Cornelius to
be their pastors, and some choosing Nouatus from whom sprung the heresy or
sect of the Nouatians, which became very noisome to the Church. But Cornelius
got the government, under whom certain of Aphrike began to put the decidyng of
their controversies to the sea of Rome. Nevertheless, the blessed Martyr and
Bishop of Carthage Cyprian, did set himself against them also, and in his 3.
book of Epistles in his first Epistle to Cornelius Bishop of Rome whom he
calls his brother, he says among other things, how it is decreed by all
men, yea and also that it is right and reason, that each man's case should be
there heard where the fault is committed. Also he says, that unto every pastor
is allotted a portion of the slocke, for every of them to rule and govern, and
he shall render an account of his doing unto the Lord. Among these things
mark that as yet at that time the Bishop of Rome, was not taken for: the
universal shepherd, to whom all the other Churches should be subject. Nay
rather he says that every shepherd had his several Church committed to him
to govern, for which he should render account, to the Lord God, and not to the
Pope. And S. Cornelius himself did not either allow such as appealed out of
Affricke to Rome, or desire to rule over all other Churches and to be called
the souerein Lord of all kings and kingdoms. To be breef, these Bishops of
the Roman Church were all put to death for the sound doctrine and the
professing of Christ's name, by the Emperors of Rome. So far were they of
from taking upon them full and absolute power over any Princes, and least of
all over the princes of Rome. For which of so many ungodly, bloody, and
manquellyng princes being mo then xl. in number, did they depose from his
souereintie? or which of them I pray you did they excommunicate? Or which of
these bishops assoyled the people of their oath made to the Emperors? Or which
of all these, said, wrate, or thought himself to have received fullness of
power at the hands of Christ our Lord by Peter, and to be set over kings and
kingdoms? Therefore it is most certain, that these first ministers of the
Roman Church, were ignorant of the things which the Romish Bishops of this
last and forworne age have usurped to themselves, and which they have now a
long time in vain indeuered to stablish by the Epistles of those me^.

That the Decretall Epistles of the first Bishops of Rome are but counterfettes.
Verily I am not ignorant how there fly abroad many Epistles of these holy
Roman Bishops and Martyrs which they call decretals. But they overthrow
themselves with their own absurdities, and show themselves to be but
counterfettes, in as much as many things be so light, so triflyng, and so
utterly unlike that ancient simplicity, pureness, and majesty, that not
with out good cause they seem unto godly and learned men, to have been devised
long since by others. Neither do I greatly regard that the same are fathered
upon the gatheryng of Damasus and Isidorus: seeing that there want not some men
which put over certain of these kind of things even to the time of Gregory
the 7. But howsoever the case stand for the time. I pray yon what can be more
fond, then the fathering of these words upon Anacletus? This holy holy and
Apostolic Church of Rome obtained the supremacy and pre-eminence of power
over all Churches, not from the Apostles, but from the very Lord himself our
Savior. And again, There was a difference even between the blessed Apostles:
and albeit that all of them were Apostles: yet did the Lord grant and the
Apostles determined among them selves, that Peter should have pre-eminence
before all the rest of the Apostles, and be Cephas, that is to say a head, and
hold the souereintie of Apostleship. Thus says he. But who knows not (though
he be but meanly seen in histories,) that after full five hundred years, it
was obtained and ordained, not by Christ, or his Apostles but by loytering
lozels or rather by traitorous persons, that Rome should be called ye head of
all Churches, that is to wit, that it should obtain supremacy and prerogative
of power over all Churches? Or who would believe that Anacletus exercised
himself so little in readyng of the Gospel, that he knew not how Cephas
signifies, not a head but a stone or a Rock? according as it is interpreted
by John the Apostle in the first chapter? And which interpreter should a man
rather believe? John the Apostle, or the cou^terfet Anaclete? The lewd packing
then of the lewd lozelles is detected both in these and in many other things.
The same party makes very often mention of Archbyshops and metropolitanes,
neither omitteth he primates. But it is most manifest, that those titles were
utterly unknown to the primitive Church, and were afterward invented and
usurped in times following. And at their first coming up the manner of using
them was after a sort meetly tolerable, till their posterity did afterward use
them or rather misuse them more proudly. Besides this, the said counterfeit
Anaclete makes a Bishop greater than an Elder: whereas Jerome himself shows
by Scriptures, that Elders and Bishops are all one, and that in process of
time Bishops were preferred before Elders, not by the ordinance of God, but by
the ordinance of man. Moreover this Anacletus allows the Appeals that are
made to the sea of Rome, saying: that all questions and matters of weight ought
to be referred to the Apostolic sea, for so had the Apostles decreed. But this
self same thing is manifestly disallowed by the holy master of Christ Cyprian
writing to Cornelius the Pope. Many other things prateth he concerning the
privileges and judgments of the Church: which who soever sees not to
disagres with these first times of the primitive Church, he sees nothing, but
is blynder then a beetle.

Furthermore there is a decree fathered upon Pope Alexander, whereby he
commands that water should be hallowed with salt, to cleanse the people and to
put away the secret slightes of the devil. But who is so light headed to
believe that so great men in so great light of the Gospel published so filthy
decrees concerning such baggagely gewgawes so openly fighting against the
Gospel and doctrine of the Apostles? These things savor not that Apostolic
and ancient pureness and majesty which entierly attributes all salvation to
the only blood of the son of God and not to water and salt.

Pope Sixtus in the said decretall Epistles commands that no man else should
touch the holy vessels but he that is hallowed. Ye may perceive that this
stuff agrees trimly with the Apostolical doctrine delivered by Paul in the
2. to the Colossians, and finally with the histories which openly bear record
that even the laymen received and handled the bread and cup of the Lord with
their [bare] hands, certain hundred years after this Sixtus. Besides this, in
the same Epistles, there is open and manifest mention made of Clementes
journey, which book nevertheless eue^ the very Decrees of Gratian do reject
among the authentical writings.

Yea and Thelesphorus commends the seven weeks fast before Easter,
forbidding also the eating of flesh. Which thing again how well it agrees
with the doctrine of the Apostles, and with the doings, it is to be known by
the things which S. Paul has written in the 2. chapter to the Colossians, and
in the 4. chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy, and which Socrates has
left written in his Ecclesiastical history in the 5. book and xxii. chap.
but most of all which are taken out of Irenaeus by Eusebius in the 5. book and
xxvi. chapter of his Ecclesiastical history.

Moreover in those Epistles Calixtus is reported to have ordained the imber
fast at four seasons of the year. Which thing others refer to other authors
or founders. And among this stuff this is a thing that can not be read without
laughter, that Eusebius the predecessor of Melciades does with so great
stateliness command the feast of the finding of the holy cross to be
solemnized the vi. day of May. For some declare that the cross was not yet
found at this time, but a xx. years after by Helene the mother of the Emperor
Constantine. Again how superstitious, peeuishe, and fond geere are commanded
in the same Epistles, namely that Nonnes should not touch the holy vessels. As
who should say there had been any Nuns as yet in those days, the first
coming up of whom is referred to far later times. Many other things of this
sort do I pass over willingly, least I might make my readers to cast up their
stomakes. For in these Epistles there be very many things so foolish, so far
against reason, so full of superstition, and so full of ambition: that all men
which have eyes may gather thereby that they be counterfettes, and specially for
as much as there is very seldom or no mention at all made in all the book
through out, of uncorrupted faith in Christ, yea or of Christ himself our
redemer, and of the treasures which the father has given us in him, which
things are the natural marks of Apostolical writings. Now although there
be many things in them not unprofitable to be read: yet are the same things
to be found in other men set forth more purely, and without any paringes
cankerfretted with the filthiness of man's traditions. Furthermore it is very
well known that those first most pure times of the Church were not acquaynted
with so many ceremonies, so many decrees, and so many constitutions, as are
found urged upon Gods Church in those Epistles. For the holy and devout folk
of old time had not yet forgotten the Apostolic Counsel that was held at
Jerusalem, wherein not only Peter plainly would not there should be any yoke
laid upon the free necks of the faithful, but also moreover it seemed good
to the holy Ghost and to the whole primitive Church of the Apostles, that there
should not any burden be laid hereafter upon the faithful. This story is
known to be written in the xv. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles.

But if our adversaries will needs proceed to maintain that these are the very
Epistles of those men upon whom they be fathered: we have answered a little
before, how they be of no authority against the doctrine of the Gospel and the
Apostles, and therefore we admit them not in disputation. Notwithstanding by the
way we have better opinion tha^ so, of so great learned men, and of so holy
Martyrs of Christ, neither will we in any wise stayne and deface their
honorable names and blessed memorial with such manner of gewgawes, whereof out
of all doubt there never came any in their minds, no not even in their dreams.

Also that the latter Bishops of Rome until Gregory the first, vaunted not of
any fullness of power, nor of their supremacy over being advanced above
kings and kingdoms.
Nevertheless we must needs grant, that from the time of Constantine the
great, who did set the Churches in peace, not only the Bishops of Rome, but
also the Bishops of other Churches through the world began to step aside from
the plain footesteppes of their predecessors, and claue not so carefully to
the simple doctrine of the Apostles, and therefore admitted mo ceremonies into
the Church, then beseemed, and furthermore intermeddled them selves in worldly
affairs and applied them selves to much unto them, yea and inverted new names
and offices of dignity, and brought such other things of the same sort into
the Church, which made way for worser things. This saw that famous Poet
Baptista Ma^tuanus, who intreatyng of the times of Constantine the great among
other things wrate thus.

Most noysom poison sprang of honny sweet.
A right fair word is Rest, a pleasant name is peace.
But yet from peace shall flow more loss,
Dishonor, shame, reproach and misery,
Then could from cruel war. For out of kind
the ancient virtue shall degenerate etc.
But howsoever the Bishops as well of Rome as of other Churches began to grow
worse and worse, yet were they still ignorant of that Romish Monarchy or
rather tyranny which is defended at this day. For that I may allege nothing
hither out of the auncie^ter writers of Gods Church: does not S. Hierome in his
Epistle to Euagrius, and in his Commentaries upon S. Paul's Epistle to Titus,
most manisfestly make the Bishop of Rome and the very Church of Rome it self,
equal with all other Bishops and Chuches in the world? Does he not openly say,
that the Churches in old time were governed by the common advise of the elders?
Does he not most piththely show out of the Scriptures, that elders and bishops
be all one thing? and that the one is not the name of age and the other of
office? Does he not plainly say that Bishops were preferred before elders, and
elders made subject to Bishops, by custom of the Church and not by appointment
of God? Wherefore it were truly a wonder, why Epiphanius against the Arrians
should reckon up this thing for an heresy, which Jerome urges with so many
and so piththy words: but that others give me warnyng that Epiphanius was to
gentle in charging other folks with heresy. Truly in this case (to speak
with reverence of so great a learned man) he wrongfully misreported the
giltlesse, contrary without authority of the holy Scripture. But if any man
list to hear Ieromes own words, behold I will briefly rehearse the things
that make to this purpose. We must not (says he to Euagrius) esteem the Church
of Rome to be one, and the Church of the whole world to be another. Both
France, and Britain, and Affrike, and Persia, and the Eastcountreys, and
Inde, and all the barbarous nations, worship one Christ, and observe one rule
of truth. If authority be sought, the world is greater than a City. Where
soever is a Bishop, whether he be of Rome, or of Eugubie, or of Alexandrie, or
of Tanais, he is all one in merit, all one in Priesthode. The stateliness of
riches or the baseness of poverty makes not a Bishop either higher or lower?
but all of them are successors of the Apostles.

And upon the Epistle of S. Paul unto Titus: An Elder (says he) and a Bishop
are both one. And before such time as by the instinct of the devil there were
sects in religion, and it was said among folk, I hold of Paul, I of Apollo,
and I of Cephas: the Churches were governed by the common advise of the Elders.
But after the time that every man imagined those whom he had baptized to be his
own and not Christ's: it was decreed through the whole world* that one (he
speaks not of the bishop of Rome only, but of all other Metropolitanes
through the whole world) should be chosen from among the Elders, and set over
the rest, unto whom the charge of the whole Church should belong, and so the
seeds of schisms and variances be taken away. Again when the same Jerome had
proved and showed by many textes of Scripture, that Elders and Bishops are all
one thing he adds byanby: I have therefore mentioned these things, that I
might show how Elders and Bishops were all one thing, and that for the plucking
up of the plants of dissension, the charge of all things was by little put
unto one. Therefore like as Priests know that by the custom of the Church they
be subject to him that is set over them: so also let the Bishops understand
that they be greater than the Priests rather by custom than by truth of
Christ's ordinance, and that they ought to govern the Church in common. And
so forth.

And although I think not that any man will look for plainer and fuller
matter in this present case than this which I have rehearsed already out of
Jerome: yet will I add somewhat more out of Gregory, who was himself a
Bishop of Rome, placed in that sea the year of our Lord. 591. in which he dyed
the year of our Lord 64. He alone will be a sufficient able witness, that in
his time the said tyrannical and Popish Monarchy was not yet either placed in
that sea, nor granted to it. Before this Gregory was chosen to the Byshoprik
of Rome, he was Praetor or Mayor of the City of Rome, as he himself witnesses
in his book of Epistles the second Epistle. Being chosen Bishop and confirmed
in his Bishoprike or sea by the Emperor Morice who kept his residence at
Constantinople: he calls him Emperor and acknowledges him to be his
souerein Lord ordained by God, and himself to be his subject and servant. Yea
and he faithfully obeyed his Exarkes and Captains that were placed through
Italy, calling them his Lords. He obeyed their laws, yea and their
Ecclesiastical laws to. All which things are to be read in his Epistles,
Lib. 2. Epist. 61. Again, Lib. 4. Epist. 31. and Lib. 1. Epist. 43. Also, Lib.
7. Epist. 11. Besides this Paulus Diaconus in his 4. book and 9. chap. of the
doyngs of the Lombardes, witnesses that Gregory submitted himself to be
judged by ye Emperor Maurice, for ye murder of Malchus a bishop, whereof he
was appeached. And Gregory him self makes mention of the same matter in the
seventh book of his Epistles.

But these things will seem light and small, if they be compared with those
which he himself has left in writing. For when as one John Bishop of
Constantinople would needs be called oeconomicall Bishop and be acknowledged
for universal Bishop to have supremacy, jurisdiction, and dominion over all
Churches and Bishops of Churches in the whole world: Gregory withstode him
sharply and stoutly, like as Bishop Pelagius had done before him. He wrate many
and sundry Epistles concerning that matter to Maurice the Emperor, to
Constance the Empress, to John himself the Bishop of Constantinople, and to
the Bishops of Antioche and Alexandria. Among other things he denies that any
man ought to be an universal Bishop saving Christ, and that any Bishops
usurped that title before him. For he says, that the title is, strange,
foolish, proud, peevish, wicked, and heathenish, whereunto to consent, were
even as much as to renounce the faith. Again speaking of John of
Constantinople, Out of the same dust (says he) in which he sat, and out of
the same lowlynesse which he pretended, he has taken presumptuousnesse, so as
he assayeth to ascribe all things to himself, and by haultinesse of stately
speech indeuereth to subdue all Christ's members to himself, which cleave
alonely to their own head, that is to say, to the same Christ. Anon after
comparing with Lucifer, he writes: Lucifer said, I will clymb into heaven, I
will exalt my throne above the stars of the sky. For what else are all thy
brethren the Bishops of the universal Church, but stars of heaven? whose
life together with their tongue shines among men's sins and errors, as it
were in the dareknesse of the night. Before whom when thou couetest to prefer
thy self by title of pre-eminence, and to tread their name under foot in
comparison of thine own, what else say thou, but I will clymb up into heaven
etc. Finally writing to the same John Bishop of Constantinople, all things
(says he) that were forespoken, do come to pass. The king of pride is near
at hand, and (which is a shame to be spoken) there is an army of Priests in
preparing for him. For they which were set to be lodesmen of lowlynesse serve
as soldiers under the neck of loftiness. And the same man again in his 6.
book of Epistles and the xxx. Epist. But I say boldly, that who soever terms
himself or desires to be termed the universal Bishop, is in his pride the
forerunner of Antichrist, because he prefers himself by his proudnesse
before the residue, and by like pride is led into error. And certes Gregory
has spoken these things most truly. For the said John Bishop of
Constantinople was the very forerunner of Antichrist, as who by his wicked and
importunate demand of highest pre-eminence, gave occasion to the Bishops of
Rome to aspire to the top of supremacy. Among them after the death of
Gregory, Boniface the third obtained of the Emperor Phocas that he should
proclaim the Church of Rome to the head of all other Churches, as Bede says:
to be the first Church, as Paulus Diaconus says: or to be the mother Church,
as Vrspergensis and Crantzius say. Whereupon the Bishops of Rome as being
Bishops of the souerein S^a, immediately proclaimed themselves both souerein and
universal Shepheardes of all Churches, to whom all ought of dewtie to obey.
For the Emperor Phocas (says Nauclerus in his history) by the Bishop of
Romes persuasion sent abroad proclamations openly and to the whole world,
ordeinyng that all the Churches of the world should obey the Church and Bishop
of Rome. The same History writer adds further that in times forepast, the
same proclamation was not observed in all points, and specially not of the
Greeks etc. The said Phocas that made this law was a monster of mankind, a
most unthrifty Prince, a most cruel murderer, a thrall of lechery, and all
wickedness as histories bear witness, and of all kings the wretcheddest.
Therefore least the pot might not have a co^^^^fit for it, or least like lips
might not always find like lettice, he made a constitution even meet for him
self.

That the latter Bishops of Rome degenerated utterly from the first and
middlemost Bishops of Rome, and that they usurp the cursed title of full
power, against all right and reason.
NOt unfitly are diverse godly and learned men of the Church reported to have
said, that among the latter Bishops of Rome that are worthy to be reckoned
among Shepherdes, Gregory is the last. For as for the hindermost sort that have
followed after him, they were not sheepefeeders but sheepebyters, a few
excepted, for through their neglecting of Gods word, and their earthly
affections, they have not only in wonderful wise darkened the clearness of
the christian doctrine with men's inventions and traditions, but also defiled
and marred the simplicity and pureness of Gods service, with unclean
superstitions, differing little or nothing from the heathenish and wicked
Idolatries. Many of them have openly defended corrupt doctrines, and the
Idolles themselves, and other abhominacions, and therewithal have forced them
upon the people. Othersome of them treading all discipline and honesty under
foot, have wallowed themselves in filthy and unlawful lusts, in riot and
lechery, in unchasteness, in aduowtrie and whoredom, in incest and other
horrible offenses, as it were in the mire of Cocytus, and the poole of Stix.
Others of them have not refrayned themselves from poysonynges, from
Necromancie, or fellowship with Deuilles, from magik, damned in all ages, from
murtheryng, and from treasons. All of them for the most part, and specially the
latter Bishops of Rome, being blinded with devilish desire of soueraintie, and
swollen and puffed up with such pride as the like was never heard of, have not
been ashamed before God, nor before his angels and the whole world, to
advance themselves into that seat by simonie, and to entangle themselves in
secular kingdom, and therwithall to withdraw themselves from the subjection of
kings and princes ordained by God, to vsurp other men's rightes, to bear both
the persons of spirituality and temporaltie, and to challenge to themselves the
iurisdictson of both the swords, to suffer no man to be equal with them, and
much less to be above them: also to deny duty and honor unto their betters,
and to such as are ordained of God, or rather to take it from them to
themselves: to reign over the Princes themselves, and to appoint them laws,
and finally to trample them under their feet, contrary to Gods commandment
and the example of the Apostles.

But least in this behalf I may seem to yield to affection or to speak these
things upon malice, or to feign never so little: go to, let us stand to the
trial, let inquisitio^ be made upon the lives of the Bishops, and read the
lives of John the twefth, of Siluister the second and Siluester the third, of
Bennet the ninth, of Gregory the sixth, and Gregory the seventh, of Urban the
second, of Paschall the second, of Calixt the second, of Honorius the second,
and Honorius the third, of Innocent the second, Innocent the third, and of
Innocent the fourth, of Adrian the fourth, of Alexander the third, of Gregory
the nynth, of Clement the fourth, and here I am feign to stop, least I might
make a beadroll over long and wearisome to the reader, for I could name yet mo
of the bishops that ensued, few better then these, but too many worser. But in
this behalf it is best to hear the judgment of some Bishop, yet will I not
allege the testimony of Cardinal Benno and certain others, but of Eberhart
Earl of Abensperg, who being bishop of Salisburg, did in the counsel that was
held at Regenspurg the year of our Lord 1240. make a meetly long oration
against the tyranny of the Roman bishops, which oration John Auentine has
copied out whole into his history of yearly affairs in the seventh book, the
683. leaf. Among other thing, Christ our Savior, Lord and God, leaving (says
he) his heavenly throne, became mortal and poor, that he might make us
immorand rich. And when he had conquered hell and was returning triumphantly
into heaven, he gave us his peace, he left us his peace, and he assigned
concord and mutual love to be as it were the badge and cognizance whereby his
citizens might be discerned from the soldiers of the infernal Jove. And he
gave us earnest warning to beware of false Christ's and false Prophets, namely
men that should seek to reign over us, and to mock us under the Christian
name and byshoply title. If we be not blind, we see a most cruel woolfe in a
sheep skin, under the title of the chief bishop. The Romish flamines have
war against all Christians, being grown great by aduenturing, by deceiving,
and by sowing war upon war, they kill the sheep, they slay, they drive
peace and concord out of the world, they bring up civil wars, and household
debates from hell, and they weake^ all men's stre^gthes daily more and more,
that they themselves may leap over all men's heads, devour all men, and bring
all men in bondage. They provide not for their flock like byshoply
shepheardes, but rather make havoc of them with outrageous licenciousnes like
tyrants. Justice waxes skant: ungodliness, covetousness, desire of honor,
love of money, and lechery wax rise. Christ forbids us to hate our enemies,
and commands us to love them. Contrariwise the Romish sort under great
pretense of holiness, command men to break steadfast couenauntes, to abuse
Gods holy name to deceive men withal, to be unkind to such as have deserved
well, to recompense good deeds with evil deeds, to make war, to quarrel,
to beguile, and to betray. Hildebrand (the same is Gregory the seventh) a
hundred threscore and ten years ago laid first the fou^dacion of
Antichrists kingdom, under pretense of Religion. He was ye first that began
this horrible war, which is continued unto this day by his successors. First
they thrust out the Emperor from the election of the bishops, and co^ueied it
to the people and the clergy. After they had given them a mock also and hist
them out of doors, now they labor to bring us also under coram and bondage,
that they may reign alone. Moreover being nouzeled in custom of bearing rule,
and having thoroughly wayed the power of themselves and of their adversaries,
they will use the beutifull color of stablishing ye liberty of the Church, as
an occasion to pluck the soueraintie to themselves and to oppress Christian
liberty. Believe me (I speak of experience) they will not cease till they have
gotten all into their own hands. The Pope imagines new devises in his breast,
to the intent he may stablish his own Empire, he alters laws, he
stablisheth his own, he defiles, he filtheth, he spoyleth, he defraudeth, he
kills. That lost man whom men are wont to call Antichrist, in whose forehead
is written a name of blasphemy, that is to wit, I am God, and I cannot err,
even that lost soul I say sits in Gods temple and reigns far and wide.
These and many other things like these, did that holy bishop discourse with
great boldness and constancy. Neither was this Prelate altogether a vain
Prophet, considering that within threescore years after, Boniface the eight of
that name, a most filthy and ungracious wight is reported to have been puffed
up into so devilish and brasenfaste pride, that openly in the Jubilee (which he
himself first invented and ordained contrary to the Christian faith) he durst
vaunt himself as highest bishop and chief Emperor, before a great assembly
and prease of people of all nations under heaven. For the first day he came
forth in his byshoplike apparel, and gave the foolish people his Apostolic
blissing as they term it. And the next day wearing an imperial crown, and
being clothed in robes of estate, he commanded a naked sword to be borne
before him, and sittyng down in a throne, cried out, Behold here be the two
swords. And being not satisfied with this Luciferlike gaze, he durst yet
further at the same time most spitefully reject the Ambassadors of the Princes
Electors which gave him to understand that they had chosen Albert Prince of
Habspurge and Austrich, the son of king Rodolphus, to be king of Romans: yea
and also to make a law in all respects tyrannical, and Antichristian, which
is extant in the extrauagantes, in the book of maioritie and obedience,
beginning with vnam Sanctam. etc. In that law, after he has attributed all
power both spiritual, and temporal to the Pope: in the end he concludes the
same and says: moreover we declare, avouch, determine, and give sentence that
it is utterly of necessity of salvation, that all men be subject to the bishop
of Rome. Whereas there is commonly blazed abroad of the same bishop this
commendation of his, that he entered as a Fox, reigned as a woolfe, (others have
as a Lion) and dyed as a dog: And whereas Phillip the fair king of France
appeached him of heresy, murder, simonie, and all manner of most heinous
crimes: yet are not the Papists ashamed to allege still the said stinking
law of this rank varlet for the maintenance of their monarchy.

Hereunto pertains it, that the Bull of John the xxij. published against
Jews the 4. Emperor of that name, (which Bull Auentine rehearses whole in
his vii. book of Chronicles) says among other things: When the chief Empire
happens to be without a head, the souerein power of it is in the hands of
the highest Bishop, whole benefit the same is, etc. This durst he write the
year of our Lord. 323. So greatly were their corages increased since Boniface
dyed in prison, which was within xxiij. years space. But the Emperor Jews
answers the Bull at large by a proclamation, which is to be read copyed
whole by the same Auentine into his book of histories. In the same
proclamation, among other things, The Bishop (says he meaning John the xxij)
thristeth, after Christian blood, and sows every where the mischief of
discord and seditions among Christians. Neither can the Christians keep the
peace given them of God, by reason of this Antichrist. So great is the madness
of that man, or rather of that feend, that he preaches his own wicked doings
as if they were good deeds, in open audience. When Christian Princes (says
he) are at variance one with an other, then is the Romish Priest the highest
Bishop in deed, then reigns he, then is he in his ruff. And so the debate
and discord of the Germans is meat and drink to the Bishops of Rome.
Therefore it stands the high prelate in hand to weaken the Empire of the
Almaines. And a little after the Emperor says. Look who soever keep their
allegiance to the Emperor, and to Christ our Savior which commands them to
obey: Them for so doing and for none other cause, does he brond with the mark
of heresy. What soever he lists, he deemeth it lawful. How shall I therefore
deal with him? He minds not to execute or to know any right, any equity,
any good. He sees nothing, he does nothing, but what he lists himself. He
takes to him the spirit of Satan, and makes himself like the highest. He
suffers himself to be worshipped (which thing a certain angel forbade
John to do unto him) and his feet to be kissed, after the manner of the most
cruel tyrants Diocletian and Alexander, whereas Christ our Lord and king
washed the feet of his Disciples being but fishermen, to the intent that his
messengers should do the same again to those that they were sent to: and so
forth. I have rehearsed these things, to the end that the manifest record and
judgment not only of a famous Bishop, but also of a most glorious king or
Emperor, concerning this latter unhappy and ungracious Bishops, might remain
in record.

In the same time of Jews the iiij. about the year of our Lord.1330. that is
to say, two hundred and forty years ago, flourished the renowned and sage
Lawyer Marsilius of Padua, who wrate a singular book for the Emperor Jews
the 4. against the Bishops of Rome, and entitled it the defense of peace. In
the same book Dict. 2. Chap. 4. he shows by many and those most evident
reasons that neither the Bishop of Rome, no nor any other Bishop, or Priest
has any souereintie over any man, either clerks or layman: and that by the
example of Christ, if any such be offered them they ought to refuse it: and
that all Bishops and Churchmen ought to be subject to the souerein that rules
them. Again the same man in Dict. 2. Cap. 25 says thus: They have taken to
them the title which they make their boast of, namely The fullness of power:
which they say that Christ gave peculiarly unto them in the person of S. Peter,
as to the successors of the same Apostle: and they indeuer to make it the
instrument of this naughtiness. By which cursed title, and by sophistical
speech, they labor to bring all Princes, people, and persons politic and
several, in bondage to them. And again, Although the Evangelist said true in
auouchyng Christ to be king of kings, and Lord of Lords: yet notwithstanding
he that has avouched any power of souereintie at all and much less any full
power, to be granted to the Bishop of Rome, or to any other Bishop, in the
person of S. Peter, or of any other Apostle, has spoken and written a false
and an open lie against the manifest opinion of Christ, and of his Apostles
Peter, Paul, and James. But such power is, was, and shall be forbidden by Christ
unto the Bishop of Rome and all others in the person of any of the Apostles,
according as we have undoubtedly certified you by the Scripture and the
authorities of holy men in the 4.5. and 9. Did. hereof. This far Marsilius.

This discourse is concluded, and here is showed that the sentence of Pope Pius
the fifth published against the most virtuous Queen of England, and all her
whole noble Realm, is utterly fond and of none effect.
BUt to what purpose serves so deep repetyng of these things will some man
say? Surely all these things serve to this purpose, that it may appear
manifestly by them, yea and be perceived eue^ of the most simplest sort of all,
that this fullness of power and souereintie over all kings and kingdoms, which
the said Pope Pius the fifth braggeth of in his Bull, to be given unto himself
and to all Bishops of Rome, is nothing else but Bullyng or Bublyng, that is to
say nothing else but a most vain forgerie, or rather a deuilish and cursed lie
devised, found out, and forced upon the people of God, by the Popes themselves
and by flattering clawbackes of their own stamp. For Christ never gave any
such thing either to Peter or to the other Apostles. Neither did Peter leave
any whit thereof to his successors: so as I may well say, that the Popes are
nothing less than the successors of Simon Peter, but rather the successors of
Simon Magnus. Moreover the Lord in his Gospel not once nor darckely, but most
openly commands bishops to obey kings, and not to reign over them. And
therefore the Apostles and the first bishops of the Roman Church, were
ministers of the Church, yea and martyrs, but not Princes of nations: and they
yielded due obedience unto Princes. What manner of men the latter bishops of Rome
be and have been, who stepping aside from the footsteppes of the fathers, have
both unjustly usurped and cruelly executed, the said fullness of power, whereof
they now make their boast, they are known to all men, not by their virtues but
by their unspeakeble outrages. What else remains then, but that the sentence
of Pope Pius the fifth (who as he says himself is mounted up into the throne
of Justice to give judgment) which he by the fullness of his power has given
and pronounced definitiuely by publishing it against the most virtuous Queen
of England and the noble Realm of England, is utterly nothing and of none
effect, because it is but a vain, a fained, and counterfeit power, by force
whereof this disguised Judge has given sentence, not as a Judge, but as a
tyrant, and Antichrst.

Therefore O England (happy even in the same resspect) when thou see the
Romish thunderbolts which the Bull spreddeth into the whole world, to be
thrown and darted against thee: thou must think it is but a new Italian Cacus
that puffs out again his vain flashes of fire, from those his shadie dens
of meant Auentine blinded with much mist, and dazeleth the sight of blearied
folk with black fogginesse and darcknes mixed with fire. They that have
received their eysight by the grace of God, know well enough what that fond
Salmonean lightener is, namely even the man of sin, and the child of
damnation, as the Apostle says, which is lifted up against all that is called
God or the power of God, in so much as he sits in the temple of God,
boasting himself to be God. Therefore the godly and those that be enlightened
believe that God blesses their curssages and curses their blessings* and
therefore that his excommunications are nothing to be feared.

Surely from the time that these men executed that unmeasurable power of theirs
in the Church, they have been so far from holding Gods people together in the
unity of the spirit, or from bringing them to their Savior, that they rather
dispersed them and pulled them away from them their Savior. Which thing the
matter it self bewrays.

Here are perused the articles as well of the accusation as also of the
slanders alleged by the Bishop of Rome in his Bull against the most virtuous
Queen of England.
NOw let us also come down to the chief points of the accusation which Pius
the fifth the bishop of Rome bends against the most virtuous Queen of
England. For by confuting them, and by mainteining the godliness and innocence
of that virtuous Queen and her noble Realm, it will appear again to the
whole world, that the Popes curse is but a very flimflaw and a filme of a
nutshell as they say in the proverb. Least he might not resemble the reuiling
and blasphemous mouth of Antichrist, he begins these things with railing
and slaundring, for he terms the noble Prince king Henry the eight, father of
this good Queen, an Apostata, as who turned away the Church of England from
the Church of Rome, and he terms his daughter Elizabeth by the grace of God
now Queen of England, a thrall of wickedness, as who (by his saying) has
plucked back and called again into miserable destruction, the Realm of
England which had been brought to the catholic faith by Queen Marie lately
deceased: and also is become the refuge of heretics. If the beast should not
speak so, he could not be believed to be the same that he is. For so does he
trimly fulfill the things that are written of Antichrist. For Saint Peter
speaking of Antichrist, and of Antichrists household, says that God knows
how to reserve the wicked to be punished at the day of judgment, and specially
such as following the flesh (that is to say, such as being led by lust of the
flesh, and not by inspiration of the spirit) walk in unclean concupiscence
and despise Lordship (that is to say, the order of dominion and soueraintie)
and such as malapertly standing in their own conceit (that is to wit, such as
being stubburne and ouerwilfull in their own opinions) are not afraid to rail
and revile the higher powers: whereas ye very angels (which are greater in power
and strength than they) give not railing sentence against them before the Lord:
and so forth as follows in the second chapter of Saint Peter's second Epistle.
Herewithall agree the things which the blessed Apostle Judas Thaddaeus has
left written concerning the same matter, saying: these defyle the flesh,
despise rulers, and rail upon them that be in authority. But in the law of
God, commandment is given that thou shall not rail upon the Gods, Exodus 23.
nor blaspheme the Prince of thy people. A man may see that the Bishops of Rome
make great account of these things, when they rail upon Princes openly. But
what (I pray you) have kings committed whereby they should deserve to be
overwhelmed with so many and so great reproaches and with so foul raylinges?

In deed, that wise Prince king Henry the viii. turned the Church that is in
England away from many Romish superstitions that were very foul. And what
offended he therein? Nay rather, he deserved praise, and his falling away is
counted among wise men, a virtue, and not a vice. Moreover the renown of this
Prince is so famous among all good and godly men, as it can not be defaced by
the raylinges of these rascals of the Romish sink. He was of singular learning,
of notable wisdom and experience, of excellent courage, and adorned with all
heroical virtues and feats meet for a Prince. And it is not I alone that
think thus of this King: there be other grave personages which have commended
the same things in him. This Prince departing blessedly out of this life in
the xxxviii. year of his reign about the end of January in the year of our
Lord.1547. and having erst by his will intayled the succession of his Crown
first unto his son Edward a young child of ix. years of age, and
successively after him, unto his daughters Marie and Elizabeth: was succeeded by
the said Edward, the vi. of that name, whose ample commendations that notable
Historiographer Sleidan has comprised in few words in the xxv. book of his
Comentaries, saying: Edward the vi. the king of England, doutlesse a Prince of
singular towardness, departed out of this life the vi. day of July in the
year of our Lord. 1553. being about the age of xvi. years, truly to the grief
of all godly men. For after his decease there followed a very great alteration
of things in England. Surely Europe has not had any king of so great hope now
these certain hundred years. Being very well trained up in godliness and
instructed in learning even from his tender years, he was seen not only in
the Latin tongue, but also in ye Greek and the French tounges, and he had an
earnest love to the doctrine of the Gospel, and gave interteinement and
defense to all learned men, Germans, Italia^s, Frenchmen, Scotts,
Spanyardes, and Polonians. Thus much says he furthermore John Bale Bishop of
Ossoria in Ireland, reports that this King did also exercise himself in
writing, and among other things wrate a Comedy of the whore of Babylon.

Queen Mary.
Concerning the governance of Queen Mary, and her bringyng of the Church back
again to the Sea of Rome: I will say nothing at this present, because the
declaration thereof would be very sorrowful and lamentable, and (to say truth)
it sticks yet still more fresher is all men's minds, thou that it needs to
be ripped up again. This only will I say further, that the Bishops of Rome
were even then also heavy friends to the Realm of England as they had been often
before: according as they had always wrought mischief unto other kingdoms also
in Christendom for these five hundred years and more. But God will judge them
when he sees time.

Queen Elizabeth.
After Queen Marie, succeeded Queen Elizabeth in the kingdom, not a thrall of
wickedness as the Popes railing mouth does slanderously revile her, but the
servant, yea and the faithful servant of Jesus Christ our redemer and Lord,
as by him set at liberty from the thraldom of sin, and made his freewoma^,
so as she is now the daughter of God, and an enemy of all wickedness, yea
eue^ of the Popes for their wickedness sake. For she cleaves entierly to her
only Redemer Christ: to him only does she with singular faithfulness and
diligence indeuer to knit the people of her Realm and the subjects that be
under her charge: Her own self lives a life beseemyng a Christian princess,
commendyng holy and honest conversation to all folks through her Realm, and
(as much as in her lies) forbidding and restreining all wickedness. Which
thing truly, is not to draw back her subjects to destruction, but to pluck
them from destruction, and to restore them to assured salvation. They that know
this Queen, know also that I feyne nothing here to curry favor. And I touch
these things the more sparely, least I may seem to purpose in any wise to
flatter. Neither has her majesty any need of my defense considering that her
own godliness and innocence defend her.

Surely her Majesty (like as also her brother of most blessed memory King
Edward the vi. did) opened a Sanctuary to outlawes, The giuyng of
interteinement and refuge to banished foli^s*
I mean me^ that fled their countries, and banished men, that is to wit which
were driven out of the Popish commonweals, not for committyng wicked crimes,
but for castyng away of Idolatry, and for professing the healthful Gospel of
Jesus Christ. I grant that these folk are enemies or angry in their hearts,
howbeit not against Christ and his most holy Gospel, but against ye Pope and
his most lewd practices, and cursed superstitions. I grant that the pope
terms these me^ heretics, howbeit wrongfully, for in very deed they be
right Catholics, abhorryng all heresy and fightyng against it. He that
receives these receives Christ, according as Christ himself witnesses, who
also promises most ample reward to such as give enterteineme^t to his
outcastes. Therefore let that gracious Queen rejoice, let her rejoice I say, in
openyng refuge to the miserable outcastes that are driven out of their country
for the true Religion: The barbarousenesse and cruelty of the Romish Bishops.
for she shall assuredly receive those most ample rewards at the Lords hand.
And let not her Majesty pass at all for that abominable barbarousnesse and
cruelty of Rome, which both persecuteth the innocents most outrageously it
self, and also cruelly commands others to persecute, oppress, and murder
them. That these men should so do, S. Peter has foretold in his Epistle, where
he matcheth them with wyld beasts. Let that virtuous Queen then shun these
cruel and beastly examples, Esaias. 16.
and let her rather hearken to Esaias the holy Prophet of God, speaking in the
name of his God and saying: Set thy shadow as a night, in the midday hyde the
chased, and bewray not them that be fled. Let my banished people dwell with
thee. Moab, be thou their refuge against the destroyer. To impeach the right of
hospitality has always ben reputed as one of the heynousest crimes that
could be, even among the heathen. But to give harbrough to the afflicted, and
to the Church of Christ, it has always (and specially in Christ's Church)
been reckened among the cheifest virtues, and allowed of all good men.

That it is no monstruousnesse at all for the Queen of England to be called
supreme head of the Realm of England upon earth.
Anon after, among the heinous offenses never able to be purged with any
sacrifice, and which most of all moves the choler that boyleth inwardly in the
breast of the universal bishop, and souerein Lord (as he him self will seem to
be) as well in cases spiritual as temporal, because that power can abide no
partnershyp: the foresaid thing is bitterly recited in the Bull, even in these
words. Which will have her self acknowledged alone for souerein Lady in cases
spiritual and te^porall, by vsurpyng monstruously the place of supreme head.
And finally which has presumed to dispose parsons of churches and other
Catholic Priests, and to make constitutions in cases Ecclesiastical
deposing and oppressing the Catholic Bishops, and aduauncing or restoryng
wicked preachers and ministers of ungodliness to the rooms of those that be
deposed etc. The striuyng, of ye bishops of Rome for the supremacy.
This (ye may see) is the fair Helene, for the winnyng of whom, the Romish
Bishops have made war in Christendom now these certain hundred years
against all Christen Kings and Princes. This is the ground of all their grief,
verily this is ye only cause for which they have turmoyled the whole world,
and cease not to turmoyle it even at this day, that is to wit in so great light
of the Gospel, which now shyneth bright, and triumphs through the whole
world: a most assured proof of invincible shamelessness and wilfulness. For
the Lord without any parable and most manifestly in the Gospel says to the
pastors of Churches, The kings of the Gentiles reign over them: but so shall
not you. Nevertheless the Bishop who will seem to be the Prince of pastors,
despising or rather trampling that so manifest commandment of the Lord under
his feet, is not ashamed to take upon him all power as well in spiritual as
temporal matters. And what else is that, but to wype away all shamefastness,
and openly and wickedly to rebel against God, and to outface him, with saying
to him, but we will do so, and not simply, but also far further, yea and more
to. But I have showed evidently enough before, that all pastors of Churches are
called and ordained by Christ, not to bear rule, but to serve in all things.

Monstruously therefore does the servant of servants which is excluded from
all Lordship, What monstruousenesse is.
and appointed only to do service, usurp to him self the thing that is
peculiar only to souereines, whom God has set in authority. For if the thing
be said to be done monstruously, which is done either against nature or Gods
express ordinance: I pray you what can be devised more monstrous, than that
he whom the Lord of all things, of whom comes all power and dominion, has
cast down as the basest servant of all, and put far underneath the
footestooles of all Lords, should not only take upon him the chair of estate
which God has granted only to kings: but also moreover, devise himself a
throne which he will have seem to be exalted above the thrones of all kings:
and mountyng up into the same without remembrance of his own base estate,
deuilishly vaunt himself to the whole world, not now as a King or Emperor
only, but also as chief Bishop that obteineth both the swords and all power
both in heaven and in earth? Here is that dubbleshapped monster, here, here is
seen that deadly and detestable, that horrible also and wonderful monster,
which is blased in the holy Scriptures by the title of the great whore which
fitteth upon many waters, Apoc. 17.
and upon the scarlet colored beast full of names of blasphemy. But for a
king or a Queen to be called a head as well in spiritual as temporal matters
within their own Realm, it is no monstruousnesse at all, because the Lord
has so ordained it, and in Gods word Princes be called the heads of the
people, and so the thing can not be said to be done mo^struously against
nature, That Queen's although they be women, do reign lawfully
which is done according to Gods will and word. With Kings I join Queens
also, and not without cause, least the Pope perchance might surmyse, that
women are excluded from reignyng, or that it is a monstrous thing if a woman
should reign. For we know that the things which the Apostle speaks
concerning the obedience of wives and the silence of women in the congregation
of God, are not to be wrested unto reigning. For it is certain that the Lords
Apostles impeached not the successions in kingdoms, ne disordered not the
accustomed manner of inherityng in kingdoms. Also we know that mention is made
in the Bible, of the noble Queen of Saba to her great praise for her much
conference with Solomon. Neither will I now say any thing of Delbora that
Judged Israel, and of other Princely Ladies. Truly Esaias, not only said. And
Kings shall be thy fosterfathers, but also added, And Queens shall be their
nurces: they shall bow down themselves before thee etc. Esaias. 49.

How it is no monstruousnesse for the Queen of England and consequently for
all civil Magistrates to determine in cases Ecclesiastical, or to undertake
and bear the charge of Church matters, as to depose evil Bishops, and to set
up better in their rooms.
NOw then it is out of dout, that the said most virtuous Queen is supreme head
or souerein Lady in that her Realm, ordained of God himself, and set over the
puissant Realm of England: except it be false which the Lords Apostle and
chosen vessel Paul has said: Romans 13.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. For there is no power but of
God: and the powers that be, are ordained of God. Therefore who soever resists
power, resists Gods ordinance. And they that resist shall purchase damnation
to themselves. Seeing now, yt all men know these things to be most true, it
follows there withal, not only that the Queen of England is Queen by Gods
ordinance: but also that the bishop that resists her and sets himself
naughtely against her, provoke Gods grievous judgment against himself. But
forasmuch as the Pope thinks it a monstruousnesse, that a king, or a Queen,
or any civil Magistrate in a commonweal should determine of Ecclesiastical
cases, put down naughty Priests or Bishops and advance and set up better in
their steddes, and take upon him to bear the charge not only of temporal
affairs, but also of spiritual or Ecclesiastical matters: Lo, I will prove
and show by evident and invincible arguments, and examples of holy kings,
howbeit briefly, that the same things are parcel of their dewtie, and
therefore that the Magistrate does then by Gods law and according to the
commandment of the everlasting God: and that the Bishop of Rome snatcheth
them to him self and to his rabble tyrannically, and wickedly against God, and
plays the Antichrist in pluckyng them from those to whom God has given them.

That God in any wise would, That the care of Religion belongs to the civil
Magistrate.
and that he has ordained from the beginning, that Kings in their kingdoms
and Magistrates in their commonweals, ought to take upon them the care even
of Religion, and to look faithfully unto it, and to order it diligently
according to the rule of Gods word: this is the greatest proof, that God in
his law does straightly command a copy of the law to be delivered to the Prince
of his people, thereby to dispose all his affairs. And in the same law he
commands the Magistrate to make examination of doctrines, and to restrain
yea and to smite such as withdraw me^ from God, and such as teach stubbornly
against the law. These things are to be read in Deuteronomy. 13. and 17. and in other
places of the book of the law. Moses.
Besides this, Moses whom God had made the only lawful and chief Magistrate
of his people, ordained, not only judges, but also Priests, and by Gods word
appointed every of them his office, yea even unto Aaron the high Priest and
chosen of God. It would be to long to reckon up these things particularly.
Iosue.
Likewise also, Iosue that most devout Captain of Gods people, gives charge
to all estates, yea even unto the Priests to, what every of them shall do. For
he ruled not only civil or warlike affairs, but Church matters also, both by
himself and by others: Howbeit he restreined all things general and
particular, not at his own pleasure, but to Gods holy law. So did David order
the Priests and the Churchmatters also. David.
In conueying and settling the Ark of the Lord, (wherein is seen the ordering
of the whole Religion) he consulted with his Princes, and afterward made all
the people privy to it, and lastly also sent to the Priests and Levites,
appointyng them as well as others what they should do. Let the first book of
Chronicles be read, in which he also sorteth the Priests into degrees, and
appoints every man his office by Gods commandment: for the which thing he
deserved right great and perpetual commendation in the Church. In the 2. book
of the Chronicles and the viii. chapter we read, Solomon.
that Solomon according to the ordinance of David his father, appointed the
degrees of Priests in their ministrations, and the Levites in their degrees to
wash and to do service before the Priests etc. And byanby there follows, For
so had David the man of God commanded. Neither did they omit or go beyond any
part of the kings commandment, as well the Priests as the Levites. The same
Solomon deposed Abiathar the high Priest, and set up Zadoch in his sted. And
many other such things as these, did that wise king Solomon the beloved of God,
with Gods well likyng and his own glory. The same things did the rest of the
kings of Judah. The kings of Judah.
Dauides holy ofspryng, that followed after him. For Asa put the Priests out of
office that were defiled with idolatry, and set in others that were more godly.
Iosaphat.
Iosaphat calling the Priests together gives them their charge, and joining
certain of the noblemen with them, sends them through his Realm to preach
Gods law. And he not only disposes the Courbarres of judges, but also
orders the offices of Priests. King Ezechias (than who there was not a
better since David, Ezechias.
except Josias only) repaired the temple of the Lord (like as king Ioas also
had done before him, Ioas.
who likewise had the Priests at commandment) and sommoned a Counsel of the
Priests, where he made an excellent Oration to them and like a good divine. He
dealt with them as one having full power, and commanded them in these words,
Give ear, Cleanse ye, Carry away. etc. The Priests also rebelled not stubbornly
against their Prince after the manner of our prelates, saying unto him, thou
put thy siccle into an other man's corn, for it is no part of thy charge to
command the Priests. But they submitted themselves redely to their Prince,
and obeyed his holy hestes in all things. It is declared at large in the holy
Scriptures, that Josias did set order in the whole Religion according to the
rule of Gods law, Josias.
command the Priests, puttyng some of them out of their office, and placing
other in their rooms. I will rehearse no mo examples for making my readers
weery. But upon all these I conclude, that Kings and Princes among Gods people
had souereintie and authority by Gods ordinance, over the Priests, over the
highest Bishop, and over the whole Clergy, and disposed not only civil but
also Ecclesiastical matters according to Gods law, both rightfully and also
with singular comme^dation.

And yet in the mean while, the Princes meddled not with the sacrificing,
which God had committed to the Priests. God made difference of functions and
will not have them confounded.
For that was not lawful for them without punishment, as it appeared by king
Azarias, otherwise named Osias, who was stricken with leprosy for presumyng
wilfully to burn incense upon the brazen altar, contrary to Gods ordinance.
For it is one thing to sacrifice and to execute the offices that belong
peculiarly to the Priests: and an other thing to dispose the Priesthode and
discipline of the Church in convenient order, and to keep them when they be
ordered. For God has sorted these offices asunder, and will not have them
confounded. Kings of the new Testament have no less authority then had the
kings of the old Testament.
And what man (except it be some giddybraynd and froward Anabaptist,) will say
that Christen Princes have less authority and power in the Churches of
Christenfolke, than the Jewish kings had in the Synagoges? Can ye say, that
the authority of these is diminished by Christ our Lord, or by his Apostles?
Most certain it is, that it is not diminished by Christ. For the Prophets, and
among them specially David in the 2. Psalm, and Esaias in his 49. chapter and in
other places, have foretold that kings should come into the Church of Christ,
and that they should not only lead their lives there after the manner of other
Christen men, but also more over continue there still in gouernyng, defending,
and aduauncing Church affairs, as kings still executyng kyngly power. Which
point S. Austin handles excellently, garnishyng and enlightenyng it with many
sentences, against the Donatistes, which denied the Magistrate to have any
power at all to deal in matters of the Church. Furthermore it is certain, that
Christ's Apostles removed not the faithful Magistrate from the administration
of Ecclesiastical matters, thereby to make Christen kings of less power than
the kings of the Jews had. For they say expressly that Princes are Gods
ministers, yea and ordained to plant the thing that is good, and to pluck up
the thing that is evil. But who is so ouerlode^ with the flesh, that he will
restreine these things to the flesh only and to outward affairs: and not also
extend them to men's souls, and to spiritual matters? Considering how it is
agreed upon among all men of a right opinion, that a Magistrate ought to look
chiefly unto such things as belong to the maintenance of the public welfare
of the common weal, or of the happy state of their Realms. But it is out of
all dout, that the diligent care of faith and Religion make to the increase and
preservation of the happy state and welfare of kingdoms and commonweals:
and therefore no man (but he that is an enemy to the happy state of Gods people)
can deny that the regard of Religion also pertains to Princes or Magistrates.
And that so much the less, because we learn plainly by readyng the stories of
the kings of Judah and Israel, that those kingdoms were and are most happy,
wherein the Princes do faithfully administer matters of Religion: and that those
be most unhappy wherein the kings either neglect or pervert the matters of the
Church, and bring things into the Church, which Gods word has not allowed,
and fill all things with men's traditions.

Furthermore we have notable examples of those Emperors and Princes, Christian
Princes and defenders of the Church.
which (according to the Prophesies) came into Christ's Church and renownced
their heathenishnesse, and showed themselves faithful fosterfathers,
overseers, and defenders of the Church. Among the first in account is
Constantine who for his noble acts and manifold vertewes was surnamed the
great. Constantine the great.
This man closed up the temples of idols, and abolished all heathenish
sacrifisings. In Nice a city of Bithynia he called a Counsel, the greatest of
all Counsels and of most authority, And there he rebuked the Bishops sharply
and laid his commandment upon them, and set order in the matters of the
Church. Eusebius in the life of Constantine, is not afraid to term this Prince
a Bishop, because he did most diligently look to the matters of the Church. If
any man require the authors words, thus they be. Constantine (says he)
employed his care upon the Church of God. And because many were at odds among
themselves in diverse places: he being ordained a common Bishop by God, sommoned
a Diet of Gods Ministers. Neither disdained he to be at it himself, and to sit
among them, and to become a fellow of theirs, and to dispose to all of them the
things that made for the peace of God. Thus much says he. Behold, here is a
Council called, not by the Pope, but by the Emperor. Whereupon when one
Ruffinus objected a certain Council against Jerome, he answered, saying: show
thou me what Emperor commanded it to be assembled. Moreover the strife of the
Bishops had burst further out, if this Emperor had not bridled them, and
brought them to order. This Prince by his intermedlyng in matters of Religion
and of the Church, did within a while not only salve them but also greatly
further them. Which thing the Emperors, Valentine, Gratian, and Theodosius did
in likewise, as it appears in the beginning of Justinians Code. And the
Emperor Theodosius in Nouellis tit. 2 concerning Jews, Samaritanes, etc.
confesses to Florentius, that the searchyng out of Religion is the chief
charge and greatest care that belonges to the Majesty of an Emperor. Also the
Emperors Leo and Anthemius, in L. omnes.C. concerning Bishops and Clerks,
have set down by name, that Civil Magistrates were and ought to be judges of
the Bishops. And before the reign of these, Archadius and Honorius, in L.
Quicunque.C. concerning Bishops and Clerks, denounce a Bishop that breaks the
common peace to be unworthy the name of a Bishop, and depose him from his
Bishoprike, and finally will that he shall be banished. Justinian.


The Emperor Justinian about the year of our Lord 550, made many laws,
openly setting order in matters of the Church, and appointyng Bishops and
Clerks what they should do. And in Nouellis. Constit. 123. he commands the
Presidentes of Provinces, that if the Bishops forslow to keep conuocations,
then they should do it, and execute the laws, Charles the great.
and mainteyne the ordinances of the Church.

Furthermore Charles the great, king of France and Emperor, and his son
Lewis the mild, published many Ecclesiastical laws concerning the holy
doctrine, the ministration of the sacraments, and the Ministers them selves.
Abbot Ansegisus compyled their laws into four books. But it would be too
tedious to rehearse and of these laws, thereby to show and prove that which is
otherwise sufficiently proved already, namely that the charge of Religion and
of Church matters pertains also to Kings and Queens, and that it is no
monstruousenesse at all though the civil Magistrate determine of matters of
Religion, unless those so many, so mighty, and so holy Kings, Princes, and
Emperors, whose examples I have hitherto alleged, were all monsters. But no
such thing can sinck in godly men's minds, who doutlesse do rather believe, that
Pope of Rome the author of this railing Bull is a monster both most hideous and
most ugly, as has been said also heertofore.

Which things being undoubtedly so, The Queen of England has not done amiss
in taking upon her the care of religion and in deposing ye popish bishops.
the virtuous Queen of England has done nothing amiss, but rather she has
done her dewtie, and deserved eternal praise, for succoryng the persecuted and
forweeryed state of the English Church, and for taking upon her the case of
Religion, which she has virtuously disposed hitherto according as she began at
the first, deposing from their estate and office the bishops that were sworn
to the pope, which preached the pope and papistry: and not Christ our Lord,
and his pure Gospel: and preferring to their rooms, men sworn to Christ our
Lord, and to the Queens Majesty, which preach Christ's Gospel sincerelye
through the whole Realm, without any corruption of popery.

The slanderous Bull railing upon these Ministers of Christ lawfully ordained
by the Queen, terms them in way of disdain and reproach, lewd preachers and
ministers of wickedness. Math. 6.
But it is well for them: for Christ our Lord says: Blessed are ye when men
revile you, and speak all evil against you, 2. Tim. 1.
beelying you for my sake. Furthermore the Apostle was not ashamed to name him
self a publisher or preacher of the Gospel: neither are they lewd preachers
which, 1. Tim. 2.
according to Paul's saying, deuyde the word of truth rightly and honestly,
and endeavor to show themselves allowable woorkmen before God: neither are they
ministers of wickedness, that do their service unto Christ, and his Church,
with all faythfulnesse and singular diligence.

I will not say at this present, how cruel those bishops (whom ye Queens
Majesty has deposed from their estate, and cast in prison) were when they had
the law in their own hands, against the faithful professors of Christ, nor
how stubbornely they sticked to idolatry, and to the Roman Idol, unto whom
they had bound themselves by oath, defending most pestilent and manifesterrors,
and continewing malicious and unappeasable enemies of the truth of the Gospel:
in so much as the Queens Majesty neither could use their service, nor ought
to wink at their rebellion, traiterousnes, and lewd meaning, if she meant to
aduau^ce and maintain the peace of her realm, the welfare of her people, and
the proceeding of the Gospel. Therefore if these men pyned away for sorrow,
and dyed miserably in prison, that is nothing to the Queens Majesty: for they
may wite it upon their own unjust stubbernesse, joined with maliciousnes:
they may wite it upon their own most wilful rebelliousnesse, and in general
upon their own wickedness. And as for those that be punished, or put to death
for their own offenses, the righteous Lord God gives sentence upon them in
his own law, saying: Their blood be upon their own heads. Most excellent and
true also is the sentence of S. John Chrysostom: No man is hurt, but by
himself. Furthermore Paul in express words to the Romans says: Princes are
not a terror to them that do well, Romans 13.
but to them that do evil: but will thou not fear power? the^ do the thing
that is good, and thou shall receive praise of him: for he is Gods minister for
thy welfare: but if thou do the thing that is evil, then be affrayde: for he
bears not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, to take
vengeance on them that do evil. Why then did not these men well, whom the
Bull bewayleth? for so should they doubtless have received both praise and
reward at the Queens hand, being a gracious and bountiful prince. The Queen
has done nothing in this behalf, which God has not commanded to be done
before in his law: yea and also which is not ordained in the laws of the
emperors Arcadius, and Honorius. L. Quicunque C. concerning Bishops and
clerks, as has been said heretofore. Yet will I not here sing the praises of
those that are set up in the places of them that be deposed, and by Gods grace
do their service at this day to the Churches of England peaceably and
healthfully. Their own virtue commends them sufficiently, so as they have no
need of my praise.

That the Queen of England has not chosen men's opinions for herself, and her
realm to follow, but Gods pure word, hertofore sought out, and received by
King Edward the sixth: nor yet set forth books of heresy, or forced her
realm to receive them.
THe goodly Bull (a Gods name) proceeds on still to lay together the rest of
the articles of his accusation, against the Queens Majesty in these words.
She has (says he) commanded her subjects to observe the wicked mysteries
and ordinances which she her self has taken up and observed according to
Caluins setting forth. Also she has set out books to her whole Realm,
containing manifest heresy. But the lying and slanderous Bull shoots wide
all the feeld over. Perchance the Romish sort measure al men by themselves, True
Christians entitle not themselves after any men.
and because they them selves hang wholly upon men, in so much as there be many
thousands to be found among them, which both will be called, and have a
pleasure to be called Benedictines of Benet, Franciscanes of Frauncis, and
diversely and sunderly after many others: and will both seem, to seem to live,
and glory to live according to these men's ordinances rules, or appointmentes:
therefore they imagine that we also would be called Lutherans of Luther,
Zuinglians of Zuinglius, and Caluinistes of Calvin, and that we hang wholly
upon these men's ordinances: but it is not so. Paul the Apostle of Christ has
forbidden any such thing to be done in the Church, 1. Cor. 1.
saying to the Corrinthians. Every of you says, I hold of Apollo, I of Cephas,
and I of Christ. Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? 1. Cor. 3.
or were you baptized in Paul's name? And again, when one says, I hold of
Paul, and an other, I hold of Apollo, are ye not fleshly? Therefore the true
Christians will be named but only after Christ. As for the names of men, be
they never so excellent, we acknowledge them not in this case, neither do we
regard or receive their ordinances furtherfoorth, then they agree in all
points with Gods word: and when we receive them, we receive the^ not for
their sakes, but for Gods words sake. And the Queen of Englands Majesty
never received of Calvin, or of any other excellent and well learned men any
ordinances to follow, nor never regarded them: and yet by the way, if any of
them have taught any thing out of Gods pure word, no godly man can take scorn
of: for the Queen in that reformation of hirs, had an eye only to the lively
word of God, delivered unto us by the holy scriptures, and so she settled all
matters of religion upon the very word of God, and not upon any men. David
speaking of Gods word says in the 119. Psalm: The majesty of Gods word.
Thy word O Lord endures for ever in heaven. Thy word is a lantern to my
feet, and a light unto my paths. Lord thou art righteous, and thy judgment is
rightful. Princes sit together and rail upon me, because thy servant talks
of thy statutes, and because thy testimonies are my delight and my counselors.
Princes have persecuted me without cause, but my heart stands in awe of thy
word. And Lord, seeing I stick to thy testimonies, bring me not to shame. etc.
That godly prince of blessed memory and worthy of immortal glory King
Edward the sixth, What order K. Edward ye vi. followed in reforming the church
of England*
following the examples of Josias, and Constantine the great, two of the
excellentest princes that ever were in the world, began the reformation of the
English church. For like as Josias calling a parliament or Couusell of his noble
men, Priests, and Commons, did first cause the law of God to be read openly
before them, and then obediently reformed his whole realm, word for word
according to the law that was read: And like as Constantine summoned a general
counsel of the teachers and Ministers of the Churches through the whole
world, and sitting down among them said, The books of the Gospelles, and the
Apostles together with the oracles of the ancient Prophets, do plainly entruct
us of Gods meaning and will: and therefore laying aside all enemylike discord,
let us take the exposition of our questions out of the sayings of the Holy
Ghost: Even so King Edward summoning a parliament at London of all the
Nobility, Bishops, and notablest learned men through his whole realm,
admitting also the famousest clerks of other realms being Gods servants,
commanded them to show by the holy scriptures, what was to be followed of him
and his realm, in so great diversity of opinions. And they executing
faithfully the charge which the King had enjoined them, did the same time with
one consent, and according to Gods word, agree upon certain articles, which
the King did both receive and publish without delay, with this title set before
them: Articles agreeed upon by the Bishops and other learned men in the
Parliament holden at London in the year of our Lord 1552. for the taking away
of the diversity of opinions, and the stablishing of consent in the true
religion, published by authority of the Kings majesty. Therefore by the
labor and endeavor of that godly prince King Edward, the English Church was
reformed according to the rule and appointment of the holy scriptures. After
King Edwardes decease, Queen Marie repealing the same reformation, abrogated
it for a time. What our sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth has setfoorth to her
whole Realm, to be followed.
And Queen Elizabeth, having received it again by Gods grace, has eftsoons
set it up in perfect estate. And therefore nothing else has she received and
delivered to be kept of her whole Realm, then that her brother of blessed
memory King Edward, heertofore most godlily and wisely thought meet to be
received and believed of himself, and to be conueighed over to his subjects,
out of the lively word of God, as has been said already: whereby it appears
now most manifestly, that the things are false and forged which the lying Bull
has bruted concerning wicked mysteries (with spightfull interlacing the name
of Calvin) received by the Queens Majesty, and enjoined to the Realm of
England.

The Queens Majesty has setfoorth no books of heresy to her realm
With like vanity, lightness, and malice, the Bull is not ashamed to give
forth, that the Queen sets forth, or enforces to her whole realm,
books containing manifest heresy: for the Queen has authorized no books to
be set forth to her realm, but such as her Majesty's brother King Edward
willed to be set forth before, specially the volume of the holy Bible. Now to
say, that this contains manifest heresies, it is an horrible and blasphemous
wickedness, and the greatest treason to God that may be. Howbeit, by the way
there be many maintayners of the Pope, and his sea, which make neither shame
nor conscience to put openly in writing and to teach, that heresies are learned
out of the Bible, and that he which has the Bible, and reads it without the
interpretation of the church of Rome has nothing. But I will speak no more at
this time of the blasphemies of these wicked men. Peradventure the Bull means
the book of common prayers and ceremo, nies of the church of England. But so
ought it also to have been showed, which be heresies that are contained in that
book. The soresayd parliament of London, makes honorable mention of that
book. And there shall be enough that will annswer, if there be heresies in that
book, (at least wise if the bull mean that book) show them expressly: unless
peradventure according to the manner of these stately sires, every thing must
bear the blame of heresy, which has not the sent and taste of the stinch of
the pope, or of the sea of Rome, which thing deserves no aunswering at all.

Truly the Queens Majesty has prohibited all ungodly books to be dispersed,
yea or read in her realm, which are heretical indeed, and repugnant to the
sincerity of our Christian religion. Neither may any man spread abroad any
wicked or blasphemous book or opinion in her realm without punishment.

Here be recited other articles of accusation, which the Bull mentions
concerning the Queens abolishing of the mass, and her taking away of many
other superstitions and abuses. Also here is expounded, what catholikenesse is,
and who be catholic.
THe Bull knitteth heerunto also other articles of accusation against the
Queen. She has also (says the bull) abolished prayers, fastinges, choice of
meats, single life, and catholic ceremonies. As concerning the sacrifice of
the mass, the Queen not unjustly, but for many and most just causes has
abolished it, The abolishing of the sacrifice of the mass.
like as King Edward had abolished it before. In the Syuode of London, whereof
we have made mention now once or twice already, thus remains in writing
concerning the mass: Christ's oblatio^ once made for all, is a full redemption,
atonement, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, Heb. 9.10.
as well original as actual. Neither is there any other satisfaction for
sins, Romans 3.
saving only that one. 1. John. 2.
Wherefore the sacrifices of masses, wherein the priest was commonly said to
offer Christ, for release of penalty and fault, for the quick and the dead,
are but forgeries, and hurtful deceites. Thus much is written there. But it is
the duty of kings to abolish and banish, yea and to punish noisome deceites
and deceyuers. Worthily therefore have the Kings of England abolished the
mass, neither have they trespassed at all in that behalf, against God or
against their own office.

The mass corrupts the Lords supper.
Moreover by the Mass, the holy institution of the Lords supper has been
overwhelmed with man's inventions and additio^s, utterly perverted, made of
public private, and also dismembered. For the Lord gave it to all his
faithful, in both kinds as they term it. Also whereas the massemu^ger takes
upon him in his mass, as a mediator between God and men: he commits such
an horrible offense, as is never able to be purged by no satisfaction. For
there is no mo priesthodes but the priesthode of Christ, Read Austen against ye
epistle of Parmenian. lib. 2. cap. 8.
and that is according to the order of Melchisedecke, and so unremovable, as
it cannot pass unto any other by succession. Again they offered or solemnized
the mass, in remembrance and honor of saints departed, which now live in
heaven. But the Lord had said, do it in remembrance (not of saints, but) of
me. And S. Paul would in no wise have garlands and oxen offered unto him. Act.
14.
Who then can think it likely, that he would have the Son of God offered in
honor of him in a mass? Shall the Lord of Lords being now in glory, do
service still as a servant to his own servant? These are frenzies and
furies of men that be out of their wits. I could allege many other
abominations of the mass like unto these: but I will add no more but only
this to all the rest. That Christ our Lord instituted his holy supper without
pomp or superfluity, simple, moderate, without ceremonies, but yet
commendable for the simplicity, and honorable for the authority of the
founder.

But the Mass is most ceremonious, most pompous, most sumptuous, and set out
with persian furniture, which in process of time has so increases with her
abuses, that in some things it could not be abated or purged, but it must
needs be taken quite away. Truly the common sort made more account of their
Chapleines Masses, and advanced them more, then the very sacrifice of Christ,
which few of them either knew or esteemed as became the^; 1. Cor. 11.
And for as much as the Apostle Paul, when the Lords Supper began in his time
to grow into abuse, taught how to call it back and to reform it according to
the Lords institution. Lib. Epist. 2. Epist. 3.
Like as Christ's Martyr S. Cryprian also being taught by the same Apostles
example, counsels and commands us, that in repayring or setting up again
the true use of the Supper, we should go to the wells head and seek out the
original, and not do any other thing in this behalf, then that which he has
done which is before all men, and alonely is to be heard: Seeing that the
Queens Majesty has done so in abolishing the Mass and setting up the Lords
Supper again in the place of it: Surely she has not sinned at all, but is
falsely accused by the Bishop in his Bull.

Most false also is this that the Bull avouches ye Queen to have abolished
prayer and fasting. Not prayer but the abuse of prayer is abolished.
For she has abolilished the abuses and superstitions in them and not the good
things themselves which God has commended unto us. Which thing the matter it
self does openly avouch. It can not be denied but prayer and fasting are
covered with abuses and superstitions, yea and with Idolatries almost
innumerable, among the Papists. Among them prayer is not made to God alone,
neither believe they that God hears us for the intercession of Christ alone.
For they call upon innumerable creatures as well as the creatures, yea and
upon them more earnestly then upon him. And they have in such wife commended
the intercession and defense of Saints to the wretched people, that they know
little or nothing of Christ's intercession to God the father, which is the only
acceptable and effectual intercession. Furthermore they serve and worship God
and Baal together.

The Popish fastings are not wings and helps of prayer nor an humbling of
our selves whereby our amendment is declared, Fasting.
but meritorious works and plain hypocrisy. And if they be compared with the
fastyngs of the ancient Church, they shall be found to be nothing less than
fastings. But it weerieth me to rehearse the fondness of these men in this
behalf. This only do I say or rather repete at this present, (which I have
said already) That the virtuous princess Queen Elizabeth and King Edward,
have abolished the abuses and superstitions of prayer and fasting, and not the
true praying and true fasting it self.

Choice of meats.
And it is strange that the Bull alleges also the choice of meats. If he
know not how diversely, yea and also with how great liberty they were used in
old time without any blame at all: Let him read Socrates in the fifth book and
xxij. chapter of his Ecclesiastical history, or the ix. book and xxxviij.
chap. of the Tripartite history. Among other things these are left in writing.
And for as much as noman is able to show any commandment written concerning
this thing: it is apparent that the Apostles left it free to every man's will
and choice, to the intent that no man should do the thing that is good, for
fear or by compulsion. Thus much is there. We simply follow the things which
we know to be delivered to the faithful by the Lord and his holy Apostle. The
Lord says. what soever enters in at ye mouth, goes down into the belly, and
is cast out into the privy. But the things that come out of the mouth proceed
out of the heart, Coloss. 2.
and be those things that defile a man etc. Math. 15. And the Apostle says.
(...) 1.
Let noman judge you in meat or drink etc. Also, all things are clean to
the clean, but unto the unclean and the faithless all things are unclean.
Moreover as for the choice of meats the Apiciusses or masters of gluttony
which are appointed and interteyned for the nonce, have a greater regard or
special care at this day to come by the finest meats in the Court of Rome, in
Bishops palaces, and in the dens or Cloisters of Monks, than is had any
where else in the universal world. And therefore we leave them this fattie
discourse untouched. Let belly Gods entreat of belly matters.

Single life.
But I marvel more with what face these men being most unclean and stinkyng of
filthynesse, the bondslaues of lusts and unreasonable lecheries, can make any
mention of single life. What manner of single life was in the religious houses
of England, and why the noble Prince King Henry the viij. emptyed them and
overthrew them every chone: Cunturia: 8. folio. 665.
truly I had lever it should be known by the Centuries of the reverend Bishop
of Ossoria in Ireland, then by my declaration. Heb. 13.
For I willingly spare chaste ears. Finally I say with the Apostle: Honorable
among all men is wedlock and the undefiled bed. 1. Cor. 7.
And again, It is better to mary then to burn and for avoiding of
fornication, let every man have his wife. Also, if thou mary a wife thou
sinnest not: 1. Cor. 9.
and if a maiden mary she sins not. For it was lawful even for the Apostles
who were busied in the ministry, to lead their Christian wives about with
them. And all antiquity avouches that many of the Lords Apostles, 1. Tim. 3.
and specially Peter, Titus. 1.
were married men. And Paul more then once expressly says, Let a Bishop be the
husband of one wife, 1. Tim. 4.
having faithful children. Yea and he calls their doctrine a doctrine of
devils, which forbid marriage, like as also which forbid meats. I know that our
adversaries wrest this place from themselves to the old heretics, Tatian,
Montane, and others. But the Prophet speaking most effectually, says
Forbiddyng, and not Condemnyng. The old heretics condemned meats and marriage
universally. But our adversaries condemn not meats and marriage, but restreine
the free use of the^, bynding men from them by wicked laws. Properly therefore
the Apostle spoke of them.

And what speak they of Catholic ceremonies, whereas if they did term them
aright, Catholics rites and Ceremonies.
they should call them superstitious and Idolatrous ceremonies. These men
bewray their own shamelessness matched with wickedness, chiefly in this
point, that they foully deceive the simpler sort, by pretending the term
Catholic unto all their errors. They stick to the term, and imagine I wot
not what a singular holiness and truth in themselves, when in very deed they
be not Catholics but Cacolykes that is to say, mischievous wolves or
sheepebyters, setting forth things particular and not universal, that is to
wit, burdenyng silly souls with the Decrees and devises of certain men both
few in number and which were conspired to do mischief. The Catholic Church.
The Church is called Catholic that is to say Uniuersall, because it is not
only found in some one place: but also is spread abroad, both through the
whole universal world, and through all ages: and also because there be no mo
Churches without this. For there is but one true Church, which is the Catholic
Church. There is but only one body, under the one Christ, in whom only is
salvation. Whereupon it follows that there is no salvation but only in the
Church. Therefore the Church of Rome, like as also the Church of Antioche, or of
Alexandria, or of any other place, is not the Catholic Church. For they be but
members of that universal body, if so be that they be by one faith and one
doctrine knit into this universality as in the body under the head Christ. The
Catholic Church then comprehends the Church of the fathers before Christ's
coming, and our Church after his coming and consequently all the Saints or
faithful folks of all places and times, and (to conclude in one word) of times
past, time present, and times to come: all which are one Catholic or
universal body, under one Catholic or universal head Christ. The Catholic
faith and doctrine.
And so the Catholic faith and doctrine is that which is preached and heard in
this Catholic Church, attributyng all things to Christ the only head of
salvation, and depending wholly upon the word of God, and directing and
governing all her matters by the same. Catholics.
Therefore those be Catholics in deed, which in what place soever or in what
time soever they be, are in the fellowship of this one body, under the only
head Christ, being all of one faith and doctrine, attributing their whole
salvation unto Christ alone, and dependyng wholly upon his holy and most
soothfast word. These also are called Orthodoxi, Orthodoxi.
or Rightbeleuing, that is to say, of right opinion or judgment, and of sound
doctrine according to Gods word. But as for them that are not in the compass
of this body under the fore said only head Christ, that they may draw life out
of him, and therefore are of a diverse or rather of a contrary doctrine and
faith, devising to themselves a new faith, a new doctrine, a new fellowship, yea
and also a new head: Cacodoxi.
they be Cacodoxi that is to say, misbeleuing, or Kirtodoxi that is say
overthwart beleuyng and not Rightbeleuyng and Catholic.

But now gentle reader wey me thoroughly within the compass and universality
of what body, Whether the Romish sort be Catholics or no.
or in what unity of doctrine and faith, the Romish sort be, who (by reason of
certain peculiar and strange opinions of theirs, which they profess and
maintain, and for their Popish Church set up under the Pope as head of it)
call themselves only Catholic. Let them say to us, whether the things which
these men urge so sore upon us, were known and general to the Catholic and
Apostolic primitive Church, faith, and doctrine? Let these Catholics then,
which (by their own judgment) are the only rightbeleuers upon earth, show us
whether ye ancient Apostolic Church acknowledged Rome to be the head of all
the Churches in the world? whether all the faithful servants of Christ must
upon pain of salvation and damnation be subject to the Bishop of Rome, as who
has both the swords in his hand, and judges all men and is to be judged of
no man? Whether the primitive and ancient Church, did pray unto dead Saints?
Whether it accounted them for patrons and spokesmen to God the father? Whether
it worshypped them with sacrifices, holidays, and such other kind of services?
Whether they builded them temples, or set up images to them? Whether the images
of God and the Saints he profitable and necessary in the Churches of the
Christians? whether the souls that be sindged, broyled, and roasted in the fire
of Purgatory, be delivered by yearemyndes and other satisfactions for the dead?
Whether Christ be worshypped in the Mass, and whether it be to be believed that
Christ himself is offered there in sacrifice for the sins of the quick and
the dead? whether our own works deserve eternal life, and whether they
justify us also? whether the state of Monks be the state of perfection or no?
And whether there were any cloisters of Monks and Nuns in the Church before
Paul the Heremite of Thebe, Antonie, and Benet? now if these and many other
things like these were not seen nor known, as they were not in deed: tell
us wherefore ye boast them to be Catholic? or how will you be called Catholic
of the^? will ye that I tell you? most falsely and most unjustly: saving in that
your Antichristian kind. For as for the rites and customs which you call and
brag to be Catholic, antiquity has registered them among Idolatries. Cease
therefore to delude the simple with your gentle terms of Catholic and
Rightbeleuyng. The faithful know who you be. Amend therefore and live like true
Catholics with us, not in the Popish Church of Rome, but in the true Catholic
Church, under the head Christ, who only is our salvation. To him be glory for
ever. Amen.

The Queen of England has justly commanded her subjects that they should
not acknowledge the Church of Rome, or obey the laws thereof. Justly also has
she bound them by oath to abjure the authority and obedience of the Romish
Bishop.
The Queen does justly forbid her subjects to acknowledge the Church of Rome.
The Bull proceeds in his purposed accusation against the Queen, saying: She
has forbidden the Clergy and laity to acknowledge the Church of Rome or to
obey the laws of it. Yea and she has compelled them to renounce the
authority and obedience of the Roman Bishop, by oath: appointing penalties
and punishments to such as disobey: the which she has executed upon those
that have continued in the unity of faith and the obedience aforesaid. But the
Queens Majesty even in this case also, has done nothing but that the Lord
God himself has commanded her to do, and which all good Princes among the
people of God have done before her. For it is already manifestly enough showed
and proved before, that by Gods ordinance it is lawful for Kings and
Magistrates to take upon them the care and orderyng both of cases and of
persons Ecclesiastical. Therefore look what the Queen has commanded her
subjects in this behalf, she has done but that she ought to do by virtue of
her office. And whereas she has commanded that they should not acknowledge the
Church of Rome or obey the ordinances thereof, has she not commanded that
thing by the appiontment of Gods word? for truly God commands his people in
his law, that they should not give ear to such as teach things contrary to
his law: also he commands the Magistrate that he give no place either to
superstitions, or to false doctrines, but rather that he root up these, Iere.
23.
and restreine the others. Jeremy (like as the rest of the Prophets also)
infers and urges the same thing. Among other things (says he) thus says
the Lord of hosts, hearken not to the words of the Prophets that prophecy
unto you. For they teach you vanity, tell you the visions of their own heart,
even their own inventions, and not out of the mouth of the Lord. But it is
more clearer then the light of noone day, that the Romish Doctors and teachers
are not only such, but moreover most cruel enemies to the sound doctrine of
the Gospel, or rather persecuters imbrewed with Christian blood. The Lord
himself in his Gospel, but specially in Matthew the vij. and xxiiij. chapters,
and in Luke the vij. chapter, has forbidden us to give ear to false Prophets
and false Christ's, specially which shall come in this last perilous ago. He
charge us that we should neither believe them nor follow the^. And S. Peter
with great gravity says, Act. 2.
keep your selves from this generation. Which thing he entreats of more
plenteously and diligently in his latter Epistle. Yea and S. Paul also
agreeing with the doctrine of S. Peter, describes the corrupt gouerners of the
Church in this last age, verily froward men, not lights but firebrandes of the
Church, 1. Cor. 10.
and he bids the faithful depart from them. If any man desire to see the
places he shall find them in 2. Cor. 6. and in 2. These. 2. and in 1. Tim. 4. and
6. and in 2. Tim. 3. and 4. chapters. Flee ye from Idolatry says the same
Apostle. And S. John says beware of Idols. 1. John. 5.
Besides this, it is reveled to S. John from heaven, Apoc. 18.
and commandment is given thus: my people, get ye out of Babylon, that ye be
not partakers of her sins, and receive of her plagues also. Uery rightly
therefore and according to the commandments of God, has the Queens Majesty
done, in chargyng her subjects that they should not acknowledge the Roman
that is to say the Popish Church, nor obey the Popes law or ordinances, as
utterly wicked or fightyng against the word of God.

The Queen has lawfully compelled her subjects to for swear ye Pope and the
Papacy.
But the thing that most of all greeueth and chafeth him is, that the Queen
has compelled her* subjects to renounce the Pope, and his authority (which
in very deed is none at all) and the Papacy it self, by oath. Nevertheless,
even in this behalf also what has her highness done, which the holy Priests
and Kings beloved of God, have not done before? 2. Reg. 11.
for we read of Ioiada the faithful Priest in the house of the Lord, that he
made a covenant betwixt the Lord, and the King and the people, verily even by
bynding them unto God with an oath according to the law, and by separatyng them
from all superstition and Idolatry. 1. Esd. 10.
Of Esdras we read thus: Esdras therefore arose, and compelled by oath or swear
the Princes, the Priests, and all Israel, that they should deal according to
the word. 2. Chron. 15.
Of king Asa we read thus. They made a covenant to seek the Lord God of their
fathers, withal their heart and withal their soul: and that whosoever sought
not the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death, whether he were small or
great, man or woman: And they swear unto ye Lord with a loud voyes, and with
showtyng, and with soundyng of trumpets and shalmes. The Scripture adds: And
all the Jews reioysed of that oath: for they had sworn withal their heart:
and they sought God with a whole will: and he was found of them: and the Lord
gave them rest round about. The same things are read of the holy kings
Ezechias 2. Chron. 29. and of Josias 4. of kings. 23. and 2. Chron. 34.
chapters. And therefore the Queen of England has done well in bindyng the
Clergy and laity by oath to the true Religion against the false.

That Kings and Magistrates ought to compel their subjects unto goodness,
and not suffer every man to make his own choice in following what seems best
to him self.
THis also seems very unreasonable to the Romish sort, and peradventure unto
others also that have a mislikyng of this case, that the Queen has laid
penalties and punishments upon such as disobey, and has executed the same
upon those that have continued in obedience to the sea of Rome. For some are
of opinion that no man ought to be compelled to do good, or unto true Religion,
or unto faith: but every man ought to be left at his own liberty, to follow
what soever seems best to himself and his own conscience: that is to say,
that no man should be called to account, of what Religion he is, nor examined
at all, no though he were a Papist, but be let alone with his own conscience:
And therefore that no man ought to be punished for breakyng the Religion of the
Gospel, or for neglectyng good laws, which he himself esteems not to be
good. Truly, as concerning compulsion to well doing, or to faith and Religion,
the Donatistes heretics taught in old time like as these before mentioned and
as the Anabaptists do at this day, that no man ought to be compelled to faith
or to goodness, but every man to be left to his own conscience. Against those
Donatistes S. Austen has disputed abundantly, yea and that by the Scriptures
and by evident reasons agreeing with the Scriptures. In which respect I think
his Record is to be believed, and therefore I will now allege certain things
out of him, that make peculiarly for the present case.

Heretics said that no man is to be compelled unto faith.
In his 83. chapter of his second book against Petilian, the same Petilian
being a Donatist, had said far from our thought be it that we should compel
any man to our faith. Austen aunsweryng him, says: And shall we then proceed
to talk as heretics do? or shall we say that the Lord God planteth hypocrisy
in his Scriptures when he drives men to goodness by threatenings and
chastisementes? Psalm. 119.
David says, Lord it is good for me that thou have brought me low. And Jeremy
says, Iere. 31.
Lord thou have chastised me, and I am chastised as a wild bullock. But if no
man ought to be compelled unto good, why I pray you does Solomon (the wysest
man that ever was,) will men so often to chastise their children? He that
spares the rod hates the child, says he. Thou truly strikest him, but by the
rod thou sauest his soul from death. Daily experience, and the nature of
things proves, that affections are over vehement in men, and if they be not
remedyed and bridled, eue^ they that might have been saved easly and by some
light chastisement, cast away themselves and others to. When me^ be out of
their wits, they mislike compulsion and chastisement. But when they come to
themselves again, and see plainly from how great mischieues they are delivered
by those that compelled the^: they be glad that they were chastised to their
weal, and praise the rigor which they misliked before. And therefore there are
among the latter writers which being of S. Austens opinion, have written thus:
who douteth that the righteousness which is compelled till it become willing,
is more acceptable to God, then uncompelled vnrightuousenesse which waxes
daily worse and worse, till at length it grow past recovery* Also the
Magistrate bridleth and restreineth heretics, least they might proceed to
cast away themselves and others to. And truly this is both good of itself and
also the Magistrates duty so to do. Now if they do the thing by compulsion
which they do, and seduce no man any more: it is a good deed. But if they
persevere in their stubbornness and wilful offendyng: truly the Magistrate has
not offended at all, neither is the sin of these men laid to his charge. But
we will return to the records of S. Austen.

The same Austen in his 48. Epistle to Vincent, Augustine him self also was
sometime of opinion that no man was to be compelled.
against the Donatistes, concerning the restreinyng of heretics by force,
says: I have been of opinion heretofore that no man is to be compelled to the
unity of Christ: but that we must deal with them by the word, fight with them
by disputation, and overcome them by reason, least we might make them feyned
Catholics, whom we knew to be open heretics. But this opinion of mine was
vanquished, not by the words that were spoken against it, but by the examples
that were showed against it. For first there was alleged against me, mine own
City [Hippone] which being erst whole upon Donates side, was turned to the
Catholic unity by fear of the Emperors laws, and now we see it so detesteth
the poison of this your stoutnesse, as a man would think it had never been in
it. And so were many mo, which were rehearsed to me by name, that I might
perceive by the matters themselves, how that even in this case also might well
be understood that which is written, Proverb. 9.
Give a wiseman an occasion and he will be the wiser. And again, Not every one
that spares is a friend, nor every one that beats, Proverb. 27.
an enemy. Better are the wounds of a friend, then the friendly kisses of an
enemy. It is better to love with sharpness, then to deceive with gentleness.
He that tyeth up a mad man, and he that waketh a sluggard, is trouble some to
them both, and yet he loves them both. Who can love us more then God does? and
yet he cease not as well to fray us healthfully, as also to teach us
pleasa^tly. Think you that no man ought to be compelled to righteousness,
when you read that the householder said to his servants, whomsoever ye find,
make them to come in? or when you read that he which was first Saul and
afterward Paul, was with great violence and compulsion enforced by Christ to
know the truth, and to hold it whether he would or no?

The same Austen again in his v. Epistle to Earl Boniface, says: where is
the freedom of beleuyng or not beleuyng, which these men are wont to blase
abroad, The Lord him self compelled men to the faith
saying, whom has Christ enforced? whom has Christ compelled? Behold, they
have the Apostle Paul: in him they may see Christ first compelling and
afterward teaching: first beating, and afterward comforting. And it is a wonder
to see how he that came in unto the Gospel by compulsion of bodily punishment,
has labored more in the Gospel then all they did that were called in by the
only word: and that his perfect charity has driven fear out of doors, whom
greatest fear compelled to charity. Why then should not the Church compel the
unthrifty children to return, if the unthrifty children have compelled
others to perish?

Why the Apostles called not for the Magistrates help for the stablishyng of
Religion.
Again in the same Epistle, the same Austen says: whereas they that would not
have any just laws ordained against their wicked heresies, avouch that the
Apostles demanded no such things of the kings of the earth: they consider
not that the state of that time was other then it is now, and that all things
are to be done in their times. For what Emperor believed in Christ at those
days, that he might have done him service by making laws in defense of
godliness against ungodliness, when as yet this prophecy was in fulfilling,
Psalm. ^.
why did the Gentyles rage, and why did the people imagine vain things? The
kings of the earth stood up, and the princes assembled together, against the
Lord and against his Christ. For as yet the world was not come to that point
which is spoken of anon after in the same Psalm: How kings serve God in
fear.
And now ye kings bethink your selves, be learned ye that judge the earth: do
service unto him in fear, and rejoice with trembling. How then do kings serve
God in fear, but by godly severity of prohibiting and punishing the things
that are done against the commandments of the Lord? for he serves in one
sort as he is a man, and in another sort also as he is a king. In that he is a
man, he serves him by living faithfully: and in that he is also a king, he
serves by stablishing with convenient rigor, such laws as command rightful
things and forbid the contrary. So served Ezechias by beating down the
groves and temples of the Idols, and the high places that had been builded
against Gods commandment. So served Josias by doing the like things. So
served the king of Niniuie, by compelling the whole City to pacify Gods
displeasure. So served Darius by breaking the Idol, and giving it into the
power of Daniell, and by casting his enemies in to the Lions. So served
Nabuchodonosor by making a terrible law to all that were under his dominion
from blaspheming God, by a terrible law. Kings therefore in as much as they are
kings, do then serve God, when they do that thing to serve God withal, which
they could not do if they were not kings. Considering then that kings served
not the Lord in the time of the Apostles, but as yet imagined vain things
against God and against his anointed, that the sayings of the Prophets might
be fulfilled: truly ungodliness could not the^ be prohibited, but rather it
was executed, by laws. For the state of those times was so far out of order,
that even ye Jews slew them that preached Christ, thinking themselves to do
God high service, (according as Christ had prophesied before,) and the Genttles
raged against the Christians, and yet the strength of Martyrs overcome them
all. But after the thing began to be fulfilled which is written. All the kings
of the earth shall worship him, All nations shall serve him: what is he that is
in his right wits, that will say unto kings, Take you no care in your
kingdom, who defe^deth or assaulteth the Church of your Lord: it makes no
matter to you who be chaste and who be unchaste in your Realm. How and in what
sense Auste^ gives a man free choice or will, read in his book of
chastiseme^t and grace, chap. 1. In his book of ye spirit and the letter to
Marcellus, chap. 30. in his book of Merits and remission of sins. Lib. 2
cap 8. and against the second Epistle of Pelagius. Lib. 4. Cap. 6.
For seeing that God has given unto man free choice: why should aduoutrie be
punished by laws, and apostasy be let slip? Is it a lighter matter for ye
soul to break her faith plighted unto God, the^ for a woman to break her
troth plighted unto man? Or if the things that be committed through ignorance
and not through contempt of religion, be to be punished more gently: are they
therefore to be neglected? In deed it is better (and who doutes?) that me^
should be brought by gentleness to serve God, then to be compelled to it by
fear of punishment and smart. But because they that be ge^tly allured be the
better, it follows not that those which are otherwise should be neglected. For
it has done many men good, (which thing is evident by experience) to be first
compelled by fear or smart, that they might afterward be taught, or accomplish
the thing in work which they had learned already by word. Thus much have I
hitherto rehearsed out of the books of Austen, which I suppose do satisfy
such as are not given to contention, in this case.

Every man must not be suffered to follow what seems best to himself in
Religion.
Furthermore, that every man should not have leave to choose at his own pleasure
and to follow what likes him best in the case of faith and Religion: it is
forbidden long ago in Gods law, according as is read to this effect: ye shall
not do every one of you what seems right in his own eyes. Mark and hear
all that I command thee, that thou may fare well and the children after
thee, when thou do the thing that is good and acceptable in the sight of thy
God. Therefore look what I command thee, that only do thou unto the Lord, and
neither put thou any thing to it nor take thou any thing away. Nay truly, it is
the welspring and original of all mischief, error, heresy, schism,
dissension, and troubles, if it were free for every man to follow the fancies of
his own head and the imaginations and devises of his own heart. Which thing is
proved by the stories of all ages, and by the experience of our time also. And
ye shall read often in the Prophets, depart ye or turn ye from your own
ways: and, you have chosen in your ways, the things that displease me. Also,
walk ye in my ways and it shall be for your weal. And what else is the Popish
Religion, but a way devised and set up by the will and pleasure of man,
contrary to the rule of Gods word? From the which God wills the Magistrate
to turn away his servant, and to bring them back again into the way of the
Lord. David the king and Prophet pleased the high God singularly in this
respect, (though in many things he defiled him self shamefully) that he
neither presented the good intent of his heart or the likinges of his own will
for services unto God, nor stiffly urged them upon other men to be kept: but
persisted simply and incorruptly in the way of the Lord, according as he
himself shows in the 119. Psalm. But king Saul put him self quite out of
Gods favor, 1. Samuel. 15.
because he ouerslipped the commandment of God, and followed the thing which
the good intent of his own heart counseled him unto. For he had reserved for
sacrifice, the thing which God had commanded him, not to reserve for
sacrifice, but utterly to destroy and put away. Whereupon the Prophet Samuel
said unto Saul: Does the Lord delight in burnt offerings and sacrifice, so much
as in obeying his voice? Behold, to obey is better then to do sacrifice, and to
hearken is better then the fat of Rams. For disobedience is as the sin of
Soothsaying or witchcraft, and stubbornness is as the wickedness of Idolatry.
And for as much as thou have despised or rejected the word of the Lord, he has
rejected thee also that thou shall not be king. They that be wise have in these
short words what to think of the things that me^ choose to follow at their
own pleasure in cases of religion: namely that they be never a whit better
then very witchcraft and Idolatry, which of all wickednesses are most heinous
before God. And I pray you to what purpose is the obedience enjoined us which we
owe, not to the Pope and to Popery: but to God and the magistrate and to their
laws, to be short wherefore are we commanded to eschew Idolatry and all
strange Religions, if every one of us may choose and do what we list? But these
things are now more apparent, the^ that they need to be set out with any mo
words.

That Kings and Magistrates do lawfully punish, yea and also put to death
such as break the true religion, and disobey holy laws. And so this discourse
is shet up.
ANd although the said latter Article of our adversaries, (namely that no man
ought to be punished for breaking of the Religion of the Gospel, or for
neglecting of such good laws as they themselves esteem not for good) may
easly be judged by ye premises which we have alleged out of Auste^: yet
notwithstanding, least any thing may remain doutfull and undiscussed, I will
by short and evident Arguments prove, that the Magistrate may lawfully punish,
yea and put to death such as break the true Religion, and set themselves
against holy laws.

God commands false Prophets to be put to death.
The Manichees and Donatistes in time past, (as has been said before) were of
opinion that no man was to be punished or put to death for his Religion. But
the holy Scripture commands the Magistrate expressly that he should not spare
false Prophets, but rather it wills all such as rebel against God, against
his laws, and against the holy judges to be put to death without any mercy.
The places are most manifest in the Scriptures and well known to all men. Read
in Deuteronomy. chap. 13. and 17. In Exode is rehearsed this law: He that offers
sacrifice to any God saving only the God of Israel, let him be rooted out.
And least any man perchance may say, that these be but Judicial laws, and
therefore perteine nothing unto us: Paul expressly says: The law is not made
for the rightuous, but for the despisers of the law, 1. Tim. 1.
and for such as know no subjection, for ungodly men and sinners, for wicked
men and Idolaters, Leuit. 24.
etc. Surely the blasphemer is (in Leuiticus) overwhelmed and stoned to death.
Number. 19.
In the book of no^bers, he that gathered sticks is put to death for breaking
the Saboth and for contempt of Religion. Exodus 32.
Also there be certain thousands of them slain, which had set up the golden
calfe and worshipped it? 3. Kings. 18
Helias the great Prophet of God, slew certain hundredes of the false
Prophets in the brook Kyson at the notable sacrificing upon Mount Carmel. 4.
Kings. 9.
Heliseus at the Lords commandment anointed Iehu king to root out the
house of Achab, and therewith to sacrifice all the Priests of Baal together. 4.
Kings. 11
Ioiada the holy Priest of God slew the Queen Athalia with the sword for her
wickedness. And king Josias the dear beloved of God, 4. Kings. 23
executed sore Justice upon the bones of the false Prophets in burning them,
to show upon them being dead, what they had deserved when they were alive.

S. Austen in his treatise upon the xj. of John, S. Austens opinion concerning
this matter.
disputing against the Donatistes, shows out of the scripture by the example
of Nabuchodonozor, that Christen princes did justly punish the Donatistes,
which made light account of Christ, and his doctrine. Among other things, If
King Nabuchodonozor (says he) gave glory unto God, for delivering the three
children out of the fire, Dan. 3.
yea and so great glory, that he sentfoorth proclamations of it over all his
dominion: how should not these (our Christian) Kings be moved,? which behold
not three children delivered out of a flame, but themselves delivered from hell
fire) when they see Christ (by whom they be delivered) to be blown up in
Christians, and when they hear it said to a Christen man, say thou art no
Christian. Such things will they do, and yet such things will they not
suffer: for see what manner of things they do, and what things they suffer.
They kill souls, and are punished in body: They make eternal deaths, and
find fault that they suffer temporal deaths. Thus much says he.

In the new Testament we have most evident examples of Christ's chief Apostles
Peter and Paul: Act. 5.
of whom the one did cast down Ananias and Zaphira for their lying, Act. 13.
and for their counterfeiting of religion: and the other made Elimas blind, as
it had been by putting out his eyes, because he perverted the right ways of
the Lord. Neither makes it any great matter, whether a man be slain with a
sword, or a cudgel, or a stone, or a potsherd, or with a word. Killing is
killing, by what mean, or with what instrument so ever it be done. And God
wrought by his Apostles, who in denouncing Gods judgment against wicked
persons, killed them, or punished them in their bodies by the word. The same
thing does God by the sentence and sword of the magistrate. Romans 12.13.
For it is Gods vengeance committed to the magistrate to be executed or laid
upon offenders, and therefore it is he yt punishes and puts to death by ye
magistrate.

Why the sword is given to the Magistrate.
And truly Kings and magistrates have therefore received the sword at Gods
hand, yea even in the church, that they may maintain public quietness, and
punish al such as trouble the peace. But experience witnesses that the public
quietness is disturbed by falls teachers: whereupon it follows, that they may,
or rather ought to be punished by the purse, in their body, or with loss of
life, according to the desert of the trespass or offense. Moreover it is
certain, that the Magistrate has received power to strike blasphemers,
whoremungers, murderers, rebels, and wicked persons with the sword. Now
seeing that false teachers be, blasphemers, and draw men away from the truth
unto lying, and destroy them both body and soul: why should not the magistrate
punish such?

Laws of christen princes concerning religion.
There be many laws of most godly Christen princes, published in the case of
religion, which give commandment to punish idolaters, apostataze, heretics,
and wicked men. I will rehearse one among many of the holy Emperor
Constantines: for he writing unto Taurus P. P, says: It is our pleasure that
in all places, and all cities, the of Idolatry.
temples shall out of hand be shut up, and al liberty of offe^ding taken away
from unthrifts, by prohibiting them from coming there any more. Also we will
that all men abstein from sacrifising. And if they chance to commit any such
thing, let them suffer execution by the sword, and seize upon their goods as
forfeyted. And if the rulers of Provinces neglect to punish the offenses, we
will that they themselves shall have the same punishment.

The same things almost are commanded by the proclamations of Theodosius and
Ualentinian, in the Code of Theodosius, in the second title, and also by
Ualentinian, and Martian in the Code of Justinian, in the xi. title of the
first book. Eusebius in his iii. book of the life of Constantine, copyeth
into his story the whole epistle of the Emperor Constantine, published against
heretics. The same Constantine when he had borne with the Arrians a great
while, howbeit without the fruit that he looked for, at the length perceiving
them to be wilful, commanded that they should be banished for ever, and taken
for diffamed persons, and their books burned, and those to be punished yt
concealed the same.

By the way I acknowledge that there is a measure to be used in punyshing,
Measure to be used in punishing.
and a consideration also to be had between those that offend of a
mischeeuous, and malicious stubburnesse: and those that stick too much to
their own opinion against the true religion, through a simple misseweening
without purpose to do harm. For in this case, al injustice and cruelty, is to
be eschewed: like as also it is a thing most of al to be abhorred, yt those
which are religious indeed, and of a sound opinion, yea and enemies of al
idolatry, superstition, and heresies, should be punished under pretense of
false religion. Of which matter I have entreated in my other books, and
specially in my fifth book against ye Anabaptists. Out of which I have taken
out these things, and put them in here.

But all these things are done to this purpose, Here is concluded the answer
to the articles of accusation.
because that the Bull has alleged it against the Queens Majesty, as an
article of accusation not of the meanest importance: that she has laid
penalties and punishments upon such as were disobedient, and executes the same
upon those that have perseuered in obedience of the Romish sea, as though in so
doing she outraged wrongfully and cruelly against innocents, and such as had
deserved no such thing, and so sinned haynously. The Bull proceeds yet
further in lying and says, that the catholic bishops have ended their days
miserably by pyning away for sorrow in prison. How fond a report this is, the
very thing it self witnesses which is commonly known to all the people of
the whole Realm. Nay rather (as I have learned by men of very good credit) the
popish bishops are handled courteously in England, and far otherwise then they
have deserved. For some of them soiorne at their liberty in the houses either
of the Archbishop or of some of the bishops, and now and then sit at their own
tables, where they fare daintely without penny cost. Other some dwell as much at
liberty as may be, either in their own houses, or in their friends houses: and
a very few (that is to wite, such as are utter enemies of the Gospel, and of
all godliness, troublesome persons, and men that can away with no quietness)
are in deed put in prison, least they might set all things in a broyle:
where they walk at liberty enough, and are not dead and pyned away for sorrow,
but alive and lusty, and pass away, their time merely. These being alate the
champions and hastelers of the popish cruelty, did oftentimes upon very light
suspicions catch up godly men that professed Christ's Gospel, and tormenting
them a long time like butchers, with lothsumnes of prison, darkness, fetters,
famine and racking, at the last put them to most cruel death. The bishop of
Rome (a Gods name) complayneth that these men are misintreated, because they be
kept in prison: and therwithall he condemns that most merciful Queen, of
cruelty. By these things that have been hitherto declared, it may evidently
appear to all men, that the Queen has not offended at all in so doing, but
has in all these things executed her office to her singular praise. Therefore
in ye Bull he concludes his accusation with these words: That all the said
things are so notorious as there can be no excuse, defense, or unsaying in the
matter: he bewrays his shameless sauciness joined with as shameful
foolishnes. For the Queen vnsayeth nothing, she excuses nothing, she seeks
no starting hole at all, she denies not that she has done as she has, but
freely confesses it, and she is neither ashamed, nor affrayd: for the knows,
says, and avouches, that the things which she has done, she has done
lawfully, justly, and according to her office: the which of all defenses is
most effectual, and with the strong blast of it, blows away this most vain
Bull. And as for the things which she has not done, or which she has done
otherwise than the Bull quarelleth: they defend themselves by their own
soundnes without a maintayner.

And thus have I hitherto in all this discourse of mine, The general
conclusion.
cut a sunder the sinews of the foresaid definitive sentence of the Bull that
was published by pope Pius the fifth against the most gracious Queen of
England: for first we showed that the popes fullness of power aforesaid, by
virtue whereof he has uttered his sentence, is but forged and counterfeit and
therefore that the sentence also being pronounced by authority that is forged,
and no authority at all, is most vain. Secondly, aunswering somewhat largely
to every article of the accusation laid in by the Bull, against the Queen: for
which he pronounces sentence against her, and wiping away the coulerablenesse
of the slanders. I have showed that all and eueryone of those articles are
most false, and that the Queen has not offended at all in any of the things,
whereof she is accused: but rather has in all of them discharged her duty to
her singular praise. Upon all the which premises concluding also the whole
latter part of this our discourse, I say and avouch it to appear more clearly
than the Moon light, that the said difinitiue sentence, which Pius the fifth,
has given against the Queen of England, is most partial and unjust. For just
judges pronounce their sentences according to law and equity. But no law, no
equity wills to condemn a party that is vnconuicted, yea and utterly
giltles in the offense that he is charged with. For by Gods own judgment, he
is an unjust, a partial, and a wicked Judge, whosoever he is that condemns a
person which is vnconuicted, yea and clear to, and discharges or acquiteth a
person that is convicted and found guilty in deed. Truly by law Judges hear
the enditementes of the accusers, and likewise on the other side the aunswers
of them that be accused: and yet he that is accused, runs not in any danger
by law, so long as the articles of inditeme^t be not lawfully proved: but
rather if he clear himself of the articles of the enditement by lawful and
evident answer, he is discharged of all domages, and acquit of al fault. Now
forasmuch as it is certainly apparent by the things aforediscoursed, that all
the accusations wherewith the pope has hitherto charged the Queen of England,
and which he has alleged by his Bull, are disproued by just, open, and
evident reasons or aunswers, and therefore that her royal Majesty is not
convicted of any of the faults that be laid against her: It is also certain
and sure therewithal, that the popes definitive sentence, against that giltles
Queen, unable to be convicted of any of ye crimes laid to her charge is both
most partial and most unjust: and that the Pope, which takes upon him as a
Judge in this case, is a most wicked and abominable judge. And yet I will not
say that even he the pope, has contrary to all right and reason made himself
both accuser and judge in this case, and has bables out what so ever came at
his tounges end, and what so ever he listed, but proves not, ne confirms
not any whit of his case.

That the Queen of England is not an heretic, and therefore not stricken
with the popes curse, nor cut of from the unity of Christ's body.
ALthough the Bull be now sufficiently confuted, and the Queens innocence
defended and declared, and the popes outrageous tyranny, cruel wrong, and
excessive vnindifferencie laid forth, so as his most unjust definitive
sentence may easily and by very good right, be ouerpassed, despised, yea and
laughed at: yet shall it not grieve me, even for an overplus, to peruse it
again in sifting it by peecemeale. The same has chiefly four points. First
the pope declares and denounces the Queen of England to be an heretic, and
a bolsterer of heretics, and therefore that she is stricken with his curse, and
cut of from the unity of Christ's body.

But it has been showed in many words already, that the Queen is a catholic
and Christian princess, and not guilty of any heresy or crime. Whereupon it
follows, that the pope by his condemning of so giltles and rightbeleuing a
Prince, bewrays and utters himself what he is, namly even one of those of
whom Peter has said, 2. Petr. 2.
They despise higher powers: presumptuous are they and stubbern, and fear not
to speak evil of them that be in authority etc. A few years past, the
reverend Bishops of England did setfoorth a godly and learned Apology: in the
third chapter whereof chiefly they show how the Realm of England has no
aliance at all with heretics, or heresies. In the same they plainly and
steadfastly profess their faith, and openly declare themselves to be of a sound
and christian religion, eloquently and truly washing away all the accusations
and slanders of the papists. It is more manifest, then that it needs to be
reported with many words, what ye Doctors, Who is an heretic.
divines, and ministers of the Church of Christ's time have thought to be
heresy, and whom they have demed to be heretics. As for the law of Lucius
the third, concerning the suppressing of heresy (which is registered by
Gregory the ninth, in the third book of decretalles, and the seventh title
concerning heretics) whereby the popes devise, and shape all their judgments
and condemnations. Wise men and godly men have always deemed it tyrannical,
contrary to the judgments of holy and religious antiquity: and therefore we
think it not worth the naming, and we esteem all the decrees that be formed
and pronounced according to the same, to be tyrannical. Yet notwithstanding I
can not stay my self, but I must needs at this present rehearse the opinion
of the ancient writer Tertullian concerning this matter. In his book of the
veyling of Virgins, Heresies (says he) are overcome, not so much by newness,
as by truth. What so ever favors otherwise than of truth, the same is
heresy, yea though it be eue^ ancient custom. And again in Prescriptions of
heretics. Heresies (says the same author) are termed of the Greek word, as
in respect of the choice which a man uses either in the mayntayning, or in the
receiving of them. And therefore he says that an heretic is condemned in
himself, because he has chozen the thing wherein he is condemned. But it is
not lawful for us to do any thing upon our own head: nor to choose the thing
that an other man has brought in of his own head. We have the Lords Apostles
for our warrant, who chose not any thing of their own head to bring in, but
faithfully delivered over to all nations the discipline that they had received
of Christ. And therefore if even an Angel from heaven should preach any
otherwise unto us, we would hold him acursed. Thus far Tertullian. Wherefore
seeing that the Queen has chozen nothing of her own head, to deliver to her
subjects, but only has betaken to them, prophetical and Apostolical truth
of the scriptures to be followed: her majesty is utterly discharged of the
crime of heresy. And seeing that the romish opinions, and the popish rites and
ceremonies differing from our opinions and ceremonies, are nothing else but
opinions invented by men's own brains, and selfchozen ceremonies. Let the
Romanistes consider, to whether of us, the crime of heresy may iustlyest be
imputed, and to whom it sticks fastest. Besides this, the Imperial laws
command all that be under the Empire, to follow that religion which S. Peter
delivered to the Romans. And it adds: We pronounce, that such as follow this
law, embrace the name of catholic Christians: and that the rest are to be
taken for heretics, judging them to be mad, and out of their wits. But the
Queen will have nothing to flourish in her realm, but the Apostolic doctrine:
ergo she is a catholic, and not an heretic: neither favors she heretics,
nor can abide to have heresies taught in her realm, nor cherishes such as be
stained wc the spotte of heresy: but rather even for the same cause she has
banished the romish traditions and popish ceremonies out of her whole Realm,
least she might be said to bear with any thing against the Apostolic doctrine
and Christian Ceremonies.

And therefore the thunderclap of that Tarpeian or Roman Jupiters curse, The
curse of the Tarpeian Jupiter is not to be feared.
wherewith he will have the Queen to seem to be stricken through, is but a
blockish thu^derbolt, and no more to be feared, then the thunderclappes,
smokes, and mistes of Cacus were to be feared of Hercules, as has been said
already before. The blind man to whom Christ had given eye sight was in old time
cast out of the Synagoge of the Pharisees. But that excommunication was so
far from hurting him, that from thence forth he was received into Christ's
household by the Lord Christ himself, who in his Gospel prophesying of the
things that are now accomplished by the Pope, John. 16.
said: They shall thrust you out of their Synagoges. Yea and the time comes
that who soever kills you, he shall think he does God service. And these
things shall they do unto you, because they have not known the father nor yet
me. But I have told these things unto you, to the intent that when that time is
come, ye may remember what I have said unto you.

Wherefore it hurts not the Queens Majesty a whit, The Queen is not cut of
from the unity of Christ's body.
that she is said to be cut of, truly not from the unity of Christ's body, but
from the fellowship of the Popish corporation. For were she not cut of from
this, verily she could not be reckened among the true and lively members of
Christ's body: neither could she have God to be her father, if she could find
in her heart to be an obedient daughter to the Sir that sits upon mount
Tarpey, devouring his own sons and daughters like Saturn. For the Lord
wills his children to get them out of Babylon if they mind to escape the
plagues of God, and to atteine true salvation. And we be not kept in the unity
of Christ's body, (which is the Church of the living God) by obeying and
reuerencing the Roman Church and the Bishop thereof: but by true faith in
Christ according to the Gospel of God. He that wants this, or he that
impugneth this, has no communion at all, neither with Christ nor with the
Church, how much soever he pratle of the unity of Christ's body.

That the Pope of Rome does falsely and tyrannously give sentence that the
Queen of England is deprived of her kingdom and of all right of her crown.
AFterward the Pope in his said definitive sentence determines peremptorily
that the Queen of England is deprived of her crown and of all right of her
crown, and of all other authority, dominion, dignity, and privilege
whatsoever. But who has made the Pope a souerein Monarche over the whole
world, to reign alone, and to have all kingdoms under him, and to hold all
kings and princes under his allegiance as his vassals or tenauntes at will, so
as he might set them up or thrust them out of their kingdoms at his pleasure?
Heretofore when I discoursed upon Ieremies words I have set thee over kings
and kingdoms etc. I have showed openly and sufficiently enough, (so as there
needs no more at this time) that the Pope is not set over kings and
kingdoms by God, but rather usurps superiority and power over kings and
nations, contrary both to the open example and commandment of the Lord.
Therefore as now I will add no more but this, that the Pope does falsely or
rather through mere tyranny without any right or regard of shame challenge to
him self this power, which the Lord never delivered to any man. For the wise
Prophet Daniel says: Dan. 2.
Wisdom and power belong unto the Lord. He it is that alters the times, and
chaunges of times. He it is that puts down kings and sets up kings.
Job. 12.
The same thing also have Job, and David in his Psalms affirmed before him. Yea
and the holy histories setting forth the same thing most plenteously, declare
that God ordained Saul king of the Israelites by the Prophet Samuel, 1.
Samuel. 9.10.12.15.
and by the message of the same Prophet deposed him again for his disobedience
and rebellion, aduauncing David to his room, 1. Sam. 16.
a man according to Gods own heart. Again, under Solomon Dauides son, the
kingdom was rent a sunder, 1. Kings. 11
and God by the message of his Prophet Ahia gave ten parts of the kingdom to
Jeroboam: and those ten parts of the kingdom were not taken away from Solomon
and his posterity for any other cause, then for that Solomon him self had
withdrawn his heart from God, and allowed his outlandish wives wherewith to set
up and exercise their Idolatry. But the same Jeroboam is deposed again, 1.
Kings. 14
and none other cause of his deposing (by the report of the same Ahia the
Prophet) then for that he hearkened not to the word of the Lord, but according
to man's policy upon a good intent of his own, made him strange Gods, and set
up the same for the children of Israel to worship, and cleaued not incorruptly
to the word of the Lord. 1. Kings. 15 16.
Other kings of Israel also were deposed from from their kingdom by God, as
Baasa, Ela, Achab, and such other like, and for none other cause, then that
they had lever to follow the Idolatry of Jeroboam, then the word of the Lord.
2. Kings. 9.10.
Furthermore, when Iehu had destroyed Iezabell king Achabs wife and all his
posterity, and therewithal made clean riddance of all the Priests of Baal,
yea and beaten down the Temple of Baal and made a draught of it: the Lord said
unto him, for as much as thou have earnestly executed the thing that is right in
mine eyes, and done unto the house of Achab according to all that was in my
heart: thy sons shall sit upon the seat of Israel to the fourth generation.
I could rehearse many other things of this sort, no less notable then these,
but that I seek to be brief as far as the matter gives leave.

And I have rehearsed these things to the end that all men may manifestly
perceive, God used the service of his Prophets in puttyng kings down.
how it is God himself and not the pope, that creates kings and displaceth
them, yea and which remoueth, shakes, overthrows, repaireth, and stablisheth
all kingdoms universally and severally. Now although he have disposed it by
his messengers the Prophets, as by Samuel, Ahias, Eliseus, and others: yet is
not the Pope called to these matters, as those men were, neither has he
received any commission from God in this case, so much as by one little word:
but rather is commanded to attempt no such thing. Besides this, God deposed
kings as it were extraordinarily by the Prophets and not by the high Priests
(which were ordained by God to be in Israel with the kings) least the
kingdom and the Priest hode might be set at odds between them selves.
Therefore although ye Pope were the souerein Bishop, yet should not the
disposing and ordering of kings belong to his charge. Moreover if a man
consider wherefore God deposed those kings by the mean of his Prophets: the
Queen of England has wherewith to comfort and confirm her, and the Pope has
that which graffeth him into the number of false prophets, discorageth him,
and utterly overthrows him. For Ahias said out of the mouth of the Lord unto
Jeroboam: if thou will hearken to my commandments and walk in my ways, as
my servant David did, I will be with thee and I will build thee a sure house,
and so forth as follows, in the third book of kings and the xj. chapter. And
I have already rehearsed out of Gods word what reward Iehu reaped at Gods hand
for taking away of Idols, Idolatry, and Idolaters. Seeing then that the Queen
of England has made reformation in her Realm according to Gods word, and
taken away the Idols and Idolatry of Baal, yea and Baals chapels and temples,
and his chapleynes also together with all Popish abominations: she has not
lost her kingdom, but rather knit it more strongly unto her, and is sure of
Gods protection and favor, and by Gods grace shall always be sure of it, if
she continue in the faith. Therefore there is no cause why her most gracious
Majesty should be troubled any whit at the Popes most perverse sentence of
deposition. For God in his word has given a contrary sentence to the Popes,
so as the pope is most manifestly reputed among the false Prophets. Also in
the times of Ioachim, Iechonias, and Zedechias kings of Judah, there were false
Prophets and favorers of Idolatry, which warranted good luck to these
Idolatrous kings, and cursed the king of Babylon (whom God had stalled in the
kingdom, and whom he would have to reign, and who afterward in the time of
Daniell was turned from Idols to the true God,) and drew away the miserable
people from his obedience. But they were grievously rebuked and disproued by
Gods holy and true Prophets Jeremy and Ezechiell, who prophesied that all
manner of miseries should be powered out upon the Idolaters: according as the
falling out of things proved in the end by Gods large pouring out of a sea of
miseries upon them. The same God also a threescore and ten years after,
overthrew the kingdom of Babylon, chiefly for Idolatries sake, as it is read
in the fifth chapter of Daniell: and conveyed the Empire to Cyrus king of
Persia, who proclaimed the true God of Israel, and let Gods people go free out
of captivity, and commanded Gods temple and holy Ceremonies to be set up
again. Therefore after so great light of Gods word, and the goodly consent of
the holy histories, there is no cause why any Princes or sacred Magistrates
should be afraid of the Balaamish popes cursinges, deprivations, and manaces,
brandished and denounced for putting away Idolles and for treading under foot
that new Baalishnesse the Popery. For God likes well of all such as reverence
Gods word, reforming them selves purely according to Gods word, and framing all
things in Rellgion by the same. But it is most manifest that Gods word
condemns and rejects all Idolatry, and all serving of God that is
counterfeit and devised by man's good intent, invented and received at the good
pleasure and appointement of men, without Gods word or against it.

That the Bishop of Rome can not discharge them of their oath which are sworn
to the Queen For the trothe that is once plighted must be kept both to good
and bad.
Moreover, look how many soever within the noble Realm of England have in any
wise sworn to the Queens majesty, the Bishop of Rome utterly discharges
them from such oath, and from all dewtie of subjection, fealty, and obedience.
But we ask him again, from whence he has that power, and what God or rather
what feend has given him commission to release those of their oath once made,
and of all dewtie, and of all their rightful obedience, whom the true God
himself in his own true word openly and streitly binds to keep their
promise? he is not able to allege so much as one little word out of Gods book,
for this power of his which he leawdly surmiseth, worthily therefore is this
traiterous ambition and rashness of his spitted at: and the faithful know
that they must obey their gracious Queen by the commandment of God.

Promises must be broken in evil cases.
For whereas the Bishops soothers allege certain things in maintenance of their
treachery, out of Gratian 22. Quaest. 4. and chiefly this saying of Isidore: In
evil promises go back from thy word: and such other things, which the
Lombard gathers together about the end of the third book of his sentences:
and that Iehu the king of Israel called all the Priests of Ball to make
sacrifice, and when they were at their business brake promise with them and
slew them every mothers son: and also that the Counsel of Constance were of
opinion that there was no promise to be kept with heretics: They make nothing
at all for the beawtifying of their most rightlesse case. For by sound
judgment we willingly admit the examples of David and Herod, and the
sentences of Ambrose, Isidore, and Bid, which are alleged by the Master of
the Sentences. But we say further, that the oath which the nobility and
commons have made to the Queen of England, is not to be accounted among evil
promises, and unadvised vows or oaths: but among such promises and oaths as
are promised and confirmed with swearing, by the commandment and allowance of
God. Wherefore I say, that those oaths must in any wise be performed, and in no
wise reuersed. And who soever teaches that they are to be reuersed, he
provoke Gods wrath against himself, and puts them that obey him, in
danger of Gods grievous judgment.

Certesse as for Iehus deed in sleaing the Priests of Baal, Iehu the king of
Israel sleaing of Baals Priests.
God disallowed it not, for he said openly that he had done the thing that was
rightous in Gods sight, and the thing that was in Gods heart. But this was a
singular or peculiar deed, like as certain of Sampsons doings were, and of
certain other noble men, which are not setforth in the Scriptures for every
man to follow, being not rightly called thereunto by God. For we know we must
live according to laws, and not according to custom nor after the example of
particular deeds. But the law commands that we should not lie, or deceive
any man by couin or craft, and much less then may we defile our selves with
perjury. The things are known well enough which Austen has discoursed to
Co^sentius against lying. We may add hereunto, that king Iehu bound not
himself by any solemn oath to the Priests of Baal: but only allured them by
putting them in hope that he would offer a right great and sumptous sacrifice:
and that the Priests being blinded with their own naughtiness and their
ouereager desire of Idolatry, came flocking by heaps, and therefore suffered
just punishment in Gods behalf, for their own sturdy wickedness and their
unappeasable hatred toward the true Religion and true Ministers of God.
Neither is this to be ouerpassed here, that Iehu commanded diligent search to
be made in the temple least there might be any of the Lords Prophets among
the wicked Priests of Baal: meaning thereby, that the true servants and
worshippers of God, must not be punished or put to death with the offenders and
Idolaters that be hated of God. Which thing does strongly assault and battre
the purpose and indeuer of the Roman Bishop, whose greedy gaping is for
nothing else but the destruction of the true servants and worshippers of God.
His desire is to advance and maintain Idolaters, and to oppress and destroy
the true servants and worshippers of God. And to bring this to pass, he is
not ashamed at all to pretend, and dissemble, to lie, to deceive, and to deal
craftily, to lay wayt, to forswear, yea and in the end to murder cruelly.

Whether promise be not to be kept with heretics.
But admit we should grant, that promise is not to be kept with heretics and
infidels that be enemies of our faith: yet ought it to be first proved, that
the Queen of England is an heretic and such a one as promise is not to be
kept unto. But that the Queen of England is of a right opinion, Catholic, and
no heretic, I have already abundantly, evidently and clearly enough declared.
Therefore promise ought to be kept with her: and they that be sworn unto her,
can not be released of their oath by any law of God or man. The Council of
Constance.
As for the Council of Constance, it has in many other things (and specially
in the Decree of the xiij. Session,) set forth Decrees openly against Christ
the Lord and against his most holy Gospel. And therefore it is of no authority
among godly and well minded men. For not even S. Austen him self would have any
Councels (of what sort so ever they be or have been) to be had in any
estimation, if they disagree with reason, right, and Scripture.

Hereby thou may learn what it is to break promise even with infidelles.
And truly about a xxvj. years after the holding of the Counsel of Constance,
those holy fathers, according to their own rule, That promise ought not to be
kept with heretics and infidels, executed that power of theirs in discharging
Ladislaus king of Hungary and Pooleland from the oath which he had lawfully
made of Amurathes the Emperor of Turkey. For Iulianus Caesarinus the Legate of
Eugenie the iiij. the Bishop of Rome made a very long oration in the presence
of King Ladislay, and the Nobility of his realm: the only drift whereof was,
to make the King and his noble men believe, that the league which they had made
with the king of the Turks being an Infidel, was to be broken, and the
promise made unto him to be reuersed, but in any wise to keep league with the
bishop, who represents the person of God upon earth. Which thing if ye do
not (says he) I fear me lest even as Judas betrayed Christ, so you will seem
to betray Christ's vicar: and so lest you find God your utter enemy herafter,
whom ye have always hitherto found helpful and favorable in your affairs.

But harken (I pray you) how helpful and favorable the king and nobility
found God toward them, according as the false prophet Cesarinus bare them in
hand, after they had concluded to break promise with the Turk, and to make
horrible war upon him, when he looked for no such thing. Truly at the
battle of Waray which was the greatest of all others, The 10. of November.
1444*
when it was likely that all should have gone to wrack on both sides,
Amurathes plucking out of his bosom the book of the league that was
concluded, and solemnly sworn, opened it, and looking earnestly up into
heaven, said: These even these, O Jesus Christ, are the couenauntes which thy
Christians have made with me: they have sworn solemnly by thy Goohead, and
broken their promise made in thy name, and like falls forsworn persons have
denied their God. Now Christ if thou be God (as they say, and we be borne in
hand) I pray thee revenge here the wrongs and mine, and show the punishment of
promise-breaking to such as know not yet thy holy name* He had scarce said
these words, but the battle which had been uncertain and doubtful a long
while, began to incline (like as we read also how it came to pas after the same
sort long before that in ye time of Clodeway the first king of France, by reason
of his calling upon Christ, in a battle against the Almanes) and fortune
turned against the Christians, so as being weeryed and tired with fighting all
the day long, they turned their backs, and were miserably slain. In that
battle the King himself was slain, who otherwise was a very good prince, and
worthy of commendation, and with him were slain the chief of his nobility,
and stoutest men of war: also there was slain the soothsayer of Tolumne,
Cesarinus. Scarce the third part of the kings army returned. Platina in the
life of Eugenye the fourth, numbreth above thirty thousand Christians that
were slain, and lays all the blame of this misfortune upon Eugenie the
pope. He that desires to know the whole story, (which is undoubtedly both
notable and terrible) shall find it set out at large in Antonie Bonfine, in the
sixth book of his third Decade of the matters of Hungary. Also the same author
geuth warning advisedly, that God did justly revenge the breach of promise upon
the Christians. By all which things it appears manifestly, how well God
lyketh the decree of the counsel of Constance, That promise is not to be kept
with heretics and infidelles.

The promise that is made lawfully* must be kept always and to all persons.
Doubtless the catholic truth teaches men expressly, to keep their lawful
promise, assurance, or oath at al times, as well to the bad as to the good, that
is to wit, both to beeleuers, and unbelievers or infidelles. For our Lord in his
law commands all and every person, Exodus 20. Leuit. 22. Ephesians. 4.
that they lie not, ne commit perjury by breaking their promise. But indeed he
lies, which utters an untruth with a purpose to deceive: for commonly men
say that to lie, is nothing else, but to speak against a man's own knowledge,
for liars speak one thing and think an other. And Gelasius in the decreees,
Lib. 22. Quest. 4. which begins with, S. Paul: etc. That man lies in
committing perjury, which knows the thing to be untrue which he swears:
for (as Saint Austen says) a lie is an untrue utterance of the voice with a
purpose to beguyle. As for example, When the pope promises safety of lymme and
life to such as he esteems to be heretics, (but in deed are rightheleuers
and catholics) and yet purposes in his mind to deceive them by opening them
the gap of that hope, and so to bring them in peril of life, lymme, and all
worldly substance, that is to say, to destroy them cruelly, which was the thing
that he purposed, when he guilefully promised them safety, and therefore
promised it, to the intent he might destroy them. This is a shameful lie, and
a cursed and abominable periurye. Whereof the Prophet has spoken saying:
Psalm. 5.
Lord thou hate all them that commit iniquity, and wilt destroy them that
speak lies. The Lord abhors a bloudthirsty and deceifull or falseharted man.

Therefore when Iosue, and the Elders of Israel had made a league of peace with
the Gabaointes, who came with a false tale, and (as ye would say) beguiled the
people of God, yet they nevertheless kept promise with them vnimpeached, even
after they had found out their deceit. Whereupon Ambrose in his book of duties,
and Austen unto Boniface, give us to understand, and that full rightly, that
the promise that is once made, must be performed, yea even unto our enemies,
and to evil men, and infidelles. Besides this, certain hundred years after,
the people of Israel were punished with a sore dearth, for Saules breaking of
the leage that was made with ye Gabaonites, and amends could not be made for
the fault, until seueu men of Saulss posterity were hanged to death under the
reign of David, according as it is read written in the second book of Samuel,
the xxi. chapter. And like as our Lord says in the Gospel. that the
Ninevites, and the Queen of Saba shall judge the Jews at the day of judgment:
Even so there is no doubt, but that Marcus Attilius Regulus, and the whole
Senate of Rome, which were heathen men, shall condemn these most blessed
fathers, forasmuch as they esteem it a thing of nothing to break the promise
that is made, yea, and confirmed eue^ with an oath: but the Romans kept promise
that a man would wonder at it, yea even to their enemies. The histories bear
witness of these things in many places

Jeremy reaches that promise is to be kept even with infidelles.
The Prophet Jeremy exhorts Gods people with many words, and very earnestly to
keep promise with Nabuchodonozor, though he were a heathen prince, and an
infidel, and to obey him, and to pray to God for his welfare. Ezechiel also
speaking of the unfaithfulness of Zedechias toward Nabuchodonozor, Ezech. 17.
says: He has set light by his oath, and broken his covenant, even when he
had given his hand upon it. All these things has he done, and therefore he
shall not escape. As truly as I live (says God) I will bring mine oath which
he has despised, and my covenant which he has broken, upon his own head.
These sayings are more apt and fit for our present case, than that they read
to be expounded and applied with many words.

The doctrine of the Apostles concerning this matter.
None other thing taught Christ's Apostles in the new Testament: for Peter
teaches men expressly to perform faythfulnes, even to wicked masters and
rulers. Let servants (says he) obey their masters, not only if they be good
and gentle, but also if they be crabbed. etc. A little before having spoken also
of the magistrate, he commands the faithful to obey them: for so is Gods
will, that we may stop the mouths of foolish men by doing well. And we know,
that in the Apostles days, the Lords and masters were heathen men or
infidelles. 1. Tim. 6.
Likewise S. Paul instructing servants says: As many servants as be under
the yoke, let them esteem their masters worthy of all honor, lest the name of
God, and his doctrine be il spoken of. Which thing the Apostle speaks of
heathen and unbelieving masters: for against these he macheth the beleuers
saying forthwith: And they that have believing masters let them not despise
them, because they be brethren, but let them be the more serviceable to them
because they be beleuers. After the same manner speaks he in Romans 13. and Tit.
3. and in other places, of perfourmance, of faythfulnes, and obedience to the
heathen magistrate. And we also inferring upon these things after the same
manner say: If the faithful be bound to wayward and unbelieving masters, how
much more are the Englishmen bound by Gods commandment to keep their promises
and oaths made to their Queen, being a faithful, holy, and gracious Prince?

And men agree also with God in this behalf: For of many things, The fourth
counsel of Tolet wills men to keep promise made unto princes.
I will allege but this one. About ye year of our Lord 630. or as other
reckon 681. under Sisenand king of Spain, at the city of Toledo in Spain,
there was hild a competent Synod, wherein this case of performing oaths sworn
unto Princes is diligently entreated of. The said Synod is commonly called the
fourth counsel of Toledo. Among other things they make a decree in these
words: Can. 74. The report goes that many nations are so falseharted, that
they neglect to perform the promise, which they have made by oath unto their
own princes, and pretend to swear with their mouths, when they wickedlye
purpose to forswear themselves in their hearts. For they swear to their
kings, and impeach the faithfulness which they have promised, and they are not
affrayd of that book of Gods judgment whereby cursednes is brought upon such
as swear by the name of God lyingly. What hope the^ shall such people have
against their enemies, when they be in danger? What credit is to be given them
any more in making peace with other contries? what leage will they not break?
what assurance sworn to the enemies shall stand stable, when they keep not their
promises sworn to their own kings? for who is so mad as to cut of his own
head with his own hands? But they (as it is well known) forgetting their own
salvation, murder themselves with their own hand by turning their own force
against their Kings and themselves. And whereas the Lord says: Touch not mine
anointed. And whereas David says, who can lay his hand upon the Lords
anointed and be giltlesse: they are not affrayd to fall into perjury, nor yet
to destroy their own kings. For promise is made to the enemies, and not
broken. Now if faythfulnes take place in war, how much more is it to be
observed in all other things? For it is hye treason to God, if people impeach
their faythfulnesse promised to their Kings. The pope then teaches high
treason against God, when he discharges me^ of their oath made to the Queen.
For the offense is committed not only against them, but also against God, in
whose name the promise is plighted. Heerupon it comes to pass, that the
wrath of God has so altered many kingdoms upon earth, that one of them is
lozoned from another, for the wickedness of their promise breaking and evil
behauior. Wherefore it behooves us to take warning at such chances of nations,
that we be not likewise stricken with swift plague, and punished with cruel
punishment: Mark these things.
for if God spared not the Angels that transgressed against him, but thrust
them out of their heavenly habitation for their disobedience: wheruppon also he
says by Esaias: Esaias. 34.
My sword has been bathed in heaven: how much more must we fear the loss of
our salvation, lest we perish for our unfaithfulness through the vengeance of
the same sword of God? But if we will eschew Gods displeasure, and be desirous
that he should turn his rigor into mercy. A very godly saying.
Let us keep the reverence of religion, and fear toward God, and perform
the faithfulness and allegiance, that we promise to our Princes. Let there not
be in us, as there is in some nations, wicked wilynes of unfaithful dealing,
nor truthles treachery of deceitful meaning, nor villainy of false forswearing,
nor traiterous practicing of conspiracy. Let no man among us vsurp the
kingdom through presumptuousnes, let no man set his contrymen together by the
ears, let no man imagine the destruction of Kings: but when a prince is
departed in peace: Let the noblemen and clergy of the whole realm dispose the
succession of the kingdom by common advice, that while we retain the unity
of concord, no man may practice the disquietnesse of his contry and realm by
violence and ambition.

This is a just curse, plain contrary to the popish curse.
But if this warning correct not our minds, ne brings our heart to the regard
of the common welfare: Hear our determination. Whosoever of us or of all the
people of Spain, shall by any conspiracy or practice, break his oath which he
has made for the welfare of his country, and the nation of the Goths, or for
the preservation of the kings estate, or shall lay hands upon the kings
person to murder him, or depose him from his royal authority, or by
tyrannical presumption usurp the crown: Cursed be he in the presence of God
the Father, and of his Angels, and let him becomme a forreiner from the
Catholic church, which he has defiled with his perjury, and a stranger to
all companies of Christians, with all the partakers of his wickedness. For it is
meet that they which be wrapped in one offense, should also be subject to one
punishment. And this their definitive sentence they double twice or thrice,
still beating and harping upon it. Which things I have hitherto rehearced, and
many other of the same sort could I allege, but that I know that these are
enough to such as use reason.

Let the pope then go as he is worthy, The conclusion of the place concerning
the discharge of the oath.
with that absolution of his, not Apostolical, but apostaticall and
diabolical, whereby he discharges the Nobility and Commons of England of all
fealty and obedience, shamlesly and openly teaching them to practice wicked
rebellion, treason, and cursed perjury, against their Queen, set over them
by God, which vices God (according to his righteousness) has always hated, and
utterly abhorred. Yea and he him self also is stricken with the curse even now
rehearced, and justly pronounced against forswearers, by ye fathers in the
fourth Counsel of Tolet, because he is not only forsworn himself, but also
teaches forswearing. Nay rather he shows by this as a most certain marcke,
2. These. 2.
how he is the man of sin of whom the Apostle speaks. For like as he
himself swarmeth and ouerfloweth with sins and wickedness, even so does he
entice and enforce all men into sin and wickedness, by his publications or
decrees. Therefore look to thy self O England, and beware of this man of
sin, whom God coming down from heaven to judge the quick and the dead,
Apoc. 19.
shall shortly wype away, and (according as John has truly foretold) throw
him headlong into a lake of fire burning with brimstone, together with all
those that have more willingly obayed him, that is to say, to Antichrist, than
to Christ.

That the Nobility and Commons of England must not obey the popes
commandment, nor fear his curse. And here is showed what thing subjects owe
to their Princes, by Gods appointment, and how grievously God has always
punished rebels and sedicious persons.
The bloody sentence of the pope.
LAstly the Bishop of Rome in his definitive sentence, commands all the
Nobility and People of England that be subjects to the Queen, that upon
pain of his curse, they obey not her Majesty's laws and commandments
hereafter. What shall they do then? Marie, forsake their allegiance, and cast
of the yoke of obedience, and with hurliburly rise up against the Queen, whom
God has given them to be their sovereign Lady, and thrust her from her
crown, and through unspeakable treason murder her, and then set all the
Realm on a broyle, beat down all the faithful, and rid them out of the way,
fill all places with slaughter, and confound heaven and earth together. These
are the counsels and commandments of this blissed sire, borrowed of that
father of his, of whom the Lord speaks in his Gospel, John. 8.
saying: You are of your father the devil, and you will follow the desires of
your father. He was a murderer from the beginning, and continued not in the
truth, because there is no truth in him. They therefore that love godliness,
and their own salvation, and the honor, peace, and welfare of their own
country (as every good and godly man must of duty do) let them fly as far
as may be from this devilish, cruel, and bloody decrees of the pope. Neither
is there any cause why they should fear to incur the displeasure of almighty
God, for disobeying the Popes Decrees. For the Pope has published those
Decrees against God and against the true word of God. Princes must be obeyed.
For God has taught things plain contrary and fighting full but against the
Popes Decrees: namely that every man ought to yield both honor and fear to his
Prince or Magistrate, and also to pay him tribute and custom, and perform due
subjection and obedience to him. And these things are to be read word for word
written by the Apostle Paul in the xiij. to the Romans.

For subjects ye and all good men must both think and speak reverently and
honorably of their Princes or Magistrates, Princes and Magistrates must be
honored.
as whom God in his word vouchsaueth to call by the name of Gods, as by whom
God himself governs, judges, defends, bridleth, and preserves his
people. In consideration whereof, in the book of Judges, judges be termed
Saviors. Which thing al subjects ought to acknowledge, with a certain
reverence, admiration, and giving of thanks. For we be commanded to make
earnest intercession for our Princes in our prayers unto God: we be commanded
to love our Magistrate unfeignedly, and in a comely, decent, and diligent wise to
honor them with the honors accustomed to each country. So have all the holy
Priests, Prophets, and faithful servants of God done to their king: as it
is to be seen in many places of the holy Scripture. Besides this, it is an
express commandment in Gods law, Exodus 22.
Thou shall not speak evil of the Gods, nor curse the Prince of thy people.
Princes are to be feared.
Moreover the Prince is also to be feared of his subjects, that they practice
not any thing against him, and much less make not insurrection against him as
enemies, or move sedition, or otherwise commit ungracious acts and worthy to
be punished. For if thou do the thing that is evil (says Paul, Romans 13.
) then fear: for he bears not the sword in vain. For he is Gods Minister to
punish him that does evil. And truly good men fear their Princes, not as
executioners, but as fathers. For again the Apostle says: Princes are not a
terror to them that do well, but to them that do ill. And will thou not stand
in fear of authority? then do the thing that is good, and so shall thou
receive praise of him.

All duties be to be paid unto Princes.
Moreover, subjects must pay their Princes all manner of tributes, customs, and
all other duties. For again the Apostle says: who goes a warfare at his
own charges? But Princes serve the common weal: therefore it is good right
that they should be maintained of the common charges. Surely Paul says
expressly, even therefore do ye pay tribute: for they be Gods Ministers serving
for the same purpose. Therefore render unto every man his dew, tribute to whom
tribute is due: Custom to whom custom is due: awe to whom awe is due: honor
to whom honor is due. The same Apostle wills subjects also to obey their
Princes, that is to wit, their laws and ordinances, not only that they may
by their due obedience escape the punishments which Princes execute upon the
disobedient: but because it is Gods will we should do so, and we must yield
obedience to his commandment, except we had lever to fall into the hand of
Gods vengeance, although princes punish us not. And this is it that the Prophet
meant by saying, ye must obey, not only for fear, but also for conscience
Also: they that resist the Magistrate procure themselves damnation. And truly
this obedience stretches so far, that if the Prince need thy service in the
wars, for the defense of his Realm against invasions: thou owe even thy
body to thy Prince, yea and thy life, and therefore much more thy goods. These
are the things, these (I say) are the things that all subjects owe to their
souereines by the allowance and commandment of God: and therefore the
Englishmen also owe the same things to their Queen. True it is in deed that
S. Peter said, we must obey God rather then men howbeit, that is in such things
as are commanded expressly against God and his word. But the politic or civil
government is stablished, and not infringed by Gods word. And most of all it
is stablished if the Princes be godly. For the Princes that govern their
people quietly, and enforce not their subjects to any wicked things, but
honor Gods service and spread it abroad more and more: Against seditions and
seditious persons.
are well liked of God and helped by him. And truly, this obedience of the
subjects which God has enjoined them, keeps them in their dewtie, and
persuades them that they attempt not any thing against their Prince or
Magistrate. As for those that rise against their Prince either by privy
practice or open force, and break the common peace: they are not only
disobedient, but also traitors and hated of God. And yet it is the thing that
the Pope in his Bull, not so much teaches as by his manaces indeuereth to
enforce the noblemen and commons of England unto. The noble Realm of England,
through Gods grace, cleaves well together in laws spiritual and temporal,
and the subjects thereof enjoy peace and public profit, by the benefit of
their most gracious Queen. Therefore not to be willing hence forth to obey her,
(as the Pope would have it) what else is it, then to trouble the state of the
whole Realm, and consequently to stir up rebellion and sedition wickedly,
and to procure themselves assured and grievous damnation at Gods hand.

But hear how God has always hated seditious persons, Plagues and
punishments executed upon rebels by God.
and how grievously also he has evermore punished seditio^s. Chore, Dathan, and
Abyron with their accomplices raised a sedition against Moses the chaplein of
Gods people: Number. 16
But the earth opened and swallowed them up with their housholdes and all that
ever they had. A right dreadful example surely, to the intent that none should
hereafter rise against their Princes any more. Number. 13. and 14.
The Israelites also raised an insurrection against the same Moses in the
wilderness. But for their so doing they were shet out of the land of promise,
and by the space of xxxviij. years together overwhelmed with sundry
calamities, tired and forspent with daily trauelyng in the desert, and at
length also in sundry times consumed and made away with horrible kinds of
death. Also in the book of Judges, the Ephraemites made an uproar against
Iephthe who had deserved well at their hands. But through the vengeance of God
for their ungracious rebellion and unthankfulness, there were slain of them
about a xlij. thousand. What befell in David's time to Absolon and Seba the
son of Bithri when they rebelled seditiously against their lawful king
David, it is better known then that if may seem requisite to be setforth in
many words. There are in the holy Scriptures and the wordly histories of
sundry kingdoms, many examples to be seen no less horrible then these, of
seditious persons that were most grievously confounded by the Lord. For the Lord
being rightuous, and a lover of order and peace, never spared any such.

I notable example of Gods grievous punishment upon king Rodolphus for his
perjury and rebellion.
And to the intent I may also bring somewhat out of latter tunes: there is a
notable example of the punishment of traitorous rebellion, and disobedience,
and perjury in king Rafe of Rinfield chosen king of Romans at the
commandment of pope Gregory the vij. against the Emperor Henry the iiij.
lawfully ordained of God, and succeding in the Empire by descent from his
aunceters who were very good Princes. The said Gregory had prophesied out of
that chair of his, in the Easter week, that ye same year (which was the
year of our Lord.1080.) ye false Emperor should dye, adding this protestation
further: never take me more for Pope, but pluck me from the Altar, if the
false Emperor be not dead between this and Whitsontyde. Which prophecy (like
as was the prophecy of Caiaphas) was fulfilled in deed, howbeit after another
meaning then ye Pope thought of. For the false Emperor Rafe who was created
Emperor by the Pope against Henry whom the Pope had deposed, discharging all
his subjects of their faith and obedience toward him: was wounded to death
the self same year. Thrice before, had he traitorously fought with Henry to
his own loss: and now trusting to the prophecy of his blessed dad Pope
Gregory the vij. he repaired his power again the fourth time, and in the
month of October encountered with the army of Henry in the fields of Misnia,
where he was put to shameful flight again, and received a very great loss
and blouddy slaughter? In the same battle, the right hand of the said Rafe was
stricken of: of the which wound he dyed within a few days after, leaving the
Empire which he had received of the Pope, and fulfilling the prophecy of the
Pope his creator. Mark this
It is reported (says Abbas Vspurge^sis in the 238. leaf of his Chronicles,)
that Rafe now drawing toward his end and beholding his right hand cut of,
gave a sore sigh and said to the Bishops which by chance were present: Lo,
this is the hand wherewith I took mine oath of allegiance to my Lord Henry the
Emperor. And behold, now I leave both his kingdom and this present life. See
whether you, that made me mount up into his chair of estate, have led me a
right way: which thing other storywriters report in these words: it was by
your impulsion that I have fought so often vnluckely. Look you to it, whether
you have led me a right way or no. Ge your ways and perform your first faith
plighted to your king: for I shall go to my fathers.

Now ye honorable Peers of England, and thou noble Realm of England in
general, learn ye by all these things, to keep your faith plighted to your
gracious souereine Lady by oath, and to obey her faithfully, to maintain the
peace of the Realm, and to abhor and eschew the trechrie and traiterousnesse
leawdly wound in, or rather wickedly commanded by the father of sedition the
Bishop of Rome that sinful man, to the intent you may also eschew the sore
punishments of God.

How great calamities and how great mischieues the Bishop of Rome has brought
upon kingdoms and nations in Christendom these four hundred, years and
more, in putting down kings, and remouyng kingdoms, and discharging
subjects of their dew fealty and allegiance, by the fullness of their power,
a brief historical declaration or wyndyng up.
Upon occasion of the fore mentioned story of Gregory the vij. and king Rafe,
I will proceed from the time of the said Gregory, almost unto our age, by the
space of four hundred years and odd, briefly compyling and knitting together
how great calamities, and how great mischieues the Bishops of Rome have wrought
to kingdoms and nations in Christendom these four hundred years and more,
in deposing kings, transposing kingdoms, and discharging subjects from their
faith and allegiance, by the fullness of their power to the intent that eue^ by
this horrible butcherie, and confusion of all things, and the sorrowful
rehearsal of most lamentable adventures, all people in Christendom may learn
to know in deed what the Bishops of Rome be whom they still honor, and with
all aduisednesse and constancy, to beware of those Romish Prelates, as of a
dispatching plague both to kingdoms and commonweals, the poison of peace and
welfare, the authors and firebrandes of treasons, wars, civil slaughters,
and all most miserable calamities, and worthily hated of God and all good men.

In the year of our Lord.1045. there arose a very great and noisome schism in
the City of Rome, between three Bishops, Benet the ix. Siluester the iij. and
Gregory the vj. which turmoyled the Church of Rome very daungerously and
outrageously. Of this schism Otho Frisingensis writes thus: Hist. lib. 6.
Cap. 32.
About this time there was a shameful confusion of the Church of God in the
City of Rome, by reason of three Intruders that sealed upon that sea at once,
who (as I my self being in the City have heard the Romans report) led there
a beastly and shameful life. And Beno the Cardinal in the life of Hildebrand,
the Church (says he) by these men's means (meaning the iij. Bishops) was torn
a sunder with a sore schism, mortal wars, and unmeasurable slaughters: and
almost choked with horrible heresies, by giving men poison to drink under
color of honey. And Platina in the life of Siluester the iij. says: The
Bishoprike was come to that point, that who soever could do most by bryberie,
and ambition, I say not by holiness and doctrine, he only obtained the state
of dignity, the good me^ being borne down and rejected: and the rest that is
written freely enough against the most corrupt manners of the Court of Rome. But
the Emperor Henry the third of that name, surnamed the Black, a godly and
stout Prince, gathered a chosen army in Germanye, and enteryng into Rome,
called a Council, and deposed those three Bishops, placing in their room one
Swigger the Bishop of Bamberg whom they call Clement the second.

Hereunto Cardinal Beno adds: The master and ye scholar were both witches.
Which things being stoutly accomplished: the Emperor Henry condemned
Gregory the sixth and his disciple Hildebrand (who afterward was Bishop of
Rome by the name of Gregory the seventh, and would not forsake his master, but
followed him even in his uttermost adversity) to be banished into the parts of
Dutcheland. Notwithstanding, being deceived with overmuch gentleness, and by
means thereof looking neither to the Church, nor to himself, nor to mankind,
he gave the new Idolaters to much scope, whom he ought rather to have shet up
in continual prison, that they might not have infected men, nor never been
heard of any more. But after the said Gregory the sixth was dead in exile.
Hildebrand became his heir as well of his wickedness as also of his money.
Thus much says Beno.

But Hildebrand being unthankful the Emperor for his deliverance, The cause
of Gregory the seuenthes hatred toward ye Emperor Henry the fourth.
kept still the hatred which he had once conceived against him in Germany. For
after he had by violence and evil slightes thrust himself into the Bishoprike
by the name of Gregory the vij: he bent himself wholly to oppress Henry the
fourth the son of Henry the third, of purpose to revenge the carrying away of
his master Gregory the sixth and of himself into Germany, and to confirm
and stablish the souerein power of his Bishops sea, that the Popes might not
hence forth stand in fear of the Emperors. And truly, Henry the third is
reported to be the last Emperor that was able to bridle the Roman Bishops and
to keep them under coram. For although there succeeded many noble and valyant
Emperors in the Empire, which did set themselves stoutly against the Bishops,
and cast some of them down from their seat: yet had none of them so good
luck in bridlyng them as had Henry the third. For the rebellion that was begone
by this Gregory the vij. and anon after continued by his scholars, and
stubbornely increased by their successors, did so break through by main
force, that the Emperors were able to do little, were they never so earnest and
stout. Yea and the time was now come, that ye foresayinges of the Prophets
and Apostles must be fulfilled.

Gregory the 7. against ye Emperor Henry the fourth.
Therefore Gregory the vij. having invaded the seat, and trusting that occasion
was given him to oppress the Emperor Henry the iiij. and to bring to pass
the thing that he had purposed in his mind now many years before: first
puts forth a Bull against the Emperor, wherein he lays sore to his
charge, and burtheneth him with grievous crimes, by spreading those letters of
his over all Italy, Germany, and France. Also he assayth to besotte the
minds of certain Princes of Germany, and to draw them to his side. Which
thing followed his hand a little to luckely. 1076.
Afterward becoming more bold by reason of the favor of the Princes, he
aduentureth to excommunicate the Emperor, and to give sentence against him ye
he should be deposed from his Empire or kingdom, and to discharge all his
subjects of their faith and obedience that they ought unto him.
Excommunicaters of Princes.
He had learned this, not of the Prophets or Apostles, nor yet out of the holy
Scriptures: but of his predecessors Zachary the first, Steven the second
Adrian the first, and Leo the third. Furthermore he commands the Princes to
chose another king instead of Henry that was excommunicated: and least they
might not know whom he would have chosen, he sendes them a crown with this
Antichristly verse engraven in it.

As Christ the Rock the Crown to Peter gave
So Peter would that Rafe the same should have.
Certain princes therefore which had conspired among themselves chose Rafe of
Rhynefild duke of Sweueland, 1079.
yt Emperors own sisters son, and crowned him at Men's. Notwithstanding the
townsmen keeping themselves true to the Emperor, were very sore grieved at the
treason that was wrought against him: wherefore arming themselves in have, and
rushing into the church, they slew as many as they met of Rafes partakers, and
set the church on a swim with blood. Afterward they flew also to the palace,
and set fire upon it: and they followed the matter so whottely, that the King,
and the Bishop of Men's had much a do to escape and save them selves by flight.
Sorrowful turmoyles in Germany.
Anon after there ensued so great a broyle through all Germany, that no pen is
able to express worthily, the sorowfulnes of these times. They that kept
themselves true to the Emperor, were by the Hildebrandines, Gregorians, or
papists, called heretics, schismatikes, symoniakes, traitors, Nicholaites,
and fornicaters, that is to wit, because the priests took wives, which thing
the pope forbad them to do. Yea truly all places were filled and ouerfilled
with injuries, raylinges, murders, burninges, vprores, betrayinges,
rauishings, and all manner of horrible and unspeakable wickedness. Furthermore,
religion was brought into utter contempt almost with all men. Of all which
things, the stories of these times bear witness most abundantly. And this was
the fruit of the fulness of that popish power, whereby he deposes kings,
transposeth kingdoms, and discharges subjects of their faith and obedience.
They that kept themselves faithful to the Emperor, were feign to thrust their
Bishops out of their cities, as rank traitors to the Emperor. And ye preachers
in many parts of Germany, The Germane preachers against the pope, whom they
call Antichrist.
maintayning the Emperors part, enueighed very sore against the Bishop,
affirming him to be Antichrist, and Rome to be Babylon: whereof whosoever desires
more, let him read the fifth book of the Germane history, of John Auentine,
in the leaf 426.

Nevertheless when Rafe the popes king was after many unfortunate battelles
dispatched out of the way: left unhappy Germany might take breath again, or
the Emperor have never so little rest: the bishop by his policies brought to
pass, 1083.
that the Saxons set up Herman prince of Loraine in Lucelbrough, to be their
king against the Emperor. But this man also by the vengeance of God, was
slain, and a great sort with him in the assault of a certain castle, by a
stone that a silie woman cast down from the wall, after the same manner that
Abimelech the son of Gedeon was slain, and so he came to a miserable end.
But all this could not staunche the Bishops unappeasable hatred, and
outrageons crueltye, against the Emperor: for he set up a third adversary and
Antiking against the good Emperor, 1086.
that is to wite, Egbert the Marquis of Saxony, who also a five years after,
was beset by the Emperors guard in a mil besides Brunswike, and there miserably
slain.

The disciples of Gregory the seventh.
This most wicked and cruel monk Gregory, left of his scholars after him,
whom he had so noozeled in his mischeuous devises and horrible arts, that
when they were placed in the bishops sea, they were never a whit meeker toward
the Emperor, then he was. Among these are reckoned Urbane the second, whom
(not without cause) the Cardinal Benno terms, Makebrooyle: and Paschall the
second. Both of them were Monks of Benets disorder, both of them most deadly
enemies to the emperor, bearing the benemous rancor of Hildebrand in their
breast, The (...) stir up the sons against their father.
and executing the same in their horrible deeds: for Urban stirs up the
Emperors son Conrade Liuetenant of Italy, unnaturally against his father. And
Paschall armeth his other son Henry the fifth, a stout prince, ungraciously
against his most noble father also. The tragedy is most cruel and horrible,
which these two sons played by the egging and incensing of the pope. D.
Robert Barnes in the life of Paschall, and many other Storywriters set out the
same at large. The Emperor growing very aged, and being at length tired with
unmeasurable toils, See to what point the popes drove the Emperor.
and most bloody battelles, (for they write that this Emperor was driven by
the leudnes of the popes, to fight three score and two pitched battelles:
wherein he went beyond both Marcus Marcellus, and also Julius Caesar, of whom
Marcellus fought thirty times, and Caesar two and fifty times in like manner)
as he thought to have fallen to composition of peace, and was iorneying
toward Men's to the general Diet of the Empire: he was traitorously
apprehended in his way contrary to assurance given, and most shamefully and
cruelly bereft of his crown and robes of estate at Ingelhen by the Bishops of
Men's, Colon, and Worms. It is a lamentable story, the which is diligently
described by Albert Krantz, in the xxx. chapter of his fifth book of the Saxon
affairs.

At length when the good Emperor being pyned with sorrow had yielded up his
soul unto God at Liege, Malice cease not against the dead.
and was buried in a certain Abbye there: the pope and his faction would not
admit the bishop, and clergy, and people of Liege to the communion, till they
had dug up the Emperoures body again, and bestowed it in an unhallowed
place. These blissed fathers burned in so unreconcilable hatred, that they
could not be satisfied with their most cruel, and continual troubling of him
while he was a live, unless that like a sort of Hienes, they also wreaked
their teene we outrageous woodnes, even upon the holy corse of him being dead.
These truly are the most worthy fruits of that unmeasurable power of the
romish Bishops. I will not rehearce here, what Calixt the second, an other
scholar of Hildebrandes, Calixt against Henry ye fifth.
which came out of the kenell of Cluniak, wrought against Henry the fifth, with
whom he would not come in favor again. till he had granted the Bishop of
Rome the right of inuesting bishops in Germany: which thing had hitherto
belonged to the Emperoures. Then at length he absolved the Emperor from the
bond of excommunication, 1122.
wherein they had wrapped the son, as well ^^ (not without cause) do call
pope Nocent. Innocent the third against the Emperor.
The hatred that this man bare toward Philip was whotter then ever was the
hatred of Uatinius. And that was chiefly for two causes: both for that he was
of the house of the Dukes of Sweueland, which had always set it self, and as
yet did still set it self against the tyranny of the Bishops of Rome: and also
because he had given and assured to his nephew Frederike the second, his
brothers son, the kingdom of Sicill, which was the lawful dowry of his
mother Queen Constance descended to her by right of inheritance from her
father: whereunto the pope also made claim. The Bishop therefore sought by all
means to enforce the Princes of the Empire to admit Barchtold prince of Zaring
for Emperor. But when this device of pope Innocents took not place, the holy
father fell into such a rage, that he burst forth into these words: Either
the bishop shall pluck the crown from Philippes head, or else Philip shall
pluck the bishops mytre from the bishops head. And byanby dealing with the
Princes of Germany for the choosing of a new Emperor, 1199.
he excommunicated Philip. Some therefore of the conspyracie, chose Otho duke
of Saxony to be king against him: of which doing sprang up innumerable
mischeeues. For these two princes maintained bloody wars one against an
other, and oftentimes encountered with exceeding great slaughter. But yet had
Philip always the upper hand. These calamities ar described by John Auentine
in the seventh book of his stories, the 458. leaf. And yet for all this, 1212.
Otho could not make the Bishop to like so well of him and of his service, but
that he excommunicated him also, and deprived him of the Imperial style, and
released the princes of their oath, which were sworn to him as Emperor. With
like fury were Honorius the third, and Gregory the nynth (but Gregory with most
deadly fewd) carried against Frederik the second, 1219.
Gregory the nynth against Frederik the second.
which succeeded Otho in the Empire. Gregory the nynth was Innocent the
thirdes nephew: whose most stately, ambitious, and bold nature bearing hatred
overmuch in mind, did singularlye utter it self in all his sayings and
doings. This Bishop alyeth himself in leage with the greatest part of Italy
against the Emperor. Afterward he publishes three bulls against him, wherein
he calls Gods anointed king, beast, heretic, and all to naught: straightly
charging all faithful Christians, that they obey not the Emperor as a creature
all to cursed. There be six books of epistles of one Peter Uynes, wherein
these things and other of the same sort are to be read, like as they be set
out also by Cuspinian, in the life of Frederik the second, and by other
storiwriters, and also by John Auentine in the vii. book of his stories. No
man that seeks to be brief (as I do at this present) can in few words
comprise the miseries, slaughters, and most bloody treasons, which the popes
that bayted this Frederik the second, (and specially this Gregory the nynth)
styrred up in Italy and throughout all Germany, and other realms, by those
bulls of theyrs like to this Bull (for the devil is no chaingling) which is
now put forth by Pope Pius the fifth, against the Queen of England. Truly
the partaking of the Gwibelines, The Gwelfes and Gwibelines.
and Gwelfes, which sprang up under Innocent the second were greatly renewed
and spread abroad far and wide through all Italy by the practice of this
Gregory the nynth. Of which things Nauclerus in his story of pedegrees 42. fol.
826. writes thus: This desire of partaking is at this time crept so far
abroad, that there is no city, nor people which remains untouched of that
most pestilent infection. For city against city, shyre against shyre, one
part of the people against another part, have gone together by the ears from
thenceforth even unto our days, without any other cause to move them, save
only these parttakinges. Neither only are the antesignes divided that are
borne to the feelde, but also even the colors of things, the fruits of the
earth, the fashions of apparel, the gate of men, the knacking of their
fingers, and the gaping of their mouths, give an incling or resemblance of
whither part they be. Thus much says he.

In what wise the bisshops of Rome have endeavored to keep folk together in
christen unity.
And (to warn you hereof also glauncingly by the way) by these and many other
such like prankes, any man may understand how faithfully the Bishops of Rome
for all their stout and loud bragging, have endeavored to keep christen folk
in the unity of faith and christian charity, seeing it appears more clearly
then the son light, that there was never any man in the world, that has more
sowly disseuered, cut of, and rent a sunder the unity of faith, and of
Christ's body, through parttakinges, strifes, and factions, then the very
bishops of Rome themselves.

Innocent the fourth against the Emperor.
But what shall I say of Innocent the fourth, whom they call the glory of the
Canonistes? This man strayned himself at leastwise to match his predecessors,
if he did not also pass them, in persecuting of Frederik. Therefore when he had
called a Counsel at Lions in France, and summoned the Emperor Frederike
thither: he read sentence of condemnation against him solemnly in the Counsel,
that he should be deprived of the Empire, and of all his kingdoms, according
as the cause of his deprivation, and the form of the sentence giving, are
written in the chapter ad Ap. de sent. and re iud. Lib. 6. and also reported by
Collenutius the storiwriter about the end of Frederikes life, and yet the said
Frederik was on his way thitherward, and had come thither, but that he was
called back again by his friends, and was feign to return into Italye by
reason of a slaughter that the popes accomplices had made of the citizens of
Parma. Immediately wheruppon certain princes of Germany, beying bewitched with
the popes hypocrisy and mischeeuous slights, did at his appoyntme^t and
instigation choose Henry the Lantgraue of Thuring to be Emperor against
Friderik. 1248.
And moreover at the same popes commandment, the Cross was preached every
where against the Emperor.

The preaching of the Cross.
And lest any man might be ignorant what this strange mystery of preaching the
Cross means: ye shall understand that the papists in those days had found
out a spyke and spawne new manner of preaching the cross. For it declared not
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, that is to say his death which is our
life, according as the Apostles, and their Apostles, and the disciples of them
preached in old time. But it published the open defiances and wars which the
pope made, not at his charges but at other men's, according as Daniels prophecy
imported. 1095.
And truly this new manner of preaching the cross began at the first against
the Saracenes under Vrbane the ij. in the time of the Council of Clermount,
when the holy war was Decreed. But afterward, if the popes had denounced any
as heretics, and judged them to be rooted out by force of arms for the same:
They sent out their preachers as vau^tcorrours to preach a Croysie to the
people, that is to wit to blow up a trumpet, persuading yea and by the popes
authority commanding, that as many as were able to bear armor, should take
ye sign of the cross upon them, and serve the Bishop of Rome in his wars.
And if these good fellows behaved themselves ma^fully, (that is to say, if they
slew ye heretics without mercy, and spoiled all that ever they had) there was
promised the^ full remission of sins, and everlasting life. All this
business is by the storywriters of late times called a Croysie. Also together
with this souldierfare, the Bishop (like as he does yet still at this day) was
wont to inioyne his seruau^ts fasting, penance, and praying, thereby to crave
good success of their enterprises at Gods hand. In this strange preaching of
the Cross, the begging Friars showed themselves stoutest servants of the
Popes: and of those also the Dominicane Friars (commonly called the Friars
preachers) were sorer fellows then the rest, wherein they resembled their
founder Dominike very well. For one Bernhard of Lucemborough a Friar of the same
order, in his beadroll of heretics says thus: These things were done under
Innocent the third.
At such time as S. Dominike with xij. Abbotes of the order of Cistertiu^
preached the Croysie against the heretics of Albigia, ye Catholics (that is
to say, the Crossed papists) slew a hundred thousand of them. Of whom one
hundred and four score continewing in their stubbornness against the Church of
Rome, chose to be burned rather then to abjure their heresy. Which thing was
also done. And S. Dominik abode x. years in those quarters, in the office of
preaching and weeding out of heresy, when all the rest returned home to their
own. Thus reports he of his own founder and of that butcherie. Friar
Dominike Canonised for a saint.
Whereby it appears, that ye pope had good cause afterward to canonize him and
make him one of his Saints. Neither is it without cause yt Dominikes mother
being great with child of him, dreamed that she bare in her womb a dog (or as
other say, a wolf) with a firebrand in his mouth, wherewith he did set the
whole world on fire, etc. But I will return to my matter.

Kings chosen against Friderike the second.
Therefore at the Popes preaching of ye Croysie, the Lantgraue of Thuring
addressed himself to the wars. Again there is running to weapon on both
sides, again wretched Germany is by the Popes ince^sing rent a sunder, and
wounded with her own weapons, and slain with civil encounters. Conradus Duke
of Sweueland the son of Friderike and proclaimed king of Romans,
encou^tering the Lantgraue of Thuring, vanquisheth, chaseth, and sleaeth all
his host, for all their being marked with the Cross. The same year the
Lantgraue dyed of a wound. The death of ye Lantgraue.
The princes of Germany that took the popes part, being not yet made the
wiser by their so great miseries, but favoring the Pope more then their own
country: set up another king against Friderike and his son Conrade. For Pope
Innocent sent his Legate Cardinal Peter Capuce into Germany, who calling the
princes together to Colon, caused them to choose William Earl of Holland, king,
against Friderike and Conrade. Which thing wrought new broils in the Empire.

Corradine. duke of Sweueland is oppressed by the Pope.
And forasmuch as Pope Innocent had excommunicated king Conrade also: He ceased
not to persecute his son Corradine the rightful heir of Puell and Sicilie
likewise, and to dispossess him of his fathers heritage. In which matter,
Alexander the fourth, Vrbane the fourth, and Clement the fourth which succeeded
next, showed themselves no flothfull folowers of Innocents steps. 1266.
Whereof Corradine set forth a public proclamation, wherein he lamentably
reckeneth up the sore wrongs, which those Bishops did unto him. And first he
declares how Innocent the fourth anoyed him being yet an innocent and
fatherless, yea and committed to the wardship of the Church, by bereeuing him
of his kingdom and dealing it among his own graundchildren and kinsme^. After
whom followed Alexander, and he allured another man to take his kingdom from
him by force. And Vrbane also showing small vrbanitie toward him, called
Charles king of France out of his own Realm, to take possession of the
kingdom which was due to the said Corradine by descent from his father. And
Clement void of all clemency set up the said Charles as counterking agaiust
Corradine, and so most wrongfully spoiled the right heir of his inheritance.
By means whereof he was compelled to seek his right by rightful force of
arms, which was wrongfully withheld him by the wrongful demeanor of the
Bishops. These things are to be read in the Chronicles of Nauclerus. During
this broyle, Pope Clement the fourth hearing how Corradine was raising a power
in Germany: did put forth a Bull, whereby he forbade all faithful Christians
to call Corradine king of Sicill, or to give him any Council, or aid against
Charles, whom he had crowned king of Sicill for a piece of money. 1268.
Thus the pope blows up the trumpet, and the Christians fall together by the
ears again. It commes to hand strokes: at the first the Germans get the
better hand, and the Frenchmen are put to flight. But when the Germans brake
their array, and fell more greedely to the riffeling of the baggage of their
enemies the^ was meet for them: the Frenchmen falling again in order of
battle, gave a fresh charge upon them unawares, and sleaing them down as they
were escattered, obtained the victory. There were taken two Princes, Corradine
king of Sicile and Duke of Sweueland, and Fridericke Duke of Austriche, who had
taken part with Corradine to aid him. Also there were other Lords and
noblemen taken, who were all carried prisoners to Naples and there kept in very
streyt ward. It is reported that Charles wrate to the Pope for his advise what
he would have done with the prisoners: and that the Pope among others
answered: O blessed saying of a butcherly Bishop.
The life of Corradine is the death of Charles, and the death of Corradine is
the life of Charles. But Robert Earl of Flaunders the son in law of Charles,
by whose advise he had gotten the victory, remembering the state of men's
affairs, counseled Charles to make peace, and to bynd unto him by bond of
alyance these two young Princes of excellent towardness, borne of the noblest
houses in Germany, and the ofspryng of Emperors, wishing that Corradine should
have Charles his daughter, and Frederike his near. But while the time was
prolonged in these consultations. Robert returned home, and then the blood
royal was condemned to death. The Princes are put to death and in the^
surceaseth the ancient ofspryng of the Dukes of Sweueland and Austrich.
And so the xxix. of October being Monday, in the year of our Lord. 1268. a
place was covered with purple, and there was Fridericke first beheaded with an
axe. Whose head Corradine taking up and kissing it with tears, lamentably
bewailed the cruel death of that giltlesse young Prince his dear friend of
whose destruction he himself was the cause. Afterward having greatly complained
of the bitterness and treachery of his enemies, who contrary to all right and
conscience (whereas of all others he was most innocent and blameless) had
bereft him of the heritage which his father, graundfather, greatgraundfather,
and graundfathers graundfather had purchased with their blood, and having
committed his case to the souerein judge, calling upon God the revenger of
trayterousnesse and murder: he appealed to Christ our Lord and God, and to his
judgment seat, and cried unto him for vengeance, with castyng his gloves up
to heauenward, and then in his own right bequeathing these kingdoms to his
Cousin Peter king of Aragon whose graundmother was sister to the Emperor
Friderike, he held out his neck vnfearefully to the execution and had his head
stricken of: lastly, eleven noblemen of Sweueland and Italy suffered the same
execution, Among whom Gerhard of Pisa a noble gentleman was one. Within a few
years after, See here the cause of the long war for Sicilie and Naples
between the Frenchmen and ye Spanyardes
Peter king of Aragon began to lay claim to Sicilie. And the Western
Frenchmen have now about ij. hundred four score and seven years striued with
the Spanyardes for those kingdoms, with exceeding bloodshed, and wasting of the
countries. But in the said two Princes were extinguished the lines of the Dukes
of Sweueland and Austriche, two of the auncientest and noblest houses of
Germany. Afterward Rafe Duke of Haspurge a Swicer, seized upon both the
Duchies, and bestowed them in Fee upon his two sons Albert and Rafe: of
whom, Rafe was made Duke of Sweueland, and Albert Duke of Austriche.

I have recited this pitiful and lamentable story out of John Auentine
somewhat the more at large, Why these things are rehearsed.
because that in it, as it were in a clear glass, a man may behold the
bloudthirstie nature of the Popes, bearing hatred in mind most spitefully, of
couetousenesse and ambition utterly insatiable, malicious in all respects,
outraging with beastly woodnesse and cruelty. And also to what point the
Bulls of the Romish Bishops have driven kingdoms and commonweals, casting
down some and aduauncing othersome, at the pleasure of the Bishops, and also
acquitting the nobility and commons of their fealty and obedience dew to
their Princes. Why God suffers so horrible things against his Saints.
Now if any man in way of objection demand, wherefore God gives these beasts
leave to outrage against all good men, and to bring to pass so great things,
and not rather overthrows the seat and them that sit in the seat: the
answer is ready shapen. The Scriptures must needs be fulfilled, and
specially the prophecy which Daniell utters in these words. The Horn that
grew up, had eyes, and a mouth speaking great things, and his look was grimmer
then all his fellows. And he fought a battle with the Saints and prevailed
against them, until the ancient of years came, and judgment was given to
the high Saints: and so forth as follows in the vij. and eight chapters of
Daniell. In the last end of their reign, when there shall be great store of
wicked folk, there shall stand up a king of a stout countenance, that
understands riddles: and he shall excel in strength, howbeit not by his own
power: and he shall make wonderful havoc, and speed his matters
prosperously, and trouble the strong, and the holy people, and he shall bring
his business to pass luckely, through his own wiliness and crafts. Also he
shall presume great things in his heart, and being furnished with store of
things he shall spoil many men. Furthermore he shall set himself against the
highest Prince, and shall be broken in pieces without hands. 2. These. 2.
For S. Paul also has said, that Antichrist shall be slain (that is to wit
in the hearts of the faithful) not with swoorde, spear, or gunnes, but with
the breath of the Lords mouth, and be quyte done away at the coming of the
judge to the last judgment of the world.

The wonderful inconstancy of the Bishops of Rome
But like as the former Bishops aforesaid drew the Frenchmen into the kingdom
of Sicill, Naples, and Puell: So the latter Popes, that is to say Adrian the
fifth and Nicolas the third sought all the means, that could be, to have them
dispossessed of the same, 1278.
the one of them calling in the Germans, and the other calling in Peter of
Aragon with the Spaniardes, against the Frenchemen. Contrariwise Martine the
fourth advanced Charles the French king again whom Nicolas had displaced, and
restored him again to his former state. Howbeit to no purpose. For all at one
same time the Frenchmen were diminished with a sore slaughter at an
Euensongtime of the Sicilians and driven out of the Isle, 1283.
and Peter of Aragon received in. Who also vanquishing the son of king
Charles in a battle upon the Sea not far from Naples, 1285.
carried him away prisoner into Spain to the great grief of his father. And
Charles himself sailing over into Aphrike, pyned away for pensiveness, a just
punishment as many men then judged, for his most shameful and unjust putting
of the ij. Princes of Sweueland and Austriche to death at the instigation of
the Pope.

But Martine the fourth being moved with Charles misery, The Spanyardes are
set at odds with the Frenchmen.
excommunicateth Peter of Aragon, and gives his kingdom for a pray to him
that would invade it, assoyling his subjects from the bond of their oath, and
finally proclayming a Croissy against him. Besides this, he sent Ambassadors
into France to king Philip, and commanded him to invade the kingdom of
Aragon out of hand. 1285.
Once again therefore when the Pope had sounded his trumpet, they met together
in mortal battle by the river of Geround. And at the first the Frenchmen had
the better: but anon after the Spanyardes get the upper hand. What needs
many words? there was a miserable and sorrowful slaughter, all things were
wasted far and wide, and blood was shed without measure.

As soon as Martine was dead byanby there steps up another Hyen, 1286.
Honorius the fourth. Who (least there might be any abatement of misery)
calls Rafe of Haspurge king of Romans out of Germany to Rome, there to
receive the name of Augustus, and to recover Campain, Calabrie, Puell, and
Sicill to the Roman Empire by driving the Frenchmen and Spanyardes from
thence. For the which matter, The Bishop of Tull against the Popes.
Rafe sommoned a Parliament at Wirtsburge, and thither there came a very great
resort: unto who^ Probus a Divine of Tubing, the Bishop of Tull made an
Oration, wherein among all other things, How long I pray you my right dear
brethren (says he) will these Romish kytes abuse our patience, I pray God I
may not say our foolishness? How long shall we bear with their treachery,
couetousenesse, pride, and superfluity: This worst kind of Archsinagoges will
never leave, till it has brought all men to beggerie and slavery. This
mischief has grown through our debate. It is our debate that sets those
rakehelles in their ruff. Neither is it possible for us to maynteine peace and
godliness, as long as they reign. Not long ago they set the Sarons and
Sweuians together by the ears. Afterward they deprived Friderike the second, a
Prince most profitable for the common weal, and Conrade his son and four
Princes of Sweueland, of Empire and life together. They have sowed the seed of
discord in Germany. Besides this, when Corradine that noble young gentleman of
excellent towardness who never did harm, sought to recover the heritage of
his aunceters by the law of all nations, they took him prisoner by craft and
policy, and put him to death. They set the Sweuians and Frenchmen of Westrich
at war one against another: and then stirred up the Spanyardes against the
Frenchmen: and now they labor to set us at odds with the kings of Spain and
France, our own kinsmen, which came in old time out of Germany. And so forth
as follows in the same Bishops Oration, in the seventh book of Auentines
Chronicles, the 15. leaf. What man reading or hearing these and such other like
doings of the Romish Bishops, can take them for Apostolic men that preach
peace to folk, and not rather for apostaticall Bellonase, cursed feendes, and
the very furies or hellhoundes themselves?

1289.
About this time Meynhard the Earl of Tyroll, entered into certain Castles that
belonged to him by right of inheritance, The Earl of Tyroll against the Pope
and the Bishops.
which notwithstanding, the Bishop of Trent avouched to be his and was not
ashamed to make claim to the^ being none of his. And when the Earl would not
surre^der them, Pope Nicolas the 4. laid his curse upon him. By means whereof
he enforced the Earl to write an Apology, wherein among other things, he
says: who is so stelyharted or (to speak more truly) so blockish a beast, yt
he ca^ with quiet mind suffer the pride, statelynesse, treachery, craft,
outrage, wickedness, prodigality, and couetousenesse of these rakehelles? Is
the seeking of othermens riches and kingdoms, is fighting for glory and
dignity, is oppressing of silly sheep, is sleaing, is warring, is this geere
(I say) is this to feed sheep and to love the flock? And seeing that they
being our servants, will against the right of all Realms be our masters,
yea and make their Lords serve them contrary to the laws and word of God: if
they be not Antichrists, what else I pray you be they? And so forth as is to be
read in Auentine in the vij. book of his Chronicles, the 720. and 721. leaves.

Boniface the viij. (even by the record of Platina) the arroga^test Bishop one
of them that ever was, 1301.
Boniface the viij. against the K. of France.
and the author of the vj. book of Decretals, whereof somewhat has been said
before, bare very sore grudge against Philip K. of France, and at last breaking
forth, sent a Legate with his Bulls to Paris, commaundyng the king to resign
the Realm of France to the Apostolic sea. But the king would suffer no such
Bulls to be published in his City and kingdom. Yea rather the Frechmen took
them from the Legate and burnt them in the fire, and drove the Legate out of
the Realm as a trouble of the state. Furthermore the king greatly accused
Boniface, and charged him with so heinous and ugly crimes, as the storywriters,
for the foulness of them, are ashamed to report. Yet proceeds he for all
that, to raise up troubles in France, to command the king to depose him self
from his kingdom and to resign it to the Church of Rome, and to assoyle the
Lords and gentlemen of their oath of fealty, whereby they were bound to the
king. But the king being no whit abashed at those fond cursinges, gave straight
charge to all his subjects that none of them should come at Rome or send any
money thither. And at the le^ght he found the means to have the most proud and
stubborn Prelate himself cast in prison, where he dyed within xxxv. days
after, being as he deserved, consumed with frettyng for sorrow and spite.

Clement the v. being as proud and as great a troubler of Realms as his
predecessors, 1307.
Clement the fifth against ye Uenetians.
Cursed the Uenetia^s and certain other notable commonweals, and abandoned
them to the spoil of all men unless they returned to the obedience of his
sea, and so he compelled the Uenetia^s to send Ambassadors with submission
unto him. The Ambassador that was sent was Fraunces Dandalus, who afterward
was made Duke of Uenice. Much a do he had to come to the Popes presence. At
length he had a cheyne of iron clapped about his neck, and was feign to lie
couched at the pope Clementes table too too basely and filthily, so long till
the popes displeasure was (with much ado) overcome, Frances Da^dalus made a Dog.
and then he assoyled the Uenetians from his excommunication. Afterward
Dandalus bare the name of Dog because he had couched at the Popes table like a
dog. The reporter hereof is Sabellicus about the end of the vij. book of his
ix. Enneade. But who could have looked upon this orped sight without grief,
unmeet for the cruel Turk, and much more for a merciful Apostle? With
wisdom therefore must they be mad, who soever they be that after so many
horrible examples of wicked and shameless vilanie and tyranny, do still
reverence and worship the bishops of Rome, and recover not their sight, ne
learn to know them by their virtues and to shun the^. They be sore deceived,
which hearing these and such like things, say still, that the Apostolic sea
must not be judged by the lives of the wicked unthrifts that sit in it: and
that the same is holy and to be obeyed nevertheless. For if by the sea
Apostolic they mean the Apostolic doctrine and ministry of the Church:
these things are always holy and unspotted: and although those that be in the
ministry and preach the Gospel be unclean, yet nevertheless, the sea
Apostolic, that is to wit the Apostolic doctrine must be obeyed still,
according also as it has been said before. But if by the sea Apostolic, they
mean the Popish kingdom or rather tyranny, whereby they challenge to
themselves absolute souereintie in matters perteinyng to God and man, as well
in Civil as in Ecclesiastical matters, through the fullness of their power:
then is it no less a pestilent seat and vncommended unto us by any word of
God, then they that sit in it be most deadly and pestilent plagues. And
therefore they that sit in it are to be eschewed, and the seat it self is to
be lothed as an abomination, of all good men. But now I return again to my
abridgement of stories which I have broken of.

The Emperor Henry the vij. is poisoned
The same Bishop to the exceeding great damage of Italy, called thither the
Emperor Henry of Lucembrough the vij. of that name, against the faction of the
Vrsines, who were of the Gwelfes, and against Robert king of Puell: with who^
he encountered twice with reasonable good luck. Whereupon the Bishop began to
fear least the Emperor should grow too great. Therefore according to the
crabbednesse of the Bishops, began to fall to the byasse of his predecessors,
and shanke aside to Robert of Puell whom the Emperor had condemned as traitor
to the Empire, and reuersed the Emperors said sentence given by law. And when
the Emperor hasted to sease upon the kingdom of Sicilie, for which he had been called out of Germany at the first: one Bernard of Mount Polician (as
Fasciculus Temporum reports) a Friar of S. Dominikes order, or a Friar
preacher, dispatched him at Bonconuent by putting poison into the Sacrament of
the body and blood of our Lord and giving it unto him: 1313.
surely a strange and horrible example. And they allege that the Friar was
corrupted with promises and brybes by the Emperors enemies, or else he durst
not have attempted this so horrible a deed.

John the xxij. after many attemptes against the Emperor Jews the iiij.
disfeated him of the Empire and usurped it wholly to himself. John the 22.
against the Emperor Jews the fourth.
For he published a Bull and in open words named himself father and Prince of
all Christendom through the whole world, and the high Gods lieuetenaunt, in
whom rested the highest power and souereine dominion of the Empire, to be
disposed by his commandment, jurisdiction, and authority, and to be bestowed
as his free gift upon whom he listed. See his shamlesse boldness.
And about the end of the Bull he commands Jews to resign up the Empire
and title of king within three months, and never after to take that dignity
upon him, but by the leave and appointment of the Pope. And if he obey not, he
commands all his Lords temporal and spiritual, to forsake their Prince,
and to compel him to obey the Pope. This Bull was published the xv. day of
October the year of our Lord God. 1323. But Jews asked the advice of all the
Clerks that were best seen in the laws as well of God as man, through
Germany, Italy, and France, at Paris, Bononie, Padua, and other
Uniuersities: The judgment of the Doctors in the chief Uniuersities in the
Emperors behalf against the Pope.
who gave an agreeable answer, That the Popes doings against the Emperor are
contrary to Christian doctrine: and that the Pope was out of his wits and
made havoc of Christ's people for desire of dominion: and that the Emperor
was not subject to the Pope, but the Pope to the Emperor. For the servant of
servants ought not to bear rule, Luke 22.
but rather to do service to such as sit at the table.

1327.
But the Bishop cries out that all these which gave the Emperor this answer,
are heretics, and he excommunicateth them all with the Emperor and burns
their books. The Emperor for all this, called a Parliament about the matter
and sommoning a Counceil, deposed the Pope. For he was openly proclaimed for an
heretic, a tyrant of the Church, and a troubler of the common peace, and
thereunto his image was burned in the Marketsted. Nevertheless when John the
xxij. was dead, Clement the sixth against Jews the 4.
Clement the sixth continewed the displeasure still against Jews, commanding
him likewise to depose himself from the Empire. Yea he proceeded yet further,
and reuiuyng all John the xxij. processes, 1346.
denounced the Emperor to be an heretic and a schismatike, moreover
commaundyng the Electors to choose another king by a time appointed, except they
had lever that the Bishop himself should give them a king. They therefore
obeying his manaces chose Charles Marquis of Morania. But for as much as the
better part of the Empire was displeased both with the Pope and with Charles,
and sticked still to Jews their true souerein Lord and Emperor: it came
again to swords drawyng on both sides, and there was burning, wasting and
sleayng, the accustomed fruits of the Bishops of Rome, which never brought
tydinges of peace, but always blew up the trumpet to battle.

1381.
And least Italy and Naples might take breath any while from their slaughters
and wastinges: The Hungarians are called into Sicilie.
Vrbane the sixth of that name made suit to Jews the puissant king of
Hungary, that he should send Charles Duke of Durace into Italy with an host
of Hungarians: for he would bestow the kingdom of Sicilie upon him. Therefore
when he came to Rome, he crowned him king of Sicilie, howbeit in such wise, as
he departed with certain of the best Earledomes in the Realm to the Bishops
neuew.

Again least Clement the Antipope might seem of less authority then Pope
Turbane, 1383.
The Frenchmen are called into Sicilie against the Hu^garians.
he crowned Jews Duke of Angeow a sideman of his, king of Sicilie, who
immediately enters into Italy with threescorethousand me^. Then followed
spoilyng, burning, and sleaing again, and all manner of cruelty was exercised
on either side, verily by the instigation of these good and peaceable Apostles
the souerein Shepeherdes of the Church of Rome. I wittingly pass over here
many outrageous doings of the Bishops, which the storywriter Theodoriche of
Nyem prosecuteth very largely and truly in his three books of the Schism.

Now come I to Martine the fifth that was created Bishop at the Council of
Constance: 1423.
who being nothing unlike his predecessors, gave Sicilie in Fee to one Aloyse
of Sicilie, against Alphons king of Spain. Whereupon rose again not a few nor
small calamities. 1428.
The war in Beam.
The same Bishop was the cause of the Civil war in Beam, and that the
Germans that went into Beam with a great power, brought nothing thence but
dishonor and very great loss. I will not pursue the slaughters, burninges,
wastringes, and miseries of that war. They be described at large by Aenaeas
Syluius in his History of Beam. The same author sets out the horrible and
blouddy practices that Eugenie the fourth and his successor Martine the fifth
used to overthrow the Council of Basil. And it has been showed already how
great mischief ye same Eugenie the fourth brought upon Christendom, when he
enforced king Ladislaus unto unhappy war, contrary to his oath made unto
Amurathes Prince of Turkye.

Pius the second, 1458.
and Sixtus the fourth were forewarder to feats of arms then to peace and
preaching of the Gospel. They never yielded an inche to any Prince, but
indeuered most scoutly not only to maynteine, 1471.
but also by hook and by crook to increase the majesty of their sea. The
Popish kingdom con^^^^^
The histories bear witness hereof abundantly.

I will not any further report what the Bishops of Rome have committed in our
age and within the remembrance of man, least I trouble the gentle reader to
much for they be better known then that they need to be rehearsed. For who
knows not how great lawlesnesse they have abused, in transposing kingdoms,
in dischargyng subjects from their dew faithfulness and obedience in putting
down and setting up of kings, and in hatching of most blouddy and mortal
wars? Pope Alexander the vi.
The horrible treachery of Alexander the sixth against Charles king of France
is well enough known, 1494.
in that he made him take arms upon him, and called him into the kingdom of
Naples against the king of Spain: and yet for all that did byanby after most
traitorously take part with the Spanyardes against him.

Pope July the second.
Julius the second a Lombard practiced the Uenetian war, which being the
greatest and sorest of all others continewed eight years, 1508.
with excedyng great bloushed before it could be ended: and stirred up Jews
king of France against the Uenetians: and byanby after led not only the
Uenetians, but also all the puissantest Princes and people of Europe against
Jews. Also he behaved himself after such a sort in the matter of calling a
Council, that even the Papists themselves do greatly blame him and find
fault with him in that behalf. Yea and even Onuphrius Panuinius has blamed
this dealing in Julius the second.

Pope Leo the tenth.
Leo the tenth not only appeased not the troubles styrred up by Julius, but
also continewed them, doubblyng mischief upon mischief, 1515.
armyng nation against nation, and keepyng promise neither with Germans nor
with Frenchmen.

Pope Clement the seventh.
Clement the seventh passed Leo and some of his predocessours. For first he
took part with the Emperor, and afterward slipped away to Fraunces the French
king, 1525.
to whom he was the occasion of a very great loss. For in the kingdom of
Naples, (whether Lawtreche had brought his army very well appointed by the
instigation of the Pope) he lost the greater part of his army by reason of an
unmercifully plague that fell upon them. The story of Frijndsperg Captein of
the Almaine souldyers avouches in the eighth book and the hundred and
threescor the leaf, that of fourscore thousand, there remained alive scarcely
one thousand and seven hundred.

What troubles Paul the third the Romish Bishop wrought unto Germany, Pope
Paul the third.
the war that was made in the bowels of Germany commonly called the
Protestauntes war, 1546.
witnesses. For he sent an army of Italians privily into Germany, and set
the Germans together by the ears among themselves. Which thing the
storywriters setforth at large.

As for the outrages of Paul the fourth they be better known by reason of his
horrible acts yet fresh in remembrance, Pope Paul the fourth.
then that they need to be set forth in many words. 1557.


But all this whole declaration tends chiefly to this end: The conclusion of
the whole discourse.
partly that such as have not yet learned to know the Romish Bishops, and
therefore do reverence and honor them still, may learn to know them even by
their abominable sayings and doings, bearing in mind this faithful
forewarnyng of the Lords, Ye shall know them by their fruits: and therefore
should also so judge of them, as their sayings and doings teach folk to
judge of them: wherwithall be interlaced by the way here and there, some
judgments of certain godly and wise men in former ages, concerning the Bishops
of Rome: and partly that all Realms and all commonweals (which will not
wittingly and willingly perish) (and specially thou noble Realm of England,)
should hereafter not only make no account of the Popes Bulls tyrannously
deposing kings, wrongfully transposing kingdoms, and wickedly assoyling
subjects of their dew faithfulness and obedience: but also cast them away and
tread them under foot as they be worthy. Ye have heard how great calamities
the Popes have oftentimes wrought to kingdoms and nations by such manner of
Bulls. And he is a wise man that can learn to beware by other men's harms.
Therefore if ye be wise and love to live at ease, keep your promise that ye
have made, and obey the Princes whom God has set over you: maynteyne peace,
and eschew wars as well inward or Civil, as outward or foreine. And that God
may voutsafe to perform these things unto you, pray ye faithfully and
diligently unto him, persevere ye steadfast in true godliness and in the Gospel
of the son of God, and cast ye away all the Popish toys, superstitions, and
Idols all together. The Prince of peace voutsafe to grant you these things,
who at his coming into this world, brought tydinges of peace to the world,
and at his going out of the world left his peace to those that be his, even our
Lord Jesus Christ grant you them, to whom be glory for evermore world without
end. Amen.

FINIS.
AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


